THE SURGIONS DIRECTORIE, (...) Young Practitioners, (...) SHOWING, (...)
Excellency of diverse (...) belonging to that noble Art and (...) Very useful
in these Times upon any sudden Accidents. And may well serve, As a noble (...)
for Gentle women, and others; who desire Science in Medicine and Surgery, for a
general Good. (...) (Whose Contents follow in the next Page.) Written by (...)
Esquire, Chyrurgion to Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Q. Mary. Q. Eliz.

LONDON, Printed by (...) dwelling in Shoo-Lane, at the Sign of the Dolphin.
1651. And are to be sold by J. Nuthall, at his Shop in (...) at the sign of
(...) Pillars.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS Book, with its several Parts.
viz.
PART. I. Of Chyrurgerie, and Anatomy of Man's body, etc. By T. Vicary Esquire.
And published by W. Clowes, W. Beton Rich. Story, and Ed. Baily, Chyrurgions*
to St. Bartholmewes Hospital, London. II. Of the Theorick and Practicke parts,
and observations for letting of Blood. III. Of the Judgment of diverse Urines,
etc. IV. The Definition of Wounds in several parts of the Body, and their
Cures. V. Of the making of several Emplaisters. VI. The making of diverse
Unguents. VII. Distilling and making of Waters, with their several virtues and
uses. VIII. The Excellency of our English Bathes, and the use of them, Written
by D. Turner, Doct. of Physic, and Published by W. Bremer* Practitioner in
Physic and Surgery, for the benefit of the poorer sort of people, etc. IX. For
perbreaking and Flux. As also, the great operation and virtue of several
Herbs, Plants, and Drugs etc. for diverse uses in Physic and Surgery, etc. X.
Of Medicines, Remedies and Cures, belonging to several Diseases and
Infirmities, incident to all parts of the body of Man etc. As also Remedies for
the French P. otherwise called Morbus Galicus; And, Preservatives to be used
against the Plague, in the time of diverse Visitation, etc.
TO ALL THE VIRTUOUS LADIES and GENTLEVVOMEN, of this Commonwealth of England,
whose Goodness surpassing greatness, and desires to Exercise themselves (as
nursing Mothers) in the Art of Medicine and Surgery, (especially in the remote
parts of this Kingdom) w ere is neither Physician nor Surgion to be had when
^od^ine Accidents happen; whereby the poorer sort of People many times perish
for want of Advice.
Courteous Ladies, and Gentlewomen,
AS this little Treatise is a Messelin of diverse hidden Secrets; So likewise
you must observe the use of them in Practice. As first, the use and knowledge
of the several Parts of Anatomy; so likewise do of the rest, as Physic,
Surgerie, Medicine, Waters, Unguents, Emplaisters, Remedies, etc. The rare
virtue of our English Bathes, the Judgment of diverse Vrines; the virtue and
operation of diverse Herbs, Plants, and Drugs, etc. All tending to the benefit
and use of man; yet various and different in their effects and workings,
according to the several humors and dispositions of men in their Cures. For
as St. Paul does say, The gift of Healing is the gift of the Holy Spirit.
Which thing may partly satisfy any rational judgment from despising of all
for the failings of some, it being the gleanings of diverse who made trial of
them for good, and has left them to Posterity. Thus leaving you Ladies and
Gentlewomen, to your charitable acting and doing good when need shall require,
the Lord no doubt will requite you or yours with a blessing.

Farewell. T. F.

A TABLE TO FIND the several Contents of this Book.
PART. 1.
COntaining the Anatomy of Man's body, etc. Chap Folio. 1 The Anatomy of the
simple Members, Folio. 9 The Anatomy of the compound Members, etc. Folio. 17 Of
five things contained within the Head, Folio. 22 The Anatomy of the Face,
Folio. 27 The Anatomy of the Neck, Folio. 44 The Anatomy of the Shoulders and
Arms, Folio. 48 The Anatomy of the Lungs, Folio. 60 The Anatomy of the
Haunches and their Parts, Folio. 75 The Ana^omy of the Thighs, Legs, and Feet.
Folio. 8^
Part, 2
OF several things belong ng to young Practitioners in Surgery, to have in a
readiness, etc. Folio 96, 97 Times convenient for ^etting of B lood, Folio.
101 Diet after Blee^ing, Folio. 104 Of the Nine Tastes. Folio. 105 Signs of
Sickness by Egestion, Folio. 108 Signs of Life or Death by the Pulses, Folio.
109 Of the four Humors, Folio. 111* 1. Signs of Sickness by Blood, Folio.
ibid 2. Signs of Melancholy sicknesses, Folio. 112 3. Signs of Choleric
diseases. Folio. ibid 4. Signs of Phlegmatic diseases. Folio. 113 Cer^aine
Observations for Women. etc. Folio. 114
Part, 3.
OF Vrines, A brief Treatise of Vrines, as well of Man's urine as of Woman's, and
to judge by the Color which betokens Health, and which betokens Weakness,
and also Death. Folio 115
Part. 4.
Definition of Wounds by their causes, Folio 121 An the Curing of green Wounds
consists a fivefold scope o^ intention, Folio. 124 How man should Diet himself
being Wounded. Folio. 126 O^ Wounds and their Cures happening in several
places of the Body, Folio. 127 Of infirmities incident to Soldiers in a Camp,
Folio. ibid. A rare (...) the which this Author did send to a very friend of
his being in the Wars: the which helps all wounds either by Cut, Thrust,
galling with Arrows, or Hargubush shot, or otherwise, Folio. 129 Of Wounds in
the Head, with fracture of the Bone, Folio. 130 Wounds in the Head, where the
Bone is not offended. Of Concussions or Bruises, as well in the Head as any
other place, Folio. 132 Of Wounds in the Neck, and the order to be used in
curing them. Folio. 133 Of Wounds in the Arms, and their importances and
Medicines, Folio. 134 Of Wounnds in the Legs, and their parts, Folio. 135 A
Discourse upon old Wounds, which are not thoroughly healed, with their Remedies,
Folio. 136 A rare secre^ ^o heal Wounds of Gunshot, etc. Folio. 137 To heal a
Wound quickly, Folio. ibid. To Heal a Wound quickly, that is in danger of any
Accidents, Folio. ibid. To stay the flux of Blood in Wounds, Folio. 138 A
defense to be laid upon Wounds, Folio. 140 A secret Powder for wounds, Folio.
ibid. A Composition of great virtue against all Ulcers and Sores* Folio. ibid.
A Note of a certain Spanyard, wounded in the head at Naples. Folio. 141 For to
heal Hurts and Wounds, Folio. 141 To stanch the Blood of a Cut, Folio. 142 For
to staunch the blood of a Wound, Folio. ibid. A healing Salve for any green
Wound, Folio. ibid. The Lord Capel salve for Cuts or Rancklings coming of
Rubbings, etc. Folio. 143 For to draw and heal a Cut, Folio. ibid* A Salve for
fresh Wounds. Folio. 144 A Salve that cleanses a Wound and heals it, Folio.
ibid. To kill dead Flesh. Folio. ibid. A Plaster for old Sores, Folio. ibid.
For a Canker, Fistula, or Wounds, new or old, Folio. 145 A Salve for any Wound,
Folio. ibid. To help the Ach of a Wound, Folio. 146 To heal Wounds without
Plaster, Tent or Ointment, except it be in the Head, Folio. ibid. To heal a
Wound that no scarre or print thereof shall be seen, Folio. ibid.
Part, 5.
Emplaisters, Folio 60 Of several Emplaisters. From folio 147, to 169.
Part, 6.
Unguents, Folio 50. Of several Unguents. From folio 169. to 185.
Part. 7.
Waters, Folio 40. Of several Waters. From folio 185, to folio 206.
Part, 8.
THe virtue and Excellency of our English Bathes, written by D. Turner Doctor
of Physic, etc. From folio 207, to folio 228.
Part, 9.
OF Herbs, and Drugs, etc. Folio 229 The virtue of certain Herbs, and Drugs,
etc. Folio. 230 The excellent virtues of Cardus Benedictus, Folio. 241 A good
Drink to strengthen the heart and all the members of a man, to drink half an
Egg shell full of it Morning and evening, with as much good wine, Folio. 243 A
special Medicine to cause sleep, Folio. ibid. A discourse concerning Corns
in the feet, or elsewhere with their remedies, Folio. 144
Part, 10. Medicines.
OF Medicines, Remedies, and Cures etc. Folio. 145 The cause of our Sciatica,
and how to help it, Folio. ibid For Hoarsnesse, Folio. 146 If a man stand in
fear of the Palsy, Folio. ibid. A Medicine for the Gout, Folio. ibid.
Stubbes Medicine for the Gout, Folio. 147 Another Plaster for the Gout,
Folio. ibid. Another for the same. Folio. ibid. For a prick of a Thorn, or
any other thing, Folio. 248 A Remedy for burning and Scalding, Folio. ibid. To
kill a Tetter or Ring^worme, Folio. ibid. For a wind or a Collicke in the
belly, Folio. 249 Against the Shingles, Folio. ibid. To heal a wound in ten
days, etc. Folio. ibid. For ache in the Back, Folio. ibid. To heal scalding
with water, or other liquor, etc. Folio. 250 To heal the Itch, Folio. ibid To
heal Sores or Tetters, Folio. ibid. For the hardness of Hearing, Folio. 251
An easy Remedy for the Toothache* Folio. ibid. For the swelling in the
Throat, Folio. ibid. To cause a Woman's speedy deliverance, Folio 252 To make a
woman's Milk increase, Folio. ibid. For the Rickets and weakne^se of Children,
etc. Folio. ibid. To fasten the Gums or loose Teeth, Folio. ibid. For one that
cannot hold his Water, Folio. 253 For the Dropsy by D. Adryan, etc. Folio.
ibid. For the stinging of Waspes and Bees, Folio. ibid. For the falling down
of the Tull, Folio. ibid. For the swelling of the Legs, Folio. 254 For the
Canker in the mouth, Folio. ibid. To make the Face fair and clear etc. Folio.
ibid. A Remedy to qualify the coppered Face, Folio. 254 A special good diet
for all fiery Faces. Folio. ibid. An easy Remedy to make the Teeth white,
Folio. ibid. To take away the stinking of the mouth* Folio. 254 A Remedy, for
sore Eyes, Folio. ibid* A Medicine for the bleeding at the nose, etc. Folio.
ibid. Against a stinking Breath, Folio. 255 For an evil breath, Folio. ibid.
For the Head ache, and clensing of the fame, Folio. ibid. To heal a swollen
Face, etc. Folio. ibid. To make an aching Tooth fall out of himself, Folio. 256
To kill Lice and Nits in the Head, Folio. 257 To help Blood shotten eyes etc.
Folio. ibid. To take away the Toothache. Folio. 258 A Medicine to purge the
Head, Folio. ibid. A Medicine for a scald Head, Folio. 259 For the Head ache,
Folio. ibid. For pain of the Head, Folio. ibid. For deafness in the Ears,
Folio. 260 To make Honey of Roses, etc. Folio. ibid. For the Pockes, Folio.
ibid. A true Medicine for the Iaundies, Folio. ibid. For the Liver that is
corrupted and wasted, Folio 261 For heat in the Liver, Folio. ibid. Remedies
for the Collicke, Folio. 262 Another for the same, Folio. ibid A most excellent
Medicine for the Colic, etc. Folio. 263 For the Collicke and Stone, Folio. 264
For the Collicke and Stone, Folio. ibid Remedy for the Stone, Folio. ibid A
Powder for the Stone, Folio. 265 To make the Stone slip down etc. Folio. ibid
A Posset drink against the Stone, Folio. 266 To make hair g^ow* Folio. 267
For to take away Hair, Folio. ibid To make a barren woman bear Children,
Folio. ibid To make a woman have a quick Birth, Folio. ibid For all manner of
Lamene^^e of swellings, Folio. 268 For to stay the Laxe or Flux, Folio. ibid
For the sweating of Sickness, Folio. 269 For him that pi^^eth Blood, Folio.
ibid For the Canker in the Mouth, Folio. ibid A powder for the same, Folio.
ibid To know the Fester and Canker, Folio. 272 For Canker in the body, Folio.
ibid For a Canker in a woman's Pappes. Folio. ibid A good powder ^or the Canker,
Folio. 271 To kill the Canker or Marmo^e, Folio. ibid For the Canker in the
Mouth, Folio. 272 To make red Water to kill the Canker, Folio. 273 To take away
the Canker, Folio. ibid A powder for the Canker, Folio. ibid A good Medicine
for the Canker and Sores, Folio. 274 For a Canker old or new, or Marmole,
Folio. ibid For the Canker, Folio. 275 For a Canker in a man's body, etc. Folio
275 For the Headache, Folio. ibid For the Head ache, and Toothache, Folio.
267 A D^inke for the Headache, Folio. ibid For the He^^-ache, Folio. ibid For
the Headache, Folio. 276 To cleanse the Head, Folio. 277 For the Headache
coming of the stomach, Folio. 280 For Ache in the hinder part of the Head,
Folio. ibid A principal Medicine for the Head, Folio. ibid For a man that is
diseased in the Liver etc. Folio. 281 A Drink to be used after this Ointment,
Folio. ibid A Plaster for the Spleen, Folio. ibid A Drink for the Spleen,
Folio. 282 To dissolve the hardness of the Spleen, Folio. 283 A sovereign
Medicine for the Spleen, etc. Folio. ibid For Ache in the Back Folio. ibid To
stay the Back, and help a Consumption, etc. Folio. 284 To take away the pain
of the Reins etc. Folio. 285 For Ache in the Back and Legs, Folio. ibid For
the Bladder and the Reins, Folio. 286 A Plaster for the Reins, Folio. ibid
For all Diseases, in the Back, Folio. ibid For pain in the bladder, etc.
Folio. 287 Against running of the Reins, Folio. ibid A Syrope for the Back,
Folio. 288 Remedies to provoke Menstruum Mulieris, Folio. 289 To stop white
Menstruum and red, Folio. 291 Another for the white, Folio. ibid The virtue of
Fearne, Folio. 292 To take away heat and inflammation, etc. Folio. ibid A
Locion for a sore Mouth, Folio. 293 A preparative, Folio. ibid To make Vergent
milk by D. Y^xley. Folio. ibid A comfortable Powder for the Heart, Folio 294 A
Remedy that breaks the Stone, Folio. ibid Another remedy for the Stone, etc.
Folio. ibd A proved Medicine to avoid the Urine etc. Folio. 29^ A very good
water for the stone proved, Folio. ib^^ To break the Stone, Folio. ibid Doctor
Argentines Medicine for the Stone, Folio. ibid Diverse Medicines for the Stone
etc. Folio. 296 Excellent Remedies for the Stone etc. Folio. 297 For the Stone
in the Reins, or Bladder, Folio. 298 An Injection for the Stone, Folio. ibid
For any evil in the Bladder, Folio. ibid A Powder to break the Stone, Folio.
299 To ^ase the pain of the Stone, Folio. ibid Against the new Ague, by Doctor
Langdon, Folio. 301 For an ague. By Doctor Turner, Folio. ibid A very good
Drink for an ague, if one shake, Folio. ibid For a cold ague, Folio. 301 A
Plaster to take away the Ague etc. Folio. 303 To kill the Palsy, Folio. ibid
A remedy for the Dropsy, Folio. ibid Against stopping of the Pipes, Folio.
ibid Against Hoarsenesse, Folio. ^04 For the yellow Iaundise. Folio. ibid For
Worms in the Belly, Folio. ibid A proved Remedy for a Woman's Throvves etc.
Folio. 305 A Powder for the Strangury, Folio. ibid For the Collicke and Stone,
Folio. ibid For a Megrim in the Head. Folio. i^^d For the Toothache, Folio.
^06 For a sore Breast, Folio. ibid For a fore eye that burns and is watrie,
Folio. ibid For to stop the Bloody Flux, Folio. ibid A Remedy for a Fellon,
Folio. 307 A Medicine well proved for the Megrim, Folio. ibid For to heal a
sore Eye, hurt with small Pocks. Folio. ibid For a sore Eye with a Pin or a
Web, Folio. 308 For a sore Eye that Itcheth and pricketh, Folio. ibid For a
Sciatica or Ache in the Bones, Folio. ibid For Sore Eyes* Folio. ibid To stop
a great Laske, Folio. 309 To cause one to make Water, Folio. ibid For the Wind
Collicke. Folio. ibid For to make a Water for the same, Folio. 310 For to bind
one from the Laske, Folio. ibid For to skin a sore Finger, Folio. ibid For a
vehement Cough in young Children etc. Folio. ibid For a broken Head, Folio.
ibid For Chilblaines in the Feet or Hands, Folio. 311 To kill the Toothache,
etc. Folio. ibid For a Stitch, Folio. ibid For an ache or a Bruise, Folio. ibd
To make white Teeth. Folio. 312 For a swelling in the Cheek, Folio. ibid To
make a Perfume suddenly in a Chamber where a sick man lies, Folio. ibid To
make a clear voice, Folio. 313 For the Mother, Folio. ibid For the Stitch or
Bruise, Folio. ibid For the bloody Flux, Folio. 314 Remedies for the I^c^,
Folio. ibid To kill Lice or Itch, Folio. 315 To cure the Crampe, Folio. ibid
For a pain or swelling in the Privy parts, Folio. ibid Remedies for Burning
or Scalding, Folio. ibid Remedies for the Piles, Folio. 316 To cure the Cappes,
Folio 316 To kill a Tetter or Ring-worme, Folio. 317 Remedies for the Shingles,
Folio. ibid Fgr griping^ in the Belly, Folio. 318 A Pla^ster for the same,
Folio. ibid For a Scurfe in the body, Folio. ibid For a wild running Scab,
Folio. ibid For a Timpany, Folio. 319 For one in a Consumption, Folio. ibid For
one tha^ is broken bellied, Folio. 320 For the shrinking of the Sinews, Folio.
321 For the staying of the flux, Folio. ibid A Medicine for a sore Throat,
Folio. ibid For weakness in the Back, Folio. ibid For the Carbunckle or
Impostume etc. Folio. 322 To take w^y Pock-holes, or any spot etc. Folio. ibid
For faintness in the Stomach, or the Morphew, Folio. ibid To Care the French
Pox, etc. Folio. 323 Preservatives against the Plague, etc. Folio. 327
THE SVRGIONS DIRECTORY: OR, An Exercise for Gentlewomen.
PART. I. Containing the Anatomy of man's Body, compiled by T. V. Esquire, for
the use and benefit of all unlearned Practitioners in the Art and Mystery of
Chyrurgerie.
CHAP. I. 1. To kn^w what Chyrurgerie is. 2. How a^ hyrurgion should be^
chosen. 3. With what Properties he should be endued.

FOr the first, which is to know what Chyrurgerie is. Herein J do note the
saying of Lanfranke, whereas he says; All things that man would know, may be
known by one of these three things: That is to say, by his Name, or by his
Working; or else by his very being and showing of his own Properties. So then
it follows, that in the same manner we may know what Chyrurgery is, by three
things. First, by his Name, as thus: the Interpreters write, that Chirurgerie
is derived out of these words.

Apo tes chiros, cai tou ergou* That is to be understood: A hand-working, and
so it may be taken for all handy Arts: But Noble Hypocrates says, that
Chirurgerie is handworking in Man's body, for the very end and profit of
Chirurgerie is hand-working.

Now the second manner of knowing what thing Chyrurgerie it, it is the saying
of Avicen; To be known by his Being, for it is verily a Medicinal Science.
And as Galen says, He that will know the certainty of a thing, let him not
busy himself to know only the name of that thing, but also the working and
the effect of the same thing.

Now the third way to know what thing Chirurgerie is, it is also to be known
by his being or declaring of his own Properties, the which teaches us to work
in man's Body with hands, as thus: In cutting and opening those parts that be
whole, and in healing those parts that be broken or cut, and in taking away
that that is superfluous, as Warts, Wennes, Skurfulas, and other of like effect.

But further, to declare what Galen says Surgery is, it is the last
Instrument of Medicine: that is to say, Diet, Potion, and Surgery: of the
which three says he, Diet is the noblest, and the most virtuous: and thus he
says. Whereas a man may be cured with Diet only, let there be given no manner
of Medicine. The second Instrument, is Potion: for and if a man may be cured
with Diet and Potion, let there not be ministered any Surgery, through whose
virtue and goodness, is removed and put away many grievous Infirmities and
Diseases, which might not have been removed nor yet put away, neither with
Diet nor with Potion. And by these three means, it is known what thing
Surgery is. And this suffices us for that point.

Now it is known what thing Chirurgerie is, there must also be chosen a Man
apt and meet to minister Surgery* or to be a Surgeon. And in this point
all Authors do agree, that a Surgeon should be chosen by his Complexion,
and that his complexion be very temperate, and all his members well
proportioned. For Rasis says: Whose face is not seemly, it is impossible for
him to have good manners. And Aristotle the great Philospher, writes in his
Epistles to the Noble King Alexander) as in those Epistles more plainly does
appear) how he should choose all such persons as should serve him, by the
form and shape of the face, and all other members of the body. And furthermore
they say, he that is of an evil Complexion, there must needs follow like
Conditions.

Wherefore it agrees, that he that will take upon him to practice as a
Chyrurgion, must be both of a good and temperate Complexion^ as is before
rehearsed: and principally, that he be a good liver, and a keeper of the holy
Commandments of God, of whom comes all cunning and grace, and that his body
be not quaking, and his hands steadfast, his fingers long and small* and not
trembling: and that his left hand be as ready as his right, with all his
limbs, able to fulfill the good work^s of the soul. Now as here is a man
meet to be made a Surgeon: (and though he have all those good qualities
before rehearsed) yet is he no good Surgeon, but a man very fit and meet
for the practice.

Now then to know what Properties and conditions this man must have before he
be a perfect Surgeon. J do note four things most specially, that every
Surgeon ought for to have: The first, that he be Learned: The second, that
he be Expert: The third, that he be Ingenious: The fourth, that he be well
mannered.

The first (J said) he ought to be learned, and that he know his principles,
not only in Surgery, but also in Physic, that he may the better defend
his Surgery; also he ought to be seen in natural Philosophy, and in
Grammar, that he speak congruity in Logic, that teaches him to prove his
proportions with good reason: In Rhetoric, that teaches him to speak
seemly and eloquently: also in Theoricke, that teaches him to know things
natural, and not natural, and things against Nature. Also he must know the
Anatomy: for all Authors write against those Chirurgions that work in man's
body, not knowing the Anatomy: For they be likened to a blind man, that cutteth
in a Vine tree, for he takes more or less then he ought to do. And here note
well the sayings of Galen, the Prince of Philosophers, in his Estoris, That it
is as possible for a Chyrurgion (not knowing the Anatomy) to work in man's body
without error, as it is for a blind man to carve an Jmage and make it perfect.
The second, J said, he must be expert: For Rasus says: He ought to know and to
see other men work, and after to have use and exercise. The third, that he be
ingenious and witty: for all things belonging to Surgery may not be written*
nor with letters set forth. The fourth, J said, that he must be well mannered,
and that he have all these good conditions here following.

First, that he be no Spouse-breaker, nor no Drunkard. For the Philosophers
say, amongst all other things, beware of those persons that follow
Drunkenness, for they be accounted for no men, because they live a life
bestiall: wherefore amongst all other sorts of people, they ought to be
sequestered from the ministering of Medicine. Likewise, a Surgeon must take
heed that he deceive no man with his vain promises, for to make of a small
matter a great* because he would be accounted the more famous. And amongst
other things, they may neither be Flatterers nor Mockers, nor privy
Back-biters of other men. Likewise, they must not be Proud, nor presumptuous:
nor detracters of other men. Likewise, they ought not to be Covetous, nor no
niggard, and namely amongst their friends, or men of Worship, but let them be
honest, courteous, and free both in word and deed. Likewise, they shall give no
counsel except they be asked, and then give their advice by good deliberation,
and that they be well advised before they speak, chiefly in the presence of
wise men. Likewise, they must be as privy and as secret as any Confessor, of
all things that they shall either hear or see in the house of their Patient.
They shall not ta ke into their Cure any manner of person, except he will be
obedient unto their precepts: for he cannot be called a Patient, unless he be
a sufferer. Also that they do their diligence as well to the poor as to the
rich. They shall never discomfort their Patient, and shall command all that be
about him that they do the same, but to his friends speak truth as the case
stands. They must also be bold in those things whereof they be certain, and
as dreadful in all perils. They may not chide with the Sick, but be always
pleasant and merry. They must not covet any W oman by way of villainy, and
specially in the house of their Patient. They shall not for covetousness of
money, taken in hand those Cures that be uncurable, nor never set any certain
day of the sick man's health, for it lies not in their power: following the
distinct conusell of Galen, in the Aphorism of Hypocrat^s* saying: Oporter
seipsum non solum.

By this Galen means, that to the Cure of every sore, there belongs four
things: of which, the first and principal belongs to God: the second, to the
Surgion: the third, to the Medicine: and the fourth, to the Patient. Of the
which four, if any one do fail, the Pa^ient cannot be healed: then they to
whom belongs but the fou^th part, shall not promise the whole but be first
well advised. They must al^o be gracious and good to the Poor, and of the rich
take liberally for both. And see they never praise themselves, for that
redoundeth more to their shame and discredit, then to their fame and worship.
For a cunning and skillful Surgeon, need not vaunt of his doings, for his
works will ever get credit enough. Likewise, that they dispi^e no other
Surgeon without a great cause: for it is meet, that one Surgeon should
love another, as Christ loves us all.

And in thus doing, they shall increase both in virtue and cunning, to the
honor of God, and worldly fame.

Thus far for his Parts.
Of the Anatomy. CHAP. II. The Anatomy of the simple Members.
ANd if it be asked you how many simple Members there be, it is to be
answered, Eleven, and two that be but superfluities of Members: and these be
they, Bones, Cartilages, Nerves, Pannicles, Ligaments, Cords, Arteirs, Veins,
Fatness, Flesh and Skin: and the superfluities be the Hairs and Nails. J
shall begin at the Bone, because it is the Foundation and the hardest Member of
all the Body. The Bone is a consimile Member, simple and spermaticke, and cold
and dry of Complexion, insensible, and inflexible: and has diverse forms in
Man's body, for the diversity of helpings. The cause why there be many Bones in
man's body, is this: Sometime it is needful that one member or one limb should
move without another: another cause is, that some defend the principal
Members, as both the Bone of the Breast* and of the Head: and some to be the
Foundation of diverse parts of the Body, as the Bones of the ridge and of the
Legs: and some to fulfill the hollow places, as in the Hands and Feet, etc.

The Gristle is a member simple and Spermaticke, next in hardness to the Bone*
and is of complexion cold and dry, and insensible. The Gristle was ordained for
six causes or profits that J find in it: The first is, that the continual
moving of the hard Bone might not be done in a juncture, but that the Gristle
should be a mean between the Ligament and him. The second is, that in the
time of concussion or oppression, the soft members or limbs should not be hurt
of the hard. The third is, that the extremity of Bones and Joints that be
grisly, might the easier be foulded and moved together, without hurt. The
fourth is, for that it is necessary in some mean places, to put a Gristle, as
in the throat-bowle for the sound. The fifth is, for that it is needful that
some members be holden up with a Gristle, as the lids of the Eyes. The sixth is,
that some Limbs have a sustaining and a drawing abroad, as in the Nose and the
Ears, etc.

The Ligament is a member consimple, simple, and spermaticke, next in hardness
to the Gristle, and of complexion cold and dry, and is flexible and insensible,
and binds the Bones together. The cause why he is flexible and insensible,
is this: If it had been sensible, he might not have suffered the labor and
moving of the joints: and if it had not been flexible of his bowing, one Limme
should not have moved without another. The second profit is that he be joined
with sinews, for to make Cords and Brawnes. The third help is, that he be a
resting place to some sinews. The fourth profit is, that by him the members
that be within the Bone be sustained, as the Matrix and Kidneys, and diverse
other, etc.

The Sinew, is a consimilier member, simple and spermatick, a mean between
hard and soft, and in complexion cold and dry, and he is both flexible and
sensible, strong and tough, having his beginning from the Brain, or from
Mynuca, which is the Marrow of the back. And from the brain comes seven
pair of Nerves sensative, and from Mynuca comes thirty pair of Nerves
motive, and one that is by himself, that springs of the last spondell. All
these sinews have both feeling and moving, in some more, and in some less,
etc.

A Cord or Tendon, is a consimple or official member compound and
spermaticke, sinewie, strong and tough, meanly between hardness and
softness, and meanly sensible and flexible and in complexion cold and dry. And
the Cord or Tendon is thus made: The sinews that come from the brain and
from Mynuca, and go to move the members, is intermingled with the Lygaments,
and when the sinews and Lygaments are intermingled together, then is made a
Cord. And for three causes J perceive why the Cords were made.

The first is, that the Sinew alone is so sensible, that he may not suffer the
great labor and travel of moving, without the fellowship and strength of the
Ligament that is insensible, and that lets his great feeling, and brings
him to a perfect temperance. And so the Cords move the limbs to the will of
the soul. And this Cord is associated with a simple flesh, and so thereof is
made a Brawne or a Muskle, on whom he might rest after his travel: and this
Brawne is called a Muskle. Then when this Cord is entered into this Brawne, he
is departed into many small threeds, the which be called Will: and this Will
has three properties: The first, is in length, by whose virtue that draws it
has might. The second in breadth, by whom the virtue that casts out has
might. The third, in thwartnes, in whom the virtue that holds has might: and
at the end of the Brawne those threeds be gathered together to make another
Muskle, etc.

Now J will begin at the Arteir. This Arteir is a member consimile, ^imple and
spermaticke, hollow and sinowie, having his springing from the Heart, bringing
from the heart to every member, blood and spirit of life. It is of complexion
cold and dry. And all these Arteirs have two coats, except one that goes to
the Lungs, and he has but one coat that spreads abroad in the Lungs, and
brings with him to the Lungs, blood with the spirit of life to nourish the
Lungs withal: And also that Arteir brings with him from the Lungs air to
temper the fumous heat that is in the heart. And this Arteir is he that is
called Arteria Venalis, because he has but one coat as a vein, and is more
obedient to be delated abroad through all the Lungs, because that the blood
might the sooner sweat through him: whereas all other Arteirs have two coats,
because one coat may not withstand the might and power of the spirit of life.
Diverse other causes there be, which shall be declared in the Anatomy of the
breast, etc.

The Vein is a simple member, in complexion cold and dry, and spermaticke,
like to the Arteir* having his beginning from the Liver, and brings from the
Liver nutritive blood, to nourish every member of the body with. And it is so
to be understood, that there is no more difference between these two vessels
of blood, but that the Arteir is a vessel of blood spiritual or vital. And
the Vein is a vessel of blood nutrimentall, of the which Veins, there is
noted two most principal, of the which, one is called Vena Porta: the other is
called Vena celis, of whom it is too much to treat of now, until we come to
the Anatomy of the Womb, etc.

The Flesh, is a consimile member, simple, not spermaticke, and is engendered of
blood congealed by heat, and is in complexion hot and moist. Of the which is
noted three kinds of Fleshes: that is to say, one is soft and pure flesh: the
second is Musculus, or hard and brawny flesh: the third is Glandulus, knotty,
or kurnelly flesh. Also the commodities of the flesh, be indifferent, or ^ome
be common to every kind of flesh, and some be proper to one manner of flesh
alone. The profits of the flesh be many, for some defend the body from cold as
does clothes: also it defends the body from hard things coming against it:
so through his moisture he rectifyeth the Body in Summer, in time of great
heat.

Wherefore it is to be considered, what profitablenesse is in every kind of
flesh by himself. And first of simple and pure flesh, which fulfilleth the
concavities of void places, and causes good form and shape: and this flesh is
found between the teeth, and on the end of the yard. The profits of the Brawny
flesh or Musculus flesh, shall be spoken of in the Anatomy of the Arms. The
profits of the Glandulus flesh are these. First, that it turns the blood into
a color like to himself, as does the flesh of a woman's pappes turn the
menstruall Blood into milk. Secondly, the Glandulus flesh of the Testikles,
turns the blood into Sparme. Thirdly, the Glandulus flesh of the cheeks,
that engenders the spettle, etc.

The next is of Fatness, of the which J find three kinds. The first is
Pinguedo, and it is a consimiler member, not spermaticke, and it is made of a
subtle portion of Blood congealed by cold: and it is of complexion cold and
moist, insensible, and is intermingled amongst the parts of the flesh. The
second, is Adeppes, and is of the same kind as is Pinguedo, but it is departed
from the flesh besides the Skin and it is as an Oil heating and moystning the
Skin. The third is Auxingia, and it is of kind as the others be, but he is
departed from the flesh within forth about the Kidneyes, and in the Intrailes,
and it helps both the Kidneyes and the Intrailes, from drying by his
unctiosity, etc.

Then come we to the Skin. The Skin is a consimile member or official, partly
spermatick, strong and tough, flexible and sensible, thin and temperate:
whereof there be two kinds: One is the Skin that covers the outward members:
and the other the inner members, which is called a Pannicle, the
profitablenesse of whom, was ^poken in the last lesson: but the Skin is
properly woven of Threeds, Nerves. Veins, and Arteirs. And he is made
temperate, because he should be a good redeemer of heat from cold, and of
moystnesse from dryness, that there should nothing annoy or hurt the Body, but
it gives warning to the common wits thereof, etc.

The hairs of every part of man's Body, are but superfluity of members, made of
the gross ^ume or smoke passing out of the viscous matter, thickened to the
form of hair. The profitablenesse of him is declared in the Anatomy of the
head, etc.

The Nails likewise, are a superfluity of members* engendered of great earthly
smoke or fume resolved through the natural heat of humors, and is softer then
the Bone, and harder then the Flesh. In complexion they be cold and dry* and
are always waxing in the extremity of the fingers and toes. The utility of
them are, that by them a man shall take the better hold: also they help to
claw the body when it needs. Lastly, they help to divide things for lack of
other tools, etc.

CHAP. III. The Anatomy of the compound Members, and first of the Head.
BEcause the Head of man is the habitation or dw^lling place of the reasonable
soul of man, therefore with the grace of God, J shall first speak of the
Anatomy of the head.

Galen says in the second Chapter De juvamentes, and Avicen rehearses the
same in his first Proposition and third Chapter, proving that the Head of man
was made neither for wits, nor yet for the Brains, but only for the Eyes. For
beasts that have no heads, have the organs or instruments of wits in their
breasts. Therefore God and Nature have reared up the head of man only for the
eyes, for it is the highest member of man: and as a Beholder or Watchman
stands in a high Tower to give warning of the Enemies, so does the Eye of man
give warning unto the common Wits, for the defense of all other members of
the body.

Now to our purpose. If the question be asked* how many things be there
contained on the Head, and how many things contained within the head? As it is
rehearsed by Guydo, there be five containing, and as many contained, as thus:
The hair, the skin, the flesh, the Pannicles, and the Bone; neither rehearsing
Vein nor Artier. The which Anatomy cannot be truly without them both, as thou
shall well perceive both in this but especially in the next. And now in this
Lesson J shall speak but of Hair, Skin, Flesh, Veins, Pannicles, and Bones,
what profit they do to man, every of them in his kind. Of the hair of the
Head, (whose creation is known in the Anatomy of the simple Members) J do
note four utilities why it was ordained. The first is, that it defends the
brain from too much heat, and too much cold, and many other outward noyances.

The second is, it makes the form or shape of the Head to seem more
seemelyer or beautifuller. For if the Head were not haired, the Face and the
Head should seem but one thing, and therefore the hair forms and shapeth
the Head from the Face.

The third is, that by color of the hair, is witnessed and known the
complexion of the Brain.

The fourth is, that the fumosities of the Brain might ascend and pass
lightlyer out by them. For if there were a sad thing, as the skin, or other
of the same nature, as the Hair is, the fumosities of the Brain might not
have passed through it so lightly, as it does by the Hair.

The Skin of the head is more Lazartus, thicker, and more Porrus, then any
other Skin of any other member of the body. And two causes J note why; One
is, that it keeps or defends the Brain from too much heat and cold as does
the Hair. The other, that it discusseth to the common wits of all things that
noyet h outwardly, for the hair is insensible. The third cause why the skin
of the head is more thicker then any other skin of the body, is this; that it
keeps the brain the more warm, and is the better fence for the Brain, and
it binds and keeps the Bones of the head the faster together.

Next follows the Flesh, the which is all Musculus or Lazartus flesh, lying
upon Pericranium without mean. And it is made of subtle Will, and of simple
flesh, Sinews, Veins and Arteirs. And why the flesh that is all Musculus or
Lazartus in every member of a man's body was made, is for three causes. The
first is, that by his thickness* he should comfort the digestion of other
members that lie by him. The second is, that through him every member is made
is the formelier, and takes the better shape. The third is, that by his means
every member of the Body, drawing to him nourishing, the which others withold
to put forth from them, as it shall be more plainlyer spoken of in the Anatomy
of the Womb.

Next follows Pericranium, or the covering of the Bones of the Head. But here
it is to be noted of a Vein and an Arteir that comes between the Flesh and
this Pericranium, that nourishes the utter part of the head, and so enters
privily through the Commissaries of the Skull bearing to the Brain and to his
Pannicles nourishing: Of whose substance, is made both Duramater, and also
Pericranium, as shall be declared in the parts contained in the Head. Here it
is to be noted of this Pannicle Pericranium, that it binds or compasses all
the Bones of the Head, unto whom is adjoined Duramater, and is also a part of
his substance, howbeit they be separated, for Duramater is nearer the Brain,
and is under the Skull*

This Pericranium was made principally for two causes: one is, that for his
strong binding together, he should make firm and stable the feeble
Commissaries or seames of the Bones of the Head. The other cause is, that it
should be a mean between the hard bone and the soft. flesh.

Next, is the Bone of the Pot of the head, keeping in the Brains, of which it
were too long to declare their names after all Authors, as they number them and
their names, for some name them after the Greek tongue, and some after the
Arabian: but in conclusion all this to our purpose. And they be numbered seven
bones in the pan or Skull of the head. The first is called the Coronall bone,
in which is the Orbits or holes of the Eyes, and it reaches from the brows
unto the midst of the head, and there it meets with the second bone called
Occipissiall, a bone of the hinder part of the head called the Noddle of the
head, which two bones Coronall and Occipissiall, be divided by the
Commissaries, in the midst of the Head. The third and fourth Bones be called
Parietales, and they be the Bones of the sideling parts of the head, and they
be divided by the Commissaries, both from the foresaid Coronall and
Occipissiall. The fifth and sixth bones be called, Pet rosa or Medosa: and these
two bones lie over the bones called, Parietales, on every side of the head one,
like Skales, in whom be the holes of the Ears. The seventh and last of the
head is called Paxillarie or Bazillarie, the which Bone is as it were a wedge
unto all the other seven Bones of the head, and does fasten them together. And
thus be all numbered. The first is, the Coronall Bone: the second, is the
Occipissiall: the third and the fourth, is Parietales: the fifth and the sixth
is Petrosa, or Mendosa. And the seventh is Paxillarie, or Bazillarie. And this
suffices for the seven bones containing the Head.

CHAP. IIII. In this Chapter is decl^red the sive things contained within the
Head.
NExt under the Bones of the Head within forth, the first thing that appears
is Duramater, then is Piamater, then the substance of the Brain, and then
Vermi forms and Letemirabile. But first we are to speak of Duramater,
whereof, and how it is sprung and made: First, it is to be noted of the Vein
and Arteire that was spoken of in the last Chapter before, how privily they
entered through the Commissaries, or seames of the Head, and there by their
Union together, they do not only bring and give the spirit of Life and
nutriment, but also do weave themselves so together, that they make this
Pannicle Duramater. It is holden up by certain threeds of himself, coming
through the said Commissaries, running into Pericranium or Pannicle that
covers the Bones of the Head. And with the foresaid Vein and Artier, and
these threeds, coming from Duramater, is woven and made this Pericranium.

And why this Pannicle Duramater is set from the Skull, J note two causes. The
first is, that if the Duramater should have touched the Skull, it should
lightly have been hurt with the hardness of the Bone. The second cause is,
that the matter that comes of wounds made in the Head piercing the Skull,
should by it the better be defended and kept from Piamater, and hurting of the
Brain. And next unto this Pannicle, there is another Pannicle called Piamater,
or Meek-mother, because it is soft and tender unto the Brain. Of whose
creation, it is to be noted as of Duramater: For the original of their first
creation is of one kind, both from the Heart and the Liver, and is Mother of
the very substance of the Brain. Why it is called Piamater, is for because it
is soft and tender to the Brain, that it nourishes the Brain and feeds it,
as does a loving Mother, unto her tender Child or Babe, for it is not so tough
and hard as is Duramater.

In this Pannicle Piamater is much to be noted of the great number of Veins
and Arteirs that are planted, ramefying throughout all his substance, giving to
the Brain both spirit and life. And this Pannicle does circumvolue or lay all
the substance of the Brain: and in some plaec of the Brain* the Veins and
the Artiers go forth of him, and enter into the divisions of the Brain, and
there drinks of the Brains substance into them, asking of the Heart, to them
the spirit of life or breath, and of the Liver nutriment. And the aforesaid
spirit or breath takes a further disgestion, and there it is made animal by
the elaboration of the spirit vital, and is turned and made animal.
Furthermore, why there be no more Pannicles over the Brain then one, is this:
If there had been but one Pannicle only, either it must have been hard or
soft, or mean, between both: If it had been hard, it should have hurt the
Brain by his hardness. If it had been soft, it should have been hurt of the
hard Bone. And if it had been but meanly, neither hard nor soft, it should
have hurt the Brain by his roughness, and also have been hurt of the hard
Bone. Therefore God and Nature has ordained two Pannicles, the one hard, and
the other soft, the harder to be a mean between the soft and the Bone: and
the softer to be a mean between the harder and the Brain it self. Also
these Pannicles be cold and dry of complexion, and ^permaticke.

Next is the Brain, of which it is marvellously to be considered and noted,
how this Piamater divides the substance of the Brain, and lappeth it into
certain selles or divisions, as thus: The substance of the Brain is divided
into three parts or ventricles, of which the foremost part is the most. The
second or middlemost is less: the third or hindermost is the least. And from
each one to another be issues or passages that are called Meats, through whom
passes the spirit of life to and fro. But here ye shall note, that every
Ventricle is divided into two parts, and in every part God has ordained and
set singular and several virtues, as thus; First, in the foremost Ventricle,
God has founded and set the common wits, otherwise, called the five Wits, as
Hearing, Seeing, Feeling, Smelling, and Tasting. And also there is one part of
this Ventricle, the virtue that is called Fantasy, and he takes all the
forms or ordinances that be disposed of the five Wits, after the meaning of
sensible things. In the other part of the same Ventricle, is ordained and
founded the Imaginative virtue, the which receives of the common Wits the
form or shape of sensitive things, as they were received of the common Wits
without-forth, representing their own shape and ordinances unto the memorative
virtue. In the middle Sell or Ventricle, there is founded and ordained the
Cogitative or estimative virtue: for he rehearses, shows, declares, and
deemeth those things that be offered unto him, by the other that were spoken of
before. In the third Ventricle and last, there is founded and ordained the
virtue Memorative: in this place is registered and kept those things that are
done and spoken with the senses and keep them in his treasury unto the putting
forth of the five or common Wits, or Organes, or Instruments of animal
works, out of whose extremities or lower parts springs Mynuca, or Marrow of
the Spondels: of whom it shall be spoken of in the Anatomy of the Neck and back.

Furthermore, it is to be noted, that from the foremost Ventricle of the
Brain, springs seven pair of sentative or feeling Sinews, the which ^e
produced to the Eyes, the Ears, the Nose, the Tongue, and to the Stomach, and
to diverse other parts of the Body: as it shall be declared in their Anatomies.
Also it is to be noted, that about the middle Ventricle is the place of
Vermiformis, with kurnelly flesh that fills, and Retemirabile, a wonderful
Cause under the Pannicles, is set or bounded with Arteirs only which come from
the Heart, in the which the vital spirit by his great labor, is turned and
made animal. And ye shll understand, that these two be the best kept parts of
all the Body: for a man shall rather dye, than any of these should suffer any
manner of griefs from without forth, and therefore God has set them far
from the Heart.

Here J note the saying of Haly Abba, of the coming of small Artiers from the
Heart, of whom (says he) is made a mavelous Net or Caul, in the which Caul
is enclosed the Brain, and in that place is laid the spirit of Feeling, from
that place has the spirit of Feeling his first creation, and from thence
passes other members, etc. Furthermore ye shall understand, that the Brain is
a member cold and moist of complexion, thin, and meanly viscous, and ^
principal member, and an official member and spermaticke. And first, why he is
a principal member, is, because he is the governor or the treasury of the
five Wits: And why he is an official member, is, because he has the effect
of feeling and stirring: And why he is cold and moist, is, that he should by
his coldness and moystnesse, abate and temper the exceeding heat and drought
that comes from the Heart. And why it is moist, is, that it should be the
more indifferenter and abler to every thing that should be reserved or gotten
into him. And why it is soft, is, that it should give place and favor to the
virtue of stirring. And why it is meanly viscous, is, that his sinews should
not be let in their working, through his overmuch hardness.

Here Galen demands a question, which is this: Whether that Feeling and
moving be brought to Nerves by one or by diverse? Or whether the aforesaid thing
be brought substantially or rather judicially? The matter (says he) is so hard
to search and to be understood, that it were much better to let it alone and
pass over it.

Aristotle entreating of the Brain, says: The Brain is a member continually
moving and ruling all other members of the body, giving unto them both Feeling
and moving: for if the Brain be let, all other members be let: and if the
Brain be well, then all other members of the body be the better disposed.

Also, the Brain has this property, that it moves and follows the moving
of the Moon: For in the waxing of the Moon, the Brain follows upwards, and
in the wane of the Moon, the Brain discendeth downwards, and vanishes in
substance of virtue: for then the Brain shrinketh together in it self, and is
not so fully obedient to the spirit of Feeling. And this is proved in men that
be Lunaticke and Mad, and also in men that be Epulenticke or having the Falling
sickness, that be most grieved in the beginning of the new Moon and in the
latter quarter of the Moon. Wherefore (says Aristotle) when it happens that
the Brain is either too dry or too moist, then can it not work his kind, for
then is the Body made cold: then are the spirits of Life melted and resolved
away: and then follows feebleness of the Wits, and of all other members of
the Body, and last Death.

CHAP. V. The Anatomy of the Face.
THe Front or the Forehead, contains nothing but the Skin and Musculus flesh,
for the Pannicle underneath, it is of Pericranium, and the Bone is of the
Coronall bone. Howbeit there it is made broad as if there were a double bone,
which makes the form of the brows. It is called the Forehead or Front, from
one ear to the other, and from the roots of the ears of the head* before
unto the Brows. But the cause why the brows were set and reared up, was, that
they should defend the eyes from noyance without-foorth: and they be ordained
with hair, to put by the humor or sweat that comes from the head. Also the
brows do help the eye-liddes, and do beautify and make fair the face, for
he that has not his brows haired, is not seemly.

And Aristotle says, that over-measurable Brows betokens an envious man.
Also high brows and thick, betokens cowardice: and meanly, signifies
gentleness of heart. Incisions about this part, ought to be done according to
the length of the body, for there the Muscle goes from one Ear to the other.
And there if any incision should be made with the length of the Muscle, it
might happen the brow to hang over the eye without remedy* as it is many times
seen, the more pity. The Brows are called Supercilium in Latin, and under
is the eyelids, which is called Cilium, and is garnished with hairs. Two
causes J find why the eyelids were ordained. The first is, that they should
keep and defend the Eye from Dust and other outward noyances. The second is,
when the eye is weary or heavy, then they should be covered and take rest
nnderneath them. Why the hairs were ordained in them is, that by them is
addressed the forms or similitudes of visible things unto the Apple of the
Eye. The Ear is a member seemly and gristly, able to be holden without, and
is the Organ or Instrument of Hearing: It is of complexion cold and dry. But
why the Ear was set up out of the head, is this, that the sounds that be very
fugitive, should lurk and abide under his shadow, till it were taken of the
Instruments of Hearing. Another cause is, that it should keep the hole that it
stands over, from things falling in that might hinder the Hearing. The
Sinews that are the Organs or Instruments of Hearing, spring each from the
Brain, from whence the seven pair of Sinews do spring, and when they come
to the hole of the Ear, there they writhe like a Winepresse: and at the ends
of them, they be like the head of a Worm, or like a little teate, in which is
received the sound, and so carried to the common wits. The Eyes be next of
nature unto the Soul: for in the Eye is seen and known the disturbances and
griefs, gladness and joys of the Soul; as Love, Wrath, and other passions.
The Eyes be the Instruments of sight. And they be compound and made of ten
things: that is to say* of seven Tunicles or Coats, and of three humors. Of
the which (says Galen) the Brain and the Head were made for the Eye, that
they might be in the highest as a Beholder in a Tower, as it was rehearsed in
the Anatomy of the Head. But diverse men hold diverse opinions of the Anatomy of
the Eyes: for some men account but three Tunicles, and some six. But in
conclusion, they mean all one thing. For the very truth is, that there be
counted and reckoned seven Tunicles, that is to say, Selirotica, Secondina,
Retyna, Vnia, Cornua, Araniae, and Conjunctiva: and these three humors. That
is, to say, Humor, Virtus, Humor Albigynus, and Humor Chrystallinus.

It is to be known how and after what manner they spring: You shall
understand, that there springs of the Brain substance of his foremost
Ventricles, two Sinews, the one from the right ^ide, and the other from the
left, and they be called the first pair; for in the Anatomy, they be the
first pair of Sinews that appear of all seven. And it is showed by Galen,
that these Sinews be hollow as a Reed* for two causes. The first is, that the
visible spirit might pass freely to the Eyes. The second is, that the form of
visible things might freely be presented to the common wits.

Now mark the going forth of these sinews. When these sinews go out from
the substance of the Brain, he comes through the Piamater, of whose
substance he takes a Pannicle or a Coat: and the cause why he takes that
Pannicle* is to keep him from anoying, and before they enter into the Skull,
they meet and are united into one sinew the length of half an inch: and then
they depart again into two, and each goes into one Eye, entering through the
Braine-panne, and these sinews be called Nervi optici. And three causes J
find why these Nerves are joined in one before they pass into the Eye. First,
if it happen any diseases in one Eye, the other should receive all the visible
spirit that before came to both.

The second is, that all things that we see should not seem two: for if they
had not been joined together, every thing should have seemed two, as it does
to a Worm, and to other Beasts.

The third is, that the sinew might stay and help the other. But hereupon
Lanfranke accords much: saying, that these two sinews came together to the
Eyes, and take a Pannicle both of Piamater and of Duramater, and when they
enter into the Orbit of the Eye, there the extremities are spread abroad, the
which are made of three substances: that is to say, of Duramater, of Piamater,
and of Nervi optici. There be engendered three Tunicles or Coats, as thus: Of
the substance that is taken from Duramater, is engendered the first Coat that
is called Secondina: and of Nervi optici, is engendered the third Coat, that is
called Retina: and each of them is more subtiller then other, and goes about
the humors without mean. And it to be understood, that each of these three
Tunicles be divided, and so they make six: that is to say* three of the parts
of the brain, and three of the parts outward, and one of Pericranium, that
covers the Bones of the head, which is called Conjunctiva.

And thus you may perceive the springing of them, as thus: Of Duramater
springs Clirotica and Cornua. Of Piamater, springs Secondina and Vnia. And
of Nervi Optici, springs Conjunctiva. Now to speak of the Humors which be
three, and their places are the middle of the Eyes; of the which, the first is
Humor Vltrus, because he is like glass, in color very clear, red, liquid, or
thin, and he is in the inward side next unto the Brain; and it is thin,
because the nutritive blood of the Christaline might pass, as water through a
sponge should be cleansed and made pure, and also that the visible spirit might
the lightlier pass through him from the Brain. And he goes about the
Christaline humor, until he meet with Albuginus humor, which is set in the
^ttermost part of the Eye. And in the midst of these humors, Vltrus and
Albiginus, is set the Chrystaline humor, in which is set principally the sight
of the Eye. And these Humors be separated and involved with the Pannicles as
aforesaid, between every humor a Pannicle; and thus is the Eye compound and
made. But to speak of every Humor and every Pannicle in his due order and
course, it would ask a long progress, and a long Chapter; but this is
sufficient for a Chyrurgion, at present.

Now to begin at the Nose; You shall understand, that from the Brain there
comes two Sinews to the holes of the Braine-pan, where begins the
concavity of the Nose, and these two be not properly Sinews, but Organs or
Instruments of smelling, and have heads like teats or paps, in which is
received the virtue of Smelling, and representing it to the common wits: Over
these two, is set Colatorium t hat which we call the Nosthrils; and is set
between the Eyes, under the upper part of the Nose. And it is to be noted,
that this concavity or ditch was made for two causes; The first is, that the
air that brings forth the spirit of Smelling might rest in it, till it were
taken of the Organs or Instrument of smelling. The second cause is, that the
superfluities of the Brain might be hidden under it, until it were cleansed:
and from this concavity there goes two holes down into themouth, of which
there is to be noted three benefits.

The first is, that when a man's mouth is close, or when he eats or sleeps,
that then the air might come through them to the Lungs, or else a man's mouth
should always be open. The second cause is, that they help to the relation
of the form of the Nose; for it is said, a man speaks in his Nose, when any
of these holes be stopped. The third cause is, that the concavity might be
cleansed by them, when a man snuffeth the Nose, or draws into his mouth
inwardly. The Nose is a member consimple or official, appearing without the
face, somewhat pliable, because it should the better be cleansed. And it is to
be perceived* that it is compound and made of Skin and Lazartus flesh, and of
two Bones standing in manner tryangle-wise, whose extremities be joined in one
part of the Nose with the Coronall bone, and the nether extremities are joined
with two Gristles, and another that divides the Nosthrils within, and holds
up the Nose.

Also there be two concavities or holes, that if one were stopped the other
should serve; Also there is in the Nose two Muscles to help the working of his
office.

And Gal^n says, that the Nose shapeth the Face most; for where the Nose
lacks (says he) all the rest of the face is the more unseemly. The Nose
should be of a mean bigness, and not to exceed in length or breadth, nor in
highness. For Aristotle says, If the Nostrils be too thin or too wide, by
great drawing in of air, it betokens great straitness of heart, and
indignation of thought. And therefore it is to be noted, that the shape of the
Members of the body, betokens and judges the affections and will of the
Soul of man, as the Philosopher says, the Temples are called the members of
the Head, and they have that name because of continual moving. And as the
Science of the Anatomy means, the spirit vital is sent from the heart to
the brain by Arteirs, and by Veins and nutrimentall blood, where the vessels
Pulsatives in the Temples be lightly hurt. Also, the Temples have dents or
holes inwardly, wherein he takes the humor that comes from the Brain, and
brings the Eyes a sleep; and if the said holes or dents be pressed and
wrung, then by trapping of the humor that continues, he makes the tears to
fall from the Eye.

The Cheeks are the sideling parts of the Face, and they contain in them
Musculus flesh, with Veins and Arteirs, and about these parts be many Muscles.
Guido makes mention of seven about the Cheeks and over-lip.

And Haly-Abbas says, there be twelve Muscles that move the neither Jaw, some
of them in opening, and other some in closing or shutting, passing under the
Bones of the Temples: and they be called Temporales: And they be the right
noble and sensatiue, of whose hurt is much peril.

Also, there be other Muscles for to grind and to chew. And to all these
Muscles comes Nerves from the Brain, to give them feeling and moving. And
also there comes to them, many Arteirs and Veins, and chiefly about the
Temples, and the angles or corners of the Eyes and the Lips. And as the
Philosophers say, the chief beauty in man is in the Cheeks, and there the
complexion of man is most known, as thus: If they be full, ruddy, and meddled
with temperate whiteness, and not fat in substance, but meanly fleshie* it
betokens hot and moist of complexion: that is, Sanguine and temperate in
color. And if they be white colored, without meddling of redness, and in
substance fat and soft, quavering* it betokens, excess and superfluity of
cold and moist: that is Flegmaticke. And if they be brown in color or cytron,
yellow, read and thin, and lean in substance, it betokens great drying
and heat: that is choleric. And if they be as it were blown in color, and
of little flesh in substance, it betokens excess and superfluity of dryness
and cold: that is Melancholy. And as Avicen says, the Cheeks do not only
show the diversities of complexions, but also the affection and will of the
Heart: for by the affection of the heart, by sudden joy or dread, he waxes
either pale or red.

The bones or bony parts, first of the Cheeks be two: of the Nose outwardly
two: of the upper Mandible, two: within the Nose three, as thus: One deviding
the Nosthrils within, and in each Nosthrill one, and they seem to be rolled
like a wafer, and have a hollownesse in them, by which the air is respired and
drawn to the Lungs, and the superfluity of the Brain is purged into the
mouthwards, as is before rehearsed. But Guido and Galen says, that there be in
the face nine bones, yet J cannot find that the nether Mandible should be of
the number of those nine: for the nether Mandible accounted there, proves them
to be Ten in number: Of which thing J will hold no argument, but remit it to
the sight of your Eyes. The parts of the mouth are five, that is to say, the
Lips, the Teeth* the Tongue, the Uvila, and the Pallet of the mouth. And
first to speak of the Lips, they are members consimile or official, full of
Musculus flesh, as is aforesaid, and they were ordained for two causes, one is;
that they should be to the mouth as a door to a house, and to keep the mouth
close till the meat were kindly chewed. The other cause is, that they should be
helpers to the pronouncing of the speech. The Teeth are members consimile or
official, spermaticke, and hardest of any other members, and are fastened in
the Cheek bones, and were ordained for three causes. First, that they should
chew a man's meat, ere it should pass down* that it might be the sooner
digested.

The second, that they should be a help to the speech: for they that lack
their teeth, do not perfectly pronounce their words.

The third is, that they should serve to beasts as weapons. The number of them
is uncertain: for some men have more, and some less: they that have the whole
number, have two and thirty: that is to say, ^ixteene above, and as many
beneath, as thus: two Dwallies, two Quadripulles, two Canniens, eight Morales,
two Causales, the Tongue is a carnous member, compound and made of many Nerves.
Ligaments, Veins and Artiers, ordained principally for three causes.

The first is, that when a man eats, the Tongue might help to turn the meat
till it were well chewed. The second cause is, that by him is received the taste
of sweet and sour, and presented by him to the common Wits. The third is,
that by him is pronounced every speech. The fleshie part of the Tongue is
white, and has in him nine Muscles, and about the root of him, is Glandulus,
in the which be two wells, and they be ever full of spettle to temper and
keep moist the Tongue, or else it would wax dry by reason of his labor, etc.
The Uvila is a member made of spongeous flesh, hanging down from the end of
the Pallet over the gullet of the throat, and is a member in complexion cold
and dry, and oftentimes when there falls rawnesse or much moystnesse into it
from the Head, then it hangs down in the throat, and lets a man to
swallow, and it is broad at the upper end, and small at the nether. It was
ordained for diverse causes. One is* that by him is helped the sound of speech:
for where the Uvila is wanting, there lacks the perfect sound of speech.
Another is, that it might help the prolation of vomits. Another is, that by
him is tempered and abated the distemperance of the air that passes to the
Lungs. Another is, that by him is guided the superfluities of the Brain, that
comes from the coletures of the Nose, or the superfluities would fall down
suddenly into the mouth, the which were a displeasure. The Pallet of the mouth
contains nothing else but a carnous Pannicle, and the Bones that be
underneath it has two divisions, one along the Pallet from the division of the
Nose, and from the opening of the other Mandible under the nether end of the
Pallet, lacking half an inch, and there it divides overthwart, and the first
division is of the Mandible: and the second, is of the Bone called Pixillary or
Bazillary, that sustaineth and binds all other Bones of the head together.
The Skin of the Pallet of the mouth is, of the inner part of the ^tomacke and
of Mire, and of Isofagus, that is the way of the meat into the Stomach. The
way how to know that such a Pannicle is of that part of the stomach, may be
known when that a man is touched within the mouth, anon he begins to tickle
in the stomach, and the nearer that he shall couch unto the throat, the more
it abhors the stomach, and oftentimes it caufeth the stomach to yield from
him that is within him, as when a man does vomit.

Also, in the mouth is ended the uppermost extremity of the Wesand, which is
called Mire, or Isofagus: And with him is contained Trachia arteria: that is,
the way of the air, whose holes be covered with a lap like a tongue, and is
griftly, that the meat and drink might slide ov er him into Isofagus: the
which gristle when a man speaks is reared up, and covers the way of the
meat, and when a man swalloweth the meat, then it covers the way of the
air, so that when the one is covered, the other is uncovered. For if a man
open the way of the air, when he swalloweth, if there fall a crum into it, he
shall never cease coughing until it be up again. And this suffices for the
Face.

CHAP. VI. The Anatomy of the Neck.
THE Neck follows next to be spoken of. Galen proves, that the Neck was
made for no other cause but for the Lungs, for all things that have no Lungs,
have neither Neck nor voice, except Fish. And you shall understand, that the
neck is all that is contained between the head and the shoulders, and
between the chin and the breast. It is compound and made of four things, that
is to say, of Spondillis, of Servicibus, of Gula, and of Gutture, the which
shall be declared more plainly hereafter: and through these pass the way of
the meat and of the air, but they be not the substance of the Neck.

The Spondels of the Neck be seven: The first is joined unto the lower part
of the head called Paxillary, or Bazillary, and in the same wise are joined
every Spondell with other, and the last of the seven, with the first of the
Back or Ridge: and the Lygaments that keep these Spondels together, are not
so hard and tough as those of the back: for why? those of the neck be more
feebler and subtiller. The cause is this, for it is necessary other while that
the Head move wtthout the neck, and the Neck without the Head, the which
might not well* have been done if they had been strong and boystrous. Of
these aforesaid seven Spondels of the Neck, there springs seven pair of
Sinews, the which be divided into the head and into the visage, to the
Shoulders and to the Arms. From the hole of the first Spondell springs the
first pair of Sinews, between the first Spondell and the second, and so forth
of all the rest in like manner as of these. Also these Sinews receive subtle
will of the sinews of the brain: of which the Will, and Sinews, and Flesh,
with a Pannicle, make the composition of Muscles Lazartes, and Brawnes, the
which three things are all one, and be the Instruments of voluntary moving
every member. The Muscles of the Neck after Galen, are numbered to be twenty,
moving the Head and the Neck. Likewise it is to be noted, that there be three
manner of fleshes in the Neck: the first is Pixwex, or Servisis, and it is
called of Children, Goldhaire, or yeallow hair, the which are certain
Longitudinals, lying on the ^ides of the Spondels, from the head down to the
latter Spondell. And they are ordained for this cause, that when the Sinews be
weary of overmuch labor with moving and travel, that they might rest upon
them as upon a Bed.

The second Flesh is Musculus, from whom springs the Tendons and Cords that
move the Head and the Neck, which be numbered twenty, as is before declared.
The third Flesh replenisheth the void places, etc. The third part of the Neck,
is called Gutture, and it is standing out of the throat boll. The fourth part
is called Gula, and the hinder part Cervix and has that name of the
Philosophers, because of the Marrow coming to the Ridgebones. It is so called,
because it is as it were a servant to the Brain: For the Neck receives and
takes of the brain, influence of virtue of moving, and sends it by sinews
to the other parts of the body downwards, and to all members of the body.

Here you shall understand, that the way of the Meat, Mire, or Isofagus, is all
one thing: and it is to be noted, that it stretches from the Mouth to the
Stomach, by the hinder part of the neck inwardly fastened to the Spondels of
the Neck, until he come to the first Spondell, and there he leaves the
Spondell and stretches till he come to the foremost part of the Breast, and
passes through Diafragma, till he come to the mouth of the stomach, and
there he is ended. Furthermore, it is to be noted that this Weasand is
compound, and made of two Tunicles or Coats (that is to say) of the inner and
of the outer. The outer Tunicle is but simple, for he needs no Retention but
only for his own nourishing: but the inner Tunicle is compound, and made of
Musculus Longitudinall Will, by which he may draw the meat from the mouth into
the stomach, as it shall be more plainly declared in the Anatomy of the
stomach. Furthermore, Cana Pulmonis, via, trachia, Arteria, all these be one
thing (that is to say) the Throat-boll, and it is set within the Neck, besides
the Wesand, toward Gula, and is compound of the Gristle, knit each with other*
And the Pannicle that is mean between the Wesand, and the Throat-boll, is
called I^mon.

Also ye shall understand, that the great Veins which ramefie by the sides of
the Neck, to the upper part of the head, is of some men called Gwidege, and of
others, Venae organices: the incision of whom is perilous. And thus it is to
be considered, that the neck of man is compound* and made of skinny Flesh,
Ligaments, and bones: and this susficeth for the Neck and the Throat.

CHAP. VII. The Anatomy of the Shoulders and Arms.
ANd first to speak of the Bones: It is to be noted, that in the Shoulder
there be two Bones, (that is to say) the Shoulder Bone, and the Kannell-bone,
and also the Adjutor bone of the Arm, are joined with the Shoulder-bones, but
they are numbered amongst them, but they are not numbered amongst the Bones of
the Arms. In the composition of the Shoulder, the first Bone is; Os Spatula,
or Shoulder Blade, whose hinder part is declined toward the Chine, and in that
end it is broad and thin, and in the upper part it is round, in whose
roundnesse is a Concavity which is called the Box or coope of the shoulder, and
which enters the Adjutor bones, and they have a binding together with strong
flexible Sinews, and are contained fast with each Bone called Clavicula, or
the Cannelbone. And this Cannell bone stretches to both the shoulders; one end
to the one shoulder, and another to the other* and there they make the
composition of the shoulders. The bones of the great Arm (that is to say) from
the shoulders to the fingers ends, be Thirty; the first is, the Adjutor bone,
whose upper end enters into the concavitie or Box of the shoulder bone: It is
but one Bone (having no fellow) and it is hollow and full of Marrow, and it is
also crooked, because it should be the more able to gripe things; and it is
hollow, because it should be lighter and more obedient to the stirring or
moving of the Brawnes.

Furthermore, this Bone has two eminencies, or two knobs in his nether
extremity, or in the juncture of the Elbow (of the which, the one is more
rising then the other) and are made like unto a Pulley to draw water with, and
the ends of these Bones enter into a Concavitie proportioned in the uppermost
ends of thetwo Focklebones, of which two bones, the less goes from the Elbow
to the Thumb, by the uppermost part of the arm, and the greater is the nether
bone from the Elbow to the little Finger. And these two bones be contained with
the Adjutor bone, and be bound with strong Ligaments, and in like manner with
the bones of the Hand. The which bones be numbered Eight, the four uppermost
be joined with the four nethermost toward the Hands: and in the third ward
of Bones be five, and they are called Ossa Patinis, and they are in the Palm
of the hand. And to them be joined the bones of the Fingers and the Thumbes, as
thus; in every finger three bones, and in the Thumb two bones, (that is to
say) the Fingers and Thumb of every hand fourteen, called Ossa digitorum: In
the Palm of the hand five, called Patinis; and between the Hand and the Wrist
eight, called Rasete: and from the Wrist to the Shoulder, three bones: all
which being accounted together, ye shall find Thirty bones in each Hand and
Arm. To speak of Sinews, Ligaments, Cords, and Brawnes: here first ye shall
understand, that there comes from Mynuea, through the Spondels of the Neck,
four sinews, which most plainly do appear in sight, as thus: one comes
into the upper part of the Arm, another into the nether part, and one into the
inner side, and another into the outer side of the Arm, and they bring from
the Brain, and from Mynuca, both feeling and moving into the Arms, as thus:
The sinews that come from the Brain and from the Marrow of the Back that is
called Mynuca, when they come to the juncture of the shoulder, there they are
mixed with the Ligaments of the same shoulder, and there the Ligaments receive
both Feeling and moving of them, and also in their mingling together, they are
made a Cord or a Tendon.

Three causes J find why the finewes were mingled with the Lygaments. The first
cause is, that the littleness of the Sinews, which many ways be made weary
by their continual moving, should be repressed by the insensiblenesse of the
Ligaments: The second is, that the littleness of the Sinews should be
through the quality of the Ligaments: The third is, the feebleness of the
Sinew, that is in sufficient, and too feeble to use his Office, but by the
strength and hardness of the Ligaments.

Now to declare what a Cord is, what a Ligament, and what a Muscle, or a
Brawne, it is enough rehearsed in the Chapter of the simple Members: but if you
will through the commandment of the Will or the Soul, draw the Arm to the
hinder parts of the body, then the outer Brawne is drawn together and the
inner enlarged, and likewise inwards, when the one Brawne does draw inwards,
the other does stretch: and when the Arm is stretched in length, then the
Cords be lengthened: but when they pass the juncture of the Shoulder and of
the Elbow, by three fingers breadth or thereabout* then it is divided by
subtle Will, and mingled with the simple flesh, and that which is made of it
is called a Brawne. And three causes J find, why that the simple flesh is
mingled with the Chord in the composition of the Brawne.

The first is, that the aforesaid Will might draw in quiet through the
temperance of the flesh.

The second is, that they temper and abate the drought of the Chord with his
moystnesse, the which drought he gets through his manifold moving. The third
is, that the form of the Brawne members should be the more fair, and of
better shape: wherefore God and Nature has clothed it with a Pannicle, that
it might the better be kept: And it is called of the Philosophers, Musculus,
because it has a form like unto a Mouse. And when these Brawnes come near a
Joint, then the Chordes spring forth of them, and are mingled with the
Ligaments again, and so moves that Joint. And so ye shall understand, that
always between every two Joints, is engendered a Brawne, proportion^d to the
same member and place, unto the last extremity of the fingers, so that as well
the least juncture has a proper feeling and moving when it needs, as has
the greatest. And after Guido, there be numbered thirteen in the Arm and Hand,
as thus; four in the Adjutor, moving the upper part of the Arm; and four in
the Fockles moving the fingers.

Now to speak somewhat of the Veins and Artiers of the arm: It is to be
understood that from Venakelis there comes two branches, the one comes to
the one Arme-pit, and the other comes to the other. And now mark their
spreading, for as it is of the one, so it is of the other, as thus; when the
branch is in the Arme-pit, there it is divided into two branches: The one
branch goes along in the inner-side of the arm, until it come to the bough
of the arm, and there it is called Bazilica, or Epatica, and so goes down
the arm till it come to the Wrist, and there it is turned to the back of the
Hand, and it is found between the little finger and the next, and there it is
called Salvatella. Now to the other branch that is in the Arme-hole, which
spreads to the outer side of the shoulder, and there he divides into two,
the one goes spreading up into the carnous part of the Head, and after
descends through the bone into the Brain, as it is declared in the Anatomy
of the Head. The other branch goes on the outward side of the Arm, and there
he is divided into two also, the one part is ended at the hand, and the other
part is folded about the arm, till it appear in the bought of the arm, and
there is called Sephalica, from thence it goes to the back of the hand, and
appears between the Tumbe and the foremost finger, and there it is called
Sephalica Ocularis.

The two Branches that J speak of, which be divided in the hinder part of the
shoulders, from each of these two (J say springs one) and those two meet
together and make one Vein which appears in the bough of the Arm, and there
it is called Mediana, or Cordialis, or Commine. And thus it is to be
understood, that of Vena Sephalica, springs Vena Ocularis, and of Vena
Bazilica, springs Vena Mediana, and in ramefying from these five principal
Veins springs innumerable, of the which a Chyrurgion has no great charge:
for it suffices us to know the principals.

To speak of Arteirs, you shall understand, that wheresoever there is found a
Vein, there is an Arteir under him: and if there be found a great Vein, there
is found a great Artier, and whereas is a little Vein, there is a little
Artier: for wheresoever there goes a Vein to give nutriment, there goes an
Artier to bring the spirit of life. Wherefore it is to be noted, that the
Artiers lie more deeper in the flesh then the Veins do: for they carry and
keep in them more precious blood then does the Vein, and therefore he has
need to be further from dangers outwardly: and therefore, God and Nature have
ordained for him to be closed in two Coats, where the Vein has but one.

The Breast or Thorax, is the Arc or Chest of the spiritual members of man,
as says the Philosopher: where it is to be noted, that there be four things
containing, and eight contained, as thus. The four containing, are, the
Skin, Musculus flesh, the Pappes and the Bones. The parts contained, are, the
Heart, the Lungs, Pannicles, Ligaments, Nerves Veins, Artiers, Mire, or
Isofagus. Now the Skin and the flesh are known in their Anatomy. It is to be
noted, that the flesh of the Pappes differs from the other flesh of the body;
for it is white, glandulus, and spongeous, and there is in them both Nerves,
Veins and Artiers, and by them* they have Coliganes with the Heart, the Liver,
the Brain, and the Generative members. Also, there is in the Breast (as old
Authors make mention) Lxxx, or XC. Muscles; for some of them be common to the
Neck, some to the Shoulders, and to the Spades; some to Diafragma or the
Midriffe; some to the Ribs, some to the Back, and some to the Breast it self.
But J find a certain profitablenesse in the creation of the Pappes, as well in
man as in woman; for in Man it defends the spirituals from annoyance
outwardly, and another by their thickness they comfort the natural heat in
defiance of the spirits. And in Women, there is the generation of Milk; for in
women there comes from the Matrix into their breasts many Veins which bring
into them menstruall blood, the which is turned through the digestive virtue,
from red color into white, like the color of the Paps even as Chilley coming
from the stomach to the Liver is turned into the color of the Liver.

Now to speak of the Bones of the breast: they be said to be triple or
threefold, and they be numbered to the seven in the Breast before, and their
length is according to the breadth of the Breast, and their extremities or ends
be gristly as the Ribs be. And in the upper end of Thorax is a hole or a
concavity in which is set the foot of the Fockle-bone or Cannel-bone, and in
the nether end of Thorax, against the mouth of the stomach, hangs a Gristle
called Ensiforme, and this Gristle was ordained for two causes. One is, that it
should defend the Stomach from hurt outwardly. The second is, that in time of
fullness it should give place to the stomach in time of need when it desires,
etc.

Now to speak of the parts of the Back here following; there be twelve
Spondels through whom passes Mynuca, of whom springs twelve pair of Nerves,
that brings both feeling and moving to the Muscles of the Breast aforesaid.
And here it is to be noted, that in every side there be twelve Ribs, that is
to say, seven true and five falfe, because these five be not so long as the
other seven be: and therefore called false Ribs, as it may be perceived by the
sight of the Eye. Likewise, of the parts that be inwardly, and first of the
Heart, because he is the principal of all other members and the beginning of
Life: he is set in the midst of the Breast severally by himself, as Lord and
King of all members. And as a Lord or a King ought to be served of his
subjects that have their living of him; so are all other members of the Body
subjects to the Heart: for they receive their living of him, and they all do
service many ways unto him again. The substance of the Heart is as it were
Lazartus flesh, but it is spermatick, and an official member, and the
beginning of life, and he gives to every member of the Body, both blood of
life, and spirit of breath, and heat: for if the Heart were of Lazartus flesh,
his moving and stirring should be voluntary and not natural, but the contrary
is true: for it were impossible that the Heart should be ruled by Will only,
and not by Nature. The Heart has the shape and form of a Pineapple, and the
broad end thereof is upwards, and the sharp end is downwards: depending a
little toward the left side.

And here it is to be noted, that the Heart has blood in his substance,
whereas all other members have it but in their Veins and Arteries: Also the
Heart is bound with certain Ligaments to the back part of the Breast, but
these Lygaments touch not the substance of the Heart, but in the over-part they
spring forth of him, and is fastened as is aforesaid. Furthermore, the Heart
has two Ventricles, or Concavities, and the left is higher then the right, and
the cause of his hollownesse, is this: For to keep the blood for his
nourishing, and the air to abate and temper the great heat that he is in,
the which is kept in Concavities. Now here it is to be noted, that to the
right Ventrickle of the Heart, comes a Vein from the great Vein called
Venakelis, that receives all the substance of the blood from the Liver. And
this Vein that comes from Venakelis, enters into the heart of the right
Ventricle, as J said before, and in him is brought a great portion of the
thickest blood to nourish the heart with, and the residue that is left of this,
is made subtle through the virtue of the Heart, and then this Blood is sent
into a Concavity or pit in the midst of the Heart, between the two Ventricles,
and therein it is made hot and purified, and then it passes into the left
Ventricle, and there is engendered in it, a Spirit, that is cleerer, brighter,
and subtiller, then any Corporal or Bodily thing, that is engendered of the
four Elements: For it is a thing, that is a mean between the Body and the
Soul. Wherefore it is likened of the Philosophers to be more liker heavenly
things, then earthly things.

Also it is to be noted, that from the left Ventricle of the heart springs
two Arteirs: the one having but one Coat, and therefore is called Arteria
Venalis: And this Arteir carries Blood from the Heart to the Lungs, the which
Blood is vaporous, that is tried and and left of the Heart, and is brought by
this Artery to the Lungs, to give him Nutriment, and there he receives of the
Lungs air, and brings it to the heart to refresh him with.

Wherefore Galen says, that he finds that man's Heart is natural and
friendly to the Lungs: For he gives him of his own Nutrimentall to nourish
him with, and the Lungs rewards him with air to refresh him with again, etc.

The other Artier that has two Coats, is called Vena Arterialis, or the great
Artery, that ascends and descends, and of him springs all the other
Artiers that spread to every member of the Body; for by him is united and
quickened all the members of the body. For the Spirit that is retained in them,
is the instrument or treasure of all the virtue of the Soul. And thus it
passes until it come to the Brain, and there he is turned into a further
digestion, and there he takes another Spirit and so is made animal; and at
the Liver nutrimentall, and at the Testicles generative: and thus it is made a
spirit of every kind, so that he being the mean of all manner of operations
and workings, takes effect. Two causes J find, why these Artiers have two
coats. One is, that one coat is not sufficient nor able to withstand the
violent moving and stirring of the spirit of Life, that is carried in them.

The second cause is, that the thing that is carried about from place to place,
is of so precious a Treasure that it had the more need of good keeping. And of
some Doctors, this Artier is called the Pulsative vein, or the beating Vein;
for by him is perceived the power and might of the Heart, etc. Wherefore God
and Nature have ordained, that the Artiers have two coats. Also, there is in
the Heart three Pellikles, opening and closing the going in of the Heart blood
and spirit in convenient time. Also, the Heart has two little Ears, by whom
comes in and passes out the air that is prepared for the Lungs. There is
also found in the heart a Cartilaginous auditament to help and strengthen the
same Heart. The Heart is covered with a strong Pannicle, which is called of
some Capsula Cords, or Pericordium, the which is a strong case, unto whom
comes Nerves as to other inward members. And this Pannicle Pericordium,
springs of the upper Pannicle of the Midriffe. And of him springs another
Pannicle called Mediastinum, the which separateth the Breast in the midst, and
keeps it that the Lungs fall not over the Heart. There is also another
Pannicle that covers the Ribs inwardly, that is called Plura, of whom the
Midriffe takes his beginning. And it is said of many Doctors, that Duramater
is the Original of all the Pannicles within the body, and thus one takes of
another.

CHAP. VIII. The Anatomy of the Lungs.
THe Lungs is a member Spermatick of the first creation, and his natural
Complexion is cold and dry, and in his accidental complexion he is cold and
moist, wrapped in a nervous Pannicle, because it should gather together the
softer substance of the Lungs, and that the Lungs might feel by the means of
the Pannicle, that which he might not feel in himself. Now to prove the
Lungs to be cold and dry of kind, it appears by his swift stirring, for he
lies ever waving over the Heart, and about the heart. And that he is cold and
moist in operation, it appears in that he receives of the Brain many cold
matters, as Catarres and Rheumes* whose substance is thin. Also, J find in the
Lungs three kinds of substance. One is a Vein coming from the Liver, bringing
with him the crude or raw part of the Chylle to feed the Lungs. Another is,
Arteria venealis coming from the Heart, bringing with him the spirit of Life
to nourish him with. The third is, Trachia Arteria, that brings in air to
the Lungs, and it passes through all the left part of them to do his office.

The Lungs is divided into five Lobbes or Pellikles, or five portions, (that is
to say) three in the right side, and two in the left side. And this was done
for this cause, that if there fell any hurt in the one part, the others should
serve and do their office. And three causes J find, why the Lungs were
principally ordained. First, that they should draw cold wind and refresh the
heart. The second, that they should change and alter, and purify the air
before it come to the Heart, lest the heart should be hurt and annoyed with the
quantity of the air. The third cause is, that they should receive from the
Heart the fumous superfluities that he puts forth with his breathing etc.

Behind the Lungs toward the Spondels, passes Mire or Isofagus, of whom it is
spoken of in the Anatomic of the Neck. And also there passes both Veins and
Artiers, and all these with Trachia Arteria, do make a Stoke, replete unto the
Gullet with the Pannicles, and strong Ligaments, and Glandulus flesh to fulfill
the void places. And last of all, is the Midriffe, and it is an official
member made of two Pannicles and Lazartus flesh, and his place is in the midst
of the body overthwart, or in breadth under the region of the Spiritual
members, separating them from the Matrix.

And three causes J find, why the Midriffe was ordained. First, that it should
divide the Spirituals from the Nutrates. The second, that it should keep the
vital color or heat to descend down to the Nutrates. The last is, that the
malicious fumes reared up from the Nutrates, should not annoy the Spirituals or
vitals, etc.

The Womb is the region or the City of all the Intrailes, the which reaches
from the Midriffe down unto the Share inwardly, and outwardly from the Reins
or Kidneys, down to the bone Peeten about the privy parts. And this Womb is
compound and made of two things (that is to say) of Syfac, and Myrac; Syfac is
a Pannicle and a member spermatick, official, sensible, Sinewie, compound of
subtle Will, and in complexion cold and dry, having his beginning in the inner
Pannicle of the Midriffe. And it was ordained, because it should contain and
bind together all the Intrailes, and that he defend the Musculus, so that he
oppress not the Natural members. And that he is strong and tough, it is
because he should not be lightly broken, and not those things that are
contained go not forth, as it happens to them that are broken, etc. Myrac is
compound, and made of four things (that is to say) of Skin outwardly, of
Fatness, of a Carnous Pannicle, and of Musculus Flesh. And that it is to be
understood, that all the whole from Syfac outward, is called Myrac, it
appears well (by the words of Galen) where he commands, that in all wounds
of the Womb, to sewe the Syfac, with the Mirac, and by that it proves, that
there is nothing without the Syfac but Mirac. And in this Mirac, or outer part
of the Womb, there is noted eight Muscles; two Longitudinals, proceeding from
the shield of the stomach, unto Os Pecten: two Latitudinals coming from the
back-wards to the Womb: and four Transverse, of the which, two of them spring
from the Ribs on the right side, and go to the left side, to the Bones of
the Hanches, or of Pecten: and the other two spring from the Ribs on the left,
and come over the womb to the right parts, as the other before does.

Here is to be noted, that by the virtue of the subtle will that is in the
Musculus Longitudinall, is made perfect the virtue attractiue: and by the
Musculus Transverse, is made the virtue retentive: and by the Musculus
Latitudinall, is made the virtue expulsive. It is thus to be understood, that
by the virtue attractive, is drawn down into the Intrailes, all
superfluities, both water, wind, and diet. By the virtue retentive, all things
are withheld and kept, until Nature have wrought his kind. And by the
virtue expulsive is put forth all things, when Nature provokes any thing to be
done. Galen says, that Wounds or Incisions be more perilous in the midst of
the womb, then about the sides; for there the parts be more tractable then any
other parts be. Also he says, that in wounds piercing the womb, there shall
not be made good incarnation, except Sifac be sewed with Mirac. Now to come to
the parts contained within: First, that which appears next under the Sifac is
Omentum, or Zirbus, the which is a Pannicle covering the stomach and the
Intrailes, implanted with many Veins and Arteirs, and not a little fatness
ordained to keep moist the inward parts.

This Zirbus is an osficiall member, and is compound of a Vein and an Arteir,
the which enters and makes a line of the outer Tunicle of the stomach, unto
which Tunicle hangs the Zirbus, and covers all the Guts down to the share.

Two causes J find, why they were ordained. One is, that they should defend the
Nutratives outwardly. The second is, that through his own power and virtue, he
should strengthen and comfort the digestion of all the Nutrates, because they
are more feebler then other members be, because they have but a thin womb
or Skin, etc. Next Zirbus appears the Intrails or guts, of which Galen says,
that the Guts were ordained in the first Creation to convey the dross of the
meat and drink* and to cleanse the body of superfluities. And here it is to be
noted, that there be fix portions of one whole Gutte, which both in man and
Beast begins at the nether mouth of the stomach, and so contains forth to
the end of the Fundament. Nevertheless he has diverse shapes and forms, and
diverse operations in the Body, and therefore he has diverse names. And hereupon
the Philosophers say, that the lower womb of a man, is like unto the womb of
a Swine. And like as the stomach has two Tunicles, in like manner have all
the Guts two Tunicles. The first portion of the Guts is called Duodenum; for he
is 12. Inches of length, and covers the nether part of the Stomach, and
receives all the dross of the stomach: The second portion of the Guts is
called Iejunium, for he is evermore empty, for to him lies evermore the Chest
of the Gall, beating him sore, and draws forth of him all the dross, and
cleanses him clean: the third portion or Gut, is called Yleon, or small Gut,
and is in length fifteen or sixteen Cubits. In this Gut oftentimes falls a
disease called Yleaea Passio. The fourth Gut is called Monoculus, or blind Gut,
and it seems to have but one hole or mouth, but it has two, one near unto
the other, for by the one all things go in, and by the other they go out
again. The fifth is called Colon, and receives all the dross deprived from
all profitablenesse, and therefore there comes not to him any Veins
Miseraices, as to the other. The sixth and last, is called Rectum or Longaon,
and he is ended in the Fundament, and has in his nether end four Muscles, to
hold, to open, to shut, and to put out, etc. Next is to be noted of senterium,
the which is nothing else but a texture of innumerable Veins Miseraices,
ramefied of one Vein called Porta Epates, covered and defended of Pannicles
nnd Lygaments coming to the Intrails, with the back full of fatness and
Glandulus flesh, etc.

The Stomach is a member compound and Spermaticke, sinnowy and sensible, and
therein is made perfect the first digestion of Chile. This is a necessary
member to all the Body, for if it fail in his working, all the members of the
Body shall corrupt.

Wherefore Galen says, that the Stomach was ordained principally for two
causes. The first, that it should be to all the members of the Body, as the
earth is to all that are engendered of the earth, that is, that it should desire
sufficient meat for all the whole Body. The second is, that the stomach
should be a sack or Chest to all the Body for the meat, and as a Cook to
all the members of the Body. The stomach is made of two Pannicles, of which
the inner is Nerveous, and the outer Carneous. This inner Pannicle has
Musculus Longitudinals, that stretches along from the stomach to the mouth,
by the which he draws to him meat and drink, as it were hands. And he has
Transverse will, for to withold or make retention. And also the outer
Pannicle has Latitudinall will* to expulse and put out: and that by his heat
he should keep the digestive virtue of the stomach, and by other heates given
by his Neighbors, as thus. It has the Liver on the right side, chasing and
beating him with his lobes or figures: and the Spleen on the left side, with
his fatness and Veins, sending to him Melancholy, to exercise his appetites:
and about him is the heart, quickening him with his Artiers: Also the Brain
sending to him a Branch of Nerves to give him feeling. And he has on the
hinder part, descending from the parts of the back many Lygaments, with the
Artiers joined to the Spondels of the Back. The form or figure of this
Stomach is long, in likeness of a Goord, crooked: and that both holes be in
the upper part of the body of it, because there should be no going out of it
unadvisedly of those things which are received into it. The quantity of the
stomach commonly holds two Pitchers of water, and it may suffer many
passions, and the nether mouth of the stomach is narrower then the upper, and
that for three causes. The first cause is, that the upper receives meat great
and boisterous in substance, that there being made subtle, it might pass into
the nether. The second is, for by him passes all the meats, with their
chilosity from the stomach to the Liver. The third is, for that through him
passes all the dross of the stomach to the guts. And this suffices for the
Stomach, etc.

The Liver is a principal member, and official, and of his first creation
spermatick, complete in quantity of blood, of himself insensible, but by
accidence he is insensible, and in him is made the second digestion, and is
lapped in a sinowie Pannicle. And that he is a principal member, it appears
only by the Philosophers, by Avicen and Galen. And it is official as is the
Stomach, and it is of spermatick matter, and sinowie of the which is engendered
his Veins. And because it was like in quantity, Nature has added to it cruded
blood, to the accomplishment of sufficient quantity, and is lapped in a sinowie
Pannicle. And why the Liver is crudded, is because the Chile which comes from
the Stomach to the Liver, should should be turned into the color of blood.

And why the Liver was ordained, was because that all the nutrimentall blood be
engendered in him. The proper place of the Liver is under the false Ribs in
the right side. The form of the Liver is gibbous or bunchie on the back side,
and it is somewhat hollow like the inside of an hand. And why it is so shapen,
is, that it should be pliable to the stomach (like as a hand does to an
Apple) to comfort her digestion, for his heat is to the stomach, as the heat
of the fire is to the Pot or Cauldron that hangs over it.

Also the Lungs is bound with his Pellikles to the Diafragma, and with strong
Ligaments. And also he has Coliganes with the stomach and the Intrailes, and
with the Heart and the Reins, the Testikles and other members. And there are
in him five Pellikles, like five fingers. Galen calls the Liver Messa
Sanguinaria, containing in it self four substances, Natural and
Nutrimentall. The Naturals is sent with the blood to all parts of the body, to
be engendered and nourished. And the Nutrimentals be sequestrate and sent to
places ordained for some helpings. These are the places of the Humors, the
blood in the Liver, Choler in the Chest or Gall, Melancholy to the Spleen,
Phlegm to the Lungs and the Junctures* the watery superfluities to the Reins
and Vesike. And they go with the Blood, and sometime they putrify and make
Fevers, and some be put out to the Skin, and be resolved by sweat, or by
Scabs, by Pushes, or by Impostumes.

And these four natural Humors (that is to say) Sanguine, Choler,
Melancholy, and Phlegm, be engendered and distributed in this manner: First, ye
shall understand, that from the Spermaticke matter of the Liver inwardly, there
is engendered two great Veins, of the which, the first and the greatest is
called Porta, and comes from the concavity of the Liver, of whom springs
all the small Veins Miseraices: and these Miseraices, be to Vena Porta, as the
branches of a Tree be to the stock of a Tree. For some of them be contained
with the bottom of the stomach: some with Duodenum, some with Jejunium, some
with Yleon, and some with Monoculus, or Saccus. And from all these Guts they
bring to Vena Porta, the succosity of Chiley, going from the stomach, and
distribute it into the substance of the Liver. And these Veins Miseraices, be
innumerable. And in these Veins begins the second Digestion and ends in the
Liver, like as it does in the stomach the first Digestion.

So it proves that Vena Porta, and Vena Miseraices, serve to bring all the
succosity of all the meat and drink that passes the Stomach to the Liver,
and they spread themselves thorough the substance of the Liver inwardly, and
all they stretch toward the gibous (or bowing part of the Liver,) and there
they meet, and go all into one Unity, and make the second great Vein, called
Vena Vlis, or Concava, or Vena Ramosa: all is one, and he with his Roots
draws out all the blood engendered from the Liver, and with his branches
Ramefying upwards and downwards, carries and conveyeth it to all other
Members of the Body to be nourished with, where is made perfect the third
digestion. And also there goes from the Liver Veins, bearing the superfluites
of the third Digestion to their proper places, as it shall be declared
hereafter.

Now to speak of the Gall, or of the Chest of the Gall: It is an osficiall
member, and it is supermaticke and sinowie, and has in it a subtle Will, and
it is a purse or a Panniculer Vesikle in the hollownesse of the Liver, about
the middle Pericle or Lobe, ordained to receive the Choleric superfluities
which are engendered in the Liver: The which purse or bag has three holes or
Necks; By the first he draws to him from the Liver the Choler, that the
Blood be not hurt by the Choler. By the second Neck he sends to the bottom
of the stomach Choler, to further the Digestion of the stomach. And by the
third Neck he sends the Choler regularly from one Gut to another, to cleanse
them of their superfluities and Dross: and the quantity of the purse, may
contain in it half a pint, etc.

And next is the Spleen, or the Milte, the which is a spermaticke member, as
are other members: and osficiall, and is the receptory of the Melancholious
superfluities that are engendered in the Liver: and his place is on the left
side, transversly linked to the stomach, and his substance is thin. And two
causes J* find, why he was ordained there. The first is, that by the
Melancholious superfluities which are engendered of the Liver which he draws
to him, he is nourished with. The second cause is, that the nutritive Blood
should by him be made the more purer, and clean, from the Dross and thickning
of the Melancholy, etc.

And next of the Reins and Kidneyes: It is to be understood, that within the
Region of the Nutrites backwards, are ordained the Kidneyes to cleanse the Blood
from the watery superfluities, and they have each of them two passages or holes,
or necks; by the one is drawn the water from Venakelis, by two Veins which
are called Vencae Aemulg^ntes, the length of the ^inger of a man, and issues
from the Liver: and by the other is sent the same water to the Bladder, and is
called P^ros Vrithides.

The substance of the Kidneyes is Lazartus flesh, having Longitudinall will,
and their place is behind on each side of the Spondels, and they are two in
number, and the right Kidney lies somewhat higher then the left, and is bound
fast to the back with Lygaments* The Philosopher says, that man's Kidneyes are
like the Kidneyes of a Cow, full of hard concavities; and therefore the Sores
of them are hard to cure. Also, they are more harder in substance, then any
other fleshly member, and that for two causes. One is, that he be not much
hurt of the sharpness of the Urine. The other is, that the same Urine that
passes from him, might the better be altered and cleansed through the same.
Also, there comes from the Heart to each of the Kidneyes, an Artier that
brings with him Blood, heat, spirit, Life. And in the same manner there
comes a Vein from the Liver, that brings blood to nourish the Kidneyes,
called Blood nutrimentall.

The grease of the Kidneyes or Fatness, is as of other members, but it is an
official member, made of thin Blood, congealed and cruded through cold, and
there is ordained the greater quantity in his place; because it should receive
and temper the heat of the Kidneyes, which they have of the biting sharpness
of the water.

Now by the Kidneyes upon the Spondels passes Venakelis, or Venacua, which is
a Vein of great substance; for he receives all the Nutrimentall blood from
the Liver, and from him passes many small Pipes on every side, and at the
Spondell between the shoulders, he divides himself whole in two great
branches, the one goes into the one arm, and the other into the other, and
there they devide themselves into many Veins and branches, as is declared in
the Arms.

CHAP. IX. The Anatomy of the Haunches and their parts.
THe Haunches are the lower part of the Womb, joining to the Thighs and the
secret members. And three things there are to be noted thereof. The first is,
of the parts containing: the second is of the parts contained, and the third is
of the parts proceeding outward. The parts containing outwardly, be Myrac and
Syfac, the Zirbus and the bones. The part contained outwardly, are the Vezike,
or Bladder: the Spermaticke vessels, the Matrix in women, Longaon, Nerves,
Veins, and Artiers, descending downwards; The parts proceeding outward, are
the Buttocks and the Muscles, descending to the Thighs, of which it is to be
spoken of in order. And first of the parts containing: as of Myrac, Syfac, and
Zirbus, there is enough spoken of in the Anatomy of the Womb. But as for the
Bones of the Hanches, there be in the parts of the back three Spondels of Ossa
sacri, or of the Hanches: and three Cartaliginis Spondels of Ossa Cande, called
the Taile-bone.

And thus it is proved, that there is in every man thirty Spondels, and thus
they are to be numbered: in the Neck seven, in the Ridge twelve* in the Reins
five: and in the Hanches six: And it is to be noted, that every Spondell is
hollow in the midst: through which hollownesse passes Nuca from the Brain,
or the Marrow of the Back. And some Authors say, that Mynuca is of the
substance that the Brain is of: For it is like in substance, and in it self
gives to the Nerves both the virtue of Moving and Feeling.

And also every Spondell is holden on every side, through the which holes, both
Artiers and Veins do bring from the Heart and the Liver both Life and
nourishment, like as they do to the Brain; and from the Pannicle of Mynuca,
or the Marrow of the back, through the holes of the sides of the Spondels,
springs forth Nerves motives, and there they intermingle themselves with the
strong Lygaments that be insensible, and so the Lygaments receive that feeling
of the Nerves, which the Nerves takes of Mynuca. And by this reason many
Authors prove, that Mynuca is of the same substance that the Brain is of, and
the Pannicles of the Nuca is of the same substance of the Pannicles of the
Brain, etc. And each of these Spondels be bound fall one with another, so
that one of them may not well be named without another. And so all these
Spondels together, contained one by another are called the Ridge-bone, which is
the foundation of all the shape of the Body. They with the la^t Spondell be
contained or joined to the Bones of the Haunches, and they be the upholders of
all the Spondels. And these Bones be small toward the Taile-bone, and broad
toward the Hanches, and before they join and make Os Pectinis. And so they
be broad in the parts of the Jles, and therefore some Authors calls it Ylea.
And each of these two Bones toward the Liver has a great round hole, into
which is received the Bone called Vertebra, or the Whorlebone. Also besides
that place there is a great hole or way, through the which passes from above
Musculus Veins and Artiers, and go into the Thighs. And thus it is to be
noted, that of this Bone Pecten, and the Bone Vertebra, is made the juncture of
the Thigh.

Now to speak of the parts contained, the first thing that comes to sight is
the Bladder, the which is an official member, compound of two Nervous
Pannicles, in complexion cold and dry, whose Neck is carnous, and has Muscles
to withold, and to let go: and in man it is long, and is contained with the
yard, passing through Peritoneum, but in women it is shorter, and is contained
with the Vulva. The place of the Bladder, is between the bone of the Share and
the Tayle-gut, called Longaon, and in women, it is between the aforesaid bone
and the Matrix.

And in it is implanted two long vessels coming from the Kidneyes, who^e names
be Porri Vrikcides, bringing with them the Urine or water from the Kidneys to
the Bladder, which privily enters into the holes of the Pannicles of the
Bladder, by a natural moving between Tunicle and Tunicle, and there the Urine
finds the hole of the nether Tunicle, and there it enters privily into the
concavity of the bladder, and the more that the Bladder is filled with Urine,
the straiter be the two Pannicles comprised together; for the holes of the
Tunicles, be not even one against another; and therefore if the bladder be
never so full, there may none go back again. The form of it is round, the
quantity of it is a Pitcher full, in some more, in some less, etc.

Also there is found two other vessels, called Vaza Seminaria, or the
Spermaticke Vessels. And they come from Venakelis, bringing blood to the
Testikles, as well in Man, as in Woman, the which by his further digestion it
is made sperme or nature in men: they be put outward for the Testikles be
without* but in women it abides within, for their. Testikles stand within: as
it shall be declared hereafter.

Next follows the Matrix in women: the Matrix in women is an official
member, compound and Nerveous, and in complexion cold and dry: and it is the
field of man's generation, and it is an instrument susceptive, that is to say, a
thing receiving or taking: and her proper place is between the Bladder and the
Gut Longaon, the likeness of it, is as it were a yard reversed and turned
inward, having Testikles likewise, as aforesaid. Also the Matrix has two
Concavities or Selles, and no more, but all Beasts have as many Selles as they
have Pappes-heads. Also it has a long Neck like an Urinall, and in every
Neck it has a mouth, that is to say, one within, and another without. The
inner in the time of conception is shut, and the outer part is open as it was
before: and it has in the midst a Lazartus Pannicle, which is called in
Latin Tengit^: And in the creation of this Pannicle, is found two utilities.
The first is, that by it goes forth the Urine, or else it should be shed
throughout all the Vulva: The second is, that when a woman does set her Thighs
abroad* it alters the air that comes* to the Matrix for to temper the
heat.

Furthermore, the Neck that is between these two aforesaid mouths, in her
concavity has many involusions and pleates, joined together in the manner of
Rose-leaves before they be fully spread or ripe, and so they be shut together
as a purse mouth, so that nothing may pass forth but urine, until the time of
Childing. Also about the middle of this neck be certain Veins in Maidens,
the which in time of deflowring, be corrupted and broken. Furthermore, in the
sides of the outer mouth, are two Testicles or Stones, and also two vessels of
Sperme, shorter then man's vessels, and in time of Coyt the Woman's sperme is
shead down in the bottom of the Matrix. Also from the Liver there comes to
the Matrix many Veins, bringing to the Child nourishing at the time of a
woman's being with Child: and those Veins, at such time as the Matrix is void,
bring thereto superfluities from certain members of the Body, whereof are
engendered woman's Flowers, etc.

And forasmuch, as it has pleased Almighty God to give the knowledge of these
his Mysteries and Works unto his Creatures in this present World. Here J
suppose to declare what thing Embreon is, and his Creation. The noble
Philosophers, as Galen, Avicen, Bartholmeus* and diverse others, writing upon
this matter, say: That Embreon is a thing engendered in the Mothers womb, the
origin all whereof is, the Sperme of the Man and of the Woman, of the which is
made by the might and power of GOD, in the mothers womb a Child: as hereafter
more at large shall be declared. First, the field of Generation called the
Matrix, or the Mother, is known in the Anatomy, whose place is properly
(betwixt the Bladder and Longaon) in the Woman, in which place is sown by the
Tillage of man, a covenable matter of kindly heat: For kindly heat is cause
efficient both of doing and working, and Spirit that gives virtue to the Body,
and governs and rules that virtue: the which Seed of generation comes from
all the parts of the Body, both of the Man and Woman, with consent and will of
all Members, and is shead in the place of Conceiving, where through the virtue
of Nature, it is gathered together in the Celles of the Matrix or the Mother,
in whom by the way of the working of man's Seed, and by the way of suffering of
the Woman's Seed mixed together, so that each of them works in other, and
suffers in other, there is engendered Embreon. And further it is to be noted,
that this Sperme that comes both to man and woman, is made and gathered of
the most best and purest drops of Blood in all the body, and by the labor and
chafing of the Testikles or Stones, this Blood is turned into another kind, and
is made Sperme. And in man it is hot, white, and thick: wherefore it may not
spread nor run abroad of it self, but runs and takes temperance of the
Woman's sperme which has contrary qualities: For the woman's sperme is thinner,
colder, and feebler.

And as some Authors hold opinion, when this matter is gathered into the right
side of the Matrix, then it happens a Male-kind, and likewise on the left the
Female, and where the virtue is most, there it favors most. And further it
is to be noted, that like as the Renet of the Cheese has by himself the way
or virtue of working, so has the Milk by way of suffering: and as the Renet
and milk make the Cheese, so does the sperme of Man and Woman make the
generation of Embreon, of the which thing springs (by the virtue of kindly
heat) a certain Skin or Caul, into the which it lappeth it self in,
wherewith afterward it is tied to the Mothers womb, the which covering
comes forth with the birth of the Child: and if it happen that any of the
Skin remain after the birth of the Child, then is the Woman in peril of her
life.

Furthermore, (it is said) that of this Embreon is engendered the Heart, the
Liver, the Brains, Nerves, Veins, Arteirs, Chords, Lygaments, Skins,
Gristles, and Bones, receiving to them by kindly virtue the menstruall blood,
of which is engendered both flesh and fatness. And as Writers say, the first
thing that is shapen, be the principals: as is the Heart, Liver, and Brain.
For of the Heart springs the Artiers: of the Liver, the Veins: and of the
Brain, the Nerves: and when these are made, Nature makes and shapeth both
Bones and Gristles to keep and save them, as the bones of the head for the
Brain: the Breast Bones, and the Ribs, for the Heart and the Liver. And after
these springs all other members one after another: and thus is the Child bred
forth in four degrees, as thus. The first is, when the said Sperme or Seed is
at the first as it were Milk. The second is, when it is turned from that kind
into another kind, is yet but as a lump of Blood, and this is called of
Hypocrates, Fettus. The third degree is, when the principals be shapen, as the
Heart, Liver, and Brain. The fourth and last, as when all the other members
be perfectly shapen, then it receives the Soul, with Life and Breath, and
then it begins to move it self alone. Now in these four degrees aforesaid,
in the first as Milk, it continues seven days* in the second as Fettus, nine
days: in the third, as a lump of Flesh engendring the principals, the space
of nine days: and in the fourth, unto the time of full perfection of all the
whole members, is the space of eighteen days: So is there fix and forty
days from the day of Conception, unto the day of full perfection and receiving
of the Soul, as God best knows.

Now to come again to the Anatomy of the Haunches: Then come we to Longaon,
otherwise called the Taile-gut, whose substance is Pannicular, as of all the
other Bowels: the length of it is of a span long stretching nigh to the Reins,
his nether part is called Annis, (that is to say) the Towell: and about him is
found two Muscles, the one to open* the other to shut. Also there is found in
him five Ve^nes or Branches of Veins, called Venae Emoraidales, and they have
Colliganes with the Bladder: whereof they are partners in their grieves.

And when this Longaon is raised up, then ye may see the Veins and Artiers,
and Sinews, how they be branched and bound down to the nether parts: the
parts proceeding outwardly, are Didimus Peritoneum, the Yard, the Testikles,
and Buttocks. And first, it shall be spoken of the Yard, or of man's generative
members, the which dureth unto that part that is called Peritoneum, the which
place is from the Coddes, unto the Fundament, whereupon is a seame. Wherefore
says the Philosopher, man's Yard is in the end and term of the share.

The Yard is an official member, and the Tiller of man's generation, compound,
and made of Skin, Brawnes, Tendons, Veins, Arteirs, Sinews, and great
Lygaments: and it has in it two passages, or principal issues, one for the
Sperme, and another for the Urine. And as the Philosophers say, the quantity of
a common yard, is eight or nine Inches, with measurable bigness proportioned
to the quantity of the Matrix.

This member has (as Avicen says) three holes, through one passes insensible
polisions and wind, that causes the Yard to rise: the other two holes is
declared before. Also the yard has a Skin, and about the head thereof, it is
double, and that men call Praeputium; and this Skin is moveable, for through
his consecration the Spermaticke matter is the better, and sooner gathered
together, and sooner cast forth from the Testikles; for by him, is had the most
delectation in the doing. And the foremost part of the head of the Yard before,
is made of a brawny flesh, the which if it be once lost, it is never restored
again, but it may be well skinned, etc.

The Coddes is a compound member, and an official, and though it be counted
amongst the generative members, yet it is called a principal member, because
of generation. This Purse was ordained for the custody and comfort of the
Testikles and other Spermaticke vessels: and it is also made of two parts, of
inner and of the outer.

The outer is compound and made of Skin, and Lazartus. Longitudinall and
Transversall, in like manner as the Myrac. The inner part of the Cods is of the
substance of the Sifac, and are in similitude as two pockets drawn together by
themselves, and they differ not from the Syfac: and there be two, because if
there fall any hurt to the one, the other should serve. The Testikles or stones
be two, made of Glandulus flesh, or Curnelly flesh. And furthermore, through
the Didimus, comes the Testikles from the Brain, Sinews, and from the Heart
Artiers, and from the Liver Veins, bringing unto them both feeling and
stirring, Life, and Spirit, and Nutrimentall blood, and the most purest blood
of all other members of the Body, whereof is made the Sperme by the labor of
the Testikles, the which is put forth in due time, as is before rehearsed.

The Groynes be known: they be the empty Junctures, or purging place unto
the Liver, and they have curnelly flesh in the plying or bowing of the Thighs.
The Hippes have great brawny flesh on them, and from thence descend downwards,
Brawns, Chords, and Lygaments, moving and binding together the Thighs, with
the Haunches themselves.

CHAP. X. The Anatomy of the Thighs, Legs, and Feet.
THE Leg reaches from the Joint of the Thigh unto the extremity of the Toes,
and J will divide it in parts, as the Arms were divided. One part is called
Coxa, or Thigh, and that is all that is contained from the joint of the Haunch
unto the Knee. The second part is called Tibia, and that reaches from the Knee
to the Ankle. The third is the little foot, and that is from the Anckle, unto
the end of the Toes. And here it is to be noted, that the Thigh, Leg, and
foot, are compound, and made as the great Arm or hand, with Skin, Flesh,
Veins, Artiers, Sinews, Brawnes, Tendons, and Bones whereof they are to be
spoken of in order.

Of the Skin and Flesh there is enough spoken of before. And as of Veins and
Arteirs in their descending downwards, at the last Spondels they be divided
into two parts, whereof the one part goes into the right Thigh, and the other
into the Left: And when they come to the Thigh, they be divided in other two
great Branches: the one of them spreads into the inner side of the Leg, and
the other spreads into the outer side, and so branching, descend down to the
Leg, to the Anckles, and Feet, and be brought into four Veins, which be
commonly used in letting Blood, as hereafter follows.

One of them is under the inner Ankle toward the heel, called Soffena, and
another under the outer Ankle, called Siarica, and another under the Hamme,
called Poplitica, the fourth, between the little Toe, and the next, called
Renalis. And it is to be noted of these four great Veins in the Legs, of
the manifold dangers that might fall of them as often it happens. There be
many other branches which a Surgeon needs not much to pass upon. The
Sinews spring of the last Spondell, and of Os Sacrum, and passes through the
hole of the bone of the Hippe, and descends to the Brawnes, and moves the
Knee and the Hamme, and these descend down to the Ankle, and move the Foot,
and the brawnes of the Feet move the Toes in like manner, as is declared in the
bones of the Hand. The first is called Coxa, that is the Thigh Bone, and he is
without a fellow, and he is full of Marrow, and is round at either end. The
roundnesse that is at the upper end, is called Vertebrum, or Whyrlebone, and
boweth inwards, and is received into the Concavities of the bone of the Leg
at the Knee, called the great Fossels. There is also at the Knee a round bone,
called the Knee-panne. Then follows the Leg, wherein is two bones, called
Focile Major, and Focile Minor, the bigger of them passes before making the
shape of the shinne, and it is called the Shin-bone, and passes down, making
the inner ankle. The less passes from the Knee backwards, descending down to
the outer Anckle, and there forms that Ankle, etc. The bones of the Feet are
six and twenty: as thus. First, next the Ankle bone, is one called in Latin
Orabalistus: Next under that, toward the Heel is one, called Galeani: and
between them is another bone, called Os Nauculare. In the second ward there be
four bones called Raceti, as be in the hands. In the third and fourth wards be
fourteen, called Digitori: and five called Pectens, at the extremities of the
Toes, next to the Nails. And thus be there in the Foot, six and twenty bones,
with the Leg from the Ankle to the Knee, two in the knee, and one round and
flat bone, and in the Thigh, one. And thus you shall find in the whole Leg and
Foot thirty bones. And this may serve for young Practitioners in the Anatomy.

Veins in Man's body perfect, is -- 365. Bones 217. Teeth 32.

For that in us all things may vain appear,
A Vein we have for each day in the Year.
For Practice. It is necessary to know what Letchcraft and Chyrurgerie is, with
their several parts thereto belonging in the Theorick and Practick. Very
useful for young Practitioners. PART. II.
Letchcraft is Chyrurgerie; that is, to heal a man of all manner of Sickness
and to keep him whole, so far as craft may.
KNow that in Letchcraft, is contained two things; that is, both Physic and
Chyrurgerie.

Likewise, Letchcraft and Chyrurgerie, has each of them two Parts, viz.
Theoricke, and Practicke. Theorick to know, and Practicke to work. The ground
of the Theoricke, is to know the Elements, and Humors that proceeds from
them, which is for man's health or against it.

Letchcraft, teaches us Causes, effects, and Signs: Signs to know the causes
and effects; and therefore J treat of signs, and many signs does belong to
Physic and Chyrurgerie, as Crisses, Urine, Pounces, Vomits, Sege, and other,
etc.

Chyrurgerie, is in Wounds, Impostumes, and Algebra; and Chyrurgerie holds
four parts, viz. Wounds, and Impostumes, Algebra, and Anatomy. And Antidotary
is the fifth; which is a kind of Salves against all kind of Sores that belongs
to Chyrurgerie.

Algebra is broken Bones, and bones out of joint.

Antidotary of Chyrurgerie, is in Waters, Powders, Oils, Ointments, and
Emplaisters most principal, some must be repercussive, some Moleficative,
some Maturative, some generative, and some Corosive.

Anotomie is to know the Body of man throughout, and all his Members within and
without. Two members has every manner of man, viz. Principal, and Official;
and four principal every man has, viz. Brain, Heart, Liver, and Stones; the
Brain has the head and neck: the Heart, has the Lungs, Breast, and Midriffe:
the Liver has the stomach, and other members down to the Reins, as Guts,
Gall, and the Kelle vein, and Milt, the Milt upon the left side, and the gall
upon the Liver: the Stones, has Reins, Bladder, and other Privities: and
these are the four principal members, Brain, Heart, Liver, and Stones; and
without Brain, Heart and Liver, no man can live; and without Stones can no man
engender, three things in the Stones is cause of engendring; Heat, Wind and
humors, Heat comes from the Liver, Spirit from the Heart, and humors from
the Brains that man is made of, if any of these four be faulty, that man can
not as he should kindly engender.

These six virtues are rooted in the Liver, viz. Attractive, Digestive,
Diminusive, Expulsive, Retentive, and a Simulative, that is in our English
tongue; Drawing, and breaking out, putting, holding, and liking: For first,
Nature draws in that which it needs to live by, and then all to break it;
and then departs the good from the bad, and holds to it the good, and then
dispierseth the good to all the members of the Body.

Official members be those that have certain offices in man's Body, where
ever they be; as the Eye to see, the Ear to hear, the Hand to touch, the
Mouth to speak, the Feet to go, and many such other, etc.

Also such are called members as branches from the principal to the official,
as the Arm, or Leg, that rooteth in the principal and brancheth to the
officials: And so Nerves, Artiers, Veins, Lygaments, Chords, Bones, Pannicles,
and Gristles, Flesh and Skin to teach them*their Office: But Nerves, Veins,
and Artiers be most needful, for they be Wells and Roots of all other
Nerves coming from the Brain, and Artiers from the Heart, and Veins from the
Liver into all the body: Nerves gives to the Body feeling, and moving, and
Artiers leaving, and Veins increasing. A Vein has but one Tunacle, and an
Artier has two, in the one runs Blood, and in the other spirits, and all
beating Veins be Artiers, the which J call Pulses, and all other be simple
Veins; and all such members saving Flesh alone are melancholious, and their
nature is Sperme, but flesh is Sanguine; and therefore it may be sodered be it
never so much cut, but the other said members because their matter is Sperme,
may never be sodered if they be much cue.

Now will J speak of Wounds, which is the second part of Chyrurgerie.
ONe of these intentions has every Surgion. The first is, to contain that,
that i^ evil, loosed; the second is, to loose that, that is evil contained;
the third is, to take away that, that is too much; the fourth is, to increase
that, that is too little.

In these four entents stands all Surgery. The first is in Wounds, the
second is Impostumes, the third and fourth Alg^br^ holds. Wounds be in many
manners Simple, and Compound: Simple in the flesh alone, and compound in seven
manners. There be seven things that lets a wound not lightly to heal, viz.
Empostumes discrased, hollownesse, or bitten by a venomous Beast; and these
lets a Surgeon suddenly to heal a wound; and if a Sinew be cut or
pricked, or wounded to the Bone, or if the wound be hollow, or else discrased
with a Fever, or bruised, or made by venomous Beasts, then may thou not as
thou would close up a wound. And if a wound lack all these seven things,
then it is simple.

Thus Medicine is Letchcraft; that is both Physic and Surgery. and every
one of them has first his Theoricke, perfectly to know, and afterward his
Practique, cunningly to work: the grounds of both which Qualities, are
Elements, and Humors, and ^^^nes most needful both of Urine and Pulses.

Thus much for the Theoricke.
Diverse things very necessary for every Practitioner in Surgerie to have in a
readiness.
And first, for Instruments, viz.
NOvacula. Sp^^ill^^. S^alp^ll^^. Lat^^ Sp^^ill^^* For^icis. Stylu^. Volsell^.
Acu^. Ca^^li^ula Forata. Fas^i^. Hab^^^ ad membra laqu^^ intepcipi^^d^.
Panni^uli linei ad v^l^^ra abliga^^^. Lint^a conc^rpta. A^ris^alpiu^^. Forcip^s
ad d^^tes ^v^ll^nd^s. Ferra^entu^ qu^ ^r^^i d^ntes, ^rad^^tur. ^n^inus, or (as
C^lsu^ calls it,) Hamul^^ ^^^^sum.


2. For sudden Accidents.
HE must have in readiness, Powders, Unguents, and Emplasters; They serve to
stop Bleeding, to conglutinate Wounds, to cleanse foul and rotten Ulcers, to
mollify hardness, to produce a Cicatrix, and Skin, to remove away all
excrescent and corrupt Flesh, to cease pain, to strengthen Fractures and
Luxations.

3. For Powders.
THey are of three sorts: The first, is to stay* Bleeding, as that which is
framed of Bolus* Armoniae, of Rosis, of Mastickes, and Pollin.

The second is, for Fractures of the Scull, and hurts of other Bones, and is
called Pulvis Cephalicus, and is framed of Radicibus ir^os, of Arist^l^^^iae,
of Myrrh, Aloes, and such like.

The third is, to remove away excrescent and corrupt Flesh; as Alumen ustu^, of
Pul*prae^ipit. Mer^urii, and such like.

4. For Unguents.
HE must have Vnguentum Basilicon, which does humect, digest, and cease pain.

Vnguentum album*Rhasis, which does Refrigerate, cool and dry.

Vnguentum Aureum called of some Regis, which does Incarnate and conglutinate
Wounds together.

Vnguentum Dialthea simplex, which does Calefie, soften, humect, and also cease
pain.

Vnguentum Apostolorum, which does deterge, mollify, dry, and remove away
corrupt and superfluous Flesh: And of like faculty almost is Mundificativum ex
api^, and Aegyptiacum.

5. For Emplasters.
DIachilon compositum, which does ripen Apostumes, and does mollify and
resolve hardness, and does digest, and also absterge.

Diacalciteos, commonly called Diapalma, which does conglutinate Ulcers,
produces Cicatrix and skin, and according to the opinion of Galen, is very
fit for the curing of Phlegm.

Emplastrum de Betonica, which is also called De Janua, it does unite and join
together the fractures of the skull, it covers the bones with flesh, it
draws out Spells and splinters of bones, it does also absterge, digest and
dry, with the like.

Of five H^arbes which a good Chyrurgion ought always to have.
THere be five Herbs that a good Surgeon ought to have all the year, and
they be good for wounded men; and these Herbs must be dried and made into
powder, and so kept all the year, viz. Mouse-eare, Pimpernell, Avence,
Valerian, and Gentian, of each a like quantity, but take of Mouse-eare the
weight of all the other herbs, when they be dried, take d^mi. spoonful in
untiment, or in some other liquor which is according to the sickness, and let
him drink it, and the Medicine is as good as a Salve for any wounded man, as
may be had for to heal him. Also the herbs that draws the wound, are
O^^ulus Christi, Mather, Buglosse, red Coleworts, and Orpine.

These be the sovereign pepper herbs for the Fester, h^arbe Robert,
Buglosse, Sannacle, Hempropes, Morrell, Rue, and Savorie, but sake good heed of
these herbs in the use of them, and ye shall work the better.

Some Physical observations tending to Physic and Surgerie, and times
convenient for letting of Blood.
To preserve Health.
IF a man will observe, he may govern himself at four times in the Year,
so that he shall have little need of Let^hcraft, as thus*

In the Spring, from March till May at which time increases the good sweet*
(...) Blood, through good meats and (...) good wholesome savours.

In Summer, from May till June, at which time begins the bitter juice of
Choler* then use cool meats, and drinks, and be not violent in exercise,
and forbear women.

In Harvest, from June till November, at which time increases Melancholy; then
be purged by a Medicine Laxative, and afterward use light Meats and drinks,
such as will increase good Blood.

In Winter, from November till Mar^h* at which time increases Phlegm, through
weakness of Humors, and corruption of air; Then the Pose begins to grow,
then heat is in the Veins, then is pricking in the sides, then is time to use
hot Meats and good drinks* and spices, as Pepper, Ginger, etc. but do not
wash thy Head.

For as a learned Physician says; He that takes much Physic when he is
young, will much repent it when he is old.

For letting of Blood.
AS in all other parts of Physic so great care ought to be had in letting of
Blood. First, skilfully and circumspectly is to be considered and certainly
known the cause. As whether it be needful and good for the Patient, to purge
his body of some unnatural and naughty, and superfluous humor. For otherwise,
letting of Blood is very dangerous, and opens the way to many grievous
Infirmities. And note generally* that it is not convenient, either for a very
lean and weak man, or for a very fat and gross man to be let blood, neither
for a Child under 14. years of age, nor an old man above 56. Especially, in
decrepit old age.

Now there remains to be considered, how it stands with the patient
inwardly, for his Complexion and Age, and outwardly, for the time of the Year,
time of the Day, and also for Diet.

For Complexion.
Let blood the Phlegmatic, the Moon being in Aries or Sagitarius.

Let blood the Melancholic, the Moon in Libra or Aquarius.

Let blood the Choleric, the Moon being in Cancer or Pisces.

Let blood the Sanguine, the Moon in either of the aforesaid Signs.

For Age.
Let blood Youth; from the Change to the second quarter. Middle-age, from the
2. quarter to the full. Elder-age, from the full to the last quarter. Old Age,
from the last quart* to the change.


Time of the Year.
Spring good. Autumn different.

Time of the Month.
Let not blood, The Moon in Taurus, Gemini, Leo, Virgo, or Capric^rne. The day
before nor after the change and full. Twelve hours before and after the
quarters. The Moon with Jupiter, or Mars, evil aspected.


Time of the Day.
Morning after sunrising fasting; Afternoon, after perfect digestion; the air
temperate, the wind not South, if it may be.

Diet after Bleeding.
Sl^^pe not presently, Stir not violently;
Use no venery, Feed, thou warily.
Notwithstanding, for the Frenzy, the Pestilence, the Squinancy, the
Plurisie, the Apoplexi^, or a continual Headache growing of choleric blood, a
hot burning Fever, or any other extreme pain; In this case, a man may not
tarry a chosen time, but incontinently with all convenient speed* he is to
seek for remedy; but then Blood is not to be let in so great a quantity, as if
that a chosen and fit time were to be obtained.

Good to --
Prepare humors, the Moon in Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius. Vomit, the Moon in
Aries, Taurus, or Capr. Purge by Neezing, the Moon in Cancer, Le^, or Virgo.
Take Clysters, the Moon in Aries, Librae, or Scorpio. Take Gargarismes, the
Moon in Cancer, or Stop rheumes and Flux, the Moon in Taurus, Virgo, or
Capric^rn^. Bathe for cold Diseases, the Moon in Aries, L^^, or Sagitarius.
Bathe for hot Diseases, the Moon in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces. Purge with
Electuaries, the Moon in Cancer. Purge with Potions, the Moon in Scorpio.
Purge with Pills, the Moon in Pisces.


For an Unguent or Plaster, is best to be applied, when the Moon is in the
imaginary Sig^e attributed to the members whereunto it is applied.

Of the Nine Tastse.
SAlt, Sharp, and Bitter, Sower, Savory, and Eager, Sweet, Walloweth, and
Fatty-Three of them be of Heat, three of Cold, and the last three be of
temperature. A cut chafeth, heateth, and fleyeth: Temperature delights,
Lycorise, Annis, Ginger, Wormwood, and Sugar: these be Examples: a cut
raweth, heateth, and fleyeth, and Nature there against ripeth, and twineth, and
puts out: make your Medicine such, that for one putting out, double twining,
and four riping.

Melancholy is dry and cold, sower and earthly colored, his Urine is thin
and discolored, his Pulse is straight, and short in digestion, and a full
stomach, loathsomenesse, and sower belching, a swelling womb, and sides,
heavy, dead, and sluggish limbs, and melancholious Urine comes of a young
wench that fails in her flowers, or have them not as she ought to have.

Fleame, cold and moist, white, and weak in colors, his Urine is discolored
and thick, his Pulse is short and broad; raw stomach; and full, loathsome,
and unlusty, watery mouth, much spitting, heavy head, sluggie, and slumbry, with
cold hands and feet, and chiefly in the Night.

Sanguine is moist, and hot, sweet, and ruddy colored, always his Body is full
of heat, namely in the Veins, and they be swelling, and of face he is ruddy,
and in sleep he seems fiery: Medicine for him is blood let upon the Currall
or Liver Vein, and simple diet, as Tyson, Water Grewell, and sower bread.

Choler is hot, and dry, yellow, green and bitter, Urine is discolored, and
thin, his Pulse is long and straight, much watch, heavy head ache, and
thirst, bitter mouth, and dry, singing cares, and much gnawing in the Womb,
and other while costiffenesse, and burned Sege, and vomit, both yellow and
green, as is that color.

Each Humor may cause a Fever or an Impostume, and then the Urine is more
colored, and the liquour thinner: and ever as that sickness defieth, the
Urine waxes thicker, and the color lower, till it come to Cytrin or subrufe.

Melancholy causes a Quartaine, and Fleame a Quotidian. Sinec and Causon have
ever Continues, the other three may be so, and otherwhile Interpolate, continue
ever holds on, and Interpolate rests otherwhile; continue is with the
Veins, and Interpolate is without the Veins, both two ways may be simple
and also compound, simple of one matter, and one place, or compound of diverse
places.

The Tertians of these Fevers be such, as the same humors be of, and also Urine
and Pulse: All saving they be stronger in Fevers and Impostumes then they be
without, and therefore their Medicine must be more discreet, but generally
Diet thus: Sour bread, and Water-grewell, and Tyson, and fleyed Fish and Wine,
and Almond milk, and all white meat saving whay, general digestive in
Summer, and in hot time, as in Oxizacia; and general digestive in Winter and
all cold time, as Oxcineil^: And general expulsive is, d^ s^cca r^sarum, a cut
with Turbit, and Scamony, ana. Scruple two, and general dormitary is
insquiamany, and double meddled with Populions, and foment him with Roses, ^^a,
double Sugar flaketh thir^^.

Signs of Sickness by Eg^stion.
IF the meat come from a man in manner as he did eat it, the Stomach is
weak, and the Bowels be lubricated, it is an evil sign.

If the Egestion look like Earth, it is ^ s^gne of death.

If the Egestion do not stink, it is an evil sign.

If the Egestion do look like lead, it is an evil sign.

If the Egestion be black as Ink, it is an evil sign.

If the Egestion be black, and look like Sheep trickles, there is
abundance of adu^^ Choler, and pain in the Spleen.

If the Egestion be yellow, and no Saffron eaten before, the body is r^pleat
with Choler and Cytren water.

If the Egestion have strains of blood, there is impediment in the Liver and
the Bowels.

If the Egestion be bloudish, there is ulceration in the Guts.

If the Egestion look like shaving of Guts, beware then of an extreme Flux
and debility of the Body.

If a man be too Laxative it is not good, for in such persons can be no
strength but much weakness.

If a man be costive and cannot have a natural egestion once a day, he cannot
be long without Sickness.

Signs of Life or Death by the Pulses.
Spigm^s is named the Pulses, and there be twelve Pulses the which do take
their Original at the Vital spirits: Three of which belong to the Heart, the
one is under the left Pap, the other two do lie in the Wrists of the arms
directly against the Thumbs.

The Brain has respect to seven Pulses, four be principal; and three be
Minors, the four principal are thus situate; in the Temples two, and one
going under the Bone called the right Furkcle, and the other does lie in the
corner of the right side of the Nose, one of the three Minor Pulses in the
corner of the left side of the Nose: And the other two lie upon the Mandibles
of the two Jaws, the Liver has respect to the two Pulses which lie upon the
Feet.

By these Pulses, expert Physicians and Chyrurgions by their knocking and
clapping, do judge what principal member is diseased or whether the Patient
be in danger.

If any of the principal Pulses do beat truly, keeping an equal course as
the minute of a clock, then there is no peril in the Patient, so be it they
keep a true course; or pulse without any pause or stopping; which is to say,
if the Pulse give five knockes and cease at the sixth knock: or else seven and
pause at eight, or else knock ten and lea^e over the eleventh, and begin at
the twelfth, the Patient is in peril, else not; for it is not in the agility,
as too swift or tardie beating of the Pulse, but in the pausing of the same
contrary to its course, that the Patient is in peril.

In such causes let the Physician be circumspect, and careful, for Sincopies
in the Patient, let him sit upright in his Bed with Pillowes, and let one sit
at his back to give him drink, and let the Patient smell to Amber greece or
Rosewater and Vin^ger, or else rub the Pulse with Aqua Vitae.

Also, when you touch the Pulse, mark under which finger it strikes most
strongest, as thus; If the Pulse under the little finger, be feeble and weak,
and under the rest more weak, it is a token of Death: But contrariwise, if
under the little finger strong, and under every finger stronger it is a good
sign.

And if you feel the Pulse under the forefinger strike until the eleventh
stroke and it fail in it, is a good sign, but if he beat swift and
unorderly, an evil.

Of the four Humors.
1. Signs of Sickness by Blood.
SLownesse, Idleness, Dullness, yawning or gaping, stretching forth the arms,
no delight or pleasure, sweet spittle mingled with bitterness, much heavy
sleep with dreams of red color, or bearing of burdens great and heavy,
perturbation of the senses, red face with much sweat, little or no appetite to
meat with red gross stinking Urine.

Of these Signs are known, stinking Fevers, Pestilence, Squinancie, and
Bloody-fluxe.

For Remedy, if the Blood be distempered, help it with things cold and dry;
for blood is moist, hot, and sweet.

2. Signs of Melancholy sicknesses.
PAle color in the Face, sowrenesse in the mouth, belching wind, little
sleep, that horrible, and infernal dreams, much thought, pensiveness and
care, a desperate mind, more leaner then before in the body, straitness in the
stomach* Elvishnesse in countenance, snappish in words; starting, coldness,
and fearful, white and thin Urine.

These signs testify* Quartaine, Morphew, Lepre, Canker, Madness, and
hardness of the Spleen.

For Remedy, if it be of red Choler, give things cold, moist and sweet; for
red choler is bitter and fiery.

3. Signs of Choleric diseases.
YEllow color in the Skin, bitterness in the mouth, pricking in the mouth of
the stomach, supernatural heat, loathsomeness to meat, lamentation or great
grief of mind. Dryness, coveting drink of diverse kinds, Vomits of yellow and
green, small or no sleep, but fearful and fiery dreams of strife.

These be signs of the Jaundies, Tertians, Plurisies, Madness, and Collicks.

For Remedy, if it be of black Choler, or Melancholy, give things hot and
moist, and sweet; for adust choler is sharp and cold.

4. Signs of Phlegmatic diseases.
SLuggishnesse and dullness of Memory, forgetfulness, much spitting, (...),
pains in the Head, especially in the hinder part, swelling in the Face and
cheeks, evil digestion* white Dropsie-like in color, patience with
doltishnesse, lacking lively quickne^se, dreaming of going naked, drowning, or
of Snow.

The diseases, Quotidians, Dropsies, Palsy, and the Falling sickness.

For Remedy, if the Disease be of salt Phlegm give things sweet, hot and dry,
thus says Soramis. And thus much for Remedies against the distemperance of
each humor.

Notwithstanding, where there is abundance of cold Phlegm not mixed with
Choler, there things very sharp and hot be most convenient; as tart Vinegar
with hot Roses and seeds, or Wines, strong and rough Honey, being boiled in the
one and in the other.

Or where Choler is mixed with Phlegm, sirrop made with Vinegar and Sugar,
boiled sometimes with Seeds, Herbs, and Roots, which may dissolve Phlegm and
digest it is very good.

Certain Observations for Women.
WHen Women's breasts diminish being with Child, is a token the child is dead.

If a woman with Child be suddenly taken with any grievous sickness, her life
is in great danger.

If a woman with Child be let Blood, it kills the child, the nearer the birth
the greater is the danger.

It is perilous for a Woman with Child to have a great Lax, or looseness.

A woman having a Convultion in temperate times of her terms, is perilous.

The C^alx of Egge-shels ministered in broth asswageth the pain and griping in
a woman, after her deliverance of child.

OF URINES. A brief Treatise of Urines, as well of Man's urine as of Woman's, to
judge by the Color which betokens Health, and which betokens Weakness,
and also Death. PART. III.
Of Bubbles resident in Urine.
IT is showed, that in the fore-parts of the Body dwells Sickness and
Health: That is, in the Womb, in the Head, in the Liver, and in the Bladder,
in what manner thou may know their properties and thereof may learn to
judge the better.

When Bubbles do swim on the top of Urine, they proceed of windy matter
included in viscous humidity, and signify rawnesse and indigestion in the
Head, Belly, Sides, Reins, and parts thereabouts, for in these especially,
hu^ours are multiplied and do ascend to make pain* in the Head.

Re^ident Bubbles does signify ventositie in the Body, or else a Sickness
that has continued long and will continue, unless remedy be found; but
Bubbles not Resident but does break quickly, signifies Debility or Weakness.

Bubbles cleaving to the Urinall, signifies the body to be repleat with evil
humors.

Bubbles does also signify the Stone in the Reins of the Back.

A Circle which is green of color of Urine, does signify wavering in the
Head, and burning in the stomach. This color in a Fever does signify pain
in the Head, coming of Choler. And if it continue it will cause an Impostume,
the which will engender the Frenzi^.

A black circle in Urine, signifies Mortification.

If any filthy matter do appear in the Urine, it comes from the Lungs and
sometimes from the Liver, and it may come from breaking of some Impostume, but
for the most part it comes from the Ulcers of the Bladder or the Reins, or
from the passages of the Urine, then the urine is troubled in the bottom and
stinketh, he has a pain in his lower parts and especially in the parts
aforesaid, when he makes water, and chiefly in the end of the yard, and
commonly there is with this the Strangurie which is hardly to be cured, unless
it be in the beginning.

If it come from the Reins, there is pain in the Loins, the Back and the
Flank.

If from the Liver, the pain is only in the right side.

If in the Lungs, the pain is from the Breast with a cough and the breath
stinketh.

If from the Bladder, the pain is about the share.

If a man's urine be white at morning, and red before meat, and white after
meat, he is whole: and if it be fat and thick it is not good. And if the
Urine be meanly thick, it is not good to like: and if it be thick as spice,
it betokens Head ache.

Urine that is two days red, and at the tenth day white, betokens very good
health.

Urine that is fat, white, and moist, betokens the Fever Quartaine.

Urine that is bloody, betokens that the Bladder is hurt by some rotting that
is within.

A little Urine all Fleshie, betokens wasting of the Reins: and who pisseth
Blood without sickness, he has some Vein broken in his Reins.

Urine that is ponderous, betokens that the bladder is hurt.

Urine that is bloody in sickness, betokens great evil in the Body, and
namely in the bladder.

Urine that falls by drops, above, as it were great boules, betokens great
sickness and long.

If white gravel does issue forth with Urine, it does signify that the
Patient has or shall have the Stone engendered in the Bladder, and there is
pain about those parts.

If the gravel be red, the Stone is engendered in the Reins of the Back and
Kidneyes, and there is great pain in the small of the Back.

If the gravel be black, it is engendered of a Melancholy humor.

Note, that if the gravel go away, and the Patient find no ease, it shows
that the Stone is confirmed. Also know ye, that if the gravel go away, and
the pain go away likewise, it signifies that the Stone is broken and voydeth
away.

Women's Urine that is clear and shyning in the Vrinall like silver, if she
cast often, and if she have no talent to meat, it betokens she is with Child.

Women's Urine that is strong and white and also stinking, betokens sickness
in the Reins, in her secret receipts, and her chambers is full of evil
humors, and sickness of her self.

Women's Urine that is bloody and clear as water underneath, betokens
Headache.

Women's urine that is like to Gold, clear and mighty, betokens that she has
lust to man.

Women's urine that has color of stable cleansing, betokens her to have the
Fever Quartaine, and she to be in danger of death.

Women's urine that appears as color of Lead, if she be with Child,
betokens that it is dead within her.

To know a Man's urine from a Woman's, and a woman's or man's from a Beast urine.
First a Man's water the nearer you hold it to the eye the thicker it does show,
and when you hold it further off the thinner it does appear; but in beasts
Urines it is not so; for the nearer you hold it to the sight the thinner it is,
and the further the sight the thicker, also beast water is more salter and of a
stronger savor, and of a more simple Complexion, and smells more raw, then
the urine of a man; also mix the water of a Beast with wine and they will part
a sunder.

Hereafter follows all the Vrines that betokens Death, as well the Urine of
Man as of Woman.
IN a hot Axes, one part red, another black another green, another blew,
betokens, Death.

Urine in hot axes, black, and little in quantity, betokens Death.

Urine colored all over a^ Lead, betokens the prolonging of death.

Urine that shines raw and right bright, if the Skin in the bottom shine not,
it betokens death.

Urine that in substance having fleeting above as it were a dark Sky,
signifies death.

Urine darkly shyning, and dark with a black Skin within, betokens a
prolonging of death.

Urine that is the color of water, if it have a dark Sky in an Axes, it
betokens death.

Urine that has dregs in the bottom meddled with blood, it betokens death.

Urine black and thick, and if the sick loath when he goes to the stool,
and when he speaks overthwart, or that he understands not aright, and these
sicknesses goes not from him, it betokens death.

Of VVounds* PART. IV.
A Definition of Wounds by their causes.
A Wound is a solution, separation and recent breach of unity, of that that
before was a continuity with out putrified matter, which corruption gives the
name of an Ulcer to the solution, and no more a Wound.

The causes of Wounds are duall, viz. First by the violence of bodies without
life, as we simply call an Incised wound, as when it is caused by edged
Instruments. Secondly, we call it a Stab or puncture, caused by theforce of
Daggers and the like. Thirdly, we call those Contused wounds, caused by violent
use of the object, being some weighty thing (cast as a Stone, or stroke with a
Staff, or their similies) against the subject receiving their forces,
differing in their appellations by the diversity of their causes.

Or secondly, wounds are caused by living things, as a wound that is of Biting,
scratching and the like, and for these causes they differ in their appellatious.

Also the differencie of Wounds, are taken either from their causes by which
they are inflicted, or from their accidents, viz. the indication of the place
wherein they are situated. Also, the place makes difference thus: either they
happen in the similar parts, as the Flesh, Artery, Vein, etc. or in the
organicall or isntrumental parts, as some entire and whole bulk, truncke, or
fully complete member, or limb, viz. The Head, Neck, Breast, Belly, etc.
Wounds of the Head grow more particular, because that parts belonging thereto
be of more note; as the Face, Nose, Lips, Eyes, and Ears: wounds of the
limbs, arc of the Shoulders, Arms, Thighs, and Legs. Of the similar parts
also, some are Sanguine, as the flesh, whose wounds are either simple, deep,
hollow, plain, or proud with flesh. The Spermaticke likewise, are either hard
or soft; the soft parts, as the Veins, Arteries, and Sinews, being wounded,
we call them wounds of the hurt part; the hard are the Bones, a breach of
which, we call a wound in the Bone.

So Wounds derive their Nominations from the cause, place and simisitudes
thereof.

What Wounds are.
WOunds are these, Which in Latin are called Vulnus, of the vulgar Vulner, and
they are of two kinds, that is, Simple and Compound: the simple are those, that
are only in the Flesh: the compound are those, where are cut Sinews, Veins,
Muscles, and Bones, and these are of diverse and sundry kinds, and the
difference that is among them, is by the variety of the place where they are
wounded, and by the difference of the weapon wherewith they were hurt. For some
go right, some overthwart, that offend diverse places of the body: The simple
are of small importance, if they keep them clean and close shut Nature will
heal, them, without any kind of medecin: but those where veins are cut, had
need of some Art or Practice, with the which they must stop the blood, and in
any wise not to suffer the wound to remain open but to sow it up very close,
so that the vein may heal, and those where sinews are hurt are of great
importance, and would be healed with great speed, so the Sinews may join with
more ^ase. But those where bones are hurt, are of great importance, for if the
Bone be separated from the other, of necessity it must be taken forth before
the Wound be healed: So that by this means every one may know, what Wounds are
and their kinds.

In the Curing of green Wounds consists a five-fold scope or intention.
THe first, is to draw out that which is sent into the Body, whether by Bullet,
Wood, Bone, or Stone; or Arrows, Darts and such like.

The second, is a Conjunction and united of parts divided.

The third, is a retaining of those parts united in their proper*seate.

The fourth, is a Conservation of the parts of the substance.

The fifth, is a Prohibition and mitigation of accidents.

For the first intention, it is performed either with fit and convenient
Instruments, or with attractive Medicines, whereby things that are infixed are
drawn out. Which Medicines are these.

Radix Aristolochiae, Ammoniacum. Arundis. Saga Poenum. Anagallis. Dictamnum.
Thapsia. Ranae combustae, Or

Emplastrum Avicennae, so much commended by Guyd^.

The second and third intention, is performed by binding and Ligature, if the
Wound be simple and small, and in a place where it may fitly be performed, yea,
although it be large, so it may be easily bound, as in the Muscles of the Arm,
and such like; but if it happen that Ligatute will not serve, then must be
added the help of the Needle, being very careful to handle the party gently,
and to place it in his due seat.

The fourth intention, is performed and accomplished, by appointing of a fit
and convenient Diet, according to the strength of the Patient, and greatness
of the affect and disposition of the whole body: for a thin Diet and cold, does
very much avail in resisting of Symptoms, we also add Bloodletting and
Purging of humors to avoid accidents, also the part is to be contained in his
due place, and a Cataplasme framed with the whites of Eggs, and other cooling
things, are to be applied, and sometimes to be fomented with astringed Wine.

The fifth intention, is the correcting of accidents, which is Flux of blood,
Dolor, Tumor, Paralysis, Convulsion, Fever, Syncope, Delerium, and Itching.

But this is to observed in the Flux of blood: whether it has flowne
sufficiently or no; if otherwise the Flux is to be suffered; for after a
sufficient Flux, the wound does remain dry, and is so much the nearer cured
and the less Symptoms follow, as Phlegmon and such like: and if the wound
bleed not sufficient, we must open a vein for revulsion* according to the
greatness of the affect, and the nature of the wound: especially when through
pain or other cause we fear inflammation or a Fever.

How a sick man should Diet himself being Wounded.
A Wounded man, or a man sore beaten being sick, must be kept from Milk,
Butter, Cheese, Herbs, Fruits, Fish, (except fre^h-water Fish) Women,
Garlic, Onions, Leekes, Peason, etc. Also diverse sorts of meats must he not
eat, as fresh Beef, water Fowls, Goose, or Duck, nor drink too much strong
Wine. But he may eat Porke, Mutton, Chicken, Hen, or Capon.

Of Wounds and their Cures happening in several places of the Body.
And first, of infirmities incident to Soldiers in a Camp.
COmmonly, there are three Infirmities that offend Soldiers in a Camp above
all the rest, the which are these: Fevers, Wounds, and Fluxes of the body* the
which thou may help in this order following with these Medicines.
Quintessence of Wine, Balsamo, Magno Licore, Quintessentia, and Spice
Imperial; and as for the order to use them is thus. When any has a Fever or
Flux, then presently when the Disease begins, let him Blood in one of the
two veins underneath the Tongue, cutting it overthwart, and this thou shall
do in the Evening, then the next morning, take a Doze of your Imperial powder
mixed with Wine, and this you may do without any Diet or strict order: that
being done, give him three mornings together, half an ounce of our
Quintessence solutive, with Broth: but if it be a Flux, and that the Patient
is not cured, let him stand in a cold Bath of Salt Water of the Sea, three or
four hours or more, and he shall be perfectly ho^pe.

Then as concerning Wounds, as well as Cuts as thrusts, and as well Galling
with Arrows, as Harquebush shot, and other sorts, thou shall cure them thus.
The first thing that thou shall do to them is to wash them very clean with
Wine, and then dry them well, then put thereinto Quintessence of Wine, and
presently join the parts together, and sow or stitch them close, then put
thereupon five or six drops of our Balsamo, and upon the wound lay a cloth wet
in our Magno Licore as hot as ye may suffer it, and this ye shall do the
first day: then the next day follow this order. First, put thereon our
Quintessence, and a little of our Balsamo, and then our Magno Licore very hot,
and never change that medicine. And this done, the wound shall be whole with
great speed and in a quarter of the time that the common Chirurgions is able to
do it, by the grace of God.

A rare secret, the which this Author did send to a very friend of his being in
the Wars: the which helps all wounds either by Cut, Thrust, galling with
Arrows, or Hargubush-shot, or otherwise.
THe first thing that ye shall do, is to wash the Wounds very clean with
Urine, and then dry it very well: then put therein Quintessence of Wine, and
presently join the parts close together, and stitch or sow them well; but in
any wise sow nothing but the Skin: for otherwise it will cause great pain:
Then put thereon five or six drops of our Balsamo, and upon the Wound* lay a
cloth wet in our Magno Licore* as hot as they can suffer it, and this do the
first day.

Then the next day follow this order.

First, put thereon our Quintessence, and then a little of our Balsamo: and
then anoint it very well with our Magno Licor^, as hot as it may be suffered:
Never changing this Medicine until it be whole. This is very certain and
approved.

Of wounds in the Head, with fracture of the Bone.
VVOunds of the Head with fracture of the Bone, of the common Physicians and
Chirurgions, are counted difficile to be healed, because thereunto belongs
great Art or Cunning: For they open the Flesh, and raise the Bone, with many
other things, of which J count it superfluous to entreat of, because that many
be helped without them. For always when the Physicians or Chirurgions do
offend the Wound for alteration or corruption* Nature it self will work very
well, and heal it without any aid. But with our Medicines they may be helped
with much more speed, because they let the alteration, and defends them from
Putrefaction, and mittigateth the pain. And the order to Cure those kind of
wounds are thus. The first thing that is to be done in those Wounds, is to
join the parts close together, and dress them upon the wound with our Oleum
Benedictum, and upon the Oil lay clothes wet in our Magno Licore, as hot as
you can suffer it: And so with the Remedies thou shall help them quickly:
because our Oleo Benedicto takes away the pain, and keeps it from
putrefaction and resolves. Our Magno Licore digesteth, mundifieth, and
incarnateth and heals. And therefore this is the best Medicine that can be
used in these wounds. For hereof J have had an infinite of Experiences, the
which has been counted miracles: and therefore J have let the world to
understand thereof, that they may help themselves if need shall serve.

Of Wounds in the Head, where the Bone is not offended.
VVOunds in the Head, where the Bone is not hurt, are not of such importance,
but are easily to be helped: for you shall do nothing, but keep it from
putrefaction, and defend it from inflammation, which are easy to be done, and
so Nature will work well with great speed. To keep the wound from
putrefaction, you must annoint it round about with our Oleum Philosophorum,
Deterebinthina, and Sera. And to keep it from inflammation, you shall wash it
with our Quintessence, and upon the wound dress it with our Magno Licore; thus
doing, thy cure shall prosper happily, and shall not need to take away any
blood, nor yet to keep any diet, no^ yet to keep the house, but to go where
you think good, without any peril or danger: and this order have J used a
long time, as diverse of my friends can testify.

Of Concussions or Bruises, as well in the Head as any other place.
COncussions or Bruises in the head or any other place of the body, of the
ancient Physicians has been counted dangerous to heal, for they say, that
Concussions must be brought to putrefaction, and turned into matter, which
opinions J do allow, for by me those Concussions or bruises is very easy to
be dissolved without maturation: And that J do with our Oleo Benedicto, and
Magno Licore, as much of the one as of the other mixed together, and made very
hot as you can suffer it, and then wet clothes twice a day, and in three or
four days at the most they shall be dissolved: and this it does, because this
Remedy assubtiliateth the humors, and opens the Pores, and draws forth the
matter that is run into the place offended, and so by those means they shall
be helped with this remedy: J have cured hundreds, when J was in the wars of
Africa, in Anno. 1551. when a whole City was taken and destroyed by the Camp
of Charles the fifth, Emperor.

Of Wounds in the Neck and the order to be used in curing them.
VVOunds in the neck are very hard to be cured, and long before they heal,
and this comes, because next are all the ligaments of the head, as bones,
sinews, veins, flesh, and skin, all instruments that hold the head and the
body together, without the which a man cannot live; and therefore those wounds
are so perilous to be healed, seeing thereunto runs so great a quantity of
humors, that they will not suffer the wound to be healed.

The true way therefore to help those wounds, is to stitch them well in his
place, and dress it upon the wound, with clothes wet in Oleum Benedictum one
part, and Magno Licore three parts, mixed together, as hot as you can suffer
it. And upon the cloth lay the powder of Mille-foyle, and this thou shall do
once in 24 hours, and so that shall help them quickly: giving you great
charge that you change not your Medicine; For it mundifieth, incarnateth, and
heals the wound without any further help, for J have proved it an infinite
and many times.

Of Wounds in the Arms, and their importances and Medicines.
VVOunds in the Arms are dangerous, for that there also are a great number of
Sinews, Cartylagines, Veins, Muscles, and other dangerous things, as it is
well seen in wounds in that place, how that thereunto runs abundance of
Humors, and there comes alteration, Inflammation, and Impostumation which
hurts the Patient much. Therefore in this case, J will show thee a rare
secret, wherewith thou shall help any sort of wound in the Arm, without any
alteration, and with a little pain, and the secret is this, Dress the Wound
upon the upper parts with our Magno Licore, very warm, without any tenting at
all, and this do once a day, and no more, and in no wise change your Medicine;
for with this thou may help all Wounds in the Arms with great speed* and
it is one of the greatest secrets that can be used for the wounds in the arms:
and proved by me infinite times.

Of Wounds in the Legs, and their parts.
VVOunds in the Legs are in a manner of the same quality as those in the arms,
because the Legs are of their proper quality and nature, compounded of the like
substance that the Arms are: that is, in Skin, flesh, Muscles, Veins,
Sinews, and Bones: And these, when they are offended or wounded, are very
perilous, because unto them runs great quantity of humors, and in the
Legs are certain places deadly (as men say) as the hinder part of the calfe
of the Leg, nnd the middle of the inner part of the thigh, the ankle, and the
foot, are all places troublesome and curious to heal when they are wounded,
and therefore to heal them according to the manner of the Ancients, it were
great trouble to the Surgeon: and pity to see the pain of the Patient.
Wherefore in any wise use not the Medicines of the Ancients. But when thou have
occasion, join unto the skill of thy Art the use of these Medicines, our
Quintessentia, Balsamo, Magno Licore, Oleo di Rasa, Olea Benedicto, Ole^
Philosophorum. Any of these, or such like, which are incorruptible, which by
their proper quality assubtiliateth concussions, pierces to the bottom of the
Wounds, keeps the flesh in his natural Caliditie and humidity, perserveth
from Putrefaction, and naturally makes the Flesh to join and grow together,
and that in a short space. Therefore consider well, which works better
Effect, ours, or the Ancients, and use them at thy discretion.

A Discourse upon old Wounds, which are not thoroughly healed; with their
Remedies.
When that Wounds are ill healed, and that therein comes Impostumations, and
that the part of the wounds be indurated and full of pain, then use this
secret of our Invention, which was never yet seen nor heard of the Ancients,
nor yet of our time, but of us. When thou find such a cause, wash the Wound
well, and make it clean round about, and then wash it with our Quintessentia
Vegetabile, and Bathe it well through, for that the said Quintessentia does open
the Pores, and assubtiliateth the matter, and causes the humor to come forth.

This being done, annoint it all over with our Magno Licore* and this done,
within three days the Patient shall feel great ease, and in short time after
he shall be whole. This is one of the most noblest Medicines that can be made:
For it takes away the hardness heals the Wound, and comfort the place
offended.

A rare secret to heal Wounds of Gunshot, Arrows, or such like, in the Wars,
when have is required.
IF thou will cure these Wounds presently, join the parts together with speed,
washing it with Aqua Coelestis, and Oleum Balsam^, of our invention, and lay a
cloth wet to the same very close thereon.

To heal a Wound quickly.
VVAsh the Wound well with our Aqua Balsamo, and close it up, and thereupon lay
a cloth of the Oil of Frankensence, and so by this means thou shall heal any
great Wound quickly: For J have proved it infinite times to my great credit.

To heal a Wound quickly, that is in danger of any Accidents.
WOunds in some parts of the Body are very dangerous of Life, and especially
where the Sinews or Veins be (cut or pierced) or Veins or Muscles be hurt,
or Bones broken, and by an infinite of other particulars, which being open or
ill healed, the Patient may be in danger of life, because the wind enters in,
and causes pains and inflammation; and therefore to avoid all these aforesaid
matters, so that the wound shall have no detriment use this remedy. First join
the parts close together, and put therein our Quintessence, and lay a cloth wet
in our Baulme, and bind it fast that the air come not in, for it is very
hurtful. You shall understand that these be two of the best experienced
Medicines that may be found: because our Quintessence does assubtiliate the
Blood, and takes it forth, and takes away the pain. And the Baulme does
warm and comfort the place offended. And will not suffer any Matter to run
thereinto by any means: for this is most true, as J have proved it diverse and
sundry times, and always have had very good success.

To stay the flux of Blood in Wounds.
When there is a flux of Blood in any wound by reason of some vein that is
cut, and that the Surgeon would stop it, it is necessary, that he put into
it our Quintessence, and then to stitch it up very close and hard, and upon the
wound strew the blood of a Man dried, made in powder, and lay upon the wound a
cloth wet in our Baulme artificially, very warm, and upon that bind the
wound very straight with Ligaments, and twice a day wash it with our
Quintessentia, and round about it annoint it with our Baulme, and also cast
thereon our secret powder for wounds, and that do, Morning and Evening every
day without opening the wound, and in short time it will remain well, giving
you charge that the wounded person do keep no straight Diet, because Nature
being weak relaxeth the Veins, and that causes the flux of blood.

Another for the same.
FIrst, stitch the wound close, then cast thereon Man's blood, and bind it
somewhat hard, so let it remain 24. hours: And when you unbind it, take heed
you remove nothing, and cast thereon more dried blood, and anoint it round
about with Oleum Philosophorum, Deteribinthina and Cera, and bind it again
other 24. hours, and bind it gently, and annoint the wound with Oil of
Frankensence, and in short time it will be perfectly whole.

A defense to be laid upon VVounds.
TAke perfect Aqua-vitae of good Wine, what quantity you will, and put therein
Hipericon, Mill-foyle, Viticella, and Bitony, and then let it stand certain
days close stopped, and when ye will use it, wet a cloth therein and lay it
round about the Wound, and thou shall have thy intent, to the great
satisfaction of the Patient.

A secret Powder for wounds.
TAke Hipericon flowers and leaves, Millfoyle, and Viticella, and stamp them
well together, and so strew it upon the Wound, and round about the wound, when
it is dressed, and that does defend it from accidents.

A Composition of great virtue against all Ulcers and Sores.
TAke the Oil of Vitrioll that is perfect, as much as you will, and put it
into a Glass, with as much Oil of Tartar made by dissolution, and so let it
stand ten days: Then take one scruple of that, and one ounce of pure Aqua
vitae, and mix them together, and therewith wash the hollow Ulcers and they
will heal in short time. It helps any crude kind of Scab or sore that is
caused of the evil quality or nature.

A Note of a certain Spanyard, wounded in the head at Naples.
There was a certain Spanyard called Samora, of the age of 34. years, of
complexion Choleric and Sanguine, the which was wounded in the left side of
the head, with incision of the Bone. Now ye must understand, that in Naples
the air is most ill for wounds in the Head, by reason that it is so subtle,
and for that cause the Doctors did fear the Cure: Nevertheless, J dressed him
with our Magno Licore, and Balsamo Artificio, keeping the wound as close as was
possible, annoynting it only upon the wound, and so in 14. days he was
perfectly whole, to the great wonder of 2 number of Chyrurgions in that City.

For to heal Hurts and VVounds.
TAke Mallows and sees them well, and when they be boiled, take and stamp
them, and take old Barrowes grease and clean Barley meal, and mingle the
Juice, the Meal and the Grease all together, and make a salve thereof, it is a
ready healer.

To stanch the Blood of a Cut.
TAke a good handful of Nettles and bruise them, and then lay them upon the
wound hard bound with a cloth, and it will stanch it presently.

Another for the same.
TAke Hogs-dung hot from the Hog, mingle it with Sugar and lay it to the wound
will stay the bleeding.

For to staunch the blood of a VVound.
TAke a Linen Cloth, and burn it to powder, and bind it to the Wound or Vein
that is hurt, and it helps.

A healing Salve for any green VVound.
TAke two yolks of Eggs, half a pound of Turpentine, half a quarter of an
ounce of Mastick, half a quarter of an ounce of Nitre and half a quarter of an
ounce of Wearick, two ounces of Bucks-tallow, half a gille of Rose Water, and
half a quarter of an ounce of Saffron, mix all these together and make of them
a Salve, and keep it for your use.

The Lord Capels salve for Cuts or Rancklings coming of Rubbings: It is also a
very good Lip-salve.
TAke a pound of May-butter and clarify it, then take the purest thereof: also
take three ounces of English wax, and two ounces of Rozine, and clarify them
by themselves, then boil them all together, and when it is well boiled, cool
it, and after keep it in the Cake, or otherwise as your Salve.

For to draw and heal a Cut.
TAke the Juice of Smalledge, the Juice of Bugle, of each a like quantity; take
also Wax, Rozen unwrought, Sheep Suet, Deeres suet, of each a like quantity,
of Sallet oil* and Turpentine but a little; Fry them all, and scrape a little
Lint, and lay a little salve upon the Lint, and put it in the Cut, and then lay
a Plaster over it.

A Salve for fresh Wounds.
TAke Harts-grease and Turpentine, of each four Ounces: oil of Roses,
Frankensence and Masticke, of each one ounce, and so make your Salve, and lay
it to the sore.

A Salve that cleanses a Wound and heal^th it.
TAke white Turpentine unwashed four ounces, the yolke of an Egg, and a
little Barley meal, and so make a Salve.

To kill dead Flesh.
TAke the Juice of Smalledge, and the yolke of an Egg, Wheaten flower, a
spoonful of Honey: and mingle all these together, and drop it into the Sore,
or otherwise make a Plaster: Fine Sugar scraped into powder will do the same.

A Plaster for old Sores.
TAke Litarge of Gold, one pound, oil of Roses two pound, white Wine a pint,
Urine a pint, Vinegar half a pint, Wax, Frankensence, and Myrrh, of each
two Drams, and so make your Plaster according.

For a Canker, Fistula, Warts, or Wounds, new or old.
TAke a Gallon and a half of running Water, and a pecke of Ashen ashes, and
sees them, and make thereof a Gallon of Lie, and put thereto a gallon of
Tanners woose* and powder of roch Allome, and Madder a pound: and sees all
these, and let your pan be so great, that it be little more then half full,
and when it rises in the seething, stir it down with a ladle, that it run
not over, and let it stand three or four hours till it be clear, and all
that is clear strain it through a good thick Canvasse, and then wet therein
a ragged cloth, and long Lint, and lay it on the sore, and this is good for all
the Diseases aforesaid.

A Salv^ for any Wound.
TAke Housleeke, Marigold leaves, Sage* Betonie, and garden Mallows, of each
one handful, stamp them, and strain them, then take the juice, and half a
pound of fresh Butter, one penny worth of fine Turpentine, ^ery well washed,
one penny worth of Aqua Composita, and an Oxe-gall, mix them all together, and
boil them moderately upon the Imbers, and so make a Plaster.

To h^lp^ the Ach of a Wound.
FOr Ache of a Wound, stamp Fennel, with old Swines Grease, and heat it and
bind it thereto, R^cip. the juice of Smallage, Honey, old Swines grease, and
Rye meal, and apply it Plasterwise.

To heal Wounds without Plaster, Tent or Ointment, except it ^e in the Head.
Stamp Fennel, Yarrow, Buglosse, an^* white Wine, and drink it 2. or 3.
times a day till you be well. Mix Swines grease with Honey, Rye meal, and
Wine, and boil it and use it, but if it heal too fast, put in the juice of
Bryonie a little, or bruise Jsop and put in while the wound is raw is very good.

To heal a Wound that no scarre or print thereof shall be seen.
Roast Lilly roots, and grind them with Swines grease, and when the wound is
healed, anoint it therewith often.

Thus much for VVounds.
Of Plasters* PART. V.
To make a resolutive Plaster of great virtue. This Plaster is to resolve
Tumors and hardness, if it be laid thereon very hot, and when it cold, to lay
on another, and this you shall do till the hardness be resolved: and it is
made in this order.
TAke common wood Ashes that are well burnt and white, and finely searced one
pound, Clay beaten in fine powder, half a pound, Carab one ounce: mix all
these in an Earthen dish, on the fire, with Oil of Roses, in form of a Liquid
Unguent, and that ye shall lay upon the place grieved, as hot as ye may
suffer it, and change it Morning and Evening* and ye shall see*it work a
marvailous effect. Moreover, when the Pelichie comes forth a diseased, let
him be folded in the same remedy very hot, and in four and twenty hours ye
shall be help, if ye be first well purged: for this is a great secret which J
have revealed. This word Pelichy, is (as it were certain spots) like those
which we call Gods tokens, the which commonly come to those that have the
Pestilent Fever.

To make a maturative Plaster of great virtue. This maturative does open an
Impostume without Instrument and pain: And the order to make it, is this.
TAke the yolks of Eggs, two ounces, white Salt finely ground, one ounce,
Hens dung that is liquid and red like Honey, one ounce: Mix all these well
together without fire, and when you will bring an Impostume to separation, and
break it, lay on this Plaster Morning and Evening, a little, and in short
time it will draw forth the Impostume, and break it, and heal it without any
other help. Keep this as a great secret, for J have oftentimes made proof
thereof, and it never failed.

A Plaster called Bessilicon.
TAke white Wax, Rozen, Pine, Cowes suet, Stone-pitch, Turpentine, Olibany, of
each of these one ounce, and of good Oil as much as will serve the turn, and
make it into a Plaster

Another Plaster for the same.
TAke Balm, Bittony, Pimpernell, of each of them a handful, lay them in a
Fuse in a pottle of white wind Vinegar two days, then let them be boiled
strongly, till the third part be consumed, put thereto Rozen one pound, white
Wax four ounces, Masticke one ounce, Turpentine one pound, and so make your
Plaster.

The Mellilote Plaster.
TAke Mellilote ten handfuls, let it be small stamped, and laid in Fuse four
days in a pottle of white Wine, and then boil it strongly, till the third part
be consumed, then let it cool, and put thereto Rozen two pound, Perosine one
pound, and Wax one pound, Dear suet one pound, Masticke one ounce,
Frankensence four ounces, and so make your Plaster according to Art.

The Musilage Plaster.
TAke March Mallow roots, Fenecricke, and Linseed, of each one pound, lay them
in fuse in three quarts of water three days, then boil it over the fire a
little, and so strain it to a Musilage, and then take thereof one pound, and
of Lytarge of Lead four pound* of good Oil six pound, put all over the fire
in a great vessel, and so let it boil with a soft fire, ever stirring it till
it come to the form of a Plaster accordingly.

Another Plaster for the same.
TAke the Juice of Bittony. Planten, and Smalledge, of each one pound, Wax,
Rozen, and Turpentine, of each one pound, Pitch four ounces, and so make your
work and dissolve it to a Plaster.

A Plaster of Camphere.
TAke common Oil one pound, Wax four ounces, Seruse one ounce, Camphere one
ounce, and so make it into a Plaster, it is a very sovereign thing.

A Spiced Plaster.
TAke white Wax one pound, Perosine one pound, Colophony four ounces, Rozen
one pound* Dear suet one pound, Cloves and Mace four ounces, Saffron one
ounce, red Wine and water of each a quart boil these altogether till they come
to a Plaster.

A Plaster called Apostolicum.
TAke white Lead and red, of each one pound, Oil four pound, stir them
altogether, and boil them with a soft fire, to the form of a Plaster,
according to Art.

A Drying Plaster.
TAke Oil of Roses, Deeres suet, of each one pound, Terra Sigillata, Lapis
Calaminaris, Seruse, of each one pound, Sanguis Draconis, three ounces, and
Incense of each one ounce, Turpentine four ounces, Camphere half an ounce,
and so by Art make a Plaster.

A Plaster for the Gowt Arteticke.
TAke Oxium, and Saffron, of each one dram in fine powder, tempered in the
yolks of three Eggs hard boiled, and oil of Violets, or Roses,
Plaister-wise, applied to the painful place upon a little sheeps leather, and
let it lie on till it come off of it self. Probatum est.

A Plaster to stake pain.
TAke crummes of white Bread four ounces temper them with sweet Milk, and the
yolks of four Eggs hard boiled: and take of oil of Roses three drams, and
in the making put thereto a little Turpentine and Saffron two drams in fine
powder, and so use it.

A Plaster against the coldness of the Nerves.
TAke Wax two ounces, Euforbium, Castoris, of each half an ounce, Sheep
suet, and Pitch of each one ounce, Turpentine a dram: and so make your work
according to Art.

A good cold drying Plaster.
TAke Oil one pound, Wax ten ounces, Seruse and Lytarge of Gold, of each
four ounces, boiled with a soft fire in a Furnace, will turn to a Plaster.

A red Plaster.
TAke Wax, Deeres suet, of each one ounce, Lapis Calaminaris, Bole-armony of
each one*dram, Turpentine one ounce, Camphere a dram: mix all these together,
and so make a Plaster.

A black Plaster.
TAke of Wax and Oil, of each a pound, Ceruse and Litarge, of each five
ounces; Terra Sigillata, one ounce: boil altogether till it be black, and
like a Plaster.

A black Plaster for old Sores.
TAke Litarge of Gold, and Ceruse, of each one ounce, the Cinders of Jron,
Quilled story Fererie, fix drams, Oil of Roses four ounces, new Wax one
ounce, strong Vinegar two drams: mix them well together, and so make it
according to Art.

A Plaster to dissolve hard things.
TAke Gum Armoniack, Serapine, Bdelium, Oppoponacie, of each one ounce, oil of
Spike five drams, Turpentine two drams, the mell of Fennicrick, and Linseed, of
each one ounce, the mell of Lupianes, as much as needs, and so make your
Plaster.

Another black Plaster for the same.
TAke Oil one pound, Wax and Ceruse of each half a pound, and so make a
Plaster according to Art.

A Plaster against old Sores.
TAke Oil twelve ounces, Litarge of Gold half a pound, Vinegar six ounces,
Ceruse, Colophonie, Perosine, Pitch, Goats Suet, of each two ounces, Dragons
blood, Terra sigillata, of each one ounce, Wax two ounces and a half: and so
with a soft fire make a Plaster, it is an approved Remedy.

A cooling Plaster.
TAke Litarge of Lead one pound, Oil four pound, wine Vinegar two pound, and
so boil them to a Plaster and apply it.

A Plaster to draw an Impostume.
TAke Galbanum and Gum Armoniack, of each one pound, dissolved in Vinegar and
four pound of Sugar, for four days together, and then boiled until the
Vinegar be consumed with a soft fire, and so make your plaster.

A Plaster made for the Lord Mark de Wise.
TAke Virgin-wax two pound, of Perosine so much, Galbanum and Gum-armoniack, of
each half a pound, Pitch four ounces, Deeres suet and Ceruse, of each half a
pound* Cloves and Mace four ounces, Saffron to the weight of twelve pence, red
Wine and water of each two pintes; boil all these things together till the
liquor be wasted away, and so make a Plaster thereof, it is very good for to
break an Impostume.

The white Musilage Plaster.
TAke pure good Oil eight pound, Litarge of Lead five pound and a half,
Musilage of March mallow roots, of Fennicrick and Linseed two pound; boil all
these together to the form of a Plaster with a soft fire, ever stirring it
well, then take and wash it in three or four waters and it will be very white,
it is good to ripen and draw.

A Spiced Plaster for the same.
TAke Wax and Perosine of each one pound Cressine half a pound, Colophonie two
ounces, Frankincense and Goats suet of each four ounces, Cloves and Mace, Oil
of Turpentine, and Oil of Spike of each one ounce, Saffron half an ounce, red
Wine two pound; dissolve them over a soft fire, and so make your Plaster.

An excellent Plaster for old Sores.
TAke Litarge of Gold one pound, Oil of Roses two pound, white Wine a pint,
Urine a pint, Vinegar half a pint, Wax, Frankensence and Myrrh of each two
drams, set them on the fire to boil, and so make your Plaster according to
art.

A Sparadrope for the same.
TAke oil of Roses a pound, white Wax three ounces, Litarge of Gold four
ounces, boil all these in form of a Plaster.

A very good drying Plaster.
TAke of Jacobs Plaster half a pound, of Vnguentum Lapis Caluminaris one
pound, mix them and so make a Plaster.

Oliver Wilsons Plaster.
TAke a pottle of Oil, Wax two pound and a quarter, white Lead in powder 2.
pound, of Storax callamitick one ounce, Bengawin one ounce, Labdanum one ounce,
Mastick one ounce, of Camphere four drams, dissolve them and so make a
Plaster.

To make another Sparadrope.
TAke Oil a quart, white Lead one pound, the grounds of Urine four ounces, of
white Copperas two ounces, white Wax three ounces, Vinegar a pint, Camphere
three pennyworth, boil all these together, and so make a plaster.

To make the Mellilote Plaster.
TAke Rozin eight pound, Wax two pound, Sheep suet one pound, the juice of
Mellilote a gallon clean strained, let your Rozen and Sheep suet be molten,
and clean strained into a fair pan, and then put to your juice of
Mellilote, and set it over the fire and stir it well together till it be like
a plaster, then take it off the fire and put unto it a pottle of red Wine, by
a little and a little, ever stirring it till it be almost cold, and then
labor it well in your ^ands for fear of heaving out the Wine, and so make it
up in rolls and keep it for your use.

To make a Seare-cloath.
TAke Wax one ounce, and a dram of Euforbium, and temper it with oil Olive at
the fire, and make thereof a Seare-cloath to comfort the Sinews.

To make a Plaster called Flowesse.
TAke Rozen, and Perosine of each half ^ pound, Virgin-wax, and Frankensence
of each a quarter of a pound, Mastick one ounce, Harts-tallow a quarter of a
pound, Camphere two drams, beat all these to a powder, and boil them together,
and strain it through a fair cloth into a pottle of white Wine, and boil them
all again together, and letting it cool a little, then put to it four ounces
of Turpentine, and stir them all together till it be cold, and so make it in
rowles according to Art.

Another Plaster for the same.
TAke two pound of Wax, two pound of Rozen, four pound of Perosine, a quarter
of a pound of Deeres suet, two ounces of Cloves, two ounces of Mace, a quarter
of an ounce of Saffron, one pound and a half of Olibanon, and a Gallon of red
Wine, and put all these into a fair Pan, and set it over the fire four or
five hours, till ye suppose that the Wine be sodden away, and then take it
off the fire, and stir it till it be cold, and roll it in balls and keep
itto use.

To make the Plaster Occinicione.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Comin, as much Wax as much Pitch, as much Rozen,
and of Saffron one ounce and a half, of Masticke one quarterne, Galbanum half
a quarterne, Turpentine one ounce, Incense half an ounce, Myrrh but a
quarter, Salarmoniac a little; first take the Salt, and let it lie in good
Vinegar, and stamped in a Mortar till it be well moystned all Night and more,
then take the Vinegar, and the Gums therein and set it on the fire, till the
Gummes be well melted, then strain it and set it on the fire again* and let
it sees until the Vinegar the second part thereof be wasted, and so that
there be but the third part left, then melt the Pitch and scumme it, and put
thereto the liquour that is left, then melt the Wax and put it to the Rozen,
and the Turpentine, and then take the Masticke Incense, and Myrrh: but look
that all the Gums be beaten into powder, before that you cast it in, and see
that you stir it apace; when that they be well molten and meddled, look that
you have a fair Basin of hot water, and suddenly cast it in, then wring it
out of the water, then chafe it against the fire as if it were Wax: and
annoint your hands with oil of Bay, and look ye have the Saffron in fine
powder: and the other that was not put in before, and when you have put in all
the eight Powders, make it up in Rowles, this is an excellent Plaster for
diverse occasions.

To make a Plaster Inplumhie.
TAke Oil one pound, Litarge half a pound: and look that the Litarge be
fine, then set it on the fire: and let it boil until it wax brown, but not
so long that it wax black: then take it from the fire, and make it in Balls
and so keep it.

A Plaster of Camphere.
TAke Camomill oil half a pound, white Wax four ounces, Ceruse one pound,
Camphere* half an ounce, and so make your Plaster.

To make a noble Plaster, that as soon as the Plaster is warm and laid to
the place the pain will be gone, and it is called a Spic^ Plaster.
TAke Wax two pound, Dear Suet one pound, Perosine four pound, Cloves and
Mace two Ounces, Saffron one ounce, Rozen two pound, Pitch four ounces, now
melt that which is to be molten, and powder and serse that which is to be
powdered and sersed, and melted altogether over a soft fire, except your Cloves
and Saffron; and then take a quart of red Wine, and by a little and a little
pour it to the salve, stirring it well together, and when it is clean molton,
strain it into a clean Pan, and then put to it your powder, of Cloves, Mace,
and Saffron, casting it abroad upon the said Ingredience, and stirring it well
till it be cold, then make it into rolls. This is a very comfortable Plaster.

To make a special Plaster for all manner of cold Aches.
TAke Perosine four pound, Rozen, and Wax of each two pound, Galbanum as
much, Olibanon as much, Masticke, and Myrrh, of each two ounces, red Wine
four pound, put in your Masticke, Myrrh and Wine, in the cooling, it has
been often times proved, and when you need it, spread it on a Leather and let
it lie on a day or two before you change it.

To make a Plaster that Sir William Farrington let a Squire that was his
Prisoner go for, quit without ransom.
TAke one pound of Litarge of Gold, and make thereof small powder, and serse it
well, then take a quart of oil of Roses, and a pint of white Wine, and half
a pint of old Urine, very well clarified, and half a pint of Vinegar, and
boil all these on the fire, but put in the Urine last, this Plaster will
heal a Marmole, or a Canker, and a Fester, as also Wounds, and all other
sores, if thou put thereto one ounce of Wax, Ollibanon, and Myrrh, of each a
dram. Probatum est.

To make Coulman Plaster.
TAke oil Olive four pound, red Lead, and white, of each one pound, boil
them together till it wax black, and then put thereto Pitch one pound, and
make it into rolls for your use.

To make the Mellitote Plaster.
TAke the Juice of Mellilot, and Camomill* of each one pound, of Wax one
pound, Rozen three pound, Sheep suet a pound and a half, white Wine two
pound and a half, and so make them all in a Plaster according to Art, for it
is good.

To make the Deaguloune Plaster.
TAke Oil two pound, strong Vinegar one pound and a half, Litarge of Gold one
pound, Verdigreace one ounce, boil them together till they be red, and so make
it into rolls for your use.

A Plaster for all manner of Sores, and especially for all green Sores.
TAke of fine Sugar and Burnet, of each of them alike much, and bruise them in
a Mortar, and wash the Wound with the juice of the same, then take the Herbs
finely beaten, and mingle with them and the juice, a quantity of English Honey,
and unwrought Wax, so boil them together till it be allof one color, then
take them from the fire, and let them stand a while: then put it into a Basin
of fair water, and so work it out into rowles, and lay it on Plasters once
or twice a day.

Another for the same approved.
TAke the Herb Sellendine, and Houseleeke, of each equal quantity, then
bruise them in a Mortar* and take the juice of them, and put it into the wound,
and annoint the same therewith: that done, fill the wound with part of the
bruised herb, and so bind it up, and in short time it will heal the sore, as
by proof has been seen.

A Plaster for the Stitch.
Anoint your side with the oil of Mellilote, then make a Plaster of the same
Mellilote upon a piece of Leather, and change it but once a week.

A Plaster for the Plurisie.
Stamp well in a Mortar, four ounces of the roots of wild Mallows well
sodden, put to it an ounce of Butter* and an ounce and a half of Honey, of
Pigeons dung two drams, mingle all together, and lay it very hot upon the
pain, and soon after the corruption will break out.

A Plaster for the Colic and Stone.
TAke Peritory, Camomill, ground-Ivie leaves, Cummin: stamp them, and boil
them in white Wine, and make a Plaster thereof, and put it about the Reins of
the back as hot as may be suffered, and see that it lie close round about
behind and before and you will find great ease in it.

A Plaster for the Headache, and for hot Agues.
TAke red Mintes, Leavened Bread of Wheat, and white Vinegar: make thereof a
Plaster, and lay it to your Forehead, for it helps diseases in the Head,
and also hot Agues.

A hot drawing Plaster, called Flowis.
TAke Rozen, Perosine, of each half a pound, white Wax four ounces, and
Frankensence four ounces, and Mastick one ounce, Dear suet four ounces,
Turpentine four ounces, Camphere two drams, white Wine a Pottle: and so make a
Plaster and give him time to draw.

A Plaster called the virtue of our Lord.
TAke oil Olive one pound, white Wax two drams, Galbanum, Ermony, and
Opponacke two ounces, Litarge half a pound, Almonds one dram, Verdigreace one
ounce, Aristoligiam Longuam one dram, Myrrh, and Mastcke, of each one ounce,
Laurel bays two Drams, Incense white one Dram: Make the Plaster in this
manner: take and temper the Galbanum, Opponack, and Ermony, in good Vinegar,
two days natural, and the other things to be provided each by himself: then
take the Wax, and melt is with the Oil in a Kettle, and the Gummes dissolved
in Vinegar, in another vessel upon the fire, till the Vinegar be sodden away:
then strain it upon the said Oil, as strongly as you can stir it well: and
then put in the Verdigreace, the Astrologium, and the other Gummes that were
not put in before, then it is made. It heals all wounds new or old, and it
does heal more then all other Plasters, or Ointments does.

A Plaster for weakness in the Back.
TAke the juyces of Comfrey, Plantane, and Knotgrasse, mingled with
Bole-armoniack, and made in a plaster spread upon a piece of sheeps leather
and laid to the back.

A Plaster for any Ache, lamenesse, or Sciatica.
TAke a pound of the leanest part of a Leg of Mutton, put to it a quart of the
grounds of Muskadine, or sweet Sack, and one pound of Oil de Bay, mince your
Mutton very fine, and boil them together into the form of a plaster, and so
apply it to the place as hot as you can suffer it. D. R.

A Plaster for a sore Breast that must be broken.
TAke one handful of Groundsill, a pint of sweet Milk, and a handful of
Oatemeale, and seethe them together. Make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the
breast as hot as the Patient may suffer it, and at every Dressing put to more
Milk: this use no longer then it breaks.

A Plaster to heal it.
TAke one pound of Bores-grease, and three Garlic heads, stamp them in a
mortar till they be fine, put them both into a box, and put thereto of Bean
flower, the quantity of two Eggs, beat them well together and so lay them to
the Breast.

To make another Seare-cloath.
TAke Rozen, and Perosine of each four ounces, Wax two ounces, Ollibanum so
much* Masticke half an ounce, Turpentine two ounces, dissolve them on the fire
and so make your Seare-cloath.

OF UNGUENTS. PART. VI.
The making of Ointments, and first of Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
TAke Honey a pint, Vinegar a pint, Allom half a pound, Verdigreace four
ounces in fine powder; boil all these together till they be red; for if you
boil it too much it will be black, and if you boil it too little it will be
green; therefore when it is boiled enough it will be perfectly red, and so
make your Unguent.

To make Vnguentum Apostolorum.
TAke Yellow Rozen two pound, Verdigrease three ounces, Wax one pound, Oil a
pint, you must set the Oil, Wax and Rozen over the fire, then put to your
Verdigreace made into fine powder* and stir it till it be cold, and so it is
finished.

Vnguentum Basilicum.
TAke Oil half a pound, Wax, Colophonie, of each two ounces, Turpentine,
Pitch, Perosine, and Cowes suet, of each two pound and a half, Frankensence,
and Myrrh, of each half an ounce, and so make your Unguent.

The golden Unguent, called Vnguentum Aureum.
TAke yellow Wax four ounces, Oil one pound, Turpentine, Colophonie* and
Rozen, of each one ounce, Frankensence and Masticke, of each half an ounce,
Saffron a dram, and so make an Unguent.

To make a drying Unguent, called Vnguentum Calaminaris.
TAke the Stone called Lapis Calaminaris, Deeres Suet, and Wax, of each four
ounces, oil of Roses half a pound, Camphere two drams, and so make your
Unguent according to Art.

To make the white Ointment, called Vnguentum Album Rasis.
TAke oil of Roses half a pound, Wax two ounces, Ceruse six ounces, the
whites of three Eggs, and Camphere a dram: and after these things be melted
and commixed together, you must wash it with Rose Water.

To make Vnguentum Lytargerii.
TAke oil of Roses one pound, Litarge of Lead one pound, Vinegar half a
pound, Camphere two drams: and so make your Unguent.

To make Vnguentum Lypeione.
TAke the juice of Honey-suckles a quart, Honey a pint, white Copperas half a
pound: and so make your Unguent.

To make the Incarnative Unguent.
TAke oil of green Balm two pound, Wax, and Perosine, of each half a
pound* Deeres suet four ounces, Frankensence and Myrrh, of each two ounces,
of Turpentine four ounces, the yolks of four Eggs, and so make your Unguent.

Another Incarnative Unguent.
TAke Deeres suet, oil of Roses, Rozen, Pitch, Litarge of Gold, Frankensence
and Myrrh of each four ounces, and so make your Unguent.

To make Vnguentum Viride.
TAke Ossingie Porsine one pound, Verdigreace two ounces, Sall gemme, half an
ounce, and so make your Unguent.

Another Unguent.
TAke burnt Allom and Vinegar, of each two ounces, Ossingie Porsine six
ounces, and so make an Unguent.

A drying Unguent.
TAke oil of Roses one pound, Wax six ounces, Litarge of Gold and Silver,
Bdelium, gum Armoniack, red Coral, Dragons blood, Deeres suet, Masticke, of
each two ounces, Camphere half an ounce, and so make your Unguent.

An Unguent against the Morphew.
TAke quick Brimstone six drams, oil of Tartary, four drams, Ceruse,
Unguentum Cytrium, of each two drams, oil of Roses, six drams, the white of
an Egg, as much Vinegar as needs, and so make your Unguent.

An Unguent called Rosye.
TAke Rozen, Turpentine, and Honey, of each half a pound, Linseed and
Fenecrick* of each one ounce, Myrrh one ounce. Sercoll one ounce: let them all
be made in fine powder, and so make an Unguent thereof.

An Unguent for Ulcers in the Arm.
TAke Litarge of Gold and silver, Ceruse, of each two ounces: Bole-armoniac
half an ounce, Lapis Calaminaris, Dragons blood, of each one ounce,
Frankensence, and Mastick, of each half an ounce, Tartarie, Sall-gemme and
Camphere, of each two drams: Turpentine washed in Rose Water, and Wax, of each
two ounces, oil of Elders, half an ounce, oil of Bays two drams, oil of
Violets and of Poppie, of each four drams: and so make your Unguent, it is an
excellent ointment.

An Unguent against Cabes.
TAke Storax liquide, two ounces, Bay Salt in fine powder, and oil of Roses,
of each one ounce, the juice of Orenges, as much as shall need, and so make
your Unguent according to Art.

An Unguent called the gift of God.
TAke Orras powder, Sall-gemme, Sall-Nitrie, of each one ounce, a Stone called
Lapis Magnates, two ounces, Lapis Calaminaris, two ounces, Wax one pound, Oil
three pound: and so make your Unguent according to Art.

A precious Unguent.
TAke Ceruse washed one ounce, in an ounce of Vinegar, burnt Lead four ounces,
Litarge two ounces, Myrrh one ounce, Honey, of Roses two ounces, oil of Roses
six ounces, the Yolks of six Eggs, and Wax as much as needs, and so make
your Unguent.

Another Unguent against Cabes.
TAke the juice of Sallendine, Femitary, Borage, Scabious, and Dockes, of each
three ounces, Litarge of gold washed, Ceruse, burnt Brass, Brimstone, Bay
salt, burnt Allom, of each half an ounce, oil of Roses two ounces, Storax
liquide, Turpentine, of each one ounce, Vinegar four ounces, Ossingie
Perosine, one pound and a half: and so make your ointment.

To make the green Ointment called Vnguentum Viride.
TAke Wax one pound, Perosine one pound, Frankensence half a pound, gum
Arabic half a pound, Verdigrease two ounces, Honey four ounces, oil Olive
two pound: and so make your Unguent.

An Unguent to increase Flesh.
TAke the gum Dragagant, and dissolve it in Rose Water, and make an Unguent.

An Unguent to heal the Serpigo.
TAke Pepper, Bay Salt, Tartary, Verdigreace, Allumines ynke, of each half an
ounce, Ceruse, Litarge, and Quicksilver well killed, of each two drams, of
Ossingie Perosine, as much as needs.

An Unguent for Fistulaes.
TAke Myrrh, Masticke, Alloes, and Epatick, of each two ounces* the juice of
Salendine, Planten, Honey, of Roses, and Vinegar, of each a like quantity, and
make it an Unguent.

An ointment for a green Wound.
TAke oil of Turpentine one ounce, the oil of Vulpinum one ounce, oil of
Camomill two ounces, and make thereof an Unguent.

A cold Unguent.
TAke oil of Roses, and Wax, of each two ounces, the juice of red Gowrd
leaves, Nightshade leaves, of each two ounces, Ceruse washed, burnt Lead
washed in Rose Water, or Planten water, of each half an ounce, Frankensence
two drams, melt all together, and decoct it a little: and then take it from the
fire, and put it into a Leaden Mortar, wherein you must labor it a good while,
and so make your Unguent.

An Unguent for a sawse-fleame Face.
TAke May butter one pound, Hony-suckle flowers three handfuls, stamp the
flowers, and the Butter together, and lay it in fuse for six days space; then
melt it and strain it, and put thereto quick Brimstone, the weight of twelve
pence, finely powdered, and so reserve it for your use.

An Unguent for the Piles.
TAke Mollene, Archangell, red Fennel stamped small, of each a like quantity,
and as much Ossingie as of the Herbs: Mix all these together, and lay it ^
rotting a week space: then strain it and keep it for that use.

Another Unguent for the Piles.
TAke Yarrow, and May butter, and stamp them together, and apply them as hot
as may be suffered.

To make Vnguentum Lipcium.
TAke a quart of Juice of Honey suckles, and a pint of Honey, and half a pound
of white Coperas, and seethe them on the fire, and let them boil till it wax
black: then put in your Copperas in fine powder.

To make Vnguentum Fanscome.
TAke Wax one pound, Rozen, Colophonie, of each two pound, Pitch one pound,
Cowes suet one pound, May-butter half a pound, Honey two pound, Oil two
pound, Turpentine four Ounces, Verdigrease and Ceruse four Ounces: and so
according to Art work it.

To make Vnguentum Dunsinnitive.
TAke two Ounces of Litarge of Gold, two drams of Lapis Calaminaris, and four
ounces of Terra sigillata, and powder them small: then take a pint of Oil,
and put thereto half a pound of Wax, and melt it with your Oil, and then
take it off the fire, and put in your powders, and when it is cold almost, put
in four drams of Camphere in fine powder,

To make an Unguent for the Skerby.
TAke a Gallon of red Vinegar, and one pound of the root of Briony, and sees
therein till it be consumed: then take the root thereof and beat it with
Oxsingie, and beat it very fine: then take one ounce of Arguentum vivum well
killed, and labor them altogether very fine, and so anoint therewith.

To make an Unguent for Ulcers in Childrens faces.
TAke Litarge and Ceruse, of each five ounces, the leaves of Ash, and Vine
leaves of each three ounces, oil of Roses one ounce, Wax half an ounce:
relent your Oil and Wax together, and beat your Litarge and Ceruse, and
mingle them with two yolks of roasted Eggs, and so use it.

To make the Sinnitive Ointment.
TAke Turpentine four Ounces, Hartsgreace, or the Marrow of a Heart two
ounces, oil of Roses one ounce, white Frankensence half an ounce, oil of
Spike two drams, and half a dram of Mynium, and so work it.

To make an Unguent for the Itch.
TAke three handfuls of Allecompanerootes, seethe them in three Gallons of
water till they be soft: then take the Roots and scrape them, and take the
white of them to the quantity of a pound, and beat them with one pound of
Barrow-hogges grease, and a quantity of Salt, and a little Saffron; and so
bring them to an Ointment.

To make an Ointment for the Morbus.
TAke two ounces of Vermillion, two ounces of Quicksilver, two ounces of Oil
of Bay, two ounces of Bores-greace, half an ounce of Vinegar, four yolks of
Eggs: and let them all be wrought, very well together before you use them.

To make the Dunsymitive Vuguent.
TAke Oil Olive one pound, Rozen one pound, Lapis Calaminaris one pound, Wax
half a pound, Turpentine and Sheep suet, of each a quarter of a pound, and
(...) use it.

To make Vnguentum Dulsum.
TAke Sheep suet five pound, Rozen in powder one pound, roch Allom in powder
one pound, and a quart of white Wine, boil them altogether: And if you will
make it red, you may put into it one ounce of Vermilion in powder.

To make Vngnentum Basilicon.
TAke Wax one pound, the best Pitch one pound, Rozen half a pound, Colophonie
one pound, Cowes suet one pound, Oil two pound, May-butter half a pound
Turpentine four ounces, the yolks of four Eggs, make all these in an
Unguent and so use it.

To make a Mundifigitive.
TAke Smalledge a little bag full, one pouad of Oxingie, three pound of
Rozen, a quarter of a pound of Wax: Stamp your Smalledge and Oxingie together
in a stone Mortar: then put it into a Pan* and set them upon the fire till it
be hot: then strain them through a cloth into a fair pan, till they begin
to wax cold, then fleet it off with a slice, till you come to the water: then
put in the Rose Water and Wax all together upon the fire, and let them boil
altogether, then strain them through a Linen cloth, and so make your
Mundifigitive.

To make Vnguentum Rosine.
TAke Honey two pound, Rozen one pound and a quarter, Turpentine two pound,
Frankensence one ounce, Fenecrike Semminis ben, of each two ounces, Myrrh and
Seacole, of each two ounces in fine powder.

To make Gibsons Incarnative.
TAke green Broom two pound, Wax and Rozen, of each half a pound, Dear
suet four ounces, Frankensence, and Myrrh, of each two ounces, Turpentine and
the yolks of Eggs as much as neecs.

To make a yellow Incarnative.
TAke one pound of Rozen, half a pound of Frankensence, a quarter of a pound
of Wax, half a pound of sheep suet, half a pint of oil Olive, half a
pound of Turpentine, and so make your Unguent.

To make another Inearnative.
TAke oil of Roses twelve drams, Rosen two ounces, Turpentine eight ounces,
Wax six ounces, melt the Wax, Rosen, and Oil together, and in the boiling
put in your Turpentine, and the Juice of Valerian, and so let it be cold, and
as you occupy it put in oil of Turpentine, and so keep it.

To make an Unguent for the Piles.
TAke Barrowes grease half a pound, burnt Allome one ounce, and the yolke of
an Egg hard roasted, put these together, and make an ointment, and annoint your
sore as hot as you can abide it.

Another fumetive Unguent.
TAke half a poond of Dear suet, a pound of Wax, one pound of oil of Roses,
half a pound of oil Olive, of Lapis Calaminaris and Camphere two ounces, and
so make your Unguent according to Art.

To make Vnguentum Foscovem.
TAke oil Olive one pound, Saffron four drams, Colophonie, Pitch, Naviles,
Gum, and Seropine, of each two ounces, Mastick, Olibanon, and Turpentine of
each one ounce, Wax a quarter of a pound, melt your Oil and then your Wax, and
then put in the Colophonie, and after stir your Pitch, Naviles, and your Gum
and Serapine together, and last of all your Turpentine, Masticke, and Olibanon,
every thing being bruised, except your Pitch and Turpentine; when you put in
your Powders be ever stirring it with your spittle till it be full dissolved,
and so use it.

An Ointment for the Stone and Colic to be made in May.
TAke the buds of Broome-flowers, near the shutting, half a pound of them
picked from the stalks, and beat them in a mortar very small; that done,
mingle them with clarified May-butter, as much as you shall think fit, and so
keep it close in a vessel eight days, then sees it and strain it; and
therewith annoint the Patients grief very warm, Evening and morning.

OF WATERS. PART. VII.
Here follows the making of diverse precious Waters, but more especially of
ten, and their virtues.
I. And first, of the Philosophers water.
TAke Hysop, Penny-riall, Avence, and Centurie, and break them in a mortar,
then put them under the cap of a Stillatory, and distill them, and that water
has many virtues as has been proved by experience. As first, take
Pimpernell, Rue, Valerian, Sedwall, Alloes, and the Stone called Lapis
Calaminaris, and break them, and lay them in the water of Philosophers, and
let them be boiled together, until the third part of the Water be wasted, and
after let the said water be strained through a linen cloth, then shutit up
close in a Vyoll of glass the space of nine days. This is a precious water to
drink four days together with a fasting stomach for him that has the
Falling sickness, but let him be fasting six hours after; and this Medicine
is in our judgment the truest medicine against all manner of Gouts, and
against Palsies, as long as it is not dead in the limbs or members of a man.

Item, this water drunk in the Morning, is much helping to Wounds that is
festered, so that they be washed therewith.

Item, this water drunk fasting, will destroy all manner of Fevers or Aches,
of what kind soever they come to a man. Therefore trust to this medicine
verily; for it has been oftentimes approved of for a very good Water for these
diseases aforesaid, by many who have made experience of it.

2. The second Water is called Poetalis, et aqua Dulcedimus Occulorum, and is
made in this manner following.
TAke Egrimonie, Saturion, Selendine, and Tuttie, and the stone called Lapis
Calaminaris, and beat it all to powder; and then put them under the cap of a
Stillatorie, and distill thereof water by an easy fire, and this Water has
many virtues in it; for be the Eyes never so sore, this water will cure and
heal them.

Item, this water drunk with a fasting stomach, destroys all manner of
Venom or poison, and casts it out at the mouth.

Item, this water quenches the holly Fire, so that there be linen clothes
wet therein and laid on the sore, but you must also note, that this water in
fire is of black disposition.

3. The virtue of the third Water.
TAke Mustard Seed, Pimpernell, Crow-foot and the clote of Masticke, and let
all these be well bruised and mingled together with the blood of a Goat, and
put thereto good Vinegar a little, and so let them stand three days, and then
put them under the cap of a Stillatorie, and still it, and this water will
help a man of the Stone if he drink thereof: and if he drink thereof every
day fasting, the stone shall void from him as it were sand.

Jtem, this water drunk fasting makes good blood and good color both in man
and woman.

Jtem, this Water drunk with Castorie, destroys all manner of Palsies, if it
be not dead in the Sinews or members.

Jtem, it will heal a Scald-head, and make the hair to grow, if it be washed
therewith.

Jtem, if a man be scalded wash him with this water, and in nine days he shall
be whole, and of all other Medicines it comfort best the Sinews for the
Palsy.

4. The virtue of the fourth Water.
TAke young Pigeons, and make them in powder, and meddle them well with
Castorie in powder, and a little Aysell, and lay it under the Cap of the
Stillatorie, and distill water thereof, this water drunk with a fasting
stomach, helps the Frenzy and the Tysicke, within nine days it will make
them whole.

Jtem, this water drunk fasting, is a very good medicine against the falling
Evil, if the Sick have had it but few years, it shall help it on
warrantise: Give it him to drink three days in the morning fasting, as is
aforesaid, and he shall be whole by Gods grace, of what manner of kind soever
it come.

Jtem, this water drunk fasting, makes a good color in the face of man or
woman, and it cleanses the womb, the stomach, and the breast of all evils
that is congealed within them, and comfort all the veins, and draws the
root of the Palsy out of the sinews, and out of the joints and nourishes
nature in him.

Jtem, if a man or woman before failed in a sinew or joint it heals them
again.

Jtem, this water being drunk fasting, heals any man or woman of the
continual Fever, but take heed that no woman with child drink of this Water.

Jtem, this water drunk with Isope, puts away all sorrow from thy heart,
and causes a man or woman well to sleep, well to digest his meat, well to
make water, and well to do his ^ege.

Jtem, if a man will wash himself with this Water, it will draw away the hair
from any place of man, and destroy it.

5. The virtue of the fifth Water called Aqua Lasta.
TAke Isope, Gladion, Avence, Sothernwood, of each a like quantity, and stamp
them in a Mortar, and put them in a Stillatorie, and still them to water, and
this water drunk in morning fasting, is good against all manner of Fevers hot
or cold.

Jtem, this water being drunk fasting, is the best medicine against the Flux
of the womb, and cleanses the belly of all ill humors, and keeps a man in
health, and helps the Palsy, but it must be drunk fasting, and as hot as
may be suffered.

6. To make the sixth water called Dealbantium.
TAke Molewarpes and make them in a powder with Brimstone, and take the Juice
of Selondine, and so let them stand certain days, and after lay it in a
Stillatory, and still water of the water of it, and this water will make any
black Beast white, that is washed therewith nine times in nine days, or any
place in him, that a man will have white: Also this water meddled with Wax and
Aloes, it heals all manner of Gouts, if the Patient be anointed therewith.
Also this water helps the sickness called Noli me tangere, but a plaster
thereof must be laid to the sore. Also it helps a man of the Strangle, if a
plaster thereof be laid to the sore.

Jtem, it heals scald Heads, if they apply a plaster thereof to the sore.

Jtem, a plaster thereof heals burning with fire.

Jtem, this with Lapis Calamniaris, helps perfectly a ^icknesse called the
Wolf, but the plaster must be changed two times in a day, but let no man nor
woman drink any of this Water.

7. This Water is called Aqua Consuitivae.
TAke Pimpernell, and stamp it in a Mortar, and lay it in a Stillatory, and
still water thereof.

Jtem, this Water washes away all Wounds in a man's body.

Jtem, this water drunk fasting with Ginger, is a good Medicine against the
Tysicke, and will cleanse the Breast from all evil Humors.

8. The eight Water called Aqua Huplaciam, the double Water.
TAke Mustard Seed, Pepper, and Sinamon, of each a like and beat them in a
Mortar, and put thereto Aqua Consuetudo, and lay them under the Cap of the
Stillatorie, and distill Water thereof, and these be the virtues thereof; and if
it be drunk fasting it is the best Medicine against the Tysicke, and all
diseases of the breast, and it must be drunk in the morning cold, and at
Evening hot as ye may suffer it, and it will make one to sleep and take good
rest that night.

Jtem, this water being drunk with Castorie is good against the Sickness
called Epilenti^, viz. the Morbus Galicus.

Jtem, this water being drunk fasting, comfort all the Members that be
stricken with the Palsy, and comfort the sinews of the Head and the brain.

9. Water of Pimpernell, the ninth water.
TAke the seed of Pimpernell, and put it in red wine, and then after put it in
the Sun, and then break it in a Mortar, and then press out the Oil through
a clean cloth, this water or oil being drunk fasting, heals a man of the
sand or gravel in the bladder, for it will break the Stone within him.

Jtem, this water being drunk, sustaineth and lightneth all the members of man
of what Disease soever he be grieved with.

10. To make water of Sage, the tenth Water.
TAke Sage, and Pollyon, of each a like quantity, and break them in a mortar,
and put them in a Stillatorie, and distill Water sthereof this waterdrunke
fasting, eats away all manner of sickness.

Item* this wate r sodden with Castory and drunk fasting, of all Medicines in
the world, it prolongeth most a man's life.

Item, if a man be fore-spoken, do this nine days and he shall be whole, but
it must be taken with warm water.

Item, this water being drunk fasting, draws away all evil in the stomach
or womb.

Item, it is good against the Scabbes, and causes a man to have good blood,
and good color in the face.

Item, this water being drunk hot in the morning, or in the day, heals any
manner o^ evil in a man within three days, if the Patient be in any wise
curable.

To make Aqua Vitae.
TAke Isope, Rosemary, Violet, Verven, Bitony, Hearbe-Iohn, Mouseare, Planten,
Avence, Sage, and Fetherfoy, of each a handful, and washing them, put them in
a gallon of white Wine, and so let it stand all night clean covered, and then
on the morrow distill it, and keep the water well. This water is good for the
Megrim in the Head, and for the Impostume in the head, and for the Dropsy in
the Head* and for the Fever in the head, and for all manner of Aches and
sickness in the Head.

To make Aqua Magistralis.
TAke the roots of Pyonie, the roots of Turpentine, the crops of Fennel, of
Egrimonie, Honysuccle, Celondine, Rewe, Chickweed, Pimpernell, Phillippendula,
the tender leaves of the Vine, Eufra^e, Sowthistle, Red-roses, Strawbery
leaves, and Verven, of each alike quantity, and bray them in a Mortar, and put
them in good white Wine nine days, and then put thereto a pint of woman's
milk that does nurse a Man-child, and as much Urine of a man-child of a year
old, and as much pured Honey, and put them all together, and let them stand
three days so, and then distill them in a Stillatorie, and keep well this
water in a Glass vessel, that no Air come thereto, and if you will occupy
this water, wash thine eyes therewith, and use it, and if ever man be helped of
the disease of the Eyes, this will help him in short time.

A precious Water for Eyes that seem fair, and yet be blind.
TAke Smalledge, red Fennel, Rue, Verven, Byttony, Egrimony, Sinck-^oile
Eufrase, Sage, Pimpernell, and Selondine, of each a quarterne, and wash them
clean, and stamp them small, and put them in a brass Pan and powder of
Tuttie, of Pepper, of Ceruse, and a pint of white wine, and put it to the
Herbs, and two or three spoonfuls of Honey, and seven spoonfuls of the water
of a Man-child, and temper them together, and boil them over the fire a
little, and strain it through a cloth, and put it into a Glass, and stop it
well, till you will occupy it, and when you will use it, put it into thine eyes
with a Feather; and if it wax thick, temper it with white wine, and then use
it often.

A Water that will help on^, that is troubled with sore eyes being debarred of
sight.
TAke of Rosemary, Smalledge, Rewe, Verven, Mather, Eufrase, Endive,
Houseleeke, Fulwort, red Fennel, and Selandine, of each a like half a
quarterne, and wash them clean, and lay them in white Wine a day and a Night,
and then distill them in a Stillatorie, the first water will be like Gold, the
second like Silver, and the third will be like Balm, and that is good for all
sores of the eyes.

To make another Aqua Vitae.
TAke Nutmegs, Gallingale, Spikenard of Spain, of each two pennyworth, and of
Cloves, Grains, Ginger, of each one pennyworth, two penny worth of Annys take
and bray them all in a brass Mortar, and then take a handful of wild Sage,
and of the other Sage, Rosemary, Isope, Savery, puliall royal, puliall of the
Mountain, Sothernwood, Hore-hound, Worme-wood, and Egrimony, Bettony, Jvie
leaves, of each a like handful, and two pennyworth of Quibebes, and bruise all
these in a Mortar, then take three Gallons of good red Wine, and put it into a
brazen pot, and then put the Spices and Herbs therein, and set the Stillatory
above, and close it well, and take fair Paste, and put it about the brinkes
hard with thy hand, and make it cleave well and sadly thereto, and when it does
begin to wax hot, put cold water above in the Stillatorie, and when it does
wax hot, let the water run out at the Conduite, and put in new cold water,
and so do as often as ye shall think good, but look that the fire be not too
great, for if it be, then will the water come up, and if there come up smoke
of the Stillatorie with the Water, then is the fire too much, and if it be not,
then it is well tempered.

The making of Waters in colors, and first of green Waters.
TAke white Wine a pint, the water of Roses, and Planten, of each six ounces,
Orpiment one ounce, Verdigrease half an ounce, etc.

Another green Water.
TAke the waters of Honey-suckles, Planten, and Roses, of each half a pint,
Orpiment, Allome, Ceruse, and Verdigrease, of each two drams, white Wine, Juice
of Planten, of each half an ounce, and it is done.

Waters for old Ulcers.
TAke white Wine, and running Water of each a pint, Frankensence, and Allome,
of each one ounce, Decocted in Balm for three hours space, and it is done.

A good Drink for the Gummorium Passio.
TAke Bursa Pastoris, Planten, of each two handfuls, take the Juice thereof in
a pint of good Ale, and drink it three times in a day, for three days.

A Water for old Ulcers in the Arms.
TAke Smiths water a quart, burnt Allome one pound, Salarmoniac one ounce,
Galls two ounces, Tartary, Copperas, of each one ounce, distill all these with
shreds, so keep the water to your use.

A Water for a Canker.
TAke Bugle, Fennel, and Rosa-Solis, of each a like, and take as much in
quantity of Honey suckle flowers, as of all the other herbs, and let them be
clean picked and so distilled in a Stillatorie, and keep it close, for it is
a precious water.

A Femitorie Water.
IS to be drunk in the Morning, at Noone, and at night, it is much worth
against Dropsies, and Sweating sickness, it purges Fleame and Choler, and
Melancholy, and it brings forth heat, and dry Sickness, and it is good for
the pain of the Head, to wash it and drink it.

A Water of Rosemari^
IT has more virtues in it then a man can tell, one is if a man have an Arrow
or Jron within him, wet a tent and put into the wound, and drink the same
water, and it shall avoid out, and it helps all Wounds inward and outward,
the Canker, the Fester, and it kills the Worms in man or Child, and all
manner of Impostumes inward and outward, it helps the Tysicke, and Flux
white or bloody, it is a great help for a woman with Child to drink thereof,
also it makes clean the Face, or any where if ye wash it therewith.

Water of Verven.
IF if it be distilled in the later end of May, it has virtue to spring
Choler, and to heal Wounds, and to clear the Eyesight, it is a principal
thing to compound Medicines.

A Locion for a sore Mouth.
YOu must take of Honey-suckle-water half a pint, Planten and Rose Water, of
each four ounces, Honey of Roses two ounces. Alloes one ounce, white Copperas
and Vinegar, of each half an ounce and so use it.

A Water for a sore mouth.
TAke Lapis Calaminaris beaten into fine powder, and put in a pint of white
Wine, then take a pottle of water, and Rosemary, boil it in the water till it
be half sodden away, then strain the water from the Rosemary, and put it into
the white Wine, and so it is done.

A compound Water.
TAke first Pimpernell, Rue, Valerian or Sedwall, Alocelipis cap, and break
them, and lay them in this said water following: Take Isop, Pulyall Royal,
Anniseedes and Centorie, and beat them in a mortar, and after put them in a
Stillatory and distill water of them, which is very virtuous: and let them
boil together, and after that strain them that the water may go from them,
and close this water in Vials of glass, the space of nine days, and give it
to him that has the Falling-evill, four days, fasting after it six hours:
and this is the truest medicine for this Disease that we can sinde, except the
mercy of God; and this Water drinking is good for the Palsy* if it be drunk
fasting: also it is good for all Gowtes likewise* in the time that they be
mortified in the members and limbs of a man: it is very helping to Wounds that
are festered, if they be washed therewith, it destroys all manner of Fevers.

Behly Water.
TAke Water a pottle, Suger-Candy four ounces, let them seethe: then put in
four ounces of Verdigrease in fine powder, and let it seethe.

A good Barley water for all Diseases of the Lungs, or Lights.
TAke half a pound of fair Barley, a gallon of Water, half an ounce of
Licorice, Fennell-seed, Violets, and Parsley-seed, of each a quarter of an
ounce, red Roses a quarter of an ounce, dry Hysop and Sage, of each a
pennyweight, six leaves of Hart's-tongue, a quarter of an ounce of Figs and
Raysins; boil all these in a new pot of cold Water, and then strain them
clear from it and drink it; The same cools the Liver, and all the members,
drives away all evil heat, slaketh thirst, is the cause of much evacuation,
it purges the Lights and Spleen, the Kidneyes and Bladder, and it causes to
make water well; and more especially, it is good for all Agues that come of
heat.

A good Drink for the Pox.
TAke Selendine and English Saffron, the weight of a halfe-penny, and a
farthing-worth of Grains, a quarterne of long Pepper, a penny-weight of Mace
and a little stale Ale, then stamp your Herb and pound your Saffron, and
mingle them well together, and so drink it next your heart.

A very good Drink for the Cough.
TAke a quart of white Wine, and boil it with Lycorice, Anniseeds, and
Suger-candy of each a like quantity, putting therein ten Figs of the best,
and boil it until it be half consumed, and so preserve thereof to drink
Evening and morning three or four spoonefuls warmed.

A restorative made of the Herb Rosa Solis, with other things, but they must
be gathered in June, or July.
THis herb Rosa Solis, grows in Marish ground, and in no other place, and it
is of a hoary color, and grows very low, and flat to the ground, and it
has a mean long stalk growing in the midst of it, and seven branches
springs out of the root round about the stalk with leaves colored, and of
a mean length and breadth, and in no wise when this Herb should be gathered,
touch not the Herb it self with your hands, for then the virtue thereof is
gone, ye must gather and pluck it out of the ground by the stalk, ye must
lay it in a clean basket, the Leaves of it is full of strength and nature, and
gather so much of this herb as will fill a pottle pot or glass, but wash it
not in any wise, then take a pottle of Aqua Composita, and put them both in a
large pot or vessel, and let it stand hard and fast stopped, three days and
three nights, and on the fourth day open it, and strain it through a fair
linnen-cloath into a clean glass or pewter pot, and put thereto a pound of
Sugar small beaten, one pound of Licorice beaten to powder, and one pound of
Dates, the stones taken out, and they cut in small pieces, then mingle them
altogether, and stop the glass or pewter pot well, so that no air come into
it in any wise. Thus done ye may drink of it at night when ye go to bed,
one spoonefull mixed with Aqua Vitae, or stale Ale, and as much in the morning
fasting* and there is not the weakest body in the worl^ that is wasted by
Consumption or otherwise, but it will restore him again, and make him to be
strong and lusty and to have a good stomach, and that shortly, and he or she
that uses this three times together, shall find great remedy or comfort
thereby, and as the patient does feel himself, so he may use it.

How to make Doctor Stevens precious Water, which Dr. Chambers and others, made
trial of and did approve the virtue of it.
TAke a gallon of Gascoigne wine, then take Ginger, Galingall, Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, grains of Paradise, Cloves, Mace, Anniseeds, Fennell-seed, and
Carraway-seed, of every of them a dram, then take Sage, red Mints Rose leaves,
Time, Pellitory of Spain, Rosemary, Peny-mountaine, otherwise wild Time,
Camomill, and Lavender, of every of them a handful, then beat the Spices
small, and bruise the herbs, and put all into the Wine and let it stand the
space of twelve days, stirring it diverse times; then distill it in a Limbeck,
and keep the first pint of the water, for it is the best, and then will come
a second kind of water, keep that close in a violl of glass, and set it in
the Sun a certain space.

The virtues of this Water be these, It comfort the spirits, and preserves
the youth of a man, and helps the inward Diseases comes of cold, and
against the shaking of the Palsy. It cures the contraction of Sinews, and
helps the Conception of women that be barren. It kills the Worms in the
belly. It helps cold Gouts. It helps the Toothache. It comfort the
Stomach very much. It cures the cold Dropsy. It helps the stone in the
Bladder, and the Reins in the back. It cures the Canker. It helps speedily
a stinking breath, and whosoever uses this said Water, it shall preserve him
in health long Take but one spoonefull of it once in seven days, for it is
very hot in operation: It preserved Doctor Stevens very long, who lived a
hundredth years lacking but two, and ten of them he lived bedridden.

The doze is to be taken in white Wine or Ale fasting, and last to bedwards.

This sovereign Water Dr. Chambers long used and therewith effected many
Cures, and kept it secret till a little before his Death, and then gave it to
the Bishop of Canterbury.

THE Virtue and Excellency of the English Bath of BATHE in England. Written by
WILLIAM TURNER, Doctor of Physic. Collected and published for the Benefit and
Cure of the Poorer sort of People, who are not able to go to the Physicians.
By WILLIAM BREMER, Practitioner in Physic and Chyrurgerie. PART. VIII.
ALthough there be a very excellent and wholesome Bath within the Realm of
England, yet for all that, J am certain that there are many in the North parts,
which being diseased with ^ore Diseases, would very gladly go to the Bath of
Bathe, if they knew the virtue and benefit thereof whereby they might receive
ease and remedy.

Wherefore, seeing that J have writ of the Baths that are in foraigne
Countries, therefore J thought good to make known the virtues of our own
Bathes; For if they be able to help and cure men's Diseases, to what purpose
shall men need to go into far Countries to seek for that remedy there which
they might have at home.

The Bath of England is in the West Country in Somersetshire, in a City
called in Latin Bathonia, and Bathe in English, of the Bathes that are in it.
This City of Bathe is 15. miles from Wells, and 15. miles from the noble City
of Bristow.

The chief matter whereof these Bathes in this City have their chief virtue
and strength, after my judgment is Brimstone, and of my judgment are diverse
other, which have examined them as J have done; when J was at the Bathes with a
certain man diseased of the Gout, J went into them my self with my Patient,
and brought forth of the place next unto the Spring, and out of the bottom,
slime, mudde* bones, and stones, which altogether smelled evidently of
Brimstone, if that a man may judge the matter by the effect; may gather that
Brimstone is the only matter in these Bathes, or at least the chief that
bears rule in them; for they dry up wonderfully, and gives great ease and
cures the Gout excellently and that in a short time, as with diverse others
(and Gentlemen of quality) can bear witness thereof: Which things are no
slight manifestations that Brimstone bears the predominancy and chief rule;
seeing that neither by smelling nor tasting, a man can perceive any other
matter or Mineral to reign there.

If there be any thing else lightly mingled with the Brimstone (which J could
not perfitly distinguish) it must be Copper; for in my abode as J walked about
the Mountains, out of the which the Bathes do spring* J found here and there
little pieces of Marquesieth and stones mingled with Copper, but J could by no
sense or wit perceive, that the Bathes had any notable quality thereof. Then
seeing that there cannot be found any other Mineral or matter to be the
chief ruler in these Bathes then Brimstone, we may gather, that these Bathes
are good for all those Diseases, which all learned Physicians write, that other
Bathes, whose chief ruler is Brimstone, are good for.

Aetius writing of natural Bathes, wherein Brimstone is either the only
Mineral or matter of them, or chief ruler thereof, says thus as follows.
The Bathes of Brimstone soften the Sinews, swage the Pain that a man has in
desiring to go often unto the stool, and when he comes, he can either do
little or nothing at all. They scowre and cleanse the Skin; wherefore they are
good for the white Morphew and black, for the Leprosy, and for all Scabs and
Scurffes, for old Sores and Botches, for the falling of humors into the
Joints, for an hardened Mylt, or the Cake in the left side, for an hardened
Mother, for all kind of Palsies, for the Sciatica, and for all kind of Itch or
Itching. But the Bathes of Brimstone hurts and takes away the stomach for
the present. Thus much also writes Avicen.

Agricola in his Books of those things which flow out of the Earth, writes
thus of Bathes of Brimstone.

The Bathes of Brimstone do soften the Sinews and do heat, they are good
therefore for Palsies, for places shrunk or pulled in too much, or stretched
too far forth; for the shaking or trembling of any member, and they swage
Ache, and draws out the swelling of the Limbs, and drive and dissolve them
away* They are good therefore for the Gout in the hands, for the Gout in the
feet, and for the Sciatica, and all other diseases in the joints: they swage
also the pains in the Liver and Milt, and drive away the swelling of them
both: they scowre away Freckles, and heal Morphewes, and Scabbes. But they
undo and overthrow the Stomach. Then seeing (as J said before) our Baths of
Bathe, have their virtue of Brimstone, they that are diseased in any of the
abovenamed diseases, may go thither, and by the help of Almighty God be
healed there.

Though those Bathes have of long time been known, even about a thousand
years, either unlearnednesse, or the enviousnesse of the Physicians, which
have been in times past, is greatly to be rebuked, because either for lack of
Learning, they knew not the virtue of those Bathes, or else for enviousnesse,
would not send the sick folks, whom they could not otherwise heal unto the
Bathes; for all men can tell, very few in times past have been by the advice
of the Physicians sent unto the Bathes, but now in this our light and learned
time, after that so many learned Physicians have so greatly commended these
Bathes. J doubt whether the niggardly liberality, or the unnatural unkindnesse
of the rich men of England is more to be dispraised, which receiving so many
good turns of Almighty God, now after that they know that the Bathes are so
profitable, will not bestow one halfe-penny for Gods sake upon the bettering
and amending of them, that the poor, sick and diseased people that resort
thither, might be better and sooner holp^n when as they are there.

He that has been in Jtalie and Germany, and had seen how costly and
wel-favoredly, the Bathes are trimmed, and appointed there in diverse and sundry
places, would be ashamed that any stranger which had seen the Bathes in
foraigne lands should look upon our Bathes, for he would think that the
stranger would accuse us Englishmen of three things. Of grossness and brutish
Ignorance; because we cannot trim our Bathes no better. Of unkindnesse, because
we do so lightly regard so high and excellent gifts of Almighty God. Of
beastly filthiness, because we make no partition between the Men and the
Women, whilst they are in Bathing, but suffer them contrary both unto the law
of God and man, to go together like unreasonable Beasts, to the destruction
both of body and soul of many.

First, and before all other things, my counsel is, that every Bath have an
hole in the bottom, by the which, the stopple taken out, the Bath should be
cleansed and scowred every four and twenty hours, at the least once, and that
I would advise to be done at eight a clock in the afternoon, that against the
Morning it might be full of fresh and wholesome water against the time the
sick folk come to it in the morning, and so should they be a great deal
sooner healed of their old diseases, and in less jeopardie in taking of new,
which may easily come unto a man, if he go into a Bath, wherein a sick man
(namely if he be sick n a smiting or infective disease) has continued.

And for the Diet that men should keep at this Bath of Bathe, hereafter
ensues; with diverse other necessary Rules needful to be observed of all
those that enter into the said Bath, or drink the water of any Bath.

Certain Rules to be obferved in Diet for all them that will enter into any
Bath, or drink the water thereof.
THe counsel of Learned and wise Physicians is, that no man should at any tim^
go into any Bath to seek remedy for any Sickneffe, except it be such a one
as that the learned Physicians almost despair of the healing of it. If God
have smitten you with any Disease, before you go to any Bath for the healing
of it, call to your remembrance how often and wherein you have displeased GOD,
and if any of your sins come to your remembrance, exercise the same no more
but be heartily sorry for it, and desire of God forgiveness for it, intending
and promising by his mercy and grace never to fall into the same again. This
counsel is agreeing with that which is written in the 38. Chapter of
Ecclesiasticus* which says in this manner, verse. 9, 10, 12. My Son in the
time of thy Sickness, fail not to pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee
whole. Leave off from sin, and order thy hands aright, and cleanse thy heart
from all wickedness. Then give place to the Physician, and let him come unto
thee, as one that God has sent unto thee. And a little after he does plainly
declare, that Sickness comes from the punishment of sin, where he says,
verse. 15. He that sins against his Maker, let him fall into the hands of
the Physician. As Christ in the 5. of John does also manifest* when he said
unto the blind man he had healed; Go and sin no more, lest worse things
chance nnto thee.

Howbeit, we may judge no man to be a greater sinner then another, because
he is oftener sick then the common sort be; for God sends unto good men
oftentimes sickne^se, not for the sins they have done more then other men,
but to keep them in good order, that the flesh rebel not against the spirit.
For if that many Infirmities had been a sure token that such a man were a
greater ^inner, then should Timothy, which had many Infirmities and sicknesses
(as Paul writes) been a very great sinner; but he was not so, therefore that
argument is not true.

But whether Sickness come for to punish sin, or to hold a man in good
nature and obedience, all Sickness comes from GOD; Therefore, for whatsoever
cause it comes of, before ye ask any help of any worldly Physician, ye
must make your Prayers to Almighty GOD, (as the good King Ezechias did,) and if
it be meet for you to be healed, you shall be healed as he was.

Then before ye go into the Bathes, in any wise ye must go to some learned
Physician, and learn of him, by the help of showing, what Complexion you be
of* and what Humor or other thing is the cause of your disease; and there
after his Counsel, use such Diet as shall be most fit for your Complexion and
sickness. Let no man enter into any Bath before his body be purged or cleansed
after the advice of some learned Physician, for if any man go into the bath
unpurged, he may fortune never come home again: or if he come home again, he
comes home most commonly with worse Diseases then he brought to the bath with
him.

Ye may not go into the bath, the first day that you are come to it, but you
must rest a day or two, and then go into the bathe.

There is no time of the year that is more fit to go into the most part of
all the bathes, then are the Months of May and September: but the Spring time
is better then any other time is.

The best time of the day is an hour after the rising of the Sun, or half
an hour: but before ye go into the bathe, if your disease will suffer you,
ye must walk an hour, or at the least half an hour before you go into the
bath.

But you must at no time go into the bath, except ye have been at the
stool, either by nature or by art; ye may take a Suppository, or a Glister,
and for a great need Savanorolla suffers Pills, but he will not suffer that
he that is so purged, enter into the bath, for the space of fourteen hours.

The same Author also, would at the least every Bather should have a stool
once in three days: wherefore if any man be hard of nature, and cannot abide
Suppositories and Glisters, he pardons the Patient, if he be once purged, or
go to the stool in three days, which thing scarcely any other writer that J
have read will do, neither would J counsel any Patient to defer the going
to stool so long, if there be any means possible to make a man go to the
stool, without his great pain.

If that he be counseled to go twice on a day into the Bathe, he must see he
go not into it, till seven hours be past after your dinner, and tarry not so
long in it in the afternoon as you did before.

The common time of tarrying in the bath, is commonly allowed to be an hour or
more or less, according to the nature both of the Bath, as also of the Patient.

Let no man tarry so long in the Bath that he be faint or weak, but let him
come out before that time.

Ye must always go into the bath with an empty stomach, and as long as you
are in it, you must neither eat nor drink except that great need require the
contrary.

Some grant that a weak person may eat a little bread steeped in the juice of
Pomegranats, Barberries, or Rilts, or in the Syrups made of the same.

Some Physicians suffer a man that cannot abide hunger so long, to take ere he
go in, two spoonfuls of Raisons well washed oftentimes with two parts of
water, one of wine, or so much of delaied or watered wine, as much as can be
holden in a spoone, or a few Prunes sodden and steeped in water, or two
spoonfuls of crummes of bread, washed oftentimes with water or wine, tempered
as J told before, or a toste put into such water: but let no man drink in the
Bath, except he swound in the bath, or be in danger of sounding, or else ye
must all the time that ye be in the bath, abstain from all meat and drink.

As long as you are in the bath, you must cover your head well that you take no
cold, for it is very perilous to take cold in the head in the Bath, as diverse
reasons may be laid to prove the same.

When you come out of the Bath, see that ye cover your self well that ye take
no cold, and dry off the Water on your body with warm clothes, and go by and
by into a warm bed, and sweat there if you can, and wipe off the sweat
diligently, and afterward sleep, but ye must not drink any thing until
dinner time, except ye be very faint: then ye may take a little Suger-candy, or
a few Raisins, or any such thing in a small quantity that will slake thirst:
for Galen in the 14 De Methodo medendi, commands that a man shall not eat
nor drink by and by after the Bathe, until he has slept after his bathing.

After that ye have sweat and slept enough, and be clearly delivered from the
heat that you had in the Bathe, and afterward in the Bed, then may you rest
and walk a little, and then go to dinner; for by measurable walking, the
vapors and windiness that is come in the Bath is driven away.

If the Patient cannot walk, then let him be rubd quickly, and if he can
suffer no rubing, then at some time it were good to take a a Suppositorie,
either of Root, or of a Beete, with a little Salt upon it, or a Suppository of
Honey, or a Suppositorie of a Flower deluce, or of salt Bacon* or white Soap.

After all these things, then shall you go to dinner, but you must neither
eat very much good meat, nor any evil meat at all. Wherefore you must rise
from the Table with some good appetite, so that you could eat more if you
would.

The meats that are commonly of all Physicians allowed that write of Diet that
belongs to Bathes, are, Bread of a days baking, or two at the most, well
leavened, and thoroughly baked, small Birds, and other birds of the fields and
mountains that are of easy digestion, (but Waterchanters ye must not touch)
Kids-flesh, Veale and Mutton, or a Lamb of a year old, new laid Eggs,
Pheasants, Partridges, Capons, Chickens and young Geese. The meats that are
forbidden, are salt Beef and Bacon, Pigeons, Quails, Pyes, and Pasties, and
such like meats* Cherries, and all such fruits, Garlic, Onions, and all hot
spices, and all cold meats, as are the most part of Fishes: howbeit, diverse
may be well allowed, so they be well dressed.

Milk is not to be allowed much: but if that the Patient be so greedy of it,
that in a manner he long for it, then let him take it two hours or thereabout,
before he take any other meat, and he must drink after it.

White wine that is small is allowable, or Wine delayed with the third or
fourth part of sodden water, according to the Complexion of the Patient: Some
use to steep bread in strong Wine, when as they can get no other Wine.

Beware that in no wise ye drink any water, and especially cold water, and so
should ye forbear from all things that are presently cold* namely, when ye
begin first to eat and drink. Let therefore both your meat and drink be in
such temper, that they be not cold but warm, lest when as ye are hot within
by your Bathing and sweating, the cold strike suddenly into some principal
member and hurt it.

They that are of a hot Complexion, and of an open nature, and not well
fastened together, ought not to tarry so long in the bath, as other ought that
are of colder and faster complexions.

If that any man between meal times be vexed with thirst, he may not drink
any thing, saving for a great need he take a little Barley water* or Water
sodden with the fourth part of the juice either of sour or mild sweet
Pomgranats, with a little Sugar: a man may use for a need, a little Vinegar,
with Water and Sugar, if he have no disease in the Sinews, nor in the Joints.

A man that is very weak, or accustomed much to sleep after dinner, an hour
and a half after that he is risen from the Table, he may take a reasonable
sleep.

All the time that a man is in them, he must keep himself chaste from all
women, and so he must do a month after, after the counsel of diverse learned
Physicians, and some for the space of forty days, as Pantheus and Aleardus
would, namely, if they come out of the Cauldron.

It were meet that in every four and twenty hours the Bath should be letten
out, and fresh water received into the pit again, for so shall you sooner be
healed, and better abide with less jeopardy, abiding in the Bath.

It is most meet for them that have any disease in the head, as a Catliaire or
Rheum, coming of a moist cause and not very hot. For them that have Palsies,
or such like diseases, that they cause a bucket to be holden over their heads,
with an hole in it, of the bigness of a man's little finger, about four foot
above their heads, so that by the Reed or Pipe made for the nonce, the water
may come down with great might upon the mould of the Head, if they have the
Cathaire; and upon the nape of the neck, if the Patient be sick of the
Palsy, or any such like disease.

The clay or grounds of the Bath, is better for the Dropsy then is the water
alone: It is also good for shrunken, swelled, and hard places, and for all old
and diseased places, which cannot well be healed with other medicines: The
matter is, to lay the grounds upon the place, and to hold the same against the
hot Sun, or a warm fire, until it be something hard, and then to wash away
the foulness of the Clay, with the water of the Bath: this may a man do as
often as he list. Some Physicians counsel, that between the Bathings, when a
man is twice bathed upon one day, in the time that the Patient is out of the
bath, to use his plaistering with the Clay: but if the person be any thing
weak, J counsel not to go twice into the Bath, but either once, or else to
be content with the plaistering of the mudde or grounds of the Bath.

It were good wisdom for them that cannot tarry long at the Bathes, either
for heat or for cold, to take home with them some of the grounds, and there
occupy it as is afore-told.

There are certain learned men, which reckon that the hot breath or vapor
that rises up from the Bathe, is much more mightier then the water of the bath
is, and it is true: therefore it were well that they which have any Dropsy,
and especially a Tympanie, should sit over such a place of the Bath, that they
might receive into the moist diseased place, the vapor of the bathe, either by
an holed stool, or by some other such like manner of thing well devised for
that purpose.

If any poor man by the heat of the dryness of the Bathe cannot sleep
enough, let him eat Lettice, or Purslaine, or the seeds of Poppy, called
Chesbowle, in some places of England, or let him eat Sugar and Poppyseed
together, let this be done at night. He may also if he cannot get the
aforesaid things, seethe Violet leaves and Mallows, and bathe the uttermost
parts with that they are sodden in. These are remedies for poor folk that are
not able to have a Physician with them to give them counsel: Let the rich use
such remedies as their Physicians shall counsel them.

If any poor man be vexed with any unsufferable thirst, let him take a little
Barley and seethe it long, and put a little Sugar unto it: or let him take the
juice of an Orange, or take a little of it with a little Sugar.

If any poor man catch the Headache, let him take a little Wormelade if he
can get it, or Coriander Comfits: or if he can get none of these, let him take
the white of an Egg* and beat it with Vinegar, and Rosewater, or with the
broth of Violets, or Nightshade, or with any of them, and a little Vinegar,
and lay them in a cloth unto the temples of his head, and forehead.

If any poor man be burned too much, let him take a Glister made with
Mallows, Beetes, and Violet leaves, or let him seethe Prunes with Barley a
good while, and Raisins, putting a way the stones, and eat of them, or let him
use Suppositories sometimes, made of roots, either of Beetes, of
Flower-de-Luce, or of white Soap, or of salt Bacon.

If any man sweat too much, let him use colder meats than he used before, with
Vinegar or Verjuyce, and let them also eat Sheepes-feete, and Calves-feete,
with Verjuyce or Vinegar.

If any man have the burning of his water when he makes it, let him an hour
after he is come out of the Bathe, annoint his Kidneyes with some cold
Ointment, as is Infrigidus Galeni: or if you cannot come by that, let him
seethe Violet leaves, Poppyheads, Raisins, Licorice and Mallows together,
strain them, and put some Sugar in the broth, and drink of it a draught
before Supper.

If any be troubled with the Rheum which he has caught in the Bath, let him
parch or bristle at the fire Nigella Romana, and hold it in a cloth to his
Nose, and let him set cups or boxing glasses to his shoulders, without any
scorching, and let him drink sodden water with Barley, and with a little Sugar.

If any man have any appetite to eat, let him use the sirrups of Ribles or
Barberies, or the sirrup of unripe Grapes, or use Verjuyce or Vinegar to
provoke appetite in due measure, and now and then if ye can get it, let him
take a little Marmalade, or of the sirrup of Mynts, or Wormwood Raman. (These
have I written for poor folk.) Those that are rich, by the advice of the
Physicians, may have other Remedies enough against the forenamed accidents,
that chance in the time of their bathing.

If thou be rid of thy disease by thy bathing, offer unto Christ in thy pure
members, such offering of Thankesgiving, as thou may spare and give him
hearty thanks, both in word, mind and deed, and sin no more, but walk in
all kindness of life and honesty, as far as thou shall be able to do, as
long as thou shall live hereafter.

But if thou be not healed the first time, be patient, and live virtuously till
the next bathing time, and then if it be to the glory of God, and for the most
profitable, thou shall the next bathing time be healed by the grace of God, of
whom comes all health both of body and soul.

Some if they be not healed whilst they be in the bathing, cry out both upon
the Bath, which heals many other of the same Diseases that they are sick of,
and of the Physician also that counseled them to go to the Bathe, such men
must learn, that they must not appoint God a time to heal them by the Bathe,
and that when as the Bath has dried up, and washed by Sweating, and made
subtle through blowing the evil matter of the disease; that it is one days
work or two, to make good humors to occupy the place of such evil humors
as have been in them before. Therefore let such be patient, and for the space
of a Month keep the same diet that they kept at the Bath, and if God will
they shall have their desire, but not only these, but all others that are
healed for a month at the least, the longer the better, must keep the same
diet that they kept in the Bath, as touching meat and drink, and if it be
possible also from the use of all Women.

When as you go homewards, make but small Journeyes, and beware of surfeiting
and of cold, and when you are at home, use measurable Exercise daily, and
honest mirth and pastime, with honest company, and beware of too much study or
carfulness.

And give God thanks for all his Gifts.
Thus much for the Bath.
Of Herbs, and Drugs. Hereafter follows diverse Medicines, Remedies, and
Cures to heal diverse Diseases curable, by the grace of God; as also the Nature
and property of certain Herbs, Plants, and Drugs, belonging thereunto. PART.
IX.
And first of Mart Mylletare, to stop the Flux of the body.
Diverse times, the Flux of the Body proceeds of superfluous heat contained in
the Stomach, the which makes a continual solution inwardly, as ye may see
by Experience of those that are troubled therewith; for so long as the cause is
not taken away, all their meat does turn into the matter, the which if it be
so, that is true which J do say; That the Fluxes are a distemperance of the
body, caused of hot and corrupt humors in the Stomach; and therefore if thou will cure it, it were necessary to extinguish the heat, and so take away the
corruption, the which thou shall do with the redness of Mart Mylletare, as
is hereafter following, for that is the most sovereign remedy that can be
found.

First, ye shall take twelve grains of Petra Philosophalla, with half an
ounce of Mel Rosarum, and then take four mornings together one scruple of
Mart Mylletare, with half an ounce of Sugar Rosate, and therewith thou shall
work very strange effects.

Also for Perbreaking and for Flux, seethe Roses in Vinegar, or Tamarindes, or
Galls, and while it is hot wet therein Wool, and lay it on the Stomach for
Vomit, and on the Navill for Flux, and on the Reins for appetite.

The virtue of certain Herbs, and Drugs.
Mallows, the Leaves boiled being eaten does take away Hoarsnesse, and being
pounded with Sage, they make a singular plaster for Wounds and other
Inflammations.

St. John's Wort, the Seed thereof being drunk with Wine voideth the Stone out
of the body.

Wormwood, is good against the Dropsy, taking often the leaves thereof
confected with Sugar.

Hysop, being boiled with Figs, Water, Honey, and Rue taken in drink, is
good for inflammation of the Lungs, it avoydeth phlegm, and eases an old Cough.

Sage, is good against all Cold and phlegmatic diseases in the Head, and
against all pains in the Joints, being taken in drink, or applied in
fomentation; It is good for great bellied women to eat, which are subject to
travel before their time.

Mynt, beaten and made into a Plaster comforts a weak Stomach, it is very
good to restore the smell, or the Feeling, if it be often held to the nose;
the Leaves dried and beaten to powder kill worms in Children; also it applied
to the forehead, helps the Headache.

Time, taken in drink is good to purge the Intrailes, or to make one spit out
the evil humors of the Lungs, and in the Breast.

Rosemary, is very good against the Colic and casting up of Meat, by eating
it in bread, or drinking it in powder in Wine.

Camomill, The leaves beaten and put into white Wine, is good drink against
Quotidian and quartern Agues, the decoction thereof drunk, heals pains in
the side, good against Fevers, and also to avoid Urine.

Lillyes, The leaves thereof being boiled, heal burnings, and confected in
Vinegar and mingled with Saffron, and Cinnamon, is good for Women that are
delivered of Child with great difficulty and voydeth the after burden.

Baulme, The property of it in Wine is to comfort the Heart, to help
digestion, to heal the feebleness of the heart, especially if the weakness
be such that it causes to break sleep in the Night, it stays the panting
of the heart, and drives away cares; the leaves thereof taken in drink is good
against the biting of a Dog, or outwardly applied is good to heal the Wound
with the decoction of it.

Dogs tooth, The decoction of the leaves taken in drink, helps the wringing
of the belly, hard making of water, and breaks the Stone or gravel in the
Kidneyes; the seed thereof does greatly provoke Urine.

Periatory, or Pellatory. Gathered in winter has virtue to dissolve, consume,
and draw; and while it is green it breaks wind in the stomach. The juice
thereof held within the mouth allayeth the Toothache, the leaves thereof being
applied heals Burnings, swellings, and Inflammations, being fried with fresh
Butter, or Capons grease, and laid unto the belly, it cures the Colic, and
being mixed with Goats or Kids grease, is good to ease the Gout; the Juice also
mixed with like quantity of white Wine, and oil of sweet Almonds newly made,
is very good against the Stone, and dropped into the Ears with oil of Roses
helps the pain.

Aleanet, is to sooder Wounds.

Aspaltum, is Tar of India, it has virtue to draw and sooder, for if the
Powder thereof be strowed on a dry Wound it will presently close it, though it
be both broad and deep.

Oats, has virtue to abate Swelling, and to soften things, being made hot in
a pan.

Asarum, makes Women to have their terms, opens the veins of the Urine,
and makes one to piss freely. It mixed with honey kills Worms* dissolveth
Winds, and warmeth the stomach, cleanses the Liver and veins of the Guts, and
reins of the Mother, it puts away Fever quotidian, and cures the stinking
of venomous Worms.

Bole-Armoniacke, if it be good, is as it were white redded.

Ballestianes, is the flower of the Pomgranet and P^idia is the rind, and it
has virtue to restrain as Bolle has.

Brancha Vrona, has virtue to make soft, or to rypen Empostumes.

Bistorta, or Tormentill, has virtue to strain together, comfort, and
confound.

Bedellion, has virtue to constrain together, it helps the Impostume, both
within and without, it breaks the stone, and breaks the Cough.

Cadamen, is the roots of Parcely, that has ^ertue to dissolve, to consume
and to draw.

Camfere, ought to be kept in Marble, or Alablaster, Lynseed, or Anniseed, is
good for the Gomora, and to abate a man's courage.

Coloquintida, has virtue to purge Phlegm and Melancholy, and for the
Toothache seethe it in Vinegar.

C^ssia fi^tula, a Gargarisme made thereof, and of the Juice of Morell,
dissolveth the Empostume in the Wezend, and also swelling in the Cheeks.

Ceru^e, is good to engender good flesh, and to fret away evil flesh.

Capers, is good to defy cold Humors, in the mouth and stomach.

Con^ube and Quibebes, the powder hereof with the juice of Borage, is good for
the cold Rheum and to comfort the Brain.

Dragagant, is of three kinds, and the white is the best in cold Medicines, and
the red in hot.

Euphorbium, his virtue is to dissolve, to draw, to allay, to consume, to purge
Fleame, and Melancholy.

Esul^, is the rind of Eleborus Albus, or Peritory of Spain, it has virtue
to purge Fleame and Melancholy, and it is the best that purges nekt to
Scamonie. Take Esula, five drams, Canell, Fennell-seeds, Any seeds, and use
this with warm Wine, or other broth, is a very good purge.

Gum Arabic, the white is cold, the red is hot in Medicines.

Gariofiolate, is Avence, his virtue is to open dissolve, and consume, whilst
he is green, it helps the Collicia passio.

Hermadactilus, the whitest is the best, it has virtue to dissolve, consume,
and draw, and principally to purge Fleame.

Jarus, Barba, Aron, Calves feet, Cuckoopintell, the leaves, and the roots,
and the gobbets about the roots be of good virtue, and the Roots being
cloven, and dried, they have virtue to dissolve and assuage.

Ipaguistidos, is Gobbets that are found by the root of the Dog bryer, it has
virtue to draw together.

Jempus, is the fruit thereof, it has virtue to dissolve, and consume; for the
Strangury and Illiaco, drink Wine wherein it was sodden.

Licium, is good with the juice of Fennel for sore Eyes.

Litarge, is good to close together and to cleanse.

Lovag^-seed with Cinnamon, is good for the Liver, and Spleen, and wind in the
Guts and stomach.

Mamia, is good to make Blood clean.

Mumia, has virtue to strain together.

Medeswete, green or dry brings Menstruum, and cleanses the Mother.

Mora, is the fruit of the Cicomore Tree* it has virtue to dissolve, consume,
and make clean, it is good for the Ovinsie, and for costivenesse.

Nitrum, the whiter the better, it has virtue to dissolve, and drive away
filth.

Opponax, if it be clear, and draw to Cytrin color, it is good, it has
virtue to dissolve and consume.

Oppium, that which is not hard nor soft, is good, it has virtue to make one
sleep.

Organum flowers, is good powdered to make Laxe, to dissolve, and to consume,
and the powder put within and without, abateth swollen cheeks.

Oxificicentia, Phenicon, Dactilis Indie, Tamarindus, They that be good, be
neither too moist nor too hard, and be somewhat black, and somewhat sower, the
Rind nor the Seed, must not be used in Medicines, It has virtue to purge
Choler, to cleanse the Blood, and to abate unkind heat.

Os de cord^ Cervi, is the bone of the Hearts heart, on the left side, it is
good to purge Melancholy blood, and Cardiacle, and Sinicapos or Sincapos, with
the juice of Borage, and Os Sexi, will make the Teeth white.

Dog-Fennell, the root is good for the Strangury, Oissury, and stopping of the
Liver and Spleen.

Pine apples, the Kernels do moysten and open, and is good for the disease in
the Breast, or Cough, or Eticke, or Consumption, and to increase good blood.

Damsons, be cold and moist, in the third degree, gather them when they be
ripe, and cleave them in the Sun, and spring them with Vinegar above, and then
ye may keep them two year in a vessel; Their virtue is to cool^ a man, and
make his Guts light, and therefore they be good in Fevers, against the
costivenesse that comes of dryness, or of Choleric humors in the Guts,
when they be ripe to cut, and when they be dry, soke them in water; and eat
the Prune, and drink the water.

Psilium, is cold and moist in the third degree; his virtue is to make soft and
light, and to cool a man's body, and to draw together.

Purslene, is good both raw and sodden, to abate unkind heat in Choleric men.

Pitch-liquid, has virtue to dissolve and consume.

Ponticum, is good for the stopping of the Liver and Spleen, that comes of
cold.

Storax, has virtue both to comfort and consume, and to fasten Teeth, and
comfort the Gummes.

Squilla, is a Sea-Onion, and that is found by himself is deadly, his virtue
is to purge and to dissolve, but the outer and inner parts must be cast away,
for they be deadly; and that which is in the midst, may be put in
Medicines, and it has more virtue raw than sodden.

Seeds within the berries of Elder, is good to purge Phlegm.

Stavisacre, has virtue to dissolve, consume, draw, and purge Phlegm, and
Litargie* and to put away heaviness from the heart, if it be taken and put in
the nose.

S^apium, is good, and has virtue to dissolve consume, draw, and laxe, and
heal, it is good for fallings down of the Mother, with suffumigation, or
supositor, and for the terms of the secondine or dead Child.

Saracoll, if it be right, it is good, it has virtue to strain together and
to sooder. Drink Calamint sodden in Wine, for coldness of the stomach, and
for stopping of the Liver and Spleen, the Reins and Bladder, and Illiac^
passio.

Saterion, his root is green, and has virtue to unloose man's nature.

Saligem, his virtue is to dissolve, and consume.

Scabius, while he is green, has virtue to dissolve, consume, and cleanse.

Dragons, take the root, and cleave it, and dry it in the Sun, ye may keep
it two years, mingle the powder of Dragons with Soap, and wet a Tent therein,
and put it deep into a fester, and it will cleanse and enlarge it, and if there
be a bone in it, it will draw it out, or else loose it that ye may take it out
lightly.

Seen, is to purge Melancholy and Epilencie, and Fever quartaine, and Emerodes;
for the Spleen and Liver, take Cardiacle sodden in water* and put to Sage, and
make a Syrope, or the Juice of Borage and Sugar, is very good.

Terra sigillata, terra sarasincia, terra argenta, is all one manner of earth,
his virtue is to constrain together.

Turbith, if it be hollow, small, and of an Ash Color, and gummie, it is good,
It has virtue to dissolve, and draw humors from the uttermost part of a man's
body, and namely Fleame; for the Gout, and Illiaca, and Podegra, and Chiragra,
give him four scruples of Turbith mingled with some other Medicine, and it
will do the like.

Taplia, or faiters Herb, his virtue is to purge above and beneath, both
green and dry, for it is never given by himself, he that stampeth it let him
hide his face and eyes that he see not, also keep close his Testacles, or else
they will swell. With this Herb beggars do make themselves seem to have the
Dropsy upon them.

Tartar is the Lees of Wine, and has virtue to dissolve, and dries away
filth, and to abate a man's fatness.

Terbentine, a fugimation thereof, is good for the subfumigation of the Mother.

Virga Pastoris, or Shepherds rod, has virtue to strain together, to cool,
and to fill that is empty, and is good for the Flux.

Bryona, or wild Neppe, is hot and dry, the root thereof makes a woman to
have her terms, and delivers a dead Child or secondine.

Flower-de-Luce, the Root of it washed and scraped clean, being dried and
finely beaten, and put into a pint of new Milk, made hot upon the fire and
given the patient to drink, it helps the Green sickness. D. B.

Ginger, comfort the heart, and makes good digestion.

Sugar, is temperate hot, and moist, his virtue is to moysten and nourish, and
to loose, if it be mingled with cold things to cool.

The excellent virtues of Cardus Benedictus.
IT is very good for the Headache and the Megrim: For the use of the juice and
powder of the Leaves, preserves and keeps a man from the Headache, and
heals it being present, it quickneth the sight if the Juice of it be laid on
the Eyes. The Powder stanches blood that flows out of the Nose, or comes out
of the Lungs: the broth of it taken with Wine, makes an appetite. It is good
for any Ache in the body: it strengthens the members of the body, and
fasteneth loose sinews and weak. It is also good for the Dropsy: it breaks
also the Stone, and breaks an Impostume: it preserves one from the
Pestilence, if the powder be taken in water four and twenty hours before a
man come to the Infected place. It is good for the dizzinesse of the Head: It
helps the memory: It helps thick hearing: It is good for short winds, and
the diseases of the Lungs: Some write, that it strengthens the Teeth: others
write, that it brings down Flowers, and provokes sleep, and helps the
Falling sickness. It is also good for falls and bruises: the Leaves provoke
sleep: the Powder is good against all poison, the same put into the Guts by a
Glyster: It helps the Collicke, and other diseases of the Guts, and the
wounds of t he same. They write also, that the water of Cardus Benedictus
helps redness, and the itching of the Eyes; and the Juice does the same, for
Burnings, and for Carbunckles. There is nothing better for the Canker, and old
festering sores: the Leaves are good for Fomentations: and to be sitten over,
being sodden in water, that the Vapor may come to the diseased places, also it
is good against the stone and stopping of the flowers.

A good Drink to strengthen the heart and all the members, if a man drink
half an Egg shell full of it morning and evening, with as much good wine.
TAke the best Aqua Vitae that you can get, and take a piece of fine Gold, and
make it glowing hot ten times, and squench it again, the more you squench it,
the stronger waxes the water and better. Then put it into the same Aqua Vitae,
and half a quarter of an ounce of Saffron, and a quarter of an ounce of
Cynamon, both beaten: let them stand four days well stopped, and stir it
every day once: but when you will take it, then let it stand still unstirred
that it may be clear. This water warmeth a cold stomach, gives strength to
all the members, specially to aged folks that have been over long sick,
whose strength is consumed: for it comfort and strengthens the heart out of
measure.

A special Medicine to cause sleep.
TAke a spoonefull of Oil of Roses, a spoonefull of Rose Water, and half a
spoonefull of red Vinegar, and temper them all together: then with a fine
linen cloth annoint the Patients head.

A discourse as concerning Corns in the feet, or elsewhere with their
remedies.
THis Callowes matter is a certain hot humor, the which nature would
discharge her self of, and when that humor is driven forth of nature, it
goes into the lower parts into the end of the Toes, for in that part of the
Toes, that skin is called Epidarma, is hard, and will not suffer it to pass or
exalate, and there many times it engenders a Tumor in the skin with great
hardness, and many times that Tumor does increase and cause such pain that it
does not only hinder their going, but hinder them from their sleep in the
Night, and this kind of Tumor is called commonly, Callo, or Corns in English;
and J thought it good to call them Crest, because they are always growing and
is of great importance among Chirurgions* for an infinite number of persons are
troubled therewith; and therefore J will show thee our secret to help them
quickly and with great ease, which secret was never known of any. First ye
shall pare them with a sharp Knife unto the bottom, and there ye shall find a
certain thing like matter, ye shall pare it until blood does appear, then
touch it with the Oil of Sulphur, and then dress it with Balsamo Artificio,
once a day until it be whole. Keep this as a secret.

Of Medicines, Remedies, and Cures of diverse Diseases of several kinds; As
also the making of Powders, and Plasters, etc. PART. X.
The cause of our Sciatica, and how ye help it.
SCiatica is a Disease so called, because it comes in that place of the Body
called Scio, and it is caused of an evil quality and gross Humors that are
strayed in that place* because they cannot pass down. And this is seen by
experience daily; for where that pain is, there is alteration, and the cure
thereof is with Glysters, Vomits, Purgations, and Unctions, because the
Glysters does evacuate those places next unto it, and so eases the Humor: the
Vomit cleanses the stomach, the Purgation does evacuate the body downwards,
the Unctions dissolve the wind, and by these means thou may help the
Sciatica, as J have done many times to my great credit and satisfaction of my
Patient.

For Hoarsnesse.
AGainst Hoarsnesse, go into the Hothouse, and when thou have half Bathed,
drink a good draught of warm water: this is often proved.

Another. Garlic sodden and eaten, makes a clear voice, and drives away
Hoarsenesse and the old Cough.

If a man stand in fear of the Palsy.
LEt him eat every Morning two or three grains of Mustar-seedes, and two
Pepper corns: the same is assured for the same dis^ase by many.

A Medicine for the Gout.
TAke a pint of white Wine, a quart of running water, a quantity of Barley
flower and let them boil together: then put thereto half a pound of black
Soape, and let all seethe till it be thick, then put thereto the yolks of
four Eggs, and when ye will use it, spread it on a cloth Plaister-wise, hot.

Stubbes Medicine for the Gout.
TAke a quart of red Wine Lees, a quarter of a pound of Bean flower, half
aquarter of a pound of Commine fine beaten, a spoonefull of Bole-Armoniacke,
half an ounce of Camphere, which must be put in at twice, and boil them all
together, till they be somewhat thick: then make it Plaister-wise and lay it
to the pain.

Another Plaster for the Gout.
TAke Occy cronium Galbanum, and Melitonum, of each one a pennyworth and
distill them: take a pound of stone Pitch, and another pound of fine Rozen, one
half ounce of Camphere, one quarterne of Deeres Suet, half a quater of a
pound of Commin, and boil them on a soft fire together, and thereof make a
Plaster, upon a piece of Leather using it as the other.

Another for the same.
TAke the Gall of an Ox, and Aqua Composita, of each a like quantity, as much
of Oil of Exeter, as of both the other, and labor them all together in a pot
with a stick, the space of half an hour: When you have so done, annoint your
palm therewith, then wet a linen cloth therein, and as hot as you can suffer
it, bind it to the sore.

For a prick of a Thorn, or any other thing.
TAke Honey, and a good quantity of Chalk, and of the Gall of a Beast, and
boil them together, and make a Plaster of it, and as hot as you can suffer
it, lay it thereunto. Let the Chalk be scraped, very small. Approved.

A Remedy for burning and Scalding.
TAke the white Wool of the belly of an Hare, and if it be raw, lay it
thereto, and it will never away till such time it be whole.

Another. Take a Thistle called St. Mary Thistle, stamp it and strain it, and
take thereof two spoonfuls, and put to this three spoonfuls of Cream, mix
them together, and annoint the Patient therewith.

To kill a Tetter or Ring-worme.
TAke the root of a red Dock, the root is very red, and slice it, and lay it
in Vinegar a Night, and after lay it upon the Tetter, and tie it with a cloth
hard, and it will kill the Tetter. Approved.

For a wind or a Collicke in the belly.
TAke a Rose Cake and toast it at the fire, with Vinegar thrown upon it, and
lay it as hot to your belly as you may suffer it.

Another. Take Mustard, Figs and Vinegar, stamped together, and lay it to the
belly of the diseased, cold, in manner of a Plaster, and it shall help*

Against the Shingles.
Annoint the Shingles with the juice of Mynts, and it will heal them.

To heal a wound in ten days, as by proof has been seen.
Stamp Camphere with Barrowes grease, and put it into the wound, and it will
heal it. Approved.

For ache in the Back.
TAke Egremont and Mugwort, both leaves and Roots, and stamp them very small,
then mingle them well with old Decres Suet, then besmeere or annoint the
grieved place therewith very warm, and after roll it up hard.

To heal in four days the scalding with water, or any other liquor, without
Plaster or Ointment.
TAke an Onyon and cut him overth-wart, and wring out the juice upon the
scalded place doing so every day twice, it will heal it quickly. Probatum est.

To heal the Itch.
TAke of Lapacinum Acutum, or of Sorell, and boil it in water, and wash
therewith the diseased person: or else take the roots of Laurel, and being
well brayed with Salt and bread, annoint therewith the body. The like effect is
done with the decoction of Egrimony and Sage, made with Rain water, and
washing therewith the sick person.

To heal Sores or Tetters.
TAke of Wax of Ganabrinum, in powder, and of Oil of Roses, as much as shall
be sufficient? Make thereof an Ointment. Or else bray Cockle and Brimstone, and
mix them with Vinegar, and make an Ointment.

For the hardness of Hearing.
TAke an Onyon and coare it, and fill it with the Oils of Rue and bitter
Almonds, then roast it soft, and drop thereof into the contrary Ear, lying
still after one hour keeping your self warm, it will both purge the Head and
quicken the Hearing.

An easy Remedy for the Toothache.
TAke a slice of the Root Acorus, of some called in English Gladen, of other
Galanga, which grows in waters and marshes, this must be laid green upon the
Tooth. Or a piece of the green root of Tormentill does it likewise.

For the swelling in the Throat.
TAke white Frankensence, and cast a piece of it upon hot coals, then put a
Funnell over it, and let the smoke thereof go into the Throat: that helps,
and is often times experimented and proved.

To cause a Woman's speedy deliverance.
TAke whites of Eggs and Castle soap, and make Pills, adding to every pill one
drop of the oil of Savin; and in time of need give her five Pills of it.

To make a woman's Milk increase.
TAke Fennell-seed, and seethe it in Barlywater, and give the woman of it to
drink, and her milk will increase abundantly.

For the Rickets and weakness of the limbs in Children.
TAke a little quantity of the best English Honey mix it with Beer, and let
them use no other drink till they recover their strength. This has bin tried
and approved.

To fasten the Gums or loose Teeth.
TAke a little Myrrh, temper it with Wine and Oil* and wash your mouth
therewith and you shall see a rare experience; Myrrh also kills the Worms
in a man's body, and chew it in the mouth, ma kes the breath sweet.

For one that cannot hold his Water.
TAke the claws of a Goats feet, burn them to powder, and take a spoonful
of it in Pottage or broth, wherein a little Knotgrasse and Hypoquistidos may
be put, and take of it twice a day.

For the Dropsy made for the Queen^, by D. D. Adryan.
TAke Polipodium, Spikenard, Calamus odoratus, Marjerum, Galingall, Selwall,
ana. vj. d. weight, Anniseeds, Saxafrage, Plantane, vij. d. weight, Cynamon,
xij. d. weight, Seenie so much as of all the rest, put them into a bag
hanging in two gallons of Ale, cover it with new Yest every fourth*day, and
drink no other drink for a week, and be whole.

For the stinging of Waspes and Bees*
TAke Mallows and rub them on the place where it is stung or else take Flies
stamped with a little dirt.

For the falling down of the Tuell.
SIt over the fumes of Ginger and Frankensence.

For the swelling of the Legs.
TAke the Juice of Walwort, of Wax, of Vinegar, and of Barley Meal, of each a
like quantity: Boil it, and make a Plaster, and bind it upon the sore.

For the Canker in the mouth.
TAke half a pint of Ale, and a sprig of Rosemary, and sees them together,
and skim your Ale. And then put in a piece of Allom as much as a Nut, and a
spoonefull of Honey, and two spoonefuls of Honey suckle water, and wash the
mouth with it.

To make the Face fair and the Breath sweet.
TAke the Flowers of Rose-mary* and boil them in white Wine, then wash your
face with it, and use it for to drink, and so shall you make your Face fair,
and your breath sweet^*

A Remedy for a red face or a red nose.
TAke Litarge of Silver, and Brimstone, of each like much, and sees them in
Rosewater, and Vinegar, and then with a linen cloth wet in the said Vinegar*
lay it to the sore.

A Remedy to qualify the Coppered Face.
MAke a Bath with the flowers of Cammomell, Violets, Roses, and Flowers of
water Lillies, then annoint the place with Vnguentum Album, Champherarius, and
mix that ointment with a little yellow Brimstone, and Quicksilver killed with
fasting spittle, and annoint the Face withal.

A special good diet for all fiery Faces.
Abstain from all salt things, spiced, fried meats, and roasted meats: also
from drinking of Wine, for it is very evil: also Onyons, Mustard, and Garlic
are very naught: in steed of which* you must take Purslaine, Sorrel, Lettice,
Hops of Borrage, with Succory or endive in Pottage, or otherwise: Also it is
necessary to be laxative, and in sleeping to lay your head high.

An easy Remedy to make the Teeth white*
TAke Vinger of Squiles, and dip a little piece of Cloth in it* and rub the
Teeth or Gummes withal: the said Vinegar fastneth the Gummes, comfort the
roots of the Teeth, and makes a sweet breathe.

To take away the stinking of the mouth.
Ye must wash your mouth with Water and Vinegar, and chew Masticke a good
while, and then wash thy mouth with the decoction of Annis-seeds, Mints, and
Cloves, sodden in Wine. If the stinking of thy mouth comes of a rotten tooth
the best is to have it drawn out.

A Remedy for sore Eyes.
TAke the Juice of Fennel, and drop thereof into the Eyes, Evening and
Morning, and it shall heal the grief and pain.

A proved Medicine for the bleeding at the Nose, called the Lady Mary's
Medicine.
TAke the shell of an Egg, the meat being very clean out* and put it into
the fire till it be burnt very black and ready to break, then take it out,
and make thereof fine Powder, whereof ye shall blow through a Quill part
thereof into the Nose that bleedeth, and it shall stanch.

Against a stinking Breath.
MElt Honey, Salt, and Rye flower well together, and therewith rub the Gum^
twice or thrice, then wash it with fair water* and it will help thee.

For an evil breath.
Sees two ounces of Commin in fine Powder, in a pottle of white Wine, unto a
quart: Then keep it, using to drink a little thereof warm at Night, the
space of fifteen days, and it will help.

For the Headache, and clensing of the same.
CHew Pellitory of Spain in thy mouth, it will cleanse the Head, and also take
away the Ache or pain.

To heal a swollen Face, that is hurt by reason of some strange Scorching.
TAke the Juice of Barba Jovis, (in English Singreene) and rub your face with
it twice or thrice a day. You may do the like with ^he Juice of Purflaine: but
if your Face (...) ^oo much marred or hurt, take forty or (...) yolks of Eggs,
and put them in a frying (...) upon a great fire, and get some Oil out of them
wherewith you shall annoint your ^^^e.

To make an aching Tooth fall out of himself.
TAke wheat flower, and mix it with the milk of the herb called in Latin
Herba Lactaria* in French Tintamaille, or Herb Alerte in English Spurge, that
has milk in it: in Greek, Tithimales, which is an Herb well enough known,
and thereof make as it were a paste or dow, with the which you shall fill the
hole of the Tooth, and leave it in a certain time, and the tooth will fall out
of it self. And if you wash your mouth every month once with Wine wherein the
root of the said herb has been sodden, you shall never have pain in your
Teeth. Also the decoction or powder of the flowers of a Pomegranate Tree, being
put in your mouth and between your Gums fasteneth Teeth.

To kill Lice and Nits in the Head.
TAke the powder or scraping of Hearts horn, and make the Patient to drink it,
and there will no Lice nor Nits breed in his head, but if you will straw the
said powder upon his head all the Lice and Nits will dye.

To remedy or to help Blood-shotten eyes coming by any Rheum, Fluxion, or
such other like cause.
TAke the tops or ends of Worme-wood, which is an herb well enough known, and
stamp it, mixing it with the w^ite of an Egg and Rose Water, and make thereof
as it were a Plaster, and spread it upon a linen cloth, which you may lay upon
the eye w^ere the blood is, or else upon both, and do this at night when you
go to bed, and the next morning take it off, and you shall see that t^is
Plaster shall have drawn* to it self all the blood, and all the redness
that was in your Eyes, and so you shall be quit of it.

For the Toothache.
TAke the Roots and Leaves of Chickweede, and boil them in water, with the
which you shall wash your mouth well, and hold it in your mouth a certain
space, and it will take away your pain.

To take away the Toothache.
TAke Hysope, and make thereof a decoction with Vinegar, and it being hot, wash
your mouth withal, and the pain of the Teeth shall go away. The Hysope also
being stamped and incorporated with Honey, and a little Nitrina, kills the
Worms in a man's body.

Against the Crampe.
TAke and beat Brimstone and Vervine together, and so bind it to your Arm, or
other place grieved, and it shall help it, for having the pain again.

A Medicine to purge the Head.
TAke Masticke, Peritory of Spain, tame Cressis Seed, Cockle-seede,
Stavisacre, both the kinds of neesing powder, white and black* Ginger,
Sinamond, of each half a dram in fine-powder, and mixed together, and put it
in a little bag of fine linen cloth, and let the Patient hold one of these
bags in his mouth a good space, but these bags must first lie in Fuse a
pretty while in Vinegar, and it will draw out Rheumes from the head
wonderfully, and when he has done, he must wash his mouth well with Wine or
Ale*

A Medicine for a scald Head.
TAke Daysie Roots, and Ale, and stamp them with as much May-butter as needs,
and annoint the sore head therewith.

For the Headache.
TAke a good handful of Red-Rose leaves dried, and a good quantity of Cummin
grossly bruised, and a good handful of Camomill grossly shred, and a
quantity of brown leavened Bread: then mix them* and put it into a
Linnen*cloth, then quilt it, and set it into a hot Dish, upon a Chafingdish,
and sprinckle the bag with Rose Water and Vinegar, and turn it in the dish
till it be as hot as may be suffered, to be laid to the noddle of the Neck:
and let it be cold, and so use another, and keep his head so hot as he may
sweat.

For pain of the Head.
TAke Marjorom and press out the Juice of it, and let the Patient, take of it
in his Nose.

For deafness in the Ears.
TAke the Juice of Coleworts, and mix it with warm water, and drop it into
thine Ears, and it will help.

To make Honey of Roses, called Mel Rosarum.
TAke four pound four ounces of Honey clarified, and two pound of the Juice
of Red Roses: and let them boil together till it be like a Sirrope.

Another making thereof.
TAke a pottle and half a pint of Honey well clarified, with a pottle of
white or red Wine, two pound of Red-Rose leaves: Boil the Rose Leaves and Wine
till half be wasted, and then put in your Honey: and let it boil till it be
somewhat thick, and in color like a Syrrope.

For the Pockes.
TAke the Juice of Peny-Roiall, and young Tansie, and give the sick party to
drink.

A true Medicine for the Jaundies.
TAke a handful of Chery Leaves, sees them in a pint of Milk, and let them
boil well: Then strain it, and drink a good draught thereof to Bedwards, and
in the morning fasting, and the Jandies shall avoid from you by siege: or else
drink in the morning this following. Take the wood of Bayberries, pill the
upper shell with the leaves from it, and take the second shell that is yellow,
put thereof as much as a Walnut into a cloth, and sees it with a pint of
water, let it be well boiled, and let it cool, and then driuke it, this has
been experimented.

For the Liver that is corrupted and wasted.
TAke a good quantity of Liverwort and bruise it a little, and then seethe it
in good strong Wort* with a quantity of Ruberb, and use this medicine, and thou
shall be whole.

For heat in the Liver.
TAke the Juice of sower Apples, and sweet Apples, of each a pound or more, as
much as you think best, and two pounds of Sugar, mingle these things together,
and let them boil on a simple fire till it be thick as a Syrrope, and use
this course every day fasting, with lukewarm water.

Remedies for the Collicke.
TAke Parcely, Watercresses, Pellitory of the Wall, unset Time, of each a
handful, a dish of sweet Butter, let the Herbs be clean washed, and seethe
them in a quart of running water, let your water be taken up against the
stream, and let them seethe till you make a Plaster thereof* then temper them
together with a handful of Wheat branne, and let the plaster be laid to the
Patients belly beneath the Navill, and let him put in his pottage some
Pellatory of the wall; and when the Patient makes water strain it through a
fair cloth, and thereby ye shall know and perceive, whether it does him good
or not, and let him use this three or four times together.

Another for the same.
TAke a quantity of Broome-seed, Grouncel-seed, Parcely-seed, Alexander-seed,
Ashenkey-seed, Lepthorne-seed or Berries, Phillipendula dried, Saxifrage dried,
Mouseare dried, Growobicke dried, mix all these together in your drink, and
drink it Morning and Evening, fasting.

Another. Take Civet and rub your Navill therewith, and champe Rosemary in your
mouth, and it eases the Colic incontinently*

A most excellent Medicine for the Collicke and Stone, with other virtues.
TAke Pimpernell, Mustard, Crowfoot, Gauriophe, Mastick, and bruise them all
well together, and then mingle them with the blood of a Goat, and put thereto
good Vinegar or a little Alligre, and let them stand certain days after your
discretion, and put them into a Stillatory and distill a water thereof; this
water is good for the Stone, or gravel, whether that it be red or white,
plain or sharp, or if it be hardened; If the Patient do drink thereof every
day fasting, the Stone will break and go away like sand.

Also, if Scald heads be washed therewith, it will heal them* and there shall
grow new hair; and if the Scabs be washed therewith, of what nature soever it
be, he shall be whole with three days or nine at the furthest.

Also, this Water drunk fasting, makes a man to have a good color, and good
blood.

Also, this water drunk with Castorie twice in one day* destroys all
Palsies* which is not dead in the sinews and members before, for it comfort
the sinews principally. This water is very much approved.

For the Collicke and Stone.
TAke half a pint of white Wine, and a good quantity of white Soap, scrape it,
and put it into the wine, and make it luke warm, and then drink it once,
twice, or thrice, or as often as the Patient needs.

A Powder for the Collicke and Stone.
TAke Parcely-seed, Saxifrage, Alisander, and Coriander-seeds, the kernels of
Cherrystones, Smallage-seed, Lovage, the roots of Phillipendula, of each a
dram, Bay Berries, and Ivie-berries, of each a dram; put to all these as much
Ginger as they all weigh, and add thereto half an ounce of Commin; this powder
is to be taken in Ale, half a dram at once, thrice a day.

A special Remedy for the Stone.
TAke the stones of Medlers, lay them upon a hot Tyle-stone, and after that you
have rubbed and dried them in a fair linen cloth, then being thoroughly dried,
beat them into a powder, and put to it a quantity of Time and Parcely, and
place it upon the fire with Beer and Butter, and throw in half a spoonefull
of the said powder; and hereof you must drink a good draught fasting in the
morning* and eat nor drink nothing else for the space of three hours after.

Another. Take a quantity of Anniseeds, Lycorice, Fennell-roots, and
Parcely-rootes, Raysins, and Currants, and let all these be boiled in Whey, from
a pottle to a quart, and so strained and drink it.

A Powder for the Stone.
TAke the Seed of Gromell, Broom, Saxifrage, Alisander, Parcely, and Fennel,
of all these seeds a like quantity, beat them very well together, and so drink
half a spoonful of that Powder, or a spoonful at a time in a draught of good
Ale, making it luke warm in any wise, before you drink it.

To make the Stone slip down the narrow passages between the Kidney and the
Bladder.
TAke a great handful of Pellitory of the wall, and the like quantity of
Mallows, boil them in a drying pan with a good quantity of fresh Butter, so
that they be not parched nor dry. And when you see by the frying that some good
part of the virtue of the herbs is gone into the butter, take the herbs so
fried somewhat fat with the butter, and lay it the length of half a yard or
more between the fold of a Napkin, and in breadth about 6, or 7. Inches, then
clap the fattie side of the napkin all along from the backbone to your flank
above the hippe, especially on that side where the pain is, as hot as may be
suffered, when it is cold apply a fresh one, and in three or four times doing,
the passage will be enlarged, whereby the Stone will slip down, and the pain
cease.

A Posset drink against the Stone.
TAke Pellitory of the wall, three crops of Lavender Cotton, three Parcely
roots, and one Fennel root, the pithes taken out, and they scraped and washed,
stamp the herbs and roots together, then put thereto one pint of Rhenish
or white Wine, strain the wine from the herbs, and with a pint of new Milk
make a posset thereof, drink freely of it Morning and evening first and last,
at the new and full of the Moon, and walk well upon it.

Also, take the herb Hartshorne boiled in white Wine, and drunk in the
morning fasting is good against the Stone and strangurie.

To make hair grow.
TAke and sees Mallows roots and all, and wash the place where Hair
lacks, and it shall grow.

For to take away Hair.
TAke Horsleeches and burn them to powder, and mingle it with Eysell, and
touch the place where the Hair grows, and it shall grow no more there.
Approved.

To make a barren woman bear Children.
TAke of these little Sea fishes called in Latin Pollipodes, and roste them
upon the coals with Oil, and let the woman eat of them, and it shall profit
and help very much, having in the mean time the company of a man.

To make a woman have a quick Birth.
TAke leaves of Dictarij, and stamp them* or else make powder of them, and
give the woman that labors drink of it with a little water, and she shall
be delivered incontinent without any great pain or grief.

For all manner of Lamenesse or swellings.
TAke a handful of Time, a handful of Lav ender cotton, and a handful of
running Strawberies that be like to a string, and so cut them small, then beat
them in a Mortar, with four or five young Swallows taken out of the nest very
fligge and quick, beat them together until ye see never a feather of them
whole: that done* take a pennyworth of May butter clarified, and mingle it in
the Mortar with Herbs, and so let it stand four and twenty hours before
they sceth: when you ha ve sodden it, use it as before you are taught, as well
in preserving of it, as in using of it.

For to stay the Laxe or Flux.
TAke Plantane, otherwise called Weybred-leaves and roots, and wash them in
fair water, and then stamp them, and take a good quantity of the Juice and
put it to old Ale, and make a Posset therewith, and after take the ale Posset,
and clarify it upon the fire perfectly, and then let the Patient drink it
blood warm, in the morning and evening, without taking of othtr drink the
space of two hours either before or after.

For the sweating Sickness.
Ye must take a good spoonful of Treacle three spoonfuls of Vinegar, five
spoonfuls of water, and two spoonfuls of the juice of Sinckfoyle, swing them
together, and drink them luke warm.

For him that pisseth Blood.
TAke a good quantity of Rue, otherwise called herb Grace, and dry it so that
you may beat it to powder, and then take the powder and and drink it with
Ale: and it will change the Urine.

For the Canker in the Mouth.
TAke white Wine, and a pennyworth of Ginger in powder, and let them sees a
walme together, and wash the sore place with a feather, and drink not in one
hour after, and ye shall have help in seven days or warrantise.

A powder for the same.
TAke Sage, Pimpernell of each a like and quantity* and half so much Parcely,
as of them both, shred them, and stamp them small, and put thereto a little
burnt Allome* and then take it up dry it, and beat it to powder and keep it,
for it never failed.

To know the Fester and Canker.
Here you may learn whereof, and of what manner the Fester comes, and also
the Canker, it comes of a sore that was ill healed, and breaks out again,
and if it be in the flesh, there does come out water, if it be in the sinews,
there comes out brown lie: and if it be in the bone, there comes out as it
were thick blood. A Fester has a narrow hole without and within, and a Fester
is seldom seen, but it has more holes then one, and the Canker has always
but one hole.

For a Canker in the body.
TAke the roots of Dragons and cut them in small pieces, and lay them to dry,
and make powder thereof, and take a penny weight of that powder, and put it in
water all Night, and on the morrow power out that water* and put thereto
white wind and then sees it well, and let the Patient drink thereof warm,
and in three day es he shall be whole.

For a Canker in a woman's Pappes.
TAke the Dung of a white Goose, and the juice of Salendine, and bray them
together, and lay them to the sore, and it will kill the Canker, and heal the
Pappe.

A good powder for the Canker.
TAke Copperas, and Roch Saunders, and Verdigreace, and Sal-armoniac, and beat
them to powder in a brazen Mortar, of each ^ like quantity by weight, and put
the powder in a vessel, and seethe it on a charcole fire till it glowe, and
then take it down, and let it cool and after make powder thereof, and that
powder shall destroy the Canker, on warrantise.

To kill the Canker or Marmole.
TAke a pecke of the ashes made of Ashenwood, and ashes of Oate straw, and put
hot water on them and make a gallon of Lie, and put thereto two handfuls of
Barke-dust, and let it stand a day and a night, and then strain it through a
canvasse; then take the same dust and put it in again, and put thereto as much
Allome, and half as much of Madder crops, and put them in a pot and let them
boil almost to half, and ever stir it that it grow not to the bottom, nor
run over, and after cleanse it through a cloth, and let it cool, and when it is
cold, take a quantity thereof and wet a linen cloth therein and lay it to the
sore place.

For the Canker in the Mouth.
TAke seven spoonefuls of Honey, and clarify it in a pewter dish, then put to
it one pint of white Wine Vinegar and roch Allome, the quantity of a Hazell
nut, and a spoonefull of Bay Salt, and let all these boil together a quarter
of an hour, and then take of dried Rose leaves and Sage a handful, letting
them seethe together for the space of a quarter of an hour, and let the
Patient wash his mouth therewith, and lay the leaves to the sore, and if the
liquor be too thick to wash your mouth with, then take running water and
white wine Vinegar, and a spoonful of Honey, and boil them well as before,
and then use it.

Another. Take Herb Grace, Lavender-Cotton, Sage, Honey-suckle leaves, of
each a like quantity, wash them and stamp them with a little roch Allome, and
a little English Honey, and put them into a fair Dish, and when ye dress a
sore mouth therewith, take as much as ye think will serve, and take a few
Sage leaves and wash thy mouth, and lay it to thy Gums, and if ye put thereto
a little Pepper and Bay Salt, it will be the better.

Another. Take Plantane, Bittony, Egrimony, Violets, and Woodbine, boiling them
in Wine or water, with Hysop, Piony, Pimpernell, and green Walnuts, and
therewith wash four times in a day, and hold it in your mouth pretty hot, and
therewith wash it.

To make a red Water to kill the Canker.
TAke three handfuls of Rue, bray it in a Mortar, and put thereto a quart of
Vinegar, and Madder one ounce, and take half a pennyworth of Allome, and
beat it to powder and put thereto, and let it so rest nine days or more, and
then take them out, and so strain them through a cloth into a clean glass,
and stop the vessel close, and keep it.

To take away the Canker.
TAke Martlemasse Beef that hangs in the Roof, and burn it to powder and
put the powder into the Sore, and it will kill the Canker.

A powder for the Canker.
TAke one quarter of a pound of Roch Allome, and burn it in an earthen vessel
that there come no ashes thereto: then take Arg^, one half ounce, and one
quarter of an ounce of Bolearmonracke, and make all these in fine powder alone,
and then mix them altogether, and put them into a Bladder, and keep it close:
and when ye will minister it, wash well the sore with the water, and then lay
on the Powder, and so dress it once in the day, and it shall help him.

A good Medicine for the Canker and Sores.
TAke a pottle of clean running water, or white wine, Sage, Rosemary, and
Sinkfoyle, of each a handful, Allome one ounce, boil all together till half
a quarter be consumed, and if it be for the Canker put in a little white
Coperas and Camphere.

For a Canker old or new, or Marmole.
TAke Smalledge, Wormwood, green Walnuts, Lillies, Broom Croppes, white
Hazell, red Nettle, Sage, Selfe-heale, Pimpernell, the root of Floure-de-Iuce,
Planten, ground Ivy, Wall-woort, Mouse-eare, Celondine, Mintes, Bittony,
Egrimony Violets, Charvell, Colwortes, and Avence, stamp all these together
and fry them in Barrowes grease, Sheep tallow, and Honey, and make thereof an
ointment with Turpentine, Wax* Rozen, Pitch, Gum Frankensence, burnt Allome,
and powder of Tanners bark and so use it.

For the Canker.
TAke the powder of Saven, Honey, and Cream, and white Wine, and mix them
altogether, and melt them over the fire, and when it is hot, with a linen
cloth wash therewith thy mouth, and when the Sore is well washed, put thereof
into the grief, with Lint, as hot as may be suffered two times a day, and be
whole.

For a Canker in a man's body, and to save the man.
TAke the roots of Dragons, and cut them, and dry them in gobbets, and make
powder of them, and take a 9. d. weight of that powder, and sees it in white
Wine, and let the sick drink thereof warm fasting, and in three days he
shall be whole.

For the Headache.
TAke Hemlockes, and sees them, till they be as thick as Pappe, and lay them
where the pain is: Let them lie all Night, and on the morrow lay another of
the same heat, and do so three or four times, and it is done.

Another* Also take and make Lie of Verven, or Bytton, or Wormwood, and
therewith wash thy Head thrice a week, and it shall do the much good, and
take away the Ache.

For the Headache, and Toothache.
TAke the Herb called Bursa Pastoris, and bruise it and lay it to the heart of
thy Foot, and it helps both the Headache, and the Toothache.

A Drink for the Headache.
TAke Bitton, Verven, Selondine, Waybroad, Rewe, Wall-woort and Sage, and a
quantity of Pepper, and Honey, and sees them all together in water, and strain
it through a cloth, and drink it Fasting.

Another. Stamp Bittony, and lay it on thy Head under thy Cap or bind it last
to thy head.

For the Headache.
TAke Sage, Bittony, and Rewe, with Worm wood, sees these in fair water,
then put out the same water into a vessel, and beat the same Herbs in a
Mortar very small, and then take of them and of the liquor, and temper them
with Wheat Branne, and with the rest of the liquor wash thy head, and then lay
a Plaster thereof upon the Mould, and let it lie there a day and a night, and
do so three or four times. Also, ye may take roots and leaves of Primroses,
fresh Butter, and Tar boiled together is very good.

Another. Take Avence, Pigeons dung, and Wheat flower, one ounce, and temper
them with the white of an Egg, and bind to thy grief.

Another. Take Bittonie, and Camomill, a handful, and sees it in a pottle of
Wine to a quart, and wash thy head with the liquor, and if it be the Megrim, it
shall help the.

Another. Take Frankensence, Doves dung and flower of Wheat, one ounce, and
remper them together with the white of an Egg, and lay a Plaster thereof
where the grief is.

Another. Take the white of an Egg and beat it well, and take away the froth,
and put thereto Rose Water, and the powder of Alablaster: then take Flax and
wet therein, and lay it to the Temples* and when it is dry, wet it again: use
it thus three or four times*

For the Headache.
TAke, Verven, Bittony, Worme-wood, sees them well, and wash the Patients
head, and after that make a Plaster, and lay on the upper part of thy Head on
this manner: take the same Herbs beforesaid when they are sodden, and wring
out the Juice of them, then take the Herbs and stamp them in a Mortar, and
temper them with the water they were sodden in, and put thereto Wheat branne
to cover the Juice of the herbs that it go not out, then take a garland of
Linen cloth, that will go about thy head, and bind the Plaster in it, as hot
as the Patient may abide it, and then put on a cap over that.

Another. If the pain come of hot humors, take a quantity of Houseleeke, and
distill it as much as you please, and with the same water wash thy Temples, and
thy Forehead and then dip a linen cloth therein, and lay it on thy Forehead,
or thy temples.

Another. Take Margerom, and green Juy leaves, Bittony* and Verven, of every
one two handfuls, cut them small, and beat them in a Mortar and sees it in
two pennyworth of fresh Butter, and stir it till it wax very green, and so
let it stand nine days in an earthen pot; then sees it again, and stir it
well and strain it, and keep it in a fair vessel, and when you need warm a
little thereof in a Sawcer, and annoint your Temples therewith.

Another. Take a quart of white Wine, and Horehound, two handfuls, and Camomill
one handful, and boil them together, and therewith wash thy Head: then take
Wheatebran, and put to the herbs, and boil it, and make a Plaster and lay
it to thy head.

Another. Take the Juice of Selondine, and good Vinegar, mingled and made hot,
and with a sponge or a linen cloth lay it to thy forehead, it quenches great
heat, and purges it that it will come no more.

Another. Take the Juice of Pimpernell, and put thereto May-butter, and frye
them together with a soft fire, and keep it, and therewith annoint thy Head
and Temples.

To cleanse the Head.
TAke Alloes one ounce, Myrthe half an ounce, Garlic four drams, Saffron in
powder, half a penny worth, and mingle them together in fine powder: then take
the Juice of Coleworts, and put them to your powder, and make it as thick as
pappe, and somewhat more stiffer, and make Pills thereof, as big as small
Pease, and when you go to Bed, take four of them, and roll them in fine
powder of Lycorice, and put them into your mouth, and swallow them down.

For the Headache coming of the stomach.
TAke Fumitory, Camomill, and Roses, and seethe them in white Wine, and make a
Plaster, and lay it hot to the stomach.

For Ache in the hinder part of the Head.
Stamp Sage with the white of an Egg, and temper it with Vinegar, and lay it
thereto.

A principal Medicine for the Head.
TAke Commin a quantity, and lay in Vinegar one night, and on the morrow put
out all the Vinegar, saving a little to keep it moist, and fry it in a pan,
and bind it in a linen cloth about thy head, and by the grace of God, ye
shall be whole.

For a man that is diseased in the Liver and Spleen.
TAke Barrowes grease, and ashes made of Ashen wood one pound, and running
water a Gallon, and seethe them till they be half wasted, then strain them
through a cloth into a vessel, and let it stand so all night, and then on the
morrow scum off the grease and cast away the water, and melt the grease, and
stir it often and put it into Boxes, and when ye have need anoint the Spleen
therewith.

A Drink to be used after this Ointment*
TAke the roots of young Ashen plants clean washed one handful, and Wormwood
as much, sees them in Wine from a gallon to a pottle, and let the Patient
drink thereof in the Morning cold, and Evening hot.

A Plaster for the Spleen.
TAke dry Lillies, March Mallow roots, and Alexander seed, of each an ounce,
of the bark of an Elm tree, the bark of an Ash, and Broom seed, of each two
ounces; all these being beaten to powder, let them be sodden in strong Vinegar,
and so let them seethe till they be sodden dry; then put thereto the powder of
Commin one dram, powder of the bark of Capers one ounce, powder of Rue three
drams, then afterward put thereto Gum Armoniacke one ounce or three drams,
dissolved in Vinegar, then with Wax, and Turpentine, as much as shall suffice,
make thereof a Plaster for the Spleen.

Another. Take the tops of Acornes, Rose leaves, Coriander seed, and Commin
seed prepared, of each one ounce, Strado Arabiae, Galanga of each two ounces,
Salinter, I. Saltpeeter one ounce terrified, mix them and put them in a bag,
quilted, or basted, quadrantwise, and lay it to the place grieved.

Another. Take Camomill flowers, wheat bran, and a pint of white Wine, boil
them all together and put them in a bag, then take oils of Violets, of
Linseed, and of Lillies, of each a penniworth, annoint therewith, and put your
bag hot thereto.

A Drink for the Spleen.
TAke the juice of Licorice one ounce, Fennell-seed, Anniseed* and Juniper of
each an ounce, pound them all in a Mortar together, and so drink it in your
drink.

Another. Take three spoonfuls of the juice of Ivy leaves in white Wine, or
else of the Juice of Egrimony, and drink of it three or four mornings
fasting, and it will help you.

To dissolve the hardness of the Spleen.
AMoniacum dissolved in very sharp Vinegar, and spread upon leather
Plaisterwise, and applied to the Spleen will mollify the hardness thereof,
and it may lie thereto seven weeks and never be removed.

A sovereign Medicine for the Spleen, and to cleanse the body.
TAke Hart's-tongue, wild Hoppes, Lettice, and Borage, with the flowers of
Fumitory, and Parcely roots, seethe all these in Whay, and clarify it with
whites of Eggs, strain it, and drink it first in the morning and last at
night during the space of a Month, and by Gods help, it will cure your
Spleen, and cleanse your blood, and comfort you many ways for your health.

For Ache in the Back.
TAke a great Onyon or two, and roast them in the embers, then stamp them and
strain them out of the Ju ice, and mix it with as much Malmesie as Juice, and
drink thereof blood warm, first and last. Probatum.

To stay the Back, and help him that consumes.
TAke the roots of Parcely, Fennel, Camphere, and of Borage, Planten, Bursa
Pastoris, and Knotgrasse, and make broth with them of young Hens, Capon,
Mutton, Rabbets, and Veale, and put thereto a Date or two, and ye may seethe
them in posset Ale made of white Wine.

Another. Take white Archangell, Cumfrey flowers, white Lillies, white Roses,
white Holly hockes, Knot-grasse, and Clary, stamp them, and take a pottle of
Muskadine, and a pint of Ale, with the pith of an Ox back, and three capped
Dates, the stones taken out and beating them in a mortar small, then put in
some of your Muskadine and grind it with some of your Ale and stir it, and
boil the rest thereof, take also the yolks of three new laid Eggs, the
strings taken out, and beat them well together, and put thereto of Sinamon two
penniworth, and of whole Mace one penniworth, and seethe all these to a quart,
and so use it.

Another. Take the pith of an Ox back and scald it, then strain it out of
the skin and shred Nippe, and beat it in a Mortar very small, putting thereto a
quart of Milk and strain it, and then seethe it with five or six Dates, and
a grain of Ambergris, and the powder of Ginger, and let the Patient use it
very often. It is proved.

To take away the pain of the Reins of one that is low brought.
TAke three quarts of white Wine, and boil therein a red Cock, and put thereto
a handful, of red Nip, a quantity of Clary, and the roots of red Fennel,
Hart's-tongue, a stick of Synamon bruised, Dates, great and small Raisins, with
a few Prunes, sees all these together, till the strength of the Cock be in
the broth, and put therein one ounce of Manus Christi, and use this Morning
and Evening luke warm.

For Ache in the Back and Legs.
TAke the marrow of an Ox, and oil Olive three spoonefuls, and the yolks of
Eggs, and Butter, Pepper one ounce, then take the milk of a woman, and mingle
it together, and anoint the sick therewith.

For the Bladder and the Reins.
TAke the seeds of Planten beaten in a Mortar, and sees them in Wine, and
drink thereof alone.

A Plaster for the Reins.
TAke Callamint, Camomill, Wormwood, Peritory, Holyhockes, and bray them in a
Mortar with Oil, Butter, or Dear and Sheeps suet, and grease of a Boar, or
Barrow hog, with a quantity of Commin, and lay it on a Plaster both behind
and before.

For all Diseases in the Back.
TAke the roots of Daisies, of Planten, of Bursa pastoris, of Centimodum, and
the Cups of Acorns a handful, and of Bole-armoniack two ounces, and of
Harts-horne burnt, and also a Bucke Conie that is fat, and let all these be
sodden together in white Wine and water, as much Wine as water, till the Cony
be consumed, from the bones of the flesh, then take away the flesh and the
bones from the broth, and so let the broth stand till it come to a jelly, and
when you are in your bed, cause your Back to be therewith anointed by a
Chafingdish of coals, three nights together, and lay thereon a warm linen
cloth, and it shall help you by Gods grace.

For pain in the bladder, and to make it whole for ever.
TAke three roots of Smalledge, and wash them fair and clean, and cut them
small, and seethe them in a quart of fair water, till three parts of the water
be consumed, then strain it, and take four drams of the powder of Bittony,
and put thereto, and drink the said water.

Against running of the Reins.
TAke one pound of Jordaine Almonds, and blanch them, and parch them, and grind
them very small and make Almond milk thereof, with a pint of Rose Water, and
a pint of Planten water, and then seethe it with Sugar, and Sina mon* and when
it is cold put thereto a dram of Masticke in fine powder, and use thereof to
eat and be whole, Probatum est.

A Syrope for the Back.
TAke the roots of Ennila Compana clean scraped, and slice them thin, and lay
them in fair running water three days, and shift them every day, then at
three days end take them out* and put them in a gallon of fair running water,
with a quart of Honey, of Lycorice one ounce, scraped clean and sliced, and of
Anniseeds one ounce, clean rubbed from the dust, let all these be boiled with
a soft fire, and take out the roots out of the liquour, washing them one by
one, and when they be cut lay them on a fair dish, and so let them lie 24.
hours, and then take the roots and weigh them, and for every pound of your
roots, take a pottle of Muskadine, or white Bastard, and put your roots
therein, and put thereto two pound of fine white Sugar, two or three whole
Maces, boil all these to a Syrope, with your roots, and then put it into a
Pot, and when you will use it, let the Patient eat of the roots, and drink a
spoonful of the Syrope with your roots, after it, Morning and Evening.
Probatum est.

Remedies to provoke Menstruum Mulieris.
TAke powder of Peeter, Bittony, Yarrowseed, in white Wine and drink it.

Another. Take Mugwort, Selondine, Marigold, Verven, Nippe, of each nine crops
three days before the change, and three days before the full of the Moon.

Another. Take Germander, and the roots of red Madder, and seethe it in Ale,
and give it her to drink, or else take Radishes* Et semen pionae, red Sanders
and Sugar, and use it as aforesaid.

Another. Take Cotula Fetuda, the which is like Camomill, but it stinketh, and
make a fomentation thereof.

Another. Take the Juice of Mercury, and Honey, and flower of Cockle, as much
as will incorporate it, and make thereof little balls, and give her one or two
of them, and she shall have Menstruum, also it shall after dispose her to
conceive, for it has seldom failed, and is well proved.

Another. Take the black seed of Pionie, and bruise them one by one to the
number of nine, and pick of the black husks, and in a Mortar break them to
powder, eat and drink the said powder at times before said, in the second
Medicine. Pro eadem.

Another. Take the roots of Gladion, and Arsmart, and seethe them in good
white Wine, or Vinegar, and when they be well sodden, take them from the fire,
and let the woman sit over it, so that the air may strike up, and none go
away, for this is proved.

Another. Take Bittonie, Puliall Royal, Centory, of each a handful, seethe
them with Wine or water, till the two parts be wasted, and then cleanse it
through a cloth and drink it.

Another. Take Balm, Margerom, Isope, and Marigolds, a handful, seethe them
from a pottle to a quart upon a soft fire, and so take it and drink it every
morning fasting, and if it be bitter, put thereto Sugar, and use it.

Remedies to stop Menstruum Mulieris.
TAke the blackest holly-hocks that ye can get, and take the flowers thereof,
and make them in powder, and drink them, and wash the place with the water of
Lovage.

Another. Take the water of Oak leaves distilled, half a pint of Rose Water,
and Syrrupe of Quinces six ounces, and let her drink thereof first and last.

Another. Take Horse-dung, and seethe it in good Vinegar, and put it into
little bags of linen cloth, and lay the one upon the Reins of the back,
and the other between the Navill, and the privy place, as warm as she may
suffer it, and let her drink it every Morning and Evening with a little
Synamon till she be whole.

Another. Take the roots of Gladium, and sees them well in Wine, or water,
and receive the fume thereof: It never failed*

To stop white Menstruum and red.
TAke the Juice of Planten, and of Bursa Pastoris, and two whites of Eggs well
beaten among the Juice, and put thereto Bole-armoniack one ounce, and of Terra
sigillata, one ounce, and a portion of Bean flower, and make it thick upon
the fire, and draw thereof a Plaster upon thin cloth, and lay it to her Back
and Navill.

Another for the white
TAke the inner rind of the Sloe*tree, Sumatch, Balestianes, the rind of the
Pomegranate, Planten, Knot-grasse, the inner rind of the red Bryer, and a
little French-Bolearmoniack, and boil all these in red Wine, till half be
consumed, and let her drink it fasting, Et restringet fluxum Menstruum.

Another. Take the foot and Leg of a Hare, and bake it to powder hair and
all, and drink it, and it restrains the same.

The virtue of Fearne.
THe Root is good to be drunk, and laid to Plaister-wise, for the Wounds that
are made with Reeds; and in like manner, the root of the Reed drunk, and
laid Plaister-wise to the sore, where Fearne sticks. The Powder is good to be
strowed upon moist Sores, which are hard to be covered with skin, and ill to be
healed: the Juice pressed out of the Fearne root, laid to with Rose Water, or
other cold water, is good for all manner of burning or scalding, perfectly and
sure.

To take away heat and inflammation of a Member.
TAke the waters of Planten and Purslaine, of each two ounces, and the water of
a little herb called Vernicula^is, two ounces, Litarge and Ceruse, in fine
powder, of each four drams, and Camphere three grains: mix all these
together and so use them.

A Locion for a sore Mouth.
TAke running water a pint, Vinegar half a pint, Honey four ounces, Bay
leaves one ounce, Galingale one dram: Let all these be decocted to the form of
a Syrope.

A preparative.
TAke Syrope of Violets, Endiffe, and of Femitory, of each two ounces, and of
common Decoction four ounces.

To make Vergent milk by D. Yaxley.
TAke Litarge of Lead one pound, with Vinegar a pint, laid in fuse three
days, and then drawn with woollen shreds, and so keep it in a Vial by it
self close: then take four ounces of Conduit-water and one ounce of Allome,
and one dram of Camphere: and melt all over the Fire, and keep the water by it
self in another Vial, and when you will use it put both these waters
together, of each a like quantity, and it will be like milk. It takes away
the spots and Freckles in the Face, if it be often applied thereto.

A comfortable Powder for the Heart.
TAke Synamon, Ginger, of each three ounces, grains of Paradise, long Pepper,
of each two drams, Saffron one dram, Sugar four ounces: and so make your
Powder.

A Remedy that breaks the Stone.
TAke a pound of Gr^mmell, a pound of Saxifrage seed, and a pound of Coriander,
with a quarter of a pound of Soras, white and red, and grind all these in a
Mortar very small, and so keep it, using to eat thereof in your Pottage every
day a spoonefull.

Another. Take Time, Damsons, Beane-Cods, Pellitory of the wall, Saxifrage, a
like quantities, and sleep them one night in white Wine, then distill them,
and use to drink thereof.

Another remedy for the Stone, and to cause the voydance of Urine.
TAke Pellitorie of the Wall, Sothernwood, and sees them in Water or white
Wine, with a quantity of Sheep Suet, till it be tender, then put the herbs
and tallow in a linen bag, and lay it warm to the bottom of the belly, using
this, you shall find remedy.

A proved Medicine to avoid the Urine that has been long stopped.
TAke Radish roots, one if it be of bigness and strong, is sufficient, and
scrape it very clean, and lay it in white Wine, a night in steep, then
strain the Wine, and give the Patient to drink, and he shall void water.

A very good water for the stone proved.
THe water of Strawberries* with the leaves distilled, and so used by draughts,
as other drink.

To break the Stone.
DRy the stones of a Cock a year old, and ^eate them into fine powder, and
give the diseased thereof to drink in white Wine, but if he have the Charward,
then give it to drink with good water.

Doctor Argentines Medicine for the Stone.
TAke the red bark of an Ivy tree dried, and beaten into fine powder, and
after s^arse it through a fine Searse; also take a like quantity of black
Jeat, beaten and searsed in like manner, and being mingled together, drink
thereof with Wine or Ale, blood warm, five or six times.

Diverse Medicines for the Stone and Strangulion.
TAke a quart of Milk, and a handful of Bay leaves, another of Time, of red
Sage, and of Parcely, of each a handful, and a quart of Malmesey, a little
Rosemary, and boil them all together from a quart to a pint; but yet let the
Milk and the Herbs be boiled all whole together, from a quart to a pint,
before the Malmsey come in, and then use it.

Another. Take Reddish leaves, and seethe them in Ale, and give it the Patient
to drink, and it will cause him to make water.

Another. Take red Bramble-berries before they be black, and Ivie-berries, and
Acornes, put them in a Pot and dry them until they be ready to be beaten to
powder; then take Alisander seed* Parcely seed, Gromell seed, Coriander seed*
Broom seed, and the seed of the Nut-tree, the inner pithe of Ash-keyes; take
of all these a like quantity also, and beat them to powder, and mingle them
together with Liquor of a double quantity; then use to drink it Evening and
Morning sodden in posset Ale, made with white Wine; and put of this powder
often in your Pottage when you eat them, and so use it continually till you
find ease.

Excellent Remedies for the Stone in the Bladder, and to provoke Urine.
TAke life Honey and Rhenish wine, of each a quart, Saxifrage, Phillipendula,
and Pellitorie of the wall, of each a handful, distill all these in Balma
Maria, with a very slow fire, keep it in a cold place in Pewter or earthen
vessels, and drink thereof the quantity of half a pint every morning fasting,
and afterward eat the quantity of a Walnut of life Honey, and use to fast and
walk an hour after it.

Another. Take a pint of Milk and put into it a pint of wild Mallow leaves,
let them boil together a quarter of an hour, then make a Posset drink of Ale
or Beer, take off the Curds and Mallow leaves, then set your Posset to boil
again, and put into it a good stick of Licorice well bruised, one spoonful of
Anniseeds, and half a spoonful of Parcely seeds well bruised, and so of Sugar
Candy the quantity of a small Walnut, boil all these to the quantity of half a
pint or less, then strain it, and at your going to bed drink it bloodwarme,
putting into it a quarter of a grated Nutmeg. It is approved.

Another. Take a pottle of Ale and a Flint stone taken from the Chalk and
beaten to powder, and a pennyworth of Reddish roots, boil all these together
to a quart, then strain it thrice and drink thereof Evening and morning.

Another. Take Saxifrage, and Rosemary, of each a like quantity, and seethe it
in white Wine till all the herbs be thoroughly sodden, then strain it and
drink it cold Evening and morning.

Another. Take Gromell, Parcely, Violets, and red Nettles, put them into a
Mortar and bray them; then take the Kernels of Cherrystones and bray them by it
self, and seethe all together in white Wine, and drink it Morning and evening.

Another. Take Perstone, unset Leekes, and Damsons, of each a like qu antity;
boil them and clarify them with the whites of Eggs, then take the juice and
drink it with Wine or Ale, in quantity double so much as the juice is.

Another. Take a handful of Bay Berries, and the shell of an Egg when the
Chicken is new hatched out of it, and beat them together; then take the powder
and* put it into Ale or Wine, and give it the Patient to drink, and by the
grace of God it shall help him.

For the Stone in the Reins, or Bladder.
MAke a Bath with Parcely, Alisanders, Pellitory, Fennel, and Saxifrage, and
let the Patient sit therein up to the Navill, then let them drink the Powder
of these seeds, and the Herbs, with warm white Wine; for this is a principal
practice for this disease. Probatum est.

An Injection for the Stone.
TAke a quart of Barley water, and boil therein a handful of Mallow leaves,
and as much of Violet leaves, till half the water be consumed, then put
thereto three spoonfuls of Mel Rosarum, and let the party take it as an
Injection with a Searinge.

For any evil in the Bladder.
TAke Ash, Parcely and Fennel, of all alike: put them and temper them with
water and drink it; and it shall help thee well to Piss, and it shall cast
out the Stone, and heat well thy stomach.

A Powder to break the Stone.
TAke the blood of the heart of a Kid, and of a Fox the blood of the heart, of
both a like quantity: take the bladder of a Boar, and all that is therein, and
put this blood thereto, take the juice of Saxifrage, and juice of Parcely, of
each a like quantity: and put these in the Bladder also, and hang up the
Bladder in the smoke over the fire, until such time it be congealed together
as hard as a stone, and make powder thereof: and drink it with hot Licour,
when thou will, first and last; and this shall break the stone to powder, and
make it void away.

To ease the pain of the Stone.
Beat the stones of Medlers into powder, and drink it with stild Milk, or
with white Wine.

Another. Take Turpentine of Jeane, make it in little balls, and roll it in
fine Sugar, and swallow it down whole.

Against the new Ague, by Doctor Langdon.
TAke Sorrel, Sowthistill, Endine, Dandelion, Succorie, croppes of Fennel
with Mallows, with Violet leaves of each one handful, and sees them all in a
gallon of stale Ale, to a pottle, with skimming, that done, strain out the
liquor, and make thereof an Ale posset, and let the Patient drink thereof as
often as he is a thirst, putting into every dra ught as much Treacle as the
bigness of a Bean* and ye shall be healed.

For an Ague. By Doctor Turner.
TAke Featherfew, Worme-wood* and Sorrel, of each a good great handful,
stamp them and strain them ^ard, and put thereto as much Sugar in weight as
the juice weighs, and put them in a strong Glass in a Skillet of warm
water, the space of four and twenty hours before you give it to the Patient,
and then give it twice a day two spoonefuls at a time in Ale or Posset-ale.

A very good Drink for an Ague. if one shake.
TAke a quart of strong Ale, and put therein nine Bay Leaves, and seethe it
till it come to a pint and then take out the Bay Leaves, and put therein one
pennyworth of Treacle, a halfe-penny worth of Pepper, stirring it well
together, and let it then seethe again one walme, and so take it off the fire,
and let the Patient drink it as hot as he can, and be covered as warm as he
may abide, the space of six or seven hours. Probatum est.

Another. Take a pint of Ale and put therein one pennyworth of long Pepper,
and four or five field Daysie roots and then sees the same well together,
and then let the Patient drink the same as hot as he may ^uffer it, and walk
till he sweat if he be able, or else laid down and covered very warm that he
may sweat well. Also Burre-leaves, and Baysalt beaten together and bound about
the wrist of the Patient is good for the same.

Another. Take a quart of Red-wine, and a quart of Milk, and still them, and
give it to the Patient to drink, when the Axis come upon him, but the milk
must be taken as it comes from the Cow.

For a cold Ague.
TAke a spoonefull of Vinegar a spoonefull of Aqua Vitae, and a little Treacle
with long Pepper and warm this blood-warme, and so let the sick person drink
it, when the fit comes, and let him walk if he be able, if not, laid down
and made to sweat.

A Plaster to take the Ague or any other ache out of a Woman's Breast in the
time of her Childbearing, if it come.
TAke the yolke of an Egg, and a little quantity of Wheat flower, and a
quantity of Honey, as much as the yolke of the Egg, and beat these together,
till it be like a Salve: then make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the Breast
that is grieved* and it will heal it without doubt. Probatum est.

To kill the Paulsie.
Drink the root of Valerian in powder, and it will destroy the Palsy, so
that ye eat no Hog flesh.

A remedy for the Dropsy.
SCrape an Elder root very clean, and break it in many pieces, or shred it
into white Wine, and let it steep therein, then drink the Wine, and it will
heal your Disease whole.

Against stopping of the Pipes.
TAke Hisope, Mintes, Rose-mary, Dai^ies* and Consond, of each like quantity,
and sees them with Ale in Lycorice, and use it Morning and Evening.

Against Hoarsenesse.
TAke a good quantity of Verven, and sees it with Lycorice in fair water,
then strain the water, and use no other drink with yonr meat until you find
remedy.

For the yellow Jaundise.
TAke the reddest Docke roots that ye can get, and being washed clean, put
them into a vessel of good Ale, and when it is stale, let the diseased drink
no other drink to his meat but Ale and it shall help.

For Worms in the Belly.
AGainst the Worms in the Belly, take Onyons and pill them, cut or slice them
small, power Spring Water over them: Let it stand all Night, and in the Morning
drink that water, and it drives away all worms: power the same water upon
the Earth where the Worms are, and within half an hour, they will all creep
out of the Earth.

Another. Likewise if one eat Garlic Fasting, it kills and drives out
Worms out of the Body. Or else drink distilled water of Knot-grasse, or
Shanie-grasse, the same kills worms also: how beit it works more in young
then in old folks.

Another. Take Mares-milke, and drink it as hot as you can have it from the
Mare in the morning fasting.

An approved Remedy for a Woman that has her Throws before her time.
Sees a good handful of whole Chervill in a quart of Claret Wine, and when
the Herbs be well sodden, wring them into the Wine, and cleanse it, and make
thereof an Hypocras with Sugar, Cynamon and Ginger, and give her thereof to
drink warm at times needful. And it shall expulse the pain, Approved.

A Powder for the Strangury.
TAke Ivy Berries dried over the Fire between two stones, and Alisander
seeds, of each a like quantity: and make a Powder thereof to be used in a
draught of good Ale.

For the Collicke and Stone.
TAke unset Leekes, unset Time, and Parcely, and make pottage of it with
Mutton: it is also good for the Mother.

For a Megrim in the Head.
TAke a cloth and warm it very hot, and chase the nape of your neck, and
your temples, a mornings.

For the Toothache.
TAke nine Pepper-cornes, and five Corns of Bay Salt, and some English honey,
and break your Pepper-cornes, and beat them all in an Oyster shell, then make
little balls of lint, and dippe them in the Honey, and lay it unto your tooth,
or rub your teeth with Allome beaten.

For a sore Breast.
TAke a Red-rose cake, and white Wine in a dish, and set it on a Chafingdish of
coals and turn the cake up and down in the dish, and lay it to the breast as
hot as may be suffered, and use this three or four times, till it be whole.

For a sore eye that burns and is watrie.
TAke Hemlockes and distill them, and take the watet and lay it to your eyes*
and take a little Lint, and dippe it in the water, and so lay it unto your eyes
as you lie upright in your bed.

Another. Take ground Ivy beaten, c^reth the Web in the Eye, putting it in
once a day.

For to stop the Bloody Flux.
TAke a pint of Milk, and a pint of water, and let them boil together over
the Fire, until it come all to a pint: and let the Patient drink it Morning
and Evening.

A Remedy for a Fellon.
THis infirmity does come of a venomous matter, and other while it comes of
an interiall cause, or of an exteriall, the interiall cause comes of some
evil humor, the exteriall cause does come of some venomous stinging of an
evil humor eat Treacle, and make a Plaster of Treacle and lay it upon the
place: or take the white of a raw Egg, and put in salt to it, and beat it
well together, and make a Plaster thereof.

Another. Take Rue, and Soape, Soote, and Boares grease: and stamp them
together, and lay it to the Fellon.

A Medicine well proved for the Megrim.
TAke the Juice of Nightshade, and as much Vinegar, with crummes of leavened
Bread, and the white of two Eggs, a quantity of Bolearmoniac, a quantity of
Sage, and Dragons tail: All these are to be made Plaister-wise upon Flax, and
lay it upon your grief; also Village to be stilled is very good.

For to heal a sors Eye, hurt with the small Pockes.
TAke the Marrow of the pinions of a Goosewing cold, a quantity of Honey, new
taken out of the Comb, in the hive, and mingle it together, and lay it on the
Patients Eye-lidde, and it will heal it.

For a sore Eye with a Pin or a Web.
TAke white Allom, and Running-water, and boil it together in an Egge-shell,
till it be half consumed.

For a sore Eye that ^tcheth and pricketh.
TAke Running water a quart, and put in white Copperas, a Rose-mary sprigge and
a spoonefull of Honey, and let it boil to a pint, and then drop a little into
the Eye: and keep it after from Rubbing or touching.

For a Sciatica or Ache in the Bones.
TAke of Rue, and red Nettles, of each a a handful, Commin, black Soap, and
Frankensence, of each a quantity, boil all these together, and make a Plaster
thereof, and lay it to the grief.

Another. Take a lapfull of Nettles, another of Neppe, seethe them in
Chamber-lye, and put therein a handful of Bay Salt, and a quantity of black
Soape, and let them boil well together, and lay it to the grief.

For Sore Eyes.
TAke Fennel roots, white Daisie roots and leaves, and lay it in white Wine,
and wash your Eyes with it.

To stop a great Laske.
TAke a pottle of fair water, and put therein a Cony fleyed, well washed, and
quartered, and let it be well skimmed when it does seethe: then take a good
handful of Almond^ unblanched, and the stones of great Raisins, and beat them
in a Mortar with some of the broth in the Pot, and un^trained put them in* then
take half an ounce of whole Cinnamon, a handful of Blackberry leaves, a
handful of Planten with the roots thereof, the Pot being clean skimmed: put
the aforesaid gredience therein, and let all boil till it come to a quart,
then strain the broth, and let the Patient drink thereof Morning and Evening,
or at other convenient times in the day.

Analliter, if the aforesaid Broth be warmed with a gad of Steel, when it is
cold, it is so much the better.

To cause one to make Water.
TAke Parceley and seethe it in white Wine, and drink it Morning and Evening.

For the Wind Collicke.
TAke Commin-seede, or fine Cod seed, and beat them to Powder, and put it into
Ale, Beer, or white Wine, and drink it, and it will make one Laxative.

For to make a Water for the same.
TAke Broomeseed, and beat it to Powder, and drink it with Muskadine, or any
other Wine.

For to bind on from the Laske.
TAke a pennyworth of Roch Allome, and sees it in a pint of white Wine, and
drink it.

For to skin a sore Finger.
TAke Nervall Oil, or Rose Oil, or Camomill Oil, or Pompilion, and annoint
your Finger or shinne with it, and it will be whole.

For a vehement Cough in young Children.
TAke the Juice of Parcely, powder of Commin, Women's milk, and mix them
together; then give the Child to drink thereof, and afterward make this
Ointment following: Take the seed of Hemp or Flax, and Fennycrick, and seethe
them in common water, then press out with your hands the substance of the
Herbs, which you shall mingle with Butter, and so annoint the Childs breast
with it as hot as may be.

For a broken Head.
TAke unwrought Wax, and a little Sugar, and running Water, and boil it in a
Sawcer, and make a Plaster, and be w ho le.

For Chilblaines in the Feet or Hands.
TAke Sheeps Suet, and unwrought Wax, and Rozen, and boil it in a Sawcer, and
make a a Salve, and it will heal them.

To kill the Toothache, or a Ring*worme, or a Tetter.
TAke Oil of Broom, and annoint the Gums at the root of the Tooth where the
pain is: It must be used after this manner Take a piece of old Broomesticke,
the older the better, and light it, and hold it downward, and it will drop
that which is yellow, and annoint your Gummes with it, or put it in the hollow
Tooth.

For a Stitch.
TAke Groundsill and dry it, and put sweet Butter into it, and put it where the
pain is, as hot as may be suffered: Or take Oats (the blackest that you can
get) and fry them with red Vinegar, and lay it as hot as may be suffered where
the pain is.

For an Ache or a Bruise.
TAke oil of Peeter* it must be used after this manner: Take a stool, and
when that you are Rising or going to Bed, sit with your Back toward the fire*
you must have a great fire, and where the pain is, you must rub it with some
of the Oil all downwards, and they that do dress you, must dry their hands
well against the fire and chafe it.

To make white Teeth.
TAke Lemmons and make stild water of them, and wash your Teeth with it, for it
is a sovereign thing: Or if you will not make the water, take the Liquor of
them, which is also good for the same purpose, but the water is better, because
it is finer: so that in the Stilling it lose not his force.

A Medicine for a swelling in the Cheek^.
TAke a pint of white Wine, and half a handful of Camomill flowers, and
seethe them in the white Wine, and wash your cheek, both within and without,
as hot as you can suffer it.

To make a Perfume suddenly in a Chamber where a sick man lies.
TAke a little Earthen Pot, and put into it a Nutmeg, two scruples of the
stick of Cloves, and two of the stick of Cinnamon, and four of storax
Calamint* Rose Water, or water of Spike, or some other sweet water, and seethe
it: then put it into a pot-shard, with a few hot Ashes, and coals under it,
and set it in the Chamber, and the smoke thereof shall give a sweet, amiable,
and hearty savor.

To make a clear voice.
TAke Elder-berries, and dry them in the Sun, but take heed they take no
moisture: then make powder of them, and drink it every Morning fasting with
white Wine.

A Medicine for the Mother.
TAke a pint of Malmsie, a little quantity of Commin-seede and Coriander-seed,
and a Nutmegge, beat these together, and then seethe them to half a pi^te,
with a little white Suger-candie, you must take a spoonefull at a time.

A Medicine for a Stitch or Bruise.
TAke three quarts of small Ale, and one pennyworth of Figs, and one
pennyworth of great Reisons, and cut the stones out of them, and one
pennyworth of Licorice, of Isope, of Violet leaves, and of Lettice of each one
handful, and seethe them from three, quarts to three pints, and strain it,
and so let the person drink it, and after make this Plaster following, Take a
quantity of horse dung, and a quantity of Tar, fry it, and put a little
Butter and Vinegar into it, and make a Plaster, and lay it to the side.

For the bloody Flux.
TAke of Sugar rosset made of dry Roses, of Trissendall, of each one ounce and
a half, mix these together, and eat it with meat or drink it with drinks;
but the best remedy J could find, is to take three handfuls of St. John's woort,
as much Planten, and as much Cressis, and seethe these in a gallon of Rain
water or red Wine to a pottle and strain it, then put to it two ounces of
Sinamon beaten, and drink thereof often. Also, take a Sponge and seethe it in
a pint of Muskadine, and wring it, and let the Patient sit over it close, as
hot as they can suffer it, and cover them warm.

Remedies for the Itch.
TAke of Salt Water a gallon, and seethe it with three handfuls of wheaten
bread crumbs that is leavened, and wash your body with the water: Or, wash your
body in the Sea two or three times. Or, else take the bran made of Cockle-seeds
three handfuls, and of the powder of Brimstone two ounces; boil these in a
pottle of white wine Vinegar, and wash your body therewith three or four
times. Or take a quantity of Brimstone, and a quantity of Allome* and burn
them on a fire-shovell over the fire, beat them very small and boil them with
Bores-greace, and so anoint the Itch.

To kill Lice or Itch.
TAke Quicksilver two penniworth, and kill it with fasting-spittle in a dish,
beating it well together, and put thereto four pennyworth of Oil of Bays,
and so anoint the place; this receipt will kill both Itch and Lice in the head
or body.

To cure the Crampe.
MAke a Ring of an Ox or Cowes horn, or of a Seahorse tooth, or of the Pizle
of a Seahorse and wear it. It is proved.

For a pain or swelling in the Privy parts.
TAke white wine Vinegar and Cow Dung, boil them to a Poultis, and when it is
ready put thereto oil of Roses; and if the grief proceed of a cold cause, put
thereto some Camomill flowers applied very hot.

Another. Take Commin-seeds beaten into to powder, Barly-meale, and Honey, of
each a like quantity, then fry them together with a little Sheeps suet, heat it
and bind it as a plaster to the Cods.

Remedies for Burning or Scalding.
TAke five or six spoonefuls of Sallet oil, and as much of Running water,
beat them together till they be well incorporated, then anoint the place
therewith and lay thereon a Doek leaf, it will both cool and heal.

Another. Take of the herb Periwinckle, fry it in a pan with fresh Butter,
fresh Grease, and Sheep dung newly made; when it is well fried strain it
through a cloth and it will be like Salve, then spread it on a Linen cloth as
broad as the sore is and apply it thereto. It will cure it, though it were
scalded and burnt to the bone, if it be taken in time, renewing the plaster
Morning and evening.

Remedies for the Piles.
TAke Martlemasse beef, dry it and beat it to powder, then put it into a
chafingdish of coals, and set it in a chair, and sit over it.

Another. Burn two or three Brickes red hot, put them into a Pan in a close
Stove and sprinckle Vinegar upon them, letting the party sit close over it that
he may receive the fume thereof into his fundament, doing this three or four
times if need require, will help it.

A Remedy for the Cappes.
TAke the oil of sweet Almonds one ounce, and anoint the place therewith; or
any of these things following is good, the powder of the rind of Pomegranets,
the Marrow of a Calfe, or a Heart, the fat of a Capon, Goose, or Ducke, and such
like.

To kill a Tett^r or Ringworme.
TRose d^ Arsmeg is good, and if it come of Blood exhaust two or 3. ounces of
blood or more if need require, and that Age, time and strength will permit; and
if it be Lupte, cut off the heads of them, and rub them with Salt and Garlic
stamped together, and then lay over them a plate of Lead.

Approved remedies for the Shingles.
TAke Rose Water, Planten-water, and white Wine, of each of them half a pint,
put all these together and wash the place often therewith. Or else take of red
Worms that come out of the Earth, and bray them in a mortar, and put to them a
little Vinegar, and so make plasters, etc. Or else take flowers of Camomill,
Rose-leaves, and Violets, the weight of each of them one ounce; of Myrtles, and
Sumack, of each of them an ounce and a half* seethe all these in white Wine
and make a plaster and lay it to the place, or else make a^ ointment of
Ceruse. J have taken Hous-le^k and have stamped it with a little Camphere and
put to it white Wine, and have laid it to the place and have healed the
Patient; also, the Oil of Roses, or the Oil of Violets is good for this
impediment, mixed together with the whites of Eggs, and the juice of Planten.

For the Colli^ke and gripings in the Belly.
GIve the patient Jeane Treacle, and pow^er of Cloves well sodden in good Wine
an^ ^^t them drink it very warn. Or, take the root o^ Lilly, and Horehound,
and seethe it in Wine, and give the patient. Probatum est.

A Plaster for the same.
TAke Lynseed and st^mp it* and Dock leaves and seethe them well in water and
make a plaster, and lay it to the grief very warm.

For a Scurffe in the Body.
THis Infirmity does come of a Choleric and Melancholic humor. For this
cure J take two ounces of Bores grease, then J do put in one ounce of the
powder of Oyster shells burnt, and of the powder of Brimstone, and three ounces
of Mercury mortified with fasting spittle; compound all these together, and
annoint the body three or four times, and take an easy Purg^tion.

A Remedy for a wild running Scab.
TAke Mercury mortified with fasting spittle three ounces, incorporate it with
oil of Bays, and anoint the body, or else take Mercury mortified three
ounce^, and of the Powder of Brimstone two ounces, the powder of Enula Campana
two ounces, and confect these together with Barrowes grease, and anoyn^ often
therewith.

For a Timpany.
TAke a pint of Broom Ashes, either of green or dry, and a quarter of an
ounce of Sinamon bruised, sift the Ashes, and let a pint thereof and the
bruised Sinamon lie in steep all night in a pottle of White Wine, then let it
run through a gelly bag twice or thrice till it run clear, put in some Sugar,
and a tossed unto it, drink thereof thrice a day, in the Morning fasting, and an
hour before Supper, and an hour after Supper.

For one that is in a Consumption.
TAke four ounces of Shavings of Hartshorne, one ounce of the Shavings of
Ivory, put it in a Pipkin with a Gallon of fair water, let it stand on the
fire twelve hours in fusing and boiling softly close covered, then take twenty
Eggs in their Shells, crack their Shells, and put them in a dish with Salt,
and let them stand an hour, and purge themselves then pull them from their
shells, washing them till they be clean* then put them in the Pipkin to the
Harts-horne, and let it boil two hours, then put in a good handful of
Raisons of the Sun stoned, half an ounce of ^iquorice scraped and sliced, and
a blade or two of Mace, boil all these till it come to a quart of Liquor, then
put in half a pint of white Wine, six spoonfuls of Rose Water, two
pennyworth of Saffron powdered, boil all a little while, then strain it, or
run it through a gelly bag, if you please you may sweeten it as you like it,
put a little Salt in it, when it is cold it will be a Jelly, you may take it
cold or warm three or four spoonfuls at a time, in the Morning fasting; at
four of the clock in the afternoon, and when you go to bed. If you do think
this too troublesome you may boil the Eggs in Broth or Milk, so you boil
them a good while and so drink the Broth or Milk as you like best, they are
exceeding strengthening and will do you great good if it please God to give
blessing to it.

A Medicin^ for one that is broken.
TAke a quantity of Comfrey, a quantity of Knee-home, a quantity of Knotted
grass, a quantity of Ribervorum, and a quantity of Polipody: stamp them
altogether, and strain them in Ale, and then give the patient the same to
drink cold, and trusse him up with some bolster and let his diet be but
competent, eschewing all slippery meats, as Butter and such like; provided
always, that the p^tient keep his bed six or seven days, lying upon his
Back, and sometimes hold his belly with his hand.

For the shrinking of the Sine^^s.
TAke the marrowe of a Horse-bone and the crops of Elders, and as much of Sage,
and chop them together, and boil them in the Marrow, and then strain out the
Herbs, and put to the liquor one spoonful of Honey, two spoonefuls of Aqu^
Composit^, and a quantity of Pepper, and boil it again, and keep it for your
use.

For the staying of the flux^.
TAke a new laid Egg, and take off a little of the top of it, and power out a
little of the white, and fill up the Egg with Aqua-composita, and stir it
together, and roast it, and sup up the Egg in the morning fasting: till you be
well use this.

A Medicine for a sore Thr^at.
TAke a pint of Milk, half a handful of Collumbine leaves, half a handful
of Gasell, a dozen leaves of Sinkefoyle, and two Jewes-eares; (and boil them)
and so the party must use it Evening and morning, and gargale it in his
throat.

For weakness in the Back^.
TAke Clary and Dates, and the pith of an Ox, and put them together, and then
put to them Cream, and Eggs, and grated bread, and fry them together, and
strew Sugar on it; and eat it in the Morning fasting, and you must put some
white Sanders in it also, when you temper it together.

For the Carbunckle or Impostume in the Head.
TAke Worme-wood, Origanum, Mayron* by even portions, and sees them in sweet
Wine, and after that wring out the juice, and lay it to the Ears of the sick,
with two spunges as hot as he may suffer it; use this two o^ three times, and
he shall be whole.

To take away Pock-holes, or any spot in the face.
TAke white Rose Water and wet a fine cloth therein, and set it all night to
freeze, and then lay it upon your face till it be dry: also take three Puppies,
the reddest you can get, and quarter them, take out the Garbage: then distill
them in quart of new milk of a red Cow, and with this water wash your face.

For faintness in the Stomach, or the Morphew.
TAke a quantity of Amber beaten to powder, and a quantity of English Saffron
in powder likewise, and put it into white Wine, and drink it seven or eight
times.

A good Fumigation for the French Pox* confirmed.
TAke Synaper two ounces, of Frankensence, of Liquid Storax, a dram and a
half, and mingle them: the manner how to minister this suffumigation is this;
You must set your Patient naked under a straight Canopie, and you must lay upon
the Coals the first part of your aforesaid Receipt, and the Patient must
enforce himself to receiv^ the smoke, keeping the fire between hi^ Legs
till he begin to sweat: and so doing the space of four days, till his Teeth
beg^n to ache.

Pills against Morbo.
TAke of all the Mirabulines three drams, of Troskes, of Colloquintida, of
Masticke of Digredium two drams, of Nigula* of Organy* of Cummin, two drams, of
black Elibore one dram, of Spike, of Euphorium, of H^rts-horne burnt, of
Sall-gemme half a dram, of Maiden hair, of the Coddes of S^ney, of
Pollytricon, of Galitricon, of the flowers of Rosemary, of Harts-horne, of
Epithiam one dram, of Coryanders, of Anniseed of Polipodium* six drams, of
good Treacle six drams, of Agaricke in Traskes, and of washed Aloes* tenn^
drams, of the Spices of Hier^* De octo R^bijs of the spices of Diarodam
Albatis, eight drams: Make a paste of Pills, with the juice of Femitory, and
honey of Roses, one dr^m.

To make your Drink.
TAk^ twenty ounces of Pock-wood, being turned of a Turner very small, which
put into an Earthen Pot of two Gallons, and put thereto eight pound of Running
water, the best you can get, and let it stand in soake four and twenty hours,
the Pot being covered, then take and stop the Pot with Paste, so close that no
air may go out, you must keep the ^tre^gth in it, and that is your chiefest
help, and with the point of your Knife make a hole in the Paste, and therein
put a peg of wood, which is to give it air, at times in the boiling for
breaking of the pot: and thus let it boil on a soft fire of Coals, the space
of six hours, in which time it will be consumed to a pottle; and that will
serve you for your Drink, to take Morning and Evening for four days, against
which time you must make more. After the first seething, sees the same Wood
again, with the like quantity of water and time likewise: and that is for your
common Drink, to serve at all times till you make new.

To make your Biscuit.
TAke four and twenty pound of the purest Wheat Flour, which you can get, and
put thereto one pound of fine Sugar, and so make your Biscuit, which will serve
for your turn all the time of your Diet.

A Receipt, and a Sovereign Diet for the French Pox^* Proved.
FIrst, prepare a Chamber, which make so close that no air ^^ter into it, and
defend all ill savours out of it, and therein to be twelve days together,
before you do begin your Diet, every day forbearing of eating, of Flesh and
drinking leese: On the thirteenth day you must begin your Diet, and then to
take a Purgation of Gassia Fistula, or of Scamonia, to make your Body empty,
keeping your Bed, sweating temperately, without any provoking: which sweating
is your greatest Remedy, in the which your Sweat, you shall drink of your
second drink as often and as much as you list: and of your first drink you
must drink every Morning at five a clock, and Evening at eight a clock,
eight ounces at a gulpe warm, saving on the day, you take your Pugation: On
which days, drink all of your second Drink, desiring always to be merry and
light-harted, in using often to smell to dried Orenges, hot Bread, Vin^ger of
Roses, Mustard, and Apples: and after this manner, you must keep your Chamber
thirty days together, and never to take Air, and at fifteen days you must
take another Purgation like to the first, and that day to drink all of your
second Drink: and in like manner, another Purgation the thirtieth day: on
which day, you may take Broth of a Chicken* or of Mutton, and by little and
little take the Air, and drink good drink.

The order of your Fare.
EVery day take a quantity of a Chicken, and seethe it in water, and put
thereto Borage leaves, or Borage Flowers without other Spices or Salt, or any
other thing* which Chicken eat to thy Dinner, and every day eat three ounces
of Biscuit, and no more; that which y^u leave of your Biscuit, eat at night,
with a few Raisins of the Sun* and your Dinner must be at ten a clock before
noone, and your Supper at five a clock at afternoon: and at your Dinner you may
dip your Biscuit in your Broth (if you will) and so drink your Drink as
aforesaid, and this is your Fare and Diet for the space of thirty days, and no
other.

A marvailous Secret to preserve a man from the Plague, and has bin proved in
England, of all the Physicians, in that great and vehem^nt Plague in the year
1^48. which ^rept through all the World: and the other in the year 1625. and
there was never any which used this secret, but he was perserved from the
Plague.
TAke Aloe Epaticum, or Sicotrine, fine Sinamon and Myrrh, of each of them
three drams, Cloves, Mace, Lignum Aloes, Masticke, Bole-armoniack, of each of
them half a dram: let* all these things be well stamped in a clean Mortar,
then mingle them together, and after keep them in some close vessel, and take
of it every Morning two penny weight, in half a glass of white Wine with a
little water, and drink it in the Morning at the dawning of the Day: and so
may you (by the grace of God) go boldly into all infection of the air and
Plague.

A sovereign Drink to preserve one against the Plague or Pestilence.
TAke the quantity of a Dram and an half of Powder Imperial, a dram of
Triakle and of Dragon water, and Sorrel water, of each of them an ounce, and
drink it with Ale in the Morning fasting, and if one have the Infection within
24. hours before, yet by Gods grace he shall escape it. This has been truly
proved in the last great Visitation.

Another. Take a dram of Methridatu^, and give it the Patient with Dragon
water, white Wine, or some other liquor to drink, when he supposes himself to
be first infected.

Another Preservative against the Plague.
TAke seven or eight leaves of Sorrel, and wash them in fair Water and
Vinegar, and steep them in the said Water and Vinegar a good while, and eat
them Fasting.

The Lady Gath, her Medicine against the Plague.
TAke Abaunce, Turmintell, Sage, Speremint, and Violet leaves, of each one
handful, and stamp them in a Mortar very small, when you have so done,
strain them through a strainer with red Wine, Claret or white, whether you can
most easily get, and lukewarm, and give of this water to the dito drink
seized.

An excellent Antidote against the Plague or Poison.
TAke two Walnuts, two Figs, twenty leaves of Rue, and one grain of Salt,
stamp them and mix them all together, eat it in the morning fasting, and you
shall be safe from the Plague or poison that day.

An excellent Preservative against the Plagu^.
TAke Sage, Herb grace, Elder leaves, and Bramble leaves, of each a handful,
take also a quart of white Wine, and a good race of Ginger beaten small or
grated, stamp the Herbs with the Wine and the Ginger, then strain it through
a cloth, take a spoonful of this Medicine every morning fasting, for nine
days together; after the first spoonful, you shall be safe for twenty four
days, and after the ninth spoonful, you shall be safe for two months. But if
it shall happen that you be stricken ere you drink of this, then take a
spoonefull of the water of Bittony, with a spoonful of it mingled altogether
and drink it* it will expel the venom, and if the sore door appear, then
take Bramble leaves and Elder leaves, of each a like quantity, stamp them and
make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the sore, and it will heal it with Gods
help.

A good Drink to be used to those that are infected with the Plague.
TAke Berries of Ivy (that are ripe, gathered on the North side of the Tree)
and dry them in the shadow: then stamp them to powder, then take a dram of the
same Powder, and temper it well with two ounces of Planten-water, or white
Wine, and let the sick person drink a good draught thereof, and remain in
his Bed, and sweat as much and as often as he can, after he has taken it,
then warm a clean shirt for him to put on* (and if his shirts may be shifted
often, it will be the better after his sweating) and likewise his sheets and
Bed-cloathes, if it may be, if not, at the least his sheets and shirt: and in
using of this for the space of three days together, he will dye or mend
without all doubt, (by Gods help.) This has been often and truly proved.

To provoke sleep to the sick person: Take a good quantity of Woman's breast
Milk, and put thereto a little quantity of Aqua-Vitae, stir them well
together, and moysten the Temples of the Head of the Patient, and the Nostrils
well therewith, and let it be laid on with some Feather, or some ^ine linen
cloth, and this will do much good. It has bin often proved.

And if it happen, that the sick person find himself greatly grieved, and
that any Swelling begin in any place to grow sore, then take Elder leaves, red
Bramble leaves, and Mustard seed, and stamp them all together* and make a
Plaster thereof, and lay the same to the Sore, and this will both draw and
heal. Or take two hand^uls of Scabious, and stamp it in a Mortar, then temper
it well with two ounces of Swines grease, that is salted, and the yolke of an
Egg, then stamp them all together, and laid thereto Plaister-wise, will draw
exceeding well.

How to break a Plague sore.
TAke black Snayles and leavened Bread, stamp them very well together, make a
Plaster thereof and apply it to the Sore, and it will br^ake suddenly by Gods
help.

When Medicines effect, give all the glory to GOD.
A Prayer.
O Eternal God, and most sure comfort and consolation in all Afflictions,
which he^lest the sick Souls oppressed with Sin, which ministrest merciful
Medicines to the repentant Heart, and do refresh the sinful sinn^rs, that
thirst after thy precious goodness, most humbly we beseech thee have respect
to our deadly Diseases, and purge them with that spilling of thy most precious
Blood, that we may be made clean and found in thy sight, to receive the
healthful salvation of our Souls, ^^d to rest with thy holy Congregation, and
heavenly Fellowship in thy glorious and everl^sting Kingdom, already purchased
for us, by thy only Son CHRIST JESUS, our only Lord and Savior.

Amen.

