THE CORRUPTION OF MIND.

DESCRIBED.

In a Sermon preached at Paul's the 24. day of June. 1655.

By RICHARD VINES Preacher of Gods Word at Laurence-Jury, London.

2 COR. 2. 17. We are not as many which corrupt the Word of God, but as of
sincerity, but as of God speak we in Christ. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at
the Sun over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street.

The Corruption of Mind DESCRIBED.
2 Cor. 11. 3. But I fear lest by any means as the Serpent beguiled Eve by his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ, or (...) toward Christ.
AS the mother of Christ truly was, so the Church of Christ may be truly called
(...) (as Clem. Alex. says) a virgin mother.

The fruitfulness of her womb to bring forth children unto God.

The fullness of her breasts to bring them up unto God, speak her a mother.

The simplicity of the faith, chastity of worship, sincerity of love, integrity
of life, speak her a virgin.

Christ answers the type of him the high Priest, Levit. 21. 14. A widow or a
harlot, he shall not take, but he shall take a virgin to wife.

And therefore it is the scope of the Gospel Ministers whom God sends (as
Abraham did his servant with Commission to procure a wife for his son) (...) to
fit and treat a match to espouse chaste virgins unto Christ, ver. 2.

Which scope if we do but carry in our eye, and aim at in our Ministry, we
should avoid the too much used folly, and embrace the successful foolishness
of Gospel-preaching. We may justly ask the cause of our Apostle his fear, lest
this Corinthian virgin should become a Thais; for unjust suspicion is a kind of
slander to chastity: and the question is, how the Apostle could say, I am
jealous; for the virgin was not espoused to him, but Christ's Ministers are but
the spokes-men, the (...), treating for Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. they neither sow
nor mow for themselves, therefore he takes off the doubt in that expression, I
am jealous over you (...), with jealousy of God.

And he gives the reason; The first Adams Eve was corrupted from her virgin
righteousness, and so may the second Adams espoused virgin (the Corinthian
Church) be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. Eve by the Serpent
which was Satanae leno, the Devils pander. The Corinthians by such Preachers as
he describes to be (...), 2. Cor. 2 17. Corrupters of the Word, as hucksters by
their mixtures do jugulare vinum, adulterate the viginity of good wine.

In these words you may consider two things:

1 The object of the Apostle his fear.

2 The instance or example, whence he draws a similitude, showing the way and
means of accomplishing that he fears.

1 The thing he fears is the corruption and constupration of this espoused
virgin, which corruption he describes,

1 By the seat of it, the mind, (...) lest your minds be corrupted, for the
foul vessel corrupts the purest liquor, corruption begins in the mind, as
they say the fish begins to stink at the head, and we know defluxions from the
head corrupt the vitals and lower region.

2 The term a quo is the simplicity or chastity that is toward Christ, which
they had before, and which is required in them that are espoused to Christ
Jesus, who are then corrupted, when they generate and deviate from their
simplicity of faith and worship; for, we cannot say of any of these virgins
espoused to Christ, as was said of that virgin, the mother of our Lord, that
before they came together, she was found to be with child by the holy Ghost.

2 The instance or example made use of for describing the way of corrupting the
mind from the simplicity that is in Christ, is the first and ancientest
example in the world, lest by any means as the Serpent beguiled Eve, etc. This
part of the Text contains the sicut and sic the As, So, and there are four
things in it.

As the Serpent, that is, Satan in his instrument; for the Devil appears not in
his own colors, the Serpent does not always wear the same slough or skin,
the Devil sheaths himself in a fit case for his purpose, for he is (...)
unsociable with man; therefore has his ministers, ver. 15. deceitful workers,
false Apostles, and these instruments he puts on, he tempts the proud by, ye
shall be as Gods, the sensual by the promise, liberty, and some by ostentation
of holiness; for, there is a Pharisaical, a monastical, a superstitious
holiness, a holiness of man's making, he tempts Christ by Peter, Come behind
me, Satan.

2 The Serpent beguiled the woman Eve, for the woman by the Serpent, the man by
the woman, the stronger by the weaker vessel, the husband by the wife; as the
Angler takes the small fish by a worm, and then that small fish taken does
become a bait for the greater fish; so it is said of his agents they lead
captive silly women, they deceive the hearts of the sipmle, Romans 16. 18

3 The way of the Serpents deceiving the woman, was by corrupting of her mind,
see its the Apostles observation, 1 Timothy 2. 14. that not the man, but the woman
was deceived, because she believed that God had enviously set them in a lower
Orb than they might be in, if they eat of the fruit of that tree of knowledge.

4 This deceiving of the woman was by subtilty, as it appears by many respects,
wherein the serpent prevaricated the words of God, and perverted their meaning,
this subtilty or (...), Cogging of the dice is ascribed to deceivers, Ephesians. 4.
14.

The sum is,

The Gospel-state of the Church is called a new Creation: I create a new
heavens and a new earth; in this new creation God has set forth another Adam
Jesus Christ, out of this Adam dying, as out of the first sleeping, God has
formed a Church, this Church is espoused to the Lord Christ, as Eve was to the
first as a chaste virgin, and there are Serpents now, as there was one then,
that attempt the corrupting of the virginity of this Church; and therefore
says the Apostle, But I fear, etc.

From the first part of the text, the thing feared, I take up two Doctrines.

1 The simplicity that is in Christ, is to be holden untainted.

2 The corruption of the mind is the cause of deviation, or recess from that
simplicity.

I begin with the first.

The virgin chastity of the soul espoused to Christ Jesus, which loves not to
be painted with any Fucus of meretricious gaudiness, simpleness or simplicity
in vulgar speech, and sometimes in Scripture sounds toward foolish credulity
or want of wit.

But in the true notion of the word it signifies a freedom from composition,
and so we call the simplicity of Gods being, which is without all composition.

Most commonly it is a freedom from mixture of heterogeneal things which might
adulterate purity. In Doctrine unlearnedness, in faith unfainedness in love
sincerity, in worship chastity, in life and conversation integrity, do make up
that we call simplicity of Christ, which I shall comdendiate into these three.

1 Simplicity of Doctrine. 2 Of Worship. 3 Of life.
1 The simplicity of Christ was personal; for being in the form of God, he
emptied himself, and took on him the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 6.

Official, in the acting of offices of his Priest, Prophet, and King, in great
simplicity.

Doctrinal, in the preaching of the Gospel.

Conversionall, in the deportment of his life.

But now I speak of the simplicity of his Doctrine, the Doctrine of the Gospel
which is a mystery that exceeds in glory, 2 Cor. 3. 9. and which the Angels
stoop down to pry into, and yet is in contempt as foolishness with the wisdom
of this world that which is a quintessence above al clementary learning, and
transcendent above every predicament, has been entertained with Stand thou
here, or sit under my footstool; whereas that which the Apostle calls vain
Philosophy, and (...), science falsely so called, has been entertained with Sit
thou here in a good place. The Doctrine of which you are born, is called (...),
incorruptible sad, and which you are nourished by, is called (...), sincere
milk, which denotes simplicity. Christ for righteousness, Christ for a root on
whom the branches do live dependingly, for the root bears them, and
derivingly, for the root feeds them is the sum of this doctrine.

Here is no mixture of Jewish rites, as if we would look for Christ in that
manger wherein he lay when he was a babe; the bird is now hatched, and the
eggshel lies empty.

Here is no corrival of man's works to spoil this simplicity, there remains no
place for them, as they are meritorious, for that sets them in the chair of
Christ; nor as they are motives of God to justify, for that sets them in the
place of freegrace, nor as conditions of the Covenant, for that sets them in
the place of faith, but as they are fruits of holiness, for that sets them in
their own place, assigned to them by this Doctrine.

2 Simplicity of worship, which is called spirit, and truth Job. 4. 23. not
Judaicall and shadowish, not Samaritan and idolatrous, but spiritual and inward.

The Apostle calls the Jewish types, which were rich, beggarly Elements, we
have them in the rich plainness of the Gospel. In matter of worship, that of
Austin is the truth, and Socrates had seen it before, colendus est quomodo se
colendum praeceperit, as himself has commanded.

Those that were mint-masters of worship, used to feign correspondence with
some deity, that under that reputation they might vend off their devices.

God must stamp that worship as shall be current, man is apt to indulge his eye
in Gods worship; It Is the hardest thing (says one) to leave our eye and fancy
behind us (as Abraham did his servants, when we go up into the monnt to
sacrifice.) The spiritual part of religion, is the hardest part.

If we look into Justin Martyr, and see how the dress of worship was changed,
by degrees we shall find, that it became at length quasi reductus in Ecclesiam
Judaismus, unbecoming the purity of this virgin.

3 The simplicity of life; It was an excellent testimonial subscribed by the
Apostle his conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 2. that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we
have had our conversation in this world.

The form of godliness, is but a Mathematical body, consisting of lineaments
only: Religion is practical and always married to honesty and righteousness
toward men; religious dishonesty is worse than a Christian married to a
Heathen; in the times we live, that saying is too true, universus mundus
exercet histrioniam, all men almost disguise and act parts.

Men either make it a stalking horse to their own game, a footstool to their
ends, a covert of gold for their filthy designs, or lodge it only in the
cock-loft of a cold brain, and not in the warm room of affections.

And the simplicity of Christ, is broken into a multiplicity of senses and
ways.

Let this Point for use recommend to Ministers and people both the simplicity
of Christ.

1 To the Ministry; for though this be not a place to teach them, yet it is a
place to teach you what to say, and what to expect of Archippus, videlicet the
simplicity of Christ both in the matter and manner of the delivery of this
Doctrine.

1 Simplicity for the matter of the Doctrine, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, says he that had sitten at the feet of Gamaliel; for (though that of
Justin Martyr be true, (...), All truth spoken by Plato or Aristotle is ours,
and that which is true in Philosophy; is true also in every place; yet) it is
of the seed of the Word, quod Christus nascitur in cord auditorum.

We must set bread before hungry souls, and not be like the Schoolmen, that
set men upon gnawing hard stones.

All learning may be spent upon the simplicity of the Gospel.

In breaking down strong holds, meeting with subtilty of men's hearts, raising
up the dejected Spirit prostrate under sin, counter-mining the methods and
stratagems of the Devil, and you will find that the old Adam in men's hearts
is too hard for young Melancthon, and who is sufficient for these things?

2 Simplicity for manner of delivery for painted glass is more gaudy, but
clear glass transmits more light, the rule is to clothe spiritual things with
spiritual words 1 Cor. 2. 13.

Its vain oil that is spent in strong lines, that hang together, as sand
without time, standing together as letters in the Hebrew, one not touching
another.

Let a crucified Christ be preached in a crucified Phrase, and though you preach
not with embroidery of silver and gold, yet surge and ambula, if you make the
hearer arise and walk, its far the better.

It is not (...), to divide the Word a right (a word taken from culling up of
the sacrifices) to shred the intrals into mince meat, or to put the text to
death and torment, so as to make the people eat the flesh with the blood; Keep
the true pattern of wholesome words.

The People
Are exhorted to hold fast this threefold simplicity of Christ in Doctrine
worship, and conversation.

In Doctrine; All Scipture centers in, and looks to Christ, both Old Testament
and New as the Cherubims to one another, and both to the mercy seat; he was
then swathed up in types, he is now unvaled in a rich plainnes of the Gospel,
those precious stones which God promises to build his Church, Isa. 54. 13. Do
all come but to this, All thy children shall be taught of God.

In worship, spirit and truth are better than Jerusalem and this mountain,
therefore be satisfied in simplicity of Gospel-sacraments, which as Duplessis
observes, have been made by men, the port-gates of superstition and curiosity,
because the eye has somewhat to do in them, as corruption began at the tree in
Paradise, and came in by the eye.

In life, that your voice be not only smooth, and hands rough; for practical
holiness is the life of religion, else we may have golden heads, and feet of
clay.

To conclude, let it be our joint aim, the simplicity that is in Christ, and
be not too indulgent to your ears, which has sometime been the vanity of
hearers of those Sermons at Paul's, coming hither for Jewels to hang in their
ears, rather then for wholesome Bread.

Let not the tree of Knowledge be preferred before the tree of life, lest when
you come to die, you cry out with Craesus, Solon, Solon, who had before time
taught him of blessedness without regard.

There is such multiplicity of opinions, that most men count it impossible to
reduce the swarm into one hive, especially because men usually lay so much
weight, every man upon his own opinion, not considering that the kingdom of God
consists not in meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the holy
Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Hence it is that one unchurches another, and unchrists
another, and solos credit habendos esse deos quos ipse colit, as the Poet
anciently leaves the question about the bigness, distance, motion of the Sun,
to Mathematicians, thou may have as much benefit by the Sun, as they that
altercare about them.

Above all things lay not the foundation of your communion in the agreement one
of another with you in all your private opinions, that is a principle that will
divide the Church in semper divisibilia, that makes the foundation of the house
of the twig of a tree, not of the body.

And peradventure, as there are not two of a hundred of one face, so not of one
opinion in all things extrinsecal, nay happily, says a learned man, not Peter
and Paul.

Certa sunt in paucis, (says Tertullian) fundamentals are few, they that make
too many of them, make the fewer Christians, if a man hold fast the simplicity
of Christ in Doctrine, worship, life; though not admitted into your fellowship,
yet they will be in your Communion through Christ, whether you will or no.

Doct. 2d.
The Corruption of the mind is the cause of deviation, or recess from the
simplicity that is in Christ.

This Point gives occasion to entreat of the cortuption of the mind; the word
(...) sometimes signifies plots, devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11 ordinarily the
reasonings, apprehension, judgment, the leading faculty of the soul, which is
the subject and seat of this corruption.

This is not meant of natural corruption, which is a part of original sin, for
it is the corruption of Gospel Truth formerly received, especially doctrinall
corruption: and therefore the Apostle having said; Christ, the same yesterday,
to day and for ever; presently adds, Be not carried away by diverse and strange
Doctrines, Heb. 13. 9.

The Text affords me three things, for the oopening of this Point.

1 The corruption of mind here feared, is of them that have received the
virgin truth; a sad thing that they that blossom so fair, should be blasted or
cankered; it is not corruption of life he fears, but of mind; many are
tainted in their intellectuals, that make a fair show in morals; the Apostle
prophesies of a time that will come, That men will not endure sound doctrine
(they will not embrace, nay, they will not endure it) but will turn away their
ears from the truth, and be turned to fables, 2 Timothy 4. 3.

2 This corruption of mind is to be feared, both by Ministers for the flock,
and also by parents and masters, yet there are few, as woeful experience shows
us; and therefore young men, and unballast are negligently suffered without
bridle to rush into the infection, as if it was nothing to have the leprosy in
the head, to make ship wrack of faith, to corrupt the simplicity of Christ to
bear that fearful brand, 2 Timothy 3. 8. men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith, The light of the body (says out Savior) is the eye. If
that be single, the whole body is full of light; if evil, the (...) bed is
full of darkness, the mind is the Pilot or Steers-man, and if we weigh truths
at a false beam, we may take and mistake the most desperate error for the
most precious truth.

3 The first point or step of recess and of deviation from the simplicity of
Christ, is the corruption of mind, how many stairs do men fall? how many
floores high, until they fall even into Atheism, from a zealous profession? A
reprobate mind is the punishment of a corrupt mind, To. 1. 28 They did not like
to retein God in their knowledge, therefore God gave them over to a reprobate
mind: therefore we had need to keep principles pure; for the cloud, that at
first shows, but like a man's hand may suddenly overspread the whole heaven.

The causes of this corruption of mind, are these and such like.

1 The mind being the upper region, is corrupted from the lower region,
passions, lusts, interests by ends, do bribe the mind to be advocate for
error, and mis-biasse the judgment; the staff that is straight of it self,
seems crooked in the water, by refraction of the species, or duplicity of the
medium; and we know that our eye or brain is distempered by suffusions of
choler, etc. from a foul stomach.

2 Ungroundedness in the truth, betrays the mind to deceit and error; and
empty barn is soon blown down; oh, that our people were so ungrounded in
Catechistical doctrine, which is indeed the reason, that they are an easy prey
to all kind of Sectaries, and do cedere occupanti (as I may say) fall to the
first occupant.

3 A mere notion, which is like light without heat, a winter-snow, a thing
without sense, and feeling of any powerful operation, and work of truth upon
the heart is but a slender guard from this corruption of the mind; a man
without much ado recedes from barren notions; he that feels the warmth and
power is not easily changed; they did not receive the truth with love of the
truth, and therefore God gave them up to efficacy of error, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.

4 A satiety or dislike of saving doctrine: when novelty is preferred, because
it is new, and ancient truth, like an old Minister, now adays is less
regarded; the stomach is crude and queasie, and so relishes trash better then
wholesome food.

5 The letting loose of wild reason to dispute out faith; reason is but a
Dwarf, too low to behold Christ, except it climb into the fig tree, and go let
sober men be content with that which is so frequently said, It Is written.

6 Pride of knowledge is very dangerous; the ancient pride is this, and the
Apostle thus expresses it, Eccles. 2. 18. being vainly pufft up in his fleshly
mind.

7 Unsuspitious credulity of others eminent in appearance of holiness, does at
unawares enwrap many well meaning men: The Novatians would not admit lapsed men
to communion. The Donatists would not bear with mixture in their Churches as
they pretended; both these sorts of men did bear a plausible show of holiness
in their opinions; but God does not approve a holiness of man's making; for
that which is indeed holiness must have upon it Gods superscription.

Use.
For the Use of this Doctrine, let me bespeak you in the words of S. Peter,
Epist. 2. Cap. 3. Verse. penult. Take heed, lest being led away by the error of
the wicked, (or of lawless men) ye fall from your own steadfastness. This
Caveat I might enforce upon you from diverse Topics or places; as namely, the
dangerousnesse of this disease which seizes on the head, from whence (as says
the Greek Proverb) the fish does first begin to be corrupted, as also from the
easiness of being infected, and from the difficulty of the cure: but having
spoke enough of the first of these, I will only use a few words concerning the
two latter.

1 It Is as easy to be infected, as it is for sheep to catch the rot by feeding
in rotten pastures; and our experience shows us, that one that angles with such
baits, catches more fish in a week, than preaching of Christ, and the
simplicity of him will catch in some years, for error has something in us, as
he that gave the reason for the faster growth of weeds than sweet herbs, said
that the soil was natural mother to the one, and but stepmother to the other.

2 There is no simplicity of truth, a multiplicity of error; the straight line
between point and point can be but one; the oblique lines, many; therefore it
is easy to hang upon one tenter-hook or other, that look so many and even
contrary ways.

3 Error is many times more specious to our shallow, proud, corrupt reason,
than the truth of God, whose depths and mysteries cannot otherwise be answered,
then with, Tu quis es?

4 The mint-masters of error do usually fashion their doctrines to
flesh-pleasing, and man-pleasing; ye shall not easily find that false prophets
did preach the burdens of the Lord, but rather as Peter observes, 2 Pet. 2. 19.
they promise liberty, which is so taking a thing, that looking humanely, we may
wonder that Christ preaching repentance, self-denial, the cross, should gain
any.

So much for the easiness of being infected; then next a word for the
difficulty of the cure.

1 The cure is difficult, because men are hard to be convinced of the sin and
falsehood, if with zeal and open profession they have maintained it; therefore
they in the Council of Trent (as the history relates) would hardly be drawn to
admit of any recess from their former errors, ne viderentur errasse, lest they
might seem to have erred, and so weaken the credit of all they held before, as
the crack made in Ice, uses to run further, then where it is first made.

But if in punishment upon them that receive not the truth in love, God do give
men up to efficacy of error, or do otherwise recompense their error, by
delivering them up to vile affections and lusts, Romans 1. 27. who shall then
pull off that fearful seal of God, that seals them up in stupidity, and under
a reprobate mind.

2 Therein men are great lovers of their own fancies; Amat quisque quod a se
repertum est, no mother but loves her own babe.

3 A conceit that errors of mind are not sin, as moral sins are, but there
are diseases of the head, as well as seated in other parts.

And certainly, these capital distempers do great prejudice to practical
holiness, being like suckers that bear no fruit, but do divert and draw away
the sap from the fruit-bearing branches.

So much for the first part, the object of the fear, lest the minds of the
Corinthians should be corrupted from the simplicity of Christ: the second part
is the resemblance of false teachers to the serpent, and this manner of
beguiling Eve by subtilty, lest as the serpent, etc.

From which words the Point is obvious.

Doct. 2.
As Eve was beguiled by the subtilty of the serpent, so are men's minds
corrupted by false teachers from the simplicity of Christ; False Doctors;
Satanae lenones, says one, they are Satan's instruments, as the serpent was,
the Devil his Pandors, worsting to the deflowering of Christ's espoused Virgins.

The wisdom of the serpent is commanded and warranted to Gods people, the
subtilty of the serpent is found in these subverters of the chastity of
Doctrine; I cannot, I may not spend any time in this point, for I have no sand
left; only observe,

1 That the defection, the corruption of men principled with pure doctrine is
feared. Gospelprinciples are not so much to be scanned by curiosity of reason,
as received in simplicity of faith

2 The Apostle alleges the most ancient example of corruption of mind that is
in the world; that which men call New Light is many times but some exploded
error furbisht up, and old ways are but acted once again. There is properly
no new truth, but there may be new discoveries.

3 What a sharp comparison does he use to resemble false teachers? unto the
devil his first instrument used by him; and therefore let no man temeraciously
say, they are holy men, they aim at more refined degree of holiness then
others: for it is no wonder, says the Apostle, that if Satan be transformed
into an Angel of light, his Ministers also be transformed or disguised, as the
Ministers of righteousness.

4 The Serpent took Eve at the beginning, and subtly ravished her of her
integrity, we must look to our selves; it is the usual time to set upon us in
our infancy of knowledge, either to disgrace the truth newly brought to light,
or to displant it before it do take root.

5 That corrupters come with subtilty, and have their slights, Ephesians. 4. 14.
they come with good words, Romans 16. 17. they beguile with enticing words, Col.
2. 4. they speak lies in hypocrisy: 1 Timothy 4. 2. they can wear the rough
garment, and sheeps clothing.

Their subtilty may be observed in the Serpentine which they imitate.

1 The serpent set upon the weaker sex, and the Apostle says, they lead
captive silly women.

2 They are subtle in being modest at first, mi^^ erroris sunt verecunda, Has
God said, Genesis 3. sa^ the serpent, the deceiver begins with queries rath^^ then
downright assertions.

3 They will take their rise from Gods Word, and rather wrest then deny it, as
the serpent here perverted those words, the knowledge of good and evil, to
another sense and meaning.

4 They promise magnificent and great things, they promise them liberty, says
Peter. 2 Pet. 2. 18. Ye shall be as gods, says the serpent, what great bubbles
are usually spoken of glory, joy, familiarity with God, etc.

5 They comply with man's pride, with self, etc. and fit the bait to the fish.
They allure through the lusts of the flesh, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 18.

6 They draw a man from practical obedience unto extrinsecal, and mere empty
speculations (for the theorie is pleasant and easy, but the truth is bitter

7 They bring points of faith, to thebar and test of captious reason: God in
the prohibition of this tree, had shown much arbitrariness of will, to make
probation of man's obedience, and therefore they ought not to have been
arraigned coram non Judice, as neither the clear points of faith.

The time pulls me by the ear, and therefore for close, as deceivers have the
Serpents subtilty, so get you the Serpents wisdom, and if I were to prescribe
prophylacticks or preservatives I would exhort you, 1 To hold the head, and so
to fortify the vitals from this epidemick infection, Col. 2. 19. 2 To pursue
practical doctrine, solid meat, and let alone these sweet meats; the tree of
knowledge is fair to look on, the tree of life better to feed on. 3 Affect not
things above the Word, a holiness, a zeal, a knowledge, above what is written:
Eve went some what further then Gods Word gave warrant when she replied,
neither shall ye touch it: so there are many will say, This is the holier way,
this is the better, not having any Word for it. 4. Avoid the house of
infection, the Fowlers net, From such turn away, says the Scripture, if the
woman will confer with the Serpent; you see what comes on it, it is the itch and
pride after novelties that exposes us to temptations.

FINIS.

