Regimen Sanitatis Salerni: OR, THE SCHOOL OF SALERNES REGIMENT of HEALTH.
CONTAINING, Most Learned and judicious Directions and Instructions, for the
Preservation, Guide, and Government of MAN'S LIFE.

DEDICATED, Unto the late High and Mighty King of England, from that
University, and published (by consent of learned Physicians) for a general
good.

Reviewed, corrected, and enlarged with a Commentary, for the more plain and
easy understanding thereof.

By P. H. Dr. in Physic, deceased.

Whereunto is annexed, A necessary Discourse of all sorts of FISH, in use among
us, with their effects appertaining to the Health of Man.

AS ALSO, Now, and never before, is added certain precious and approved
Experiments for Health, by a Right Honorable, and Noble Personage.

LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP, dwelling in Grub-street ne^^ the Upper-Pump, 1649.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY much honored, and nobly accomplished, Sir SIMONDS D'EWES
KNIGHT and BARONET.
SIR,
MAy it please you, Your singular love to Learning, and unparalleled studious
collecting, and preserving of venerable Antiquities in general, and
particularly of the Antique Coins and Medals of this (whilome) flourishing
(now) forlorn Kingdom of England, idque magnis sumptibus, and my poor and
unworthy self being lately made known unto your worthy Self, have induced and
emboldned me to inscribe or dedicate this Book unto you: It being a work that
has heretofore passed the Press, more than once; but never so complete, as
now it is, it having my deceased learned Father Dr. Holland his many
emendations and additions.

And albeit it is in a subject of Physic, De sanitate tuenda, and so out of
your studious Element: Yet the original Verses are as pleasant as profitable
to read, for all degrees of men; and no less, but more (for such as have not
bin in Latio) in English than in Latin.

The Stock-fathers of this work in Verse, were The School or University of
Salern; Inscribing, writing, and sending it to one of our famous English Kings,
And in those very Verses (as I have heard my said venerable Father eft-soons
say is couched the whole Body of Physic, Ad valetudinem conservandam, And the
Comment upon the same, in Verses, very profitable for the beter vnderstan^ting
of the Verses, was the work in Latin of the famous Physician Arnaldus de Villa
nova, a man well known by his writing to all of th'Apollonian Art in Europe.

Unto which Work, there is an Addition of Fishes, the more to illustrate the
Work, not unprofitable to read, and take notice of; as also some observations
of a Noble Personage.

Now, Noble Sir, Pardon, I beseech you, of your innate goodness, my boldness
herein; and vouchsafe or deigne the Patronage of it, which a victorious King
(of famous memory) has done to its Original: In an assured (presumed) hope
whereof most humbly takes his leave, and subscribeth

SIR, Your aged, devoted, and vowed Eleemosynary Servant, H. H. PH. F.
Londinopolitanus.

THE REGIMENT OF HEALTH, OR A Direction for the life of Man.
Anglorum Regi scripsit schola tota Salorni,
Si vis incolumem si vis tereddere san^^:
Curas toll graves, irasci creda prophanum,
Parce mere cenato parum non sit tibi vanum:
Surgere post epulas, somne ^uge meridianum,
Non mictum retine, non comprimo fertiter anum:
Haec been si serves, tu long tempore vives.
All Salern School thus write to Englands King,
And for man's health these fit advises bring.
Shun busy cares rash angers, which displease;
Light supping, little drink, do cause great ease.
Rise after meat, sleep not at afternoon,
Urine and natures need expel them soon,
Long shall thou live, if all these well be done.
THis right fruitful and necessary Book, was compiled at the instance, and
for the use of the most noble and victorious King of England, and of France, by
all the Doctors in Physic of the University of (Salern) to the intent, that a
man should know how to keep his body in health,

The author in the beginning of this books, teaches sight general doctrines,
the which hereafter he specissed, and also declares at length.

The first Doctrine is, that he that destreth health of body, must eschew and
avoid great charges, thoughts and cares. For thought dries up man's body,
hurting and leaving the spirits, in desolation and comfortless: which being to
lest, and full of heaviness^ dries up the bones. In this doctrine are
comprehended melanchollinesss and heaviness, the which do greatly hurt the
body: for by their operation the body waxes lean, and cold, the heart
shrinketh us, the wit and understanding waxes dull, the reason is troubled and
the memory utterly marred. Yet nevertheless, it is very expedient for sat, and
corsle folk, to be sometime pensive and heavy, that thereby they may moderate
the rank heat of their spirits, and make their bodies leaner and more flender.

The second doctrine is to eschew anger. For anger (in like manner) dries up
the body, and excessively chaseth and inflameth the members* And too great heat
as Avicen says, avidisi. 1 cap. (...). doct. 3.
dries up man's body.

Secondly, anger hurts, through heating, and inflaming of man's heart, and it
sets also the operations of reason. Some there be that naturally, either by
sickness, or chance of poison, are cold; for such folk to be angry, is very
necessary, for their bodily health, that their natural heat (by such means)
may be stirred up gotten and kept,

The third doctrine is, to eat and drink soberly: for eating and drinking
excessively, causes us to be unlusty, drowsse, and slothful hurting and
inseebling the stomach Many other inconveniences, as Avicen says, avi cap. de
vino and aqua.
grow and change through excess of meats and drinks, as hereafter shall be
declared.

The fourth doctrine is, to make a light supper. For too much meat veing taken
at night, causes and ingendreth gnawing and pain in the belly, unquietness,
let of natural rest, and other griefs, which we feel and see by experience,
the which hereafter shall be more plainly declared.

The fifth Doctrine is, to walk after meat moderately. For thereby, the meat
descends to the bottom of the stomach, where (as Avicen says) rests the
virtue of digestion. For the mouth of the stomach destreth food, and makes
digestion.

The sixth doctrine, is to eschew Sleeps immediately after meat, which causes
health, and avoydeth diverse jusirmities, as it is after showed in these verses;
Febris Pigrities etc.

The seventh doctrine is, to make water as often as needs: For be that keeps
or holds his water longer then nature requires; shall avoid it with great
pain, and so it may chance: That death should follow thereon as Avicen says.
Also to keep the dregs and superfluity of man's food any longer then nature
requires; avi did. 9. li. 3. ca. de difficultate mingendi.
engenders many inconveniences in the body. For the liver, and veing called,
Meseriakes, do dry up for the most part, the humors of the foresaid
superfluity, and so they be made hacd and cannot be avoided, and this causes
opilations in the guts, and ventostries: and so it may chance, it breeds
Impost^umes: as after shall be shown.

The eight Doctrine is, that one doing his easement, and avoiding the ordutes
and filth of the body, should not much force and constrain his fundament: for
in so doing, the Hemoroids, and Fistula shall greeve him, and the fundament
many times is misordered and thrust out of his proper place finally, the author
says, that who so will observe the foresaid doctrines, shall live long in good
health and prosperity.

Si tibi deficiunt medici, modici tibi fiant
Hac triamens lae^a, requies, moderata dieta.
When Physic needs, let these thy Doctors be,
Good diet, quiet thoughts, heart mirthfull free.
Here are taught three general remedies, whereby to confothe in health all
creatures, and especially noble men.

The first is. to live joyfully: for joy and mirih causes man to be young and
lusty. By moderate joy and mirth, youth is conserved, natural virtue
comforted, the Wit sharpened, and stirred up, and thereby man is more prompt
quick, and of ability to do all good and honest operations, For if is not said
without a cause, that our joy and mirth ought to be moderate; for when it is
without measure, it ingendreth death, both bodily, and ghostly. This moderate
joy is most couvenient for them that have much care and trouble, which joy may
be got by the use of delicate meats and drinks by avoiding of such things as
engender and cause melancholy, and also (as Avicen says in his eleventh Book
and Chapter) of the failing of man's heart, Avi did. 2 cap deff. cor.
By dwelling and accompanying among our friends.

The second remedy is Tranquillity of mind, of understanding and of thought;
for Noble men, through their great business and charges, are much more grieved
and troubled then other meaner persons: Great cark of mind and understanding,
destroys the natural rest of man, which is most expedient for Noble men for
they most commonly are naturally dry and choleric, and therefore for them,
rest and quiet is right profitable and convenient.

The third remedy is moderate diet, that is, to cate and drink moderately, as
after shall be declared, what inconveniences grow through excess of meats and
drinks.

Lumina mane manus surgens gelida lavit unda.
Hac illac medicum pergat, medicum sna membra
Extendat, crinem pectat, dentes fricet, ista
Confortant cerebrum, confortant caete a membra.
Lote cale, stae, pasce, vel insrigisce minute.
Sleep not too long in mornings, early tise,
And with cool water wash both hands and eyes,
Walk gently forth, and stretch out every limb,
Comb head, rub teeth, to make them clean and trim.
The brain and every member else these do relieve,
And to all parts continual comfort give.
Bathing, keep warm walk after food, or stand,
Complexions cold, do gentle warmth command.
Here are declared fix Doctrines which comfort man's brain and the other members
of the body.

The first is, when we rise in the morning early, to wash our eyes' with clear
cold water. The eyes would be washed, to clonuse away the ordure and
filthiness that hang in the bries of them. And Avicen says, Avi did. 13. li
3 cap. de conserva O cul^^um Idem did. 3. cap. deed. 6. Galen, li 3.
That the soveraignst thing to mundisie and cleanse, and to make sharp of
sight the eyes, is to open them, comfort, and conse^veth sight, and
specially of young folk The reason why the eyes must be cleansed with cold
water, is, because every thing must be conserved by that is like it. For Galen
says; That hot bodies have need of hot medicines, and cold bodies of cold
medicines; Considering then that man's eyes be cold of nature: it stands with
reason, that they should be washed with cold water, and not with hot.

The second Doctrine is, to wash our hands when we rise in the morning, for
they be instruments ordained, wherewith to keep and mundifie those Members, by
the which the super sluities of the brain be expulsed and avoided, as by the
nosethrils, the eyes, the ears, and other natural conduien, And therefore, the
hands specially ought to be washed with cold water, for the washing of the
hands with hot water, engenders worms in the belly: and specially to wash
them in hot water immediately after meat, Avi did. 16 li 3 tra. 5. cap de
lumbri.
as Avicen says, For the washing of the hands in hot water, presently after
meat draws the inward and natural heat of man to the exterior parts, and
so the disgesting is unperfect, the which imperfect digestion is the principal
cause that Worms be engendered.

The third doctrine is, to walk a little hither and thither, when we are risen
front rest that so the superfluities of the stomache, guts, and liver? as the
gr^sse matter of urine) may the more speadily be thrust under.

The fourth Doctrine is, competently after rest or sleep, to extend and stretch
out our hands, feet, and other limbs, that the lively spirits may come to the
utter parts of the body, and s^ cause the spirits of the brain to be more
quick and subtle.

The fist doctrine is, to Comb our heads in the morning, that the pores of the
head may be opened to avoid such vapors as yet by sleep are not consum^d: and
also to quicken the, spirits of the brain. Furthermore to comb the head is very
wholesome especially for aged men. avi did. 3. li. 4. cap. de debili visus.
And Avicen says. That to comb the head is wholesome, specially for old men.
Therefore one should daily and often comb his head. For often combing draws up
the vapors to the superior parts, and so divides them from the eyes.

The fist doctrine is to wash and purge the Teeth. For the filthiness of the
Teeth causes the breath to stink. And of the filthiness of the teeth grows
certain vapors, that greatly do annoy and hurt the brain^. Furthermore the
filthiness of the teeth mingled with the meat, causes the meat to corrupt and
putrify in the stomach. avidist. 7. li. 3. cap. de condent.
Avicen instructs and teaches us, how we may keep the teeth from ach and
^tinch. That is; To wash the mouth with wine twice a month: but to make the
breath sweet, it must be boiled with the root of Spurge: whosoever uses the
aforesaid decoction and medicine, shall nover have the Toothache.

In the last verse are certain general rules: the first is, that after we have
washed and bathed our selves, we must keep us warm, For then the conduits of
the body that is the pores are open: by the which cold will pierce into the
body and engender in us diverse diseases.

The second is, that after we have dined or taken our repast, we must for a
while stand upright, that so the meat may descend down to the bottom of the
stomach, and then to walk a little softly: for hasty moving drives natural
heat from the in^eriour parts to the outward, and causes ill digestion.

The third is, that one of cold complexion, should not warm himself too
suddenly, but by little and little, for sudden change hurts Nature: as
Galen says in the gloss of this Canon, Secundum mul^um and repent, etc. All
strong things and of extreme nature, do corrupt the body.

Sit brevis ant nullus tibi somn^^s meridianus,
Febris pigrites, capitis dolor, atque Catar^us:
Haee tibi provenient ex somno Meridiano.
Let little sleep, or none at all suffice,
At afternoon, but waking keep thine eyes.
Such sleep ingenders Fevers, Headache, Rheumes,
Dullness of Soul, and belcheth up ill fumes,
From forth the Stomach. All these harms ensue,
By sleep at afternoons, believe it true,
Here he teaches, that four inconveniences are engendered by sleeping at
afternoon.

First, the afternoon, sleep. causes and engenders Fevers, by reason of
opilations. For the natural heat and spirit of man by day, draws to the
outward parts of the body, and therefore digestion by day is but feeble: But
when the natural heat and spirits of man draw to the inward parts of the body,
then through their motion, the natural heat is stirred up, and therefore the
night is the very season of perfect digestion, and the undigested and raw
humors are the cause of opilations, which opilations engender Fevers, as
Avicen says.

Secondly, avi did 1. li. 9. cap de patri.
the afternoon sleep causes a man to be slothful in his operations and
business, by the reason aforesaid, for gross humors and undigested, cause
man's spirit flowly to move the body. For as a subtle quick spirit causes
lightness of body, so a lumpish or a heavy spirit causes a sluggish body.

Thirdly, the afternoon sleep ingendreth the headache. The cause of headache.
For the gross and undigested meat that remains in the stomach, does lift
up to the brain gross vapors, the which trouble and grieve it And of very
consequence, if vapors of gross matter be stirred up and caused, they must
also be gross: For Galen says in the gloss of this Aphorism, Qui crescunt,
etc. That it must needs follow, that all things be like those things of whom
they be engendered.

The fourth inconventence, is the pose and Rheums. Rheums be humors, that run
from one member to another, and as they run to diverse parts of the body, so
they have diverse names. For when the Rheum comes to the lights, they be
called Catarri: and when they run to the cheeks, they be called Branchus, and
when they run to the ^ose, they are called Coriza: as it appears in these
verses:

S^ fluit ad pectus, dicatur rheuma Catarrus,
Ad sances branchus, and nares dico Corizam.
Rheum, from the breast, ascending through the nose:
Some call Catarihes, some Tysick, some the Pose.
But besides the reasons of the Diseases before rehearsed, there be many other
reasons and more effectual. The diversities of Fevers.
The cause of the first inconvenience, that is of Fevers, which sometime are
called putrified Fevers and sometime Fevers Effimeras.

A Fever Effimere. A Fever Effimeras, is a day ly Fever.
is tagendred of vapors and smudge fumes kept and retained after the afternoon
sleep, the which abstaining from sleep. is wont to consume. Galen says, That
these Fevers Effimeras, came through faintness, drunkenness, Galen de art
curativa ad Glauc. 1.
anger, furiousness, inward sorrow, and other vehement cares of the mind: and
the Fevers that come by inslamation of the privy members, are of the same kind.
These Fevers be soon cured, as by bagrning and customable Diet. The putrified
Fever is engendered of the humidities in man undigested, and augmented by the
afternoons sleep. Calen says, Gal de art curativa ad Glauc. 1.
That Fevers ing^ndred of corruptions of humors, are called putrified Fevers.

The second inconvenience, that is, to be flow in operation and motions
chances by reason that by the afternoon sleep the humidities and fumes in
man, are retained about the Mushlas, Weyn^^, and Joynis, and also causes the
foresaid members to be astonyed and asleep, and therefore the vody after dinner
is slow and heavy in operations.

The third inconvenience (that is the Head ache) comes as is before declared
in the second inconvenience: that is to say, by the humidities and vapors
retained in the Body, through sleep and rest, which by such means, are troubled
and moved toward the brain,

The fourth inconvenience, that is Catharre, signifying all manner of Rheumes,
chances to a man, and greatly grieveth him through vapors and fumes, which
are wont to be dissolved and consumed by watch, and by reason of sleep, they
draw to the inward p^rts of man-and fume upward toward the brain: which fumes
engrossed by cold, return to the low parts or Caterrisans of man's body, Avicen
alleges many other inconveniences, avi dise 1 ^t. 1. doct. 2. cap 9.
and diseases engendered of the afternoon sleep.

The first disease is the Gawt and Palste, the which grieve us, by reason that
the humidityes, that are wont to be dried up and consumed by the heat of the
sun, and by watch, be remain still in the body.

The second is the color and corruption of the face, through the waterish
humidities, like unto man's urine mingled, with the blood; which waterish
humidities are wont to be wasted and consumed by watch, and by reason of
sleeping; they ascend with the blood toward the brain and the face, and so they
cause the face to swell, and to wax pale.

The third inconvenience is, that afternoon sleep engenders the spleen and
that by the keeping of the gross melancholy humors by the day rest. For as
watch with the hear of the day (which does open) gives moving and may to
melancholy humors, by the straight conduits of the body: in the day sleep,
lets and destroys the passages and proper ways of them, and specially it
destroys, and stops the conduties, that come from the Spleen to the mouth
of the Stomach, which are ordained to provoke man's appetite, by which conduits
all melancholy superfluities are wont commonly to be ^larified,

The fourth hurt is, that the afternoon sleep molifieth the deyns because that
the humidities, the which are went to be dissolved by the day watch, cannot be
restored; which so remaining in man's body do dry up the veins.

The fifth inconvenience is, that man by reason of rest or sleep, loses his
appotite, for lack of resolution of the humors: which resolution is the chief
and principal cause of the appetice. Another reason is, that the replenishing
and filling of the stomach with fumes and humidities, molifieth and shut teth
the mouth thereof.

The sixth inconvenience, that afternoon sleep does engender are Impostumes, by
means of humidities increased by the day sleep, the which draw to one member or
other, and so cause it to swell. Avicen says, that besides all these aforesaid
there be two other special causes, that prove the afternoon sleep to be
hurtful.

The first is, that the day rest is soon corrupted, because the beat of the
day, draws the corporal heat to the exterior parts of man: but the night
rest does clean contrary, for it draws the corporal heat of man toward the
inward parts. Of the which two motions there is engendered a violent motion that
disturbeth nature. And therefore they that will sleep and rest them by day, are
councelled to sleep in dark places and in some shadow.

The second cause is, that the day rest makes a man, unlusty, drowsy, and as
half afraid, and that by the changing of nature from his old custom that is,
from digestion of his meat; yet notwithstanding: that the rest or afternoon
sleep, is generally dispraised, and the night rest greatly commended and
praised; yet the sleep that is taken in the morning three hours before sun
rising and three hours after the sun rising, is not to be dispraised: A note
well worthy of the observing. Hypoc. in l. 2. Prog.
in his as Hipocrates says, second book of Prognost. Sleep convenient and
natural taken by night or by day, is allowable, and contrary is hurtful: but
the morning sleep of all the day is least worthy dispraise.

And albeit the day sleep, and at afternoon, are forbidden by Old Fathers and
Doctors: yet for all that, now a days, sleep taken in the day time is not
greatly to be blamed, specially as Bartrutius says, if these five conditions
therein be dillgently observed, The first is, if it be customably used. Five
conditions of sleep.
The second is, that it be not taken immediately after dinner. The third is,
that one sleep not with his head lying low. The fourth is, not to sleep too
long. The fifth, not to be waked over suddenly and fearfully, but with good
moderation.

Quatuor ex vento veniunt in ventre retenis,
Spasmus, Hydrops, Colica, vertigo quatuor ista.
When wind within the belly is restrained,
The body is by four diseases pained.
Cramps, dropsy, colic, giddiness of brain,
Wheeling it round: break wind and not refrain.
Here are declared four inconveniences or diseases, that come by long holding
of wind in man's body.

The firsst is, called the Cramp. The ventosities of the body run often amongst
the Joints and veins, and fills them with wind. Of the which filling, comes
retraction and wrinckling together of the veins And Avicen says, That the
cramp is a disease that lies in the veins, Avi. dic. (...)
by the which the members of man move and extend themselves. This cramp is in
diverse kinds, One is caused by replenishing, whereby the member is made short
and great, and wrinkling together like leather, or a Harp string, through the
matter replenishing the members. This manner of cramy comes so dainly There is
another kind of the cramp much like a Taboret, which enforces the member
(after his length and largeness to crumple together like parchment cast in
fire, This manner of cramp comes slowly,

The second inconvenience is called the Dropste, a material disease engendered
of a very cold marter, which enters and inflameth the members or places of a
man's body, in which is the regiment, that is, the digestion of ments and
humors, as in the stomach, the Liver, and the ^oyd places about the belly. For
dropsy never engenders, but when the Liver is corrupt by reason of blood.

There be three spices of Dropsy, Iposarca, Asciides, and Timpanites, and of
the Timpany these two inconveniences are understood. A Timpany (as says Master
Bar^^uce) is engendered of an ill complexion, by coldness of the stomach and
liver, which will not suffer man's drink or meat to be convarted into good
humors, but turns them into ventostries, which if they be not avoided by
belching, by sweat, or otherwise, they will stop the wa^s of voydance. Also
these Uentosities gather together between the places of the belly called
Mirach, Idem quod adonian.
and Siphach, and there they engender the Dropsy.

The third inconvenience is called the Clolick, a perilous and a painful
disease, it is engendrod in a gut named Colon. Like as the disease called
I^ica, is engendered in one of the guites called Ylion. And these two diseases,
are engendered by ventosities closed in the guts.

The fourth inconventence and disease, is the Head ache, called Vertigo, the
which makes a man to think that the world turns round: by the ventosities
which draw to the brain and mix them with the lively spirits and so cause the
said disease, called Vertigo, which as the name declares is a turning of
swimming in the head. And as Galen says. They that have the said infirmity,
are soon astonished, and with a little turning about they fall down.

And Avicen rehearses these incoveniences with other, Gal. de loass. cap 8
avi. did. 1.
and he says. That ventosities kept long, do cause and engender the Co^icke,
by reason they ascend up, and gather together, enfeeb^ing the Guts. And
sometimes they engender, the Dropsle, and sometime darkness of sight, and
sometime the megrim, and sometime the failing evil, and sometime it runs
unto the joints, and causes the cramy.

Ex magna caena stomacho sit maxima poena,
Vt sit nocte levis, sit tibi caena brevis.
Great Suppers put the stomach to great pain,
Sup lightly if good rest you mean to gain
Here we be taught to make a light supper. For too much meat lets
man^^tiaturall rest, and causes anguish and gnawing in the belly, and causes
the face to break out: and makes one to have a heady head in the morning, and
an unsavory mouth.

Here this question comes well to our purpase, whether a man should eat more
at dinner, or at Supper. For dafinition hereof is to be noted: that after the
quantity of the body (more or less) meat is convenient at supper or at dinner.
For either the bodies be whole and sound, or else sick. If they be sick,
either they incliue to material sickness or vnu^ateriall. If the sickness
be not caused through some humor: one may eat the more at supper because in
such sicknesses, nature only endeavoreth to digest the meat. If the sickness
be material, one may eat the more at dinner, as it is declared in the fourth
Treatise, in the fifth Chapter of the curation of falling sickness (...) this
wise.

He that cann^t be sufficed with one meal in a day because he is otherwise
accustomed, must divide his meat into three parts, in Trat 8 Much cat. dut cap.
5.
and eat two parts at dinner, and the other part after temperate, exercise at
Supper.

The reason hereof is this at such season the feeble nature has help by the
natural heat of the Sun to digest, and the superfluities thereby are more
resolved, wherefore the refecton should be larger at dinner then at supper. And
moreover, because the heat of the day, which causes digestion, joyneth with
the natural heat of man's body, (are there by day time) two Cundry beats to
help the digestion: but it is not so in the night. Likewise nature endeavors
her self most by night, to digest the superfluities. And therefore she should
not be hindered with the digesting of too much meat: And though it be so, that
the natural heat of man is in many things fortified in the night, as by
retraction of the Spirits, and reduction of sleep: yet that self same heat
cannot digest two diverse things, (...) the meats, and the superfluities.

Then it follows, that such folk should ease less at supper then at dinner.
At the bodye^ of such folk, seem whole, or else if they be very whole, strong,
and without any sensibility of super^^ities, avoiding all through their vigor
and strength as mighty big men: such may eat more at supper. For the nature
of these bodies labor only by night to digest the meat received: and not to
ripe the superfluities, for (in a manner they have none. Also they labor only
to fortify their Bodies, which wareth more stronger by night then by day:
because the blood and corporal spirits be engendered by night in a more
quantity, and better divided throughout the body.

If the bodies be not greatly disposed to health (as it is rehearsed) but are
disposed to be lightly sick: then, whether they travel and labor sore
continually with their arms and hands, or not, it is best they eat more at
dinner then at supper. For meat is not only taken to nourish and restors the
body, but also to make moist and to over-sprinkle and water the members that
(through great labor and travel) they war not dry and likewise to withstand
the dissolution of natural heat. Nor such labor and travel lets not their
true dig^stion. For we se^ by experience, that they eat twice or three in a day
with good appetite and good digestion. If the bodies be not apt nor disposed to
labor continually as the doies before rehearsed, it may chance two ways: for
of ^^er they labor very sore, but not continually, or else they labor feebly
whereby superfluities iucrease.

They that travel much, as in riding or going about their w^rldly business
should eat more at supper then at dinner: because the unacenstomed great
travail, will not suffer the meat taken at dinner to digest but does corrupt
it. Yea and further, through superfluous motion the natural heat is dissolved
and spread into every member of the body, which in the night-draweth to the
inward parts of the body, and is the principal^ cause of good digestion.

And therefore a good and large supper, is more expedient for them, then a
large dinner. Also, the same persons were not brought up (before this season)
in such great travail and therefore their bodies are full of bumidities: which
little meat at dinner, may resist the revolutions, caused by great motions and
travail. But in case they travall little and-easily by the way, to eat more at
dinner then at supper is best: as it is declared in sick bodies, for they most
commonly are feeble both of complexion and of digestion, and the heat and light
of the sun does comfort their natural heat and spirits. Also the reason hereof
is this the corporal conduits, and passages by day are open, wherefore the
superfluities of the body, are sooner expulsed by day then by night,

Further, they ought to eat but little meat by Night, for then, nature is
greatly busted to digest and bring to good point. And though the digestion to
digest, and great repletions of meats and the superfluous humors: be holy by
the night, yet nevertheless, the strengthening thereof is not sufficient to
digest great repletions of meats, and also super fluous humors, And know
withal, that the custom in eating much or tittlet adinner or supper, ought to
be regarded and kept, For custom is good and necessary, both for the health of
the body, Galen l. 9 de morbis curand.
and to cure sickness, as Galen says. For sudden change of custom is very
hurtful and specially for old folks. For nature cannot cannot bear, nor yet
suffer sudden mutation. But as Galen says; The alteration that is done by
little and little, Galen in seeun^^o Aphor. Hypo^.
is sure enough.

And thus it is well proved that we ought to eat more at dinner then at supper,
and that, because sicknesses are most commonly materials; yet for all that, if
a man could be consented with one repast in a day, it were better to take it at
a dinner then at a supper. For the repleation of the supper hurts fore the
brain and the eyes. And know beside, that not only the repleation of the
Supper hurts the stomach, but also all manner of other repleations; For they
ingendes Opilations. Fevers, Putrifactions, the Lepry and undigested humors.

And Avicen says, avi. did. 2 li. 3. cap. de his que nocent stomache.
That all manner of repleations hurt the stomach. For the great eater (by
repleation) augmenteth not his body, because he digesteth not his meat: but he
that eats mode cately has always some appetite, and encroaseth his body. in
regard he digesteth well his meat.

Therefore we ought to take heed. that we hurt not our stomach by over much
repleation, nor that we make not our selve purfle and the pulse to beat over
vehemently.

In like manner, Repleation that engenders loathing of meat^ought principally
to be eschewed, but especially when it comes of ill meats. For if it come by
ill meats, it engenders pain in the Joynte, in the reins, in the Lyver, and
the Gowt, and generally all other phlegmatic diseases.

And if it come by clean meats it engenders sharp Fevers and bot Impostumes

It follows then that this repleation must be eschewes above all other
things For as Galen says overmuch repleation, Galen in 3 apho. Hip.
portended strangling or sudden death.

Secondly, we must take herd, that we over till not our stomachs and utterly
destroy our appetite: but we must keep some appetite: and in especfull they
that have a strong and a good ^ppetite. Some there he that have a feeble
appetite, and they ought to eat more then their appetite requires.

Tu nunquam comedas stomachum nisi never is aute,
Purgatum vacunmque cibo, quem sumpseris aute.
Ex desideriopotere cegnoscerecerte,
Haec tria sunt signa, subtilis inore dieta.
Thou should not eat until thy stomach say,
The meat's digested, which did pass that way.
For the true use of appetite to feed,
Is natures diet, no more then shall need.
Here are certain commandments, the which he that destreth his health, must
of necessity observe and keep more duly, then eat or drink.

The first is, he should eat no manner of til meats, without his stomach be
neat and purged from all ill humors, by vomit or other convenient ways. For
if a man receive meat into his stomach, in the which are corrupt humors; they
will mingle themselves together, and cause the meat nowly enten, to corrupt.

The second is, to eat no more till the first meat that is eaten, be digested
and avoided out of the stomach. For there is nothing more hurtful to man's body
then to receive meat upon meat that is but only begun to be digested. For the
meat last taken, shall let the digestion of that that was first eaten, and the
digestion of the meat first taken, shall be first finished, which departs to
the Liver by the veins called Meseriakes, and therewith carries the meat last
taken, not yet well digested, whereof raw humors, and undigested, are
multiplied in man's body.

Further, in the Text are put two tokens, to know when the stomach in void of
the meat before eated. The first, is very hunger. And for a knowledge heteof,
know assuredly, that there are two manner of hungers; very hunger, and fained
hunger. Very hunger is described by Galen, in this wise. Galen in apho. Hip:
Very hunger (says he) is when a man needs meat: but fained hunger is an
appetite to have meat, though the body have no need thereof. And as very hunger
comes by contraction, and corrugation of the veins, proceeding from the
mouth of the stomach, by suggillation of the members needing meat, so in like
manner, sayned hunger is wont to be caused of them, that constratue, that they
should provoke the mouth of the stomach (the members having no need of food)
as by cold things, hard, or sharp.

And of this sign and secand precept precedent, Avicen says. No man ought to
eat but after he has a lust: Nor he should not tarry long therein when lust
pricketh, Avi. 3. doc. c. ca. de co qup. etc.
unless it be a fained lust; as the lust of Drunkards, or such whose stomachs
abhors meat.

For to endure hunger long, fills the stomach full of putrified and corrupt
humors. And after in the same Chapter he says. That whosoever do love their
health, should never eat till they have a true lust, nor till their stomach and
uppermost entrails be voyded of the first food that they took, For the most
dangerous thing that may chance to a man's body, is to receive meat upon
undigested meat.

The second thing that signisteth true last, The knowledge of true lust, or
very hunger.
or very hunger, is stender diet precedent: that is: small sustenance before
taken, for when hunger follows thereupon, it is very trus hunger,
Furthermore, ye shall understand, that to eats much, and of sundry meats
mingled together at one repast or refection, is worst of all: as of flesh and
fish. Chickens, and Pork, and afterward, to prolong the time in eating, For the
first meat, begins but then to digest, when the other meats are served into
the table: and so the parts of the meat be unalike in digestion. So that the
first taken are digested. ere the last that is eaten, can come to the midst
of their digesting, and this causes that some parto corrupt other some. And of
thie thing Avicen war neth us, saying: There is nothing more dangerous, then to
mingle diverse meats and sustenances together, and afterward to prolong the time
in eating: for when the last meat is received, the first is well near digested.
Avi. 3 1. doc. c. ca. de co, etc
Thore fore, the said meats in diverse of their poets (as touching digestion, be
not alike.

But yet know, that prolonging of the time in eating moderately (as an hours
space to chaw and swallow our meat, is allowable, and helps much to the
conservation of health. For good chawing and swallowing down is as good as half
a digestion, or else does greatly hinder it, but prolonging of time in eating
with talking and telling of tales, of the length of two or three hours; is very
hurtful, and therefore are engendered the diseases before rehearsed.

Persica, poma, pira, lac, caseus, and caro salsa,
Et caro cervina laprina, caprina, bovina,
Haec melanchollica su^t, infirmis inimica.
Pears, Apples, Peaches, Cheese and powdered meat.
Venison, Hare, Goats flesh and Beef to eat.
All these breed melancholy corrupt the blood,
Therefore not feeding on them, I hold good.
Here are delared ten manner of meats or foods, that engender melantcholly,
and are unwholesome for st^k folks. Of the which the first of eating of
Peaches: Gal. 2. aliement cap p.
Whereof Galen says. The juice of Peaches, and their material substance, is
soon corrupted and utterly ill. Wherefore they ought not as some say, to be
eaten atter other meats: because they swim above, and soon corrupt.

But this ought to be minded which is a common thing, that all things that are
moist, slippery and lightly goes under, should be eaten first, and so should
Peaches, which swiftly go to the bottom of the stomach, and make way for the
meats that shall come after. But when they be eaten last, they both corrupt
themselves, and also the other meats, And thus it appears, that this saying
ought to be understood of Peaches, eaten after other meats. For when they be
eaten before meat, they be good for the stomach, and they moliffe the belly,
avil 2 cap. de perficis.
and provoke the appetite as Avicen says: Ripe Peaches be good for the
stomach, and causes one to have an appetite to meat. And further he says:
They ought not to be eaten after other meat, for then they corrupt, but they
must be eaten before.

Likewise Serapion, in the Chapter of Peaches by authority of Dioscorides,
Serap, and Dioscor.
faith, ripe Peaches are good for the stomach, and they molifie the belly: but
when they be not ripe, they make a man costive and when they be dry they bind
sorer. And a decoction of dry Peaches, and so drunken does let the flowing of
humidities to the stomach and belly. To stomach blood.
And the powder of Peaches being cast upon the place where one bleedeth,
stauncheth the bleeding.

And although Peaches have these medicinable virtues aforesaid: yet because
they engender putrifted humour^^ they be hurtful to sick folks, and specially
when they be not taken culye. Peaches be cold in the first degree and moist in
the second. Dios, li, 1 de medi mat.
Dioscorides says. That ripe peaches are wholesome, both for the stomach and
belly.

The second thing, Eati^g of Pears.
is Pears, or eating of Pears. The cause is, because Pears, and generally all
manner of new, and raw fruit, do fill the Blood with water, that boyleth up in
the body, and so prepares and causes the Blood to putriffe, and by
consequence, is hurtful for sick folks. Pears as Avicen says, Engender the
Chollicke, But yet Pears (above all fruit) make folk fat. avic. 2 can cap
a^ pyris.
And therefore Hogs fed with Pears, are made fatter then with any other
fruit. And because Pears engender ventosities, and so cause the Chollick^
therefore they are used to be eaten with such fruit, that do break or avoid
ventosities: or else to withstand the ill operations of these fruits, drink
after them, a draught of old wine of good savor. And the sweeter savor that
Pears have, and the more ripe, the better they be. And also sodden Pears be
better then raw, and they may be sodden with Anis seed, Fennel seed, and Sugar.
Dios li. 1 de medic Plini in de not h^st li. 23. ca: 7. avi. 2 can, co. prim
Dioscorides says, That it is hurtful to eat Pears fasting. Pliny says.
Pears is an heavy meat of all other, though they be in health that eat them,

The third thing is eating of Apples: of which, as Avicen says. To eat often
and much, causes ache of the sinews. And also Apples have an ill property,
for they engender ventosities in the second digestion, wherefore they be
unwholesome for sick folks, and also for the like cause as it is before
rehearsed of Pears. And these sayings touching the vnwholsomenesse of Pears
and Apples, ought especially to be understood when they be raw, and not when
they be sodden or tosted, and not only these fruits should be eschewed of those
that be sick, but also all other fruits that fill the blood with boiling water,
as new fruit, of which the juice boyleth in a man's body, as if it were Must or
new wine; for you may seeby experience, that the juice of new gathered fruit
boyleth when it is put into a vessel, by reason of the heat of the Sun that
remains in them after their riping. These new fruits, through boiling of
their juice do cause the blood to putrify, although they comfort a man's body
with their moisture, when they be eaten. And for this cause most especially.
Avicen forbids them the eating of fruit, which have the Ague, for he says,
That all fruits hurt them that have the Auge, avi di. 4 ca, de universe. cura^
through their boiling and corrupting in the stomach.

The fourth thing, is eating of Milk: the cause why eating of milk is not good,
is because it is lightly corrupted and turns unto fume or sharpness in the
stomach, as in their stomachs especially that are diseased with putrified
Fevers, and therefore they that have a putrified Fever, are forbidden eating of
milk.

And as Hipocrates says, Hip: ophe: lac dare.
It is hurtful for them to eat Milk that have the Headache, for them whose
Gutts suspensed to rumble, and for them that be very thirsty. Yet
notwithstanding, in some diseases, Hippocrates says, Milk is agreeable for
them that have the Tysick, caput dolenti, etc.
the Fever Ethick, and for them that be in a Consumption. And also hereafter
following, something more shall be said when we come to Lac Ethicis, etc. And
although milk in the foresaid diseases is blamed, yet in them that be whole, it
is allowable, and that if it be well digested in the stomach and liver And
Galen says. That milk well sod does both nourish and ingonder good humors.
Gal. in ap hip. lib. (...).


Also milk by reason that it is waterish it washes the intr^^^ and by reason
it is b^ttry it mundifieth, and striv^th against venomous humors, and
moystneth the members, and allienateth the greifes of the breast and it does
mittigate the shooting or pricking of the Lungs, Guts, Reins, Entrails, and the
bladder, and it is good against pricking humors in the Entrails.

Furthermore milk is good for temperate bories, whose stomark is clean from
choleric and flematick humors. For unto such folks. Milk well digested is
great nourishing, it ingendre^^ good blood, it nourishes the body, and
conveniently moystneth and makes fair the exterior parts, as Isiac says, in
the universal dyets. And there also he says by authority of Ruffus. That they
that will drink milk, must drink it fasting, and it must be drunk hot from the
Cow: and to eat nothing (...) that be digested^nor one should not then labor,
no^sur about much. Yet seldom or at any time one would forbear walking: but
then one must walk aneasi^ pace till be perceive it be descended to the bottom
of the stomach.

But milk is unwholesome for those bodies that be distempered: for in hot
bodies it is soon turned into chollericke sumostly. In such as be cold, it
turns to sharpness and putr^^action. Also milk is unwholesome for an
unclean stomach, for therein it corrupts. Galen says. That he knew a man,
Gal. de sanit^^^e (...) in lib.
that by the daily use of milk had a stone bred in the reins of his back: and
another that lost all his teeth. And some he knew, that used to eat milk
continually, without hurt. Yet to some it was very wholesome, as to an
husbandman, that lived above an hundred year, and his mast food was milk: and
another, that thought to do so likewise sound it always hurtful to him.

Touching the choice of milk, choice of milk.
it is to be noted, that mean milk is to be chosen for nourishment, and not
thin milk as milk of a Camel, or of an Ass neither the most fat and gross is
to be chosen, as milk of kine and sheep, but rather Goats milk should be
chosen. For it is not so waterish as Camels milk, the which is not apt to
nourish, by reason of humidity, and it makes a man to lask. Nor it is not so
fat, nor so gross, nor so full of cruddes and butter, as Cow milk and Sheep
milk is: which by reason of their fatness stop the veins, and engender
ventosities, and is stop the veins, and engender ventos^ties, and is more
harder of digestion, then is requisted in the governance of health Therefore
milk of a Goat not too near kidding time, nor too far from it, and that
goes in a good pasture and when pastures be at the best should be chosen. Gal.
de sanitat^ li. 5.
The pastures as Galen says, where the beasts go do help much the goodness of
the milk.

The fifth thing is eating of Cheese: Eating of cheese.
and it may be understood of all sort of Cheese but especially of old cheese.
The reason is because new Cheese is cold moist, and of gross substance and
hard of digestion: and ingendreth epilations of the stone and helps or
conserveth man's health (^y way of nourishment) but very little or nothing. And
old Cheese is hot and dry, and by reason of the salt therein, it causes
degestion; but yet of it self it is hard of digestion, and of small
nourishment, and hurts the stomach, What cheese i^^est.
and dries over sore, and agrees worse then new Cheese. But Cheese b^twetne
both, neither new nor old, nor too tough, nor for b^ittle, too hard, nor too
soft, too sweet, nor too sower, not too salt, nor too full of eyes, of good
tallage and of good savor when it is cut, which tarryeth not long in the
stomach, made conveniently of good milk sufficiently oily: is good, and
should be chosen before all other, whereof (after meat) we should eat a little
quantity, for much in quantity, in way of nourishment, is universally ill, and
hurts the stomach and will not digest, but engenders epilations, the stone
in the reins, gross humors in the body, and venta st^ies, Therefore that
Cheese'is only good, that comes out of a nigga^rds hands.

The sixth thing, Salt meat. Gal, de locis affect, li. 3. avi 3, do, 2. ca, 15.
is Saltmeat, dried with salt or smoke, or of what kind of beast soever it be,
it engenders gross blood and melancholy, and so per consequens, It is not
wholesome for sick folks: nor is it not wholesome for them that he whole. For as
Avicen says, Salt flesh nourishes but little, and it is gross and ingendreth
ill blood.

The seventh thing is Haris-flesh, which likewise engenders melancholy blood,
Harts-flesh:
as witnesses Rasis Alaman, 3. Chapter de animalibus silus stribus and
domesticis.

The eight thing is Hare flesh, Hares, Gal. de locis affect l, 3
which likewise engenbreth melancholy blood, as Rasis says in the place before
alleged. This flesh engenders more melancholy then any other as Galen says.
And of this Jsaac, in dietit vniversalibus, says, the Hares-flesh, should not
be eaten as meat, but only used in medicines. And know beside, that Hares
flesh, and Hearts flesh when they be old, ought utterly to be eschewed, yet
neverthelesss they may be eaten, and they be best before calving time, that
their dryness may be tempered with the age.

And yet they ought to be eschewed, except they be sat: for their dryness is
tempred with their fatness.

The ninth thing is Goats flesh.

The tenth is Ox flesh: Goats flesh. Oxe-flesh.
for both these be melancholy fleshes, For Isaac. in de univers. says: Goats
flesh and Ox flesh be worst, hardest, and slowest of digestion, and when they
be digested they engender gross blood, and melancholy. And Avicen, in his
second Canon of Goats flesh, says: Goats flesh is not very good, and
perchance the humor is very ill. And likewise ye shall understand, of Goats
flesh and Cowes flesh, Goats flesh, Ox flesh. avi. 2. can: ca, de Cor.
the which are worse than the foresaid fleshes, Goats and Ox flesh. For of
them. Avicen says. Cow flesh, Hearts flesh, wild Goats flesh and great Fowls,
do engender Fever Quartains. And yet further be says of Cow. flesh. That Cow
flesh nourishes much, and engenders gross melancholy, and mel^choly
diseases. And he says further, Cow flesh engenders Lepry. And of Goats flesh
he says, That it is absolurely ill,

And forasmuch as it is touched in the Text what Fleshes should be eschewed,
especially of four-footed Beasts: me thinks it were convenient to show, what
flesh of sour footed Beasts are to be chosen. Yet in the choice of fleshes,
Physicians agrce not. For Galen and certain other say, choice of flesh
that Pork is best. Some other, as Avicen, Rasis, and Averrois say. that kids
flesh is best. Yet notwithstanding, Averrois in the first Col. blames Avicen
because he says that Pork was best: yet he said it not, as though he held
therewith, but after the Christian opinian. Some other praise Weal above all
other.

A man may know the best flesh of four-footed Beasts, and the goodness thereof
by many manner of ways. First by great nourishing, which thing be tokeneth
hard digestion and by the likeness of man's flesh, and in this trise Pork is
better than any other flesh.

First, for the likeness unto man's flesh, as witnesses Galen 3. Alimentor,
where he says, That Pork is like man's flesh. and may be known, by that many
have eaten man's flesh in stead of Pork, and could not perceive it. neither by
the savor nor by the taste, but that it had been Pork. avi: 2. can: ca, de: san,
And Aviced says Man's blood and Hogs blood be like in every thing. So that
there have been, that have sold man's flesh in s^ead of Pork, which thing was
not spyed till a man's singer was sound among the flesh, Averrois writes the
same.

Secondly, Porke nourishes greatly. For Galen says 3 Alimoncor, aver. 5^ col.
cap de cor^.
That Porke above other flesh nourishes most? whereof those that be called
Athlete, have best experience. And after in the same book he says: One can cat
no meat, that nourishtch more then Pork.

Thirdly, Porke engenders a steadfast and a strong nourishment, that resists
resolution. This is Galens opinion, in the places before rehearsed, where he
prefers Porke above all other flesh: and in his 8. book, Dei^genio, he
says, Pork of all Flesh is most laudable so that it be wild brought up on
Mountains: and next unto Pork is Kid flesh. And like wise in 5. te^a. he
says. Of all flesh of four footed Beasts, Porke is most laudable, which is
temperate in heat and moisture, and ing^ndreth better blood then any other
flesh: so that it be of young Swiae, that is of a year or two old, whether it
be will or tame. Nor young Suckets are not so good: for their flesh is most
moist And of a more likelihood, wild Pork brought up in the Woods, is better
then tame brought up at home, for same Pork is more clammy then it ought to be.

And of Wild H^g^ Flesh, or Bo^^e. Avicen ^a^th: Christian men and their
Followers say, avi, 2 can de cap. The best Hog-flesh.
that the best Wild Flesh that is, is of Wind Swine. For besides that it is
more light then the tame Swines Flesh, so it is of more strength. and much more
nourishing and more sooner digesteth: and in winter there can be no better flesh

So then it follows, that Hogs flesh is right good and wholesome for their
bodies that be young, whole, strong, occupied in labor, and not disposed to
opilations, and for them that desire to be fat: ^^man ca vi^^n t^ carnium. avi
3 (...) capi^ d^^^gim eius quod comdoijur.
for such have need of much nourishment, and are hard of digestion. And
therefore Rasis says: Gross flesh is convenable for them that labor much:
clean flesh, is best for them that do contrariwise. Avicen wills the tame,
saying: They that labor much may better away with gross meats then other.

The choice of good Flesh stands in three things in temperance of complexion,
in lightness of digestion, and ingendring of good blood: that is to say, the
better flesh is of temperate complexion, it is lightest of digestion, and
temperate eat in ingendring blood between hot and cold, slenderness, and
grosseness. And for this cause Kids flesh is better and more laudable then any
other flesh after the mind of Rasis, Rasis 3 a^^^^ ca de adima silvestrious
(...) ^omes^.
Avicen, and Averrois. For Rasis says: Kid flesh is temperate, without any ill
mixtion; the which though it engen dreth temperate blood, yet it is not
convenient for Laborers, but yet for all that there is none other flesh should
be preferred before it. It is not so weak that a man's strength is diminished
thereby, nor the nourishing thereof is not so much gross, that repleation
should come of it, or gross blood be engendered. The blood also that is
engendered thereof, is between subtle and gross, hot and cold: nor this flesh
is not meat for great Laborers, but yet for temperate young folites, the which
use mean exercise. For this flesh ingendreth blood, that by mighty exercise or
labor is soon resolved but not with mean travail. And Galen says: Gal de
samiate tuendali 5
That Kids flesh is not wholesome for an old man:

And touching the intention, as Kid flesh is better then any other Household
Flesh; so Goats flesh is better then any other bred in the Woods. And next to
Kids flesh, many Physteians as Rasis and Averrois, put Mutton. And Averrois
says, that most part of Physirians are of this opinion, averrois 5. c^l ca
decarae. Gal de samiate tuendali. ^
save Galen, who commends not P^tton. For be says, That Mutton is notill for
young folks, but it is unwholesome for old folk. And he thinks that Veale
nourishes more then Mutton. And peradventure. Galen understands here the
bitterness of nourishment, of that that is to nourish much and to give
nourishment more hard of Resolution, which more agrees unto Veal then Mutton
since Mutton is of more humidity.

Thirdly, the goodness and choice of Flesh, may be taken by reason of their
small clamminess, and by their good savor: And herein Veale is better then any
other flesh. And Averrois to this agrees, saying: Veale is good Flesh, for as
much as it is not clammy, cold, nor dry, as Beef is. averrois 5 e^. cap de
carne.
And Veal has sweeter savor then any other flesh, and in these points it is
better then Rid flesh; for in Hid flesh one ^ay perceive a clamminesse before
it is sodden, and because Veale ingendreth better humors, it is betier then
Rid Flesh. And thus it appears plainly, what thing causes controversy
among the Ph^sitians, touching the c^oice ^^^eshes.

The controversy in choice of flesh.
Further know, that the flesh of a dry complexion, is better hear calving time
then far from it: And there fore kids and Calves be better then Goats and Oxen
because their dryness is ahated with the humidity of their youngnesse. But
flesh of beasts of moist complexion, is better and more wholesome in age then
in youth for great part of their over much humidity is dried away as they do
increase in age; and therefore Weathers of a year old are less clammy, and
more wholesome then tucking Lambs.

And likewise Porks of a year or two old, are better then young P^gges. And
therefore Avicen says: It behooveth that the Meat that conserveth health
should be such as the flesh of Kid, avi 3.1. ca de re erus; quod comeditur.
or a sucking Calls is, or Lambs of a year old. Then by these rea; sons it
appears, that the flesh of Goats Male and Female, of old Mution, of Beef of
old Pork, and especially of Brawn, of Pigges, no of sucking Lambs, is not very
wholesome for the conservation of man's health: but the flesh of young Calves,
of pearling Weathers, and Porke of a pear or two old, is conveniene enough to
eat, to prolong man's health.

And it is to be well noted that the flesh that is inclined to dryness must be
sod, and the flesh that inclined to humidity. must be roasted, thereby to
temper their dryness and humidity. And therefore the flesh of Conies and
Hares, Hearts, Calves, Kids should be sod: and perk and lamb roasted. And by
this reason it appears that in moist seasons, for moist complexions, flesh
disposed to dryness should be roasted: and in dry seasons, and for
complexions, flesh dry and old, moist meats be more convenient.

Ovarecertia vina rubentia pingnia jura,
Cum ijs simtlia pura natura sunt nalitura.
Your new laid Eggs, brisk, cheerfully colored wine,
And good fat broth in Physic we define.
To be so wholesome, that rheir purity,
Does nourish nature very soveraignly.
Here in this Text diverse nourishing meats are expressed, The first, is new
laid Eggs, which be of that sort of foods, that in a little quantity
nourishes much. For Avicen says, That things small in quantity, and great of
nourishment, Avi. 2. caned. dc ovis and (...) ca. 1
are Eggs and Cock stones,

Touching the choice of Eggs, know that the Eggs of Hens, Partridges, and of
Pheasants young and fat are very good in the Regiment of Health and simply
better then any other eggs: for the Priests daughter said. That long Eggs and
small, were the best of all, as in Verses.

Filia presbyteri jubet pro lege toneri,
Quod bona sunt ov^, candida, long a, nova.
The Priests fair Daughter, held it a Law most true,
That Eggs be best, when they are long, white, new.
Further, potched Eggs, are better then Eggs roasted, bard or ters, and they be
of great nourishment, and of good and light digestion, and they engender blood,
specially proportionable to the heart: wherefore they be exceeding good for
such as be recovered from sickness, for aged folk, and for weak persons, and
specially the yolk. For Avicen says: av. in tract de virihus cord^^.
That the yolke of Eggs, and of Fowls, whose Flesh is good to be eaten, as of
Hens, Partridges, and Pheasants, though they be not medicinable for the heart,
yet they comfort it very much. And has adds following: That they be lightly
turned into blood, and after they qe turned, there remains of them but small
superfluity. And therefore, they comfort most especially the heart.

And further be says: That they be excellent good to restore the spirits and
blood of the heart.

Rere roasted Eggs are lightly digested, and they ease the Lungs and the
breast, and mollify the Belly temperately; but they nourish not so much as
poched Eggs do. Hard Eggs sodden are hard of digestion, and they nourish the
body grossly, descending slowly to the Stomach, and slowly they enter therein.
Further know, that the Eggs (by the dressing of them) are made better or
morse: Dressing of ^g^,
For either they be roasted, sodde alone, or fried, or sodde with some broth.

Roasted Eggs be more gross then todde, and more bard of digestion; for the
Harth or fire dry^th up the Substance of their humidity And they be roasted two
ways: One is in the Shelles taken in the hot Imbers: Another way is they be
roasted standing on Imbers, with their shells a little broken. But they that be
broken, be worse then the other, and they that in the shells be raked in bot
Imbers, are done two manner of ways, either they be all raked in the Imbers,
or set upon Imbers and Coals, with part uncovered. They that be all covered,
are worse; for by reason that the heat of the fire goes about them, the
fumosities are kept still in and they that be set upon the Imbers and part
uncovered, aboyd out the sumosities, whereby they be purified. They be better
sodden in water then roasted, for the humidity of the water, striveth with the
heat of the fire, that dries by their humidity. And thus they be dressed two
ways: for either they be sod in the Shells or elle broken in the water. They
that be sodden in the Shells, are worse then the other. For the Shells do let the
dissolution of fumosityes and grossenes. When they be poched, the bent of the
Water temperately pierces in, and makes more pure their grossness, and
takes away the ill smell and savor. Wherefore poched Eggs be most wholesome:
for when they be tried, Rasis opinion indict universe.
they engender most ill humors, and hurt the stomach, and causes sumosity
and corruption, and makes one to loath his meant. But good eggs sod in some good
broth, are betweens both roasted and poched.

Also know that there is a Diversity in one Eggs, Gal de mord^s cur^ndis li 12.
Rasis 3 almen. ca de virtute Oce. rum
touching his compound parts. For the Yolk is temperatel^ hot: The white is
cold and clammy, and hardly digesteth and the blood also thereof engendered, is
not good. And as the foresaid Eggs, that is to say of Hens. Partridges, and
of Pheasants, be more couvenable in the Regiment of Health; so Eggs of Duckes,
Geese. Shovelards, and such like fowls are unwholesome in the Regiment of
Health and should be eschewed.

The second thing, is red, or Cheerful colored Wine, Gal super 1 (...) 3
part Reg acuterum Red-wine.
And here ye shall understand that Wines differ in their to lour, for some
Wines be White, some be Claret, some be Citrine, and some be black. White Wine
is seebler then any other, colder, and less no arishing, but it does least
hurt. the head and it does provoke a man to his urine, better then any other
wine. That White Wine is weaker then other wines, it appears by this that
Galen says: Weak wine is it, that least heateth or inflameth, and less
grieveth the brain then other. And Garen says: It is impossible, that White
Wine should greatly inslame any man. And be says, White Wine inflameth or
heatech least of all Wines. Which thing is true, if one will make comparison
between White Wine and Red, both of one Courtry growing, and none otherwise.
For the Red Wines of France are not so hot nor yet so strong, as the White
wines of some other Cenutry.

And therefore, the comparison must be made, betwoene the Wines of one manuer
and Country, and White Wine nourishes less then other Wines do. Gal. in Hip
aph. iih 2.
For Galen says Waterish, slender, and White Wine. is universally, neighbor
to Water. and as touching nourishment, is like Water whereby it provokes one
to Urine, Gal. in Hip. Aph. ^ib. 2.1 avi. 3.1. doc. 2 ca. de reg. aqua and
vini. Gal. in con. 3. part. reg. acu.
and nourishes the body but little. And likewise Galen says. Watrish Wine
nourishes the body least, whose liquor is as slender as water, and color
white. And Avicen says, White slender wine is best for them that be chafed and
hot. For it does not fume, nor cause the Head to ache: but it moistneth the body
and eases the headache. To this agrees Galen.

The reason why White wine least burteth the head, is this, because it is less
tumish, and less vapourous than other. That it provokes or causes one to his
urine, more than other, appears by this saying of Hippocrates. The passage or
entrance of this White wine into the bladder is easier than of any other drink:
Hip. 3. par. reg. acntorum.
whereby we may perceive that it has strength to open.

By this it well appears, that White Wine is better for them that be hot and
chafed, than other wines are, whether they be hot of nature, as Choleric and
Sanguin folks, or else by accident, as hot chafed by anger, and biding in the
Sun.

And likewise it is better for them that study, who ought to use such wine as
will not distemper the brain. And likewise it is convenient for them that have
a feeble brain, whether it be natural or accidental. avi. 4. don. ca. de reg.
aqua and vini.
For strong wine makes them soon drunk, that have a weak brain* as Avicen
says.

And therefore, If such Persons will drink strong Wines, they must allay them
well with Water, And also it is good for them, whose Liver and Stomach is
hot, and for them that dwell in a hot Country, because hot and strong Wines
will together inflame, and burn their Bodies.

Red wine and Claret, as of the Country of Bern are hotter then other. Red wine
and claret. Cap super can: de hin^ etenim albo. Gal, in Hipp, (...) ^rho, lib,
2.
And Galen says, Wines that are red of color, and Claret, are very hot, and
they nourish much more than other Wines, And again he says, That the Wines
that be gross and ruddy of color, nourish more then other Wines. And they soon
fill or replenish or feeble bodies, that are empty or void of substance,

And here it is to be noted, that it is said, Red wines nourish more, because
(for the most part) they be turned into the substance of man's members. Yet for
all that, the Wines black of color, may be called greater nourishers then
other: for they give more constant nourishment, and more slowly be resolved
from the members, Wherefore Galen says: That gross Red wines nourish more
then waterish, Gal. in Hi. aphe li. 2. Isa. in d^eris part.
but yet they nourish less then black colored wines.

And on his wife, the saying of Isaac, is understood, when he says That black
colored wine nourishes more then red, And these red wines, hurt the head more
then White, and less provoke one to vrin, and this is the cause, that strong
wines be not convenient for feeble brained folks, as is aforesaid: but it
agrees well with them that have a strong brain. For a strong brain resists
vapors, when they smite up thereunto, as Avicen says.

And here observe that the wit of a man that has a strong brain, is clarified
and sharpened more, if he drink good Wine, then if he drink none, as Avicen
says, avi. 3 1 ca. pre al.
And the cause why, is by reason, that of good wine (more then of any other
drinks) are engendered and multiplied subtle spirits, clean and pure. avi. 3.
1 ca. pre al.
And this is the cause also, why the Divines, that imagine and study upon high
and subtle matters. love to drink good Wines and after the opinion of Avicen;
These wines are good for men of cold, and flegmaticke complexion. avi 3 1 ca.
pre al.
For such wines redress and amend the coldness of complexion, and they open
the opilations and stoppings, that are wont to be engendered in such persons
and, they digest phlegm, and they help nature to convert and turn them into
blood, they lightly digest and convert quickly, they increase and greatly
quicken the spirits.

But wine Citrine is not so much burning, as Read Claret as Galen says Red
wines be hotter then white, ^al in h^ aph^ (...) 2.
and therefore they grieve the head more, as Galen says. Also Claret Wine,
nourishes less then Read, and more then White. And in some places they call
Claret wine white, and that is the cause that some say white wine death quickly
inflame man's body ^^he black wines be not so fervent hot as the red wines be:
and therefore they hurt the headless. But for as much as they descend more
slowly into the bell^ and provoke more slawly man's v^ine* they grieve the head
more slowly as Galen says. Gal super can. p^^ a (...) dul^^s. suppings or
broaths.


The third thing is supping or spoon meat, made of good broth of flesh but
specially of Chickens, for such broathes are very kindly to man's nature, and
are lightly converted unto good blood and they engender good blood. especially,
when they be made with fine flower. For flower principally of Wheat is a great
nourisher, and causes great nourishment, as Rasis says. And of these three
foresaid things Avicen says, Rasis 3. Almen Avic. 3. do. 2 ^^^n 1. cap 15.
Example of clean and good nourishing mears and humors, be tho yolks of Eggs.
wine, and broathes made of flesh. And thereupon he concludes: That these three
foresaid things are comfortable, and of restorative help for man's body.

Nutrit and impinguat, triticum, lac, cas^us infans,
Testiculis porcina caro cerebella medulla,
Dulcina vina, cibus gustu jocundier, eva
Sorbilia maturo sicus vnaequerocentes.
Bread of Red wheat, milk, and new made Cheese,
Beasts testicles, Pork Marrow, brain of these.
Sweet wines, delicious meats, eggs that are rear,
Over-ripe Figs and Raisins, these appear,
To make the body fat, and nourish nature,
Procuring corpulence, and growth of stature.
Here are touched, twelve manner of things, the which do greatly nourish and
make fat man's body.

The first is bread made of wheat, which as Avicen says, Bread, avi. 2. can.
ca. de pan. Rasis 3 alman.
Fatteth swiftly, specially when it is made of new red Wheat. Rasis says.
Wheat is neighbor to temperance, although it incline a little to heat, and the
heaviest and soundest Wheat does nourish best; and of all grains, it is most
wholesome for all folks: and the blood that is engendered thereof, is more
temperate then of any other grain.

As touching the choices of Wheat, ye shall understand, that the election is to
be considered in two things. First, the substance of the Wheat ought to be
considered and secondly; the preparation thereof. And of the choice, touching
the substance, Avicen says. That that Wheat is best, Choice of Wheat.
that is neither hard nor soft, great, fat, and new, and not too old, and
between red and white. Black wheat is an ill nourisher. Rasis says it is heavy.

Now of the Choice, concerning the preparation, know, that all things made of
Wheaten flower, do descend from the stomach slowly, and they engender gross
humors. and do cause opilations about the liver, augmenting the Spleen, and
engendring the Stone; for when it is digested, it nourishes much. Wheat
sodden, is heavy meat, and hard to digest: but when it digested, it nourishes
strongly, and straineth a man much. But wheat made in bread, well leavened and
baked in an ovell, ^eated with a moderate fire is mavelous wholesome. All
these things are gathered out of Galen. Gal dealimen,


The second thing is milk and after the mind of some Doctors, Butter Milk.
it is understood by the Butter-milk called Odor and commonly called Bal^uca.
There is noth^ng nourishes more then this Milk, when ^t is new supped up, and
with new hot bread. It may also be understood by Goats Milk: which nourishes
as much, and whereof we have largely spoken before

The third thing is, green Cheese, Gree^ ch^^se.
which as Av^c^n says Is a nourisher and a fatter, And although green Cheese
does nourish and fat; yet it is not wholesome in the Regiment of Health, for
thereof come the inconveniences before declared.

The fourth thing is Testicles or Stones, cocks stones. avi 2 can de test.
and especially the stones of fat Cocks, which as Avicen says, Be very good.
and great nourishers. And he says, That in a small quantity, they nourish much.

This also may be understood of Hogs stones very fat that has not boared Sow;
for as Porke, of all four legged beasts (touching nourishment) is best: in like
manner the stones, in regard of other beasts stones, are the best, And here is
to be well noted, that the stones of aged beasts, whose seed is fermented, be
nothing nourishing but the stones of young beasts that be not able to do their
kind, and whose seed of generation is not yet ripe, be meetely good
nourishment, if they be well digested.

The fifth thing is Porke, Pork.
in choosing whereof, and of the effect of the same, has been largely declared
before; whereof Galen says. Gal. de moribis curandis li. 6 Eating of brains.
That of all foods Porke is the greatest nourisher.

The sixth thing is eating of Brains: and understand that brains be ill for the
stomach, and they cause loath somnesse by taking away a man's appetite: and
brains engender gross humors; yet nevertheless it nourishes the body, if
it be well digested, but in no wise it should be eaten after other meats, And
if it be dressed with Penyreyall or Nept, to attemper the clamminess and cold
thereof, or with things that by their virtue have heat; Rrsis 3. alman ca de.
de vir membrorum animalium.
it is wholesome, as Rasis says. And briefly to speak, brains are forbidden
in foe Regiment of Health. But yet sometime they do well in Medicines, as the
brain of a young Goat is good against venom and against venomous biting. And
a Hates brains. is good against trembling: And some say, that the brain of
Chickens and Capons, is good for the memory, and comfort the wit. choice of
brains,
Yet touching the choice of brains, it is to be known, that the best brains
be of Fowls that fly, and properly about mountains. And of four-footed
beasts, the best is of a Ram and next of a Calf, as Avicen says.

The seventh thing is Marrow, which being well digested nourishes much, as
Avicen says, and it is lightly turned into blood. avi 2 cau ca de cere avi ibi
dim ca. de medula.


Yet nevertheless, it destroys the appetite and makes one to loath his
meat: and therefore Avicen teaches us, to eat it with Pepper, Now touching the
choice of Marrow, Avicen says, That the Marrow of Veal, of a Heart of a Bull,
of Goats and of sheep, is most wholesome. And some say, the marrow of young
white bulls is very wholesome and good.

The eight thing is, sweet Wines, whereof we shall entreat more hereafter.

The ninth thing is delicious meats: Marrow. Delicious meats. Gal, in 2. Par:
tic. apho^s.
for such do most especially nourish, as Hypocrates says. And Galen says.
That all savory meat, wherein one has a delectation, when he eats it is of
the stomach received, retained, and digested, with a more fervent desire then
any other.

But if the meat be loathsome, the stomach will not abide, it whereof vomit,
abborring of meat, inflation, and belching are engendered, and this is the
reason, that we see some more healthy, being fed with course meat then with
good, because such course meat is more delicious unto them.

The tenth thing is Rere Eggs: Rere-egs.
which in small quantity do nourish much, and whereof we have spoken before at
large.

The eleventh thing is ripe figst which (though their sweetness) nourish and
fatten much.

As touching Figs, though they nourish not so strongly as flesh and grain;
yet there is no fruit is strong a nourisher: as Avicen says, avi. 2. can ca.
de sicubus, avi. in re civs, quod comedi.
That Figs nourish more then any other fruits. And beside he says, That
fruits of most nourishment, and most like and near unto flesh in nourishing,
be Figs, very ripe, Raysins, and Dates. As concerning the choice of them
know, that as Avicen says: choice of figs.
The white figs be best for they be lighter: and next unto them, be the
ruddy or Citrine Figs, and then the black, for they that be ripe are best.

Also the moist and new figs are greater and swifter, nourishers, then the dry,
and sooner pass from the stomach to the Liver, and they moist the Liver more,
and are more mellow then the dry figs. But yet the dry Figs cullats not so
much, and are more wholesome for the stomach, then the moist, for Avicen says.
The dry Figs (in their operations be laudable, but the blood which of them is
engendered is not good because thereof lice be engendered: but eat them with nuts
and Almonds, and their humor made good. And he says also. The operation of
Figs is maryellous nourishing, if they be taken fasting with nuts or Almonds;
for they open and prepare the way for meat. But yet the Fig that is eaten with
a Nut, nourishes more then the Fig which is eaten with an Almond. And know
withal that all figs do enfiate, mellow and expulse superfluityes to the
skinue: and they provoke sweat, and avoid or remotine away sharpuesse of the
throat, and they cleanse the breast, lungs, and pipe of the same, and open all
manner of opilations of the Liver and spleue.

The twelfth thing is Grapes, Grapes.
that is to say, such as are sweet and ripe: for ye shall understand, that
there are three manner of Grapes. Some be green and sour, whereof verjuyce
is made; these Grapes bind fore, and repress the ruddy color and Sanguine,
and are wholesome for a cholle. rick lask. There is another sort naturally
green and new, whereof wine is made. Those Grapes (specially if they be white,
and the grains and bucks set apart or taken away) do cause one to have a Lask,
and they nourish more then the other fruits, avi. 2. can. ca di vna.
but not so much as figs, as Avicen says. Yet of truth, they engender
ventos^ties, inflations, and ache of the belly. But if they remains two or
three days after then be gathered, till the husk be somewhat assuaged they
nourish the better, and are less laxative, for then they inflate not.

And they whose stomach is tull of meat, and unclean with ill humors, should
in no wise eat Grapes, especially if they be new, and without grains or
kitue^s: for in such a stomach they corrupt soon, because they are oversoon
digested, and cannot avoid out of the stomachs after they be digested, by
reason of the meat, that is not ^et digested. Wherefore when they both be
corrupted in the stomach, then they corrupt the other meat, as likewise it is
to be understood of other fruits larative. And he that will eat Grapes green
and new gathered, it is good to lay them first in warm water an hour, and after
in cold water, and then eat them.

Rasis says: That Grapes sweet and new, do soon fat the body, Rasis 3 alime^
and argment the rising of a man's yard.

And further he says, That the Grape that has the thinnest husk, descenderh
soonest from the stomach, and the thickest husk the slowlier.

There is another called a dry Grape, or a Raisin of Lent, and though the Grape
be numbered amongst his equalis, yet it is a little inclined to heat.

Afterward, Rasis in the places before alleged says; It nouriseth well, and
comfort the stomak and liver, and avoideth opilations, And thus the foresaid
Text may be understood of a fresh gathered Grape or Raisin: or dry grape called
Passula.

Vina probantur odore, supore, nitor^, cosore,
Si bona vina cupis, haec tunc probantur in illis,
Fortia, formosa, fragentia, frigida, frisca.
Smell savor, color, cheerful, fine,
These are the best proofs of a cup of wine,
In choice of good wine these are ever speaking.
Strength, Beauty, Fragrance, Coolness, Sprightly, leaping.
Here in this Text are declared, five manner of proofs of good wine.

The first, The tokens of good wine.
is the smell for wine of good odor, and savor, multiplyeth or increases a
man's spirits, and as Constantine faith. It nourishes well, and ingendreth good
blood: but stinking wine is unwholesome for man's nature, and does engender
gross and melancholy spirits. And after the mind of the said Constantine,
Constant. 5. Theoric. Gal. con 3 1. part. reg. acu.
It engenders ill blood, and head ache, that of the ill sum ascends to the
head. Galen says: That wine that has good smell, engenders good blood: but
it fills ones bead full of sumes and vapors by reason of the subtility and
and heat thereof: but wine of ill smell, after the quantity of ill blood
engendered thereby, does hurt the head very little, by reason it is cold and
gross.

The second thing is favor: for like as good savory meat nourishes best, and
is better received of the stomach then other as is aforesaid: so in likewise
does wine.

But ye shall understand, that Wines differ in savourings, for some that be
sweet, are more nourishing then other, and they engender gross blood, and
moist the belly, and yet they be hard of digestion and make one thirsty. There
is another sort of wines called Spontica or Stiptica, which comfort the stomach
and ease the belly: but they hurt the breast and purtenance, as the lungs and
pipe thereof they he wholesome for the entrails, and are hard of ot digestion.
There be other wines, that are sharp or sour, the which provoke one to brine,
they do not engender humors, but they dissolve them. There be other Wines that
are bitter: Constant. 5. theoric.
But they be not so hot as Constantine says.

The third thing is clearness or brightnesss, which she she booth the
pureness of the wine, and so consequently of the spirils engendered.

The fourth thing is the color. An their color Wines very and differ greatly
in their nourishing. For the ruddier Wines of the same, do nourish more then
while. And therefore they be more wholesome for lea^e fath then white be, and
white more wholesome for them that he sat. And touching the diversity of Wine
in c^^^t^ we have spoken before of Ova recentia.

Further, in the Text are rehearsed five special things by which a man should
prove and know good wine. The first is the strength, which is known by the
operation. Gal. 3 Reg. a. culo con. Culo. 1
For as Galen says, Strong win is that, that vehemently milameth a man; body,
and replea^eth or fills the head.

This strong wine is a special increaser of the spirits, and a great
nourisher. But yet I advise them that have a weak brain to beware how they
drink strong wine except it be well allayed with water: For the fumishnesse
thereof, hurts the head.

The second thing is, fairness of the Wine. For the fairness or goodlinesse
of the Wine, causes one to drink it desirously, which does cause it better to
digest, and better to nourish.

The third thing is fragrant, and of good odor. For fragrant and redolentwine
comfort most, and engenders subtle spirits, as it is aforesaid.

The fourth thing to, Wine ought to be cold, touching the taste, but hot in
effect and operation. For Wine made hot by reason of the clearness and
sinenesse, does overcome a man's brain the sooner. and enseebleth the sinews,
and hurts the head, except it be taken moderately.

The fifth thing, is that wine ought to be strisk and sprinkling, and with the
spuming to make a little noise and the spume to be then and soon flashed and
the spume to remain in the mids of the cup For if it have not these properties,
it must be called hanging (that is suable wine: and specially, if it make no
sound, and has great bubbles and spume, that remain long by the sides of the
Cup.

Sunt nutritiva, plus dulcia candida vina.
The sweetest wines do most of all revive,
And cheer the spirits, being nutritive.
Here is one doctrine of wine declared: the which is, that gross and sweet
wines do nourish more, then any other of the like sort. constant. 5. theoric.
aug 3 1. de reg. aquae and vini. avi 2. tract. 1. ica. 3.
To this agrees Constantine: and so does Avicen, saying on this wise. Gross
wine that is dulce is best for him that would be fat. The reason is; because
the dulce Wines, through their dulcetnesse are vehemently drawn of the members,
wherewith Nature rejoices. For Avicen says: That the operation of dulce wines
do digest, mellow, and increase nourishment, and nature loves them, and the
virtue attractive draws them.

And although this Text may ^es verified by all dulcet Wines, yet the moderate
dulce or sweet wine is chosen, and not that that exceeding dulce, as Muskadell:
for such wines do corrupt the blood by reason that nature draws it violently
from the stomach to the Liver, before it be well digested and before the
superfluity thereof be riped and (through the great dulcetnesse thereof, it
fills the blood with undigested watcinesse, that makes the blood apt to
boil, and putrify. And this also should be understood by other meats, that
are exceeding sweet.

And further know, that by the use of sweet wines, and other dulce nourishments
three inconveniences are to be feared, especial in them that are inclined
thereto.

The first is Loathing: for all sweet foods, through their heat and moisture,
Three inconveniences ingend^ed of dulce foods.
do Supple and fill the mouth of the Stomach, and there engender a disposition,
contrary to the vacuation and corrugation of that which should cause hunger.

The second thing is, these dulce foods do swiftly inflame and turn into
choller^ for dulce things are most apt to engender choler. Therefore honey
(above all other things) soonest ingendreth choler, because it is of sweet
things the most sweetest; And next to Honey is sweet Wine. (as Galen says.)
And hereupon rises thirstinesse: Gal. in comen cau. 3. par. reg. acul.
for it is not wholesome for them that have the Ague, nor for chollericke folks.

The third is Opilation, or stopping of the Lyver and Spleen: For these two
members (and especially the Liver) do draw dulce things with their Dregs unto
them by reason of the great delight that they have in them before they be
digested.

Wherefore in these parts they lightly cause Opilations: Through the help and
operation of the gross substance. wherein the sevourinesse of sweetness is
grounded, as Avicen says. avi. 2 ca. tract 1. ca. 1.
And this is the cause that sweet wine does less provoke one to vrin, then
other Wines.

Against these three noc^n^ents, eager, sharp, or savory things are very
wholesome: for with their Tarinesse, they provoke the appetite, and with their
coldness they quench inflammation, and with their finenesse of substance, they
open opilations. Further know, that although sweet wines and other dulce
nourishments, do stop or shut the Lyver, and Spleen; yet they unstop the
Lungs. And the reason why they stop not the Lungs as well as the Liver and the
Spleen Galen declares: Because dulce things (in their passage) reside notihng
thereto, but that which is fine and pure: Gal. 3. per reg acut.
and the blood engendered of dulce things, comes to the Lungs, putrified first
in the Liver, and fined in the heart, Also, as Hypocrates says: Hi. 3 par reg
acut ca, Mentem levins, etc
Dulce wines do least make one drunk,

Thus we may conclude, that if Wine be drunk for nourishment, for a
restorative of the Body, or to make them fat that be lean, whether it be
naturally or accidentally; then dulce wines and gross, sufficiently colored,
are wholesome. For such wines as are nourishments and restoratives, for such as
be low brought: wherefore they are most convenient to make lean bodies fat. But
such as will not nourish, restore, nor make fat their bodies as they that be
corsie and fat already: then, though they may not use sweet wines, but subtle,
yet they ought to choose such as be amiable, and have a good swo^ and flavor and
are inclined to whiteness, and be sufficiently strong.

I one drink wine to quench his thirst, then he must take white wine, thin,
and feeble: For such Wines, do m^^sten better, and cools more, and so
consquently do better quench thirst then any other. And the greater the thirst
is, the wholesommer such wi^^ is But if so be, wine is drunk to refresh the
Spirits and to comfort the corporal virtue; then it should be subtle sweet
and of delectable savor, of mean color, And of sufficient strength. And such
Were ought to be tak^^ with a little meat, and it must be deputed from all
su^e^fl^ity, and also be taken in small quantity. But dulce Wines of mean
substance, and of good flavor should be chosen to scowr the breast and lungs,
and to cause one to ^ask.

Si vinum rub^um nimium quandeque b^batur,
Ventes stipatur, vox lampida turpisicatua.
When too much Red wine carelessly we drink,
It binds the belly makes the voice to shrink.
This Te^^ shows to us, two hurts, that come by overmuch drinking of Red wine.

The first is, that over much drinking of Red wine makes one costive. The
^eason, as some say is: because such Red wine heateth ^^re ^hen other of that
sort, and is more nutritive For in th^^ tha^^^ is better it dries more: and in
that, th^^ it is more ne^^^^^tive, it is more desirously received of nature But
^e^ this Text may be best understood, by overmuch drinking of binding Red wine,
which is somewhat eager sharp, and costive. And cone^ning this, know, that if
the stomach or the guts be feeble in their natural operation; that then red or
black wine called Stiptick, which is somewhat tart ought to be used and drunken
as they use to do, (that by debility of stomach are laxative and can hold
nothing. Thus says Hypocrates in the Canon. Palm us quidem, etc. And also
Galen in the comment of the same. But he that will comfort the virtue of
digestion, the cleane^^ Wine or meanest in substance and color of a good and
convenient savor and of sufficient strength, and somewhat stiptick, is most
wholesome.

The second thing, is hearsenesse of the throat, the which hoarsenesse some red
Wines do cruse and ^nduce, only thorough their dryness and earthinesse. And
this hurt comes also by drinkink red wines that grow in the parts of Br^ba^^,
through their st^pticity and earthinesse: and especially this grief chances,
when the said Wines be not well fined. But yet they make not a man costive,
because Must that is very red, is wont to cause the Flixe by reason of his
earthy dregs mingled there withal: the which byteth and gnaweth the guts, of
which gnawing comes the Flixe, and such Wine should not be drunk till it be
fined. For so long as it gnaweth through the earthy dregs thereof a biting time
is raised to the brain: which gnaweth and biteth the eyes, and makes them red.
Such inconveniences are engendered by new vnflued Wines of Brabant, Whether they
be white or red, through their earthinesse. The cause why this fume is
mordicative, is, by reason that the Wine that it comes of, is mordicative.
For Galen says: Ga. in comm^n^o i^^i is pha: and qui c^escuut, etc.
Whatsoever is dissolved from a thing, must needs be like the thing from which
it is dissolved.

Allia, nux, ruta, pira, raphanus, and theriaca.
Haec sunt Antidotum contra mortolev^nenum.
I read from Garlic, Nuts, Hearb-grace, or Rue,
Pears, Radish-roots, and Treacle do ensue:
Such virtuous qualities, that they all serve
As Antidotes against poison to preserve.
In this Text are comprised six Remedies against Venom. The first is Garlic
which is very medicinable against such inconveniences as are wont to be
sugendred of water, Garlic.
and especially it is wholesome, S^^ap. (...) segre c^p. de alleo Avi. 2 can.
ca. de al^^o, etc.
if one hap to drink naughty corrupt water, wherefore Serapion says, That if
one eat Garlic first, and drink corrupt water after, it shall not hurt him.
Whereunto Avicen agrees. The same operation is also in Onyons, as Avicen
says, and so Oayons may be comprehended under Garlic. And Avicen says, That
an Onyon is subtle, piercing, and scowring with stipticity, and opens
strongly.

Also it is hot in the third degree, wherefore it heateth ill waters, and
lets that they with their coldness hurt not the stomach: and it makes gross
humors pure, and causes them lightly to issue: for Vinegar being mixed with an
Onyon, does greatly sorti^^s his subtle piercing or entering virtue and keeps
one from thirstinesse, the which eating of Onyons is wont to cause.

The very same is veriffed of Garlic. And Avicen says, That after one has
drunken gross and troublous waters, he should eat Garlic: because it fineth
them, and makes them lightly to descend, and lets, that they hurt not the
Stomach and Entrayl, in regard that they stop not the Veins.

Also, Garlike is good to eats before one take his Journey, and it is one of
the best and most wholesomest things, for them that come out of a cold air,
Avi. 1, 1 cap. de regendo inter.
or go into it. as Avicen says. And by this it appears that Garlik is
specially good for them that journey, and wander over diverse Countries, and use
diverse Drinks, according to these Verses.

Allia que jejunio sumpserit ore,
Hunc ignotarum non laedit potus aquarum,
Neediversorum mutatio facto locorum.
He that takes Garlic early in the morn,
Needs let no drink by him to be forborne,
Diversity of countries he may see,
And well enabled if his mind so be.
Moreover. Garlik (drunk with Wine) is good against the stinging of venomous
worms, and bytings of Serpents, which thing Avicen says, that he proved; avi 2
can. ca. de allic.
also it is good against the biting of mad Dogs: and a platster made of
Garlic, Fig Leaves, and Comine, is good to lay to the place that is bitten
with a venomous beast called Mugall. Also an Onyon as Avicen says, is
wholesome to annoint the place that is bitten with a mad dog, either with the
juice thereof, or a Plaster thereof made with Salt and Rue. And an Onnyon
eaten, expels the hurt of venomous things. And some say that they engender
in a man's Stomach a moist humor, very wholesome against the hurt of venomous
things. Now here is to be noted, that Garlic, Onyons, and also Leeks, are not
wholesome for temperate bodies, nor hot, and specially when they be eaten raw.
For then they nourish very little, and ill, and they engender sharp pricking
blood: yet they make gross humors subtle, and break or cut clammy humors.

And when they be sodden, they lose the pricking, and yet then their virtue
inci^ive, cutting and subtilative, remains. Therefore when they be sodden,
they be wholesommer then raw.

Leeks he hot and dry, and their nourishment is naught, they hurt the eyes,
Eating of leeks.
and engender black melancholy blood and cause terrible dreams: they hurt the
^news with their pricking, and they hurt the T^^th and ^ummes, and chollerick
and melancholy folks should not use to eat them, and specially raw.

Onyons be hot, Fating of onyons.
and they have an earthy superfluous heat, and a waterish moustnesse, subtle,
and vndigestd, If they he eaten raw, they engender ill humors, and corruptible
putrefaction in the stomach and they cause ill dreams and dreadful, and also
headache. And if they be too much used, they mar the memory, and trouble the
understanding, and make one beside himself. But when they be sod with the
broth of good flesh, and so ^aten they cause good digestion, and the^r
hurtfullnesse is diminished, and they moderate the coldness of meats, wherewith
they be sod: but the best is, not to use them.

Garlic is hot, Eating of Garlic.
declining somewhat to humidity, but less then Onyons, it is medicinable
against ventes^ty, and also to the Cough. And it makes one to spit well; but
it hurts the sight and breeds headache, and yet it is treacle for
v^landish me. And thus the foresaid things are wholesome for them only, that
have in them phlegmatic, gross and clammy humors, but chollerick folks ought
to abstain from them.

The second thing, is Walnuts, The use of nuts. (...) 2 can, ca. de^ne nu^e.
Disease^ in^endied by eating of nut.
whereof Avicen says, That they with Figg^, and Rue, are medicinable against
all manner of Venom. And of Walnuts, of Onyons, and of Salt, is made a
^la^^^ter to lay to the biting of a mad Doyge. And this speciall^ is understood
of a dry nut, that is eaten before meat, in form as is aforesaid. And know
that dry Nuttes are wors^ then new and moist. For the dry are more O^^ie, by
reason whereof they turn to choler, and engender head^ach^ they hurt the eyes
and cause swimming in the head, and specially if they be eaten after meat, they
cause the Pas^ie in the tongue; and provoke one to vomit, and make bli^^ers in
ones mouth and they that have a ^holletick stomach, ought specially to eschew
dry Nuttes, and the older they be, the worse ^hey be. The new nuts have less^
of ill Oylinesse, and therefore they engender not the ache or swiming in the
head, and such like diseases as the dry do, and by reason of their slippery
humidity, they make one to have the lask, and if they be a little warmed at the
fire, and eaten after dinner, they press and drive down the meat. And thus it
appears, that new Nuts are more wholesome for folks in health, then dry.

The third thing is Rue whereof Avicen says, R^^.
That it resists poison. And after he says: If one fear least he should
drink poison, or be stung of a venomous Beast, let him take, 1 of the seed,
with the leaves thereof, and d^nk it with Wine, and a Nut stamped and mingled
together. And Aristotle says, That when the Weafell will sight with the Adder
or Toad, she eats Rue first, and by reason thereof sleyeth the other: For the
smell of Rue is a foe to poison.

The eating of Rue in the morning with Figs and sweet Almonds, Two kinds of
rewe^
preserves one from poison.

Here is to be noted, that there be two kinds of Rue. The one is Garden Rue;
the other is wild Rue. The Garden Rue is better then the field Rue: for the
field Rue is exceeding dry. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, wherefore
it is hurtful to make much thereof. The Garden Rue is moist, hot, and dry, in
the second and third degree: it pierces and resolves ventosity, and specially
if it be dry. For Scrapian says, That dry Rue, of all Medicines for ventosity,
is the best and most wholesome; but moist Rue engenders ventosity.

Also, Rue does vehemently quicken the sight, and especially the juice thereof,
with the juice of Fen^ll and Honey, made in an Ointment, or else ^aten, as
Avicen says. But yet forasmuch as the juice of Rue has a property hurtful to
the eves, it were best to ^an wind upon your eyes therewith; and in no wise to
touch your eyes with the material Rue.

The fourth thing, is Pears: whereof Avicen says, Pears!
That they be wholesome against Diseases, that be engendered by Mushromes or
Toad-stooles. For Pears sodden with Mushromes, do allay their hurtfulnesse; Or
else this Text may be understood, by Pears Aromatickes, which by reason of
their sweet smell comfort the spirits, and so they avoid poison.

The fifth thing is radishes, Radish roots. avi. 2 can. ca. de rad.
whereof Avicen says. That they be wholesome against the biting of a Snake:
and when they be drunken with wine; they are good against the biting of the
beast called Corn^te: the seed whereof is good against all venom. And when the
seed of Radish is laid upon a Scorpion, it stays him, and the water thereof
has in that behalf been proved; and it is stronger then the seed: and if so be
a Scorpian byte one that has eaten Radish, it shall not hurt him. It is also
very good against the choking of Mushromes. Or it may be said, it is good
against poison, because it proveketh one to vomit and so by reason of vomit the
stomach is purged of ill humors,

And here is to be noted, that Radish, and Radish-roots are like of complexion,
which are unwholesome for chollericke folks: for they engender a sharp pricking
blood, and Radish is unwholesome for the stomach because it makes one to be^ch
much, and ingendreth gross humors; and if the digestion be feeble, it
ingendreth raw humors: yet it is subtle and of a p^er^ing nature. Some men
use to eat Radish after other meats, to comfort digestion, whereof Galen
marvelleth: and yet cunning Phys^tians say, that it a Radish be^ eaten after
other meats, it belpeth digestion, and vnlooseth the belly. But if Radish be
eaten before other meats, it lists upward the meat, and causes one to vomit:
yet it is wholesome after other meats, to eat a little quantity of radish: but
nevertheless they hurt the eyes and the head. Rasis says. That Radish lying
long in the stomach avoideth phl^gm, and the leaves thereof do digest meat, and
help the appetice, if they be taken in a small quantity.

The sixth shiner, Treacle.
is Treacle which of every sort is good against poison and therefore it is good
both for man or beast as well c^l^ as hot. And under the name of Treackle, the
noble medicine Mitridatum, may be comp^^vended, which two be like in
operation. avi. 6 4. ^^a. (...) ca 1.
For Avicen of Treacle (...) says Ye shall understand, that the greatest rule
in cuting of poison, is to comfort natural heat, and to labor to drive it out
as Treacle does And of Treacle and the medicine Mitridatum together, avi. 6.4.
^ra. ca. de med. c^n
Avicen sa^yth. There be certain Medicines contrary to purpose, which w^ll not
suffer po^^on to approach near the heart, as Treacle and Mirida^te.

A^r sit mundus, habitabilis, ac luminosus.
Nec sit infecius, nec olens soetere cloacae.
Dwell where the air is clear, sweet, wholesome, bright,
Infected with no fumes, that hurt the spright:
For sweetest Ayrs do nature most delight.
This text declares four things, touching the choice of whole some air.

Of which the first is, that one ought to choose a clean air, that is not
infected with vapors. choice of wholesome air.
For unclean air does alter the heart, after the nature of the complexion, that
it is mingled with, as Haly says.

The second thing is, one ought to choose a light air, for dark air makes a man
heavy and dull spirited, because such air mingleth it self with the humors in
man's body, and so being troubled, it run^eth to the heart: of the which and of
the humors, gross and troublous spirits are engendered the which do make one
lumpish and slow. Therefore there is nothing makes a man more ^ocund or merry,
and less heavy then to walk in a fair clear air and to rise early.

The third thing is that we ought to e^chew in fected oyre, that is: where
slaughter of people has been: for commanly in these places whereas great
slaughter of people has been, and in places near thereunto, follows great
Pestilence: for when we draw in the infected ^^yre, it infecteth the spirits in
our body. The fourth thing is, we should eschew Gunges. Sinkes, Gutters,
Channels, stinking Ditches, and all other particular places that are infected
with Carrion, and places where as dead carcasses, or ^ead folks bones are
cast, and placed where Hemp and Flax is watered. For the air so infected does
insect the spirits of our body, and specially hurts the brain.

And therefore Avicen says. That so long as the Air is temperate and clear,
and no substance according to man's nature mingled therewith, it causes and
conserveth a man's health. But when it is changed it does contrary to the
operation thereof.

And for a more perfect Declaration of the foresaid things, know, that the Air
(in the Regiment of Health) is necessary two ways.

First, for the refreshing of the heart. Secondly for the abo^ding out of
furnish superfluities, that trouble the spirits and natural heat. For
likewise, as we see by exterior things, as the fire (without fanning of the
air) is choked and quenched: so likewise we may imagine that the spirits and
natural heat in man, had need to be nourished, conserved and attempred

The at temperance of the natural heat is caused by drawing of the air, and
the purging thereof is caused by expulsing of the air: The first, is done by
motion of the attraction, and the second, by motion of ex^ulsion. Therefore, if
we draw in stin^king and unclean air, it corrupts in us the natural heat and
spirit. Therefore, the air should be fair and clear, without vapors and
mists: it may not be troublous and cloudy, nor mixed with ill vapors. For such
air troubles the Humors, and m^keth a man heavy and sad, as is aforesaid.

The open air ought to be chosen, and not between walls, or houses: and to
speak truly, the close air should be eschewed. Yet nevertheless, in the time
of pestilence, when the air chances to be infected, the close air is to be
chosen. I herefore at such seasons it is good for us to abide within our
houses, and to kee^ our windows fast shut, least the putryfied air should
enter in; but otherwise the open air is best.

Further, in the Regiment of health, the air ought to be eschewed, the which is
mixed with vapors of Lakes and deep Pits, containing stinking Waters, and
also of certain Heaths as Coleworts Hemlocks, and such like: and of trees, as
Fig Trees and Waln^t trees. Further, that air is to be chosen, wherein the wind
blows from high or equal ground. And also we ought to take good heed, that
the air exceed not in any of his first quallites; that is to say in heat, cold,
moyst^^re, or drought, which if it chance, it must be tempered by craft, as
much as is possible. These things Avicen teaches.

Si tibi soritina noceat potatio vini,
Hora macutina rebibas, and e^^^ medici^a.
If overmuch Wine has thy brain offended,
Drink early the next morning and its mended.
This text teaches one doctrine, the which is this, if a man be diseased by
drinking of Wine over night, let him on the morning afresh drink Wine again.
For either drinking of wine over night causes drunkenness, thirst in the
morning, or else inflammation of the body: If it inflame the body, then it is
right unwholesome, again in the morning to drink Wine afresh, for that were as
one should lay fire to fire: but if one happen to be drunk, and therewith
pe^^reak a little, then it were wholesome for him to drink wine a fresh again
in the morning: For the drinking of wine then again does lightly cause one to
vomit, whereby the stomach is cleansed: and by reason of cleansing of the
stomach, the hurt of drunkenness and parbreaking goes away lightly. And
therefore, Hypocrates councelleth us to be drunk once a month, that of the
drunkenness come vomit: which thing preserves us from all diseases of long
continuance, If the drinking of Wine overnight does hurt one, by reason that
he is not accustomed to drink Wine: then he may drink Wine again in the
morning, to accustom him, and so the drinking of Wine shall less hurt him.

For as Hypocrates says. Hip. 1. aph. ex multo tempore etc:
Of a customable thing comes less grief. But in case that thirstinesse in
the morning, does follow on drinking of wine over night, to drink water in the
morning is best to cool his thirst.

And for as much, as we have spoken of hurt that comes by drinking of wine,
understand that he that has a ^eeble brain, of what condition soever it be,
avi. 2. cap, de regimine aquae and vmi. six inconveniences engen^ted of
drunkenness.
he ought to be well ware of drunkenness; For to be often drunk, as Avicen
says, is cause of six inconveniences.

Of which, the first is is corruption of the Livers complerion: for Wine
excessively taken, comes to the Liver, and resolves the heat thereof,
whereby the Liver loses his natural generation of blood, and instead of
blood it engenders watrishnesse, and causes the Dropsy, or else, it ^utte^^
the Liver or the humors thereof, whereby Lepry or madness is engendered.

The second thing is, the corrupting or infecting of the brains complexion, by
reason that thick and continual fumes of the wine do ascend up thereto the
which dispo^e the bore brain to madness and ^renzy, and the cold to the
falling Evil, forgetfulness and palsy.

The third thing is, weakness of the sinews, as we set commonly, that daily
drunkards the have palsy in their head and other members, as well in youth as
in age.

The fourth thing is Diseases of the Sinews as the Crampe and Palsy. For
superfluous drinking of Wine, oftentimes thineth to vinegar in the stomach,
which hurts the Sinews. Also oftentimes, for fault of digestion, it turns
into undigested wa^^^shnesse, which does m^lli^e the Sinews, and oftentimes it
induces or draws gross humors to the sinews, whereby they be stretched
out, or drawn together.

The fifth thing, is the Pal^ey, that the humidityes of the brain (increased by
Wine) do engender, so that they stop wholly the ways of the lively spirits,
which proceed from the brain to the other members.

The sixth thing, is sudden death, for while the drunkard s^orte^h or sleeps,
his wind-pipes are closed or stopped, either with the abundance of wine, or
humidities thereof engendered, whereby he is so dainly strangled.

And although the immoderate drinking of Wine causes the aforesaid
inconveniences: yet Wine moderately taken is wholesome diverse ways. And Avicen
rehearses five benefits ensuing by ^^ine moderately drunk.

The first is, Five benefits by wine moderately drunk.
that it easily conveyeth the meat that is minglad with it, to all the members
of the body, through the hot subtilty, and hid convenient property thereof.

The second thing is, it digesteth and resolves Phlegm, through the heat and
subtilty of his substance, and makes it apt to avoid o^, opens the ways,
and comfort nature to drive it out.

Tho third is, it avoydeth red choler by urine, and by other insensible
evacuations, as sweat and such like. And this is to be under shood of Claret or
White wine the which are feeble of nature, or else allayed with water: for
otherwise it will increase choler, by turning it self into choler, and
inflammation of the Lyver.

The fourth thing is, it causes melancholinesse (the which is gross and
moves slowly) eastly to pass through the pipes or conduits thereof, from the
Lyver to the Spleen, and from the Spleen to the brimine or mouth of the
stomach, and at last, with the dregs to avo^d out of the body. Properties of
m^lanchely and of Wi^e.
And if dec^neth or rep^esseth the hurt of melancholinesse, through
contrariousnesse of complexion, and manner of substance in the effects thereof.
For melancholy engenders heaviness, faintness of heart, and covetousness,
but Wine engenders joy, boldness, stoutnesse of stomach and liberality.

The fifth thing is, it resolves all causes of weariness, except it be mixed
with some other meat. For Wine reviveth the resolute spirits again abundantly,
and does comfort natural virtue and takes away or diminishes humidities that
be left or remain in the muskles, in the sinews of the hearts, or in the
joints. And if the body be dried by weariness, and needs moystning. Wine
moystneth quickly, so it be allayed with water.

Furthermore, besides these things, Wine has many other good properties. For
above all other things, Wine is a swift and a sudden nourishet: it comfort
the heat and natural spirits, and heateth all the body: it clears the wit,
it appeaseth anger, it drives away headiness, and provokes bodily lust. And
no drink digest^th raw humors so well as Wine: because Wine makes one manly
both in stomach and body. And they that drink no Wine, are nothing in regard of
their equals that drink Wine neither in stomach, valor and courage.

Gignit and humores melius vinum melior es,
Si fuerit nigrum, corpus redait tibi pigrum.
Vinum sit clarumque vetus subtle, ma^urum,
Ac been limpatum, saliens, midera mine sumptum.
The better that the Wines in goodness be,
The better humors they beget in thee.
If Wine look black, it makes thy body dull,
If it be clear, old, subtle, ripe and full,
Well qualified, leaping drunk discreetly;
Then with thy body it agrees most sweetly.
This Text declares one special Doctrine of Wine, and that is this; The
better that Wine is, the better humors it engenders. The reason is, because
black Wine is more gross and earthy, then any other: and therefore the Spirits
thereof engendered must needs be gross. And Galen says: Gross Spirits make
the Body heavy, or flow. And further, there be seven doctrines rehearsed,
touching the election of wine.

The first is Wine ought to be clear, because wine, VII doct^^^es to choose wine.
(by reason that it is subtle) ingendreth subtle and clear Spirits.

The second is, it ought to be old and not new, For new Wine or Must, does
sooner overcome ones brain, and make one have the task; then any other of the
like. It ingendreth the colic and other accidents, that shall he declared
after when we came to Impedit vrinam. Here yoe should not understand, that wine
ought to be over-ald. avi. 3.1. ac rey, aquae c^^vini.
For such Wine as Avicen says, is a medicine and not as a drink. And such wine
does rather alter a temperate body to beat and drought, then any way nourish
it. For when it is so very old, it receives again his first natural verdure
and sharpness, and is then all fiery Wherefore the Aggregator writes.
Aggregator cap de vito.
That it is hot and dry in the third degree,

The third lesson is, that Wine ought to be subtle. For subtle wine makes
the spirits of man subtle, and gross wines engender gross spirits.

The fourth doctrine is. Wine should be ripe, and not vert, or eager, or else
it will deprive man of his natural vacuations, and good health, as Galen
says, And therefore it is hurifull for them that want evacuation by urine. and
all other their upper Members. Yet as Galen says, Gal. in commen^o. 2. ca. 3.
pa^. reg. acuterum.
Such supticall Wines, is wholesome for diseases that chance in the Guts. And
the stipticalness of Wine may be put away, with much mingling of Water.

The fifth doctrine is, that wine should be allayed with Water: for thereby the
sumosity of the Wine, is put away, and so it does less overcome the brain.
This is (...) truth if the Wine be subtle; but if it be gross it ^^er comes
the brain^ the sooner, for thereby it is made subtle, and more fumish And of
this Wine, Avicen understood, when he said, That Wine allayed with Water, does
sooner overcome the Brain then clean Wine.

The sixth Doctrine is, Wine should be sprinkling when one tastes it, aad this
is one of the conditions of good wine before said.

The seventh Doctrine is considered in the Drinkers condition, and not of the
Wine; that is, one ought to drink wine temperately. For, Wine temperately taken
sharpeneth the wit, and ingendreth all the wholesome things before declared.

By all these things here expressed, we may conclude, that wine that ought to
be chosen, and is best in the Regiment of Health, if it be mean Wine, equal
betweens old and new, clear, somewhat red, of good odor and flavor, of
equal savor; that is, neither eager, sharp nor sweet, which is not gross nor
too much subtle, and beside; that it be not too strong, nor too weak, and that
it grow not on stony and hilly ground, nor on simple, plain, and arable
grounds, but on high ground, lying open toward the South, in a Country not too
hot, nor too cold.

Touching the Regiment of Wine concerning the ages: the Rules that Avicen
gives are to be well noted.

The first is to give Children to drink Wine, is as it one would lay fire to
fire, made of dry Wood. For Children be tender, and soon enflamed, through the
abundance of their natural heat, and their sinews and brains be weak and
feeble. Wherefore Wine hurts them many ways, but specially by quick
inflammation by hurting of the Brain, by lightly piercing of the sinews, and
abundant sumosity. Therefore, when giving children wine to drink, the enflaming
heat of the wine is added to the flaming heat of their bodies, which are of as
small resistance, as dry Sticks, Reed, or Tow, is against the fire.

The second Rule is, that one may give an old man as much Wine to drink, as he
can hear without hurt, that is, as much as is natural and due appetite
desires. For like as old Boots and Buskins (that be dry and wrinckled) are
made supple and plain with oyling: fo likewise old Folks by drinking of chosen
Wine, as Wine of Benvoys. Ancient folks are cold, and wine heateth: their
spirit is heavy, and they be full of Melancholy, and Wine makes them merry,
and represseth Melancholliness. And commonly, old Folks sleep ill, and Wine
makes them sleep well, Old Folks be disposed, to Oyllations, and Wine
opens. And like as Wine is to children most contrary, so for old folk it is
most wholesome.

The third rule is, that young folks should drink Wine temperately, which
temperately is to be understood in measurable quantity, and with convenient
allaying with water, And although that young folks are as hot as Children, yet
their Members are more sound, and their sinews and brain far more stronger,
whereby they may the stronglyer resist the hurt that comes by drinking of
Wine. Much good comes by drinking of Wine soberly, thet is to say; the voiding
of cholier, the quick^ing of the corporal might, and wit, and the abounding of
the subtle spirits.

Mon sit acetosa, cervisa, sed been clara.
De validis eota^granis satis, ac xeterata.
For drinking Beer or Ale, thus we advise,
Not to be sharp or sower in any wise,
Let them be clear, well boiled corn found and good,
Stale, and not new; All these cause healthful blood.
This Text declares five things, by which one may know good Ale and Beer.

The first is that if it be not sower for that hurts the stomach. A sower
thing (as Avicen says in many places) hurts the sinews. And the stomach is
a member full of sinews, especially about the brim or mouth.

The second thing is, that Ale must be clear: for troubled Ale is a stopper:
and burteth them over much that have the Stone it fatteth and in^^ote^^ it
mak^th one short winded, and ing^ndreth much phlegm.

The third thing is, that Ale should be made of good corn, that is not corrupt,
that is to sa^ of the best Barle^ Wheat or Dates for the better the Corn is,
the better are the humors thereof ingen^^ed.

The fo ^th th^^^ is, that Ale ought to be well sod: for that causes it the
better to be digested, and more amiably to be rec^^ved of Nature for the
inconveniences thereby growing, are the better to be born. For if the Ale be
not ^ell sod, it ingendreth vento^^ties in the belly, gnawing, infl^tion, and
^ollick.

The fifth thing is. that Ale ought to be stale and well purged For new Ale
ingendreth the same hurt that Aledoth, the which is not well sod: and so does
light bread ^^^ains the ^oy^ion.

De qua potetur stomachus ^eninde gravetur.
Of whatso^re you drink, see no offense,
Unto the stomack^ be procured thence,
Here is taught one lesson touching the use of Ale That is one ought is drink
it moderately, so that the Stomach be not ^urt thereby, nor drunkenness
caused. For it is worse to be drunk with Ale then with Wine, and endures
longer: and the tumes and vapors of Ale that ascend to the head, are gross,
wherefore they be not so soon resolved, as they that be mounted up b^ wine.
Whereupon it is to be noted; that in the beginning o dinner or supper, it is
wholesome to drink ale before Wine, the cause is for at the beginning of out
repast or dinner, the body is hungry: so that the Stomach before we began to
eats meat, was hungry, and so drew superfluityes from the members: Therefore
if we begin with wine, by reason that Nature greatly desires it and for the
great non^^^hment thereof the super^^uities together with the ^^ne) are
dr^w^^^e off the Stomach and thence conveyed to the paris of the bo^^: but
Nature does not so desirously draw^ Ale. And also ale washes away the humors
that hang about the brim of the Stomach. And for thi^ cause P^^s^^tians
counsel, that where one is most hungry, he should first assay to vomit e^e he
eat an^ meat, that those superfluities that be drawn together h^ the hungry
Stomach, may be voyded out, lest they be ming^ed with the meat. Likewise, he
that fears to in ^^^^sty, by superfluous drinking of water, should drink ale,
because it quancheth vnuaturall thirst.

Temporibus veris modicum prand^re juberis,
Sedcalcor esta^is dapibus (...) ocet immoderatis,
Autumni fructius caveas, ne sint tib^ ^ctis:
De mensasume, quantum vis tempore Brumae.
The Spting-time does command our dinners be,
But light and little sparing in degree,
The Summer season being soultry hot,
Immoderate feeding should be then forgot.
The fall of Leaf or Autumn does deny.
Eating much fruit great harm ensues thereby,
But in the winter, cold does then requi^e,
Such a full meal, as nature can desire.
Here the Author determines, Dyer after the 4 seasons of the year.
what quantity of Meat^ should be eaten according to the diversit^ of the four
season of the year that is to say Ver, or Spring time Summer, Autumn and winter.

He says that in the time of Ver. or Spring we must e^t little meat. To this
Avicen agrees and says. The reason is because in Winter, man's body is not
greatly given to labor and exercise: Red humou^s are increased, and specially
^legmatick, which (after the proportion of the season) then specially are
engendered: which humors by reason of cold are engendered in the body, and when
Ver or Springtime comes those raw humors so gathered together, do melt and
spread through all the body: wherefore Nature is then greatly busy in
digesting them And therefore in Ver season, if one eat much meat, it lets
Nature to digest such phlegmatic humors and causes them to divert or turn
another way: For by those humors and great quantity of meat, Nature is
oppressed. And so (thereby, such humors shall remain in the body undigested,
and run to some member, and there breed some disease: and therefore we ought to
take good heed, that we eat not any great quantity of meat in Ver, For little
meat in this season is a special preservative from Diseases that then r^ign as
Avicen says.

And this saying is of a truth, from the midst to the end of Ver, and not in
the beginning, because the beginning of Ver is likened to Winter: wherefore
then one may nourish his body as well as in winter.

And this also may be thus understood: If the body be full of humors when Ver
comes, then meat is to be given after the natural heat and resolution, that
is caused of the Body: for then the cause is avoided, for which, meat should be
diminished To this Hypocrates agrees, saying: Bellies in Winter and Ver are
most hot and sleep most long.

Therefore, in those Seasons, by reason that natural heat is much it needs
much nourishment.

Secondly, he says, that to eat much meat in summer is hurtful, because that
then the virtue of digestion is most feeble. For the spirits and natural heat
(which are the instruments of corporal operation) are then right feeble
sparkled, and resolute, by reason of the outward heat^, the which does
vehemently draw them to the exterior parts, and so causes, that much meat
cannot (as then) well digest.

And here is to be noted, that for as m^ce as the vehement resolution of
humidities, (as well substantial, as nutrimentall) of the body is great, and
therefore grosser, more meat in Summer should be eaten, if the digestive might
digest it But because nature cannot-digest much at once, we must then eat a
little and often: as Galen says. In Summer we must eat many times, and little:
because the body has often need, by reason of often dislolution. And although
little meat should be eaten in Summer, yet one may drink much, by reason of
the great resolution, and drought of the body, The reason that one ought to eat
little meat in summer.
and because the natural heat of the body exceeds the moisture thereof: and
man is then more thirsty then at other, times, But yet, then one ought to drink
less wine, specially if it be not pure, because such wine does soon inflame
and causes the natural heat (augmented by the ardent heat of Summer) is burn.
And therefore he that will drink wine in Summer, should mingle it well with
water, and forbear old and strong wine.

Thirdly, ^e says, that in Autumn we ought to beware of fruits, especially of
the same Season as Grapes, Peaches, Figs, and such like: or (at least) to eat
but little of them: because such fruits to engender blood that is apt to
putrify, by reason of humors and boiling that they make in the body, and
specially it they be received into an unclean stomach or corrupt body, which
for the most part chances in Autumn: and so then, ill and ^lthy Diseases are
engendered as the Pocks, and other pestilent Diseases.

Know also that in Autumn, hunger and thirst should be eschewed, or to eat much
meat at one meal, as Rasis says. The wine also that is drunk in Harvest should
be allayed with water that it may moist the Body, and cool the heat: but unt so
superflously allayed with water, as it is in Summer nor to be drunk so
superfluously.

For by reason that nature is then but feeble, it is not able to weld and
digest it: and too much allaying with water, destroys natural heat, and
increases ventosities, whereby the colic is engendered.

Fourthly, he says, that in Winter one may eat as much ^o he will, that is to
say, more then in other seasons, after the mind of Avicen. And Galen says: In
Winter, much meat leisurely should be eaten. Gal in ca^aph. and quthus semel,
etc.
The reason is because the heat of our body in Winter is strongest, both by
reason it is congealed together, and fortified by position of his contrary:
that is to say, the coldness of the air, environing our bodies about.

And this is verified in big bodies, and fleshy and not in bare and feeble: for
in such bodies coldness of winter being inclined, does not comfort them with
heat but rather makes them more feeble: For in Winter, as Hypocrates says,
Bellyes be hottest of nature and sleep most long. Whereby it appears that the
gross nourishments and hardest of digestion, are more wholesome in winter then
in other seasons, because the heat is stronger. But the Wine that is drunk in
Winter, should be as red as a rose, and not white, and allayed with a little
water.

Here is to be noted, that although by the strength of heat, and vertus of
digestion in winter, the gross and strong meats are most wholesome: yet because
the season is disposed to opilations and repleations, by reason of much
phlegm, it were wholesome to use mean meats between heavy and light gross and
subtle, as kid veal, mutton pikes perch and e^vesses. And they that use gross
meats as beef pork ve^iso^ goats-flesh, and such like: should eat but one meal
a day, or else to use Meats larative, as parsely, cresses, mustard and such
like, and to use great labor.

Salvia cum ratae faciunt tibi pocula tutae,
Add rosa floram, minuit potenter amorem.
If in your drink, washed Sage is mixed with Rue,
It is most wholesome poison to subdue:
Add thereto Rose flowers if you feel the heat,
Of Venus to wax wanton, o^ grow great,
Here the author, des^ibeth two remedies, against ill drink. The first, is
Sage-leaves, Sage put into the drink hinders: be hurt of it, and also it
comfort the sinews and brain, the which being comforted does the better
resist the ill s^mes, that (of the ill drink) ascend thereunto.

The second R^medy is Rue, whereof it the whole leaves be put into the drink
the virtue of it over comes the malice of the drink. And how good and
wholesome Rue is against poison, it has been declared before at Allia nux,
ruta, etc. And this Text says, that to the two foresaid Herbs, we may put the
Rose flower, which ought especially to be understood of a Redrose because the
sweet smell and stipticalnesse thereof, amendeth the malice of the drink.

Nuasea non poterit quemquam vex are marina,
Aurea cum vino mixtam, si sumpserit illum.
Seawater drunk with Wine does well defend thee,
If on the Sea casting chance to offend thee.
Here the Author teaches a remedy how they that are not accustomed to pass
the Sea, A remedy ^o^ perbreaking on the sea.
may avoid perbreaking or casting. He that will pass the Sea, must (a few
days before he ^ake shipping) mingle the Sea water with his wine. This is a
remedy for them that be rich but if it be a poor man, then he must drink
Seawater only, that he may the easier eschew casting. The reason hereof is,
because the Seawater is salt, and so with his saltness and stipticity, that
follows saltness, it closes the mouth of the stomach, and thereby avoydeth
casting.

And here is to be noted, that as Avicen says, A Traveller on the Sea should
not much go about to withstand, or to forbear perbreaking or casting, at the
beginning, but to vomit, until he think himself well purged, because that it
preserves him from many Diseases.

And yet not only preserves, but also heals or alleviateth grievous and
great Diseases, as Lepry, Dropsy, Coldness, and swelling in the stomach. Thus
Avicen says. But in case that the traveller on the Sea do coast so much, that
he thereby is right greatly feebled: then he must refrain himself by eating of
stipticall and sour fruit, as vntipe fruit. Crabs, sour Pomgranates and such
like, wherewith the mouth of the stomach is comforted, and the humors expelled
down; as also the stomach is therewith comforted, and the humors (flowing
thereunto by taking of the water) are driven away.

Or else we may take Mustard seed dried by the fire, and drink it with Wine,
or Wormwood may be eaten and drunken or a toast wet in redolent Wine is good to
eat. And generally, tart meats are good for travelers on the Sea; for they
comfort the stomach, and prohibit vapors and fumes, that would ascend up into
the head, as Herbs sod in Vinegar, or in the juice of sour Grapes.

Sa^via sal, vinum, piper, allia petroselinum:
Ex his fit falsa, nisi fit commixio ^alsae.
Sage Salt, and Wine, Pepper therewith applied,
Garlic and Parsley, these have well bin tried:
To make good sauce for any kind of meat,
Procuring appetite when men would eat.
Here the Author teaches us how to make a common sauce, it we lack a better,
and five thing goes to the making of this sauce.

The first is Sage, To make a common sauce.
wherewith we may make sauce for a Goose roast or sod. For commonly a Goos^ or
Pig roasted is, stopped with Sage, to dry up the humidities and clamminess of
them, and also because the flesh should smell somewhat thereof: but yet after
it is roasted, the Sage would be cast away, and not eaten.

Likewise of Sage, vplandish folk make a sauce to eat with a Moose: for they
stamp Sage and Garlike together, that the Sage may abate somewhat of the
Garlickes favor.

The second thing, is salt mixed with wine, and this Sauce is for rich and
Noblemen. For when they want Mustard, or ver^uyc^ they put Wine in a Saucer,
and mingle it with a little Salt.

The third thing, is Pepper, a Sauce for vplandish folks: for they mingle
Pepper with Beans and Pease. Likewise of toasted bread with Ale or Wine, and
with Pepper, they make a black sauce, as if it were Pay, that is called Pepper,
and that they cast upon their meat, flesh and fish.

The fourth is Garlic; whereof the vplandish People make a Sauce, for they
mingle soft cheese and milk and stamp Garlike together, and so they eat it with
their meat whether it be roasted or sod, salt or fresh and with hard Eggs.

The fifth thing is Persley; of Pe^sly leaves stamped with Merjuyce, or white
wine, is made a green Sauce to eat with roasted meat.

And here is to be noted, that Sauce or Sauces do vary, according to the
Seasons of the Year. For to ho^e Seasons Sauce must be made of cold things, or
of stuff of little heat; and in cold seasons contrariwise. Therefore Summer
Sauce should be Verjuyce, Eyzell or Vinegar, the juice of Lemons or of
Pomgranates, with Rose Water and such like And other while in Sauces made in
Summer, one may put a little Pellitory and Parsley to attemper the coldness of
the foresaid things. But the matter of comperent Sauces in Winter is Mustard
Carloke, Ginger-Pepper, Cinnamon, Gell^flowres, Garlic, Sage Mints, Pellitory
and Parssey: Wine, Water of flesh Vinegar not so strong, but very ^eet to the
nature of Wine. And in mean seasons the Sauces should be mean, neither too hot
nor too cold.

Secondly, Sauces differ by reason of the meats for which they be made: for one
meat will have one Sauce; an other meat an other Sauce; as Lords Cooks know.
Sauce for Mutton, Meals and Kid, is green Sauce, mad^ in Su^mer with Vinegar
or Verjuyce, with a few spices, and without Garlic. Otherwise with Parsley,
white Ginger, and toasted bread with vinegar.

In winter the same sauces, are made with many spices, and little quantity of
Garlic, and of the best Wine, and with a little Verjuyce or with Mustard:
Sauce for roasted bref is made with pepper, toasted bread, broth of flesh and
Grapes, and the same sauce is good in Winter to once with Pork, Also Pork in
summer may be eaten with vinegar and parsley at the beginning of dinner.

But in case, that the foresaid meats be baked and specially beef and pork, and
in winter, then serve in a white onion and a small quantity of sweet spice,
beaten in powder But in summer serve it in without onions and with verjoyce or
else with a few small onions. And if the pasties, be made of more tender fresh,
and lighter of digestion, then serve no onions therewith: but in summer, Almond
milk with verjuice, and a little blanch powder and at the last you may put
thereto an Eggs broken with verju^ce.

But in winter instead of verjuyce, take wine and more spice, with roasted
rabbets and chickens, sauce made with Cinnamon crumbs of bread, and with verjuce,
in summer season is wholesome and in winter with wine.

For roasted Pork in winter take of the dropping tempered with good-wine and
onions: Diverse good P^^ces for ^^^dry meats,
and in summer, take the green sauce above named. For roasted seasants,
pigeous, and turtles take none other sauce but salt. For boiled Capons, and
Cocks take of the same broth with a little bl^nch powder. And namely in
Winter, if they be botled, with Sage, Isope, and Parsley this is good sauce:
and in summer the broth of the Capon and a little verjuice mingled together,
is a wholesome sauce.

For fat Capons and bens baked, serve in none other, sauce, but a small
quantity of blanch powder, and at the end the above named green sauce in
summer, and in Winter good wine. But fish, the grosser it is, the harder of
digestion on the more superfluous, and moyster of nature, the more it needs
hose sauces and sharp. And the same came rule is likewise true in all manner of
f^e^h.

Si fore vis sanus, ablue sapemanus,
Loti^ pose mensam tibi confert munera bina,
Mundificat palmus, and lumina reddit acuta.
If thou will walk in health, let me advise,
Often washthy hands, chiefly when thou do rise,
From feeding at the Table: for thereby,
Thou gain'st two benefits, It clears the eye,
Gives comfort to the palms, both which well tended,
Our health (thereby) the better is be-friended.
Here the author teaches two wholesome things, that comes by washing of out
hands and feet.

The first is, the palms of our hands are thereby greatly cheared and
comforted.

The second is, out sight is sharpened thereby, and that is specially by
accidents because the hands be the instruments to cleanse the eyes, and it is
right wholesome for them to be kept very clean: whereof we have spoken before
at Lumine mane manus.

Panis non callidus. nec, sit nimis inveteratus,
Sed fermentatus, oculatus, sit coctus.
Modice sa^itus, frugibus validis sit electus.
Non comedas crustum, coloram quigignit. adustam.
Panis salsatus, formentatus, been coctus.
Parus sit sanus, quia nun it a sit tibs vanus,
Not over cold nor hot let be thy bread,
Hollow and light, but easily leavened,
Sparingly falted, and of the purest wheat,
And see that Crusts thou do forbear to eat.
Because that angry choler they beget,
Thy bread well baked, light salted, sound of grain:
All these observed, thou do not eat in vain.
In this Text two things are touched or remembered concerning the choice of
bread.

The first is heat; Five propertles of good bread.
because Bread ought not to be eaten hot. Hot bread (as Avicen says) is not
convenient for man's nature, and bread that comes hot from the Oven is now
unwholesome: the reason is; because it stops much.

And again after he says; That hot bread causes thirstinesse, by reason that
it is hot: For it swimmeth in the stomach by reason of his vaporous humidity:
yet it is of quick digestion, and desendeth down stoutly. And although that hot
bread in the Regiment of Health be unwholesome to eat: yet the smell thereof is
right wholesome; for it relieveth one in a swound: and it is possible that some
folk may live by the smell of new Bread.

The second thing is, we ought not to eat bread that is very stale or moldy;
for such bread is unwholesome for the nourishment of man's nature: because it
dries the body, and ingendreth melancholy humors; whereupon it follows,
That bread should not be too new, nor too stale, but a day old. Further, this
Text declares five properties of good bread.

The first is, it must be well leavened as Galen says. The Bread of digestion
is it that is well leavened, and baked in an Oven that is heated with moderate
fire.

And again he says; Unleavened bread is wholesome for no body. And after the
mind of Avicen, Bread made with little leven nourishes much; But the
nourishment thereof is a stopper, except they eat it that labor much.

The second thing is, that bread ought to be light; for thereby it is known
that the clamminesse thereof is gone: Yet nevertheless this kind of bread
after the mind of Avicen, Is the swift enterer, and of less and worse
nourishment, even as bread that is made of suth Bran.

The third thing is, that Bread ought to be well baked, for bread that is ill
baked, is ill of digestion, and engendereth grief in the stomach And Avicen
says. That bread ill baked nourishes very much but the nourishments causes
opilations, except they labor much that eat it. And bread baked on a stone or
in a pan is of the same fashion: for it is never well baked within.

The fourth thing is, that bread ought to be temperately salted. For bread
over-sweet it a stopper* and bread over salted is a dryer: but bread moderately
nourishes best, is that if have the other conditions.

The fifth thing is, that bread should be made of the best grain that is to say
of the best wheat.

Moreover the Author in this Text warns us, to beware of crusts eating
because they engender a dust cholor, or melancholy humors, by reason that
they be burned, and dry. And therefore great estates, the which the chollerick
of nature, cause the crusts above and beneath to be chipped away wherefore the
pith or crumme should be chosen, the which is of a greater nourishment, then
the crust. Yet notwithstanding the crustes he wholesome for them that be
whole, and have their stomach moist, and desire to be lean, but they must eat
them after they have dined, because they enforce the meat to descend down,
and comfort the mouth of the stomach.

Further in the two last verses is showed, that good bread ought to have these
five conditions, that is to say. It must be well salted, leavened well baked
made of good clean corn, that us ^ipe gathered bound up in sheaf and housed in
due season And here is to be noted, that if one desire to nourish his body, be
must have his bread made of pure flowr, the bran clean taken out but he that
destreth to be lean, must leave some bran therein: for bran nourishes but
little, and vnlooseth the belly, and flower does contrariwise.

Est car^ p^ocina sine vino pojor cuina,
Si tr^bus vine tunc est cibem and medicina.
To feed on Pork, wherher we sup or dine,
Is worse then Mutton if we have no Wine:
But dinking Wine therewith, it is sound food,
And Physic for the body very good.
Here in this Text, the Author compares Pork with Mu^ton. If Pork be eaten
without wine, it is not so wholesome as Mu^ton; but if Pork be eaten with wine,
it nou^^^heth bast and is medicinable, because it moystneth much. And this is
to be understood, especially of roasted Pigges and Brawne well dight. And here
is to be noted that Pork salted, or dried in the smo^k^ such as men to the
Country use, called Bacon, is in no manner so wholesome as Mutton, whether it
be eaten with wine or no; but it is understood by roasted Pork, or Pigge, or
Brawn, as is beforesaid.

Ilia porcorum bona suut, ma^a sunt reliquorum.
The Tripes or Inwards of the Hog is best,
And better then of any other Beast.
Here the Author says that Hog Tripes be better than of other Beasts. The
reason is, because we eat few Entrayls, except they be full of blood, and of
very ^at Beasts, as Hogs be. Now only Hogs blood, through the ^imilitude of
complexion to man's Nature, is blood of which the Bowels be filled. And likewise
Hogs be sooner fat then any other Beasts: therefore we eat rather the Tripes
and Chitterlings of an Hog, then of other Beasts.

Impedit vrinam musium solvit cito ventrem,
Epatis emphraxim and splenis, generatque lapillum.
Sweet Wine to Urine is a stop or stay,
To looseness in the belly, it makes way.
It harmeth both the Liver and the Spleen,
Causing the Stone, as has by proof bin seen.
Here the Author she weth five inconveniences that breed by drinking of new
Wine or Must.

The first is that Must hinders or lets the urine: and this may be
understood two ways. First by reason that Must is thick and gross, it
mingleth wita the dregs, and so stops the Liver and the Reins; so that the
urine cannot easily have his course. Secondly, it lets the brine to have due
course, even as Renish Must does, and certain other subtle Wines likewise.

For there is some Renish Must, of the which the Le^s are mordicant and biting:
and while it runs into the Bladder, and constrain one to urine contrary to
the due order and manner that he was wont to do.

The second is, it loses the belly, by reason that it scoureth the entrayls
and through sharpness of the Lees it pricketh the guis, and causes the
or^u^es to avoid out: First, by reason that the Lets be mord^cative: Secondly,
through the ventosity, which such Wine causes: and thirdly, by reason that it
makes the guts slippery by way of vndigestiblenesse and grief of the stomach.

Wherefore the stomach loseneth and opens the ways that were shut.

The third inconvenience is, that must burteth the good complexion of the
Liver: For it stops the Liver through much mingling of the Lees, and causes
a disease in the Liver, called Disenteria, only through swelling, whereby the
Liver is enseebled. Thus Avicen says. And thus it ingendreth all ill color,
and all diseases of the Liver, that is to say, spices of the Dropsy.

The fourth inconvenience is that most hurts the Spleen and the disposttion
thereof, through the same cause that it does the Liver; for it stops the
Spleen, and so causes it to be hard.

The fifth hurt is that Must ingendreth the Stone, land especially that which
is in the Rains, which is ruddy, and lightly t^ang^ble, by reason of opilation,
that it causes through the gross substance thereof. And this is very certain,
it the Must be of very sweet Wines, whose Lees be nothing biting or sharp. For
Must that has sharp and biting Lees, preserves a man from the Stone, because
it makes one to urine often: like as some Renish Must does, that causes Sand
or Gravel to be seen in the urine: the which does often provoke one to make
water. This often making water; washes away the small Gravel that cleaves to
the man's Reyns, and so be avoydeth it.

Potus aquae sumptus sit elenti valde nocivus,
Infrigidat stomachum, ^ibum nititur fore crudum.
He that drinks water when he feeds on meat,
Does diverse harms unto himself beget:
It cooles the stomach with a crude infesting,
And voids the meat again without digesting.
Hures that ^ome by drinving of water.
Here are declared two hurts that come by drinking of Water.

The first is, drinking of Water hurts ones stomach that eats: by reason
that Water cools and looseneth the stomach and especially it destroys the
appetite.

The second hurt is, dringking of Water with meat, lets digestion, for it
makes the meat that is then eaten to be cawish after the mind of Avicen. For
as Avicen says Much Water should not be drunk after meat; because it divides
the stomach and the meat, and causes it to swim in the stomach. And he says,
That when Nature dath digest meat, and that a sufficient quantity of water is
mingled therewith: then it we drink more Water after that, it lets very much
the digestion that was begin.

And again Avicen says, ^ Avicen car, tract. 11 cap. 4. vin^.
That drinking of water should be eschewed, except it be to help the meat down,
when it slicketh or descends slowly; but with meat water should never be
taken or used.

Averroes in his Comment, shows the reason, and says, To drink water upon
the meat makes the stomach cold ere it be through hot: and makes the meat
rawish, and also it causes the meat to swim in the stomach, and will not let
it stick fast, whereas it should conveniently digest.

The operation of the stomach is, to make a good mixtion of things received
therein and to digest them well.

That done, there follows an ordinary and a natural separation of pure and
vnpure things. And as agreat quantity of water being put into a Pot, slaketh
the seething of the meat therein: so likewise it chances in the stomach by
drinking of much water.

But to drink a little quantity of water without meat before it descend down
into the stomach, is not forbidden but allowed especially if one be very
thirsty: for a little quantity of cold water taken after the foresaid manner
eases the stomach, and quenches the thirst.

The coldness of the water enforces the heat of man's body to descend to the
very bottom of the stomach, and so fortifieth the digestion thereof. Thus
says Avicen.

But know withal, that though water be more convenient to quench thirst then
wine: yet ^^ine for a man's health is more wholesome then water. And though
water universally quench thirst better then wine, because it in cold and moist:
yet to make a natural and good como^xtion of meats and to convey them to the
extreme parts of man's Body. wine is better then water. For wine (through his
subtle substance and operation) mingleth it self better with meat then water
does and nature delights more in wine then in water therefore the members
draw wine more sooner unto them, mingling it with the meat.

The miring in this manner, is as a boiling or seething of things together
which is greatly hope by the heat of the wine: but coldness of the water
lets it. So then it appears, that wine in mingling with meat, and dilating
of the same, is better then wa^er. For wine, by reason that it is subtle of
substance, and of a virtuous heat, is a mavelous piercer. And so it
follows, that wine dilateth or spreads more then water, wherein is no
virtuous heat, nor substance of air nor fire.

Furthermore, water is not so wholesome drink as wine is for water hinders the
nourishment of the body, avi 2 1 ca. de re^ aqua and vi^i.
by reason that it nourishes little or nothing at all, so that the more
watrish that the meat is. the less it nourishes. Therefore it is very
wholesome to drink wine without meat. For wine is a great and a special
nourishment, and are restorative, for it nourishes swiftly as it is aforesaid.

Further ye shall understand, that to drink water with meat, is not only
hurtful but also in many other causes, which are declared by Avicen.

First it is unwholesome for a man to drink fasting, because it pierces into
the body by all the principal members thereof, and it destroys the natural
heat: This is of a truth, if one that is truly fasting drink it. But it a
drunken man drink it fasting, it does not greatly hurt him: for a drunkard
fasting, is not utterly fasting because his stomach is not vacant, but somewhat
remains of the other days ingu^gin^ and the drinking of water in the morning,
does both wash the stomach, and represseth the vapors, and fumes, and disposes
it to receive a new sustenance.

The second hurt is, to drink water after great labor and travel, and
likewise ater the fleshly act between man and woman: for then the pores of the
body be very open, whereby the water enters into the bottom of the members,
and mortifieth the natural heat, which heat also (after the fleshly act) is
weakened.

The third inconvenience is, to drink water after baining, specially if one
bain himself fasting: for then the candites and passages of the body he very
open; wherefore the water then entering into them, hurts much, as is aforesaid.

And Avicen says. That it is to be feared, lest drinking of water, Avic. 6
quarti. suma 2 cap. ultimo.
fasting after baining, and after carnal copulation, should corrupt the
complexion and breed the Dropsy.

Fourthly, it is hurtful to drink cold water, to quench fained thirst in the
night, as it chances to sur^eytures and drunkards: for by drinking cold water,
the resolution and digestion of the salt humor is prohibited. But in case that
one be so exceeding thirsty, that neither the coldness of breathing, nor
washing of his mouth with cold water can suffi^e: then let him drink cold water
out of a cup that has a narrow mouth, or supping it, that the water may more
slowly come unto the brim of the stomach: for so it shall best quench his
thirst, and less thereof shall be drunk, and then it shall not utterly destroy
digestion.

Fifthly, it is gen^rall ill for whole folks to drink much cold water, for it
quenches natural heat, it griedeth the breast, and marreth the appetite of
the stomach, and it is very hurtful to all the sinewy members. Yet
nevertheless. Water that is temperately cold, does sometime (per accidence)
stur one to have an appetite, and makes the stomach strong in helping,
opening, and cle^sing the ways thereof.

Sunt nutritiva multum carnes vitulina.
Flesh of young Cales, on Veal is very good.
Quick in digestion nourishing the blood,
Here the Author says, that Veale nourishes very much. And thus Avicen
affirms saying. That meat that conserveth health, must be as the flesh is.
For they are of like nature, and very apt to be converted into blood: and
specially Kid, young sucking Calves and deatling Lambs. And Galen says. That
roasted Veal of six or eight weeks old, Gal. 3. ali. The best veal.
is more wholesome then Mutton, and it is sooner digested and nourishes very
much. Both of these fleshes we have spoken off before.

Sunt bona gallina, capo, turtur, sturna, columba,
Quis^ula vel mervia, phasia na, ethigoneta,
Perdix frigillus, or ex tremulus amarillus.
The Hen, the Capon, Turtle and the Stare.
The Ring-dove, Quail, Lark, Owsell fat and fair,
The Partridge Robin Red-brest, Cock of the wood,
The Pheasant, Heath-cock Morehen, all are good,
So the wild Mallard and green Ploover too,
Eaten with wisdom as we ought to do.
Here the Author shows, The best Fowls to eat.
that wild Fowls are most wholesome, to eat, to nourish man's nature, and the
number of them is fourteeen.

The fith is, Gal. 1 can. do gallinis and Ga. consiliator. 18 quest.
a Hen, the which is very wholesome to eat, Haly, Avenzoarre, and Mesuus say,
that the best Flesh of Poultry, is of a Hen that never laid, and of a Cock that
never trod Hen: for they (without superfluity) are soon turned into blood
because their property is to temper man's complexion, and their broth is the
best Medicine that can be for Lepers. As Gale^ says: That the flesh of young
Pullets augmenteth intellection, and clears the voice, and (...) the s^ed of
generation.

The second is a Capen, the flesh whereof Consiliator numbered among the
wholesome fleshes: and those fleshes with the other aforesaid, the stomach (of
his own property) does digest.

The third is a Turtill, which also nourishes well, and ingendreth good blood:
wherefore Avicen says, There is no fowls flesh better then a Tu^les or Hens,
nor more subtle: but yet they nourish not so much as the Partridge.

The fourth (after the opinion of some) is a Sta^e: this Bird should be eaten
gonng. Some other call this Foul Starna, Avi. 2 cap. ca. de cane.
the which Rasis prayseth above all other Fowls, saying, A Sterling flesh is
lightest of all other Fowls, Rasis 3. alin. i
and wholesome for them that will keep a slender diet.

And by this may be understood a great Foul, as a gray Goose, whereof the
flesh is right commendable, and specially when it is young.

And on this wise Alman^, understands, preferring this flesh before other. Or
else by a Stare may be understood certain small Partridges, whereof Moses
seems to understand, where he says to the Jews: Likewise Stares are
unwholesome for our King for they constrain and indurate the belly.

And this propriety some ascribe unto Partridges also because their flesh (as
Rasis says) does bind the belly.

The fifth is a Ring-Dove, or other Dove, whereof the flesh is Choleric and as
Rasis says, is exceeding hot, and lightly ingenoreth the Ague. And therefore
Pigeons be better baked with sour Grapes then roasted: because by the sour
Grapes the heat engendered in the blood is allaid.

And the young Pigeons ready to fly be the most wholesome to eat, for such be
of light digestion and of better humor. For the young Pigeons not yet able to
fly, are superfluously hot, and moist: Whereby they engender gross humors, as
Avicen says.

But old Pigeons for their over great heat, drought, and difficulty of
digestion are to be eschewed, and likewise old Turtles.

The sixth is a Quail: some Doctors say that a Quail is of light substance, Avi.
2 can. cap decolumbis.
and ingendreth good blood, and is very wholesome for whole folks. After the
mind of Isaac. Quails are worse then any other wild Fowls: for they are not to
be praised, neither for their nourishment nor for digestion. For through eating
of their flesh the Cramp is to be feared, Avi 2 can. ca. de cor.
as Avicen says.

And be says, that the reason is in the substance of their flesh, that they
engender the Cramp.

And for this cause Frenchmen bake and eat Quails with soft buttery cheese.
Yet by the Quail may be understood another Bird, a little bigger then the
aforesaid Partridge, of the same color, with red feet and bill, and of a
deliciou^ savor.

And on this wise Rasis takes a Quail, when he prefers the flesh thereof
above the flesh of a Sta^e, and all other Fowls.

The seventh is an Owsell, which likewise should be eaten young.

The eighth is a Pheasant, which of all Physicians is numbered for one of the
best fleshes. For the flesh of that Fowl is most wholesome for man's nature, and
it is meat for Princes and great Estates. Consiliator says, That the wild
Pheasant is both best for health and strength. And also peradventure
universally, for as much as they be like unto Hens, and well near of the same
shape: and they be dryer of air, and of seeding, and of larger exercise.

The ninth is a Woodcock, the flesh of this Bird is specially wholesome.

The tenth is a Partridge, Avi. 2 can. ca. de cubigine. Gal. 3 alim. c. 1 and
11 de ingenien ca. 2.
Whose flesh, as Avicen says, is subtle, and a great fatter, yet it scowreth
away the Dropsy, comfort the stomach, and also augmenteth carnal lust, and
nevertheless it is a binder.

And this flesh Galen prefers above all other, because it is said. that the
customable eating of this flesh comfort the memory.

The eleventh is a Ruddock, called Robin red-breast, it eats grapes, and
flees swiftly as a State does: but it nourishes better then a Stare does, and
they haunt much about the Wines, and they be drunk by eating of Grapes, and
they be best in season to eat about Halo^tide.

The twelfth is Orex, which (as some say) is a Pheasant Hen, or a More Hen,
the flesh is of good nourishment.

The thirtienth is a Bird called Tremulus, which Bird commonly abides near the
Seacoast, and is less in quantity then a Hen, and russe^ of color, it
cries loud, and flees swiftly, and when it plumeth upon the earth, the ^ayle
waggeth still, and therefore is called Tremulus, or the green Ploover, and upon
the head grows a long tuft of feathers, yet it is not the same bird, the
which is vulgarly called a wagtayl.

The fourteinth and last is, Amarillis, which also is a Water-^aule, like unto
a Ducke, but it is wild, And to speak generally, among souls to eat, they be
best praised, that be swiftest in flight. And as the flesh of the foresaid
fowls are of a commendable nourishment and of cas^e digestion: so likewise the
flesh of some Fowls is of a discommendable nourishment, and hard to digest,
and of vnequail complexion. As the flesh of O^ese, Peacocks and ^ame Malards,
and universally of all fowls that have long necks, long bills, and live upon
the Water. And so is the flesh of Sparrowes, which are exceeding hot and
intemperate, and stirs to bodily lust.

But touching the election of fowls flesh, ye shall understand, that their
natural nourishing must be considered that is, whether they be restorative,
light of d^gestion, light of sustance, or of subtle operation, and so after
their diverse properties) to praise them. Wherefore Galen beholding the easy
alteration and subtilty of Partridges flesh prefers them But Rasis with
Israc, considering the subtility and lightness, of the State prayseth th^e
best. Isaac also, after the diverse intentions of Wild Fowls flesh prayseth
diverse. Avicen commends the Turtles flesh above other, either in having
respect to the propriety, whereby it strengthn^th or comfort a man's
understanding, or else by the Country of Arabia where Avicen was born^ for
their Turtles, are better then in other Countries.

Furthermore know that the flesh of ^oules is more wholesome then of four
legged beasts; especially for them that forsake labor, and give themselves to
study and contemplation, because it is sooner digested. Galen says: That the
flesh of fowls is sooner digested then of beasts and especially of Partridges;
Gal. 3 Alimen 1.
which ingendreth clean and pure blood, that is disposed to augment, and sharp
the operations of the brain, the which is man's understanding cogitation and
memory.

Si pisces molles sunt magna corpore tolles,
Si pisces duri parvi sunt plus valituri.
The Fish of soft and biggest body take,
If hard and little do not them forsake.
This Text teaches us two knowledges, touching the choice of fish. For either
Fish is hard or soft: if it be soft, then the elder is the better. The reason
is, because softness comes of humidity, the which is more digested, in old
fish then in young: and so when such Fishes be young they engender much more
ph^egm then when they be old. And so it appears, that an old E^ls is
wholsomer then a young, as some say. But if such Fish be hard, it is wholesomer
then young, that is to say, it is sooner digested, as P^kes and Perbe, because
their hardness res^sieth digestion. For Avicen says: Of hard Fishes take the
smallest: and of soft Fishes choose the greatest.

Lucius, and Perca, laxaula, and alblca, tinea,
Gurnus, plagicia, cum ca^pa galbio, truta.
Pike, Perch, and Sole, are known for dainty Fish,
The Whiting also is a Courtly dish:
Tench Gurnard and a well-grown Plaice in May,
Carp, Rochet, Trout, these are good meat I say.
Here are rehearsed ten sorts of Fishes, that he very wholesome for man's body.
The first is a P^ke, called the tyrant of fishes, because he not only devoureth
fishes of other kind, but also of his own kind: and therefore on him these
verses were made.

Lucius est piscis Rex and tyrannus aquarum,
Aquo non differt Lucius iste parum.
Among our Fish, the Pike is King of all,
In water none is more tyrannical.
The fish of Pike is hard, and a Pike is swift in smimming.

The second is a Perch derived of this Verb Parco, pardis to forbear, or to
spare, but by a contrary sense: for a Perch spares no fish, but wounds other
fishes with his fins on his back, nor a Pike dare not adventure upon a Perch,
but as Albertus says, There is a natural amity between the Perch and the
Pike.

For if the Pike be once hurt of another fish, he is healed with great
difficulty. And when he is hurt he goes unto the Perch, the which seeing him
hurt, touches and sucketh his wound, and so the Pike is healed again. And the
Perch is likewise an hard Fish,

The third is a Sole or Sea Fish, called a Sold, which is a special good fish.

The fourth is a Whiting.

The fith is a Tench, which is a fresh water fish, and the skin thereof is
slippery and slimy, and somewhat black, and the meat thereof is hard.
Whenever one will dress a Pike, a Perch, or a Tench, he must take the
skin away.

The sixth is a Gurnus, which is a Sea fish. This Fish is as great in quantity
as a man's middle finger, the which is eaten with the head and fins,

The seventh is a Playce.

The eighth is a Carpe, a fresh water fish, the which is much slimy: but great
estates have them sod in wine, and so the sliminess is away.

The ninth is a Rochet a Seafish, and it is a Fish of hard meat and wholesome.
Some other texts have Govio, that is a Go^on, which is a very wholesome fish.

The Tenth is a Trout, the which (in eating) is like a Salmon, and yet it is no
Salmon: It is long and not gross, it is taken in great Rivers, and will suffer
it self to he rubbed and clawed, being in the water, and so it is taken, and
thereof Pasties be made with spices, and it is a right dainty fish.

Now as touching the choice of fish, ye shall first understand, that fish (if
it be compared to Flesh) is of less nourishment, and is lighter of digestion,
and the nourishment thereof is full of phlegmatic superfluities, cold and
moist, and they be hardly digested, and abide long in the Stomackc. And by
reason that the Stomach labors in digesting them, and that otherwhile they
be corrupted in the Stomach; they retain a certain putrified quality, and
engender thirstinesse. And surely, the nourishment of wholesome flesh is better
then fish.

Secondly, know, that Seafish is better in the Regiment of Health, then any
other of the same sort, which is taken in fresh water. For their nourishment is
not so superfluous, and yet is more nearer to the nature of flesh. But because
Sea fish is harder, then other of the same sort, Conditions of good fish.
that is taken in fresh Water; therefore it is of more difficulty in digestion,
and of more pure nourishment. Yet notwithstanding fresh water fish is more
wholsomer for sick ^^lk by reason of their feeble digestion.

Thirdly fish, as well of Salt water as fresh, should be discreatly chosen: the
which when it is dressed is white, and not clammy, that is brittle, and not
very gross; it must have a good savor, that does not soon putrify, and of a
good color. Nor it may not be bred in Lakes or ponds, nor in filthy places nor
in water wherein grows ill weeds. And they ought not to bet too old nor too
young, they should be swift of moving, and o^ small clammishnes.

But if it be Seafish, we must choose such as are taken in rivers a good way
from the Sea, and such as have the other aforesaid conditions. And the more
skaly that Fish is, the better it is, and so it is likewise understood by the
fins; for many fins and skales betoken the pureness of the fishes substance.
Also among sea fish, they be best that that are bred in the deepest water, the
which ebbeth and flows. And therefore the Fish that it taken in the North
Sea, that is more surging, and more tempestuous, and more swift in ebbing and
flowing is better, then the fish that is taken in the dead or the South Sea.

And ye shall likewise understand of fresh water fish: for fish bred in deep
water is better then the other of the same sort being bred in shallow waters,
and little brooks. And hereby may sufficiently be known, what kind of fish
should be chosen. For bestiall fish, such as the Sea Swine, Dog-fish and
Dolphin, are unwholesome in the Regiment of Health, because they be hard of
digestion, and of superfluous humors.

Nor in the meat of the aforesaid Fishes, the above numbered conditions appears
not, as whiteness, subtility, no such other. For it those Fishes (and such
like) chance to be eaten, they should not be sod so soon as they be taken:
but they should be kept a few days after, till time the meat of them do
mollify and ware tender, without corrupting of their substance. And also the
aforesaid fishes be heifer, being a little corned with Salt, then fresh, or
viterly salt,

Now among all Seafish (the aforesaid conditions considered) the R^chet and
Gurnard some to be most wholesome: for their meat and substance to most pure,
and next to them is a Place and a Sole. But the m^at of those two is more
clammy, less frangible, less white, more gross; and less subtle: Nor the
savor and smell is not so delicious.

Some hold, that the Whyting is more commendable then the rochet. It is not so
clammy as a Plaice and a Sole and the meat thereof is frangible enough, but the
relish smell, color, pureness of substance and mobility considered, it is not
to good as a rochet and gurnard,

The like ye shall understand of Herring, and the fish called Morua, being
young enough, they draw near to the foresaid fishes in goodness, so that they
have the above said conditions: yet they are grosser and more clammy then the
foresaid ashes.

But as for Salmon, Tuthut and Makerell, they are not so good, because they be
much gross, more clammy, hard of digestion, and fuller of superfluity.
Therefore they be only wholesome for Laborers, and young folks of strong
complexion: and their clamminesse, grosseness, and coldness may be taken away
with certain sauces.

Among fresh Water Fish (the foresaid conditions considered) the ^earch and the
Pike are the best, so that they be fat: and next to them are the Vendosies,
and then Lobsters. And though the Perch be more shaly then the foresaid
fishes: yet the meat thereof is as white frangible, and subtle, as the Pike
and Carp, as it is often found in ponds.

Now universally the best fresh water Fish of the same sort, is that which is
taken in water that is stony in the bottom, running Northward, deep, and
laboring much whereunto runs no ordures of the Cities, and wherein no
Weeds grow,

Crevesces both of the sea and rivers, are very nutritive, because they do not
lightly corrupt the stomach: but they be hard of digestion.

Furthermore note, that fresh Fish does m^yst the body, and engenders milk
and seed of generation: and is very wholesome for chollerick folks. Also after
great travel or much labor, we should not eat Fish, for then it soon
corrupts in the Stomach. And they that have a weak Stomach, or full of ill
humors, ought to beware of eating of fish.

Moreover, gross fish corned with a little salt is better then fresh fish: and
fish of any long time salting, is vnwholesom. Eating of Fish good and bad.
Also fish and flesh together should not be eaten, nor fish and white meats nor
fish should not be eaten after other meats. Also fish a little salted, and a
small quantity thereof is wholesome: it stirs up the appetite, and fortifieth
it, if one have an appetite thereto,

Vocibus, anguilla pravae sunt, fi comedantur,
Qui physicam non ignorant, hac testificantur,
Caseus anguill^ nimis obsunt fi comedantur,
Ni saepe bibas, and rebibendo bibas.
Who knows not Physic, should be nice and choice,
In eating Eeles, because they hurt the voice:
Both Eeles and Cheese without good store of wine,
Well drunk with them, oftends at any time.
The Author says here, that the Eele is an unwholesome Fish, and specially it
hurts the voy^e. And this he proves by the saying of Physicians, and
Students of natural Philosophy. The reason is, because an Eele is a slippery
fish, clammy, and specially a stopper: and it wants much much of the
conditions of good fish before spoken.

Also this that is said by an Eele, may be understood of Lampreyes: although
Lampreys be a little wholsomer then E^les and less je^pe rdous, because that
there be not so clammy and gross, at Eles be.

And though these Fishes be delicious to taste, yet they are very perilous:
because their generation in the water, is like the generation of Serpents on
the earth. Wherefore it is to be doubted lest they be venomous: and therefore
the heads and tails, in the which the venom is wont to be, and likewise the
String within, should in no wise be eaten,

Also it is very good to plunge them alive in good wine, to take away their
clamminesse, and to let them lie still therein till they be dead. And then let
them be dressed with Galendine, made of the best spices, as great Estates Cooks
are wont to de^: but it is good to perboyle them (twice before) in Wine and
Water, and that broth being cast away, to sees them thoroughly: and to make
Galendine for them: or else to bake them, or fry them in green Sauce with
strong Spices, and a little good Wine in Winter: but in Summer, to dress them
with a little Wine Verjuyce and Vinegar: yet he that can forbears these two
Fishes, does best.

Further the Text says, that Cheese, and Eeles do hurt much when they be
eaten: but this is to be understood, it ye eat any great quantity thereof.
The cause of Cheese is before showed, at Persica, Poma, etc. and of Eeles here
now before.

At follows in the Text, that if these things he taken with often drinking of
Wine; their hurtfulnesse is amended: yet this should not be understood of
subtle and piercing wins, nor of wine that is given in way of drink
conductive: because such wine should not be given vpon'any meat the which meat
engenders ill humors when it is eaten: nor yet before nor after is digested,
as Avicen says. avi, 3 ca. de reg. aqua and vini.
For then such wine induces great hurt, for it causes ill humors, which are
engendered of that drink, to enter into the extreme parts of the body; which
peradventure were not able to enter, without help and leading of the wi^e.

But this, is to be understood of strong wine, not greatly pierring, often and in
small quantity given or taken to the intent to mix the meat together: for such
wine does allay the malice of the meat, and comfort digestion, and directs
the phlegmatic cold humors. Wherefore it helps the digestion of ch^es^ and
Eeles, which are of very ill digestion.

Inter prandendum sit soap parumque bibendum,
Si jumas Ovum, molle sit arque novum.
In feeding at our meals some Doctors think,
Oft-times, and yet but little, we should drink.
In eating Eggs choose them are soft and new,
For otherwise, great perils may ensue.
Here the Author teaches two things. The first is, that one at dinner and
supper should eat well, and drink often, and yet but a little at once: and not
to do as a bruit beast does, that eats hie fill of meat, and drinks
afterward: for the better the drink to mingled with the meat, the sooner the
meat is mollified, and the more capable of digestion.

Now here is to be noted, that there are three manner of drinkings. The first
is that which mingleth the meat together. The second is that which dilateth.
The third is that which quenches the thirst.

The first that we speak of, is to be understood of drink mingled with our
meat, though we be not thirsty, Thus we ought to drink, even as we have
eaten a little. For (except a better reason) I say, we may not abide till the
meats end, nor till we be a thirst. And this manner of drinking is specially
good for them, which feed on meat that is actually dry: as appears by sick
folks, that eat dry bread.

But such as be in good temper, should not drink to quench their thirst, till
the meals end: for then comes the true thirst, by reason the meat is hot and
dry. It is not very reasonable, that thirst and hunger should assayl us both
together: for they are of contrary appetite. And thus one should drink,
according as the thirst is more or less.

Drinking dilative, is most convenient after the first digestion regularly, and
a little before we take other meat. And this manner of drinking is wholesome,
when the meats (before taken) be gross in substance: nor thus to drink we
may not tarry till we be thirsty. For this drinking prexareth the stomach to
receive other meat, and causes the meat that is digested, to depart from the
stomach to the Lider: nor this drinking should not be in any great quantity, to
the end it may be the sooner digested. For before it be digested, it goes not
to the liver: And this is of truth, except such drink dilative be water, in
which we must not tarry till digestion, before it come to the Liver. But
regularly, convenient drink dilative or permixtive. ought to be wine, Ale,
Beer, Perry, or such like, but wine is best of all.

Secondly, the grosser, dryer, and colder the meat is, the stronger the drink
permixtive and dilative should be. And contrariwise, the b^tter, subtiler, and
moister the meat is, the weaker the drink permixtive and dilative should be.
And the more subtle, hot and digestible the meat is, the weaker the drink or
wine ought to be. Wherefore one ought to drink stronger wine with beef then with
Chickens, and stronger Wine with fish then with flesh.

The last doctrine, is, that if we will eat an Egg, it must be rere roasted,
and new. The cause thereof is before showed.

Pisam laudare decrevimus ac reprobare,
Pellibus ablat is est bona satis pisa
Est inflativa cum pellibus atque nociva.
Pease may be praised, and discommended too,
According as their nature is to do.
The Husks avoided then the pulse is good,
Well nourishing not hurtful to the blood.
But in the Husks they are gnawing meat,
And in the stomach cause inflations great.
Here the Author says, that Peason some way may be unwholesome. They be
very wholesome to eat when the husks be taken away: for if they be eaten in
the husks they inflate. And therefore it is not artificial to eat them in the
husks, because the nature of that within, and the husks do disagree: for the
one labors to be loosed and to go out, but the other withstandeth and
binds, as Isaac says. Wherefore they cause a rumbling, gnawing, and
inflation in the belly. Yet Peason only do not this, but also all Pulse, as
Beans, Chyches, Chestons, and such like, and specially such as have much huek,
as beans and black rice. Also the husk of them all nourishes worse then the
pith within.

Now here is to be noted, that there is a manner of white round Peason, whereof
the cod is very small and thin: and one may eat these Peason (with the husk)
more surely then other, although it were better to hull them. And albeit that
the reason aforesaid is true, touching all pulse, yet ye ^ha^l understand, that
the huls of green Pulse is less, and less of. versity is between the husk,
and the pith within, and more easse to digest, And therefore some say they be
more wholesome for folks in health; but yet it is not so, because green^ Pulse
is of great superfluity, and corruptible substance, wherefore they be less
wholesome for whole folks. And note this for a truth that dry pulse if the
viter husk be taken away, is more wholesome then green but green is better then
dry vnhusked.

Further the substance of all pulse is inflative, and hard of digestion, and
their ill nourishment is unwholesome in the Regiment of Health: but the broth of
them is wholesome, because the broth makes the belly laxative, and precureth
urine, and vnstoppeth the veins. Wherefore it is wholesome at such times as
folks use gross and opilutive meats, as on fasting days. For this broth or
postage conveniently made, is not so hurtful as the substance^ therein is no
inflation, nor difficulty of nourishment or digestion.

This broth is made one this wise. The Rice Peason must be laid in warm water,
and therein to be all rubbed with ones hand a good while then after, in the
foresaid water, they should be tempered all the night: and therein (the next
night following) to be boiled twice or thrice, and then dreff, and so served.
But when the hour of dinner draws near, you may dress it with Cinnamon and
Saffron, and a little quantity of wine put thereto, which done then boil it
once, and to eat it at the beginning of dinner or supper, and the broth or
po^^age of Rice and of round white peason is very wholesome, and friendly to man's
nature, and so likewise is their substance.

La^ Ethicis sanum, Caprinum post Camelinum,
Ac nutritivum plus om^^^bus est Asni^um,
Plus nutritivum Vaccinum sit and Ovinum;
Si febriat caput, and doleat, non est been sanum.
Goats milk, nor Camels milk to drink is good,
When Agues or Consumptions touch the blood,
They nourish well. But (beyond all) some say,
Milk of an Ass does nourish more then they.
Yet when as Headache or hot Fevers fall.
The milk of Kine and sheep are best of ail.
Here the Author teaches us certain lessons, To chusemilk
whereby to choose milk.

First Goats milk is wholesome for them that be in a consumption, or are lean,
or that have a consuming Agu^. And Avicen says; Avi. 1 can cap. dela. and 1 3.
trait. 2 cap. de remor. medic. enmact. Ethicos.
That Goats Milk and Asses Milk is good for them that be in contemplation, by
reason that the Goat, milk is temperate and nourishes much. And next to this
is Camells milk: because it is subtle very to ^^^trish, and moist, and by
reason that it is very moist it nourishes but little: and therefore it is not
so wholesome for them as Goats milk is: But yet Camels milk, newly after
following, is wholesome for them that have the Dropsy, and for them that have
any disease in the Liver; Avi. 2 can. ca. de lect.
Because it reviveth the liver as Avicen says.

Secondly, he says, That Asses Milk is most wholesome for dry folks in a
Consumption. This is of truth, if ye will compare Asses milk with milk of
other bruit beasts: because it inclines to coldness and humidity, and is
sub^ile, it sooner enters and more slowly congealeth, then the milk of any
bruit beast, as Galen says. The same says Avicen, and that next to Woman's
milk, there is none like to Asses milk. And he says, If any help the Fever
Hectic, it is Asses Milk: yet to compare Asses milk with a Woman's milk, it
is not so wholesome. For a Woman's Milk, taken by sucking, is most wholesome, as
Avicen says. By reason that a Woman's milk is cold, moist, and more like to
man's nature, it enters more swiftly, and is digested more sooner, and
nourishes better. And this milk is to be given to them that be in a
consumption, that should be milked as near the Patients bedde-side as is
possible and forthwith to minister it unto him, least the air corrupt it.

And here is to be noted, that in some cases, sour or butter milk is better
for some folks in a consumption, then either a woman's milk, or Asses. First,
when by this Fever Ethick they be cast in a la^ke. The second is, when they
suspect ceagulatien of the Milk in the Stomach, either by vehement heat of
the Fever, or else, because the stomach of it self is chollerick, the Milk
should turn to choler.

The third is, when the Ethick Fever is coupled with a putrified Fever:
specially, when there is not many opilations in the interior paris. For sows
milk restrains the belly and does not lightly turn into choler, because the
buttrinesse of it is gone, whereby the milk does lightly inflame: nor in a
putrified Fever it is not soon putrified. The The fourth, if the Stomach be
foul, milk does lightly corrupt therein. The fifth is, when he that has the
Ethicke disease, abhors the dulce and clean milk, but not the sour or butter
milk.

The third lesson is, that Cow milk and sheeps milk are more nutritive, for
they be fa^ter and grosser then other, as Avicen says. Avi 2 can. (...). de
Lacte.
And all those beasts Milk that in bringing forth their young continue longer
then a woman is unwholesome: but the milk of those that bear equally with a
woman. is most wholesome, as Cow Milk.

But Rasts says, That the Cow Milk is the grossest milk that any beast gives:
and therefore is wholsomer then any other, for them that desire to be fat.

The fourth Lesson is, that milk hurts them that have the Ague or the head
ach: The cause why is before showed at Persica Poma.

Lenit and humectat, soluit sine sebre butirum,
Butter does soften; moisten and make loose beside,
Those bodies where no Fever does abide,
Here the Author shows three properties of butter.

The first is, Butter moll^sieth the belly and makes it slippery by reason
that it is oily. The propertio^o, butter,


The second is, that butter is moist, for it is made of the best parts of the
milk, wherefore it must needs be moist, seeing that the milk is moist whereof
it is made.

The third is, that it loses the belly, and that is by the slipperinesse that
it causes in the gu^s.

These three properties Avicen rehearses. And these three properties Butter
induces in a body, that is not sick, of a Fever: for it hurts them that
have an ague, by reason that the vn^tuosity of the Butter augmenteth the heat
of the Fever.

And albeit that butter causes the foresaid properties: yet by reason that it
is over moist and vn^tlous, it is unwholesome in the way of meat, and specially
to eat much thereof. For it ingendreth loathsomeness: and makes the meat to
swim about the brim of the stomach: and laxeth the belly out of measure, and
provokes one to vomit: therefore butter should in no wise (as meat) be eaten
in any great quantity and specially it should not be eaten after other meat,
but to use it with other it is very wholesome.

Incidit aqua lavat et penetrat, mundat quoque laectis.
Whey is incisive washing piercing too,
Cleansing, and purging where it is sit to do.
Here the Author shows four properties of Whey. The properties of whey.


The first is it is incisive or subtle.

The second, it is washing or scouring.

The third, it is piercing, which property proceeds of the first.

The fourth is, it cleanses or purges.

Avicen reciting these properties says. That Whey is subtilative, washing and
loosing, and therein is no mordication. Rasis says, That Whey does expel
ruddy choler, skabs, and pushes, and also pimples in the face. And also it is
wholesome for them that have the Iaundes and also for them that be distempered
by too much drinking of wine.

Caseus est frigidus, stipa^^s, grossus quoque dur^s.
Caseus and panis bonus est cibus, hic been san^s.
Si non sunt sani tune hunc non iungite pani.
Cheese is by Nature cold, stuffing, gross and hard:
Yet good with bread, where sickness is debarred,
When being sound in health, for them it is good,
But if not joynd with bread, unwholesome food.
Here the Author recites four properties of Cheese. Four properties of cheese.


The first is that Cheese is naturally cold. And this is to be understood of
green Cheese, the which is cold and moist, and not of old Cheese, the which is
hot and dry, as Avicen says. Or else it may be understood of Cheese that
cruddeth only of the milk, without mingling of any other thing, for there is
some Cheese naturally hot, that heateth the stomach and biteth the t^ngue, by
mingling of other things therewith, as some cheese that is green in color, of
which if one eat much in quauntity it does heat and inflame the body.

The second property is that Cheese makes one costive, and this is of truth
specially if it be hard and made with much renles.

The third property is, that all Cheese engenders gross humors: for all
Cheese is ma^e of the grosser and more earthy part of the milk.

The fourth property is, that Cheese binds the womb and this, and the second
is all one.

Further the Text says, that though Cheese that is eaten alone, be unwholesome
by reason that it causes ill digestion: yet if one eat a little thereof with
bread, if shall digest with the bread, and not otherwise. And this is of truth,
for whole folks and not for sick folks to eat. We spoke before of Cheess, at
Nutrit and impinguat, etc.

Ignari Medicime dicunt esse nocivum,
Sed tamen ignorant cur nocumenta feram.
Languenti stomach^ Caseus addit opens,
Si post sumatur terminat ille dapes,
Qui Physicam non ignorant haec testificantur.
Cheese does Apology his own defense,
When they (unskild in Physic) urge pretense
That is hurtful yet through ignorance:
Know not whereby his hurtfulnesse does chance.
The stomach languishing, Cheese does releeve,
And (after stuffing cates) great ease does give,
A modicum thereof, after all other food,
By best Physicians, is allowed for good.
Here the Author blames them that absolutely reprove the use of Cheese, and
expresses two utilities thereof.

First, Cheese comfort^th a sick stomach. But know then, that all Cheese does
not ease every diseased stomach. In some cases, all Cheese hurts the stomach
by seldom knitting, and every stomach which is weakened by long sicknesses. But
new green Cheese, and of small clamminesse, comfort a hot stomach, as
Rasis says, and it represseth his browninesse and heat. And also it comfort
a dry stomach that is moist. And old Cheese, or very tart, or much cruddy,
burieth much such Stomachs. But old Cheese, or very cruddy Cheese comfort
the stomach, about the which hangs much phlegm; for such cheese with his
tar^nesse cutteth and scoureth away the phlegm. But new and soft cheese hurts
such a stomach right much. The second vtility is, that cheese that is eaten
after other meat, makes it to descend down into the place of digestion, that
is into the bottom of the stomach. All this they know that have the very
science of Physic, and Rasis says, That a little quantity of tart Cheese,
eaten after meat, fortifieth the mouth of the stomach, and takes away the
overmuch society and loathing, the which sweet and unctious meats are wont to
engender above the stomachs mouth.

Inter prandendum fit saepe parumque bibendum.
Vi minus aegrotes, non inter fercula potes.
Often, yet little, drink in dinner time,
But between meals, you must from drink decline;
That sickness may in power lesle prevail,
Which else (through drinking) sharply does assayl.
Here the Author teaches two lessons.

The first is, that a man (at his meat) should drink little and often: but this
thing is already declared.

The second lesson is, that between meals one must forbear drink, especially,
if the meat that he did eat be undigested in the stomach except necessity
constrain him to drink; for drinking then, lotteth and breaks digestion of
the meat that is before eaten. For it causes the meat to descend from the
stomach undigested, and marreth the appetite, it grieveth the body, and
engeadreth the Fevers, and other Diseases.

Vt vites paenam, de potibus incipe coenam.
Physicians much contend about this Text,
If that with sickness thou would not be vexed.
With drink begin thy Supper. Others say,
Till thou have eaten first, keep drink away.
The Comment therefore yields the best direction
Of drinking when we go to our refection.
Here the Author says, that one ought to begin his Supper with drink Some
expound this verse thus. If thou w^^^ eschew sickness, drink at Supper ere
thou begin to eat. But this exposition is reprooved. For after the judgment of
Physstians a man should begin his Supper with meat. and not with drink. And
although this book was made for Englishmen yet they keep not this rule: for at
what hoar of the day soever they drink, they eat first a morse^^ of bread.
Therefore this verse may be expounded otherwise: taking drink for meat moist
and easse of digestion, as Hypocrates takes drink when be says, It is easier
to fill one with drink then with meat. So that the sentence of this verse
should be thus. It is better to begin our supper with drink, that is with meat
moist and easse of digestion, then with meat that is gross, hard, and of ill
digestion. The reason is if one eat meat, that is moist and easy of digestion,
after meat that is gross, and hard of digestion, by reason of the digestive
heat of the night, it will be digested long before the gross meats. And when it
cannot (for the gross meat that is undigested) have issue it burns overmuch:
or if it get issue, it plucketh with if some part of the gross meat that is
undigested. Therefore it is best to begin with meat moist and easy of
digestion: that when it is digested, if may (without let) issue out.

Singula post ova pocula some nova,
Post pisces nux sit, post carnes casens adsit.
Vnicanux prodest, necat altera, tertia mors est.
A new laid Egg craves a good cup of wine,
Drunk after it, it will the blood refine.
Nuts after fish, Cheese after flesh, is best,
In both these, they ate helpful to digest,
One Nut does well, the second does offend,
Beware the third, it brings a deadly end.
Here be certain lessons.

The first is, to drink a good draught of Wine; after one has eaten a new laid
Egg rere roasted, is very wholesome. The reason may be, because a new laid
Egg rere roasted, is of right great nourishment, and easily digesteth, and it
is of that sort, that in small quantity it nourishes much: and principally the
yolk, as is before said at Ova recentia. So that the wine, which is friendly of
nature, causes that the E^ is more destrously drawn by the nourishing members:
and helps it to enter. Another cause may be. An Egg descends slowly down:
and drink helps it to descend.

The second Doctrine is, to eat nuts after Fish instead of cheese. For ^^ts, by
reason of their dryness, hinders the engendring of phlegm, that is wont to be
engendered of fish. And for this cause, nuts are the last service in Lent.

The third lesson is, that after flesh, we nust eat Cheese and not nuts, for
nuts do dry over much, and so does not cheese: but it causes the meat to
descend to the bottom of the stomach where the virtue of digestion is. And this
is certain, it the cheese be neither too old, nor too new.

Further, a Nutmeg.
the Text has in the last verse, that a Nutmeg is wholesome for the body: It
makes the month to favor well it comfort the sight* and likewise the
Liver, and the spleen, and specially the mouth of the Stomach, as Avicen says.
But the other common nut called a Walnut, is hurtful. This Walnut, as Avicen
says, Does instate, it engenders Ventositie in the Womb, avi. 2 can ca. de
nuc. musen^a
it is hard of digestion, and stirs one to vomit, and that is, by reason
that it is hot. But the third Nut, that is the nut of the cross-bow, is death,
for the Crosse-bow kills men. Or else we may understand the nut Nethell:
which as Avicen says, is venomous, wherefore it sleyeth,

Add potum piro, nux est medicina veneno,
Fert pira nostra pirus, sine vino; sunt pira virus.
Sipira sunt virus, sit maledict a pirus.
Si coquus, antidotum pira sunt, sed cruda venenim.
Cruda gravant stomachum, relevant pira cocta gravatum,
Post pira da potum, post pomum vade cacatum.
When we eat Pears, boldly we may drink wine,
Nuts against poison are a Medicine.
Pears eaten (without wine) are perilous,
Because raw pears are counted venomous.
Being boiled or baked, weak stomachs they do cheer,
Because restoratives they then appear.
By being raw, the stomach they offend.
But comfort (otherwise) does them attend,
Drink after Pears, and after Apples, use
The course that nature no way can refuse.
In the first verse here the Author teaches us to drink Wine after Pears, for
Pears (as it has been before sufficiently declared at length) engender
ventosity: and of their property they cause the chollick and engender blood
full of aquosity. And therefore with them, one should drink strong wine, which
consumes those ventosities and a^uosities engendered of Pears.

Secondly he says, that nuts are a remedy against venom: as it has been
showed at Alia nux, etc.

Further, in the second and third verse; he shows, that Pears that be eaten
without Wine, are denemous, that is, hurtful to man's nature, The cause is
showed in the first verse. Yet for all that, Pears be not venomous simply, for
if they were they would kill us, and Pears (so doing) are accursed.

In the fourth verse be shows that raw Pears, are venomous, that is to say,
hurtful: for they make the humors to boil, and breed the chollick, fleam, and
scab: yet if they be sod, they be medicinable, in manner as is before said,
that is to say* with wine: and specially if they be eaten after other meat, for
they expulse the dregs.

In the fifth verse he says, that raw Pears grieve the Stomach; for they
hinder digestion, and enflate: but sod Pears relieve the Stomach that is
grieved, and dispose it naturally,

In the last verse are two things.

The first is, after Pears we must drink for the cause before said.

The second is, that after the eating of Apples, we must go to siege: for
Avicen says. av. 2 can. ca. de po.
If sweet or sour Apples find any gross humors in the stomach, they force them
to descend from thence to the guts: because Apples are much inflative and
engender ventosities, which nature expels to the inferior parts.

Cerasa si comedas tibi coufert grandia dona.
Expurgant stomachum, nucleus lapidem tibi t^llit.
Et de carne sua sanguis critque bonus.
By eating Cheries, great good does arise,
To such as use them, for the learned wise
Say, that they purge the stomach, and beside,
The broken stones and kernels have been tried,
To break the bladder stone, breed wholesome blood,
To fat and feed the body they be good.
Here the Author declares three commodities that come by eating of Cherries.

The first is, that Cherries purges the stomach. Eating of cherries.
This some say is truth, when that the stones he broken and eaten withal: for
these two together by their natural property, do secure and cleanse.

The second is, that the kernel of the Cherry stone, by self-vertue, breaks
the stones in ones reins, for bladder, and if it be eaten dry or made in milk.

The third is, that the substance, or meat of Cherries engenders very good
blood, and it comfort and fa^^eth the body. And this is proved by
experience, for we see that Sparrowes, which are great eaters of Cheries, in
Chery-time their livers be far greater then in other seasons, whereby it
appears, that Cherries increase and comfort the Liver.

Yet here is to be noted, that there be two sorts of Cherries, gross and
small. And also of the grosser, there are two sorts some are sweet, and some
sour. All dulce, and small Cheries are unwholesome, for they be lightly
corrupt, and breed vermin. The gross, and sour Cheries are called Cina, and
of these are two sorts.

Some be ruddy and soft of substance, and such must be eaten fresh and new
gathered, and at beginning of dinner, their nature is to scowr the stomach, and
to provoke the appetite.

The other be black, gross, and hard of substance, and specially the sower.
And these should be eaten after dinner, or supper. The cause is, for by their
sowernes they close the month of the stomach, whereby the better and speedier
digestion follows.

Infrigidant, laxant, multum prosuus tibi pruna.
Prunes cool and loose the body very kindly,
No way offensive, but to health are friendly.
Here the Author recites two utilities, that come by eating of Prunes.

First, Prunes cool the body, and therefore Portugals that dwell in a hot
Country, sees Prunes always with their meat.

Secondly, Prunes make one to lask, by reason of their humidity and
clamminesse, as Galen says. This is truth, if they be ripe. Gal. 2 alimen.
For Prunes that be ripe, be Stipticalli and nourish little, as Avicen says.
And though Damask-Prunes have the foresaid vtility, yet properly they be
ascribed to Prunes of Armenia. For Prunes of the Country of Armenia, are better
then any other, And they unbind the womb more vehemently then any other, Avi 2
can. ca. de pru. (...)
as Avicen says: yet know, that ripe Prunes are to be used, and not unripe.

The Prunes most wholesome for man's Nature, be the long ones, that have little
substance about the stone, small, hard, and in manner dry, and the butter skin
thin, and they should not be sweet in taste, but somewhat sour, and of this
sort are Damask Prunes: The best Prunes.
and these do refresh and cools the body, as is said.

There be many other sorts of Prunes, whose use is not accepted.

There be also Prunes, called wild Prunes, the which grow in the woods; these
be not laxatide: of them water is distilled to bind the womb.

Prunes that be taken to make one lask. must first be laid in cold water, for
then they cool and moist more perfectly, and by their slipperinesse they loose
the choler that they come to: and so the Stomach is better disposed to receive
food.

And here is to be noted, that moist Prunes and new, are more alterative,
though they be of less nourishment, and of more superfluity: but dry Prunes
comfort more, and better nourish the body. And as it is by Prunes, so after the
same manner it is understood by Charries.

Yet notwithstanding, the humidity of Cherries is subtle, and not clammy,
whereby they nourist less then Prunes.

Persica cum musto vobis datur or dine justo.
Sumere sic est mos, nuethus soc^ and racemos.
Passula non spleni, tussi valet, est bona reni.
Must or sweet Wine, with Peaches we should drink
Else harm will happen by them, as most think,
And show good reasons why it should be so.
With dry old Nuts a Raysin still must go;
Because in cooling they are dull and slow.
Yet Raisins hurt the Spleen by opilation:
As Nuts are diverse, and cause inflammation,
Here the Author teaches three Doctrines.

The first is, that with Peaches we should drink Must, To drink wine with
peaches.
for two causes The first is, because Must is hot, and boyleth in our body;
which hoyling and heat fordeeth the coldness of the Peach.

The second reason is, Peaches veright cold and cool the body very much.
Therefore, that wine should be drunk upon them, which beats more then other,
and that is Must which is known by experience. The manner how we should eat
Peaches and other fruits, is declared at Persica Poma, etc. The second doctrine
is, that with old dry Nuts we Nust cat Raysins. For new gathered Nuts are
wholesome alone: but old dry Nuts are great dryers, and through their
vnctuosity they lightly inflame the body: wherefore Raysins with them must be
eaten, which restrain inflammation and dryness, by reason that they m^yst. And
of Nuts is spoken more largly as Alia nux, etc.

The third Doctrine is, that Raysins or Corans hurt the Spleen, for they cause
but opilation thereof: yet they are wholesome for the Re^ns, for by their
provoking of urine, they purs the Keyns.

Scrosa, tumor, glandes sicus cataplasmate ^edit
Iunge papaver ci; consracta foriss tenet ossa.
The evil that is termed by the Swine,
Under the chin does to the throat incline;
Swellings boyls, Kernels, all these helped are,
If you a plaster made of Fags prepare.
But if the same with poppy mingled be,
Broke-bones it knits and strengthens perfectly.
Here the Author says that Plasters made of Figs are wholesome against three
diseases: that is to say, the Swines evil, Kernels and Swellings. By Swines
evil is understood Instation under the chinne about the throat. And it is
called Scrofula a Scrofa: that is to say, a Sow or a Swine, avi 3 4 traw, 2 ca
de scrosulis.
Either because this disease chances many times to Swine, through their
gulosity, or else because the slape of this disease is like to a Swine, as
Avicen says.

By Kirnels are understood Impostumes, which commonly chance under the
arme-pittes, and in the gruyne. And by swelling may be understood Inflations
under any part of the body. A plaster made of Figs.
Wherefore to heal Impostumes, and specially to ripe them, Figs should be
sodden in water, and with the water should be mixed a little quantity of
Vinegar, the which helps the virtue of figs to enter. And when it is sub, the
Figs must beaten in a Mortar: and then mingled with a curtisle of water, that
they were sod in and so make a Plaster. A Plaster is properly a Medicine made
of some Herb or slower and the juice thereof, as this verse says.

Cum succum ponis and herham, tune Cateplasma facis. The second vtility is,
that a Plaster made of Figs and Poppy sees joyneth or sets broken bones
together again, a plaster of Ags and poppy seed.
and they must be sod together in Water, without Vinegar: and then slamp it in
a Mortar, and put thereto a little of the water that it was sod in and so lay
it to the sore.

The reason hereof may be, because Poppy seed both takes away the
sensiblenesse of the members whereby the ach (that is wont to chance in
breaking of Bones) is done away, and proveketh one to sleep. And the Figs do
draw the humidities of the body to the vtter-parts: which humidities brought to
the Bones will draw, retain or hold them together, but never perfectly knit
them.

Know withal, that there be three kinds of Poppies white, red, and black. The
red is venomous, and grows among Corn Young scholars are wont to stamp the
flowers thereof, and so make red Ink.

Pediculos, veneremque facit, sed cuilibet obstat.
Both Lice and Lust by Figs engendered are,
Of those corrupting humors they prepare,
Here be declared two operations of Figs.

First much eating of Figs makes one lousse; Eating of ^igs Avi 3 can ca^. de
sicubus,
and this is certain, if the Figs be dry as Avicen says, the cause is, by
reason of the maliciousness, and corruption of the humor that is of them
engendered. Another cause may be by reason that figs stir one to sweat much
whereof Lice are engendered

The second operation is, Figs stir one to carnal lust: and likewise they have
many superfluities, and augment the seed of generation.

Multiplicant mictum, ventrem, dant mespila strictum,
Escula bona dura, sed mollia sunt meliora,
Medlars do bring very much increase,
And loosnesse in the belly makes to cease:
The hardest Medlars therein you may use,
But get to nourish: then the softest choose.
Here are declared two vtilities of Medlars.

The first is, that they increase urine: that is, by reason that they make the
dregs hard, and so their waterines turns into much urine.

The second vtility is that Medlars make one costive, by reason of their
sowernesss and Stipticity and therefore the text says, that hard Medlars be
the better to stop the lask: but yet the soft Medlars be better then the hard:
for they nourish more, and bind less. And here is to be noted, that Medlars
nourish less then Apples, Pears, Peaches, Figs, and such like; which thing
appears plainly, by the eagerness of relish or taste, and hardness of their
substance, after they be ripe on the tree, and therefore we should eat few
Medlars, and rather in way of medicine, then meat. And because Medlars ripe not
on the tree soft enough to eat, they must be laid in straw, till they be soft:
and then they be more delectable, and less stipticall.

Provocat Vri^am Mustum, cito soluit, and inflat,
Must does provoke much urine, and some say,
It does inflate, and quickly scours away.
Here the Author reciting three properties of Musse, says, that it provokes
one to urine, by reason that the earthy parts (scouringly) bite the bladder,
when they come thereto: the which constrains the bladder to avoid the urine.
And this property is understood of Musts, that have biting lees, as much
Rhenish Must has, For Musts that have gross lees, do not nip, but rather stop
and let the urine, as is before said at Impedit vrinam, etc.

The second property is Must makes one lightly to lask, the reason why is
showed in the first property.

Thirdly, Must is inflative: for the ho^ling that it makes in the body,
raises up ventosities. The causes of these two properties, are showed before
at Impedit vrinam, etc.

Grossos humores nutrit Cervisia, vires
Prestat, et augmentat carnem, generat que ci Morem;
Provocat vrinam, ventrem quoque mollit et inflat.
Infrigid^t modicum sed plus desiccat acetum.
Infrigidat, macorat, melan^. dat. sperma minorat,
Siccos infest at nervos, and pinguia siccat.
By drinking Ale or Beer gross humors grow,
Strength is augmented, blood and flesh also
Increases daily, urine they do procure,
Enflate the belly, as the learned assure.
And furthermore, of vinegar, they say,
Although it dries, yet it cools his way
In passage, and ir makes one lean
Being received fasting, so I mean,
It causes melancholy, harms the seed
Of generation, and does shaking breed.
Lean folk it hurts, drying up their blood,
And unto fat folks, greatly does no good.
Here the Author rehearsing two things, declares eight properties of Ale or
Beer.

First, he says, that Ale ingendreth gross humors in man's body, which is of
truth, in regard of Wine, And after the diversity of corn or gross substance,
that the Ale is made of; the grosser humors it engenders.

Secondly, Ale augmenteth man's strength: and this does Ale that is made of the
best grain, and well sod, for by reason that it nourishes much, it increases
strength.

Thirdly, is increases flesh, by reason that it nourishes much: and for the
same cause it increases the blood.

And these three last properties be in stale Ale, that is well sod and made of
the best Grain.

Fifthly, it stirs one to urine.

Sixthly, it makes one to lask. And these two properties be in clear Beer that
has much of the Hag, as Beer of Hamburgh, which by reason of the Hops, it
brings one in a lask: But it is not good for then: that have a weak brain:
For, this Beer by reason of Hops, does lightly overcome the Brain.

Seventhly, it inflateth the belly: this is of truth, if it be ill sod, as
Holland Beer does which inflateth most, and stops; and therefore it fatteth
right much.

The eighth is, that a little curtisie of ale cools: So does Beer of Holland,
Braband, Heynault, and Flanders; and this is that we use daily, and this
property is for certain, in respect of Wine.

Here is to be noted, that Ale may be made of Oats, Barley, and Wheat; and as
the Grain is altered, so is the comple^ion of the Ale.

Yet that which is made of Barley, inclines more to cold, for Barley is cold.
Yet that which is made of Barley and Oats stops less, and less engenders
ventos^^ies, and nourishes less.

But Ale made of Wheaten malt, enclineth more to heat, it nourishes more, and
stops more. And the grosser the Ale is, the worse it is the subtiler the
better.

Further, Ale that is made of things that makes one drunk, is worst, as of
Darnell. For this Grain specially engenders head: ach ^^^d hurts the sinews.

Further, in the ^ext are five properties of Vinegar.

The first is, Avi. 2. ca ea. de aceto. Avi. 3 1 a in ca. unico. doc v.
it dries. For Avicen says, It is a strong dryer, And therefore Physicians
^id (in the time of Pestilence) to use it with meat and drink.

For, Avicen says, He that uses Vinegar in his meat and drink in Pestilence
time, needs not to dread the sickness.

The second is, that vinegar of his own property cools.

Thirdly it makes one lean, by reason that it dries: and and this is for a
very truth. If one take it fasting, avi, 3 8 dec 4 ca. v.
as Avicen says. Yet nevertheless, the continual use of Vinegar, specially
fasting, breeds many inconveniences, it feebleth the sight, it hurts the
breast, and causes the Cough: it hurts the stomach and Liver, and vehemently
oppresses the sinews and joints, vering them with arthreticall griefs, with
trembling and shaking.

Fourthly, Vinegar ingendreth Melancholy humors, by reason that it cools and
dries.

Fifthly, Vinegar diminishes the seed of generation, for as much as it
cools, dries and makes one lean. These said properties Rasis puts,
saying. Vinegar is cold and dry, which makes one lean, it destroys the
strength, it diminishes the seed of generation it enforces black choler it
makes ^uddy sanguine color and makes meat subtle that is mingled with.

In the last verse the Author puts three things.

The first is, that Vinegar hurts lean folks, by reason that it dries, and
the tartness makes it to dry the more: For like joynd to like, makes one the
more surious. And also every decayed complexion is holp by the contrary, and by
the like it is brought into worse case.

Secondly, Vinegar hurts the sinews, and thirdly, it makes one lean, as is
before said.

Rapa juvat stomachum, novi producere ventum,
Provocat vrinam faciet quoque dente ruinam,
Si male cocta datur, hinc tortio tunc generatur,
Turnips do hurt the stomach, breaeth wind,
Provokes urine, as by proof we find,
They comfort sight, but yet the teeth offend,
And gripes into the belly, they do ^end.
Here the Author declares three vtilities of Rapes, temperately sed, and one
inconvenience of the same.

First. Rapes comfort the stomach: for the stomach digesteth them well and is
not grieved therewith.

Secondly, Rapes break wind, as appears by experience.

Thirdly, Rapes provoke the urine. Yet besides these properties, Averroes
says, That Rapes greatly comfort the sight.

The ill of Rapes is, that the continual eating of them hurts the teeth.

In the last verse be says, that Rapes cause throws or gnawing in the belly,
by reason that they multiply ventos^cies, as says this verse.

Ventum saepe ramia, si tu vis vivere rapis.
Rapes are the best to nourish, so some say,
And for our Urine they do cleanse the way.
The tayls of Rapes loose the belly. Furthermore note, that of all roots Rapes
do best nourish man's body, as appears by the sweetness that is found in
their savor, for all sweet meats nourish more the body, then sour, bitter or
tart. Therefore because Rapes be the sweetest of all roots, and less sharp,
they be most wholesome in the way of meat: but yet they engender gross
melancholy blood, if they be not well digested. And it is good to purify them
from the first water, and in no wise to eat them raw. They stir one to bodily
lust. (...) cleanse the ways that the urine runs.

Eg^ritur tarde cor, digeritur quoque dure,
Similit^r stomachun metior sit in extremitate,
Reddit liagua bonum nutrimentu^u medicinae:
Digeritur facile pulme, cito labitur ^pse,
(...) ^us ^^r ^brum gallinarum reliquorum.
Prescriptions for the inwards of a Beast,
The heart is held but hardly to digest.
The Maw is of like nature, slow in descent,
And therefore is no wholesome nutriment.
The Tongue is said to be of good digestion,
And therefore is allowed in our refection.
The like opinion of the Lights we hold,
Though Nature is sometime by them controlled.
Of Brains, a Hen's is best of all to eat,
And those of Chickens are most wholesome meat.
Here the Author recites five things.

The first is that the heart of Beasts is slowly digested, avi. 2 can. cap. de
all.
by reason that the Heart flesh is melancholious, which is hardly digested, and
slowly descends; and as Avicen says: Is unwholsom flesh; and as Rasis says:
It nourishes little.

The second is, that the Maw likewise is ill of digestion, and slow of
descending, by reason that it is a sinewie member, and gristly, wherefore it
digesteth ill, and engenders ill blood. Further the Text says that the
extreme parts of the Maw, as the bottom and brim, are better digested, by
reason that those parts are more fleshy and fat.

The third is, that the tongue is good nourishment, and that (...), touching
the root as Avicen says, avi. ^x can. cap. de carne.
By reason that it is fleshy and easy of digestion: and among all other a
roasted Pigs tongue the skin scraped off, is like Brawn, as Princes Carvers
know, A Neates-tongue, by reason that it is moist, is not very wholesome.

But for all this these delicate fellows, before they roast a Neats-tongue, they
stop it with cloves, whereby the moystnesse is diminished, and the meat is
apter to eat.

The fourth is, that the Lights are easy of digestion, and easy to avoid out,
and this is by reason of their natural softness: yet their nourishment is
little, and unwholesome for man's nature, because it is ^^egmatick, as Avicen
says. And here is to be noted, that though the lights of a Tupp^ be
unwholesome to eat, yet it is medicinable for a kybed or sor^ heel if it be
laid hot thereunto, as Avicen says.

The fifth, avi. 2 ca, de pulmone.
is that a Hens brain is best, which (as Avicen says) stauncheth bleeding at
the nose. It must be eaten either with salt or Spices, for (of it self) it
provokes one to vomit. And Physicians say, that Chickens brains augment the
memory. The brains of hogs are unwholesome for man. But the brain of a
Sheep, of a Hare, or of a Cony, may be eaten with salt or spices. And of
brains, we have more largely spoken before, at Nutrit and Impinguat, etc.

Semen Feniculi, fugat and spiracula culi.
Of Fenell-seed, our learned Physicians say,
For breaking wind, it makes a ready way.
Eating of Fennel-seed.
Here the Author rehearsing one doctrine of Fenell-seed, says it breaks
wind: by reason that it is hot and dry. And Physicians say, that the eating of
Fenell-seed ingendreth four commodities.

First it is wholesome for the Ague.

Secondly, it avoydeth poison.

Thirdly, it cleanses the stomach.

And fourthly, it sharpneth the sight, These four vtilities are rebearsed in
two verses.

Dis duo dat marathrum, febres fugat, at que veninum,
Et purgat stomachum, Lumen quoquereddit acutum,
Four virtues in the Fenell are allowed,
It quails the Ague, when it grows to proud,
Poison it soon expels, the stomach cheareth,
Sharpens the sight, and comfortably clears.
And Avicen rehearsing these four properties, says Democritus deemed, that
venomous Worms desire new Fenell-seed to comfort and sharpen their sight: and
Serpents (after Winter) issuing out of their Caves, do rub their Eyes against
Fenell, to clear their sight.

Further note, that Fenel digesteth slowly, and nourishes ill and little: and
therefore it is used as a medicine, and not as meat: wherefore it ought not to
be used in the Regiment of Health, but to expel the vnwholesomnesse of their
meats: as we use sometime to eat Perfly with Lertice ^^so likewise Fenell may
be sod with Gourds and Rapes, to withstand the vnwholesomnesse of them.

Eme^dat visum, stomachum comfortd^ Anisum.
Copia dulcoris Anisi sit meli^^ is.
Anni-seeds for the stomach wholesome are,
And quickness of the Eyesight they prepare.
In sweetness goodness, look how they exceed,
The better blood, and humors still they breed.
Here the Author recites two vtilities of Au^-seeds. Most hurtsul^ for the
sight.
First it comfort the light; and secondly the stomach, by reason that it
h^rteth and mundi^^eth the stomach; and also (for the same reason) it
comfort the sight: for, nothing butteth the sight more then uncleanness of
the stomach.

For, from the unclean stomach, avi 2 can. cap. de aniso^.
unclean vapors ascend to the Eyes, that trouble and hurt the spirits. These
are the two properties of dulce Aniseed.

And beside these, Avicen rehearsing many other profits of Aniseed, says:

That it asswageth dolours, breaks wind, and quenches thirst, caused of salt
moystness: It opens opilations of the Liver and Spleen, engendered of
humidities; and likewise of the Reyns, Bladder and Matrice: It provokes urine,
menstruous ^^ux: It cleanses the Matrice from white humidities, and stirs
one to carnal lust.

Si cruor emanat, Spodium sumptum cite s^na^.
If flux of blood at any time abound,
Spodium does instantly that flux confound.
Here the Author puts one commodity or Spodium, and that is, that Spodium
taken heals the bloudy-flux: by reason that the virtue thereof comfort the
liver, and so the liver fortified (which is the original fountain of blood)
the blood is there better retained.

And Avicen says, That Spodium is the roots of Reeds burned.

And it is said, Avi. 3. can. ^a. de aniso.
that those Reeds moved by the wind, and rubbing themselves together, burn one
another. Yet Simon the Genoway says, That Spodium is a thing, whose beginning
is unknown unto us: it seems to be a thing brent, and divisions of Reeds
burned. And it does not only help the bloudy-flux, but also the lask and
purging, as Rasis says. It helps also a sharp Ague, and is comfortable
against the shaking thereof, and for over much avoiding of choler: it helps
the stomach, as Avicen says. And as Spodium does help and comfort the liver,
so there be other medicines that have like effect, and like property to comfort
other special members. As Mace the heart, Musk the brain. Licorice the lights,
Capers the spleen, and Gallingale the stomach, as appears by these verses.

Gaudet Epar Spodie, Mace cor, Cerebrum quoque Musco,
Pulmo Liquiricia, Splen Epar, stomachusque Galanga.
Vas condimenti praeponi debet edenti,
Sal birus refugat, cibum speciemque saporat.
Nam s^pit esca male, qua datur absque sale.
Vrunt perfalsa nisum spermaque minorant,
Et generant s^abiem, puritum, sive vigorem.
Spodium the Liver worthily does please,
And Mace the heart, if ought do it disease.
Musk is a wondrous comfort to the brain,
And Lycoris keeps the Lights from any pain.
Gallingale helps the stomach, Capers the Spleen,
All these are wholesome Physic, as I ween.
Concerning Sauce that does our Table fit,
Salt is commended best by men of wit.
Poison it does resist, makes savoury meat,
Whets on the stomach with desire to eat;
For without Salt, our food can yield no taste,
Yet over-salted, mears are bad repast.
They instate the face, diminish Natures Seed,
Itch, Scabs, and pushes, they do daily breed.
Here the Author teaches three things; says. That before all other things,
Salt must be set upon the Table, as the vulgar verses teach us.

Sal primo poni debet, primoque reponi.
Omnis mensa male ponitur absque sale.
Salt should be first upon the Table set,
And last tan'e off, when we have done with meat.
Secondly, he says, that salt resists venom, for two causes. First, for
that salt is a dryet: and so dries up the humidities that would corrupt.

Another cause is, that salt dries and suppresseth the humidities, drawing
them out of the body, and so shuts the poors, and consequently stops the
entrance of Venom, which is wont to enter by the poors.

Secondly, he says, that salt makes man's meat savoury. For, commonly, we see
no meats savoury without salt, as says the third verse.

Thirdly, the Auth^r opens four inconveniences of salt, and meats too much
salted.

First, very salt meats mar the sight, for two causes.

The first is, that salt things dry over, much, which is contrary to the eyes
the instruments of sight: For the Eyes are of the nature of water, Phi. 1. de
sensu and sensato.
as the Philosopher says.

The second cause is, for that meats very salt do engender Itch and nipping in
manner as is aforesaid. Of mordicative mea^s being in the stomach, ^umes
mordicative are lifted up, which by their nipping hurt the eyes, and make them
very red. And therefore we see that they that make salt, have commonly red eyes.

The second hurt is, that very salt meats diminish the seed of generation, by
reason that very salt meats do dry very much all the humidities of the body;
whereby the seed of generation is dried up, and so made less.

The third hurt is, it engenders the skabthy reason that salt engenders a
sharp by ting humor adust, which causes the skab.

The fourth hurt is, it augmentoth Atch, by reason that it engenders a
mordicative itching humor. And of these four hurts Rasis speaks.

Further, it burns their blood that take great quantity thereof: it feebleth
their sight, it diminishes the seed of generation, and engenders itch and
scab.

And besides these hurts, very salt meats engender Ringworms dry scu^phs,
morphew, lepry, in them that ^e disposed thereunto, and fleateth the passage of
the urine, when they are long continued: yet when meat is a little poudred, it
takes away loathing, and makes one to have a good appetite.

Hi fervore rigent tres, saisus, amarus, acutus.
Alget acetosus sie stipans, ponticus a^ que
Vnctus, and insipidus duleis dat temper amentum.
Three kind of tastes do soon the body heat,
Salt, bitter, sharp, and diverse harms beget.
Three other savours cool in moderate kind,
Tart, Stipticall, and Pontick, as I find.
Three more, unsavory, unctuous, and sweet,
Nor heat, nor cool, and therefore held most mere,
Here the Author recites the qualities of all savorinesse,

First, he says, that these three savorinesses or relishes, salt bitter, and
sharp heat the body that receives them,

Secondly, he says that these three savorinesses, fart, stipticall, and
pontick, cool.

Thirdly, he says, that these three relishes, unctuous, unsavory, and sweet,
are temperate, they make the body neither hotter no colder,

Further, according to Avicen there be eight talages, avi li. can. tract. 1. ce
3.
or so vorinesses that follow vnsavorinesses: And they be sweet, bitter, sharp,
tart, pontick, stiptick, and unctuous: and to number vnsavorinesse for
savorinesse, as the text does, there be nine: and then savorinesse is taken for
every thing judged by taste.

And among these talages, there be three hot, as says the text, salt, bitter,
and sharp: and as Avicen says. The sharp is the hotter, and the next salt, and
then the bitter: for as much ^as sharp, is stronger then the bitter is, to
resolve and scour the incidents. And then salt is like bitter, broken together
with cold humidity,

And of these tallages three be cold, eager, stiptick, and pontick. But pontick
is colder then the other: and next thereto is stiptick. And therefore all
fruits that come to any sweetness, have first a tallage pontick, of a vehement
coldness, and after that the fruits, by the heat of the Sun be digested, there
appears in them stipticity, and afterward they decline to sowrnesse as
Grapes, and then to sweetness, And though tart be not so hot as stiptick,
yet by reason that it is subtle and piercing, it is in many of more coldness.
And after Avicen, Ponticke and Stipticke are in talage very like, but yet the
Stipticke causes the upper part of the Tongue to be sharp and rough, and
pontick causes the tongue to be rough within.

Three of these tallages are temperate, neither exceeding, hot nor cold, as
sweet, unctuous, and unsavory, for though sweet be hot, yet therein appears
no mighty heat, as Rasis says: and every tallage has his own operations, as
Avicen and Rasis say.

The operations of sweetness be digestion, soking and increasing of
nourishment, and nature lovingly desires it, and the virtue attracttive
draws it. And Rasis says. That sweetness engenders much ruddy color, and
opilations of the Liver and spleen, specially if the said Members be apt
thereunto, and thereof follows the flux. It mollifieth the stomach, and
comfort the breast and lights, it fatteth the body, and augmenteth the seed
of generation.

The operations of bitter, is to sharp, and to wash away. And after Rasis,
Bitter heateth and dries strongly, and lightly reduces the blood to a dust
malice, and augmentetha ruddy color in the blood.

The operations of pontick tallage, after Avicen, Is contraction, if the
ponticity be feeble, or else expression, if it be strong. And after Rasis.
Pontick cools the body and it dries the flesh, and diminishes the blood, if
one use it often. Also it comfort the stomach, it binds the womb, and
engenders melancholy blood.

The operations of stiptick talage after Avicen, Is contrary, thicking,
hardening and holding. And after Rasis, the operations thereof are like pontick,
though they be weaker: for he seems to comprehend stiptick tallage under
pontick for of stiptick he says nothing expressly.

The operations of unctuous talage (after Avicen) Are soking, slipperiness, and
small digestion. And after Rasis. It mollifieth the stomach, it makes one
laskative, and fills one before he has taken any necessary quantity of
meat: And it heateth, specially them that be vexed with a Fever and that have
a hot Liver and stomach. It moysteth and softeth the body, but it augmenteth
phlegm and sleep.

The operations of sharpness. Are resolution, incision, and putrefaction,
after Avicen: And after Rasis, It increases heat, and lightly enflameth the
body, and burns the blood, and tu^neth it into red choler and after into
black.

The operations of salt talage, after Avicen: Is to scour, wash, and dry and it
lets putrefaction.

The operations of sharp talage, after Avicen: Is to cool and divide. And after
Rasis; It refraineth choler and blood and restrains the belly, if the stomach
and guts be clean. But if there be too much phlegmatic matter, it makes the
belly to lask, it cools, the body and also weakneth the virtue of digestion
properly in the liver It hurts the sinews and sinewy members, it dries the
body, but stirs up the appetite. And Rasis says, That some unsavory thing
nourishes well, and that is, such as is temperate.

There is other some that heateth temperately. And another that cools
temperately and if moistness be joined therewith it moisteth, and with a dry
thing, it dries.

Bis duo vipa facit, mundat dentes, dat acutum
Visum, quodminus est implet, minuit quod abundat.
Four benefits come by our sops in wine,
They purge the Teeth they make them clean and fine.
They sharp the sight, cause good digestion,
Remove superfluous things, that breed infection.
Here are declared four commodities of wine-sops.

The first is they purge the Teeth, by reason that they stick longer in the
teeth then wine alone, or bread alone: therefore the filthiness of the teeth
is the better consumed and the teeth the better purged.

The second commodity is, that they sharpen the sight: for they let the ill
fumes ascend to the Brain, which by their mingling together darken the sight.
And this is by reason that it digesteth all ill matters being in the stomach.

Thirdly, it digesteth perfectly meats not well digested: for it closes the
mouth of the stomach, and comfort digestion.

Fourthly, if reduces, superfluous digestion, to a mean. And all this is of
truth, so that the bread sopped in wine, be first tosted, or dried on imbers,

Omnibus assuetam jubeo servare dietant.
Approbo sic esse, ni sit mutare necesse.
Est Hypocras testis, quoniam sequitur malapestiis.
Forti^r est mata Medicinae certa dieta,
Quam non si curas, fatue regis, and male curas.
To keep a customary diet, is the best,
Both for our health, and for mild natures rest.
Custom observed, we may not lightly leave,
A dietarie custom will receive
No giddy imperfection. Grave Hypocrates
Gives good advice, for health and Natures ease.
It is a better way to cure by diet,
Then lavishnesse, which brings all out of quiet.
He that is carelesle for his proper good,
By such a one, no danger is withstood.
Here the Author reciting certain doctrines says: To keep diet.
That it is good for all folks to keep a customable diet. And by diet is
understood the ministering of meat and drink. The breaking from customable use,
hurts grievously: for customance is another Nature. Therefore as it behooveth
us to keep nature, so likewise it does custom: and spcially if the customable
use be laudable.

And as it behooveth us to keep the customable administration of meat and
drink: even so it behooveth us to observe custom in other things not
natural, for the self same reason. Wherefore i^ a man that is w^nt to labor
much will forgo this custom, and live idely, or labor much less, or go in
hand with other labor, or take another time, or another way: undoubtedly it
shall right much infeeble him. So in like manner it is in man's diet, in his
sleep, in his watch, and such like accidents. For truly, good custom in all
things must needs be observed, if it be laudable, or indifferent in goodness or
hurtfulnesse, in respect of that whereto the change is made.

And know withal, that they that be accustomed to labor, and exercise
themselves in any kind of labor: albeit that they be feeble or old, yet it
grieveth them less, and they labor more strongly, then if they were young
fellows unaccustomed, as Hypocrates says. Hip. 1 apho.
By reason that these feeble or old persons have more inclination and custom to
those labors. For then the custom before taken is lighter, as is said in the
aforesaid Aphorism.

And this is the cause, why we see old and feeble Craftes-men, to do that which
stronger and younger men then they cannot do, in regard if grieveth them less.
As a feeble old Miller, to lift a great weighty sack: a Smith to weeld and
labor with a great Hammer, then a younger man not thereto accustomed.

The second Doctrine is: That great harm follows chang of Diet, as Hypocrates
says: Hip. 1 apho.
Except it be needful to change it.

First, it is needful to change it, when grievous diseases should grow
thereby: as custom to feed on ill meats, which at length (of necessity) will
breed in us old diseases. Such a custom, and other like must needs be amended
and changed by little and little, but not suddenly. For all sudden changes hurt
vehemently, specially from a thing customable, to a thing vnaccustomable.

Secondly, it is needful to change, to the intent if should less grieve us,
if we happen to change our diet. For he that uses himself to all manner of
diet, shall hurt himself the less. And this must be understood of other things
not natural, for as Hypocrates says. Hip. 1 aph.
A thing long accustomed, though it be worse then those that we have not used,
hurts the body less. Therefore it behooveth us to use things unaccustomed.

And here is to be noted, that every man should take heed, how he accustometh
himself to one thing, he it never so good, which to observe were needful. For
example: If a man custom^ himself to one manner of meat or drink, or do abstain
wholly from them or to sleep, or to know a woman carnally: it were very
dangerous if he otherwhiles must abstain from his custom. Therefore every body
should be disposed, to endure heat and cold, and to all motions and
nourishments, so that the hours of Sleep and Watch the House Bod, and Garments,
may be changed without hurt: which things may be done: if one be not too near
in observing custom. Therefore otherwhiles it behooveth to change customable
things. Thus says Rasis, Rasis 3 alea. de conservan consue 1.


The third Doctrine is, that the stronger and nearer way inhealing a Patient,
is to minister a certain diet: for which if the Physician does not care, but
will minister another undue diet: he governs his patient foolishly, and
heals him ill.

And note, that there be three manner of dyets, gross, which is whole folks
diet, Three manner of dyets.
slender diet, which is to give in manner nothing, and the third is mean diet,
which absolutely is called slender. And this diet is divided into slender diet,
and declining to gross diet as the broth of flesh, rere roasted Eggs, small
Chickens: and declining to slender diet, as Mellicratum and wine of
Ponigranades: and mean diet, which is called certain diet, as Barley, juice,
not beaten together. And this certain diet is wholesome in many diseases, but
not in all.

It is not wholesome in long diseases: for in such diseases, the might of the
patient, with such mean diet, cannot endurs to consume the sickness, without
great debility. Therefore in such diseases the meat must be engrossed, Likewise
it is vnwholesom in sharp diseases, as those that end within three days space
or sooner: For in such sickness, most slender Diet is best, as Hypocrates
says. The most sovereign help, is to diet the Patient after his strength and
corporal might.

Quale, quid, and quando quantum, quoties vbi dando,
Ista notare ^ibo dobet Medicus dietando.
Six things in diet should observed be,
First, to respect the food in quality.
Next, what it is in substance; and withal,
What time for ministration best does fall.
Fourthly, the quantity requires a care;
Fifthly, how often we should the same prepare.
Lastly, the place is not amiss to know,
And where such Diet best we may bestow.
Here the Author rehearses ^i^ things to be considered of the Physician, in
ministering of diet.

First, of what quality the matter ought to be: for in hot sicknesses, he must
diet the patient with cold meat in moist sicknesses with dry meat, and in dry
sicknesses with moist meat Pet the natural complexion must be observed with
diet like thereunto. For Galen says. Gal. in 1 reg.
The hotter bodies need the hotter medicines: the coldrr bodies, the colder
medicines.

The second thing is of what substance the meat ought to be. For they that be
strong and lusty, and exercise great labor must be dyeted with grosser meat
because in them the way of digestion is strong, and so the^ ought not to use
slender meats, as Chickens, Capons Veal, or Kid, For those fleshes in them will
burn, or be disested oversoon: wherefore they must needs eat often.

But noble men, and such as live restfully, most use diet of slender substance,
for in them the virtue Digestive is weok, and not able to digest gross meats,
as Bacon Beef, and fish dried in the Sun. Likewise, they that be sick of
sharp diseases, ought to use more slender diet, then they that be sick of long
diseases, as a Fever-Quartane.

The third is, what time diet ought to be given: for they that be in health,
ought specially to regard custom, Wherefore they that rise early in Summer, and
eat but two meals a day, ought to eat about the hour of ten, or a little
before: and not to abide till noon, because of the overgreat beat. Likewise,
they ought to sup about the hour of six, or a little after. But in Winter, they
ought to dine at eleven of the clock, or at twelve, because of the long
sleeping: and then to sup at seven a clock, or a little after, and especially
custom should be kept.

Time also (in dyeting of sick folks) must be considered: for they that have an
Ague, when it begins to vex them, or a little before or after they should
eat nothing: For if one eat a little before, or when the fit comes: thereby
Nature (that should extend to digest the meat) is diverted another way. It be
should eat soon after the fit is gone, it were unwholesome: because the virtue
of digestion is very weak, by reason of the fit past, Therefore he must eat so
long before as the meat may be digested ere the fit come: Or else so long after
the fit is gone, when as Nature is come to due disposition.

This is of truth, except ye dread great feeblishing of Nature: For then at all
times he must eat. For whenever man's strength is feebled by any chances, he
should eat forthwith as Galen says. Gal. in con: Aphorismi, contemplari,
autem, etc.


Fouthly, the quantity of the meat must be considered: For, as it is before
said, in Summer we must use a small quantity of meat at every meal, for then
the natural heat is feeble, through the over'great resolutions. But in Winter,
one may eat a great deal of meat at a meal. For then the virtue digestive is
strong, when the natural heat is united through circumstant cold, as we said
at Temporibus Veris, etc.

The fifth is how off we should eat in a day. For in Summer we must eat oftener
then in Winter, in Autumn and Ver, a little at each meal, as is beforesaid.
Likewise if the virtue digestive be weak, we must eat little and off: but if
the virtue digestive be strong, we may eat much, and make few meals, etc.

Sixthly, the eating place must be considered: which should not be too hot nor
too cold, but temperate.

Ius caulis soluit, cujus substantia stringit.
Viraque quando datur, ventrem laxare putatur.
Broth made of Cole-worts does both loose and bind,
According as their nature is inclined:
Yet if the broth and substance both you take,
Digestion the more sollid they will make,
Here the Author declaring three things, says: That the broth of Cole-worts,
and specially the first broth, if they be sodde, loaseth the belly, by reason
that in the leaves and utter parts of the Cole-worts, is a sopy scouring
virtue, weakly cleaving, and lightly separable, by small decoction or boy'
ling, which being spread abroad by the same water, is made Laxative. And this is
the reason that the first water, that Coleworts be sod in, does make one
Laxative, rather then the second.

The second is, that the substance of Cole-worts after they are boiled,
restrains the belly: by reason that all their virtue Laxative is taken by the
decoction, and the earthy dry substance remains, which binds the womb.

The third is, that both taken together, the broth and substance of Cole-worts,
loses the belly: by reason that the scowring sopy virtue remains in the
water, which loses all.

And note, that coleworts engender melancholy humors and ill dreams, they
hurt the stomach, they nourish little, and dusk the sight, and cause one to
dream, and they provoke menstruosity and urine as Avicen and Rasis say.

Futhermore note, That the decoction or seed of Cole-worts keen one from
drunkenness, Aristo. 3. part problem Avi. 2 can. Rasis 3. ale
as writes Aristotle. And this thing is affirmed of Avicen and Rasis. The
reason (as some think) is the gross fumes, that by eating of Cole-worts are
lifted up to the brain, engrossing the sumosities of the wine, which ing^ossing
does let them enter to the brain.

Aristotle says. That all things that draws to them the moistness of the
wine, expe^l it from the body and that that cools the body, keeps it from
drunkenness; Cole-worts are of such nature Ergo etc. And that the Coleworis
are of this nature, he proves thus: By the juice of cole-worts, the undigested
humidities of the wine are drawn from all the body into the bladder: and by
reason of the cold, nice that remains in the stomach, which cools all the
body the piercing of the wine is prevented. And so by this mean it keeps a
man sober. For the subtle super fluities, that naturally could not descend, by
reason that the heat of the wine stirs them to ascend upward to the brain
are repressed down, and (by virtue of this juice) are drawn to the Bladder.

Dixerunt maluam veteres, qui a molli at alnum,
Sed Maluae radices raze dedere feces,
Vuluae moverunt, and fluxum sape dederunt.
Malowes the belly much do mollisie.
And their roots shaven, Physic does apply:
For sound purgation; hereof I am sure,
The menstruous flux in women they procure.
Here the Author rehearsing three properties or effects of Malows, says: that
they mollify the belly.

There be four that mollify: Malowe^.
Malowes and double Malowes, Branca, Ursina, and Mercury, of which most
commonly Clisters be made, to mollify all induro^e and hard matter in man.
There be two sorts of Mallows, the one hears a bloud-red flower, the other a
white flower, and this last properly does mollify more then the first.

The second effect of Malowes is, that Malow-roots shaded, and suppositories
made of them, such as Physicians are wont to make of Mercury, draw out of man
the indurate matter and dregs.

The third effect is, Malowes cause the menstruous flu^ in women, and that
through the great moistning and slipperinesse thereof: whereby the veins about
the Matrix soon power out, as Platearius says, and as appears by experience.

Mentitur Mentha, si sit a^pellere lenta,
Vents is lumbricos, stomachi vermesque nocivos,
Mint were belied; if it should want the might,
The stomach, worms, and belly to kill quite.
As Worm wood juice, it works in operation,
And is to health a sovereign preservation.
Here the Author says, that a Mint should not be called a Min^, Mint.
except it have might to kill worms, in the belly, and stomach. A Mint has a
great strong savor, and is right bitter and therefore as Wormwood kills
worms, so does the Mint. And the juice thereof (as of wormwood) must be drunk,
and not the substance. And because it is hot and dry, and burns the blood, it
is unwholesome in the way of meat in the Regiment of Health. But yet in
medicines it is wholesome, for it comfort the stomach, and heateth it, and
stancheth yexing, and digesteth, and prohibiteth vomit phlegmatic and
sanguine, and through inflation stirs one to bodily ^ust, and prohibiteth
the spitting of blood; It is very wholesome against the biting of a mad Dog:
and if ye crimble Mint into milk. it will never turn to make a Cheess, Avi 2
can, ^ de Menta.
as Avicen says,

Cur moritur homo, cui Salvia crescit in H^rto?
Contra vim mortis, non est Medicamen in Hortis.
Salvia confort at nerves, manumque tremorem
Tollit, and ejus open febris acuta fugit,
Salvia, castoreum, lavendula, primula veris.
Nastur, Athanasia sanant Paralytica membra,
Salvia salua^rix Naturae concila^rix.
Why should man die (so does the sentence say,)
When Sage grows in his Garden day by day?
And yet all Garden-Phisick not Prevails,
When deaths stern power our chiefest health assails,
Sage comfort the nerves both sweet and kindly,
The Palsie-shaking hands it helps friendly.
His power is sovereign against an Ague fit,
Sage and the Beaver stone, by learned writ.
Lavender and the Prime-rose of the Spring,
Tan^ey and Water, cresses comfort bring,
To all such members as the Palsy shake,
When in the very greatest kind they quake.
Sage does both council, and keep Nature sound,
Where Sage then grows, happy is the ground.
Here the Author touching principally four things, shows the great vtility of
Sage, The bountyer goodness of sag.
asking as though he doubted) wherefore man dies, that has Sage growing in
his Garden? He answers, in the second verss, that no medicines growing in the
Garden, can withstand death, although in the Garden grow medicines that keep
the body from putrifactionn, and defend, that natural humidity be not lightly
consumed away, as teaches Avicen, saying. The science of Physic does not
make a man immortal, avii 3 1 ^^sing.
nor it does not surely defend our bodies from outward hurtful things, nor
cannot assure every man to live to the last term of his life. But of two
things it makes us sure, that is, from putrefaction and corruption: and
desendeth, that natural moisture be not lightly dissolved and consumed.

Secondly be puts three effects of Sage.

The first is, that sage comfort the sinews: for it dries the humidities,
by which the sinews be let and loosed.

The second is, that it takes away the shaking of the hand: The virtue of Sage.
by reason that it comfort the sinews (as is said:) Now all things that
comfort the sinews remove trembling: because trembling comes of feebleness
of the sinews. And therefore, some old men and women, specially put sage
leaves in their meat and drink.

Thirdly, Sage letreth the sharp ague that would assail us by reason that it
dries humors, it lets them to putrify, whereby a sharp Fever might be
engendered.

Further note, that Sage is hot and dry, and therefore it is not very wholesome
alone in the way of meat, Yet because Sage comfort the sinews greatly, folks
in hearth do use it much two manner of ways.

First, they make Sage-wine, sage-wine
which they drink especially at the beginning of dinner or supper. This wine is
wholesome for them that have the falling sickness, moderately taken, and after
the purgation of the accident matters,

Secondly, they use Sage in sauces: for it stirs up a man's appetite and
specially when the stomach is full of ill humors, raw, and undigested,

There are two kinds of Sage: Two kinds of sage.
One that has great broad leaves, and another commonly called Noble Sage,
whose leaves he more narrow, and less: Physicians call it Silifagus.

Thirdly, the Author recites six medicines good for the Palsy. It is said,
that sage, Castorie, that is a Castor^ stones, Lavender, Prime-roses,
Watercresses, and Tansey, cure and ^eal members insect with the Palsy. Why
Sage does help it, we have showed already, because it comfort the sinews,
which the Palsi^ weakneth. And also because Sage is hot and dry, it consumes
the phlegmatic matter that remains in the sinews, whereof the Palsy
breeds. And that Castorie is wholesome for the Palsy, appears, in that it
is most comfortable, in heating and drying the sinews: For Avicen says
thereof: That is subtiler, and stronger then any other that heateth and dries.
avi. 2 can. ca, de cast.


And after he says, That it comfort and heateth the sinews, the shaking,
the moist cramp, and benommed Members caused of the Palsy.

Also he says: There is nothing better for ventosity in the care: then to take
as much as a Pease, and temper it with oil of Spike, and so let it drop into
the ear.

Casto^ry has many virtues, which Avicen rehearses.

Castorium is the stones of a Sea beast called Castor. The Oil also of Castory
is as specially good for the Palsy, after the voyding of the matter that
remains, and comfort the Sinews.

Of Lavender it appears, because the sweet savor thereof does consume the
Palsy matter.

And also of the Primrose it appears: because the sweet savor and heat
thereof comfort the Sinews. This flower is called Primula Veris, because it
is the first flower that springs in Ver.

The fifth is Watercresses, for they are hot and dry subtle, incisive, and
resolutive: whereby it takes away the matter of Palsy. And Avicen says. They
comfort all ^^^llification of the sinews. Because they heat and draw out
phlegm, and cleanse the sinews from phlegm. Besides, Physicians counsel us to
eat Watercresses in Lent, because Lenten meat is phlegmatic.

Watercresses is a common heth, growing in cold, stony, and waterish places,
where be many Well springs.

The sixth is Tansie. The virtue of this herb is to purge phlegm, and the heat
thereof dries the sinews. Also it purges a man from wo^^s, and from the
matter whereof they be engendered. And therefore Frenchmen use ^^^h^tenly to
fry Eggs therewith in the Camer-week, to purg away the flighte engendered of Fish
in the Lent, whereof wo^n^^ are engendered in them that be thereto disposed.

In the Text, the Author says, that Sage is called the saver and keeper of
Nature.

Nobilis est Ruta quia lumina reddit acutae.
Auxilio Ru^ae vir quippe videbis acute.
Ruta v^ris coitum minuit, mulieribus auget.
Ruta facit castum, dat lumen, and ingerit astum,
Cocta facit Ruta, de pulicibus loca tuta.
Needs must we call Rue noble, by due right.
Because it clears and perfecteth the sight.
Carnall-desires (in men) it does appease,
But yet to women gives no such case.
Rew-water sprinkled in the house, kills all the fleas,
Rue, as it causes chastity, it whets the wit,
And for the Eyesight always counted fit.
Here the Author declaring four properties of Rue, says, Four properties of
Rue. avi, 3. cas.
if sharpneth the sight and properly the juice thereof, as Avicen says; and as
is before said, at Allia, nux, ruta, etc.

The second is, Rue diminishes the desire of Carnal lust in men, and in women
Rue augmenteth it; for by reason that Rue henteth and dries it diminishes the
seed of men which is subtle, and of the nature of the air. But in women Rue
makes subtle, and heateth the seed, for in them it is waterish and cold, and
therefore it stirs them more to Carnal lust.

The third is, Rue makes a man quick, subtle, and ingenisus: by reason of the
heating and drying and so cleateth the wit.

Tee fourth is, That the water that Rue is sod in, To kill flea^. Avi. vi. 4.3.
c. de effug puli, cum.
cast and sprinkled about the house, riddeth away fleas, and as Physi^ians say;
it kills them. And after Avicen: When the House is sprinkled with the Water
of wild Gourds, the Fleas leap and flee away: and so likewise does the Water
that black thorn is sod in. And Avicen says, That some have said, that if
Goats blood be put into a pit in the house, the Fleas will get them thereunto
and dye.

And likewise if a log be anointed with the grease of an Vrchin the fleas will
gather thereto and dye. Fleas cannot abide the savor of Cole-worts, nor leaves
of Oleander.

Some say, that nothing is better to avoid Fleas, then things of strong savor,
and therefore Rue, Mints, Horse-mints, and Hops he good, and above all things
Horse-dung, or else Horse-stale is the chief. Also the house sprinkled with the
decoction of Rape-seed, kills the Fleas. And the persuming of the house with
a Bulls horn, drives away Fleas, Yet to take Fleas, nothing is better then to
lay blankets on the Bed, for therein they gather themselves.

De Caepis Medici non consentire videntur,
Cholericis non esse bonas dicit Gaelinus:
Flegmaticis vero multum doect esse salubres,
Praesertim stomache pulchrum que creare colorem.
Contritis copis loca renudata capillis
Saepe fricam poteris capitis reparare decorem.
Onyons (in Physic) wins no consent,
To choleric folk, they are no nutriment
By Galens rule. Such as phlegmatic are,
A stomach good in them they do prepare.
Weak appetites they comfort; and the face,
With cheerful color evermore they grace.
And when the head is naked left of hair,
Onyons (being sod or stamped) again repair.
Here the Author speaks of Onyons, Of Onyons,
and declares five things.

First, touching their operation, Physicians agree not. For some say they be
good for phlegmatic folks, and some say nay: as Rasis, which says: That they
engender superfluous and phlematick humors in the stomach.

Secondly, Galen saith^t They be right hurtful for choleric folks because,
as Avicen says: Onions be hot in the third degree, and therefore they hurt
hot folks as chollericke be.

Thirdly, onyons be wholesome for phlegmatic folks. For they be hot, piercing,
subtle, scouring and opening, wherefore they digest, cut make subtle, and
wipe away phlegmatic and clammy humors, grown in the bodies of phlegmaticks
folks.

Fourthly, Onyons be wholesome for the stomach, for they both heat and mundifie
it from phlegm. avi. can. 2 ca de ireal and 6 4 ca. de curatione alopecie.
And therefore Avicen faith: That that which is eaten of the oynon, through the
heat thereof, comforceth a weak stomach.

And therefore they make a man well colored. For it is impossible for one to
have a lively color, if his stomach, be very phlegmatic, or silled with ill,
raw, and phlegmatic humors.

The fifth is, that Onyons sod and stamped, restore hairs again, if the place
where the hairs did grow, be rubbed therewith. This is of truth when the hairs
go away through stopping of the Pores, and corruption of the matter under the
skin. For the onyons open the Pores and resolve the ill matter under the
skin, and draw good matter to the same place. And therefore as Avicen says:
Often rubbing with onions is very wholesome for bald men,

Wherefore the text concludes, that this rubbing with onions, prepares the
beauty of the head: for hairs are the beauty of the head.

Furthermore, onions stir one to carnal lust, and they drovoke the appetite,
and bring color in the face, and when they be mingled with honey, they destroy
Warts they engender thicst, and they hurt the understanding: because they
engender an ill gross humor: They engender spittle, and the ^uyce of them is
good for watering eyes: and does clari^e the sight, as Avicen says. Further
note, that Onions, Honey, and Vinegar stamped together, is good for the biting
of a mad dog. And therefore some do add these two verses, unto the foresaid
text.

App^sitas p^rhibeut morsus curare Canin^^.
Sitritae cum melle fuerint and aceta.
A mad Dogs biting may recured be,
With Onyons, Honey, Vinegar, these three.
But of this is spoken before at Alia nux, etc.

Est modicum granum siccum calidumque Sinapis,
Dat lachrymas, purgatque caput, tollitque venenum,
Though Mustard Seed is held the smallest grain,
His Powerful heat and strength is not in vain.
By causing tears, it purges well the brain,
And takes away infecting poisonous pain.
Here the Author reciting two things, Of mustard seed. avi. 2 can ca. de sinapi.
says: that Mustardseed is a little grain, which is hot and dry, unto the
third degree, after Avicen. Secondly, he putreth three properties or effects of
Mustard Seed.

The first is it makes ones eyes to water: for by reason that it is very hot,
it makes subtle, and loses the humidityes of the brain, whereof then by
their flowing to the Eyes, the tears come.

The second effect is, it purges the brain, and cleanses away the phlegmatic
humidities of the head. And also is it be put into the Nosethrils, it purges
the head by reason that it provokes one to neese. And therefore it is put into
their nosthrils that have the Apoplexy, for the neesing purges the brain.

And likewise Mustard Seed, by reason that it is hot, does dissolve and loose
such phlegmes, as stop the conduits of the brain: of which follows Apoplexy.
And thus it appears, that Mustard Seed is a great looser consumer, and
cleanser of fleginatick humidities. The third effect is, it withstandeth
poison: Ay. loco pr^al.
For Avicen says, Thar the venomous Worms cannot abide the smoke of
Mustard Seed.

Crapulad scutitur, capitis dolor, at que gravedo,
Purpuream dicunt violam curare c^ducos,
The heavy headache, and that i^ksome pain,
Which drunken surfciting does much constrain:
The sinell of Violets does soon allay,
And cures the Falling Sickness, as some say.
Here the Author recites three properties, or effects of violets. Three
properties of violets.
First* Violets delay drunkenness, by reason that violets have a temperate
sweet savor, which greatly comfort the Brain. For a strong brain is not
lightly overcome with drink, but a weak is. Also Violets be cold, wherefore
they cool the brain, and so make it unable to receive any fume.

The second is, Violets slake the headache, and grief that is caused of heat,
as Avicen, Rasis, Alman, and Mesuus say: For by reason that Violets be cold,
they withstand hot causes.

The third is, that Violets help them that have the falling^sicknesse. Though
some say thus, yet this effect is not commonly ascribed unto Violets. And
therefere, if Violets have this property, it is but by reason of their sweet
smell that comfort the brain: which being strengthend, is not hurt by small
griefs, and consequently fal^eth not into Epilepsie, which, is called the
little Apoplexy, chancing by stopping of the sensible sinews.

Vrtica dat somnumque aegris, vomitumquoque tollit,
Compescit tussim veterem, colicisque medetur,
Pellit pulmonis frigus, ventrisque tumorem,
Omnibus and morbis subveniet ar^iculorum,
The Nettle Sovereign is in his degree,
It causes sleep in bodies sick that be.
Casting or vomiting it clears away,
And phlegm that hurts Nature day by day.
An ancient Cough it quickly does prevent,
For phlegm thereby is soon dispatched and spent.
It cures the Chollick, a most cruel pain,
Diseases in the Joints it does restrain.
Cold in the Lights, the Bellies tumors too,
And other hanns the Nettle does undo.
Some say beside, that it does cure the Gout,
Though diverse Doctors thereof make some doubt.
Here the Author recites eight properties of Nettles.

First Nettles cause a sick body to sleep. For a Ne^tle is subtiliative, and
cutteth and scoureth phlegm and grosseh mors, that grieve nature, and let sleep.

Secondly, it does away Vomit, and custom thereof: by reason that Vomit and
parbreaking, is caused of a clammy humor which the Nettle cutteth.

Thirdly, the Nettle preventeth an old cough: and specially with honey, wherein
Nettle-seed is to be tempered. For the Nettle avoydeth clammy phlegm out of the
breast, as Rasis says. And. Avicen says, avis. can. ca. de urtica.
That the Nettle, when it is drunk with water that Barley is sod in, does
mundifie the breast: And when the leaves thereof are fod in Barley-water, they
draw out gross humors, that are in the breast, but the seed thereof is
stronger.

Fourthly, it is wholesome for them that have the Colic. For a Nettle is a
Cutter, a sub^iser, a resolver, and a scourer of phlegmatic humidity, or gross
ventosity, which engender the Colic.

The Colic is a painful grief in a Gut called Colon, as the grievous disease
Iliaca, is named of the Gut Ilion.

Fifthly, the Nettle with his heat, drives cold out of the Lights.

Sixthly, a Nettle asswageth the swelling of the belly: for it resolves wind,
whereof for the most part of the swelling of the belly comes.

The seventh effect is, the Nettle helps the diseases in the joints, as the
Gout. This is of truth, when it comes through matter that is cold, phlegmatic,
and gross; by reason that Nettles heat, cut, and make subtle such matter.

And besides these effects, after Avicen: The Nettle stirs one to carnal
Lust, and properly the seed thereof, drunk with wine, opens the close of the
Matrice, and in loosing, draws out phlegm, and raw humors, by his virtue
abstersive, and not resolutive. avi. 2 can. ca. de 3. urtica.
Yet least taking of the Nettle or the seed should hurt the throat, it is good
to drink after it a little Oil Rosate. A Nettle is hot in the beginning of the
third degree, and dry in the second, Avicen.

Hisopus est herba purgansa pectore Flegma.
Adpulmonis opus cum melle coquatur hisopus.
Vultibus eximium fertur reparare colorem.
Hysop a purging herb is hold to be,
And phlegm from forth the breast it sends free.
Being sod with honey, then it comfort sends
The stomach, and the lungs it much befriends.
Purges the lights from phlegm, and adds a grace,
By a most clear complexion to the face.
Here the Author reciting the effects of Isope, says: First, Of Isope.
It purges the breast of phlegm: by reason that Isope is an herb hot and dry
in the third degree: it is a great wiper, loo' ser, and consumer of phlegmatic
humidity, and has a singular respect to the parts of the breast: and therefore
Hysope most properly is said to purge the breast of phlegm.

Secondly, it is also good to purge the breast from phlegm, for the same cause,
and properly if it be sod with Honey: for Honey is a scourer: and the Hysopes
scouring is augmented with the honey. The same wills Avicen, saying: Hysop
comfort the Breast and Lights, diseased with the Cough and Thisick of old
continuance, and likewise does the decoction thereof, made with Honey and Figs.

Thirdly, avi. 2 can. cap, de Hysopo.
Hysop makes one well colored in the face: for Avicen says: That the drink
thereof causes good color. And besides these effects Hysop avoideth phlegm
and worms, as Avicen says And after Platearius, Hysop sod in wine, cleanses
the Matrice from all superfluities.

Appositum canc, is tritum cum melle medetur,
Cum vinum poto poterit sedare dolorem.
Saepe solet vomitum, ventremque juvare solutum.
Chervill or Cinquefoyl call it which you will,
Being steept with Honey does a Canker kill,
Drink it with Wine the belly-ach it heale^h,
And does assuage inflation where it swells.
Lastly, when lask or vomit shall oppress,
she power thereof does heat and makes to cease.
This Text declares three operations of Cherfill or Cher, vill or Cinquesoyl.

First, Cherfill stamped with honey, Of cherfill.
and laid plaisterwise to a Canker, heals it. Thus says Platearius in the
Chapter thereof. A Canker is a melancholy impostume, A canker;
that eats the parts of the body as well fleshy as sinewy. And it is called
Canker because it goes forth like a C^ab.

The second effect is, if Cherfill be drunken with Wine, if heals the ach of
the belly. For it asswageth inflation that is caused of gross ventosity,
whereof ach comes, and loses the ventosity of the stomach, and all other
guts, and opens stopping and thereunto the wine helps.

Thirdly, Cherfill cease vomiting, and the lask: and by reason that it is hot
in the third degree, and dry in the second, it digesteth and dries that
matter, whereof vomit comes. And this is very truth, when Vomit or the Lask
come of cold phlegmatic matter.

And besides these effects, it provokes Urine and Menstruosity, and asswageth
ach of the sides and reins, and especially taken with Mellicratum.

Enula campana red^i^ praecordia sana,
Cum succo Rutae, si succus sumitur hujus:
Affirmat ruptis ^il esse salubriu^ i^tis.
Of Enula campana thus we say,
It cheers the heart expelling grief away.
The juice of Rue and this so well agree,
That they are good for such as bursten be.
Wine made thereof does clearly cleanse the breast,
Expels wind, and helps well to digest.
Here the Author declaring two effects of Enula campana, El^^^^^^e, seab-wort,
or Fl^^^e-heel.
says:

First, it comfort the heart strings, (that is) the brim of the stomach,
which is properly called the Heart strings, or else the vital members, that
is. the windy members, which be near the heart, and especially the heart-root.

That it comfort the brim of the stomach, it appears in that the sweet
smelling root of Enula comfort the sinewy members. For the brim of the
stomach is a sinewy member. That i^ comfort windy members, appears; For
Wine made of Enula called Vin^in Enulatum, cleanse^h the Breast and Lights or
Lungs, as Avicen says.

Also Enula swallowed down with Honey, helps a man to spit, and it is one of
those herbs, that rejoice and comfort the heart.

The second effect is, that the juice of this herb, with the juice of Rue, is
very wholesome for them that be burst, and that is specially, avi. 2. can. ^i.
de enula.
when the burstnesse comes by ventosity: for these two juyces dissolve that.

And besides these effects, Aenula is good for a stomach filled with ill
humors, and it opens opilations of the liver and splone, as Rasis says. And
it comfort all hurts, cold griefs, and motions of ventosities, and
inflations, as Avicen says.

De Pulegi^.
Cum vino choleram nigram potata repellit.
Sic dicunt veterem semptum curare podagram.
Hill-wort, or Peneriall steept in wine.
Purges black choler, as the learned divine.
Beside, our Elders say, and make no doubt,
That it melts phlegm, and clearly cures the Gowt.
Here the Author rehearsing two effects of Hill-wort, says. That principally
the water thereof, or Penyriall (taken with wine) purges black choler. A
remedy for chollor.


Secondly, Hill-wort heals an old Gout: for the property of this heath is, to
melt and dissolve phlegm, where of very often the Gowt is wont to be engendered.
And note, that after Platearius, Hill-Wort is hot and dry in the third degree.
The substance thereof is subtle, the virtue comfortable, through the sweet
smell: the substance thereof opens, and the qualities do draw, the fiery
substance or nature thereof, consumes by burning and drying.

De Nasturtio aequatico.
I ^^ius succo crines retinere fluentes
Alitus asseritur dentisque curare dolorem.
Et squamas succus sanat cum melle perunctus.
Of Watercresses, most opinions say,
Hair they retain, when it does fall away.
The toothache that tormenteth grievously,
They give thereto a present remedy.
They cleanse all skales that cleave unto the skin,
If Honey to the Ointment you put in.
Here the Author rehearsing three effects of Water-cressies, water-cressies
says:

First, they retain hairs falling away, if the head be anointed with the juice
thereof: or else if the juice or water thereof be drunk. This effect Avicen
touches, saying; Avi 2.2 can. ca. de Nastu^. cio.
The drinking or annoincing with Water-cress^es retains hairs falling away.

The second effect is Water-cressies does cure the toothache, specially, if the
ach come by cold, for it pierces, resolves, and heateth, as appears at Cur
mor^^ur homo.

Thirdly, the juice of Water-cressies taken with honey, or the place anointed
therewith, does away skales that cleave to ones skin: by reason that such
skales be engendered of falt phlegm.

Water-cressies (as is said) purges all phlegm: therefore if it be drunk, it
resists the cause of skales: and honey, which is a cleanser, helps much
thereto. Beside these effects Water-cressies dry up the corruption of the
belly, and cleanses the lights, it heateth the stomach and liver and is whole'
some against the grossness of the spleen. Namely, When a plaster is made of
that and of honey, it causes one to cast up choler, it augmenteth carnal
lust, and by dissolving, avoideth out worms, and provokdth menstruosity as
Avicen says.

De Chelidonio majore.
Caecatis pullis, hoc lumina matter hirundo.
Plinius vt scribit, quamvis sint, eruta reddit.
Young Swallows that are blind, and lack their sight,
The Damme (by Celendine) does give them light.
Therefore (with Pliny) we may boldly say,
Celendine for the sight is good always.
Here the Author says, when young Swallows be blind, the Damun brings
Celendine, Of celendine.
and rubbeth their eyes, and makes them to see: whereby the Author shows,
that it is wholesome for the sight. And this appears to be true: for commonly
it is a medicine against feebleness of sight. Celendine has ju^ce, which is
well known. And why Swallows know it better then other Birds, may be, because
their young be oftener blind then any other. Swallows dung does make them blind,
and so the Dam dungeth sometime in the youngs eyes, and makes them blind.

And after Pratearius. Celendine is hot and dry in the third degree. And the
qualities and substance thereof, has virtue to dissolve consume, and draw. And
the roots thereof stamped and sod in wine, are good to purge the head, and a
woman's privity from broken may humors: if the Patient receive the smoke
thereof at the mouth, and after gargarise Wine into the throat.

Auribus insusus vermes succus necat ejus.
Cortex verrucas in aceto coctaresolvit,
Pomorum succus, flos partus destrui: ejus.
The juice of Willow put into the Ear,
Does kill the Worms which are engendered there.
The rind of Willow sod in Vinegar,
For taking Wares away, the most prefer.
Let teeming-Women cast Willow-flowrs away,
Because they hinder Childbirth with delay.
Here the Author rehearsing three things of Willow, says.

First, To kill worms
the juice thereof, powered into ones Ear, kills Worms: by reason of the
stipticity and drying thereof and after Avicen, Nothing is better to heal all
mattering at the Ears, then the juice of Willow leaves. Av. 2 can, cap. de
salites


Secondly, the ^inde of Willowes sod in Vinegar, takes away Warts. And Avicen
says: Willow ashes with Vinegar, dries up Warts by the Roots: To void war^s.
by reason of the ashes vehement drying. Yet to destroy Warts, nothing is
better then to rub them with Purslain This the property, and not the quality of
Purslain does, after Avicen. avi. 2 can. cap. de por^iaca.


Thirdly, Willow-flowers, and the juice of the fruit thereof, lets the birth
of a child: for through stipticity, and brought thereof, it causes the Child
to be born with great pain.

Confortare cr^cus dicatur laetisi^ando,
Membraque defect a confort at, epar reparando,
Saffron does glad the heart being sick and ill,
But yet too much endangereth to kill,
Defective members it does comfort kindly:
And next, restores the Liver very friendly.
Here the Autho^ says that Saffron ^omforteth man's body, Of saffron.
in gladding it. But know withal, that Saffron has such a property, as if one
take more thereof then he ought: it will kill him in rejoicing or laughing.
Avicen says: That to take a dram and a half w^ll kill one in rejoicing.

Secondly, Saffron comfort defective members, and principally the heart. It
comfort^th the stomach, with the stipticity and heat thereof: and for the same
cause restores the liver, for it will not suffer the liver to be dissolved.
Yet to use it overmuch, induces parbreaking and matteth the appetite. Ot this
Avicen warns us, saying: It causes parbreaking, Avi. 1 capit de croco.
and marreth the appetite, because it is contrary to the sharpness in the
stomach, which is cause of appetite.

Besides these properties, Saff^on makes one sleep, and dulleth the wits, and
when it is drunk with wine, it makes one drunken: it cleanses the eyes, and
lets humors to flow to them and makes one to breath well: it stirs to
carnal lust, and makes one to urine well.

De Perro
Reddit facundas premansum sape puellas,
Iste stillantem poteris retinere C^uorem.
Leeks if their property is not belyde:
To make young women fruitful, has been tryde.
Beside they stint the bleeding at the nose:
In greatest violence, as some suppose.
Here the author reciting two commodities of Leeks, says that often eating of
Leeks makes young women fruitful by reason, as Avicen says; Leekes dilate the
Matrice, and take a way the hardness thereof, which lets conception.

Secondly, Leeks stint bleeding at the nose as Avicen says: and any other
effects of Leeks are rehearsed at Allia, Nux. etc.

Quod piper est nigrum, non est dissolvere pigrum,
Flegmata purgabit, digestivamque iuvabit.
Leucopiper stomacho prodest, inssisque dolors,
^^ile praeveniet motum febrisque regorem.
Black P^pper in dislolving is not slow,
But quickly purges Phlegm, as many know.
Beside, 'is very good to help digestion,
When other things may fail that are in question.
White Pepper, to the stomach comfort sends,
And many ways it from the Cough defends.
For diverse griefs it yields good prevention,
And with a Fever stands in stout contention.
Here the Author declaring many commodities of pepper says.

First black Pepper, through the heat and dryness thereof, loses quickly:
for it is hot and dry in the third degree.

Secondly, it purges phlegm, for it draws phlegm from the inner part of
the body, and consumes it. Likewise it a doideth phlegm out, that cleaves to
the breast and stomach, heating subtiling, and dissolving it.

Thirdly, it helps digestion. And Avicen says: That Pepper digesteth and
causes appetite: avi. 2 can. ca. de pipere.
and specially long Pepper which is whorsomer to digest then either white or
black, as Galen says.

Secondly be declares. 5. wholesome things of white pepper

First, White pepper comfort the stomach: Gal. 3 de reg. sanita^ is ca 7
avi. loco preal.
for Galen says: That it comfort more then the other two. And Avicen says:
That white pepper is more wholesome for the stomach, and more vehemently does
comfort,

The second is: pepper is specially wholesome for the cough, that comes of
cold phlegmatic matter: for it heateth, dissolveth, and ca^teth it. And Avicen
says: When Pepper is ministered in Electuaries it is wholesome for the Cough,
and aches of the breast.

Thirdly, white Pepper is wholesome for the ach, and that is to wit of the
breast and ven^noks pain. And for that, all pepper is good: for all pepper is a
diminisher and avoider of wind And Avicen says: That white pepper and long,
Against the belly-ach.
is wholesome for pricking ach of the belly, if it be drunk with honey, and
fresh Bayleaves.

Fourthly, Pepper withstandeth the causes of a cold Fever, for it digesteth and
heateth the matter.

Fifthly, Pepper is wholesome for a shaking fever, by reason that the heat of the
Pepper comfort the sinews, and consumes the matter spread on them. And
Avicen says: In rubbing it is made an ointment, which V^guentum is wholesome
against shaking. These five properties are ascribed to the other kinds of
Pepper as Avicen says. And besides these effects; Pepper heateth the sinews
and brains of man's body: it mundifieth the lights, and a little provokes the
urine, but much loses the belly, as Avicen. says:

There be three sorts of Pepper: white-Pepper, called Leucopiper, long-Pepper,
called Macropiper, and black-Pepper, called Melanopiper. It is called
white-pepper that is very green and moist: and when it is a little dried, and
not perfectly ripe, it is called long-Pepper. But when it is perfectly ripe, it
is called black-pepper.

Et m^x po^t escam aormire ^^mi^que moveri,
Ista grevare solent auditus; ebrietasque.
If after meat we fall to sudden sleep,
Our food from all digestion it does keep.
Overmuch moving is ^s hurtful too.
And drunkennes^e does most of all undo.
In all these, let us use discreet forbearing,
Being enemies that do offend our hearing.
Here the Author recites three things that grieve the hearing. Hurtful to the
hearing


The first is immediate sleep after meat, and that is, if one eathis fill. For
the immediate sleep will not suffer the meat to digest, and of meat undigested
are engendered gross undigested fumes, which with their grosseness stop the
conduites of hearing: and they engrosse and trouble the spirits of hearing.

The second is, too much moving after meat for that also l^tteth digestion and
the due shutting of the stomachs mouth: by reason that then the stomachs mouth
closes not so easily, as by a little walking, whereby the meat descends to
the bottom^ of the stomach. For when the stomach is not shut, many fumes ascend
to the head, that grieve the hearing.

The third is drunkenness, whereof many fumes and vapors are engendered, which
ascend to the head, and the Organ of hearing, and troubles the spirits
thereof, and grieveth the hearing. And drunkenness does not only hurt the
hearing but also the sight and all the senses, for the same cause as is before
said.

There be three things, avi 4.3 ca 2. de conse sanit. anric.
as Avicen says. That hurt the ear, and other senses, lothing, repletion, and
sleep after refection: and some text has this verse, Balnea, sol, vomitus
affert, repletio, clamor. Which things grieve the hearing, but specially great
noise. For Avicen says. If we will hear well and naturally, we must eschew the
sun, laborious baining, vomit, great noise, and repletion.

Metus longa fames vomitus percussio, casus,
Ebrietas, frigus, tinnitum causat in aure.
Long-fasting, vomiting, and sudden fear,
Are hurtful to the Organ of the ear.
Blows, falls, and Drunkenness are even as ill,
And is so cold, believe me if you will.
Such as would noises in the ear prevent,
To shun all these, think it good document.
Here the Author recites seven things, which cause a humming and a noise in
ones ear.

The first is, fear, specially after some motion. The reason is, because in
fear, the spirits and humors creep inward toward the heart suddenly, by which
motion, ventosity is lightly engendered, which entering to the Organ of the
hearing, cause the tinging and ringing in the ear. By corporal moving also
humors and spirits are moved, of which motion, ventosity is lightly engendered,
which coming to the ea^s, causes ringing. For ringing is caused through some
moving of the vapor or ventosity, about the Organe of the hearing, moving the
natural air of those Pipes or Organes, contrary to their natural course,

The second thing, is great hunger, Avicen shows the reason, avi. 4 3 ca. 9.
saying: That this thing chances through humors spread, and resting in man's
body. For when nature finds meat, she is converted unto them, and that
resolves and moves them.

The third is vomiting: for in vomiting (which is a laborious motion) humors
are specially moved to the head. In token whereof, we see the eyes and face
become red, and the sight hurt. And thus also by vomiting vapors and
ventosities are soon moved to the organ of the hearing.

The fourth is beating about the head, specially the ^ares, for thereby
chances vehement motion of natural air, being in the organe of the be^^ing.
For when any member is hurt, Nature immediately sends thereto wind and blood,
which two be the instruments of nature, by which then motion is caused in the
ear.

The fifth is falling, especially on the head, for the same cause that is showed
of beating. And of a fall (whatsoever it be) a moving of the humors is caused
in the body.

The sixth is drunkenness: for drunkenness fills the head with fumes and
vapors, which approaching to the Organe of the hearing, troubles it and makes
a noys^ in the ear.

The seventh is cold, for by great cold the organe of the hearing is feebled,
wherefore of a small cause by cold, ringing in the ^ar chances, for great cold
causes ventosities.

And ringing in the ears chances not only by these causes, but also of many
other, as ventositie engendered in the head, and therein moved, or else by some
matter engendered in the head, of else by motions of ventosities, chancing
oftentimes in the opening of the ear, as they that have an Ague: or by the
great repletion of the body, and most especially of the head or by some clammy
matter resolved into a little ventosity, or by medicines, Whose property is, to
retain humors and ventosities in the parts of the brain, as says Avicen.

Baluea, Vina, Venus, ventus, piper, allia, fumus,
^orri cum Caepis, le^s, Flotus, Faba, Synapis,
Sol, coitus, Ignis, ictus, acumina, puluis,
Ista nocent ^^nlis, sed vigilare magis.
Bathing, Wine, Women, boystrous wind,
To harm the eyesight always are inclined.
The like does Pepper, Garlic, dusting Smoke,
Leeks, Onyons. Len^ils, draw the sight aslope,
And dims it as Beans do. Such as use weeping,
I would not have mine eyes in their moist keeping.
Mustard, and gazing much against the Sun,
The sight thereby is utterly undone.
The violence of lust in hot desire,
Spoils them outright, and looking on the fire.
Extremity of labor hurts the eye,
And the least blows, blood-shot it instantly.
Tart and sharp sauces needs offend them must,
As also walking in a windy d^st.
The last is too much watching; these, believe me,
Avoid and then thine eyesight will not grieve thee.
Here the Author rehearses one and twenty things, One and twenty things
hurtful for the eyes.
hurtful to the eyes.

The first is baining, or bathing whether it he moist or dry, called
hot-houses. For baining greatly heateth the eyes, and so hurts the
complexion: for the eyes be naturally cold, and of the nature of water.

Secondly, Baining dries and resolves the subtle humidities of the eyes,
with which the fighty spirits that are flerie. should be refreshed and
tempered. This has made many blind in Almaine, where they use many Baines and
Hot-housed. Like as in Holland are more Lepers, then in any country, only by
fault of good governance.

The second is, wine immoderately taken: for that feebleth the eyes and sight
by reason that it fills the head with fumes and vapors, which dull all the
wits.

The third is, overmuch carnal copulation, which all Phy^^tians say feebleth
much the sight. Aris. 4 part problema.
And Aristotle notes the cause: For by carnall-copulation, that, that is
behovefull for the eyes, is taken away. There must be in the Eyes moist
waterish subtilty, which fortifieth the visible spirits. For the eye is
naturally moist. arist de s^nsu and sensa^o and v. d^animal.
And therefore Aristotle says: That our Eyes be of the nature of water. But
when natural moystures are drawn and voyded out, the bod^^ wareth dry; and
withers away: the Eyes then loose their proper nature, which they retain and
keep by humiditie, and not without a cause: for by flery spirits (which are in
moving) the sight would vanish away, ere that it were succored with moisture.

Thus it appears plainly, that Carnall-copulation, by drawing away the
moystnesse, dries up the superior parts of man whereby the quick sight is hurt.

The third is wind, and specially the South Wind. For Hypocrates says: The
South Wind is mystie, and dusketh the eyes for that wind fills the head with
humidities, which dull the wits, and dark the sight.

The fifth is pepper, which through eht sharpness thereof, ^ng^ud^^^ ^^mes
that bite the eyes.

The sixth is Garlic, which also hurts the eyes, through sharpness, and
vaporosity thereof, as is said at A^^ia, Nux, Ruta, etc.

The seventh is smoke, which hurts the eyes, through the mordication and
drying thereof.

The eight is Leeks: for by eating of them, gross melancholy fumes are
engendered: whereby the sight is shadowed, as is before said at Allia. Nux, Ruta
etc.

The ninth is Onyons, the eating of which hurieth the eyes, through their
sharpness.

Te tenth is Lens or Lentils: The much eating whereof, as Avicen says: Dusketh
the sight, through the vehement drying thereof.

The eleventh is, too much weeping, which weakneth the e^es for it causes
devility retentive of the eyes.

The twelfth is Beans: the use whereof, engenders a gross melancholy fume,
darking the visible spirits as Leeks do: and therefore the eating of Beans;
induces dreadful dreams.

The thirtienth is Mustard, the use whereof feebleth the sight, through his
fartnesse.

The fourtienth, is to look against the Sun: and that is through the vehement
splendour and brightness thereof: whereby the sight is destroyed, as appears
by experience. For the vehement sensiblenes of a thing, not proportioned to
man's sense, as the Sun Beams corrupt man's sense.

The fifteenth is too much Carnal copulatien and specially after great feeding
or repletion or after great voyding or emptiness: but this is already declared.

The sixteenth is fi^e, the beholding whereof causes vehement dryness in the
Eyes, and so hurts the sight: and also the brightness thereof hurts the
Eyes. And therefore we see commonly, that Smiths, and such as work before the
fire, be red-ey'd, and feeble-sighted.

The seventeenth, is great labor: for that also dries vehemently.

The eighteenth is smiting upon the Eyes, which hurts the sight, for it
makes them blous-shot and troubles the visible spirits and otherwhile
engenders Impostumes.

The nineteenth is, too much use of tart or sharp things, as Sauces, and that
is, through the fartnesse of Fumes, of them engendered.

The twentieth is dust, or walking in dusty places: in which dust flies
lightly into the Eyes, and dusketh the sight.

The one and twentieth (and above all other hurtful to the Eyes and Sight) is
too much Watching: For too much watching induces too much drowsines in the
eyes: and generally all repletions hurt the Eyes, and all that dries by
Nature, and all that troubles the blood by reason of saltness, or sharpness.
All Drunkenness hurts the Eyes: Vomiting comfort the Sight in that it
purges the Stomach yet hurts it, in that it drives the matters of the Brain
to the Eyes: and therefore if it be needful to cast, it must be done after
meat and without constratning.

Also, Too much sleep immediately after meat, and much bloudletting: and
namely, with ventosities, hurts the sight, as Avicen says.

Foeniculus, Verbena, Rosa, Chelidonia, Ruta.
Existis sit, quae lumina reddit acuta.
Of Fenell, Vervein, Roses Celendine.
Wi^h Rue among them water stilled fine,
They are most wholesome for to clear the eyes,
Here the Author recites five heaths, To clarify the eyes.
whose water is very wholesome for the sight.

The first is Fenell: Whose juice put into the Eye sharpneth the sight, after
Rasis.

The second is Vervein, whereof the water is of many Physicians put in receipts,
wholesome against feebleness of sight.

The third is Rose Water, which does comfort the living spirits and sight.

The fourth is Celendine whose juice is c^^^ine, it is called Celidonia (that
is) giving celestial gifts.

The fifth is Rue, the water of these heaths is wholesome: for the sight, as
Physicians commonly say,

Sic dentes serve porrorum collige grana,
Ne careas jure cum insquiame simul ure, ^vs. 3. tar, (...), ^a. 4.

Sisque per embotum Funum cape dente remotu^^^.
To cure the tooth ach, take the seed of Leeks,
When that fell pain annoyes, and swells the cheeks:
But seed of Hen bane m^st be mixed among.
And burn them both to make the smoke more strong.
Hold thy mouth ore and so receive the fume,
The pain it slakes, and worms in teeth consume,
If through a Tunnell you the smoke assume.
Here the Author reciting certain Medicines, For toothache. A^. ^ can. cap. de
perro.
for the toothache faith.

Leek seed and ^en-bane burned together is good for the Toothache. But they
must be minis^ied on this wise. The juice of Henbane* with the Leek-seed must
be burned together, and the smoke must be received, through afnunell on the
sid^ that the ach is,

The virtue of the Hen-bane, takes away tho feeliing of the pain. And the
virtue of the Leek-seed-fume kills the worms, which otherwise living in the
concavities of the teeth, causes intolerable pain as Avicen says.

Nux, olcuns, frigus capitis, anguillaque, po^us,
Ac pomum ^^^dum faciunt, hominem fore raucum.
Nuts, oil, and cold, which strikes into the head,
Eeles, and raw Apples, drinking late toward bed,
By all these hoarsenesse in the voice is bred,
This text declares six causes of Hoarsenesse.

The first is eating of nuts, for nuts dry much, and therefore they exasperate
the voice and make it like a cranes voice.

The second is oil, the use whereof may engender Hearsenes: for some parts
thereof cleave fast to the pipe of the lights, causing hearsnesse. Secondly, it
makes Chollerick folk hoarse by reason that in them the oil is lightly
inflamed, and so the inflammation causes exasperation and hoarsenesse: but the
first cause seems better.

The third is cold of the head; for cold of the head does press together the
brain, whereby the humors descend toward the throat, and pipe of the Lights,
and induces hoarsenesse, through too much moystnesse of the pipe.

The fourth is eating of ^eles: for the eating of them multiplieth clammy
phlegm, which coming to the Lights, stick there still, and cause ^oarfen^sse.

The fifth is overmuch drinking, especially toward bed; for then the vehement
wetting of the pipe of the lights, does chiefly cause hoarsenesse of the voice,
as all Physicians say.

The sixth is raw Apples: for by reason that they be raw, they increase phlegm,
and if they be not ripe, but sharp and sower, they make the thr^^t rough.

^ejuna, vigila, caleas dape, valde labora.
Iuspira calidum modicum bibe, comprime statum,
Haec been tu serv^ si vis depellere reuma.
S^ stuat ad pectus dicatur reuma catarrns,
Ad fauces branchus, ad nares esto corisa.
Use fasting, watchings, if the Rheum possess thee,
Hot meats and drinks avoid, they not redress thee,
Labor thy body and thy breath restrain,
Inspire warm air, if the Catharre do pain.
Beware of drinking much, it does offend,
These (against all Rh^umes) to thee I do commend.
To know these Rh^umes, this is an observation,
If to the breast they flow in exaltation.
They Are called Cathares. But running through the nose,
Its called Corisa: Others say the pose.
When by the neck it does it self convay,
They term it Branchus as Physicians say.
Here the Author derlareth 7 things that cure the Rheum.

The first is, For the Rheum,
abstinence from meat, or tasting, for thereby the matter is o^^ini^hed because
abstinence dries, and the matter is better ryped and consumed: For when nature
finds no matter of food whereon she may work, she works on Rheumatick
matter, and consumes it, and the head is less filled there with. Wherefore
Avicen says: That a man having the Catharre or the Pose, should take heed that
he fill not himself with meats.

The second is Watch for watching dries the brain, and withstandeth that the
vapors ascend not to the head.

The third is hot meats and brinks; for with their heat, the cold water of the
Rheum is digested.

The fourth is to labor much: For thereby the matter Rheumatick is consumed by
reason that much labor dries up all superfluityes of the body. But in stead
of Valde, some texis have V^ste. And then the sentence is, that warm Garments
is wholesome for the Rheum, specially when it comes by cold matter.

The fifth is inspyring of hot air, and specially if the Catarre proceed of cold
matter: for by breathing of warm air, the matter is warmed and riped.

The sixth is to drink little, and to endure thirst: for thereby the Rheumatick
matter is consumed: For little drinking fills not the head, as much as
drinking does.

The seventh is to hold ones breath, for that is specially good in a Catarre,
caused of a cold matter: By reason that this holding of the breath heateth the
parts of the breast, and so the cold ph^^gmatick matter causing the Catharre, is
better digested.

Avicen rehearsing these things, says: avi. loco. preal.
It behooveth to keep the head warm continually. And also it must be kept from
the wind and namely that of the South. For the South wind repleteth and makes
rare: but the North wind constrains. And he must drink no cold water, nor
sleep in the day time. He must endure thirst, hunger, and watch as he can: for
these things (in this sickness) are the beginning of health,

Furthermore Rasis bids him that has the Rheum: Rasis. 3. al.
To beware of lying upright: For by lying upright the Rheumatick matter sloweth
to the hinder parts of man, where be no manifest issues, whereby the matter may
avoid out. Therefore it is to be feared, least it flow to the sinews, and cause
the cramp or palsy.

And likewise he ought utterly to forbear wine: for wine is vaporous, and in
that it is very hot, it dissolveth the matter, and augmenteth the Rheum. And
likewise he must not stand in the sun, or by the fire, for the sun and the fire
loose the matter, and augment the Rheum.

In the last two verses, the Author puts difference between these 3. names,
Catarrus, Branchus and Corisa. And the difference stands in the matter
flowing to one part or another of the body. When the matter runs to the
brest-parts it is called Catarrus, when it tunneth by the nose, it is called
Corisa, when it runs by the neck, it is called Branchus.

But this word Rheum does note and fig^ifie generally all manner of matter,
flowing from one member to another.

Auripigmentum sulphur mescore memento,
His decet apponi calcem, com^^sc^ saponi.
Quatuor haec misce, commixtis qua noristis:
Fistula curatur, quater ex his sireplea: ur.
Au^ipigmentum, which some Arsenick call,
Remember to mix Brimstone therewithal,
White lime and Soap: these four by way of plaster,
Are able any Fistula to master.
Observe these sour then, if thou would be cured,
Many (thereby) of help have been assured.
Here the Author rehearsing a curable medicine for the Fistula, For the Fistula.
says. That a plaster made of Aurpigmentum, Brimstone, while Lime, and Soap
mingled together heals the Fistula. Because these things have virtue to dry
and mundifie: which intentions are requisite in healing a Fistula. Platearius
says: Auripigmentum is hot and dry in the ^ourth degree: it dissolveth and
draws, consumes and mundifieth. Brimstone and Soap as he says) are hot and
dry, but Brimston is more vehement, because it is hot and dry in the fourth
degree; but Soap is not. Avicen says: That Lime washed dries without
mordication, and makes more steady.

The Fistula is a running fore, which avoydeth matter more or less, after the
diversity and co^rse of the moon. Auripigmentum is that which gravers fasten
brass and metals withal in stoue.

Ossibus ex denis bis certenisque novenis,
Constat homo denis bis de^tibus and duodexis,
Ex ^recen^^nis decies s^x quinqueque venis.
The bones, the Teeth and veyns that are in man,
The Author here does number, as he can.
Two hundred nineteen benes agree some men,
Two hundred forty eight, says Auicen.
Numbering the teeth, some two and thirty hold,
Yet four of them by others are controld.
Because some lack those teeth stand last behind
In childhood. Others till their greatest age they find.
The G^inders, and Duales, Quadruph,
And them above, beneath called Cani^^.
That grind that cut, and hardest things do break,
And those called Sensus, Nature these bespeak
To grind man's food. The veyns in man we count,
Three hundred sixty five, which few surmount.
Here the Author numbreth the bones teeth, The number of bones.
and veins in man's body.

First be says there be CC^i^-bones: yet after the Doct^rs of Ph^^i^ck
Hypocrates, Galen, Rasis, Averroes, and Avicen, the bones in man be CCxiviii
And though herein be variance, yet there is a master of Physic that says:
Ossa ducent a sunt, aique quater duodena.

Secondly, The number of Teeth:
the Author says that a man most commonly should have xxxii. Teeth. But yet it
chances, that some lack those sour last Teeth, which be behind them, that we
call the Grinders, and those have but xxviii. Teeth. Some lack four of the last
teeth in childhood only: some other lack them till they be very old; and some
all their life.

Here is to be noted, that after Avicen, The two foremost teeth be called
Duales, and two on either side of these twain, be called Quadrupli. There be
two in the upper jawe, and two in the nether: all these teeth be ordained to
cut, and therefore some call them Cut^ers, and specially the Dua^es. Next unto
these Qua^ruples, are two Teeth above, and two beneath called Canini, whose
office is to break hard things. After these, be four other on either side
called Grinders, four above and four beneath. After these, same have a Tooth
called Sensus, on either side, and as well above as beneath: These also are
ordained; t^gri^d man's meats. And so the whole number of the Teeth is xxxii. or
else xxviii. in them that have not the teeth called Sen^u. There is then four^
Duales, and four Quadruples, fours Dog-teeth, sixteen Grinders, and four
Sensius.

Thirdly, the Text says, that there is in man CCClxv. veyns, as appears in
the Anathomy.

Quatnor humores in humane corpore constant,
Sanguis cum cholera flegma, melancholia,
Terra melan. aqua fleg. and aer sanguis, choler ignis.
Four humors in man's body always are,
Blood, Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy. And compare
These, unto those four several Elements,
Whereof they are continual presidents.
To Earth Melancholy, to Water Phlegm,
The Air to Blood, Choler to fire extreme.
Here the Author declares the four humors in man, as Blood, Choler, Phlegm,
and Melancholy. And showing the Nature and complexion of them, he compares
each to one of the four Elements.

Melancholy is cold and dry, and so compared to the Earth, which is of like
nature.

Phlegm is cold and moist, and so compared to water.

Blood is hot and moist, and so compared to the air.

Choler is hot and dry, and so compared to the fire.

These things are declared in these verses.

Humidus est sanguis, calet, est et vis acris illi,
Alget, humet flegma, sic illi vis fit aquosa.
Sicca ealet Colera, sic igus sit simulata,
Melancholia friget, sic^at quasi terra.
The blood is hot and moist, like to the air,
And therefore therewith carries best compare.
Phlegm cold and moist, even in his chiefest matter,
Bearing his best resemblance with the water.
Sullen is Melancholy, cold and dry.
And to the Earth it self does best apply,
But Choler being hot and dry, desires
To meet (he cares not) with how many fires.
For a further knowledge, avi. 1. do. 4. c. 1.
know beside that after Avicen, There be four humors in man's body, Blood,
F^egme, Choler and Melancholy, as is said.

The best of them is Blood; First, because it is the matter of man's spirits, in
whom consists man's life and operations. Secondly, because it is comfortable
to the principles of man's life, it is temperatly hot and moist. Thirdly,
because it restores and nourishes the body more then the other humors. And it
is called the treasure of Nature: For if it be lost, Death follows forthwith.

Next to blood in goodness, is Phlegm. First, by reason that if need be, it is
apt to be turned into blood.

Secondly because it is very near like humidity, which is as the foundation of
life.

After Phlegm in goodness is Choler, which is partner with natural heat, so
long as it keeps convenient measure.

Then follows Melancholy, as dregs and dirt removed apart, from the
principals of life, as enemy to joy and liberality, and of near kindred to age
and death.

Secondly note, that in the division of humors, there are two kinds of blood
(that is to say) natural and unnatural. Natural blood, that is to say, Veyn
blood, which is ruddy and obscure; and Artery blood is ruddy and clear, without
ill savor, and (in comparison of other humors) it is very sweet. Of unnatural
is two sorts, the one is unnatural in quantity that is to say which is changed
from good complexion in it self, or else by mingling of another humor.

There is another unnatural blood, which (through mingling of other humors) is
ill, both in quality and substance, quantity, and in proportion of the one to
the other. And this is double, for the one is not natural, by mingling of an
ill humor that comes to him from without, The other is unnatural, by
mingling of an ill humor, engendered in the self blood; as when part of the
blood is putrified, and the subtle part thereof is turned into Choler, and the
gross part into melancholy: or else into Choler or the melancholy or else both
remains in the blood.

And this unnatural blood by mingling of an ill humor, va^yeth from natural
blood many wares,

First in substance: for it is grosser and fowler, since melancholy is mingled
there with: or ^lse it is more subtle, when watrishnes or ^^trine choler is
mingled therewith.

Secondly in color: for sometime when phlegm is mingled therewith, it
inclines to whiteness or through melancholy to blackness.

Thirdly in favor: for by mingling of putrified humors: if is more stinking or
else by mingling of raw humors, it has no savor.

Fourthly in tallage: for by mingling of Choler it inclines to bitterness, and
by melancholy to sowernes, or the phlegm of unsavorines.

Also of phlegm there be two kinds, natural and unnatural Natural is that which
(within a certain space) will be blood, for phlegm is undigested blood,

There is another spice of phlegm which is sweet, and somewhat warm, if it be
compared to the bodily hear. But comparing it to the ruddy blood, and choler,
it is cold. Phlegm is naturally white: and this is called sweet phlegm,
extending this name sweet to all the talages, delighting the taste: for
otherwise the natural phlegm is not sweet, but unsavory and waterish and very
near the ^allage of water. And to this phlegm nature has not given a proper
Mansion, as she has done to Choler and melancholy: but nature makes it run
with the blood, for it is a very near similitude to blood,

And of this phlegm there be two necessityes, and one vtility.

The first necessity is that it be near the members, so that their virtue may
digest it, and turn it into blood, and that the members by it may be nourished,
when they have lost their natural food: (that is for to say) good blood,
through restraint of material blood, which restraint is caused through the
stomach and liver through some cause accidental.

The second necessity is, that it mingle with the blood, and make it apt to
nourish, the memhers of phlematick complexitous as the brain and such: for that
which must nou^^sh these members must be mingled with phlegm.

The vtility of phlegm is, that it moysten the joints, and members that move
much, least they ware ^ry through the heat that comes of their moving and
rubbing.

Unnatural phlegm may be divided first into the substance, and to some thereof
is Muscilaginosum, and that is phlegm, (to ones seeming) diverse for in some
part it is subtle and thin, and in some other gross and thick: is called
Muscilaginosum, because it is like Muscilages, drawn out of seed.

There is an other phlegm, that appears equal in substance: that is in
subtility and grosseness^ to one^ deeming, but for a truth it is diverse in
every place this is named raw phlegm, and this, increases in the stomach, and
entrails. And to avoid it out of the stomach. Hypocrates, bids us, To cast
twice a month, and to avoid it out of the guts: Nature has ordained Choler to
turn it from the chest of the Gal to the entrail Iejunium, and so sorth to the
lower guts, to scowr away the phlegm from the brims of the entrails, and cause
it to descend down with the other dregs and filth.

Sometimes the phlegm is increased in the vein^s, specially of old folks, by
diminishing of their digestion, and there remaining, is by little and little
augmented and engrossed, and hurts nature, which cannot (by the veins thereto
ordained) avoid it out. Yet it does all that is possible, to keep it from the
hearts, and other inward m^mbers, and drives it to the outward members, and
specially to the Legs: for by the heaviness thereof it draws naturally to
the lower parts of man. And this is the cause why old folks legs are sw^lne,
and that if one press down his finger therein, there tarryeth a hole,
specially toward night, most in fat folks and such, as were wont to be
nourished with moist meat.

There is another spice of phlegm, very subtle and watrish like unto water,
and somewhat thick: this phlegm is often mingled with their spittle that have
ill digestion, and of those that be great drinkers: it removes from the brain
to the nose, as it is wont in the beginning of the pose, and when by decoction
and boiling in a man it becomes gross, it is turned into phlegm gross,
white and musc^lage.

There is another phlegm gross and white called Gipseum the subtle parts of
this phlegm, is dissolved through long biding in the joints: and the grossenes
thereof remains in the joints as hard as stones. This phlegm engenders the
Gowt incurable.

There is another phlegm thick and gross, like to the mol^en glass, in colrr,
clammines, and weight.

Secondly, unnatural phlegm differs in Tailage: for there is certain phlegm
that is sweet, which is by mingling of blood with phlegm. And under this is
contained the unctuous phlegm, which is inge^dred by mingling unctuous blood and
phlegm.

There is another manner of unsavory phlegm, caused of rawnesse as certainly
glassy phlegm.

There is another salt phlegm caused by mingling of choler And this is more
biting drier, and lighter then any other phlegm through the choler mingled
therewith, which is dry, light, and sharp. And this phlegm is often found in
their stomachs, that be phlematick, that drink much strong wine, and that use
salt and sharp meats; because it cleaves to the stomach, and causes other
while thirst intolerable and running by the guts, if it sometime fle^eth them
and causes the blood men^^n: and in the fundament oftentimes induces strong
costivenesse.

There is another phlegm, that is sharp, by mingling, of sharp melancholy
therewith: and sometime through boiling of fi^gine, as it chances in the sweet
juyces of fruits, that first boil and after, wax ripe. And this phlegm
appears oftener in their stomachs that digest ill, then in other parts: for
natural Choler flows to the mouth of the stomach, to stir up the appe^ite,
which desconding downward sometime mingled with phlegm, makes it sour and this
is perceived by sour belchings. And otherwhiles this phlegm is engendered in
the stomach by boiling with a weak heat.

There is another phlegm called Pantick, which is sometime caused by mingling
of pontick melancholy. But this is seldoms, by reason that pontick melancholy,
so very scarce. It is sometime caused through vehement coldness thereof,
whereby the moistnes thereof is congeled, and somewhat altered to earthlines,
and thereupon comes no weak heat, which causing it to boil, should convert it
into sharpnes: nor no strong heat, which digesting it should turn it into blood.

There be two kinds of Choler, natural and unnatural.

Unnatural Choler is the some of blood, whose color is ruddy and clear, that
is c^trine, in the last degree of citrines as Saff^on heads, and it is light
and sharp: and the hotter, the more redder it is. And after this Choler
engendered in the head it goes wite the blood into the veins the other goes
into the purse of the gall.

The part that goes with the blood endures therewith both for necessity and
prof^e. It is needful that it mingle with the blood, to nourish the choleric
members It is behooveful that it make the blood subtle and cause it to enter
into the veins.

The part that goes to the purse of the gall, goes thither for necessity and
profit. The necessity is double. The one is needful for all the body, to
mundifie it from choleric superfluities. The other necessity is in respect of
the gals p^r^s.

The pressed also is double. The one is, to wash the E^drails from dregs and
clammy phlegm cleading to them.

The other is to wash the guis and Muscles that they may feel, the thing that
hurts them, and void all other filthiness The proof of this is that the
cholick chances often times, by stopping of the hole that comes from the
purse of the gall to the guts.

Unnatural choler is double. For one is unnatural through outward cause mingled
therewith. The other is unnatural, through a cause in it self, for the
substance thereof is not natural.

Choler unnatural through an outward cause, is another known and fame as: and
is is that, that phlegm is mingled with, and it is called famous or notable by
reason that it is often engendered. And of this kind of Choler comes the
third, that is well known. There is another that ^^lesse famous, and that is it
wherewith melancholy is mingled.

Famous Choler is either ^^t^me, and engendered by mingling of subtle phlegm
with natural choler, or else it is yolky, like to the yolks of eggs, and is
engendered by mingling of gross phlegm with a natural choler.

Choler of less same is caused two ways. One is, when the choler is burned in
it self and turned to ashes, from which the subtle part of the Choler is not
separated, but mingled therewith, and this choler is the worst. Another is, when
melancholy comes from without, and mingleth it with the chole^. And this
Choler is better then other, and is ruddy in color, it is not clear nor ^lowing
but more like to vein-bloud. This unnatural choler having his own proper
substance without mingling of any other humor, is often engendered in the liver,
by reason that the subtilenes of the blood burns it self and turns into
choler, and grossly into melancholy.

Another choler is engendered in the stomach of ill meats not digested but
corrupted: or ^is it is engendered in the veins, by other humors. And of this
choler be two kinds: for one is called Choler Praslive, like the color of the
bearb called Praslion, which is engendered of the yolkines when it is burned:
for burning causes a yolky blackness in the choler, which mingled with choler
citrine, engenders a green cholet.

The other is called rusty choler, like to rusty Iron, and it is engendered of
Prassive, when Praslive is burned only, til the humidity thereof be dried away:
and of the dryness begins to war white. And these two last Cholers be ill,
and venomous, yet rusty, is the worst.

Likewise there be two kinds of melancholy, natural and unnatural.

The natural is, the dregs and superfluity of good blood, whose tallage is
between sweet and pontick. And thus melancholy when it is engendered in t^^
^^ver, is ^^rted in two paris Of which one enters with the blood and the (...)
remains in the veins, the other is conve^^ed to the splen^. The first part
entieth with the blood for necessity and profit: It is needful that it mingle
with the blood, to nourish the melancholy cold and dry members as the bones.

The vtility is to make thick and then blood to stint the superflous tunning
thereof: to make it strong and to strengthen those members into which it must
be converted. The other part that needs no blood goes to the spi^ne, both
for necessity and profit. The necessity is double one universal through out
the body, to purge it of melancholious superfluity. The other is but particular
only to govern the s^lent.

This melancholy is also profitable for man's body, for it ^^tinneth to the
mouth of the stomach, straining out the humidityes, that is finds there, as a
woman strayning a cows dugs, draws out the milk: this vtility is double,
First, it constrains, thicketh and comfort the stomach. Secondly, by
reason that the eagerness thereof, moves the mouth of the stomach, it makes
one to have an appetite to meat.

Unnatural melancholy is a thing burned, or ashes in respect of other humors.
Of this there are four famous kinds, though there be many not famous.

The first is ashes of Choler.

The second is ashes of phlegm, and if the phlegm that is burned were very
subtle and watrish, then the melancholy thereof engendered, will be salt in
tal^ge. But if the phlegm be gross that is burned then the ashes thereof, or
the melancholy of it engendered inclines to sowernes or ponticity.

The third is ashes of blood, and this melancholp is salt, a ^^tle inclining to
sweetness.

The fourth is ashes of natural melancholy. And if natural melancholy
(whereof soever it be) be subtle, then it will be very so^r. And when it is
cast out upon the ground it boileth and labors of the air, and causes both
flies and beasts to avoid the place. But if the natural melancholy be gross,
the unnatural thereof engendered, shall not be sower.

Sangui^eorum signa
Natura pingues isti sunt a^quejocantes
Sempor rumores, up^unt audire frequentes.
Hos Venus and Bacchus delectant, fercula, risus.
Et facit hos hilares, and dulcia verba loquentes.
Om^i us his stud^is habiles suxt, ac magis apti.
Qualibes ex causa, nee hos leuit^r moves ira.
Largus, amans, hilaris, ridens ruberque colo^ i^.
Cantans carnosus satis, audax atque benig^^us.
To Sanguine men, Nature has much commended,
First, with a jocond spirit they are attended.
Desirous to hear tales and novelties,
Women, nor wine, they gladly not despise.
Their looks are cheerful and their language sweet,
For any study they are prone and meet.
No common matter kindles angers fire,
Contentious company they not desire.
They are liberal loving mirthfull: and benign,
Fleshy and fat, capring and apt to sing.
No muddy countenance, but smiling cheer,
And bold enough as causes may appear.
Here the Author teaching us to know S^nguine folks, s^^th, that a sanguine
person is naturally sat. But yet we may not understand, that sanguine ^^^ks be
properly fat: For that is a token of a cold complexion, as says Avicen, But
they be sat and fleshy withal: ^orfat in Sanguine persons is taken for Fleshy.
Avicen says, That abundance of all ruddy flesh and stiff, signifies a hot
and a moist complexion, as a sanguine person is For the abundance of ruddy
flesh, witnesses fortitude of virtue assimulative, and multitude of blood,
that work and war by heat and moyst^re, as witnesses Galen, saying: The
abundance of flesh is engendered of the abundance of blood. For heat perfectly
digesting, and the like ^ertue to flesh, makes the flesh fast and stiff. Also
Avicen says. Every fleshy body without abundance of fat and grease, is
sanguine. Whereto Galen assenteth.

Secondly, the sanguine person is merry and jucond, that is to say, with merry
words he moves others to laugh, or else he is glad, through benignity of the
sanguine humor, provoking a mall to gladness and ^ocondity, through clear and
perfect spirits engendered of blood.

Thirdly he gladly hears fables and merry sports, for the same cause.

Fourthly he is inclined to ^^^hery through heat and mois^nesse, provoking to
ca^uall-copulation.

Fifthly, he gladly drinks good wine.

Sixthly he delights to feed on good meat, by reason that the sanguine person
des^^eth the most like to his complexion, that is, good wines and good meats.

Seventhly, he laugheth lightly, for blood provokes to laughing.

The eight is, the sanguine person has a gladsom^ and an amiable countenance,
through likelinesse of col^ur and fairness of complexion.

The ninth is, he speaks sweetly, through amiablenesse of sanguine nature

The tenth is he is a^t so ^^^^n any manner of Science, through liveliness and
peripicuity of wit.

The eleventh is be is not (...), and this comes through moys^nesse, abating
the f^^ve^ of choler provoking to anger.

The last two Verses roci^e some of the foresaid tokens, and also some other.

First, a sanguine person is free, not covetous, but liberal.

Secondly, be is amorous.

Thirdly, he has a merry countenance.

Fourthly, he is most part smiling, of all which the benignity of the blood is
cause and provoker.

Fifthly, he has a ruddy color. For Avicen says, That ruddy color of the
skin signifies abundance of blood. And this must be understood bright ruddy
color, and not dark such as is wont to be in their faces that drink wines
abundantly, and that use sauces and sharp spices, for such color signifies
Lepry to come.

Sixthly, he gladly ^^^geth and hears singing, by reason of his merry mind.

Seventhly, he is fleshy through the causes beforesaid.

The eight is, he is hardy, through the heat of the blood, which is cause of
boldness.

The ninth is, the sanguine person is benign and gentle, through the bounty of
the sanguine humor.

Flegma vires modicas tribuit, lat^sque brevesque,
Flegma facis ping^es sang^isreddit mediocres.
Sensus hebes, tardus motus pigritia somnus.
Hic somnolentus piger and sputamine multus.
Et qui sensus habet pingues, facit and color albus.
Men that be phlegmatic, are weak of nature,
Most commonly of thick and stubbed flature.
And fatness overtaketh them amain,
For they are slo^hfull and can take no pain.
Their fences are but dull, shallow and flow.
Much given to sleep, whence can no goodness grow,
They often spet: yet natures kind direction,
Has blessed them with a competent complexion.
Here the Author shows certain properties, concerning the complexion of
phlegm.

First phlegmatic folks be weak, by reason that their natural heat, which is
the beginner of strength, and operation, is but feeble.

Secondly, phlegmatic folks be short and thick: for their natural heat is not
strong enough to lengthen the body, and therefore it is thick and short.

Thirdly, phlegmatic folks be fat by reason of their great humidity. Therefore
Avicen says, That superfluous grease signifies cold and moistness, for the
blood and the unctuous matter of grease, piercing through the veins into the
cold members (through coldness of the members) do congeal together, and so
engender in man much great, As Galen says in his second book of operation. He
says also: That sanguine men are middle men, between the long and the short.

Fourthly, phlegmatic folks are more inclined to idleness and study, then folks
of other complexion, by reason of their coldness that makes them sleepy.

Fifthly, they sleep longer by reason of their great coldness, that provokes
them to sleep.

Sixthly, they be dull of wit and understanding: for as temperate heat is cause
of good wit and understanding, so cold is cause of blunt wit and dull
understanding.

Seventhly, they he slothful, and that is by cold: for as heat makes a man
light and quick in moving, so cold makes a man heavy and slothful.

The eight is, they be lumpish, and sleep long.

Est et humor cholera, qui competit impetuosis,
Hoc genus est h^minum, cupiens pracoliere cunctos.
Hi leviter discunt, multum comedunt, cito crescunt.
Inde mag^animi sunt largi, summa petentes:
Hirsutus, fallax, irascous, prodigus, audax,
Astutus, gracilis, siccus, croceique coloris.
Choler, is such an humor as aspi^es,
With most impetuous, insolent desires,
He covers to excel all other men, (...)
His mind outsteps beyond a Kingdoms ken.
Lightly he learns, eats much and soon grows tall,
Magnanimous, and somewhat prodigal.
Soon moved to anger though upon no cause,
His own will is his reasons largest laws.
Subtle and crafty, seldom speaking fair,
A wasting unthrift, overgrown with hair.
Bold-spirited, and yet but lean and dry,
His skin most usual of a Saffron die.
Here the Author teaches us to know a person of a^holerick complexion.

First, he is hasty, by reason of super^^uous heat that moves him to
hastiness, Avi. 2. doc. 4 ca. 4
and therefore Avicen says, That deeds of excessive motion do signify heat.

Secondly, the Choleric person is desirous of honor, and cove^eth to be
uppermost, and to excel all others, by reason that superfluous heat makes man's
mind prone to arroganey and fool-hardinesse.

Thirdly, they learn lightly, by reason of the choleric humor, and therefore
Avicen says; That the understanding, promptness, and quick ag^lity to
intelligence, Avi. 2.1. lo^. 3 ca.
betokens heat of complexion.

Fourthly, they eat much for in them the heat digestive is strong and more
resolutive th^n in other bodies.

Fifthly, they increase soon through strength of natural heat in them which is
cause of augmentation.

The sixth is, they be stout stomacked that is, they can suffer no injurits, by
reason of the heat in them. And therefore Avicen says, That to take every
thing impatiently, signifies heat.

The seventh is, they be liberal to those that honor them.

The eight is they desire high dignities and offices.

The ninth is, a choleric person is hairy, by reason of the heat that opens
the pores, and modeth the matter of hairs to the skin. And therefore it is a
common saying. The choleric man is as hairy as a Goat.

The tenth is he is deceivable.

The eleventh is, he is soon angry, through his hot nature. And therefore
Avicen says, Often angry and for a small cause, betoken^th heat, through ea^ie
motion of Choler, and boiling of the blood about the heart.

The twelfth is he is a waster, in spending largely to obtain hou^^^s.

The thirtienth is, he is bold, for boldness comes of great heat, specially
about the heart.

The fourtienth is he is wily.

The fiftien^^ his (...) is slender membred and not fleshy.

The sixtienth is he is lean and dry.

The seventienth is ^e to Saffron colored. And therefore Avicen says, That
choler signifies dominion.

Resta^ adhuctristis cholerae substantia nigrae,
Quae reddit pravos, pertristes, pa^ca loquen^es,
Hi vigilant ^tudi^s, nec men's est dedita somno.
Servant propositum sibi nil reputant fore tutum.
Invidus and tristis, cup^a^s dextraeque tenacis.
Non expers ^raudis, timidus lutei^que coloris.
Where melancholy bears the powerful sway,
To desperation it inclines always.
The melancholy spirit is dark and sad,
Sullen, talks little, and his sleeps are bad.
For dreadful dreams do very much affright them,
Start out of sleep, and nothing can delight them.
Their memory is good, and purpose sure,
All solitary walks they best endure.
Because to study they are still inclined,
And being alone, it fitteth best their mind.
Simple, and yet deceitful, not bounteous.
But very sparing, doubtful, suspicious,
Earthly and heavy looks: By all opinion,
Here melancholy holds his sole dominion.
Here the Author declares some tokens of a Melancholy person.

First, melancholy makes men shrewd and ill mannered, as they that kill
themselves:

Secondly, melancholy folks are most part sad through their melancholy spirts,
troublous and dark, like as clear spirits make folks glad.

Thirdly, they talk little by reason of their coldness.

Fourthly, they be studious, for they covet always to be alone.

Fifthly, they steep, not well by reason of the over much dryness of the brain
and (through melancholy fenmes they have horrible dreams, that wake them out of
their sleep.

Sixthly, they be steadfast in their purpose, and of good memory and hard to
please.

Seventhly, they think nothing sure, they always dread through darkness of the
spirits.

In the two last verses he recites some of the foresaid signs and other.

First, the melancholy person is envious, he is sad, he is covetous: he holds
fast, and is an ill payer, he is simple, and yet deceitful: and therefore
melancholy ^olks, are devout, great readers, fasters and keepers of abstinence.

Sixthly, he is tearfull.

Seventhly, he has an earthy brown color: Which color if it be any thing
green, signifies the Dominion of Melancholy, as Rasis says.

Hi sunt hum^res, qui praestant cuique colores.
Omnibus in rebus ex slegmate fit coloralbus.
Sanguine sit rube^s, colera rubea quoque rusus.
Sipecc^t sanguis, facies rubet, extat ocell^,
Inflantur genae, corpus nimi^mque gravatur,
E^puls quam frequens plenus, mollis, dol^r, ingens.
Maxim fit frontis, and constipatio ventris,
Siccaque lingua, s^^isque, and somnia plenarubore,
Dulcor adest sputi, sunt acria dulcia quaeque.
The humors that complexion do extend,
And color in our bodies, thus they lend.
To him is Phlegmatic, a color white:
Brownish and tawnie, under Cholers might.
The melancholy man is pale as earth,
The sanguine ruddy, cuer full of mirth,
Yet where the Sanguine does too much exceed,
These inconveniences thereby do breed.
The blood ascends too proudly to the face,
Shoots forth the eyes beyond their wonted place.
And makes them swell. The body lumpish grows,
The pulse beats thick, by vapors them enclose.
The head will ache, and costivenesse ensues,
The tongue is dry and rough, can tell no news.
Extremity of thirst, caused through great heat,
And bloody colored dreams, which make men sweat.
Here the Author recites the colors, that follow the complexion. A
phlegmatic person is white colored: the choleric is brown and taw^y: the
Sanguine is ruddy: the melancholy is pale colored like earth.

Afterward, the text declares twelve colors, signifying superfluity of blood.

The first is when the face is red, by the ascending of blood to the head and
face.

The second is, when the eyes bolle out further then they were wont.

The third is, when the eyes are swolen.

The fourth is, when the body is all heavy for nature cannot sustain nor govern
so great a quantity of blood.

The fifth is, when the Pulse beats thick.

The sixth is, when the Pulse is full, by reason of the hot and moist vapors.

The seventh is, when the Pulse is soft, through too much humidity that
mo^^ifieth the matter.

The eight is, ach of the head.

The ninth is, when the belly is costive, through great heat that dries up the
stichy matter.

The tenth is, when the tongue is dry and rough for the like cause.

The eleventh is, great thirst through dryness of the stomachs mouth engendered
of great heat.

The twelfth is, when one dreameth of red things. This Avicen affirms,
saying: Sleep that signifies abundance of blood, avi. 2.1. c. 7.
is when a man dreameth he sees red things: or else that he sheddeth much of
his blood, on else that he swimmeth in blood, and such like.

The thirteenth is, the sweetness of spittle through sweetness of blood.

Here is to be noted, that like as there be tokens of abundance of blood, so
therebe signs of abundance of other heemors, as in these Verses following.

Accusat choler am dextra dolor, aspera lingua,
Tiunit us, vomitusque frequens, vigilantia multa,
Multa sit is, pinguis egestie, torsio ventris,
Naus a fit morsus cordis, languescit orexis.
Pulsus adest graetlis, durus voloxque calescens.
Aret, amarescis, incendia somnia fingit.
Where Choler rules too much, these signs will show,
The Tongue grows sharp and rough in speaking slow.
More wak fullness then needs, ti^gangs in the car,
Unwonted Vomits, hateful d^y ap^^^.
Great thirst, the excre^^^ de quickly void,
The stomach is too nice, as over-^ord.
The heart is full of guipes, and extreme heat
Compels the pulse impatiently to beat.
Bitter and sour our spetle then will be,
And in our dreams, strange fires we seem to see.
The tokens of abundance of phlegm are contained in these verses following.

Flegma supergrediens proprias in corpore leges,
Os facit insipidum, fastidia crebra, salivas
Costarum, stomachi, simul occipitisque dolores.
Pulsus adest rarus, and tardus, mollis, inanis,
Pracedit fallax fantas;mata somnit aquosa.
Where Phlegm superabounds, these signs will tell*
The mouth distasteful, nothing can relish well,
And yet with moisture over-floweth still,
Which makes the stomach very sick and ill.
The sides will ache, as if they beaten were,
Loathsome will all our meat to us appear.
The pulse beats seldom. The stomach and the head,
With gripes and pangues do seem as they were dead.
Our sleeps are troublous, and when we dream,
Of brooks and waters, then we see the stream.
The signs of abundance of Melancholy are contained in these verses following.

Humorum pleno duns fex in corpore regnat,
Nigracutis, durus pulsus, tennis and vrina,
Solicitudo, timor, tristitia somnia, tempus,
Acerescit rugitus sapor, and sputaminis idem,
Levaque pracipuc tinnit and sibilat auris.
When Melancholy in the body raigns;
It does endanger many dreadful pains.
It tills it with corrupting filthiness,
Makes the skin look of blackish fulsomnes.
The pulse beats hard, the vrin weak and thin,
Sol^tcitude, fear, sadness, sleep it droweneth in.
It sa^ses bitter belches breeds much Rheum.
And in the care often breeds a ting^ing cune.
Now concerning the letting of blood this Text is abouched.

Denus septenus vix slebothomians petit annus.
Spi ^^us vberior erit per flebothomiam.
Spiritus ex potie vini mox multiplicatur.
Lumina clarificat, sincerat slebothomia
Mentes, and cerebrum, calidas facit esse medullas.
Viscera purgabit. stomachum ventremque coorcet.
Puros dat sensus, dat somnum, toedia todit.
Auditus, vocem, vires producit and auget.
At seventeen years of age, safely we may,
Let youthful bodies blood, the learned say.
The spirits are restored by letting blood,
And to increase them, drinking wine is good.
After blood-letting little good they gain
By present eating meat, that is but vain.
Phlebothomy does purge and clear the sight,
Cleanses the brain, and makes the marrow right.
The stomach and the belly it does clear,
And purge the entrails thoroughly every year.
It sharpens wit, and does induce to sleep,
And from the heart all painsull grief does keep.
It comforts hearing, and relieves the voice,
Augmenting strongth, wherein the most rejoice.
Here the Author speaking of bloodletting, says, That at seventeen years of
age one may be let blood.

And touching this, Galen says, Gal de ingenis
That Children should not be let blood, before they be 14 year old at least,
because Childrens bodies be soon resolved from outward heat, and therefore by
voiding of blood they should be greatly weakened. Also, for that they need to
nourish their bodies and augment them, they should not diminish their blood.
And also, for that they be soon dissolved from outward heat, it sushceth that
they need not be let blood.

Know likewise, That as bloodletting is not convenient for Children, so it is
unwholesome for old Folks, as Galen says: Gal. 9 reg!
For the good blood is little, and the ill much. And bloodletting draws away
the good blood, and leaves the ill, as Avicen says: Av. 4.10. cap. 10.
and therefore bloodletting is vnconvenient for such persons. Secondly be
puts the hurt of bloodletting, of necessity with voyding of blood, done by
bloodletting, man's spirits being in the blood, do then avoid.

Thirdly, he shows how the spirits should be cherished and restored, and that
is by drinking of Wine after the blood, letting: For of all things to nourish
quickly, Wine is best, as is before said: The Spirits also be cherished and
restored by meats, but that is not so quickly as by Wine. And the meat after
bload-letting must be light of digestion, and a great engenderer of blood, as
rere-rosted Eggs, and such like. And although meat restore tha spirits after
bloodletting, yet let the Patients beware of much meat the first and second
day.

For Isaac says In dictis. That they must drink more then they eat, and yet
they must drink less then they do before bloodletting, for digestion is
weaker.

Fourthly, the Author puts eleven profits of bloodletting, when it is duly
done.

First, temperate bloodletting comfort the sight: For diminishing of humors
does also diminish fuming to the head, and the repletion thereof, that darketh
the sight.

Secondly, it clears and makes pure the mind and brain, through the same
cause.

Thirdly, it heateth the marrow: for it mingleth the superfluities that thereto
come, and cool it.

Fourthly, it purges the entrails: for Nature (vncharged of blood) digesteth
better the raw humors that be left.

Fifthly, blood letting restrains vomiting and the lask, for it diverteth the
humors from the interior parts to the outward, and specially the letting blood
of the arms, as Avicen says, for letting blood of the feet stops not so
well.

Yet perchance the Bloodletting shall augment the lask. end that two ways.
First, by Bloodletting. Nature is discharged of her burden, and being
comforted, it provokes other hacuations. Secondly if the Lask be caused by
great weakness of virtue contentive: for then, by reason that by Bloodletting
virtue is weakened the lask is augmented.

Sixthly, Bloodletting clears the wits: for it minisheth vaporation that
goes to the head, and troubles the wits.

Seaventhly, it helps one to sleep, for thereby many humors be voyded, of
which diverse sharp vapors are lifted up, that let one to sleep.

The eight is, it takes away tediousness and overgreat grief, for thereby
virtue is unladen of grief: for with the melancholy blood, the dreas of blood
(which induce tediousness and grief) are drawn out.

The ninth is, it comfort the hearing: for thereby the vapors and humors
that ascend is the head, and let the hearing, are diminished.

The tenth is, it comfort the doyce: for thereby the superfluities and
humidities that would come to the Breast, or pipe of the Eights, and let the
doyce are diminished.

The eleventh is, it angmenteth the strength, for thereby the body is
discharged of grief, wherefore the virtue is angmented.

Tres insun i^tis Majus, September, Aprilis,
Et sunt Lunares sunt velut Hydriades,
Prima dies prim^ postremaque posteriorum.
Nee sarguis mi^u^ nec^arnibus Anseris vti,
In senevel juvene, si venae sanguine plenae.
Omni mense been confort incisio Venae.
Hi sunt treimenses, Majus, Septembris, Aprilis,
In quibus eminuas, vt longo tempore vivas.
Three special Months, our text does here remember,
For letting-bloud, April May, and September,
The Moon rules most these Months, yet certain days,
Some do deny and other some dispraise
The first of May, and the last of April,
As also of September they hold ill.
Days of these Months they do forbid to bleed,
And think it dangerous on a Goose to feed.
But this is idle, for these Months are good.
And for our health in these to let our blood.
For old or young if blood abounding be,
All Months it may be done advisedly.
If length of days and health you do desire,
These are the Months that bleeding best require.
Here the Author says, that these three, May, September, and April are the
months of the Moon, and in them are days forbidden to let blood: that is, the
first of May, and the last of September and April. Though this be a common
rule, yet it is false. For the foresaid days may be as good, and as worthy to
be chosen as the other, after the diversity of the Coustellation in them.
Farther he says that in those days one should not eat flesh, which is also
false and erroueous and very withchcraft. I think the Author had this saying of
the Jews, which observe such manner.

Secondly, he says. That men of middle Age, and young solkes, whose Veyns be
full of blood, may be let blood every month, for those may well re^^
resolution, and in them is great quantity of good blood.

Thirdly, he says, that bloodletting for man's health must be done in one of
these three months, May, September, and April. But yet with difference, for in
April and May the Liver-veyn must be let blood, because then in Spring the
blood increases: And in September in the splene-veyn, because of Melancholy,
which then in Autumn increases.

Frigida natura frigens regio, dolor ingens,
Poit lavacrum, cottuns, minor aetas atque senilit,
Morbus prolixus, reple^i^ potus and escae,
Si fragilis vel subtilis sensius stomachi sit.
Et fast^diti, tibi non sit slebothomandium.
A cold complexion, and a chilly air,
Aches, or ingreams that to inslame prepare,
Bathing and wanting dallying in that sport,
Where Venus most delights to resort,
Too young or else too old, A long disease,
Eating or drinking, nature to displease.
Sea-sick feeling, when the stomachs weak,
And empty Veyns, that loathingly do speak.
All these forbid bloodletting, and advise,
Not then to deal therewith in any wise.
Here the Author sets dawn twelve things that do hinder blood, letting.

The first is coldness of complexion: For, as Galen says, Blood letting
cools, and augmenteth coldness. Because as Isaac says, blood is the
foundation of natural heat: and in regard that bloodletting voydeth the
blood, it voydeth heat, and so consequently cools.

The second is a fervent cold Country, under which a cold season should be
comprehended, which also lets bloodletting: for in a Country and Season
very cold, the blood is closed in the deepest parts of the body, and the blood
that carries in the upper parts, the cold makes thick which to avoid is no
wisdom.

The third is fervent ach under which also may be comprehended great
inclamation of the body; for if one in such accidents be let blood, there
follows great motion agitative contrary to nature, and greater inflammation,
which weakneth nature more.

The cause of this motion agitative is attraction to diverse parts: for by
bloodletting) attraction is caused to the place that is let blood: and by
great ach, attraction is cause to the place of ach.

The cause of greater inflammation is, that by bloodletting the humors be
moved, whereby they be the more inflamed. And this is truth when blou^-letting
is little and artificial: yet if it be done till one swound, it is wholesome
in the foresaid cases: For this bloodletting when it overcommeth the
attraction of the ach it causes not motion agitative and like. wise it takes
away inflammation when there be no humors, that should move heat, and cause
more inflammation. This is Galens mind, saying; Gal. comments illius apli. qua
geruntur.
There is no no better medicine for an impostume of fervent inflammation,
Fevers, and a great Ach, than bloodletting.

The fourth is bayning, specially resolutive, for that denies Bloodletting,
because that were vacuation upon vacuation, which Nature cannot easily bear.

The fifth is carnal copulation: for immediately after that, one should not be
letten blood, because of double weakening of Nature.

The sixth is, too old or too young, as it is before touched. Of this Avicen
says, Take heed how thou let one blood in any of the foresaid cases,
except thou trust in the figure insolidite of the muscles, largnesse of the
veyns, the fullness of them, and ruddy color.

The seventh is long sickness: for by such letting of blood Nature is doubly
feebled, both by long sickness and diminishing. This is truth, says Avicen,
except there be corrupt blood, for then bloodletting is wholesome.

The eight is great repletion of drink.

The ninth is to eat too much meat: and under this is comprised meat
undigested. The cause whereof (as Avicen says) is this. There be three things
that draw to them, that is, emptiness, heat and secret virtue or property.
Then if the veyns be empty through voyding of blood, they draw to them from the
stomach or liver undigested or supersluous meat or drink, which undigested meat
when it comes to the members, cannot be amended, that is digested: for the
third digestion cannot amend the fault of the second, nor the second of the
first, if the fault be so great that it cannot convert into the members, and it
there remaining may cause some disease.

The tenth is feebleness for bloodletting is a strong voyder as Galen says;
therefore a feeble person may not endure great diminishing of blood.

The eleventh is subtle sensiblenes of the stomachs mouth, which is called the
heart-string, for of such blood letting sowning follows lightly. And under
this wesknesse of the stomach is comprised an east flowing of choler to the
mouth thereof inducing vomiting, wherefore they that have the foresaid
accidents, should not be let blood: for by bloodletting, the humors moved, be
endured to the stomachs mouth, as to a place accustomed: And because it is a
weak and an impotent member to resist that flixe; therefore by such letting of
blood, many inconveniences chance.

This is one cause, why so many sound when they he let blood by reason that
Choler flows to the stomach, which biting the stomach, paineth the heart and
stomach so, that it causes one to sound.

The twelfth is loathing: for if in this loathing one be let blood, when the
veyns be empty, they draw to them ill matter, that causes loathsomeness.

And besides the foresaid accidents th^^^ be yet other that hinder
bloodletting.

First, voyding of menstruous stire, or the Emrauts, for one diseased with
either of these, should not be let blood: yet it may be done to divert the flix
or matter another tray.

The second is rareness of composition: for in rare bodies is much
dissolution; And therefore this dissolution suffices them without evacuation,
as Galen says. Gal. 9. Res.


The third is rawnesse and clamminesse of humors, for then beware of leting of
blood because it increases rawnes of humors: and therefore in long sickness
ye should not be let blood for of rawnesse, humors increase, strength seebleth,
and the sickness prolongeth.

And therefore Avicen says, That in long sickness, before one is let blood,
he should take a laxative, although he need both.

Rawnesse of humors is caused two ways. One is through abundance of humors
that choke natural heat, which choking breeds raw humors and then
bloodletting is wholesome.

Wherefore Alexander says, Letting of blood in the beginning of dropsy is
wholesome, Alex, 2. l. cap. hydropic.
when it comes by abundance of menstruous blood, that through some cause is
prohibited to issue, or by abundance of the Enmauds For like as a little fire
is quenched under a great heap of wood, so likewise natural heat is suffocated
with abundance of humors.

The second cause of raw humors, is feebleness of natural heat, as in folks
of feeble complexion, or such as have him long sick, or be very aged; for then
the said bloodletting is unwholesome, because it augmenteth rawnesse: for the
blood that conserveth heat is drawn out and so the body is made cold, and the
humors more raw. Therefore the blood must be left to digest raw humors.

The fourth is, undue disposition of the air, either too hot or too cold; for
much heat causes strong resolution: and great cold makes the blood thick, and
unapt to issue or avoid.

Quid debes facere, quando vis stsbothomari,
Vel quando minuis, fuer is vel quands minutus.
Vnctio, siv; potus, lavacrum, vel fascia, motus,
Debent non fragili tibi singula mente teneri.
What should we do when we to bleeding go,
These faw instructions following will show,
Before and after, unction will do well,
Lest the incision, or the veyn should swell.
Yet unction (without wine) is not so good,
It prevents sowning, and begets new blood.
Bathing is wholesome, in diverse times observed.
And linen cloths ought well to be reserved.
After bloodletting be discreet in walking,
And trouble not the brain with too much talking.
This Text declares five things that ought to be done about Bloodletting,
Five things in letting blood.
some before, some at the time, and some after.

The first is anointing, which otherwhile is used in the Bloodletting, as to
anoint the place or veyn that is opened, to assuage the veyn: Sometime it is
used after Bloodletting, to keep the gash that it close not up too soon, that
the humors that be lest in the veyns, may have some respiration and some ill
fumes void out.

The second is to drink, and specially wine, which is good in Bloodletting, if
one happen to sown, add also it is very whol^some (after Bloodletting) to
revive the spirits, and engender new Blood, which thing, in practice all
Physicians observe.

The third is bayning, which is wholesome three days before, and three days
after, and not the same day. It is good before, if one think he have gross
humors within him: for bayning loses and moves the humors, and for the same
cause it is wholesome to take a sharp strupe before, to move, dissolve and make
subtle the humors.

And therefore, when ye will let one blood, ye must rub the arm, that the
humors in the veyn be made subtle and prepared to issue out more eastly. It is
wholesome after bloodletting, that the residue of humors and vayors that be
left behind, may be loosed. It is not wholesome the same day, for bayning
makes the skin linnow or supple, which made linnow, will not abide the stroke
that is given in bloodletting, and that is dangerous.

The fourth is, binding with linen clothes, which is very wholesome, to stop
the blood after often evacuation thereof, and before bleeding to draw the
humors in the veyns, and to cause them to swell and better to appear.

The fifth is, moderate walking after bloodletting, to dissolve and make
subtle the humors, and afterward to loose the residue of the humors that be
left behind.

Some use to let blood fasting vut some other say, it were better to eat a rere
rafted Egg first, and thereto drink a draught of wine, about the hour of nine
or ten before dinner, and forthwith to let blood because when the stomach is
empty nature retains still the blood more strongly, lest she should lack
nourishment. But when they have eat a little nourishing meat, as wine and eggs
is, then nature suffers the blood better to issue.

Exhilar at tristes, iratos placat, amantes,
Ne sint amentes, flebothomia sacit.
Bleeding removes sad motions from the heart,
Asswageth anger, being too mallepart.
And those distempered fits procured by love,
Bloodletting gently does them all remove.
Three effects of blood, letting.
First, it makes a sad person merry.

Secondly, it pleases angry folks: and the reason is this, because much
melancholy mingled with blood, causes heaviness, and much choler causes
anger: which two humors as they be mingled with blood, are drawn our by blood
^etting.

Thirdly, it keeps Lovers from furious raving for i^ removes the blood, from
the head: and avoideth is by other exteterior parts.

Furthermore, there be five cause of blood-letting.

The first is, that the abundance, whether it be in quality or quantity, or
both, should be voided. For as Avicen says; Two manner of folks must be let
blood. One are such as be disposed to be sick, that have abundance of blood in
quantity. The other are they that are sick already, through the malice of
humors or blood.

But there is a difference in these bloud-lettings For bloodletting for the
abundance of blood, ought to be much; but when it is done to avoid ill blood,
it must be moderate, as Galen says, And therefore they do very ill, that let
themselves blood till they perceive the good blood issue: for (peradventure all
their blood shall run out, ere they see any good blood appear. Therefore they
should void a little at once: and after the mind of Galen in this case Before
they let one blood, they should give him good meats to engerder good blood, to
fulfill the place of the ill blood, that is avoided, and after (within a little
space) to let blood a little, and a little. This is called direct letting of
blood, for it is done to avoid abundance of blood, and of such humors as
should be avoided.

The first indirect cause, is the greatness of the disease, and greatness of
the apparent vehement inflammation; for as Galen says. There is no better
Medicine for an Impostume of vehement inflammation, Fevers, and a great ach,
then bloodletting.

The second indirect cause is, that the matter which is to be avoided, be^
drawn unto the place from whence it must be avoided. And therefore in
retention of the menstruous flix and Emetauds: The great vein in the feet
called Saphena, must be opened, as Galen says, to draw down the matter of the
blood.

The third indirect cause, is to draw the humors to the place, contrary to the
place that they flow to, to divert them after from the place. Therefore, for
too much abundance of menstruosity, the vein Basilica must be let blood, to
turns the matter to the contrary part, and so to void it from the proper
course. And therefore, he that has a Pluresie on his left side, must be let
blood on the right side, to divert and draw the matter to the place, contrary
to that place, that it enclineth so. And likewise if it be on the right side,
to let blood on the left.

The fourth indirect cause is, that by letting of blood, one portion of the
matter may be avoided, that nature may be strong upon the residue, and so
letting of blood is wholesome when the body is full least impostumes grow: for
the regiment of nature is feeble, in regard of these humors. Wherefore when a
portion of matter is voided, nature governs the matter so, that it should not
flow to some weak place, and breed an Impostume.

Fac plagam largam mediocriter, vt cito fumus.
Excat vberius, liberiusque cruor.
The Orifice (or as some say) incision,
When as for bleeding you do make provision,
Ought to be large, the better to convay
Gross blood, and sumes which issue forth that way.
Gross humors and gross blood must needs have vent,
In cold or hottest times by good consent,
Here the Author says that the gash or Orifice, made in letting of blood,
ought to be of a mean largeness, that the gross blood may easily issue out:
for when the gash is straight the pure blood only goes out, and the gross
abides still in. And note that sometime the gash must be great, and sometime
small The gash must be great for three causes.

First, because the humors be gross, and gross blood must be voided, as in them
that be melancholy.

Secondly, in winter the gash must be great, for cold engrosseth the humors.

Thirdly, for the abundance of humors, for they avoid better by a great gash
then by a small. But the gash must be small when the person is of weak strength,
that the spirits and natural heat avoid not too much: and likewise in a hot
season, and when the blood is pute.

Sanguine subtracto sex h^ris est vigilandum,
Ne somni fumus laedat sensibile corpus.
Ne nervum laedat, non sit tibi plaga profunda.
Sanguine purgatus non carpas protinus escas.
When blood is come away, ye must be sure,
Six hours after watchful to endure:
Least sleep raise fumes, or turning on that arm,
Impostumes breed, by doing it least harm.
The nerves, and sinews, Arteries also,
Offend not, if in health you mean to go.
The blood thus purg',d you instantly may eat:
So that the humors be in quiet set.
Three things must be considered when one is let blood.

First, that be sleeps not in six hours after; least the fume (engendered by
sleept) ascend to the head, and hurt the brain.

Furthermore, least in his sleep he turns him on the arm that in let blood,
and thereby hurt him, and least the humors (by sleep) flow to the painful
member, by reason of the incision, and so breed an impostume. For Galen says,
Impostumes breed in the body, or in a member that is hurt: the humors will flow
thereunto. But Avicen assigns another cause; That by such sleep may chance
confraction of the members, The cause may be as Galen says. That sleep is
unwholesome in the Ague-fit: Gal. 2 aph. super illo. In quo. and c.
because natural heat goes inward and the outward parts wax cold and the
fumes remain unconsumed, whereby the rigor is augmented and the Fever-fit
prolonged.

Also by moving of the humors in letting of blood, fumes are ^aised up to the
sinews and brawns of the arms: which remaining unconsumed, wax cold in sleep,
and ingresse in the viter parts. And therefore, it one sleep immediately after
letting of blood, they cause confraction of the sinews and brawns of the arms.
And he says further, That one in letting of blood, must beware that he make
not the gash too deep, least he hurt a sinew. Gal. coni^^^u^ aph. que reguntur.
or an arterie-string under the vein: for hurting of a sinew causes a mortal
cramp, or loss of a member, as an arm, or a finger, and hurt of an
artery-string, causes bleeding uncurable.

And one ought also not to eat immediately after he is let blood, but he must
tarry til the humors in him be at quiet, least the meat before it be digested,
be drawn together with the blood to succor the hurt member.

Omnia de lacte vitabis rite minute.
Et vitet potum flebothomatus homo.
Prigida vitabit quia sunt inimica minutis.
Interdictus erit minutis unbilus acr,
Spiritus enultat minutis luce per auras.
Omnibus apta quies est, motui valde nosivus.
Shun milk and white meats, when we are let blood,
Because (at such times) they are never good.
And drinking then perforce we should refrain,
With undigested drink never fill a vein.
Cold and cold (...) with all cold things beside,
Are then our enemies by proof well tried.
Cloudy and troubled Ayrs are likewise ill.
With melancholy blood the veyns they fill,
Too stirring motion, or excessive labor,
Avoid, and with soft ease the body favor.
Here the Author says, sive things must be eschewed of him that is let blood.

The first is milk and white meats: for by stirring of humors (caused by
letting of blood) often times some humors sloweth to the stomach: therefore if he
should eat milk by mingling with the humors it would corrupt in the stomach
since of it self it is very coruptible. And also by reason that it is sweet, the
milk may be drawn to the veyns undigested: and through stirring of humors
lightly corrupt.

Secondly he must beware of much brinking, for by reason that the dryns be
empty, the drink undigested is lightly drawn to them as is before said.

Thirdly be must eschew all cold things, as well outward, as inward, as meats,
very cold, air cold hathing, thin clothing, resting on stones, colonesse of the
head and seet: for by reason that the natural beat is feebled by setting of
blood, the body will soon be too cold.

Fourthly, he that is let blood, shouls not walk in dark cloudy or troublous
air: for that makes him heavy and vninsty, as is before said at, Aer sit
mandus. etc. And heaviness is cause of melancholy bload. Therefore he must
walk in a fair clear air: for that recreateth the natural and lively spirits.

Fifthly, he must esch^, excessive labor, and use moderate rest: for excessive
stitting about (then specially) weaketh and moves humors, but temperate rest
swageth motion.

Principio minuas in acutis and peracutis.
Aetatis mediae multum de sanguine toll,
Sed puer atque senex, tollet vterque parum,
Ver tollit duplum, reliquum tempus nisi simplum.
In the beginning of a sharp disease,
Then letting blood is good, if you so please.
The middle age does favor bleeding best,
Children and aged folks may let it rest,
Or take but little from them. In the Spring,
A double loss of blood, no hurtful thing,
At other times, to take but indifferently,
And still let good advice keep company.
Here he speaks of four things.

First, the letting of bleod should be done in the beginning of sharp diseases,
which are ended the fourth day. For such be short, and make no delay: therefore
they must be remedied at the beginning.

The second is, that from 30 year to 45 or 50. one should be let blood most,
for at that age Blood increases most of all: nor the diminishing thereof
lets not the growing, nor the bodily strength is not lessened therevy,
because the Body in that age grows not, but seems to stand still at one
state.

The third is, that old folk and children should be let blood but little: for
young children need most bleed to nourish and increase them and aged folks
strength decays from them.

Fourthly, in Springtime double quantity of Blood should be boyded, in regard
of other seasons: for that time specially enereaseth blood, as all Physicians
say.

Touching the first saying, a few rules concerning letting of blood would be
given.

The first is, that at the beginning of the sickness, one should not be let
blood: for as Galen says, That Nature is worker of all things, and the
Physician is Minister. But he says, That no vacuation at the be^^^ning of
sickness, Gal. 3. reg. Idem 3 Ape. in consu agritu dini. Ga, in pho.
Inchoantibus morbi.
is natural: for as Nature in the beginning of sickness avoideth nothing,
likewise no more should the Physician.

Yet three things withstand this Rule.

The first is, furlo fity or sterceness of the matter. For Avicen says, That
when the sickness begins, one should not be let blood, because letting of
blood shrreth the humors, and makes them subtle, and to run throughout all
the body, except the matter be furious.

The second is abundance of the matter: for Galen says, That it is then
behovefull to be let blood: or take a Medicine laxative, to alleviate Nature
loaded with abundance of matter.

The third is, greatness and sharpness of the sickness, as when there is a
great and an achfull imposiume, though the matter be little. For Galen says,
If the Impostume be great, ye must be let blood at the beginning, though there
be but little matter, least it break, or open before it be ripe: therefore to
eschew many inconveniences, bloodletting must be done.

The second rule is, that bloodletting may not be done on the day of motion of
the sickness, erists is a sudden indication either to hea'th or deaths mutation.
as in Crisis, nor no other vacuation, nor diverting of matter from the place
that nature sends it to etc.

Nor likewise in the Ague fit.

For Galen says, That when the sickness is in his estate, neither
bloodletting, nor laxative should be done.

For then the matter ripeth, which ripeth better by quietness then by
stirring.

The third rule is, that bloodletting should not be done in beginning of the
sickness, when Crisis is removed.

For Isaac says, in his Book of Vrines. That though the Heart be the
Engenderer of the blood and spirits, yet the blood is foundation of Natural
heat, and sustaineth it, for the heat is naturally thereof engendered. And
therefore, be that voydeth Blood, voideth heat, which should digest the matter
of the sickness, and so consequently the sickness is prolonged; and strength
weakened. And therefore it is to be feared, least through the lengthning of the
sickness, and weakening of the strength, nature would sail.

The fourth rule is that the body (having dregs of filth in the guts) should
not be let blood. The cause is, there be thre^ things that draw to them heat
emptines, and all things sharp: so when as the veins be emptied by Letting of
blood, they draw to them from the next member, as the guts and stomach, whereby
the belly is judurated, and the matter in the Veins is more infected the
Meseraike drawsth the humidities of the ordures and the ordures are dried the
more, therefore you must first mollify the belly with Clisters or
Suppositorie^^, except it war laxative alone.

The fifth rule is, that letting of blood should not be much used; for by often
using thereof, one drawing on in age, falls into diverse diseases, as
Epilepsie, Apoplexy, and Palsy, for by removing of the blood and heat, many
phlgematick super flutties are engendered that cause these diseases.

The sixth rule is, that a woman menstruate, or with child, should not be let
blood. A Woman with Child should not: for thereby the heat, that digesteth
meat, is diminished, and the food of that she goes with is taken away
specially when if that she goes with waxes great: for then it needs more
food. Thus says Hypocrates: When the menstruosity keeps due course, and
avoidoth naturally enough, letting of blood should not be done: but when it
avoydeth too much, then (to divert the matter) it must be done, for nature
would not be let of her operation.

The seventh rule is that after the Chollicke passion, one should not be let
blood, for by reason that Letting of blood stirs up the humors: a Choleric
humor may flow to the stomach, and inflame it: Nor after vomiting, least
humors likewise flow to the stomach: Nor after the Flixe, nor after great
watching: nor after much travel: nor after any thing that greatly hurts or
dissolveth: for in these two ^ases, letting of blood should greatly move the
humors, and enfeeble the strength.

Now it is to be considered, who are meet to be let blood: and therefore we
shall declare a few rules.

The first rule is, that letting of blood is very expedient for delicate idle,
and corste folks, and that use meats engendring much blood.

The second rule is, it is wholesome for those that have abundance of blood,
which abundance is known by the thickness of the brine: for abundance of
blood makes it thick, and abundance of Choler makes it thin.

The third is they should be let blood, in whom melancholy abounds: For when
much natural Melancholy runs with the blood throughout all the body not
puristing the ill blood: then letting of blood is wholesome.

There be two kinds of melancholymatural, and vunafural,

Natural is the dregs of blood which when it abounds, it runs with blood,
and in letting of blood is votded therewith. For, of the same temperate beat,
blood and melancholy, the dregs thereof is engendered.

The fourth rule is, that when boiling conturbation, and calefactions of humors
is feared, it is wholesome to let blood: and those persons, as soon as they
feel themselves inflamed, should be let blood, to avoid the foresaid motions,
caused by the great abundance of humors.

Yet otherwhiles some ^e deceived by this rule, for forthwith when they feel
calefaction, and fear boiling of humors, they let them blood. And when this
comes of beat calefaction and incision, the calefaction or boiling cease
not by Blood. letting, but it is rather augmented: for bloodletting moves the
humors, and makes them run thorough the body. Therefore letting of Blood is
not wholesome, except it be for abundance of humors, which is known by much
sweat, especially in the morning, for there be some that sweat not except they
need evacuation.

The fifth this is, they that be mighty and strong should be let blood and not
they that be cold and dry. For Rasis says: That those bodies are apt to be let
blood, which have great apparent veins that be h^iry and colored between brown
and red, and folks not too young, nor too old, for children and unwieldy aged
persons should not be letblo^d except necessity require ie. Many of the said
rules be gathered out ^i Avicen.

Aestas, Ver, dextras, Autumnus, Hyemsque sinistras,
Quatuo haec membra, cephe cor pes epar vacuatur.
Ver Cor, Epar Aestas, ordo sequens reliqua.
Springtime and Summer, if we intend to bleed,
Veins on the right side do require as need.
Autumn and Winter, they the left side crave,
In arm, or soot, as they best like to have.
The Head, Heart, Foot, and Liver, all these four,
Emptying require themselves best to restore.
The Heart calls for the Spring, Summer the Liver,
Order unto the rest is a due giver.
Here the Author reciting certain things, concerning the members that be let
blood, says:

That in War and Summer, the veyns of the right hand, arm, or foot should be
let blood: But in winter and Autumn, the veyns of the left hand, arm or foot
must be diminished.

The cause hereof may be, for that Her increases Blood, and Summer Choler,
therefore in Uer and Summer us should diminish those veins in which blood and
Choler abound, which be on the right side of the body, near to the member that
engenders good blood (that is the Liver) and the receptacle of choler, the
Gall.

Autumn engenders Melancholy, which is gathered together, and not resolved by
Winter: therefore in War and Winter, these two Ueyns should be let-bloud, in
which melancholy has dominion, which be the left side voins, for the spleneis
on the left side of the body, which is the receptacle of Melancholy.

Secondly, be says, the Head, the Heart, the Foot and the Liver (according to
the four Seasons of the year) must be emp^led: the Heart in Uer, the Liver in
Summer, the Head in Winter, and the Foot in Autumn.

Dat saluatella tibi plurima dona minuta,
Purgat Epar splenem, pectus praecordia, vocem,
Iunaturalem tollit de cord dolorem.
Saluatella, the opering of that Veyn,
In any man five benefits does gain.
The Liver it does purge from all offense,
And from the Spleen commands annoyance thence.
Preserves the stomachs mouth, and clears the Breast,
And keeps the voice from being by harms oppressed.
Here the Author recites five commodityes that come by letting of blood of the
vein Saluatella. It is the vein on the back of the hand, between the middle
singer, and the King-singer, it purges the lyder, it cleanses the Spleen, it
mundifieth the brett, is pr^serveth the stomachs mouth from hurt, it does away
the hurt of the voice. The reason of all these commodityes is because the
foresaid vein avoideth blood from all these places, as after it shall appeat.

For a more ample declaration, you are to understand, that in letting of blood,
other whiles the veins be opened, and sometime the Art^ryes. The opening of
the Artery is dangerous, the cause here of is, the overmuch bleeding which is
caused two wapes.

One is through fervent heat of the Artery blood, for a hot thing is soon
moveable, and dilateth and opens the Artery, and therefore t^ help^^h much to
void the blood, in letting blood the Artery.

The second cause, is mobility of the Artery, and therefore the wound or gash
in it is slowly healed. Yet this letting of blood is wholesome three mannet of
ways.

First, when there is aboundauce of subtle blood in the body.

Secondly, when the blood is vaporous.

Thirdly, when it is hot. For subtle blood of which natural blood and spirits
be engendered, rest each in the artery: but gross blood that nourishes the
members, rests in the veins. Like wise the vaporous blood is contained in the
artery, and sanguine blood in the veyn. Also the hottest blood, the which is of
the heart (the hottest member) engendered and digested, is contained in the
Artery, and the other Blood in the Veyns.

Secondly note, that the veyns are opened in many members, sometime in the arm
or in the hand great or small, sometime in the foot, sometime in the nose,
sometime in the forehead, sometime in the lips sometime under the tongue, or
in the roof of the mouth, sometime in the corner of the Eyes toward the
forehead.

From the Arm-pit to the Elbow, are five veyns to be opened as Rasis and Avicen
says.

The first is called Cephalica, which is the Head-veyn.

The second is Basilica, which is the Liver-veyn.

The third is called Mediana, or Cardiaca, or Nigra, after Avicen, or Matrix,
after Rasis.

The fourth is called Assillaris.

The fifth is called Funis brachij.

In the left hand is Saluatella. so that in the arm, in that it contains the
more and the less hand, are six veyns to be opened, Cephalica emptieth the
parts abont the neck, and therefore to open that veyn, it is good for the
diseases of the head as the Megrim, and other hot griefs, caused of hot matter.
This veyn begins at the shoulder, and goes forth soward the left side of
the arm.

Basilica emptieth the parts under the neck, as from the Bre^^ and Liver: and
therefore the letting blood of this veyn is wholesome for diseases of the Breast
and Liver, and right good in a Plurisle This veyn begins at the arm-hole,
and goes along to the bowing of the arm.

Mediana is between these two said veins, and is compact of them beth for it is
the branch of each. And it is also Median in vacuation: for it voydeth from all
about, under, from and about the neck. Wherefore it is the universal veyn to
all the body in voyding: but not universal (as some say) because it begins
at the heart, but because it is the branch of Cephalica, and Basilica.
Therefore when you will let Cephalica blood, and it appears not ye should
rather take Mediana, then Basilica. And likewise when ye will let Basilica
blood, and it appears not ye should rather minish Mediana, then Cephalica.
For it agrees better to both, then one of them with the other.

Saluatella is the veyn between the middle finger and the ring-finger, more
declining to the middle finger. It begins of Basilica. This veyn is opened
in the right hand, for opilation of the Liver, and in the left hand for
opilation of the Spleen.

There is no reason why it should be so, as Avicen says, but only Experience,
which Galen sound by a Dream (as he says.)

He had one in cure, whose Liver and Spleen were stopped, and he dreamed that he
did let him blood of this veyn, and so he did, and cured the Patient.

When this veyn is let blood, the hand must be put in warm water to engrosse
and dilate it, because it is suvtile; and that the gash should not close too
soon, and to make the gross blood thin.

Assillaris is under Basilica, and appears in binding the arm: and the like
judgment is of it as of Basilica.

Punis brachi^, is over Cephalica, or else the bindermost bone: and is of one
judgment with Cephalica. Therefore, as Avicen and Galen say: Though in opening
of veyns be universal vacuation of all the body yet not from all the veyns
equally, nor like jeopardy is not in all. For Rasis says,

That Cophalica is the surer, and Basilica, more to be seared, and Cardiaca, is
to be feared, but not so much as Basilica.

Cephalica, is surest, for there is neither sinew nor Artery above nor under
it, but under Cardiaca, there is a sinew, and vyper above it is a subtle sinew:
therefore it is to fear, least it should be cut.

Basilica is very jeopardous: for under it is an Artery, and near it a sinew
and a muscle. Saluatella is not jeopardous, and therefore the better to open
it, it would be put in warm water. In the feet he three veins, Scyatica,
Saphena, and the Ham-veyn These veins be opened, to draw the blood to the
lawer paris as in provoking menstruosity, and the Hamme veyn is better then
Saphena, or Scyatica; because it is nearer the matrice. Saphena draws blood
from the yard, cords and matrice, and Scyatica from the ancles, reins, and
other members toward man's left side. Saphena from the Matrice, and members
there about, they be branches of one veyn. In the midst of the forehead, is a
veyn, which is opened for old diseases of the face, as Morphew, dry scutse, and
Scab, and for diseases of the eyes, but first Cephalica must be minished.

There is likewise a veyn in the nose, and when any of them is opened the neck
must be bound, and one opened after another: and by binding of the neck they
will better appear.

There be veyns in the lips, which be opened for impostums in the month or
g^^ns, but Cephalica is first minished.

To open the four veins in the rooffe of the mouth is wholesome against the
rheums that flow to the teeth and cause them to ak^. These veins appear plainly
and must be opened when the matter is digested.

There be veins in the corners of the eyes toward the forehead, and they be
opened for diseases of ths eyes: but first, Cephalica must be minished.

The veins in the Temples, be let blood for the Megrim, and for great and long
Headache. And those be she veyns that Hypocrates, and Galen call Iuveniles,
the incision of these veins makes a man unapt to get Children.

Also in the neck be veins called Guides which must be opened in the beginning
of ^epry, and specially for stopping of the wind-pipes, and in the Squinancie,
which lets one to draw his breath.

Si dolor est capitis ex potu, limpha bibatur,
Epotu nimio nam Febris acuta creatur.
Si vertex capit is vel frons aestu tribulentur,
Tempora fromsque simul moderate saepe fricentur.
Mirtella cocta nec non calidaque laventuo.
If headache come by drinking too much wine,
Or any other drink that may resign,
The bodies danger to an Ague fit,
Engrossing fumes that much perplex the wit,
To drink cold water let him not refrain,
Because it hinders all that hurts the brain.
Crown of the head, or forehead being vexed,
And with extremity of heat perplexed:
Chafe then the temples with mild moderation.
And wash them with warm water in good fashion.
But seething Motherwort therein is best,
Because it gently cools, and causes rest.
Here the Author noting two things, says.

That if the headache come by too much drinking, Headache caused by drinking
and remedy therefore.
and specially of wine, or of any other drink, that makes folk drunken, one
must drink cold water upon it, the which with the coldness thereof, ingrosseth
the fumes that are lifted up, and lets them to hurt the brain.

The second thing is, that if the top of the head or forehead be grieved with
too much hear, then the Temples should be moderately chafed, and after washed
with warm water, in the which Mother-wort is sod, for Mother-wort is cold, and
^ooleth,

Temporis Aestivi j^ixnia co^pora siceant.
Quolibet in mense confert vomitus queque purgat
Humores nocnos, stomach^ lavat ambitus omnes,
Ver Autumnus, Hyems, Aestas dominatur in anno.
Tempore vernali, calidus sit aer humidusque:
Et nullum tempus meltits sit slebethomi^,
Vsus tunc homim veneris conf^rt moderatus,
Corporis and motus, ventrisque s^^^ni sudor,
Balnea, purgentur turc corpora cum Medicinis,
AEstas morocalet, siccat, nascatur in illa,
Tunc quoquam praecipue coleram rubeam dominari.
Humida frigisla, fercula dentur, sit Venus extra.
Balnea non prosunt, sit r^ra Flchothomia.
Veilis est requies, sit cum modoramine potus.
In summer season, fasting is not good,
Because it dries the body and the blood,
To vomit once a month wholesome some hold.
For hurtful humors thereby are controld,
And voided quite away. The stomach clear,
Beware what next annoyance commech there.
Spring, Autumn, Winter, Summer rule the year,
And all their several hours in them appear.
The Vernall season is both moist and hot.
And for bloodletting no time better got.
Let men with Venus meddle moderately,
For then they best any spare such company.
Then temperate motion lask, nor sweat offends,
To purge by bathing Physic then commends.
Summer is hot and dry, red Choler then
Increases, and dries all that's moist in men.
Meats moist and cool, do best become that season,
And wantoning with women shows small reason.
Bath not at all, and seldom open a vein,
Use little motion laboring much refrain,
And drink but little, least it prove to pain.
Here the Author noting diverse things says:

That much falling in Summer dries the body, for in that that Summer is of
nature hot and dry, it resolves the humors: the which also be resolved by often
sweating in Summer, and so falling thereupon dries the body much more, for
when the humidity of meats is gone, the heat of the body works upon his own
humidities, and dries them clean away. Wherefore Hypocrates says: Hunger is
expedient for those that be very moist, for hunger dries the body.

The second thing is that vomiting once a month is wholesome, for thereby
hurtful humors, that be contained in all the circuit of the stomach are
voyded. To this agrees Avicen, saying. Hypocrates bids one to vomit every
month twice, two days one after another that the second day may avoid it, that
which the first could not; this conserveth health and scoureth the stomach from
phlegm and choler. The stomach has nothing to purge it like as the guts have
red choler. Avicen puts other prests of vomiting that it is well done.

First, it is good for headache, caused of moist vapurous matters that ascend
from the stomach to the head, but if headache come of his own hurt of the
brain, then vomiting does rather hurt then proffe.

Secondly, it clears the sight, darkened with vaporous matter of the stomach
or else not.

The third is, it does away wambling of the stomach, in that it avoideth the
hum is that cause it.

The fourth is, it comfort the stomach, into which choler is descended, the
which corrupts the meat.

The fifth is, it does away loathing or abborting of meat.

The sixth is, it does away the cause that makes one have a ^^st to sharp,
pantike and sower things, the which cause (by these dispositions being removed)
puts or does away the effects thereof.

The seventh is, vomiting is wholesome for the lask that comes before the
Dropsy, for it avoydeth the matter of the said lask and purges the stomach.

The eight is, it is wholesome for the grief of the reins and bladder, for it
diverieth the matter that sloweth of those parts another way.

The ninth is, if vomiting be done by constraint of Elchory, it avoydeth the
matter whereof Lepry grows: it amendeth the first digestion, that the other
digestions may the better be done.

The tenth is it makes one to have a good color.

The eleventh is, it purges the stomach of a humor that causes Epilepcy.

The twelfth is, by strong constraint it removetth stopping matter, the which
causes Ictericy. And likewise it avoydeth a slegmatick matter, the which
commonly is cause of stopping.

The thirteenth is, it avoydeth the matter that causes Asma, a disease that
causes one to draw his breath painfully, and also it comfort the spiritual
members, by whose heat the superfluities that cause Asma, are consumed.

The fourteenth is, it is wholesome against shaking and palste, for it avoydeth
the matter that is cause thereof.

The fifteenth is, it is whelesome for one that has great black sores on his
lower parts: for it turns the humors from thence.

Now although vomiting duly and well done, because of these commodities, yet
when it is vuduly done: It induces many hurts, for it feebleth the stomach,
and makes it apt for matters to slow into: it hurts the breast, the sight,
the teeth, causes headache, as Avicen says.

The third thing that is noted in the text is, that there be foate Seasons of
the year, Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. Spring time in respect of the
other Seasons is vote and moist, though it be temperate in it self, as Galen
says in his book of Complexions, wherefore it follows, that this Season is
more apt to let blood, then the other: for it does more enerease humors. And
therefore in this Season, moderate use of carnal copulation, temperate motion
lask stire, and sweat is convenient. and likewise temperate bathing to diminish
repletion. This Season is good to take purgations in.

The fourth is, Summer heateth and dries: and therefore it increases red
Choler hot and dry. And for this cause, is Summer we must seed on cold and
moist meats, to diminish the ferventnesse of the heat and drought. and then too
ought to abstain from carnal copulation, the which also, dries and from often
hayning, and be let blaud seldom, nor like cause. We must use quietuesse, and
littie motion, for quietness does moist, and much motion dries.

In this season especially we must use moderally to drink cold brink: for
superfluous drinking of cold drink (by reason that the pores be open) does make
the body suddenly to take cold, or causes the Palsle, or laraty of the
members, or else sudden death. From the which. He defend Us, that lives and
reigns eternally, A MEN.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
A Light supper, pa. 2.13. Ale not well sod. pa 60. Ale moderately drunk. pa.
cadem. Anger. pa. 12. Anger for certain folks is necessary. pa. cadem. Avoid
water as often as needs. pa. 13, Apples, pa. 21. A strong brain. p. 45. Air
is necessary two ways. p. 51. Air temperate and sweet. p. cad. 52.159. Amity
between a Pike and a Perch. p. 83. Asses milk. p. 93. Amarillis a Bird. p. 81.
Auripigmentum. p. 158. Anise-seed, with the vtilities thereof. p. 115.
Abundance of blood is known by the thickness of the Urin. p. 76. Artery
blood. p, 181. Assellaris the vein, p. 164,
B
Bacon. p. 72. Bayning. p. 182. Basilica the vein. p. 199. Best hog-flesh. p.
26. Begin thy dinner and thy supper with Ale. p. ^^. Begin thy meal with moist
meat. p. 99. Bean. p. 91. Beware of fruits in Autumn. p. 63. Birds that she
most swiftly are most praised. p. 82. Bestiall fish. p. 85. Be not too near in
observing custem. p. 123. Blood the treasure of Nature. p. 179. Blood provokes
to larghing. p. eadom Bloodletting. p. 181. Black rice, p, 91. Black wine. p.
39. Bodies wax more stronger by night then by day. p. 14. Brawn, p. 39. Brain
of hens, chickens, hogs, sheep, hares, and conies. p, 113. Brains. p. 36.
Brains well digested, and for whom they be wholesome. p. eadem. Brains are
medicinable, and for whom. p. 156. Branchus. p. 8. Brimstone, p. 134. Broth of
Coleworts. p. 127. Bread. p. 35. Bread made with pure flower and some bran. p.
71. Riting fume, p. 35. Butter^ milk. p. 35.95. Butter. p. 94. Bulls hom. p.
144. Blood letting, restrains vomiting and the lask. p. 180. Bloodletting
may augment the lask two ways. p. ead. Blood letting cools and augmenteth
coldness. p. ead. Bloodletting is good for fevers and great aches. p. ead.
Bodies that are apt to be let blood. p. 168.
C
Care of mind. p. 4. Catarri. p. 9. Camels milk. p. 93. Castorum. p. 131.
Canker, p. 140 Causes of hear senes. p. 155. Carnal copulation. p.
149.183.151. Celendine. p. 146. Cephalica the vein. p. 199. Certain
commandments to ob. serve health. p. 15. Chawing, and swallowing of meat. p.
19 Choice of milk, p. 23.93. Choice of good flesh stands in three things. p.
25 Choice of eggs. p. 29 Choice of wheat. p. 35 Choice of brains. p. 39. Choice
of wholesome air. p. 51 Choice of fowls flesh. p. 78 Charvill and his three
operations p, 140. Cheese. p. 88 Cheese engenders gross humors. p. 96. Cheese
with bread does digest. p. ead. Change of diet. p. 123. Cheries with their
commodities. p. 103 Cheristous. p. ead. Cheries are of two sorts. p. ead.
Children should drink no wine. p, 58.162 Children and old folks should be let
blood but little. p. 179. Claret wine, p. 33 Clisters, p. 195 Cockstones. p.
39.33. Constrain not the Fundament. p. 3 Close air. p. 52 Combing the head in
the morning. p. 5. Coriza a Rheum. p. 8. Colic and the inconveniences
thereof. p. 12.195. Condition of good fish. p. 85 Coleworts. p. 127. Cold of
the head. p. 130. Clean, and a corrupt stomach. p. 18 Cow flesh. p. 22.25 Cow
milk. p. 94. Cramp, and the diversity of cramps. p. 11. Crevices. p. 87.
Crysis. p. 194. Crusts must be eaten after dinner., p. 71, Custom is another
nature. p. 122 Customs ought to be kept. p. ead. Customs in eating and
drinking. p. ead.
D
Days forbidden to let blood, p. 181 Darnell. p. 95. Damask-prunes. p. 13.
Delicate meats and drink. p. 34. Delicious meats. p. 34 Decoction of Peaches.
p. 20. Decoction of rape seed. p. 136 Definition, whether a man should eat more
at dinner then at supper. p. 13. Dissenteria. p. 66. Diverse fauces, for diverse
meats. p. 6.67. Digestion by day is but feeble. p. 8 Diseases engendered of the
afternoons sleep. p. 8 Dressing of brains. p. 39 Diet, and the diversity of
dyets. p. 122. 123. 124. Dry figs, p. 38. Dry. grapes. p, ead. Dry Nuts, and
hurts that they engender. p. 46 Drink so that once in a month thou may vomit.
p. 53 Drink a little at once. p. 89, Drink little and often at meat. p. 98 Drink
not between your meals. p. ead Drink after a new laid Egg. p, 100 Drink wine
after pears. p. 20. Drunkenness is cause of six inconveniences. p. 73 Drunkards
are infected with the palsy. p. ead. Dropsy and three spices thereof, p 45
Dulce and sweet things engender choler. p 42.
E
Eat and drink soberly. p 2 Eat not till thou have a lust. p 18 Eat not much
of sundry meats. ead. Eat little Cheese, p 23 Eat no great quantity of meat in
Ver. p 61 Eat little in summer and much in winter. p 67, 1^8 Eat no crusts, p
64 Eating of fi^h good and bad. p 85 Eat nuts after fish. p 102 Eating of
E^les. p 87 Eggs roasted. p 29 Eggs are roasted two ways. ead. Eggs sod in water
two ways. p 30 Eggs rere roasted engender blood p 59 Eyes and 21 things
hurtful unto them. p 151 English men do first eat, or ever they drink, p 99
Ennula campana and the effects thereof. p 144 Excessive eating and drinking. p
2 Exceeding sweet wine is not to be chosen. p 73 Emptiness, p 61. 195
F
Fat corsie f^lks. p 2 Fatness is a token of a cold complexion. p 168 Easting
in Summer. p 179 Fesants p 80 Fenell-seed and the properties thereof. p 114
Fenel sharpneth the sight of Serpents. p 115 Fevers. p 7 Figs and the choice of
them. p 38 Figs with nuts and almonds. p. ead Figs must be ^aten fasting. p
ead. Fistula and remedy for it, p 158 Filth of the teeth. p 5 Fish is lighter
of digestion then flesh. p 84 Fish taken in the North Sea. p 8. Fish should not
be eaten after travel. p 87 Fish corned with salt. ead. Five conditions of day
sleep. p 11 Five things by which good wine is proved. p 40 Five bounties of
wine moderately daunk. p 67 Five things to know good ale. p. 59, Five
properties of good bread. p. 70 Five inconveniences that breed of drinking of
new wine. p. 73 Five things that ought to be done about bloodletting. p. 178
Five causes of bloodletting. p. 180. Five things that must be ^^chewed of him
that is let blood. p. ead. Five commodities that come by letting of blood of
the vein Satuatella. p, 161. Fleshes that endender the Fever Quartain. p. 22.
Fleshes that should be sod and roasted. p. 26 Fleshes of fouls is more wholesome
then of four legged beasts. p 79, Phlegm of two kinds. p. 160. Fresh water fish.
p, 85, Fish is lighter of digestion then flesh. p, ead. Flower of wheat. p. 35.
Fried eggs. p, 30. Four properties of Cheese. p. 96. Four things that mo Ili^ie.
p. 121. Fruits should be eschewed, p. 19 Fruits hurt them that have an Ague. p.
ead. Funis Brachij. p. 199,
G
Garack: p. 46.47, 48. Gash made in blood-letting. p. 199. Gall the receptacle
of Choler. p. 172 Good wine is proved five manner of ways. p 40, 41. Good wine
sharpneth the wit. p. ead. Good medicines for the Palsy. p. 144. Goats milk p
23.24. Goats flesh. p. 25. Gray goose, p. 80 Gross flesh is best for laborers
p. 26, Gross nourishment is best in Winter, p. 64 Gross meats. p. eod. Green
cheese, p. 32, 86 Grapes. p. 35 Gurnard. p. 64 Gowte. p. 9.138
H
Heart of Beasts. p. 113 Heart is the engenderer of blood. p. 178 Hearts flesh.
p. 25 Hare flesh. p. eod. Hard Eggs. p. 29 Head ach. p. 8, 164 Head^ach called
Vertigo. p. 12 Hen. p. 78 Heat is cause of augmentation. p. 144 Herbs wholesome
put in drink. p. 64 Herbs whose water is wholesome for the sight. p. 154 Herbs
sod in vinegar. p, 67 Hearing. p. 76 Holding of wind. p. 11 Hogs fed with
pears. p. 11 Hogs flesh. p, 25 Hot bread. p. 70 How Grapes should be eaten. p.
38 How to be let blood for a Pluresie. p. 178 Honey. p. 39 Hill wort. p. 142
Hunger. p. 168 Hunger is after two sorrs. p. 17 Hunger long endured. ead
Horse-dung. p. 128 Hogs stones. p. 39. Hurts of red wine. p. 64 Hurts that come
by drinking of water. p. 74 Hurts of Salt meats. p. 117 Hurts of Coleworts. p.
127 Hurts of vomiting. p. 140
I
Juice of Peaches. p. 19 Juice of new gathered fruit. p. 21 Juice of coleworts,
p. 128 Juice of Watercresses. p. 143 Inaca. p, 12 Incision of the veins. p.
167 Joyful life. p. 3
K
Kernels, p. 106 Kernel of cherystones p. 103 Kid flesh. p. 25 Know ledge of
the best flesh of four footed beasts. p. ead.
L
Lampreys and dressing of them. p. 88 Lavender. p 132 Lask. p. 63 Laxative
meats. p*ead. Leeks raw and sodden. p. 7 Light supper. p. 2 Lights. p. 113
Lights of a tup. p. 114 Let not blood in long sickness. p. 193 Letting of
blood is wholesome in the beginning of the Dropsy. p. 194 Letting of blood
keeps Lovers from surious raving, p. 195 Letting of blood may not be done in
the ague fit. p. ead. Letting of blood should not be much used. p. 196
M
Making of water. p, 2 Marow and the choice thereof. p. 37. Many good things
come by drinking of wine toberly. p. 55 Man may live by the smell of hot bread.
p 70 Malard. p. 80 Ma^owes and three properties of them. p. 129 Maw of beasts.
p. 113 Meat a little powdered. p, 118 Meat, and why it is taken. p. 13 Meat
upon meat is hurtful. p. 15, 16 Meats that engender melancholy. p. 17 Meat
that conserveth health: p. 27 Meats unwholesome, p. ead Mean and thin milk. p.
32 Mean meats. p. 6^ Medlars and their utilities. p. 108 Mediana the veyn. p.
199 Megrym. p. 165.167 Medicine to stanch blood, p. 18 Medicine against the
pestilence. p. 73 Medicines to comfort diverse members. p. 114 Medicine for the
ventosity of air. p. 21 Medicines to kill sleas. p. 133.134 Medicine to restore
hayr again. p. 135 Medicine for Warts. p. 135 Medicines for the toothache. p.
143 Medicine for the Fistula, p. 154 Medicine to avoid the tooth, ach. p. 6
Melancholy. p. 173 Milk and for whom it is good and no^ good. p. 20 Milk must
be drunk fasting. p. 21 Milk of it self is very corruptible. p. 124 Mint. p.
129 Milk daily used engenders the stone. p. 32 Moderate joy. p. 3 Moderate
dyer. ead. Moderate eatings increases the body. p. 14 Morning rest. p. 9 Must
that is very red causes the flixe. p. 44 Must lettech the vrin. p. 35 Must
engenders the stone, and preserves a man from the stone. p. 49 Must and his
three properties. p. 53 Mustard Seed, and three properties thereof. p. 136.
Mutton. p. 27. Mushromes. p. 49.
N
Natural rest is most meetest for noble men. p. 3. Natural heat is in many
things fortified in the night. p. 15. Natural heat is suffocated with
abundance of humors. p. 164. Nature cannot suffer food in immutation. p. ead.
Nature is the worker of all things. p. 168. Ne its tongue. p. 113. Nettles and
eight properties of them. 138 Night is the very season of perfect digestion. p.
6 Noble men are dry and chollerick p. 2. Nourishing meats. p. 15. Nuts. p. 105.
Nutmegs. p. 109. Number of bones teeth and veins. p. 19.
O
Often angry. p. 159. Oleander. p. 125. Old wine is all fiery. p. 71. Onions. p.
46.47. Oil of Castory. p. 132. Operations of tallages, p. 146. Opilations
engender fevers, page 6 Ox flesh, p. 24.
P
Parbreaking heals great discases. p. 25. Pensivenesle is expedient for fat
men, p. 1. Peaches and when they should be eaten, p. 19. Peaches are hurtful to
sick folks, p. 20. Percely, p. 46, Pears, p. 19.101. Pears make folk fat, p.
19. Pears fod with Mushromes, p. 50. Pears without wine are hurtful. p. 101
Pigeons baked are better then tosted. p. 80. Perch. p. 83. Peasen and how they
be wholesome. p. 91 Pike. p. 64. Partridges. p. 60.61 Pepper white and black,
p. 147. pig. p. 26. plaster made of Garlic. p. 48. plaster made of an onion.
p. 48. plaster made of Walnuts. 49. plaster made of figs. p. 100. plaster
made of figs, and Poppy feed. p. 107. Physic makes a man sure of two things.
p. 128. Plurisie. p. 185.186. Pork. p. 25.26. Poched eggs. p. 29.30. Pork with
wine nourishes. p. 27. Poppy-seed. p. 115. Powder of Peaches, p. 20.
Prolonging of time in eating moderately p. 17. Properties of melancholy and
wine. p. 59. Properties of butter. p. 95. Properties of phlegmatic folk. p.
170, Properties of choleric men. p. 172. Profits of blood-letting. p. 149,
Profit of vomiting, p. 172. Putrified fevers. p. 7. Pulse. p. 61. Primrose. p.
131. Pruncs and their utilities. p. 164. Purslain, p. 132.
Q
Quails are not to be praised. p. 79. Qualities of all favourinesse. p. 119.
Quietness of mind. p. 3.
R
Radish roots. p. 46.47. Raw pears. p. 101. Raw Apples. p. 155. Rawnesse of
humors is caused two ways. p, 176. Rapes with their utilities. p. 112. Red
wine. p. 42, 43. Renish must. p. 74. Remove a little after meat. p. 5. Remedy
for the toothache, p. 5, 154. Remedies against venom. p. 46. Remedies against
ill drink. p. 67. Remedies for casting on the sea. p. 65. Remedy for Choler. p.
166. Remedies against the Rheum. p. 156. Reums and pose. p. 7. Repletion of the
Supper hurts. p. 14. Resolution of the humors is the chief cause of the
appetite. p. 9. Rest of the day and night. p. 9. Rere roasted eggs. p. 29.30.
Rue. p. 46. Rue and four properties thereof. p. 133. Rochet. p 86. Raisins and
currants. p. 105. Rice. p. 91. Rose-flowers. p. 55 Rose Water. p, 154. Ruddock.
p. 78. Rules concerning letting of blood p, 178. Rules declaring who be meet to
be let blood, p. 179.
S
Salt meat. p. 24.118. Sage. p. 64.130. Sances vary after the seasons of fthe
year. p. 66 Salmon. p. 84 Salt. p. 116. Sage wine. p. 131. Sastron, p. 145
Sanguine persons and their properties. p. 168, 169. Seven doctrines to choose
wine. p. 32. Seafish. p. 85. Seed of Coleworts. p. 127 Sleep not after meat.
p. 2. Sleep is unwholsom in the ague fit. p. 187 Sleep not by day. p. 6 Sharp
wines. p. 47. Saluatella, the vein. p. 198 199. Sudden change of custom. p.
114.122 Sodden Eggs. p. 30. Soles. p. 83. Sower miik. p. 84 Stand after meat.
p. 5 Stretch thy self after sleep. p. ead Strong things corrupt the body. p. 6
Stones of aged beasts. p. 39 Stones of young beasts. p. ead. Stale bread. p. 70
Starling. p, 79 Sparrows. p. 80 Spoditan, p. 116 Spleen the receptacle of
melancholy. p. 163. Suppings of chickens, p. 81 Subtle and gross blood. p.
164 Swimming of the head. p. 11 Sweet wines. p. 47.48. Swines evil. p. 106
Swallows dung. p. 144 Swounding. p. 177.
T
Tart meats. p. 63 Tart cheese. p. 98 Tansey, and why it is eaten after Easter.
p. 132 The best hog flesh. p. 26 The yolk and white of an Egg. p. 29 The
inconveniences of too much meat. p. 11 The properties of sigs, p. 38 The tokens
of good wine. p. 40.41. The wholesomnesse of eager and sharp things. p. 49. The
seed and water of radish. p. 50 The best fouls to eat. p. 79 The best time and
age of letting of blood. p. 178 The smell of new bread. p. 71 The broth of a
hen and a cock, p. 78 The operations of figs. p. 107 The things that a
Physician should consider in ministering of dyers. p. 126 The four humors. p.
160 The cause why old men's legs are swollen. p. 160 The months of the moon, p.
181. The cause why many swound when they be let blood. p. 184. The profits of
vomiting. 168.169. Things hurtful to the hearing. p. 148.149. Things causing a
humming in ones ear. p. 151. Things hurtful to the eyes. p. 151.152. Things
after which blood is not to be let. p. 161. Three inconveniences engendered by
dulce and sweet foods. p. 42. Three manner of drinkings. p. 89 Three kinds of
poppy-seeds. p. 97 Three manner of dyets. p. 224 Three things that draw unto
them. p. 195.196. Three indirect causes of letting-bloud. p. 179. Three things
are considered when one is let blood. p. ead. Thought and care dries up a man's
body. p. 1. To walk in a fair air. p. 51. To rise early. p. ead. To kill worms.
p. 129. Tokens of a holyminded person. p. 173. Tench. p. 84. Tranquillity of
mind. p. 3. Treacle. p. 46. Tympany. p. 12. Tongue. p. 113.114. Tripes. p. 73.
Trout. p. 84. Two kinds of Rue. p. 49: Two knowledges touching the choice of
fish. p. 84 85. Two valities of cheese. p. 97. Two kinds of Sage. p, 131. Two
kinds of blood. p. 161 Two kinds of choler. p. 165 Two kinds of melancholy. p.
167 Two tokens to know when the stomach is void and empty. p. 18.
V W
Walk after meat. p. 3. Washing of the eyes. p. 4. Washing of the hands. p. 4,
69. Washing of the teeth. p. 5, Warm not thy self too suddenly. p. 6. Walk
sofely after meat. p. 6. Water destroys the appetite. p. 74 Water should not
be used with meat. p. ead. Watrish meat does not nourish. p. 75. Walnut, p.
100. Watercresses, and when they should be eaten. p. 143 Water wholesome for
the eyes. p. 154. Wethers and hogs of a year old, p. 28. Wesill. p. 53. Veins
Meseraiks, p. 3. Veins, and when they should be let blood. p. 182. Veal. p.
27.72. Vinegar mixed with onions. p. 46. Vinegar and the properties thereof. p
109. Vinegar continually used, breeds many inconveniences. p. ead Unclean
stomach hurteeh the sight. p. 112 Vnwholsom eggs. p. 30. Violets and three
effects of them, p. 137. Vtility of phlegm. p. 177 Vomit every month twice. p.
180 What things should be eaten first. p. 18. What loathsome meat does
engender. p. 34. What time a man should dine and sup in summer and winter. p.
126. Wheat of all grain is most wholesome. p. 38. Wild pork. p. 26. White wine.
p. 41 42. Why white wine provokes to vrin. p. 43. White wine quenches thirst.
p. 43. Why divines love to drink good wine. p. 30.33. Whyting. p. 86. White
peason. p. 91 Why Nuts are the last service in Lent. p. 100. Willow. p 144.
Whey and the properties thereof. p. 95. Wine Citrine. p. 31. Wine allayed with
water. p. 57. Wine hurts children many ways. p. 38. Wine for old folks is
most wholesome. p. ead. Wine is a mavelous piercer. p. 76. Wine sops and their
commodity. p. 121. Woman's milk. p. 93. Women with child should not be let
blood. p. 195. Vomit ere thou eat. p. 63. Wormwood. p. 129. Worms in the teeth.
p. 154.
Y
Yeels. p. 87.88 Yeels are of the nature of water. p. 155. Ysop and the effects
thereof. p. 139
Here ends the first Table.
Here follow certain excellent and approved Receipts, abstracted out of the
originals of diverse learned Doctors and Physicians both of England and Holland.
To make Mead excellent good, to cleanse ^he stomach, preserve the Liver, and
very good against the Stone.

TAke fair Spring water, and put honey to it, so much that when its warm and
well strirred together, it will bear an egg the breadth of a great above the
water: let it stand so all night close covered, the next day set it on a clear
fire and boil it, still scumming it as long as any will rise; then put into it
three handfuls of Egrimony, and two of Dellitory of the wall. Cinnamon three
ounces, Ginger two ounces, and four or five Nutmegs grossly bruised, put the
spice into a little bag, with a bullet of lead or a stone to make it slick, put
it the heaths and spice into the kettle together, and let them sees about half
an hour, then take out the heath when you take off the Mead from the fire, let
the bag of spice he put into the barrel with it, but it must stand till it be
quits cold before you tun it; this quantity of heaths and spice will serve ten
or twelve Gallons of Mead.

An excellent Receipt to make one sleep.

Take one ounce of Conserve of Red-rases, and half a dram of Alkermis, and a
dram of dius cordium, mingle them together, and eat them when you go to bed, as
much as a Nutmeg at a time.

To stay a flux of blood.

You must still frogs as you do herbs or flowers, or any thing else, but you
must put nothing unto them but the frogs; take two or three spoonfuls of this
water in any thing that you will drink.

To take out a Burn.

Take Lambs blood if you have it, or Chickins blood, if you can warm from the
Lamb or Chickin, and if not, warm it, and so bath the place burned therewith.

For an Ague.

Take Dragons, Sallendine, Burredge Buglas, Angelica. Succory, Endife, Sortill
Bittony, Pimpernell, Scabius, Egrimony, white honey, Suckles that grow among
the grass, and red boncy Suckles of the same sort, of each of these one
handful; of Cardus Benidict. two handful, dried or green, shred them and
brnise them very small; then lay them in steep in a pottle of white wine over
night, and still it the next day in a dry Still the first is the best, and the
small water is very good though not so strong; then give it to the sick party
one hour before the sit does came six or seven spoonfuls, warming it first and
let the Sick go into a warm bed to sweat presently after it.

This Medicine is to be used thr^e several times when the fit is to come.

This water is very good also to expel any thing from the heart.

To make an Issue.

Take R^e-flower and Mustard Seed heaten to powder, and with water make a
little paste, and lay a ring upon the place made of a rush and apply it.

For the heat of the back.

Take Oil of Roses six ounces and a half, and put to it I little Worcester, and four
drops of Vinegar and anoint the back therewith.

For the Gowt.

Take Ivy that grows an a wall two handfuls, and put is into raw milk, and put
thereto Bores grease, and Oatmeal. and boil it together to a Plaster.

For all manner of Swallings.

Take Smallage and boil it in milk with crumbs of bread and apply it.

A special Powder for the Memory.

Take three ounces of Senae-leavs, Sednarij, Commin, Parsiey, and Dill-seed, of
each an ounce, Ginger tell ounces and a half, Cloves Nutmegs, Galling all,
Pimpernill roots, Sage, Rue, Walerian, Annis seeds of each one quarter of an
ounce. Sugar three ounces pound all these small, and temper them together, and
take thereof morning and evening 31 at one time.

For the Redness of the Eyes.

Anoint the eyes three nights together with thin Cream, and then anoint them
other thres nights with live honey.

For heat in the mouth or throat.

Take a quart of Spring water, and put it into a Pipkin, and put thereto two
sticks of liquarish, and some violet leaves, then hayl it to a plate, and strain
it, then gargle therewith often.

For an extreme headache, and to cause quiet sleep.

Take Wormwood, and bruise it finely in a Mortar, and boil it well in water,
then put it into a linen cloth, and apply it to the head.

For a heat in the face.

Take Camphere, and lay it in fair water four or five hours then take a piece
of Camphere, and some of that water which it lies in, and a spoonful of
Capons grease, and stir them well together half an hour, then anoint the face
therewith twenty times a day.

A Diet Drink against any desperate Disease that is curable, prescribed by
three Dutch Doctors.

Take of Harmodactills two ounces, of Salla perilla four ounces, of Sen^
Alerandrina sour ounces, of Sasafras two ounces, of Liquorice one ounce, of
Anni-seeds one ounce, of long Pepper half an ounce, of the leaves of Seabious,
a great handful, of Egrimony half as much, of Bittony half a handful, of
Watercresses and Brock-lime, of each one great handful, of Sea-scorvey-grass
two great handfuls of good Nutmegs one ounce; let all the weeds be slit and cut
small and the heaths shred, and put into a hag, and hang it in a harrell with
six gallons of new Ale and let if stand and settle eight days: then drink
continually of it, and no other Drink while it lasseth, and eat Bakers mead
with Corianders seeds, and keep a good Diet; use this lix weeks.

A Posset Drink to cool the Liver.

Take milk, and put therein a Succory root well bruised, and boil them, then
make a Posset thereof with two spoonfuls of vinegar, and boil therein Carrants,
Reasons of the sun, and Cinnamon.

To heal a Fellon.

Take the grounds of Ale, and a handful of groundfell, with a piece of tower
Leaven, boil them together to a salve, and apply it.

To open the obstructions of the Liver, and to preserve from the Dropsy.

Take every day half a dram of fine Rubarb, thin sliced, with a spoonful of
Currants sleeped and washed in White Wind two hours: then chop them finely with
the Ruharb and eat them fasting nine mornings together at the Spring and Fall.

For an ach in the Bones.

Takered Fennel, Parsley, with the roots, Rue, Wormwood, of each in like
quantity; of Commin-seed half a quarter of a pound feeth these in stale urine,
and wash your grief with that liquor, and make a plaster with the substance.

An excellent Electuary, to warm and dry a cold and moist brain.

Take conserve of Roses two ounces, and a half, Conserde of Bittony one ounce
and a half, green Ginger two ounces, Cinnamon. Cloves and Anniseeds, of each a
half leaf, and mix them all together, and if it be too dry, and some of the
syrop of Citrons or any other syrop.

For the mother, and wind about the heart.

Take Liquorice, Fennell-seed. Anniseed, Alirander seed, of each a like
quantity, and heat them together, and then take Cinament and Saffron, and beat
them to powder, and temper it with clarified honey or sugar, and make thereof
an Clectuary, and eat thereof morning and thening.

For the Wind Chollick.

Take Sarap^rase, Parsley, Lime, and Archangell, of each a like quantity, boil
them in stale Ale, from a quart to a pint; then strain them, and let the
Pattent drink thereof morning and evening and fast an bour after it.

To make a bag to lay to the Stomach, to comsort it, and expel wind.

Take Ci^^^mon, Ginger, Mace, Cubebes, Gallingall. Annis-seeds. Commin, seeds
and Parslep-seeds, with powder of Bays, Camomill-flowers, Wormwood, Mints, and
Rue, the which being mixed together, put them in a cup of Beer, drink the same
morning and evening, and it will give speedy remedy.

For a pain in the head.

Take Violet, leaves and flowers and bruise them, and apply them alone to the
head or mingle them with oil, and it will case the headache and provoke sleep,
moysten the Brain, and is good against melancholy.

To make a Water to drink with Wine in Summer.

Take a Gallon of Spring Water, or as much as you will, a pint of Straw
berries two ounces of Cinamen, three or four cloves, one grain of Musk, still
these with a soft fire, and it is very cooling and pleasant.

For a scaled head.

Take a sandle, and let it drop upon if as hot as you can, and in so doing, it
will ^^^ls (...); then take the stale of a Cow and the furring of o whole
chamber pot, and boil it together, and wash the place, and it will be a present
remedy.

Anapproved Receipt to cure children that are weak, and cannot go.

Take of Sage, sweet Marjorum, of each a like quantity, beat them a long time
together, stir out the juice, and put it into a double violl glass, filling of
it full: then stop it with paste very close, and cover it with thick paste all
over: then set it in an Oven, and there let it stand so long as a great loaf
requires time to be thoroughly baked: then take it out, and let it be cold, then
break the Paste cound about it and if the juice be grown thick, break the
glass, and take it in a dish, and keep it in a Galley-pot, when you will use
it take the quantity of two spoonfuls at a time, and as much marrow of an Ore
leg, melt them together, and mingle them well; and morning and evening anoint,
as warm as can he, the tender parts of the childs thighs and legs, as also
thin knees, crafing well with your warm hands and so in a short time (through
Gods blessing) he will be able to stand and go.

For a looseness.

Take a pint of milk of a red or black Cow, set it on the fire and when it
boyls up, power in a spoonful of Spring Water: then let the milk boil up
again, and do in the same manner 9. times; drink hereof when it is boiled
morning, afternoon, and evening.

Another approved Receipt for an Ague.

Take Dragons, Sallendine, Burredge, Buglas, Angelica, Succory, Cudife, Sorrill
Bittony, Pimpernell, Scabius, Egrimony, white honey, Suckles that grow among
the grass, and red honey Suckles of the same sort, of each of these one
handful; of Cardus Benidict. two handfulls, dried or green. (...) them, and
br^ise them very small; then lay them in sleep in a pottle of white wine
overnight, and still it the next day in a dry Still, the first is the best, and
the small water is very good though not so strong; then give it to the sick
party one hour before the fit does come six or seven spoonfuls, warming it
first and let the Sick go into a warm bed to sweat presently after it.

For a Web or Pearl in the Eye.

Take the white of a new laid egg, beaten to an Oil, and the juice of Deafie^
roots and leaves, and of the inyce of the too^s and leaves of brown founell,
and of the juice of the leave and roots of the white honey-suckle, with the
three leaves; take of these juyces two good spoonful, and put to the white of
the egg, and a litile spoonful of pure honey, and a ^^^oonfull of woman's
milk, and one spoonful of Rose Water, and a half peuy worth of Sperma-city,
and as much white Sugar^^^^^y heat, and as much white Coperas as a good Nut^^^^
made into fine powder, labor them all well together with assiver spoon and
scum of the fount, and put it into a glusse, and loose slop'd and lying on your
back, with a feather drop two or three at a time into your eye, using it so
three times a day till it be well.

Another precious and approved experiment for health, by D.D. an Englishman.

Take of (...) two ounces, of Salfa perilla four ounces, of Se^a ^erandrin^
four ounces, of S^s^s^as two ounces, of Liqu^^ice one ounce, of Auni-seeds one
ounce, of long Pepper ^ol^ an ounce, of the leaves of Seabious a great
handful, of Egismony half as much, of Bittony half a handful, of
Water-eresses and Brook-li^e, of eath one great handful, of Sea-scor^^y-grass
two greath ^^^fuls, of good ^^^^negs ^ne ounce; let all the (...) be flit and
(...), and the (...) shred, and put into a bag, and (...) it in a barrel with
six gallows of new Ale, and let it stand (...) eight days; then drink
continually of it, and no other Drink while it lasts, and eat Bakers bread
with Corianders seeds, and keep a good Diet; use this six weeks.

A soverain medicine for the pain at the heart.

Take milk, and put therein a Succory root well bruised, and boil them, then
make a Posset thereof, with two spoonfuls of vinegar, and boil therein
Currauts, Reasons of the su^, and Cinnamon.

Another for the same.

Take Liquorice, Fennell-seed, Anniseed, Alirander seed, of each alike
quantity, and beat them together, and then take Cinament and Sassron, and beat
them to powder and temper it with clarified honey or sugar, and make thereof an
Electuary, and eat thereof morning and evening.

For those that cannot hold water.

A slain mouse roasted, or made in powder, and drank at once, does perfectly
help such as cannot hold water, especially if it (...) used three mornings
together.

For those that cannot void water.

Take Saxaphrase, Parsley, Time, and Archangeli, of each a like quantity, boil
them in stole Ale, from a quart to a p^^te; them strain them, and let the
Pationt drink thereof morning and evening (...) an hour after it.

To take away freekles of the face.

Take the blood of a white Hen and anoint the sacetherewith and after three or
four times dressing, it will take a^^y all the spo^^ (...) freekles.

An excellent Receipt for the Eyes.

Take celandine and dastes, of each a like quantity stamped, and a little sugar
and rose water, and out thereto a drop with a tether into the eyes it takes
away all manner of inflammation, spots, webs, itch smarting or any grief
whatsoever in the eyes yea although the sight be nigh gone, it is proved to be
the best medicine in the world.

An excellent medicine for the head.

Take conserve of Roses two ounces, and a half, Conserve of Bittony one ounce
and a half, ^^een Ginger two ounces, Cinnamon. Cloves and Auniseeds, of each a
half lead, and mix them all together, and if it be too dry, add some of the
syrop of Citrons, or any other syrop.

A present Remedy for the Itch.

Boil the roots of Elecampane which boil very soft, and mix in a Mortar with
fresh butter, and the powder of ginger, makes all excellent Ointment against
the Itch, Scabs, and such like.

For a Bruise.

Take red Fennel Parsley, with the roots, Rue, Wormwood, of each a like
quantity; of Commin-seed half a quarter of a pound, sees these in stale brine,
and wash your grief with that liquor, and make a plaster with the substance.

A sovereign Remedy for the Cough.

Take Brimstone beaten in powder, half an ounce and put it in a new-laid egg
soft roasted, mingle it well together; then drink it in the morning at your
breakfast, make as much again at night when you go to bed, and you shall be
well at the second or third time; but if the cough have holden you long you
must take if so much the oftener.

A Practioner in London who was famous for curing the F^ensie, after that he
had performed his cure by due observation of Physic, accustomed every year in
the month of May, to diet Patients after this sort.

Take the leaves and flowers of Primrose, boil them a little in Fountain water,
and in some Rose and Betony water, adding thereto Sugar, Pepper, Salt and
Butter, which being strained, he gave this to them first and last.

For the Palsy.

The distilled water of Daffodils, does cure the Palsy, if the Patient be
bathed and rubbed with the said liquor by the fire.

For the Dropsy.

Take every day half a dram of fine Rubarb, thin sliced, with a spoonful of
Currants steeped and washed in White wine two hours: then chop them finely with
the Rubarb and eat them fasting nine mornings together at the Spring and Fall,
and it will preserve them from the Dropsy.

For a green wound.

The coals of a Birch-fire made in powder, and put into the wound or sore
heals it perfectly without any other thing, in few days.

For the Rheum in the Eyes.

Anoint the eyes three nights together with thin Cream, and then anoint them
other three nights with live honey.

For a Woman that has great Breasts.

If a woman anoint often her paps with the juice of succory, it will make them
round and hard; if they be hanging or bagging, it will draw them together,
whereby they shall seame like the Paps of a Paid.

For new Swellings.

Take Smallage and boil it in milk with cr^^ms of bread and apply it to the
grief morning and evening, and the rage thereof will seen abate.

To make a Water to drink in Summer, for preverting of the Surfeit.

Take a ^a^^on of Spring Water, or as much as you will, a p^^e of Straw,
b^^ties, two ounces of Cinam^^, three or four cloves, one grain of Musk, still
these with a soft fire, and it is very cooling and pleasant, and very s^verain
to qualify heat, and prevent surfeit.

For an ach in the back.

Take ^yl of Roses ^^x ounces and a half, and put to (...) little War, and four
drops of ^^eg^^ and a^ndi^t the ba^^ therewith.

For the Cramp.

The little Bone in the knee-joynt of the hinder, leg of a (...) ^oth presently
help the crump, if you touch the grieved pla^^ therewith.

To draw out a thorn.

A little piece of the tongue of a For being moystned and (...) it be laid ^po^
(...).

For the Hickup.

Stop both your ears with your ^ng^rs, and the ^^ek^p will presently leave you.

For a pain in the head.

Take U^olet leaves and flowers and bruise them, and apply them alone to the
head, or mingle them with oil, and it will case the headache and provoke
^^eep, m^y^^^n the Brain, and is good against melancholy.

For a deafness in the ear.

Black sheeps-wooll mixed and chased by the fire with fresh butter, and the deaf
ear stopped therewith at night, and thus used nine or ten nights together, it
helps the deafness perfectly and speedily.

For the morphew.

Whosoever does use to drink the water of Straw-berries distilled, it will
certainly kill the Root of any Morphew that is within the Body.

To take away a Weft from the Eye if it be quite over.

Take the juice of Fennel and put it into the eye, and it helps perfectly.

An excellent drink.

Take the roots of Monks-rubarbe, and red madder, of each half a pound, Sena
four ounces, Annis-feed and Licoriet, of each two ounces, Scabious and
Egrimony, of each one handful, slice the Roots of the Rubarb, bruise the
Annise^ds and Licorice, break the heaths with your hand, and put then into a
Stone-yet, called a Stean. with four gallons of stron^^le to steep or infuse
the space of three days, and then drit this Liquor as your ordinary drink for
three weeks togeth at the least, and the longer you take it, it is the better:
prov^ded you have always one Stean under another being always careful to keep
a good diet: It cures the Dropsse the yellow Iaunders, all manner of Itch,
Seabs, of breaking out and mainginesse: It purifieth the blond from all
corruption, prevails against the Green-sicknesse very greatly, and all
oppilations or stoppings, makes young Wenches to look fair, and cherris-like,
and brings down their terms, the stopping thereof has caused the same.

THE TABLE OF The Additionall Receipts, and approved Experiments, annexed unto
the Regiment of Health.
TO make Mead excellent good to cleanse the Stomach, preserve the Liver, and
very good against the Stone. page 207. An excellent Receipt to make one sleep.
p. 208. To stay a flux of blood. p. ead, To take out a Burn. p. ead. For an
Ague. p. ead. To make an Issue. p. ead. For the heat of the back. p. 209. For
the Gowt. p. ead. For all manner of Swellings. p. ead. A special Powder for
the Memory. p. ead. For the redness of the Eyes. p. ead. For heat in the mouth
or throat. p, ead. For an extreme headache, and to cause quiet sleep. p. 211.
For a heat in the face. p. ead. A Diet Drink against any desperate Disease that
is curable, prescribed by three Dutch Doctors. p. ead. A Pollet-drink to cool
the Liver. p. ead. To heal a Fellon. p. 211. To open the obstructions of the
Liver, and to preserve from the Dropsy. p. ead. Eor an ach in the Bones. p.
ead. An excellent Electuary towarm and dry a cold and moist brain. p. ead. For
the Mother, and wind about the heart. p. ead. For the Wind Chollick. p. 212. To
make a bag to lay to the Stomach, to comfort it, and expel wind. p. ead. For a
pain in the head. p. ead. To make a water to drink with Wine in Summer. p. ead.
An approved Receipt to cure children that are weak, and cannot go. p. 213 For a
looseness. p. ead. For a Web or Pearl in the Eye. p. 214 Another precious and
approved experiment for health by D. D. an Englishman. p. ead. A soverain
medicine for the pain at the heart. p. 215. For those that cannot hold water.
p. ead. To take away freckles of the face. p. ead. An excellent Receipt for the
Eyes p. 216. An excellent medicine for the head. p. ead. A present Remedy for
the Itch. p. ead. For a Bruise. p. ead. A sovereign Remedy for the Cough. p.
ead A Practioner in London who was famous for curing the Frenzy, after that he
had performed his cure by due observation of Physic, accustomed every year in
the month of May, to diet Patients after this sort. p. 217. For the Palsy, p.
ead. For the Dropsy. p. ead. For a green wound. p. ead. For the Rheum in the
Eyes. p. ead. For a Woman that has great Breasts. p. 218. For new Swellings.
p. ead. To make a Water to drink in Summer, for preventing of the Surfeit. p.
ead. For an ach in the back. p. ead. For the Cramp. p. ead. To draw out a
thorn. p. ead. For the Hickup. p. 219. For a pain in the head. p. ead. For the
morphew, and other impediments. p. ead. For a deafness in the ear. p. ead. To
take away a Weft from the Eye if it be quite over. p. ead. An excellent drink
to cure, the Dropsy, the yellow Jaunders all manner of Scabs and mainginesse.
p. ead.
FINIS.

