ROME NOT CALLED A CHURCH.

JEREMIAH 7. 4. Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these.

Printed in the year, 1641.

To Mrs ELIZABETH FOOT.
Early begin to think upon thine end,
Long'st do they live, who are disposed to dye.
In youth when many wholly do offend,
Zeal is most pleasing to the God most high;
And they who have been long enured thereto,
Be able much to suffer, more to do:
Even shame for Christ, which drives the most away,
They can receive with meeknes and with joy:
Here Is the true Christians shield, and Sun, and stay.
Fix fast thy Foot unto the word divine;
Othere, there only does Gods wisdom shine,
One beam whereof is first discovered here,
That which (I think) did never yet appear.
Yours H. VINCENT.

ROME NOT CALLED A CHURCH. ROMANS 1. 7.
YOu who read Paul to the Romans now with us,
Know, Paul's Epistle is inscribed thus.
To the Saints that are at Rome: Why how now Paul?
What was that famous Rome no Church at all?
To the Saints, why not To the Church? why did not thou
Write To the Church at Rome? did not allow
That Rome was then a Church? why other places
Thy Spirit-guided pen thus sweetly graces;
To the Church; To the Church: yea further, even there
Where grosser errors and corruptions were;
As, Corinth, and Galatia, yet do thou
Write Church and Churches: what is the matter now
Why Rome's not so saluted? sure it is,
The blessed Spirit had some aim in this.
Rome was a Church most pure and excellent,
Rome was a Church most highly eminent;
Yet neither in that Salutation there,
Nor (I believe it) any other where
Is Rome once called a Church, or in Gods book,
(He that expects to find it, let him look,)
Does that all-seeing, knowing spirit of thine,
Those two so thwarcing syllables conjoyne
Of Rome and Church, or Church and Rome: no, no;
The Church of Rome the Scriptures do not know.
And sure if I be asked, whether I
Hold Rome a Church of Christ; thus I Will reply:
Where is it said, that Rome or new or old,
Or old or new? where have the Scriptures told
That Rome, or is, or ever was a Church?
Where is it precisely called Church? I search
The Apostles writings, yet I cannot find,
That ever Christ has so revealed his mind.
Unless it be the Church which blessed Peter
Calls Church of Babylon; and no man meeter
(Save John himself) to cry aloud to all,
Come out of Babylon before it fall.
Come out of Rome, for now by strong delusion,
There naught remains but horrible confusion.
In Rome's no room for me, and such as I,
All you who love your souls and bodies fly.
But O all you, who do the Scriptures search,
Show me where else Rome's ever called a Church.
And O ye Popish Priests, take this not ill,
That I stand stiffely to the Letter still.
You, you your selves, even you have taught me this,
For when we say, we may be sure of bliss;
You ask, and think thereby to Nonplus us,
Where our admired Scripture speaks thus;
Thou John, thou Thomas shall attain Salvation:
Thou James, thou Philip shall escape damnation.
And though we say and show it, that the Word
Does what is equivolent thereto afford;
Yet will not this suffice, for still you crave,
Where any of us such a Scrtpture have.
And why may we not then with you so deal,
And say this unfound text to us reveal,
Where Rome is called a Church: and chiefly too,
Because we are commanded so to do
To you, who seek to shake our comfort thus,
Accordingly as you have done to us.
Say then, and show us where the Lord affirms
Pure Rome a Church in strict and even terms.
No, no, I know there is no such place at all,
In Peter, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, James, Paul;
Or in that little book of faithful Jude,
No Letters left our spirits to delude.
But Lord what was thy very mind therein?
Surely thou saw, that the man of sin,
Would there not only (in the time to come)
Rule, reign. and rage, roar rather, even at Rome;
But also (to be thought to hold the truth)
Would have the Church, the Church, still in his mouth
You must believe the Mother Church of Rome,
The Cath'like Church, or else receive your doom
Among the Devils and the damned souls:
The Church, the Church of Rome keeps Christ his rowles.
Thou Lord foreseeing that those croaking frogs
Would count all other, (even thy children) dogs,
Who cannot grant belief unto their lie;
Which under name of Church they magnify.
Would not so much as give a Churches name,
To such as turn their glory into shame.
Thou did foresee, sweet Lord, that all their noise,
Would be the Church, the Church, the Church thus says;
And therefore would not give a Churches name,
Though what was fully equal to the same.
Thou saw, sweet Lord, that they who should sueceed;
Would not thy dear-bought flock with Scriptures feed:
But with their own Traditions and decrees,
Not with pure milk, but poison, dregs and lees.
And yet all this for wholsom'st food must go,
Because the Church, the Church will have it so.
And therefore would not say to the Church of Rome,
Though then thy Gospel there did kindly bloome.
Yea, though thou gav'st that very name to such,
Whose blots were more, whose fame not half so much.
FINIS.

