THE ADVANCEMENT OF MERCHANDISE: OR, CERTAIN PROPOSITIONS For the Improvement of
the Trade of this Commonwealth, humbly presented to the Right Honorable the
Council of State.

AND ALSO, Against the Transporting of GOLD and SILVER.

By THO. VIOLET of London Goldsmith.

SPQA



LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard, Printer to the Council of State. Anno Dom.
1651.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN BRADSHAW LORD PRESIDENT of the COUNCIL of STATE.
My Lord!
WHEN first I attended your Lordship, about preparing of an Act, against the
Transporting of Gold, your Lordship was pleased to take notice of me; and that
you had heard of my Imprisonment in the Tower, you commanded me to use my
uttermost endeavors, to serve the Commonwealth, that so I might give a clear
testimony both to your Lordship and the State, of my good affection to the
present Government; and by that means, the State might be induced to consider
my condition, and that my business might be examined in Parliament, and I have
Justice, by restoring me to my Estate again.

In humble pursuance of your Honor's commands, I did print several Placarts and
Ordinances of France, Holland, and Flanders, concerning the regulating of their
Money, Bullion, and Mints, and breviated the Laws and Proclamations heretofore
made in England against Transporting of Treasure. And made several arguments
upon the whole matter, how highly it did concern this Commonwealth, speedily
to give a stop to the Transporters of Gold and Silver, and several other abuses
practiced upon the Coin and Bullion of this Commonwealth. And I did humbly
present one of the Books to your Honor, and had your Honor's approbation for
the speedy passing of the Act, which your Honor, and the Right Honorable the
Council of State, had recommended to the Parliament; but as yet, through the
industry of some guilty men, this Law, which so highly concern's the safety,
and welfare of the Nation, is not passed the Parliament. And if it were
dispatched, it would restore your Mint, to it is flourishing condition, by
removing all obstructions in the Mint. And then the settling the valuation of
all Coins in Christendom, and the Parr of the Exchange, between us and them, in
any part of Christendom, I would see should be finished, and the mysteries of
Exchange opened, to the high advantage of the Merchants of this Nation, who are
now generally ignorant of this mystery, and are as far to seek of these
Sciences, as two hundred year ago, the passage to the West- Indies, was to
Christendom. The reason is, in England we have none but our own Money run's in
current payment, and our Merchants are generally ignorant of the true value and
fineness of Foreign Coins, and what proportion all Foreign Coins hold between
us and them, and the just weights and fineness all Foreign Coins ought to hold,
and being all weighty according to their just standerd, what they will make
the Merchant to coin them into our Money within the Tower of London; and this
is the Parr I humbly intend, and petition your Honor for the speedy dispatch.
These things are no secrets to the Dutch Merchants, and other
Merchant-Strangers here, and that make's them so out-wit the Merchants of our
Nation, upon the Exchanges of Money to any part of Christendom.

My Lord! I humbly again address my self to your Lordship, with some prime
Observations for Trade, which may highly concern the Commonwealth; and it has
been no small comfort to me, that both your Honor, and many other Honorable
Gentlemen of the Council of State, upon the reading of them in Manuscript, do
approv of what I have don in this particular, and that you will speedily put it
in practice for the good of this Nation.

My Lord! I have obeyed your commands for the putting in an Index to what I
have said, that so you may contract what is by me humbly desired. The whole
drift of what is desired, is the equal enriching of the Nation in general, the
repairing and inhabiting all our Sea-Port-Towns, and Harbors, the bringing in a
Nurserie of rich Merchants into our Land, the increas of Manufacturie, the
increas of Shipping, the setting of all our poor awork, the making England the
Mistress and Empross of the Sea, in being a Bulwark and Protection to her
Friends, by spreading out her arms to give shelter in all weathers, both for
Merchantmen, and Men of War, in all her Havens and Harbors, both to shelter
them from storms, and to furnish them with all manner of Ammunition, Victuals
and Merchandise, for all parts of the world, and to be the Magazin for the
world, for all wealth and Trade. For as the World is Ring, so England is the
Diamond of that Ring; and the wealth, strength, and valor of this Nation, was
never so well known to all our neighbors, as under the government of a
Commonwealth, as it is now settled, and a few years will show to the world.
This I say to be true, so visibly, that the poorest Commoner in this Nation,
will find there is as much difference between the situation of England and
Holland to bring and contract the Trade of the world, as there is in
proportion, difference between an ounce Troie, and a pound weight Troie; for
they in Holland, have not six points of the Compass, to have wind to go in and
out, and all dangerous Seas, and in some of them, as at the Texel, forty sail
of ships are cast away in a year. But behold, England hang's in the Sea, like
an Oriental Pearl at a fair Lady's ear, no wind can blow at any point of the
Compass, but ships may both go in and com out of her Harbors. And I believ, a
Free Trade will treble the Importation, and Exportation of goods into all the
Seaports of this Nation, besides the emploiment of the shipping of the Nation.
And as we are a shield and protection to our friends, by putting in execution
these Observations, you will reduce the rebellious Seamen of our own Nation,
have an account of their wives and children, in what service they are, and
where against the State; and by this means, if not out of obedience and love to
the present Government, yet out of an affection to their wives and children,
and to save their estates, you shall have them return to their obedience; for
when their wives are sequestered in England, it will be a greater Lodestone,
then your Men of War you send out, to reduce them, and this business require's
a diligent and able man, to give the State an Account from time to time, and if
it be effectually followed, will bring home most of our Seamen to their
obedience, a business of the highest consequence both to reduce them, with the
least change of blood and money.

Then the examination of the carriage of several Companies, for the private
enriching of a few, is humbly presented to the Council of State, and the
Council for Trade, that so the abuses for the times past, may be found out and
punished, and such Rules and Regulations for the future, may be made as shall
be most conducing to the benefit of the Commonwealth in general, without any
private regard to private persons. My Lord! this argument which I have
undertaken, concern's the corrupt interest of many men, who will storm to see
these things laid open to the world, and I shall be sure to be stung with the
venom of some of their tongues; Therefore I am an humble suitor to your Honor
and the Council of State, for your Honor's protection and countenance of these
my weak endevors for the service of this Nation, which noble favor shall for
ever oblige me to pray for your Honor's happiness and prosperity. God
continue your Honor in all prosperity in this world, and in the world to com;
and this shall be the prayer of

Your Honor's humble and obliged Servant THO. VIOLET.

TO THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL OF TRADE, This Book with my most humble service.
Honorable Gentlemen!
THese Papers are most of them recommended to your care by order of the Council
of State, to take them into your consideration. Indeed, many of them were drawn
by me about five years ago in the Tower, before I ever thought of a Council of
Trade. But seeing it is the hap of these unpolished Papers to be recommended
to your care, I am very glad of it, and most humbly give the Council of State
thanks for recommending them to your judicious examination; making no question
of their sowing in a fertile ground, seeing some of these Propositions are
already com to the perfections of Acts of Parliament. May it pleas your Honors,
I am no other then the daylaboring man; I have brought you Marble from the
Mine, felled you Trees, and brought them to you, and at your feet lay them
all, to be hewn and squared by your judicious and profound Wisdoms; You are
the Master-workmen, who are now to take your Instruments to hew and square them
for the building of the trade of this Commonwealth. And I shall presume to
wait on you those days you sit, to see how your Building goe's forward; and
when that you give a dispatch of the Materials in these Propositions, it shall
not repent me of what I have don. And I shall with all humility and
cheerfulness furnish you with some other Propositions for the service of this
Commonwealth. To so great and grave Judgments, I know multiplicitie of words
need not; the great God of Heaven and Earth be in the midst of your Counsels,
and be Counselor to you all, and put that into your hearts, that you may be
enabled for so great a work, as the State has laid on you, and to be careful
of the maintenance of the Trade that concern's the poor of this Nation in
general, that they may have a livelihood as well as the rich. And thus much in
all humility, let me tell you, if ever any men in this Nation had need to
make use of Christ's rule, of being as innocent as Doves and as wise as
Serpents, it is your Honors in this emploiment you have for regulating of
Trade. The infinite subtilties, frauds and abuses in several Trades, are so
many, that the hundredth part of the cheats used to get money, cannot be
imagined by any other persons but your selves, that daily hear the abuses
practiced on many Manufactures made in this Nation. And some men by these
cheats, have gotten wealth and dignity; for in London formerly, many times
they chose Aldermen most an end for their wealth, not for their wit or
honesty, and that has made such a hole in the Chamber of London's Treasure,
and the poor Orphans portions, when such Kites as got their Estates indirectly
came to be Magistrates. Other Trades there are, whose poverty being pestered
with more multitudes in the Trade then it will bear, make's many people in
several Trades, fall a making the Manufacture indirectly, falsely, and slightly,
to the great abuse of the Nation, and all the wearers; and this more
particularly I know is don, in the making of Gold and Silver-Thread, as was
justified to your Honors by hundreds of the women-spinners in London, upon
their Petition against the Wheel-spinners, and their humble desires to your
Honors for a Regulation for the future: So that what between the covetousness
of the rich, and the necessity of the poor, all the abuses in Trade is
committed; and these weeds will every day increas in the Garden of this
Commonwealth, if the Parliament make not strict and sharp Laws against these
offenses, and offenders, that make the Manufactures of the Nation slight and
base. And not only to make Laws, but appoint such persons as shall see those
Laws put in execution, that Justice be don; and these men would be the
pruning knives to rectify the Garden of Trade: and till it be don, the abuses
in Trade and Manufacture will not be prevented. I have humbly and plainly told
you what I think is to be don for the best improvement of the Trade of this
Nation, and leav what I have said to your Honor's grave consideration; and
shall ever pray for the prosperity of your Honors:

Signed By your Honor's humble Servant THO. VIOLET.

TO MY HONORED FRIENDS, the Merchants, Natives of this Nation of England, and
the Merchant-Strangers living and inhabiting in any part of the Dominions of
the Commonwealth of England.
GENTLEMEN!
MAny of these Papers were drawn by me in my solitude in the Tower, and I
never intended them for public view, but for my private use; afterward
Providence ordering it so, I was commanded by some of the Council of State to
give them my attendance and humble advice about removing the obstruction of the
Mint, and to attend some honorable Gentlemen, who were to draw a table of the
just value of all the Coins in Christendom, and to settle their true values
according to the Standard of the Mint in the Tower of London, and what those
Coins will make in our Mint being full weight; a great part of that work is
already don, and a model drawn for the taking away the obstructions of the Mint
in the Tower of London, and when the Parliament and Council of State pleas to
command, it will be perfectly finished; having this opportunity with somof
the Council of State, I was commanded by some of them to draw them such
Observations concerning Trade, as I did conceiv might be for the benefit of
the Commonwealth, the increas of Trade, and the increas of Shipping. And
though I knew my own insufficiency for so weighty a business, and that there
were many hundred in London more able to do this then my self; yet considering
that now God had put into my hands an opportunity that I might present my self
to the Council of State, and to the Nation in general, that I was not such a
man as some maliciously had charged me to be, which was, that I was a
Malignant, and one disaffected to the present Government, as it is now
settled, without King and Lords. I say, to give a clear testimony of the
falsness of that malicious charge against me, I was willing to obey the
commands of some of the Council of State, and did with all humility present to
my Lord President and some of the Council of State, most of these Propositions,
for their private use, and they were honorably pleased to accept of my
endeavors, and gave me their approbation of them, as a great service offered
by me to the Commonwealth, wherein I did deserv all encouragement, and that
the State would see to put many of them in execution; which noble favor of
theirs, far beyond my imagination and desert, has everlastingly obliged me to
their service, to study always to advance the interest and prosperity of the
present Government of this Commonwealth, as it is now settled, without King or
Lords, to the uttermost of my power, and to the last drop of blood I have,
against any person or persons whomsoever, that endeavor the damage or
undermining of the present Government.

Now my request is to all the worthy Merchants of this Nation, that some of
them would be pleased to take this argument into their hands, and what I have
said undigestedly, and without a method, they with a more learned pen would
perfect for the service of the Nation in general. Most of these Papers are
transmitted down to the Honorable Council of Trade, by an order of the Council
of State, and referred to their judicious consideration. And the true reason of
my printing of them is, that some more learned pen might finish what I have
roughly begun; and whosoever does it, would do a great service to the
Commonwealth. And for the Merchant-strangers that live and inhabit in any part
of this Nation, my request to them all is, That they would consider of what I
have here presented in their behalfs, and that they would all contribute their
advice and reasons for the perfecting of what is by me humbly propounded, and
so to carry themselves in all their actions, that no just exceptions may be
laid to their charge of being prejudicial Instruments either to the present
Government, or that any of their dealings should be disadvantageous to the
prosperity and commerce of this Nation; but that they in humble requital of
the Parlament's Protection, which they all enjoie equally with the Natives of
this Nation, would be pleased to study all ways and means for the setting of
such Manufactures here, as they know is made beyond Seas, for employing our
shipping, for contributing their humble advice in repairing our Havens and
Harbors, for dreining of our Lands, for employing of our poor, for setting up
the Fishing Trade, for making our Sea-Port-Towns their storehouses of Corn,
and for laying a foundation of bringing in their rich commodities from all
parts of the world into our Ports and Harbors of England, we having far better
and securer Harbors then our Neighbors. And for their enabling them to do this,
that they would humbly propound to the Parliament and Council of Trade, the best
means and ways they conceiv all these things may don; whereof one of the
principal ways is, to have free Ports in this Nation, to Import and Transport
all Foreign goods Custom-free, that is not spent in this Nation; and for their
settling of a bank in London, and settling of a course of Bills of Exchange in
several Sea-Port-Towns of this Nation; and for the settling of a Court of
Merchants in London, to determine all differences amongst Merchants. If they
would study these things, and all others they know, which would conduce to the
profit and honor of this Commonwealth, and would show themselves openly that
they are public spirited men, they would Petition the Parliament, and Council
of Trade, in these particulars; and when they are required by those in
Authority, would contribute their best reasons and advices clearly, without any
by-ends, justly, and according to the great experience many of them have by
their knowledge of business of trade in other Countries. This would be a great
service to the Nation in general, and it is no more then I think is their duty
to do, and I humbly conceiv the State exspect's from them, they should do.

And that all Merchants would present unto the State, what new Customs and
Imposts have been laid on the English Nation in Foreign parts, more then was
formerly laid; that so, if our Merchants cannot procure a redress themselves
beyond seas, the State; upon the Merchant's Petition, might by their Letters or
other ways, to Foreign States, take notice of it, and see our Merchants to
have right; and this is usual in Holland, upon the least obstruction of trade,
or intrenching upon the Merchants; the States General make it matter of state,
and either by force or by treaty, remove the obstruction, as all men know,
that are acquainted with their proceedings between the King of Denmark and
them, for Customs in the Sound, and the Portingals and them in the East and
West Indies, and in their other transactions with other Princes and States;
their principal care is, to take off the obstructions of Trade, I pray God all
just and fair-dealing Merchants with us, may have the like and greater
countenance and protection from the State, then their Merchants have in
Holland. And whereas the Merchant-strangers in London, have exacted on them
several fees more then is conceived to be by Law, that these
Merchant-strangers would petition the State, that the City of London be
required to bring in forthwith the tables of fees for Package, Scavage, and all
other duties they can by Law justly and anciently demand of the
Merchant-strangers. And that a certain rule may be set up up in Printed tables
in the Custom-Houses, what fees shall be taken for the future. And that such
Officers that have formerly exacted more money of the Merchants, then their
just fees, may be compelled to restore the money back to the Merchants. And if
the State reliev Merchantstrangers here, it will be a great Lodestone to
other States and Nations to do all right to our Merchants beyond Seas.

But for those men, either English or strangers, (I will not honor them with
the name of Merchants) that are Transporters of Wool, Fuller's Earth, Horses,
Gold and Silver, or any other prohibited goods, to the weakening and
impoverishing of this Nation; and all such as have culled and melted down the
heavy Money of this Nation into Ingots, and sold it to such as have
Transported it, or to such as have made Gold and silver Wier, and silver
Thread, and such as have couzened the Commonwealth by buying up the light and
clipped English silver Coin, and vented it again to Graziers or public
Cashiers, or any other persons, to the great deceit and damage of the
Commonwealth; I shall leav them all to the Law, with this memento to them,
That as Justice is leaden-footed, yet she has iron hands; and though slow,
yet she is sure, and all ages have held men that do these things, as Moths and
Cankers in a Commonwealth.

But for your just Merchant, hec is the Beauty and Ornament of the
Commonwealth, a great pillar in any Nation where they remain; and that State
or Commonwealth that does not love and protect them, must at long running
bring themselves to poverty. For me to speak of the worth and dignity of
fair-dealing-Merchants in all ages, is to hold a Candle to the Sun; only my
prayer to God shall be, that their numbers may be increased in this Nation,
and all encouragement given them by the State, that they may have good Convoie
to guard their ships, both outward and inwards, from Pirates and Rovers; and if
it be the chance of any Merchantmen to meet with Pirates, that God would
strengthen their seamen, and give them valiant and loial hearts to fight for
their Country, and their Merchant's ships and goods; and after their
deliverance from Pirates, God's protection go along with them all, and bring
them every one to his desired Port; and at the end of our days, bring us all
to the blessed Harbor of the Kingdom of Heaven; and this shall be the prayer of

Your assured Friend to serve you THO. VIOLET.

THE ADVANCEMENT OF MERCHANDISE.
To the Right Honorable the Council of State, viz. John Bradshaw, Lord
President; Earl of Denbigh; Earl of Salisbury, Lord Howard, Thomas Lord Gray of
Groby, Lord Chapter Justice Roll, Lord Chapter Justice St John, Lord Chapter Baron Wild,
Thomas Lord Fairfax, Lord General Cromwell, Philip Lord Lisle, Sir Henry
Mildmay, Sir William Armyne, Sir William Constable, Sir Peter Wentworth, Sir
Gilbert Pickering, Sir William Masham, Sir Arthur Hesilrige, Sir James
Harrington, Sir Henry Vane Jun. ^t Genesis Ludlow, Lo. Comr Whitelock, Lo. Comr
Lisle, Colonel Stapley, Colonel Morley, Colonel Purefoy, Colonel Jones, Isac
Pennington Ald. Henry Martin Esquire. Philip Skippon Esquire. Will. Heveningham Esquire.
Rob. Wallop Esquire. Jo Hutchinson Esquire. Denis Bond Esquire. Valentine Wanton Esquire. Tho
Scot Esquire. Cornel. Holland Esquire. Tho. Chaloner, Esquire. Mr Robinson, Mr Gourdon,
Thomas Violet a true Lover of his Country most humbly present's these
following PROPOSITIONS.
SEveral Reasons for the admitting all Merchants to have equal privileges, so
far as agrees with the Pattern and Policy of Amsterdam, Legorn, and Genoa,
who have gotten themselves to the hight and greatness of trade; And therefore
hold in all Commonwealths that are seated, (as by the blessing of God this is
one) in the midst of the Seas, being adorned and beautified with more safe and
fair Harbors for shipping, then any of our Neighbors whatsoever.

And there ought to be an especial eye had upon the paths and steps of our
neighbors, to see by what ways and means they have got to this greatness of
Trade, and to keep a good observation of these times; and to give all
encouragement to the Dutch and Forain Nations to com and plant in our Ports and
Harbors; They having many of them an earnest desire not to be so penned up as
they are, and therefore many Families are lately removed to Breme, and
Hambrough, out of Amsterdam.

As was presented to the Council of Trade, by a worthy Member of the Council of
State, with his Recommendations to the Council of Trade, to take all
Informaltions concerning free Ports, or Landing places for Forain commodities
Imported, without paying of Custom if again exported, and in what manner the
same is best to be effected; in pursuance whereof, and for the advance of
Trade, I have, according to directions of some of the Council of State, treated
with the principal Merchants in this City; and I do humbly present these few
Heads unto your Honors consideration, for the benefit of Trade, and the Nation
in General.

1. That Genoa, Legorn and Amsterdam, have raised their greatness only by
giving Merchants Strangers, equal privileges with their Natives, and in levying
Imal duties upon goods;

And if not spent in their Ports, freely to export them to any part of the
world, by which means they have been made the Warehouses and Shops for all the
Merchandises in the world.

2. By the same means also they grow in Amsterdam mighty in Shipping and
Seamen; for they know the benefit that only the bringing of goods thither,
though never spent in the Country, make's them; for there is not the thousand
part of the goods spent in Amsterdam that is brought thither, but shipped again
all over the world.

And they have this advantage, that all the Commodities of the world are there
to be had, which is a benefit to them that spend the Commodities, to have the
Market at their own doors, for they can have it cheaper, then to go abroad for
it.

And the wealth that is gotten by Shipping, Ware-housroom, and imploiment of
thousands of laboring people, in lading and unlading Merchandise, is and has
been one of the fairest flowers in the Garland of Amsterdam, Genoa, and Legorn.

And by the blessing of God, and the Parlaments countenance of such Merchants
and others, that shall put to their helping hands, and their industries, the
Seaports of this Nation will participate in a large proportion with them, and
put the inhabitants of our Seaports in a flourishing condition; we may see it
by experience when our Composition Trade was at Dover, what that Town made the
State a year for half Customs, and how the rents of houses were raised, how all
the Townsmen grew rich, and Merchants set the poor awork; and also the great
imploiment of our Shipping and Navigation, and no Town in England lived more
happily, (make it but a free Port, you will restore it again to its former
condition) whereas now their poor do so infinitely increas on them, that many
perish for want of means, and all the houses in the Town not worth the third
penny rent they were ten years ago; for at the time the Customs made fifty
thousand pounds every year, now not four thousand pound per annum.

3. I pray your Honors observe where great Customs are laid, there, either in
Kingdom or Commonwealth, the Trade decays, and at last fal's to nothing;
it is true they may be present benefits, and have been made use of by evil
Counselors, both in this Age and formerly, both in this Nation and others; But
I pray observe those remedies have ever been wors then the diseases, and in some
places it has cost some of the Inventors, their lives, others, their estates,
and all of them, at long running, repentance; and those Kingdoms, Nations, or
Commonwealths, that have soonest recovered out of them, have been the easiest
cure of their distempers and commotions.

Whereas in such Kingdoms, Nations, or Commonwealths, where such oppressions
have long continued, when the remedy com's to be workt and wrought, it work's
so violently as it break's all the old frame of Government in pieces, or else
weaken's it in that manner that it corn's not to its first strength again in
some Ages; and this I humbly conceiv is like shortly to be the fate of a great
Kingdom, I mean France; The inventions for gathering money there being so many
that the common people their life is bitter to them, and in all likelihood will
end in the ruin of their Taskmasters: for the fury of an oppressed people,
and a breach of an enraged sea is one and the same.

4. All men know Spain was the Fountain of Gold and Silver, while Customs were
easy, the Fleets returning every year with fifteen, and sixteen Millions
registered, and all the rich commodities brought out of the Indies, landed in
Spain, when there was a small Custom. Afterward by ill counsel, the Custom of
Silver and Commodities was raised from two, and three in the hundred, to five,
six, eight, ten, twelv, fifteen per cent. and more for commodities, which the
Merchants seeing, and finding no remedy, grew discontent; and casting about
which way to avoid this duty, agreed that Ships should lie out beyond the Bay
of Saint Lucar, Cales, and other Roads, when the West India Ships came home;
and there take out their Silver and rich Commodities, and ship it for other
parts of the world, before it paid one penny Custom, or touched the Spanish
shore. Behold what the State got by this, they might have had all the returns
landed in the Kingdom of Spain, had they been content with moderate Customs.

And not being content with it, the greatest of what com's from the East and
West Indies, is sent away as aforesaid; and Spain, that is, according to a
wel-regulated Trade, the Fountain of Gold and Silver, is filled only with
black money, copper money, going at ten times the true value, it it will make
in any part of Christendom; The Merchants Cash-houses being more like Braziers
shops, then banks of Treasure, and the proverb is fulfilled, which says, who
goe's wors shod then the shoo-maker's wife. So in Spain that should abound in
silver, there is nothing stirring in payment there, within two months after the
Fleet com's in from the West Indies, but black money. And now the mischief is
past cure, Forain Nations having filled them with such quantities of copper
money, that it cannot be called in; I pray God that the State would keep an
eye of our Coins, and keep that little we have now left in the Nation, and
call the transporters of Gold and Silver to a strict account, or else this
Nation will find the inconveniencie when it is too late.

5. If you will have Trade flourish, give the same encouragements to Merchants
Strangers here, as they have in Amsterdam, and other parts of Christendom; they
have found that course to be thriving to them for many years, and themselves and
the strangers that have planted amongst them to be both equally advantaged by
it. And in France, Spain, Legorn, Genoa, Poland, and many other places, where
all strangers of what Nation soever, pay no more Custom then the Natives
themselves; and this business had not been now to do, had it not been for the
old Farmors in the Custom-Hous. About fourteen years ago I was employed by the
late King to have settled it, (when the business of silver to be brought up to
be coined from Dover, was concluded of) But I found my Lord Cottington, and
the old Farmors against free Ports, out of an opinion that Cottington ever had
to be avers against any model of the Dutch, it savoring of a Commonwealth too
much, and not being suitable to his designs, which was always for Monarchy,
and the Spanish greatness. The old Farmors I do verily believ were not against
it out of any aversness, or envy to the wealth of this Nation's increas by a
free Trade, but for some other reasons, and some as I am confident were that upon
letting in of a free Trade, you would draw a great many Merchants Strangers in
here, which are very prying and subtle men, men acquainted with managing the
Excise and Customs in Holland, and they would presently discover that which
they (the Farmors) above all other things labored to keep as a secret, which
was the excessive gain every one of them made by the Farm. Secondly, that upon
new alteration in the model of the Farm, there might com new undertakers, and
so they might be disappointed of their money that they had advanced, which
after upon another occasion fell out heavily upon them.

6. But sure I am, diverse of the best Merchants in London, and true Lovers of
this Nation, have tole me, and will justify it to be true, had I effected it
to make free Ports all over the Nation fourteen years ago, the Common wealth
had got Millions of money by it before this time; then you would have had many
score of rich Merchants up and down the Ports of this Nation, Which would have
managed trade, not as it has been: (the miscarriage, I fear me, has in part
been willingly, and require's a strict examination) But if you had made Trade
free, they would have kept stout Men of War at Sea, gone with Convoies, being
readier to offend, then to take affronts at Sea; which would have been highly
for the honor of the Nation, whose sad losses most coming by disorder, and the
covetousness of some Merchants, might have been all avoided, the losses,
amounting within this twenty months to more then would have kept a Convoie
sufficient to defend all the Trade of this Nation for thirty years. If it be
examined, I do verily believ, it is not the French that take these ships, but
our own Seamen, that serv's them, and go's in by connivance.

7. I do humbly desire that an inquiry may be made after it by the Trinity
House, and by all other ways what English Seamen have been taken by the French
in the ships lately taken within these twenty months, and where they now
remain, and what Families they have, in or about LONDON, or other places in
England, and how they live, and that their wives give an account where their
husbands are, and in what service. I am of an opinion you will find a Pad in
the straw, and that you are robbed by your own Seamen; and if it be so, I
humbly present unto you, that all ways and means be found out for the
discovery of the truth, and strict punishment be inflicted on all such
Mariners that shall serve in any Forain Men of War, and their wives and
families to be sequestered, their goods confiscated as Rebels and Traitors to
this Nation. For such ships as the French take, are taken most by English
Mariners, and are richly laden, with Merchandise in the Straits; one of them
is worth one hundred of their French Coasters, or Fishermen, and there is
never a ship of the Straits-men, but with the Lading will produce fifteen Men
of War; for the French lay almost all out in shipping, that the return make's
of their prizes: and by this rule I humbly desire you to consider what their
Increas is, and if some speedy order be not taken, we shall not be able to
put a ship to sea, but 'twill be snapped in the Straits, being the best,
richest, and strongest Merchant's ships, we have that Trade.

I pray God the neglecting it so long, do not cost the Merchants and this
Nation dear.

8. If you will make the Trade of this Nation flourish, I humbly conceiv you
must make all Ports, where there are now Customs paid, to be free Ports, for
some commodities; as Wine, Fish, Salt, Corn, Wainscot, Clap-boards, Masts,
Furs, Fur-deals, and Timber of all sorts, Iron, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar,
Cordage, Hops, Madder, and all other commodities of great bulk, to be free to
bring into any Port.

And if not spent, to have License to transport them back, paying only such
small acknowledgments as they do in Amsterdam. But for fine goods, as Silks
wrought or unwrought, Gold and Silver Thread, Bag-cloth, Lawns, Spices, and
Drugs of all sorts, and all other fine goods, none to be laid upon the shore,
or imported, till a true account were given to the Chief Officer of the Port,
and good security given, not to defraud the State either of the Customs or
Excise, if spent in this Nation. And if any were found, either Merchants, or
others, stealing Custom or Excise, the same punishment and penalties should be
inflicted upon the offender as in Holland; for it is but equal, that, if the
Merchant desire's the same privileges they have there, the offender should be
punished by the same Laws they have; therefore for such as deceiv the State,
such a strict course would save much in managing the business both of Excise and
Customs.

For I believ here are many slight fellows, put in inferior offices, which are
corrupted; and when the Constable is a thief, the Felon will hardly be found;
For as soon as a poor fellow gett's into an office in the Excise or Customs,
though his fee be small, only to keep life and soul, yet you shall have many
of them spend yearly ten times their salarie, which must be don out of their
gains, in an indirect way. I am confident the Merchant or Tradesman will not
give such fellows twelv pence, but they will deceiv the State of twenty
shillings. Therefore the same rule as is in Amsterdam for managing the Excise
and Customs, or some stricter way then is at present, would be highly for the
advantage of the State, in point of profit; for the penalty is there so great,
that no man will steal the duties; and it is sit to be so here, or else you
will make only honest men to pay, which make conscience: And others, that
will steal the duties, the penalties are so little, it encourages them to
steal the Excise and Customs.

9. I humbly conceiv Order and Government in Trade is to be looked after,
especially in these times, when the French take our ships so fast, that every
week almost bring's us one of Job's Messengers; And it is more then time strong
Convoies went with our ships, and they not to com and go single, but in Fleets,
which cannot be don but by a rule, and must be under a government. The Dutch
(I have it from good hands) have made Proclamation, that none of their ships go
into the Straits, France, or other parts without Convoie. Such a government as
this, it is for the honor and safety of the Nation. I heartily commend, and
pray for, and would have all men put to their helping hand. But there are
governments which are for the private advantage of a few men, procuring
prohibition of Importation of several commodities but only by particular men,
and exportation of our Native commodities, but only by particular men, and
only for some Ports, and at some seasons of the year; I shall instance in some
particulars for all the rest, though there be many score more.

1. The Green land Company has a power that no Dutch nor no others, shall
bring in Green-land Oil, which is a commodity of great use in this Nation, and
if the Natives may have a free Market, they might be served some years twenty
and thirty in the hundred cheaper, then they are forced to pay the Green-land
Company; And this is for the benefit of a few, to the damage of the general.

2. Currants is a commodity bought up all with ready money, in Zant, and as
Capt. Roberts says, only vented in England, and that so greedily coveted by
this Nation, that the Natives thought we made some dying stuff with them, and
could not devour them; sure I am, our Cloth is too good a commodity to give
them for such ware. But for our Merchants, when they have money for their
return of our Cloth, to invest it again in Currants, and in such quantities as
will appear by the Custom-Books every year in this Nation; I shall humbly leav
it to your Honors, to consider of it, and that you would be pleased to call
for the Propositions and Petitions of those Merchants, that the beginning of
this Parliament procured an Act for the prohibiting the Importation of Currants;
And that you would consider of this branch of Trade seriously, whether it be
fit so much ready money which else would be returned into this Nation, should
be spent in Cakes and Puddings, whereas in Spain, France, or any other
Country where they grow, they eat none, and we spend ten times more then all
the world besides.

But when these Currants are here, then the Merchants get a Prohibition that
none but the Turkey Company shall Import Currants, and though Foreign Nations
would sell them thirty in the hundred cheaper then the Merchants sell them
here, none must be brought into the Nation: So that by this Trade we give
money for little better then dirt; it being a vanity, the Nation may very
well subsist without, and the Natives, if they will spend them, might have the
commodity upon a free Trade thirty in the hundred cheaper then they have paid
for many years.

3. Cloth is the staff of England's Trade, but of late, through the sad
distractions of these wars, and by the covetousness of some people, both many
workmen have unkindly left us, and by many subtle ways and means, stolen away
great quantities of unwrought Wool, and Fuller's Earth, and so have laid the
foundation of a Trade in Foreign parts. But as I am credibly informed, this was
not the ground of setting up Cloth in Holland, and Germany, but it did arise
by other means, which was the Merchant-Adventurers. They kept their staple but
in two places, Hambrough and Roterdam, and there they tied men to such rules
for show-daies, and other orders, by forcing all people to com some two or three
hundred miles to a Market, whereby the commodities in their Merchants coming
down to buie them, and carriage up into the Country was raised, and some
difference happened between the English, and the Merchants Natives, in several
particulars.

The great taxes laid here upon Cloth, to keep up their Company by bribes, and
pay the vast sums given in that behalf, the Formal way of shipping but
twice or thrice in the year, all which loaded and clogged the Cloth with such a
price at the Market, that Foreign Nations would no longer be kept under these
formal rules.

And knowing the advantage would com unto them, by getting the making of
Woollen Cloth, labored by all means to attain to it, which they have don. But
withal they gave our Clothiers all encouragement, and privileges, and put them
upon such wages, as they live better there then here.

10. We must match the Dutch at their own weapons, and give them as great
privileges, as they have given to our Clothiers in Holland; it will invite them
hither, for our Harbors are better then theirs, and they are straightened for want
of room, and by this way you will make England truly the Empress of the Sea,
when every Sea-Port-Town will be an Amsterdam. I am informed, by the ablest
and best Merchants, and I do believ them, that from Dover to Plymouth, there
are ten Sea-Port-Towns, every one of them lying more commodious for to make
the Mart, and Bank for the world then Amsterdam; And besides, Northward,
Harwich, Woodbridge, Alburie, Sold, Lastof, Yarmouth, an excellent Haven, and
safe Rode; Blackney, Wels, Linn, Boston, Hull, New Castle, and many others,
which by their situation there is no wind shall blow but ships shall go in and
out, whereas but few winds will bring you in and out at Amsterdam, especially
in the Winter, besides the danger of the Harbor of Texel. In Winter, sometimes
in one year forty Sail of ships and more cast away, to the great damage of the
Merchants, which would be of a safer Harbor, if they can have free Trade, as
they have at home.

If you embrace this motion, and make your Ports free, all the wealth that is
brought from the East Kingdoms, and Hans-Towns, in Germany to Amsterdam, and
laid up in the Summer, there for Markets, will be brought to our English
Harbors, and our English shipping be employed in carrying East-Countrie Corn,
Flax, Hemp, Timber, and all manner of Provision for Spain, and all other parts
of the world, and make their returns in good pieces of Eight, then land them at
the first Seaport, and away to Sea; this is a sure way to set the Mint a
going, to emploie all our shipping, and return us to our former Trade.

And if you will let every man com in to Trade, according to their skill and
abilities, that will, and let the rule be equal to all people in Trade, let no
man have a greater privilege then another; If this course be followed, you
would sell two Clothes for one that is now sold, you will not have Wool enough
in the Nation to make the Manufacture; and then you may Ingross the Spanish and
Irish Wool into your own hands, and have it Manufactured here, which would
give a comfortable emploiment, to the greatest part of the poor of England.
For, I most humbly pray you observe, how the poor Clothier, he cannot make and
vent that quantity of all sorts of Cloth, and other Woollen commodities, nor
also cannot emploie thousands of poor people, which otherwise they may do, if
it were permitted for all Nations freely to buie of them. For the Turkey
Company, the Merchant. Adventurers, the Fast-Land Company, the Russia
Company, and of late years, the French Company,

These only do and may buie, and that is only when shipping is appointed by
their Corporation: by which means the Clothiers Cloth lie's by the walls, and
the poor want's emploiment, and Cloth must be sold, when, and at what rates,
and time, the said Merchants pleas to give, which occasions the Clothier's for
want of quick sale, that they make not yearly the quantities of Cloth which
otherwise they would do, and the poor perish for want of work; and this by
reason of the said Merchant's Corporation, and Prohibition of other men, which
if free leav and liberty were given to all men, to buie and transport Cloth,
would occasion the imploiment of many thousand poor people, and the vent of a
far greater quantity of Woollen commodities then now is, which would be a
great benefit to this Nation, in giving a comfortable livelihood to all the
poor, and advance the Customs and Revenues of the Commonwealth.

11. I humbly desire your Honors, that you speedily would take into your
consideration, the Provision for Fish for all the year, this being the season
of the year for doing of it; and that you would have some treaty with the
Fishmongers speedily about it, and that an Act may be presented to the House
about it, that so the whole Nation may take notice of it, and all Merchants,
and Fishermen make their provision accordingly for the Market; for heretofore
this has only been spoken of about that time, which was usually called Lent,
when there was not provision to furnish the City for a week; and if you would
put a restraint, for some time, for the killing of Lambs and Sheep, by God's
blessing we might in a short time, recover a stock of Wool, and this Nation
flourish with as many golden Fleeces, as ever it did, the Clothier, and
thousands of other people, having no other subsistence, then what springs from
this Mine. And if by a Law you bring in Wednesdaies, Fridaies, and Saturdaies
for Fish-daies, and see to the strict execution, you would give encouragement
to Fishermen and Mariners, and you will breed up a Nurserie of Seamen, which
must be our surest strength under God. And when once the Nation has tasted of
the wealth of the Fishing Trade, they will be as much in love with it, as the
Hollanders; we have greatly the advantage of them, we have the Fry along the
Northern and Western Coast, at our own doors, whereas others must make a Voyage
to look them out, and that costs charges and time.

12. That you would take into consideration to have the Parliament send some
eminent Merchant, to treat in Spain with the Merchants at Cales, and Saint
Lucar, about sending their Silver and Commodities from the Indies or Spain, to
Plymouth, or any other part of this Nation, and that there may be always a
good Convoie for their safety by Land or Sea for that purpose; and that you
would be pleased to advise with Mr Antonio Ferdinando, Mr Derrac Host, Mr
Stanier, Mr Vandeput, Mr Kilvert, Mr Vincent Lucas, Mr Vincent Delabar, and
such others as you shall think fit, to inform you about this business, and what
they desire to have don in it; the Nation found the benefit of the last Treaty
for the Composition Trade at Dover, it brought in to be coined in the Tower,
in Gold and Silver, from 1630 to 1647 above fifteen Millions of money, which by
the covetousness of some men, has been almost all transported, and the Town of
Dover paid the State for all that time above forty thousand pounds a year
Custom.

13. That the Parliament would be pleased to make an Act, to declare that all
Merchants Strangers, or other, that bring in Silver or Gold into the Mint, it
shall be justly (according to the Standard) delivered them back again; and
that the Master Warden, and Controller for the time being, make due payment
thereof, as has been formerly accustomed; and that no attachment;
sequestration, nor other pretense whatsoever, shall cause a stop to be made
upon any Gold or Silver brought into the Mint, for, or by reason of any
Malignancie, or Delinquencie whatsoever, by any person, so having Treasure in
the Mint: But that the Warden, Master, and Controller, for the time being,
shall make speedy payment, as heretofore has been accustomed to the party
that brought it to the Mint, or his assigns; notwithstanding any Warrant or
Command, the Act making all such to be void, if any should presume to do it.
This is desired by some Merchants, that know the Spaniard will not trust his
Treasure to be liable to Imbargoes, for the Delinquencie of his Factor, if it
should so chance that he be charged to be a Malignant.

If you pass this Act, and give the Merchants good Convoie, you will have your
Mint go again, and you will get the Fishing Trade, you will have the Staples
for Corn, Flax, Hemp, Timber, Iron, Salt, Wines, and all other commodities of
the East and West Indies, brought into your Harbors; and by a free Trade, this
Nation will never have a dearth of Corn; for it would be grainar'd up in every
Sea-Port-Town, for a Market, as it does in Amsterdam, that we should ever be
first served, and at home, and at our own doors: whereas there has been these
last three years, transported many hundred thousand pounds for Corn, bought up
at high prices beyond Seas.

14. That you would be pleased to take into your consideration, the Customs of
our English Cloth, and Woollen Manufacturies, of all sorts, and so lessen the
Customs and duties, that we may be able to undersel, and beat out all those
that have set up our Manufacture beyond Seas; And that you would procure an Act
to make Transportation of Wool, and Fuller's Earth, Felony; and in
consideration of what you abate of Manufacturies of England, that you may, if
you pleas, raise upon such superfluous commodities in your Customs and Excise;
as shall be Imported from beyond the Seas of Foreign commodities, to the value
of what you abate of Native commodities, and this was the constant practice of
the great and wise Lord Treasurer, Burly and his son, as I have seen by
several Manuscripts.

15. I humbly present, that all encouragement, and little duties be laid upon
Raw Silk, of all sorts, Imported into this Nation, Flax, Goat's hair, Cotton,
Wool, Grogran Yarn; and that such as will set up Looms, or any other Engines,
may receiv all encouragement; and if they be strangers, that they may be
Ordered to take our English poor, to teach them their Manufacturies; By which
means, in a small time, you will bring a rich Manufacture into the Nation, and
not only be able to furnish your selves, with all such wrought Silks, of all
sorts, as you spend in this Nation, but be able to furnish Neighbor Countries,
as Germany, Flanders, Holland, and other Foreign parts, which have not yet
this Manufacturie.

If you pleas to cause them to be transported with little duties, the poor will
find a great advantage by it, (thousands being set on work in this
Manufacturie) and the State get by it; for if the Merchant that bring's here
raw or throne Silk, does transport it within a twelvmoneth, the State does
repaie them back one half of their Custom; and when that Silk is Transported
and Manufactured beyond the Seas, most commonly those Silks are brought back
wrought, and the Custom and Excise stolen, for it is most easy to steal the
Custom of Silks wrought, by reason of the little bulk: But a Bail of raw Silk,
can hardly be stolen, by reason of the bulk, and by this means, the State is
deceived of their due; for if the said Silk were employed and Manufactured
here, all the Custom would remain, and the Fxcise would be duly paid, and it
will be undertaken to make here as good commodities of all sorts of wearing
Silks, and better and truer then beyond Seas; for there com's much falls black
into this Country, to the great prejudice of those that wear them; and those
men that have an opinion, that nothing of this kind can be made good in their
own Country, when they shall see the contratie daily practiced, they will be
constrained by their own reasons to alter their imaginations, when they shall
see thousands of Families employed, some as Throwsters, Silk-Diers, weaving at
the Loom, by twisting of the said Silk, and also the working of all other
necessaries that do depend thereupon; for of sixteen shillings, which the small
pound of sixteen ounces cost, the first penny when it is wrought in black
Plush, or other Silks, it will yield at the least thirty four, and thirty
five shillings per pound, so that full one half of all Silk Manufactured in
this Nation, does turn wholly to the benefit of the poor for Manufactures, a
thing of high concernment to he speedily put in execution.

The like or greater improvement may be made of Flax, Goat's hair, Cotton,
Wool, and Grogran Yarn, if the undertakers may receiv encouragement to bring
some men from beyond Seas, to settle these new Arts and Manufactures amongst us,
and so in a short time, we may prohibit the Importation of all wrought Silks
from beyond Seas, and make here what we spend, and also get to that
perfection, to furnish most part of Christendom, with Silk Manufactures, we
having the Trade, that can afford our raw Silk to the Loom, as cheap, and
cheaper then most part of Christendom, bringing it immediately by Sea from
Persia, which is the Fountain of raw Silk.

16. That you would be pleased to make the late King's House at Greenwich, a
Store-hous for some commodities that shall be Imported, and lie there for a
Market, as Corn, Wine, Fish, Salt, Wainscot, Clap-boards, Fur, Timber of all
sorts, Iron, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Hops, Madder, and all other
commodities of great bulk; and what proportion com's in there more then London
or the Nation will spend, the Merchants to have free liberty to transport them
back to any Foreign part, Custom free, only paying the State Ware-hous room,
and such other moderate fees for Officers that keep accounts, as shall be
settled by the State. Your keeping this Staple, will ever avoid a dearth of
Corn for the City of London, and have all commodities at the best hand.

17. If these Merchant Strangers, such as abide here with their Families, were
all Naturalized, some men say, they would buie up all our Land, and in time
supplant the Nation. Truly the contrary has been seen and known, for those
that are here Merchant Strangers, but especially the Dutch, that have all
turned into English; what wealth they have gotten, has all been bestowed on
the English Nation: As first, Sir Peter Vanlore, Sir Thomas Curtel, Sir Moses
Trian, Lucas Lucey, Vandeput, Fortrees, Lamot, Francis Sion, Jacob Oils, De
Boise Ganes, Matthew Godscale, Bultel Derrick Host, Hermes Dolens, Vanbrough,
Littler Rousiot, Vandecouter, De Fisher, Terance, Lodick, Cross Corsellioos,
Vanackers, De Labars, Chamberlain, Sir William Courteen, Antonie, Sir Peter
Ricot, Adam Lawrence, Lucas Jacobs, James Stenirs, Demestrias, Sass, Depester,
and many more that abide and plant amongst us in London, and other parts of the
Nation, most of them are married into English Families, and are English.

And it cannot be denied, that most of these men have originally, by their
fore fathers, brought many industrious Manufactures into this Land; by which
means, this Nation has equally been enriched with the Merchant Strangers;
witness Colchester, Norwich, Canterbury, and the Seaport Towns wherein they
live, the people being willing to pay all duties, and helpful to their
Neighbors, an industrious Nation, and by their frugalitie, and long continuance
in following their Trade, attein the reward of their vigilance, being Riches.

And when that they have it, do they not dispers it amongst us, marrying our
daughters, our sons marrying their daughters, and so we become one Nation. I
have ever esteemed a good Dutch Merchant, as beneficial to us and our Nation,
as they in Holland esteem of their Dutch Cows; one bring's a great deal of Milk
to the Pail, and these men a great advantage to the Commonwealth, by planting
amongst us. And put the case the State should, by priviliges given them, invite
many Merchant Strangers to com and plant amongst us, I say, Merchants, and
dispers themselves into several parts of this Nation, and that these men would,
and should be admitted to buie our Lands, and bring over their banks of money,
you would quickly find money to be here at five in the Hundred, and your
Lands at double and treble the price. For in Holland, they will give threescore
years purchase for Land; would not this, that they object as an argument
against their coming hither, be the most advantageous to this Nation, both to
the Gentry and Tradesmen? The Gentry should double and treble his stock in
Land, the Tradesman would have money at five per Cent. Whereas he paie's now
eight and can hardly get it; besides, they give with their daughters great
portions; a tun, and two tuns of Gold with one of them, is ordinary there.
These men com to manure our Lands, and improve our Nation by their draining,
and other husbandry, to teach our Nation the Fishing Trade, and make our
Harbors their Storehouses, and what we have been so long laboring to get,
which is their Fishing Trade, a great part will be brought to our Harbors, and
will invite, and stir up our Seamen, by their example, to be as industrious as
they. And when all is don, this wealth wholly falls into this Nation; for they
are English in two ages, and by former experience, we know what great
advantage we have had by their planting amongst us.

18. I humbly desire you to take into your considerations, that upon a Medium,
there was for ten years last past, about twenty thousand tun of French Wines
imported into this Nation, till the Act prohibiting the Importation of French
Wines.

That you would be pleased to take notice, that the Customs and Excise of the
French Wines paid to the State about two hundred thousand pounds a year; and
these French Wines, Casks and all, cost not, the first penny, in France, one
hundred and fifty thousand pounds per annum.

That, besides the money coming to the State upon the duty for French Wines,
thousands of people get livelihoods by that Trade, which is very considerable;
as, first, our shipping employed, Vintners, Wine-Coopers, Car-men,
Wine-Porters, Cellarage, and many other people have their livelihood out of
Wines imported from France.

That many Merchants taking advantage of this Act against French Wines, Import
Wines from Holland, pretending they are Renish Wines; but the truth is, they
are Wines mixed at Dort, and other places of Holland, and are small Coniack
Wines, of the growth of France, and after they are brewed and sented in
Holland, are Imported here for Renish Wines, which is very unwholsom for men's
bodies, and sold almost in all Taverns, when it is mixed with Red Wine for
Claret Wine; so that the people pay dear for what is bad, it being sold for
twelv pence a quart, and might be afforded for six pence, and some Merchants
get infinitely by selling these Wines. I humbly desire it may be seriously
considered of; and if French Wines be not admitted, that then there be no
Renish Wines Imported, for under color of Renish Wines sold at the Still yard,
they import all small Wines of France, and sell them at double the price they
could be afforded at the best hand.

But it is worthy a great deal of consideration of your Honors, whether we or
the French lose most, for the reasons aforesaid, upon prohibiting of French
Wines; I humbly leav it to your consideration, whether the State does not lose
more then the French, and if they do, then to prevent it for the future; For
two hundred thousand pounds a year, which is a great sum, toward the charge
of the Navy, and if the French will not be quiet, that money so employed,
will beat them into better manners.

19. Another Manufacturie of great concernment, is, making of all sorts of
Linen Cloth within this Nation, and would set thousands of people on work. We
can make as good Flax, as any com's out of the Fast Countries, and what we
make not here, may be imported from Foreign parts.

I do most humbly desire that a Law be made, that every woman beyond the age
of twelv years, within this Nation, not being troubled with sickness, be
injoined to spin one pound of Hemp or Flax every month, and such women whose
occasions, or quality, will not, or cannot spin one pound of Flax or Hemp
every month, they pay to the use of the poor the sum of six pence for
every woman, that shall not spin a pound of Flax and Hemp; and the Constable
and Collectors for the poor of every Parish, may be injoined to levy it
monthly, and to pay the said sum in to the Justices of Peace of each
Counties, to be emplo^ed only for a stock of Flax and Hemp, to be spun by
the poor of the Parish, where such Collections are made. And that such prices
and encouragements may be settled in each County of this Nation, for the
poor, for their labor of spinning, as by the Justices of the Peace in each
County shall be thought reasonable, to give all the poor a competent
subsistence, and to keep them from loitering and begging, by which means
thousands of Linnen-Weavers, who now live in great poverty, will have
comfortable subsistence, and all the poor women in this Nation will for ever
bless the remembrance of this Parliament, for making so charitable a Law. And by
this means, we need not be beholding to France for Canvass and Linen for our
shipping, or clothing, and we shall keep the stock of our Nation amongst us.
We see the Town of Manchester, and many people in Lancashire, have grown rich
only by this Manufacture, and set thousands of poor on work; and if the
Northern Factors that deal in this Manufacture, were consulted withal, they
would present you ways to set our own people on work throughout this Nation,
and then we should not need the Locrams, and Dowlass, your French Canvass,
which is all bought with ready money. And if you pleas to give encouragement
to some Foreign Linen Weavers, only for Cambrick and Holland, to com and plant
in this Nation, and to have equal privilege, as they give the English in
Holland and Germany, you will have your Tiffanie, Cambrick, and Holland
Weavers, com over and teach this Nation these Manufactures. And that which you
now lay out (the Treasure of this Nation beyond Seas) in vast sums, in
buying these Manufactures for ready money, you shall emploie the poor, keep in
the stock of the Nation, and export so much to Foreign parts, as you shall
spend here: by managing all the Trade in this manner, you would quickly double
the stock of this Nation: for if you make your Exportation more in value then
your Importation, all what is above, is gotten to the State; The like argument
hold's for loss, that if you Import more Foreign commodities, then you do
export Native, the balance must be made up in money. (And I have seen at Sir
John Cooks, the late King's Secretary (by whom I learned most of these
Observations) an account for many years, yearly presented to Queen Elizabeth,
of the exact Importation, and Exportation of Native and Foreign commodities, at
every Port, where Customs were paid; so that the Lord Burly saw as in a
Prospective Glass, the increas or decreas of the stock of this Kingdom: And
this account the Queen had yearly presented by him to her. I pray God the
Parliament would renew that Custom, that so the State may know truly how the
stock of the Nation stand's. By that means, they will know what commodities are
commodious, and what prejudicial, and so lay a great Custom and Excise on that
they find superfluous, and lighten and abate upon all our English commodities,
where our poor have a livelihood by the Manufacture.

20. If you make a free Trade, you will, besides all the former advantages, add
one more, that is highly considerable to the Commonwealth in general, and to
the Merchants in particular, as every ingenious Merchant must be forced to
confess; for whereas now we give all the credit in Spain, and Portugal, and
many other Countries, and have none of their Merchants stocks here, or not
considerable; whereby when an Imbargo comes, the loss falls, not only upon
the Merchant, but the Nation in general; for it falls upon the Usurer, the
Clothier, the Woollman, and the workman, and so by consequence on the Gentry;
for the breaking of one great Merchant, make's the loss fall on ten several
Callings, and peradventure two hundred several Families; So that it is not the
Merchant that suffer's, but the Nation in general. For I have seen a Merchant
after his breaking, grow rich again, and I have seen some of that Merchant's
Creditors receiv such losses by the Merchant's breaking, that they and their
Families have for ever been ruined, and this is no strange sight to see in
London; Therefore, if you make a free Trade, you will have great stocks of
Forrainers lie here in our Harbors, and on our Shores, that if any Imbargo com,
as now at Lisborn, we should have had as much and more of the Portugal's goods
in our hands, to have made our loss good, as they had seized. All men know,
that have ever been at Amsterdam, what vast sums the Portugals have there,
and if we had free Trade, we should have all our Ports full of their goods;
by which means, our Merchants could have made themselves whole; and it is highly
for the security of this Nation, to have as much Foreign commodities in our
Ports, as we send to any place, that so upon any oppression of our Merchants,
we may have to make it good at home. And this, if Trade were free, and
Merchants Strangers paid no more Customs, then the Natives, and had liberty to
retransport such commodities as they could not vent here, after they had tried
the Market, you would ever have their stocks here to make good any Imbargo laid
on our Merchants beyond the Sea, a business of the highest advantage to this
Nation, and greatest security of Trade that can be; and if what I do with all
humility propound, had been don fourteen years ago, when I first moved this
business, it had prevented the sad loss our Merchants have sustained at
Lisborn; for if the Portugals had more goods here, then our Merchants there, it
would have made good for the Merchants of both Nations; for an Imbargo had
never been made at Lisborn, and so Trade would have gone on freely.

21. Thus I have with all clearness, according to the best of my judgment,
humbly presented you that which cost me many years pains, and here laid down
at your feet; besides, I have the advice and approbation of the ablest, and
sufficientest Merchants in London, who by long experience in Amsterdam, Legorn,
Genoa, and other Foreign parts, know this to be true, what is here set down,
and to be most advantageous to the State, in bringing in of a Nurserie of able
rich Merchants of all Nations, to contribute to the public taxes; besides, you
will draw all the benefits before recited to this Nation. The consideration for
the speedy putting it in practice, is now most humbly presented to your care,
which will oblige this Common wealth to bless God for you, and after ages to
have you in honorable remembrance, as the first Founders of laying a foundation
of a free Trade. By which means, the Dutch from a small and contemptible
beginning, have held war against the most Potent Prince of Christendom, and
after fourscore years war, compelled him to give them their own conditions,
have made themselves rich and Potent in the East and West- Indies, and their
Amsterdam the Mart of Christendom. Let us by their examples, invite all
Merchant Strangers, giving them the same privileges as they have there; Our
Ports are far better and safer for all the Trade of the world, then theirs; by
this means, you will contract the wealth of the world, you will increas in
shipping, Manufacture, and all the precious things of this world; you will make
all our Sea Ports, as it was said of Tire and Sidon, and you will justly be
called the Restorers of the English Nation to the splendour of the ancient
Roman Common wealth.

22. Concerning the management of the Custom, I humbly conceiv, as they are now
carried on, is not to the best improvementt of the State, in point of the
Revenue, nor safety to the Commonwealth; for in the several Seaports of this
Nation, and in the Custom-hous at London, none ought to be employed in Offices
of Trust, but skilful men, and men of Estates, that if any miscarriage com,
their Estates might be responsible to the State: And whereas some men are of an
opinion, that they would have Trade free, to Import all commodities, and Export
all without any restraint, not for Leather, Fuller's Earth, Corn, Wool,
Ammunition, Gold and Silver, Horses, and all other things that are the staff
and stay of this Nation; I would not write it, but I have it affirmed by men
of great quality, that this is the opinion of some men that are in place and
power. Truly I humbly conceiv, there cannot be a more destructive thing to
this Commonwealth, then that those men's principles should be followed: And I
humbly conceiv, that it would very greatly conduce toward the better
management of Trade, that if there were such Officers settled in the
Custom-hous, as by virtue of the ancient Laws of the Nation formerly were, who
were men of known quality, and did not only put in sufficient security
security to answer to the State, what money they received, but also that they
should well and faithfully execute their place, in guarding all things
prohibited Exportation and Importation, and were also by diverse Statutes
deprived of Merchandising, Shipping, and many other emploiments in the
Commonwealth, whereby they might solely attend their several services, to the
best advantage of the Nation.

About settling a Court of Merchants in London, as it is in Roan, Paris,
Bordeaux, Lions in France, and other parts of Germany; the Model is much after
this manner:
23. ONce every year to cause a general meeting of the Merchants in Roan by
common consent, to chool a Prior, and two Consuls, to remain in their Authority
for a year; and so to be yearly chosen, according to most voices, not only
the Merchants of Roan, but also the Merchants Strangers, being to be
presented, an assistance in the said collection; And this is don the beginning
of Januarie every year.

The Prior and Consuls may take unto their Assistants twenty Merchants, or
more or less, as they shall think fit to assist them, in the proceedings of
their Judgments; They are likewise to appoint one Counselor, and one Atturnie
for this service, and a Register, and the Court to sit one day in every week,
to hear, determine, and dispatch the said Appellations, by order of Roll for
that purpose ordained. And to give judgment between all men of what condition
or quality soever, of all Suits, Controversies, and Differences touching
matters of Merchandising, or buying or selling, as well for obligating Bills of
Debt, Receipts, Blanks signed, Bills of Exchange, Answers by Sureties,
Associations of Merchants, either general or particular Assurances, Accounts,
Transportations of Bills, Bargains, and Partnerships for matters aforesaid, or
any thing belonging thereunto, Commanding all people, Judges, and any other of
what condition soever, that they permit the Merchants to use and enjoie this
benefit plainly and peacefully, without any contradiction, notwithstanding any
Ordinance, Customs, Statutes, Privileges, Commands, or Letters to the contrary.

The Reason wherefore the King of France set up a Court of Merchants, is
declared, because the Merchants were the first setters up and inventors of
commerce, together with the Order and use of Exchange, and by that means, had
the best and soundest understandings to be Judges in these cases; and
therefore he did institute them to be principal Judges.

That upon the Prior and Consul's choosing, immediately they take an Cath in
the presence of all the Merchants there assembled, promising duly and
faithfully to execute Justice, without any regard either to poor or rich, or
private interest, as other Judges do, when they are newly established in their
Government; And the Merchants that are called to assist the Prior, or Consuls,
are to be sworn to do Justice every time they are requested, to assist the
Court of Merchants.

And all Jailors, and Keepers of Prisons, are commanded to keep and arrest the
prisoners committed unto them by the said Prior and Consuls, as they do the
prisoners of all other Judges, under the same penalty and bonds, without
demanding leav or license of other Judges, or any other person whatsoe^ver.

And all Judgments of the said Prior and Consuls, shall be executed throughout
all the King's Dominion, be it by attachment of goods and sale thereof,
arrest, and imprisonment of persons condemned, as also by penalties and
forfeitures of money, according to the cause of the offense; And all Noble
Personages and others, as well Spiritual-men and Laie-men, of age or under age,
or their Deputies, using and exercising the Trade of Merchandising, or
Exchange, shall in that respect be subject to the Power and Authority of the
Prior and Consuls; and all other Judges are forbidden to intermeddle concerning
such debates and differences, growing between Merchants.

And the said Priors and Consuls, with the Merchants their assistants, are
required to be just and careful, and so to avoid giving of offense to other
Judges, by rash hearing.

The said Consuls, and Prior, have likewise in charge, the punishing of all
frauds, abuses, deceits, falsification, and all other ill dealing in
Merchandises, and all abuses committed in the course of Exchanges. All Civil
Causes between men of what quality soever, besides those which concern Trade
of Merchandise, or matters of Exchange, be all exempted from the Jurisdiction
of the Prior and Consuls, the party or parties grieved may accuse the said
Prior and Consuls, and other Jurisdictions of this Court, if they have lawful
cause so to do, and that not in writing, but by word of mouth, in the presence
of them they charge. And their accusations shall be summarily examined, justly
decided, and if the said Prior or Consuls be parties, then the Priors or
Consuls for the five last years past, or so many as are in being, shall adjung
the cause. And if the said Prior or Consuls shall be accused, and justly proved
of any corruption, then they are not to give sentence, but the most ancientest
and eminentest Merchants, and those that have the first pre-eminence in the
Exchange, shall sit in the place of the said Prior and Consuls, and give
Judgment without any salarie to be given to the said Merchant, in regard of
their judgment; and the Merchant that shall be chosen, Prior, Consuls, and
Clerks of the Court, must be free Denizens, or else naturalized, and married in
the City of Roan.

The elections of the said Prior yearly, must be made before a Committee of
two Counselors, named and deputed by the Parliament for that purpose, and the
Clerk of the Ensurance Office, must be an Inhabitant in the City of Roan, in
some public and eminent place which shall be assigned for that purpose. And in
Paris, you have one Judge, and four Consuls, with the like Jurisdiction as they
have at Roan for Merchants, and by their Charter, charging all Judges not to
intermeddle in any cause concerning Merchandise and Exchange, upon the penalty
of making void the Suit, and of Arbitrarie amercements, charges and damages,
and interests of the parties grieved, as well of the said Judges, as against
the Laws, and Atturnies injoining all Sergeants every one of them in their
turns to assist, and to be present at the days and hours, in which the Court
of the said Prior and Consuls uses to be kept, and there to command silence,
and to put in use and execution, their Orders and Commands, and to give them
such honor and reverence, as they owe unto Magistrates, injoining all our good
Subjects to do the same. And if there shall arise a Dispute or Controversy,
whereby the Merchants shall conceiv they have not justice of the Prior and
Consuls, for the time being, then all such Merchants, that have been Priors
and Consuls, and are remaining in the City of Roan, without they be hindered
by sickness, or other just excuse, shall make a Court of Merchants, and there,
after they have taken an Oath, to do equal justice, they shall give the
sentence, which shall be binding to all parties irrevocable for the time to
com.

This Court is at this day in use in many great Cities in France, by which
means, Lawsuits are speedily dispatched, to the great eas of all Merchants,
both Natives and Strangers, and they find the good and speedy justice which
all men have there.

I humbly desire, that the principal Merchants in London, might be consulted
withal, and their humble desires concerning a Court of Merchants, which may be
settled amongst them, which will be a great eas and benefit to the Merchants,
and to all honest-minded men that are Traders, to have their Suits for
Merchandise and Traffic determined amongst themselves, to have their
differences speedily dispatched, and not delaied as it has been, to the ruin
of many Families in this City and Nation.

To the Honorable the Council for Trade The humble Petition of Thomas Violet
Shows,
24. THat your Petitioner seeing in the Journal Books of the Parliament, an
Order referring the East- India Companie's Petition, (Which they made unto the
Parliament, for obteining of a License, to transport twenty thousand pounds of
Foreign Bullion beyond Seas) to this Council for Trade, to give their opinions
concerning the said Petition.

And your Petitioner having perused the late Act, for the advancing of Trade,
whereby you are made Commissioners, and a standing Council for regulating of
the Trade of this Commonwealth, whereby you are autorized not only to receiv
all such Propositions and Overtures, for the well regulating and benefit of
Trade, which shall be offered unto you by any person whatsoe^ver; but you have
likewise full power and authority, to view all Books, Records, and Writings of
Public use, which you shall find needful for your better information; your
Petitioner having for these sixteen years been employed about stopping the
transporting of Gold and Silver out of this Nation, and so having many
opportunities offered unto him to know many things, that may be secrets to
this Council; his humble prayer to You is, that, before you make your Report to
the Parliament, you would be pleased to take these his humble Propositions into
your serious considerations, being highly for the benefit of the Commonwealth.

1. That this Council require the East- India and Persia Company, to bring in
their Charter, whereby you will inform your selves, with what privilege they
have granted them, and upon what conditions and restrictions.

2. That you would be pleased to require an account of the East India and
Persia-Companie, of all the sums of money, Gold or Silver, either Foreign or
English, which they have sent into India and Persia, ever since Julie 1620.
this is no new thing, for they did in 1620 give an account, as will plainly by
their Books appear, that from the Original and first foundation of their Trade,
in Anno 1601, to Julie 1620. they had shipped away for India only, 548090l.
sterling, in Spanish moneys, and some Flemish and Germane Dollars, which account
was presented in Parliament at that time.

3. Your Petitioner desire's you to take notice, that if the State in Parliament
were then so careful in times of peace, and the Trade of the Nation
flourishing, to call the East- India Company to an account for twenty years,
and to cause them to make their accounts plainly to appear by their Books for
twenty years; surely, I humbly conceiv, this Honorable Council will exspect
for the service of the Commonwealth, to have an exact account of all the
Treasure the East- India and Persia Company have exported; and to have them to
produce a just account what quantities of Gold or Silver they have bought in
Holland, and in other Foreign places, immediately upon their proper account;
and what quantities of English melted Silver in Bars, they have bought of
Goldsmiths in London; what quantities of Gold in Bars, they have bought of the
Guinie and Barbary Companies, what quantities of English coined Gold they have
sent into the East- Indies, and to Persia; what quantities of Cardquess,
Rex-Dollars, Rials of Spain, or any other Foreign Silver, they have bought up
in Londou, of Merchants, Goldsmiths, or others, which without the East India
Company so buying, would have been brought into the Mint and coined, to the
great augmentation of the stock of this Nation. And that they be required to
give you an Account of what qnantities of Spanish Pistollers, Dutch Riders,
Hungarian Ducats, Gold Gilders, Gold Albertus of Flanders, Italian Pistolets,
Turkey Sultels, and all other Foreign Gold and Silver, they have bought up in
London, of Goldsmiths, Merchants, Natives, and strangers, which have not been
members of their Company, and transported to India and Persia, within thirty
years; all which, I am sure they have perfect Accounts of. And that the
aforesaid Company be required to send you in all the Warrants and Licenses
for their doing of the same, and for a true discovery of the premises.

4. That you would require the Books of Invoies of the Lading of every ship of
all the Gold and Silver, in Bars, or Coin, that has been sent to the East-
Indies and Persia, since 1620. for by them you shall see what Gold and Silver
each ship carried, and the Ships, Factors, and Master's names, and to what
Factorie in Persia or India, and the several years, and so you will quickly see
the just quantity to a penny, what they have transported, and in what sort of
Coin, either English Gold or Silver, or Foreign Gold or Silver, for these
thirty years; the giving you a true account thereof, will be of great
concernment to the Commonwealth in many respects.

5. That you would appoint a Committee to view over the Journal Books: for out
of them there will be gathered businesses of great concernment to the Nation;
and if some able Book-Keepers be appointed with me, to take out what I shall
observe in them, it will tend highly to the service of the Nation, and give a
stop to great mischiefs that is daily practiced on the Commonwealth.

6. If you pleas to inform your selves by this way, you will see clearly many
other secrets, upon perusal of these Books, then I will speak of, and so you
will be able to rectify and settle the Trade in a flourishing condition, that
it may be beneficial to the Common wealth, and all the Adventurers, whereas
heretofore, and now as it is managed, none gets by it, but the Committees of
the said Companies, and the Companie's Factors and their Officers. The
Adventurers having been blinded ever since it was a Company, and led by the
nose by their servants, or else how could their Factors and servants be so
rich, and the Companie's stock so poor.

7. I humbly conceiv upon the Examination of all the premises, when that the
Books of the Company are examined, it will be found that the East- India
Company has sent away the Commonwealth's Coin, both in Gold and Silver. I am
the more encouraged to speak this plainly to you, because I know there is now no
Lord Treasurer, no Lord Privy Seal, no Bed-chamber-men, nor Privy Council to
bribe, nor as I hope any else to be bribed, to take off and suppress the just
examination of abuses in Companies, which heretofore have been proved to have
been a common Trade with some Companies, to keep up their Letters Patents, to
the high deceit of the Nation, having given great sums of money for Bribes,
to have liberty to oppress the good people of the Nation, and to have License
with Authority to deceiv the Commonwealth; all which abuses, I pray God may,
by the wisdom of this Council, be carefully found out, and presented to the
Parliament, and such Order and Regulation made for the future for all Traders,
as may be most for the prosperity of this Nation in general, without any
regard to particular Interest, when it shall be found destructive to the
Commonwealth.

September. 11. 1650. Signed Tho. Violet.


Die Mercurii Sept. 11. 1650. At the Council for Trade at White Hall.
THat the East India Company be desired to produce their Original Charter
before this Council.


Ordered,
THat the East- India-Companie be desired to bring in to this Council, what
Licenses they formerly have granted them for the Transportation of Bullion, or
Coin, since the year 1620.


Ordered,
THat the East India- Company be entreated likewise to produce the direct and
true Accounts of all the several sums of Bullion and Coin, in any specie to
the full, that have been yearly transported by them, since the year 1620.

Ex. Ben: Worslie, Secret.


THat your Honors would be pleased to move effectually in the House, for a
positive Order, to require the East- India Company to give obedience to the
Order of the Council of Trade, dated 11 of September. 1650. And that the East-
India's and Persia Companie's Books of Invoices, may be brought forth to the
Council for Trade, and not to accept of the Account what they have Registered in
the Custom-Hous, but what shall appear really upon their Original Books of
Invoices in the Companie's custody, which they have sent really to every
Factor yearly in Persia and India; for they enter at the Custom-Hous but what
they pleas, but the truth must appear by the Companie's Original Books; the
Dutch, East- India-Companie, as I am credibly informed, have since their first
stock, made every hundred a thousand to the Adventurers, and as this stock
has been managed in England, the Adventurer get's nothing, but the private
Officers. I humbly desire for the service of the Nation in general, the truth
of all these proceedings may be truly stated, that so, the Council may be
enabled, when they see their Accounts, justly and clearly by their own Books,
to give the Parliament their opinion concerning the East- India-Companie's
request, and for the regulating that Trade for the future, for the best
advantage of the Commonwealth, being a business of great concernment to the
wealth and honor of the Nation.

May it pleas your Honors, I am of old Mr Carmarthen's mind, which was an
Officer in the Custom-Hous in Queen Elizabeth's time; he would speak a truth,
though many of the great Officers of the State, and Merchants, and Customers,
were against him for it; yet by his vigilance and constant perseverance, the
truth came to the Queen's ear; and she checked her Treasurer, and Leicester,
and commanded them to bring Carmarthen to her, when Burly and Leicester, had
laid him in the Fleet for a busy fellow; she would hear, for all their words,
what that busy fellow said, though much against her great Counsellor's mind;
and then the Queen found, upon examination, that her great Officers were
bribed. And the conclusion was, Carmarthen raised the Queen's Farm in few years
to double the money it made before, and made Customer Smith pay it, and, in
despite of the Lord Burly and Leicester, Carmarthen had the Queen's thanks.
For, though in other things she would hear them; yet when it concerned
themselves, and upon the point of her Revenue, she would not trust wholly the
greatest of her Officers, but had her instruments to give her true Information,
a sure way for a State never to be deceived, and a rule fit for these times.
This story is much after this manner recorded of Queen Elizabeth, for a piece
of high Prudence, Justice and Bounty, she making Carmarthen and his son
Surveyor of all the Customs and Customers, in which place they continued above
50 years; and this Carmarthen's son died but three years ago, in the same
office the Queen gave his Father for this service.

These Propositions in these several Heads being set on foot by the Parliament,
I humbly conceiv is another manner of service for the State, then Carmarthen's
both in point of profit, honor, and safety, and though some private men, for
private Companies, may be avers against what I have here said in these
particulars, it is their self-interest that make's them so.

I am an humble suitor to your Honors, that the Act against transporting Gold
and Silver, culling and melting the current Coin of the Nation, which has
laien so long committed, may forthwith pass into an Act; for till that be don,
your Mint will be obstructed, and to transport all the Gold and Silver, and
coin none, what the end of such things will be, I am enforced to speak.

1. For I see there are some which either out of spite to the welfare of this
Nation, or by the subtlety of the transporters of Gold and Silver, and cullers
out of the heavy current Coins of this Nation, have engaged themselves to
obstruct this great Service, that so the Commonwealth may be circumvented of
his surest strength, Money, which is the sinews of war, and strength of the
Nation, and those people that abound with it, are able to command all things in
the world; And that Commonwealth and Family that is without it, is made
incapable of doing any great action. Besides, by this dangerous Maxim, as much
as in them lie's, they labor to darken and weaken the splendour and strength of
your Army, which has don such great things; for if your Treasure all be
exhausted, how shall they be paid? And these tenets at the best smell of a
Presbyterian, if not of a Jesuitical design. And I do most humbly desire the
Council of War would resent it, it concern's the safety and well-beeing of the
Army, the keeping of treasure within the Nation; for they, and the Army are
like a ship at sea, which must be well-provided with Anchors and Cables, and
Victuals; money is to them all this, nay, every thing. And for those that have
maliciously opposed the Act, for prohibiting transporting of Gold and Silver, I
make no question to find a time to call them to an account; For others that
desire to have the question truly stated, I will with all willingness and
humility present what former ages have don, and this present time require's.
First, I humbly present to you, that the treasure of England is but like a
quantity of water in a Cistern; we have no springs of treasure, as in Spain,
every year to be supplied from the West- Indies; and therefore it concern's
us to keep in our treasure, for being once transported, it cannot be drawn
back, but by inhancing of money, to the ruin of all the owners of Land and
settled Revenues; for so much as you raise money, you take from all Landlords.
To this is replied, we may bring money from Holland, and several other parts
of Christendom, freely, and therefore it ought to be as free here in England,
and it is no prejudice to the Commonwealth; and this is the opinion of some
Gentlemen, that I believ love the Commonwealth, and speak not out of a design
to prejudice either the Nation, or Army; for these men I humbly offer these
reasons to consider.

2. In Holland, when it was made a new State, the Placarts and Edicts show,
which I caused to be Translated, What severe penalties they put upon
transporting of money; And made it Banishment, Confiscation of goods,
Imprisonment, and Corporal punishments; they knew Money was the principal
Ammunition of their Nation, for having that, they could want neither Men,
Victual, nor Arms, and this they did at the beginning of their Wars, which is
now our condition, and we ought to follow this rule.

But now in Holland, by long continuance of Trade, great thrift and abundance
of shipping, they are no other then a Bank or Ware-Hous; they have little lands
or houses to invest their stocks in, but must put it into commodities and
money. And since, by God's blessing upon their industry, they have in a Spot
of Ground, contracted the wealth of Christendom. And so abounding in Moneys,
and not knowing how to invest it, let it be granted, that they let money be
exported freely, this make's nothing that we should do so now, for the reasons
following.

3. In England, by the Statute, any man may transport Corn freely, when it is
at four shillings a Bushel, because of the abundance, that so the Farmer may
pay his Landlord, and keep his House, and pay Laborers for the clearing of his
Ground, and Threshing it in the Barn. Does the Law allow any man to carry Corn
when it is 10 or 12 s. a Bushel out of the Nation, by that means you may starv
the poor, and any that should do it, deserves the highest punishment; my
Argument upon this fallows, viz.

4. Let us attein so much beforehand in stock of money, as the Hollanders
have, be in so flourishing a condition of Trade as they are, he master of all
the subtilties of the Banks and Exchanges in Christendom, as they are, which
they make that use of, as they do of their Sluices, for water, so they let in
and out all the Treasure of Christendom to their own advantage; then I say,
with all cheerfulness, transport Money as they do, and freely, and as you do
transport Corn, when it is at four shillings a Bushel, but till you have that
plenty of Money to pay your Fleet, to pay your Armies, to maintein Trade,
and Commerce, and all these in a plentiful manner, keep your Laws in force,
follow the Offenders with severe and sharp punishments, as you do, when there
is a death of Corn, punish the transporters of Corn, with the severest
punishments, as Murderers, and Destroiers of the poor. And this is a certain
Maxim, that That Commonwealth that has Money plentifully, can command all
things.

5. I shall leav it to the capacity of any reasonable man that see's; you may
receiv one thousand pounds in a payment, and not twenty shillings in Gold; you
shall receiv one hundred pounds in Silver, and not fifty pounds of it but
clipped, and lighter then the Standard, as it com's out out of Tower, all our
weighty Money being melted into Ingots, and sent beyond Seas; you shall have
fifty thousand pounds in a payment in Holland, all of English half Crowns, and
this is known to all men that know France and Foreign parts, that our Gold is
forty times more plentiful in France, Flanders, and Holland, then here.

6. You have some Goldsmiths that have constantly bought the clipped English
money, many times over of several people, (and put it away again) and so make
the Cheat run round like a Horse in the Mill, and cozen the whole Nation; you
shall not receiv in many Towns of this Nation, not in five hundred pounds
payment, two hundred pounds of good Moneys, such as the Gentry or Merchants
can pay away again in London; And if he be forced by reason of his occasion,
to pay Money in London, he must sell it in London to the Goldsmiths, at above
twenty pound in the hundred loss.

And some Goldsmiths so buying it, sell it to the Grasiers, Receivers of Public
Cash, or some one or other, that the Gentleman is sure to have it paid him the
next Quarter in the Country. And if these Cheats must be spoken for,
countenanced, and by some publicly warranted, there shall never pass a Law to
have the Offenders punished. The draught of this Act of Parliament, was drawn by
Order of the Council of State, and several times debated upon a Petition of the
City of London, the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint, the Officers of
the Customs, the Committee of the Navy, and yet nothing don in it, to the
unspeakable hazard, and damage of the Commonwealth.

I do humbly beseech you consider the great sums of Money the Navy take's up
every year, and the Armies with both their appurtenances; and these, it is
true, waste not the treasure of the Nation by transportation, but it remain's
constantly amongst us, and without these necessary supports, the splendour and
safety of the Commonwealth would be undermined, which is the hearty desire
of some of the Presbyterian party.

But those that are versed in the managing of these great Affairs, know you
must constantly provide the Sea-man's pay, with the Victuals, and Soldier's
pay, besides the Train of Artillery, and an hundred other necessaries
incident to a Fleet and Army, and without Money all these strengths ceas as a
Clock does when you take off the weights. I shall humbly leav it to every
judicious man, what the transporter of the treasure is, according to the
conjuncture of this time, and as your Affairs now stand, for many other
designs may undermine the State by degrees. But the transporter of treasure
now in these times, is a Powder-Plotter, he blow's up Parliament, Army, Fleet,
and Commonwealth, all at once, and yet some, through ignorance, speak for them;
but let the transporters of Gold and Silver, and the cullers and melters of the
heavy Coin of this Nation, run their course a little longer, (which God defend)
they will leav no Money in the Nation; and then, when it is too late, you will
find as Sampson's strength lay in his hair, so the sinews of War is Money;
and, if formerly they deserved to be punished in the purs, that were
transporters of money, cullers, and melters down of the heavy current Coin of
the Nation, they much more deserv to die for it now, for it is undermining of
the whole State; And what in time of peace, in this particular was a
misdemeanor, I humbly conceiv for the safety of the Commonwealth, ought to
be made Felony at this time, considering the multiplicitie of your occasions.

I do therefore humbly desire, that the Act may be speedily dispatched; and
not delaied, by the subtlety of a few men, to the ruin and destruction of the
Commonwealth; for without it pass, you will not have Money left to pay your
Armies, your Navy, nor maintain Commerce.

It is not an Act of Parliament can levy Money, if you take not present Order
to keep it in the Nation. And therefore (I most humbly pray) as you love the
safety of your selves, and the Army, keep the treasure in this Commonwealth
(which is yet left) by making transporting treasure Felony for the future, and
punish those that have transported the treasure, and give all encouragement and
privilege to such as bring in Silver and Gold into your Mint.

I humbly desire, that all private interest in this particular, may, by the
Authority of the Parliament, be suppressed, which shall be proved to be
against the Public. And that Briberie may be examined, and branded with all
infamy, which have kept up the corrupt interest of many Companies, to cheat
the Commonwealth, and obstruct the passing of good Laws, for the benefit of
the Nation. Yet I do most humbly declare to you, I am for all good Orders in
Companies, both Merchants and Tradesmen, so far as it is not prejudicial to the
Commonwealth in general.

If this which I have with all humility said, shall find a favorable
construction with your Honors, and that it have life from your Honors
countenance and protection, and that you put forth your selves, to see that
these things be put in execution, according to the power you have in this
Commonwealth, I shall thank God for it, and I shall be well content, that you
have seen that in an hour, that cost me many years pains and study. And I
shall be willing, for the service of this Commonwealth to take some pains to
enlarge my self in these particulars, if my humble advice be required. For
though I love not to give an account of my faith to a Presbyter Elder, yet with
all humility, I conceiv my self bound, and I am ready to give the State an
account in what I can serve the Commonwealth, when I am commanded, and shall
and can do it with more cheerfulness, they many a Presbyter, that have falsely
charged me to be a Malignant, and without the Justice of the Parliament, have
robbed me of my Estate, to a great value, and I never was as yet heard to
obtain a hearing. And that I may have Justice, is all my humble desire, to your
Honors. In the procuring me Justice, I shall be ever bound to pray for your
Honor's happiness here and hereafter.

Your Honor's most humble Servant THOMAS VIOLET.
Jan. 1. 1651.
A TRUE DISCOVERY TO THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND, HOW THEY HAVE BEEN Cheated of
almost all the Gold and Silver Coin of this Nation,

WHICH Has been, and is daily Transported into Foreign Parts.

AND, How the people of this Nation are, and have been abused by Light and
Clipped English Money, and the means showed for the prevention thereof.

HUMBLY Presented to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

By THOMAS VIOLET, a true lover of his Country.

LONDON, Printed by W. DU-GARD, in the Year 1651.

Behold Transporter of Treasure, Culler of Money, Deceitful Wier-drawer. A TRUE
DISCOVERY HOW THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, Have been cheated of their
Treasure; and means showed for the prevention thereof.
IT has been daily practiced by some particular Merchants, both Native and
Strangers, to transport the treasure of this Nation, to the great prejudice of
the State; who for their own private gain, have not spared to damnifie the
Commonwealth so highly, that their persons and estates cannot give a full
satisfaction for the great mischief don, and practiced by them to this
Commonwealth, and without a strict examination, and exemplarie punishment of
the offenders, or some of the chief of them, these mischiefs will never be
prevented, and the Commonwealth will be still undetermined by those Moles, to
the unspeakable damage thereof. And because some, through ignorance, do not
understand and conceiv the great damage which may com to the Commonwealth, by
the suffering these abovesaid abuses to continue; and others more crafty and
subtle, both Goldsmiths, and Merchants, that are transporters of Gold and
Silver, and practisers of several high frauds and abuses upon Coin and Bullion,
have the confidence (or impudence) to make arguments for defending the
transgressors; Now for the information of some in their judgments, that have
desired a true account, what Laws are now in force in this Nation, for
prevention of these mischiefs; what Orders and Laws in France, Holland, and
Flanders, for the regulating of their Mints, Money, and Bullion; what
punishments and restriction upon the offenders; I have procured the Ordinance,
and Placarts of France, Holland, and Flanders, to be translated; have
abbreviated them for your information, and quoted some Laws of this Nation now
in force, as hereafter follow.

And if you pleas to make the law, now presented to the House, stricter than it
is now drawn, I Humbly conceiv you will do the Commonwealth the greater
benefit, considering the present condition of the Commonwealth.

Transporting of Treasure has been Felony, 4 Henry 7. cap. 13, and 17 Edward
4. this Statute to endure for twenty years. I humbly conciev the Common wealth
has now as much reason to look to keep the treasures in the Nation, as they
had then, considering all things.

That you would be pleased to give one moitie at the least to any person or
persons, that will, or can discover the offenders: that so by this reward, all
persons may be invited to discover the offenders all over the Nation, and the
same rule followed which was in 14 Rich. 2. cap. 12. where Commissions by Act
of Parliament, were granted throughout the Realm, to enquire of such as had
conveyed the Money of England out of the Nation; in doing whereof, great sums
throughout the Nation will com to the State, and the offenders will remember
the Proverb, sweet meat must have sower sauce, when they shall be enforced to
pay back to the State, that which they have defrauded them of, and will
prevent them and all others hereafter, for to take the boldness to get
themselves fortunes by any of the aforesaid indirect courses, which so highly
tend to the damage of this Commonwealth.

By these deceits Commerce is spoiled, Traffic decaieth, those things that are
needful for man's preservation, grow dear, the handiecraft's work cease, the
workmen betake themselves to some other places, and the Commonaltie, to speak
all in a word, is brought to poverty, (as is gravely observed by the Master
General, and Council of the Mint in Flanders, 2d October 1647. in their
Declaration, clearly demonstrating, that the careful and punctual keeping of
the Placart of the Mint, is very necessary, and withal profitable to all
persons of what state, quality, or condition soever; showing, that if the
Placart be not observed, but that money should be paid out above the true
value through these disorders, they shall never be able to keep their treasure
within their Country.

And in their Declaration, showing most judicially, the great mischiefs that
befall a Nation by enhauncing and raising their Money, being no real cure for
the Commonwealth, but utterly destructive to all sorts of people, even from the
Prince to the poor Laborer, to any Free State or Commonwealth, to all
Merchandise and Commodities: all which considerations, although very potent,
yet do not oftentimes com into the minds and comprehensions, not only of the
common people, but also of those to whom the emploiment of Public Office have
given more judgment and credit in managing of affairs themselves, and who dare
to spread it abroad, that there is no harm nor evil in enhauncing the Coin
above its true value and worth, because they can put it away at the same price
as they receiv it; not taking notice by the way, that raising and augmenting
the price of the Money, does, or must by consequence, augment and encreas the
price of all Merchandises and Provisions proportionable; whereby of necessity
it must follow, that if the Moneys be augmented and hightned, the Landlords
and Creditors receiv so much less; the Merchandise, Victuals, and all other
Wares, grow presently dearer; the public treasure, either Excise or Customs
are abated, by so much as you enhaunce or lessen your Moneys: for it is not the
Denomination of an high price of Gold or Silver set's the value, but it must
have weight and fineness proportionable to what you call it, or else you go upon
a wrong ground; As for example, in Scotland, they call Thirteen pence half
penny, a Mark; and Twenty pence, they call Twenty shillings; this
denomination of a great value give's not the intrinsical value.

I caused these men following, to be fined in the Star Chamber, for
transporting Gold and Silver, and culling and melting down the heavy Coin of
the Nation. The 25th of Jan. 12th Car.
Charles Frank 4000l Robert Ellis 4000l Isaac Romeer 3000l Jacob Delew 1000l
Roger Fletcher 1000l Richard Cockram 1000l John Parrat 1000l The 17th of Febr.
12th Car.
Peter Hern 2000l John Terrie 2000l Timothy Eman 2000l Isaac Brames 1000l
Henry Futter 500l Henry Sweeting 500l John Perrin 100l

The Total of the said Fines amount to the sum of 24100l.

Sir John Wollaston Knight, and William Gibs Esquire, both Aldermen of the
City of London, being informed against in this Information, by the late
King's then Atturnie General, procured the late King's Pardon, and so were
discharged.

And Peter Fountain, who was informed against for transporting of Gold,
procured his Pardon upon payment of 1100l. And all these I did bring to a
Trial, all at my own charge.

That besides the fourteen offenders sentenced in the Star Chamber, and
pardoned, as aforesaid, there are many other Merchants, Goldsmiths, and
others, that have transported Gold and Silver out of the Nation, that have sold
Gold and Silver at above the price of the Mint, that have furnished much light
Gold, English and Foreign, and great quantities of Gold and Silver to
Merchants, and others to transport, that have culled and melted down the
weightiest current silver Coins, as shillings, six pences, and half crowns, all
which offenses are against the common Laws of the Nation: And the Wisdom and
Policy of State has, upon free and general pardons at Parlaments, exempted it
out of the free pardon, thereby the more to terrify and restrain men from
venturing in that kind, to transport Gold or Silver, or to melt down the
current Silver Coins of the Nation.

That diverse Goldsmiths of London, are become Exchangers of Bullion of Gold and
Silver, and buy it of Merchants and others, pretending to carry it to the
Mint, but indeed they are the greatest Instruments for transporting that are;
and in a manner, they are only those who furnish transporters with English and
Foreign Gold, Spanish money, Rix-dolars, Pistollers, Cardacues, culling and
melting down the current Silver Coins of this Realm for Plate and
Silver-Thread; and no doubt, when a true representation of the abuses of such
Goldsmiths, Finers, and Wier drawers, as has been formerly, and is daily
practiced by many of them, shall be made appear; I doubt not, but the
Parliament will think fit to take the same into consideration, and provide some
means to restrain them from doing the Commonwealth that damage, as formerly
has been don.

That some of the Goldsmiths make it their use and practice to by light English
Gold of shopkeepers, and others, which by the Laws of this Nation, wanting
beyond remedy, ought to be bought as Bullion, and upon the sale, ought to be
defaced, and new coined in the Mint: But they take another way; for they sell
all this Gold to transport, though it want four, five, or six grains above the
allowance, and that a Twenty shilling piece will not make nineteen shillings
to be coined in the Mint; yet the Goldsmiths will not abate above two pence
or three pence, and sometimes but one penny in the piece, let the Gold want
what it will; by which means, they out-give the Mint: And the Gold which the
Goldsmiths buie of the Subjects, thinking it is to carry to the Mint to be
new coined to pass in current payment, they put it into a dead Sea, never to
be made use of in our Common wealth: For weekly, French and English have
bought up this Gold, let it be as light as it will, at higher prices then the
Mint are allowed to give by their Indenture, to the value of many hundred
thousand pounds; for by the Gold-smith's rule, the Mint is always last served,
as being the worst Chap man, and giving least for it; for after all hands are
full, both for transporters, Plate-workers, Finers, and Wier-drawers; then
that, which they cannot vent otherwise, comes into the Mint; which the
Officers of the Mint know very well: and if Gold and Silver never came into
the Gold-smith's hands, (which Merchants sell to them, believing they carry it
all to be coined) far more Gold and Silver would com into the Mint, then now
does.

And for this last 5 years, some Gold smiths have given for English Gold twenty
shillings six pence, twenty one shillings six pence, and twenty two
shillings, for a twenty shillings piece, which for the most part have been
bought of them by Merchants, strangers, and others, and transported out of the
Nation, so that now you may receiv five thousand pound in a payment, and never
a piece in Gold: If this ought not to be looked after, and the offenders
brought to Justice, I shall humbly leav it to the Parliament to consider.

Also, many thousand of Dolars and pieces of Spanish Money they furnish
Merchants yearly with that Trade for Norwaie and Denmark, and other parts, and
transport Silver for those parts, to the great weakening of the stock of this
Nation, and hinderance of the sale of our woollen commodities, which (before
that pernicious way was found out) those Countries vented much of. Besides the
hinderance of the sale of our commodities, the State is hindered of their
Custom; for the Merchants drive a Trade inward and outward, and so pay the
State no Custom; for instance, Hambrough.-Merchants bring great quantities of
Rix-dollars from Hambrough and other parts of Germany, and pay no Custom,
because the State has ever made Gold and Silver free to be imported without
Custom, which the Merchants usually sell to the Goldsmiths, and the
Goldsmiths for the most part sell to the Merchants that trade in Norwaie and
Denmark: which Dollars are closely packed in some part of the ship, and so no
Custom paid, either for bringing in the Silver, or sending it out; and no
commodities, in a manner, other then Silver; are transported into those parts
by the said Merchants, considering the quantity of their return; for what they
want in goods exported from hence, they must make up in money: If great returns
of commodities from Norwaie and Denmark, and few commodities exported from
hence, the Balance must be made up with Silver; for no Nation will give us
commodities, but there must be a Balance for goods imported, by goods
exported, or by treasure.

It is to be feared, that the industry of many ages cannot replenish the
Nation with so much Gold, as has been transported out of it within these few
years; for it is an infallible rule, that, where Gold and Silver is
over-valued, thither will it be transported by Merchants and others; for it
continually resort's, where it is most made of; and if you seek to raise it
here, the remedy is wors then the diseas; for then you take from the Gentry
and all settled Revenuers, as much of their means, as you raise the current
money; for if Gold should be raised in England, for example, the twenty
shillings, to twenty six shillings, as it was in France, either higher or
lower, you should buie no more at your Market for twenty six shillings, then
you could before for your twenty shillings; and contrariwise, if your twenty
shillings were but fourteen shillings, you should buie as much for your
fourteen shillings, as when it passed at twenty shillings; so that whenever
money is raised, the loss falls most upon the Nobility and Gentry, and
certain Revenuers, who lose so much out of their inheritance, which they have
let out in Leas, as Money raised.

All Merchants that trade for Spain, know, that when the West India Fleet
comes not into Spain, the trade for that year is lost; and No money, no trade.
If this be an infallible rule for Spain, which suffer's so much for the
forbearance of bringing in of treasure for one year, and is supplied the next
out of the Indies, and till their Fleet came home, no dealing with Merchants; I
do most humbly present, how much more it does concern this Nation, which has
no West Indies to supply the treasure transported, to provide, and carefully
keep in the Nation's stock, which once transported, cannot be drawn back, but
upon unreasonable terms; which will impoverish all the Gentry to an
inestimable value; and as long as it remains out of the Nation, all Trading
and Commerce decaieth, the Subjects are unable to pay taxes, and other duties,
and it is one of the greatest mischiefs that can befall the Commonwealth.

1. These reasons amongst many other, I humbly presented to the Parliament,
April 12, 1643. which if they had been then taken into consideration, had kept
many Millions of Money in the Nation. But by the subtlety of two Aldermen,
whose pardon I had got from the late King, I for my reward was committed to the
Tower, for bringing up a Letter from the late King, though I had a Warrant from
the House of Commons, and a Warrant from my Lord General Essex, for to go to
Oxford, and the Committee at Darbie-hous knew of my going to Oxford, for the
late King's Letter, which I desired Sir David Watkins before ever I went, to
have him acquaint the Committee of both Nations at Darbie-hous with my
business, and some other of the House of Commons, and that I would not go without
their leav, which I had from them by him; and Master Rilie the Scout-master of
London, procured my pass from the House of Commons.

But the truth was, the Presbyterian party ruled then all, and they were
resolved to make their Brethren of Scotland rich, and had a design to
circumvent this Nation, both of all their Gold, Money, and Movables; which for
a great part they have don, as I will make it appear; and therefore any that
did speak against Transporting Treasure, or knew so much of their tricks as I
did, must be a Malignant, an enemy to the Covenant; and so I was kept three
years and eleven months prisoner in the Tower, almost three years of that time
close, because I should tell no tales; and my Estate given away without hearing,
and Sequestered to my damage, to the value of above eight thousand four hundred
pounds.

Besides, the infinite ways the Presbyterians found out for to enrich their
Brethren of Scotland, which all the Nation know; I shall declare one, which was
so usurious and destructive to the Nation, as never the like practice was
before put on this Nation, nor I believ, scarcely upon any other, under the
color of Friendship, League, and Covenant, and this to be don upon their dear
Brethren of London, and that was briefly this. The Scot's Commissioners
procured an Ordinance, that no ships should bring Coals from New Castle, as
appears at large by the Ordinance. When this was don, They must be the only
men must bring us Coals from Scotland; whereas before our dear Brethren brought
us Coals for nine and ten shillings the Tun, and sold them delivered at London
at that price, as will appear by all the Wood-monger's books; they having by
the subtlety of their Faction, got all their trade for Coals for the City of
London, and other parts of the Nation, into their hands, then the City shall
pay for their Brotherly assistance. For since the Ordinance for restraint of
fetching Coals from New Castle, until New Castle was reduced to the Parliament,
Scotch Coals were at thirty and forty shillings the Tun; so that they sold
them after they had Monopoliz'd the Coals into their own hands, at four times
the value they could, and did constantly before, afford to bring them from
Scotland. And the Sea-Coals, which upon a medium for ten years before were all
the Summer under twenty shillings a Chaldron delivered; during all the time
the Scots were in England with their Army, were at three pound, four pound,
and five pound a Chaldron, as all the Inhabitants of the City of London know.

Then they had their Factors here, to buie up all the Hangings, Bedding,
Pewter, Stools, Chairs, Household Stuff, Pictures, and all manner of Lumber,
which was sold to the value of many hundred thousand of pounds, out of the
City of London and Nation, for half the value, and by them in stead of Ballast
carried to Scotland, and this can be witnessed by thousands of people, who
have to their total undoing suffered in this kind, and are never likely to see
their goods, nor never to be Masters of such again, without they, or their
Children will take the pains to go Scotland to fight for them: By this way
they may recover their goods, or their value again. I have been told by several
Gentlemen of credit that live in the North, that when the Scotch Army was with
them in the Bishopric of Durham, Cumberland, and New Castle, they have seen
many of the Scotch soldiers date their Letters with this title, From New Castle
in Scotland; From Ferrie-Brig in Scotland; From York in Scotland; and so other
places where their Army came in England, they took it all for Scotland. But
God has put a Hook in their nostrils, and sent them back, and now the
victorious English may in requital date all their Letters, if they pleas, From
Edinburgh in England: and so I pray God it may continue to the world's end.

I shall humbly desire the Parliament to take notice after what rate the
Brotherly assistance from Scotland came in to help their Brethren, even, after
the rate of sending one hundred pounds worth of Coals to London, to their dear
Brethren, to make their return worth eight hundred pounds in a month, or six
weeks time, as it is apparent, and can be witnessed by thousands of people,
now they read this. Which after this rate, a poor Scotch-man might with one
hundred pounds, within the compass of one year, cheat this Nation of ten
thousand pounds, and transport it all in Money. And this has been don by many
of them, to the value of many hundred of thousand pounds.

And because I Petitioned the Parliament, to look to the transporting of the
treasure, by which means, they would have been prevented in sending the
treasure of this Nation into Scotland, I must be Sequestered, Imprisoned in the
Tower, and held a Malignant.

But I humbly hope the Parliament will give me the hearing for my just defense;
and when they shall by experience find, that this I say to be true, and that
I discover the nest of them that have robbed this Nation, they will do me
right, and unloos me from oppression, and restore me to my Estate.

Hereafter follow the Laws in Holland, Flanders, and France, for the regulating
their Bullion and Money.
PLACART and ORDINANCE. Concerning the general course and regulating of the
Mints and Moneys, as also concerning the Exchange and Exchangers, Refiners,
Goldsmiths, and others in the United Provinces, 1586.
ARTIC. XI.
AND as for the Gold and Silver-Monies, whose value is valued by this
Ordinance, We forbid every one to present, pay away, or receiv the same at a
higher rate, then is here Ordered, upon the forfeiture of such Moneys, or the
worth of it, in case the Fact be not presently discovered, and besides, upon
the forfeiture of ten Golden Angelots the first time, for the second time twelv
Golden Angelots; and for the third, four times as much, and besides, arbitrarie
punishment according to the heinousness of the Fact. And we understand the
same forfeitures and penalties, to take place, as well upon the Receiver, as
the Paier away, unless one of them, presently after the Receiving, or Paying
away, do present himself to an Officer, in which case the Denuntiator, either
Receiver, or Paier away, shall be freed or quitted of the abovesaid penalty
and forfeiture; and besides, to enjoie the third part of the same forfeit and
penalty.

ARTIC. XIV.
So that we expressly forbid, and interdict every one, to over-buie, or
over-sell, Change, or Chop any Species of Moneys, rated by these presents,
either in taking, or giving upon the same, any profit, gain, or advantage,
after what manner soever, upon the same pain and penalty, as abovesaid,
against those who shall Receiv, or Pay away the same at an higher rate then
that of the Ordinance.

ARTIC. XV.
We forbid also, every one to Cull any Gold, or Silver-Monies, and so by this
means, to sort the weighty and good ones, from the light, and bad ones, to
Pay away the light ones, and make their profit of the weighty, upon penalty
as abovesaid.

ARTIC. XVI.
And as for the Stuff, and Materials of Gold and Silver, being in Mass, or
Sweepings, We forbid to buie, or sell them at an higher rate, then according
to the Rule of this Ordinance, upon penalty of confiscation of the abovesaid
Materials; and moreover, to forfeit double the worth of them, at the charge as
well of the buier, as of the seller, for the first time; for the second time,
twice as much; and for the third time, four times as much; and afterward
arbitrarie punishment.

ARTIC. XVII.
We expressly forbid henceforth to transport, or cause to be transported out of
the abovesaid Province, toward any strange Mints, any Gold or Silver-Monies,
and also any Materials, in Mass or Moneys, also any Materials in Mass or Ingots
fit to Coin Moneys of them, upon forfeit of confiscation of the abovesaid
Moneys and Materials, or the worth of them, in case they were already
transported; and besides this, upon penalty of one hundred Golden Angelots,
upon every Mark of Gold, and twenty Angelots for every Mark of Silver, and
of more or less proportionably for the first time; for the second time, upon
the same forfeit and penalty; and moreover to undergo bodily punishment: and
if they have not wherewithal to pay the abovesaid forfeits and amerciaments,
they shall be bodily punished according to the manner of the Fact; under which
penalty and amerciaments; we understand are comprehended all those who had
assisted, and had an hand in the abovesaid Transportation, or conveying them
away, although the Moneys or Materials did not belong unto them.

ARTIC. XX.
Moreover, We forbid every one to File, Cut, or Wash with strong Water, or
Cement, or any otherwise, any Gold or Silver-Monies, or to Soulder, Guild,
Piece, or Nail the same, or any way to make the same lighter or heavier, upon
the forfeit of life and goods, where Confiscation takes place.

ARTIC. XXII.
We forbid henceforth every one, to Melt any Gold, or Silver-Monies of her
Majesty's of England's stamp, valued by these presents, upon penalty of life
and goods, where confiscation takes place: And the Moneys of Gold which are
found to be light by three Grains, or otherwise Clipped, Washed, Nailed, or
Souldered, shall be brought to the Exchange, after the old custom.

PLACART and ORDINANCE, For Flanders, at Antwerp, the fourth of October. 1585.
ARTIC. XIII.
AND to hinder the Transporting of the good and true Moneys, We forbid all and
every one henceforth, to buie or sell any Species of Gold and Silver-Monies,
to give any profit or gain for it, upon penalty of the seller to forfeit the
Pieces which are sold, or shall be sold, and besides the buier, as the seller,
to forfeit threescore pounds of the abovesaid good Moneys, for the first time;
and twice as much for the second time; and for the third time, four times as
much; and besides, they are to be arbitrarily punished.

ARTIC. XIV.
We also forbid all, and every one, to Weigh, Clip, File, or make chois of
any Species of Gold and Silver, for to make any profit with Melting, or
Transporting of them, upon penalty of Criminal punishment, besides the loss of
the abovesaid Pieces.

ARTIC. XV.
Furthermore, We forbid, and interdict well expressly; that no one of what
quality, degree, or condition soever, shall henceforth endeavor to transport,
or carry into any strange Mints, or into any other then our own, any Gold, or
Silver-Monies of our Stamp, or others tolerated by this Our Ordinance, nor also
any other Moneys, being Clipped, or declared Bullion, Melted, or in Mass, or
otherwise, nor also any other stuff, fit to Coin Moneys of them, upon forfeit
of the abovesaid Gold and Silver, and besides, of two hundred Golden-Reals, for
every Mark of Gold, and twenty Golden-Reals, for every Mark of Silver, and
of more or less in proportion for the first time that this shall happen; and
for the second time, besides the abovesaid forfeit, to be bodily punished, and
otherwise as occasion shall serve. And if so be, that any person have
transported any sum of Moneys, without being taken in the fact; We will
nevertheless, that whenever it shall be perceived, and discovered, they
shall proceed against the transgressors by execution of the said penalties,
even as if they were taken in the same fact, well understanding, that in stead
of Confiscation of the Species, they shall be bound to pay the price, and
estimation of the transported Moneys, and besides, the double worth of them,
and also to be criminally punished.

We will and command also, That those who shall have helped to pack, or
secretly convey, and transport the abovesaid Moneys, either in Mass, or
Species, although the abovesaid Moneys did not belong unto them, they shall be
bodily, or Arbitrarily punished, according to the quality of the fact, and
persons.

The Policy and Laws of this Realm, have always aimed at, and intended the
Increas and Augmentation of Money, especially that of Silver, and this diverse
ways:

I. By providing again Exportation of it. 9 E. 3. c. 1. 38 E. 3. c. 2. 17 E. 3.
21. 5 R. 2. c. 2. 2 H. 4. c 5. 2 H 6. c. 6. 17 E. 4. c. 1. Made Felony, 19 H.
7. c. 5. 3 H. 8. c. 1.

II. By providing, against the melting it down, to make Plate or other
Manufactures of it. 9 E. 3. cap. 3. 17 R. 2. cap. 1. 17 E. 4. cap. 1. 2 H. 6.
cap. 13.

III. By providing, That if any Moneys through time, or any other practice,
became uncurrant, then the same to be converted into Money again, and not to
be diverted from Coin. E. 1. Statute de monet parva Rastal Tit. Money.

IV. By providing, That none should give a price for Bullion, or Coined Money,
above the rate of the Mint, or what the same is current for: for it is not to
be exspected, that any Bullion, either Gold or Silver, shall ever be brought
to the Mint, when the owner may have a greater price, then at the Mint, either
to be transported, or to be converted to make Plate, or other things. This
agrees likewise with the policy of Spain, which though it be the Spring, and
Fountain from whence the greatest Streams of Silver has been derived into
other parts, yet Silver there, will always yield the seller six pence, or one
Real more upon the Mark at the Mint, then to be sold to any other for any
purpose whatsoever, concurring likewise with the practice of other States.

That all these Acts are defective, and not effectual to the ends abovesaid,
for the reasons following.
The Acts against Transportation; some extend not to Gold, as 9 E. 3. c. 1.
Others have effect only upon the Money that is transported, and that com's too
late, and is seldom or never known, as 38 E. 3. c. 2. 5 R. 2. c. 2. 2 H. 6. c.
6. 17 E. 4. c. 1. being now discontinued.

Those that extend to the shipping of it, etc. viz. 2 H. 4. c. 5. 19 H. 7. c.
5. and 3 H. 8. c. 1. give the whole forfeiture to the King, and no part to the
Informer, whereby they are not at all made use of, no man being willing to be
at charge to prosecute another, doing no good to himself.

None of those Acts do give sufficient forfeitures to restrain the offenses, as
has been manifested by experience.

Lastly, they have not given any means for discovery thereof, without which,
the offenders will not be deterred from finding out close and secret ways to
adventure and practice against them, when opportunity of great gain, and hope
of concealment, shall invite and encourage them thereunto.

And for the now Act drawn and propounded to be passed.
BEsides the frame and body of it, comprehending, and fully extending to all
the ways and means of the abuses, the same for the forfeitures, is drawn from
the example and president of 18 El. c. 9. against transportation of Leather,
Tallow, and raw Hides, and others in the Queen's time, and the late Ordinance
1647. Against transportation of Wool, Fuller's Earth, etc.

The Clauses touching the proceeding by Information, etc. are the same with the
like Clauses of the said Ordinance for Wool, 1647.

And the Clauses to encourage the Instrument, and others to discover the
offenses, wherein themselves are liable to the penalties, are framed in
imitation, and by the president of the said Act of 18 El. And the other
Ordinances and Edicts of other Kingdoms and Estates, that give like exemptions
and encouragements to such, as though guilty themselves in the second degree,
shall reveal and discover others more principal offenders, taking likewise from
them the confidence they would have, that the persons they employed should
conceal their offenses, whereby they will be much deterred from hazarding and
adventuring upon the practice.

And the Claus touching the Commission, and examination of Witnesses for
discovery, etc. And to commit them in case of their refusal to be examined,
is exampled by the 13 Eliz. c. 7. The Act against Bankrupts, and discovery of
their Estates; There being greater reason and equity, for the discovery of
fraud, concerning the Commonwealth, then concerning any private person.

In an ORDINANCE and PLACART, For the general Regulating of the Mint, published
at Brussel, the 18 of Mar. 1633. is inserted.
ARTIC. XXV.
WE declare, That although any of our Subjects or others, who shall have acted
any thing contrary to this Ordinance, and were not taken in the Fact, yet
notwithstanding, after they shall be convinced of the said transgression, they
shall be proceeded against, with condemnation of the said penalties and
amerciaments; well understanding, that in stead of forfeiting the said Moneys
and Materials, they shall be condemned to pay the worth of them.

ARTIC. XXVI.
And if it happens, that the just quality and quantity of the said Species,
Bullion, or Materials cannot be precisely known or verified, We will, that
such transgressors be punished according to the heinousness of the fact, being
left to the discretion of the Judges.

ARTIC. XXVII.
Which we intend shall take place, in regard of those who shall be convinced,
to have paid away, presented, or received any forbidden Moneys, at an higher
price then by this present Ordinance is declared, although the said quality
and quantity of the same, could not be precisely verified.

ARTIC. XXVIII.
We have autorized, and autorize by these, all Officers, for to seiz upon, and
break open the Packs, Letters, and Portmantles of the Messengers, or others
whom they shall know or suspect to bring in any of the forbidden Species, or
Materials, or to Transport, or conveie out of our said Lands, any of our
Species, and that in the presence of those, to whom the said Packets are sent,
or do belong, if so be they are residing in that place; as also in the
presence of one of the Magistrates of the said place, only to know the name of
those who cassued the said Gold and Silver to be Transported, and to no other
end.

ARTIC. XXXVII.
We also Order, That all those that shall be found to have Counterfeited,
Coined, Stamped, Pressed, or cast into the sand, any Moneys, of what manner,
stuff, or Metal soever, shall be executed as falls Moniers, in a kettle with
boiling Oil, and Water, and with Confiscation of all their goods.

ARTIC. LV.
If so be any one be convinced, that he had picked, or chosen out, or caused to
be chosen out, any of the said valued Species, for to keep the heavy ones for
his profit, and to pay away the light ones, to the damage of the Commonaltie;
We will, that he, besides the said forfeits and amerciaments, shall be
banished out of Our said Lands, for the space of ten years.

ARTIC. LVI.
In case that any of the particular Masters of Our Mints, or Exchanges, were
convinced of the said abuse, or that they should have presented, or paid away
any of the said Clipped, or other forbidden Species, after that they had received
the same for Bullion, or not Current, then shall they be banished for ever out
of Our said Lands, and their goods confiscated.

ARTIC. LVII.
And because the price of the Species is commonly regulated according to the
price of the Gold and Silver-Materials, Therefore we have forbidden, and
forbid every one of what quality and condition soever, to buie or sell any
Gold or Silver-Materials, or Species declared for Bullion, or not Current, at
an higher price then the Ordinance of Our said Mint permits, upon penalty
of Confiscation of the said Materials, and the worth of them, at the charge as
well of the buier, as seller, for the first time; for the second time, four
times as much, besides the Confiscation and Forfeit, and of other Arbitrarie
correction.

ARTIC. LXIII.
We order also, that the Brokers, who did assist and help to conclude or treat
upon such parcels, either in regard of Money given upon Exchange, or upon use
or obligation, either in payment of the sold Merchandises, or otherwise, shall
be publicly whipped and banished out of Our said Lands, for the space of ten
years.

ARTIC. LVI.
And as We have understood, and are truly informed, that a great part of the
irregularitie concerning the said Placarts, is risen and occasioned, by reason
that many Merchants and Factors will not buie the Works and Manufactures of the
workmen, and handie-crafts-men, unless they will receiv the Gold and Silver at
such a price as they will give it them; or when they have almost bought the
goods, they give the Merchandise back again to the sellers, if they will be
paid according to the price Ordered in Our Placart: Therefore We will, that
such oppressors of the poor Commonaltie, shall be rigorously proceeded
against, and punished, by apprehension of their persons, and that they, their
Process being summarily, and criminally formed, and found guilty of what is
abovesaid, shall be banished for ever, and their goods confiscated, or in
stead hereof, to be condemned in a great sum of Money, according to the
heinousness of the fact; of which confiscation and amerciament, the half shall
be given to the Plaintiff, or discoverer.

ARTIC. LXX.
In like manner shall be punished those with the same forfeits and
amerciaments, who shall have received, paid away, or presented any clipped Money,
or declared for Bullion, with protestation, or declaration, that it is for to
deliver them into Our Mint, or to the Exchangers, unless they had presently cut
them in pieces, or deformed them, or caused the same to be don by others.

ARTIC. XCI.
We declare, That although it be that any of the Transgressors do obtain
favor and pardon from Us, or from Our Council, We do not intend, nor We will
not, that therefore they should be quitted, and discharged from the parts of
the said forfeits and amerciaments, granted by Us to the Officers, Callers in
question, and Plaintiffs, or Discoverers respectively; but such favor and
pardon only to take place, for as much as belongs unto Us.

ARTIC. CV.
We Order well expressly, all Our Fiscals and Officers, to take their
conclusions; and all Our Counselors, Magistrates, and other Judges, to give
their Sentences in conformity to this Our present Placart, without using any
moderation of the penalties and amerciaments therein contained, under what
pretext soe^ver; nor also any compensation of charges, to the prejudice of the
Officer founded in the principal, upon penalty of Our indignation, and for to
answer for it in their own persons, unless they shall plead any ignorance, or
the general transgression. Which excuses We do not intend shall avail, or help
them in any manner of way: but Our intention is, that they shall be punished,
because of their negligence and connivence.

This Ordinance and Placart of the 18 of March, 1633. is again confirmed; and
all Magistrates and Officers are required to do their utmost endeavors to see
it strictly observed in all points. Published at Brussels the 26 of August,
1643.

In an ORDINANCE and PLACART, For the Regulating of the Mint; Published in
Brussels the last day of May, 1644. is inserted.
ARTIC. XI.
WE have also forbidden, and forbid by these presents, every one of what
quality or condition soever, as well our Subjects, as others, to transport any
Gold or Silver from henceforth out of our Lands, directly or indirectly, or
cause the same to be transported, either Minted or Unminted; as also in Mass,
Ingots, or Bullion; without having obtained of us beforehand express leav and
consent for to do the same, upon penalty of forfeiting the Gold, Silver, and
Bullion, and to pay besides the double of their worth, and upon forfeit of the
Merchandises, if so be the abovesaid Gold, Silver, or Bullion shall be found
to be packt in them; as also of the Horses and Wagons of those, who shall
willingly and wittingly have brought and conveied the same.

ARTIC. XV.
And if any one be found and taken to have transported or caused to be
transported out of our Lands, any Moneys by Us valued, or other declared
Bullion, or any Materials of Gold and Silver, and have delivered or caussed to
be delivered the same into any strange Mints; We will, that such persons
shall be proceeded against, sharply and rigorously by the imprisonment of
their persons; and that they, besides the forfeits of the said Species and
Materials, and four times the worth of them for the first time, shall be
banished out of our abovesaid Lands, for the space of five years; and for the
second time, for ever.

ARTIC. XVI.
And those who willingly and wittingly have assisted for to pack and transport
the abovesaid Moneys or Materials, shall be punished according to pleasure, or
banished according to the quality of the person.

Other Countries you may see strictly provide against these offenses; and it
will never be mended here, if you make not as strict Laws as they.

In a Declaration of the King of France, for the Regulating of the new price
set upon the Light and Clipped Species of Money: likewise for the observation of
the prices of Gold and Silver employed for the Gold-smith's work. It is also
expressly forbidden to melt the Money, and to transport them, or other Materials
of Gold and Silver out of the said Kingdom. Printed at Paris 30 of October,
1640.
FOLIO 8, 9.
WE expressly forbid, that all Materials of Gold and Silver, either Coined or
Uncoined, shall not be bought or sold at an higher rate then is expressly set
down in this Placart, which does contain the true value that must be paid for
the Mark of Gold and Silver.

FOLIO 13.
We expressly forbid every one, of what condition or quality soever, to
transport out of Our Kingdom, any Gold and Silver Coined or Uncoined, nor any
other Goldsmith's work, upon penalty of forfeiting the Materials and
Merchandises, and other things wherein they shall be found to be packt up in;
besides the penalty of fifty pounds, and bodily punishment.

Now that general Laws and Statutes in England from time to time, have provided
against transporting of Gold, or melting down the current Coin, and buying
Silver and Gold at above the price of the Mint, appears by these following,
viz.

Stat. 9. Edw. 3. Both forbidding the transporting of the Gold of the Nation,
and the melting down the current Silver Coins, by Gold smiths or others into
Plate.

Stat. 14 Rich 2. cap. 12. Commissions made through the Realm, for to enquire
of such as had conveied the Money of England out of the Nation, to the
prejudice and damage of the King and Realm.

Stat. 17 Rich. 2. cap. 1. There shall be no melting of the current Money to
make any thing by Goldsmiths or others, upon pain of forfeiture.

2 Hen. 4. cap. 4. No person to transport Gold or Silver, either in Coin or
Bullion, upon pain of forfeiting as much as they might.

4 Hen. 4. cap. 10. No Goldsmiths or other person to melt down the current
Silver Coins of the Nation, upon pain of forfeiting four times the value.

9 Hen. 5. cap. 1. All Statutes heretofore made touching the good and lawful
government of Gold and Silver, and not repealed, to be in force.

2 Hen. 6. cap. 6. Upon a grievous complaint made in Parliament, that great
sums of Gold and Silver were transported into Flanders and Bordeaux, out of
this Kingdom, it was ordered and enacted, that no Gold or Silver should be
transported out of the Realm.

And because it is supposed, that the money of Gold is transported by
Merchants-aliens, It is ordained, that the Merchants-aliens shall find
security with sureties in the Chancerie, that they shall not transport Gold or
Moneys out of the Kingdom, upon pain of forfeiting the sum or the value; and
if any do contrary, and that duly proved, and he so doing be gone over Sea,
then his pledges shall pay his said forfeiture; whereof he that the same
espied, and thereof gave notice to the Treasurer or the State's Council, shall
have the fourth part.

2 Hen 6. ca. 12. To the intent that more money be brought into the Mint, It
is ordained, That neither the Master of the Mint, nor Changer for the time
being, neither sell nor cause to be sold, nor alien to no other use, but apply
the same wholly to Coin, according to the tenure of the Indenture made betwixt
the State, and Master of the Mint.

4 Hen. 7. cap. 13. Item, Where in a Parliament begun and holden at Westminster
the 16 of Januarie, the 17 of Edw. 4. No person to carry Gold or Silver either
in Bullion or Coin, nor Jewels of Gold, but such persons as be dispensed with
by the Statute of Hen. 4. upon pain of Felony, to be heard and determined as
other Felony is; the which Statute to endure from the Feast of Easter, the 18
of Edw. 4. unto the end of seven years next ensuing: Since the which seven
years expired, the Gold and Silver Coin of this Realm has, and daily is
conveied into Flanders, Normandy, Britanie, Ireland, and other parts beyond
the Seas, as well by Merchants-Strangers, as by Denisons, to the great
impoverishing of the Realm, and greater is like to be, without remedy thereof
be hastily provided. The King our Sovereign Lord, the premises considered, by
the advice of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Prayers of the Commons
in the said Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, have
ordained, and enacted, and established, That the said Statute made in the
sixteenth year of Edw. the fourth, be, and stand a statute good and effectual,
with all the premises in the same observed and kept, and put in due execution,
from the Feast of the Purification of our die, which shall be in the year of
our Lord 1489. to endure to the end of twenty years next ensuing.

1 Hen. 8. cap. 13. An Act made, That whosoever shall carry any Gold, or
Silver, or Jewels out of the Realm, shall forfeit double the value, the one
half to him that shall seiz it, or therefore sue by action of debt at the
Common Law. This Act to endure to the next Parliament.

5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 16. An Act touching the exchange of Gold and Silver, that
whosoever give's more for Gold and Silver then it is or shall be declared by
the King's Proclamation, shall suffer imprisonment by the space of one year,
and make fine at the King's pleasure, the one moitie to his Majesty, the other
moitie to be to the party that seizes the same, or will sue for it by Bill,
Plaint, or information, or otherwise.

1. A Proclamation against giving for light Gold more then is current, 21
Julie, 17 Jac.

2. A Proclamation against melting English money, 18 Maii, 9 Jac.

3. A Proclamation against buying and selling Gold and Silver, at higher prices
then the Mint, 14 Maii, 1 Jac.

4. A Proclamation against transporting of Gold, 23 Maii, 1o Jac.

5. A Proclamation against profit for Gold and Silver, and melting English
money for Plate; Waste in Gold and Silver, 4 Feb. 19 Jac.

6. A Proclamation against transporting Gold and Silver, and melting down the
current Coins of the Nation, 25 Maii, 3 Car.

From all which Statutes and Provisions, it may be gathered, that the current
Money and Bullion of the Nation, is the Subjects, only to use between man and
man, but not to abuse: for no man by the Law, can buie or sell them by way of
Merchandise at higher rates then they are Proelaimed; if he do, he is finable
by the Law: he that washes, clippeth, or lesseneth the current Coins,
commit's treason. He that export's the Treasure of the Nation, either in
Bullion, or current Coin, being taken, loses them: he that melt's down the
current Gold or Silver of the Nation for Plate or other Manufactures, commit's
a forfeiture; and transporting of treasure has formerly been made Felony, as
by the several Statutes and Laws to this purpose appears.

By these and diverse other Laws and Statutes, our Prededecessors have
endeavored the retention and preservation of the Coin and Treasures within this
Nation, but could hitherto never effect it.

Nor will these mischiefs ever be stopped, till there be Commissions by Act
of Parliament according to former presidents, when the Nation was defrauded of
their Treasure as now it is, strictly to enquire of the offenders, and bring
them to Justice.

For of late, the easy easy of Delinquents for these offenses, has given the
boldness to offenders to go on: and Time, the truest Schoolmaster, has taught
all ages to know, that little penalties could yet never interpose betwixt the
Merchant and his profit.

Whereas the Parliament, by their Ordinance 6 of Sept. 1647. did descrie all
Clipped, Filed, or diminished Money (by means whereof great quantities were
sold to some Goldsmiths) who have made it a Trade to deal with Receivers of
Public Cashes, Grasiers, and several other persons (and in stead of melting of
these Moneys down) some Goldsmiths have issued these Moneys out again in
payment, whereas at the Tower these Clipped Moneys would make but five
shillings the Ounce Troie, these men have vented out these Clipped Moneys to
diverse ill-affected people at five shillings six pence, and five shillings
eight pence, and six shillings the Ounce, who have dispersed the said Clipped
Moneys so bought from Goldsmiths, up and down the Nation again, to the great
enriching of themselves, and defrauding of the good people of this Nation, by
buying up this Clipped Money since the Ordinance 1647. at the least twenty
times over, and venting it for current again, which had been helped, if there
had been but six words put into the Ordinance, which was, to have required all
persons exchanging any Clipped, or uncurrant English money with any Goldsmiths or
others, upon forfeiture of double the value, to see it cut in two pieces, or so
defaced, that it should not be passable after. I humbly present this defect of
that Ordinance, that it may be looked after and amended; and I humbly desire,
that the Act against transporting Treasure now committed, may be enacted with
such vigor, that the Commonwealth may have the real benefit, and the offenders
brought to exemplarie Justice.

There has been twenty Millions of Money coined within this twenty five
years, as will appear by the Mint-Books, and almost all of it transported out
of the Nation, the Gold all gone, the current Silver culled out, the weightiest
melted and transported: and that Silver-Monies which remain's is but little,
and all culled Gold is made as precious in this Commonwealth as Diamonds. What
inconveniences will arise by the indirect dealing of private men in this
particular to the Commonwealth, I shall humbly leav it to you to consider.

In the Year 1643. It was humbly offered to this Parliament, to have the
offenders discovered, and to bring them to Justice, and this mischief stopped;
but, by the great Interest of the offenders, that had then power in this
Nation, the Proposition was slighted, and these mischiefs ever since daily
practiced, to the unspeakable damage of this Commonwealth: for it is far
easier to keep the Treasure in the Nation, by making strict Laws against
Transportation, then when it is gone to bring it back, as too late experience
will make this Commonwealth feel. But you have the power to call these
offenders to a strict account, if you pass the Act fully to enable all people
to make their discoveries. How, and in what manner other Nations do punish
these offenders, you have already presented out of their Placarts. This evil
is grown to such an hight, that both our own Laws put in the strictest
execution, and the Customs and Laws of other Countries added to them for this
particular, with the greatest diligence of expert men, to make the search for
what is past, and to prevent these mischiefs for the time to com, will be
little enough: and to make this discovery is a service of more Importance to
the Commonwealth, then at first sight can be apprehended.

This is a certain rule, No great action in any Commonwealth or State, can be
don but by Money, which all ages have held to be the sinews of War, and
Garland of Peace; and what occasions we have to use it both for commerce and
safety, is humbly left to you to consider, and in all well-regulated States it
has ever been accounted a great service to discover the offenders and abuses
practiced upon the Treasure of their Nation; and to prevent the growth of these
mischiefs, is the work of every faithful lover of his Country; And he or
they that shall be against the discovery of these offenses and offenders, may
amongst judicious men be justly suspected to be Parties themselves.

And though some Merchants and other Interested persons may, for their own
interest, either for their profit, or fear of punishment for what they have
don, speak themselves, or get others to oppose the Act against Transporting
Treasure to pass the House, or procure it to be so altered, as it shall not be
effectual to give a full cure to the Commonwealth of the great inconveniences
it is now under, by several abuses practiced upon Coin and Bullion.

To give a cure to the Commonwealth of these great inconveniences, and also to
take away the great obstructions of your Mint, which will never be don till
this Act pass; and if it were more stricter, it would be more beneficial to
the Commonwealth, especially in these times, when you have so many occasions
of Money, by bringing in presently very great sums of Money to the State by
the punishment of the offenders.

You have here, with all humility, set down to you, the ways and means
whereby your neighbor Countries use to prevent these mischiefs, and to punish
the offenders for what is past, with several old Statutes of this Nation: out
of which if you extract the quintessence, and make a sharp and vigorous Law,
and require all your Officers and others to put it in full execution, you may,
in a short time, cure this Commonwealth of these dangerous diseases, which if
you let it go on, will prove a Gangrene.

I humbly beseech you to take notice, there has been, within seven years
Coined in ten days, more Money in the Tower of London, then has been Coined
near upon this three last years. Now if you suffer treasure to go out of the
Nation every day for want of a Law, to give all people power to discover and
examine the offenders, in a short time you will not have any Money left in the
Commonwealth. For experience in all ages shows, that little and slight
penalties can never stop some Merchants from their profit: so they get to their
private, they care not what mischiefs the Commonwealth suffer's: For a
Commonwealth without plenty of Money, look's like a great House unfurnisht;
and bare Walls is no handsome sight; and you will find there will not be Money
left to pay your just Taxes, Customs and Excise, and to maintain Trade and
Commerce, if you clear not the obstruction of the Mint, and take not some
effectual course to set it on work. And this Act is but a preparation and ground
work to cause your Mint to go; and till it pass, you will never see your Mint
flourish; for to allow any man to out-give the Mint for Bullion, is, to shut up
the Mint; for all men will vent their treasure, where they can have the
greatest price; and not to make a way for the opening of the Mint at this time,
especially when you have such occasions of money; I shall humbly leav it to you
to consider the inconvenience.

The Goldsmiths when they were before the Honorable Committee, by their
Counselor Mr Recorder, and Mr Vinstanly, being demanded by the Committee,
what they could say why an Act should not pass for discovery of such as had
Transported the Coin and Bullion of the Nation? did by their Counsel, and by
Sir John Wollaston, Alderman Viner, and the rest, declare their willingness to
have the offenders brought to punishment: The like they did for all such as
culled, or melted down the current Coin of this Nation for their own private
profit, or such as bought up the light Clipped English Money, descried by an
Ordinance of Parliament the sixth of Sept. 1647. and did not deface it, but
contrary to this Ordinance, did vent it again into several parts of the
Nation, and pay it away to the deceit of all the people of the Nation. Upon
this answer to the Committee, it put's me in mind of a custom, which is usual
in all men's houses; If Glasses be broke, or any other mischief don, No body
did it: But upon a Commission of inquiry, many times it is found to be Some.
body. But to the question that was asked the Goldsmiths. by the Honorable
Committee, concerning buying Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint, they
pleaded, The Trade was an ancient Trade; that if they were restrained to a
price, they, and their families could not subsist, that they could not buie
Silver, but sometime the Market was at 5 s. 1 d. 5 s. 2d. and 5s. ^d. and Sir
John Wollaston said, That he, and diverse others, had given 5 s. 4 d. nay, 5 s.
5 d. for Sterling-Silver for their Trade, and for confirmation of the truth of
this, he did appeal to his Brethren, Alderman Viner, and Alderman Nowel, and
the rest of the Gold smiths at the Committee, and none of them did deny it.
Now I shall humbly offer to your consideration, First, Sterling-Silver will
make but 5 s. in the Mint; and it is delivered out of the Mint, after it is
Coined, at 5 s, 2 d the Ounce. If the Goldsmiths give 5 s. 5 d. for this
Sterling Silver, how can any be brought into the Mint? nay, how is all the
heavy Money culled and melted down, and none left to pass but light and
clipped? And this is the true ground why many Goldsmiths are Cashiers to
Merchants, and keep servants to receiv men's Moneys, without any reward, only
that they might cull, and weigh out the heavy Silver, and melt it or transport
it beyond the Seas, for their own private gain, to the high deceit of the
Nation.

There is nothing in this Act does restrain the due and orderly Trade of a
Goldsmiths, when in is well weighed and considered. But that which is their
usual Trade, now discovered to be so highly destructive to the Nation, ought
to be restrained. The Bakers may as well Petition against all Pillories, or
against my Lord Major, for weighing their Bread, as the Gold smiths justly
except against the restraining them, for giving for Gold and Silver, above the
price of the Mint.

They see it, that it is the Law of the Land, in the 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 13. It
is the daily practice of France, Holland, Flanders, as appears hereby their
Laws. Clothing is the Staple of the Land, and ought most to be cherished; yet
the law propound's for the regulating of the weight, the length, and breadth.
Brick-makers, Wood-mongers, Meal-men. and diverse other Trades, are restrained
and regulated, and yet all these Trades receiv protection and countenance in
their orderly working of their Manufactures, from the Commonwealth.

There are people which believ, That if there had been a real intention to give
a stop to the transporting of Money, it had been don before; though for my part
I am not of that opinion. There was (say they) notice of it nine years ago,
when the Presbytery had the power: And seven years ago, the grievances of the
Transporting of Gold and Silver, with several other abuses, was by me at large
presented to the Parliament, and the same mischiefs foretold, which are now com
to pass; that without it were looked after, and a strict Law made against it,
to discover the offenders, there would not be any Gold or Silver left in the
Nation. And this has proved too true; for many millions of Gold and Silver
have since been transported, to the unspeakable damage of the Commonwealth.

And upon seizure of several great quantities of Gold and Silver, by M.
Watkins, chief Searcher of the Port of London, which was shipped to be
transported; the Order of the Parliament, the 1 of September. 1647. was made to
the Committee of the Navy, to see to prevent it.

After all these Certificates made by the Officers of the Mint and Customs, and
the Committee of the Navy, for the speedy putting so good a work in
execution, (all which, I have hereafter set down.) The Council of State was
pleased to make a Committee of themselves; and after many great and serious
consultations, drew up the draught of an Act of Parliament, with their desire to
the Parliament to have it pass with all expedition, for the service of the
Commonwealth.

There are others, more unhappie, which say, Now the Steed is stolen, shut the
stable door: Now there is no more Gold left to transport, to what purpose does
the Parliament make an Act against transporting Gold? this should have been don
before; for how can we maintain Commerce, pay Taxes, when our English Gold is
forty times more plentiful beyond the Seas, then it is in England, and almost
all the Silver Coin of the Nation transported, and scarce any left, but
clipped, and light money.

And some people are so impudent to believ, that there are some Members of
Parliament guilty of transporting money, or else this Act should not have stuck
so long upon their hands.

Others there are, that have transported money, and committed many abuses upon
the Coins of the Nation, that hope they shall have their pardon for what is
past, though they have transported almost all the Gold and Silver of the
Nation, that now if they would, they can offend no more; and they have don the
Commonwealth that damage, that a Million of money cannot give them
satisfaction. These I humbly conceiv, ought to be made to restore their unjust
gain, which will deter any others hereafter from doing the like.

And there are that say, Look how almost all men have sped, that have
certified against transporting money, or looked to stop the same. Has not Sir
Robert Harlow, and M. Cogan been put out of their places in the Mint? Has not
M. Watkins, M. Tomes, Sir Thomas Daws, and M. Hollowaie been put out of their
places in the Custom-Hous? Were not you Thomas Violet imprisoned in the Tower
four years, because you should not tell the truth, and let the Commonwealth
know for all that time, most of their money and treasure was sending out of the
Nation?

I shall add something more to this. I have observed what the State has gotten
by putting out these men; and I found, First, That upon the putting forth of
the old Officers of the Mint, in M. Swallow's place, who was the Clerk of the
Irons, and Surveier of the Melting-Hous for the Mint; a place of great skill
and trust, there is a now a Clerk put in, to execute that place, that can
neither write nor read; and other Officers put into the places of the old ones
in the Mint, that were utterly ignorant of managing the mysteries of that
Office. And one of the greatest obstructions of the Mint, com^s through the
ignorance of the Officers, and their want of correspondence and acquaintance
with such as usually have brought Money from beyond the Seas.

The old Officers of the Mint, were Masters in this Mystery, which is not so
soon learned as men think. And for son of those that have been turned out of
their places out of the Custom-Hous, now the Act is passed for the Council of
Trade, there will quickly be presented the practices of some of the Officers of
the Customs, and Petitions for a redress of many abuses practiced by some of
them, and a Review Petitioned for, to know upon what grounds many of the old
Officers were turned out of their places, being never charged with any
offense, but only forced out to make way for others to com into their places;
some of the old Officers of the Customs being turned out of their places, only
because of their activitie in stopping the Gold and Silver of the Nation from
being transported; and this is M. Edward Watkins his case, and others put into
his Office, that seize's Gold and Silver before it is forfeited, and when the
Merchant recover's it again by Law, the Searcher that made the seizure, take's
the King's Bench, and so the Merchant may go seek his money, to the great
damage of the Merchant.

But according to the former presidents, all Officers of the Customs were to
put in security for the just performance of their trust to the State, and no
Officer was to receiv the Customs, and Moneys of the Commonwealth in any Port
of this Nation; nor to make any seizure before he had put in security to the
Lord Treasurer, to make a true account of what moneys and goods came to their
hands, which I (having more then probable reasons) do believ the Collectors,
and other Officers of the Ports, have not don, to the great damage of the
Commonwealth, and prejudice of the Merchants, if seizures be unjustly made,
and the Merchants recover their Goods or Moneys by a Verdict at Law, and after
all their charge and hazard, not to have all their Goods and Moneys again. This
discovery I have put in for the service of the Commonwealth, it being a cause
judged in the Checquer this last Term, that for the future such abuses of the
new Officers of the Customs might be prevented.

I have to some men replied this Act; it has been delaied by the Parliament,
only by the multitude of other business, though I must confess there are very
few businesses of the Commonwealth can take place before this, but that all
people should see when the Parlament's business was a little over, how zealous
in deeds, and not in words, they would be, for to punish these great
offenders, and to make them paic back the unjust gain; which moneys should be
employed for the Public, and so save the Nation Taxes: That I was confident
there was not any Member in the Parliament was guilty of transporting money; or
if there were, they durst not be seen to justify so wicked an Act, but would
be glad to sleep quiet in a whole skin; and truly if I did know any of them, I
would not meddle with them, unless the Act did positively enjoin me to do it.

It has been objected to me, by some Goldsmiths, and others; That I my self
have been a transporter of money, and melter down of heavy Coin of the Nation,
and a furnisher of Gold and Silver to transport out of this Nation, and a buier
of Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint. I deny it not, and my answer
to them is, An old Dear-stealer is the best keeper of a Park. And though I had
the late King's pardon, I had it not but it cost me dear; I paid at one time
to his Privy Purs, two thousand twenty shillings Pieces in Gold, and I am out
at this day by his command, in making the discovery of such as transported
Gold, nineteen hundred and threescore pounds; both which sums, I have been
out of Purs fifteen years: I would not have the greatest offender (that is a
Goldsmiths) by my consent, pay so great a sum. And this is my answer to
them, to that objection.

I would have them by my example leav off so destructive a Trade to the
Commonwealth, as furnishing the transporters with Gold and Silver, culling and
melting down the current Coin. If I had not been convinced in my conscience,
that it was bad, I would have followed that trade still. I had as good an
Estate, as most of the Goldsmiths to do it. I had as good credit, and I left
my trade as fairly; for I challenge all, or any man in London, that can say I
did not pay all men ready money to every penny and farthing I ought, when I
gave over my trade; and the best Alderman of London can do no more. It is
incident to all men to err; happy is he that repent's; but to persist against
the light of a man's conscience, is don by the strong instigation of the Devil.

I do humbly present further, that there have great mischiefs happened to this
Nation and their Army in Ireland since this Parliament, by the indirect dealing
of some Merchants and Goldsmiths in London, who contracted with some of the
adventurers for Ireland, to sell them Rials of Eight and Foreign Coins, giving
them some small time; but the poor Soldiers that received these moneys in
Ireland, lost above twenty pounds in the hundred by the moneys so paid them;
for first, the Goldsmiths culled out all the weightiest, and delivered none
but light and clipped; and then the coursness of the Silver, which was
Bead-monie, and adulterated in the West- Indies in the Mints, sometimes six
pence, sometimes more upon every piece of Eight, as is well known to some
Goldsmiths and Merchants, so that by the baseness of the Allaie, and want of
Weight there has been at the least twenty pounds in the hundred loss to the
soldiers, if he would make any return of it to his wife or children in
England, as many of them found by sad experience.

The Goldsmiths are the general Cashiers, for some of the principal Merchants
in the City; and this rule the Goldsmiths observe; when they receiv moneys, to
take none that is bad or clipped, (but let any man send to them to receiv
moneys, they shall have great quantities of clipped money mixed in their moneys
they receiv, and some of it constantly will escape the teller's eyes) which
clipped moneys the Goldsmiths buie of several people for Bullion, but never
Coin it; the rest that they cannot put off here in London, they have their
Agents to vent it to Grasiers and other people in the Country all over the
Nation; by which means in many Towns and Cities of this Nation, they are so
pestred with clipped money, that there is little else stirring in payment, to
the unspeakable damage of the receiver, who cannot pay it in London, but sell
it to the Goldsmiths, sometimes at twenty five, and thirty in the hundred
abated: which is by the Goldsmiths returned down into the Country next week
after; So that this abuse is like an Horse in a Mill, it turn's round, and is a
cheat put upon all people of the Nation, and without a strict Act of Parliament
against it, will not be prevented.

All these abuses aforesaid, are so high and transcendent, that the offenders
ought to be used as men usually use Wolvs and Foxes; for if private murder
be so penal, much more is public murder: now Money is the Life, Blood, and
Soul of the Commonwealth, without it no great action can be undertaken, for
the service of the Nation; and those that transport it, or adulterate it in
weight, may well be esteemed as the greatest enemies to the Commonwealth.
Therefore I humbly pray, that you would be pleased to give all encouragement
to all people, both in the Seaports of this Nation, and in the City of
London, for the discovery of the transporting of Gold and Silver, and such as
cull out the heavy Silver Coin of the Nation, and such as have bought Gold and
Silver above the price of the mint, to transport; for as the affairs now of
this nation stand, you cannot have a greater dis-service don to the
Commonwealth; and you will find the Commissioners and Officers of the Customs
certify to the Commissioners of the Navy in Sept. 1647. their desires in
their fourth Article, that a greater allowance should be given to such as
discover the transporters of Gold or Silver, then by the Statutes in that Case
is provided; and the Statute in 1 Henry 8. cap. 13. give's double the value,
the one half to him that shall seiz it, or therefore sue by action of Debt at
the Common Law; and by this draught of the Act, there is but one moitie of what
shall be proved to have been transported, given to the prosecutor.

What Foreign Nations do, you have here the presidents of France, Holland,
Flanders; and what former ages here in this Nation have don, you have in 14
Rich. 2. cap. 12. by Act of Parliament Commissions made through the Realm, to
enquire from the beginning of his Reign, which was for fourteen years, of such
as had conveied the Money of England out of the Nation, to the damage of the
Realm; and unless you make the like Commissions, the Commonwealth will be
brought to extreme poverty.

Here are annexed two Certificates of the Officers of the Mint, and
Commissioners and Officers for the Customs, grounded upon an Order of
Parliament, and an Order of the Commissioners of the Navy, viz.

Die Mercurii, 1 Sept. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That it be referred to the
Committee of the Navy to consider of, and take some effectual course to prevent
the transportation of Bullion out of the Kingdom: and speedily to report what
they have don herein, to the House.

H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl.

Committee of the Navy, 2 Sept. 1647.
THe Commissioners and Officers of the Customs, with Master Watkins the
head-Searcher, are desired to consider of some course to be taken to prevent the
transportation of Bullion out of the Nation, according to an Order of the House
of Commons, hereunto annexed; and to certify the same to the Committee.

Giles Green.

THe Commissioners and Officers for the Customs, having together with the Head
Searcher, in the Port of London, in pursuance of the directions of this
Honorable Committee above mentioned, perused sundry Statutes yet in force,
relating, as well to the restraint of the Exportation of Bullion, as the
regulation of Merchants-Strangers in their way of Trade, do humbly conceiv,

1. That if the Statute of 2 Hen. 6. cap. 6. enjoining Merchants-Strangers, to
give security in Chancerie, not to transport the Money or Plate of the Realm:
And the Statute of 3 Hen. 7. cap. 8. enjoining them to emploie the money they
receiv in the Merchandise of this Nation;

2. And that to the Statute of 5 Rich. 2. cap. 2. and 2 Hen. 4. cap. 5. The
Parliament would be pleased, first, to declare who shall be reputed Aliens:
for that since the sitting of this Parliament, the children of aliens born in
this Kingdom, are reputed free born subjects, and do enjoie their privileges
accordingly: which in former times was not allowed till the third descent.
Secondly, To declare by Ordinance that the Estate of him or them that shall
Export Money or Plate, shall be immediately sequestered.

3. To impose a severe penalty upon the Master of such Ship or Vessel, upon
which any Money or Plate shall be found above his ordinary charges, he
being privy thereunto.

4. To allow to such as shall discover, or find out any Bullion or Plate,
endeavored to be transported, a greater share and proportion, then by the
Statutes in that case is yet provided.

5. And to settle some way of punishment for such as shall resist, or abuse
Officers sufficiently autorized in their endeavors this way on the State's
behalf.

The said Commissioners and Officers, do humbly conceiv, That it would be a
good means to deter such, who by all secret means do daily endeavor the
Exportation of the Coin and Bullion of this Kingdom, and much prevent the
Exportation thereof. All which, nevertheless they humbly submit to the Wisdom
of this Honorable Committee.

Tho. Daws, Col. John Hollowaie, Comptr. R. Carmarden, Super. Vis. Edw.
Watkins, Searcher. W. Tooms, Super. Vis. Genesis Walter Boothbie. Rich. Bateman.
Sam. Averie. Christoph. Pack. Charles Lloid.


The Officers of the Mint in the Tower of London, whose names are here
underwritten, in pursuance of the directions of the Honorable Committee of the
Navy, in relation to their Order dated the third of December present, do
humbly conceiv, and certify as follows:
THat to prevent great abuses practiced upon the Coin and Bullion of the
Nation, which is transported out of the Nation; as also to prevent the culling
and melting down the current Money of the Nation: and for the discovering of
such as have offended, to be brought to Justice, to deter others from acting
the like abuses for the future, do humbly conceiv,

That according to the President of the 14 Rich. 2. cap. 12. a Commission be
granted to make inquiry through the Realm, of such as had conveied the Moneys
of England out of the Nation, and to make inquiry after all such as melt and
cull out the heavy current Money, contrary to the Statute of the 4 Hen. 4.
cap. 10. none to melt the current Silver Coins of the Nation, upon pain of
forfeiture four times the value.

That 2 Hen. 6. cap. 12. It is ordained, that neither the Master-worker of the
Mint, nor the Changer for the time being, neither sell or cause to be sold,
nor alien to no other use; but apply the same wholly to Coin, according to the
tenure of the Indenture of the Mint, made between the King's Majesty and the
Master of the Mint: to declare by Ordinance, That what Goldsmiths, or Changer
shall buie Gold or Silver, and convert it to any use to transport, shall
forfeit the value.

To declare by Ordinance, that according to the 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 19. an Act
touching the Exchange of Gold and That whosoever give's more for Gold and
Silver then it is, or shall be declared, shall suffer imprisonment by the
space of a year, and make fine at the pleasure of the State. The Mint cannot
be employed, nor the transporting of treasure stopped, if some course be not
speedily taken to discover these great abuses. And already, almost all the
Gold is transported out of the Nation: and the Silver follows it apace, as is
prudently insisted upon in the late Petition of the Citizens of London, to both
Houses of Parliament.

We humbly conceiv, that the making of this discovery throughout the Nation,
of such as have, or shall transport Gold and Silver into parts beyond the Seas,
and of such as have, or shall melt down the current Gold and Silver Coins of
the Nation; or have, or shall buie Gold and Silver at above the price of the
Mint: (the practice of which abuses, if not timely prevented, is likely to
bring speedy destruction to the Trade of this Kingdom: which is presidented
Anno 4 Rich. 2. c. 2. when the Nation found the same mischief as we now suffer
under, by transporting of treasure. And Anno 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 19. by giving
for Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint.) As it will be a service of
great importance to the Public affairs, and bring great advantage to the trade
of this Nation; so it will draw with it a very great charge. Which if Master
Watkins will undertake, he will deserv highly to be encouraged. Nevertheless,
we humbly submit the premises, to the Wisdoms of this Honorable Committee.

John St John, Warden. Robert Hartlie, Master. Henry Cogan, Comptr. December
20. 1647.


THese Gentlemen by reason of their places in the Custom-Hous, and Mint within
the Tower of London, and their long experience in Merchandise and Trade of this
Nation; I humbly conceiv their Certificates will leav a great Impression upon
the Parliament, and on the Honorable Committeee that are appointed to report
this Act, that what these Gentlemen have certified, has been don upon a great
deal of consideration, and upon great experience, with all their best skill and
judgment for the service of this Nation in this most weighty business, it
tending so highly to the safety and welfare of the public, and the delaie of
passing this Act in its full force and vigor will one day be found to be
highly destructive to this Nation, and that the design has been set on foot,
and prosecuted to hinder the Act from passing, is don by some people that have
made themselves fortunes by these wicked practices; and though they dare not
speak against the Act, yet they labor to stop it and delaie it, or to procure
the altering of it, that it may be uneffectual, to give a stop to these
mischiefs which I hope they shall never be able to effect; I would have these
men to know, Justice is slow, but it is sure, and I am assured they will be
discovered and brought to Justice when they least think of it; forbearance will
be no payment: and this Act will bring their dark actions to light when it is
passed the House. Besides these former Certificates, the Act now committed was
drawn up by a Committee of the Council of State, and I was required to attend
the Right Honorable Sir James Harrington in Januarie last, being one of the
Committee for taking away the obstructions of the Mint, which I did
accordingly, and thereupon by Order of the Honorable Committee, for removing of
the obstruction of the Mint, I was desired to send into Holland for several
Coins of Foreign Gold and Silver, and several Placarts and Weights, and some of
the said Gold and Silver, I have delivered to Doctor Gurden to make Assaies of,
for the service of the State, the remainder I have ready to deliver to any
that will see me paid upon the deliverie; I having demanded money of Doctor
Gurden diverse times, who tell's me, he will procure money, but has not as
yet paid me for what I delivered him: and if I should not be paid for the
Gold and Silver I writ for from Holland, the same price as by my friend I paid
for it in the Bank in Holland, there would be a great loss redound to me to
Coin it here, and lose the Exchange; the Exchange from Holland, when I writ for
these Species, running at about thirty two shillings Flemish.

I do humbly desire the Honorable Committee for obstructions of the Mint, to
call to the old Clerks of the Mint, for an account of what they have don about
the Assaies made of Foreign Coins; and I humbly desire you to consider, how
much it were for the service of the Nation, both in point of honor, profit, and
safety, to set your Mint on work.

Which upon the peril of my life, if you pass the Act, as it is recommended
from the Council of State, I will find out ways to set your Mint presently a
going, or lose both my Estate and Life. I would not make this proffer, but that
I am sure of it; it is well known to all the Officers of the Mint, I know as
much of Mint-business, as any of them here do; and for the Goldsmiths, I am
sure, they think I know too much: and the Merchants have found it, that I know
what many did, and do here, and what their Factors did and do beyond Seas; and
to be Master of this secret, cost me many an hundred pound, besides many
years time and pains; and by my intelligence in the Seaports of this Nation, I
have caused the transporters of money to be fined at four and twenty thousand
one hundred pounds. And now as I have laid this business, they shall be
discovered all over this Nation. If I should offer this, and could do the like
service in any other State, I humbly conceiv I need not Petition twice, but it
would be accepted at the first time; and the delaie of passing this Act,
move's me not at all for my own particular, but for the Commonwealth. I shall
never forget Sir John Coke his rule to me, and he was Secretary of State to
the late King, That he never knew a patient and a vigilant man lose his
business, if it were just; for at one time or another, that man will find an
opportunity to do it; and truly, by observing this rule, I have passed through
great business, and some of much difficulty; for all which, I humbly thank God,
and attribute it to his mercy.

THere is another cause of the great waste of the Treasure of the Nation, which
is the great quantity of Flanders Laces, and French Laces, both in the Thread,
and in Silk, which are imported into this Nation, to the value of many scores
of thousand pounds a year, which Lace is stolen in without paying any Custom,
being subtly packed in commodities of great Bulk.

But what the State lose's by the Custom, is nothing in comparison to what it
lose's in Stock; for the returns of this Lace is for the most part sent over in
Gold and Silver of the current Coins of this Nation.

Neither is this mischief all the hurt that comes to the Commonwealth; for
this Lace is made by them in France and Flanders, that can afford it far
cheaper then any of our poor can do here; for generally it is made in Religious
Houses, in their Nunneries; which Nuns, generally bring into the Religious
Houses their Dowries when they are admitted, and as long they live, they are
well provided for all manner of necessaries to live very handsomely, both for
their diet and apparel, being left to their voluntary choice after their
religious Exercises is don, to spend their time as they pleas.

Now many of them being excellent Needle-women, spend their time in making
Cut-works, for their Altarcloths, Black Laces for Scarffs, and Flanders Laces,
(as they are called) though many of them are made in France.

These the Nuns make, and sell great quantities of them into England; which
money is all returned into the use of the Monasteries, these Nuns thinking they
merit most, that can get their Monasteries most money by their labor.

And truly when I have been in company of some fine Dames in London, that
profess much; I have told them of their Laces and Gorgets, that if they did
know whom they made rich by such vanities, they would lay by the fashion, and
give that money, they spent in Flanders Laces, to the poor, and not be
instruments of making Nuns and Monasteries rich beyond Seas; and I have desired
them to think how contrary their work was to their Husbands: their Husbands
are destroying Bishop's Houses and Lands, and Deans and Chapter's Houses, and
Lands, here in England, being Relics of Popery; and their Wives by buying
up of the Nun's Laces in England, with the Returns of that Money, which they
produce here, are a building Nunneries, and Religious Houses in France and
Flanders.

I humbly desire all the English Gentry, that are wearers of Lace, both Men
and Women, to consider seriously what I say; it is of concernment. I take God
to witness, I have heard French men, and Dutch men, say to me, above twelv
years ago, that have dealt in Cut-work Laces, and in Flanders Laces, both black
and white here in London, that they did believ there was above five hundred
thousand pounds in a year transported in Gold and Silver into France and
Flanders, only in Return of Foreign Cut-works, and Flanders Laces, both Black
and White; and I believ in my conscience they spoke truth; and to this day
there are extreme excesses in these vanities; which as your affairs of the
Commonwealth stand, highly concern you to look to prevent it; for I humbly
desire you to consider, the Nation fling's away so much stock in money; for
Flanders Lace is of no use but to keep up pride and vanities; Gold and Silver
Lace make's something upon the Return, one hundred pounds worth may make about
forty pounds when you have don wearing of it: But for thread and silk Laces,
that which cost one hundred thousand pound, when they are worn out, will not
make the Commonwealth one penny.

I do humbly desire you to consider of a strict Law against importing any
Foreign Laces, or selling them in London; the forfeiture of the Laces is
nothing, because it will not be discovered, once in one thousand times. But I
humbly conceiv, it must be made Felony for any to import Flanders, French, or
Foreign Laces, or Cut-works, and loss of any Shop-keeper's Estate that shall
knowingly sell any Foreign Laces, either Flanders, or any other.

By which means you will prevent the transporting many hundred thousand pounds
of treasure in a year, and you will stop the trade of making Nunneries rich by
our money; And if the Gentry will wear Laces, let them on God's name put our
own poor on work, and not Forrainers; and by this means, you will give relief
to many poor Gentlewomen, which through the calamities of the War, are almost
starved, and they are ashamed to beg, and they would be glad to make Lace, if
any would emploie them.

THere is also a great and excessive waste of the Gold of this Nation, in the
vanity of guilding of Caroches, which is com to that extravagancie, that if a
Bainian of the Fast- Indies, or a Chinoes of China, or any other strange Nation
should com to Hide-Park, in an afternoon, he would report in his own Country
such stories, as your Jesuits report of Perue, and Mexico, upon the first
discovery of the West- Indies; That there were Towns that all the houses were
covered over with Gold and Silver: So would an Indian report the Gentrie's
wealth of this Nation; That they were drawn through the streets of this City
of London, in Caroches covered over with beaten Gold.

But I shall tell you what a French Merchant said to me this Summer in
Hide-Park, as we were talking of the great quantities of English Gold, which
has been transported into France and Flanders, and other Foreign parts; Says
the French Merchant to me, I have heard you often complain of all the English
Gold, being transported beyond the Seas, and now we are again speaking of it,
I will demonstrate to you presently, that all is not gone, for you see how many
gilded Caroches here are; then laughing, he told me, you see Sir, how you
are mistaken, all your Gold is not gone; but if you had said, almost all the
English Gold is transported beyond the Seas, that I would have granted you, for
you have the shell of the Gold to guild your Caroches, and to make you fine
things, but we in France have the kernel of your Gold, and thus much I grant
you. But we in France, and Holland, and Flanders, have not all, we are more
conscionable, good Monsieur Violet. I was forced to bite my lip, for I could
not deny but that he spoke truth.

THere is another great waste of Gold and Silver in this Commonwealth, and
that is, the making of Gold and Silver-Thread and Lace within this Nation:
there are some things may be said for it, and some things against it; I shall
impartially put down some things which I know in this business; for I had the
principal care of regulating that Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Wier and
Thread, for five years together in the late King's time, and paid him about
four thousand pounds yearly for it; besides I was enjoined to look to the just
standard of the Silver, and to the substantial making of the Manufacture, which
now is totally neglected, and the Commonwealth cheated in the coursness of
much of the Silver, and in the slight making of it.

If the Manufacture of the Gold and Silver-Thread, was brought in from beyond
the Seas, then would the State have the Custom, there being a great Impost and
Custom laid on it, which would be a considerable Revenue to the Commonwealth.
The Commonwealth in the stock of their treasure would be augmented; for all
Gold and Silver-Thread make's a Return to the melting pot, and so increase's
the stock of money in the Nation; besides, that is an advantageous Trade, which
for the Returns of our Commodities and Manufactures of England, bring's us
Returns in Silver.

There is replied to this, the setting so many thousands of poor people on
work, which will starv, if the Manufactures of Gold and Silver-Thread, were
brought in from beyond the Seas, or if the State should prohibit the wearing of
Gold and Silver-Thread and Lace. Indeed this is of great consideration, and
ought to be considered on. But then if they will have leav to make it here, it
should be don with such restraints and limitations, as the treasure of the
Nation should not be wasted or impaired, the current money of the Nation
should not be culled out to make Gold and Silver-Thread, as many hundreds of
thousand pounds have been since the making of this Manufacture, which was but
begun to be a Trade in London, within less then forty years; also there
should be a restriction of the number of the workers, not to encreas as they
have don, and the Wier-drawers should be a distinct Corporation, and Officers
appointed to look after their due and Orderly working, and an account kept for
the State, of what Silver and Gold is spent every year in the Manufacture, and
the Company of Gold-Wier-drawers enjoined to bring in the value in Bullion
from beyond the Seas, as they waste in this Manufacture; for without doing of
this, the trade is wholly destructive to the Commonwealth, and there can be
no just plea to allow their trade to continue.

I humbly conceiv the Commonwealth is not in a condition to suffer fifty
thousand pounds a year in Silver, to be brushed and blown away out of Gold and
Silver Lace: If those that work the Manufacture, will not see to Import Silver
from beyond the Seas, and be bound not to work Silver with a Core of Copper,
and sell it for good Silver, (for which cheat I have caused some of them to
stand in the Pillorie, when I had the managing of that Manufacture) and also
that the Wier-drawers be bound, not to make any Spangles, Wier, or Thread,
under sterling, which heretofore has been their daily practice, and I believ
is continued still. Therefore ought by a sworn Officer to be regulated, and
that Officer to be no Trader in the Manufacture.

M. Jackson the Assaie-Master of Gold smith's Hall, by direction of the Lords
of the Council, made many score of Assaies of Gold and Silver-Spangles, Lace,
Wier, and Thread, found and taken in Silk-men's shops, which were adulterated,
and under the Standard; and this Manufacture will never be justly made, if
there be not a government settled by a Corporation, and then the Trade might
be so managed by their contracting for Bullion from beyond the Seas, that they
may get a great Manufacture here. But I humbly desire that Trade may be driven
with Foreign Silver; Imported, and not with the Stock, or Coin of the Nation.

Die Veneris December. 20. 1650. At the Council for Trade at White Hall.
Ordered,
THat a Model or Way for the regulating the Trade of Gold and Silver-Wier, and
Thread, and for preventing of all slight or base work, to the abuse and deceit
of the Commonwealth, be tendered to this Council against Fridaie, Januarie 17.
by the Gold Wier-drawers and Refiners of London, and some of the Women-spinners,
who are hereby all required to meet together, and consult about it. And they
are to take into their consideration likewise the Papers this day delivered
in, and read before this Council, presented by Master Thomas Violet.

Ex. Ben. Worslie, Sec.

In obedience to your Honor's Order, directed unto me 29 November, 1650
concerning the Hand-Spinners of Gold and Silver-Thread, I humbly offer to your
grave considerations these few Propositions, for the service of the
Commonwealth.
I. THat it be not lawful for any person, either Wierdrawer, Weaver, or
others, to keep any Wheels for the spinning of Gold or Silver-Thread, but
within the Lines of Communication of London; and every person using such
Wheels, to give in their names, and their abiding places, and how many Wheels
they keep, and their several working places, and a sworn Officer appointed, who
by himself and his sufficient Deputies, to view and examine both the Sizes, the
Silver so spun, and the fineness, and to deface and burn all under the Standard.

II. That no Wheel be admitted to spin Gold and Silver-Thread, but only
superfine, and all other sorts and sizes, to be spun with, and by the
Hand-spinners; and some strict penalty put on the offenders: for if you keep
not a sworn Officer that is no Trader in it, and do not restrain the offenders
by a penalty, there will be no keeping these men within a rule: for few Laws
well executed, is better then a multitude of Laws, and none to look after the
execution of them. And if this Regulation shall be left to the Wier-drawers
(only) they being parties, and their own profit concerned in it, the
Commonwealth will still be deceived; for where the Felon make's the Hue and
Cry, the Thief will never be found. I humbly conceiv, the Wier-drawers may do
well in having an equal power with the sworn Surveior, to find out the frauds
in the Trade, but not to leav it wholly to them to find out; for if you do, I
humbly conceiv the Commonwealth will have no benefit, but a mischief, as it is
in some other Corporations, which have such privileges, that the Members of them
are empowered to oppress and circumvent the Common people of the Nation, and to
enrich themselves and their private interest, to the great damage of the
public. The Regulation of which is left to your Honors in the ninth Article of
your Commission.

III. That no Gold-Wier-drawer be admitted to make Gold and Silver Lace, nor
Silver-Ribbon, nor no Weaver to make Gold and Silver-Thread, but either Trade
tied to his own Art only; for by the means of blending these two Trades
together, all the bad and slight Stuff is foisted into the Lace, and so
cunningly interwoven, interwoven, that Artists themselves cannot discern it,
when it is made into Lace; and by this slight of blending two Trades together,
they put into their Silver-Ribbon, much Gold and Silver-Thread, made by the
Wheel; some hold's not three Ounces Silver in a pound Venice, which is eight
Ounces and four Drams Troie, whereas according to the rule of Merchantable Gold
and Silver-Thread, there should be five Ounces of Silver at the least to three
Ounces Silk; a cheat that ought to be punished with the highest penalties; to
cousen the buier of two Ounces in eight Ounces of Silver, and to make them pay
for Silver, when the buier has nothing but Silk, and that many times heavy
died, which causes the color of the Gold to tarnish; and if the late King's
Commissioners Books of Orders for the regulating of Gold and Silver-Thread,
were returned out of the Parliament House to this Council, there it will be
found the Wheels were upon several great complaints of the many abuses thereof
totally suppressed. And it was don upon serious deliberation, and much debate
before the late King's Counsel at Law, and the Commissioners; and this can be
proved to be true by the Oaths of many people, and I will depose it, if I be
required by this Honorable Council.

IV. The poor Women-spinners by the hand spindle, are discouraged from speaking
truth by many of their workmasters, or to move for a Regulation of the abuses
of their Trade, and dare not speak against the said abuses, left they should
be turned out of their work, as those poor women spinners are, that your
Honors commanded to agitate for the whole Company of Hand-spinners. And some of
these poor Women-spinners, besides turning out of their work, have been beaten
and abused by their tyrannous work-masters, and reviled with base and odious
names by some of the Master Wier-drawers; and this is the true reason why the
workmen are retarded, that they do not com and join with the women, and show
their just grievances, and the many abuses daily practiced in their Trade,
whereby the Commonwealth is, and has been so grossly abused, and the poor
workmen and women oppressed. And indeed if the poor Hand-spinners had not
opened some of the abuses of the Trade to your Honors, neither Work-master,
Finer, nor Workman, would have put to their hand for a Regulation. And this I
believ in my conscience to be true.

May it pleas your Honors, the greatest part of the Handspinner's work is fine
five-bourn, and the greatest multitude of the poor Petitioners are fine
five-bourn-spinners; some of the Wier-drawers are utterly against the Wheels for
any sort of work, and many of them for superfine, if they durst speak it: But
they all being parties, I most humbly leav it to your Wisdoms to take notice,
that their self-interest make's many of them speak that with their mouths,
which in my conscience their hearts know they speak not the truth in this
particular. And as I humbly conceiv, if that the Wheels be not strictly tied
up only to superfine, many of the Hand-spinners will perish for want of bread:
and this I speak, I believ in my conscience is a truth; and therefore I do most
humbly leav it to your Honor's pious and charitable consideration.

That if your Honors would have a speedy Reformation in this Trade, I humbly
conceiv, that if any Wier-drawer, Weaver, or others, that make Silver-Thread,
or Wier, courser then the Standard, or spin on the Wheels any other sort of
Silver-Thread, then such as shall be appointed by your Honors; and any other
persons that shall make any Gold or Silver-Thread, not holding at the least
five Ounces Troie upon every pound weight Venice, which is eight Ounces, and
one fifth Troie; that strict punishments may be ordered and inflicted on the
offenders; and upon the third time of conviction, besides the loss of the
Materials, to be further punished, either by being dis-franchised for a time,
or for ever, as to your Honor's shall seem most agreeable to Justice. And that
a sworn Officer be appointed according to the best of his skill, to see to
make it his business to go from place to place amongst all the workers of the
Manufactures, to see the workers make all fine Silver, and every sort of this
Manufacture to be according to the rules settled by your Honors. Many other
things I could enlarge my self in concerning this Trade, but shall respite them
for the present; and humbly submit my self, and all that I have here said to
your Honor's grave consideration.

Signed THO: VIOLET.
December. 18. 1650.
WHereas the Gold-Wier-drawers and Refiners of London, have presented to the
Honorable Council for Trade, the draught of a Corporation, as it is desired by
them, it is utterly destructive to the Commonwealth; and I do most humbly
desire the Honorable Council for Trade, to take notice that some of the
Gold-Wier-drawers of London, in the behalf of themselves, and diverse other
Wier-drawers of London, did Petition the late King for a Corporation, in March
1634. and in April 1635. confessing the many abuses practiced in the managing
of the same Trade, which were then under no government; did desire in their
Petition, that by his Majesty's gracious care, they might be reduced into
Government, and made a Corporation; and that they might have one or two
Refiners, such as the Wier-drawers should deem fit, to be added to their
Corporation, (and excluding all the rest of the Refiners) that were
Hous-keepers or Freemen, and only themselves might solely have the Order and
Government of the Trade, and the Regulation of the said Manufacture.

And in consideration of this, the Wier-drawers offered the late King for his
favor in that behalf, to pay to him and his successors, one thousand pounds
per Annum, and 2 d. the Ounce for every Ounce of such Bullion and Foreign
Species, as they should use in their said Manufacture, over and above the
current price of the Merchants. And about the same time the Company of
Goldsmiths being at the late King's Council Table, did there charge several
abuses and high misdemeanors upon some of the Refiners of London, and other
persons, as will appear by the Council-Table-Books, and by the Records and
Journal Books at Goldsmith's Hall, if one could com to the sight of them; for
it cannot be imagined, the Company of Goldsmiths would give so high a charge
as they did against some of the Refiners, and some Goldsmiths, but they have the
Charge recorded in their Books, which I humbly desire the Council of Trade may
have a Copy of, that so they might see the abuses in the Trade of Refining and
Wier-drawing, and who were the offenders; and no question but the same abuses
are practiced still, if there were an examination, and power given to the
Surveior of Gold and Silver-Thread, to find them out. The truth is, that upon
the complaint of the Gold-smith's Company at the Council Table, of the several
abuses in the Trade of Refining and Wier-drawing, the Wier-drawers, conceiving
the late King and his Counsel would put down the wearing and working of Gold
and Silver-Wier, and Thread, and punish the offenders in Star Chamber, and
knowing what would move, and be most taken in Court, I say, the Wier-drawers
voluntarily, and of their own accord, did com and petition, and made friends,
that their Trade should be continued. And this Model was laid to have a
Monopoly to some Wier-drawers, and Finers as aforesaid; and in the pursuance of
this project of the Wier-drawers, they had many meetings with Sir Ralph
Freeman, Sir Ralph Whitfield, and Master Nathanael Tompkins, and diverse others,
where the whole drift was to exclude all the Refiners but one or two from their
trades. And in consideration thereof, that they would for this great grace and
favor (their own words) pay two pence the Ounce, and one thousand pounds a
year to the late King. It is as true, that upon complaint of some of the
Goldsmiths, several Refiners and Goldsmiths were proceeded against in the
Exchequer, and Star Chamber, for melting down the current Silver Coins of the
Nation, for buying Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint, and for
refining of Silver contrary to a Statute made in Henry the seventh's time;
and it is as true, that I Thomas Violet was informed against in the
Star Chamber and Exchequer, for all these offenses, and being to be examined
upon Interrogatories against my self, both at the Council. Table and
Star Chamber, and before Master Atturnie Noie, and Master Atturnie Banks, I did
refuse to be examined upon Interrogatories, such as Master Atturnie General
had exhibited against me in Star Chamber; for I knew, if I had denied them,
the Atturnie General could prove them on me by some Goldsmiths and others,
that had voluntarily confessed against me, that I had transported Gold, and
that I had melted the current heavy Silver of this Nation, and that I had sold
Silver and Gold above the price of the Mint.

Whereupon that most Honorable Gentleman Sir John Coke, Secretary of State,
after that I had oftentimes been examined at the Council Table, and at the
Star Chamber Office, and for refusing to answer to their questions, had
suffered close imprisonment for above 20 weeks, being close prisoner to
several Messengers, viz. Measie, Stockdal, and Barker, for all that time, to
the loss of my Trade, which was then greater then any Gold-smith's in London. I
say, that great Statesman had a noble care of me, and sent for me, showed
me what was proved against me, and withal a Warrant that he had signed by
Order of the late King, and his Privy Council, for Master Atturnie General to
bring me to the Star-Chamber-Bar, the next sitting of the Court, and there to
crave the Judgment of the Court against me, his Charge being taken against
me pro confesso.

Whereupon Secretary Coke became a Petitioner to the late King, that before
he delivered Master Atturnie the Warrant, to proceed against me, he might
send once again for me; and he told the late King, that he was of an
opinion, that when I saw my danger, and how I was discovered by those that held
me fair in hand, and were the men that did betraie me, I would be so
ingenuous to my self, to keep me from a ruin, to confess the truth, and all
that I knew upon oath against those that had discovered me; and my so doing,
would be much for the service of the State: and to this effect, when I spoke
with Secretary Coke, was his Discourse to me, not giving me a quarter of an
hours time to return him my answer, nor suffering me to go out of his sight.
When I saw the Snare, I blessed the Fowler, (which was Sir John Coke) who had
traversed me in France, (and intercepted my Letters, though not written to me
by name) knew a great part of my proceedings there, about my Transporting Gold,
and he had many Goldsmiths that he sent for, which confessed to him that
weekly I had bought great quantities of Light English Gold of many Goldsmiths
of London, and I was to be forced to give an account what I did with it.

And some other of my Factors that I had dealt with in France, Sir John Coke had
gotten them upon their coming over at Rye, and at Dover apprehended, and they
confessed they did receiv Light English Gold of me, and other Foreign Gold and
Silver in France. And all the papers that discovered any thing against me, he
showed me, and told me my danger: When I saw it, I was astonished, not
imagining that any man did know my proceedings in this business, or that I was
betrayed by those that spoke me fair, and was as faulty as my self; for if it
were a crime in me to buie this Light Gold, it was as great an one in the
Goldsmiths to sell it; and if it were a crime in me to transport Gold, it was
as great a crime in English men to be my Factors and Partners, though at Roan,
Calice, Deep, or Paris. And when I found these were the men that abused me to
currie favor, and to get their own discharge, I besought God in my heart, so to
direct me, that I might overcom this Philistim; and I was an humble suitor to
Sir John Coke, to make my peace with the late King upon any terms, and that I
might have the late King's pardon; and in humble requital, I would really
discover to him what Transporters of Gold I knew, and what Goldsmiths I knew
had sold Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint, and Culled and Melted
down the current Money of this Nation, and pay him two thousand pounds in Gold
to his Privy Purs, which I did accordingly pay into his Privy Purs, and had
my pardon under the Great Seal.

And I was forced before I could get my pardon, to bring in all my Books and
Accounts to Sir John Coke, and by them I proved that I had Imported into this
Nation more Silver in value, then I had Exported Gold. By which Accounts, I
made it clearly appear, that the benefit and advantage was to be made by
understanding the weight and fineness of all Foreign Coins, and what proportion
their Silver has to our Gold, and our Silver to their Gold; for this was the
Account in France 1632, 1633, 1634. that all our English Gold whether Light or
Weight, (for they went all at one price without weighing the twenty shillings
piece) passed in current payment in France for twenty six shillings, and the
Cardecu in France went then at 16 Sols, as all men know which were then in
France; so that upon this account, I made my reckoning 16 Sols in France, is 19
d. ob. English for every Cardecu, what will these Cardecues make me in
London, being all full weight, six penny weight Troie at the least, which in
the Mint in the Tower of London would make 18 d. sterling. By this account, I
found there was above twenty in the hundred got by transporting our English
Gold, and returning of heavy Cardecues, which then at those times there was as
much of them to be had both at Calice, Paris, Roan, and Deep, amongst the
Bankers, as a man would desire. Then for the most part the lightness of the
Gold paid for the Portage, and a man might make his return once every month,
and I have don it sometimes in fourteen days, and got above twenty in the
hundred.

When the late King saw my Accounts in this manner made up for many thousand
pounds, he commended my ingenuitie, but he would share stakes with me a
little; for he commanded me to bring him two thousand pounds in Gold, and
then I should have my pardon; which I did very willingly, and humbly thanked
him for his mercy to me.

But that which pleased the late King, and brought me into his service, was,
when I showed him several processes attested out of France, under public
Notarie's hands, that some of those French men that dealt with me for English
Gold, were sued in the Parliament of Paris, for sending out of France the heavy
Cardecues at an under-value, and for bringing into France English Gold at a
greater value. Much about this time, the refiners and wier-drawer's business
being under examination; the late King finding by what I before had declared,
my skill in managing Mint-business, and the Bullion of this Nation, appointed
me to have the view and surveying of all the Manufacture of Gold and
Silver-Wier, and Thread, and to confirm it to me for three lives; the Grant
cost near fifteen hundred pounds, to the Lord Treasurer, Lord Cottington,
Master Secretary Coke, and others; and I make no question to show the justness
of the Grant to the Honorable Council of Trade, and what service it is to the
Commonwealth to have me restored to that office again, which all the while I
had it, I caused the Manufacture all to be justly made, and according to the
Standard, and that there was never so good Gold and Silver, Thread made in the
Commonwealth before I had the Office, nor since the Office was sequestered from
me; and this I can prove by many people that are Artists in the Trade.

That a little before this time, upon the information of some of the Company of
Goldsmiths to the late King and his Council, a Commission did issue out to
make inquiry of the deceits and abuses of the Refiners of Gold and Silver, and
in transporting Gold and Silver; whereupon as I said before, Sir John
Wollaston, Will. Gibs, Walter Hill, Henry Patrickson, Refiners; Henry Foot,
John Perin, Timothy Eman, Tho. Violet, Goldsmiths, were made Defendants in
the Star Chamber. The Refiners had that good fortune, they all got off without
a sentence, by their wit, which was to out-bid the Wier-drawers; for the
Wier-drawers bid as appears but one thousand pounds a year, and two pence an
Ounce, and a few humble words, viz. And the Corporation of Gold-Wier-drawers,
for your Majesty's grace and goodness to them, in continuing their Trades, and
reducing the same to Government, humbly offer to pay to your Majesty, your
heirs, and successors, for ever, one thousand pounds a year, and two pence an
Ounce, in lieu of your Customs, from Michaelmas next; and for and toward their
Provision and Importation of such Bullion as the Members of this Corporation
shall use; and this was in March 1634. and in April 1635.

And thereupon Master Atturnie General had many treaties with the Wier-drawers,
and others, and modelled the draught of a Certificate; and truly I know not
whether he ever delivered it to the late King; but the pithiness and brevitie
of it, will show it must be his: and that this Certificate was made upon many
arguments of all hands, and treaty with all parties; for Master Atturnie had
drawn a Certificate fit for a King to look on, containing so much matter in so
few words; and if the Honorable Council of Trade will be pleased to consider
of this Certificate, they will find a great part of the Regulation of the
Trade settled in this Certificate, if they pleas to consider of every branch
of it, for it is all matter of State.

A Copy of Sir John Bank's Certificate to the late King, he being his
Atturnie General.
May it pleas your most Excellent Majesty,
I Have taken consideration of the several Petitions of Henry Earl of Holland,
Jane Countess of Roxborough, and of Joseph Simmons, and other Gold-Wier-drawers
of the City of London, to me referred. And after several hearings of their
Counsel, and of the Company of Goldsmiths, and the Refiners, I humbly conceiv,

I. That many abuses have been committed in the consumption of the Gold and
Silver of this Kingdom, which are fit to be reformed.

II. I do not discern any inconvenience that the Gold-Wier-drawers (who offer
unto your Majesty one thousand pounds per Annum, and two pence upon every
Ounce of Bullion which shall be used by them) should be incorporated for
their better Government, so that they be tied unto these conditions, or such
other conditions as your Majesty in your Wisdom shall think fit. 1. That they
shall use in their Trades none but Foreign Bullion or Species, and no more
thereof yearly, then shall be yearly Imported, by their means, or by others,
whom your Majesty shall emploie in that service.

2. That the Bullion Imported, shall not be bought with English Coin, to be
Exported, but for Commodities.

3. That the Importation of Bullion or Foreign Species by others, shall not be
restrained, nor accounted any part of their said Foreign Bullion or Species, so
undertaken to be yearly Imported.

4. That the Gold and Silver-Thread, Purls, Plate, Oes, Spangles, etc. shall
be made according to the Standard, or better.

5. That under color of these sums given unto your Majesty, they may not in
any undue proportion inhaunce the price of their Commodities.



III. Touching the Assaie of the work of the Gold-Wier-drawers claimed by the
Earl of Holland, by a former intended Grant, and desired by the Countess of
Roxborough's Petition; I find upon the perusal of the Grant unto the Earl of
Holland, dated 12 Novembr. 3 Car. Reg. (which passed only the Privy Seal, and
not the Great Seal) that there was thereby intended to pass unto him the Assaie
of Gold and Silver-Thread, Purls, Oes, Spangles, etc. after the same was made
into work. But the thing desired by the Countess, is to have the Assaie of Gold
and Silver-Wier at the Bar before the same be made into work, which is an
Assaie of a differing nature. I conceiv that an Assaie is necessary to prevent
the adulterating of the work: All which I humbly submit to your Majesty's
great Wisdom.

Whereupon the Refiners, as Sir John Wollaston, Master Alderman Gibs, and
others, seeing the Wier-drawers go about to exclude them of their Trade, and to
get a Corporation upon the terms aforesaid; they (I say) did serve the
Wier-drawers, as the Merchant-Adventurers served the Cloth-workers, out-bid
them; for they to have their pardons, and to be freed of the complaints of the
Goldsmiths in the Star Chamber, and to have the Trade only in their own
hands, that none but the Refiners of London might be his Majesty's Agents in
the new way of Regulation, for the furnishing, and preparing, fining,
refining, and selling Gold and Silver-Wier, to be used and employed in the
Manufactures. First, they did covenant with the late King, to bring all the
Gold and Silver by them prepared for the Manufactures, to an House called the
Golden Fleece in Little Britain, or to such other place as the late King's
Commissioners should appoint; there to sell and utter the same, and not
elsewhere. That all Silver so provided, should be assaied before the same was
put to sale, by such as the late King should appoint in that behalf; not to
sell the Gold and Silver so provided, but to persons by the late King's
Commissioners allowed to work and use the same, and to none other, unless to
known Goldsmiths, for the augmentation and amendment of Plate, or to, or for
the use of the Mint; and not sell the same to persons allowed, unless they
would pay the duties limited to the late King, viz. for every Ounce of Silver
guilt, six pence; and for every Ounce of Gold, six pence; So that upon the
finishing of this agreement between the late King and the Refiners, the
Wierdrawers which would have excluded the Refiners from their Corporation, are
by these Articles debarred their Trade; and both Goldsmiths, and Wier-drawers,
or any other but these Agents, were debarred to prepare any Silver for any of
the Manufactures of Wier-drawers; and because they came off so freely, and bid
the late King roundly six pence the Ounce on all the Wier, the late King was
pleased to gratify them with a Courtly title, calling them his wellbeloved
subjects, the Refiners of London, his Agents; and to requite them, settled such
a price certain for fine Silver, and refine Silver, and such a price certain
for ordinary guilt, and rich guilt, and no person should presume to have or
make any of these Materials, but to give these the late King's Agents their own
price, and none to sell, but these Refiners, lately created the late King's
Agents.

Whereupon Captain Williams, the late King's Father's Goldsmiths, in the behalf
of the Company of Goldsmiths, he being one of the late King's
Commissioners, oftentimes did desire, that the Goldsmiths might be heard
against the Monopoly of the Refiners; and he being a rich man, worth at least
fifty thousand pounds, did offer in the behalf of the Company of Goldsmiths,
to give any security to the late King; that if the Trade were left open to a
free Market for all the Goldsmiths as formerly, the Goldsmiths would sell all
the Silver to the Wier-drawers of London, in every Ounce of guilt Silver-Wier,
two pence, and in Silver-Wier one penny cheaper, then the late King's Agents
made them pay.

The like Propositions was made by Henry Footer Goldsmith, then a man of great
credit, and by William Simmonds Wier-drawer of London, and diverse others, for a
free Trade, that they might not be restrained to buie their Silver of the
Refiners of London only, but to be at liberty as formerly to buie their
Silver where they will, and to refine their own Silver.

But these offers after many disputes, the Refiners opposed, and then said it
was their Trade, and none should fine and prepare Gold and Silver for any
Manufactures used by the Gold-Wier-drawers, but themselves, the late King's
Agents, which was, as I take it, only to eight Refiners of London.

The Wier-drawers seeing themselves over powered by these the late King's
Agents, a little before the Parliament, and at the beginning of this Parliament,
complained and clamored at the Regulation; when, if the Refiners had left the
Market open for all men equally to prepare his own Silver, paying the late King
the duties, it is well known the Wier-drawers could never have hindered the
sealing and surveying of the Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Thread; for by that
way, the Manufacture was warranted to the Commonwealth: and if it had been
continued, it would have avoided and prevented the many abuses since, in making
slight and course Silver-Thread, and Spangles, and Wier. And if I had had the
managing of my Office, as I had formerly, the State should have had twenty
thousand pounds in their Coffers for Excise, more then they have received
within these four years, due to them upon four pence the Ounce Excise; which
money is in the hands of some of the Wier-drawers and Refiners.

Now when this business came to be examined in Parliament, these Agents that
would not before part with their Title, would not let the Goldsmiths have a
free Market to prepare Silver for Gold and Silver-wier; would not suffer the
Wier-drawers to prepare their own Silver, they offering to pay the late King's
duties in the Office. I say, these Agents finding some of the Members in
Parliament to resent a restraint in Trade to a few Refiners, and knowing none
but themselves guilty of the offense, cunningly put in a Petition into the
Parliament, the twenty fourth of November 1640. as though the prices allowed to
them to sell their Silver, and they only to be the Agents to sell, was
forceably put upon them, and against their wills; and if they should not have
furnished the Silver at the place appointed, and be ready always at fit and
convenient times to sell and utter the same to the persons so allowed, desiring
to buie the same at the rates limited by their Indenture, but should fail
therein for the space of eight days. Then upon proof thereof before six of the
Commissioners, whereof one should be of his Majesty's Privy Council, and
upon their Certificate his Majesty might give liberty to others to do the
same; the consequence whereof would have been to deprive the Refiners of their
Trade.

This shows clearly, if this Agencie had not been for their profit, and to
make an advantage, the Refiners might have forfeited their Agencie every eight
days. But they kept it up for their own profit; for if they had laid it down,
the Company of Goldsmiths, and the Wier-drawers, would have had a free
Market, and the duties still reserved to the late King, would have been paid by
the Wier-drawers and Goldsmiths as was offered. And whereas they are so
injurious to say, that they were fettered with the late King's Covenants and
Agents, I knew the time when they said otherwise, and when some of them were
most humble Petitioners to the late King for his mercy, which he gave, at my
Intercession freely, to some of them, and his pardon under the Great Seal of
England; and that courtesy I did for them freely, without one penny reward.
In requital to say they were fettered with his Agencie; truly it was such a
fetter, that I upon my own knowledge do know both the Silk-men of London, the
Wier-drawers of London, and the Goldsmiths of London, did oppose the
restraining of the Trade of selling Gold and Silver-wier only to the Refiners,
and desired to have a free Market; and some of them did offer to sell it two
pence in the Ounce in guilt-wier, and one penny the Ounce in Silver-wier
cheaper then the late King's Agents, and to put in good security to perform
the same to the Nation, and to pay the late King's duties, which at six pence
the Ounce in Wier, is not above two pence the Ounce in Venice Gold and
Silver-Thread.

This I can say, what the Finers called a Fetter, would have been an Ornament,
if the Wier-drawers had not complained of them in Parliament, both for their
title of the late King's Agents, and the many hundred pounds a year they
received for their Silver, more then it was offered to be sold to the
Wier-drawers at, by the persons before named; and this I know to be true.

That upon many days examination of the whole business, by Master Atturnie
General, and all the rest of the late King's Council at Law, and before the
Lords of the Council, it was unanimously upon many great and grave disputes
carried, that the intrusting of the Regulation of this Manufacture of Gold and
Silver-wier, and Thread, was not to be don by way of Corporation, neither to
the Refiners, nor Wier-drawers of London; and the principal reasons were.

1. That upon a trial of above one hundred several assaies of Gold and Silver
bought up in several Silk-men's, and Wierdrawer's shops, both of Spangles,
plated wier, Gold and Silver-Thread, and made by Master Jackson the
Assaie-Master of Gold-smith's Hall; the Gold and Silver-Thread, Spangles, and
Wier, were found to be made course and adulterated, and under the sterling; and
I had all these Assaies attested under Master Jakson's hand, the Assaie-Master
of Gold-smith's Hall; and for his pains in making these Assaies, I had order
from the Lords of the Council, to pay Master Jackson five pounds, which I did
accordingly, and I delivered the Reports of these Assaies to the Lords of the
Council; and Master Jackson the Assaie-Master of Goldsmith's Hall, cannot deny
this to be true.

2. It was proved that the Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Thread, was slightly
made, and not so substantial and serviceable as the Gold and Silver-Thread
which was Imported from Venice, and other Foreign parts; all of the Gold and
Silver-Thread coming from Venice, holding two parts Silver, or within a very
little, as six Ounces Silver to three Ounces Silk.

3. Thereupon a rule was set by the Lords of the Council upon many debates,
that no Gold and Silver-Thread should be made under five Ounces Silver, to
three Ounces Silk at the least; and for Needle Gold-Thread, according to the
standard of Venice, six Ounces Silver to three Ounces Silk.

4. That all the Gold and Silver-Thread Imported from beyond Seas, being of so
strong a plate, was made up in scanes, that so the buier might but turn it in
his hand, and see it was all perfectly good; a great advantage to the
Manufacture, to have it all justly made for the fineness of the standard, and
to have such a body of Silver on the Silk, as it was serviceable to the
Commonwealth; and when it was worn out, almost all returned into the melting
pot for Bullion; and upon this reason the slight stuff was prohibited, viz.
that it was almost all wasted, and not a tenth part returned to the melting
pot, to the waste of the treasure of the Nation, above fifty thousand pounds
in a year.

5. The Lords of the Council after many debates with the King's Council, and
they with the Silk-men and Wierdrawers, set this rule for all the Manufactures
of Gold and Silver-Thread, That it should all be made up in scanes, of about
an Ounce weight, according to the commendable way of Venice, which make's this
Manufacture so justly both for the weight and fineness, that in one hundred
Cases of Venice Gold-Thread, there is not one six pence difference, but
according to the seals or burns, it passe's all the world over. A gallant thing
to manage a Manufacture so exactly, and to keep up the reputation of it.

The late King and his Council appointed me a Seal, which was the Rose and
Crown, to seal all Gold and Silver-Thread in scanes, at one end of the scane,
and to warrant it to be good Silver to the Nation, with a Prohibition to any
to presume to counterfeit that Seal: The other end of the scane of
Silver-Thread, the workman was to put to his seal; by which way, the Nation
had the Gold and Silver-Thread warranted to them, and if any Gold or
Silver-thread were sealed with the seal of the Office, and had the workman's
seal to it; which seal of the work-mans, was put in a Table in the Office for
any man to see, by which means if any man should have counterfeited the
Office-seal, and the Thread was found courser or worser then the standard, and
not to have five Ounces to one pound Venice, the party offending was to be
punished; and if any Clerk of mine should have sealed any course Silver with the
seal of the Office, then I Thomas Violet was to make it good to the
Commonwealth, or any party grieved, what they were damnified; and to warrant
this Manufacture right, both for to have five Ounces Silver on a pound Venice,
and that to be good Silver. I had no more then four pence the pound weight
Venice for my pains and hazard, which was little more then one farthing an
Ounce; and if any person did complain, then I Tho. Violet was to make all the
damage good to the party or parties grieved; and out of this fee I was to pay
Clerk's wages and other Officers for their attendance in sealing the Thread,
and for wax for sealing.

Besides, it is no small trouble to have daily conversation with people of such
several humors, and some of them of such uncivil and course behavior, that the
Honorable Council for Trade have had more patience to hear their speeches one
to another at the board, then I believ they ever had with any people that came
before them; then they must needs be clamorous when the Officer does his duty
to see they make all good work; and this place I Thomas Violet was required to
execute. And I have the Grant of this Office under the Great Seal of England
for two lives; and though I was commanded to deliver my Patent to the Honorable
Gentleman Sir Robert Harlow, who was then Master of the Mint, and Chairman for
this business, but as yet he has not made any report concerning this
business. I stand upon my Grant as a good Patent, and for the benefit of the
Commonwealth; for the fee was not 10 s. in 100 pounds for all Gold and Silver
Manufactured in Silverthread, Silver-spangles, Oes, and Purl, and Wier, and for
that fee I was to run the hazard to make all the Manufacture good to this
Nation, that was bought in the Office, or had the seal appointed by the State
put to the thread; and I shall humbly appeal to all the wearers of Gold and
Silver-Lace in this Nation, whether they would not be glad to pay ten
shillings in the hundred pounds now, to have their Gold and Silver-thread, and
wier warranted to them to be good Silver, and the Silk truly covered with a
substantial Body of Silver, and to the Thread every pound Venice to weigh at
the least five Ounces of Silver, by which order and rule, their Silver-Lace
would last six times as long as it does, and never lose the color; and when
they had don wearing it, it would yield above one third penny it cost to the
melting pot, whereas now upon some Silver-Lace that is made in London, when it
is worn out, that Silver that cost ten pounds, will not yield twenty shillings
to the melting pot; and this is known by slight Wheel-work, and slight Laces; a
great deal of difference upon the return to the melting pot, of rich Lace made
by the Hand spinners, and slight Wheel-work made by your Wheel-men; and this
can be proved by many Tradesmen, as Tailors and Silk-men, and
Silver-spinners, who are best able to judge the Manufacture, that the Gold and
Silver-Thread, and Wier, was never so well made in England, before nor since,
as during all the time I had the regulating of the Manufacture; and it did
concern me to look to have it well made, or else I might have been undon, for I
was to make it all good. It was not to receiv a fee, and never to look how the
Manufacture was made; but my fee was to be earned with a great deal of
attendance, and charge, and hazard, and my constant searching to see the
Manufacture was well made.

The Wier-drawers and Silk-men knew I would spare none of them that made bad
ware; for I caused Gares to stand in the Pillorie, that made Gold and
Silver-Thread with a Core of Copper; I caused slight work to be unspun
again, that was not covered with five Ounces Silver to one pound Venice; and
this I did to Archer that was the Clerk of the Commission, though he brought
me a Letter from a Privy Counselor, to deliver the Silver-Thread without
defacing; yet I valued the keeping my trust, before a Lord's Letter, and he
was no mean man in power then.

I questioned Master Bradbourn the Queen's Silk-man, for putting in Copper into
an Honorable Lady's Silver-Lace, and selling it her for good Silver; and a
second time for putting Copper into my Lord Carlile's Suit and Cloak, and
selling it to him for good Silver; and if the Queen had not sent to me, and
laid her commands on me not to proceed farther, I had made him an example.
Many other Silkmen sold Silver-Thread with a Core of Copper, and some sold
Copper for Silver, which as long as I had the Trust, I would not spare any
man.

I seized on fifty pounds of Silver-Lace, mixed with Copper, in Master
Alderman Garrawaie's custody, when he was Lord Major of London, and brought
it away from him against his will, as Sir George Sands knows, and the world
know's he had spirit enough: and upon that seizure, I found twenty men had an
hand in it, for it was sent to Russia, and there the Emperor's Council seized
it, and laid Master Sands in prison, Sir George Sand's brother, who had brought
the adulterate Silver-Lace into the Country. And upon examination and proof,
that Master Sands was cousened by buying this Silver-Thread for good Silver in
London, it was sent over to the Russia Company to have the offenders found
out, where upon examination before the Commissioners, twenty men run away.

By these good ways, I so ordered the Regulation of the Manufactures during
the time of the Regulation, that the stuff was made all good Silver, and five
Ounces to one pound Venice; and if any did work in Corners, that which was with
a Cote of Copper, or against the rule, my Instruments were sure to find them
out one time or another. And for doing of this service, I had Warrants directed
to several people for to discover the offenders; and because I was true to my
trust, I would not suffer the Commonwealth to be cousened in this
Manufacture (some men that have deceived the Commonwealth in making of slight
Gold and Silver-Thread, fear, if a Regulation should be settled by Parliament,
to have no Silver-thread spun, either by the Hand or Spindle, but such as is
covered with a good Plate of Silver, and five Ounces Troie at the least, to
the pound Venice, that then they shall be suffered to cosen no more; and this
is the true reason of their anger against any that stand's for a Regulation;
then they know their own guilt in so notorious defrauding the State in the
Excise, and how much money they owe the State in Arrears within this four
years, being above twenty thousand pounds, which is in the hands of fewer
then thirty men; and they know, if I be commanded by the Parliament, I will
give a good account of this business.

I do humbly desire Sir Robert Harlow, that my Grant might be delivered to the
Honorable Council for Trade, and that he would pleas to report what he found
concerning it to your Honors; and that if I cannot maintain my Grant for the
surveying the Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Wier, and Thread, for the good of
the Commonwealth, and for the service of the wearer, and honor of the
Manufacture, I shall with all humility lay my self at the Honorable Council
for Trade's feet, so to regulate my Grant, as they in their great Wisdoms shall
find most advantageous to the Commonwealth.

And I do humbly farther propound to the Council for Trade, that they would be
pleased to take notice that there is an Ordinance of Parliament of the sixth of
August, 1646. for all Gold and Silver-Wier, to pay four pence on the Ounce
Troie, at the disgrossing at the Bar; and this Ordinance fallows in these
words, viz. That four pence shall be paid by way of Excise, for every Ounce
of Silver Troie weight, and so for a greater or lesser quantity proportionable
of Silver and Gold; that any Refiner, Goldsmiths, or Gold-Wier drawer, or other
that shall prepare, melt down, or disgross for Wier; the same to be paid by
every Refiner, Goldsmiths, Gold-Wier-drawer, or other, at the Bar, where the
same shall be disgrossed. And that all Gold and Silver to be disgrossed for
Wier as aforesaid, be brought to one certain place, or places appointed, or to
be appointed by the Commissioners of the Excise, and not elsewhere; and that no
Bars, Benches, Screws, Engines, or other Instruments for disgrossing of Silver,
be used or allowed in any other place; this is in the Book of Ordinances; fol.
1114.

That for almost four years this four pence the Ounce did not make to the State
above one thousand pounds for all that time, of near upon four years. And
during these four years, the Refiners of London being named in the Act, many
of these Refiners durst not sell Guilt and Silver-Wier, without taking and
securing the duty of four pence the Ounce to the State; whereupon rather then
they would run into contempt of this Act, some of them gave over their trades,
and others of them lost their customers; for many of the Wier-drawers drew and
refined all their own Silver, and never paid the State the duties reserved by
the Ordinance; and there remain's in the hands of some of the Gold-Wier-drawers,
and Refiners above twenty thousand pounds, contrary and in contempt of this
Ordinance of Parliament, and which some of the said Wier-drawers and Refiners are
in Arrears to the State.

The Wier-drawers, and diverse other Trades, having with great advantage made
the wearer pay four pence the Ounce Venice for Excise, when any bought it in
Lace; and this which I now put in writing, is, that the Gentry may know what
to pay for the future; for upon a true account, four pence an Ounce Troie in
Silver-Wier, is not above one penny farthing upon every Ounce Venice in
Silver. Thread: So though the Wier-drawers made a great advantage of the
Excise, collecting far more from the Gentry of this Nation, then four pence
the Ounce Troie, yet they have not paid these Arrears to the State; a business
of great concernment, now there is occasion for money, and require's a speedy
examination.

That for this last year, the Wier-drawers and Refiners did pay but one penny
the Ounce, which penny make's now fifteen hundred pounds a year; so that four
pence the Ounce would have been above six thousand pounds a year, if the four
pence had been justly gathered.

Now upon examination, it may be proved there was more Silver-Wier disgrossed
and made into Thread, and small Wier, by the Refiners and Wier-drawers in
every of the years 1646, 1647, 1648, 1649, then in this last year 1650; so
that by this account, there will clearly remain in the Refiner's, and Master
Wier-drawer's hands, above twenty thousand pounds, and the number of them is
not above thirty men, which owe this money, for which sum, they are tied by
an Ordinance of Parliament, and no discharge can be given them of this debt,
but by an Act of Parliament; for all that drew Silver at the Bar, are upon the
drawing of it, bound to pay the State four pence the Ounce for what they
drew, and no persons have any power to discharge this debt, but the Parliament;
and if I be required and empowered, I make no question to give the State a
good account of this debt.

I do most humbly desire the Honorable Council for Trade, to take notice that
by the eighth Article of their Commission, they are to consider what Excise is
fit to be laid on all goods and commodities, and so equally and evenly lay
it, that the State may not be made incapable to defraie public charges. Now I
humbly desire the Honble Council for Trade, to take especial notice of this my
humble Proposition, which is, that one penny on the Ounce Troie upon all Gold
and Silver-Wier disgrossed at the Bar, and made into Gold and Silver. Thread,
is no equal Excise in proportion to other commodities that are rated with
Excises which are far more serviceable to the Commonwealth.

Besides, the Gold-Wier-drawers before any Excise was thought of, did offer
unto the late King, and his heirs for ever, one thousand pounds a year, and two
pence the Ounce, to have a Corporation, as I shall make it appear. But the
deceits so grossly practiced by many of them, was so clearly proved that then at
that time the State would not trust them with a Corporation, as I have formerly
declared. Neither would the late King and his Council trust the Finers, but
under a Regulation by Commissioners, though they saw paid the late King six
pence the Ounce for all Gold and Silver disgrossed at the Bar, upon sale of the
Silver. Now I say, after the Excise of one penny the Ounce upon Silver and
Guilt Wier, when it is Manufactured into Thread, it is not above ten shillings
the hundred pounds Excise for some sorts, and not above fifteen shillings in one
hundred pounds worth upon any sort of Gold and Silver. Thread, when it is
Manufactured. And other sorts of goods that are for use, and not superfluous,
paie's five pounds in the hundred.

Now if the State pleas to lay six pence on the Ounce for all Gold and
Silver-Wier, that is disgrossed at the Bar, it is not above three pounds in one
hundred for some sorts of Gold and Silver-Thread, and four pounds ten shillings
in the hundred pounds Excise for the heaviest; when it Manufactured, and it is
a superfluous commodity, that if any will wear it, they ought to pay so much
Excise as other commodities does; and if the rules desired in the
Silverspinner's last printed Petition to your Honors, with some few other
Observations on Master Atturnie General Banks his Certificate, for the
Regulating the Manufacture, the State will make six thousand pounds a year of
it, and the Manufacture all made right, both for the fineness of the Silver,
and the just covering of the Thread, with a good plate, and to settle a
comfortable livelihood for the labor of all the poor working Wier-drawers, and
Silver-spinners, that have a right to the Trade by service or seven years
usage; and the supernumerarie Master-Wier-drawers, and Workmen, to be
excluded the Trade, that have not served for it, or not wholly followed it for
seven years.

I humbly desire your Honors to take notice by the Ordinance of Parliament, that
laie's four pence upon all Silver disgrossed at the Bar, dated the sixth of
August 1646. all Gold and Silver-Thread was to be made up in scanes, and to
be sealed without any fee: and this no doubt was moved to be put in by some
people who knew very well, if there were no fee allowed, there could be no
service don; and that which has made the City of London so full of slight
Silver-Thread, is the neglecting the surveying of it: For how could any Sealer
give his attendance, warrant the Silver to the Nation, and to any Merchants, to
be good Silver, both according to the Standard of the Silver, and that it
contain's in one pound Venice, five Ounces of Silver; (and without this warrant
to the buier, what good does the sealing of it?) While I had the surveying of
this Manufacture, which was above four years, I warranted it all to the
Commonwealth; and I challenge any Wier-drawer, or Finer, or Silk-man in
London, to produce one pound of bad or slight Silver, I ever sealed at the
Office, or that any man could ever fasten one penny on me, or other reward,
for conniving at any man that did not work good Silver.

It is well known, I did always stand to reliev the poor workmen, and
work-women, while I had the Office, against their oppressing work-masters, in
causing their workmasters not to deliver them bad Silver, or such as would not
work by reason of the not refining of it well, and made the Refiners change it,
though it were good according to the Standard, yet not being well drietested,
it would bring the poor workmen a great deal of trouble and loss, by reason of
the Quicksilver.

That I was strict to see all men work good Silver, and to cause those that did
not to be punished, I confess it ot be true, and it did concern me to do it,
for else I had brought a scandal on the Manufacture, and my Office, and I might
have been undon in warranting the commodity to be all right that was sealed
in the Office. And if the Wier-drawers could have proved but any Gold and
Silver-Thread, with all their vigilant search throughout the City, that had
been sealed, that was course Silver, or held not five Ounces to every pound
Venice, it had gone in to the Parliament with a full cry: but though they
sought, and sought carefully, to find it out, that either I or my servants had
sealed any bad Silver, they could not find one Ounce; though I am sure I and
my servants in the time I had the Office, sealed above one Million of Scanes of
Gold and Silver; and it was a great mercy of God to me, the Wierdrawers with
all the tricks they used, could get no course or slight Silver-Thread to produce
to the Parliament. But missing their mark in that design, they with some
Refiners, whose tongues I have found more sharp then a two-edged sword, with
the greatest industry, subtly spit out the poison of Asps, which naturally
grow's in some of their mouths, or else so much untruth could not be invented as
they bestowed upon me; the poison of their mouths and tongues being to me as
venomous as the Aquafortis they make: For in the beginning of this Parliament,
some of them cast about the City of London, and to people that never knew me,
as if I had been the worst man living.

And though the Finers and Wierdrawers of London both Petitioned the late King
for their Trade, as I said before, and each striving which of them should set
their trade in such a way that might bring them in the most for their
particular profit; when they had molded all their Regulation, then I was
nominated Surveyor and Sealer of all the Manufacturie by the late King, which I
did discharge faithfully, in seeing they should not cosen the Commonwealth;
for my doing thereof, some of them clamored most lewdly against me about the
City of London. And some which I know did use these unworthie ways to defame
and slander me, are now discovered, and held themselves unworthie men, and in
as much contempt with the City of London, as they put upon their neighbors. It
is not their removing out of the City of London, can make their cursed
remembrance be forgot: These restless spirits have left no stone unmoved to do
me a mischief, and to present me as a Malignant, and disaffected to this
Commonwealth.

Truly I will declare to all the world, I ever loved and honored the late King
with all my heart, as long as he bad breath in his body, and would have don
him any just service; and nothing beyond that I would have don, and I am
confident no gallant man will condemn me for speaking this truth. Now he is
dead, I am free with the same faith and humble duty, and something more, by
reason my afflictions has got me some more experience, I will constantly serve
this Parliament and the Common wealth of England, as it is now settled without
King or Lords, to the last drop of blood in my body, against any person that
oppose's them, and will do the Parliament all just service for the Commonwealth.

And I thank God I never by any was desired farther; and if I should, I would
bid any that ask's me to do it, do it themselves. Yet these Moles, some of the
Refiners, and some of the Wier-drawers, would introduce to some of my friends,
that I am a dangerous Instrument for some of the State; so that these men's
tongues are like saws, with cross teeth, (if I be of the King's side, I shall
be blasted, when the King is dead; if I serve the State, I shall not escape
them) but if they had rested with words, I should better have born their
malice: But this last Michaelmas Term, they fell on me with deeds, took me
upon an Execution at the suit of one Widow Simonds, wife of one Joseph Simonds,
when I never warranted any Atturnie to appear for me, and I had a Releas of
the said Joseph Simonds for to withdraw all Actions; and thereupon I delivered
him an Ingot of Silver which was seized on by the late King's Commissioners, by
order of the Lords of the Council, and this was don eleven years ago. I never
owed this woman or her husband one penny, and I make no question but I shall
have reparation, and to find out the confederacy against me.

This Joseph Simonds brought the same Action against Sir John Wollaston,
Alderman Gibs, Sir William Becher, Master Alderman Harison, and diverse others,
and they all nonsuited him several times; and if I had known the declaration
against me, I would have pleaded and gotten off as well as others; but I was
in the County of Darbie-shire, and never knew of it till there was Judgment
entered upon a Nihil Dicit, and a Writ of Inquiry of Damages, when I had the
said Joseph Simond's Releas attested by five witnesses, and I found this Releas
by a strange accident after I had lost this Acquitance, about ten years, the
tenth of this present Januarie; this I put down openly, that as I was affronted
publicly on the Exchange, by being arrested there, upon an unjust Action all
men should know I cannot be arrested for a just Debt.

REceived the 19 day of October. 1640. of Thomas Violet by virtue of an Order of
the Lords at White Hall, the 18 of October. 1640. one Ingot of Silver-Guilt,
weighing 17 pound weight, one Ounce and five penny weight; and I do promise to
withdraw all Actions that have been commenced either against Robert Amerie,
Thomas Violet, or any other, for seizing and deteining of the said
Silver-Guilt; In witness whereof I have bereunto set my hand,

Joseph Symonds. Witness we, M. Blunt. Andrew Heitly. Will. Creswell. Will.
Crosbie. Will. Bourne.



Beyond Seas it is not permitted to a Sergeant to arrest any man on the
Exchange, and it were very fit it should be so here in London; for many
Merchants are crazie commodities, and their reputation's not to be touched,
lest they fall in pieces. I speak not for my self, for I owe not one hundred
pounds in the world, that any body can justly ask me, though I have had taken
from me by Order of Committees above eight thousand four hundred pounds, and I
have left off trading this ten years: But I know there is a great necessity at
this time for Merchants not to be arrested on the Exchange, for the humor of
many English Usurers and some others is, that if they find a man sinking,
every man enter's his Action, and pul's sometimes a good Estate in pieces;
whereas they should do as they do in Holland, if their debtors have losses at
sea, or by fire, or bad debts, they play the good Samaritan, bind up their
wounds, and instead of adding affliction to their debtor, comfort him, and by
this careful usage, many a score of men beyond seas have recovered their
Estates, and been gallant Merchants again; whereas here they fling them into
prisons, and ruin them. But for such Merchants or others, that break out of
knaverie, to cosen men by their Composition, as too many do, or such as have
Diced or Whored away their Estates, and then break in other men's debts, I
desire from my heart, and humbly pray, a Law may be made to make it Felony
in any that has, or shall do it; I am credibly told it is so in France, and
other Foreign parts.

But that which was the Masterpiece of all the Refiner's plots to destroy
me, was, when by the subtlety of two of them they put me into the Tower for
three years and eleven months, and did engage great and honorable men against
me, for what some of them knew themselves long before I did, and I did nothing
but by warrant of public Officers. By which falls information, they caused me
to be sequestered of my Estate, and damnified, and plundered to the value of
eight thousand pounds, and kept close prisoner in a room in the Tower for nine
hundred twenty eight days, and never could be heard to make my just defense;
and had not God sent Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army to London, I had never got
out of the Tower, but been buried there alive.

For the true Examination of all the transaction of that business, I am an
humble suitor to the Parliament to have Justice, and that the truth of this
business might be found out, and that it may be referred to the Honorable
Committee of Examinations, and then it will be found this design was to blast
and undo me, and by that means, to prevent me that I should not tell the
State what I knew to be true, and should never com to be heard in what I
could serve the State; for as they had laid the design for my life and good
name, it was one hundred to one, that ever I escaped their mortal snare.

An Account of what has been taken from me, for which I humbly desire
reparations and satisfaction.
1. WHen I was sent to the Tower the sixth of Januarie 1643, my mother had of my
Goods, Bonds, and Bills, in her hands, taken away from her at several times,
viz. to the value of one thousand three hundred and odd pounds, besides many of
my Papers and Accounts of a great value, and consideration to me seized, and
many of my Papers were of great concernment to the Commonwealth, and as yet I
cannot com to the knowledge who has them; but this I am sure of, if there had
been any thing in them that could have made against me, there had then use
been made of them.

2. My mother had at another time a Privy Seal taken from her, wherein the
late King acknowledged he owed me for my expenses in the Discovery of the
Transporters of Gold and Silver, nineteen hundred threescore and eight pounds,
which money I laid out every penny out of my own purs.

3. The Committee of Essex, put me out of possession of the Manors of Battles
and Paton Hall in Essex, as appears by their Warrants here annexed; of which
Land, I had an extent to the just value of one thousand pounds due to me in
1643. and Master Philip Cage was in possession of the premises for my use, as
hereafter fallows.

4. The Committee of Shropshire, seized in my sister's hands in London, three
bonds due to me in two thousand pounds, for the payment of me Thomas Violet
one thousand pounds by the Lady Wade, Edmond Lenthal Esquire, Philip Cage
Esquire, Charles Mordent Esquire, as appears under the band of Philip Cage
Esquire.

5. I had the Leases of ten several Houses at the Postern in little
More-Fields, and the Tenants owed me when I was committed to the Tower, in
arrears for rent, about one hundred pounds, and for this seven years I received
no rent of them, but Master Elconhead has received the rent ever since.

6. Some of the Wier-drawers by their clamor, caused my Office to be sequestered
from me, which was for the surveying and sealing of all Gold and
Silver-Thread, by which means they have made slight Silver-Thread, to the
deceit of this Nation ever since: which office for the surveying and sealing of
all Gold and Silver-Thread, and Wier, I had from the late King, for three
lives, and it has cost me near fifteen hundred pounds to my Lord Treasurer,
Lord Cottington, Sir John Cook, Sir John Banks, before I could get the Grant to
pass under the Great Seal of England; and that Office made me above three
hundred pounds a year, besides an House rent-free; the necessity of having that
Office, I have showed before.

7. I had one quarter part of the Lady Viller's Farm for the importation of
all Foreign Gold and Silver-Thread, Hat-bands or Lace, and Copper-Thread
throughout England and Wales; sor fourteen years, which cost me a little
before I was sequestered seven hundred pounds, and it was worth one hundred and
fifty pounds per annum to me.

8. I spent in my imprisonment in the Tower for almost four years seven hundred
pounds, and could never get my Cause to be heard.

An Order of the Committee of Shropshier.
WHereas by Virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament, autorizing us, the Committee
for the County of Salop, to seiz, sequester, and secure the Estates of
Papists, and Delinquents, for the raising of Moneys for the service of the
Parliament in the County of Salop, which we shall discover; we have seized
and taken into our possession three several Bonds or Obligations, whereby you
amongst others, stand bound to Thomas Violet, a Delinquent and Prisoner in the
Tower of London, for payment unto him of several sums of Money therein
mentioned. It is therefore Ordered by the said Committee, That you pay such
Moneys as are due upon the said Bonds, unto the said Committee, or to such as
they shall appoint, and unto none other, until further order be taken therein
by the said Committee. And further, you are desired to be present at the said
Committee at Salter's Hall, in Bread-street in London, upon Tuesdaie next, at
three of the Clock in the afternoon.

Dated the tenth day of October, Anno Dom. 1644. H. Mackworth. Jo. Corbet.
Tho. More. Chapter Meredith.


To Master Philip Cage, of Great Harwel in the County of Hartford Esquire.
Memorand. That the 21 of December, 1646. this Warrant was showed unto Master
John Corbet, at the Tower, in the presence of us, and he did acknowledge it to
be his hand, and that the said Bonds were seized upon according to their
Order, and were in the hands of one Brom, belonging to the Committee of
Shropsheir. And that the said three bonds were in two thousand pounds for the
paying of Thomas Violet one thousand pounds.

Henry Cogan. William Bourn.


Two Orders of the Committee of Essex.
Essex scilicet,
WHereas Thomas Violet a Delinquent, is imprisoned in the Tower of London, for
a Conspiracy against the Parliament, and that his Estate is seized and
sequestered, and that it appears to the Parliament, that there is an extent of
the Lands of James Waad Esquire, at the suit of the said Violet, or some others
to his use, of the penalty of one thousand pounds, for the payment of five
hundred pounds charged upon the Manors of Battles, and Paton Hall, with their
appurtenances within this County of Essex. The high Court of Parliament taking
the same into consideration, have been pleased to order the benefit and
advantage of the said extent to the use of this County. Now we the Committees
of the County aforesaid, have assigned, and do by these presents assign the
said extent and all the benefits thereof unto Edward Elconhead Esquire, giving
him hereby full power and authority, to take and receiv all and singular the
profits and rents of the said Manors of Battles, and Paton Hall, with their and
every of their appurtenances: And we do also hereby appoint the said Edward
Elconhead Esquire, to take into his hands and possession, the said Battles and
Paton- Hall, with their appurtenances. And we do hereby further Order and
Appoint all and singular, the Tenants and Land-holders thereof, respectively,
to pay their several rents with the arrearages thereof, as the same are, or
from time to time shall grow due unto the said Edward Elconhead: And we do
hereby require all Captains, and all other forces, as also all High Constables
and Petty Constables within this County, to be aiding and assisting to the
said Edward Elconhead, in gaining, preserving, and keeping him in the quiet
possession of the premises aforesaid.

At the standing Committee at Chelms-ford the 17 of August 1644. Thomas
Barington. Will. Goldingham. Rich. Harlakenden. H. Holcrost. William Roe.
Robert Smith. S. Sparrow.


Essex, scilicet.
WHereas we the Committee for the said County, now sitting at Chelms ford,
have assigned the extent of the Manors of Battles and Paton-Hall, with their
appurtenances (made not long since by Thomas Violet, now prisoner in the Tower
of London) unto Edward Elconhead, of the said County Esquire. We do also
hereby Order and Appoint, that if any differences shall happen to arise betwixt
him the said Edward Elconhead, and any of the Tenants of the aforesaid Lands,
that then we refer the consideration and settling thereof unto Timothy
Middleton Esquire, High Sheriff of the aforesaid County, and Sir Thomas
Barington Knight and Baronet, or either of them, who are hereby desired to
mediate therein, or in case of refusal, or obstinacy of any of the said
persons, to make their return to us thereof, whereupon we shall proceed as to
the demerit of the cause shall appertain.

At the standing Committee at Chelmsford, the 17 of August 1644. Will. Roe.
Will. Goldingham. Rich. Harlakenden. H. Holcrost. Rob. Smith.


These two are true Copies of the Committee of Essex Orders,

witness our hands this first day of August 1646. Philip Cage. Thomas
Conningsbie. Christ. Hatton.


A DECLARATION OF PHILIP CAGE, Esquire, Showing by virtue of the Committee of
Essex Order, dated 17 August 1644.
He was forcibly driven out of the possession of the Manors of Battles, and
Paton-Hall, which he held for and to the use of THOMAS VIOLET.
Attested by Thomas Conningsbie Esquire, of Hartford-shier, and Christopher
Hatton of London, Gentleman.
UPon this Order of the Committee, I Philip Cage being in possession of both
the Manors of Battles, and Paton-Hall, with the appurtenances, in the County
of Essex, by virtue of a Leas, of an extent from his Majesty, assigned to me
and others, by M. Thomas Violet, in trust of those Lands, with diverse other
Lands and Tenements in London and Middlesex, for the use of Thomas Violet, I
Philip Cage, and my Family, were forcibly driven out of possession about the 20
of August 1644. and had above three hundred pounds worth of Corn standing on
the ground with Hops, with other the Corn and Haie in the Barns, inned; which
several Barns and Houses was all forcibly broken and taken from me by virtue
of this Order; and I do acknowledge, that there is now due to Master Thomas
Violet, the sum of one thousand pounds, which Edmund Lenthal Esquire, Charles
Mordant Esquire, and I Philip Cage Esqwith Dame Anne Waad, late of Battles in
the County of Essex, are bound in two thousand pounds, to Thomas Violet, for
the payment of one thousand pounds: which debt we entered into bonds for my
brother James Waad's debt to Master Violet, and then Master Violet had all my
brother's Lands in extent, and assigned them over to me and others in trust,
in consideration of our entering into bonds to pay him one thousand pounds, at
or after the death of my Lady Waad, which Money is now due. And I Philip Cage
am ready to pay it, so as I may have the Sequestration of the Lands taken
off, and enjoie the Extent.

Witness my hand, this first day of August 1646. PHIL. CAGE.
Witness us underneath, that M. Cage signed this. THO. CONNINGSBIE. CHR.
HATTON.


An Order of the Committee of ESSEX. JULIE II. 1649.
IT is Ordered that Edward Elconhead Esquire, be desired to attend this
Committee upon Thursdaie the six and twentieth of this instant Julie, at the
Black-Boie in Chelms-ford, and bring with him the Charge against Master Thomas
Violet, sometimes prisoner in the Tower of London, for Conspiracy against the
Parliament, and Delinquencie, as the said Master Elconhead has formerly
informed. The Order of this Committee, by which the Estate of the said Master
Violet was Sequestered, the cause thereof, with the witnesses and proofs, to
testify the Conspiracy and Delinquencie of the said Master Violet. As also
the Composition made with the Committee of Essex, for the Extent of the said
Master Violet, and the Discharge made by this Committee upon payment of that
Composition; That so this Committee may give an account of the whole business
to the right Honorable the Barons of the Exchequer, according to their Order
dated 28 May last.

By the standing Committee for the County of Essex. THO. COOK. THO. HONYVVOOD.
W. ROW. ROBERT SMITH. BARNARD DESTON. J. MATTHEVVS. JOHN FEINING.


An Acknowledgment of Mrs Mordant, concerning Tho. Violet's Bonds and Extent on
the Manors of Battles, and Paton-Hall, in Essex.
IArmenigilda Mordant, daughter to the late Lady Anne Waad, of Battles- Hall,
in the County of Essex, and sister to James Waad Esquire; Do declare and
testify, that my brother in Law, Philip Cage Esquire, and my late Husband
Charles Mordant Esquire, had an Extent of the Manors of Battles and Paton Hall,
in Essex, and diverse other Lands in London and Middlesex, assigned over to them
in trust to, and for the use of Thomas Violet of London Gold smith, until the
sum of one thousand pounds were paid unto Thomas Violet, which they both
entered into bonds in two thousand pounds, for the payment of one thousand
pounds, within three years after the death of my mother, the Lady Anne Waad,
viz. in this manner. The first year after my mother's death, four hundred of
pounds to be paid; the second year, three hundred pounds; the third year,
three hundred pounds more, in all the sum of one thousand pounds; and this
bond was sealed and signed by my late Husband Charles Mordant, Philip Cage, and
Edmund Lenthal Esquires, and my mother Dame Anne Waad, the sixth of Julie, 1638.
and I Armenegilda Mordant, and Jone Campion, and diverse others, are witnesses
to the aforesaid Bonds, and that the assignment of the Extent from Master
Violet of the Manors of Battles, and Paton- Hall, was but in trust until Master
Violet had received the sum of one thousand pounds, and then such debts as my
brother Philip Cage, and my Husband Charles Mordant, were engaged for, were
afterward to be answered out of my brother Waad's lands, and my foresaid
mother the Lady Anne Waad died about June the third, one thousand six hundred
forty three.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand this 15 of August, 1649.
Witness on the signing hereof

Vincent de la Bare Gerrard Whorwood.


per me Armenigilda Mordant.

Another Order of the Committee of ESSEX, JULIE 28. 1649.
IT is Ordered, that Master Edward Elconhead, do return to this Committee, upon
Thursdaie the 23 of August, the cause of the Sequestring the Estate of M. Thomas
Violet, within this County.

By the standing Committee of Essex. Bernard Deston. Tho. Honiwood. Robert
Smith. William Harlackenden. Jo. Eldred.


Upon Master Elconhead's several times attending the Committee of Essex, and
not proving his Charge against me before the Committee; according to these
Orders I did Petition the Committee of Essex, that they would require the
Tenants of Battles and Paton. Hall, to forbear to pay Edward Elconhead any
more rent, and to require Ed. Elconhead presently to bring into the Committee
of Essex, all sums of money that he had received by virtue of their Order or
Orders, on the Manors of Battles and Paton-Hall, to be deposited into the
Committee's hands, till my cause was examined in Parliament; for Master Edward
Elconhead finding I was in the displeasure of the Parliament, thought at once to
give me a payment both for Master Waad's debt, and my life; and therefore M.
Elconhead charge's me with a Conspiracy against the Parliament before the
Committee of Essex, as appears under the Committee's hands by the two
aforesaid Warrants; then Master Elconhead compound's with the Committee of
Essex for three hundred pounds, that which I had all Master Waad's Lands under
Extent, worth one thousand pounds Land a year, to pay me one thousand pounds
due to me in 1643. which Lands of Master James Waad, upon color of this
Sequestration of the Committee of Essex, Master Elconhead ever since hold's in
his hands, and keep's Master Waad's Creditors without their Money; and though
Master Waad has a great Estate, more then will pay his debts, if it were well
managed, to live like a Gentleman, yet Master Waad is kept in prison in great
want, and Master Elconhead receiv's his Estate without any Account. And I had
three several Bonds in two thousand pounds as aforesaid, for securing my money.
Now if I had forfeited my Estate to the use of the County of Essex, the
Committee for the County of Essex were not good husbands for the County, to
let Master Elconhead have one thousand pounds good Estate for three hundred
pounds; for they had Lands tied for it in their own County of Essex, of above
three hundred pounds a year value. But the truth is, I have enquired whether
ever any money was paid into the use of the County by Master Edward Elconhead
of this three hundred pounds, and I cannot find any paid for the use of the
County. I humbly desire the Committee for the Accounts of the Commonwealth,
would take notice of it, and have it examined. I shall leav Master Elconhead to
the world, to judge of him, to give me a Charge of Treason, and then by that
means to get my Estate for a quarter of the pretended sum he compounded for,
when I was close prisoner in the Tower, and could not make my defense; and then
M. Edward Elconhead the 28 of Julie 1649. to deny before the Committee of
Essex that he ever charged me with a Conspiracy against the Parliament,
though it be attested by the Committees of Essex Warrant as aforesaid; and
that Honorable Gentleman Sir Will. Row, told then to M. Elconhead before the
Committee, that if he could not prove my conspiracy against the Parliament,
he had don me Tho. Violet wrong, and the Committee of Essex wrong; for it was
only upon M. Elconhead's Information to the Committee of Essex, that the
Committee certified any thing against me to the Parliament, and wished M.
Elconhead to bring the Acquitance of the Committee, for what money he had paid
for this Extent, and he said the Ordinance of Parliament for giving my Estate
away, which I had in that County, being an Extent on the Manors of Battle and
Paton-Hall, was made on the Committee's Information to the Parliament against
me, and their information was only grounded on M. Elconhead to the Committee;
and if he could not prove his Charge, the Sequestration would ceas, and what
money M. Elconhead could prove he paid to the use of the County, should be
paid him back; for if Master Elconhead failed in the foundation, all that was
don on that Charge against me would ceas, and I ought to be restored to the
possession of my Lands in the County, but as yet I could not get the Committee
of Essex to restore me to my possession, Master Elconhead desiring further
time of the Committee; therefore I am an humble suitor to be relieved in
Parliament.

Here follows the Copy of the late King's Letter.
To Our Trusty and Well-beloved, Our Lord Major and Aldermen of Our City of
London, and all other our well affected Subjects of the City. It is
Superscribed, Charles Rex. And beneath, By His Majesty's Command, George Digbie.
Trusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well. When We remember the many Acts
of Grace and Favor We and Our Roial Predecessors have conferred upon that Our
City of London, and the many Examples of eminent Duty and Loialtie, for
which that City has been likewise famous, We are willing to believ,
notwithstanding the great defection We have found in that place, that all men
are not so far degenerated from their affection to Us, and to the Peace of the
Kingdom, as to desire a continuance of the miseries they now feel; and
therefore being informed, that there is a desire in some principal Persons of
that City to present a Petition to Us, which may tend to the procuring a good
understanding between Us, and that Our City, whereby the Peace of the whole
Kingdom may be procured: We have thought fit to let you know, That We are
ready to receiv any such Petition, and the Persons who shall be appointed to
present the same to Us, shall have a safe conduct; And you shall assure all Our
good subjects of that Our City, whose hearts are touched with any sens of
duty to Us, or of Love to the Religion and Laws established, in the quiet and
peaceable fruition whereof they and their. Ancestors have enjoied so great
Happiness, That We have neither passed any Act, nor made any Profession or
Protestation for the Maintenance and Defense of the true Protestant Religion,
and the Liberties of the Subject, which We will not most strictly and
religiously observe; and for the which We will not be always ready to give
them any security that can be desired. And of these Our Gracious Letters We
exspect a speedy Answer from you. And so We bid you farewell.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, in the nineteenth year of Our Reign: 26 December.
1643.

Two Letters fo Master Read's, sent to M. Theophilus Rilie, Scout-master of the
City of London, from Oxford.
SIR!
I Wrote to you formerly, but never had any answer, I assure you faithfully I
have not been wanting to do what you desired (as you may perceiv by the
effects) and if you have not your desire, blame your self, but give me leav to
tell you, that if you neglect the opportunity now offered to you, it may be
you shall never have the like again; for I have made those whom you have given
just occasion to be your worst friends, to be your best, and the only
instruments to procure what here is sent you, and be you confident she shall
still be so, provided you do your part; consider I beseech you, what a gap is
opened by bringing in of the Scots, for the destruction of this Kingdom, if
there be not a Peace, (which I pray God Almighty to send speedily) you must
exspect Armies of Strangers from several places, who are now preparing, who
certainly at their coing in will overrun the whole Kingdom, and when it is
past remedy, you will see your own errors, and therefore to prevent more
misery then I am able to express to this deplorable Kingdom, and the effusion
of the blood of Millions of men, women, and children, which must inevitably be
this Summer; apply your selves in an humble and submissive way to his Majesty,
whom I know you will find ready with arms outstretched to receiv you to
favor and mercy, and grant you favors, even beyond your exspectation. Defer no
time (for God's sake) and what you will do, do it speedily; I say again, do it
speedily, for reasons, I may not write.


The direction of the Letter by the same hand that it is written within, is for
the Man in the Moon, without date.
Sir!
I Assure you I have not been wanting to further your good desires, and if it
be not your own faults, I make no doubt but things will have an happy issue;
for I find those that are most concerned in it, forward enough. Reflect now
upon the misery of the times, and upon the groans and sufferings of those you
see not, which yet have been nothing to what they will be, if not speedily
prevented by a Peace; which to obtain, I beseech you, let it not only be your
own care, but the care of all those you love, or have power with; otherwise be
confident of a general ruin, which certainly will be inevitable both to your
selves and posterity; and therefore take it into your serious consideration,
and let not causless jealousies hinder you to apply your selves in an humble and
submissive manner to his Majesty, who I am sure will yet look upon you with a
gracious eye; lose no time, for the longer you delaie, it may prove the more
difficult, no doubt.

This last Letter I Tho. Violet delivered from Read to Master Rilie, in
November 1643.


UPon the bringing up to London of the aforesaid Letter of the late King, I
Thomas Violet was examined before an Honorable Committee at Gold-smith's Hall
the third of Januarie 1643. where I made the Honorable Committee acquainted,
that the later of Master Read's Letters I delivered to Master Theophilus Rilie
Scout-Master of the City of London, who was autorised by Ordinance of both
Houses of Parliament, and by Act of the Common Council of the City of London,
to hold Intelligence in any of the King's Quarters; and that the said
Theophilus Rilie did daily emploie Intelligencers into the King's Quarters by
Order of the City of London, and by authority of the Parliament, as he told
me Tho. Violet; and that the said Theophilus Rilie, by virtue of his place,
did procure my Pass from the then Parliament to go to Oxford, the twenty fifth
day of December, 1643. as appears by the Journal-Books in the House of
Commons; and my Lord General Essex did give me a Pass to go to Oxford in
Exchange for Master Haslerig, then prisoner in Beaver Castle, and this Warrant
of my Lord General's, Sir Arthur Haslerig procured me by means of Master
Rilie, I being prisoner, committed by the Parliament for my Twenty part; both
which Warrants were procured for me Tho. Violet by Theophilus Rilie
Scout-Master of the City of London, and I Tho. Violet did before the Honorable
Committee plead Justification for my doing what I did, having the Warrant and
Approbation of the Commonwealth's Scout-master for what I had don.

And I then told the Honorable Committee that I conceived my Warrant from
Master Rilie for what I did, was as sufficient as if I had had Master Elsing's
Warrant: for M. Rilie was as he told me approved on by Order of Lords and
Commons, and I knew by the consent of the Common Council of the City of
London, to be Scout-master for the City; and if he were a man unfit for such
a trust and power, it was the fault in those that chose him, and not in me which
was not to question his power, abilities, or trust, but to act according to his
directions, as long as he had the Office of Scout-Master.

Moreover I told the Honorable Committee, that before I went to Oxford, I
desired Sir David Watkins Knight, to make the Committee of both Nations, who
sat then at Darbie-Hous, acquainted with what I had don with Master Rilie the
Scout-master of the City of London, that so I might do nothing but by the
approbation of the Committee of both Kingdoms; and Sir David Watkins did make
some of them acquainted with what I had don with Master Rilie, and I had their
approbation to go to Oxford for the late King's Letter, and my Lord General's
Pass as aforesaid.

Moreover I declared to the Honorable Committeee at Gold-smith's Hall, that
there was not then at the time of my bringing up of the late King's Letter,
(being the 2d of Januarie 1643.) any Ordinance or Order to forbid me or any
other person to bring up a Letter of Peace from the late King as ever I then
heard of; and that by God's Law, where there is no Law, there can be no
Transgression; and my bringing then the late King's Letter up to London, before
a Law made to show me my rule to walk by, I humbly conceived could be no
offense.

And the reason wherefore I was willing to go to Oxford, for the late King's
Letter, was, because I was told that some in London had procured the late King to
send me his Commands, that I should not discover the Transporters of Gold and
Silver to the Parliament, which I offered then the Parliament to do. And if I had
not then been by the subtlety of some Finers, and some Transporters of Gold,
having incensed the Honorable Committee against me, (and cast me into the
Tower) but had been employed by the Parliament to make the Discovery of the
Transporters of Treasure, I say, that all the Gold and Silver that since has
been Transported (which has been a greater mischief to the Nation then can be
expressed) had never been sent away; and by the fines of the offenders, would
have com to the State a great and considerable sum to pay public debts, and
such a Regulation settled by the Parliament, that none should have presumed to
have Transported Gold or Silver for the future.

Here follows the late King's Letter verbatim, viz.
Charles R.
Trusty and Well beloved, We Greet you well. Whereas We have formerly
employed you for the Discovery of all such as Transported Gold and Silver Coin
beyond the Seas, and all such likewise who contrary to the Laws, and for their
own private gain, have Melted down great quantities of Silver; Wherein We
acknowledge you did Us good and acceptable service, for which (when God shall
enable Us) We do hereby promise to give you full satisfaction. And for that
We understand that you are pressed by Our Two Houses of Parliament to proceed
in the said Discovery, We do hereby strictly Command you that you intermeddle
no further therein, without Our special Direction, As you will. answer the
contrary at your peril. And for so doing, this shall be your sufficient
Warrant. Given at Our Court at Oxford the nineteenth day of November 1643. in
the nineteenth year of Our Reign, etc.

By his Majesty's Command, GEORGE DIGBIE.

To Our Trusty and Well-beloved Thomas Violet Goldsmiths in London.

And to get the late King to take off his Commands which he sent me by the
aforesaid Letter, and to give me leav to Discover the Transporters of Gold and
Silver, was the only reason that I went to Oxford: When I came to Oxford I
besought the late King to give me leav to make the Discovery to the Parliament
against the Transportes of Gold, but he would not, and told me he reserved
that business for himself, for it would make him good store of money when he
came to London. Then I prayed him to give me leav to pay my Twenty part to
the Parliament, and that it should be no damage to me, in regard the late King
owed me one thousand nine hundred sixty eight pounds for what I had laid out
in discovering the Transporters of Gold, which he readily consented to do, and
bid me pay all Taxes laid on me, and that should not prejudice my debt he
owed me, nor his favor to me, and that he would see me paid as soon he was
able.

I do humbly desire the Committee of Essex and Shropshier, and all others that
have my Estate, to take notice that every one that is committed to the Tower
by the Parliament, is not guilty of a Conspiracy against the Parliament. Col.
Monk he was committed to the Tower, and cleared, and at this day a most
gallant man in the Northern Army; Sir Tho. Bendish in the Tower, and cleared,
and now Ambassador at Constantinople; and many Honorable Members of this
Parliament have been committed upon displeasure of the Parliament, and yet
restored to sit in Parliament again; I am sure of it I am, and can be more
serviceable to the Parliament of England, then any Finer or Transporter of Gold
has, or can be, that maliciously have charged me to be a Malignant, for I
will bring the State in fifty thousand pounds, if they will pass the Act
against Transporting of Gold. And I humbly conceiv, no man ought to have his
Estate taken from him, and given away, before he be convicted by Martial Law,
or the Common Law of the Land. If those that have maliciously informed the
Honorable Committee that examined me at Goldsmiths Hall, could have made good
their Charge, or have proved any thing to my prejudice, they would have brought
me to my Trial in the compass of four years, while I was prisoner in the
Tower; I could not have avoided a Trial, or kept it off one day, and I know
they left no stone unrolled, for they sat many days to have don me a
mischief, and I have it from good hands; that worthy Gentleman Doctor
Doreslaws told them, I had don nothing but what I could justify, having M.
Theophilus Rilie's approbation and Warrant, he being a public Officer of
Trust; and if any were in fault, it was M. Theophilus Rilie, who had abused his
place and Trust, if he had don any thing beyond his Commission. But the truth
was, they looked more to keep me close prisoner in the Tower, (that so I
should not discover them that sent away the Treasure of the Nation) then any
thing else; for they knew if I were abroad, I would have served the Parliament in
that Discovery.

To the Honorable Council for Trade I am an humble suitor, for restoring me to
my Office for the Regulating the Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Thread, the
Regulation is now depending before them, and with all my heart I humbly shall
lay it at those grave Senator's feet, to regulate me and my fee, as they
shall see the Office just and necessary, and for the benefit of the
Commonwealth, and no further.

For the Goods, Bonds, and Accounts taken at several times from my mother while
I was in the Tower, J shall humbly desire any persons that did sequester them,
to let me know of it, whither they were carried, and how disposed of, and J
shall be bound to pray for them; and if they be inferior Officers, or
others, that can tell me, they shall be well rewarded by me and God's
blessing; for as yet J cannot hear who has them, and my mother died in my
close imprisonment in the Tower; and though by the great favor of Master Henry
Martin one of the Right Honorable Council of State, J had liberty to go and
see my mother whilst J was prisoner in the Tower, with two keepers, yet when J
came to her, she was so spent, and her heart broke for my oppressions, she
being threescore and seventeen years old, that she could not tell me any
thing of my business, nor give me the least notice in the world who had taken
my Goods, Bonds, and Accounts away, other then that she was plundered several
times; and this old Master White the Warder of the Tower, Master Axtel, and
Master Jackson, keepers in the Tower, know's to be true, who were with me all
the times J saw her.

For my Farm in the Custom-Hous, and for the late King's debt, with all my
aforesaid losses, J do most humbly leav it to the Parliament, for my
satisfaction; and J pray that the Committee of Shrop-shier may be Ordered to
restore me my Bonds they seized of mine from my sister in London, being three
Bonds in two thousand pounds for the paying me Tho. Violet one thousand pounds
as aforesaid; and that J may be enabled by Order of Parliament to sue the said
Bonds, and any other Bonds or Debts J have due to me; and the parties owing
me any money that I can justly prove due to me, may be required by the
Parliament to pay it to me, notwithstanding any Ordinance or Order of
Parliament heretofore made; and my humble suit is to the Parliament, that the
Committee of Essex be Ordered to put me into possession of the Manors of
Battles. Hall, and Paton. Hall, they having forcibly driven Philip Cage out,
when he was in possession for the use of me Tho. Violet, as appears by their
own Orders, and that I may enjoie all the said Lands till the rent of sixteen
hundred pounds be paid me, for so much I am out of purs.

The truth is, this envy of some of the Finers, and some of the Wier-drawers,
came upon me because I would not let the Wier-drawers cosen the late King of
his duty while I had the Office, but to the uttermost of my power made them
make all good Silver-Thread, and to have five Ounces to the pound Venice, and
right Silver; and I have heard some of the Wier-drawers confess, that they had
rather the State should chose forty Officers to look after the Excise, and
Regulation of this Manufacture, then one Violet. And this, though it be a
crime to them, is a service to the State, to have such an Officer, which know's
all the ways how they are cousened in their Excise in this Manufacture, and to
prevent it: and had not my place of surveying of this Manufacture been but I
had still enjoied it, the State should have had twenty thousand pounds in
their purs more then they have, only by the Excise on the commodity of Gold
and Silver-Wier; and all this money is lost through the ignorance of the
Officers of Excise, who know not how to manage the business; for I know the
State many times has Officers put into such places through the interest and
affection of friends, that are utterly incapable of such places they enjoie;
whereby the State is at great charges in fees and salaries to ignorant men. But
that is not the tenth part of the mischief the Commonwealth suffer's by their
fees; for through these men's ignorances, the State is cousened of the duties
that should support the Commonwealth, as is notoriously visible in the Excise
of Gold and Silver-Wier, which at four pence the Ounce at the Bar, which is
laid on it by Ordinance aforesaid, would have made the State six thousand
pounds a year: and by the ignorance and negligence of the Officers of Excise,
it has made the State not three hundred pounds a year for almost four years,
which is not the twenty penny of what ought to have been collected. And if I
had had my place, I would have seen every penny the Wier-drawers then paid
for Excise, made twenty pence to the State.

And this the Refiners and Wier-drawers know to be true, and that make's some
of them so unwilling that I should have my Office again; they fear I should be
commanded by the State to use my uttermost endeavors for the collecting of
those Arrears that are in the Wier-drawer's and Refiner's hands, and to
restrain them for the future, many of them having bought Lands and grown rich
with the money they owe to the State, which is fitter to pay the Arrears of
the Army, then to lie in their hands.

Now whereas the dispute is, which can afford it cheapest, the Wheels or the
Hand-spinners, I say, the best is best cheap; the Hand-spinners, work will
make two shillings eight pence, and three shillings the Ounce to the melting
pot, and last six times as long in Lace, as some of the Wheel-work will do; and
when this Wheel-work return's to the melting pot, it make's not one shilling
six pence the Ounce, nay, some of it not twelv pence the Ounce, the Silver
being most of it galled and brushed off the Silk. And this the Goldsmiths and
Tailors know to be true, that within this ten years all the slight Wheelwork
came up, which make's not half so much to burn, as it did formerly in Lace. And
whereas it is objected that some of the Hand-spinners work and spin
Silver-Thread, as slight as the Wheels, which I believ cannot be don; but if
it be don, they ought both Wheel-spinners, and Handspinners, to be severely
punished, if they do not put into one pound Venice of Thread, at least five
Ounces Troie of Silver-plate; and a sworn Officer that is no Trader in the
Manufacture to Regulate the Trade, for whatsoever they put less in Silver then
five Ounces Troie to one pound Venice, is a damage to the wearer, and the
wearer is cheated by paying for Silver, when he Silk for his money, by which
means the Lace will not wear a quater so long as if the Silver were bound in
with a strong plate of Silver; for you may observe your slight Silver Laces, one
part where it com's to wearing, that look's like Silk Laces, the Silver being
all stripped and galled off the Silk; but make it with a strong plate, you
shall have the Silk wear away, and the Silver remain.

I do humbly desire in the behalf of the poor Womenspinners, and some of the
working Wier-drawers of London, that their printed Petition for a Regulation of
the trade may be considered; And for the service of the Commonwealth, that a
rule may by your Honors be set, what fineness of Silver all the Gold and
Silver employed in the Wierdrawer's Trade, shall be made, and that it be all
assaied at the Bar, and that what person soever, that shall sell Gold or
Silver-Wier, before it be assaied, and the duties paid, which shall be
settled by your Honors, and approved on by the Parliament, shall for the first
offense lose all the Silver so wrought to the State, and the party that shall
discover it to have one tenth part for his service; and for the second offense,
to lose his or their freedom, and be dismissed of his and their Trades for
ever.

The like penalties for such as work Silver courser then the Standard, and such
as pay not the duties at the Bar reserved to the State, and such as do not put
five Ounces of Silver at the least upon every Venice pound of Gold and
Silver-Thread.

Then I humbly commend unto your Honors as an Excellent pattern for a
Regulation, the Copy of Sir John Bank's Certificate (the late King's Atturnie
General) to the late King; which if you tie the Wier-drawers and Refiners to
that rule, the Trade will be maintained here to the Profit and Honor of the
Nation.

And whereas it is objected, that some of the Spinners by the Hand make as
slight Gold and Silver-Thread, as the Wheels: Truly if they do, they ought to
be punished, any Hand-spinner that put's less Silver in a pound Venice, then
five Ounces Troie of Silver; for whether the slight Thread be made by hte the
Hand-spinners or Wheels, is not so much to the point, for which of them soever
does it, cousen's the Commonwealth: and therefore a sworn Officer to look to
them both, is for the service of the Commonwealth,

But if it be left to the Refiners, and Wier-drawers, to melt up the Plate and
heavy Coin of this Nation, as they have don, for this Manufacture, the Trade
so managed is a canker to the Commonwealth, and will in time eat out the
bowels of the stock of Money of this Nation.

I my self when I was an Apprentice, delivered to Alderman Gibs for my Master,
in little more then one above twenty thousand heavy shillings and six pences
melted into Ingots; and when I told his brother Richard Gibs within this two
months, that he knew it to be true, for at that time he was his brother's
Apprentice, he replied it was not in Coin, but in Ingots, and that he
conceiv's might excuse his brother.

The truth is, as this Trade is managed, it is a great waste of the treasure of
the Nation, for this is the usual way of it to furnish some of the Refiners and
some of the Wier-drawers with Silver; some of the Goldsmiths they are general
Cashiers for many Merchants, they receiv this money for nothing, then when they
have it in their houses, they cull it and melt down that which is the
weightiest, and melt it into Ingots, which is bought up by some of the Refiners,
and some Wier-drawers, and fined for Gold and Silver Lace; and according as some
of the Manufactures are made by the Wheels, five parts of six are swept away
and wasted, and never return's to the melting pot, and this is known and seen
to many men.

And for this, and other abuses practiced on the Coin and Bullion of the
Nation, there is the draft of an Act of Parliament commended from the Council of
State, and twice read in the House, which when it is past, I shall with all
humility give the State a true discovery of all these abuses, and prevent the
like for the time to com, which will be a great service to the Nation.

Then that there may be an account kept of all the Silver made in this
Manufacture, and such Merchants contraoted with, that once in the compass of a
year, what is spent in this Manufacture, may be coined, or at least so much,
as upon a calculation of the surveior of the Manufacture, shall be delivered
to the State that he conceiv's the Bullion and Treasure is wasted: But for
your Honors to settle the Trade of Refining of Gold and Silver, and
Wier-drawing, in a Corporation, as it is now desired by the Wier-drawers, it
were to make all the speed possible, that that little Silver in Coin which is
yet left in the Nation, should be culled and melted up for Gold and Silver
Lace, and leav it to their good discretions and honesties, to manage the other
parts of their Trade. The poor Spinners and some workmen, desire your Honors to
the contrary; for as they have beaten them down in the prices, that many of
them are ready to starv, so if the whole power of governing the Trade were
left to sixteen of their wisdoms and discretions, which is a Master, and
Wardens, and Assistants, then should the workmen and work-women's face be
ground and oppressed. These Master-work-men that desire this Corporation, are not
forty, and the workmen and work-women thousands; I shall with all humility
tell you what Foreign Nations do to Regulate their Money and Bullion, and these
Manufactures: and unless you have the like rule here, I humbly conceiv it will
be impossible to restore the Mint, to keep the Goldsmiths within compass, or
the Wier-drawers in any rule; for many of them have got to licentious height
and pride, having got great Estates by culling Money, selling Gold and Silver
to transport, buying of clipped Money, and paying it away again, and twenty
other tricks, that they are so proud, they know not whether they stand on their
heels or their head; but the Act against transporting these, when it com's
forth, will regulate them all.

I say, if you will have these abuses rectified as in France, Flanders, Spain,
Germany, and other Countries, I humbly conceiv, you must erect a Council for
Moneys and Bullion; for in France I have seen great Volumes of Arguments of the
Government and Management of Money and Bullion, and the due Regulation is of
mighty importance as your affairs now stand; and in all Foreign Countries, the
States, that are Kings, or Commonwealths, have a particular care, and make the
mysteries of managing their treasure, matter of the greatest state and policy;
and Gold and Silver, either in Coin or Bullion, the late Kings and Queens in
England, did ever appropriate the especial management of them to themselves, as
being a business of State.

And though now by the blessing of God, we are a free State, and the Nation a
free Nation, I humbly conceiv, not so free, that the Bullion and Coin of the
Commonwealth should be Manufactured and wasted without any account, and
without any regard for the bringing in Foreign Bullion for the proportion is
spent here, in the making Gold and Silver-Thread, without offering the State an
Excise fit for to be imposed on so superfluous a commodity; when these
Wier-drawers voluntarily offered the late King one thousand pound a year, and
two pence an Ounce, and the Refiners did give the late King six pence the
Ounce; and this to be don in a King's time, in a time when the Commonwealth
had no Armies to pay; which six pence the Ounce, almost all of it was given by
the late King to a couple of Courtiers, the Earl of Holland two thousand pounds
a year, the Countess of Roxborough twelv hundred pounds a year. If the
Wier-drawers would pay the Arrears they owe to the State, and submit to a
Regulation for the present, and bind themselves to work good Silver, well
covered with five Ounces Silver to a pound Venice, seal all the Gold and
Silver-Thread as formerly, and pay the duties shall be imposed on them by the
State for Excise, and keep an account of all the Silver Manufactured by a
Comptroler, there might be some hopes that this Manufacture might be
regulated: if they will not, I humbly conceiv, if the Parliament pass the Act
against Transporting Gold and Silver, and have a Council for Moneys, according
as it is in other Countries, it will regulate the abuses of this Trade, and all
others that trade in Gold and Silver.

If the State had had a Council for Moneys eight years ago, as they have in
Foreign Countries, I believe Cheapside-Cross would have yielded them more
Moneys then it made the State: I do humbly desire that it may be examined, how
many fodder of Lead was made of the Cross; for all the figures were Lead, and
who bought it, and what they paid a fodder, and the total sum in money was
paid for it.

Then I do humbly desire to have the party or parties that bought the Lead of
the Cross examined upon Oath, whether they did ever fine or refine the Lead,
and parted the Gold from the Lead, by blowing it down in an Almondfurnace, and
then refining it on attest; and what Gold they extracted out of it, to give a
just account of the pound weights and Ounces of Gold, he or they refined and
extracted out of the Lead of Cheapside-Cross.

Then that all men would be pleased to take notice of the long continuance of
Cheapside-Cross, since it was made, and in how many King's and Queen's Reigns
it was guilt, the Citie-Books I believ will show, this very Cross with the
Leaden figures.

And then that they take notice that the Rain and Weather decaie's not the
Gold, for it will sink into the Lead; and though it change color, and tarnish
with the Weather, yet the Body of Gold is in the Lead. And all men know the
superstition of former times did not care what Gold they laid on Popish
Relics; and I believ the Citie-Books will show many thousand pounds laid out
in Gold for guilding Cheapside-Cross upon several occasions.

I do humbly conceiv that when the Cross was sold, it was sold by the State
only for Lead, and the State had no more for it but for Lead; and if any did
refine, and part that Lead, and converted the Gold to their own use, (that all
that Gold which was sold for two pence the pound weight, the State ought to have
an account for it) and my desire to them that bought it, is, that they would
give the just value of all the Gold they extracted out of Cheapside-Cross, to
the poor maimed soldiers, toward their relief and maintenance, they having
never paid the State for it.

The taking away of Crosses, and Superstition, and plucking of them down, I
thank God for; but withal, I would not that the State should sell Gold at two
pence the pound weight to any person, upon what pretense of service or
well-deserving soever; for after that rate the Parliament may have servants too
many for their profit, and in managing business in this manner, the whole
Commonwealth suffer's, and some private persons get mighty Estates, to the
great damage of the Commonwealth in general. I humbly say, what is the
Commonwealth's, ought to be sold at the best advantage and improvement for
the public, and and not for private respects, sold at an under value, upon any
pretense to any private person whatsoever. I know for speaking this truth. I
shall have envy, but my comfort is, it will be by or from none but interested
parties; and all those that are not, will thank me for speaking truth.

The Parliament heretofore made many Provisional Acts, some only to continue to
the next Sessions of Parliament, which was sometimes three, five, seven, ten,
fifteen years before a Parliament was called, and no remedy could be had out
of Parliament, if that these Acts were found prejudicial to the State till the
next Sessions of Parliament. Now by the blessing of God on this Nation, these
inconveniences are remedied, for the Parliament sit's always; so that if the
Parliament pass any Act, which they shall find upon just grounds either to add
to it, or take from it, they have it in their own power to alter it upon the
trial, if a Law should pass which were not for the general good of the Nation.

I being required to attend the Committee of the Council of State, about the
Act now presented to the Parliament, I did see, and was privy upon what grave
consideration every branch of the Act now depending before the Honorable
Committee, was framed and put down by the Committee of the Council of State,
before ever it was recommended to the Parliament. And I do humbly desire for
the service of the Commonwealth, if any alteration be made in the Act, those
that drew the draft of the Act, may be required to attend the Committee to
give their reasons for the whole Act, or any part of it; for upon the effectual
passing of this Act, much does depend for the safety of this Nation, and it is
of an higher concernment to the Nation, then I can express; and I humbly
conceiv, there ought to be no respect of private interest, where the safety
of the Nation is so highly concerned.

I humbly desire the Honorable Committee, that the Certificate of the Officers
of the Mint may be taken into your serious considerations, there being very
few men in the Nation, can speak so much upon their own experience of these
abuses concerning the Treasure of the Nation, as these Gentlemen, the Officers
of the Mint have certified, which ever since their Certificate, has been found
in every part to be true.

The Mint standing still and neglected, the Treasure that has been Imported,
was never brought into the Mint, but Exported out again; by which means for the
private gain of a few men, the Nation is ruined and impoverished, and a Trade
Inwards and Outward, driven without paying of Custom, and the Stock of
Treasure of the Nation almost all Exported in these times, now there is so much
occasion for money, to the admiration and astonishment of many lovers of the
Commonwealth, that truly understand the secrets and mysteries of Trade,

And what mischiefs these doings will in the end bring upon this Commonwealth,
is deeply apprehended by many wise men, and can have no stop but by a vigorous
Act to bring the Offenders to Exemplarie Justice, whose Fines and
Compositions, throughout the Nation, will amount to many scores of thousands of
pounds to the States, for the payment of public debts, if Commissions of
enquiries according to former presidents be granted by Act of Parliament
throughout the Nation, to enquire for the last ten years of these abuses.

If in declaring what has passed at the Committee, and of other Transactions,
be not usual, I shall, and do humbly desire to have my pardon; for if my
silence might not have endangered the Commonwealth, this that I have said,
should never have com to public view; for I know how to keep secrets as well
as some other men.

I have read of one that was born dumb, and so continued for many years; seeing
one coming to kill his Father, cried out, God save my Father, and so gave
timely warning for his Father to prevent the danger. A happy speaking of the
Child for the Father. Truly I count the Obligation to my Country, above the
Obligation to my Father.

I have seen this danger many years coming upon the Nation. Though I am but
young, and ignorant in other business, I am sure there are but few, if any in
the Nation, that have had those ways and means to find out, and discover
these mischiefs, which I have. I know and apprehend more then I will or can
express.

The great mischiefs Transporting Gold and Silver bring's on this Nation, I
apprehend.

The condition of your Army, which must be burthensom, if they have not money
to pay for Quartering, I apprehend the danger and damage.

The necessity of Tradesmen, and Handie-Crafts men will be put to for want
of emploiment, upon the scarcity of money, making all Trade to decaie, I
apprehend.

The sad condition of poor people, who will be enforced for want to part
with their clothes, their bedding, their dishes they eat their meat in, I
apprehend.

The danger the want and poverty of the poor will bring upon this State, if
there be not ways found out to bring Money into the Nation, I do very sadly
and seriously apprehend the inconveniences.

And therefore I cry, God save the Commonwealth.

God put it into the hearts of the Parliament, to see to keep that little money
we have yet left; and to find out and punish those that have cheated, and
robbed the Commonwealth of their Treasure, and to study ways how to bring
in money into the Nation; for if this be not don speedily, in all
probability, greater inconveniences then I dare write, will com on the
Commonwealth.

Much more I could say, but if these Reasons before recited, nor the
Certificates of the Officers of the Customs, and the Certificate of the
Officers of the Mint, and several reasons of some Aldermen of the City of
London, for the stopping of the Transporting of Gold and Silver, and the City
of London's Petition to the Parliament, presenting the great inconveniences
Transporting Treasure has brought upon this City of London, and the Nation; I
humbly say, if all these will not prevail, I have don: For if I should write a
Volume as big as Speed's Chronicle, I cannot give more clear satisfaction of
the necessity of passing this Act.

If God has decreed this Nation shall be cousened of all it is Treasure, and
the Offenders not questioned, nor diligent inquiry made after it, and such
means as our Ancestors and other Nations (having far less occasion for money
then we have) do daily practice; to prevent these mischiefs, and discover the
Offenders, I shall with all humility submit to God's Providence, and rest
satisfied.

I have clearly discharged my duty to my Country, in declaring this business
to the Commonwealth, that so they may know the true reasons of the scarcity
of Gold and Silver in the Nation, and the damage they sustein by the want
thereof, and how the Mint com's to be obstructed, that almost no Money has
been Coined for these three last years.

For some men that have clamored at me for first engaging to discover the
Transporters of Gold and Silver in the year 1635. in the late King's time, I
shall desire them to consider, that I was first complained of by the
Goldsmiths themselves, being at the Council Table, 1634. for buying up of
Light Gold, and Transporting of it into France, as Mr Perin the Goldsmiths in
Cheapside told me the same day that some Goldsmiths complained of me at the
Council Table; I going then up to White Hall, to see what the Goldsmiths did,
and upon their complaint, I was committed close prisoner for twenty weeks; and
yet for all that, death would have been more welcome to me then to have
discovered the Merchants at that time, and this Doctor Amies, Master Turner,
and Master White, all of London, and now living, know. But when I found the
Merchants joined against me, that were Transporters of Gold themselves, I was
willing to make my peace, though it cost me dear, and not suffer longer for
ungrateful men.

When I was engaged in the late King's service, I was ever faithful to all his
just Commands, and to the uttermost of my power did serve him in all lawful
ways, and beyond that I would never go.

Now with all humility I have humbly tendered my self to the Parliament, for I
think and believ, and I speak as in the presence of God, I living under their
protection, I am as much bound to serve them faithfully, as ever I did the late
King; and I have this advantage in the change, Kings die, but the Parliament of
England, as it is now established, never die's: so that here I humbly fix and
prostrate, lay my self, and all my endeavors to the uttermost of my power to
improve the interest and service of the Parliament, as it is now established,
without King or Lords, against any person whomsoever.

It may be objected by some men, that I have not don prudently in declaring so
much for the service of the State, as I have don, before I knew my conditions,
what the State would do for me; for by these informations, I have given light
enough to have others to go on, and lay the foundation of the Regulating of
the Trade of this Nation, and it may be now don by others as well as by my
self. This in part I grant to be true; but my cause, is not every man's cause;
I was blasted by the devilish invention of some men, and to the City of
London, Army, and the Parliament, presented as a Malignant, a Papist, one
disaffected to the Parliament and present Government, as it now established,
without King, or House of Lords: So that being under this cloud, and hard
opinion of the State, and suffering so long time in the Tower, as before J have
said, and my Estate still under Sequestation, it did highly concern me to take
any opportunity to remove this hard opinion off me, and that the Parliament
might see from the bottom of my heart my seal in deeds, and not in words, to do
them service.

J have with all humilitie-truly and plainly stated this business, and J hope
have laid the groundwork for the setting of other more learned heads on work,
for the perfecting what I have roughly begun; and that the Commonwealth will
receiv a great advantage by it: and if the Parliament shall pleas to command me
to serve them in any of these particulars, they shall not find many men will do
them service on the terms I shall, and do with all humility offer them; for I
will willingly, so I may have my Estate, and Offices restored again to me, or
their value, which have been taken from me, upon misinformation of some
malicious people, give the maimed soldiers that have fought in the Parlament's
service since the death of the late King, one half of my Estate I shall die
possessed of; and to the maimed Seamen, that are employed in the State's
service, since the death of the late King, one quarter-part of my Estate, which
I shall die possessed of; and the other quarter-part, I will, and do reserv to
give to some friends; so that three parts of four of what I have, or shall have,
com's to those that have, or shall have ventured their lives in the State's
service; and I am, and shall be no more but a faithful Steward to improve my
Estate to their advantage. And for the true performance of this, I will
willingly give a perfect Account to the Master's of Trinitie-Hous, and of Saint
Thomas Hospital in Southwark once every year, and give them a perfect Invoies
of my Estate, and where it remain's, with security not to pass any of it away,
other then for my expenses for my maintenance; and to have the disposing of one
entire quarter-part to some kindred or friends of mine, at my death; the other
three parts to be freely given to the relief of maimed soldiers and seamen,
that have or shall be employed in the Parlament's service, provided J may be
restored to my Estate.

And this J do not as J am conscientious of any evil wittingly or willingly, I
ever acted against the State (for J stand upon my innocence) but J do it
really, that it may be a pattern to some that have blasted me to the State as
a Malignant, and a Delinquent, they having no children, and have got some scores
of thousands of pounds by the Parlament's service; that they in humble
thankfulness to God for his mercy, would bestow a good part on the poor, and
for the future be ashamed of scandalizing me, when the reality of my words
and deeds disprove them to the whole world; for Malignants make not such free
will-offerings to the poor maimed soldiers, and maimed seamen, that have, and
shall lose their limbs in the defense of their Country and Liberties, as it is
now settled, without King, or Lords: and though it may not be above a mite in
comparison to the State, J cannot possibly express my real intentions in the
Parlament's service, more then by these my words and deeds. And J will upon the
peril of my life, bring the Parliament in fifty thousand pounds by the Fines
and Compositions of the Transporters of Gold and Silver, and such as have
practiced many abuses on the Coins and Bullion of the Nation, within the
compass of one year, besides what sums hereafter, if Commissions according to
former presidents be granted, and if the Parliament pleas to pass the Act as it
is now drawn, against Transporters of Gold; which Act was recommended by the
Council of State to the Parliament, and has been twice read in the Parliament
House, and committed; and when it passe's the House, the Mint in the Tower of
London will again flourish, a business of the greatest honor, profit, and
safety to the Nation in general, that can be, as your affairs now stand.

What is here said, is with all humility presented to the Parliament for the
service of the Commonwealth, by a faithful lover of his Country; being
desired to state my Reasons by some in Authority for passing the aforesaid Act,
I humbly conceiv (if it were made stricter then it is) it were far better for
the Commonwealth: For Transporting Treasure heretofore has been made Felony,
when the Commonwealth, I humbly conceiv, had not so much occasion to see to
keep their Treasure in the Nation, and the Mint going, as now they have.

Signed THOMAS VIOLET.
London, Feb. 12. 1651.
An Index of the principal matters contained in these PROPOSITIONS.
LEgorn, Genoa, and Amsterdam have raised themselves to their Greatness only by
giving Merchantstrangers equal privileges with their Natives, Prop. 1. page 1.
The great Wealth that has been gotten in Amsterdam, in bringing of
Merchandises thither, though exported back Custom-free: And the like
advantageous Trade at Dover, upon the Composition Trade, now brought to
poverty for the want of free Trade, Pr. 2. p. 3. The dangerous effects of
great Customs either in Kingdom or Commonwealth, Pr. 3. p. 3, 4. Spain lost
almost all it is Customs of Goods imported from the West and East Indies, only
by laying an excessive Custom; whereas if they would have been content with a
moderate Custom, the Wealth of the East and West Indies would have been landed
for Spain, which now very scarcely touches that Land, Pr. 4. p. 4, 5. In
France, Spain, Holland, Poland, Legorn, Genoa, and many other places, the
Merchant-strangers pay no more Customs then the Natives. I Thomas Violet was
commanded 14 years ago by the late King, to attend the Lords of the Council
about free Trade: and the reasons wherefore it went not on, was, the old
Farmers of he Cu stoms, and the Lord Cottington were against it; with the
grounds of their aversness against free Trade Pr. 5. p. 5, 6. If free Trade had
been settled 14 years ago, the Nation would have gotten many millions of money
before this time, and our ships not so easily lost as they have been, Pr. 6. p.
6. We are robbed by our own Seamen, who have their wives and families here, in
and about London, and several other parts of this Nation, Pr. 7. p. 7. Good
security to be given, not to defraud the State of the Custom or Excize of any
Goods imported and spent in this Nation, Pr. 8. p. 7, 8. The great abuse in the
Excize and Customs heretofore, by collecting of them, and the profuse expense
of inferior Clerks, beyond their allowance, which must be maintained in an
indirect way, to the prejudice of the State; for where the Constable is a
Thief, the Felon will hardly be found. Stricter penalties to be made against
stealing Excize and Customs, Pr. 8. p. 8. No Ships to put to Sea, but in Fleets
with good Convoie, Pr. 9. p. 8. Several Governments in Companies highly
prejudicial to the Nation in general, instance in three particulars, but there
are many score more: First, as in Oil, Currants, and English Cloth, the
miscarriage of the Merchant-Adventurers has caused the Manufactures of Cloth
to be set up beyond Seas, Pr. 9. p. 9, 10. Give the Dutch the same privileges
they give our Natives, you will draw all their rich Merchants into our Harbors;
for they had rather bring their Goods unto our safe Harbors in England, then
run the hazard of their Texel at Amsterdam, where they lose forty sale of
Ships a year, if they could have their Goods brought hither with as little
charge as to Amsterdam, Pr. 10. p. 10, 11, 12. If you allow a free Trade, and
let no man have greater privileges then other, you will sell ten Clothes for
one that is now sold, Pr. 10. p. 12. That you would treat speedily with the
Fishmongers, about serving the Nation with fish, this being the season of the
year for doing it, and so maintain your nurserie of Fishermen. And to
prohibit, for some time, the killing of Lambs and Sheep. The benefit that will
accrue thereby, Pr. 11. p. 12, 13. That you appoint some eminent Merchant and
send him into Spain, to treat in the behalf of the Merchants in England, about
the Spaniards returning Gold and Silver for England from Spain, and other
Merchandises. That the prime Merchants in London, which are strangers, may be
consulted with about it, for they are the most likely to draw their Trade
hither by a Treaty with their Countrie-men, Pr. 12. p. 13, 14. That the
Parliament would be pleased to declare, That no Imbargoe or Sequestration be
upon any Gold or Silver brought into the Mint. This is desired by some
Merchant-strangers, that know the Spaniard will not trust his Treasure to be
liable to Imbargoes for Delinquencie of his Factor, Pr. 13. p. 14. To lay
small duties upon English Cloth, and all manner of Woollen Manufactures, and so
to lessen the Customs, as we may undersel any other Nation; and to make
transporting Wool and Fuller's Earth Felony, Pro. 14, 15. p. 14. To lay
little duty upon raw Silk, Flax, Goat's-hair, Cotton, Wool, Grogran-Yarn,
that so our poor may be set on work. That some French and Walloon Weavers be
invited into this Nation, and ^rdered to, ^ake our English poor to teach them;
these being Manufactories whereby many thousand people may be set awork, and
we get a rich Manufacture into this Nation, as appears Pr. 15. p. 15, 16.
That you would be pleased to make the late King's House at Greenwich a Magazine
for Goods; the reasons are, by this means the City of London will never have a
dearth of Corn, and have all Commodities at the best hand, when the Merchant
shall have liberty to export such Goods as he cannot sell here, after that
he has tried his Markets, Custom-free, Prop. 16. p. 16, 17. Several reasons,
to show what benefit will com to the Nation by Naturalizing all
Merchant-strangers, such as shall com over and plant amongst us, and bring
their Families, by former experience of the Dutch, that have planted amongst
us; witness several Families now abiding here, Pr. 17. p. 17, 18. About the
importation of French Wines, that it make's the State near upon two hundred
thousand pounds a year; and the Wine^ and Casks cost in France the first
penny, not one hundred and fifty thousand pound. Then that it is
considerable, the many thousand of people live on that, as Wine-Coopers,
Vintners, Carmen, Wine-Porters. Besides, I am informed there will forty Sail
of Ships this year com away from the Canaries unladen, the Wines this year
having failed; and if there be not some course taken to bring in French Wines,
hundreds of Vintners will break. The money that come's in by the Excize and
Impost will keep a good Fleet to defend our Navigation; two hundred thousand
pound a year is a very considerable sum, Pr. 18. p. 19. About setting up a
Manufacturie of Linen Cloth, and the several great advantages would com to the
Commonwealth thereby, Pr. 19. p. 20, 21. About keeping an exact account in the
Nation of all the Native's Goods exported, and foreign Goods imported; by
which means you would constantly see yearly, what the Importation exceed's the
Exportation, and so would be certainly informed, how the stock of the Nation
stand's, Pr. 19. p. 20. If you make a free Trade, you will have Stocks of
Foreigners lie here to balance any Imbargo, and make good to the Nation when
our Merchants are oppressed beyond Seas; for upon Imbargoes it is not only the
Merchants suffer, but the Nation, Pr. 20. p. 22. The great advantages and
benefits will com to this Nation by making a free Trade; by the same means the
Dutch, from as small and contemptible beginning, have held War against the most
potent Prince in Christendom, and after fourscore years war, compelled him to
give them their own Conditions, Pr. 21. p. 23. Great inconveniences arising to
the State, by not having skilful and able men to manage the Customs by the
former rules in L. Treasurer Burly' s time, and since all Custom-hous-men were
to put in security, not only for the money they received, but also that they
should well and faithfully execute their places, in guarding all things
prohibited exportation and importation; and that no officer of the Customs
should trade as a Merchant. Those Laws were made upon great consideration, and
highly for the service of the State, Pr. 22. p. 24. Several heads of a Model
for a Court of Merchants in London, to determine their differences upon
Accounts and Merchandising, as it is in France and other Countries, where all
Merchants, that are honest men, find the great benefit com's to them by giving
a speedy dispatch of their business. My humble request is, That the principal
Merchants in London may be spoke withal, and their humble desires granted to
them concerning this business Pr. 22. p. 25, 26, 27, 28. A Petition to have the
East India and Persia Company bring in the Books of Invoices of all the Gold
and Silver sent by them into India and Persia for thirty years; this is no new
thing, for in Parliament, in 1620. they were ordered to bring in their accounts
for 1601 to July 1620. They had shipped for India five hundred forty eight
thousand and ninety pounds sterling in Spanish money, and some Flemish and
Germane Dolars; which Account was presented ub Parliament at that time. The
Reasons wherefore I move to have this business examined, is, because we have
now no Courtiers to bribe, nor I hope no other will dare to take any Bribes, if
I knew them, I would not fear to name them* When this business is thoroughly
examined, the* East India Company will be found very faulty, and as the
affairs of the Commonwealth do stand, ought to have a quick and strict
Examination in Parliament, p. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. An humble request to the
Council of State, to have the Act pass against transporting Gold and Silver,
and six several Reasons for the doing thereof, for the honor and safety of the
Nation, p. 35. The Treasure of England like a quantity of water in a Cistern,
we have no spring of Treasure in the thousand proportion as Spain has, p. 35.
In Holland, when they first made it a free State, the Edicts which I have
translated, show what severe penalties were put on Transporters of Gold or
Silver, p. 36. In England any man may transport Corn freely when it is at four
shillings a bushel, but not when it is twelv shillings. Let us get as much in
stock of money as the Dutch, and have as little Lands as they, then we might
make money a Merchandise, p. 36, 37. Against the Goldsmiths buying clipped
English money, and putting it away again to Grasiers or others, p 38. The
great sums of money the Navy and Army take up, and the dangerous
consequence to the whole Commonwealth, not to call the Transporters of
Treasure to a strict account, to terrify others for the future, and by their
Fines to make some reparation to the State, p. 38, 39. The names of such
Goldsmiths and Merchants that were sentenced in Starchamber, for melting down
the heavy current Coin of this Nation, and for transporting Gold and Silver,
being fined in the Court of Star Chamber the 25 Jan. 12 Caro. and the 17 Febr.
12 Caro. at twenty four thousand and one hundred pounds, p. 46. Against
several great abuses practiced by several Goldsmiths, in gathering up several
sorts of foreign Gold and Silver, and English Gold, for several people who
buie it up of them to transport, and culling and melting down the current
Silver Coin of the Nation, for to transport or to sell it to such as make Gold
and Silver Wier and Thread, p. 47, 48, 49. The great mischiefs that will com to
all settled Revenues, if Gold and Silver be raised, p. 49. The deadness of
Trade in Spain when the West India Fleet does not bring in Silver; that year
the Fleet com's not to Spain, no trading in Spain, p. 50. The design of our
dear Brethren of Scotland, to circumvent this Nation, both of all their Gold,
Money, and Movables, in buying up most of the plundered* Goods in London and
other parts of the Nation, not paying half the value, and in monopolizing the
Coals that served London, and other parts of this Nation, into their own hands,
and then raising the price at four times as much as they were sold for before,
all the time of the restraint of bringing coals from Newcastle, *till Newcastle
was reduced to the Parliament, p. 51, 52. The Scots, when they were in the North
of England, as far as their Army came, dated their Letter from Durham,
Cumberland, Ferribrig, Newcastle in Scotland; I hope the Officers of our Army,
in requital, may date all their Letters, from Edinburg in England, p. 52.
Several Laws and Ordinances for regulating the Mints and Moneys, and concerning
the exchanges and Exchangers of Money, Refiners, Goldsmiths, and others in the
united Provinces, Anno 1586. p. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57. The policy of this Nation
has always aimed at, and intended the increas and augmentation of Money,
especially that of Silver, and this by diverse Statutes and Laws, p 57, 58. For
the new Act against transporting of Gold and Silver, and recommended by the
Council of State, and twice read in the House: it is drawn from the example and
president of the 18 Eliz. cap. 9. against transporting Leather, and Tallow, and
raw Hides, and the late Ordinance 1647. against transporting Fuller's-Earth,
and the claus that incourageth the Instruments to discover the offenses, are
drawn by the president 18 Eliz, cap. 9. and other Ordinances and Edicts of
other States, that give like exemptions and encouragement to such, as though
guilty themselves in the second degree, and the claus touching Commissions and
Examination of Witnesses for discovery, and to commit them, in case of
refusal, to be examined, is don 13 Elizab. cap. 7. p. 58, 59, 60. An Ordinance
for the general regulating of the Mint, at Brussels the 18 March 1633. p. 60,
61, 62, 63, 64. An Ordinance for the regulating the Mint at Brussels, the last
day of May 1644. p. 65, 66. A Declaration of the King of France for
regulating the new price set upon light and clipped Species of Money; likewise
for the observation of the prizes of Gold and Silver employed for the
Goldsmith's work. It is also expressly forbidden to melt the Money, and to
transport it, or any other materials of Gold and Silver, out of the said
Kingdom. Printed at Paris 30 October. 1640. p. 66, 67. What general Laws and
Statutes in England from time to time have provided against transporting Gold,
or melting down the current Coin, and buying Gold and Silver at above the price
of the Mint, and Commissions made throughout England, to inquire of such as
transported Money, 14 Ric. 2. cap. 12. p. 67, 68, 69, 70. The easy escape of
the Transporters of Gold and Silver, has encouraged the Merchants and others
to transport the Treasure. Little penalty cannot hinder the Merchant from his
profit, p. 70. The several abuses and cheats of some Goldsmiths and others,
taking advantage of the Parlaments decrying all light and clipped English
Silver, which mischiefs had been prevented, if there had been put into the
Ordinance, to require all people upon the exchanging of clipped English Money, to
cut it in two p^ices, p. 70, 71, 80. Twenty Millions of Money coined in the
Tower of London, within this twenty five years, as will appear by the
Mint-Book, and almost all transported, p. 71. No great Action in a
Commonwealth, can be don without Money; therefore to prevent the growth of
this mischief of transporting Treasure, is the work of every faithful lover of
his Country p. 72. An old Dear-stealer is the best Keeper of a Park* Yet
before I had my pardon, I paid to the late King two thousand pounds in Gold to
his privy purs p. 79. Great mischiefs formerly don to the Army in Ireland by
paying their Army with light and course pieces of eight, which was delivered to
them at twenty in the hundred more then any Soldier could make, to make any
returns to their wives and children; and this was don for the profit of some
Goldsmiths in England, p. 80. ^everal Orders of Parliament, for the discovery
of the Transporters of Gold and Silver, and the Committee of the Navy, the
Commissioners of the Customs, and the Officers of the Mint's Certificate, for
the speedy dispatch, in Sept. 1647. and nothing don in it yet; the Mint ever
since at a stand, and almost no Money has been coined for above three years,
not so much as within this twelve years, has been coined within the compass of
fourteen days. It were worth inquiry, to have them publicly known, that
retard the Act against transporting Gold; it does highly concern the safety of
the Nation to have it looked after, for there is more in it then vulgarly can
be imagined, p. 82, 83, 84, 85, 87. There is another cause of great consumption
of the Treasure of this Nation, by importing French and Flanders Laces, to the
value of many score of thousand pounds, which of late is stolen in without
paying of Customs, being subtly packed in Commodities of great bulk, p. 88,
89, 90. Against the excessive waste of Gold in guilding of Coaches and
Carroches p. 90, 91. Concerning the Manufacture of Gold and Silver Thread, p.
91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97. For the regulation of the Manufacture of Gold and
Silver Thread, to have a sworn Officer, that is no trader in this Manufacture,
to be Surveyer and Sealer. The draft of the Corporation of Gold-wier-drawers,
presented to the Honorable Council for Trade, by some of the Wier-drawers, p.
98. The Gold-wier-drawers offered the late King and his Successors, one
thousand pounds a year, and two pence an ounce, for to have a Corporation, p.
98. The Company of Goldsmiths complained at the Council Table, in 1634. of
several abuses in the Trade of Refining and Wier-drawing, and transporting of
Gold. Upon their complaint, I Thomas Violet, and several other Goldsmiths and
Fines, were brought into the Star Chamber, p. 99. My great obligation to Sir
John Cook, the late Ring's Secretary, for procuring my Pardon, p. 100, 101. I
imported more Silver then I transported Gold, page 102, 103. I was commanded by
the late King, to have the viewing and surveying all Gold and Silver Thread,
and the Grant cost me near fifteen hundred pounds. Never so good Gold and
Silver Thread made, as while I had the Office, proved by many people that are
Artists, p. 103. The Refiners had that good fortune, they got all off the
Star Chamber without a sentence, by their wit, which was to outbid the
Wier-drawers, p. 103, 104. A Copy of Sir John Bank' s Certificate to the late
King, concerning the Wierdrawer's Corporation, very fit for the State, to tie
up the Trade to such Rules as is there desired, to avoid the consumption of
Treasure, 104, 105, 106. The Refiners of London served the Wier drawers, as the
Merchant-Adventurers served the Cloth-workers in King James' s time, out-bribed
or out-bid them, and so got the Monopoly of being the King's Agents, they
only to furnish the Silver, p. 106, 107. The Wier-drawer's Petition in
Parliament against the Finer's Monopoly, p. 108. The Refiner's crafty Petition,
read the 24 of November 1640. as if they were enforced to be the King's
Agents, when it was their desire, and thereupon some of them had their pardon
from the late King. And because they gave six pence the ounce to the late King,
or see it secured, there was two pence the ounce allowed to them more, for
their gilt Wier, and a penny an ounce for the Silver Wier, then it was
offered, to furnish the Wier-drawers at the Golden Fleece, and this is known to
be true, that these Agents were allowed many hundred pounds a year more in the
price of their Silver, then the Wier-drawers could have bought it for, had they
had a free market, 108, 109. That upon trial of above one hundred Assaies of
Gold and Silver Thread, Spangles, and Wier, by Master Jackson, Assaie-master of
Goldsmith's-Hall, these Manufactures were found to be course, under sterling,
and adulterated; and that was a principal ground the late King, and his
Council, would not trust the Wier-drawers nor Finers with a Corporation, but
with a Regulation; for it was the sens of the whole Council Table, To give them
a Corporation, and to leav it to themselves to manage, was to give them a Licens
to deceiv the Commonwealth with Authority, p. 110, 111. The Erecting of my
Office of Sealer and Surveyor of Gold and Silver Thread, and to warrant it all
good that was sealed with the Seal of the Office. Without that assurance the
Commonwealth had no benefit by the sealing, p. 111, 112. The rude carriage of
some of the Wierdrawers, and others trading in the Manufacture, at the Council
for Trade. If they cannot carry themselves civilly before such a great
Assembly, what clamors shall the Surveyor have, when he does his duty in
seeing them make good work, p. 112. That all Gold and Silver-Threed should be
made with five ounces Troy Silver to one pound Venice of Thread, and if any
were made under, to deface or burn it; then you would have your Silver-Lace
last six times as long as it does, p. 113. The Fee of four pence the pound
weigh in Thread allowed to me Thoma Violet, was earned with a great dea of
attendance, charge, and hazard for I was to see all the Manufactur made good to
the Commonwealth, the had the Seal of my Office, p. 113, 11^. Several people
whom I did question f^^ making falls Gold and Silver-Three^ and Wier, and for
putting Copper i^ to Silver Lace, and selling it for go^^ Silver, p. 114, 115 I
humbly desire that Sir Robert Harlov may deliver my Grant for my Offic^ to the
Council for Trade, and he being the Chairman appointed by the Parliament, to
examine the business and that he would be pleased, to certify to the
Honorable Council of Trade what he found upon Examination concerning my Grant,
that so the Honorable Council for Trade may do that which they shall find upon
my Grant most advantageous for the Service of the Commonwealth, that so the
Wearers of the Manufacture of Gold and Silver Lace, may not be cozened, p.
115. An Ordinance of the sixth of Aug. 1646. for laying four pence upon the
ounce Troy, upon all Gold and Silver-Wier, p. 116. That there is twenty
thousand pounds in the hands of some of the Gold-wierdrawers and Refiners, which
they owe in arrears to the Parliament; the Excize not making, for almost four
year, above one thousand pounds; which if I had had my Office, I would have
collected six thousand pounds a year, which is four and twenty thousand
pounds: and all this money due to the Parliament, lie's in the hands not of
above thirty persons, p. 116, 117. The Gold-wier-drawers, before any Excize
was thought upon, did offer the late King, and his Heirs for ever, two pence
the ounce Troy, and a thousand pounds a year, to have a Corporation: but the
deceits so grossly practiced by many of them, were so clearly proved, that this
State would not trust them with a Corporation, nor the Finers, but under a
Regulation by Commissioners, all men of great quality in the Commonwealth, p.
118. There is now, for a time, collected of the Wier-Drawers and Refiners at
the Bar, but one penny the Ounce, which upon account of Excize, is not above
fifteen shillings in an hundred pounds of Gold and Silver-Thread, when it is
manufactured. Other Commodities which are for use of the Nation, and not
superfluous, paie's five pounds in the hundred Excize. p. 118. If the Council
for Trade pleas to take into consideration Master Atturnie General Banks' s
Certificate, for regulating the Manufacture of Gold and Silver-Thread, this
State will make six thousand pounds a year of the Excize, if the Rules desired
in the Silver-Spinner's last printed Petition to the Council for Trade, be
also taken into consideration, and my humble Propositions to the Council for
Trade, p. 94. 95, 96, 97. be taken into consideration, the Manufacture shall
all be made right, both for the fineness of the Silver, and the just covering
of the Thread with a good Plate, at least five ounces the pound Venice; by
which means the poor working Wier-drawers and the Silver-Spinners, will have a
comfortable livelihood, and the Commonwealth served with good Silver-Lace,
Thread, and Wier, which heretofore they have been grossly cozened in, by reason
of the slight making of them, p. 118, 119. I challenge any Wier-drawer, Finer,
or Silk-man in London, to produce one pound weight of bad or slight
Silver-Thread I ever sealed at the Office; or that any man could ever fasten
one penny on me, or other reward, for conniving at any man that did not work
good Silver; and I am sure I and my Servants sealed above a million of Scanes
of Gold and Silver; and if they could have found me faulty in that
particular, they would have gone to the Parliament with a full cry. But though
they sought, and sought carefully, yet they could not find one ounce, p. 119,
120. While I had the Office of Surveyor and Sealer for the Manufacture of Gold
and Silver-Thread, I did discharge my trust faithfully, in seeing the
Commonwealth should not be cozened; for which some of them clamored most
lewdly against me, about the City of London, p. 121. The several mischievous
designs of Refiners and Wier-drawers against me, as the Widow Simmonds, wife
of one Joseph Simmonds, set on by the combination of the Wier-drawers, in
vexatious Suits, when I had their Acquittances, and only mis-laid them upon my
troubles in my Sequestration, which was brought upon me by the malicious
charge of some of the Refiners of London, p. 122, 123. 124. An account of what
has been taken from me by Sequestration, p. 124, 125, 126, 127, 128. Tho.
Conning^bie of Hartfordshire Esquire, and Christopher Hatton of London
Gentleman, Witnesses of Philip Cage Esquire his Declaration, p. 129, 130. An Order
of the Committee of Essex, for Master Edward Elconhead, touching Thomas Violet'
s Lands in Essex, p. 130. An Acknowledgment of Mistress Mordant, concerning Tho.
Violet' s Bonds and Extents on the Manors of Batels and Paten-Hall in Essex, p.
131, 132. An Order of the Committee of Essex, touching Master Elconhead' s
bringing in the cause of my Sequestration in Essex, p. 132. Master Elconhead
never paid any Money to the County of Essex, for the use of the County, as I
could hear of, for the composition of my Lands in Essex, p. 133, 134. The late
King's Letter to the City of London, p. 135, 136. Two Letters of M. Read' s,
sent to M. Theophilus Rilie Seout-master of the City of London, from Oxford,
p. 136, 137 M. Theophilus Rilie Scout-master of the City of London, did daily
then emploie Intelligencers into the King's Quarters by Order of the Parliament
and the City of London, as he told me Thomas Violet, p. 138 I had a Pass to
go to Oxford, as appears by the Journal-Books, p. 138 The reason wherefore I
was willing to go to Oxford, was, that I might have licens from the late King
to discover the Transporters of Gold and Silver, which, about a month before I
went to Oxford, he sent me a Letter, to command me not to proceed in the
said Discovery. The Copy of the King's Letter to me Thomas Violet, 19
November. 1643. The reason why be would not suffer me to make that Discovery,
he told me it would make him good store of Money, when he came to London, p.
139, 140, 141. I do now offer the State to bring them fifty thousand pounds,
within the compass of one year, if they will pass the Act against the
Transportation of Gold and Silver, as it is now presented by the Council of
State, p. 141. For the Honorable the Council for Trade, I humbly present, if
they settle the Trade for refining Gold and Silver, and Wier-drawing in a
Corporation, as it is now desired by the Wier-drawers, it were to make all the
speed possible, that that little Silver in Coin which is yet left, should be
culled, and melted down for Gold and Silver Lace, p. 148. A Council for Money
were very necessary, p. 148, 149. Concerning the buying Cheapside-Cross, p.
150, 151. The great mischiefs Transportation of Gold and Silver bring's on this
Nation, p. 153, 154. It may be objected, that I have not don prudently, in
declaring so much for the service of the State, before I knew my conditions,
what the State would do for me. The reasons which did induce me to do it, p.
155, 156. If I may have my estate restored to me again, which has been
sequestered upon the mis-informations of some malicious people, I will give the
maimed Soldiers which have served the Parliament since the death of the late
King, half of my Estate I shall die possessed of, and to the maimed Seamen
employed in the State's Service one quarter-part; and for the true performance
of this, I will give a perfect account to the Masters of Trinitie-Hous, and the
Masters of Thomas Hospital in Southwark once every year, upon conditions by
once recited. p. 156, 157.
FINIS.

