SPEEDY HELP FOR RICH and POOR.

OR, Certain Physical Discourses touching the Virtue OF WHEY, in the Cure of
the Griping Flux of the Belly, and of the Dysentery.

OF COLD WATER, in the Cure of the Gout, and Green-wounds.

OF WINE-VINEGER, in the Preservation from, and Cure of the Plague, and other
Pestilential Diseases: as also in the prevention of the Hydrophobia, or Dread
of Water, caused by the Biting of a Mad Dog. etc.

Written in Latin by HERMANNUS VANDER HEYDEN, a Physician of Gaunt.

LONDON Printed by James Young, for O. P. and are to be sold by John Saywell,
at his Shop, at the Sign of the Greyhound in little Britain without Aldersgate.
1653.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
Gentle Reader:
Upon my publishing of my small French Treatise, some Persons of Note told me,
that I ought to have written to the Whole World, and not to some certain
particular Kingdoms, or Provinces only. And others there were, that were of
opinion, that I should do well to collect a brief Compendium, at least, out of
the said Treatise, and publish it in Latin: giving me this reason too, because
that the Latin Tongue is the most Generally known throughout the World, and is
the most esteemed by all men. For seeing that there is no Nation in the World
so Barbarous, but that it has some in it, that are great Honorers of the
Latin Tongue, they conceaved it to be the most Profitable way that could be,
if a Compendium, at least, of these so Useful, and Obvious Medicines (many
whereof, they said, were hitherto by none either read, or heard of) were
published in Latin. For, although all people do not understand Latin, yet
they way every where meet with some or other, that do understand it; by whose
assistance in interpreting the same for them, they may possibly cure many of
their Infirmities out of this Book. This was urged to me, by those Friends of
mine, out of the Natural affection, and charity that they bear to All Men. Well
then! what was now to be done? Nothing certainly, but to obey the Counsels of
so great Persons, my Friends: which, I confess, I should have done sooner, had
not my daily Distractions, and Troubles, and also my very Old Age taken off
both my Mind, and Pen from the business. I confess it would have been a more
Acceptable thing to Foreigners, that understand not the French Tongue, if this
Book had been published in Latin, in an Elegant, and Polite Style. But seeing
that this is the business rather of Orators, and makes for the Glory only of
those They make choice of for their Patrons, (where as no such Politeness, or
Flourish of Words is to be expected, either from a Philosopher, or a
Physician;) yet however, that I might not be found wholly wanting on my part, I
have thought fit, in some measure, to obey my Friends desires, by letting alone
my French Treatise as it is, (which yet I had resolved to have reprinted,
having first digested it into a better Method,) that I might declare to the
world, what power those Noble Persons have upon me. I have therefore made a
brief Collection of some Particulars, that are more largely treated of in the
last, and most perfect Edition of my French Treatise; and especially of such
things, as (Reason prompting me thereto) I have now had trial of for the space
of Three and Fifty years (for so long it is, since I first Practiced Physic)
and in the use whereof I have been confirmed, by Experience; Which is the
Mother of all Physical Observations. And therefore I conceave, that my French
Book is not now necessary at all, for the understanding of those things, which
I have here treated of in Latin. And if there be any thing here, that shall
please the Reader, and may be of use to himself, or his Friends, and yet is not
so particularly, and fully treated of here; he may easily, by the help of any
Interpreter, have recourse to the French, where most of these things are more
fully handled; and there he may have fuller satisfaction. Yet I must here
desire the Reader to take Notice, that I have inserted many New Things in This
Treatise, which are not in the French; as in like manner I have discoursed more
fully, and purposely of some other things here, which I touched upon but by the
By, as it were, in my French Treatise. An Index of all which I have here added,
for the benefit of the Reader; that so he may, with a glance of his Eye only,
find out, what he shall think is for his Turn.

Farewell.
CLARISSIMO Expertissimoque Viro, D. HERMANNO Vander HEYDEN, Primario
Gandavensium Medico, Sibi coaetaneo, gratulatur JOANNES STVLLIVS,
Corteracensium Medicus.
QUis tua commendet, Medicam qui corrigis Artem;
Vulneraque, omisso pure, coire doces.
Qui subito Ventris, cum fluxu, tormina tollis,
Et Rabidae Pestis saeva venena domas.
Qui Podagrae, Coxaeque, aliosque, aliosque dolores,
Hactenus indomitos, exuperare soles.
Qui rabidi Morsus Canis exitiale venenum,
Infidias cordi dum parat, interimis.
His condigna novis, rarisque, encomia nullum,
Qui canat, esse sciens, obstupeo and sileo.
In English thus.

Who shall Thee praise, who Physic do chastise.
And heal up Wounds, before Corruption rise?
Who Torturing Gripes, and Fluxes do disarm,
And the devouring Plagues fierce Venom charm.
The Gout, Sciatica, and several more
Thou tamest, which unconquered stood before.
Thou do control the Mad Dog's poisonous dart,
And sly infections, which beseige the heart.
To these New, Rare Discoveries, since can come
No Equal Praise, I stand amazed, and dumb.
A TABLE Of such Principal Things as are contained in these Five following
DISCOURSES.
In the First of which is treated of the Virtues of Whey, in the Dysentery, and
the Griping Flux of the Belly; and of the Difference of These, from other
Fluxes.
THat Whey, in Griping Fluxes of the Belly, is the best Remedy: but where there
is no Griping, the Party must abstain from it. Fol. 1. The External, and
Internal Causes of the Griping Flux. Fol. 2. That upon the very day of Purging,
even in other Diseases too, especially where there is any Griping of the Belly,
the Party is to drink a draught, or two of Whey. Fol. 3. That Whey is also a
good Preservative against this Griping Flux. Fol. 4. That seeing Detergent
Medicaments that are taken by Potion, or that are administered by the Ordinary
way of Clysters, are in this case not so safe, I have therefore hinted, that
Whey may better be taken, which is but a gentle Cleanser. Fol. 5. That, even in
Women that have their Courses, if the Administering of Whey, and other
Purgatives be necessary; the taking of them cannot be deferred, without evident
danger. Fol. 7. That they ought to be administered also to Women with Child, if
need so require. ibid. That they are to be repeated, if the Gripings cease not.
ibid. This Flux is so much the harder to be cured, the longer it has continued
in wringing and corroding the guts. Fol. 8. What Purges are to be given in all
Ages. Fol. 9. What Clysters are to be administered. Fol. 11. That Clysters are
here to be administered Cold, even to little Children, though it be in the
Winter: ibid. That Vinegar is to be put in, sometimes, into Clysters. Fol. 13
That Breathing of a Vein is very seldom admitted here. Fol. 15. That in an
Inveterate Flux too frequent Purges are not to be administered, nor so great a
quantity of Whey, as in those that are but newly begun. Fol. 17. What Meats and
Drinks are to be used, both in an Inveterate Flux, and in one that is but newly
begun. Fol. 18, 19. Astringent Medicaments are seldom used here; and Topical
Applications are of little Efficacy. Fol. 20. Opiates are here dangerous. ibid.
All Violent Fluxes are to be stopped in the same manner, as that is in the
Disease called, Cholera. Fol. 21.
THE SECOND DISCOURSE.
WHat the Disease called, Cholera, is; and what the cause of it is. Fol. 23.
That Laudanum Theophrasti is the only Remedy here. Fol. 25. The description of
this Laudanum, and in what quantity it is to be administered. Fol. 27. What
Regiment of Health is to be observed in this Disease. Fol. 29. What Drink and
Meat the Patient is to take. ibid.
THE THIRD DISCOURSE. Wherein is treated of the singular, and Incredible
Virtues of Cold Water, in the Cure of several Diseases, Strainings, Bruises,
Pains, and Wounds, without Suppuration.
NOthing is more useful, both for Preventing, and Curing the Gout, then Cold
Water. Fol. 32. That this Disease is caused by the Acrimony, or Saltness of the
Humors, and so consequently from Heat. ibid. The Parts Affected here swell by
reason of a Cold Humor; because that the Natural Heat is weakened by the
Malignant Heat; as it happens in the Erysipelas. Fol. 33. That the Opening of a
Vein, upon the Part Affected, or near to it, is of very good use. Fol. 36. That
Revulsion, or Derivation of the Blood another way, is of very little use here.
Fol. 37. That Old Men also may, with very good success, make use of Cold Water.
Fol. 38. What Applications are to be made use of, for the asswaging of the
Pains of the Gout. Fol. 41. That the Sciatica, or Hip-gout, is also caused by a
Hot Humor; and, at the beginning of it, may be perfectly cured, by the taking
of Cold Water, for the space of Three, or Four days together. Fol. 42. That
the Pains of the Shoulder, and Hip, when they are not joined with other
Goutish Pains, are not at all, or very seldom obnoxious to a Relapse: as
neither are the Pains of the Running Gout. Fol. 43. That seeing no Veins
appear either on the Hip, or Shoulder; we must apply Cupping-glasses, and
Horse-leeches; and must open the Anckle-Veine. Fol. 44. That Purgative, and
Sudorifical Medicaments are here of use; and when to be applied. Fol. 45. In
what case a Cup of Cold Water is of use in the Pains of the Stomach, caused
by Crudity, and also in the curing of a Hoarseness, that is but new begun. Fol.
47. That Cold Water is good against the Stone in the Kidneys. Fol. 49. That
the putting of the Feet, and Hands, being benumbed with Cold, into Cold Water,
recovers them. Fol. 52. That Cold Water cures that kind of Cramp, called
Tetanus according to Hippocrates. Fol. 53. That Cold Water is said to have
cured those that have been taken with the Palsy, by being applied for the
space of two, or three hours together; and that the Party Affected has been
thereby restored, the same day, to his sense and Motion. Fol. 54. That a
Sudden Fright, by repelling the Blood and Spirits inwards, has driven away a
Quartane Ague. Fol. 55. That by the Violent breaking forth of the Blood and
Spirits to the Thighs and Legs, caused by a Vehement Anger, Motion has been
re-restored to those, that could not move before. Ibid. That by reason of both
these Passions, namely, Fear, and Anger; the Son of King Crasus, that was born
dumb, suddenly spoke, and ever after continued a Speaking Man. Fol. 56. That a
Windy Exhalation, being close kept in, becomes Rarefied, and so causes
Lightning, and Earthquakes. As likewise Gunpowder, being set on fire, (least
two bodies should be in one and the same place) requires a larger place. Fol.
56. 59. That Hippocrates teaches (and that with good reason) that the Gout in
the Feet is cured by a Large Effusion of Cold Water upon them. Fol. 62. That
the Immersion of the Head into Cold Water, is good against an Inveterate Pain
thereof, and Defluxions from thence: and how. Fol. 64. 65. That by the
Application of Cold Water for a good while together upon the Part Affected, and
up above the Temples, the Toooh-Ach has many times been cured. Fol. 69. An
Inflammation of the Eyes, taken betimes, may be cured in the same manner. Fol.
70. That the Pains of the Shoulder, Back, and Loins, though never so Raging,
and of Long Continuance, have, by my Advise, been cured in the same manner.
Ibid. That the Hot, and Dry Distemperature of the Reins, which is the
Efficient Cause of the Stone, may in all probability be reduced to its former
state, by Cold Water; (for, I confess, I have not yet made Trial of it) if it
be applied to them once a day, for the space of half an hour, for four or five
days together. And I would have those, that are much troubled with it, to do
this, if not so many days, yet at least two days together, twice, or thrice a
month, for the space of a whole year together; or thereabout. Ibid. Children
also, that through Extremity of Pain could not stand upon their feet, by the
said Bathing of their Legs, as far as to the Knees, in Cold Water, have found
thereby very much good. Fol. 71. The Wind-Collick is cured, by long Immersion
of the Legs, and Hands in Cold Water. Ibid. That Cold Water (in a very strange
manner) cures both the Cold, and the Hot Distemperature of one and the same
Part, by repelling, and driving backward the Blood, and Spirits toward the
Center of the Body; which having its Heat there increased, in its return
overcomes the Cold Distemperature of the part: and in a Hot one, it suffers
them not to return to the same. Fol. 72. That the Application of this Cold
Water only, but continued a good while together, is a most secure way of
curing of Green VVounds; without coming to Suppuration at all: and also when
there is some Purulent Matter in the Wounds, they have also been cured by the
same means; as I have seen, and made the Experiment. Yet my advise is, that
people should not delay the business. It cures VVounds also upon the Face,
without leaving any Disfiguring Skar behind: and also heals Bruises in other
Parts, either the Legs, or Thighs; and that in Old People too, without any
pain, or danger. Fol. 73. That Cold Water cures VVounds, where a Nerve is
pricked withal. Fol. 82.
THE FOVRTH DISCOURSE. Touching the Admirable Virtue of Wine-Vineger, and
especially in the Preservation from, and Cure of the Plague.
THat the Use of VVine-Vineger has been always, by all people commended, for
the Preservation from the Plague. Fol. 95. That Dioscorides affirms the same to
be of Excellent Virtue against many Venoms. Ibid. That Cornelius Celsus, and
Pliny thought that nothing was better against the Biting of an Aspe, then
Vinegar. Ibid. That, seeing that the Venom, which is caused by the Biting of an
Aspe, seems scarcely to differ at all from that which is caused by the Biting
of a Mad Dog; I conceave the said Wine Vinegar to be good also for the
preservation of people from the Hydrophobia, or Dread of Water; especially if
it be decocted with the Herbs here set down, which are of a Specifical Quality
against the same. Fol. 97. That Vinegar is good also in the Scurvy. Fol. 102. I
have always caused Vinegar to be put into all Medicines both for the
Preservation from, and Cure of the Plague. Fol. 104. What the Plague is, and
what the Cause and Symptoms of the same are. ibid. That none ought to be so
improvident, as to defer the taking of some Antidotall Medicine, till such
time as the Principal Symptoms of the Plague appear. Fol. 107. How, when, and
by what Preservatives People ought to defend themselves; especially such as are
not accustomed to Contagious Aires, and yet are necessitated to attend day and
night upon those that are Infected. Fol. 108. That Tobacco is very good to
preserve people from the Plague. Fol. 110. The Composition of my Preservative
against the Plague. Fol. 115. That very many, by observing these Prescriptions
of mine, have strangely preserved themselves from the Plague. Fol. 116. How
those that live near Infected places, may preserve themselves. Fol. 128. How
those may provide for their own safety, that do not live near Infected Places.
Fol. 129. That the Contagious Air is either to be left, or to be corrected.
Fol. 131. That Moderate Exercise may in this case be used, provided it be in an
Air that is not suspected: but Violent Exercise is dangerous. Fol. 133. That
Study, or serious Minding of Business, as also the Exercising the Act of
Copulation, are hurtful. Fol. 134. As Sleep, in those that have the Plague
upon them, is dangerous; so is the Excess either of It, or of Watching, in the
Prevention of the same. And among the Passions of the Mind, Fear, Anger, Care,
and Grief, must here be quite banished. ibid. That very great care is to be
taken of the Cleanness of the whole House, and of all things in the same. Fol.
135. That Issues are here of good Use; and that they are therefore for good
reason commended by Authors, Experience testifies; which yet lets us understand
also, that we are not to trust wholly to Them. Fol. 136. And therefore for the
same reason, those that are Scabby, or have any Old Sores about them, are not
to look after any Cure for themselves of these things. ibid. That Amulets, made
up of Arsenicke, or other like Poisonous Ingredients, are not to be used; but
rather instead thereof, a Silk Bag filled with Cotton, and Cordial, and
Antidotal Powders. ibid. What Meats are to be used, in the Prevention from the
Plague. Fol. 137. And what Drinks. Fol. 139. That those that have been with
Infected Persons, and yet had not been fore-armed by some Preservatives, may
do well to have recourse to Sudorifical Medicines, and to drink upon the same
some Wine-Vineger, warmed. Fol. 140. That Good Signs are very seldom to be
taken notice of here: for although the Plague-Tumors, and Carbuncles do appear
before any Feavorish Heat, or that this Treacherous Enemy flatter you thus or
thus; yet you are not to trust It at all. And where many of those signs meet
together, which I have set down, they are of sad Omen. Fol. 141. That where any
perceave themselves to be infected, by any the least sign, they must presently
have recourse to Sudorifical Preservatives, and Wine-Vineger, warmed; and must
sweat abundantly upon it: and in case they find not themselves the better for
it, they must then do the same the Second time; and sometimes the Third too,
or the Fourth: as I have known practiced with good success. Fol. 143. In what
quantity these Sudorifical Preservatives are to be taken; and, which are of
most use. Fol. 145. That a Great Dose, as, for Example, half an ounce of
Treacle, is not to be administered, where the Party infected is very Drowzy.
Fol. 148. That Infected People are not to be too rash in changing their Shirts,
and other Linen: and that the smell of Soap is hurtful, even for those that
are in good health. Fol. 150. That there is great care to be had to the Parties
Strength: and what Meats are good in this case. Fol. 154. What Drinks he must
take. Fol. 156. That Bleeding, Purging, and Vomiting, are not here to be
allowed of; and why. Fol. 157. The Cure of the Plague-Tumors, Carbuncles, and
Tokens. Fol. 165. How Infected Houses are to be purged; and after how long a
time people may safely return to the same. Fol. 169.
The FIFTH DISCOURSE. Treating of those Epidemial Diseases, and their
Symptoms, which reign commonly in places near the Sea; which the Dutch call
POLDERS: and which infest the Inhabitants, but more especially such Strangers
as come thither, and have not been before accustomed to this Contagious Air.
THat these Diseases reign commonly from the beginning of Autumn, and sooner
too, sometimes, when it has been a hotter Summer then Ordinary. Fol. 172. That
this Contagious Air is in like manner exhaled from Ponds, Standing Waters, and
Fenny Places, being too much dried by the extreme Heat of the Sun. As Meadows
also, that have layen long drowned under Water, have a slimy Sediment left upon
them; which being not able to be dissolved by the greatest Rain that can fall,
do infect the neighboring Inhabitants. Fol. 174. That the Diseases, that
reign in these places, are Bastard Tertians, and Quartans, and, many times
too, Continued Fevers; and many other, that attend these, as Symptoms: Of
which, seeing there is a greater care to be had, then of the Fevers themselves
which they accompany, we must alter our Remedies accordingly. Fol. 175. That
there is no trust to be given to the Patients Urine, in his absence Fol. 176.
That the Parties Urine is not to be sent to the Physician, without sending with
it due Instructions, touching the State of the Disease, by the Bearer of it.
Fol. 177. That the Signs of Peoples Destiny cannot be seen in their Urine.
Fol. 178. By what Preservatives Men are to arm themselves against these
Diseases, especially those that have not been accustomed to this Malignant
Air, and yet are necessitated to go into It. Fol. 180. That many Eminent
Persons, both Colonels, and Marquesses, being in Garrisons either in the
aforesaid places, or in Cities near the same, where they have had to do with
their Enemies, have either in the same, or else in those they have removed to,
yielded up both the Victory, and their Lives too, to these Contagious
Dieseases. Fol. 184. That the Cures of such Diseases, and their Symptoms, as
are performed by Whey, Cold Water, and Vinegar, as also of the Disease called,
Cholera, may, and ought in some sort to be entrusted to those that yet are not
Physicians. Fol. 198. That the said Diseases neither can admit of Delay, nor
can expect the Digestion of the Malignant Humors; yet neither can the
Physician be always presently with the Patient, nor indeed, in Contagious
Diseases, for the most part will he, though he can. Fol. 199. That these
Liquors, in the aforesaid Cures, do far excel all other the most Precious
Remedies that are; although Cold Water is accounted a thing of no value; and
neither VVhey, nor Vinegar are of any great Price. Fol. 205.
THE FIRST DISCOURSE: Wherein is treated of the Excellent Virtue of WHEY, in
the Dysentery, and the Griping Flux of the Belly.
IN the Dysentery, and Flux of the Belly, that is accompanied with Gripings,
though there be no bloody Corrosion of the Guts, I have especially commended
Whey: That in a Flux, where there is no Griping, the Patient must abstain from
Whey,
but where there is with it neither a fever, nor any Gripings, I have
forbidden, not only the use of it, but of all other Liquids also, both Meats
and Drinks, as far as the Constitution of the Patient could endure: yet have I
allowed them to take some small quantity of Red Wine.

Where by the way the Reader is to take notice, that since I first commended
the use of Whey in Griping Fluxes of the Belly; many have, without ever
consulting the Physician, made use of it indifferently in all Fluxes
whatsoever; in so much that at Antwerp, and Brussels it is by many made and
sold, only to get money: Whereas, in my Treatise written in French, I
particularly, and expressly forbid the use of it in those Fluxes, that are
accompanied neither with a Fever, nor Gripings in the Belly. Because that in
this Flux, the Acrimony, or Saltness of the Peccant Humor (which is the true
cause of a Griping Flux) are supposed to be wanting; The true Interna, and
External causes of the Griping Flux.
which are caused by the excess of the inward heat of the Body, and for the
most part of the Liver; or else from the heat of the Sun, Violent Exercise,
over sharp Meats, and Drinks, or else from Purging Medicines; Which Hippocrates
seems not to allow of, either in, or immediately before the Dog Days, unless
necessity so require; because it is then an unseasonable time for Purging. And
no marvel; for while the weather is so extreme hot, our Bodies are too much
dried, and consequently the Humors grow very Acrimonious; and the Medicines
themselves, having also for the most part a peculiar Acrimony of their own, do
sometimes cause a Dysentery: and therefore the same Hippocrates in another
place insinuates, That seeing Purging Medicines somtims cause the Dysentery,
upon the very day of Purging, the Patient must drink a draught or two of Whey.
that when any would Purge their Bodies, they should first make them moist, and
fluid.

And for this reason I advise my Patients, at what time of the year soever they
chance to take Physic, upon the very day they take a Purge, (especially if
they have any Gripings in their Guts) to drink a draught or two of Whey; that
by this means they may repel the Acrimony, whether of the Humor, or of the
medicines: Which, as it immediately cures the Griping Diarrhoea, and the
Dysentery it self, so it is also a great Preservative against them.

So that it evidently appears from hence, that Whey has as well a Curing, That
Whey is also a good Preservative.
as a Preserving faculty. And certainly it is a wonderful thing, how much VVhey
excels all other Medicines in the cure of the Griping Flux, if it be taken in a
great quantity, cold, and at any time of the day or night, either fasting, or
at meats, or after meat, or late at night: and especially at the beginning of
the disease; when it ought to be taken in the greatest quantity.

And this is the reason that Dioscorides, considering how agreeable to our
Constitutions the nature of VVhey was, though there were neither a Griping
Flux, nor any other Necessity, yet prescribed the use thereof every Spring, for
some time; beginning at first with a Pint and a half: And this he did,
probably, to allay the heat of the Blood, which at that time begins both to
grow hot, and to increase; and withal to prevent those diseases that are
caused thence; such as are the Pleurisy, Quinsie, and the like. And
Hippocrates also himself, in his Book De victus ratione, in some diseases,
prescribes no less then 12. Cotylae of boild Asses Milk (which is very serous)
and, in case the Constitution of the Patient would bear it, he says that he
may take 16. Cotylae: and yet a Cotyla contains 9. Ounces. We are to consider
also, that from our very birth we are brought up with Milk, the greatest part
whereof by much is VVhey. Neither are we to be afraid of VVhey, as being too
cold, seeing that a very Learned Author (to whom yet I cannot assent) maintains
that it is hot: for I conceave, that it is cold in some degree, Whey is cold,
and somewhat cleansing.
and withal something cleansing. And I remember once, when the Humor was very
Acrimonious, I prescribed my Patient, that was sick of a Dysentery, to take,
within the space of Four and twenty hours, Eight cups of Whey: which within the
said space of time (as appeared by exact observation) he did, with very good
success. And as, by this means, the further Corrosion of the Guts is stopped;
so is the growing of any Ulcer in any part hereby also prevented, in case it be
speedily taken. Yet my Rule is, to prescribe a Moderate quantity only of Whey,
in this Flux. And those, that have not any VVhey at present, may make use of
scim'd Milk, which is made up of Whey and Cheese: and that you may make a
separation of them, you must put some Rennet into the Milk, while it is over
the Fire; and so you make your VVhey.

And for as much as there is no greater danger then from the delaying the use
hereof, you are therefore to have no regard at all (as appears by constant
experience) whether your Patient be a Woman that has her Courses upon her,
That no regard is to be had either to Women that have their Courses, or are
with Child. That the Peccant Humor is to be purged out the very first day of
the Flux.
or perhaps is great with Child. And therefore the very first day of the Flux,
the Peccant Humor is not only by proper Medicines to be purged out, but the
Acrimony of it also is to be allayed, by drinking a sufficient quantity of
VVhey, even upon the very day of taking Physic. Yet we must remember, that we
are not to give as large a quantity of VVhey, or of Purging Medicines to
Great-bellied Women as to other people; but must prescribe them so much the
less quantity of either, by how much they are nearer the time of their being
brought to bed.

You must fall again to your Purgations, if the Gripings cease not.
And if by chance the Gripings of the belly cease not, (as usually they do, if
the Flux be not of above two, or three days standing) you must fall again to
your Purgations; and in case they should continue longer, perhaps a week, a
fortnight, or three weeks; you must then often purge your Patient, and that
sometimes for two or three days together, or at least omitting but one day
betwixt; according as you shall find the Necessity in this case require; that
so as well the Antecedent, as the Comcomitant cause may be removed: Which
(though much assuaged) by how much it continues in wringing the Guts, so much
the harder will the Flux be cured. Yet notwithstanding I have many times
observed, that even an inveterate Flux has been perfectly cured, by the Means
here laid down.

In the mean while, there is regard to be had to the strength of the Patient,
Regard to be had to the strength of the Patient.
if he be very weak, least he be brought too low, by too frequent Purges: which
may very easily be, in a body that is extremely weakened by a continual Flux:
though there be no such danger in a Flux that is but newly begun; where though
they go commonly very often to stool, yet it is but in a small quantity. And
where there is danger of too much weakening the Party, you must use so much the
more gentle Purgatives; and if either by them, or without them, by the violence
of the disease, too great a quantity either of Humors, or of Blood has been
evacuated; you may then endeavor to stop the Flux (at least for a while) either
by Astringent or Stupifying Medicines, or else by such Clysters as are here set
down.

Now for an Ordinary Purge, they use to administer to those that are of ripe
years, 4. Ounces of the syrup of Roses Solut. mixed with Rhubarb, with some
spoonfuls of VVhey; or in case you cannot get any Rhubarb, you may take five
Ounces of Syrup of Roses Solut. without Rhubarb. But to younger people, and
such as are of weak Constitutions, you must give a less quantity. And in case
(as it often happens) it should not work to any purpose, you may then add
about an Ounce of a Cordial Decoction Solut.; as you may leave it out, if it be
too violent. And if so be the sick Party cannot endure to take any Syrup, he
may instead thereof take the Infusion of two or three Drams of Rhubarb made
with VVhey; or about the quantity of two Ounces of Calabrian Manna infused in
VVhey: and you may give an Ounce of the aforesaid Syrup, mixed with Rhubarb, to
a child; and half an Ounce to little children, with a spoonful, or two, of
VVhey. And you may give as much, or very near, with a little VVhey, to Children
that suck: to whom I have known VVhey, with the Yolk of an Egg, and crumbs of
White bread, mixed together, given for meat, and VVhey only for drink, with
very good success. This Syrup mixed with VVhey, as it seemed to me a very
proper remedy for this disease, and such as might very safely be administered,
without any danger of over-purging; so has the success herein so often
answered my expectation, as that I was scarsely ever put to make use of any
other Medicine instead of it. And although these things, if they be speedily,
and duly administered, do cure both in a short time, and certainly enough; yet
notwithstanding the careful Physician must, in the beginning of this disease,
not fail to make use of Ordinary Clysters also: yea, What Clysters are in this
disease to be made use of.
and sometimes too, if the body be not thoroughly purged, he must then have
recourse to Extraordinary; which must be composed of a Pint of VVhey, or more,
and four or five Ounces of Syrup of Roses Solut. with Rhubarb, or the like
quantity of Honey of Roses Solut. The Ordinary Clysters used in this case, are
made of the same quantity of VVhey, mixed with two raw Yolks of Eggs. And to
the end the Party may retain them the longer, and so consequently they may work
the more effectually; I would have them always, even in the Winter, administered
Cold: Clysters to be given cold.
Which I would have also to be often repeated, if there be an extreme Griping
of the Guts with the Diarrhaea; and you must apply it so, yet much more
frequently, in case the Party void Blood: which if it cease, and if some
Purulent Martter only, or the same mixed with a very little Blood only, be
voided from some Ulcer, you must then give your Clyster a little warm. And I
have always, and to people of all ages, in a quantity proportionated to their
age, administered them cold: and, for instance, to the daughter of the Count de
VVacken, Clysters to be administered cold, to Children of 2. or 3. weeks old
only.
who was sick of a Dysentery, and was not above a fortnight old; to whom I
caused a Clyster to be given Cold, by which her health was very speedily
restored. And even in the depth of a very hard Winter, I have with very good
success, done the like to little Children, that were not above two, or three
months old. And certainly, if it were objected against me about Thirty years
since, by some Outlandish Physicians, and those of no Common Note neither, that
it was against both Reason, and Hippocrate his Aphorism, where he tells us,
that cold things are hurtful to all Nervous, and Vlcerated parts: without
question they must needs now think it both a very Absurd, and a Paradoxall
Opinion, to maintain (as I, for very good reasons, dare underatke to do) that
in these Clysters, which I would have administered Cold, there must sometimes
Vinegar also be put in. And indeed this Mixing of Vinegar with these Clysters
is of very good use; In a great Flux of Blood, Vinegar is to be mixed with the
Clysters.
in so much that I have diverse times caused 2. 3. or 4. spoonfulls of it to be
put in, as well in the Ordinary ones, as into that more Astringent one; and
that in a Flux of the Belly, where the Patient has been in so sad a condition,
as to void in one day near two or three Pints of Blood. Neither did my
Expectation fail me; for the Blood by reason of so piercing a Cold, was
suddenly repelled, and the Orifice of the Vein contracted, and shut up. Neither
do I conceive this practice of mine to be any whit derogatory to Hippocrates
his Authority: seeing he himself, in another place, gives his advice, that
where the disease is desperate, they should not forbear to try any manner of
Experiment for the curing of it. And if we will but appeal to Reason in this
case, we must needs confess, that there is much more care, and regard to be had
to this Flux, which immediarely destroys, then to the Ulcer, whose cure will
admit of more delay. Neither is the Indication here taken from the Ulcer, when
we administer these Clysters cold; but from the Flux of Blood, which weakens
the Patient too much, which by this means is repelled, and stopped: as, on the
contrary, it is drawn downward, if the Patient put his foot into warm water; as
is usually done, when a Vein is to be breathed, in case of the stopping of
Women's Courses: As it likewise is seen in Violent Bleeding at the Nose; where
when the Blood has issued forth in manner of a swift Torrent, the speediest,
and most certain remedy in this case, (when all other means have failed) has
been, to put the Patients feet into VVarm Water; and that, if need so require,
as far as to the very Knees, or higher: as it happened to one, that was at the
very point of death, whence by the trial of this Experiment he was happily
recovered, when both his Legs, and Thighs, for want of Blood, had now grown
cold: and no marvel; for, his Blood flying up to his head, he had lost no less
then Eighteen Pints of it, at the Nose; as by most exact observations was found.

But to leave this Digression, and to return to my former discourse of the Flux
of Blood in a Dysentery, I say; that wherever I found the strength of my
Patient to have been too much weakened, by so violent, and plentiful Voyding of
Blood by stool, Letting of Blood is very seldom admitted here.
I never appointed the breathing of a Vein, which yet may here seem to be
proper enough: and I have been very sparing also in prescribing it, in this
Dysenterical Flux: and therefore those, who object against me, that I have
sometimes used it too sparingly, may hence receive satisfaction, if they please
but to consider with me, that these so frequent goings to stool, (especially
if the Party void Blood,) do so much debilitate the strength of his body, as
that Bleeding would be very dangerous; neither do I allow of it by any means,
unless it be in a high Fever, or in a great Voyding of Blood, (provided it be
not in so great a quantity, as was said before,) or in case there be a stoppage
of the said Flux, (as is usual in the Hemorrhoids) or if there be any fear of
an Inflammation of the Guts; in which cases it seems to be necessary. For, the
Heat of the Patient is attempered sufficiently by the store of VVhey which he
must take; which also sufficiently aswages the saltness, or Acrimony of the
Peccant Humor: in so much that I have been so fully persuaded, that, seeing the
Humor it self may easily be purged out, (if it may conveniently be done) and so
together with it, the disease, and all the danger of it may be taken away; that
therefore there has been need of no other Evacuation at all; so that among
sixty Dysenterical Patients, I have scarcely let one of them Blood, and that
with very good success; as is declared more at large in my French Treatise,
where I have spoken largely of this Particular, and of the Regiment of Health
in this case to be observed; advising all persons, that are sick of this
disease, to abstain chiefly from all Motion of the body, all Peppered and Salt
Meats, and from all things in general, that are either Actually, or Potentialy
Hot. In an Inveterate Flux, too frequent Purges are not to be administered; nor
so great a quantity of Whey, as in those that are but newly begun.


I also have said there, that in an Inveterate Flux, you are not to administer
so frequent Purges; and that these are to be varied, according as the disease
is: and also, that you are not to prescribe so great a quantity of VVhey in an
Inveterate Flux, as in one that is but new-begun: yet in case the Gripings
continue, though they be much abated in the violence of them, the taking of
VVhey must Proportionably be continued: you may also, though but in a small
quantity, administer Red Wine; which may be diluted with Water, with a little
Cinnamon boiled in it. And as in all diseases, that have been of any long
Continuance, the Patient is apt to nauseate at any thing that is given him, as
well Meat, as Drink; therefore we are to change his Ordinary Drink, What Drinks
are to be used.
according as the disease requires; where if the state of it be doubtful, or
that the Patient will not be confined within any due bounds; the Indication
must then be taken from such things, as are either Good, or Hurtful for the
sick person: yet we are not at all to neglect that which is taken from the
Gripings of the Guts; which, if they should chance to grow Violent again, he
must then take a greater quantity of VVhey, and must give over his taking of
Wine.

And as for Meats, I should chiefly commend the use of Eggs; with which many
sorts of Brothes may be made: and chiefly by boiling the Yolks of Eggs,
together with some crumbs of White bread, (which is only of use in this case) in
Whey; They may also take some fresh Broth made of Veale, or Mutton. The juice
also of Chickens, or Capons, expressed out of them, or Restoratives made of
them; as also a Toast of White bread, dipped in Wine mixed with Water, and with
Sugar sprinkled upon it (where the Gripings of the Belly are not Violent) may
here be admitted. And the Party may take things either Actually cold, or but
lukewarm, as I have ordered in my French Treatise: where I have also set down
some Astringent Medicines, which notwithstanding in a Flux newly begun (unless
there were Extraordinary cause) I have scarsely, and in an Inveterate one,
where the Gripings have been very Violent, I have but seldom made use of:
neither yet have I often prescribed those things (as I have there said) which
have a faculty of comforting the spirits, and of resisting the Malignancy of
the Peccant Humor: such as are Terra Sigillata, Bole-Armenick, Coral, burnt
Hartshorn, and the like. And as Astringent Medicines, which are commonly used
in this case, for the stopping of the Flux, are of very little force, so (as I
have said) is the application of Topical Remedies of much less: and among them,
as there is no trust at all to be put in Oils, so there is very litttle in any
other Outward Application. And I think it were well, if people would consider,
whether, or no, some of those Outward Applications, which are commonly in use,
do not hurt rather, then do any good.

Opiates are dangerous, and therefore seldom to be made use of here.
And as for Opiates, and Stupifying Medicines, though they do somewhat assuage
the Pain, yet I not much approve of the use of them; although I have sometimes
prescribed them, in a small quantity; an Ounce, or two perhaps, of Syrup of
Poppy, (having given my Patient before a good sufficient quantity of Whey, and
of Purgative Medicines,) that so I might, with all the speed I could, satisfy
his longing desires. In all violent Fluxes, the same means of stopping is to be
used, that are in the disease called, Cholera.
But where the Flux has been so violent, either with Gripings of the Guts, or
otherwise, that it has brought down the strength of the sick Party so very
low, as it is usually in the disease, which we call, Cholera; I would
administer a Dram of New Treacle, or rather a Pill of Laudanum Theophrasti, of
the quantity of four, or five grains: Which Pill would then be of most use,
when the excessive Purging by stool is accompanied also with vomitings, or an
inclination to it.

THE SECOND DISCOURSE: Of the Disease, called by Physicians, CHOLERA: And of
the only Cure thereof.
I Shall in the next place come to speak of the Disease called, Cholera; which
as it is most swift and violent in its progress, so is it usually also most
dangerous, and destructive. So that I could not forbear with all the speed I
could to give an Account of the nature of this disease, to the end that the
Fury of it, (which is sometimes so great, as that it takes away a man in the
space of four and twenty hours, or at least brings him to deaths door,) may be
made know^ to all, and chiefly to such as are o^^tute of any sudden means of
help, so that they may in due time provide themselves of convenient Rem^dies.
Which I do the more willingly, because I have long since observed, that betwixt
the excessive Flux in the Diarrhoea, and this disease, which we call Cholera,
there is some Affinity: in so much that sometimes it may be a doubtful
business, how to distinguish the one from the other.

Now this disease called, Cholera, What the disease called, Cholera is, and
how it is distinguished from other Fluxes.
is, a continual, and violent voiding both of Choler, and other Humors, and
whatsoever a man takes in, and that both upwards and downwards, by Vomit, and
Stool: the violence whereof is so great, as that Nature being not able to bear
it, the Patient's strength must thereby necessarily be brought extremely low.
And hence you may easily perceive how it differs from a Diarrhoea with Gripings
of the Guts, and from other Fluxes. The cause of this d^^^ase I have (in my
French Treatis^ showed to be, rather the Malignant Quality of the Humors and of
the Things taken in, then the A^^imony of Choler: The cause of this disease.
Which very thing seems to have been also insinuated by ancient Authors, where
they tell us, that our Medicines are to be varied, according as the cause of it
is different, whether it proceed from a Hot, or from a Cold Cause. And even
Alexander Trallianus professes, that he had recovered diverse, that were at
deaths door, by administering Wine unto them. Erasistratus, in like manner,
considering, that there was respect to be had, in this case, as well to the
Crudity, as to the Acrimony, affirms, that nothing is more effectual in the
cure of this disease, then Wine, diluted with Water: Which is also commended by
Galen in his Book concerning Phlebotomy. But for as much as in this so violent
a disease, these things seem not to be at all sufficient for the Cure of it; we
must therefore have recourse to Laudanum Theophrasti; of which, people, that
are of ripe years, Laudanum Theophrasti is, in this case, (provided, the party
have been sufficiently purged before) the only remedy.
may take a Pill of four, or five grains in weight; and Children, of one grain
only; and so proportionably in all other ages. Yet this is not to be
administered, unless the Patient have before purged sufficiently, both upward
and downward; least otherwise something should be retained, which should rather
have been purged out. Neither yet is the taking of it to be deferred so long,
as that the patient is fallen into Convulsion-fits, and his Excrements are of
the color of Whey; which are evident signs, that Nature is spent in him: for
then it must be taken with all speed; and in case the party cannot keep it, but
that he vomiteth it up again whole immediately, you may then either wash that
in Wine, and give it him again; or else you must give him another fresh one.
And in case he do retain it, and yet his Evacuations cease not, you must then
give him another, of the quantity of two or three grains. Yet for the most
part, one pill only is sufficient to do the business; and to the end that he
may keep it, and not vomit it up again, he must chew in his mouth a slice of
Citron, the pill taken off, and rolled about in a little Sugar, if he please.
Other Opiats are not in this case so proper, neither are they so easily
retained: yet, where this cannot be had, you may give him some of Rondeletius
his Pills, or else some of my Pectoral Opiat, which I have set down in my French
Treatise, concerning the Cough, to the quantity of half a scruple.

And to the end that no man may be mistaken, I shall here set down the
Composition of this Laudanum Theophrasti, as it is usually made among us;
although some of the Ingredients, being put in in so small, and so
disproportionate a quantity to the rest, (as, for inftance, of Unicorns Horn)
seem to confer little to the business.

TAke an ounce and a half of Spec. Diambrae. infuse this in half a Pint of Aqua
Vitae rectificata and set it upon the Embers, or in the warm Sun, for the
space of twelve or thirteen days; that is, till the Infusion be sufficient; in
the mean time often stirring it about. Then leaving the Powder behind, add to
the Infusion two Drams of Opium Thebaicu^ disolved in a Dram and a half of the
juice of Henbane. The next day after add to it Mummy, Red Coral prepared, and
Eastern Saffron, of each one scruple, and of White Amber half a Dram, and of
Unicorns horn, and Oriental Musk, of each four grains. And having brought this
to the Consistence of a thin Pultess, you may again (if need be) for some
certain days together add some small quantity of Aqu. Vit. rectificat. and
having so done, you must lastly dry it into the Consistence of a Solid Mass;
out of which you may make up your Pills, as occasion shall require.

Which Composition, seeing it is of so great efficacy, as that it is a certain,
and indeed the only Remedy in this disease; I have always advised many great
personages, and others, that have dwelt far from any City, and have had great
Families, that they should never be unprovided of one or two of these Pills,
and of the weight aforesaid; least they should be suddenly snatched away by the
violence of this disease, before any can be new made, or be sent for to the
Neighboring Cities. I have also in like manner allways persuaded my friends,
that when ever they take any journey, seeing these Pills are not every where to
be had, they would be sure to carry with them one or two of them. The same care
did I also take, above twenty years ago, for my Sons, when I sent them abroad
to the University; instructing them withal in my way of proceeding in the cure
as well of this disease, as of the Griping Diarrhoea, before spoken of, and
also in the manner of Preservation from, and Cure in the Plague: wherein
notwithstanding I advised them to consult the Physicians of the place, that so
the Cure might be the more certain, and speedy.

As concerning Diet, Concerning Regiment of Health.
I have spoken very largely in my French Treatise; where I have said, that for
their Ordinary Drink, the sick parties must take Water, and Verdjuyce, of each
a like quantity, Drink.
mixed together; that is to say, the quantity of a Cup and a half of either,
with the Yolk of an Egg boiled in it, with a small quantity of Sugar. And if
the Party be not very thirsty, he may then take a draught of Red Wine; or where
that cannot be had, of old White Wine: with which, if need be, you may mix
Water, with a little Cinnamon boiled in it. You may also allow your Patient a
draught of small Ale, so it be clear. He may also have made him several kinds
of Broths, of the aforesaid Verdjuyce, Meat.
or Wine, with Water, Sugar, and the Yolks of Eggs mixed with it. Restorative
Gellies also, and a Toast of White Bread in Wine mixed with Water, and with a
little Sugar put upon it, are here of very good use. And whatsoever he takes,
either of Meats, or Drinks, he must take them Cold. And least, by drinking too
much, his Evacuations should be the more violent upon him; he may sometimes
allay his thirst, in some measure, by taking two or three spoonfulls of Wine
and Water, mixed together in equal quantities, with a little Sugar, and juice
of Citron added to it, to make it relish the better. He may also take a slice
or two of Citron (the Pill taken off) rouled about in Sugar. Rob de Ribes, etc.
Conserves of Red Currants, and of Berberies, and the like, which are both
Cooling, and Astringent, and also pleasant to the taste, are here of good use
also.

THE THIRD DISCOURSE Wherein the most Excellent, and Incredible Effects of COLD
WATER, as well taken Inwardly, as applied Outwardly, are declared: and its
wonderful Virtue in curing of Wounds is set forth.
IN my French Treatise, I have prescribed Cold Water for my Patients to take:
But do you not think me a very Inhumane person? Or, do you allow me to be a
Physician, for doing so? Certainly there is not any greater Preservative from
the Gout, if it be taken twice a year at the least, Nothing is more useful,
both for Preventing, and Curing the Gout then Cold Water.
that is, in the beginning of the Spring, and Fall, and continued for some days
together; or else if it be taken some days immediately before such certain
times as it is usually wont to seize upon the party: in like manner as nothing
is of more efficacy (when it has seized on him,) for the asswaging the violent
Torments of it, then Cold Water is; as I have there by many reasons proved at
large: and especially, if to this taking of Cold Water, we join the Breathing
of a Vein. Neither will any man deny this, that shall come to it with a clear
Eye, and without any Prejudicate opinion, if he but weigh diligently those
Pregnant Reasons, if not Demonstrations, whereby I have there made it appear,
that the tormenting pains of the said disease of the Gout are caused either by
Acrimony, or Saltness, and so consequently by Heat. Neither need any man be
hindered from assenting to this opinion, because perhaps he has known many
times old men, and those too, that have been withal Hydropical, to have been
taken with this disease: For there is even in them a sufficient stock of Salt,
Serous Humors, to cause this disease.

Neither let it seem strange to any one; that the Parts affected by a Cold
Humor do swell: for he ought to take notice, that when by reason of this
Malignant Humor the Natural Heat is weakened, The parts affected here, like as
in the Erysipelas swell, by reason of a Cold Humor; because that the Natural
Heat is weakened too much by the Malignancy of that Humor.
this both may, and must be: and especially if he do but consider, that (for
the greater clearing of this business) that part of the Body that is taken with
an Erysipelas, immediately also begins to have a swelling about it. Which
seeing it is not imaginable that it should be caused by the mutual conflux of
both Humors, we therefore ought to think, that it must proceed from the
Malignant Heat of Choler, that has so far weakened the Natural Heat. Which
Bilious Humor, as it is likened to the Element of Fire; so, when it is kindled
to a very great height, it also burns the part Affected, like Fire; and so
raises Blisters on it.

But suppose that the excellent virtues of Cold Water in the Cure of this
Disease were never before discovered to the world; or that other its
excellencies, in other the like Cases, have heitherto been neither written, nor
heard of: Suppose this, I say, Must the Vast Abyss of Physical knowledge, and
the large stock of the ways of Cures, have before this been necessarily
exhausted and drawn dry? Is it impossible to say, or write any thing, that may
be deduced out of the very Principles of Nature, which may be of good use in
the Curing of the diseases men are subject unto, and particularly of the
intolerable Pains of the Gout, and the like? Certainly there are diverse,
that having by experience found the excellent virtue of Cold Water, for the
asswaging of those Horrid Torments of the Gout, (which are a second Hell) will
be ready with a very grateful remembrance, Publicly to extol the same. And
those, that to the use hereof, have added the opening of a Vein, either upon
the part affected, or somewhere near it, will cry it up to the same height.
And to the end that what concerns the Public Good, may Publicly be known, (I
shall deal Ingeniously, with those that are Ingenious) I say, that I have
known many, who have testified, that among the so many, and various Medicines
that are in use for the cure of this disease, they have not known, nor applied
any, that has so certainly assuaged, if not utterly cured (as it sometimes
has done,) the intolerable pains of this disease, as Cold Water; especially
when it is joined with Letting of Blood.

For it is certain enough, (as I have proved in my French Treatise) that the
Pains in the Gout are caused, not by any Cold defluxion of Humors from the
Head, but by a Hot Humor, which is either an Acrimonious, or a Salt one,
proceeding from the Liver, and gathered together in some neighboring part, till
such time, as that Nature drives it forth, by the Greater Veins, into the
Capillary, as into certain small Channels by nature designed for the conveighing
of humors: whence it is conveyed to the Joints, together with the Aliment
provided for the nourishment of the parts of the Body; and commonly first of
all it seises upon the Great Toe; and as the cause of the disease increases,
it afterward seiseth upon other joints also.

For this cause therefore my Counsel has been, that a Vein should be opened,
both in the Great Toe, and also in other parts that are nearest to it: that so
the next Antecedent cause, which lies in those Veins, and fomenteth the
Concomitant Cause, lying near unto it, may be taken away: which being removed,
the pain is either assuaged, or altogether cease. For I cannot believe that
the Concomitant cause lies in the very joint, where the Bones are not wrapped
about with any Periostium, which is of most exquisite sense, (for so all Motion
must needs be painful) but instead of that are environed with a Gristle, and
joined together with Ligaments, that are void of al sense: so that the pain
must therefore necessarily be attributed to the neighboring parts, which are
most sensible. In the producing whereof, seeing that this Antecedent Cause is
also to be supposed to cooperate, I am clearly of opinion, that without any
Letting of Blood, either by way of Revulsion, or Derivation, we ought to fall
immediately to the opening of a Vein upon the part it self: unless the body
being very Plethorical, or the Patient young, or the part lying convenient for
Revulsion, which had formerly been infested with the same distemper, do require
the same. For in other Cases you must be careful how you let Blood; both
because, my opinion is, that people ought to be let Blood once or twice a year,
by way of Prevention, and especially in the aforesaid Great Toe, or what other
part of the Body has usually been most afflicted with this disease; as also,
because that when it has seized upon several joints at once, the violence of
it seems to require the opening of a Vein, where neither the Age of the Person,
nor any other impediment is against the same.

And seeing it is confessed, and assented to by all Physicians, that Contraries
are cured by Contraries; why may I not lift up my voice, and make use of my
Pen, in the just Praises of this our Cold Water? Especially, seeing I am able
to produce Experience on my side; (who is the best Mistress in all Sciences
whatsoever) and that backed with Reason two. I shall not here speak of Young
men, or of those of Perfect Age; but I shall only here have to do with Old
men, (who, by reason of the Saltness of Humors, wherewith they commonly abound,
are very much subject to this terrible Disease:) many of whom, when they either
already felt, or were in fear of these Tormenting pains, have by my Counsel
had recourse immediately to this drinking of Cold Water; which drinking
constantly for many days, weeks, yea and months together, it has succeeded
so well with them, as that many of them, who have been very far stricken in
years, have found very great ease hereby; and that too without any offense to
the Stomach, or hinderance of Digestion; and have continued thus now for some
years space together; only drinking a draught of it off every morning: which
course they also resolve to continue while they live. And some, that had used
to drink Wine constantly, did the same; drinking Water at their Meals, but
moderately.

And although that in an Inveterate Gout, or where the Party is very old, or
where there are other either Manifest, or Occult Causes, hindering it, I have
said that the use of it would do very little, or no good at all; yet in very
many of this kind of patients, where I have judged the use of it to be
convenient, I do here testify to the world, that I have had very good success.

And as for all other Medicines, whether they be those they call Anodyna; that
is, Mitigatives of pain; or those they call Discussives, that is, such as
dispel the cause of the disease in the Gout; as I have made little mention of
them in my French Treatise; so in this, (where I commend so much the use of
Cold Water, and Letting of Blood) do I make as little: because, as the
aforesaid Mitigative Medicines, by too much relaxing of the parts Affected, do
open an easy passage for the return of the sharp Humor back again upon them;
so the Discussive, by over-drying the parts, dispose them toward the Knotted
Gout.

Yet those that either cannot, or will not patiently endure the tormenting
pains of the Gout, and yet abhor to drink Cold Water, or to be let blood upon
the part Affected, they may make use of the common Poultess made of White
Bread; which they must make of crumbs of the same, (or rather of the powder of
the Root of Althaea) boiled in new Milk to a Consistence, and pounded together,
with Oil of Lilies, or fresh Butter, mixed with a small quantity of Saffron.
There are some that choose rather to make use of an Ointment made of raw Yolks
of Eggs, and Rose Water heated together over the fire: and there are others
that say they have found very much ease, in putting their feet, or hands into a
Bath made of Castile Soap, made as hot as they can endure it: and when it
begins to be cold, they must take them out. There are some also that in this
case make use of the Lees of Red Wine.

An also Ointment made of Spanish Wine, and Oil of Olives, of each a like
quantity, and boiled till half of it be boiled away, and so applied hot to the
part Affected, has been said to have done good to some: which having bin
either Casually, or seasonably applied, nay sometimes, if not of it self, yet
Accidentally have assuaged somewhat the pain.

Neither is this taking of Cold Water (as I have prescribed it) useful only in
asswaging, and curing the pains of the Gout in the Feet, Hands, and Shoulders;
but also the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout, which is both the most violent, and the
hardest to be removed of all the rest. And who ever shall but grant us, that
the cause of this Gout proceeds from the self same Acrimony, or Saltness of
Humors, if not from a greater: it need not seem so strange a matter to him, if
while it is yet but newly begun, by the taking of Gold Water, according to my
Prescription, (either Well-Water, or Fountain Water) taking it an hour or two
before supper, (because this disease uses commonly to rage most of all toward
bedtime) or at any other time when the party is in pain, taking it in this
manner by way of Prevention, and doing the like every morning, and that many
times in very Aged persons, who have taken it only for the space of four or
five days together; it has, without using any other Remedy, been perfectly
cured, and which is more, for ever from that party banished; especially if he
will but consider with me, that this disease is not subject to Recidivation, as
the Gouts in the Feet, and Hands are. The joints of the Shoulder and Hip are
not at all, or but very seldom troubled with this disease the second time.
Now why the joints of the Shoulder, and of the Hip, are so free from any
Return of these Goutish pains (for they are very seldom taken with them the
second time) I shall leave this inquiry to the search, and Disputation of
others; least my Reasons, (which can but seem Plausible ones only) may appear
obnoxious to Contradiction, as to my present design, which pretends here to
Brevity only. Now in case any Vein should appear, either upon, or near the Hip;
without question it would be very much useful to open the same: Seeing that no
Veins appear either on the Hip, or Shoulder, we must apply Cupping-glasses to
the part affected.
But seeing that neither upon the Hip, nor yet upon the Shoulder, there appears
any; we therefore in this case make use of Cupping-glasses, with more then
ordinary Scarifications; and that with good success: and these Cupping-glasses,
(or Horseleeches, instead of them) must be applied upon those very parts of the
Thigh, or Leg, where the pain is most violent. It is very proper also in this
case to breath the Vein that lies on the Outward Anckle, The Outw ad
Anckle-Vein may be opened.
which is therefore called Vena Ischiadica, or the Hip-Vein: as in like manner
the opening of the Cephalica, or Mediana, in the Shoulder affected, is of good
use against the pains thereof. But for as much as these Veins, which are to be
opened, are so far removed from the part affected; questionless that other way
of Evacuation, which is performed by applying Cupping-glasses, and
Scarifications upon the part it self (seeing that in all probability they are
the more likely to remove the cause of the disease) seems to be to much more
purpose. For thus, by applying of these, together with opening a Vein, (by my
Prescription,) taking away from the party twelve ounces of blood, and somewhat
more, a most cruel, and inveterate Pain in the Shoulder has been presently
cured: whereas a Goutish Pain, but newly fallen upon the part, is used by this
means to be cured with more ease. I add moreover, Purgative Medicines are of
use, through the whole course of the disease.
that Purgative Medicines are here of good use also, through the whole course
of this disease: Which having been taken first, then Sudoriferous Decoctions of
China, Sassafras, Guaiacum (which is of special use in many Cases) if the
disease be neither of too small, nor yet of too long a continuance, In what
cases Sudoriferous Decoctions are to be applied.
have been applied with very good success. And this Sweating is to be repeated
for some days together, in the morning; where that the Sweat may be the more
plentifully excerned, and so the Concomitant cause laso may be the better drawn
forth; you may apply upon the hip, a bladder full of the warm Decoction of
Sage, Hyssop, Thyme, Rosemary, and the like Herbs. But in an old, Inveterate
Grief, a large Blistering Plaster spread over the whole Hip, uses to be the
most effectual Remedy: Yet sometimes we must have recourse to Red-hot Iron.

Neither ought it to seem strange to any, that this disease is cured as well by
Hot, as by Cold Remedies: for, of these, such as do not of themselves do any
good, by refrigerating the part, and asswaging the hot Quality of the Humor;
the same notwithstanding, by drawing forth the said Heat out of the Part
Affected, do Accidentally prove Cures to the same: as we see, the Inflammation
of a Burnt Finger is drawn forth by Fire; and a Tertian Ague is cured by
Rhubarb. Neither shall I here omit to acquaint my Reader, that as Cold Water,
taken an hour or two before supper, is a speedy Remedy against the pains of
the Gout; so sometimes also, if a draught of it be taken immediately after
Dinner, it has given great ease to some kinds of pains in the Stomach: And,
which is more, a Raw Apple, (which yet must be a Sharp, or Sour one,) taken at
supper time, with a cup of Cold Water, In what case a cup of Cold Water is of
use in the Pains of the Stomach, caused by Crudity; and also in the curing of a
Hoarsness, that is but new begun.
instead of all other Meat or Drink, has very often restored both to
Preachers, that have been hoarse, and to others also, (provided their Hoarsenss
has not been of any long continuance) their Natural clear Voice, the next
morning. It will be looked upon a little strangly, that I should approve of the
use of Cold Water, in those Distempers, that are caused by Crudity, and
Flatulency; whereas Galen, on the contrary, affirms, that a Lusty Draught of
Cold Water, taken in a Burning Fever, is a most present Remedy. Yet seeing
that is evident enough, that in such cases where the disease is dangerous, and
something desperate too, the use of Cold Water is the only Remedy: without
question the same may be taken safely enough, for some days, yea and weeks
together, in very many diseases that may happen, and very good success also be
from hence expected.

Thus, those that have Fiery Faces, and Carbunckled Noses, with many pimples
rising thereon, (which is commonly caused by the Fuliginous Vapors of Wine, or
Strong Drink) or have any other the like Ill-affection of the Skin in any other
parts of the Body, proceeding either from a Salt, or Acrimonious Humor; by
taking this Cold Water we speak of, every morning, for the space of some days,
or weeks together (as need shall require) may easily, and for no charge,
relieve themselves, and recover the Natural color of their Face, and Skin.
Neither is it any matter at all, whether this Redness proceeded from the too
free drinking of those aforesaid Liquors, or from a hot and dry distemperature
of the Liver

Cold Water is good against the Stone in the Kidneys
The Stone in the Kidney is in like manner-caused by the same Distemper, as by
its Efficient cause; and therefore there is no doubt to be made, but that the
taking of a draught, or two, of Cold Water, for some days together, (as I my
self have observed) is in this case very good. Which seems also to be
sufficiently insinuated by Piso, and Alexander, who both assure us, that the
taking of a draught of Cold Water in the morning constantly, for some days
together, has done so much good upon those that have been troubled with the
Stone in the Kidneys, that in diverse, after the voyding of the First Stone,
never any grew there again. And indeed lam of opinion, that in this case, it
would do the patient very much good, if he took either Cold or Lukewarm
Water: neither do I doubt, but that either of these are very good; yea, and Hot
Water too, (as I have said in my French Treatise) where notwithstanding I have
chiefly commended the use of the Cold. And indeed it may be taken, without fear
of any Crudity; which the aforenamed Authors seem to suppose may be caused by
drinking Cold Water. There are some also, who thankfully acknowledging the
great benefit they have received by this my Counsel, do still every meal, when
they rise, adventure to drink a draught of the said Cold Water, and that
without any danger of causing Crudities in the Stomach, or of spoiling
Digestion: nay, which is more, if at any time they chance either to eat, or
drink too much; they are wont, of their own heads (though perhaps they are
herein too adventurous, for this practice cannot possibly be allowed in all
Cases) to have immediate recourse to this drinking of Cold Water, that so they
may both presently expel all Crudities, Cold Water is good against the Crudity
of the Stomach.
and also prevent Drunkenness. And as concerning Crudity, I conceave that
Cornelius Celsus was also of this opinion; when he gives his advise, that such
as are troubled with raw, and belching Stomachs, should drink Water. Neither
will this seem unreasonable to any, that shall but consider, that this cure
(which either cannot in any measure at all, or not fully be effected, by the
use of Wine, Meats, and other Hot things, which seems here to be commended upon
very good grounds) should yet be cured by Accident; when as the Stomach, being
either distended by Wind, caused by the weakness of the Heat, or else being too
much relaxed by the use of moist and unctuous things, begetting Crudities
within it, is contracted by means of the Cold Water; and its Orifices are so
closed, that the mouth of the Stomach being shut up, it hinders the ascending
of the Vapors: by which means it is certain that the Heat must be united, and
consequently the Crudity hindered, and a stronger Appetite excited. And hence I
conceive it was, that Hippocrates called the Water, A Devourer.

Neither is this our Cold Water useful only, taken inwardly, in inward
diseases; but applied Outwardly also, it cures the Outward Pains of the Body.

And indeed it ought not to seem unreasonable to any, Putting benumed Hands and
Feet into Cold Water, recover them.
if I shall here boldly affirm, that when by reason of the violence of Cold in
a hard Winter, the Feet have been so benumbed and frozen, as that the Toes
through stifness stood out like so many sticks, by putting the Feet some
certain times into Cold Water, and continuing this about the space of half an
hour, they have again returned to their former state and condition. And that
this is grounded upon Reason too, it may be hence collected; because that the
Blood, being by this other Cold repelled, and driven back toward the Bowels,
and by continuing there some space of time, growing thereby more united and
knit together, acquires the greater strength; by which means in its return
possessing its self of the extreme parts of the Feet, it overcomes their Cold
Distemper, and revives, as it were, their almost-extinct Native Heat. And the
effect will so much the more certainly follow, if while his Feet are in the
Water, the party drink a large draught of Wine warmed, and spiced with Nutmeg,
or Cinnamon; that so the Blood may with the greater force and vigor make its
passage to the Feet; whose Recovery is discerned by the Redness of the Blood,
appearing by little and little, as it gets down: as on the contrary it is a
sign that those parts are mortified, which partake not of that tincture of
Redness. Now this being done, the Feet and Thighs must be wiped dry with a
linen cloth, and so anointed with ordinary Soap; which is done well enough
without any fire, which for a time he must not come near. Cold Water cures that
kind of Cramp called, Tetanus.


And thus Hippocrates tells us (in his Lib 5. Aphor. 24. that that kind of
Cramp also, which is called Tetanus, may be cured.

Cold Water is said to have cured those that have been taken with the Palsy.
And I have heard, (and that from a person too, whom I could not but believe,)
that one taken with the Palsy, both in the Thigh, Arm, and Shoulder, by the
continual application of Cold Water for the space of two or three hours
together, was perfectly cured the very same day. Which experiment
notwithstanding I have not as yet made trial of, because there are very many
that much suspect the same: although both in reason, and because of the happy
success that may be hence expected, it seems in some kinds of Resolutions of
the parts to be allowable enough: seeing that it is most certain, that many,
that have been taken with a Palsy, by a sudden Fright have been cured
thereof. Whence we are to conceave, that by this so violent driving back of the
Blood inwards, the spirits were so chafed, and heated, as that they were able
to make their way through the Backbone, and the obstructed Nervous parts of
the side Affected; and so by dissolving the Viscous Humors that had obstructed
the said parts, and quite dispelling the same, had restored to the parts his
Natural, Voluntary Motion. And that by the same means many have been cured also
of a Quartane Ague, A sudden Fright has driven away a Quartane Ague.
we have so many late Examples in Story, as that we need not trouble our
selves further to prove the same.

So we likewise read, that some, who have had their limbs so contracted, by
reason of Convulsions, Some taken with Convulsion have been cured in like
manner.
as that for some years together they have not been able either to go, or stand
upon their feet, being provoked to sudden, and most vehement Anger, have risen
up in an Instant, and have followed their flying enemy; and so by this means,
by the forcible breaking forth of the Blood and Spirits toward the Thighs and
Legs, and other Affected Parts, the Humor that was there gathered together
being attenuated, and discussed, they have both recovered, and ever after
retained their Natural Motion.

Thus the Son of Croesus (as Herodotus tells the story) being smitten with a
sudden Fear, and presently falling into a most violent passion of Anger, when
he saw a certain Persian, that knew not his Father, running furiously upon him,
with an intent to kill him, cried out with a loud voice, (...), Villain, kill
not Croesus. And thus, that which hindered his speech being removed, he for
ever after continued a Speaking Man to his dying day. Whence we may also
observe, that a greater effect ought to be produced by the Concurrence of these
Passions together; namely by the driving of the Blood and Spirits Inwards, by a
Fright; and by driving the same Outward, How an Exhalation, being close kept
in, becoms rarefied, and so causes Lightning.
by a violent Anger, then if the Operation had been by one of these only.

We are much rather to wonder at the Impetuosity, and Violence of Lightning,
which is caused by a Hot and Dry Exhalation; which, by an Antiperistasis, while
it is straightened, and kept close in, by a Thick and Cold Cloud, is so rarefied,
that it does service to the Laws of Universal Nature; which cannot endure
either the Penetration of Dimensions, (least two Bodies should so be in one and
the same place,) or a Vacuum, or Emptiness in Nature: and at length being
kindled, it breaks the Clouds with a Horrid Noise, and Crack; and by its
violent Eruption, and Impetuosity of Motion, it rends in pieces, and destroys
whatever by its hardness makes resistance against it, not hurting at all such
bodies as are Porous, and Yiedling.

And the like is to be supposed also of Earthquakes, The effect is also the
same in- Earthquakes, which are caused by a Hot and Dry Exhalation of the Wind.
which are caused by a Hot and Dry Exhalation of Wind, that has got within it;
and sometimes also by the like which is engendered, and shut up within the
Cavitie, and hollow parts of the same: When as this Vapor, or Exhalation,
being tossed, and agitated up and down through the bowels of the Earth, is at
length so rarefied, that being forced to raise up part of the so vast body of
the earth, (merely to avoid the aforesaid Penetration of Dimensions,) it has
sometimes brought forth Mountains: and on the contrary, sometimes also,
according as the Disposition of the Place, and the violence of the Eruption of
the Exhalations have been, have overturned Vast Buildings, yea and have buried
whole Cities too in the Cavernes of the Earth. For it does not to me seem any
whit Probable at all, that so horrid a Motion of the Earth should be caused
merely by the Motion of the Wind only, which struggles to recover its proper
place; unless that, to the end that this may be effected, there be also a
sufficient Rarefaction of the Exhalation. And it is most certain, that those
Earthquakes are of the largest Extent, and withal the most Terrible, where
there is a Cooperation of Sulphurous, and other Mineral Exhalations, kindled
within the bowels of the Earth.

In like manner as we see it is in Gunpowder, The like is seen in Gunpowder
on fire.
which being shut up (in making of Mines) within the Earth, and there filling
but a little place, by being afterward set on fire, and requiring then a much
larger place then before, it blows up by its force the strongest Walls, and
Bulwarks, and makes such breaches in them, as that by this means there is an
easy passage laid open to the enemy for his entrance into the besieged place.

And if we may be permitted to compare small and great things together, how
unutterable is the Power, that is in those Highest Intelligencies (I mean, the
Angels) which are also called, Spirits. That in the Microcosme, the Spirits
also being agitated, produce admirable effects.


Which said Exhalations, seeing they produce such Admirable effects in the
Greater World, why may they not do the like also in our Microcosme, or Lesser
World, where the Humors are compared to the Elements, and our Spirits are in a
sufficient Disposition for the admitting of a kind of Inflammation, or
Burning; as may be perceaved, when shutting our Eyes, and winking with them
something hard, we see a certain Animal Spirit, in some measure representing
the Heavenly Fire, and the Light of the Stars?

But leaving this Digression, let us return to our former Discourse, touching
the exciting, and putting into Motion of our Blood, and Spirits, by Cold Water.

Strainings Bruises, and huge Swellings are cured by Cold Water.
It must seem much more agreeable to Reason, if I shall here affirm, that all
Straining of the joints, and all Contusions, either on the same, or any other
parts of the body, as well as any huge Swellings, may, by the aforesaid bathing
of the part in Cold Water, be much more safely cured, then by any other
Remedies whatsoever; and that more speedily too, and certainly, and without any
either Cost, or Trouble, or Loss of Time. Thus the Hands, and especially the
Feet, which are most of all subject to these Strainings, and the like
Accidents, may be restored to their former strength, and ability in going; yea
although the said Remedy be not made use of, till two or three hours space
after the aforementioned accident, or the like, befell the Party, (as I have
seen with my own eyes, more then once) where by careful, and often plying of
this bathing the part in Cold Water, the Humor has been repelled, within the
space of an hour; which to many seemed to have been so far settled, as that
there could be no hope of repelling it; and that, by reason of the Bruise, and
the very great Swelling of the part, it was to be brought to Suppuration, or
else to be dealt withal as with Blood, when it is gathered together without its
own proper Vessels: and yet the Blood here, still continuing in the Capillary
Veins, which are much dilated, and swollen, together with the Flesh, when it
cannot be discussed, is yet by the use of Cold Water repelled, in case the
Application of it has not bin deferred too long: although I am very certain,
that where no speedy cure has been taken herein, yet the making use of this
Cold Water the next day after, continuing it the aforementioned space of time,
(if the Swelling has not been too great) has perfectly cured the Party. Which
Mischances, seeing they very often befall Carpenters, Smiths, and Masons, and
indeed all sorts of Laboring Men, they have this most excellent, and present
remedy always at hand.

And here I cannot but take notice, that it was not in vain that Hippocrates
admonishes us, that the Gout in the Feet is cured by a Large Effusion of Cold
Water: for it is most certain, that by holding the Foot, that is affected, a
long while in the same, both the Swelling abateth, and the Redness of the part,
and the pains and assuaged also. But seeing that, by reason of the Corrupted
Blood, which may speedily return again to the part, the Pain may easily be
renewed; my judgment is, that this Bathing in Cold Water is to be repeated
often, for the space of five or six days together. And in this sense do I
understand that Doctrine of Hippocrates, to the great comfort of the Patient,
when as his pain, and the continuance of his Disease shall be so taken off, as
that he shall now be troubled with it so many days only, as otherwise he
should have been weeks.

Some also that have been troubled with the Gout in their Feet, that they may
either utterly avoid the falling into a Relapse, or at least may have but light
touches of it, make use of this Bathing in Cold Water every day, so long a
space of time as a man may be saying over the Lords Prayer. But for as much as
the Acrimony of the Humor cannot always be so clearly taken away as could be
wished, nor the Humor it self purged out: the same may be farther suppressed by
the taking of Cold Water inwardly, and the Humor it self may be evacuated, as
Occasion shall require, either by opening a Vein, or by some Purging Medicine
proper in this case.

Neither is this Bathing of the Feet in Cold Water a Remedy in the Pains of
the Leg only, and the joints thereof; but it cures also the Inveterate Pains
of the Head, and the Continual Catarrhes, and Defluxions from thence. For it is
certain, that if the Head be put into Cold Water, as far as the Middle of the
Bone of the Hinder part of the Head, and to the end of the Nose before, so that
there be left just so much of the Nose out of the Water, as that the Party may
have freedom of Breathing only; and that this be done so long, as while a man
may be saying the Lords Prayer, the pain of the Head, though it has been of
long continuance, will hereby be removed, and the Defluxions stopped; as has
often been proved by experience. Or else instead of this putting the Head into
Cold Water (which seems to be very improper for Women) you may take a Linen
Cloth, dipped in Cold Water, and apply the same several times to the Head. For
seeing that it is not so much the Moisture of the Water that is here requisite,
as the Peircing Coldness of it; I conceive that it would do very much good in
this case, if we should take a Linen Cloth that had been dipped in Cold Water,
and wringing it well, we should apply the same to the Head of the Party, having
first covered it all over with another dry Linen Cloth, and that to be
doubled too, and applying this to the Head for the space of a Quarter of an
Hour together; and so repeating the same some certain times.

And I have been very much confirmed in this opinion of mine, by an experiment
of it made upon a certain English Knight, named Sir Toby Matthews, a man no
less eminent for Wisdom, then fit for Public Trust. This Gentleman having been
troubled twenty years together with an intolerable pain on one side of his
Head, and also with a Continual, and violent Defluxion from the Head,
distilling through his Palate, and Nose, in so great a quantity, as that he
could never go without a wet Handkerchief in his pocket: he was so happily
cured of both these Maladies in the sixtieth year of his age, by this Bathing
his Head in Cold Water, as that till the seventieth year of the same, which he
has now passed, he has never had the least touch of either, during the said
space of time; and being now better in health then ever he was in his life
before, to prevent his falling into the same Infirmities again, he uses the
said Immersion of his Head in Cold Water all the year long, and even in the
depth of Winter also. And he says, that he received this profitable Advise
from a certain English Nobleman, who having himself been a long time much
tormented with the same Disease, had by this means cured both himself, and very
many others who were alike affected, and restored them to their perfect health,
to the great admiration of all men.

And that this Practice is grounded upon sound Reason also, is confirmed by
Constant Experience. For it is certain, that the Skin of the Head by this means
is so hardened, and strengthened, and fitted to resist the Cold, as that it is
able to secure the Head against the greatest that can be, and against any other
External injuries whatsoever; and also to mitigate the Hot Distemperature of
the Head, and the Acrimony of its Humors, This Immersion of the Heat into Cold
Water, as it is grounded upon Reason, so it is confirmed also by Testimonies.
and either to attemperate, or repel such Vapors, as shall ascend up out of the
Stomach, Veins, and Arteries.

And it is evident that this may receive some Confirmation, by what Cornelius
Celsus has delivered in his Lib. 1. Cap. 4. and 5. where he says thus: Eos
quibus caput infirmum est, and assiduis lippitudinibus, gravedinibus,
destillationibus, and tonsillis laborant, nihil frigida aeque prodesse posse,
caputque per aestatem largo canali aliquandiu quotidie subiiciendum, and
perfundendum esse: that is, That for those that are subject to Infirmities in
their Head, and are continually troubled with Sore Eyes, Stuffings in the Head,
Distillations, Swelling of the Glandules, or Almonds of the Ears, nothing is so
good as Cold Water; where the Head all the Summer long, is to be held under a
VVater-Spout for a pretty while together every day, the Water all the while
running down upon it. And hence it is, that some, that have had Children, that
have been healthful enough, have yet, to the end they might continue so,
suffered them from their very Infancy to go bare-headed, and to expose
themselves to all External Injuries of the weather: and that according to the
Doctrine of the same Cornelius Celsus, whose Advise it is, in the Beginning of
his First Book, that all persons that are in perfect Health, and are at their
own disposing, should accustom themselves to the aforesaid Hardnesses; and not
only so, but in the rest of the Regiment of Health also, and in their Course
of Diet, should observe a kind of Indifferency, and Freedom; eating and
drinking sometimes more, and sometimes less then at other times: provided that
the Exess in these cases be not too great, and Extravagant. Which seems to
have been the Opinion also even of Hippocrates himself, where he tells us, that
Bad things, that we are accustomed to, do hurt less, then Better, that we are
not used to. But these things I would not have done rashly, or without the Advice of an Able Physician.

The Toothache is cured by Cold Water.
The Toothache also has in like manner many times been cured, by applying this
Cold Water to the part Affected, and bathing the parts therewith also that lie
higher, beyond the Temples, and repeating the said Application. And I know by
experience, that an Inflammation of the Eyes, An Inflammation of the Eyes taken
betimes, may be cured in the same manner.
taken in the beginning, has been cured by this means, by repeating the said
Application several times; in like manner as I have known, and before related,
that the grievous Pains of the Shoulder, and of the whole Arm have also by the
same means been removed.

The Pains of the Shoulder, Back, and Loins, are cured in the same manner.
In like manner also have the most horrid pains of the Shoulder, Back, and
Loins, been cured by my prescribing this Application of Cold Water; as I can
testify from my own certain experience.

This Application of Cold Water to the parts about the Kidneyes, probably may
be good against the Stone in the Kidneys.
And as the Stone is engendered in the Kidneyes, and increased also in the same,
by standing with ones back toward the Fire, or if the Parties back be
overheated by lying in a Feather-bed: so likewise may the Hot and Dry
Distemperature of the same, whether proceeding from the aforesaid causes, or
from any other, be (in all Probability) cured, by the Application of a Linen
Cloth dipped in Cold Water, and applied to the part for a pretty while
together, and so repeating the said Application several times.

And Children also, that through extremity of Pain have not been able to stand
upon their Feet, by the aforesaid bathing of the Legs, as far as to the Knees
in Cold Water, for a good while together, according as I had given direction,
have often found very much good.

The Wind-Collick is cured by bathing the Leg In Cold Water.
By the said continued, and often repeated bathing of the Legs in Cold Water,
and consequently by the repelling of the Blood and Spirits toward the Heart and
Liver caused thereby, the Wind-Collick has been discussed: although in this
case I should rather make use of some other Remedy.

Neither can I think that any man will refuse to subscribe to the truth of the
things before delivered, that shall but (when occasion is offered,) make trial
himself of the said experiments; at least of so many of them as I have said,
that I my self have proved, and found to be true. For there are some of them, I
confess, which though, being deduced from solid Principles, they seem to
promise answerable effects, and happy success; yet for as much as I have not
made trial of them my self, (as, where I speak of them, I have faithfully
confessed) I have left them to the further Examination of others.

Certainly that which at first sight may seem very strange, will not yet be
found to be dissonant to Reason, to any man that shall but seriously consider,
that this same Cold Water we speak of, applied to and part of the body, cures
the contrary Diseases of the same; as it does, in the aforementioned
Benummedness of the Toes and Legs, by putting them into Cold Water; whereby
the Blood, and Spirits being driven back toward the Heart, and Liver, and after
some reasonable long stay thereabout, their forces being increased by reason of
a doubled Heat; in their return they overmaster the Extreme Cold distemperature
of the Feet, and Legs: And so again, when at another time (notwithstanding the
Philosophers Axiom, which says, that One and the same things, so long as it
continues the same, necessarily produces one and the same Effect:) the said
Cold Water, being applied to the same part of the body, that is Inflamed,
Bruised, and Extremely Swollen, cures also the Hot Distemperature of the same.

All which things being considered; it was not without some special Happy
Omen, that I fell upon this Persuasion, that many kinds of Fresh VVounds, Cold
Water very safely cures all Green Wounds without any Suppuration at all.
as well in the Head, as in other parts of the body, might be perfectly cured
in the same manner, by the First Intention: by reason that by means of this
Immersion into, or Application of the said Cold Water, the Blood is repelled
very far back, and its Vessels are by this means closed up; and so there is a
hinderance of all conflux either of the Blood, or of any other Humors; to the
part Affected: which otherwise, by reason of its weakness, would there be both
received, and through the Heat and Pain of the said part, would be also drawn
thither; and would dispose the same toward the generation of Purulent Matter;
and sometimes also would cause an Impostumation, or an Ery^pelas; (neither of
which is at all here to be feared:) as it often uses to happen, when the
Periostium, or thin Skin that immediately enwrappes the Shin-bone, is inflamed
by a Wound, or Bruise; so that the neighboring parts come thereby to Gangrene,
and putrify; and all life in them being quite extinct, and afterward by
degrees all life also throughout the rest of the whole body, the Carcass is in
the end brought to the grave. And these Accidents, which sometims befall young
people, but old folk very often, I have the more largely dilated upon, that men
might take the better notice of the most evident Danger in this case, which yet
by so facile, and a ready Remedy may easily be avoided.

For it is very certain, that the aforesaid Immersion in Cold Water, if it be
duly made use of, so soon as the Wound is received, or else within some few
hours after; it will infallibly and perfectly cure the same. And I can assure
the Reader, that for these three and fifty years space (for so long it is,
since I first lighted upon this way of curing of Wounds received upon the Leg,
which I had never before either read, or heard of,) I have never known any of
my Patients to have suffered hereby any great pain, much less Death; but all
things have ever succeeded according to my Wish; as I have always by most
curious Observation found.

Thus in Autumn, in the year 1674, in a Wound almost all along the whole Leg,
and that where the Party was very old too, after he had (by my Presumption)
bathed his Leg a good while together in Cold Water, he had not the least
feeling of any pain in his Leg, neither was there any Purulent Matter bred in
the Wound; and that by reason of the so effectual Repulsion of the Blood, and
the other Humors, and Spirits (as we have showed before) by the said Cold
Water: Which, least by the Patients too rash venturing upon Motion, they should
by chance be called down toward the part again; it will be necessary that he
keep himself quiet for a while. To the end therefore that in these, and the
like Accidents, there may be an orderly, and a secure way of Proceeding, we
must be sure to continue this Immersion at the least for half an hour, or
rather an hours space, till such time as the Part Affected shall be reduced to
its proper Temperature, or be rather brought down to a Colder Temper then its
own Natural is; that so the aforesaid dangerous Symptoms may with the greater
security be hindered. Which being done, there is nothing at all to be laid upon
the Wound, save only some of that small Film, or thin Skin, that lies
immediately under the Shell of an Egg, enwraping the whole Egg about: which you
must be very careful that it fall not off, or be carelessly pulled off, or
removed from off the Wound; till such time as that having lain there for some
days, or weeks space, according to the Constitution of the Patient, and of the
Part Affected, the Wound being closed up, and grown whole, it falls off of it
self. And yet I have observed, that, where this thin Egg-Skin has been gently
taken off, Nature it self has defended the part, now left naked with a dry and
hard Scab; which also, when the Wound was perfectly whole, fell off: for there
was danger, that if it had been violently pulled off, the Sore would have grown
worse again, if at least it be proper, in this Case, to use the Word, Sore,
which presupposes Purulent Matter; whereas here was not any, so much as the
thinnest moisture that could be, seen to come from the Wound all the while,
till it was perfectly whole. As in like manner, where this my Counsel has been
followed, no running Matter at all has been seen to come from such Wounds, as
have been either in the Heads, or any other parts of the Body, where ever it
has been my fortune to be called to Patients of this nature, either with
Surgeons joined with me, or otherwise; save only in one Wound that a Person of
Quality, of eighty four years of age, had received in his Leg: where, although
the blood had been repelled, by the speedy, and continued Application of Cold
Water; yet some small quantity of Purulent Matter coming from the Wound, on the
sixth day after the hurt received, (yet without any foregoing Pain, or Heat in
the part,) the Surgeons that were called thither were presently of Opinion,
that for the perfecting of the Cure, they were to make trial of Suppurating
Medicaments: which when they had, without my knowledge, applied; and had put
the Patient to a great deal of pain, and had caused much Purulent Matter to
come from the Wound; I was then straight sent for again: where immediately
causing the said Medicaments to be taken away, and cleansing the Wound with
Whey, I applied to the Sore a Plaster, that is usually called, Emplastrum
Diapompholigos; which being well bound about with dry Linen Clothes, and then
taking other Linen Clothes, and dipping them in Cold Water, and so wrapping
them all round about the place, having first well wrung the same, and changing
them ever and anon; I caused this Application to be used for the space of a
quarter of an hour together at least, that so the part Affected might be freed
from all Heat, and Pain: which Application I caused to be repeated for the
space of four or five days together, till such time as the Wound was perfectly
healed up, not the least drop hardly of Purulent Matter in the mean while being
seen to come from the same. In like manner as at other times, while the
aforesaid thin Egg-Skin was sticking still upon the Wound, when there was very
little, or no sense at all, either of Heat, or Pain in the part Affected, I
have caused a wet Linen Cloth, well squeezed, and the Water well wrung out,
to be wrapped about the place, That so the Penetration of the Cold might assist
the said Skin and might moysten it, without pulling if off. Yet if you shall
perceave, that there is any thing under the Skin, you must then take it off;
and so, cleansing the Wound, you may apply to the Wound the aforesaid
Emplastrum Diapompholigos, and the place must be wrapped about with a Linen
Cloth dipped in Cold Water, and afterward well wrung, in the manner we showed
before.

Neither was I at all restrained from making use of the aforesaid Experiment,
by that Aphorism of Hippocrates, Lib. 5. Cap. 23. where he says, that Cold
things are not to be applied to those parts, whence Blood either already
issues, or is likely to issue; for he there speaks of such Wounds, as are to be
cured by Suppuration: neither was the world then at all acquainted with this
way of healing up of Wounds perfectly, by the First Intention, by the
Application of Cold Water, which Hippocrates there speaks of. And although it is
true, that Cold Water, applied to any Sore, causes some Smart, and Pain in the
part; yet there is much more regard to be had (as the same Hippocrates else
where rightly admonishes us) to the exceeding great Benefit here to be
expected, then to the very little harm, or Annoyance; as indeed the Smart is
but little, which is caused by the application of Cold things to the part.

Cold Water cures Wounds, when a Nerve is hurt.
And I conceive, a Question might here very well be moved, whether or no in the
Hurting of a Nerve, either by a Cut, or by a Prick, where by the Surgeons
neligence in striking a Vein either with a Lancet, or other Instrument, he hits
upon a Nerve; whence commonly follow Impostumations, Gangrenes, yea and Death
it self, (although the Prick be never so small) this Application of Cold Water
for a good while together, as has before been set down, might not be of good
use: Notwithstanding that our Authors will not hear of the applying of Cold
things, (at the beginning of the Cure,) and such Medicaments as are of an
Astringent faculty, and are therefore proper to close up the Wound; as in other
cases is usually practiced. As to instance, among the rest, in Paraeus, who
would not at all allow of this way of proceedings, in the curing of the King of
France, that had had a Nerve pricked by his Surgeon, in being let Blood: but
the course he took, was, to pour into the Wound Oil to Turpentine warm, mixed
with a little Aqua-Vitae, whereby the Nerve was dried up, and the Sharp Humor
proceeding thence, which put him to great pain was consumed; yet both it, and
all fear of the other aforementioned Accidents together with it immediately
ceased. Which course of his, if it had not succeeded according to his desire,
he had then resolved to have cauterized the Nerve, by pouring into the Wound
some drops of scalding Oil; or perhaps he would rather have cut it in two, then
that he would have suffered the Fatal Atropos to have cut the thread of the
Kings Life in sunder.

And yet Paraeus observings, that, notwithstanding the application of these Hot
things, the Conflux of Humors toward the part affected was also to be hindered,
to prevent the aformentioned accidents; immediately upon the receaving of the
Wounds, he fell to make use of Refrigerating, and Repulsive Applications over
the whole arm, fortifying it with a very straight Rowler, which bound down the
Muscles exceeding close, binding the same about the whole Arm, from the
Hand-wrest up to the Shoulder.

But seeing this curing of Wounds by the Application of Hot Medicaments is
Accidental only, as it that of curing a Burnt Finger, by the Fire, as we have
said before; why should we not rather go the direct way to work in these kind
of cures, by opposing Contraries to Contraries; and so endeavor by this
Application of Cold Water to repel the Blood, and Spirits from the part
affected; and to allay the Pain, caused by the Acrimonious Humor, that draws
the same to it? For that this will do the business, is evident enough, by the
several cures that have been wrought in Wounds that have been made upon the
Hand, and Fingers, (wherein there is abundance of Nerves) either by the bitings
of Dogs, or by hurts from some sharp instrument; all which, by this Advice of
mine, I mean only by this Long-continued Bathing in Cold Water, and often
repeating the same, have within three or four days space been perfectly cured,
and that without the appearance of any Purulent Matter at all coming from the
Wound: as I can give a Particular Instance in one very large, and deep Wound,
that was made by a Hatchet, where a part of the Back of the Hand, and the
Forefinger were cut to the very bone. Which that it could not possibly be,
without the hurting of some Nerves, nor indeed without the cutting of them off
in two rather, (whereby, I confess, the Wound had much less danger in it, then
if a Nerve had been but pricked only, or but half cut off) appears plainly by
this; because that when the Cut on the Finger was quite closed up, and
perfectly healed, the party could not by any means lift it up, nor indeed ever
will be able to do so. And although that in these, and the like Wounds, there
uses to be some pain in the part the next day, and the Hand will begin to swel;
yet by reiterating the said bathing in Cold Water, both the Pain, and the
Swelling will immediately Vanish: and if it be but quietly kept up in a Scarff,
fastened about the Neck, the Party shall never hear of them more. Yet
nevertheless, in a case so dangerous, as is the Pricking of a Nerve, which,
after long, and most tormenting pains, together with the aforenamed Accidents,
has brought so many thousands to their graves; I shall willingly refer the
Practice of this bathing in Cold Water, (though it promise abundantly a most
happy success) to the Examination, and Approbation of the most Skilful in our
Profession.

Yet I dare assert, as a most certain Approved thing, and which has now been
long enough confirmed by Experience, that our Cold Water not only may, but
also necessarily ought to be applied, in the aforesaid Wounds; and especially
in those on the Face: that so the aforementioned Inconveniences, and also the
unseemly Scars thereon, may be avoided: of the most happy success whereof
seeing I have, by most frequent, and curious Observation, been most certainly
assured: I have endeavored to persuade many Surgeons, and indeed some of the
greatest Name, that in the Cure of Wounds, (where neither the greatness, nor
depth of the same, nor the great quantity of Clotted Blood sticking therein,
nor the too violent Gushing forth of the Blood from some great Vein, nor a
Fracture in the Skull, nor the Wounds being in the Breast, or the Belly, nor
some other Impediment be in the way,) leaving their old wonted Road, and the
usual first Applications, and betaking themselves to this so Present, and so
easily-procured Remedy; they would endeavor to satisfy the greedy Expectation
of their Patient; and that they would rather look after as well their Own, as
the Reputation of their Art, and would preserve a safe Conscience (which is
much violated, where the Cure of any Wound is protracted without any cause)
rather then mind their own gain only: who afterward hearkening to my
Counsel, and finding the success answer the Experiment, confessed, that it was
to be preferred before all other; notwithstanding that they knew well enough,
that by this use of Cold Water coming into practice, there would much of their
gains be lost.

I must needs here add, that some are of opinion, that those that are bitten
by a Mad Dog, by the Application of Cold Water to the Part Affected, or rather
by the Bathing of the same in the said Cold Water, may be preserved from that
they call Hydrophobia, or the Dread of Water: and they persuade themselves,
that by this means that Venom may be overmastered, and expelled. And this they
conceave to be no unlikely thing, if there be any credit to be given to
Cornelius Celsus; who writes, that the only Remedy in this case, is, to throw
the Party, that is troubled with this Hydrophobia, unawares, either into a Fish
Pond, or into a River; and, when he is thus plunged in over head and ears, to
let him stay there so long, till such time as he is filled with water, whether
he will or no. For, by this means, (says he) both his Thirst, and his Dread of
Water are cured. For he is so extremely fearful of coming near any Water, that
though he be never so thirsty, yet, like another Tantalus, he is in so strangly
a sad Condition, that neither by fair, nor foul means can he be got to take
the least drop of any kind of Liquor whatsoever; as I have often seen, and
made the Experiment. Which Immersion (say they) if it be of use when the Party
is gone so far as to a Hydrophobia; why should it not rather be of greater
force in the Preservation of him from it; especially if it be speedily applied
and often reiterated. And seeing it is much easier to prevent a disease, then
to cure it; it is therefore still the Common use to throw such as are bitten by
a Mad Dog, into the Sea, as well Men, as Beasts; or else into some River; and
to do the same again for several times. By which repetition of the said
practice, they suppose that the Venom will be the more easily suppressed, and
the Party bitten will also be so much accustomed to the Water, that at length
he will not be in any fear of it at all: Which Practice (say they further)
having always continued, even to this very day, would never have been so held
up, unless the speedy, and often repeated practice of the same had sometimes
been found to do some good. Which reasons, seeing they are built upon no solid
Ground, may easily be overthrown. For it is certain, that this Venom, is not
extinguished by the Water, nor yet is decocted, and spent by length of time; as
it too evident, by the miserable death of very many, who had eaten the boiled
flesh of such Beasts, as had been bitten by Mad Dogs: as neither any other
Venoms (for instance, that of the Pestilence) can be overmastered by the same:
but that the Water it self is rather infected by the Venom, is so clear a
Truth, as that we need not here stand to prove it. And that a Fisher is
infected by the Venom of the fish called Torpedo, though it be cast forth under
the Water, the Proverb it self, (which says, that, Piscator ictus sapit,)
sufficiently proves.

Neither are we so well satisfied concerning the success, in using this Remedy,
(which they have received, as the only Remedy in this case, from Cornelius
Celsus, who was a Roman,) as to give any credit to it: Neither indeed does he
speak of the Sea at all, which is very much different from a Fishpond. For
without question, if this Experiment had been made use of with happy success,
either by him, or by any other, it must needs have come to the ears of Ovid;
who yet affirms, that it was generally acknowledged by those of his Age, that
the Hydrophobia, and the Knotted Gout, were Incurable Diseases: as he testifies
in these Verses Tollere Nodosam nescit Medicina Podagram;
Nec formidatis auxiliatur aquis.
For Knotted Gouts no Cure we can descry:
Nor yet for those that do the Water fly.


And as I shall not exclude these, and the like Operations from the Predicament
of the Virtue of our Cold Water; so neither shall I reduce any Doubtful ones
unto it; Least thereby I might draw into Suspicion the Incredible Virtues of
the same. But I am clearly persuaded, that Vinegar is very necessary to be made
use of, in this Disease called Hydrophobia, which we here have last spoken of.

THE FOURTH DISCOURSE: Wherein is treated of the Wonderful Efficacy of
Wine-Vineger, in all Poisonous, and Pestilential Diseases; and especially in
the Preserving from, and Curing of the Plague, together with other Necessaries
thereunto required.
FRom Water, I shall come to treat of Vinegar: and as in the Griping Flux of
the Belly I have commended the use of Whey, and in the Gout, of Cold Water; so
in the Pestilence, and the Preservation from it, I have chiefly commended
Wine-Vineger.

Neither will the Reader wonder, that, in the Preservation from, and the Cure
in the Plague, I attribute so much to Wine-Vineger; if he but please to
remember, that the same has been commended, as very good in these cases, both
in all ages, and by all sorts of people. And the same commendation is also
given to it both by Galen himself, and by all other both Ancient, and Modern
Writers; who tell us, that Vinegar is, by its Antidotal Faculty of excellent
use, not only against the Plague, but against many other Venoms besides: which
Antidotal Faculty of Vinegar, Dioscorides so much extolles, as that, in his
opinion, it is able to overcome al venoms, not only those that are of a hot,
but such as are of a Cold quality also.

Cornelius Celsus endeavors to maintain, both from Demonstrative Reason, and
also from Experience it self, that there is no better Remedy in this case, then
Vinegar: and withal gives us a Story of a Young man, who being bitten by an
Aspe, and afterward getting into a place, where was neither Water, nor any
other usual Drink; and casually lighting upon a bottle of Vinegar, he at once
both allayed his Intolerable Thirst, and withal expelled the most desperate
Poison of the Venomous Aspe. And that Pliny also was of this opinion, may
appear from hence, that he finds fault with the Physicians of his time, for
being ignorant of what excellent virtue Vinegar was, against the Biting of an
Aspe.

Which said Venom of an Aspe, seeing it seems to be not very different from
that, caused by the Biting of a Mad Dog; I am verily persuaded, that
VVine-Vineger would be of excellent Use in the Preserving people from the
Hydrophobia: and especially, if there be a Decoction made of it, with some
certain Herbs, which our Authors, and those of the best Note too, tell us, they
have found, by a certain specifical Quality of their own, to have been of very
great Efficacy against the said Venom. The Efficacy of Wine-Vineger
inpreserving people from the Hydrophobia.
And that the same has been confirmed also by frequent Experience, I have been
assured by those that I could not but believe; and particularly by a certain
person of Honor, who is of most Eminent both Integrity, and Credit; who, having
received a very excellent Remedy in this case, from a most Illustrious Family
of these United Provinces, for the public good, vouchsafed to communicate the
same to me: and it is made of Pimpernel, Rue, Carduus Benedictus, Chervil, and
Betony, of each a handful, decocted in a proportionate quantity of
VVine-Vineger. Yet I should think, that there ought to be a much greater
quantity of Pimpernel, and Rue, put into this Decoction, then of any of the
other Herbs; and that, by reason of their Specifical Quality, as to this
purpose: as is also testified of Pimpernel, by Palmarius; who in his Treatise
De Morbis Contagiosis, speaking of the Biting of a Mad Dog, affirms, that he
had received from a very Credible Person, that a certain Huntsman of Henry the
second, King of France, having by this means first preserved the Kings Dogs,
that had been bitten by other Mad Dogs, from running Mad themselves, he
afterward preserved also diverse persons, that had been in like manner bitten
by the same, from falling into the Hydrophobia, by means of the said Herb,
causing them to take it either eaten by it self, or with their Meat. And he
tells us also, that the said Huntsman, when he lay upon his Deathbed, was very
desirous that the same should be communicated to Fernelius, who came to see
him: as is also confirmed by him, in his Lib. 4. Cap. 5. The Virtue of
Pimpernel in the Preserving people from the Hydrophobia.
De Methodo Medendi, where he says, that Pimpernel has a Specifical Quality
of its own, proper in this case.

And I am very well assured, that the Admirable Virtue of this Herb is well
known to many people of these Parts, who to my knowledge have often made use of
the same as of a certain Remedy, when any of their Cattle have been bitten by a
Mad Dog. And how great Virtue Rue is of, both against the Plague, and other
Pestilential Diseases, is so well known, as that I need not stand to prove it.
But that which shows how Incredible force this Rue has in these cafes, is,
(if we may believe Levinus Lemnius) that a VVeesell, having first but fortified
himself by eating of Rue, is able thereupon to kill a Basiliske, which is the
most Venomous thing in the world.

Now the course that the aforesaid Noble Family take in the preventing of this
so horrid a Malady, is this. So soon as ever the Party is bitten, they apply to
the Part Affected a large Cupping-glass, and use very deep Scarifications; that
by this means as much blood may be drawn forth as may be. This being done, they
take a Toast of White Bread, dipped in Oil of Olives and apply it hot upon the
Place, and a little while after take it away again; repeating this two or three
times, that so by the doing of this often, the Heat of the Bread (as I
conceave) by drawing forth that of the Venom, the Venom may by this means be
the better fetched forth, and sucked up by the said Toast: and by this means,
they say, that the VVound becomes to look white. When this is done, they then
give the Party every day a pretty big glass full of the aforesaid Decoction, to
the quantity (as I suppose) of six, or seven Ounces: which course is to be
continued for nine days together; only you must abate some of the quantity in
his Mornings draughts, and his Wound also is to be washed very clean with the
said Decoction (being questionless first made warm) and then rubbed with a
little Oaken Stick, fitted for that purpose, that so the Wound may be always
kept open, and consequently may be hindered from healing up. And they think,
that during that space of time, there needs no more to be done, but only that
the Party must all that while be sure to abstain from eating either of Beans,
Pease, or Hogs-flesh. Now I confess, I should advise, that immediately after
the Party is bitten, besides the aforesaid Cupping-glass, and Scarifications,
there should be some stronger Drawing Medicaments applied to the Part, then
those before spoken of; and that according to the opinion of Authors: and
amongst the rest, I should make choice of a Live Hens Fundament, rubbed all
over with Salt. And I should also apply a Caustic to the Part, and then come
to Scarifications upon it; that whatsoever Venom is yet left behind, by this
continued Application of Attractive Medicaments, may the more effectually be
drawn forth; as I have more largely showed in my French Treatise, where I have
also set down some Remedies in this Case. I must needs here add, that I know
no reason, why, immediately after the Party is bitten, when the Cupping-glass
is applied, there should Vinegar also be made use of: and, if the Wound be very
deep, why the Cupping of the Part should not be reiterated also. But for as
much as that what I have here spoken touching the effectualness of his Remedy,
and the good success that have followed upon the Trial of it, I have received
only but by Relation (though, I confess, it was such as I might very well give
credit to) and have not at all made experiment of the same my self; I shall
therefore leave the Examination of the same to others; neither dare I as yet
persuade any to the Practice of it, unless where other Convenient Remedies are
wanting.

The Virtue of Wine Vinegar in the Scurvy.
VVine-Vineger is also highly commended in the Scurvy; and especially if it be
mixed with the juice of the Blades of Wheat: Which Mixture it is said to be of
much greater Efficacy, then if it be made either with Scurvy Grass, of
VVater-Cresses, or the like which are in common use: and this is of special
use, as well where there is only a Putrefying and Stinking of the Gums, as in
the height of the Disease it self, when it is accompanied with all its
Essential Symptoms; amongst which this Putrefaction is a most inseparable one.

Now the Party is to take every morning Wine-Vineger, and the juice of Blades
of Wheat, of each two, or three Ounces for some certain days together, perhaps
ten, or twenty, according to the Exigence of the Disease: and he must also use
often to take of this Composition, and hold it in his mouth for a good while
together, washing his Gums, and some times gently rubbing the same therewith.

All which aforesaid things, together with the Judgment of Authors, when I had
seriously considered, and had withal compared, the same with as well the
Specifical, as the Manifest Quality of Wine-Vineger; they so much confirmed me
in the Opinion I had before conceaved, touching the Virtue of it against the
Plague, as that I at length thought fit to mix it with all Antidotal Medicines
whatsoever, as well such as are good to preserve from, as those that are of use
in the Cure of the Plague: that so it might either prevent, or correct the
Putrefaction, or Malignity of the Humors; or, by its Sudorifical Quality,
assisted by the Antidotal Medicaments, might force out the said Humors through
the Pores of the Body: according as I have declared more fully in my French
Treatise.

Now what the Plague is, and what the Causes of it are, as the Nature of it is
very Occult, and the Qualities of the other very Abstruse; so is there a very
different Account given of the same by Authors: which yet all agree in this,
that the Plague is a very Extreme Acute Disease, caused by a Poisonous, and
Pestilential Air; which, by its most violent Antipathy, seizes first upon the
Spirits; and so chiefly infesting the Heart it self, hinders all the Operations
of the Body, and by its Destructive Contagion sometimes rages so excessively,
that not only Cities, but also whole Kingdoms have thereby been depopulated,
and laid wast. That this Disease therefore proceeds from a Poisonous, or
Pestilential Aire^, appears plainly by this Definition. Which Disease, the Holy
Scriptures testify, is often sent amongst us, for the Expiation of the sins of
Mankind; as diverse Authors also, and those of the Gentiles too, have always
confessed the same to have proceeded from the Angry Gods: which the Christians
also to this day confess to be sent from God; as the Pagans suppose it to come
from their Idols. And hence it is, that my Countrymen the Dutch, (by a pious
interpretation) call it, De Gave Goots, that is, Gods Gift.

And that the same is caused also by other means, then that of Gods a
Vengeance, as namely, by some Malignant Exhalation, issuing out of the Earth,
or coming from some Standing Waters, or else from the Corrupt Vapors that
proceed from Houses of Office, and Dead Men's Carcasses, is affirmed by diverse
Authors.

Others are of opinion, that it is caused by the Influences of the Malignant
Conjunctions, or Oppositions of the Stars: to whose opinion, I confess, I
cannot subscribe. For it is certain, that Almighty God created nothing at all,
that, by its Malignity, should tend to the Destruction of Mankind, but should
rather some way or other be useful to it; and it is as certain, that even all
Venoms themselves were to the same end created; as appears plainly enough, by
that of Vipers, in the Preserving from, and Curing of the Plague; where we see,
one Poison is an Antidote against another.

Now I shall here add a Corollary touching the Signs, and Symptoms of the
Plague. None ought to be so improvident as to defer the taking of some
Antidotal Medicine, till such time as the Principal Symptoms of the Plague
appears.
And first of all I shall advise all persons whatsoever, that they be sure,
that so soon as ever the Disease begins to spread it self, in the place where
they inhabit, they do no neglect the care of themselves, till such time as the
Principal Symptoms of it appear upon them; as namely, Tumors, Carbuncles, or
Plague-sores breaking out upon their bodies. Neither is it at all necessary,
that the several Symptoms that here concur, should be Univocal, especially
when the Party dwells in a house, where some lie sick of the Disease, or
perhaps have been buried out of it. But it is a sufficient warning for him, if
he feel but any extraordinary Chilness about him, or find himself Feverish,
or have any Pain in his Head, or Loins, or any Heaviness of his Heart or be
taken with any other suspected Distemper: nay, although there be no Appearance
either of any Fever, or Blackness of the Tongue, or Extraordinary Headache,
Dizziness, or Delirium; (which are not Essential Symptoms, in the beginning
of this Disease;) yet must not the Party defer the making use of some
Sudorifical Antidote, but must speedily take one, as soon as ever any the least
sign of it begins to appear; least when the Disease has taken deeper Root, it
either come to late, or perhaps cannot be administered at all.

And to the end that those that dwell in house that are infected, and such
especially as are forced to attend day and night, and be by those that have the
Disease upon them, may be preserved from this so Contagious a Disease, they
ought to take exceeding great heed, and care; that so being before unarmed,
they may not be unawares surprised, and ruined by this so Treacherous, and
Dangerous an Enemy. And first of all, I would have them always be chewing of
Angelica Roots, Zedoary, Nutmeg, Cloves, Citron Pill, or the like, that so by
this means they may fortify their Mouth, against the admitting of the
Pestilential Air.

Neither is there less Care to be taken to defend the Nose, How the Nose is to
be defended.
by smelling to Vinegar (chiefly that which is of a Preservative Faculty
against the Plague, and is therefore called by me, Contrapestilential Vinegar:)
and you must also rub the Nostrills over often, both within and without, with a
little Treacle, or some of my Preservative hereafter described; or in defect
these, you may rub them over with Rue; lest through these passages, where is a
continual Transpiration of the Breath, the Malignant Quality of the Contagious
Air might (to the evident hazard of the Parties life) be suffered to pass,
without any correction at all, to the Heart. And I conceave that these
Preservatives are to be preferred far before those other, that are made up with
Musk, Amber, and the like Odoriferous Ingredients in them; which seem rather to
please the Nose with the sweetnsse of their smell, then any way to defend it.

For the Correcting, or rather Countermanding of which Pestilential Air, That
Tobacco is very good to preserve from the Plague
there are none, I believe, but will confess, that to take Tobacco must needs
be of very good use; especially if it be prepared for this purpose, by the
mixing of a little Rue seed, Nutmeg, or Angelica root with it: and so the
Smoke of it be held a pretty while together in the Mouth, before it be blown
out at the Nose; to the end that it may leave behind it the stronger
Impression upon those parts, and withal may the more freely diffuse it self
into the Lungs, and Heart; that so, if it there meet with any Pestilential
Air, it may either dissipate, or else choke and overmaster the same. And
therefore they shall do very well, whoever either have a mind, or are
necessitated to be with such as are sick of the Plague, that as well before
they go in unto the sick Party, as after they come from him, they take a Pipe
of the aforesaid Tobacco; while they are taking it, holding the Smoke a good
while in their Mouth. For it is probable enough, that where there is a Weak,
and light Touch only of this Infection, it may by this means be discussed, and
quite removed: Yet notwithstanding, when ever any one finds that he is
certainly infected with it, his best way will be to have recourse to some
Sudorifical Antidote, which by its Specifical Quality is able to expel, and
overmaster the Pestilential Air: as we see it is in that Composition, which
they call Ovum Philosophorum, or the Philosophers Egg; and in Treacle, and
other Confections made up with Vipers Flesh; as we know, that against the
Stinging of a Scorpion, the Oil of Scorpions, or, as some say, the Powder of
the same, is a Sovereign Remedy.

Neither do I conceave it fit to provide for the defense of the Mouth, and Nose
only; but there must be care also taken of the Stomach, by those that are come
out of Fresh, How you are to provide for the Stomach, in this case.
into this Pestilential Air, and have no possible means of avoiding the same.
And the best way here will be to take such Cordial and Antidotal Confections,
Powders, and Drinks, that the Heart may be thereby corroborated; and the virtue
of the same being thence sent forth abroad, not only by the Veins, but also by
the Arteries's the whole body may by this means be defended from Infection; and
the Pestilential Air also, which is drawn in by the Aspera Arteria, or
Windpipe, may be corrected by such Vapors, as ascend up by the Mouth of the
Stomach; Vt, si non prosint singula, multa juvent:
That if some fail,
More may prevail.


And therefore my Counsel is, that every morning, the Party be sure to take a
spoonful at least of my Contrapestilential Vinegar; or, where that cannot be
had, two spoonfuls of Wine Vinegar; wherein, for the greater security, some
small quantity of Rue has been steeped: and about some two hours after he may
eat a piece of Bread and Butter, or the like, for his Breakfast, and may drink
after it a draught of strong Ale, or Wine: and if there were some of the said
Rue, or Wormwood steeped in the said Liquors, it would be so much the better.
Then about two hours before dinner, he must take a Dram and a half, at least,
of my Preservative; the like quantity whereof he must take three hours after
dinner; and some quantity of it also again, before he goes to bed. And he shall
also do very well, if he be constantly chewing either of some Angelica Root,
Zedoary, or Cloves; which he shall do well to take, as soon as ever he wakes in
the morning. He must also wash his mouth with Vinegar; that so, in case any
Contagious Air should lurk about his Chamber, or should by any body be brought
in thither, he may not draw it into his body uncorrected. For, as Cities that
are besieged, or lie not far from an Enemy, are to be defended, and fortified
by Trenches, Walls, and a continual Guard of Soldiers; in like manner are we,
night and day, without the least intermission at all to stand upon our Guard,
and fortify our selves against this Pernicious Disease, by making use of
Antidotal Medicaments; that so none of its Venom may be received into our bodis
but what is first spoiled and deprived of its Venomous Weapons. And therefore
the Party may take a little quantity of my Preservative, (the Description
whereof here follows) and may hold it in his mouth, and now and then swallow
some of it down; besides that which he is to take of it, at some certain
appointed times.

A Preservative against the Plague.
TAke an Ounce and a half of Fracastorius his Dioscordium, two Drams and a half
of Old Treacle, one Dram of the Confection of Hyachynth; of the Powder of
Nutmeg, Rue-seed, Angelica Roots, and Elicampane of each a Dram and a half: mix
these with an Ounce of Wine-Vineger and fifteen drops of Oil of Brimstone, and
as much of the Syrup of the juice of Citron, as shall be needful to make the
Composition up, into the Consistency of an Opiate.

Poor people, and Country folks, that have not this Preservative by them, nor
cannot go to the price of it, may take Elicampane; which if they take it dry,
as it is, will do them much more good, then the same Conserved does Rich folks:
for it is of a very Antidotal Faculty. And they may easily procure themselves
Wine-Vineger, and steep Rue in it.

And indeed I have been always very desirous, that those, that live in any so
Contagious, and Pestilential an Air, should be sure exactly to observe the
Rules that I have here laid down. And although perhaps these Rules have not
been so exactly observed as I would have them, (which is a thing likely enough)
yet that they have done very much good, where they have been observed but in
part, appears sufficiently, by the large Catalogue of those that have been
preserved hereby, mentioned both in my French Treatise, and in this also. For,
those persons I speak of, although they had never been before accustomed to
this Pestilential Air, nor had ever been with such as had had the disease upon
them, nor themselves had ever formerly been visited with the same; by being
armed with the aforesaid Antidotes, they have boldly attended continually, both
night and day, upon those that have had the disease upon them, and have not
been at at all touched by this so dangerous and contagious a disease. As, in
like manner, very many of their friends, who came very often into their
company, and some also that dwelt in the same houses with them, have gone
clear without any Infection. All which things, although they were prescribed,
and appointed by me when I was not in presence with the Sick Persons, (for, I
confess, I seldom see them, but for the most part refuse to do so) yet by my
most diligent inquiry about these things, and by the confession of those many
persons themselves, that have been by this means preserved, as also by the
relation of others too, that have given me a very particular account of all
Circumstances, I am so well assured of the efficacy of the same in these Cases,
as that, I conceave, no man ought to doubt thereof.

Which also can be attested to by the Monks of the Abbeys in Gaunt: for when
the said disease had gotten into the Abbey of Saint Peter there, and that the
second time too; those servants that attended upon the Sick Persons of said
Abbey, though they had never been before accustomed to this Pestilential Air,
by arming themselves with these Preservatives only (yet without any Counsel of
mine) adventured, upon the strength of the same, to attend continually upon
those that were sick of the disease. And to instance in some, Master
Crombruggen, who was there the Prior; and another, that had taken his
Confession, were both seized upon (themselves not at all suspecting the same)
by this Close and Dangerous Disease; against which, having not made use of any
Preservatives, they both died, in the year of the Lord 1634. whom a third
person also followed, in the year 1636. And the same servants after their
decease, aired and purged their Chambers, and the things that were in them, all
the ways they could imagine; neither did any of them then, nor has any other
since miscarried out of the says Abbey, or has had the least Touch of the same.

And about the sam tim, in the Abbey of Baudeloo: which two Abbeys were far
enough distant from each other, there being two of the said Abbey infected with
the Plague, one of which died the very next day after he had been taken with
the same, and the other also, after he had lain six days sick of the said
disease, at length died Frantic; yet for all this, none of the rest of the
Convent, although they had never been before themselves sick of it, or had come
near to such as were infected, trusting to the Virtue of these Preservatives
here set down, and presuming the more, by the Charitableness of the Office,
adventured to be present with, and willingly to attend upon those that were
sick: and this they did, without receiving any Prejudice at all to their own
health thereby, or any spreading and carrying it abroad to others they kept
company with.

So likewise in the Abbey of Tongerboo, one Antonius Kirckovius, who was a Friar
there, being a man of a very strong Constitution, and in the flower of his age,
in the year 1634. was taken suddenly with a great Sadness of Heart, Vomiting, a
Fever, and Headache; and finding the third day of his sickness a hard Tumor
risen under his left Arme-pit, and having three Plague-sores broken out upon
the Region of the Heart, he presently sends for a Surgeon; who being come, and
having examined, and considered of all the several Symptoms, his opinion was,
that the Party could hardly live till the next day. In the mean time the sick
person sends to me, (for I came not to him) desiring earnestly of me, that I
would prescribe him something for his Cure. But because than I conceaved him to
be no better now then a dead man, I though good to make use of Prognostics,
rather then of Preservative Medicaments, which seemed here to come too late.
Yet I prescribed him to take a double Dose of the Sudorifical Preservative: by
means whereof after he had sweated so extremely, as that not only all his Bed,
and Bed-cloathes were wet through, but that the sweat ran down through the same
also upon the ground, running down in so great a quantity in manner of a little
stream, as it were; so than both his Headache, Fever, and consequently the
aforesaid hard Tumor, and Plague-sores by little and little also vanished, and
the Party within a few days after had now been restored again to his perfect
health; The Prior of the said Abbey, with another of the Friars, named Poret,
supposing, by reason of the so sudden recovery of this man, that there was no
danger of the Plague at all, they presently adventured to give him a visit.
Which as soon as ever I heard of, I presently took care to send them some
Preservatives; assuring my self, that they must necessarily be infected by so
Pestilentiall, and Contagious an Air, as they went into: as indeed the Prior
was; who the next day after was taken with so great a Heaviness at his Heart,
and with a Headache, Swimming in the Head, and a Fever, as that he could hardly
stand upon his Legs. Well then; what was now to be done? Why thus: Immediately,
he takes his Sudorifical Preservative, as I had appointed him, so soon as ever
he found himself ill; and, after he had sweat for the space of four hours by a
great fire, finding himself very much refreshed, and as he thought, quite freed
from his disease; he gets up, and would needs presently go to his Bedchamber:
where after some certain hours space finding in himself some Relics of the
Contagion, which began to bring upon him again the aforesaid Symptoms which he
had felt before, he betakes himself presently to his former Practice again; and
getting a good fire made him: he immediately falls to make use of his
Sudorifical Preservative; and so by this means perfectly at length cured
hfmself. But Poret, his Brother-Frier, who had neglected his Preservatives, and
had taken no Antidotal Medicine at all against the Disease so soon as ever he
felt it upon him; and presently a Swelling risen in his Groyne: yet by applying
such Convenient Remedies as the present Occasion required, he was perfectly
cured, (nor was any other person infected by him;) and in this perfect state of
health he continues to this very day. And by making use of the aforesaid means
of Preservation, very many, both Friars and Nuns, and others also in many
other houses, both of Eminent Persons, and of those of meaner note also, have
been so strangely preserved from this disease, as that I have thought fit
rather to pass some of them over in Silence, then here to make mention of them:
as neither have I spoken of them in my French Treatise; least in so doing, I
might be thought to attribute too much to this my manner of Practice. In like
manner, as in the aforementitioned story of the Cure of Kerccovius, I have not
mentioned at all what he himself affirmed to me and his Brother-Friers; namely,
that when he was in those his Intolerable Sweats, he saw plainly the Tokens
appearing all about his Arms, and yet had at the same time both his
understanding and his Eyesight perfect. Which Happiness though it very seldom
befall those that are fick of the Plague; yet I am very certain, that the same
has very often happened to several Patients of mine, (and yet those that were
frequently with them, have not been infected therewith at all;) who having
taken my Preservative, the secret Venom has been driven out from within, to
the outward parts of the Body; as the Purple Spots appearing always upon their
Skin did evidently manifest.

And, which amongst the rest may seem to be a most Incredible story, when the
Abbess of Oostecloy, in the year 1634. lay desperately sick of the Plague, (for
she had a Plague Sore broken out under her Chin, and a Swelling risen under her
left Arme-pit, and her Tongue was all over Black, and Swollen, and Spots of the
same color appeared all over her body, which are all Evident signs of the
same, (the now Abbess, (that after ward succeeded her in her place, together
with three other Nuns, neither of which had ever before been accustomed to
any such Pestilential Air, nor had ever been sick of the said disease; yet for
all this attended night and day upon her, and that too in a very little
Chamber; and would needs, though imprudently, and to no purpose (for she was no
better then a dead Woman, in the judgment of all people) perform that deed of
Charity, even descending to the most sordid and course Offices; only presuming
upon the Virtue of my Preservatives, and Regiment of Health in this case
prescribed them; although I confess I dissuaded them from so doing. And yet
they all four (being yet alive to this day) by the singular mercy of God, have
together with the rest of that whole house, continued all hitherto clear, and
free from any the least touch of Infection; save only one Lay Sister of the
said Nunnery, who died the day before the Abbess her Mistress, whom she had
infected, coming newly to her from a Kinswoman of hers that lay sick of the
Plague. Yet notwithstanding, although these things, by Gods blessing, have
succeeded so according to my wish, and beyond my expectation; Yet shall I never
persuade any one that has not been accustomed to this Contagious Air, and
perhaps is incapable of receaving my Instructions, or when this Venomous
disease rages more then ordinary, to expose himself to the inevitable danger
of the same: conceaving it sufficient for me, that I have been able to give a
faithful account of many more that have in this case been happily preserved,
then that have miscarried; and that the Preservatives that I have in this
disease prescribed, have been found to be of so great Efficacy, and Virtue, as
that those that are necessitated to be present which such as are sick of the
disease, or else shall have a mind to visit their friends, that are infected,
may without any fear (for there is no Passion of the Mind more dangerous in
this case, then that of Fear,) perform this Act of Charity. For, this
Pestilential Contagion is very apt to seize upon such as are either stricken
with fear, or dejected by grief. To the end therefore, that by reason of these,
and the like Passions, people may not be so much the apter to receave and take
in this Contagious Venom; they may sometimes refresh themselves by drinking
Wine, in a greater quantity then usual, and even to some good height of Mirth,
provided that it be not to drunkenness:) or in defect of Wine, they may take
good strong Ale, that is Stale, and clear.

How those that inhabit near Infected houses ought to defend themselves aginst
Infection.
Those that dwell near to infected houses, yet have not been in the same, must
endeavor to keep out the Infections out of their own houses, by shutting up all
doors, and passages as carefully as they can: but if this cannot conveniently
be done; they must then labor to correct the Pestilential Air by Fumigations,
and strowing sweet Herbs, and sprinkling Vinegar up and down the house: and
they may sup up every morning a spoonful at least of my Contrapestilential
Vinegar; and may twice a day take a small quantity of my Preservative, before
set down; not neglecting neither the sauce which they are to take with their
Meat, nor any of the order things here prescribed. Neither will it be amiss, to
take some pretty indifferent Dose of my Preservative in warm Vinegar, and to
sweat lustily upon it: but none ought to go either out of their chamber, or
house while the Pores of their body are open, and that too after the Sun has
been up a sufficient while, and has dispelled the Contagious Vapors; and so
likewise they must return home again before the Sun be set. And it will be very
requisite also, that after any infected house has been purged, those that come
into them should have recourse to the Sweating again.

And as for those that do not dwell near Places that are Infected, How those
may provide for their own safety, that do not live near places that are
Infected.
and yet would make as good provisions for their own safety as possibly they
could; these, according to the spreading abroad of the Contagion, as it is
either larger or lesser, may in like manner either more or less carefully Study
their own Preservation. And therefore first of all I advise them to take for
nine days together, at least, a spoonful at least of my Contrapestilential
Vinegar betimes in the Morning: and if they cannot have this at hand, they may
then infuse Rue, in the best Wine-Vineger they can get; and it will not be
amiss, if they put to it some Angelica Root, and Elicampane bruised: and some
add to these Treacle also. Or if they would provide yet more certainly for
their own safety, the best Preservative that is, in this case, is said to be
that Electuary, which is compounded of Three Adverbs, which are these, Cito
Long, Tarde Signifying, A Speedy flight from the Infected place; A Far distant
Habitation; and A Slow return, to it again. But for as much as this cannot
always be done, those that must stay upon the place, may provide for their own
safety by making use of those Mastications, before set down, for the defense of
their Mouth; as they must do for their Nose, by smelling to Vinegar, and for
their Stomach, by such Confections, as we have before prescribed for such, as
either inhabit, or are necessitated often to come to houses that are infected
with the Plague: and these things they must do, before ever they go out into
the open Air; and especially, when they are necessitated to go into such
Streets as are infected with this disease, or are otherwise Noisome, by reason
of the filthy, stinking smells that are found in them. And certainly there is
no small regard to be had to the Condition of the Air whether at home, or
Abroad: and therefore so soon as ever they begin to suspect its Purity, and
Freeness from Infection; they must either utterly quit the place, or else must
endeavor to correct the Contagiousness of the Air, by springkling Vinegar all
about their houses, by Fumigations, and by Sweet Herbs, That the Contagious
Air is either to be left, or corrected.
strowed up and down their Rooms and Bed-chambers, and by making great Fires in
the same; as we see, that by making great Fires in the Streets of Cities, or in
any open Places, the Contagious Venom of the Air is usually utterly
extinguished, and suppressed; and that according to the Doctrine of
Hippocrates, who for the same reason, when the Plague raged extremely in Xerxes
his Army, advised them that they should set on fire all the Woods, that had
Sweet Smelling Trees in them, as they marched along: from which Advise of his,
the glory of his Name was infinitely increased; and a most Stately Statue was
also thereupon erected unto Him.

And those also, that may conveniently fly away, and leave the place Infected,
may yet do very well to take with them some of the Sudorifical Preservative;
that so in case they should chance, either in their journey, or else at the
place where they intend to settle, to find the least Touch of Infection
appearing about them; by Sweating lustily, they may quite expel the Venom of
the Disease; which is most certainly known sometimes to lurk for some pretty
while in the body, before it discovers it self by any evident signs. And I my
self also can affirm for a certain truth, that when some, that have kept their
houses, and have not felt the least Touch of it at all, have yet by my Advise,
taken of my Sudorifical Preservative; the Lurking Venom of the disease has
been driven forth from within, to the outmost Parts of the Body, and has been
thus utterly dispelled: as has many times evidently been testified by those
Purple Spots that have appeared upon the Skin, (which are, as it were, the Seal
of this Disease) both at the very time that the Patient has been in Sweating,
and afterward also; and that too, without the Parties finding any
Inconvenience at al, either at the present, or afterward.

But for as much as there is regard to be had, There is exact care to be had of
the things called Non-Natural.
not only to the Air, but to the rest of the Non-Natural things also; we
ought therefore to remember, that Moderate Exercise also is allowed, where the
Air is not suspected: yet this Exercise must not be either Violent, or Long;
lest the Body be too much heated, and so by reason of the opening of the Pores,
there be made too free a passage for the Air to get in, and more of it be
taken in then should be. For although that Air is not utterly to be rejected
as bad, yet certainly it is in some sort to be suspected, that is not som-what
remote from Infected Places.

It is hurtful also either to Study too much, or to mind serious Business; as
it is likewise to exercise the Act of Generation. Sleep, as it is dangerous,
when the Plague has already seized upon the person; so is the Excess either of
it, or of Watching, very bad, in the Prevention of the same. But of the two,
Excessive Watching is less dangerous, in the Disease it self, then Excessive
Sleeping is. Repletion ought in this case to be avoided; but especially
Emptiness.

Among the Passions of the Mind, Fear, Anger, Care and Grief, must here be
quite banished; and Alacrity, and Cheerfulness of Mind, must by all possible
means by procured.

There must also be an Extraordidnry Care taken of the Cleanliness of the whole
House, and of all things in the same; but especially of their Wearing Clothes,
which they usually walk abroad in; which ought to be Smooth, without any Nap,
and Light, and such as the Contagious Air cannot easily stick in, or hang
upon; as it easily may in Woollens and Furs: and the same must often also be
hanged forth in the open Air, or aired before the fire, and be shaken out
without doors, and brushed. If the Air be clear, they may then set open the
Windows of their houses, those chiefly that look toward the North, and East;
unless the same open toward Infected places: for the North wind sweeps away,
and scatters the Contagious Air.

That Issues are for very good reason commended by Authors, Experience it self
evidently testifies: yet that it is not safe to trust to these alone, the same
Experience has also taught us. In like manner Old Running Sores are of use
toward the Preservation of the Body from Infection, as Issues are; and
therefore they are to be let alone, and no endeavors to be used for the
stopping of the same: as neither are Scabby persons to look after any Cure for
themselves.

As for Amulets carried about them so made up of Arsenick, or the like
Poisonous Ingredients, seeing (as they are Enemies to Nature) so they have been
sometimes also known to have done hurt, I cannot at all approve of them.

And indeed in reason we ought rather to commend the use of a Silk Bag, filled
with Cotton, and Cordial, and Antidotal Pouders put therein; and so, hanging it
about the Neck, to place it about the Heart.

I shall here speak something, touching what Meat is in this case to be eaten,
and what to be forborne. In Contagious times therefore people must abstain
from Hogs-Flesh, Beef, Of Meat.
and all other kinds of flesh that are Hard of Digestion, as also from all
Inwards and Extreme Parts of Beasts, as Feet, Ears, etc; And so likewise from
all Slimy Fishes, all kind of Pulse, Herbs, and from all White Meats, or
things made of Milk, Except only Butter. And so, on the contrary, they are to
make choice of all such Meats, as are light of Digestion; and withal, they must
abstain from Fish, when they eat Flesh; which also they are to eat rather
Roasted, then Boiled: and if they will have them boiled in any Liquor, or make
Broth of the same; they may put into it a little Wine Vinegar, Juice of Citron,
Nutmeg, Cloves, or the like; or some Sweet Herbs, prepared according to the
quality of their Meat; which will not only be very pleasant to their Palate,
but also do them otherwise very much good.

Hitherto is to be referred also a certain Sause, which I would have them
always to have at their table; and it is made of Wine-Vineger, Nutmeg, and
Sugar; boiled in Broth: (or in defect of this, they may take Wine with Butter
in it,) which yet must be so prepared, as that the taste of the Vinegar, and of
the Nutmeg, may be above all the rest. And in this Sause, I would have them to
roll all over, and lay a soaking all meat whatsoever that they eat; or else,
they may take, at the end of their Meal, a spoonful or two of it, and sup it
up. Those that are Asthmaticall, or Short-breathed; or are otherwise Tyssicall,
and troubled with a Cough, must put the lesser quantity of Vinegar, and the
greater of Sugar, into this Composition: as likewise in using the
Contrapestilentiall Vinegar, they must either decoct or infuse in it some Figs,
Currance, Liquorish, or other the like Pectorall Ingredients; and if their
Cough be very strong upon them; instead of Vinegar, they may then use some
other Preservatives: in like manner as those that are Hydropicall, should every
morning drink a good draught of Wormewood-Wine, or Rue-Wine, rather then a
spoonful of Contrapestilentiall Vinegar.

Concerning their Ordinary Drink, my Opinion is, that they may take the same
that they have been accustomed unto, Of their Ordinary Drink.
whether it be Wine, or Beer, or Ale: into which nevertheless I would have them
sometimes squeeze in some few drops of Juice of Citron, or of Oil of Brimstone:
and the Ale they drink must be clear, and not strong; as their Wine also must
not be of the richer sort, but must be either Rhenish Wine, or Ordinary French
Wine; wherein they may do well to put sometimes a little boiled Water, with a
small quantity of Citron Pill, or Cinnamon.

And if it so fall out, that any one has either been in company with those
that have been infected, In the lest suspicion of being infected, they must
immediately fly to their Preservatives.
or that have been with such as have been with such as have been necessitated
to attend upon such as have had the disease upon them, (which can hardly be
without a strong suspicion, if not a certainty of being infected by this
Contagion,) and especially, when he has not before hand armed himself against
it by Preservatives (notwithstanding that the Party find no sign of it at all
about himself) yet my advise is, that he presently betake himself to
Sudorifical Medicines, and take two Drams of Old Treacle, mixed with a spoonful
of Wine-Vineger; and drink upon it two or three spoonfulls of the said
Vinegar, warmed.

Now to the end that people may know, (where the signs of the Plague do
evidently appear,) whether the Cure of it may be undertaken with any hopes of
recovery of the Patient; I shall here briefly set down such things as seem
chiefly to relate to the Predictions in this case. And first of all I conceave,
Predictions.
that very good success may be expected, if so be the aforemention-
Preservative be taken at the very beginning of the Disease, and that the Party
keep it; so that he may thereby Sweat lustily, in case that any Plague-Sores,
and Swellings appear, before he feels any Feverish Heat. And although this
Treacherous Enemy flatter us thus and thus, yet that we are by no means to
trust him, Sad Experience has too often taught us. And if the Party be taken
with a Continual Vomiting, and be extremely Sleepy, and have a very Stinking
Breath, or the Tongue be Black, at the beginning of the Disease; it is a sign,
that the danger is very great: and so likewise if the Patient have an
Intermitting Pulse, or Swooning Fits, or a Looseness, or where there happens a
Bleeding at the Nose, or an unseasonable Eruption of the Courses: and
especially if the Party have a Hoarsness: or if his Urine, and Excrements, and
what he throws up by Vomit, be black; or he be taken with the Hickop, or a
Trembling in his Limbs; or if he spit Blood, or piss Blood; are evident signs
of Death.

And if, as I have formerly said, it is very Necessary, that where any one has
but the least suspicion of being infected, he should presently have recourse to
Sudorifical Preservatives; there is no question, but such, as find any real
sign that they are already Infected, ought to fly unto the same, as to a
Sanctuary; and that too, at the very Instant that they discover the same,
(seeing the Disease may be overmastred much easier, then the people imagine, if
it be taken in time) lest when these aforesaid Fatal Prognostics appear,
there be no hope of Recovery left. And this Preservative the Patient is to take
with Vinegar, (as has before been showed,) and in his Bed, being well covered
with Clothes, and with a good fire by him, if it may conveniently be had. And
he is to sweat as long as possibly he can; and if the Sweat come not from him
in very great Abundance, (which in this case is very Necessary) he must then
have a Bladder half filled with Warm Water, applied to his Belly; in which if
there be decocted some leaves of Carduus Benedictus, Rue, or Angelica Roots, or
Zedoary, there may much the better success be expected. And if so be the Party
sweat not enough nor grow the better upon it; he must presently, (as soon as he
has something recovered his strength a little,) fall again to his Sweating the
second time; yea, and sometimes also there is very good reason that he sweat
the third time too: Which Reiteration of Sweating notwithstanding is very often
not at all Necessary, in case that the Sudorifical Preservative, being taken in
the beginning of the disease, has wrought abundantly enough, Concerning the
Efficacy of which Timely Sweating, in the beginning of this Disease, Sennertus
also has given us a large Testimony, in his Lib. 4. De febribus, Cap, 6. where
he has these words. Existimo tot homines peste interire, quod plerique tardius
Alexipharmaca usurpant; multosque posse servari, si ea citius, and antequam
venenum humores corrumpere incipit, assumerent. Aliquoties enim observavi, in
pestilentibus constitutionibus, quosdam, cum se infectos sensissent, statim
sumptis Alexipharmacis ad sudorem se composuisse, and postea nihil mali amplius
passos esse; imo postridie ad consueta negotia rediisse. Contra, si curatio
protrahitur, and horae 8, aut 9, jam elapsae sint, antequam Medicamentum
aliquod propinetur; centesimus vix evadit. I am of Opinion, says he, that the
reason why so many die of the Plague, is, because they differ the time too
long, before they take any Preservatives, and that many might escape, if they
had but had recourse to the same, before the Venom of the disease had begun to
corrupt the Humors. For, I have several times observed that, in a Pestilential
season, some, that have found themselves infected, presently betaking
themselves to Sudorificall Preservatives, and sweating thereupon, have
immediately freed themselves utterly from the same; and the next day after have
gone about their business again. Whereas, on the Contrary, where the Endeavors
for Cure have been deferred, and put off for a matter of eight or nine hours,
without the taking of any Preservative, there is scarsely one of an Hundred
that has escaped.

Now the Ordinary Dose of this Sudorifical Preservative, is, A Dram and a half
of the Philosophers, Egg, The Quantity of the Sudorifical Preservative that is
to be taken.
one Scruple of Confection of Hyacinth, six Grains of Oriental Bezoar, or ten
Grains of Bezoar of Peru, and five drops of Oil of Sulphur: Mix these
together, and take it in a Spoonful of Warm Vinegar, (as has before been
showed) and drink upon it three other spoonfulls of Veneger Warmed. And in
defect of the Philosophers Egg, they may take two Drams and a half of Old
Treacle, and half a Dram of Confection of Hyacinth: and in stead of Bezoar
Stone, where the people are poor, they may take some Grains of the Shavings of
Unicorns Horn. Extracts, and Salts, which are made out of Scordium, Rue,
Carduus Benedictus, and Angelica, are used by many in this case, taken to the
quantity of about a Dram. The spirit of Antimony also, so prepared, as that it
may neither cause Vomitings, nor Going to Stool, but may provoke Sweating
only, is here very much commended: in which, as in the former Extracts, we may
have much the greater Confidence, if it be given with a little Warm Vinegar,
and a Dram of Old Treacle at the least; lest that part of the Medicine, which
is principally Antidotal, (as Vipers Flesh is here) should be wanting. And for
this cause I chiefly prefer the aforesaid Preservatives Which also may be
administered in a greater quantity, where the strength of the Venom requires the
same: and therefore in this case they may take two Drams of the Philosophers
Egg, or three Drams of Old Treacle, with the other prescribed Ingredients: in
like manner as Galen himself also, and other ancient Authors, were wont to
prescribe half an Ounce of Treacle; and in case that were not sufficient to
expel the Poison, then they appointed the same to be repeated, prescribing
either the same, or a less quantity, according to the Constitution of the
Patient.

And I know besides that at Gaunt, in the year 1647. this Preservative was
administered by Mr. Cortreau, a Jesuit, to another of the same Fraternity, (who
had a Tumor risen under his Left Arme-Pit, and two Plague-Sores broke out in
other places,) whom, within the space of twenty hours, he caused to take an
Ounce and a half of Treacle; namely the first time he gave him Two Drams, and
eight hours after half an Ounce, and after the space of other eight hours six
Drams more, drinking after each several Dose a lusty draught, or two, of Water
of Carduus Benedictus, and the like, with such Syrups as are proper in this
case; in the mean time not neglecting the reparation of the Parties strength,
by convenient, and proper Meats. About the same time, during the raging of the
Pestilence there, a Surgeon belonging to the Pesthouse gave to one that was
sick of the Plague, (and that with very good success too) half an Ounce of
Treacle: with Quantity of the said Preservative seems much more proper to be
administered at the first, where the disease appears Evidently upon the Party,
then two Drams only; for this quantity may suffice, in the beginning of the
disease: Although I shall not advise any to take so great a quantity, nor yet
an ordinary one, when the Party Affected is very drowzy, and given to sleep: in
which case some other Sudorifical Medicines may be administered

And I have also heard, from Persons of very good credit, that both in this,
and other diseases too, they have caused their Patients to sweat in a very
abundant quantity (and with very happy success) by administering to them half a
Dram of the Powder of a Viper; which is thus prepared. You must take a Viper,
and put it in whole, and alive, with its head, teeth, tail, and bowels too,
into an Earthen Pot, covered at the top; in which cover there must be some
holes made for Evaporation, and thus you are to set it upon live Coals, so that
it may only be dried, and not scortched: and this being so prepared may, as
occasion shall require, be made into a Powder, and be administered (as other
things are to be, and as I have more largely related in my French Treatise)
with Vinegar, Warmed. And it would not be amiss, if one should add to this a
Scruple of Sudorifical Antimony, as half a Dram thereof; or else some few
Grains of Bezoar. And where these things are not to be had, they may take five
Ounces of Wine-Vineger warmed, with a Dram of Nutmeg, and a Scruple of Saffron,
and put them into a Bladder half full of warm Water, and so apply it to the
Lower part of the Belly: continuing this Application so long, till such time as
some other Preservative Medicine, that may be able (if need be) to cause the
Party to Sweat in so great a quantity, as in necessary, may be procured.

And for as much as, where the Patient is to Sweat in so great abundance, (as
in this disease is very requisite,) his Shirt and his Linen about him, must
necessarily be very Wet; and therefore Authors conceave, (and reasonably
enough) that these being as certain Recaptacles of the Venom, ought to be
changed; that so the Patient may be freed from the filthy Stench, wherein he
lies wrapped up; yet I advise all people, that they should not be too rash in
changing the sick Parties Linen; The Patients Shirts, and his other Linen
about him is not to be changed unadvisedly
but should rather wipe off the Sweat from them with Towels, which are not
fresh, and newly taken out of the Chest; but being first sprinkled over with
some sweet Water, have afterward been very well aired by the fire, till such
time, as that all the smell of the Soap, or what other Acquisititious smell
soever, be quite driven out. And I have been confirmed in my Opinion of the
dangerousness of applying Fresh Linen to People in this case, both by the
common voice of the People, and also by those that have belonged to
Pest-houses, and such as have otherwise attended upon Persons that have been
sick of the Plague; the greatest part of whom will not suffer the sick Party to
change his Linen, (not in this disease only, but in the Small Pox also) but
will have him either keep on the same, or if he do shift) he must put on either
what himself formerly wore, in the time of his health: or what have bin worn
by some of his Healthful Friends; and those must be very well aired too first
by the fire. It has also been observed, that by Shifting of Linen (I mean of
that next the Skin) the Courses in Women, which in this case are dangerous; and
the Hemorrhoids in persons, that have been otherwise in good health, have
broken forth. Which putting on of Fresh Linen, before the Seventh Day of the
Disease, how extreme Dangerous it is, and indeed how Insufferable (unless the
Party, impatient of the Stinking smell about himself, will needs shift his
Shirt, and put on one that had been worn before) is most earnestly, and
seriously pressed by Isbrandus Diemerbrouc, in his Observations: where he tells
us of some, that having heedlesly put on Fresh Linen in this disease, within a
few hours after they have been taken with a Feavourish Heat, a Heaviness of
Heart, and other the like Symptoms, which have grown so strongly upon them, as
that they have been brought even to deaths door; none of which things have
happened, where the Parties have put on such Linen as had been worn before;
in which the Smell of the Soap has been dissipated by the heat of the Body;
which is much more to be feared, then that Stink which comes from Foul Linen;
as by most certain Experience has very often been confirmed: To which we ought
to give greater credit (especially in such matters as concern this so Occult,
The Stink of Soap is dangerous, not only for those that are Infected, but for
those that are in health too, in the time of the Plague.
and Dark Disease) then to Reason: seeing that we know, that those that are
free from infection, and do live in houses that are so too, yet by having their
Linen washed with Soap, are much more apt to take the Infection of this
Pestilentiall Air, then otherwise they would have been, if they had not
suffered the other to come near them: which is so certainly known to be true,
as that I need not stand here to prove it.

And to the end that there may be the more sure means used for the Prevention
of this most Tyrannical, and Raging Disease; there ought to be very great care
taken for the repairing of the strength of the Patient; which is to be
endeavored presently after his Sweating, and at other set times, What Meats are
allowed in the Plague.
by giving him such meats, as either his weakness, or the Feavorishness of his
Temper will require, and his Nauseous Stomach will admit. Which, seeing it is
not to be overloaded with Flesh, must be cherished up with Broaths, Juyces
Expressed, and Restorative Gellies made thereof; to which you may add some
Juice of Citron, or some Verdjuyce. And to the end that his Weak Stomach may
not cast the same up again, he may do well to take a slice of Pome-Citron, with
the Pill taken off, and rouled first in a little Sugar. A Broth also, made
with Verdjuyce, Water, and one or two Yolks of Eggs, and Crumbs of White Bread,
is in this case very good; into which you may, if you please, put a little
Sugar; which notwithstanding is not, in this disease, very Wholesome; as is
neither Honey. And hence it is, that in Lozenges and Conserves, that are here
of use, we put a greater quantity of Powders upon them then is usual, and a
much less of Sugar, except in such cases, where the Taste, and Strength, either
of it, or the Honey, is overpowered by the Antidotal Medicines, and the
multitude of Ingredients; as it is in Treacle, and the iike Compositions. It
will be also very useful sometimes, when the Feavorish Heat is not too great,
to put into these Broaths four or five spoonfulls of Rhenish Wine. And
sometimes also the Party may take a julip, made of the distilled water of
Carduus Benedictus, Scabious, Sorrel, and Borage, mixed with the Syrup of the
Juice of Citron, and putting into it also a few drops of the juice of Citron,
and of Oil of Sulphur: or in stead of these he may take some Apozemes, made of
the like Ingredients. And sometimes also he may take Conserve of Hyacinth, and
other Cordials; as likewise the Powder of Pearl, Bezoar Stone, and of the
Shaving of Unicorn Horn. The Parties Drink must be small, Drink.
clear Ale, into which he may now and then put in some few drops of Juice of
Citron, or Oil of Vitrioll; or else a small quantity of the best Verdjuyce; and
sometimes too, when the Fever and Delirium do not persuade the contrary, he
may put into his Ale a little Rhenish Wine, or some other Smaller Wine. If the
Party be bound, and go not freely to Stool, he may take an Ordinary
Suppository, or a Clyster of Broth made of Weathers Flesh, or the Decoction of
Emollient Herbs; putting in two raw Yolks of Eggs, and of ordinary Salt, and
Mithridate, or Dioscordium, of each a Dram. By the taking of which, if the
Expulsive Faculty be not quickened; you may then add to the same some Ounces of
the Syrup of Roses Solut. and of the Oil of Sweet Almonds: for I do not
conceave it safe to make use of any more Violent Purgers in this case: Neither
ought we any whit to fear the Patient, in case he should be Bound for a day or
two together: for I have both read, and heard of some Persons, in this case,
that have not gone to Stool in seven days together, which yet have done very
well for all that. And that this very thing happened to one that was a Tenant of
mine, in the year 1647, I have been very certainly assured both by the Man
himself, who is now perfectly recovered, and well; and by his Wife also.

I shall not here at all commend Letting of Blood, Purgings, Bleeding, Purging.
and Vomiting, are not here allowed of.
and Vomitings: which in my French Treatise also I have passed by, as
Suspected, and Dangerous Courses: For, the Agitation of the Spirits, and
Communication of the Corrupted with the Purer Humors, and the Large Diffusion
of the same, seeing it cannot be, without very great loss both of the Parties
strength, and also of time too, (which in this desperate Disease ought to be
very precious) have hindered me from assenting to the same. Which reasons,
seeing I have found many very Learned Authors not only to dissent from, but
some of them also (that had been very exact in their observations of the Event
in these cases) to have confirmed too; I was the more encouraged to trust my
Own Observation, (which I made diligently enough) and therefore fell upon this
Persuasion, that the aforesaid Ways of Evacuation were not at all in this case
to be allowed of; but, that the Venom of the Disease was, with all the speed
that could be, to be driven out to the Outward Parts of the Body; (whereunto
Nature has the most Proper, and Apt way for Passage; as appears by Its sending
out of Tumors, and Plague-Sores thither,) and so to be expelled by Sweat.

Yet I am not Ignorant, that many Excellent Authors are of another Judgment;
although I conceave that they judge rather according to Plausible, then
Peremptory Reason; while they think that by the Sharpness of their Wit only,
they are able to penetrate into the very Essence of this so Dark, and Abstruse
a Disease; and to overpower, and master it, without having had any sufficient
Experience by Practice in this Case: without which, Reason is utterly Blind,
and can light upon nothing, but what is uncertain, and doubtful. And even
Hippocrates himself, writing different ways, according to the different States
of Pestilential Fevers, seems to move a Doubt, (which yet shows plainly that
he favors our Opinion) in his Lib. 3. Epidem. Text. 3. Where, speaking of this
most Pestilentiall Disease, he says that Purging had done hurt to many, and
that by this means many had died also. Neither did he, in the true Plague, ever
use Letting of Blood; as appears out of his Lib. 1. Epidem. in the History of
Crato; and also in Lib. 6. Epidem. Sect. 7. Text. 1. Where he confesses, that
though he had tried what the Opening of a Vein would do, in many Patients of
his, that had been sick of Pestilentiall Diseases; yet he never found it to do
them any good. As Galen also, Lib. de bonis and malis Succis, tell us, that
when the Plague raged in his time, the Opening of a Vein in those that had it,
was very seldom used: and he then commends those Physicians, that were
fearful, and spareing in prescribing the same; as on the contrary side he
cries out against, and laughes at those, that in other Diseases, where
Breathing of a Vein seemed to be necessary yet durst not adventure on it,
calling them (...) that is, Blood-fearers. And many other Physicians also, both
Modern, and Ancient, have confessed that it was very dangerous in this case to
make use of the same. And besides, Fallopius also tells us, that in a Plague
that happened in his time, all those, that were let blood, died. And Palmarius,
who for two years space together (while the Plague reigned at Paris) was
appointed to take care of such as lay sick in the Pesthouse, in his Cap. 7. de
Peste, tell us, that, of those that were let blood, scarce one in a hundred
escaped. Dodoneus also, and Hildanus, with many others, unanimously affirm,
that scarce any that were let Blood in the Plague (which then raged a long
while amongst them) ever escaped. Of which judgment also was the
aforementioned Isbrandus, who was a very Learned Man, and was a Physician of
Vtrecht. This man, who was a most diligent Visiter of Persons that were
infected, when the Plague was at Nimmengen, (as Palmarius in the like manner
was, when it was at Paris) and withal a most Exact Observer of all things
whatsoever related either to the understanding of the Disease, or the Cure of
it; at what time the Plague raged there most furiously, in the year 1636, and
1637; in his Book which he put forth in the said year 1637, by most strong
Reasons, and the same confirmed also by Experience, proves, that in the Plague,
people are altogether to forbear both from Letting of Blood, and from taking of
Purges, or Vomits; giving there very good Reasons why the same ought not to be
admitted; and giving an account also of the bad success that others had had,
when they had prescribed the same to their Patients: where also he further
affirms, that of a very great number of Infected people, scarce any one that
had been let Blood, recovered: and, which is yet much more strange, He,
together with Riverius, and Lidderius, observed, that Letting of Blood was not
only dangerous, in persons that had the Plague upon them, but that it was
unsafe also for those that were in health, in the time of the Pestilence,
(unless there were otherwise very great Necessity of doing so,) to adventure
upon the same, by way of Preservation from this Disease.

When I considered, that this difference of judgment among Authors, in this so
Hazardous, and Weighty a business, produced nothing but Doubtfulness in
Physicians, and Injury to their Patients; I thought fit to treat something the
more largely of this point, in this my Short and Compendious Treatise; that so
I might hint to those, that are so very earnest in maintaining that the
aforesaid Evacuations are in this case of very good Use, that they would not
think much, before they prescribe the same, to enquire, and and inform
themselves sufficiently, what the success has hitherto been, where the same
have been used: for as much as, in all doubtful cases, the best judgment is to
be made from such things as are either Good, or Hurtful to the Patient. And if
they will but vouchsafe to do this, they will questionless find that the
greatest part of those, that have admitted of the said Evacuations, have
miscarried, and that very few have in this case escaped; and, that if they did,
it was rather to be attributed to the strength of their own constitutions, or
else to the weakness of the Venom, then to any thing else.

Now in case that leaving, and rejecting the said Evacuations, the Sick Party
shall have recourse to Sudorifical Preservatives, and that these do not prove
to be able quite to expel the Venom of the Disease through the Outmost Parts of
the Body, but that either by means of their force, or else of its own accord it
breaks out into Tumors, and Carbuncles upon the Body; there must then some
Attractive, and Concoctive Medicines be applied to the Part Affected, for the
drawing forth of the Venomous Humor lying in the said part; which yet must not
be brought to perfect Maturation; as indeed it cannot be: neither, if it could,
would it be safe to admit of so much delay. As for such Oils, Cataplasmes,
Fomentations, and Plaster, which are in this case useful, you have then
(besides what I have set down) abundantly described by others, and they are
indeed of common use every where. As for example, when any Tumors about the
body begin to rise, The Cu^ of Plag^ Tumors, (...) Swelling
they usually annoint the Part with Oil of Lillies, and Scorpions; or with
Fresh Butter, mixed with a little Treacle; over which you may lay a Red
Cabbage-Leaf, having first soaked the same in Warm Water. After this you must
apply Cataplasmes, made of the Roots of Lilies, Mallows, or of the Leaves of
the same, adding thereto some Leaves of Rue, and Linseed: which being boiled,
and brought to a due Consistency, you must then put into to same some Yolks of
Eggs, Vnguentum Basilicon, Turpentine, or the like. There are some that, in
this case, apply nothing to the Part Affected, save Roasted Onyons, mixed with
Fresh Butter, or Oil of Lillies. Many have with very good success made use
here of a Hens Fundament, having the feathers pulled off, and then being rubbed
over with Salt, and so applied to the part for a good while together, and when
the first Hen was dead, they applied another, as long as the Patient was able
to endure it: and the Bills of the said Hens they held sometime fast shut up.
When they had thus done, they then fell again to make use of the aforesaid
Ointments, and Cataplasmes; until such time as that the Tumor being brought to
a sufficient Suppuration, it might be lanced with an Instrument, to let out the
Purulent Matter: which yet if the Hardness of the Tumor will not admit, you
must make use of a Caustic, to draw it forth. And when the Tumor is now
broken, you must cleanse the Sore with Honey; and you may apply unto it, as
occasion serves, either the Yolke of an Egg, with a little Turpentine, mixed
together; or else some of the Ointment called, Vnguentum Apostolorum, or else
that other called Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, if need so require. And you must cover
the part Affected all over, either with the plaster called Emplastrum
Diachylon, with the Ointment named, Basilicon; or else with some other plaster
of the like Faculty and Virtue.

In the curing of a Carbuncle, or Plague Sore, they make use of the like Oils
and Plasters; which yet are ordinarily made not quite so strong, and drawing;
least, being so strong, they might too much exasperate the same. And you are
afterward to proceedin the cureof this, as of al other Sores, til it be
perfectly healed up. Which Carbuncles, or Plague-Sores, as well as those of
Plague-Tumors, must be kept open as long as may be.

As concerning the Cure of the Tokens, as they call them, which are Dark Purple
Spots, or of the like color, appearing upon the Skin in Pestilential Diseases,
I shall not say anything here, having said so much of this point in my French
Treatise; least by doing the same thing over again, I might seem to have
troubled my self to no purpose. Now while this care is taken for these External
Tumors, and Spots; the Patient is not in the mean time to neglect the taking
Inwardly of Sudorifical Preservatives, Cordial Confections and Powders, and
likewise his Julips, and Apozemes, which he is to take all in their due times;
in like manner as he must be very exact also in his Diet. And for quenching his
Thirst, he may sometimes take a little Ale, which must be but small, and very
clear: and I have been informed, and by persons of very good credit too, that
they have in this case often given Infected persons a draught of plain
Fountain, or Well-water, and that with very good success. Yet that they may not
drink too much of it, they may now and then sup up two or three spoonful of
small Ale, with some Juice of Citron mixed with it; putting a Brown Toast into
it, and a little Sugar. To which you may adventure to add a little Rhenish
Wine, or some other smaller sort of Wine; in case a Delirium, or else the
greatest of the Feavorish Heat he is in, hinder not the same. Slices also of
Pome-Citron, with the Pil taken off, put into two parts of Water, and one of
the aforesaid Wine, with a little quanti- of Sugar, may be allowed the Patient
for the same purpose; and this Composition, besides the allaying the Thirst of
the party, will be also very pleasant to his Palate. Yea the whole, Pome-Citron
also, taken with its Pill and Kernels together (both which are also Cordialls)
and so cut in pieces, may very properly be put into his Ordinary Drinks,

Now how the Impure, filthy Stenches of such houses as have been infected, are
to be cleansed, and washed away with Water, which would do better if it were
mixed with Vinegar or with Rue boiled in it, and hot also, rather then if it be
only fair Water; and also ought to be suffocated, and overmastered, by
Fumigations of Juniper Berries, Brimstone, Gunpowder, Vinegar, and the like
things, which have been made use of with good success; and which are to be
diligently observed by such as keep such infected houses, and by those also
that live near unto infected places: and besides, that those, that have
forsaken their houses, ought not by any means to return back to the same
again, till six Weeks at least are over since that any person died out of their
house of the disease; or till the last Infected person has now been recovered,
and clear from the same, and in perfect health for a whole months space, as
has been sufficiently asserted both by others, and by Me also, in my French
Treatise.

Neither was it my Intention, to have here said any thing more, touching this
so Pestilential, and Contagious a Disease; save only to set down what
Antidotal Medicines, and Preservatives, I have found to be most proper for the
driving out of the Venom of this disease in the beginning of it, through the
Outward parts of the body; by the right, and due administering of which, I have
always found good success to follow. And I had also resolved to have said
nothing either of this, or the former matters before treated of; unless it had
seemed both to some others, and to my self also, a very unreasonable thing, if,
leaving those Epidemial Diseases, that usually rage in our Maritime Parts,
untouched, I should here make an end of this Treatise. I shall therefore here
in the next place say something of the same; that so the Malignity of these
places being known, people may either avoid the coming into them, or else may
know how to provide for their health, by convenient, and proper Preservatives.

THE FIFTH DISCOURSE: Wherein is treated, concerning those Epidemial Diseases,
and their Symptoms, that in Maritime parts which are commonly called in Dutch,
Polders, do infest the Inhabitants, but more especially Strangers, that had
before been unaccustomed to this Malignant Air: and where are set down also
the best Preservatives against the said Diseases.
THese Diseases are wont to seize upon people about the beginning of Autumn;
and sometimes also sooner, according to the temper of the foregoing Summer,
whether that had been hotter, or cooler: and they some years rage so violently,
as that they last the greatest part of the said seasons, miserably afflicting
people all that while, and destroying very many of them; and that most
especially in those Places, which the Dutch call Polders; which having formerly
layen covered with Salt Water, and recovered since from the Sea by Man's
Industry, by raising Banks against the same; they have by this means been made
habitable, though not quite reduced to their pristine Nature, and purity. For
there is still inherent in the same, I know not what Malignant Quality, which
is generated out of the Putri'd Bottom of the Sea Water: for which reason, at
the aforesaid times specially, as also when the Ground in Sowing time, or
otherwise, is broken up with the Plough, there breaks forth a most Stinking
and Contagious Air: which lasts, till such time as the Issuing forth of this
dangerous, and Morbifical Air is stopped, by the Earths Pores being shut up,
either by the Frost, or some other very cold Weather.

In like manner as Lakes also breath forth the like Contagious Air; as do
other Fenny, and Marish places also, when by the extreme Heat of the Sun they
are more dried up then ordinary: for by this means, both from the Putrefaction
of dead Fishes, and other Creatures, and perhaps from some Venomous ones too,
dying therein for want of Water, this Malignant Vapor is drawn up, and spread
abroad.

As in Meadows also, that have layen drowned a long while under Water, after
that by the continual heat of the Suns beams, the said water comes to be dried
up, there is a Viscous, and Slimy Sediment left behind, which no Show^es of
Rain can wash away, and dissolve; and this, by its filthy Stink, does very
often infect all the neighboring Inhabitants.

Now the Diseases, that chiefly reign in these kind of Places, are Bastard
Tertian, and Quartane Agues, and many times, also Continued Fevers; and many
other the like Distempers, which accompany the other, as Symptoms: among which
the most usual are, most stubborn and Intractable Obstructions, from whence
oftentimes proceed Hard Tumors on the Spleen, and Liver, and Violent Fits of
the Colic, the Jaundise, and Stone; as also Impostumations in the Privy
Parts, and continual Defluxions falling upon the Lungs, some of which bring
them into a Consumption.

Of which Symptoms, seeing, as I have often said, there is much more care to
be taken, then of the Fevers themselves which they attend, though they be not
yet quite gone, and therefore both the Regiment of Health, and the Medicines
also, according as either of them are the more Violent, are to be changed; I
could not but give directions concerning the same, in my French Treatise; that
even the meanest Countryman, and all others, that are destitute of the
Physicians advise, might at least know, at what time, and what manner both of
Medicines, and Meats they are to take, and what to forbear. Whom also I should
here desire to take notice, that there is no trust in the Earth to be given to
a sick Parties Urine, unless the Physician see the Party also: Which being sent
with the Sediment, (if there be any in it) all tumbled up and down, and
sometimes is of a high fiery color, and another while looks pale, and crude;
there can no Certain, but rather sometimes a Contrary Judgment be made from
it. As it falls out, among other diseases, in that of the Dropsy; wherein
seeing the Patient ordinarily makes Urine but in a very small quantity, and
that too after it had been long retained by him; you shall have it sometimes
look higher-coloured, then in a burning Fever: as it is likewise less Red, in
the height of a Fever, then at the Beginning of it: which might deceive both
the Phycisian, and the Patient, unless he saw him, so that he might observe his
Countenance, Speech, and Pulse, which is the Messenger of the Heart; and so had
opportunity by these to discover his disease; and by the same to be informed
also, that as the Urine grows Paler, the Heat of the Fever increases; and
that That, which had inflamed it, was now ascended upward toward the Head, and
there threatened a Delirium, and a greater danger of the disease. So that it is
a very plain case, that the Patients Urine is by no means to be sent to the
Physician, without perfect Instructions, and a due Care taken, that he may have
withal a particular Account given him, by the party that brings it, of
whatsoever concerns the present state of the Disease. Although I confess, for
the most part, the Messengers, by which the sick Parties Urine is carried to
the Physician, are persons that are not very able to manage such a business, as
is the delivering the Patients Account of himself to the Physician, or of
bringing back the Physicians Advise to the Patient; which yet in many cases is
a very considerable business, and necessary to be done. And therefore I have
ever refused to look upon the Urine, unless I could see the sick party too,
considering, that should I have done so, I could not possibly have satisfied
either the Expectation of the Patient, or my own Conscience.

I have also in my French Treatise endeavored to lay open to the world the
abominable Abuse and Cheat, that is practiced by some Country Empiricks, and
Quacksalving Knaves, who gaping after their own unjust Gains only, to the
most evident ruin of their Patients, are not ashamed to boast, (and the simpler
sort of people believe them too) that by looking into the Parties Urine only,
They can tell him his Destiny, whether he shall live or die: which yet is a
thing that is by no possible means to be discovered from the Urine: as neither
has any Author, since the world begun, ever pretended to the the same
Peremptory giving of Judgment by it. So that there is no question to be made,
but that, in case it should so fall out, that the party, upon whose Urine any
such judgment has been made by some of these fellows, should chance to die in
earnest, this judgment of theirs so made, upon pretense of a bare Inspection
into the Urine only, was pronounced upon the same either Casually, or
Conjecturally only; or else was given rather by the power of Necromancy, and
the like Diabolical Arts. For the Indications, for the discovery of this so
close, and lurking a disease, and the Medicines to be used in the cure of the
same, are very far different from those, which are conceaved by these wretched,
juggling Mountebanks, to be the most certain, and proper in this case; and are,
as such, obtruded upon the credulous Multitude.

Now in the next place I shall, according to my Usual Method, briefly set
down, (in favor of those that have not been at al accustomed to the Malignant
Exhalations of this Unhealthful, and Dangerous Air, and yet are necessitated,
either to pass through these places, or perhaps to make their abode there for
some time) such Medicines, and Rules of Diet, as I conceave most proper for
their Preservation against the same. And first of all, I would have people take
notice, that this Epidemial Contagious Air may possibly be spread abroad, and
so not to be trusted, even before the Beginning of Autumn; especially in Hot
Summers: and that too, by the space of some Weeks sooner then is usual, in
case the Heat of the Sun has been very vehement in the Dog Days, or perhaps
some good while before the same. For, we conceave it a thing not to be doubted
of, but that this Malignant Quality of the Air is in these Excessive Heats of
the Seasons much more Feirce, and Raging; and so much more Dangerous, and
Infectious, then it is in other more Temperate years, when the Heat has
neither been so Vehement, nor yet of so Long Continuance. So that it will in
this case concern those that are careful of their health, to make timely
provisions for themselves, by getting out of these parts before Summer is
ended: or else if their Important, and Urgent business there cannot admit of
this flight of theirs; their Bodies must then (as a Castle is by its Works and
Trenches) be fortified by other Convenient Preservatives. And therefore first
of all I would have them correct the Malignity of the Air by strowing Sweet
Herbs about the rooms of their houses, and by sprinkling of Vinegar about the
house, and making Aromatical Fumigations. They must also take care of their
Stomach, by drinking every morning a good draught of Wine, or Strong Ale; and
in case they are to go abroad, they must eat a Breakefast first, and drink
after it a lusty draught of the like good Wine, or Strong Ale; or at least they
must sup up three, or four spoonfulls of Aqua Vitae, or rather may drink a
draught of Wormewood-Wine (if it may be had) before they go abroad into the
open Air. But neither must they neglect the care of their Smell; but must
fortify their Nose against the Contagiousnesse of this Pestilential Air, by
smelling to strong-sented things; as they must likewise their Mouth, by chewing
such things, as I have prescribed in my former Discourse of the Plague. And
these things, which I have here prescribed, are chiefly to be observed by such
are unacquainted with this Malignant Air, and yet are necessitated to go to
these places, and perhaps to make some stay there. Yet seeing it is still
somewhat doubtful, whether the Infecttive Quality of this Contagious Air may
be sufficiently corrected by the aforesaid Remedies, they shall (if they be
wise) do well to hasten their departure thence; that by this more certain
remedy they may avoid all disposition toward those so Long, and Dangerous
Diseases: least being, before they are aware thereof, seized upon by the same,
they increase the number of that vast multitude of persons that have perished
thereby. For thus some very Honorable, and Eminent persons, and thus also some
Counselors of the Provincial Council of Flanders, having in the Vacation Time
been held there by their business for some long time, and being not at all
Armed against the Malignity of that Contagious Air, when as the disease raged
in those parts in an extraordinary manner; they have been infected with it; and
so returning to their homes, have there either layen miserably languishing for
a long time; or else have in a little while died of the same.

To these I can add diverse, both Colonels, Captains, Counts, and Marquesses;
who having had occasion of being in the said Parts, or in any other, that have
been recovered from the Sea, by casting up of Banks against it, or else in some
other Fenny Places, where they have been necessitated either to meet with their
Enemy, or perhaps to keep Garrisons there; having been assaulted by these
Contagious Aires, have either upon the place, or perhaps being removed some
whither else, yielded up both the Victory, and their lives too, to the same.

All which things seeing I am very certainly assured of, as having bin a a most
diligent observer of the same, ever since I practiced Physic in Flanders,
which is now about two and fifty years, I could not but give a light touch of
the same; least if they should be buried in Oblivion, and no Notice taken of
them, the world might yet be to seek for the same, both to our own great
detriment, and that also of Posterity: and I have the rather discovered these
things to the World, that so every wise man might the better make provision for
his own safety, and in himself make that happy experiment, which is in every
ones Mouth; Foelix, quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
He Is happy, who does arm
Himself by others harm.


As concerning the Curing of the aforesaid Fevers, as they are Epidemial, and
also of the Symptoms of the same, seeing I my self have written abundantly in
my French Treatise, and other approved Authors also have treated largely of the
said Fevers, though proceeding from other causes, (of the different ways of
curing whereof there is notwithstanding little regard, or notice to be taken,)
I shall not here say any thing; but shall only in this my Second Discourse add
to the former, such other things, as I found to be very rarely made use of, and
yet were such as I conceived were of most excellent use in this case. And yet I
know very well, that those that are of the more Curious sort in our Profession,
have presently a strong prejudice against whatsoever they find to be dissonant
to the common way of Practice, and which are commended to be the better, and
more useful things: and I know besides, that there are some of them, whose
fingers itch again to be scribbling; that so they may show to the world, that
they have lighted upon some thing which they can contradict. Which occasion of
quarrelling, I confess, they may very easily pick out of what I have delivered
in my former Discourse, touching the Gout; concerning which there are found so
many different Opinions, and Arguments, as that those that are unacquainted
with, and have not experience of my New Way of Proceeding herein, may think
themselves sufficiently furnished with the same, so as to be able to hold
Argument against my Reasons, though they have been confirmed by daily
Experience; although they will never be able to overthrow them. As for
instance, among other things it may be objected against me, that I maintain
that the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout is always caused by a Hot, and Sharp, or Salt
Humor; and that the same, although it were never so Violent, and raged never so
much, and was such, as otherwise would have been very long in curing, has yet
been miraculously, and perfectly cured, by drinking a cup of Cold Well, or
Fountain Water, in the manner, and the ^imes before prescribed; provided this
course be taken in the beginning of the Disease.

Besides, as this our Cold Water is used to cure most strangely, and certainly,
both in this case and otherwise, being taken as well Inwardly, as applied
Outwardly; yet will not these men willingly admit of the same: much less will
they believe, that the applying of the same upon the part Affected, being
afflicted either with a Hot, or Cold Humor, can produce the desired effect. And
especially they will be ready to maintain, that it is both an Absurd, and an
Incredible thing, that the Blood and Spirits being repelled, and driven back
toward the Bowels, by the Immersion of the Legs and Feet in Cold Water, and
being there heated, should return, and dispell the Cold Distemperature, and
Nummednesse of the same: and again, that on the contrary, both the Spirits and
the Blood, being in the same manner, and by the same Cold Water driven back,
and hindered from their return to the Part Affected, shall cure the said Feet,
when they have been any way hurt, and are thereby inflamed. And yet that both
these effects are wrought by this our Cold Water, if they please but to make
trial of the same, Experience it self (which is always the Inseparable
Companion of Reason) will make manifest unto them. Which very thing Cornelius
Celsus also considering, yet withal studying Brevity, where he writes of this
subject; he did not set down his Reasons, but left the business to the
Examination of others; according to that which is written: Quaerite, and
invenietis, seek, and ye shall find. Although notwithstanding I must confess
that I believe, that it has pleased Almighty God, though not in this case, yet
in some other, (as is Evident in the Plague, and other Pestilential Diseases)
not to reveal to Man the Occult Qualities of some things. For, it was
necessary, that nothing should be Prefect, but Himself only.

And I believe, it will seem Ridiculous, to many, rather then Credible, that by
the said Application of Cold Water, or by the Immersion of the part Affected
into the same, such Wounds as I have before spoke of, with great Swellings and
Bruises, may be perfectly, and more safely cured, then by any other
Chirurgicall way of Operation; and that, by the First Intention, without
bringing the same to Suppuration, and without any Pain, Impostumation or
Erysipelas caused in the part affected; concerning which, I understand, I have
been censured by some, that yet never made trial of this New way of Practice,
but extremely decry this Truth, (with though themselves are ignorant of, is yet
very certainly known to others:) and, laughing extremely at it, demand how it
is possible, that so excellent a Remedy, and so ready at hand as this is,
against so Common, and so Dangerous Disasters, could ly so long hid, and
concealed from the world, to the so great detriment, and prejudice of Mankind.
Whom notwithstanding (that they may not any longer envy the Public Good, and
seem to look after their own Private Gain only; and may forbear by striving
against the Truth, to draw any more scandal upon themselves,) I do here
assure, that I have found by Experience, in very many cases, where there have
been Great Swellings accompanying the Wounds, that by the Application of the
said Cold Water to the Part, or the Immersion of it in the same, for a good
while together, as has before been showed, though this were done the next day
after the hurt received, yet the Swelling has fallen, and the Sore, being
cleared from all Purulent Matter, has closed up within three days, and the
Part Affected has recovered its former strength again. Yet notwithstanding I
advise people, (though, I confess, I have found it to succeed well enough,
where I have had to do) that they would not be too rashly confident in this so
Late Application of the same.

Neither can they want Arguments, with which they may furnish themselves out of
the Best Authors, to prove, that Letting of Blood, Purging Medicines, and
Vomits, and of good use in the Cure of the Plague: all which, notwithstanding,
in those Plagues that have reigned in our times, both here, and in other
places, and in that which began to rage again at Gaunt, in the beginning of
the year 1647. and ended the year following, I never approved of, but always
held them for suspected, and dangerous. And where either a Pleurisy,
Peripneumony, or Quinsey, accompanying the Pestilential Disease, seems to
require the Opening of a Vein; the Skilful Physician may order matters as he
shall think fit, with all due care: and yet after all his care, in so desperate
a Complication of Diseases, the may have very good cause to doubt that none but
an unhappy success is like to follow; unless, that saying of Hippocrates may
here have any place, where he says, that Probably, nothing is Impossible to
Nature. I confess I shall willingly assent to those Authors, who though they
will not allow of these Evacuations, while the Venom of the Plague is strong
upon the Patient, do yet, when the said Venom is pretty well overcome, and when
the sick parties strength is not too much weakened, admit of Bleeding, in very
Plethorical Bodies: and allow likewise of Purges, where the Body digests ill,
and abounds with Putrid Humors: yet for as much as the Disease is not to be
reckoned, now, to be within the Compass of the Plague; and also because those,
that usually attend upon Infected Persons, are not of sufficient Capacity for
the Managing of these Matters, I have therefore passed them by in silence.

I know besides very well, that I have rendered my self Obnoxious to the
complaints of Impatient Patients, especially in the Gout; who while they desire
to have that removed which cannot possibly be removed will break out (together
with the Carping Zoili of our age, of whom there is no end) into I know not
what scoffing, and abusive Language. Yet I must desire these Gentlemen to
remember, that I always excepted al Knotty, and Inveterate Gouts; which, as
sometimes we cannot assuage the pains in them according as we could wish, so
much less can we cure them totally, by the drinking of Cold Water: as neither
by the Opening of a Vein, the Pain, although it be not an Inveterate one, is
assuaged; so long as the Next Antecedent Cause is too strongly settled in the
Neighboring Veins, and is also diffused far about through the other Veins.
However it is sufficient, that it is most evidently sometimes of good use, as
also that Cold Water, both in this Disease of the Gout, and in other Cases
also, has done very much good; where whatsoever other Medicines were taken,
did very little, or none at all: and besides that in has seldom failed of
asswaging the pain of the same, and has sometimes quite taken it away; nay,
and has utterly exterminated, and banished it from the Patient, and that in a
short space of time too; especially, where the Opening of a Vein has been
joined with it.

Neither did I ever say, that we were to expect a happy success always from it:
in like manner as we know, that such as are sick of a Dysentery, may begin too
late to to make use of VVhey, and Purgations of Rhubarb: especially when the
Small Guts are very much corroded, or when the Great Guts, being too much
fretted by the Sharpness of Humors, begin to putrify, and are inclined toward
being gangrened.

And so likewise, when in the Plague, at the very beginning of the Disease, the
Patient takes not a Sudorifical Preservative; and when need so requires, does
not repeat the same: or perhaps, when, by reason of some Impediment
intervening, it cannot be administered, or if it be administered, yet it may be
overmastred by the Venom of the Disease, which may be so strong, and powerful,
as that by its excessive Malignity, it can take away a man in a quarter of an
hours space. So that I would have all men take notice, that I never intended
to maintain that this Terrible, and Dangerous Enemy, was not so fearful a
thing, as it is commonly thought to be; but I rather maintain the contrary, and
say that it is really such. All that I intended to insinuate, was only this;
that if it were taken at the very beginning of it, it was much easier to be
overmastered, and cured, then most people imagine, supposing there be nothing
to hinder the putting in practice of our Medicines: as I have found by most
diligent observation, and by the faithful relation of many, that (by Gods
blessing) have been most happily preserved by taking such Preservatives, and
other things, as I have prescribed; especially, at the beginning of the
Disease; wherein, though absent, I took all the care that could be, that they
might be rightly and duly administered.

As my purpose was likewise to publish to the world, by what Preservatives, and
Cordials, and by observing of what Regiment of Health, very many, who in
several places where the Pestilence raged extremely, attended upon, and were
continually in the house with those that were infected, though they themselves
had never before been sick of the same, nor had been ever before accustomed to
this so subtly-infecting an Air, yet (by Gods mercy) were miraculously, and to
the admiration of all people, preserved, and kept from any the lest infection.
And among these, and other the like things, I could not but give notice here,
of how great use, and indeed how Necessary in this case Wine Vinegar is; as the
drinking of Whey is, in the Griping Flux of the Belly; and the Drinking, and
Outward Application of Cold Water also is, in the Gout, and many other Pains
in the Body,

The great force of which Three Liquors, and the Marvelous Virtues that God
has endowed them with, for the Good, and Preservation of Mankind, when I had
by most Exact, and Diligent inquiry into, and a long making use of the same
with good success, been most certainly assured of; I at length resolved to
write of the same, and publish them to the world in Print, in some certain
small Treatise, concerning the Disease called Cholera; and concerning Epidemial
Diseases, and their Symptoms, and touching the Biting of a Mad Dog. Which I
the more willingly did, because I conceaved, that the use of these Three
Liquors may not only be entrusted to such, as are not at all skilled in Our
Profession, but rather ought indeed to be commended unto them; if there be any
regard to be had to Humane Infirmity, or Necessity, if not to Mutual Charity:
seeing that it so falls out for the most part, that either a Physician cannot
be had so timely, as is requisite in these Diseases; or perhaps, if the Disease
reign hot in the place, will not come when he is called: and also because that
in the curing of those Diseases for which the use of these Liquors are
designed, and in the administering of the same, all people may have (though not
an exact, yet) a Confused knowledge at lest, and such as is in some sort
sufficient for the business in hand; so that their administering of the same (to
speak clearly) cannot but do very much good: and especially when the Urgency
of the Necessity requires the same, and cannot admit of any Delay; wherein
there would be, for the most part, most Evident, and most Present Danger; as
Ovid to this purpose well alludes, where he says: Opprime, dum nova sunt,
subiti mala semina Morbi;
Et tuus incipiens ire resistit equus.
Nam mora dat vires.


In English thus.

Acute Diseases first assault restrain;
Whilst, setting out, horses obey the Rein.
Delay adds Strength.
And as the same Poet elsewhere speaks no less pertinently, in these Verses.

Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Which may be rendered thus.

Resist at first: the Cure's applied too late,
When delayed sickness brings approaching Fate.
Which Verses, if any where, they have place chiefly here, in the business of
the Plague, and in such other Contagious Diseases, where the Venom of the same
is so extremely fierce, as that it in an Instant diffuseth it self through the
body; and so likewise in the Griping Flux of the Belly; in which cases there is
no wearing out, and Digesture of the Venom by length of time, to be expected.
In like manner as I my self, being taken with this disease in the Seventy Sixth
year of my Age (at which time also I was busy in putting this present Treatise
to the Press,) perceaving, toward the Evening, some Bloody Corrosion of the
Guts fallen upon me; I did not at all defense the business, but resolved
presently to fall to taking of Physic, (though it were then late at night) to
purge out the Acrimonious Humor: and I drank as much Whey as possibly I could;
and that with so good success, as that I quite freed my self from it in the
space of four and twenty hours. And the same success have I had, in the same
disease, two other several times, by using the self same course.

And I would have people also take notice, that it was not in vain, that in my
French Treatise I gave my Judgment, that in the Jaundise, at the very
beginning of the Disease, the Patient was to have Purging Medicines administered
unto him; which are to be repeated also for four, or five days together, if
need so require; that the Conjunct Cause it self also, which being let alone,
grows hard, and in time too sometimes petrifies, may be driven out of its
Bladder, into the Guts. And to the end that men may the easier believe how
Necessary this Festination is in these diseases, I shall here, for the greater
benefit of the Public, add, that I my self, about some fifteen days before
the aforesaid Dysentery seized upon me, was evidently taken with the Jaundise;
before the appearing whereof, I had a Griping Pain in my Belly; whereupon
immediately followed the Whiteness of its Excrements, together with a very
Thick Urine, which also had a Yellow Froth floating on the Top of it: all
which, together with the diffusion of Choler all over the body, as appeared by
the Yellowness of my Skin, clearly showed that it was the Jaundise. Yet
notwithstanding, (by Gods blessing,) though I was of so great an Age, I
perfectly recovered from this so Dangerous a Disease, within five days after it
seized upon me; after I had purged for three days together, and that in a much
greater abundance, then many men, if they were of my age, would be able to bear.

And in like manner as in Wounds, which are best and most safely cured by the
First Intention, the Ripening of the Purulent Matter is by all means to be
prevented; so neither in the Disease, called Cholera, are people to protract
the time, and expect the Digesture, and wearing out of the Malignant Humor;
which, being taken in time, according as I have before prescribed, may easily
be overmastered, by giving the party Theophrastus his Pill, to the quantity of
four, or five Grains; and so the patient would by this course as speedily be
cured, as otherwise, without it, he would be lost. And hence it is, that many
liken this Disease to a Battle in War, in which, (as Horace says,) Aut cita
mors venit, aut Victoria laeta.

That is: We soon are lost;
Or Conquest boast.


And for this reason the Dutch call this Disease, in their Language, Kuyters
Zieckte, that is, The Horseman Disease.

For very good reason therefore have we commended the Use of the aforesaid
Three Liquors; seeing that, besides that by reason of their Excellent Virtue in
the aforesaid Diseases, they are far to be preferred before any other the most
precious Medicines that are; they are also agreeable to the Palate, and are
every where to be had, as well by Poor, as Rich. For Water is accounted a thing
of no Value at all; and as for Vinegar, and Whey, they bear no high price
neither; and besides, because that those Diseases, in which the use of these
Liquors is chiefly commended, are very frequent every where; and are so common,
as that they make our Physicians the greatest part of their business.

Neither would I have any to think, that, the virtues of these Three Liquors,
and especially of Water, and Whey are to be confined within the bounds of the
aforesaid Diseases only: For, what skillful Physician is there that will not
allow, that in the Heat of the Liver, a Feverish Distemper, this Whey mixed
with the Juice of Citron may be administered for a Julip, and for an Apozeme,
the same Whey, or Water, decocted with Sorrel, or Succory, or the like Herbs,
and with some of the Opening Roots, or other things, of like quality, may be
administered? if so be the Physician perceaves that there is any Obstruction,
and that the same requires this course: into so much whereof as is strained out
for use, a little Sugar may be put in to make it the more pleasant to the taste;
all which Medicines may easily, and for little charge be procured by poor
folks; and may with as great Advantage, and Ease be made by others too. For
there is no need of any great number of Ingredients; which, by reason of the
Diversity of their Qualities, prove oftentimes a hindrance to each other. For
these things are enough, that are proper, and are of Virtue sufficient for the
effecting of the business, when they are prepared, and administered in a
sufficient Quantity. Nay, Whey taken alone, or Water taken alone, do many times
abundantly satisfy the Expectation of the Physician: as Gulen also tells us,
that a lusty draught of Cold Water is a most present Remedy in a Burning
Fever. And, I confess, I my self had rather administer Whey alone in the
Griping Flux of the Belly, then to give it mixed with other ingredients that are
proper for the asswaging of the Acrimony of the Humors: neither do I approve of
putting into it so much as the lest quantity of Sugar, to render it the more
pleasant to the Taste; neither yet do I allow of the putting it into Ordinary
Clysters; least they should cause the same to work too much, and should
exasperate the Exulceration.

And here I shall now conclude, with this commendation of these Three Liquors;
and willingly submit both this Compendious Treatise, as also that which I wrote
in French, both of them in my own Plain, and Ordinary Style, to the Prudent
Judgment of the more Learned of our Profession, and to the Courteous Reader;
and for a Close of all shall profess, that I have faithfully, and Sincerely
written those things which I conceaved were the Truest; without any purpose in
the world of detracting from any one, from whom I dissent in Opinion; nor have
at all sought hereby after Fame. But my Only Design, and the drift of my
Writing has been, to consecrate both my self, and all my Endeavors, to the
Public Good; and I earnestly entreat the Reader, that he would accept of this
Work of Mine, such as it is, with the same mind that it was written; and would
vouchsafe to take in good part, and favorably interpret all things, as they
have been written by me; and that of what things have been by Me brought into
Common Practice, (though hitherto not made use of in these Cases) in those
common Diseases that so frequently befall Mankind, he would boldly adventure to
make due and seasonable Trial.

Vale and Fruere.
FINIS.
The Approbation of the Book.
THis Book, containing new, and most choice Physical Discourses and
Experiments, proved first by D. Hermannus vander Heyden, and now with very
happy success received into Practice by others also far and near; seeing it
has nothing in it that is contrary either to the Orthodoxal Faith, or to good
Manners, is worthy that it should be published to the world, and put into
Print, for the Benefit, and Advantage of all people. Dated at Gaunt, Mart. 9.
1649.

Nicholas Breydel, Licentiate in Divinity, Canon, and Chaunter of the Cathedral
Church of St. Bavo, and Licenser of Books for the Press.

A Rich Closet of Physical Secrets, Collected by the Elaborate pains of four
several able Physicians, and Digested together; to wit, The Child-bearers
Cabinet. A Preservative against the Plague and Small Pox. Physical Experiments
presented to our late Queen Elizabeth's own hands. With certain approved
Medicines, taken out of a Manuscript, found at the dissolution of one of our
English Abbeys, and supplied with some of his own Experiments, by a late
English Doctor. And are to be sold by John Saywell, at his Shop, at the sign of
the Greyhound in little Britain, without Aldersgate.


