VINDICIAE VERITATIS Or an Unanimous Attestation to Gods blessed Truth Revealed
in his WORD: Together with a serious Protestation against those
Church-desolating and Souldamning Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies, which of
late have come in like a flood upon our County and Kingdom: Especially against
a Toleration of them. Made in pursuance of the National Covenant, BY The
Ministers of the Gospel within the West Riding of the County of York, as a
Caution to their flocks, and Testimony to the world of their zeal for, and
love to, Christ's truth and Church.

Readily and Willingly Subscribed, April 6. 1648.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for LUKE FAVVNE, at the sign of the Parrot in
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXLVIII.

Vindiciae Veritatis. OR An Unanimous Attestation TO Gods Blessed Truth
Revealed by his WORD.
WE the Ministers of Christ, residing within the West Riding of the County of
York; seriously calling to mind the many wonderful mercies, and deliverances,
which God has vouchsafed in those latter years to this Church and Kingdom;
especially in freeing us from the insupportable yoke of the Prelatical
Hierarchy, and setting open a fair door of hope, to a full and through
Reformation, by means of this present Parliament, in pursuance of our National
Covenant; cannot but desire to be unfeignedly thankful to God, first, and then
to the Honorable Houses for all their pains, piety, prudence and fidelity
manifested therein: Yet we cannot but with sad and sorrowful hearts, weep, yea
(if it were possible) bleed over those inexpressible Calamities, which threaten
this poor distressed Church with speedy and inevitable ruin, by reason of the
many pernicious Errors, damnable Heresies, unparaleld Blasphemies, and more
then abominable Irreligion, and Atheism, which daily increase and spread
amongst us. Especially our hearts tremble, when we consider the desperate
attemps of those, who endeavor and plead for a Bloody Tenent preface
toleration (of all Consciences and worship, even Antichristian; Diametrically
opposite to the National Covenant, and that) which would entayl all these evils
upon us, and our posterity for ever.

Fearing therefore, by our sinful silence, to betray the Truth of God, which in
the worst of times has ever found some friends to own and assert it. And
having before our eyes

First, The Honor of God, which ought to be dearer to us then our own Exodus 32,
32 Rom 9.3
salvation.

Secondly, The preciousness of our peoples souls, Acts 20, 28
bought with no meaner price then the Blood of Christ, now in danger to be
subverted.

Thirdly, The strictness of our engagement by Covenant within our calling, to
endeavor the extirpation of Heresies, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever is
contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness

Fourthly, The express charge that lies upon all, earnestly to Jude verse 3
contend for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints, especially upon
Ezekiel 33, 7 Acts 20, 29
Ministers, to warn the people of their danger, to watch over their flocks
against false Teachers, and to hold Tit 1.9 (...) It notes an hold against a
contrary bold, when we have any thing in our hand that another would wrest from
us
fast the faithful Word.

Fifthly, The forwardness and zeal of Believers in all ages, that have
maintained the Truth of the Gospel, against all the assaults of the Devil, and
his Instruments, together with the late, fresh and pious 2 Cor 9, 2
example, of our dear Brethren the Ministers of Christ, within the Province of
London.

Sixthly, Our own 1 Timothy 5, 21
exemption from being partakers of other men's sins, that we may free our selves
both from the guilt of these reigning corruptions, and the Blood of souls.

Seventhly, And lastly, The sweet and comfortable Mat 10, 32
promise of our Lord and Savior, which he has made, to the confession of his
Name, and truth before men: We do freely give testimony, as follows;

1. We cannot but exceedingly check and blame our selves, with broken and
bleeding hearts, that we have been no more active and forward for God, in
promoting and advancing the happy begun Reformation of Religion, according to
our Covenant, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government. And also, that
we have so little appeared (out of the spheres of our rerespective
Congregations) against the many intolerable Errors, Blasphemies and Heresies,
which have daily increased whiles they should have been suppressed.

2. We do firmly believe, the holy Scripture given by Divine 2 Timothy 3, 16
inspiration, contained in the Canonical books of the Old and New Testament, to
be the 2 Pet. 1, 19 20, 21
undoubted Word of God; the supreme Judge in all Controversies of Religion,
from which there is no appeal: The most perfect Ephesians. 2, 20
rule of faith and obedience both in respect of Gods Worship, and the whole
conversation of man. To which, as nothing ought to be added, so from it nothing
ought to be Deuteronomy 4, 2 Rev 22, 18, 19
diminished.

3. Upon a diligent perusal of a Confession of Faith, and Catechism, presented
(as the humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines, then setting at Westminster)
to both Houses of Parliament, for their civil sanction: We cannot but
thankfully acknowledge their unwearied pains taken therein, notwithstanding the
many apparent difficulties they daily wrestled withal; heartily blessing God
for guiding them so by his Spirit into all truth; that as we do freely and
fully assent to the whole Doctrine of Faith therein contained, to be sound,
orthodox, clearly grounded upon the Word of God, and agreeable to the
Confessions of the Reformed Churches, (of all which we are abundantly
satisfied, and convinced in our Judgments and Consciences;) so we can
cheerfully submit our selves unto that Confession and Catechism, as a special
means to preserve Unity and Purity of Doctrine amongst us; earnestly imploring
they may receive the stamp of supreme Authority, for the nearer Conjunction of
the three Kingdoms, that we and our posterity after us, may as Brethren live in
peace and love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

4. Whereas it is undenyably evident, and more clear then the Sun at noonday;
that men of corrupt minds have broached and spread amongst us many Remonstrance
etc. by Borealis printed at London, 1648 page 8, 9 And Colemans reexamination,
page 10
unsound opinions, and monstrous Errors, both in word and writings, of which
those many dangerous and heretical books, (such as are Bests Mysteries against
the whole Trinity. Bidles twelve Arguments against the Diety of the Holy Ghost.
Comfort for Believers. Man's Mortality. Bloody Tenent. And Sparkles of Glory;
with many more commonly printed and published,) are lively, and never dying
Monuments to all posterity: We could not but sit down astonished, and wish our
heads were waters, and our eyes a fountain of tears, that we might weep day and
night for the spreading and growth of those Errors, Heresies and Schisms, which
by such an express, sacred and holy oath, our Kingdom is bound to extirpate. Oh
how are we ashamed, and blush to lift up our faces, either to God, or to any of
the Reformed Charches, when we consider, how God is notoriously blasphemed, by
being made the Author of Comfort for Believers. page 36
sin: The doctrine of the sacred An account to the Parliament by the Ministers
of Oxford, page 36, 7
Trinity of persons, in Unity of Essence horridly reproached, by those
hell-fetcht Vaal Best in his manuscript, presented by the Ministers at York to
the Lord Fairfax.
expressions of a three-headed Cerberus, Monstrum Biforme, Triforme, a
two-shap't, and three-form'd Monster, yea, stigmatized for Antichristian, and
the brand of the great Whore: The sacred Diety of the eternal Son of God
Account by Oxford Ministers. page 30
destroyed, and the whole work of our Redemption accomplished by his
Manifestation in the flesh clearly overthrown; in making Christ, who is truly
and really God-man in one person, (by the merit and satisfaction of whose death
and obedience imputed to us we are saved,) to be a mere Sparkles of Glory. page
203 205. 217
figure or example only in which God discovers to us grace and love; and in
making the Account by Oxford Mansters, page 32 ct 34. ct page 30. ct 41
Sparkles of Glory page 254, 255
Saints to be Christ. The Divine Authority of the Scriptures openly oppugned,
in being denied to be the Pilgrimage of Saints. page 4
Word of God, and any Sparkles page 245
binding rule to the Creature. The eternal Decree of God concerning Election
and reprobation decryed, as not fit to be Paul ^obsons book entitaled, Christ
the (...) not the Cause of the Law. page 7, 9
preached. The standing Sparkles page 30, 31, 232 245, 246
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, prayer, Sacraments, Lords day Sabbath, Law,
Gospel, Ministry, all razed to the very foundation; yea, the Church of Christ
on earth, and all Sparkles page 50 51 ^ by Oxford Ministers. p 13 14 ct; o
Sparkle, page 116 117
distinction of Church Officers utterly taken away, denied and destroyed: All
which Errors and Heresies, with many more particularized in a Catalogue, by our
Reverend Brethren the Ministers of London, in their Testimony to the Truth of
Jesus Christ, and multitudes of others, every way as horrid, too long to
enumerate, tend to the great dishonor of God, the insufferable reproach of the
Gospel, the dangerous undermining of Magistracy, and the unspeakable ruin of
thousands of souls, yea, and of all Religion; and will speedily and mortally,
like a Gangrene (if not timely prevented) eat out all faith, piety and peace,
both in Church and State. And yet (which most of all saddens our spirits) we do
not find any effectual means used by Authority to restrain and suppress them;
but on the contrary, the orthodox party in the Kingdom is discarded and
discountenanced, and notorious Sectaries and Seducers highly respected and
preferred among us.

Having therefore seriously weighed the miserable effects of the prevalency of
the Spirit of Errors and Infatuation, which has possessed so many in this
Kingdom, a woeful experiment whereof we have lately had in our own County, in
some acted by the spirit of delusion, to cast off all piety and natural
affection, in the wilful murder of their own Samuel Hutchenson, who dyed in
York Castle, about a work before the Assize held there; March 20. 1647. His
sister, and her husband both condemned for that fact, the one executed, and the
other reprieved.
Mother, pretending to kill the evil spirit in her. We do here before God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ (who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing,
and his Kingdom) for the discharge of our Calling and Consciences; declare to
the whole world our dislike, utter detestation, and abhorrency from our very
souls, not only of all Popery, Superstition, Profaneness, but of all those
Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies formerly mentioned, though 2 Cor. 11, 13 14, 15
gilded with never so specious pretenses of new light, all spirit, highest and
most glorious discoveries, and of whatsoever else is contrary to sound
doctrine, and the power of godliness 1 Timothy 6, 3
.

And further, we do in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, warn and charge our
several flocks and Congregations, as they tender the honor of God, and his
Gospel, and the salvation of their own souls; that they take heed, lest they be
2 Pet. 2, 2, et 3, 17
led away with the Error of the wicked, or follow the pernicious ways of them
that bring in damnable Heresies; and for this cause we how Ephesians. 3 44
our knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would Heb. 13, 9
Ephel. 4, 14
establish their and our hearts with grace, that we may not be carried about
with diverse and strange doctrines, but may stand 1 Cor 16, 13
fast in the faith, and be 2 These. 2, 17
established in every good word and work.

5. Upon the due Consideration of the many lamentable confusions and mischiefs
the poor Church of God groans under amongst us for want of Government, Ephesians.
1, 22 Heb 3 2, to 6
and the due Administration of Church Censures: And being fully assured; that
Jesus Christ, the King and head of his Church (faithful in that his house above
Moses) has in the Scriptures laid down a sufficient rule for the governing of
his Church now under the Gospel, 1 Cor 12, 28 2 Cor 2, 6 Mat 18, 17 1 Timothy ^, 17
1 These 5.12
we testify, that we are verily persuaded, in our Judgments and Consciences,
that the Government of the Church truly, and indeed Presbyterial, by Mat 18, 15
ad 21 Acts 14, 23 Titus 1, 5 Acts 11, 30 and Chap. 21, 18 1 Timothy 4, 14 Acts 15, 6
Presbyteries and Synods, in a way of subordination, practiced by the best
Reformed Churches, is that particular Government which is most agreeable to the
Word of God, and will mightily conduce to the removing of all Errors, Heresies,
Corruptions and Scandals in Life and Doctrine from amongst us.

And further, we thankfully acknowledge what the Parliament has done by their
several Ordinances, in reference to the settlement of this Presbyterial
Government in the Church, patiently waiting for the full establishment of it in
all the parts thereof. In the mean time, though we cannot find so complete a
rule in any, or all those Ordinances of Parliament for Church Government, which
have (at this distance) come to our hand, as we are persuaded in our judgments,
Isaiah 9, 6 Mat. 16, 19 2 Cor 10, 8 a Note, that by virtue of an Order from the
Committee for the 60000 l. per mensom, (according to a late Ordinance of
Parliament) the west riding of York shire was by the assistance of the
Ministers divided into ten Classical Presbyteries. April 6, 1648. But it seems
there is yet no return made of them, because they have not divided the whole
County
is held forth in the Word: And though we believe, that Jesus Christ (the
spiritual Monarch of his Church) upon whose shoulder alone the whole frame of
all Ecclesiastical Government and power is laid) has immediately from himself,
invested the sole power of dispencing all Church Censures, and in particular,
that of suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in his own
Church Officers, who from him alone receive their Office and Authority: Yet in
regard the necessities of putting Church Government into actual execution, are
so great, and pressing, we are resolved (if God permit) to a act in our places
for the exercising thereof upon the present Ordinances, so far as we apprehend
them consonant to the Word of God, and the will and appointment of Jesus Christ,
hoping and praying that God will reveal to all in Authority the whole truth
concerning Church Government, that their Consciences being fully satisfied
therein, what is wanting may be added, what is unwarrantable may be altered,
and that in Gods good time the Model of Church Discipline may be perfected, and
the whole Government fully settled, duly exercised, and conscientiously embraced
throughout all the Kingdom to the Glory of God, and recovery of this
languishing Church, out of all her dangerous Maladies and distempers.

In pursuance whereof, we shall, through the Grace of God, endeavor, that our
whole carriage may be such as becomes those who are ready to be responsible for
whatsoever we shall do, not only to the supreme Authority of this Kingdom, but
also, and chiefly to our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, the great sheephard of
the sheep, at his glorious coming and appearing, how we have taken heed to our
Ministry, which we have received in the Lord, in every thing to fulfill it. Col
4.17


6. When we call to mind the many dangerous plottings and practices of the
Ministers of Satan, to bring in a full and formal toleration; and being
convinced by woeful experience, that the present connivance at Errors, Heresies,
Sects and Schisms, (which swarm in the Kingdom) amounts to no less: We tremble
to think what such indulgence will produce, how quickly would a toleration
prove an inlet to Atheism, the bane of our peace, the ruin of Reformation, the
destruction of Religion, the grand provocative of Gods wrath against this Land,
to make us an hissing and astonishment to all Nations: And therefore we do from
our hearts abhor and protest against the toleration so much cried up in these
days, as contrary to the Scripture, Gal 1, 8, 9, and 5, 12 Rev. 2, 2, 20, v
and that which will undoubtedly un-Church, un-Parliament, and un-people us (if
God prevent not.) And as we cannot approve or allow of Independency or
Erastianism, so we are resolved by the Grace of God never to consent to the
toleration of Arrianism, Antitrinitarianism, Antinomianism, Antiscripturism,
Arminianism, Anabaptism, Enthusiasm, Familism, Libertinism, Socinianism,
Skepticism, or any other Heresies, Sects, or erroneous opinions whatsoever; but
to withstand the same by all lawful ways and means within our places and
callings, though to the loss of our Liberties, Estates, lives, and whatsoever
else may be dear unto us, all which we count not too dear to loose for Gods
Glory, Truth and Gospel.

7. Finally it cannot be unknown to the Reformed Churches abroad, that all the
three Kingdoms stand engaged by virtue of a solemn Covenant, sworn with hands
lift up to the most high God, sincerely, really and constantly through the
Grace of God, to endeavor in our several places the Reformation of religion in
the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government according to the Word of God, and example of the best Reformed
Churches. Which Covenant the Parliament did not only commend unto us by their
example, but command by their Authority to be taken by us, and our people: Yet,
as if all our other provocations were not sufficient to fill up the measure of
our sins, and bring wrath upon the Kingdom to the uttermost, Many takers of
this Covenant do now trample upon it; horrible A Pamphlet entitled, The
peoples and soldiers Observations on the Scotch Message November 5 1647 page 6
et 8
reproaches are cast upon it; sundry endeavors used to evade and elude the
true sense and meaning thereof: Yea, so far have some proceeded in their enmity
against it, as to labor by all means the extirpation of the Covenant name and
thing from amongst us, rather then of Heresy and Schism to which they are
engaged by it, that so England may become the grave, not only of all Gods
Truths, Ordinances, Mercies, Victories, Deliverances, but also of their own
Declarations, Protestations, Oaths and Engagements.

Wherefore, Nehem 9, 38 Ezekiel 17, 15 16, 18, 19
being sufficiently convinced of the lawfulness of entering the Covenant, and of
the sinfulness of violating it, we prefess our unfeigned desire to be humbled
for our own sins, and the sins of this Kingdom, especially, that we have not
endeavored a real Reformation, both personal and public, as we have
covenanted.

And to conclude, that we may not involve our selves in the guilt of wilful
perjury; We further profess and declare before God, his elect Angels, and the
whole world, that as at the first we did strike Covenant (as in the presence of
the Almighty God) without any equivocation, mental reservation, or
subordination to any politic interest in point of Church Reformation,
according to the common, plain, genuine, grammatical sense of it, so we are
still bound to perform the same, to the utmost of our power whilst we live,
without admitting any other sense to be put upon it, or permitting our selves
to be dis-engaged and absolved from it, by any power or persons here on earth
whatsoever.

Thus have we endeavored to discharge our consciences, in owning and asserting
the Truth, Cause, Government, and Covenant of our God, in warning our people of
those dangerous Sects, Heresies, Blasphemies that are so rife amongst us, in
protesting against the impious and boundless toleration of them; for which if
we be maligned, reproached, persecuted, we trust (by the grace of our good God)
that none of these things shall move us, Acts 20.24
neither shall we count our lives dear to our selves, so that we may finish our
course with joy, and the Ministry which we have received of the Lord Jesus to
testify the Gospel of the Grace of God.

Subscribed by us, April 6. 1648.
Edward Hill Minister of the Gospel at Creston. Elka. Wales Minister of the
Gospel at Pudsey. Rob. Todd Minister of the Gospel at Leeds. Hu. Everard
Minister of the Gospel at Worsbrough. Rich. Calvert Minister of the Gospel at
Selby. Edward Richardson Minister of the Gospel at Rippon. Joshua Witton
Minister of the Gospel at Thornhil. Will. Clarkson Minister of the Gospel at
Addle. Tho. Binkbeck Minister of the Gospel at Ackworth. Jos. Ferret Minister
of the Gospel at Pontefract. Dan. Clark Minster of the Gospel at Kirkburton.
Christopher Richardson Minister of the Gospel at Kirk-Heaton. Alexander
Robertson Minister of the Gospel at Sherburn. David Barnes Minister of the
Gospel at Brotherton. Hen. Moorehouse Minister at Castleford. Hen. Horncastle
Minister of the Gospel. Nath. Rathband Minister de York. Ste. Charman Minister
of the Gospel at Himsworth. Tho. Calvert Minister of York. Theod. Hering
Minister of York. Tho. Hawkesworth Minister at Hunslet. Joseph Bowde Minister
of the Gospel at Leeds. Ric. Foster Minister at Holbeck. Tho. Chapman Minister
at Denton. J. Fisher Minister de Sheffield. Immanuel Knutton Minister of
Ecclesefield. Samuel Kendal Minister of Edlington. Christopher Amgil Minister
of Treeton. Luke Clayton Minister of Rotheram. Thomas Clark Minister at
Rotheram. Tho. Bosvile Minister of Braythwel. John Bridges Minister at
Sheffield. John Cart Minister at Hawsworth. John Spofford Minister of the
Gospel at Silkston. Nathanael Cradock Minister at Wakefield. John Noble Pastor
of Kirkesmeaton. Timothy Denison Minister at Normanton. William Hawdon Minister
at Brodsworth. John Johnson Minister at Methley. William Meek Minister of the
Gospel. Hugh Jennings Minister of the Gospel at Water-Friston.
FINIS.

