A TREATISE OF THE Institution, Right Administration, and Receiving of the
SACRAMENT OF THE Lord's Supper.

Delivered in XX. SERMONS at St Laurence-Jury, London.

By the late Reverend and Learned Minister of the Gospel Mr Richard Vines
sometime Master of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Thomas Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-door, 1657.

Upon the Sight of Mr VINES His Posthumous TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENT, October
18. 1656.
WHile thou grew'st here, thy fruit made glad
The hearts that sin and death made sad:
Lest we should surset of thy fruit,
Thy life retired to the Root,
Desiring with us first to keep,
A Passover before thy sleep;
Weary of Earth, thou took'st thine ease,
Passing into the Land of Peace:
The threatened evil we foresee,
But hope to hide our selves with thee.
Though thou art gone, while we must fight,
We Will call it Victory, not Flight.
When God had taken up this VINE,
We thought to taste no more its Wine,
Till in the Land of Salem;s King,
We drink it new, even from the Spring:
But unexpectedly we find,
Some Clufters which are left behind:
This Mantle from thy Chariot fell;
We know it by the pleasant smell:
Who know's but from this little seed,
Some more such fruitful Vines may breed?
The Tree of Death beau's precious fruit,
Though in the Earth it have no root.
Dear Brother, thou art gone before,
And I a wretch wait at the door:
Sin does not only keep me thence,
But makes me loath to go from hence:
When Christ has healed me of this sin,
And made me fit; he will let me in:
Till then, may I but in a Glass
See what you see with open face;
Sure it will raise my heavy Soul,
And these distrustful fears control!
And make me willing to be gone,
As knowing whither, and to Whom!
If Time be Nothing, as some say,
You that were with us yesterday,
Are with us still; or we with you;
Which is the better of the two.
The Soul imbodied in those lines,
Does make us say, that, This is VINES:
And if our hearts with you could be;
Our Lord would say, that there are we.
But as according to desert,
The Heavens have got thy better part;
And left us but some of the Wine,
Whilst they have taken up the Vine:
So we look up, and wait, and pray,
And yet still feel we live in Clay.
Here we are keeping sin's account,
While some small sparks do upward mount,
Crying [How long, Holy and True!]
Till we are taken up to you.
Thus also we must follow Love,
To find our HEAD, and LIFE above.
He that is made by the New Birth,
A BURGESS of the Church on Earth,
And then by Faith can rise so high,
In Divine LOVE to Live and Die,
Shall be translated to your soil,
Removed from sin, and fear, and toil;
And from this HoUse of Worms and Moles,
Unto that Element of Souls.
Where every Branch becomes a Vine;
And where these Clods like Stars will shine:
God is not there known by the Book:
You need not there the Pruning Hook:
There you have Wine without the Press;
And God his Praise without Distress.
There we shall find our Eyes and Sight,
When we come to our Head and Light.
The Kernel is where you now dwell,
And we here strive about the Shell:
You have the Reconciling Light,
Who are past Faith, and live by sight:
No wonder then if you are One,
When Peace from Earth is almost gone:
We crowd about a little spark,
Learnedly striving in the Dark;
Never so bold as when most Blind;
Run fastest when the Truth's behind.
No Heresies with you are sown:
There Is not a Truth but all will own:
A mixture we get here by rote;
And Error keep's the major Vote.
There Pride and Faction cannot enter.
There Is no Division in the Center.
The Saints there play not Satan's part;
They Use not any Carnal Art,
Their Righteous Brethren to defame;
And by untruths to blot their Name.
There you are Comely, and not Black:
Each One has All, yet None do lack.
What sin or smart can you befall,
Where SELF's put off, and God is All?
Look up and see, now VINES is gone;
Are not the Stars the more by One?
No: but One fewer, in our sight;
For we have forfeited his Light.
And such a One, as all do miss,
Save those whose pleasure darkness is.
And who can Number Stars above;
When Saints so fast to Heaven remove?
If but three such in all our times,
As USHER, GATAKER, and VINES,
Were taken hence by fatal sleep;
Three Nations should consent to weep.
And if an Age this loss repair;
The Church will think it very fair.
They shine in Glory now to God,
Who shined and burned here to a Clod.
May such a sinful Worm as I,
Aspire and ascend so high?
That Kingdom's mine in Hope and Right,
Which you possess by Love and sight.
That God, that Christ has loved me,
Whose Glory blessed VINES does see:
We were both washed in one stream:
And both enlightened by one beam:
One Garment also did us cloth:
At once One Pulpit held us both;
Much more One Church: for we agreed,
Both in One Method, and One Creed.
One Evil we did both condole,
As animated by One Soul:
Me think's where thou art, I should be;
Although the lowest in degree.
Though thou art gone, and I am here;
Yet is my Passing-Hour near:
Time is at work both Night and Day,
Even when it seems to delay:
My Grave and Coffin are at hand:
My Glass has but a little Sand:
Now I am writing; and anon
They'se also say of me, He Is gone.
Then I shall see the shining face,
Which is the Glory of your place.
But lest in vain I hope and run,
Lord perfect what thou have begun!
Richard Baxter.

TO THE READER.
THe Posthumous Works of Learned Writers, like fatherless Children, are exposed
to many wrongs and injuries; Yea such has been the fraud of some Impostors in
the Church, that they have taken away the live* children of famous men, and put
their dead ones in the room; Hence are those spurious and supposititious Books
which have wandered up and down with their counterfeit Passes. That therefore
no suspicious thoughts may possess thee concerning this Treatise, which is here
published under the Name of that Learned and Eminent man Mr Vines, I do upon
sure and unQuestionable Evidences give my public Testimony, that it is his
proper and genuine Work, printed by the Copy that was written with his own hand.

Thy Well-wisher ANTHONY BURGESS.
Sutton-Coldfield, Sep. 20. 1656.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Passover or Paschal Lamb; It Is signification, and the Analogy
or Resemblance between it, and Christ our Passover. CHAP. II. Of Errors and
Corruptions in the Church; How soon they spring up; When they are a ground of
Separation, and when not; That this Ordinance must be suitable to Gods
Institutions: And the Communicants must be suitable to this Ordinance. CHAP.
III. That the Lord Jesus is the Author of this Sacrament. CHAP. IV. Of the time
of this Sacraments Institution, and of Judas betraying Christ. CHAP. V. Why
Christ deferred the instituting of the Supper until the night in which he was
betrayed. CHAP. VI. Of the Outward or Elements of this Ordinance of the
Supper. CHAP. VII. Some Observations upon the precedent Discourses. CHAP. VIII.
Of the Real Presence. CHAP. IX. Of the inward things signified or represented
in this Supper. CHAP. X. A fonr-fold Exhortation from the premises. CHAP. XI.
Of Christ's Mandate or Charge for the celebration of this Ordinance in
Remembrance of him. CHAP. XII. Of doing this in remembrance of Christ; The
Properties of this Memorial. CHAP. XIII. A Lamentation for the neglect of this
Ordinance. CHAP. XIII. How much it concerns Ministers to Teach, and all to
Learn the true meaning of this Ordinance. CHAP. XIV. The great Business that
lies upon the Communicant, as often as he eats this Bread and drinks this Cup, he
shows the Lords Death. CHAP. XV. The Lord's Supper is an itterable Ordinance.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Continuance of this and other Gospel Ordinances in the
Church. CHAP. XVII. Of Worthy and Unworthy Receiving of the Lord's Supper. CHAP.
XVIII. The Uses which are to be made of the two last Theses. CHAP. XIX. What
must be done where Discipline cannot be executed for want of Administrators.
CHAP. XX. Whether a Godly man lawfully may, or ought to stand as a Member of,
and hold Communion in the Ordinances of God with such a Congregation as is mixed
(as they call it) that is, where men visibly scandalous in Life and
Conversation are mingled with the Good in the Participation and Use of Divine
Ordinances? Or, Whether this Mixture of Heterogeneals do not pollute the
Ordinances, and the Communion to the Godly, so as they are concerned to
separate from such Communion? CHAP. XXI. Whether the Lords Supper be a
Converting Ordinance? CHAP. XXII. Of Worthy and Unworthy Receiving, with some
Cautions to prevent mis-judging our selves in the Case. CHAP. XXIII. Of Worthy
Receiving, etc. CHAP. XXIV. That a Godly man may receive the Sacrament
unworthily. CHAP. XXV. Of the Graces which are to be exercised and set on work
in the Use of this Sacrament. CHAP. XXVI. Motives to quicken Endeavors to a fit
or worthy Participation of this Ordinance. CHAP. XXVII. False and insufficient
Qualifications for the Receiving of this Sacrament. CHAP. XXVIII. The Fruit and
Benefit of worthy Receiving. CHAP. XXIX. The Sinfulness of Eating and Drinking
unworthily. CHAP. XXX. The CaUse of this Sin, Viz* Not discerning the Lords
Body. CHAP. XXXI. The Aggravations of the Sin of unworthy Receiving. CHAP.
XXXII. The Danger of this Sin. CHAP. XXXIII. Of Examination in order to this
Sacrament.
The Bookseller to the READER.
THis Treatise was very fairly writ by the Reverend Author Mr Richard Vines
now with God, and perfected for the Press with his own Hand; after which a
great part of it was lost, and carried by a stranger that took it up; thirty
miles off, which yet (by a good Providence of God) was brought to his own hands
again, to his great rejoicing, and I hope the Churches great benefit, which
seems to be the design of that unexpected Providence, now that it is made
public. He omitted to divide it into Chapters and Sections (for the pleasure
of the Reader) which notwithstanding is now done, together with the Contents of
every Chapter, and of most of the Sections, which I thought good to certify,
lest any expressions therein should seem unsuitable to the Authors own Genius,
and derogatory to his worth.

A TREATISE OF THE Right Institution, Administration and Receiving of the
SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SUPPER.
CHAPTER I. Of the Passover or Paschall-Lamb; Its signification, and the
Analogy or Resemblance between it and Christ our Passover.
1 COR. 5. 7, 8. For Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let
us keep the Feast, not with old leven, etc.
notion of a Sacrament in general, and then to descend to particular
Sacraments, which we call Baptism and the Lords Supper in their order, But the
Field is large and the compass great, and therefore I begin where the Lords
Supper it self began, and therefore I begin where the Lords Supper it self
began, and that is at the Passover, at the death whereof, and out of the ashes
of it, this Sacrament of ours like another Phoenix did arise, for our Lord at
his last Passover called (...) his dying Passover, did institute and ordain
this, which is to live and remain till he come again, and which Scaliger and
others have Observed, the very materials of our Sacramental Supper were taken
out of the Paschall Supper, for that very bread which the Master of the Family
Used of custom (not by any Scripture-command) to bless and give to the
fraternity, saying, Holachma degnania, (...), This is the bread of affliction
which the Fathers did eat in Egypt, and that Cup which he blessed and gave to
them to drink called the Cup of the hymn, or Cos hallel, becaUse the hymn
followed after and closed all; That bread, and that Cup, did Christ according
to the rite severally bless and give, saying, This is my body, This Cup is the
New Testament in my blood, and so he put a new Superscription or signification
upon the old metal, and let all blind and bold Expositors know, that if they
expound not many phrases and things in the New Testament out of the old Records
of Jewish writings or customs, they shall but fancy and not expound the Text
as may be confirmed, says Scaliger sexcentis argumentis by very many arguments.

In handling of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper I shall select such practical
and preparative doctrine as is necessary for your knowledge that ye may discern
the Lords body, and not be guilty of it, and for your practice that you may
examine your selves, and not eat and drink unworthily: For if I should lanch
out into controversies, there would be no end; There has been more paper
written upon those six syllables, but five in English, This is my body, then
would contain a just and large Commentary upon the whole Bible.

I begin with the Passover which was the second (for Circumcision was the
first) ordinary standing Sacrament of the Jewish Church, beginning at their
going forth out of Egypt, and continuing till the Death of Christ, when the
Lords Supper did commence or begin, and so displaced it; The Passover,
signified what should be the Lords Supper, what is fulfilled in Christ; In the
Passover, were represented the Sufferings and Death of Christ by a Lamb slain
roasted with fire; In the Supper, by bread broken, and wine poured forth. The
outward symbols or signs differ; But Christ is the same under both; As
Circumcision theirs, baptism ours, are different signs and rites, but the
inward Circumcision and Regeneration both one; Theirs were both bloody
Sacraments, for the blood of Christ was to be shed, ours unbloudy, for the
blood is shed, and our English well translates the word Passover, the Greek
and Latin keep the word Pascha, which gave some occasion to derive it from the
Greek (...) to suffer a mistake; The word is Pesach, from Pasach, which is to
leap or pass over: For when Israel after long servitude in Egypt was on wing
to be gone, God commanded them in their several Families to kill Seh a Lamb or
kid, to roast it whole, to eat it within doors that night, to sprinkle the side
and upper door-posts with the blood, not the threshold propter reverentiam and
significationem, Christ's blood must not be trampled on, and so doing they
should be safe from the destroying Angel that rode circuit that night to kill
all Egypts firstborn, but he past over all the hoUses of Israel sprinkled with
blood, and hence the name Passe-over the Etymon whereof is given by God
himself, Exodus 12. 27. We have the kernel in this shell, the marrow of this
bone, a Passover as well as they, but ours is Christ, our Passover is Christ,
says the Text.

Passover Christ is or was sacrificed for us; Our Passover Christ was a true
Sacrifice, but whether their Passover was a Sacrifice or no, it is in
Question: The Papists swallow it greedily, hoping thereby to prove our Supper
to be both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament as their Passover (they say) was, but
there are others both Lutheran and Calvinist, as Gerald. in harmon. Rivet on
Exodus 12. that do not yield the Passover a proper Sacrifice, though it be so
called Exo. 12. 27. It is the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover, for the Greek
word (...), and the Hebrew Zabach are sometimes taken generally for mactare,
when there is no Sacrifice, and they find in Egypt at the first Passover no
Priest but the head of the Family, or (...), no Altar, no offering of the Lamb
to God, no expiation, nor is it necessary that it should be a Sacrifice to type
a Sacrifice, for the Serpent on the Pole signified Christ crucified, and so the
Passover as a Sacrament may figure out a Sacrifice, as our Supper is the
commemoration of a Sacrifice, but not a Sacrifice; On the other hand Calvin and
others, the Jewish Writers and many from them do hold it to be a Sacrifice and
a Sacrament, for the Scripture calls it Sacrifice, and this blood is shed at
first by the Pater-familia's that was a Priest (no other being yet consecrated)
in after times by the Priests or Levites, and the blood brought to the Altar,
as it was blood shed to a religious end, a blood preservative from destroying
Angels, and therefore a proper Sacrifice: What shall we say? The difference
between a Sacrifice and a Sacrament.
I Will promise you not to puzzle you with controversies and disputes, for I had
rather set meat before you which you may eat, then hard bones to gnaw upon; The
truth is, a Sacrifice is something offered up to God by men, a Sacrament is
offered and given to man by God to be eaten or Used in his Name, and so that
part of the offering which is offered up to God may be called a Sacrifice, and
that part eaten or Used by man a Sacrament, the very body and blood of Christ
was a Sacrifice, no Sacrament: The bread and wine as Used are a Sacrament no
Sacrifice, The Passover was the figure of a true Deuteronomy. 16. 5.
Sacrifice, Christ and we may call it so, becaUse the Scripture does: It
follows (...) Let us keep the Feast, What is that? Ye shall find that after
the Passover Lamb was eaten the next day began the Feast, Numb. 28. 16, 17.
and the Passover is called Feast, too, Exodus 12. 15. etc. and that continued
seven days, kept in great festivity and solemnity, but with unleavened bread,
the Apostle alludes hereunto, Our Passover is sacrificed, therefore let us
henceforth, etc. We that have received the sprinkling of blood, and eaten his
flesh by faith, live all our days in a holy rejoicing and thanks*giving, which
is a continual Feast, and let us cast out the incestuous Corinthians out of
our Society, for he is a leven, ver. 6, 7. and let us purge out of our selves,
malice, wickedness, etc. For they are leven, ver. 8. that we may be a holy
Congregation, and a holy people, and so the argument of the Apostle stands
thus, from the example of the Old Passover, Those for whom Christ the
Passover is sacrificed ought as holy Congregations and holy people to be
unleavened with sin and wickedness, and to walk before God in an unleavened
sincerity, but for us Christ the Passover is sacrificed, therefore let us keep
the Feast, etc.

I have explained the words, and now we shall consider this Passover two ways.

1. As a Sacrifice or figure of a Sacrifice, and so it refers to Christ our
Passover, Christ is sacrificed for us.

2. As a Sacrament, and so it relates to us, and shows us our duty upon that
Sacrifice, (...) Let us keep the Feast, The Sacrifice is given for us, the
Sacrament is given to us: From the first,

Our Passover is Christ sacrificed for us.
Our Passover is Christ sacrificed for us, We have a Passover, but it is
Christ sacrificed: And here before I show the Analogy or resemblance between
the Passover and Christ, we shall note three or four things.

Israel had Christ as well (though not so clear) as we, 1 Cor. 10. 4. The Rock
that followed our Fathers in the Wilderness was Christ, the Passover was
Christ, the personal Types such as Isaac on the Wood, the real Types as their
bloody Sacrifices were Christ; He was then in his swaddling clouts swathed up in
shadows and types, and not naked; as now Gal. 3. 1. those Types being
anatomized, unbowelled are full of Gospel, full of Christ, the death of Christ
pecus prosunt quam fuit, says Bernard de coena; Christ is the marrow in the
bone, the kernel in the shell, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever,
the sum and sweet of all Ordinances, therefore those that say they were
filled with temporal promises, but had no spiritual, derogate too much from
them as that they were Swine filled with husks, and speak a wondrous Paradox;
that those that had so much faith, Heb. 11. should have no Christ, we give them
the right hand of fellowship, and they were the elder brother, yet we have the
double portion.

Christ our Passover, that is, our Paschall Lamb, which is also called the
Passover, Exodus 12. 31. Kill the Passover, Now the Passover properly was the
Angels passing over the Israelites hoUses, and not the Lamb, but we must learn
to understand Sacramental phrases, the sign called the thing signified, the
figure called the thing figured, The Rock was Christ; Christ our Passover,
that is, paschal Lamb, Circumcision called the Covenant, Gen 17. 13. My
Covenant shall be in your flesh, this will be allowed in every place but one,
and that is this one, This is my body, For the Lutheran stands up for a
corporal presence under the Signs, The Papist for a change of the Bread and
Wine into Christ's body and blood; No conferences, no disputes, no
condescensions will satisfy them, and yet we say very fairly, the very body of
Christ born of the Virgin, that died on the Cross, that sits in heaven, is
present in this Sacrament, but not in the Bread or Wine, but to the faithful
Receiver, not in the Elements but to the Communicants, but all this will not
serve turn; These two Prepositions Con and Trans have bred more jarres, and
cost more blood since they were born (and there is neither of them in this
caUse six hundred years old) then can be well imagined.

Egyptian slavery, and their deliverance, and so they were commanded, but of
Christ not a syllable; It entered not into them that a Lamb roasted should figure
the Messiah, as they had formed him in their thoughts, and so they held the
Passover as a (...) looking backward, but as a Type looking forward, no
knowledge except the faithful had some glimpse of it, and this is the great
fault of men in all Sacraments, they mind not the inwards of a Sacrament, nor
look for the kernel, they did so, and we also, not discerning the Lords body,
is not that it which makes us guilty of his body and blood, there is in all
Sacraments res terrena and res coelestis, as Irenaeus. Earthly men see the
earthly part, they eat, they drink, It feeds not, they eat shells, the inwards
within the bone are marrow, Christ; Christ set spiritual food before our
bodies, viz. ayery, set corporal before the soul, and you illude both, says
Parisiensis, de Euchar. sub finem.

Ye show the Lords death till he come, this is the sight which a sinful soul
would see, this is the comfortable spectacle, to see the price paying, the
ransom laying down, the thing in doing; Hence he draws the hope and comfort of
Redemption, and therefore the bread was broken, and the Cup was full of blood
to represent to the life this life giving Death to Christ; The Papists have
cheated the people of the blood by a trick of concomitancy, telling them that
the bread is his body, and his body has blood in it, we have a word of
Institution of both severally, the life of the representation is the blood
shed, the Passover is a Lamb slain and roasted, and the blood on the doorpost,
and by providence, if the Papists will allow all to eat, then we have expressly
for the Cup a Bibite ex hoc omnes, Mat. 26. 27. Drink ye all of it; So that it
is the Death of Christ here represented, and which is one step further, it is a
Sacrifice Death, which works and makes atonement, this was it that all the
Sacrifices, that the Passover did prefigure, a Sacrifice death, that should
deliver and make expiation; This Cup (says Christ) is the New Testament in my
blood, which is shed for you and many for remission of sins, a death, and such
a kind of death as in our Sacrament set forth a Sacrifice Death, therefore
it is said sacrificed for us.

resemblance between the Passover and Christ sacrificed, wherein I shall The
resemblance between the Passover and Christ sacrificed.
endeavor to avoid the vanity and curiosity of making similitudes to run of
all four, which is incident to men in handling Types, Parables, and similitudes
which like a string over-stretched makes a jar and disharmony, and shows more
fondnes, then soundness.

1. The Paschal must be a male-Lamb without blemish, the son of a year taken
from the Sheep or Goats, Exo. 12. 5. and this resembles Christ himself and his
perfection, there were many blemishes which the superstitious or curious Jews
Observed to the number of fifty or seventy, any blemish disabled it, Christ was
without all blemish, nothing was excepted from other men, or his likeness to
them but sin, in all Points tempted like as wear, yet without sin; Heb. 4. 15.
He was of masculine perfection, at the perfection of his age, about 33 or 34
years, of Lamb-like humility and meekness; which are noted in him as exemplary
graces; He was figured out in the Lamb of the daily Sacrifice, in the Lamb of
the Passover, in Abraham's Ram in stead of Isaac, in the Scapegoat, Lev. 16.
21. and pointed out by John Baptist under this Name, Behold the Lamb of God*;
It Is implied, Heb. 9. 28. he shall appear the second time, (...), that in his
first coming he was not without, but we must distinguish of sin, ours imputed
to him, and so he was made sin for us, so as to bear it in his body, which at
his second coming he shall not bear nor be laden with as he was before, and
therefore is said to come without sin both his and ours.

2. This Paschall-Lamb was to be separated from the flock, and set apart for
Sacrifice on the tenth day of the month, but not killed till the 14. day in
the Evening, or according to that vexed phrase between the two Evenings, that
is, in the afternoon, when the Sun declined before Sunset, and about the same
time of day our Savior (the true Passover) was slain, but in a further
meaning it shows that Christ was set apart and fore-designed of God to be our
Passover long before, not in his decree, but his promise, and the predictions
of the Prophets which have been since the world began, Luke 1. 70. but now in
the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of
himself, Heb. 9. 26. He suffered between the two Evenings of the world, which
was in his declination, when he came that was our Evening, and the latter is to
come, the days of his appearance are called often the last days, and though
that have another meaning, showing the unalterableness of the
Gospel Ordinances, contrary to those of the Law, yet we may affirm, that it was
past the noon of the world, when he came, and the time shall not be so long
after unto Sunset, as before.

3. This paschal Lamb must be killed, the blood taken into a basin, sprinkled
with hysop, shall be on every door, the flesh roasted with fire not eaten raw or
boiled in water, the head, the legs, the inwards, Exodus 12. 7, 8, 9, 22. and
this may set forth unto us the unutterable sufferings of Christ, both in his
soul and body, which the Scripture sets out to the life with such an emphasis
of words, I mean especially those of his soul, scorched with the sense of Gods
extreme wrath, which are expressed by words extraordinary, (...), Sweating like
drops of blood, with expression of strong cries and tears; Oh man thou
understandest not the sufferings of this Passover roasted with fire forbidden
to be boiled in scalding water, for that expresses not the sufferings in
extremity, and what is all this for? Even to make Christ more pleasant meat to
thee, which if thou feed upon, and with a bunch of hysop sprinkle this blood,
applying it by faith, eating this roasted flesh, and drinking this blood poured
forth, it will feast thy soul, and secure thee from the wrath of God, which is
the next.

4. The destroying Angel seeing this blood on the door posts, passes over the
hoUse, goes and kills the Egyptians firstborn, and executes Gods last plague
upon them, in the mean time the Israelites were safe within the protection of
blood, Exodus 12. 12, 13. and here is the safety of those Israelites; Believers
that have applied by faith the blood of Jesus Christ, when God shall let loose
his last and final plagues upon the world, they shall be safe; Hell, and wrath,
and condemnation shall not touch them, When I see the blood (says he) I Will
pass over you, Exodus 12. 13, 23. nothing else will save you; God looks at
nothing but the blood of Christ upon you; Happy they, that before God ride his
circuit of destruction, to make a cry in all Egypt, are gotten under the
Sanctuary of blood, for then the plague shall not be upon you, when I smite the
Land of Egypt, Exodus 12. 13.

5. After the Israelites had been secured from the stroke of that dismal
night, then presently they march away, are hired by the Egyptians to be gone,
the four hundred and thirty years were out, and God being punctual in his
times, finishes their captivity that hour, and begins to fulfill his promises
that he had made to them of bringing them to their promised Land, Exodus 12. 31,
32, 33, etc. 41, 42. and here we see, that when a soul has long lien in the
base bondage under sin and the devil, and comes to take hold of Christ, and
is sprinkled with his blood, and enters Covenant with God in Christ, then is he
set free from his bondage, and then he goes out of Egypt, and then all the
promises begin to open upon him, and he sets upon his heavenly journey, and no
Pharaoh can hinder him any longer; All the sweet promises of peace, and
comfort, and hope, begin to be made good to him, for they are all Yea and Amen
in Christ; the Devil, and all his power and instruments cannot hold him, the
blood is upon him, from that hour he is a freeman, to own no Lord but God, and
yet still he has a Wilderness to go through, but he is miraculously carried as
Israel was through it; but this must not be expected, that they should eat the
Passover and stay in Egypt still, they must go out of their bondage, that are
sprinkled with this blood by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent out thy
prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water, says he in a like case, Zech. 9.
11. and happily this Type is yet to be fulfilled in the Gospel Churches, whom the
Lord will deliver out of the hands of their oppressing tyrants, Pope or Turk,
not by the Sword but Ordinances of his Covenant, and then if they shall pursue
a people under blood, as Pharaoh did, there will be a red Sea to swallow them
horse and man. And so much for the Passover, as referring to Christ our
Sacrifice, for that it does so, is plain by this. That which is said of the
Paschal Lamb, Exodus 12. 46. is expressly applied to, and fulfilled in Christ,
John 19. 36. So much for the Passover as a Sacrifice, or as the figure of our
Sacrifice and theirs, Christ Jesus.

Considered as a Sacrament.
propriety, though often so called in transitu, and much contended for by
Papists, For what Jew could ever have found out our Supper figured in that
Passover? and in what propriety can our Sacrament be the Sacrament of another?
Christ is the res Sacramenti of theirs and ours, there they meet, as the inward
Circumcision and Regeneration is the thing of their Circumcision and our
Baptism, but that one Sacrament should be the figure of another, is absurd and
void of Reason; As two pictures of one man, are both resemblances of that one
man, but one is not the picture of another, and yet becaUse the Passover has
the common nature of a Sacrament, does set forth the same Christ as our Supper,
and that the Apostle draws an Argument from it, to persuade Gospel-Christians
to holiness: Therefore we shall consider what significancy there is in it, for
though the signs be not ours, yet the significancy is

The signification of the Passover.
as eaten by the Israelites and feasted upon, it was a Sacrament, and in
aftertimes, both by Jewish Records, and by Scripture, I conceive it appears, 2
Chro. 35. 11. Ezra 6 20. that the Levites killed the Paschals, the Priests
sprinkled the blood on the Altar, and then they took the Lamb to their (...),
or Families, or Chambers in Jerusalem, and there did eat it; so in our Supper
there is a Sacrifice slain, and offered up for atonement, and that is Christ
his body and blood, and then there is an eating and drinking of this Sacrifice
in the Sacrament of bread and wine, as in many Sacrifices of the Law, there was
first an offering up to God, and then a feasting on the remainder; we have a
true Sacrifice, Christ offered up to God for us; we have a true Sacrament, as
that Sacrifice is eaten and drunk by us; the oblation belongs to God to
propitiate and redeem; the communication belongs to us, to be refresht and
nourisht; their eating the Passover was no Sacrifice, but a Sacrament; our
eating and drinking bread and wine is no Sacrifice but a Sacrament; their
killing and rosting of the Lamb made it eatable; Christ his sacrificing of
himself for us, renders him fit nourishment to us; Had he not been a Sacrifice
offered up for us, what profit had there been in eating and drinking
sacramentally and spiritually that body and blood? This consideration is of
special remark, you feast upon a sacrifice, you live, you feed upon a sacrifice
toll Sacrificium. toll Sacramentum, the mouth eats the Sacrament, the eye of
faith discerns the sacrifice, Christ is the sacrifice, the Sacrament no
sacrifice, but the commemoration and communication of a sacrifice; and here the
Reason must be Observed, why God did institute their Passover, and our
answerable Sacrament to consist in meat and drink, eating and drinking, and I
conceive thus, that it being the most proper way to partake of a sacrifice, for
how else can it be? Therefore we eat and drink in way of participation of our
sacrifice; Hence the phrase, Living upon Heb. 13. 10.
the Altar, eating of the Altar; and thus if we carry our eye to the earthly
part in the Supper, and to the heavenly part, that is to the Sacrament, and the
sacrifice represented, and feed upon the sacrifice represented, as well as the
Sacrament representing, we then discern the Lords body. This is the first
(...), de hoc plus intra.

2. Their Passover was instituted as an Ordinance for ever, for a memorial of
their Deliverance in Egypt, and their eduction out of it, a commemoration it
was, and to be Observed for ever, that is, in all succeeding generations,
whiles their Polity and Religion stood, Exodus 12. 14, 24, 42. and therefore we
read in Jewish Writers, and there is some foot-step or original of it, Exodus
26. 27. What mean you by this service, that in every company of
Passeover-communicants, there was some one that rehearsed and made
commemoration, Haggadah shet pesuch, the history Buxtorf. Chal. Lexic.
of the Passover, and so God that would have the sacrifice of Christ for our
sin, that greatest work of his, and our deliverance thereby from worse then
Egypt, or destroying Angel, to be Observed and kept in mind by a lasting
trophy or monument, viz* our Supper: The Apostle in allusion to their custom,
Uses a word (...) 1 Cor. 11. 26. Ye do show, As often as ye eat this bread and
drink this Cup, ye do show forth the Lords death till he come, or ye do
commemorate and with affection and thanksgiving set it forth, and as theirs was
for ever, till Christ's first coming, so ours is for ever, till his second
coming; so long as their Church continued they were charged with this
Ordinance; so long as the Gospel Church continues, they are charged with this,
and therefore neither of the Doctrine of the Gospel, nor of the Sacraments
shall there be any removal or alteration till Christ come.

3. Their Passover in Egypt was eaten in their several Families or societies,
A Lamb for a hoUse, except it were too little, Exodus 12. 3, 4. and in after
times when this was repealed, Deuteronomy. 16. 6, 7. and was confined to the place
that God should Choose, and so to Jerusalem, then though the Lamb might be slain
in the holy Court, and the blood sprinkled on the Altar, yet they did carry it
home to their hired chambers, and there did eat in companies, not less then ten
in a fraternity, Joseph de bello lib. 7. cap. 17. nor above twenty, but no man
alone, Solum epulari non licet, says Joseph, Christ and his company made one
society; so though Christ be our Sacrifice, once offered up upon the cross a
sacrifice to God, yet does our Supper bring him home to us into our Churches,
and into our souls. There is an application of him to be made, the blood
sprinkled on our doors, the Paschal brought home to our own hoUse; Take ye, Eat
ye, Drink ye; God comes to particulars with us, and the application of the
sacrifice is the life of the Sacrament; we must eat and drink at home, in our
own souls; Christ comes home to us, and yet this Supper ought as the Passover
to be eaten in societies, I know no Reason for one alone, there must be a
(...), a company, for it is a communion, one makes not a communion; The Apostle
1 Cor. 11. 20. When you come (...) into a meeting, v. 33, 34. when you come
together, tarry one for another; hence it has been anciently called (...), a
meeting, a Congregation. It Is Gods Ordinance (says a learned man) that the
Lords Hildersam Joh. 4 p. 122.
Supper be administered in public Assemblies; How can there be a Communicant
without a Communion, sed de hoc infra, not that the walls of a Church do make it
a communion* but a meeting of believers?

4. Their Passover was eaten with unlevened bread and sour or bitter herbs,
Exodus 12. 8. There are many circumstances and ceremonies found in the Jewish
Authors about the searching out of all leven, yea with candles at noonday, and
an execration of all leven, if any should remain unfound, and the bitter herbs
were in constant Use, the unlevened bread remembered them, what haste they went
out of Egypt in, Exodus 12. 34. and the bitter herbs, what affliction and
bondage they had suffered, and further they saw not; The Apostle interprets
leven, malice and wickedness; unlevened bread, sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.
8. and so it teaches us, how Christ is to be received by us, and what manner of
persons they must be that apply and receive Jesus Christ; They must remember
their bondage under sin, not with delight but bitterness, and feel the sour
taste of their former ways, as sinners contrite and broken; bitter herbs are
good sauce for the paschal Lamb; sin felt sets an edge on the stomach as
vinegar; Christ relishes well to such a soul; When thou come to eat his
Supper, bring thy own sauce with thee, bitter herbs, and refresh on thy self
the memory of thy old ways and former lusts; that is the sauce, the bread is
unleavened bread; you cannot eat the Lamb and leaven togegether; a secure
hypocrite, a filthy swine not purged from sin, to think to have Christ and
his sin too, to be pardoned and not purged, to be saved and not sanctified;
Away, and never think to eat this Lamb with leavened bread; come with bitter
herbs thou may, contrition for sin, but come not with and in thy sins, for
that is eating with leavened bread; therefore search it out, and let thy sins
be searched out as with a candle, and let them be execrable to thee, that God
may see thy hatred of them, and thy loathing of thy self for them.

5. Their Passover in Egypt, was to be eaten with loins girded in procinctu,
shoes on feet, and staff in hand, and ye shall eat in haste, Exodus 12. 11. and
therefore standing as ready to be instantly on their march to leave the Land of
Egypt, and go to seek their promised country, which signifies to us, that we
must receive Christ and his blood with intention and purpose to leave the
dominions of Pharaoh, the Kingdom, service and bondage of sin, and the Devil,
and from that hour to set forward toward our heavenly country; This is that
hard Doctrine of the Gospel; This makes men neglect, refUse Jesus Christ,
becaUse they cannot part with sin, they will not resolve to quit their former
course, as he that went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions: So we
would fain be saved, but go away sorrowful, for we have powerful, pleasing
and profitable lusts. And as it may allude to our Supper; Let it teach us to
come to the Table of the Lord with staves in our hand, and our loins girded up,
as men resolving to march, and begin a new and holy life, Henceforth not to
serve sin, Romans 6. 6. But of this I spoke before.

6. In their Passover they must roast and eat a whole Lamb, and nothing of it
must remain till the morning: If any did remain it must be burnt with fire,
Exodus 11. 9, 10. the flesh must be eaten, not a bone broken, Numb. 9. 12. This
shows, that Christ is all meat, there is no offal in him, there is variety of
nourishment for all our Uses, righteousness, and peace, and comfort, and
contentment to fill our capacities, relieve temptations, pardon and purge away
our sins, but we must not divide, but take him whole, his merit and Spirit, his
salvation and Sovereignty; Christ our Way, our Truth, our Life; What an unhappy
Doctrine is that of the Papists, that takes the blood from us, and will not let
the people drink? It is as if they should not allow our Passover to be a whole
Lamb, and as unhappy they, that do not only rent his coat, but break his bones
by depraving the fundamentals of Gospel-Doctrine, and tearing the Creed,
Article from Article, and nothing left, until the morning, tells us, That in
the morning-light of the Gospel, all those shadows should be abolisht and
disclaimed, or as Rivet says, That Sacraments are not Sacraments, but in their
Use, and while they are Used, as the bread and wine after the Use are no
Sacraments, as a mear stone is a boundary in it is place, remove it, and it is
lapis not limes.

7. No uncircumcised person might eat the Passover, nor no unclean person that
was under an uncleanness, Exodus 12. 44, 48. Numb. 9. 7. where the instance is
of some unclean by the dead, but it extends to other uncleanness, leprous or
menstruous, etc. Joseph. de bello lib. 7. cap. 17. and yet there was provision
made for the unclean, that they might keep the Passover in the second month,
as they did in Hezekiah his Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 13. but for the
uncircumcised there was no provision, and this sets forth to us two sorts of
men that are incapable of worthy coming to the Lords Supper.

1. The uncircumcised that are strangers and foreiners Two sorts incapable of
the Lords Supper.
to the Church, and not initiated by the first Sacrament of Baptism, no person
of what condition soever that is unbaptized can come to the Supper, for he is
not entered and admitted into Church Fellowship or Communion by the first
Sacrament: He is not one of the hoUse, or of the fraternity, where the Lamb is
eaten, and out of the hoUse the Passover must not be carried; they that are
out of the Church have no right to the privileges of the Church, as they that
are no freemen have not the privilege of the City. It was never known in the
old Church, that an uncircumcised person, nor in the Gospel Church that an
unbaptized, did partake of either of the Suppers, theirs or ours, for both of
them are second Sacraments, not firsts, the way to the Table has ever been by
the Font or Laver of washing. Of this more hereafter.

2. The domestics that are of the hoUse, that are Almost one and twenty
hundred thousand all pure. Joseph. cap. 17. lib. 7. de bello Judaic.
circumcised Israelites, yet if they be at the time of the Passover unclean,
they may not eat it, was a case came into Question thus, some were unclean, put
the case to Moses, he respited the decision till he had asked of the Lord, and
the Lord adjudged it, that he should be put off to the Passover of the second
month; and this tells us by way of allusion, that a member of the Church
baptized, yea a true believer may be unfit at some particular time to come to
the Lords Table, and may eat and drink unworthily; Were not the Corinthians
such men, and in such a case, 1 Cor. 11? Were they not punished for their
unworthy coming, and yet doubtless some of them godly, and all professed
Christians? But of this more also.

Egypt, Used and commanded by express word, certain rituals or occasionals,
which as Jewish Writers and practice shows, were omitted and not Used in
aftertimes. As 1. The eating in dispersed hoUses, afterward in Jerusalem only.
2. The taking up the Lamb four days before, which we read not of afterward.
3. The striking of the door-posts with the blood. 4. The not going out of the
hoUse that night, which in aftertimes Christ and his Disciples did. 5. The
eating it in traveling posture in procinctu, with staves, etc. which we find
our Savior, and read that the Jews did in another posture of discumbency, a
lying on beds, etc. These or some of these were occasional at the first, and
the occasion ceasing, custom had ruled it otherwise without offense; for in our
Supper the Lord celebrated and instituted it at night, in or at the end of the
paschal and common supper. 2. In unlevened bread. 3. Late at night. 4. In a
gesture of discumbency, a leaning or lying posture, Joh. 3. 13. 5. In a chamber
of a private hoUse. 6. Without presence of any woman. 7. Consecrating, a
blessing the bread and See Evang. for so Used in Passover.
the Cup severally and apart. 8. Singing the hymn at the close of all, as was
usual, etc. And these, or many of these were occasional circumstances by Reason
of the custom and Rite of the paschal Supper, or the particular exigency at
that time; And what then? Do they oblige to a hairs breadth all after-ages? Do
they that impose any one of these themselves hold to all of them? Shall we be
supercilious and superstitious in Observing all occasional or local customs?
Why do we not appear in sackcloth at our Fasts? Where is that osculum pacis? As
the Apostle said about the 1 Cor. 11. 16.
length of hair, so I say, If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God. If Christ had celebrated the Supper with his
loins girt, and staff in hand, had we been bound to it, and yet we must not
raffle this thread too far, and under color of an occasional circumstance,
change or mutilate the real substance, as the Papist that takes away the Cup
which Christ blessed, and breaks not the Bread, as he did, and of a Sacrament
makes a Sacrifice; the Matter and Form, the intended Analogy between the Sign,
and the Thing signified, will guide us in our distinguishing Substance from
Accidents.

I here make an end, though in this Point, and in this Lamb, which was served
in with Legs and Purtenance, I might find out other lesser Resemblances, which
I shall not; but having shown you, what fresh Marrow lies in the old Bones of
this Passeover-Sacrifice, will hereafter set forth our Lords Supper before you.

CHAP. II. Of Errors and Corruptions in the Church; How soon they sprung up;
When they are a ground of Separation, and when not. That this Ordinance must be
suitable to Gods Institution: And the Communicants must be suitable to this
Ordinance.
1 COR. 11. 83. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered
unto you, etc.
THis Epistle is directed to the Church of God in 1 Cor. 1 2. Grotius in initio
hujus Epistolae. Heylin Geog. page 388. 1 Cor. 1. 5, 7.
Corinth, which was sometime a slately City of Greece, much renowned in ancient
Authors, but now is a place of small note, being together with other Cities
mentioned in the New Testament, swallowed up by that great Leviathan of the
Land, the Turkish Empire. In this City was a famous Christian Church of the
highest degree of elevation for parts and gifts, and spiritual endowments, but
their beauty was blemished with as great blots, schisms, 1 Cor. 1. 11. Denial of
the Resurrection of the dead by some of them, 1 Cor. 15. 12. and in this
Chapter with a grand abUse of that high and precious Ordinance the Supper of
the Lord with ordinary and unwashen hands, polluting it with their own
intemperance and drunkenness, not brought from their own homes, or from the
Tavern to the Table, but Used at the very Table it self, which that you may
understand, you may take notice, that it was an ancient custom, (...), says
Zonaras in Council. 6. in Trullo. in the Primitive times, that the rich and
wealthier sort of Christians did by a common purse or contributions, furnish
out solemn feasts in the very meeting places, or Churches, and there sit down
promiscuously the rich and poor, which feasts were called (...), Feasts of
Love, or Brotherly-charity, to testify the intimate affection of Christians
among themselves. The Scripture speaks of them, Jude verse. 12. 2 Pet. 2. 13.
and the ancient Fathers make often mention of them; The occasion of them might
be this; It Is plain, that the Heathens at their Sacrifice had their festival
entertainments, (...), in their Idols Temple, that the Jews in their
Eucharistical Sacrifices feasted before the Lord, God as it were entertaining
them to eat and drink with him, and that Christ and his Apostles feasted
together at the Paschal Supper before the celebration of the Lords Supper, and
so by imitation very obvious, the Christians had taken up a custom of feasting
at their religious meetings, at which entertainments no Heathens were present,
and thereupon they suspected and scandalized the Christians for these feasts,
de pabulo crudae and post convivium mesto Tertul. Apol. c. 7 etc. 39.
that they eat and drunk the flesh and blood of a child, and that after they
had filled themselves with wine and good cheer, they fell to incestuous and
promiscuous lusts, but the ancient Fathers wipe off these aspersions, etc.

one is hungry, another is drunken, verse. 21. The word may signify had drank
liberally; as it is said of Joseph and his brethren, Gen 43. ult. and as the
word is Used, John 2. 10. The Sum is, there was

verse. 18. which is contrary to the nature or name of (...), Feasts of Love.
One party went to it before another came, v. 21. and 33.


2. Here was a slighting and laying aside the poor Christians that could send
in nothing, contrary to the nature of a religious communion, ver. 28, 22.

3. Here was intemperance and excess, ver. 21. contrary to Christian sobriety.

4. These feasts were made in the Assembly or meeting place (as we say the
Church) as appears ver. 22. Have ye not hoUses? And

Beza. in Act. 2. in illis convivis. Grot. in Mat. 26. 25. Casaub. Exere. 16.
of the Lord's Supper, Mensis suis pascebant, says Austin. Epist. 118. and
therefore the Apostle tells them, they defaced it, verse. 21. This is not to eat
the Lord's Supper, for quod non rite fit, fieri non dicitur; and he does
therefore set forth the Lords institution of the Supper, verse. 23. that they
might see the bare and naked nature of it, one thing is doubtful, Whether the
Lord's Supper was celebrated at the beginning or end of these feasts? And the
doubt rises, BecaUse in this Chapter, as is conceived by learned Diodat
Estius. Cajetan. in loc. Gerard. in har. p. 461.
men, the feast went before; as in Christ's last Supper, the paschal Lamb was
first eaten, and the Cup was taken after Supper, verse. 25. and the unworthy
coming to it, mentioned v. 29. and the punishment of this Church for their
unworthiness, verse. 30 argues, That their feasting first had unfitted them for
the participation of this Ordinance, and yet Chrysostom and Donaras says,
(...), After the participation of the Lords Supper the feast was; and that Vbi
supra.
is true, for aftertimes, for the reproof of the Apostle happily had removed the
feast unto the last place for good Reasons* but the feasts were not quite
removed out of the Churches of Greece and Africa, where Tertul. Apol. c. 39.
we find them continuing: Insomuch as the Synod of Laodicea which was about
three hundred years after Christ, and before the Nicene Council, made a Canon,
cap. 22. (...), etc. That it is not fit the Agapae should be in Churches or
public places of worship, and so these ancient Feasts grew out by little and
little, and now no remainders of them in all Christendom.

I have been the longer upon this, becaUse I think otherwise you would not
clearly understand the foregoing verses, that touch upon the abUse, nor the
caUse and Reason of the Corinthians coming unworthily to the Lords-Table, and
so I have set up a light in the entry, by which you may find the way into the
better understanding of all that follows in this Chapter, wherein he sets the
Lords Supper to rights, which was drowned in a feast; Then he orders the
address of the Communicants, which through the aforesaid misdemeanors had come
to it unworthily, and then exhorts them to make it a Communion and not a
Division, as they had done, Tarry one for another, verse. 33. and to prevent the
intemperance of public Feasts, he bids them, if they must eat before they come
to the Lords Supper, Let them eat at home, verse. ult. and so clearly abrogates,
not the Feasts, but the order of them, as foregoing the Lords Supper; and here
we shall stand a little and make Observation.

The Apostle interdicts not all eating or drinking before the Lords Supper, but
this feasting, and the abuses Obs.
growing thence, he does forbid. Those words, A man may eat before he come to
the Lords Table.
verse ult. If any man hunger, let him eat at home, that they come not together
unto condemnation, teach us, That this Feasting was before the Sacrament, and
that a man may eat at home, if occasion be, before he come to the public
Assembly. To put a necessity upon Fasting, is to put Superstition into it; for
our Savior at first celebrated it after Supper, by necessity of the Law of the
Passover, but binds us not by his example to eat first, nor by any rule to
fast before it, therefore it is of free Observation and Use, yet the custom of
coming fasting had spread over the Aug. Epist. 118 Per universum orbem mos isto
servatur. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11. 26.
universal Church in Austins time, Per universum orbem, mosiste servatur;
Chrysostem speaks too highly of it, (...), that thou may be worthy to
receive, for setting it aside as any piece of spiritual preparation, and I know
not why it may not stand, Omnes jejuni celebramus, says that Light of France.
Chamier. de Euch. lib. 6 cap 1.. 13.
All the French Churches celebrate the Supper fasting; I hold to the Rule, If
any man hunger, etc. either of these is best which puts the body in best tune,
to serve (as I may say) the soul in a holy duty.

How soon abUse crept into this Ordinance of the Supper. It was not above
twenty or thirty year from the nativity or birth of this Ordinance when this
Epistle was written, it was nothing so long from the birth or foundation of
this Church to this time. The Apostle had sown good corn in this field by his
Doctrine. I have delivered unto you the naked institution of Christ, and now it
stands in need of weeding. The Devil was not asleep in the very Apostles Error
and corruption sprung up in the Church betime.
times. He raised up Simon Magus, and after him a fry of Gnostics, or knowing
people, so they would be called, but falsely, says Irenaeus, to corrupt the
Doctrine; and it was betimes that the Devil set his foot in this most excellent
Ordinance, and from first to last there have been scarce any times wherein some
soil has not cleaved to this Sacrament, every Age adding or declaring
somewhat, till it became a monster, unlike it self in the Romish Mass, which
is a Mass of Idolatry and abomination, a very abomination of desolation to
this Ordinance, the stamp of Christ's institution being so defaced, that he that
minted it cannot own his own coin; for being an outward Ordinance, consisting
of outward elements and actions, the fancy of men thinks, this and that
dressing would do better, and so by putting on more ornaments, as they call
them, they quite spoil the feature of the child; and if men would be tampering
while the Apostles lived, what would they do after? If I should say, that the
unhappiest and oldest weeds have grown in this Garden, I should not speak far
wide; I may say of it, as Solomon says of man, Eccles. 7. 29. Loc, this have I
found, that God has made man right, but they have sought out many inventions.

The Apostle does not command those that were pure from these abUses to
separate from their Communion with the rest, whom he reproves for their sin
of Of separation, when sinful, and when lawful.
coming unworthily. We know not who, or how many were free, but it may seem the
poorest were the purest, as commonly they are; but he that reproves schism does
not command separation; He assayes the cure another way,

1. By setting the Ordinance right according to Christ's Institution.

2. By rectifying the Communicants from their unworthy coming, and so gives
both a purgation, disallowing their schism, not allowing any separation.

If Babylon become ahabitation of Devils, then come out of her my people, Rev.
18. 2, 4. Yea flee out and deliver your souls, Jer. 51. 6.

If Christ must be coupled with Belial, the Temple of God with Idols, as it is
when Christians participate in Heathenish Sacrifices and Idolatries, then, Come
out from among them, and be ye separate, 1 Cor. 6. 16, 17. You have an old and
famous example in them that left all to go to Jerusalem when Jereboam set up
his Calves, and cast out the Priests of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 11. 14, 16. For if
Bethel turn Bethaven, the hoUse of God become the hoUse of iniquity, then, Come
out of Gilgal, Go not up to Bethaven Hos. 4. 15.

If any that is called a brother, a Professor of the Christian Religion, be a
Fornicatour, or Idolater, or covetous, have no free familiarity with him, with
such an one, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Turn away from them, 2 Timothy 3. 5.

If they bring corrupt Doctrine, hoUse them not, salute them not, Epist. a.
John 10. for that makes you partaker in their sin, verse. 11. If their works
be unfruitful works of darkness, be not partakers with them, have no
fellowship with their works, Ephesians. 5. 7, 11.

These separations are duty, and unto duty, but for a Corinthian to separate
from Gods Church and Gods Ordinance, becaUse some come unworthily to the Lords
Table is no duty, becaUse there is no command, it is no duty, and therefore we
read not this word, Come forth, in any of those Epistles written to the seven
Churches, Revel. 2. and 3. against which Christ says, He has such and such
things; they that lived in the impurer, are not called forth into the purer
Churches, but there are promises made to them that keep themselves pure, and
duties enjoined them toward the impure part, for we may not make these Churches
and Babylon all one, nor make every disease the plague: Shall the sons of God,
the Angels, forsake the Lords presence, becaUse Satan comes also amongst them?
Job 1. 6. Must Shem and Japhet leap out of Noah's Ark, becaUse there is a Cham
there; Would not our Savior rather have sent for John Baptist to have baptized
him, rather than himself have come from Nazareth to Bethabara, which some
compute Hildersam in Joh. 4. Lect. 26 p. 122.
fourteen Dutch miles, that is of ours fifty six? If that generation of vipers
that came also to John's Baptism, had either polluted the water, or the
Ordinance unto Christ? Matthew. 3. 7, 14. But of this more afterward.

The abUses reproved were such as depraved the Ordinance, and the corruptions
such as put themselves forth in the Communicants at the very time of their
participation. The Lords Supper, was so intermedled with their festival cheer,
as the difference between the Lords body, and their own repast was not truly
made. They discerned not the Lords body. Their corruptions which at all times
are blameworthy, as divisions, intemperance, slighting the poor brethren, do
now appear most odious and unsuitable, I note hereupon, That sin never does
us more hurt than in frustrating and disabling the Use and fruit of Ordinances.
This is not, says he, to eat the Lords Supper, verse. 20. You come together not
for the better, but for the worse, verse. 17. We are the worse, when we bring
such sins as carnalize the heart, and disapten us for spiritual fruition and
enjoyment; An outward reverence, as it is an argument of a serious spirit; so
it is becoming the Ordinances of the Gospel; The meeting of the Church is the
greatest meeting in the world, the irreverent Use of the Lords Supper, called
for a sudden Reformation, Other things, says the Apostle, will I set in order
when I come, verse. ult. but this cannot stay, it is a matter of importance, that
the reverence of this Ordinance be preserved, bring not hither then the
behavior of a Tavern, or of your meeting at the Hall of your Company, though
grave, but the deportment of Christians that come to the best and greatest
Table in the world: It Is true, I could worship Christ though lying in a manger,
but I should not put him in a manger, if I had a better room for him in my
Inn; Let all things be done decently, or beautifully, 1 Cor. 14. ult.

For I received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you; A good
recommendation of his Doctrine, a good preparative to make way for Cameron.
Myrothec. in loc. Horac. lib. 2. Satyr. 8. Aeneid. l. 2.
their acceptance of it, I received it from the Lord. The expression is
Hebrewish, with whom; the Teacher is said to give, Prove. 9. 9. The Scholar to
receive, and the Latin owns both the words in that sense, That which I have
learned, I also have delivered; This very Doctrine he had taught them by word
of mouth, but now upon occasion of their swerving from it, he repeats and
writes them a copy of it for perpetual memory. Beza is in this place a
Hypercritick from the word (...) not (...), and will have it thus, Ut a Domino
profectum, I received it upon report, as from the Lord: It weakens not the
credit of the Doctrine, whether the Apostle had it by immediate revelation, as
most say, or by report of eyewitnesses, or both; He did receive it from the
Lord, and from the Lord he hands it to the Church, and therein, as Estius
says, he is a fourth Evangelist, for John Estius in loc,
recites not the institution of the Supper, though he speak upon the borders of
it, and so Paul makes the fourth relator.

The Observations hence are,

1. The best way to redress and remedy abUses and corruptions crept into this
Ordinance, is to reduce it to the Justum regulum adjubet Martyr. Institutio
Christi certa regula. Calvin.
Lords Institution. This the Apostle here does, having opened the nature of the
disease, he applies this medicine, For I have received of the Lord, etc. Our
Savior had Used this way upon the Question of Divorce, which was grown very
abusive, and stood in need of regulation; he tries it by the standard of the
first institution, yea though the authority and antiquity of Moses was pleaded,
But, says Christ, from the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19. 8. Though error
be old, yet truth is first. All corruptions of Ordinances are deviations from
their institution, and therefore the false copy must be corrected by the true
original, The institution of Christ is the certain Rule; He instituted it for a
Communion, therefore O Corinthians, your divisions and contempt of the poor is
unsuitable. He instituted it as a Sacrament of his body and blood for spiritual
repast, therefore your intemperance and common Use of it at your feasts, is not
agreeable to the nature and Use of it, as the standard discovers false weights
and measures, and a straight rule, a crooked line, so the institution of our
Lord, corruptions. The Popish-masse would not be found in the mass, if it were
tried by this Rule; but we must distinguish between Christ's institution of this
Sacrament, and his celebration of it, though at the same time. The institution
shows the nature and Use of it, and abides as a perpetual Rule, He took bread,
he blessed, he broke, he gave, etc. His celebration of it was by Reason of the
Passover attended by very many occasional circumstances, after Supper, in a
private room, in such a gesture, to such a number, in unlevened bread, etc.
It Is no corruption to vary in these occasional circumstances, except we must
always keep Passeovers too. I showed you before out of Jewish Writers, That
the Passover of aftertimes, even that of Christ varied in such particulars
from the first Passover in Egypt, without corruption, and so this Supper in
all ages has varied from the first celebration in such occasionals. He, says
Naz anzen, Naz. Not. 40.
celebrated the Supper, (...), in an upper room, we in our hoUses of prayer; he
after, we before Supper; he before his death, we after his Resurrection, and so
accordingly all Divines. It is universalis notio, says Chamier, an universal
notion Chamier. de Euchar. l. 8. c. 7.
that the circumstances of an individual action be distinguished from those that
pertain to the Law thereof, and these may be of good Use for instruction, not
of necessary Use for imitation; I say with learned Hooker, Hooker Eccles.
Polit. l. 5. p. 366
To do throughout every like circumstance with Christ were to err more from
the purpose he aimed at, then we now do by not following them with so nice
strictness; What is superstition but to make that necessary which is
indifferent, and that a part of worship which is an accident to it? So
Constantine the Emperor deferred his Baptism, and almost mist it, becaUse he
would have been baptized in Jordan, as Christ was. Hold the institution, but be
not superstitious without a command, or hoc facite, in the circumstances that
fall out at the time of celebration.

This Ordinance we receive from the Lord.
That the Apostle received from the Lord what he delivered to the Church. This
high and honorable Ordinance, the Passover of the Christian Church, we can
receive from no higher hand, than the Lord, we may receive from no lower; our
faith can be resolved into no lower authority than the Lord. I believe and
receive this, and Use it, and expect the fruit, not becaUse Paul delivers it to
me, but becaUse he receives it from the Lord, and so the Apostle leads our
faith to the original, the first authority, and higher we need not, we cannot
go: It was the dignity of an Apostle to be a receiver from the Lord, or else he
could not have had the authority of a deliverer to the Church. See the
difference between Christ and Paul in this matter of delivery to the Church, in
Matthew. 5. 21, 31, 33. Ye have heard it has been said of old thus and thus, But
I say to you; He speaks like the Lord, But I say; when Paul comes to speak,
Then, I have received from the Lord, he speaks as an Ambassador, or a servant;
No other authority ought to take place in the Church, but of Christ only.

Cor. 12. 28. yet they were but receivers, there was a higher authority which
they advance, I have received from the Lord; See the scale or ladder of faith;
we receive our Doctrine from the Scriptures, the Scriptures from the Apostles
and others that were inspired; they from Christ, and Christ as Mediator says,
He has received his mission from God; and here alone our faith stands, and is
quietly settled, so in the Commonwealth, you receive a warrant from the
Constable, a meaner man then you, he from the Justice, he from the Council,
they from the supreme power.

And what need or Reason was there that he should avouch his receiving the
Doctrine of this Sacrament from the Lord? Was it for that he wrote to the
Corinthians, a proud and stomackfull people that had his person in some
contempt in comparison of their preachers, who by their tinkling eloquence led
them by the ears into captivity, and were partners with, or patrons of them in
these abUses? Therefore he brings the name of the Lord to bear down their
naughty stomachs, and the Lords institution to whip these corruptions out of
the Temple: Or

Rather was it for a closer Reason; He that believes to receive a soul-benefit
from an outward Ordinance of eating and drinking bread and wine, had need to
see good ground for his believing, for they are incommensurate and improper to
the soul; the body may more easily be fed with air, than the soul with bread
and wine; Therefore he appeals to the Lord, for the benefit is from the
author, the virtue and fruit from the institution; He that by a piece of brass
healed a mortal sting, can by bread (as I may say) feed the hungry soul; He put
clay in my eyes (says the blind man) He sent me to the pool of Siloam, and I
washed, and do see, Joh. 9. 15.

That the Apostle delivered to the Church what he had received from the Lord
also delivered unto you, ( Et omnibus Ecc esiis meo ministerio fundatis) and
all Morton in loc. P. Martyr.
Churches founded by my Ministry; He did receive and deliver, but not institute
this Ordinance; He that will institute a Sacrament makes himself a God, says
Peter Martyr, Had he not received he had wanted authority? Had he not
delivered, he had wanted faithfulness and honesty, as a messenger that keeps
the God always had officers in his Church.
Ring sent to a friend? God has ever had in his Church such as should be
receivers and deliverers, an office of men, taken from among men, and ordained
for men in things pertaining to God, as it is defined, Heb. 5. 1. but all are
not receivers, as Paul, by immediate hand from the Lord; Moses receives the
Law, and the pattern in the Mount; he was a receiver and deliverer, the Priests
in their generations did receive and deliver, but they were bound to the Law,
and to the Testimony: So in the Christian Churches the Apostles receive the
Word and Sacraments from the Law, they see the pattern in the Mount, then there
are others in their generations that receive and deliver too, but they are
bound to the Law and Testimony. Hear the Apostle 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things that
thou have heard of me, commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also: So that here is Paul that received from the Lord, Timothy from
Paul, other faithful men from Timothy, and others from those faithful men;
There is no government of any Commonwealth on earth, but they have their
Officers to receive Laws and Commands from the highest, and to convey and
deliver them to the people.

received from the Lord two things, His Commission and his Errand; His
Commission to be an Apostle, Romans 1. 5. From Christ we have received our
Apostleship, and this he may show to the people, as he does to these
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9. 1. Am I not an Apostle? etc. but he does not deliver
this to them; His errand, and that is the Doctrine of the Gospel, and this he
does both receive and deliver, I have delivered unto you; so an Ambassador
has a Commission, and that he may show, but delivers not; and he has an
errand, and that he receives from his Lord, and delivers to them to whom he is
sent. There were Prophets in Jeremiah's time that would be deliverers, but they
neither received Commission, Jer. 14. 14. I sent them not; nor errand, Jer. 23.
16. Their vision was of their own heart; The one of these being wanting made a
false prophet. I fear we have many more deliverers then receivers from the Lord,
either they want one of these legs, or both, and yet (which is the wonder they
run) having received neither Commission nor Errand from the Lord.

least iota's or tittles of the Law, as precious things, and permanent. It was
the admirable wit of Homer, to make (in his Poems) Ambassadors to speak in the
same words, as they received their errand by the same spirit, and the same
inspiration that he received this Doctrine from the Lord, he also delivered it
to the Church. How pure does this Ordinance of the Supper come to our hands?
What credit ought it to be of with us? You know the Heathens, and so Mahomet
that impostor, that set up or devised the heathenish Theology or Worship, they
feigned a conversation with some god or goddess, a spirit, that their votes
might be received of the people with awe and credit; for the conscience of man
stoops to none but God, from whom we are assured by the Apostle that we have
this Ordinance, That I received, I also delivered to you.

That what the Apostle had formerly delivered to the Corinthians by lively
voice, now he writes upon the occasion of abUses grown in, How easily do
corruptions steal Estius in loc.
in? How soon do we forget the Law of Ordinances and institutions of Christ? It
could not be many years since he had delivered the manner of this Ordinance,
What necessity there is of having the Scripture written.
and now he repeats it in writing: What necessity is there of having the
Scripture written? That it may continue and pass pure from generation to
generation. Men find it very requisite that their Laws be written and upon
record; what inconveniences would follow, if not? While the Church of God
consisted of few persons or families, as in Noah and Abraham's time, there was
the word of God, but not Scripture. It was handed down from father to son by
tradition, and the frequent appearances of God to them, supplied defects; but
afterward God began the example, and wrote the Decalogue in Tables of stone,
the ancientest writing this day in all the world, then Moses also wrote the
Scripture, and he is the ancientest writer in the world; if all the Greek Law
givers or Poets be compared with him, they are but ( heri aut nudius tertius
says Cunaeus and Josephus) as of yesterday, hundreds of years before the
Trojan war, yet not so many, as Theoph. ad Autolycum. affirms, The Jews had the
Old Which was in Jephaes days 900. or 1000.
Testament written, though they were so frequently visited by extraordinary
Prophets; and the Jewish Masoreth had so industriously mended and numbered all
the letters in every word of the Old Testament, that they knew the number, and
could as easily miss one as you can miss a pearl off your chain, and hereof
we have the benefit, Codicem portat Judaeus unde credat Christianus, The Jew
says Austin, though Aug. in sa. 56
himself an unbeliever is our Library Keeper, and carries the book after us out
of which we get our faith: for how often does our Lord and his Apostles cite
those Records; Nor would the Lord let the New Testament be unwritten, which in
the wide world, over which the Gospel spreads, would have been mangled and
transfigured into a thousand shapes. Remember sometimes in your prayers to give
God thanks for the Gospel written, the Jews never forget the Law in theirs. And
yet again, I note it, that many parts of the New Testament were written on
accidental occasions, as ill manners occasion good Laws; so Paul writes this
Epistle, and this part that I preach upon: So the Epistle to the Galatians, an
occasion of false teachers that mingled Moses and Christ, Law and Gospel; and
all Writers give this occasion for that lofty and sublime piece, In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was, etc. becaUse the hellish Gnostics
did even then begin to adulterate the simplicity of the Gospel, and to bring
Christ unto a lower rank, and therefore he Uses their very words (...) and
(...) Grot. in Proleg. ad Johan.
which they had in Plato and Pythagoras his School, and applies them to Christ
Jesus; we get this excellent piece of Scripture which entreats upon the
preparation of the Communicant above any, above all other, and we get it by the
abUses and corruptions reigning then in Corinth, upon occasion of their sin,
the whole Church has gained a Rule for ever, I had almost said, as it is said
in another respect, foelix culpa, happy were these corruptions.

The safest, simplest, certainest Rule by which a Communicant. 17. Obs. 5.
may examine himself, whether he come worthily to this Table, is to do it by
the nature, Use and end of the Lords Supper. The Apostle had found great fault
with the Corinthians manner of communicating, to prevent By what rule men are
to examine whether they come worthily to the Lords Supper.
which he gives one short Rule in these words, Let a man examine himself; but
he sets down no form of this self-examination; He does not answer the Question,
How? Yea, he delivers the institution of Christ in all points, as that Rule to
square the Communicant; For if a man do rightly calculate, he shall find that
here is presented and represented the closest union and communion of the soul
with Christ, the most spiritual intimacy, the most humbling and passionate
prospect of a broken Christ, the most refreshing water that runs out of that
smitten Rock, the most real exhibition and affording of this to me; and indeed
the sweetest and nearest intercourse with our Lord, is here set forth, as in no
other Ordinance, for the manner of it, and then what does this bespeak? Does a
feast so set forth bespeak a swine? Are Superstition, Ignorance, Profaneness,
fit garments to come in to such a Supper? Are those Christ-killing-sinnes of
ours, which caUsed this breaking of him, fit companions for us to bring to the
eating of him? That is, as if we should bring to the Lords Table the bloody
knife that killed him; Let a man but Use his Reason with his faith, and ask
this broken bread, this poured wine, what they mean, or what they speak, and
they will tell him enough, whereby he may examine himself, and this is
Chemnitius his Rule for examination, Chem. Exam. de preparatione.
whom a great man of this Nation says, to be the best Scholar of all the
Lutherans (Sic inquit Montacut. origenes.)

The result of all that has been said, comes to these two instructions,
pertaining either to Minister, or people, or both.

1. That this Ordinance of the Supper be suitable to the Exodus 25. 40. Heb. 8.
5.
institution of Christ.

2. That the Communicant be suitable to the Ordinance, and then both things
which the Apostle speaks unto here, both sorts of abUses or corruptions,
whether in the Ordinance, or of the Communicants, are set to rights, and all is
right.

That the Ordinance be suitable to the institution; For see (says he) that
thou make all things according to This Ordinance must be administered according
to Gods institution.
the pattern showed thee in the Mount; Moses had no liberty to vary from the
matter or form, or any particular; and have not we an institution, and the
pattern of this Ordinance set before us, not in the Mount, but in the upper*
room, where Christ celebrated the first Supper, and gave forth a hoc facite,
This do as often as ye do it, hoc facite, is as much as, See that ye make or do
all things according to the pattern; The Apostles were not now at a
Councel-Table with their Lord, to give their vote what manner of Sacrament
should be appointed, but as guests to take and eat at present such cheer as the
Master set before them, and in aftertimes to do This, Do this in remembrance
of me, and yet our Lord Christ would have his Ordinances administered (...)
decently. Clemens the ancientest of Fathers in his Epistle to these
Corinthians, has an excellent saying, (...), We ought to do all those things
orderly which our Master has commanded us to do; For Christ himself was no
friend to slovenliness, or loathsome nastiness (as one observes) Hildersam in
John 4.
out of that Mark 14. 15. He shall show you an upper room furnished and
prepared; but presumption is bold, Superstition adventurous, as if it was
called to council with God, makes no bones of clipping his coin; and therefore
this Sacrament has been filled with many devices, and long groaned under their
inventions, which after long possession plead prescription, and come in
aftertimes to be counted parts, which at first were but scabs or wens. The
Apostle did not, durst not deliver but what he had received; but they that have
less power than the Apostle, dare deliver what they received not, and by
adding or substracting, do plainly find fault with Gods own model: Why should
the Papist give into the mouth of his Communicant a whole wafer, but that he is
afraid to break the bread least some loose crumbs should fall? Why does he cheat
the people wholly of the Cup, but upon pretense that a drop of the blood might
be shed or spilt? May we not think that they are too nice, and more scrupulous
than Christ, at whose breaking bread there might fall crumbs, and in the
Apostles drinking, drops from the cup? Superstition is foolish, that pretends
holiness, and corrupts Ordinances, and had rather make than take a Sacrament;
We have the Minister in the name and stead of Christ Jesus; if this be denied
(as it is by some) I shall at present affirm but this, That the reverend and
most ancient Father Justin Martyr in his second Apology to the Roman Emperor,
written about fifty years after the death of John the Apostle, sets out (as I
shall show you) the full manner of their administration of this Sacrament, and
therein says, the (...), or Minister, does pour forth prayer, and gives thanks
over the bread and wine, which (I can give no account of private corners) has
been practiced in the Christian Churches, till this very time and year, being
1500 years at least. The Minister takes the bread, and likewise takes the Cup.
He gives thanks or blesses over the Bread and Cup He breaks the Bread, he
says, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye. He pronounces, This bread is the body of our
Lord Jesus Christ. This Cup is the New Testament in his blood. You do take, you
eat, you drink. This the Minister does; this you do for a remembrance and
commemoration of Christ, showing forth his death; and this is an Ordinance
suitable to the institution.

That the Communicant be suitable to the Ordinance. When the Song is truly set
and pricked, the singer must Of worthy communicating.
keep time and tune, or else all is not right; The Papists have the Ordinance
unsuitable to the institution, and we alas have Communicants unsuitable to the
Ordinance. That word which follows in this Chapter, that dangerous word (...),
unworthily; what is it but unsutably, we must measure, and fashion the
Communicant by the Ordinance: He must of necessity be a Disciple, to such
Christ spoke, Take ye, eat ye, etc. not as ye are Apostles, but as Disciples;
He must bring with him a Christ receiving, or a Christ applying faith, for
Take, Eat, without a hand or mouth of the soul he cannot; He must come with
hunger and thirst for strength and refreshment, for he does come to a Table to
eat and drink the staff of bread the cordial cheering wine; This strength and
nourishment is by virtue of his union with Christ himself, and communion,
therefore he comes to eat the very body, and drink the very blood of Christ; He
comes as a confederate with God, to receive the seal, or as a Legator to
receive a Legacy bequeathed by Will, viz. Christ and remission of sins in
Christ, for this Cup is the New Covenant, or New Testament sealed with Christ's
blood; He comes as to a festival commemoration, where the founder of the feast
is remembered with praise and honor, Do it in remembrance of me; He looks
through and beyond the broken bread and wine poured out, to a broken body and
the shed blood of Christ; He looks at another taking, then taking of bread;
another eating and drinking than of bread and wine, viz. the taking to himself,
and the spiritual and intimate application of Christ's body and blood, For he
discerns the Lords body, and therefore comes as a consecrated person to
consecrated elements, to broken bread with a broken heart, full of affections,
as the Ordinance is full of mysteries, and here is a Communicant suitable to
the Ordinance, and so Paul, who received of the Lord, and delivered unto them
the institution of Christ, has set to rights both the Ordinance, and the
Corinthian Communicant.

CHAP. III. That the Lord Jesus is the Author of this Sacrament.
1 COR. 11. 23. That the Lord Jesus, etc.
I Shall follow the track of the Apostle, who goes before me in the two points
I am to entreat upon.

1. The Nature and Use of this Sacrament.

2. The due Preparation of the Communicant.

Of these in order, and with what brevity I can, contenting my self to speak in
decimo sexto, what might be spoken in folio, in hope that your proficiency by
Mr Anthony Burgess and Mr Love.
your former most worthy teachers, may excUse me the labor of so large a
volume.

The next words I come unto, do plainly point out unto us.

1. The Author of the institution, The Lord Jesus.

2. The Time of it, The same night in which he was betrayed.

The Author of this Sacrament.
The Author of this institution is the Lord Jesus. The consent of all the
Evangelists that write the History, puts this out of all controversy; Christ
was personally present both celebrating and instituting this Ordinance; He is
res Sacramenti, the thing of the Sacrament, and Author Sacramenti, the Author
of the Sacrament, the feast-maker, and the feast; Out of this pierced side (as
Austin alludes) there came forth both blood and water, the two Sacraments of
the Church; He took the bread, he blessed, he brake it, he gave it, it may well
be called the Lords Supper, yea the Lord is the Supper, This is my body, this
is my blood.

The Lord Jesus is Author, the Mediator of the new Covenant, the Testator of
the new Testament, appoints the seal of that Covenant, and ratifies that
Testament with his blood; He is the Lord to whom is committed the Sovereignty
and Government of his Church, therefore he makes Officers, Laws and Ordinances.
The Lords day, and the Lords Supper are particularly in Scripture called by
Rev. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 11.
his name, The Lords; The Lords day ex illius resurrectione festivitatem suam
habere coepit, took its festivity Epist. 119.
from his Resurrection, as Austin; The Lords Supper is the memorial of his
death, so his death and resurrection, a Supper, and a day to memorize them.

As he is Lord, so his Laws bind whatsoever they be, though Abraham be
commanded to kill his son, for the Laws of God have not their obligation from
the quality of the Law, but from the authority of the Lord the Lawgiver: As he
is Jesus a Savior, so his Laws are benefits and liberties tending to
salvation; as the Laws of your City are freedoms, and your freedoms laws, so
you obey them ^s Laws, enjoy them as freedoms, they are our benefit and our
duty; His invitation is to a Supper, it is the invitation of a Lord, it is the
Supper of a Savior.

Secondly, There must be institution of a Sacrament. The elements are ciphers,
till the institution make them figures. Institution is as necessary to a
Sacrament, as superscription is to money, for it is created (...), of things
that did not appear, Sacraments are of that rank of things, Quae nihil sunt
sine institutione, says Chamier, they were bread and wine Chamier. de Euchar.
l. 7. c. 10
indeed before, but they were nothing to that relation which Christ put upon
them; a seal of a thousand a year is made of a peny-worth of wax; What was a
piece of brass to the healing of a mortal sting? Nothing, till God put an Use
upon it, that all that looked to it being bitten should be healed.

There must be a divine institution to make a Sacrament. The Legatee does not
seal the will, but the Testatour, the Granter seals the Deed, not the Grantee;
the Delinquent seals not the pardon, but the Keeper of the seal, Sola divina
institutio facit Sacramentum, Montac. origin. part. 1. page 73.
says a learned man; Take that away, and it cease to be a Sacrament; The
Supreme Power only can coin money, in other its c^pit^l. All the whole Church
together cannot make a Sacrament, then it should be the Churches Supper, not
the Lords, and it is theirs to eat, but not to make, Ejus est signa Synopsis de
coena. 7.
gratiae addere, cujus est gratiamtribuere, He may add the signs of grace,
that can give the grace. There is a fourfold word requisite to a Sacrament,

1. A word of institution, which appoints the matter and form.

2. A word of Sanctification or blessing, to set them apart from common Use.

3. A word of Promise of some good to the Communicant, and so we have here a
promise of the Lords body and blood; The promises of Sacraments, (as is well
Observed by the Centuriators) are vestitae Centur. mag. ce^t. 1.
promissiones, clothed promises: He that believes shall be saved, is a naked
promise: He that eats this bread, etc. shall have Christ as a clothed promise.

4. A word of Command, as we have the (...) Buckler. Pr^t. evidence.
in Baptism, so hoc facite here, as a learned man. Let the Word be added to the
Element, and you have a Sacrament. Austin.

It Is the institution that gives the nature and efficacy to a Sacrament. He
that mints the money, sets the value and price upon it. A Sacrament is an
outward and visible sign, but it is not a natural, but a voluntary sign, nor
yet a bare sign as the picture of Hercules is a sign of Hercules, and no
more; we must not make the Sacraments, (...), empty names, empty figures, empty
representations, that resemble and signify something, and no more; as the
Sacrament was a crucifix, and the Supper painted resemblances of meat and
drink, this is a hungry feast; he must have his stomach in his eye, that is fed
with it, but the Sacraments are signacula, symbola, seals and pledges, or
instruments offering, exhibiting and making present to our faith the very
benefits which they signify, the very body and blood of Christ is not only
represented, but present to a believer, and brought home to his soul, yet they
are not natural instruments Montac. orig. part. 1. p. 67.
in which the inward grace is contained, as in a vessel, as the Romish
Praesentialists and Schoolmen dream, like plasters which have in themselves a
virtue or power to heal a wound, or a medicine to expel poison, but they are
moral and voluntary means or instruments serving to the purpose ex destinatione
by appointment, as the brazen Serpent to heal the sting. Bernard has writ upon
it, As (says he) in vestitures, and possessions, Bernard* de c^^^^a.
and assurances, do pass by the staff and ring, Annulus non valet qnicquam,
haereditas est quam quaerebam, The ring avails little, I seek the inheritance
that is confirmed and conveyed by it; so we say, the Lands, Inheritance, etc.
do pass by the great Seal, for so I come to have and hold, and they are mine
by it; Thus the Sacrament is a seal of confirmation and conveyance of the
inward grace to the hand or faith of a believing soul; And as really as the
estate does pass by the Seal into your right and possession, not by any inward
work or power of the Seal in it self, but by the Use it is of, in sealing and
conveying; so really is Christ, and all his tReasure passed over unto you that
receive him by faith, not in respect of any worthiness or virtue in the very
outward Sacrament, but in and by the Use it is of, by Christ's appointment to
seal, confirm and convey; that excellent place speaks my mind fully, 1 Cor.
10. 16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, Is it not the Communion of the
blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, Is it not the Communion of the body
of Christ? He says not barely representation, as a sign, but communion or
participation as a conveying seal; I declare this to you, becaUse some believe
too much, and think the outward Sacrament works (I know not how) like a
plaster by some virtue contained in them, that is opere operato, as they
barbarously speak; and others believe-too little, as if they were mere and
empty signs and resemblances of Christ's body and blood; as if a woman should
receive a ring merely, becaUse the picture of her beloved is engraven on it,
and not as a ring of espousals, really sealing and confirming the contract, and
assuring himself hers; sed de hoc infra.



The Lord Jesus is author, therefore this Supper is not ours that are
Ministers, but it is the Lords. Alexander Ales. pars 4. quaest. 49. memb. 1.
Hales has an excellent Rule, which I shall make Use of hereafter, it is this,
Sacerdos est dispensator non Dominus Sacramentorum Ecclesiae, non dat suum, sed
reddit alienum, quod de jure negari non potest, The Minister is the Dispenser
or Steward, not the Lord of the Sacraments of the Church. He gives not that
which is his, but restores that which is another, which de jure cannot be
denied to him to whom it is Homil. 83. in Mat.
due, and therefore Chrysostom speaks to his fellow Ministers, and calls them
(...), Distributers, Dispensers, as you are of the poors bread in the Church,
which some Benefactour formerly appointed to be bestowed on them by his Will,
and of his Gift, to whom the Lord gives it; We cannot deny, if they be within
the Sphere of our office, and to whom the Lord denies we cannot give. A man
comes to an Executour, Sir, I come to you for a certain Legacy given me by my
Fathers will, whereof you are Executour, the gift bequeathed is not yours, and
you are but the hand, whereby the Donour was pleased to hand it unto me: True,
says the Executour, there is such a Legacy bequeathed, but if you look the
Will, you shall find it given with some limitations and proviso's: See the
words, ver. 28. of this Chapter, (...), and so, there is an And so; But let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat, and so let him drink: It is confessed on
all hands, The Conditions being performed, the claim is good; but if it can be
said, You are not a Disciple, and to such only this Legacy was bequeathed by
Christ, or the Church has set on you the brand of a Heathen or a Publican,
though you was a Disciple, and you have for the present by your sin forfeited
the right you had, until by your repentance you return again, why then all
will say, that an Executour or Administratour may not act directly contrary to
the Will, for he is not the Testatour to do what he will, but he is
Administratour to Observe, and not to violate the Will.

The Lord Jesus is author from him, therefore let the benefit and efficacy of
this Ordinance be expected; for it has and veritatem, and virtutem, both esse
and operari, being and working from the author; As money has the stamp and
the value from the supreme power; and here is the difference between natural
and moral instruments (we take the word instrument largely pro medio for a
mean) that if the Sacraments were natural means or instruments, in which (as
the Schoolman does) the very virtue, or the grace and benefit by them conveyed
were contrived, then were the virtue and benefit to be expected from
themselves, and no otherwise from the author, than as author of the
instrument; as the Candle gives light whether the maker of it be present or no,
and the plaster heals by a quality in it self, but a moral instrument not so,
being empty of any virtue to such an effect, except the author do work by it,
or ( ad praesentiamejus) at the presence of it; as the Serpent of brass on the
Pole, the Clay and Spittle on the eye, the Lambs blood on door-posts, had in
themselves no power to their several effects, but as they were appointed and
Used by God or Christ. It is very hard to believe that there is a true and real
exhibition of Christ's body and blood to my faith, as there is of the bread and
wine to the mouth of the receiver; sottish and superstitious people, that Use
charms or enchanted means for diseases, etc. never ask themselves, How these
things work, by any natural virtue in them, or by the devil the author of
them; And so here, there are thousands that have a reverend esteem of these
mysteries, yea and a superstitious conceit, thinking that there is some good in
them, and imagining at least that they shall be better for them, but whether to
apply their eye to the very things themselves, or to Christ they know not, nor
matter not, but rest in a confUsed imagination, just as they that Use charms.
Now for redress of this confUsed notion, I commend that of famous Dr Whitaker,
Quasi De Euchar. page 624. in 40.
Christos in medio sederet, etc. As if Christ fate amongst you, and did the
same as in the first Supper, so ought we to think of this Sacrament, and that
is to see Christ, to take, and bless, and say to us, This is my body, take and
eat; This is my blood, Drink ye all of it, a very effectual consideration,
according to that good old solemn word, Used to be spoken to the people at this
Table, Surjum corda, Have your hearts upward, to which they answered, Habemus
ad Dominum.

Now as to others that have their eyes so near the book that they see the
worse, I mean such as by curious enquiry, and too much niceness, how it is
possible that the eating of a piece of bread, and drinking of a sup of wine,
should exhibit and convey to the faith of a believer, the very true and real
body and blood of Christ, do dispute themselves into a naked figure and sign,
as a painted supper represents a true. I say this, That God imitates men in
their assurances or conveyances, as we read of his oath, of his earnest, of his
seal; so that as men in passing of estates and inheritances, do make Deeds, and
seal them, and deliver them, and then the real estate is not conveyed out by
virtue of a bit of wax, but by the Donors sealing that wax, and fastening it to
his Deed, and delivering it as his Act and Deed: So God, or the Lord Jesus
Christ makes a Covenant of giving Christ and eternal life to believers, and
appoints Sacraments to be Seals of that Covenant, and delivers this sealed
Covenant to a believer, and thereby really and truly the Lord Jesus Christ; for
in hoc sacro, speaking of the Supper, says Bernard, non solum quaelibet
gratia. sed Sermon. de caena. 2.
ille in quo est, omnis gratia, not only some one certain grace is given, but
he in whom is all grace viz. Christ Jesus the Lord. And yet I must not say,
that God has so tied himself, or us, to the sacramental Seals, as that no man
can have Christ, or the inheritance without them, for that faith which eats and
drinks the flesh and blood of Christ extra Sacramentum, Joh. 6. 50, 51, 53, 54.
does save, and the Covenant ( whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved)
passes the estate effectually to a believer, though it be never sealed
sacramentally, so a Will unsealed and unwritten too, will stand good to many
purposes. The Emperor Valentinian earnestly desired Baptism, but before
Ambrose could come died; He was said, says Ambrose, voto Baptismi, by the
desire of Baptism: No, The desire was good, but it was his faith in Christ that
saved him. Creed and manducasti, says Austin, Believe and thou have eaten;
What then need we care for Sacraments? Yea, the Covenant passes the Estate, the
Seal secures and quiets it; God need neither add to his Promise, Oath or Seal,
to bind himself thereby, but to settle us.

CHAP. IV. Of the Time of this Sacraments Institution; And of Judas his
betraying Christ.
SO much of the Author, now to the Time of this The time.
Institution, In the same night wherein he was betrayed; The Lord Jesus was
betrayed, he was betrayed in the night, The same night in which he was
betrayed, he instituted and celebrated this Supper.

The Lord Jesus was betrayed. The same word signifies Gods delivering up his
Son to death, Romans 8. 32. and Judas his delivering up his Master to the Jews,
Luke 22. 4. and the Jews their delivering of him up to Pilate, Mat. 27. 18. God
is not said to betray his Son, becaUse according to his purpose, and out of
his love to mankind, he delivered him to death for their redemption, but both
the Jews and Judas are said to have betrayed him, they for envy seeking his
blood, Matthew. 27. 18. He for covetousness seeking money, Matthew. 26. 15. for it
is thought that Judas conceived that Christ would slip out of the mids of them,
and go away, as often he had done, and then his Master were safe, and he had
his money, for it is said, Matthew. 27. 2. that then Judas which had betrayed him,
when he saw that Christ was condemned, repented himself. It Is a good saying,
that we should not look on pleasure, as it comes toward us, but as it goes from
us. Sin before it be committed seems to the eye of lust full of profit,
pleasure, after commission when the lust is spent, Ammon hates Tamar for whom
he was sick before.

But the traitor sticks fastest to Judas; he is (...) the betrayer of Christ
his Lord and Master, and therefore the brand is set upon him, Judas Iscariot
who betrayed him, as on Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin, and how did he
betray him? He brought a band of men to the place where Christ was, and marked
him out unto them with a kiss, Matthew. 26. 48. This is he, take him, and hold
him fast. This Text refers not to Gods delivering up of Christ, nor to the Luke
22. 48.
Jews, but to Judas; for it is said, In the night that he was betrayed, and that
was by Judas only.

being an instrument to bring to pass Gods holy council and purpose, plunged
himself by his sin into Obs.
deep damnation. It was Gods purpose and decree that Christ should die, and he
himself delivered him up to death, but as God holily and justly does what
Joseph's brethren do sinfully, so he delivers up the Lord Jesus by wicked hands,
Luke 22. 22. The Son of man goes, viz dies, (...), as it was decreed and
determined, But woe to that man by whom he is betrayed, it had been good for
that man that he had not been born. It is according as it is decreed, yet woe
to that man, etc. Acts 2. 23. He was delivered by the determinate council and
foreknowledge of God, but you have slain him by wicked hands; God brings his
holy councels, purposes and decrees to pass by most wicked instruments; The
giving up his Son to death was the most glorious work of grace and love that
ever was, but effected by most wicked hands. Godly men could not be employed in
such services. An Artificer Uses a crooked tool to do that which he cannot do
by a strait one; The secret will of God is no rule of our obedience, Nec omnis
revelata, says Ainsw. not every revealed Medull a lib. cap. 1.. 23.
will neither his instance is of Jeroboam to whom it was revealed long before
that he should have ten Tribes, 1 King. 11. ^1. which yet peccavit occupando,
he sinned in assuming, 2 Chronicles. 3. 5, 6, 7. The revealing of an event, which
God has determined, or those actions, whereby that event shall be brought to
pass, gives no warrant, for else Hazael, being told 2 King. 8. 12.
before, and Judas too, what they should both do, might have been pleaded for
justification; After a wonderful manner, says Austin, that is against Gods
will, which is not besides it. It Is against the will of his command, which is
our rule, which is not beside the will of his purpose, and yet may be our sin,
God is just and gracious in delivering up his Son to death, but Judas and the
Jews sin horribly in it, there is Romans 12. 2. That good, and acceptable, and
perfect will of God, which the godly are to hold unto, but for the Act. 2. 23.
(...), Gods determinate council Pharaoh and Judas, and Herod, and Pilate, the
worst names in the whole world, may be the instruments and damned midwives to
bring it to the birth; for (as Mr Brightman says in another case) a fair and
perfect child born does not make any thing the better, the adultery in which
it was begotten: so the being the work of Gods purpose, nothing warrants the
act of any man, or of Judas that betrayed Christ. I must not enlarge upon these.

The Lord Jesus was betrayed in the night. Judas marches as Captain of the band
of men, and Officers of the Chief-Priests and Pharisees, unto the Garden with
Lanterns, Torches, Weapons, Joh. 18. 3. They are cunning to do their work in
the night without notice, and noise, and tumult; He that about an hour or two
ago had been at Passover with Christ, now betrays him; He had sold him before,
and now delivers him.

Judas was present at, and participant of the Lords Supper, that is, whether he
received both Sacraments, the Passover and the Lords Supper, we may happily
hereafter consider, but at the Passover he was at that Passover, which Christ
says, he had heartily desired to eat with them, Luke 22. 15. and with the
holiest society in the world, but he was a Serpent in Paradise all the while.

a thief, John ^2. 6.

2. His Covetousness in time began to fly at great gain; for though he
retained to such a Master, and was both a Teacher and Preacher of heavenly
Doctrine, yet he thrives from a thief to a traitor, and exposed to sale the
most precious jewel, Jesus Christ, Luke 22. 3.

3. Of this sin he went breeding, and came full Matthew. 26. 16.
of it to the Passover; This he had premeditated, and with this he was
prepossest, and with no better preparation comes to the Sacrament, to which he
came not to repent of his sin, but to cover it: So some men Use Religion, and
his success was according, for what he was conceived with before, now is
quickened, After the sop Satan entered into him, Joh. 13. 27.

4. He goes from the Sacrament full of Satan, and within few hours sels that
blood which should have been sprinkled on his door-posts.

etc. they think to receive Christ in the Sacrament, and Satan receives them;
for you must know, That as Christ is presented in the Sacrament, so Satan is
present at it, to enter in after the morsel, being first by the morsel sealed
to be his. Sins of purpose and resolution, are the key that opens the door for
his entrance, do not look at Judas his particular sin of selling his Master,
that was not yet, but look at his purpose and resolution to commit the sin,
for that was now even at the Sacrament, that was it that set open the door to
the Devil, and such a purpose to continue in your sins, will do the like
office for Satan in you, as in him, that is, hold the door open. The Devil had
put it into Judas heart, Joh. 13. 2. and after the Supper he entered into him,
verse. 27.

It Is true, the best of us bring sin and corruption in us, and with us to the
Lords Table, it is well if it be sour herbs to this Passover, but it must not
be unleavened bread, sweet sins; we may come with sour sins, but not with
sweet. The Apostles (as Luke relates, Chap. 22. 24.) had some ambition and
desire of greatness in them, which even now began to peep up, and our Savior
checks it, and they also freshly come from the Lords Table showed infirmity,
they could not pray with him, they all ran away from him, after denied him:
What alas, so soon after the Sacrament? We learn this excellent lesson, to
bewail our corruptions that bubble up in us, even while we are at the Table,
and those in us which still appear in us, when we are newly gone from it.

But there is great difference between their sins and Judasses, they thought of
some preferment under Christ, and he made a preferment of him; He like a false
soldier forsook his colors, and fled to the other side; They were routed and
ran away with intent to return again, for (...): His was an old fire that had
long lien in him, and been fed by him: Theirs were some sparklings that
sparkled, and soon went out: His was premeditated and purposed sin, theirs upon
the sudden temptation; They were imperfectly good, he was perfectly evil, as
was said of Simon Magus, Act. 8 2^. Thou art in the gall of bitterness, not,
there is some gall of bitterness in thee.

I have said this, and laid open Judas to affright men, not from the Supper,
but unto preparation or self-examination, And so let him come, says the Text.
I will wash mine hands in innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar, Psalm.
^6. 6. For when or where do ye read such an expression, as verse. 29. He that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats damnation, drinks damnation to himself: It
puts me in mind of a comparison of Chrysostoms in his Sermon de proditione
Judae. As corporal food, finding (...), a stomach possessed with ferment, vicious
humors, does more hurt than good, and incReases the disease, not of it is own
nature, but by fault of the stomach: So this Sacrament received by wicked men,
aggravates their condemnation, not of it self, but through their unrepented
sins.

The same night in which he was betrayed, the Lord Jesus did both institute and
celebrate this Sacrament. The concurrent testimony of the Evangelists, and of
Paul in this Text, asserts it as the first Passover in Egypt, was eaten in
the night, so was this Supper, and as that was kept in aftertimes as a
memorial of the destroying Angel, his passing over the hoUses of Israel, until
the death of Christ: So this is kept as a memorial of the deliverance of the
Church from eternal destruction by the death of Christ, until his second
coming.

CHAP. V. Why Christ deferred the instituting of this Supper, until the night
in which he was betrayed.
THat Christ could have ordained this Supper before this time there is no
doubt, but why he deferred it to this night in which he was betrayed, (...),
Chrysostom. in loc.
says Chrysostom, was not without some Reason; and the Lord himself intimates
as much, Luke 22. 15. With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with
you, before I suffer: Which Reasons are diverse, and may be ordered to two heads:

1. Why he instituted it at the close of the Supper, for after Supper he took
the Cup, v. 24.

2. Why he instituted and celebrated it a few hours (if hours) before he was
betrayed.

coena justa Grotius.
or apolytica, the dimissory Supper it must of necessity be at night, for the
Passover was eaten at the beginning or forepart of the night, therefore
Christ was necessitate legis adactus, says Peter Martyr, moved by In locum.
necessity of the Law to do it in the night, and after Supper, as substituting
it in the place and room of the Passover (as Paraeus) which he first
fulfilled, and then abrogated it, and he abrogated it as one that did not
impugn it, for it was an Ordinance of God, and therefore he did not tear it
down, as some old hangings off the wall, but he did fulfill it by Observing it,
and decently laid it in the grave by placing in its room the memorial of an
infinitely greater, and more largely extending mercy, than the deliverance from
Egypt was: So that when he whom that roasted and slain Lamb did type out, was
as the true Passover slain and sacrificed, then it was time the body being
present to draw a curtain over the picture, and in stead of that commemoration
Used at the Passover, when they broke the bread, and distributed it, saying,
This is the bread of affliction, which our Fathers suffered in Egypt, to put a
new memorial upon it, This is my body broken for you; This is my blood shed for
you, and as that continued in the Church till the body came which that shadow
represented; so shall this continue in the Church, till the person come alive,
which is here represented dying, and then an end of this too

2. At the end of the paschal Supper, to show that Jansen. Harm. p. 105.
in this Sacrament there is no bodily repast intended, for they had already
supped, but a spiritual refection of the soul. The roasted Lamb might afford the
guests a belly-full; so the Religion, and Ordinances, and Promises in the Law
were more outward and bodily, but this Sacrament of the Gospel is an after
Supper modicum, full of spiritual signification, but not so stuffie for outward
matter, that we may prepare, not (as Austin says) our months, but our faith,
and expect to satisfy not the hunger and thirst of the body, as they might,
but the hunger and thirst of the soul, which in this little model may find
enough and overmeasure: The Temple-service among the Jews was an Heb. 9. 1, 10.
Romans 2. penult.
outward Religion, and as their Ordinances were outward, so they generally were
Jews outwardly; we wonder that they so little saw and tasted the marrow and
kernel of them, and stuck in the rind feeding on the crust of most Ordinances,
as if a man should think the cloth would heal the sore, and not the plaster
spread upon it; but if we take estimate of them by our selves, we shall find
that most of us should have been as they in that case, for God having ordained
for us outward Sacraments, for number few, for Observation easy, for
signification excellent, as Austin speaks, Epist. 118.
we are for the general, but outward in them, and though we be clearlier taught
what is within them, yet we are in the Use of them, but outwardly reverent as
they, and do not spiritually and inwardly enjoy the kernel of them, which the
Apostle took notice of, when he said, Not discerning the Lords body, and so
they are seals indeed, but rather seals of a Letter, which shut it up, than
seals of a Deed or Covenant conveying the Estate to us.

3. Though it be not a Reason why this Ordinance was appointed after the
Passeover-Supper, yet I may Observe it to you in this place, that hence it is
called The Lords Supper, from the Author it is called the Lords, and from the
Time it is called a Supper, being celebrated in the night, and at the close of
Supper. Some later Maldonat. in Mat. 26. 26. Estius in 1 Cor. 11. 20.
Jesuits do tax the novelty of the name, and affirm, Nullus in Scriptura
locus, etc. No place of Scripture calls it so; for the term in this Chapter
refers, say they, to the (...), or Feasts of Love, Used with it, they may say
as well, that Lords Table (1 Cor. 10. 21.) refers to them too, which we believe
not; it is a spiritual feast, that which Matthew calls a dinner, Matthew. 22. 4.
is called by Luke a Supper, Luke 14. 16. but we call it the Lords Supper,
though it be received in the morning, or any other time of day, with reference
to the time of the first institution, as the Passover in aftertimes was
called the Passover, not becaUse there was any destroying Angel past over
their hoUses every year, but in respect of the first Passover in Egypt, and
in memory of that, wherein there was a passing over the Israelites hoUses, and
a destroying of the Egyptians firstborn. I could name to you many other
names, that this Sacrament bears in Scripture and ancient Authors, far more
ancient then their Missa, which is but once found in Ambrose, and in none
before him, or the Sacrament of the Altar, as they call it, but I insist not
now on names. He that will may see them in Casaub. Exercit. 16.



1. He now seals his will, which men Use to do Paraeus in loc.
when they are in sight of death. This is the New Testament (says he) in my
blood; when men make their Wills, they bequeath their body to the earth. Christ
bequeaths his body and blood to us; He bestows his body natural on his body
mystical, the Church; The Testatour is Christ, Heb. 9. 16. The Legacy bestowed
is himself, and all spiritual benefits with him, My body and blood; The heirs
are, all believers, Disciples; The Executours for the outward part are those to
whom he says, Hoc facite, do this, execute this my Will; The Witnesses are the
Evangelists, and Saint Paul; Here is a perfect sealing then of a Testament,
which is of force by the death of the Testatour, and nothing must be added or
taken away, for it is a Will sealed and Gal. 3. 15.
published.

2. To leave it as his ultimum vale, or last memorial Aug. Epist. 118
of precious relish and esteem; when men are going, then they give memorial
gifts unto their friends, then they give their pictures, Keep this for me,
Remember me, when you see me not; When men are dying, then they pull their ring
off their finger, and leave it with their beloved; Oh what impression have the
verba morientis, the word of a dying man! As if a man, says Chrysostom,
should say to children, These were your fathers dying words, This was his last
charge, This he spoke and died, and there is nothing that is remembered with
more awe, more affection than the last words, the last gift of dying friends.

3. To testify his dearest love to his Church and people, that when death was
in sight, and all the unspeakable sorrows, shame and suffering, were now ready
to invade him, when injuries from men were ready to load him, and the justice
of God upon sin to be demonstrated on him, all these did not make him forget
his love; His love to his poor people overtop'd all; He loved them to the end,
Joh. 13. 2. and expressed it at the last, and when he was in expectation of
utmost sorrow, he forgets not his love to his.

4. To fortify his Disciples against temptations, which were now rushing in
upon them, when they should presently see their Lord led away as a prisoner to
be arraigned, and themselves scattered and discouraged. Peter denying, bloody
enemies insulting, then to fortify their hearts, Let not your hearts be
troubled, Joh. 1^. 1. He administers this Sacrament to strengthen the Union and
Communion between him and them, and to tie them to him so fast, that the gates
of hell might not prevail against them, that their faith might not fail, though
it fainted, as was said to Peter, and though they fall, yet they might not
utterly be cast down, as the Psalmist says; They had before eaten the body,
which they after saw broken, and drunk the blood which they after saw shed; The
broken body was not theirs that broke it; The blood shed was not theirs that
shed it, but it was theirs that had before eaten it, and drunk it; so God
underprops his weak servants before the wind blow, and seasonably antidotes
the hearts before the bitter cup, that they may stand fast, though for fear
they runaway.

5. That when we iterate this Sacrament our hearts may be pricked with
remembrance of this dismal night, Chrysostom in loc.
(...), says Chrysostom, that he might exceedingly prick us; for a wounded
heart is a good preparative to the receiving of a wounded Savior, He was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, Isa. 53. 5.
Let a man survey this night how his blessed Savior was for him betrayed into
the hands of bloody men; This right he was plunged into most doleful sorrows;
He was amazed and laden with grief, exceeding sorrowful, in a woeful agony,
sweating like drops of blood, running down to the ground without any comfort
from any man; his chief Disciples could not pray with him, all fled and ran
away from him, betrayed by one of his own, denied by another, sending forth
loud cries and tears; God smit the Shepherd, scattered the flock, an Angel from
heaven strengthening him, an Angel that had not the benefit of Redemption by
him, but not a man for whose Redemption this was: Oh the dark eclypse that now
seized on this Sun of righteousness! Who can express the anguish and dolor
of this night, (...), though he was a very stone, says Chrysostom, it would
melt him, wound him? Therefore I exhort you all, when you come to this
Sacrament, bring this night with you, bring this night with you in which he was
betrayed: It is a night of Observation to be remembered, as was said of the
first Passover in Egypt, Exodus 12. 42. so it may be said of the night of this
first Supper, read, read again, or get some body to read to you, this History
related by Matthew or St Luke, and water your meditations with sorrowful
tears, not as he that wept when he read the History of Dido in the Poet, out of
an imaginary compassion, but as beholding in this glass both your sins, and
your redemption. This do in remembrance of him.

CHAP. VI. Of the outward of this Ordinance of the Supper.
1 COR. 11. 23, 24, 25. He took bread, and when he had given thanks, etc.
This do in remembrance of me, verse. 24. Drink it in remembrance of me, verse.
25. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the
Lords death, verse. 26. Therefore as several dishes are but one Supper, so these
several signs are the parts of one Sacrament.

To avoid tautology and coincidency, I mean to open the parts distinctly, and
yet to take together element with element, rule with rule, action with action,
as fitly yoked together jointly, and so be as soon at the end of the one, as of
the other, which course of handling that word in Luke 22. 20. whom of all the
Evangelists Paul does nearliest agree with, and verse. 25. of this Chapter
(...), Likewise, or, After the same manner, points me unto, and if there be any
word in the three Evangelists that write the History of the institution
(whereof one that is Matthew was present at the action) that may serve for the
beautifying or clearing of any point, as we go along, we shall take it also
into the contexture of our Discourse. The Method and order is, to handle,
1. The outward Ordinance of this Supper. 2. The inward thing signified or
represented. 3. The mandate or command, Do this. 4. The end, For remembrance of
me.


Res Sacramenti, the thing of the Sacrament; for the Sacrament is the outward
visible sign; and therefore it is very absurdly said of Bellarmine, and other
Lib. ^. de Euch. cap. 24.
Papists, who have lest nothing but accidents, and shadow of bread and wine,
that Jesus Christ in the Eucharist is the figure and remembrance of himself, as
if one should say, that the King is the picture, or image of himself; for as Dr
Whitaker Observes, The De Sacram. page 616.
body and blood of Christ is no Sacrament, but the thing it self whereof the
Sacrament is taken; As the contract is no ring, but that whereof the ring is a
pledge; The Covenant is no Seal, but that whereof the Seal is, though in vulgar
speech, when we take the Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament in
complexion, we Use to say, that the Sacrament consists of two parts, Terrena
and coelesti, as Irenaeus says, an earthly Iren. l. 4. c. 34. Whitak. de
Sacram. 626.
and a heavenly, an outward and an inward, a visible and an invisible, Ut duae
naturae in Christo.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or the outward Ordinance consists.

1. Of materials or elements, bread and wine.

2. Of rituals or actions about those elements, and they are,

1. The Rites Used by Christ, or some other in his name, He took bread, he
blessed, etc.

2. The Actions of the Communicants, They take and eat, they take and drink;
And so ye have a Sacrament consisting of several elements, and sundry outward
rites and actions, all concurring to the essence or integrity of this Sacrament.

. 3. Of the Elements Bread and Wine.


1. Two, viz. Bread and Wine: Our Melchisedech entertains the children of
Abraham, as that Melchisedech did Abraham himself, Genesis 18. ^8. He brought
forth to him bread and wine. Christ did not take these two by accident, becaUse
he found them then on the Table, but by choice and election for their Use in
signifying. The old Church of Israel had a Table-Sacrament, the Passover, and
Christ will have the Gospel Church to have a Table-Sacrament too, this Supper;
but as before Christ their Sacrifices and Sacraments were all bloody: So when
Christ the substance of all Sacrifices and Sacraments has suffered, the
Sacraments of the Gospel and Sacrifices are unbloudy: Many Divines show the
convenience of Bread and Wine to be the materials of this Sacrament, Vide J
nsen. Harm. p. 626.
and some with too much fancy, The representation of his Body broken, and of
his Blood shed. The participation of his Body and Blood for soulstrength, and
soul-refreshment, could not be better shadowed forth than by the staff of
Bread; and cheerful Wine; which as they are the most common* so the most
necessary and prime materials that are Used at our tables, answering both our
appetites of hunger and thirst; weakness is strengthened by bread, faintness
cherisht by wine, the faint and feeble soul by Christ. Famine and thirst are
importunate things, no delights of the eye, no Music to the ear can satisfy
them. Violent desires toward Christ are not to be excUsed, but praised: For
his Flesh is meat indeed, his Blood is drink indeed, Joh. 6. 55.

2. Bread and Wine severally and asunder, to set forth his death, wherein
Corpus a sanguine separatum fuit, says Jansenius, his Body and his Blood Harm.
896.
was sundred. The Papists, as to their Priests and some Kings or Princes, will
allow bread and wine, but as to the common people, bread or wine they say by
concomitancy, the blood is in the bread virtually, and so they shut up the
wounds of Christ by their dry Mass. But Christ would represent himself here not
as a Lamb, but a Lamb sacrificed and slain; and therefore the blood is severed
from the body, as the money is not a prisoners ransom, while it lies in the
chest, but when it is paid: So the blood of Christ as shed is our ransom. As
Israel in the wilderness had a type of Christ, Manna which they did eat, and
the rock also of which they drank, so have we the memorials of his body and
blood, that we may eat and drink.

And which is the sum of all that may be said on this point, since the Lord
was pleased even under the Gospel to continue that old way of Fellowship and
Communion with his Church, by entertaining them at his own Table, upon his own
cheer in an Ordinance of eating and drinking; as he always allowed the
Israelites to feast with him upon the remainders of the Sacrifices in token of
followship: and the very Heathens did by feasting on their Sacrifices testify
their fellowship with their Idols, as is plain, 1 Cor. 10. 18, 19, 20. I see
not how more fit materials could be Used then Bread and Wine, which as they
best stand with the simplicity of the Gospel, so they are the most common and
necessary attendants in all feasts, and do both together set forth that full
and perfect nourishment which we find in Christ.

As for that I find in Cyprian, and from him in Cyp. Epist. 76. Aug. Tract. in
Jo. cap. 6. 26.
August. and after both, in most Divines, That as one bread is made of many
grains, and one cup of wine of many grapes, so the Church is one Body of many
Members; whose Communion and Fellowship is here professed, testified and
signified by their participation of one Bread and of one Cup: The allusion is
proper, and not unlike that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 17. We being many are
one bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread. And this
union of members was anciently professed with all dearness of love and
affection in the Use of this Ordinance; and they delighted to express their
division and separation from all the world, their combination and
concorporation among themselves, by all entercourses of love and dearness that
could be; their Feasts of Love, their Kiss, mentioned in Scripture and ancient
Authors, are hereof great witnesses.

But what shall those places or Countries do that have no bread of corn, no
fruit of the vine: I confess that though God said in the Passover, a Lamb
Exodus 12. 5.
or Kid, yet Christ expresses nothing there of other materials, and therefore
in case of extreme necessity, where the proper Elements cannot be had, they
must either be without the Ordinance, or celebrate in that which is
Analogicall, and which passes for bread with them, or wine with them; which
it is better (say some) to do, than wholly to be deprived; Moulin Buckler page
531. Beza Epist. 2.
but this Eclipse is not likely to be seen in our Horison, therefore I shall
not further discuss it.

. 4. The Rites or Actions about the Sacrament.


Now I proceed to the Rites or Actions; and first them of Christ's using, in
which you are to Use your eye: as in the Word preached God speaks to your ear,
so here he speaks to your eye. The Sacrament is a visible Word, and therefore I
hold it requisite that the Communicant be within sight of the Elements and
Actions, that he may see the bread and the wine, Taken, Blessed, Broken, Poured
forth; and not in corners and holes, whence he has not the actions under
command of his eye. Not that I deny but a blind man may receive the Sacrament,
but that all means of spiritual impression must be Used. Behold, says Moses,
the blood of the Covenant, Exodus 24. 8.

The first Action of Christ is, He took bread, likewife after supper, the cup,
so Paul, so Luke. He took the bread, he took the cup, so Matthew and Mark: of
the two Elements the Bread is first taken both by Christ, and by the
Communicant: This order is to be held by the consent of all the four Writers;
And of Christ's Action, let us Note

1. That Christ took the Bread into his hands, he took the Cup into his hands,
Observing the rite and custom then Used, and gave thanks over the Bread,
holding it in his hands, and so over the Cup, having it in his hands: This is
the first step toward the separating and setting apart the Elements; he took
them in his hand, see there was a solemn rite that the pater familias did Use
to take into his hands and bless these principal parts of the meal or feast.
The taking of the Lamb was the first action toward the Paschall, Exodus 12. 2,
5, 21.

2. That Christ took and blessed the Bread and the Cup severally, one after the
other: He took Bread and blessed, and pronounced, This is my Body. Afterward he
took the Cup and blessed, and pronounced, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood: The Evangelists Matthew and Mark express it, Luke and Paul likewise
confirm it; and if there were nothing else, the very rule and usage amongst the
Jews to bless them severally, would prove it to us.

3. But whether there was any intervall of time between his taking and blessing
the Bread and the Wine, is a harder knot: Matthew and Mark say, As they were
eating, or as they did eat, he took Bread: Luke and Paul say, After they had
supped he took the Cup: This seems to plead for some intervall of time, Videtur
says Calvin in 1 Cer. 11. 25. In Mar. 14. 22. Beza.
and yet if Matthew and Mark be viewed alone, the Action seems to be continued:
What wedge must be Used for this knot? Beza hints that (...) may be variously
translated, When they had eaten: but I shall not grant Beza his Interpretation,
but hold to our own, and appeal to the rule or custom then received amongst the
Jews, to decide the Controversy: for if those words, As they were eating, be
all one with those of Paul, After they had supped, then how does Paul and Luke
so frequently and emphatically apply them to the Cup, which may by that
interpretation be said of the Bread also. The rise Gretius in Matthew. 26. 26.
was, that while they were eating, not the Passover Lamb (for so all that
Christ did was after supper) but the post coenam or after supper, the second
course, and toward the end thereof, the Master took bread and blessed and brake
it, and distributed it with a signification of the bread of affliction in
Egypt; then at the very close, and after all eating, the Cup was taken and
blessed, what intervall of time went between I know not. Non constat, says
Calvin, whether Calvin in 1 Cor. 11. 25.
the Action was continued, but I believe the Bread was eaten, before the Cup
was blessed or taken; and Christ that instituted no new Rites, but set a Hugh
Brought^^.
new superscription on the old metal, imitated this custom, and took and
blessed the Bread while they were yet eating, and took and blessed the Cup at the
close after all, and so all are agreed: And here let me show you a Reason why
the Churches now are not bound to consecrate and distribute the Bread before
they consecrate the Wine, as it was in Christ's Supper, becaUse the Rite was so
at that time, and the thing being merely occasional, is not obligatory, but
indifferent: We pronounce the words of signification, This is my Body, This Cup
is, etc. severally, but we do not distribute the Bread before we bless the
Wine; that Christ did occasionally to the Rite.

4. The Bread which Christ took into his hands, was such as was obvious and
ordinary, on the Table at that time, (...), says Matthew, signanter; some
Cameron in Mycoth. Matthew. 26.
peculiar Bread designed and prepared for that Use, doubtless unleavened,
according to Law and custom; and yet the Greek Church stiffly holds to leavened
bread, on opinion that Christ kept his last Passover on the 13th day of the
month, one day before the time by Law prefixed for leaven to commence; and of
this opinion for the day is a late Learned Writer, in his answer to six
Queries, who also holds that Christ and his Disciples at this time did eat no
Lamb, but kept only the usual post coenum or aftersupper. As to the time I
assent not, and therefore hold the bread unleavened, in which the Romanist
celebrates the Supper; and Calvin would not contend in so slight a matter,
against the same custom Used in Geneva; nor do we make it any matter of moment,
but bless such as the Table does afford, being pure and wholesome, as the Use
requires.

The Cup which Christ took has this mark, it (...). ^os. Hallel.
was a Cup after they had supped; and that was the Cup of the Hallell, or of
the Hymn the last Cup, which Used very solemnly to be blessed; this mark, after
supper, differences it from that Cup, Luke 22. 17. He took the cup and gave
thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among your selves: This is not the
Cup which Christ took into his Supper, for that comes after, ver. 20. There
were diverse Cups solemnly blessed and given round at this Passover feast, three
or four, therefore this which Christ took in, is the very last, after which
they eat and drunk no more that time: And the last Cup was even among the
Heathens counted solemn and sacred, in honorem Grotius in Matthew. 26. 26.
(...), in honor of their good Genius, etc.

. 5. Of Christ his Consecration or Blessing of the Elements.
He took Bread and giving thanks he brake; likewise also the Cup. He took the
Bread and blessed, Matthew. 26. 16. Mark 14. 22. He took Bread and gave thanks,
Luke 22 19. and St Paul here: Two of them say of the Bread, He blessed: Two of
them say of the same Bread, He gave thanks. They all say of the Cup, He gave
thanks; and yet in another place, 1 Cor. 10. 6. The Cup of blessing which we
bless; what can be more plainly inferred hence, then that these two words (...),
are in this business of one signification and effect, as in Mark 8. 6, 7. He
gave thanks and brake the bread or loaves, the fishes he blessed. Shall we be so
trivially curious as to seek criticisms in a thing so plain. Not only our
Divines, but Romanists also consent, he blessed the Bread by thanksgiving and
prayer over it; He prayed God, he blessed God, or he gave God thanks, and thereby
blessed the Bread and Wine; therefore it is said, The Cup of blessing which we
bless, apply the one of these words to God, he gave him thanks, the other to
the Bread, as Paraeus and others, all comes to one, the Bread and the Cup were
blessed by Prayer and In loc. Jansen. Harm. p. 96.
Thanksgiving. Thus the Jew in his form blessed his Bread and Cup, by blessing
God that created the fruit of the earth, and of the vine, and these two words
in Greek express but that one in the Hebrew Barak, as Maldonate and Paraeus
note, and this blessing is that we call Consecration or Sanctification, by
which the Elements are set apart to holy Use, and segregated from common or
profane; For the further clearing of which,

First, That Christ, whether at miraculous meals, Calvin. in loc. P. Martyr. in
locum. Mark 6. 41.
or at common sittings down with his Disciples, Luke 24. 30. Matthew. 14, 19.
always gave thanks and blessed the bread. Let his holy example be a command to
us. The Jew held his meat profane, until he had blessed it. He had a form of
Religion beyond most of us, therefore the Apostle Uses the word, It Is
sanctified; It Is sanctified, or made legitimate unto us by the Word that
warrants it, and prayer that blesses it, 1 Timothy 4. 5. For shame either learn
of Christ, or of the Jew; mock not God with pulling a hat over your face, but
give thanks and bless.

Secondly, We find no form of words Used by Christ in this Consecration or
Blessing, none of the Evangelists tell us, what words he Used, but they
express the action in the same words of ordinary grace at meals, He gave
thanks, he blessed, in what words Estius in loc.
it is not reported to us; He prayed (says Estius) that the Bread and Wine
might be turned into his very body and blood; So he imagines; But who told him
so? No Scripture nor ancient Father. The Jewish form of words is known in their
Rituals, Rara benedictio (says Scaliger) without these solemn words, Blessed
be thou, O Lord, that have sanctified us by thy commands, and given us a charge
concerning such or such a thing. In Reason Christ did accomode his blessing to
the occasion, praising God for his Redemption of mankind, and for the coming
of his Kingdom, for his new Testament or Covenant, and a blessing upon his
Ordinances and people. Ignorantia licita est, says Scotus, It Is a lawful
ignorance not to know Lib. 4. did. 8. qu. 2.
the words of consecration. But as to those operative and conversive words (as
they call them) This is my body, wherein the Schoolmen show their learned
fopperies, those almighty words, whereby a silly Priest makes his maker; And as
Lapide hyperbolically See Annot. in 1 Cor. 11. 25.
says, If Christ had not been incarnate, would have incarnated him; They must
not be angry, if with Pope Innocent the third, that great Creator of
Transubstantiation, we deny them to be the words of Consecration for three
Reasons:

1. BecaUse Christ bad his Disciples, Take and Eat This is my body. Reasons why
they are not the words of consecration.
before he pronounced those words, This is my Body, and he did not sure bid
them, Take and Eat the Bread before it was blessed and consecrated.

2. BecaUse the words of consecration or blessing should in Reason be spoken to
God, not to the Disciples of the bread, as these are.

3. BecaUse these words, This is my Body are assertive, signifying what the
bread is, and (as one of themselves says) should be false and untrue, if they
should not signify what the bread is, before the words be pronounced, not what
they shall be afterward. God when he created light, said not, This is light,
but Let there be light.*

Thirdly, The form of Consecration or blessing Used by the Churches of Christ
is Thanksgiving and Prayer, reciting the words of Institution, as they are here
in Paul, or the other Evangelists. We (says Lib. 6. de Euch. cap. 5.. 12.
Chamier speaking of the French Churches) do religiously Observe, to pray to
God that these Elements which Christ has sanctified may be profitable to us
unto salvation, and we recite to a word the first Institution of this Ordinance
out of Saint Paul, viz. in this very Chapter. So the Church of England in their
form, so is it directed since, Thanksgiving, Prayer, and the words of
Institution recited, as for Exhortations ad populum, then also Used, with which
anciently in England, and now, we first begin, together with places of
Scripture memorized and in ulatum of the worthy, they are rather to consecrate
you, and quicken up unto liveliness your faith and graces. Now we may not take
(...), strictly to exclude prayer; For as Chrysostom Observes, it denotes the
praising of Exercit. p. 382. P. Martyr. in 1 Cor. 11. 24.
God, the giving of thanks, prayer, and the blessing of the Symbols, and
therefore we read in Justin Martyr, in this action, (...), and (...) Epist. 2.
Lib. de Trin. 3. cap. 4.
(...), and Austin calls it Panem prece mystica celebratum; So Jerome Jansen.
Harm. p. 99.
ad Evagrium. So others, So generally Christ made choice of, and sanctified
these Species, or these kinds, Bread and Wine to be the Materials or Elements
of his Supper, and these we bless by prayer and thanksgiving, reciting his
Institution, The Cup of blessing which we bless, 1 Cor. 10. 16. and this is
verbum ad Elementum, or sanctifying by the Word and Prayer, and from this word
(...), giving thanks: The Lords Supper has been anciently called (...), the
Eucharist, (...), says Justin, (...) Apol. ^.
(...). Origin. cont. Cells. l. 8.

. 6. That a Presbyter only can consecrate or bless the Elements to this Use.
He gave thanks, or he blessed, and for aftertimes he commanded his Apostles,
hoc facite. This was not then the action of the Communicant, they eat and
drink, but they do not consecrate, this is the action of those that Christ
authorizeth by a lawful calling to be Stewards of his Word and Sacraments. The
Pater-familias did bless the Bread and Cup in and unto his own family or
company, becaUse it was a hoUse, a chamber-supper, but the Temple service of
sacrificing was lawful to none, but to a Priest; and if Christ has ordained a
lawful calling of Officers and Ministers, called his for the service of his
Church under the Gospel, as it appears to us; this act of all others does
properly belong to them to bless in his Name, for it is (...), public Office,
we find no Rule or Example in Scripture to the contrary, and if that be a good
argument in point of calling, which is delivered Heb. 7. 13, 14. that of the
Tribe of Judah no man gave attendance at the Altar, for Moses spoke nothing of
that Tribe concerning Priesthood, then we may Reasonably argue, That no private
man that is not called by God can perform the Office of a public Minister, for
Christ spoke nothing of them concerning the Stewardship of his Mysteries.
Justin Martyr is clear the (...) did Apol. 2.
bless and consecrate, the Deacons did indeed carry about the bread and wine,
and deliver them, but not bless them, and therefore Jerome speaking of the
difference between a Deacon, and a Presbyter, or a Minister, says, What does
the Deacon swell against the Ministers ad quorum preces corpus Domini
conficitur, by or at whose prayers the body of Christ is made? Whitak. de
Euchar. 651.
I shall not be tedious in this point, Convenit inter omnes Pontificios. It Is
agreed on all hands by the Papists Instit. l. 4. e. 15.. 20. De Euchar. page
656.
for the Character sake, and for our Divines. Calvin says, It Is a part of the
Ecclesiastical Ministry to dispense the Sacraments, and if you will, you may
see Whitakers de Euchar* who acknowledges, That the efficacy of the Sacrament
depends not on the person or quality of the Minister (though Jerome on 2. Ephan.
3. has a strange passage to the contrary) yet that it is no Sacrament, except
he that celebrates it have authority from Christ Jesus, whom he calls
Sacrilegious and Profane persons that dare attempt it without Commission, and
makes the difference thus, What if any man shall set a public Seal, which he
has stolen into his hands, Is it all one as if done by a public Notary, or
allowed Officer? No, surely. I know there is a little dissertation de coena,
that debates the Question, what may be done, ubi Pastores desunt? And I know
the Socinians, those Levellers of Divinity, that slight Christ into a mere man,
his blood from a Sacrifice to a Martyrdom, the Sacraments into void and empty
figures, and the Ministers into fore men of the Jury, if so much; but stand you
in the old ways in this point.

. 7. That the change of the Elements is only of their Use.
Panis certa conservatione, Com. Faust. l. 20. c. 13. Apol. 2.
fit mysticus, says Austin; now the bread is not common bread, says Justin,
(...), etc. The bread when it does percipere vocationem Dei, says Irenaeus,
then it is not common bread, but the Lib. 4. c. 34. and l. 5 c. 4.
Eucharist of the body and blood of Christ. If the bread should be changed in
substance, what argument could the ancient Fathers have found thence to prove
against Marcion? that Christ had not a fantastical Iren l. 5 c. 4.
and aerie body; And how again could they every where allude thus, that the
Divine Nature of Christ did not destroy the humane? As the symbolical Nature of
the Elements destroys not the substantial and natural being; The water of
Baptism is water still; The Rock that was Christ, was a Rock still; The Serpent
on the Pole was brass still; The great Seal that conveys a great Estate is Wax
still. The Use, the office, the relation of these sacramental mysteries is high
and admirable, and becaUse the spiritual signification and Use is so admirable,
therefore the Fathers (...), exceeding rhetorically and hyperbolically do speak
of them to awaken and quicken, and cheer up the spirits of people to look upon
and Use them in their symbolical Use, as instruments and exhibitive conveyances
of Christ to our faith. Bellarmine triumphs in one word of Cyprian de Coena,
Lib. 2. de Euch. cap. 9.
Panis non effigy, sed natura mutatus, nullam admittit solutionem, a crack of
vanity; That piece is later then Cyprian, but if his, by sin of first
parents, natura humana, humane nature was changed, says Austin, Aug. de cin.
lib. 14. c. 12.
and when a man is regenerated, his nature is changed, say we, how, not his
flesh, his body, but quality, etc. Naturam expellas furca licet, what is that
but Vide Forbes Epist. Theol. p. 537.
quality or custom, not substance; The holiness of any thing sanctified to
God, infers a change of Use and relation, but not of substance, consecrations
of times, persons, places, things, may appropriate them to holy Use and ends,
and there is accordingly an esteem or reverence of such things so set apart,
but the substance of the things is as it was; for consecration is not a
Philosophers-stone, holy things may be spent in their Use, as the Sacrifices of
old, the Paschal Lamb, the bread and wine in the Supper, but the sanctifying of
them to that Use does not first change them into the thing signified, and so
destroy the sign and signification, as the relation is destroyed sublato
fundamento; Every Papist is bound to have the faith of miracles; for the
miracle of turning stones into bread is nothing so great as this of turning
bread into Christ's body. Maldonate has a story, that in his days there was a
book came forth, De Art nihil credendi, and that there was but one true saying
in it, which was this, He that will be an Atheist, let him first be a
Calvinist, and if there had been in that book, He that will believe any thing,
let him first be a Papist, there had been another, or rather, one true saying
indeed.

. 8. Of Christ's Action of Breaking the Bread.
He brake it, and so say all the three Evangelists, and he said, as here it
follows, This is my body broken for you, and concerning his blood both Matthew
and Luke say thus, This is my blood which is shed for you, which (as some say)
was in the parallel, the Cup represented correspondent to the breaking of the
bread by the Morton in loc.
pouring forth of the wine out of some greater vessel into the Cup, and so the
bread is broken, the wine is poured out, as the body of Christ was crucified,
and his blood shed: Upon this Action we shall for memory sake speak of these
particulars:

1. That from hence the Eucharist or Lords Supper has been called (...), The
breaking of bread, as the phrase, Acts 2. 42, Acts 20. 7. have been
interpreted: So Paul 1 Cor. 10. 16. The bread which we break, Is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ? Thus some love to speak in our days, calling
(I wish it be not out of singularity) this Sacrament, The breaking of bread,
which as it is by Synecdoche of the part for the whole, so it was Used by the
Hebrews of any common feast or meal, when they did eat together, and is applied
to this Sacrament, but at second hand; They began all their solemn meals with
blessing, and breaking of bread, and their feasting was called eating of bread,
Genesis ^^. 25. a form of Casaub. Exerc. 16 p. ^. 339. Beza in Act. 2. 42. and 46.
speech new and insolent to Greek and Latin ears, who called their feasts by
the other element (...), or convivia, drinkings together.

2. Christ at all other meals, where he was Master of the meal and blessed, did
also break the bread, for he that prayed the blessing, was by the Jews called
Giodw. in Antiq. Jewish. in the Passover ex Drusio.
Habbotseang, the breaker at his meal-meals, and at other, he blessed and brake,
but in this Paschal Postcaenium, or Supper, (to which you must still have your
eye) the usual Rite was, That he that blessed broke the Grot. in Mat. 26. Scult.
de emend. l. 6. p. 536
bread into parts to be distributed to the guests or sitters, and the pieces
were about the bigness of an Olive, Morton. in loc. Martyr. in loc. Beza. in
Act. 2.
says Scaliger. He that brake did eat one, and the rest were communicated; for
their bread at this time was not, as learned men say, great and thick loaves,
but 42. Steph. Glossa Mat. 26.
broad and thin, instar placentae, like your Cakes here in England; If they
were thick as ours, then may the knife Leviter scindere non Obscindere, and so
be broken.

3. The Churches of God do many of them hold this Ceremony of breaking of the
bread, and it ought to be holden. Our Churches, says Paraeus, do Par. in loc.
rightly Observe it: And in all our Churches (says Chamier) we Use it: And it
has a command, Do this, Chamier. De Euchar. lib. 7. c. 11. Piscat. in loc.
Paraeas ^^ 1 Cor. 11. contro. 2 sed non integram.
says Piscator. And therefore it is not a diaphorous or indifferent: And there
is a Dissertation in Paraeus fully debating the point, in which he does not
say, The Sacrament is null without it; nor does Beza say so, Epist. 2. Nor yet
that it is merely indifferent and left to choice, but Useful and requisite, he
holds it for good ends and significations, as I shall show, and he affirms,
That it continued in the Church, and was Used for a thousand years after
Christ. But the Papists as sacrilegious, they steal away the Cup from the
people; So they Use the Bread superstitiously, making their Host into pines
nummularios, little round wafers, like our money, and put them whole into the
mouths of the Communicants; For, says the learned Jansenius, The Church (viz.
of Rome) does laudably Harm. 895.
Observe, that the Eucharist be touched only by sacred hands (viz. the Priests:
As for Christ (says he) Promore fecit, he followed the Custom or Rite at that
time.

4. This Bread was broken, and Wine poured forth: Calvin. in loc. P. Martyr. in
locum. Beza in loc.


1. For the more lively representation of the death and grievous sufferings of
our Lord; for though a bone of him was not broken, nor his body properly, yet
the Apostle calls it broken in regard of those wounds, and pains, and torments,
which brought forth a violent death, and all this for us; As the corn is not
grinded or baked, nor the bread cut or broken, but for us, that the breaking of
his body might break our hearts, and his flowing blood, shed our tears; for it
is the highest representation of death, the bread broken, and wine poured
forth, and is Usefully Observed to raise up such affections, as the sight of a
dying Christ may work even in a heart of stone, as Chrysostom said before.

2. It was broken for distribution sake; for in Hebrew speech, to break bread
to the hungry, is to distribute it, Lam. 4. 4 and this has another meaning in
it, and sets forth the communion and fellowship of the Church, all partaking of
one Christ, and feeding on him, and his death unto eternal life, 1 Cor. 10. 17.
We being many are one bread; We are one body, and of one holy fellowship and
communion, For we are all partakers of that one bread; for Christ is that
common center in whom we meet, and by union with him, we have communion with
one another; and thus the signification is lively, one bread broken and divided
amongst many Communicants, who are one, is one Christ given wholly to every
believer, and all believers one in Christ. This brotherhood was observed and
noted for their mutual love in those times, when their profession of Christ
distinguished them from all the Heathens about them, and when they were enclosed
round by Observing and cruel men that envied and hated them to death; now that
heat is diffUsed, and not so concentered by the antiperistasis, and so is not
so warm; we stand in need of persecution to make us love one another.

. 9. Of the Manner of Christ's giving the Bread and the Wine.
He gave it to his Disciples, which in this place you find not, but in the
implication of the word Accipite, Take ye, but all the three Evangelists
Matthew, Mark, Luke, expressly say, He gave to the Disciples, He gave to them;
for the word Disciple, I leave it a while, and only speak of the Action, He
gave, that the Disciples received the bread and wine from Christ into their
hands, and not put by him into their mouths, I make no Question, as I shall
touch afterward: Nor do I doubt but they received them from his hand, for he
blessed and brake, and reached them forth to them, and so the people may be
said to receive them from the hand of the Minister that consecrates either
mediately or immediately, which may be the true meaning of that speech of
Tertullian, Nec de aliorum manu De Corona.
quam praesidentium sumimus, nor we take them (says he) from the hands of
others, but of our Presidents or Ministers, but the clear Question will be,
Whether Christ did with his own hand give to every particular person into his
hand, the bread and the cup? And, Whether there were any words spoken
particularly to every one in the delivery of them, as for instance, Take thou,
Eat thou, Drink thou?

For the first, Whether Christ did with his own hand deliver the bread and cup
into the hand of every particular Communicant, viz. immediately? We must look
still to the rite or custom Used in the Paschal Supper; and if we consider
that well, we shall see it probable, that the Pater-familias did not rise from
his discumbency or posture of lying, to go to every particular person, or that
every one came to his hand, for there might be twenty at the Table, and not all
within the reach of his hand, nor do we find that Christ rose up, nor that
they rose up to receive them. He said, Take ye, eat ye, Drink all of it; and
though he might give the Cup to the next into his hand, yet his speech is
general to them all, and so the bread and the cup past in the Postcaenium, or
Paschal Supper. Maldonate says, He reached out the Maldona* in Mat. 26. 26.
bread sigillatim, but the cup he gave to the next, and he to the next; for, he
says, Luk 21. 17. Take this, and divide it among your selves, wherein though
he De emend. l. 6. Martyr. in 1 Cor. 11. 24.
be mistaken in the cup, as not being the same with ours, ut supra, yet the
rite and manner of distribution is very like to be the same in both: So
Scaliger, that the Master first delivered the cup to the second, the second to
the next, till it had past through the (...), or Table; and Jansenius says,
That he Jans. Harm. p. 895.
gave to each particular his part, Aut patinam tradidit propinquioribus, or
gave the plate or dish with broken bread in it to them that sat nearest, and
then successively and in order it passed along: As also, says he, he delivered
the Cup, so that every Communicant had his part from the hand of Christ, either
immediately or mediatly. As for after times, and not long after, that of Justin
Martyr is express, that when the Ministers had blessed, the Deacons did carry
it and deliver it to the several Communicants, and did either put each part
into each persons hand, or as I find in Clem. Alex and. Strom. lib. 1. (...),
the distributers do suffer or permit each person to take his part of the bread.
There might be different Rites in several Churches as to this point, and of no
great moment one way or other; but for all the Communicants sitting down at the
very Table by companies, and their sitting and receiving the Elements, I find
not in my simple reading in Antiquity, when Communicants grew numerous, and met
in one common place to perform Divine Offices: but so did Christ and all other
Paschall societies, which eat in chambers and hoUses, and as I showed you
before, were not under ten nor above twenty of a company.

Let then the Lords and his Disciples sitting at the same Table in that Rituall
posture and manner then in Use be holden as indifferent or appendant to the
Paschall custom; for we shall never hit that pattern in all respects, becaUse
they sat at the Table while Christ blessed and brake the Bread, which we that
have several Tables full do not, nor can do; and let the Disciples dividing
among themselves, or handing both the Bread and Cup from one to another, be
accounted indifferent too, and hardly and not conveniently imitable in our
numbers, yea and not certain neither (though very probable to me) for if one,
as Peter Martyr holds it so, yet another, as Martyr. in 1 Cor. 11. 24.
Paraus in locum, says, that it is not Obscure out of the History, that when
the Lord said, Take ye, Benedictum and fractum panem singulis manu porrexisse,
he reached the Bread to every person with his hand.

Let us touch the other Question, Whether there were any words spoken to every
one at the delivering into his hands; and here indeed we find nothing but Take
ye, eat, this is my Body broken for you: Drink ye all of it, this is the Cup of
the New Testament; and doubtless the whole Institution needs not to every
single person be repeated, having been recited in the Consecration: Yet you
know that in the form Used in England, the Minister was appointed to deliver
Bread and Wine into the Communicants particular hands, with a prescript form of
words, The Body of our Lord, The Blood of our Lord, etc. and Chemnitius Examen.
de praparat. ad coenam.
the best Scholar of all called Lutheran, says, that the form of applying the
words of Institution to every Communicant, mihi maxim probatur, is best of all
approved by him: And that in these words the Sacrament was delivered in the
Church of old time, he calls in for witness Ambrose, who has indeed these lib.
4. de Sac. sub finem.
words, the Minister says Corpus Christi, and tu dicis Amen, The body of
Christ, and thou say Amen: And before this time Novatus distributing the
Mysteries to every one his part, adjured them into his faction first (...), in
stead of saying Amen, Histor. lib. 6. cap. 35.
says EUsebius: which Amen it seems every Communicant said when the Bread was
put into his hand, as Justin Martyr says, when the Minister has finished his
Consecration-prayer, all the people present Apol. 2.
(...) makes acclamation to it saying Amen. I Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. p. 366.
conclude with Learned Hooker, that upon the ground that Sacraments are
particularly applying Ordinances, and we are dull and heavy-hearted, If [ I
Baptize thee] offend not, why should [ Eat thou] offend any man? I conclude
upon the whole matter, that what is most to the reverence of this Ordinance,
and serves best to raise up and elevate the peoples hearts, shall be followed
by me.

So much for the opening of the Rites or Actions Used by Christ, or that are to
be Used by any Minister that shall in his Name celebrate this Ordinance, He
took the Bread, and the Cup, He blessed or gave thanks, He brake, he gave: In
which it is to be noted, that he did not recede from the then received rite or
custom for both the Elements; and the rites are quite through the same which
were usually and by custom at that present on foot in their Paschall
Solemnities; and which is more, yet this Bread and Cup so blessed and given at
these Solemnities are not found to stand by any express command of holy
Scripture, but were such as their wisdom had by custom made Use of in this
service, of that Bread and that Cup the Lord was pleased to make the Seals of
his Body and Blood, as Hugh Broughton, our Learned Broughton in Dan. page 46.
Countryman, Observes.

. 10. Of the outward Actions pertaining to the Communicants.
Take eat; He said, Drink ye all of it, as you may see in St Matthew, who was
Myroth. lin Matthew. 26. 26.
present in the action, and as it is here. Forsan at haec sunt vetus formula,
etc. says Cameron. Happily that this was the old Rite, but in the Jewish Rituals
that are now, as it is recited by Cameron in the Hebrew, and by Scaliger in
Greek, it is somewhat diverse. Scaliger de Emend. lib. 6. page 536.
Thus every one that is hungry, let him come and eat, and whosoever has need, let
him come and keep the Passover.

1. Take ye: It is to be understood of taking in the hand, for it is not likely
that Christ rose and put the Bread and Wine in every ones mouth, says Beza
Epist. 2.
Beza, but as the Cup passed from the nearest to Christ to them more remote; so
it is probable (says the same Author) that the Bread also did. There is a great
stir about the Communicants taking the Elements in his hand, not as though,
if other wise, the Sacrament was a nullity, as Beza proves; for a Bezain Epist.
2.
man may have no hands to take it with, but for the decency and significancy
thereof: The taking in the mouth only being more like that of Bruits, which
take their meat with mouth or beak as Chamier says, than that of men; and
there is a whole Chapter spent in reciting Antiquities for this taking in the
hand, in Chamier, who saves me the labor to recite any of De Euchar. l 7. cap.
ult.
them to you, and this is all upon occasion of the Papists, who take the Bread
into their mouths, and touch it not with hand, out of a too superstitious
veneration Beza Epist. 2.
of the Elements, as Beza notes: Nor do they of them that search out the
footsteps of this custom rise any higher than about five or six hundred years
ago.

The signification of it is, the appropriation of Christ to our selves, whom
God makes ours by his gift, and we make ours by faith, even as truly as if he
were put into our very hand. They that make Paraeus in lo.
Taking and Eating diverse Rites of diverse significations, as many of our
excellent Divines do; do tell us that there are diverse degrees of faith, that
by taking Christ we have propriety in him, He is ours: by eating his Body and
drinking his Blood we have comfort and refreshment from him; and that he is
first ours in claim, before he be ours in comfort; as first take, then eat. In
the Use of the brazen Serpent our believing was set forth by an act of our eye,
Joh. 3. 14.
looking up; but here it is set forth by an act of ourhand, retension or
receiving; the promise of Adoption is made to our receiving Christ, Joh. 1. 12
and our faith must be a Christ taking, a Christ-receiving faith: Christ would
be ours, else he would not have instituted this Christ-applying Ordinance: He
came into the hand of murderers that slew him, that crucified and wounded and
dying, he might be taken in the hand of thy faith; faith like the hand has a
faculty of working and bringing forth obedience, but like the hand again, it
has a taking and receiving faculty, which is the most excellent, the
justifying act of faith, taking Christ.

Take ye, is not a bare permission but a command, it is our duty, as well as our
benefit, to receive Christ, and consequently not to receive him, is both sin
and misery.

. 11. Of Sacramental Eating and Drinking Christ's Body and Blood.
Eat ye, drink ye all of it: Christ speaks and repeats often Joh. 6. the eating
of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, at which some of his followers took
offense, conceiving him carnally and literally, which he told them were to be
understood spiritually, ver. 63. There is a spiritual eating and drinking
Christ his flesh and blood by faith only, which is extra-symbolicall or without
the Sacrament, for that Doctrine was delivered a year or two before this
Sacrament was instituted; and it is such, as without which ye have no life in
you, ver. 53. which may not be said of all that never received this Sacrament;
but that spiritual eating and drinking is here symbolized, as that flesh and
blood is: For the understanding of which, let us neither be like the carnal
Israelite that did eat Manna, and drink of the Rock, but neither saw nor tasted
Christ in them; nor on the other side let us be like the Capernaites, Joh. 6.
that had a gross apprehension of eating very flesh, and drinking man's blood,
but rightly conceive the meaning thus:

1. The first and not the least thing is this, that This is the one and only
Ordinance under the Gospel where eating and drinking are Sacred and Religious
acts: for in all the world, among all sorts of men, friendship, fellowship,
communion, are maintained and shown in feasting together, eating and drinking
together; and our God never let his Church be without such an Ordinance,
wherein he and his people might testify this fellowship and communion: In the
Law there was not only a Lamb roasted, but in all their Shelamim or
Peace Offerings, they that brought them had part to feast upon and make good
cheer as at all their feasts they rejoiced before the Lord, God bidding them to
his own Table to feed upon Sacrifices, for they that eat of the Sacrifices are
partakers of the Altar, 1 Cor. 10. 18. and Rev. 3. 20. I will come in and sup
with him, and he with me: Thus God entertains his friends, invites them to eat
and drink with him upon his own Sacrifices, upon Christ the great Sacrifice:
It Is Gods own cheer, provided for such Abraham's as are the friends of God: What
a favor and condescension of God is this! What honor and dignity is dust and
shes graced with, to sit together and feast and have fellowship with God in an
Ordinance of eating and drinking the flesh and blood of this Sacrifice Jesus
Christ! Nay, and further yet, It was a custom in Covenants making that the
Confederates feasted, eat and drank together; therefore Berith the Hebrew word
Covenant, may come of Barah to eat, and so still, and further it is implied
that this is a Covenant solemnity, an eating and drinking of confederates
together, God smells a savor of rest in the Sacrifice of Christ, and we eat and
drink of that flesh and blood sacrificed unto God, and renew our Covenant with
him, and he with us, by mutual feeling, he to be ours, we his. I am so taken
up with this, that if no more be said, I should be satisfied, but there is more.

2. That Christ is full and perfect nourishment of the soul, both meat and
drink; Joh. 6. 55. My flesh is meat indeed, my blood is drink indeed, far
beyond Manna, which yet was called Angels food, as the substance is beyond the
type: sights may please the eye, sounds or airs the ear, but they are not so
necessary as nourishment unto life; life cannot be maintained without
nourishment; growing bodies (...), says Hypocrates: growing Christians stand
in need of much nourishment to bring them up to their (...), the stature of a
full Christ: decaying Christians stand in need of nourishment to repair
decaies: Every life, be it never so little must be nourisht, so necessary is
Christ to every Christian, and still more of Christ, for his meat is Christ,
his drink is Christ. As nothing so necessary, so neither so sweet and pleasant,
sights are pleasing to the eye, and smells to the sense, but nothing is so close
and delightful as the meat and drink to the sense of tasting; Christ is sweet
to faith, as meat and drink to hunger: There is no content comparable to the
receiving of Christ. He is Manna, the best Bread and Wine, the best drink. The
fruition of the joys of heaven is set forth by the pleasure of eating and
drinking, Luke 22. 30. That you may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom.
It was experimentally said of Galeacius that all the delights of this world are
not comparable to an hours enjoyment of Christ Jesus.

2. No act of ours could so well have signified the close and intimate union of
Christ with a Believer: We may see at a distance, and hear and smell, but not
taste nor eat nor drink; the meat and drink is concorporated into us, and is
made flesh and bone with us, Job. 6. 56. He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, dwells in me, and I in him: Christ must be present to the faith of a
Christian, for we cannot eat and drink that which is absent. This union with
Christ is real, though mystical, and it is lively drawn forth in this
Ordinance, under the resemblance of eating and drinking: We hardly conceive,
and hardly believe it, but when we see the graft live, we are sure it is knit;
and we may be as sure of our union with Christ, by his spiritual sap of Grace
which we find is in us.

4. This command, Take and eat, goes before the pronouncing of the words, This
is my Body; Aquinas says it is a Hysteron Proteron, but I shall not take his
word, let us hear him speak that was present, an ear witness, an eye witness
Matthew. 26. 26, 27. Take eat, This is my Body; Drink ye all of it, For this is
my Blood: what stands this For for, if drink ye, did not go before? This
Observation is noted by almost all Divines from Peter Martyr, and Mr Hooker
makes Use of it thus, That Christ is not present in the Elements, but in the
worthy receiver: The order of the words shows it, first eat and drink, then it
follows, for this is my Body, and this is my Blood: an ingenious observation
that cuts the hamstrings of the Popish or corporal presence in or under the
outward signs, as if it were a knife set in the Text to cut that intricate
knot, that makes such a garboyle in the Text: when you take and eat by faith,
then is the Body and Blood of Christ present to you, but not latent and hidden
in the Bread or Cup: The union of Christ is not otherwise with the Bread then
as the thing signified with the sign, but it is with the Communicant, the
Hooker. Eccles. Polit. p. 359.
believer really, though spiritually; the sacramental signs do exhibit Christ,
but not contain him under them, they contain not the grace which God bestows
with or by them.

. 12. Of Spurious Rites and Gestures.
Costerus says, That the bread-worship was the greatest Idolatry that ever was
in the world. If the bread be not turned into the true and natural body of
Christ, as (says a learned man) Dr J. Burgess Lawf. of kneeling, p. 113.
upon my soul it is not, and if the persuasion of Christ's real presence in the
Eucharist, will by no means excUse their adoration from Idolatry, much less
excusable is any Protestant who is persuaded of the contrary. As for other
circumstances of the action, as the time, viz. at night, in the close of the
Paschal Supper, the place an upper-room or chamber, Mark 14. 15. The guest;
twelve in number, Matthew. 26. 20. The gesture which was discubiture or lying on
couch-beds fitted to the Table, which the Jews were at the Passover by custom
fixed unto, as appears by the ritual, In other Scaliger. lib. 6. De emend. page
534.
nights we sit or lie on couches, but in this we lie along. These, I say, are
movables, and not of the freehold of this Ordinance: Nor shall I say any thing
of the D. Burgess, ubi supra p. 112.
gesture, which as it was Used in England has been an apple of contention and
much written pro and con. The Reformed Churches vary, some sit at, some about
the Table, some receive this Sacrament passing by the Table in order, as in a
Marah, as in the Reformed Churches in France, and I condemn them not; and for
those Divines of the Reformed Churches that disliked our gesture Used here in
England, they did not many of them pronounce it simply unlawful, but
inconvenient, becaUse it was a gesture of adoration, and did not serve to pull
the bread worship out of men's minds, nor was so suitable to this Ordinance,
which is a Table Ordinance, nor to set forth that fellowship and communion,
which is expressed in eating and drinking with our Lord, these were their
Reasons, and I do not know that I have any occasion to debate the point, but to
leave it determinable by the Churches of God, as may be most suitable to the
Decorum and nature of this Ordinance, for if I should, some of you might happily
say, that I made a Funeral-sermon for meeting at Sacrament.

Having laid open the parts of this Supper, let us upon the whole matter stand
still a little and make Observation.

CHAP. VII. Some Observations upon the precedent Discourses.
simplicity of the Gospel, as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Here is no
outward pomp or ostentation, no stateliness to take the eye, for as gaudy
attire becomes not mourning, so this Sacrament setting forth the passion and
sufferings, the death and bloodshed of our Lord had not been suitable to him in
his lowest estate and darkest eclipse, if it should have shined in outward
luster. It was Tertullians Observation, Nihil obdurat, etc. nothing Lib. de
baptism
so hardens the minds of men, as the simplicity of the works, and yet the
magnificence of the promise, that great and glorious things should be found
under so plain a dress, as a rich diamond in a plain case, to the end that the
eye of faith might be more exercised then the eye of the body, and that the
spiritual and inward part might be looked after and intended, Is not this the
Carpenters son? was a great stumbling block: and so may the simplicity of the
two Sacraments be to us. The Temple, Utensils and Service were rich and
stately; Christ was prefigured in golden Types, But grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 17. But we have a better Covenant, and better Promises,
Heb. 8. 6. And if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which
remains exceeds in glory, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. but that was an
outward, this an inward glory; that was in Moses face, this in the face of
Christ; that the carnal Jew might see, this the spiritual Christian sees; We
saw his glory, Joh. 1. 14. or rather there the glory was veiled, But we with
open face behold the glory of the Lord, 1 Cor. 3. 13, 18. The glory of their
Ordinance was a stumbling block to them, for they rested in the cabinet, and
looked not for the jewels; The meannesse of our Ordinances are a stumbling
block to us, for we look not for the tReasure in such earthen vessels. God does
great things by poorest means, Jericho's walls fall at the sound of Ramshorns,
the fiery sting is healed by a piece of brass, the sight restored to the
blind by the Use of spittle and clay; The figure in this Sacrament is poor,
the thing signified heavenly and rich; the Seal is mean, the inheritance or
estate is great, but why were the types so rich, and our memorials so poor? You
know Spectacles are for diverse sights, they had finer Spectacles, we better
eyes; They had less spirit stirring in the Ordinances then, than we now; if
their Tree had more shadow, we have more fruit.

Austin his Rule, If Epist. 23. and al^bi.
a Sacrament should not have similitude and resemblance with that whereof it is
a Sacrament, it should not be a Sacrament; and from this similitude or
resemblance it is that the sign is called by the name of the thing signified,
as the bread, Christ's body, the wine is called Christ's blood; The Rock was
Christ, Circumcision called the Covenant; The Lamb called the Passover; and in
common speech, When we look on a Picture, we say, This is Casar, this is
Augustus, this is Hercules; nothing more ordinary. In the Sacrament this
similitude is a similitude of proportionality (says Bonaventure) consisting of
four terms: You are most of you Arithmeticians, and you have a golden Rule,
called, The Rule of Three, becaUse three terms being given, the fourth is
given* and this sets forth to you the Analogy of a Sacrament in four terms; As
water in Baptism washes the body, so the Spirit by his grace, or the blood of
Christ cleanses the soul; As the bread and wine nourish and refresh the body,
so the body and blood of Christ nourishes and refreshes the soul: As by the
hand we take, and with our mouth we eat and drink the bread and wine, so by
faith we receive the body and blood of Jesus Christ; If you destroy the
similitude, you destroy the Sacrament, as the Papists do by their
Transubstantiation, for they destroy the Analogy: Thus the accidents of Bread
and Wine, or the Species, do not nourish the Body (say we;) Nor the very Body
and Blood of Christ does not pass into bodily nourishment (say they) (for it
was horrible to imagine it) therefore there is no resemblance, the similitude
is destroyed, and so the Sacrament.

Thirdly, It is a most true, most firm and golden Rule, That a Sacrament out of
the Use appointed Chami^r. de Luchar. l. 7. c. 4.. 11. and l. 8. c. 3 Forbes.
Hist. Theol p. 550.
by God, has not the nature of, nor is any more a Sacrament. It is not a
Sacrament extra usum, out of the actual Use. There must not only be Bread and
Wine, but Blessing, and Taking, and Eating, and Drinking, or else to us there
is no Sacrament; The Bread and Wine upon the Table are no Sacrament, but the
eating and drinking of Bread and Wine; As in Baptism, the water is no
Sacrament, but the washing with water is. The Papists confess this of every
Sacrament, and of Baptism, but not of the Lords Supper, which for
Transubstantiation-sake, which troubles the whole Scaene, they hold to be a
perfect Sacrament by consecration, whether it be received by the Communicant,
yea or no, and this is the Doctrine of their Schoolmen, and Aquin. part. 3. Qu.
80. and aliis Scholasticis.
all others of their confession; We appeal to the Text, Take, Eat, This is my
body; It Is so, being taken and eaten, and not otherwise, The remains of Bread
and Wine are no Sacrament, it is the Use which gives the Reason and nature of a
Sacrament, and when and where the Use is not, the Sacrament is not. It Is true
in our vulgar speech we call it the Sacrament, as on the Table; as the beast
might be called a Sacrifice before it was slain, being destined and appointed
thereunto 1 Samuel 13. 9 Whitak. de^ acram. p 621, 624, etc.
(as Whitaker says) but it is no Sacrifice till slain and offered; nor was the
Lamb a Passover, but as it was eaten and roasted; so a mere stone, is a stone,
wheresoever it be, but not a boundary, but in the Use; and an earnest is money,
but not an earnest, except taken upon agreement; Bread and Wine are Elements,
but not a Sacrament, till all the Rites and Actions be Observed, which God has
appointed, viz. in the participation and Use, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, 18. The Cup of
blessing and the bread, are the Communion of the body and blood of Christ,
being partaken and received, not else.

There is some kind of Argument urged against this Rule from the reservation
of the Bread especially, and of the Wine, which is read of in Antiquity, and
that was either private reservation, when the Communicant carried home the
Bread, and kept it in his chest for his private Use to eat of privately, or
else it was by the Ministers to give to lapsed Christians in time of extremity
or sickness that were debarred of public participation: The first is
mentioned Cypr. de lapsis.
by ancient Authors, and by some commended, as Ambrose de obitu. Satyr.
Nazian. Epitaph pro sor. This is excUsed by Jewel against Harding; As in time
Forbes Hist. Theol. p. 553. Col. 1.
of persecution, when Christians might be deprived of the public Ordinance,
and by others on other grounds. Burgess of knealing.


The other has one only example in true Antiquity, and that is Serapions
case, Eusebius. Histor. lib. 6. cap. 34. and is excUsed by Chemnitius, as if Chem.
de coena. Examen. p. 93.
it was to oppose the Novatian opinion, of not restoring the lapsed, though
penitent unto the Communion of the Sacrament; Of both these, I see no clear
warrant in the Institution of Christ, and therefore say with Cyprian, Non quod
aliquis ante nos, etc. We are not to look what any has done before us, but
what he did and commanded that was before all, even Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, It is the peoples right to receive the Cup as well as the Bread,
Drink ye all of it, Matthew. 26. 27. Moulin Buckler p. 529.
They all drank of it, Mark 14. 23. As often as ye eat this bread, and drink of
this Cup, says Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Nothing more plain, and yet whether it be
the ambition of the Priests, that would exalt themselves above the people, or
whether it be the fruit of Transubstantiation, or both, this Cup is taken from
the people in the Roman Churches, but it was not taken away by public Decree,
till the Council of Constance, Anno 1416. since which time there was great
petitioning to the Council of Trent, for the Cup, but Chem. Exam. de coena. p.
134, 135. Council. Trid. Sess. 6.
they referred it to the Pope, in whose hands it lies, and it seems will lie,
till God put another cup into his hand to drink. And so you see that that
Council of Constance that burnt John Husse and Jerome did let out the blood of
good Christians, and shut up the blood of Christ from them. I conclude, Let us
follow that which is simplest and purest according to Christ's Institution, and
neither superstitiously reserve, nor impiously mutilate the holy Ordinance.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Real Presence.
NOw I draw on to the Anatomy of the viscera, the entrails and inwards of this
Ordinance under the outside, whereof if you take off the cover, you shall find
such cheer as never was in any other feast, This is my body (says Christ)
which is broken for you (says Paul) Which is given for you (says Mat. 26 26,
27 28 Mark 14. 22, 24. Luke 22. 20.
Luke) This Cup is the New Testament in my blood (says Paul) Which is shed for
you (says Luke;) Or as Matthew and Mark, This is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many, for remission of sins, says Matthew,
which is shed for many, says Mark, which is shed for you, says Luke. And all
these together are my Text at this time.

Mirifice lusit Satan, says an excellent Author, Satan has played his
pranks, and Chamier. de Euchar. l. 6 c. 1.. 1.
tried conclusions upon Divines, how he could infatuate aad make them mad, such
cart-loads of perplexities, alterations, absurdities, and wild fancies have
they been possessed with in the agitation of this point, and discussion of these
very words, which as a Reverend D. Rainolds Medit.
Divine says truly, are clear and easy to a spiritual ear or mind, it is the
carnal fancy that perplexes all, and corrupts the Text, which had been clear,
if the water had not been muddied with dirty hands: so Nicodemus understands
Christ carnally in matter of Joh. 3.
Regeneration, and talks of entering again into our mothers womb: So the
Disciples of Capernaum understand that excellent Doctrine of Christ, John 6.
about eating his flesh, and drinking his blood; of the very Cannibal eating of
man's flesh and blood: The very antidote he gave them would serve here, John 6.
63. The words that I speak, they are spirit, and they are life, that is, their
spiritual meaning is lively, and if we could agree on this, then we should give
our Hooker. l. 5. p. 359.
selves more to meditate with silence what we have by this Sacrament, and less
dispute the manner how, for this heavenly food is given for satisfying empty
souls, and not exercising our curious and subtle wits; for it often comes to
pass, that curious sifting and disputing Hooker. Eccles. Pol. l. 5. p. 364.
too boldly chils all warmth of our zeal, and brings soundness of belief into
great hazard.

Hooker speaking of Ancients, lib. 5. page 362.
say the most notable for there are more.

1. That Christ is present in this Sacrament by his efficacy and power, to
realize and exhibit virtue to, and by the Ordinance, Nec ullo modo se absentat
divina Majestas a Ministeriis. Cyprian. de Caena, and other Ancients.

2. That Christ his very body is present with, or in or under the outward
elements, as the Consubstantiatists, or Lutheran says.

3. That Christ is really present, but modum nescimus, we know not the manner
how, and in this dark some of our learned men spoke of late, to what intent
they best knew.

4. That there is a real turning of the substance of Bread and Wine into the
very substance of Christ's Body and Blood. Thus the Papists or
Transubstantiatists.

5. That the Bread and Wine are sacramentally Christ's Body and Blood, or the
memorials thereof, symbolically representing and exhibiting to the faithful
Christians, himself, and so say We.

Chemnitius that learned Examen de Eucbar. p. 65. Col. 1.
Luther an professes, That he imbraceth that sense which holds the true and
substantial presence of Christ in the Supper, which the words in their proper,
and genuine, and usual signification hold forth. The Papist professes, That he
has the very plain letter of the words, and the sense literal; So far as
Lapide, I know not whether with more confidence or impudence says, That if God
ask him at the day of Judgment, why he held so, he will confidently say, Tu
docuisti, Thou have taught me. We are as clear, Vide Lee in Annot. in loc.
that we follow the true proper literal sense, and that says a learned man,
Upon my soul, there is no such D. Jo. Burgess, Kneeling at Sacram^nt. p. 113.
turning of the Bread into Christ's Body, as the Papist affirms.

. 4. This is my Body.
This is my Body, about which there is the greatest heat and quarrel.

In the Rite of the Paschal Supper, when the bread Cameron. Myrothec. in Mat.
26. Scaliger. de Emend lib. 6. page 536.
was given, there was a solemn signification put upon it, This is the bread of
affliction, and our Savior transferring that bread into his Supper, gave a new
signification, This is my body; In the first Rite there was no turning the
substance of bread, nor yet in this second. Mouliu Bucklet p. 471.


For our clearer understanding, we must constantly hold these two things: 1.
That Christ gave bread. 2. That this bread was his body.


First, Christ gave bread to his Disciples at this Supper; for that which he
took, which he blessed, which he brake, was bread, He took bread, and that he
gave, saying, This is my body which is broken for you; for the bread was broken
as a sign that his body should be crucified, and bread the Apostle calls it
after consecration, thrice in this Chapter, verse. 26, 27, 28. and 1 Cor. 10.
16. The bread which we break, and ver. 17. We are all partakers of that one
bread, and he calls it so, not becaUse it was bread before, for he might so have
called it wheat; a man might be called a boy, ripe wine verjuice, but becaUse
it is so, except all our senses be put out and extinguished with the bread.

Secondly, This bread is Christ's body; What body? Even his own natural body,
which is given for you, Luke 22. 19. which is broken for you, as in my Text;
What blood? Even that which is shed for you, Matthew. 26. 28. Luke 22. ^0. But
how can this be, it is impossible that bread while it is bread, as we have
proved it is, should be Christ's body, or wine, while it is wine, should be his
blood? It Is very true, that it is impossible, Disparatum de disparato non
proprium praedicatur, therefore we must seek for a possible Calvin. in 1 Cor.
11.
meaning, and of necessity conclude with Calvin, Sacramentalem esse
loquutionem, that it is a sacramental form of speech, the sign bears the name
of the thing signified, as in vulgar, and in Scripture language, for in
Scripture both signs figuratively representing, or sacramentally sealing, do
bear the name of the things represented or sealed, as Genesis 40. 12. The three
branches are three days, verse. 18. The three baskets are three days, Genesis 41.
26. The seven ears of corn are seven years; the seven kine are seven years.
Ezekiel. 37. 11. These dry bones are the whole hoUse of Israel. Dan. 2. 38. Thou,
O King, art this head of gold, Dan. 7. 17. The four beasts are four Kings. Gal.
4. 25. This Agar is mount Sinai. Revel. 17. 9. The seven heads are seven
mountains: So in sacramentals, Circumcision is called the Covenant, Gen 17. 13.
And a token of the Covenant, v. 11. And a seal of the righteousness of Faith,
Romans 4. 11. The Lamb is called the Passover, Exodus 12. 21. The Rock was
Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. and in this Sacrament, This Cup is the New Testament;
What shall we require further, the form of speech is plain, a child may
understand it? And it is without example in all Scripture, that the sign
should be, or be changed into the substance of the thing signified; and which
is further to be said, The Hebrew Tongue, or the Syriack, in which Christ spoke
does not Use in this form of speech any copula of subject and predicate, either
is, or signifies but sometimes, and not always a Pronoun, as in these places
by me cited in the Old Testament; There is no [ is] nor other Verb, but thus
the seven ears of corn, they seven years, the four beasts, four Kings, which
when Cameron. Myrothec. in Mat. 26. Moulin. Buckler p. 478.
they come to be translated into Greek or Latin, then the idiome of the
language requires it, and says [ is] The Rock was Christ, and so in the
present case, Hoo lach ma, this bread of affliction, that is, This is the bread
of affliction.

. 5. This Cup is the New Testament in my blood.
This Cup is the New Testament in my blood; or, This is the blood of the New
Testament, where the contenders are a little cooler, and must perforce allow a
Trope or figurative speech; for the Cup sure is not changed into a Covenant or
Testament, nor the blood of Christ neither, nor the wine; The cup is not put
for the blood of Christ, for then it would be thus, This blood is the New
Testament in my blood, a pure non sense, that Papists cannot salve without
invention of two bloods, but the cup is put for the wine; This wine is the New
Testament (...), ratified in my blood; The wine represents, and by
representation is the very blood of Christ, which confirms and ratifies, Gods
Gospel Covenant, or the New Testament, bequeathing to believers the Legacy of
remission of sins in Christ, for that Christ gave wine, and not very blood in
the cup, is that which Matthew and Mark say, Matthew. 26. 29. Mark 14. 25. I will
drink no more of the fruit of the Vine; Peri Haggephen, was the word signantly
Used Stegman. disp. 51. p. 593.
for wine in the Paschal Rite, The fruit of the vine. That Climax and Gradation
of Luther is pleasant, The Cup contains the wine, the wine exhibits the blood
of Christ, the blood of Christ ratifies and confirms the New Covenant, the New
Covenant promises remission of sins: Therefore the drinking of this Cup,
applies, seals, confirms to believers the promise of remission of sins; And
the allusion is excellent, as Cameron in Mat. 26. 27.
the Apostle Observes, Heb. 9. 20. out of Exodus 24. 8. that Moses said, This is
the blood of the Covenant which God has enjoined you; for all covenant with
man fallen is sealed with blood, that, under the Law with typical blood, this,
of the Gospel by the very blood of Christ; For without blood is no remission,
Heb. 9. 22. And of this Covenant-confirming blood of Christ, this wine is the
lively representation or memorial.

The particulars thus cast up, are summed up into this total, as the sense and
meaning of this Ordinance:

Hercules represents Hercules; This would bring the Sacrament to a Socinian
emptiness, as a matter of our duty only, not as of Gods conferring any
benefit upon us; This is more like the Sign of a Shop, than the Seal of a
Deed, and would rather serve the eye, than refresh the soul by eating and
drinking, as meat and drink. Therefore.

Secondly, This Bread is my Body, This Cup is the Calvin. in 1 Cor. 11.
New Testament in my blood, as Pledges, Seals and instrumental means of
exhibition, solemnly Pet. Martyr. ibid. Hooker. Eccles. Polit. p. 359. Paraeus
in 1 Cor. 11.
conveying, though symbolically to the faith of a believer, Christ himself, for
union and communion, and the benefits of his death, remission of finnes; as the
pledge confirms the contract, the Seal passes or conveyeth the estate, by
which we are as truly partakers of Christ Jesus, if we receive by faith, as we
are partakers of bread and wine for nourishment; this is a high signification
and Use, it is full, and rich, and comfortable, and this I prove by that of the
Apostle, wherein I rest as a full explication of the phrase in hand, 1 Cor. 10.
16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, Is it not the Communion of the blood
of Christ? The bread which we break, Is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? Here is Participation, Communion; and he says, Is it not, Is it not?
As a known and received truth amongst Christians, and with this I content my
self, as clear and full against all contenders and gainsayers.

As for the Ancients, I refer you to a whole Parliament of them, called
together, and voting down Transubstantiation. Crakanthorpe Defens. cap. 73.
against that unhappy man, the Archbishop of Spalato, who had before his last
revolt said, Omnes Patres, All the Fathers are against the Real Presence, but
he unsaid it again afterward to his Justin. Apol. 2.
loss. Justin Martyr calls the bread (...), Bread over which thanks were given.
Irenaeus the very same. Tertullian and Origin prove, That Tertul. l. 4. contra
Marc. c. 40. Origin.
Christ had a true body, against the Phantasticks, becaUse the bread is a
figure and sign of a true body. Hierom calls it a representation; and Austin is
Greek Fathers call them (...) Dionysius. Basilius. Theodores.
totus Calvinianus in the point: There are rhetorical flourishes, hyperbolies,
and high expressions sometimes to procure honor to the Ordinance, or quicken
up the Communicants, but in judgment they are with us, Crakantherp Defens.
cap. 73.. 30. (...) lingua (...), Chry. hom. 82. in Matthew. sanguinem sugimus
Cyp. de caena, and such hyperbolies, etc.

So much be spoken for the explication of the words, which are so ravelled and
perplexed by contrary senses.

CHAP. IX. Of the Inward thing signified or represented in this Supper.
I. What is presented to the Believer.
NOw we shall proceed to open to you what Christ presents unto and sets before
the faithful in this Supper, and what the faithful do receive in the right
Use thereof.

For the first, There is here presented and set before you in this Supper,

1. Christ himself sacrificed for you, with the fruits and benefits of his
death, or of the sacrifice of himself.

2. The New Testament or the New Covenant, confirmed and ratified by his Blood,
with the contents of that Covenant, viz. Remission of sins, and other benefits
by consequence flowing from it.

Hooker Eccl. lib. 5. page 360.
Body and Blood is not all that is here presented to be received, as is consist
by the true Protestant Churches of our Confession, but first and principally
Christ himself; as the influence of heaven is in plants, beasts, men, but there
is not such a thing only here set forth, but a Divine and mystical Union with
Christ himself; for here is a participation says the Apostle, of the Body and
Blood of Christ, who is exhibited, as really and truly present, not opposing
real to spiritual, but to chimericall or fantastical, nor intending his
presence in the Elements, as contained in them, but to the faith of the
receiver, who has union with him. The very Body and Blood of Christ, that Body
which was fastened Peter Martyr in 1 Cor. 11. 24. Calvin in 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.
to the Cross, that Blood which was shed was a Sacrifice, as offered up to God,
is meat and drink, as offered unto us; and therefore our Divines say, that
Christ is truly and really, but yet spiritually, given to us, as he was given
for us. This is my Body which is broken for you, given for you, says the Text,
and that which was given for you, is given to you: He was given for you in the
Sacrifice, he is given to you in the Sacrament, with those blessed fruits and
benefits that flow from his Death.

New, either from the excellency of it, as the word New sometimes signifies, or
for the durableness and perpetuity of it, as the Apostle explains it, Heb. 8.
ult. in opposition to the Old made with Israel, Cameron in Myreth. Matthew. 26.
which was to determine and vanish away as to the form of dispensation. This
Covenant is, That God will be our God, and we shall be his people: That he will
forgive our iniquities and remember our sins no more, etc. and the Blood of
Christ is the sanction of this Covenant, for without Blood is no remission; the
blood of Christ is the Seal which ratifies the truth and validity of this
Covenant: The Wine in this Sacrament represents that Blood of Christ, and is
not so properly a Seal confirming the Covenant in it self, as conveying the
comfort and participation of it unto us; or if you will, it is a Seal of
Remission of sin to us, which is an Article of the Covenant that is sealed by
the Blood of Christ, and therefore it is said, This is the blood of the New
Testament which is shed for many, for Remission of sins.

My Body broken for you, my Blood shed for remission of sins, makes him
bestirre himself to turn off the Body broken to the bread, and the Blood shed
to the wine: and so you see two extremes, the Papist turns bread into Christ's
Body, and wine into Blood; the Socinian on the other hand, that which is spoken
of the Body puts off upon the bread, and that of the Blood upon the wine, that
the death of Christ might not be a proper Sacrifice for us.

. 4. II. What the faithful do receive in the right Use of this Ordinance.


1. The faithful communicant receives Christ himself, or his Body and Blood:
Faith is a receiving of Christ himself, we cannot receive the benefits that
come by him without receiving of himself; as in Marriage the consent is, I take
thee, not I take thine, and yet this is consequent, upon that, our union with
Christ is strengthened and more closed; and this union with Christ is one of
those great mysteries, Ephesians. 5. 32. resembled by man and wise, who are one
flesh, though a thousand miles asunder; and as she is under covert, and free
from arrest of Law for debt, so a Believer by his union with Christ is under
coverture, and the curse and condemnation of Gods Law cannot touch him: or as
members knit, or branches united to the tree, receive influx of life and
spirits from the head and root, so Believers united to Christ by his Spirit
receive influences and spirit and life from him by virtue of their union, I in
them, says Christ, Joh. 7. 23, 26. The inhabitation of Christ in his people,
seems to be expressed by their eating and drinking of his Body and Blood
spiritually, and that inhabitation cannot be without a presence of him; such as
his inhabitation is, such is his presence, both real, and yet both spiritual,
he dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.

etc. are particularly sealed up for our better evidence and peace and
security, that we may be enabled to make a personal and particular claim of
the benefits and privileges of it, which are called The unsearchable riches of
Christ.

ver. 12. the receiving of Christ himself, and of the Covenant made in Christ
and confirmed in his Blood, does follow that which is usually said to be the
benefit of this Sacrament, the strengthening, refreshing, sustentation of the
soul by those graces, comforts, hopes, which flow by consequence from Christ or
the Covenant, so that whatsoever a man may expect for bodily strength or
reparation from bread and wine, the like he may expect from Christ or the
Covenant for his soul; life maintained, graces quickened, deadness enlivened,
resolutions enabled, hope erected, faith strengthened, lusts subdued, which
follow by consequence upon our union with Christ, and our interest in the
Covenant, in the sense of which when a Christian walks, he is in a good frame
and posture of spirit.

CHAP. X. A fourfold Exhortation from the premises.
FRom what has been said upon this point, I would possess you with four things.

This is my Body. This is the Blood of the New Testament, which has been so
perplexed and depraved by superstition, and the vanity of humane inventions,
especially since the rise of the Schoolmen, whose itch of Disputation has bred
such a scab, that there has been left no soundness in the place, which has
been tortured with such Convulsions, Distortions and Absurdities, that the
sense, which to a chaste and simple ear is easy and smooth, has been raveld
into knots inextricable; and this Text of all other has suffered infinite
injuries, and been made the stage of impudent fooleries, which have brought and
buried out of sight the true meaning of them, and made our Savior that Used to
speak vulgarly and easily, to delude the senses, amUse the Reason, nonplus the
faith of sober Believers. And though it be truly said, The sense of Scripture
is the Scripture, and that the right understanding of these words, carries you
in a right line, to the nature, Use and benefit of this Or inance, yet let me
say this more to you as English men, That the true meaning of them has been
conveyed to you by the blood of your own Martyrs, who in Q Mary her days, were
most of them put to the test upon the point of Real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, and bare witness against it, and I do believe that if Popery do ever
make another attempt upon you, it will play upon you with his battery at this
place.

. 2. Extremes about Christ's Real presence, and the middle way held by the
Churches of our Profession.


1. The first extreme is that which some did fear in Zuinglius and others at
first, and yet is unjustly charged upon us by many, viz. That the Sacraments
are (...), naked signs, empty figures and shadows, merely representing the
death of Christ, as the Picture of Hercules resembles and represents Hercules,
which we disclaim, and leave it to Socinianizing spirits, and other Levellers
of Divinity; for we are taught that Sacramental signs are more than mere
representing signs, being Seals which do confirm and make over unto us the
spiritual benefit which they represent and exhibit, also they are signs which
God commands us to Use, and in their right Use he conferres upon us the
benefit, as the Seal passes a Right to the Estate promised and conveyed, as the
Apostle says, Romans 4. 11. He received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of faith, and 1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ; The bread which we break, is it
not the communion of the body of Christ? not representation only, but communion
or participation also; for the picture of a loaf of bread feeds not the hungry,
nor does the Ivy-bush refresh the weary, and therefore there is not only a
representation of the body of Christ broken, by the breaking of the bread, but
Take and eat and drink, which denotes participation of the body and blood of
Christ.

2. The other extreme is twofold: 1. That the very body and blood of Christ is,
as it were, molded up with the bread and wine, or hidden under them, which is
the sense of the Consubstantiatists or Lutheran Churches; and this, though it
be too gross an opinion, yet is not liable to so many monsters, and
incompresensible absurdities as the other, which is, 2. That the bread and wine
cease to be, and are evoided, being turned or change, the substance of them
into the very substance of the flesh and blood of Christ, which is hidden under
the species or outward accidents of bread and wine, a monstrous Paradox, holden
stiffly by the Transubstantiatists or Papists.

The middle way holden by the Churches of our Confession, is, That the outward
Elements do represent as Signs and exhibit as Seals and moral Instruments to
the faith of the receiver, the very Body and Blood of Christ sacrificed, as
spiritual repast for our souls and spiritually given and taken, but that they
continue not as incorporated with them, nor are converted into the very
natural Body of Christ, as locally or corporally, there to be received by the
mouth of the receiver.

We hold a difference or change of bread and wine blessed, but it is a change
of signification not of substance, a relative change, not real, a change in
regard of Use and esteem, not of their natural substance, as the wax, now a
Seal to a Conveyance is wax still, but not a Seal, not of that value till now;
all the Rhetorical flowers Used by the Ancients reach no further, if they do,
we cannot keep them company: We hold that the Body and Blood of Christ is
really, that is, truly exhibited and present to the faith of the receiver; and
we might express the real presence, as real is opposed to imaginary or
chimericall, were it not for caption and misunderstanding; none of ours denies
the Body of Christ to be really, though spiritually eaten by a Believer; nay it
is immotum axioma, whatsoever is eaten, in that it is Forbes p. 53^.
eaten, it must be present; no man can eat a thing that is absent, but the
presence with or under the Elements is one thing, and the presence to the soul
and faith of a Believer is another: We know no union of Christ's Body with bread
and Wine, but with his members, which is real and mystical, not real and
corporal; therefore Christ says, Take eat, before he say, This is my Body, as
if it were his Body to their faith, not as in the outward Element.

. 3. Arguments for the Protestants sense of the words, This is my Body.


1. Compare one part of this Sacrament with the other: This cup is the New
Testament in my Blood, that is by Metonymy, the Seal of the New Testament, but
not the New Testament it self: so, This is my Body, that is the Sign and Seal
of it, but not it self.

2. Compare the one Sacrament of the Gospel with the other: In Baptism the
water is water without real alteration, so here the bread is bread, the wine
is wine, not changed into flesh or blood.

3. Compare the Sacraments of the Old Testament with the New: Circumcision is
the Covenant becaUse the Sign or Seal of it, the Lamb is the Passover becaUse
the memorial or sign of it, so the bread is my Body, the wine is my Blood in
the same form of speech.

4. The Language in which our Savior spoke, had no other property of
expression, there being no word for [ signifie] but [ is] in stead thereof, as
Learned men say; and its certain the Scripture in both Testaments, Hebrew and
Greek, Uses the same form in a hundred places, giving the name of the thing
signified to the sign, as has been shown, as the seven ears of corn are seven
years. The dry bones are the hoUse of Israel. The seven Candlesticks are seven
Churches, etc.

5. The words, This is my Body, are not proper in the Lutheran sense, no more
than to say, This Cloak is Peter, becaUse Peter is in it: nor in the Popish
sense, except the Body of Christ be there before the words be pronounced, This
is my Body, which should rather be thus, Let this be my Body; as God said, Let
there be light, not This is light, for it was not light before.

6. The spiritual benefit which is eating and drinking Christ's Body and Blood
by faith, is no less in our sense, than if there were his very flesh, for
Christ says, The flesh profits nothing, Joh. 6. and the Papists hold that the
eating of Christ's flesh by wicked men profits nothing, except besides the
Sacramental, there be a spiritual feeding upon Christ, which we affirm.

7. The Apostles understood these words as we do, and as the Hebrews had ever
understood the same expression for form in the Old Testament, else they would
have been amazed and startled at it, and have asked some Question as they were
inquifitive enough in lesser matters, but they saw Christ fit at table, and eat
and drink first himself, and therefore could not be ignorant of their meaning.

8. The Capernaite Disciples, Joh. 6. having taken offense at those frequent
expressions of eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blood, understanding them
carnally, were answered by Christ himself, The flesh profits nothing, The words
that I speak are spirit and life, as if he himself would give the
interpretation.

9. The Apostle thrice in this Chapter following calls it still bread after
consecration, as also in the Chapter foregoing, and surely he that never before
did, would not delude the senses of his Disciples in this Ordinance; and
himself calls it wine too, Matthew. 26. 26. I will not henceforth drink of this
fruit of the Vine, which is the Periphrasis usual among the Jews for wine.

10. The remembrance of Christ, the showing forth his death till he come, do
import the absence of his Body, which the Scripture tells us, ascended into
heaven and there is contained, in lieu of his corporal absence he sent the
Spirit to abide for ever as another Comforter: Memorials and monuments are of
things absent.

11. For the Ancient Fathers they prove against the Marcionites, that held the
Body of Christ to be merely fantastical, That it is substantial, becaUse the
Elements of bread and wine are substantial, which was no good argument, if
only the accidents or shadows of the Elements do remain; and all along
downwards they call the outward Elements, symbols, Forbes p. 561.
types, figures, signs of Christ's Body, until about the year 1215. when
subtle and superstitious Disputes grew hot about the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, which occasioned Innocent the third to introduce both name of
Transubstantiation and thing, not before openly heard of, and so as a Decree of
the Lateran Council, vented it as a point of faith, since which time the
Council of Trent has confirmed Sess 13. ca. 4.
the Decree, and the word, as most fit and proper, which are the rotten, yet
the best props upon which Transubstantiation does stand at this day, being upon
the first birth of it, as I said even now, opposed Forbes p. 609 col 1.
by the Waldenses, and afterward by Wicliff, and those that followed them, and
shall be opposed by all Orthodox, till that Dagon fall.

. 4. Why the Error of Transubstantiation is to be rejected with utmost
detestation.


1. The Idolatry and Sacrilege which does ensue upon it, and that is the
adoration and worship of the Host, a piece of bread, and the mutilation or
maiming of the Sacrament by bread only, and the propitiatory Sacrifice of
Christ himself in the Mass, who was once only offered up to God upon the Cross,
all which are the issue of this Error.

2. The monsters of contradiction and absurdity to sense and Reason which
follow thereupon. It was begotten by feigned miracles and fabulous Legends, and
is the mother of blasphemies and inextricable absurdities, which set faith it
self on the rack, and which though they would seem easily to blow away, yet by
their straggling it appears they strive with that they cannot master. The point
of Consubstantiation has brought forth a grand absurdity, maintained by some
Psendo* Lutherans, the Ubiquity of Christ's Body in all places.

But this of Transubstantiation surpasses all, as I show thus,

1. Suppose Christ sitting at the table with his Disciples, and eating this
bread and drinking this cup first, as the custom at the Paschall Supper was,
and as the Papists generally, and the Fathers hold, and we deny not, becaUse
the Scripture seems plain for it, (...), Matthew. 26. 19. Henceforth I will not
drink of the fruit of the Vine; supposing, I say, this, How is it possible or
imaginable that he should eat himself? or how can he sit at table, and yet be
in the mouths of his Apostles? Was he at the same time in his Apostles mouths
or stomachs, while he sat and rose from table, and discoursed those three
Chapters of John 15, 16, 17? or while he sweat that Bloody sweat in his Agony
in the Garden, etc. a monstrous impossibility!

2. It Is Impossible to make that which was before existent and in being: Can a
father beget a son that Chelling. p. 70.
is already begotten? Can an Architect build a hoUse that is already built? Can
the body of Christ, which is before the conversion of the bread, be made or
produced by the turning of bread into it? Can he that was conceived by the holy
Ghost born of the Virgin be made by pronouncing of four or five words? If ever
delusions were strong, these are, Nam factum facere and factum infectum facere,
are equally impossible.

3. They say that the substance of bread and wine is avoided, and that only the
accidents remain, so that there is length and nothing long, breadth and nothing
broad, thickness and nothing thick, whiteness and nothing white, moisture and
nothing moist, sweetness and nothing sweet, that is, a long, broad, thick,
white, moist, sweet Nothing. The Priest pours out nothing but lines and
colors, when he pours out the wine, for these accidents of bread and wine are
not in the bread, becaUse that is avoided and vanished, and they are not in the
Body of Christ, as themselves say, and yet it is plain this bread and wine do
nourish the body, and is the body nourishable by mere accidents? Can there be
plainer contradictions?

4. Can the same body at the same time have his just dimensions, distance of
parts, symmetry, proportion, as the Body of Christ has, and yet not have
these, becaUse all parts? yea the whole Body of Christ, say they, are in one
and the self same point or crum of bread.

5. Can the Body of Christ which is much greater be wholly contained in a wafer
or piece of bread, in his full dimensions, and that as many times as there are
points, crumbs, drops in the bread or wine?

6. Can the bread be turned into the very Body of Christ, and yet not anything
of that bread become anything of Christ, nor the matter nor form nor accidents
of bread be made either the matter or form or accidents of Christ?

7. Can the same thing, as Christ's true Body, at the same time be wholly above
it self, and wholly below it self, within and without it self? can it be moved,
and yet be still? be carried from one place to another, and yet not move? be
brought from heaven to earth, and yet not come out of heaven? who then can
assure me that when he hung upon the Cross, he was not walking somewhere else,
crucified and not crucified, eaten and not eaten, alive in one, dead in another
place, as in case the Apostles celebrated this Supper while Christ was in the
grave.

8. What dishonor do these men render the Body of Christ obnoxious unto, to be
eaten by wicked men, by bruit creatures, by mice, by other vermin, to be cast
into some unclean place? for so long as the form of bread remains, so long the
Body of Christ is there, though it be in the mouth or belly of a moUse, says
Ales and the rest of the Schoolmen, who do one where or other acknowledge the
most of these monstrous absurdities, and go about to heal and salve them. I
surcease from raking further into this ungrateful sink, whose name
Transubstantiation is but of yesterday in comparison, and which dishonours the
Body of Christ into a monster, destroies the nature of the Sacrament, and fills
the world with dreadful contentions and broils; and let us but observe, 1.
What grievous impositions the Romanists lay upon the faith of them that are
devoted to her communion. 2. What contradictions and absurdities the common
people do ignorantly and implicitly believe. 3. What strong delusions even to
believe lies God gives up Learned men unto, that refUse the simplicity of the
truth for interests and politic ends! 4. What a mercy of God it is to deliver
us from that tyranny, which leaves us no other choice, but to swallow and
digest such impossible things, or to be sacrificed in flames; and the Lord
forbid the re-entrance of that Religion among us, which in all likelihood will
cost us our souls or our lives.

This is my Body, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, teaching all
Ministers to explain the outward Ordinance what it means, and all communicants
to set their hearts upon it; for as the Parchment and Wax are little worth, but
the Estate conveyed, so the Bread and Wine do but convey by their Use, the Body
and Blood of Christ, and the Covenant of grace and peace confirmed unto us; and
as we Use to search and pick out of every corner of the shell that is broken, as
of a Wallnut, the kernel that is in it, so we should study the marrow and
kernel of this Ordinance, to lose the sight and Use of nothing here presented;
God loses honor and praise, and we benefit and com ort, when we look not to
the inwards of an outward Ordinance, especially when Christ himself and all the
great and capital benefits that accrue by him, are not only represented but
confirmed, and to be participated: They that look upon a mere representation of
Christ's death in this Ordinance, reduce it to a pretense or shadow, and look
for too little, for it is a sealing Ordinance: They that look for his very Body
to be eaten, look for too much; we may expect from Gods institutions the grace
or benefit which God appoints them to exhibit, and in the way wherein he so
appoints: Then have we the benefit of his death, when we have him; and here is
offered to Calvin in 1 Cor. 11.
you not the benefit only, but the Body in which he suffered; his body was a
Sacrifice, here it is spiritual food, we feed upon that Sacrifice as the
manner was; the Covenant was confirmed by his Blood, here we feast upon it; the
Blood was shed that he might reconcile to God, it is drunk that we may be
partakers of that Reconciler, and that reconciliation. He shall confirm the
Covenant with mercy, is Daniels phrase, Dan. 9. 29. The memorial we celebrate,
the benefit we participate here, and the great Question, Whether I have
remission of sins, whereat we stick, is here answered to a doubting soul, that
believes in desire, not in comfort, as sure as God can devise by outward
Ordinance. The Word answers that Question by description of qualification of
the person, a Believer: The Spirit answers it by witnessing and sealing it up
to our spirits that we are children: The graces of Regeneration do answer it,
as fruit does to the life of the tree, by demonstration: This Sacrament answers
it by exhibition and offering Christ to me that I may appropriate him, for the
blood was shed for you, says Christ, Luke 22. 20. for you that take and eat
and drink.

Finis non intus, dente non mente, as Austin expresses the inward of Ordinances
are enjoyed by them that inwardly are Christians: the Covenant is sealed to
them that come to the terms of that Covenant: those that bring inward graces
receive inward benefits: Sed de hoc plura.

CHAP. XI. Of Christ's mandate or charge for the celebration of this Ordinance
in remembrance of Him.
1 COR. 11. 24, 25, 26. This do in remembrance of me. This do ye, as often as ye
drink it in remembrance of me. For as often, etc.
He took bread, and giving thanks he brake it, and gave it: Likewise also the
cup after Supper. And so much also touching the Kernel and Marrow of the
Feast; This is my Body broken for you: This Cup is the New Testament in my
blood. And now having past through our thorny and perplexed way, encombred with
adversaries, through whom we must fight our way, we are come into a fairer and
clearer road, as into a champain, not so much infested with enemies and
Disputes: For whether it be that a practical conscience be easilier satisfied
than a subtle wit, or that the devil does most labor to corrupt our
intellectuals, that so as once he may corrupt our worship and our morals, or
whatsoever the Reason be, there are more wranglings and Disputes raised about
speculative and theoreticall Points, than about matters of practice or moral
obedience.

These words contain our Savior his mandate or charge for the celebration of
this Ordinance, together with the end whereunto it serves: This do in
remembrance of me: This do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. This do
ye, there is the charge: for remembrance of me, there is the end. None of the
Evangelists have these words but Luke only, out of whom either our Apostle
takes the words, or at least symbolizeth with him, making them or rendering them
as part of Christ's own words spoken by himself at the first Institution and
Celebration of his Supper; and which you may Observe, the two Elements Bread
and Wine taken and received, though they have distinct significations, Christ's
Body broken and his Blood shed, yet they meet as two lines in this one point,
The remembrance of Christ. This do in remembrance of me, is spoken of eating
the bread, ver. 24. This drink in remembrance of me, is spoken of the cup, ver.
25. The Use of both the signs makes up but one memorial of Christ, once
dying, once sacrificed up to God for us; and I shall take up the words in this
one Point,

The Lord Christ has left it in charge and commandment, that his Church or
people should celebrate this Supper for a remembrance of him. Or if you will
read the words thus, (...), for my memorial, or for my commemoration. What
impression has the dying charge or commandment of a Testator upon his children
or executors? Christ builds a monument for himself before he die, plain and
simple to the eye, but a lasting monument that must continue till he come
again, ver. 26. One of the seven wonders of the Heathen world was Mausolaeum, a
Monument or Tomb. The goodliest monument which distinguishes and beautifies the
Christian Church, is this of Christ's own erecting, his Memorial. The second
Temple built after the captivity of Babylon, was far inferior in outward
magnificence and splendor to the first, built by Solomon: and the Jews observe
five things to be wanting in the second, which were in the first, as the Ark,
etc. yet God promises, Hag. 2. 9. The glory of this latter hoUse shall be
greater then the former, becaUse Christ the desire of all Nations should come,
and fill it with glory, ver. 7. And shall not the presence of Christ's Body and
Blood in this Sacrament excel in glory, all the typical glory of Sacrifices
and Sacraments of the Law? They were but shadows of him that should come, this
the memorial of him that died and is alive. The particulars comprehended under
this Point are these:

Do this, it is more then a Warrant which gives authority, it is a Command that
requires duty: It is more than a Command, it is a Charge of a dying Testatour
or Savior, laying an injunction upon his Church to do this. For both
Sacraments of the Gospel we have the word of command: The Baptizate, Go and
Disciple all Nations, baptizing them, is the word for Baptism: Hoc facite, This
do ye in remembrance of me, is the word for the Supper. There must be in a
Sacrament, First, An outward Element. Secondly, A word of promise. Thirdly, A
word of command to Use it to that end, as none but Whitak. de Sacr. Qu. 6. de
numero.
the supreme power has authority to stamp or coin legitimate, and current
money, so none but God can institute and make a Sacrament. The Sacraments are
parts of Gods instituted worship, standing by positive appointment of God, The
eating and drinking of bread and wine in their natural being or Use, are no
more memorials, symbols and pledges of Christ's body and blood, than the form of
a Serpent in brass of healing those that were bitten with fiery Serpents; no
man can authoritatively institute a Sacrament, or prescribe to God any part of
his worship, I have received of the Lord, says the Apostle, that which I
delivered also unto you, and the Reason is good; He only can make a Sacrament,
who can make good the promise or grace thereby represented and exhibited.

Do this, that is, to celebrate this Supper: Chist limits and confines us to
Jans. Harm in Mat 26.
this, as God did Moses: See thou do all things according to the pattern shown
thee in the Mount; If we vary from the pattern there lies a quis requisivit
against us, Who hath-required this at your hands? So God checks our inventions
and superstition in creating will worship, by adding or detracting, as we may
not coin, so neither wash, or clip, or embase that which is stamped by the
Lord, (...), referrs to that which went before, Eat this blessed and broken
Bread, the next words explain it, Do this as often as ye drink it, principally it
relates to the actions of Gerard. Harm. cap. 171.
Communicants, Do this, that is, Eat ye, Drink ye, and consequently to the
actions of the Dispenser or Minister, Do this, that is, Bless ye, Break ye,
which are antecedent to eating and drinking, and so all the external rites or
actions of this Sacrament may come under the command, Do this, but we may not
stretch the (...) to accessories and circumstances appendant, not to the upper
room, nor to the night after Supper, nor to the gesture of discubiture; for
neither the injunction of the Passover did in after times extend to all the
circumstances Used at the first Passover in Egypt, as the Hebrews note. The
Papist seems to epsy here some glimpse of proof of the real Sacrifice of
Christ in his Mass, from the word here Used Facite, which in Latin sometimes
signifies to sacrifice or offer, and so it does with an ablative case, which is
not here, but the thread is too fine to hold, for if the word signify so
somewhere, it is not consequent that therefore here; where the word (...), Do
this, plainly limits it to the actions of the Communicants, as I have said. The
Ordinances of God are most powerful and proper, when they are themselves pure,
plain, naked of all humane disguizes or embellishments, and therefore I bespeak
all Communicants, Ministers and people, not to study how to add more glory or
gracefulness to this Ordinance, as they suppose, but to rest in, and submit to
that which we find in Christ's example, or first original, and suffer your
selves to be limited to do this, Do this in remembrance of me.

. 5. Who are commanded to receive this Sacrament.
Do this, is given to the Church, the Saints, Disciples of Christ. It is true,
the Apostles only were present at Christ's first celebration, He sat down with
the twelve, says the Text, and so the command was directed to them only; But
how? Not to the Apostles as Apostles, but as Communicants, as representing the
Church Lucas Brug. in Evang.
or people of Christ, or to the Apostles as Dispensers of it, and to them as
receivers of it; For when Christ said to the Apostles, Go and baptize, Do this
in remembrance of me, he intended not that either Sacrament should die with
them, but from them continue in succession of all times, therefore Do it in
remembrance of me; they received it in anticipation of his death, but it was to
endure as a memorial of it, as the Passeover-Lamb was first eaten in Egypt, or
slain before the destroying Angel passed through the Land, but intended for a
memorial for ever in all generations, till Christ came, and therefore the
Apostle here delivers it to the Church of Corinth, the very institution of
Christ is delivered to this Church, and the Use of it enjoined to them, and all
Churches till he come again, ver. 26.

When I say it is a command given to the Church, or to the Saints, I mean, that
it is an inner commandment, an inner Ordinance, (as there was inner Ordinances
in the Temple) for Church Members and Disciples. The command of hearing the
Word is given to all. The commandment of being baptized is to believers, as a
Sacrament of their initiation or entrance, or admission. To make a Disciple,
and to baptize one, seems to be put for the same, John 4. 1, 2. but this
commandment, Do this, lies more inner yet, it appertains to them that are
Disciples already, or Church Members, which was signified in the ancient
Christian Churches by the baptistery or font at the Church-door, and by the
Table intra Cancellos within the Chancel; so in the Passover, a stranger was
not admitted to the Pasleover, but when he was circumcised, then let him come
near and keep it, Exodus 12. 44, 48. Let him come near, says the Text, for it
is an inner Ordinance, and the Communicants must be such at least, whom the
Apostle calls (...), 1 Cor. 5. those that are within, for here is that inner
fellowship and communion of the Saints and members of Christ exercised and
professed. This then is that peculiar and most inward command and privilege
that appertains to an enclosed company, it is a pasture enclosed, not a common;
Here Christ holds a more familiar presence and fellowship with his peculiar
people, to whom he vouchsafes an interior admission; Shall not we then keep
this charge, and Observe this commandment, and enjoy this privilege properly
belonging to Disciples? Oh it was this that made Christians of old, when they
were for their sin debarred and excluded, so cry, weep, lament their sad
case, that they should depart as it were from the presence of their Lord, and
stand aloof in the court that had been admitted into the parlour or chamber of
presence; and for those that were in the school of catechism, called (...), it
was the utmost end to which they did aspire, and for which they waited a long
attendance to be admitted to this communion, and then properly called sideles,
this was the highest form.

. 6. The End of the Institution and Celebration of this Ordinance.
remembrance of Christ, for it is (...), a memorial of that great, that
universal Sacrifice, Christ Jesus; Memorials of dying friends, though plain are
precious, and of great account with all men, being kept amongst their (...), or
esteemed tReasures, and we may see how little Christ receded from the intent of
the Passover, which was a memorial of the Hebrews deliverance in Egypt, Exodus
12. 14. and transferred to a greater memorial of himself, by whom is wrought a
greater and more universal deliverance of the Church; The day of the Jews
Sabbath was changed to the first day of the week for celebration of the
resurrection of Christ, and so the creating of a new Heaven, and a new earth
that day; The paschal rite of the Jew was changed from a memorial of their
deliverance from Egypt into a memorial of the death of Christ, by which we
have a greater deliverance; Their Passover was to be Observed by them in their
generations for ever, Exodus 12. 24. and our Supper is an Ordinance to be
Observed by the Gospel-churches for ever; Their ever was Christ's first coming,
our ever is till he come again; It Is twice repeated, For remembrance of me;
both the eating of the bread and drinking of the wine are but one memorial,
which is the (...), or bufinesse of this Ordinance; All Churches and Christians
could not see the Lord dying, for he died but once, and therefore they have a
glass or representation of that death, which as it is always in the efficacy
and effect, so it might always live and be fresh in our memory, the
commemoration of that Sacrifice which never is, never needs to be repeated, is
repeated often in this Sacrament, and this Sacrifice of Christ as it was
promised and prefigured in old Types and Sacrifices, so was it performed ence
in truth upon the cross, and is often celebrated in this Sacrament of memory.

This memorial is solemn, this remembrance must be practical.

CHAP. XII. Of doing this in remembrance of Christ; The Properties of this
Memorial.
Purim, the Encaenia or feast of Dedication; Great victories, have their days
of Thanksgiving; great deliverances, benefits. Benefactours are honored with
solemn memorials; private remembrances which every man may agitate in his own
mind are too low expressions of public, and eminent, and universal benefits,
therefore Christ will set up his own monument, and ordain a solemn Ordinance
for remembrance of himself, to be Observed by all that have his memory, and it
is one of the great Sea-marks of the Church of Christ, he did not set up
anniversaries or festivals for his Nativity, Circumcision, Ascension, etc.
which the Churches in after times Observed, but he did set up in gross this
solemn memorial of himself, and that is principally of his death; His death I
say, For ye show the Lords death, ver. 26. And why? BecaUse his death is the
expiation of sin, therein was made the Sacrifice of Atonement; Redemption,
Reconciliation was made thereby, the Covenant confirmed, the love of God to man
demonstrated, the justice of God for sin exemplified, the foundation of our
righteousness, hope, peace and victory laid, the fullness of merit, the
mirror of mercy, the admiration of Angels, the center of all Christianity, and
the sum of all Scripture types, Prophecies, Promises, the most admirable of
all the works of God that ever were; and indeed all that can be said, and more
then can be said was here to be seen, and is here to be remembered.

Secondly, This remembrance of Christ must be lively and practical; There is a
naked, historical, theoretical remembrance, a review of the Species or Ideas
formerly imprinted in the mind; So Absalom is remembered in his Pillar, and
Lot's wife in her pillar of salt, merely historically; and there is a practical
remembrance, which connotes affections fruitful effect, and so in common
speech to remember is to requite good or evil, and in Scripture phrase, God
remembers our sins, our services, when he punishes or rewards, Remember me, O
my God, and spare me, Nehem. 13. 22. with infinite the like. Our remembrance of
Christ in this Supper sets awork all that is within us; Our sorrow for sin,
as Peter's remembrance of his words, when the Cock crew, Mark 14. 72. He wept
bitterly; our faith to believe in, and receive him, so Psalm. 20. 7. We will
remember, that is, trust in the Name of our God. It sets on work our
thanksgiving, for so great a benefit ingages resolutions, blows up the coals of
love, fills with admiration. What would the sight of Christ bleeding on the
cress for us, groaning under our sins, have wrought on tender heart? The same,
as far as a reflection can work (which is weaker than the direct Species) should
be the temper of our hearts, when we see him and his death personated, and
acted in this Sacrament, here we see him dying, paying our ransom* Oh the
dreadful example of Gods justice upon sin! Oh the sweetest example of Gods
mercy to a sinner, actually acting their several parts in this spectacle of
Christ represented to our says, as yet hanging on the cross, the Lamb of God
is as yet smoking upon the Altar, which takes away the sins of the world, if
you seel not your remembrance of Christ, it is nothing; If you exercise only
wit and invention, it is barren, but the exercise of affection is the best
commemoration; He that brings sin hither as bitter herbs, shall be sweetly
refresht with Christ our Passover

. 3. To whom this Remembrance is made.
Quest. To whom is this remembrance made?

Ausw. 1. We make it unto, and within our selves, whetting upon our hearts the
fruit and benefit we receive from him, and the torments and pains he endured
for us.

2. We make this remembrance to others, to all the world, by our solemn
profession of Christ and his death, as that we stand unto for remission of
sins, and acceptance with God. Let the Jew or Infidel laugh at us for trusting
to a crucified Savior and memorizing him in a piece of bread and cup of wine.
It is our joy and triumph, we live, and hope to die in, and if need be for this
profession.

3. We make this remembrance to God, we set before him the Sacrifice of his own
Son, and put him in mind by him to be merciful to us, we inculcate the
death of Christ to God, and set before him these monuments, we say and pray,
Lord remember Mede* Diatrib in Mal. 6. c. 1. v. 11. Forbes. Hist. Theol. p.
618. Call. 2.
that Sacrifice which we here remember: If thou remember our sins we will
remember thy Christ, pardon us in the name of that Sacrifice, which we
commemorate, and make mention of before thee; and this is the reason why the
Ancients so often called this Ordinance a Sacrifice, which Chrysostom recalling
himself, says, Chrysostom. in Heb. Homil. 17. page Graecat. 856.
(...), rather the commemoration of a Sacrifice, becaUse they offered up their
prayers and thanksgiving in the name of Christ the Sacrifice here commemorated,
for here is no real sacrificing of Christ to God, that turns the Table into a
cross, but here is the commemoration of a Sacrifice, and a feasting and
feeding thereupon by faith, as men that are in covenant and fellowship with God.

CHAP. XIII. A Lamentation for the neglect of this Ordinance.
NOw to the Use of this point, The Lord has left it in charge, that his Church
do celebrate this Ordinance in remembrance of him. And

England since it became Protestant, the remembrance and memorial of Christ
has been even forgotten, and the Ordinance of Communion been rendered as the
apple of contention and division, a matter of quarrel rather than of Use, the
loss that is gained by this intermission or neglect, or disUse or it is very
great, for we lose an inestimable benefit by it, the solemn remembrance of
Christ with the comforts thence resulting, we lose a duty by it; for Christ
said, Do this, and is it not a great loss to lose so signal a note of the
Church of Christ, so great a benefit, and the visible mischief has been very
great, for hereby separation has been mightily advanced, the people like sheep
wanting fodder at their own crib, have scattered themselves to other cribs and
pastures, where they might find sustenance, and several communions have been
taken up on the same Reason that water being carn'd or stopped from this old
channel, finds out or makes other watercourse, and leaves the other channel
dry, and the generality of the people by their too easy patience under so
great a famine have given too sad an argument, how easily they would part with
all Religion, that have so carelessly suffered the loss of so great a part
thereof, as this Ordinance is.

I know that we shall like Joseph's brethren be ready to transfer the fault on
others, no man will own it, and yet happily we are all guilty, it but in this,
that the Apostle said* to the Corinthians in another case, 1 Cor. 5. 2. And ye
are puffed up, and have not rather mourned; For had not pride and envy,
discontent and security prevailed over us, we might have mourned and lamented
after, or over this loss or eclypse, and thereby have manifested not only a
good disposition of heart in feeling the want of Ordinances, but a very good
sign that God would restore it, and a good part of preparation in our selves to
the due and orderly receiving of it; the child is either very fullen or sick
that cries not for his bread.

. 2. The Occasions of the Eclypse of this Ordinance in our days.


1. As I look upon God without whose hand this could not come to pass. I
acknowledge that when he brings a man, or a Church into an incapacity of
Sacraments, as Israel in the wilderness, or as in that case then, that a man
was unclean by Reason of a dead, body, or in a journey far off, Numb. 9. 10.
and such, like cases now; There is a relaxation of this command for the time,
and either necessity or, duty may dispense with our forbearance; And I further
say, That God is just in punishing us with this loss or stroke for our abUse
and contempt of this holy Ordinance in former times, by shutting out those that
were fit to be admitted, merely upon a ceremonious inconformity, and compelling
in upon penalty, that by this test they might find out Recusant Papists, such
as were contrary to their own rules, sottishly ignorant, notoriously wicked;
and therefore I conceive this storm may be upon us, and this breach in this
Ordinance; for the Lord tells Israel, that when in good intention they sought to
bring up the Ark of God, and laid it on a Cart, which should have been carried
on the shoulders of the Levites, he made a breach upon them, for that they
sought him not after the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. For God is severely holy
in exacting of us the due order of his Ordinances, as we may see in Nadab and
Abihu, and in that great rule, Numb. 10. 3. I will be sanctified in them that
come nigh me: When we take hold of misshapen Ordinances put out of form by
us, we take a knise by the edge, and not the haft, we cut our fingers.

2. As for them of the Separation, whose advantage it was, and of some of them
the design to have us broken, that they might thrive as the people on the
Seacoast do by the wrack; They (I say) while some were laboring, and all were
waiting for to have Gods order stamped by civil Authority, not to give esteem
or value to that which is of God, but to make it more current with us; As the
stamp makes not the gold more precious, but more current in common Use; While I
say some were endeavoring this, or happily some of you will say, While men slept
the envious man sowed his tares, and took his opportunity of that long
vacation, as Israel did of Moses his absence in the Mount, and they planted
their battery here upon this Sacrament, and cried down promiscuous Communions
with all their might, laying a good foundation, That only visible Saints are
fit Communicants, which is true as to the Churches Admission; That real Saints
only are worthy Communicants, which is true too, as to the inward grace or
benefit, but then, as always in such cases it is the superstructure was hay
and stubble; That Saints are only such as are of their making and judging; And,
That they that are of their opinion or party, though vicious in life and empty
of true grace, are Saints; and thence come the several Communions and divisions
molded up together into several bodies, for and by interests, passions and
worldly ends, which I speak not of all, for some godly souls might be carried
away to enjoy this Sacrament in a Communion more pleasing to them, as Aaron was
in the business of the golden Calf, and others were mightily taken with it,
who hardly passing for honest men at home in their own Churches, were presently
canonized for Saints, All the Congregation are Saints, every one of them, says
Corah, Numb. 16. 3.

3. When I look upon the standing Ministers, who should dispense the Sacrament,
I must plead this for them, that while it is their intention and practice to
make the door of this Sacrament no wider, no narrower than Christ has made it,
they cannot be condemned. It may be so wide, as to let in the uncircumcised to
the Passover, and bring Greeks into the Temple, as they said of Paul. It may
be so narrow, as to shut out fit and worthy Communicants for circumstances, for
mere ceremonies, as in former times; There is great difference between Christ's
real members and guests at this Table, and as I may say the visible Churches
members or guests; If he be a visible Professor of faith unshipwrackt, of
capacity to discern the Lords body, of life without scandal, he is a guest of
the Church, and yet not happily a true member of Christ, but a Jew outwardly in
letter, a Simon Magus, a Judas, an hypocrite; We are not Domini, but
Dispensatores, Lords of the Sacrament we are not, Stewards we may be, but the
Steward cannot invite to his Masters Table, whom the Master will not have his
guest, nor shut out any whom the Master has invited; The Priests that were
partial in the Law, did God make base and contemptible before the people, Mal.
2. 9. and their partiality was in admitting the blind, lame and blemished
Sacrifices of the rich, or of their friends: Such partiality will embase the
Ministers of Christ, and the Lord taxes the Prophetesses for like partiality,
Ezekiel. 13. 19. For handfuls of barley, and pieces of bread, they slay the souls
that should not die; they save the souls alive that should not live; These are
the two extremes, which as applied to our purpose is to shut the door against
them that should come in, and open the door to them that should not enter,
which if any do for handfuls of barley etc. for partial respects and carnal
ends, their sin is great.

4. If we look on the generality of people in this Land, they are not prepared,
and which is worse, they will not be. How many are bruits for their knowledge,
and beasts for their lives? The only way to bring them and the Sacrament
together, is either to stoop the Ordinance to them, and being so set on tilt, I
fear it will run dregs, or to elevate and lift them up to the Ordinance, and
that is the only way to be attempted; God grant success. When the ignorant,
superstitious, profane are weeded out, the Garden will hardly look green;
These are they that hold up old corruptions; Religion is nothing with them but
an ancient custom, or tradition received from father to son, The high places
were not taken away, for as yet the people had not prepared their heart to the
God of their Fathers, 2. Chron. 20. 33. For the frowardness of those places
where security, senslesnesse of spiritual things, opposition, is predominant,
this Rule would be laid, That there is no Reason to deny those that are godly
the liberty of performance of this duty, or enjoyment of this benefit; Why are
they starved, becaUse others will not, or ought not to eat? Did the Church that
lived amongst Jews or Heathens always want this Sacrament? They were sometimes
disturbed and persecuted, when the Civil Magistrate turned the edge of the Axe
toward them; but they lost not the Ordinance. Why but we have no rule
established by Civil Authority, or rather no Government: Nor had the Primitive
Church for 300 years, when the vigor of Discipline was strongest; How was
their Discipline of force, Per pacta conventu, by consent, whereby all
Discipline is valid. He that will be of our body, must submit to the Laws and
Rules of that Corporation he is free of, whether to be enfranchised or
disfranchised: What if wicked men break in and abUse our Sacrament? what if
Heathens had so done in the Primitive Church? If they eat our bread, it is no
Sacrament to them. If extreme violence be Used or feared, we have the
protection of the Magistrate, or as the first Christians, we have our hoUses to
break the Lords bread in.

. 3. Of removing Obstructions to this Ordinance.
Quest. If the command be so high, the memorial so sweet, the benefit so
great, What may be done that there may be no Obstruction between my soul and
this duty, this remembrance, this benefit?

Ans. I Will set my self amongst you, and be as the lowest of the people, and this
should be my rule, I would abate and submit, and strip my self of all carnal
respects, pride, stomach-envy discontent, scorn, etc. rather than deprive my
self of this benefit, or hinder my self from coming to meet my Lord Christ: It
should be point of conscience that should hinder me, or nothing. And now on the
other side, I Will set my self in place of a Minister or Church Officer, and my
rule is this, I will abate and strip my self of all pride, interest, enmity
contempt of my neighbor, partiality, base and carnal respects, rather than
keep my self from giving it to you, and would bring it to a point of conscience
only, that shall forbid me or nothing; when it is at a point of conscience,
then both I and you must examine whether our consciences be not bound by
error, that which binds you may loosen me, that which binds me may loosen you;
if we inform one another, and if error be found, I will cut the bond and set
my self at liberty, to receive or give the Lords Supper: and I am consident
that if carnal thoughts, Reasons and respects were cut off on all sides,
thousands would be reduced that stand off, both from their duty and from their
benefit: It was the case of many of precious memory, that liked not the
Ceremonies, yet submitted to those inconveniences, rather than lose that
benefit which by their submission to them might be gained.

Do this; and upon what terms he runs the loss of such a benefit, as to keep a
memorial of Christ: It Is a kind of Thanksgiving to Christ, to commemorate his
death and sufferings for us. As there is an exhibition of Christ and his grace
to a faithful receiver, so the benefit should draw us to the Use of this
Ordinance. As it is a command, a dying command of Christ, Do this in
remembrance of me, so the duty or conscience of duty should impell and move us.
The two Sacraments of old were both of them backed with cutting off in case of
neglect, Genesis 19. 14. Numb. 9. 18. The positive worship of God in Sacraments,
is not easily, either misperformed or neglected. You will say, God affrighted
his people of old unto his Sacraments, but now we fright you from them: Far
be it from us, we affright you into preparation, not from the Sacrament, as
Joshua did the people, Josh. 24. 19. Ye cannot serve, the Lord, for he is a
holy God, he will not forgive your sin: it was a quickening speech, not a
discouraging: we would not have you run on the point of this Ordinance. Why,
but if it be a command, how can we be debarred? If Christ say, Do this, who can
say, Do not this? I have answered this already. The command here is not an
outward commandment, as I may say, but an inward, not given to all the world,
but to Christ's Disciples, to certain qualified persons, as the command of the
Passover was limited to the circumcised and to the clean, and this also to a
man that examines himself, and so let him eat of this bread, etc. It Is a duty
and a privilege both, of all outward Ordinances the inmost.

Go and sin no more: but he that takes heart to sin becaUse Christ died, seems
neither to see his own sin nor death, in the death of Christ.

. 6. How our minds should be exercised in the time of the celebration of this
Supper.
viz. in the remembrance of Christ, the survey of whom is enriched with
excellent fruit of renewing our repentance, quickening our faith elevating our
affections; and the impression made* upon us by this lively spectacle of a
dying Savior, cannot but work as the bloody Robes of Caesar did upon the
people, when they were hanged out in sight by Marc. Anthony; and therefore it
is suitable to the end of this Sacrament, to be exercising our memories, minds
and affections in the perusal of Christ Jesus. I know that some Churches Use
to sing a Psalm, while the action is performing, whom I condemn not, as a means
to keep the heart intent, and in spiritual frame or fixedness, but should
rather Choose a silent meditation and employment of the mind in the remembrance
of Christ, for that is more suitable to the end of this Ordinance, and to
Christ's example and institution, who according to the custom of the Jews filled
the time of action with commemoration, and closed it with a Hymn: and if we may
give credit to the Jewish Writers, and others out of them, as Hugo Broughton
shows in his Commentaries on Daniel, the Psalms of the Hallel or Hymn sung by
the Jews, was the 113, 114, and so onward; and it is very probable that Christ
and the Apostles did not herein vary, for they sung a Hymn at the close, as
Matthew. 26. 30. which example I need not stand to improve against the
Anti-psalmists of this age.

There are several pertinent meditations that may fully take up the time of
the action with great advantage and benefit to our souls, as namely,

1. The dreadfulness of Gods justice which with a terrible stroke did smite the
great Shepherd for our sins, the least dram of it would have sunk us to all
eternity.

2. The cursed nature of sin that so exasperates the holy God, and makes such
a breach between God and the creature, as can never be made up but by the
broken body of the Lord of Glory.

3. What it cost to redeem a soul, a mass of gold as big as the whole earth,
not valuable with one drop of this blood.

4. What an infinite love broke forth, that God, rather than let our souls be
lost, would send his eternal Son, and make him sin for us.

5. What a great work it is to reconcile a sinner to his God, all names of men
and Angels are nothing to it, all their sufferings would not pay a penny of
this debt, which is not dissolved by any blood but of the Lord of Glory.

6. That God would not only pardon sin, by giving forth a general pardon, as a
King pardons rebels; but so pardon, as might even melt the hardest heart, and
for ever humble, and silence, and satisfy it by the love of God, and the
sufficiency of that Sacrifice, whose virtue extends to thousands, and lasts
always.

7. That the gracious Covenant of God made with all that beleeeve in Christ, is
sealed and ratified with such blood, as there needs no doubt of the validity of
the Covenant, though one man bad as many sins on him as all the world.

8. That Gods way of saving man by a Mediator, the death of a Mediator, does
oblige man to be the thankfullest creature in the world: Angels that sinned not,
have need of no Mediator; Angels that sinned have none; man that sinned, and
therefore needs one, has one given to him, The man Christ Jesus.

9. That as God gave Christ for you, so he gives him to you, that he that was
your Sacrifice offered up to God, might in this Sacrament be offered unto you,
as meat and drink, as spiritual repast, that as we live by Christ, so we may
live upon him, being entertained as confederates to feast with God upon the
Sacrifice offered up unto him. It is a fruitful field of Meditation, through
which ye may walk the time of celebration, and then breathe out your
Meditations in a Song of praise, as the close and music of this heavenly
Feast: Concerning which Hymn, wherewith the Jews did usually close the coenam
apolyticam, or dimissory Supper, calling it the Hallel, from the first word of
it Hallelujah, you may consult not only the Jewish Writers, but our Learned
men, Cameron Myroth in Matthew. 16. 30. Drusius in Matthew. 26. 30. Hugo Broughton
in Dan. page 46. beside Paulus Burgensis, Gerard Harm. Fol. 178. col. 3. who do
also point out to us the 113. and 114. Psalms, as that Hymn; for though some
others do rather conceive it a new Hymn composed by our Savior, Grotius in
Matthew. 26.
and the 17 Chapter of St John to be it, we find no Reason to go with them in
that opinion, both becaUse our Savior did not easily vary from the Rite or
Custom received, nor could the Disciples have sung with him in consort, except
we imagine such a praelection of it to them, as is Used by us now a days,
which will not be proved.

CHAP. XIII. How much it concerns Ministers to Teach, and all to Learn the
true meaning of this Ordinance.
1 COR. 11. 26, 27. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye
do show the death of the Lord until he come. Wherefore whosoever does eat this
bread and drink this cup of the Lord, etc.
When this Ordinance of the Supper is suitable to the Institution, and the
Communicant is suitable to the Ordinance, then all is right. Of the former I
have acquitted my self, by setting forth the nature, Use, end of this
Sacrament, according to our Lords Institution, recited by the Evangelists, and
by St Paul in this place.

speak, but the Apostle in this place speaks more fully and directly unto, than
in any other place is found, the abUses and distempers of the Corinthians
leading him most properly to it; and though in Popish Churches the grand error
and abUse lies in the unsutableness of their Mass to the Institution, yet in
Reformed Churches, who endeavor to imitate the pattern in the Mount, the
common sin lies in the unsutableness of the Communicant to the Ordinance; and
so the point of worship stands between us; and the Papists, much alike as it
stood between the Samaritans and the Jews of old, The Samaritans Used a false
worship, Ye worship ye know not what, Joh. 4. 22. The Jews had a true worship,
but were carnal, and for the most part formal worshippers. The Feast is
prepared, dressed, and ordered according to the Institution of Christ: Now the
guests are to be surveyed and tried, whether they come worthily or unworthily,
by the test or ticket of the Apostles Doctrine following to the end of the
Chapter; of which I shall say this in general.

1. That the Apostles Doctrine in this place is properly calculated for the
rectifying the abUses and unworthiness of the Corinthians, as ye may see at the
33, 34, verses, but so also most other Scriptures occasionally written, are of
general Use, their latitude is greater than their particular direction.

2. That the Apostle spends the most of his Doctrine upon eating and drinking
unworthily, setting home the sin and danger of it, for, the occasion, viz. the
sin of the Corinthians, required it; and yet doubtless the point of
worthiness, should in order of nature be first stated, before unworthiness can
be understood, for how should I know sin, except first I knew a law of duty;
how a crooked line, except I know what is straight: and therefore to attent
consideration, the Apostle will be found to begin there, as I shall show you
afterward.

3. That the Apostle in setting home the sin and danger of eating and
drinking unworthily, speaks thunder and lightning in very pertinent, but yet
new and unusual phrases, which are (...), have no brother in any other part of
Scripture, as guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, eating and drinking
judgment or damnation, etc. full of terror, and fit for compunction. These of
the 26 verse are the words of St Paul, who having recited what Christ did and
said at the first celebration and institution of this Sacrament, goes about to
set his Corinthian communicants to right, teaching them and us, what is the
meaning of this Ordinance, and what the (...), or main business of a
communicant is, that so he may eat and drink worthily, viz. To show forth the
Lords death; this he collects from the institution, this he inculcates upon the
communicant, as the great business which he is to do, that he may be suitable
to the Ordinance.

The words have no difficulty, but what may best be opened in every point as it
comes to hand: The first Point shall be from the connection or whole words:

People have need to be taught what the meaning of this Ordinance is, and what
is the main business of the Communicant* The Apostle has set forth this
Sacrament, and now teaches them what is the meaning or great business intended
in it. For as often as, etc. Outward Ordinances consisting of visible matter,
as most of the Jewish Ordinances did, and our Sacraments do, do ordinarily
terminate and bound the eye of the ignorant, that cannot, and of the Christian
outwardly, that does not look within the rind or shell of them: The time is
not lost that is bestowed either by us in the anatomy and opening, or by you in
learning and spelling out the mind and meaning of an Ordinance of God. When
your children, Exodus 12. 26. shall say unto you, What mean you by this service?
ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, etc. And in another
instance, When your children shall say, What mean you by these stones? ye shall
answer, Josh. 4. 6. The waters of Jordan were cut off, etc. This was the veil
that covered the eye of the Jews, they had Sacrifices, Washings, manifold
Rites, but were not able to spell and put together, they generally little
dreamd of the meaning of them, but were as the Apostle calls them, Jews
outwardly and in the letter; for it pleased God in the times of that
dispensation, to give his people the kernel, but enclosed in a hard shell; to
give them a pillar of fire, but in a cloud; to hide the light in a dark
lantern, to convey the truth in shadows. Now that the Obscurity is taken off
the Ordinances, there remains an ignorance upon our hearts, and many of us know
as little the meaning of our Sacraments, as the Jews did of theirs; there is
scarce any of our ignorant, superstitious, profane persons, but they think
there is some holiness in this Sacrament, and therefore they put on a posture
of some reverence for the time, but the particular Use of it, or the spiritual
importance they know not, and therefore rest in the opus operatum, and receive
the Sacrament as a medicinal potion naturally working, or worship that which
should be made Use of by faith, for the nourishment of the soul.



First, The Minister is hereby taught, That it is not only his duty to give the
Sacrament, but also to teach the Sacrament; he gives the outward Elements, he
teaches the inward meaning of them; he gives the bone, and shows the marrow
that is in it; otherwise you take the Sacrament by rote, and he gives you
integram nucem, as Bernard says, a whose nut, to a child that cannot crack it,
and so partakes in that sin and guilt being dumb, which you contract being
blind. Our Savior when he gave the Bread and the Cup, said also, This is my
Body, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, and so taught the meaning. St.
Paul when he had recited the Institution, shows the mind of it, As often as ye
eat, ye show the Lords death. And you are to be taught what is Gods meaning,
and what is the meaning of your own actions; Gods meaning is to make a
representation of Christ's death and sufferings, by the breaking of the bread,
and to afford you the communion of his Body and Blood, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The
meaning of your actions is to make commemoration of Christ, and to show forth
his death: Gods meaning is to dress out Christ in best manner and fittest for a
sinner, Christ broken, Christ bleeding; and the meaning of your eating and
drinking, is to feed sorrowfully and sweetly upon Christ, so prepared and
presented to you, for your repast and comfort. But now, if the same cup taken
with such ingredients, would be deadly poison, with such a lively Cordial,
would you not expect that the Physician should teach you to make it Cordial,
so the Lords Supper worthily received, is the most sovereign Cordial: But some
again may eat and drink damnation to themselves, Would you not expect that the
Minister, if he have either conscience of his duty, or respect to your souls,
should teach you to avoid the danger and obtain the benefit? If you do not, yet
God looks for it at our hands, Ezekiel. 44. 23. And they (the Priests) shall teach
my people the difference between the holy and profane, and caUse men to
discern between the unclean and clean; for else you may eat and drink damnation
to us, as well as to your selves.

ver. 29. He eats and drinks damnation to himself not discerning the Lords
Body, that is, not knowing the meaning, the nature, Use and end of the
Ordinance, which to understand is a good part of preparation, and without it,
there can be no right or true preparation. And therefore all you that intend to
be Supper-communicants, attend: The first lesson which you must learn, the
first Question to be answered is, What is the true meaning of this Ordinance?
what is the main business of it? for it is supposed in those words, Exodus 12.
26. When your children shall say to you, What mean you by this service, (i.
Passover,) that the father should be able to teach his child, as it is there
directed, and that the child should, as his first lesson be taught what is
meant, To know what the meaning of this Ordinance is.

1. It is a proper and excellent antidote or remedy of such abUses and
miscarriages as creep in at the door, either of ignorance, superstition, or
profaneness; and the Apostle signifies so much here, by applying this
corrective to those distempers which then reigned in the Church of Corinth, as
if he had said, Could you come and eat and drink so rudely, proudly,
confUsedly, irreverently, unworthily, if ye did consider but what ye ought to
do? that is, exercise communion with Christ, keep a commemoration of him, show
forth his death.

2. This will direct all your preparations to the true end, your prayers,
meditations, self-examination, will be answerable and suitable to the
Ordinance. Here is not the eating of a piece of bread, nor the drinking of a
cup of wine in a public company of sober men and of my betters (which yet is
enough to the putting on my better clothes, and framing my self to a grave
composure) but here I am to meet my Lord Christ, and to receive him as my
Savior, I am to have the Covenant of mercy sealed to me in his blood; I am to
make a thankful memorial of Christ, and to profess my embracement and
adherence to his death, as my only comfort; therefore be thou awakened, O my
faith, my godly sorrow, my spiritual appetite, my thankfulness, that I may go
out to Christ, and he come in to me.

3. This takes off all slighting and undervaluing of this Ordinance, which
appears to an outward and carnal eye, No better bread or wine than I can have
at home, for in this plain case is a rich Jewel, this bread is the body, this
wine is the Blood of the Lord of Glory; and therefore I must not value the seal
by the worth of the wax, which is not worth a penny, but by the pardon, or the
inheritance, which passes, and is conveyed by it.

4. This keeps me from running blindfold into the sin of guiltiness of the Body
and Blood of the Lord, and so into condemnation, for as the same Signet or Seal
of a Prince, does to one seal a pardon, to another an execution; so this very
Sacrament is to a Believer a seal of pardon, to another, as it were, the seal
of his condemnation.

5. Lastly, The preparation so much spoken of, and the self-examination
required by the Apostle, cannot be imagined to refer to the eating of bread
and drinking wine, but to the inward thing of the Sacrament: it necessarily
follows that those inward graces that enable us to have communion with Christ,
and make commemoration of him, can never be known or sought, except we know the
meaning of this Sacrament, for it is that which gives the Law and Rule of all
our preparations. And so I have shown you the Reasons why we should labor to
understand the language of this Ordinance.

So much of this general Point, the second Point shall be taken from those
words, Ye show the Lords death, or show ye, for the word might be construed
imparatively, but that the particle [ For] would not then so well consist.

CHAP. XIV. The great business that lies upon the Communicant, as often as he
eats this Bread and drinks this Cup, is to show the Lords Death.


We are buried with him by Baptism, into death, Romans 6. 4. and in the Supper,
we show the Lords death. As of all deliverances and benefits vouchsafed to
Israel of old, God would have the Passeover-deliverance celebrated by a
constant memorial in all generations; so of all that Christ does for us, it is
his death that must be shown forth in all generations of the Church, till he
come again: and therefore this Ordinance is speculum crucifixi, as Calvin
says; and In 1 Cor. 11.
the memorial, not so much of Christ's life or resurrection, De satisfact. cap.
1.
says Grotius, as of his death. This death has no second in all the world,
for it was the death of the Son of God, the death of the Lamb of God.

1. Of the Son of God, the Lord of Glory, whose highness and excellency gave
price and value to his death. Had he not been man he could not have suffered:
Had he not been the Son of God, God blessed for ever, he could not have
satisfied and conquered.

2. Of the Lamb of God, and therefore his death was a Sacrifice, and that is
more than a Martyrdom; for though a Martyr may be said to seal with his blood
that truth he dies upon, yet no blood can seal the Covenant but this of Christ,
no death can ratify the Testament but the Testators death: Had the death been
the death of the Lord, a most excellent person, and not also the death of a
Lamb for Sacrifice, to make atonement, it had wanted one of his properties,
but it was both. As it was the death of the Lord of Glory, the Son of God, so
it gave us the most illustrious testimony and example of the love of God, as
ever was or could be, and that the Scripture often points unto. As it was the
death of the Lamb of God, so it was a Sacrifice death, wherein he was made
sin for us, and bore our sins in his Body. As it was the Joh. 11. 13. Romans
5. Gal. 2. 20.
death both of the Son of God, and the Lamb of God, so it reconciled us
sinners unto God, and meritoriously redeemed and ransomed us from our bondage
to the curse and wrath of God, the only ground and foundation of our hope,
peace and comfort.

body, speak but a dying Christ: As the Ordinance, so the Communicant does by
eating and drinking, in fact declare and annunciate his profession of adherence
to, and embracement of the death of Christ, we solemnly and publicly avow,
both to God and men, that we stick unto, and abide by the death of the Lord,
for remission of sin, and reconciliation of our persons to God; and it is a
solemn part of Gods positive worship, to show forth the death of Christ our
Lord, not by a mere historical relation, but a practical and public
profession of our faith, and acceptance thereof, which though at all times we
may remember, yet God would have a solemn Ordinance in his Gospel-Churches, for
the commemoration and showing of it forth, which Ordinance is this of the
Supper. I know men are witty to elude Ordinances, and to flatter themselves
with private devotions and meditations, but when God has set up an Ordinance
on purpose, for the public and solemn showing of the Lords death; let them
consider it, that are not only careless of the benefit of it, but fail of their
duty, by not presenting themselves at this solemn showing of the Lords death:
but how can it be expected that they that show not the life of Christ by a
godly conversation, should care to show forth his death by public profession;
or rather, how can it be construed that they do it out of conscience of duty,
and not out of mere superstition, expecting that from the Sacrament, which the
Papist expects from his auricular confession, that is, to quit the old score,
that he may more freely begin upon a new.

But I may not forget that which is very learnedly Observed, that the Apostle
using the word (...), which frequently is Used for publishing and preaching
Schiud. in loc* Haggada.
the Gospel, does allude to the Haggada, as it was called by the Jewish custom
at the Passover, and that was a set and solemn declaration or annunciation of
the Lords passing over the hoUses sprinkled with blood, of their slavery and
hard bondage in Egypt, and their deliverance thence, teaching us, in this our
Gospel-Passeover, to show forth our hard bondage under sin, and the Lords
justice passing over all the souls sprinkled with this blood, and thereby
delivering us from our spiritual Egypt.

hoc agere, to be intent upon, and taken up with this employment, Show ye forth
the Lords death, this must be your actual exercise at the time of eating and
drinking, the death of Christ must fill your eyes, your ears, your lips, your
thoughts: If any of you could see Christ dying, the sight would wholly take you
up; and you come as near to see him dying; as an Ordinance can bring you, in a
representation: If any where, that Psalm. 2. 11. takes place here, Rejoice with
trembling, Tremble, for you see the weight of sin upon the Lord Christ, and
the severity and wrathful indignation of God against sin, both those
terrors cannot be seen in a clearer glass, than the death of the Lord: Rejoice
for the love that delivers up Christ is unparalled, and the death of the Lord
is succedaneous, a Sacrifice death, the Sacrifice bears the sin, and takes it
off you; there is a nunc dimitiis for all you that take Christ in your arms, I
would not be thinking of the joys of heaven, the second coming of Christ,
absolutely and abstractly considered, but showing forth his death: As in
prayer, good thoughts, if impertinent, are distractions, and to be whipped for
vagrants, so here, If my heart present to me the anger and terrible wrath of a
just and holy God, I show the Lords death; If the Law take me by the throat,
and say, Pay that thou owe, I show the Lords death; If conscience ask me what
I have to show for pardon of sin, and peace with God, I show the Lords death.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, Its Christ that died.

CHAP. XV. The Lords Supper is an iterable Ordinance.
THe third Point is taken up from the words (...), For as often as ye eat this
bread, etc.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is an iterable Ordinance, which is to be
repeated: Our Savior gives a hint of this in those words, This do for a
remembrance of me, and the Apostle from him, For as often, etc. The word often,
is sometimes opposed to seldom, and sometimes to once, as Heb. 9. 25, 26. Nor
yet that he should offer himself often, as the High priest enters into the
holy place every year: For then he must have often suffered since the
foundation of the world.

The Sacrifice of Christ, or the offering of him up, was but once, Heb. 9. 26.
The Sacrament of his body and blood is often as a memorial of that Sacrifice,
and the comparison Used in that place, is this; As man dies but once, so Christ
also: As in the Sacraments of the Jews, the first of them Circumcision, was but
once, nor indeed could be, but the Passover often, once every year; and Christ
was but once circumcised, but kept the Passover often: So in the Sacraments of
the New Testament, Baptism is but once, Christ was but once baptized, but the
Supper often, which though Christ celebrated but once, yet he gave order for
the repetition of it, I will not now take up the discussion, why Baptism* but
once, the Supper often, the Scripture gives us no hint for the repetition of
the one, but it does for the other, and the old saying is plausible, Semel
nascimur, saepius pascimur, we are but once born, but we are often nourisht.
God did more punctually and precisely under the Law prescribe the times of
their Sacraments, the eighth day for circumcision, such a day of such a month
yearly for the Passover, as he also did the times and place, and other
circumstances of his worship, for the people were more servile then, and the
worship more outward, but under the Gospel circumstances are at more liberty,
and spiritualnesse more called for, and therefore in this Sacrament for
instance, we have nothing, for how often, but we have, for how worthily, as a
learned man Observes, and therefore under correction it was not so right,
Muscul. de coena. Lib 4. distinct. 13. Qu. 5.
that when as Durand says, The primitive devotion of communicating every day,
was grown so cool, that it came to be commanded on the three great festivals,
whereof Easter was by Innocent the first made Anno 1200.
of the Quorum: (I might instance nearer home) enjoining all to it at that
time; For of this Chrysostom had complained long before that at those times the
people either of custom, or by Law crowded in (...), who as well, (...), O the
custom, says he, O the partiality of men. The truth is, I find, that in
times of persecution threatening Christians either to arm themselves, or in fear
of being scattered and dispersed, took every occasion to celebrate the Supper,
and Justin Martyr signifies, that their solemn meetings on the Lords days were
accompanied with this feast, and that the Question, how often is propounded in
Austine and Chrysostom, and Austin persuades and exhorts every Lord's Day,
Austin. Eccles. Dogm. cap. 53. Chrysostom. hom. 13. heb. Gerard. Harm. cap. 171.
if the heart be prepared, and Chrysostom says, that a pure conscience may
come as often as it will, but for a wicked man (...), once is too often; and to
conclude, if the necessity of our infirmities, the great benefit, the honor of
this memorial may be heard to speak, we shall come to this Rule, That frequency
beget not a customary formality or fastidious satiety, as Manna did, nor
seldomnesse beget forgetfulness, or superstitiousnesse extraordinarinesse, and
under this caution I leave the determination of the times unto the Church.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Continuance of this and other Gospel Ordinances in the
Church.
THe fourth point arises from the last words, Until he come, and it is this,
This Ordinance, and so all Gospel Ordinances are to continue in force in the
Churches, until Christ come, and this point cleaves into two parts.

Heb. 10. 37. He that shall come, he shall appear the second time, Heb. 9. 28.
as in the old Church of Israel, there was a glorious Temple, then a captivity
that followed; after the captivity a second Temple, and then Christ came; So in
Gospel-Churches, there was first a glorious Virgin primitive Church, then
followed a captivity under Antichrist, and that captivity shall be followed
with a second Temple, a Reformed Church, and then Christ shall come again; but
as the Church of God waited near four thousand years from the first promise of
Christ made to Adam, to his first coming, so shall the Church of the Gospel
wait many years from that promise of Christ's second coming, Act. 1. 11. until
it be; The first Christians did not imagine so long Revolution of time, until
Christ's second coming, as we have seen sixteen hundred, and how many yet are to
run out we know not; The Apostle checks it in the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
2. who began to think that the day of Christ was at hand, and the Christians in
Justins time, who were most of them of the millenary opinion ((...), says he)
did not think it should be so long ere the thousand years should commence; and
in Tertullians time, they Used in their public prayers to pray pro mora finis,
for delay of the end in respect of Antichrists tyranny, but the Jews are the
example of the efficacy of error, that have overshot already that which is
Christ's first coming by above sixteen hundred years; and are yet gazing; we
rest in this, there is a fullness of time for Christ's first, and so for his
second coming, and then he will come, our hope, our comfort, our salvation, do
all lie upon it, and therefore we look for it.

Secondly, This Ordinance of the Supper is to continue till Christ come; the
meaning is not, That men shall not deface and dishonor it in some places, but
that it shall continue in force, though not in Use: God will not alter or
discharge it, and the like, for there is the like Reason may be said of other
standing Ordinances of worship. The Jewish Passover was an Ordinance for ever,
but that ever had an end when Christ came; and the Ordinances of that Church,
though they might be defaced and destroyed for a time, yet were in force till
Christ's first coming, and so the Gospel-Sacraments, Worship, Ordinances, and
(may it please you) Ministry shall be in force, and God grant in Use, for the
time of their Ever, and that is Christ's second coming. The legal Sacrifices and
Ordinances were (as the Apostle expounds Heb. 12. 27.
the Prophet) to be shaken down and removed by the bringing in of a better
Covenant, and other Ordinances by Christ Jesus, but the Ordinances of the
Gospel cannot be shaken, are never to be removed by any other Ordinance, or any
new Church, but only to cease and expire with the worlds end. The Scripture
closes and shuts it self up with this, Come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22. 20.



1. To confirm us in the Use and esteem of the Ordinances of Christ, which have
no other period then the world, wiser we cannot be than he that thought them
necessary, but we may be prouder than we should by thinking our selves in a
state of perfection and not infirmity, which Christ has provided for, by his
Ordinances; of the Sacrament he says, Till I come; Of the Gospel Ministry, he
says, I am with you to the worlds end; The devil is foolishly subtle now
adays under a pretense of immediate spirit, crying down Ordinances, and the
Gospel Spirit must put down Gospel Ordinances, what Christ set up, the Spirit
must demolish, and it is a Spirit indeed, but a perverse one, as you may see by
the same argument cast in another mould; The water only refreshes and quenches
thirst, therefore cut off all the cocks and pipes, you know my meaning.

faith, saying, Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3. 4. They are
Infidels in their faith, that they may be Epicures in life; We have not waited
half so long for his second coming, as the old believers did for his first; God
has somewhat to do in the world, besides the saving of us; Time is not so
long, if it be measured by his span, as by ours, a thousand years are as one
day, and then what shall we say to the real Presentialists? who will have
Christ to come into every Sacrament, and yet it is said, Till he come, as if he
were not personally there, at present? The Scripture says nothing of Christ's
corporal invisible presence on earth, takes notice of a first coming and a
second, but no more; and yet lastly, What shall we say to those that are called
Seekers, and to the Sans-Ordinance men, and the Supra ordinance men, that will
be without and are above Ordinances? I say no more then this, Christ is not yet
come the second time, and as it was his first coming that set them up: So it is
his second only that shall take them down; Let not pride infatuate you, for as
it is a miserable case when the best plea or excUse for a man is to say, he was
drunk, he was mad; so it is but a sorry excUse for blasphemy, to say, It is his
conscience; let the Ordinances of Christ have his own date, viz. till he come.

This Bread and this Cup, where we find it called Bread still after
Consecration in confutation of Popish Transubstantiation, and both Bread and
Cup allowed to the Communicants; a shame to Popish Sacrilege, that has robbed
the Sacrament of one of them; but enough was said of both these before, when I
handled the words of Institution.

CHAP. XVII. Of worthy and unworthy Receiving of the Lords Supper.
1 COR. 11. 27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
THis verse has a mark in it is forehead (the word (...), Wherefore) whereby
at first sight it looks like an inference or collection from that which went
before, where the Apostle having laid down the Institution of this Sacrament in
the Use thereof, gathers from thence, That whosoever eats this bread, etc.
unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

Not discerning the Lords body, by the judgment that follows upon it,
damnation or punishment, by the way of prevention of the sin, the guilt and
judgment, and that is self-examination, and selfjudging, self-examination for
the prevention of the sin, self-judging for prevention of the punishment
inflicted by God.

So that for a particular sin properly incident to the abUse or miscarriage
of men in this Ordinance, there is very much said to show the nature and danger
of it, becaUse the distempers reigning amongst the Corinthians, did herein show
themselves, which the Apostle studies to discover and to heal, and we by so ill
an occasion gain such a piece of Doctrine as is not so fully delivered on this
subject in any other place of Scripture, for the better guidance and steerage
to stand off from those rocks which the Corinthians fell foul upon.

Worthily and unworthily] He that knows one, knows both; as he that knows a
right line, knows a crooked; The right interpretation of them is the hinge on
which hangs the true understanding of all that is to be said hereafter, and yet
they have been cloudily and confUsedly sensed by many that expound by fancy,
and at random, becaUse they do not first set down the right rule of exposition,
and so are themselves, and leave also their hearers in a mist.

We Use to denominate the Communicant worthy or unworthy, not at all intending
any merit or meritorious condignity, for such a worthiness is the greatest
unworthiness, but a meetnesse and congruity of the action to the rule of the
action, and therefore the Apostle applies worthiness or unworthiness to the
manner of communicating, He that eats and drinks unworthily. In all
Ordinances, either preaching, prayer, Sacraments, the eye of God is much upon
the manner, how they are performed, which I might make my first point, but that
I will not shoot my arrow at so great a compass.

Worthiness is relative, and refers to the rule of the action, which here is
the institution, the Nature, Use and End of this Sacrament: for to eat and
drink worthily, is to do it answerably and suitably to the Ordinance, when the
Communicant has, and so exercises such graces, qualifications and deportment,
inward and outward, as this Sacrament does require, bespeak and call for; And
the contrary is unworthiness, when the manner of communicating, or the
Communicant is not suitable or answerable to the Ordinance, either becaUse he
has not, or exercises not the qualifications, that the Sacrament requires in
a worthy receiver, or brings a contrary disposition to it, and this
interpretation is easy, natural and convincing; for the Apostle lays down the
institution first, and then infers what receiving unworthily is, as a strait
Rule discovers a crooked line by the incompliance of it to the Rule; and thus
the Scripture, which advances not the merit, but the meetnesse of actions and
persons, Uses to speak, as Ephesians. 4. 1. Walk ((...),) worthily of your
calling, Phil. 1. 2^. ((...)* As becomes the Gospel, Romans 16. 2. Worthy of
Saints, or as it becomes worthy of the Lord, Col. 1. 10. that is, as becomes
people that are the Lords, Worthy of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 1^. in all which places
it is required, that we walk or live answerable to such condition, calling or
relation, or engagement, and so to eat and drink worthily, is as it is meet and
answerable, as becomes such an Ordinance.

And if any should object, as well they may, Why the Apostle does not first
tell us, what it is, or how we may receive worthily, for the abUse is not known
but by the right Use, the privation by the habit, the deviation by the rule,
the crooked line by the straight.

I answer, the Apostle insists upon the unworthy receiving, becaUse that was
the case before him, but he did not forget himself, as if he had not shown what
it is to receive worthily; for though he name not the word, but as implied in
the word unworthily, yet he had enough declared the thing by his laying down
the Institution of this Sacrament, which is the rule of worthiness. It being
nothing else but the answerablenesse of the Communicant to the Ordinance, which
every man that once knows the Ordinance must also know, if he apply the rule
and his action together, and so I am confident you have the meaning of worthily
and unworthily.



This Bread and this Cup of the Lord may be received worthily, and they may be
received unworthily. I mean de facto unworthily. If any doubt of the collection
of this point the very expression (...), Whosoever shall eat and drink
unworthily, implies the one, and plainly expresses the other part of the point.
The Communicant may come and eat suitably to the Ordinance or Institution, and
then he receives worthily, and he may come and eat unsuitably to the exigence
of the Ordinance, and then he receives unworthily: So that the point is an
undoubted truth, except any can demonstrate, that no Communicant can eat and
drink worthily, and then to what purpose is the Institution, but to bring
damnation or judgment on all that partake of it, but I wave the proof. The
point is clear in its own light; only let me acquaint you, that my intention
is to weave all I have to say into this one main point. For herein I will show
the qualifications of a worthy, and the defaults of an unworthy Communicant,
then the special guilt that aggravates the sin of unworthy receiving, He
shall be guilty of the body, etc. then the particular caUse of unworthiness
assigned, and that is not discerning the Lords body; Then the fearful danger
of this sin, whereby a man is said to eat and drink judgment to himself,
then the way of prevention of this sin, that we fall not into it, Let a man
examine himself. Then the prevention of the judgment in case we fall into the
sin, If we would judge our selves, etc.

. 4. That the Lords Supper is not common for all, but a barred Ordinance to some.
Quest. There may arise a Question thus, Worthily and unworthily are words that
belong to the manner of communicating, and cannot be applied to any but
Communicants, but is there not a third sort of persons, viz. non-Communicants,
such as may not come to this Table, or eat and drink here? And were it not
requisite to know whether there be any, and who be such, as well as to know who
comes worthily, who unworthily? This indeed is a Question the more material,
becaUse it is in our days of great agitation, and therefore I intend to
dispatch it first, that I may have to deal only with Communicants worthy or
unworthy. And for answer to it, I first make and lay down this general Position.

That as it is said of some Havens, they are barred, Thesis. I.
so is this Ordinance of the Lords Supper a barred Ordinance, a several not a
common field, a recept for a select company, not a common Inn or Ordinary*
It Is a Table in this respect like yours, which is not spread for every one to
run unto, and sit down that will, but for your children, your guests, your
friends; or if you think I have spoken too low, It Is like the Table of a common
Hall, which is not yet common to all the world, but to such a Corporation or
Fraternity. And it may be said without hyperbole, that there is scarce a
Christian Church in the world this day, nor has been in any Age since Christ,
who have not enclosed, made several and impaled this Ordinance of the Supper:
And if I could but lead your eye into the Primitive Churches, you would wonder
at the fortifications they made about it, There you should see the Catechumeni
that were in the school of Catechism, learners of the Doctrine of Christianity,
admitted indeed to hear the Sermon, ( Tertullian calls them Audientes) but never
grumbling at the Ite missa est, Go you are dismissed* When the Fideles or
Communicants went to this service; And there you should see the Lapsi or
Poenitentes, Christians that had fallen into open and manifest scandals,
standing a long time upon the four stairs or degrees of public repentance,
weeping for admission, and bewailing their sin and suspension from the Lords
board, which rigor of Discipline, though full of sharpness and asperity, yet
the reverence of this Ordinance, the Heathens among whom they lived, that
watched for their haltings, and the great temptations to Idolatry and
Apostasy, by fear of persecutions and continual Alarms, may plead some excUse
of that severity: In short, though some have made the gate wider than others,
yet all have impaled the Ordinance, and taken it from the common; The Word
indeed preached or read lies open to all: the high ways and hedges may be
compelled in to fill up the place where it sounds, and Baptism may be
administered at the entrance, for imitation and listing of soldiers under
Christ's colors: but the Lords Supper ever was intra Cancellos, within the
mound, for it is the inmost Ordinance that we have, for Church Members,
Disciples, not lying open to the streets, but as an inner room within a room,
an Ordinance for fellowship of Saints and Christians, that are past the Font;
All have not right to it, and some that have had right, may for the time have
forfeited and lost their capacity.

This is my general position, which (as in the sequel will be clear to you) may
be proved by a threefold evidence:

1. By evidence of fact, the universal sense and consent of all Christian
Churches, and thereby it will appear that it is no new Doctrine.

2. By evidence of Scripture, by which it will appear to be no false Doctrine,
for it is past all doubt, that the Passover in the old Church was a barred
Ordinance, shut up from the uncircumcised and the unclean, and the Supper in
the New Testament is so too: In the 28 verse, Let a man examine himself, and
so; the word And so, is a limitation and a proviso, and contains in it,
otherwise not. When men have traversed the Point to the utmost, this little
word (...), and so, as it opens the door to such as are so qualified, so it is
a bar, and shuts it against them that are not: And it is Chrysostom his note
upon the man that came in without his wedding garment, Matthew. 22. 12. that the
King said not, (...), but (...), that is, he said not, Why did thou sit down
and eat? but, How came thou in hither?

3. By evidence of Reason; for those that have no right or no capacity, may not
communicate, nor those that having had a right or capacity, have lost it for
present by some grievous sin, and the censure of the Church, which I shall
pursue more particularly and distinctly: In the mean time, I thus conclude my
general Position; We have warrant and may call all men, Turks and Jews, unto
the Word of the Gospel: The Word calls them all to faith in Christ and
repentance: If they enter not into Covenant, the seals of the Covenant are not
for them: If they do enter Covenant, then the Sacraments or Seals follow, for
the Covenant does not follow the Seal, but the Seal the Covenant, I hope to
rational men this appears Reason; to me it appears above contradiction.

So much for the general Position or Thesis* Now I will proceed to confirm it
particularly according to the three fold evidence.

. 5. The evidence of Fact.
Paul says, ver. 16. yet I make them not Dictators but Consuls only, and that
testimony they give shall be but in matter of Fact, their own practice, which
those in our days that set open too wide a gate to this Ordinance, seem to
take very little notice of: And I begin with Justin Martyr, who seems (says
Bellar.) to be the first of De Script. Eccl.
those, after the Apostles times, whose writings are come to our hand. He in
his second Apology says, That it is lawful for no other person to partake of
the Eucharist, viz. this Sacrament, but such an one as believes the Doctrines
taught in the Gospel to be true, that is baptized for remission of sins, that
so lives as Christ has delivered; where you find the three requisites of
partaking in this Ordinance, are Faith, Baptism, and good Conversation. This is
the most ancient Testimony of the custom of the Christian Church in his time,
and for that age fully stops the mouth of all contradiction.

For the Ages after this Author, both those that passed under the Heathen, and
under Christian Emperors, I shall not cloy the Reader with citing the
Testimonies of the Ancients by retale, becaUse there Cypr. Pass. Tertullian de
Panit.
was a form of Discipline or Government, which obtained in all Churches, Greek,
African, Roman, which with great consent prohibited access to this Sacrament,
unto two sorts principally. 1. Those that were yet in the School of learning
the grounds of Christianity. 2. Those that having been reckoned among the
fideles, were for some great sin put into the School of correction; and these
two sorts do answer those so much spoken of now adays, the ignorant and the
scandalous. I say, there was a form of Discipline that took place, as appears
by that of Origin in his third Book against Celsus, so much magnified and
insisted on by Blondell, and it is this, De Jureplebis, page 94.
That among the Christians there were appointed certain men to enquire into
(...) the lives and conversations of those that came to this Table, that they
might prohibit them who had committed finne forbidden from access to this
public Convention: A clear place against them that will have none Sequestered
for a time from participation of the Lords Table.

1. The first sort of which were such as having a mind to relinquish
Heathenism and Idolatry, yielded up themselves to learn the Doctrine and rule
of Christianity, and these were called Catechumenoi, or hearers, who were
instructed and trained up to learn until they had attained cum al quo profectu
convenienti, Aug. de Fide and Operibus.
some convenient proficiency to become competontes, that is, to give up their
names to be baptized, till which they were always dismissed, with Ite missa est,
when the faithful went on to the Lords Table, and the Officers thereto
pertaining.

2. The second sort were such as having been Communicants, styled Fideles in
opposition to the Catechumeni; and Stantes in opposition to the Lapsi, did
afterward lapse or fall into Heathenish Idolatry, by offering to Idols, and
these were thurificati, renegates, or else they gave money to be excUsed from
that abhorred act, professing themselves Christians, but they would buy it out,
and these were called Libellatici, or they were traditores, such as in
Dioclesian's Forbes 649, etc. and 646.
cruel time delivered up their Bibles to the fire, or they fell into some
atrocious and notorious sin, Heresy, Whoredom, Drunkenness, Murder, etc. and
these were Sequestered from the Lords Table, and put to the School of
repentance, called (...), by Balsamon, the stairs or degrees of correction,
which were four, through which they passed with weeping and sorrow, some
longer, some shorter time, till they were reconciled to the Church, and so
readmitted to the Table, Cyp. Epist. 28, 38, 39, 52. Cypr. de Orat. Dominica:
Yea and after the date and danger was out of being compelled to offer to Idols,
in the times of Christian Emperors, Chrysostom charges the Ministers under
him, that if they knew a man to offer himself to the Table that is a gross and
open sinner, they should prohibit him, (...), etc. though he be a Lord
General, though a great Commander, though he wear a Diadem, as Ambrose forbad
and interdicted Theodosius, And if you say (says he) I dare not do it, then
tell me of him, Homil. 83. in Matthew.
and I for my part, (...), etc. will part with my life, before I will allow him
the Lords Board, (...), let us stave off all notorious persons absolutely. Was
this a copy of his particular zeal, or rather a testimony of the ancient
Discipline, the vigor of which being drowned in the dead sea of Popery, yet
even therein the rubbish or skeleton thereof is seen, by the Doctrine of their
Schoolmen, and by the Council of Trent, which requires of necessity to a man in
mortal sin, that he that will come to the Council. Trid. do praparat. ad
Euch. cap. 7. can. 11.
Mass, must premise Auricular or Sacramental confession and penance; for they
also have their preparation to the Sacrament, such as it is: As for the
Lutheran Churches they have an exploration of all, what they understand of this
Sacrament, and before the Communion, a certain confession of sin, which
Chemnitius calls paenam institutam. And as for Chem. Exa. de praparat. ad Euchar.
the Churches of our Confession, you may read their Confessions and Books of
Discipline, and be satisfied: I will instance only The Church of England,
English Liturgy Rubric before Commun. and after Confirmation.
by rule whereof no notorious and Obstinate offendour might be admitted, nor
none that had not their Catechism perfect, which are the two points of
ignorance and scandal. If this rule had been followed, and this Law put in
execution, the practice would have been no new thing in England, as even the
old rule is now by some accounted. I conclude with that which one argues, as
out of the common rule of the Church in Austin's Epistle ad Januarium, Austin
Epist. 118.
Epist. 118. That if there be such a course or force of sin in any man, he is
to be removed from the Lords board, by the authority of the chief, and put into
the School of penitence, till he be reconciled to the Church.

And so much be said of the evidence of Fact, as appears in the rules of the
Churches, both ancient and later, both corrupter and purer; not that I or that
I wish any else to be absolutely swayed by this Authority, for there may be
error in the practice of the Church, yea error universally received, as in
that of giving this Sacrament to infants, upon that ground, Jeh. 6. 53. Except
ye eat the flesh, etc. ye have no life in you; and yet it was the practice of
the Church so to do, both in Cyprians and Austin's time, but I prove the
evidence of Fact by this Argument, otherwise not to be proved at all: and I do
not expect that any should condemn so ancient a practice, nor think they do,
but rather do conceive that the bottom of the business is the disrellish of
that Authority by which it is to be done. Bucephalus will be ridden by none but
Alexander, and it was the saying of Cardinal Matheo Langi concerning Luther,
That the Church of Rome, the Mass, the Court, the lives of Priests and Friars,
stood in need to be Reformed, but that a poor rascal Monk (meaning Luther)
Heilin. Geog. in Bavaria.
should begin all, that he deemed intolerable, and not to be endured.

. 6. The evidence of Scripture.
We are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles bond or
free, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and have been made to drink into one Spirit: and therefore
the word of the Gospel lies open to all Nations and people, without partition
wall, such as between the Jews and others of old time; but the bar lies in
point of Religion, for if they lie in their Idolatry and Infidelity, though
they may come to the Word, yet not to the Table of the Lord.

Who are to be kept from the Sacrament.
1. The Jews that serve the Tabernacle, and stick to the old Service under the
Legal shadows, are excepted: We have an Altar, or rather a Sacrifice, Jesus
Christ our sin-offering, whereof they have no right to eat, Heb. 13. 10. that
is, no right of Communion with us, or Christ: The place is difficult, but
easily cleared by Levit. 6. 30. for as the Priests that served at the Altar,
had no right to eat of the flesh of the sin-offering, whose blood was brought
into the Sanctuary, but burnt it must be without the Camp, so the Jews that
hold to the Legal service, have no right of eating the flesh of Christ, whose
blood was brought into the Holy place of heaven (virtually) and his body
suffered without the gates of earthly Jerusalem, thereby signifying that they
were discommended, that hold to the Legal service.

2. Heathens and Infidels are excluded from this Table, becaUse they are
extraneous and without, so they are called, 1 Cor. 5. 12. What have I to do to
judge, or censure, them that are without; they are without the gates of the
Church, not obnoxious to the Government, nor allowed the privileges of it; and
they that are without the gate, cannot be admitted to the Table, until they
come in and be members of the family.

3. All unbaptized persons are excepted by the order of our Sacraments, whereof
Baptism is first for insition and implantation into the Body of Christ, and the
Lords Table, for further coalition and growth; this order is confirmed by the
Use or business of the Sacraments, the one being of Regeneration, and so first,
the other of Communion, and so the second: See 1 Cor. 12. 13. By one spirit are
we baptized into one Body, and have been all made to drink into one spirit;
first baptized, and then made to drink, which order the Church of Christ has
held from the beginning, as it is said by Justin, (...), Apol. 2.
After the new Convert is thus washed, we bring him to our meetings where the
Eucharist is.

4. Those that are under a present incapacity of performing such antecedaneous
acts of preparation, or which are to be exercised in the act of communicating,
provided that this incapacity be visible, as I may say, or manifest unto us, as
in infants, idiots, stupid ignorants, bruits in the shape of men, who though
baptized, yet are not capable of discerning the Lords Body, or of examining
themselves, who seem to be excepted, ver. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat and drink. And so, I know a mad man may have lucid intervals, and a
poor ignorant soul may be brought to know the letters, and spell the first
syllables of Christianity, against either of which I would not shut the door;
but if the ignorant cannot be gotten beyond sottishness and stupidity, nor got
out of his Obstinacy in blindness, I should be very unwilling to let him run
blinofold down the precipice, or leave the door open for him to fall into
condemnation; not that I envy him a benefit, but pity his downfall, which I
ought to hinder, or at least not to help forward: and I may say of such an one,
as the Apostle of the Law, Romans 7. 13. Shall that which is good be made death
unto him? God forbid: Especially considering that the Apostle having said, Let
a man examine himself, and so let him eat, does in the next words come on
again, ver. 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body.

As for infants, though the Churches of ancient time admitted them after
Baptism to partake of the P Martyr in Musculus de caena.
Lords Supper, for some hundreds of years, and one or two of our Reforming
Divines speak somewhat favorably of it; yet the ground they went upon, Joh. 6.
53. that otherwise they had not salvation, is disclaimed by all, both becaUse
that Chapter speaks nothing of Sacramental or Symbolicall eating the flesh of
Christ, and drinking his blood; and also was delivered by Christ a year or two
before this Sacrament was born into the world, and becaUse there is so much
activity and exercise required in a Communicant, as viz. to remember the Lords
death, to show it forth, to discern the Lords body, to examine ones self, to
judge ones self; therefore is that ancient practice Obsolete, and as by tacit
consent deserted, and in room thereof we admit now, not by their years, for a
man of threescore may be a child in understanding, and a child in years may
be a man, but by their discretion and knowledge in the mystery of Christ: and
if the Parents or Pastors care, the blossoming of grace, and pregnancy in the
child, were answerable to my desires, I should, as I am, for great reasons, be
for eatly admissions of them, as namely, that the benefit and refreshing of
this Ordinance might curb the over-growth of the sins and lusts of youth, and
help forward the growth of their graces to an early maturity.

Those that are professed Christians, baptized-Church-members, whether they
live in open practice, or fall under the guilt of some gross and scandalous
sin, are for that time as they be impenitent, to be secluded from, or not
admitted unto this Communion; and this is an adjudged case in Scripture, 1 Cor
5. where one for terrible incest, notoriously manifest, detested by very
Heathens, remained in the Communion of the Church, through neglect of their
duty, which the Apostle reproves; and having shown what power they had of
judging such as were within, members of their Church, enjoins them to purge out
the leaven, and to cast out from themselves that wicked person: and least any
perverse gainsayer should restrain this power to this one sin, the Apostle
says, ver. 11. If any that is called a brother be a fornicatour, a covetous,
or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or extortioner, the Church has
power to judge them that are within; But what is this to the Sacrament? enough
verily, for he that is cast out of the hoUse, is certainly cast out from the
household table; and the abstention from Communion, so much named in Cyprian, or
(...), or seclusion Forbes 631.
mentioned in the Canons, and whatsoever word is Used for this casting one out
of Church Communion, here if any where it operates and works, in forbidding the
Use of the Table, where the (...) of Church society and communion is; as for
instance, Divorce though it extend further, yet signifies nothing at all, is no
Divorce, if not a thoro or mensa, from bed or board, so this restention is
nothing, it works nothing, (I speak not of a private avoidance of familiarity
with wicked persons, which lies on private persons) if not to this seclusion
from the Table: I shall not further urge the example of the old Testament,
which debarres the uncircumcised and the unclean for the time, from the
Passover: and I deny not that under that worldly Sanctuary, and those carnal
Ordinances, as they are called, Heb. 9. 1, 10. Legal uncleanness might
debar, when spiritual and moral did not, as now moral filthiness may, when
legal uncleanness is not; for that uncleanness under the Law, had a spiritual
signification, and though it was not always sin, yet it signified moral
pollution, as the leaven which was held Hag. 2. 13.
execrable and must be cast out, at the Passover is spiritually applied to
another meaning by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. Purge out the old leaven, ver. 7. for
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: the old leaven, that is the wicked
and incestuous person ( Beza, Slater, alii) out of your society, and malice and
wickedness out of your lives, ver. 8. and therefore the Argument which is drawn
from the signification of the legal type, is not so contemptible, as a Learned
man of M. Humfrey.
late would seem to make it, since the Apostle seems to argue from the leaven
cast out at the Passover, as I have hinted.

. 7. The evidence of Reason.
themselves: I say those that have no right, and they are those, that as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. 12. are mere strangers to the Covenant; for in Reason
the Covenant must go before the Seal, and not the Seal before the Covenant; and
therefore they were Disciples to whom Christ said, Take and eat, not aliens or
strangers to the Gospel* Covenant, whereof it was ordained a Sacrament,
infidels or unbeleevers, which answer to the uncircumcised, were debarred the
Passover. Or else they are such as having had both right unto, and Use of this
Ordinance, have afterward lost their capacity for the time, by some gross and
enormous crime, which has brought them under seQuestration or deprivation by
the censure of the Church; and these answer the unclean under the Law, who
having right to the Passover as Churchmembers, were yet forbidden the Use,
during such uncleanness; for against such is the key turned, and the door shut,
until and unless by their repentance for their sin, they be restored to
their right, and the seQuestration be taken off; for so in the ancient
Churches, while the Lapsi lay under penance, and were in the School of
repentance, they could not communicate, the Crier said, (...), as Chrysostom.
hom* 3. in Ephesians. and if the same Author and the same place may be heard, ye
shall learn from him the very two sorts which I am speaking of; There ought,
says he, to come to this Table, neither any, (...), of them that are not
initiated and entered Disciples, (...), nor any of those that are professors
and members, but unclean or flagitious, whose sins are such, ut judicatur
excommunicandus, as it is said in Austin Epist. 118. ad Januarium.

Now there is Reason that such as lie in manifest and enormous sin without
repentance, should either forbear, or by the Church be forbidden access to the
terrible mysteries, as Chrysostom often calls (...)
them.

1. That they should forbear being made acquainted what a fearful sin they
boldly adventure upon, viz. to be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, the
very naming of it being able to strike terror, and what danger they rush
themselves into of eating and drinking damnation to themselves, as it were
professedly seeking and solemnly setting their hands to their own ruin; for
though every sin have death the wages of it, yet for a man to provoke his own
destruction, and solemnly seal it upon himself, is most fearful: Who would not
tremble to eat such a sop as should be presently followed with Satan, or to eat
such forbidden fruit as is sawced with this bitter sauce, Morte morieris, Thou
shall die: for if this bread enter into a man filthy and polluted, Calvin.
Iustit. lib. 4. ca. 17.
Majore illum ruina praecipitat; and he that has purpose to sin, gravatur
magis, says Austin, he is De Eccles. Dogmat. cap. 35.
laden with a greater guilt: He takes poison, both by Reason of his guiltiness
of other sins, and of the abUse of the Sacrament, says Bernard. And
therefore let Sermon. de caena. 2
men consider what they are like to reap, that either ravish and force, or
secretly think themselves well if they can steal the Sacrament* for he that is
in mortal sin, sins mortally (as Alensis says) and Pars 4. Q^. 46
that becaUse, as the Schoolmen say, Committit falsum Aquin. 3. pars* Quaest.
8. and Esti^. lib. 4. distinct* 12.
in Sacramento, he commits a falsehood in this Sacrament, professing himself to
come to and receive Christ, to whom he is an enemy and a stranger; he mocks God
solemnly: And therefore as Mr Seldom De Synodecis p. 254.
says, If Judas that had a deliberate purpose of betraying Christ, had of
himself therefore gone forth becaUse he was so unworthy, certum ipsi laudi
fuisset, verily it had been a credit and commendation to him to have forborne;
and indeed there would appear some conscience in such forbearance, whereas
there appears nothing but blindness, boldness, pride, custom, etc. in a
dangerous intrusion: I cannot encourage men to forbear this Ordinance, nor
allow the excUse of those that flatter themselves in such forbearance by their
sin, as I have heard some, they cannot come to the Sacrament, becaUse they
are not in charity: Sin may be an impediment, but it is not an excUse* if you
be in manifest and flagitious sin ye may not come, but that sin excUses
not, for you ought to find a third way, that is to repent and lay aside your
sin, that you may come. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, says
the Apostle. As in the Marriage feast, Matthew. 22. he that came without his
wedding garment was cast out, and they that pretending excUses, came not, are
said not to be worthy, v. 8. What then is to be done? this third, to have a
wedding garment and come too. Instance, a drunken servant that forbears to wait
at his Masters table becaUse he is drunk, but yet that is no excUse, for he
ought to be sober and wait also: And this answers a captious fallacy or
objection which may be made by some.

There is Reason that the Church should forbid openly criminous persons from
access to the Lords Table.

1. It would be not only contra veritatem, but contra charitatem, to make such
partakers of the holy Supper: They are the words of Learned Grotius, Grotius de
imperio, p. 229.
who cannot be suspected to speak partially in this caUse, but to speak the
sense of Antiquity: Against truth, for the seal, says he, is not to be applied
to him, to whom the thing signified, manifestly belongs not: and therefore in
the Churches of old it was wont to be proclaimed, (...), Holy things to holy
persons: And Chrysostom shows, that one with a loud and terrible Homil 17. ad
Hebr.
voice pronounced, (...), for pearls are not to be cast to swine. Against
charity it is to suffer a blind soul that discerns not the Lords body, to fall
into the pit which we have left open: No mother would suffer her child to eat
that which may be poison to it, no shepherd would call his sheep into such
pastures as will certainly rot them; no friend would put a sword into the hand
of a furious man; no Physician would reach water to an Hydropick that eagerly
thirsts for it. It was charity as well as duty in that Jehojada, 2 Chronicles. 23.
19. that set porters at the gates of the hoUse of the Lord, that none that was
unclean in any thing should enter in. The diseased or dropick man is angry and
frets sore against those that keep water from him, but they are his best
friends that do it.

2. The admittance of ignorant, malicious, unclean, scandalous, drunkards,
blasphemers, and such manifest works of the flesh, of which it is said, that
those that do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 19,
21. will render the Lords Table a common Ordinary, a common lane, a common
shore, and fill the Church of God, and the society of Saints, with all
prodigious lusts and heresies, as if it were a stie of unclean swine; and what
an ulcerous body would that Church be, where such a common liberty does reign?
when so many spo^s should be in your feasts of love, Jude ^2. so much old
leaven, to leaven the lump by their example; when as the Apostle in the case
tells us, a little leaven would do it, and therefore purge it out, says he,
purge out 1 Cor. 5. 6.
that leaven while it is little: For as when the multitude a major part of a
Town or City becomes infected, who shall shut them up, Si contagio peccandi
multitudinem invaserit, says Austin, then farewell all censures. And therefore
if any shall encourage the Church to keep (as I may so say) open hoUse in this
Grotius de imperio page 233.
case, does little less, considering the corruption of men that would account
such a liberty a warrant, than if I should counsel you to plant weeds in your
Garden, or bring stones into your Vineyard.

3. This would give occasion and advantage to separation, and put into the
hands of men an argument to withdraw from such society and communion, and to
rend themselves off from the body so corrupted; not that I justify separation
upon such ground, as I intend to show hereafter; for the people were
blameworthy that abhorred the offerings of the Lord, for the wickedness of Eli
his sons, 1 Samuel 2. 17. and yet their wickedness was to be abhorred which
gave the occasion: Woe be to him by whom the offense comes. The Matthew. 18. 7.
mouth that blasphemeth the truth and way of God is wicked, but the sin of him
that opens that mouth is also to be condemned. We are told, Ezra 6. 21. that
all such as had separated themselves from the filthiness of the Heathen of the
Land, came to the Passover; and if we separate not from the filthiness of the
Heathen, there are many that will separate from the filthiness of the Church,
and we shall in vain call them back into a hoUse infected with the plague, when
once they are broken out.

4. The Church has little or none other way, as the Church, to keep the holy
things from being profaned, to correct the sins and lapses of her children,
Ezekiel. 22. 26.
to preserve it self from being gangrened, to defend and wipe off scandals, but
this way of privation of privileges, and calling of the peccant from her
Communion, shutting this door against rebellious children, and what should the
Church have done all the while the Civil Magistrate gave no assistance, if they
had not Used this power of their own, to maintain themselves free from scandals
and heresies, and to keep the credit of their corporation, which otherwise
would be the most contemptible corporation in the world, and of no better
credit than Algier, or any City of miscreants; for if God have deposited his
Word and Ordinances with his Church, and committed them to it, the case is
hard, if they might not put to the door against unjust invaders of her
privileges; as if one should commit a Vineyard to be kept, and not allow a
hedge to be made about it. Now all men know, that almost all the coercion or
correction that lies in the Churches hand, is the debarment of privileges of
the Church, that is of the Sacraments; for the Word lies open to all, as the
outward Court to all comers; and as for civil punishments, they are neither
proper, nor the Churches; the rod belongs to Moses; And whereas it may be said,
The Church has the word of God, and by that they denounce judgment, declare
sin, wound the profane, prohibit the unworthy from this Table; I grant it;
and it is a necessary and proper means, but withal, I say, If a City or
Commonwealth have Laws proclaimed and expounded, and penalties set forth and
declared, but no execution of any restraint or punishment, no power to correct
or punish; I need not tell you, how full we should be of thieves and felons for
all that.

Thus much be said in confirmation and maintenance of my general Position, That
the Lords Supper is a barred Ordinance, which I have endeavored to make good
by evidence of Fact, by evidence of Scripture, and by evidence of Reason, for
the satisfaction of your scruples (if any be) and the settling of animosities:
Much more might have been said and argued upon the point; For if the very
Heathens in their idolatrous Sacrifices by their light of Reason, did no less,
as appears by their (...), in Callimachus.
Callimachus, and Procul o procul este profani, in Virgil. Away, away all you
that are profane. If both Heathens, and the Church of God had some that did
(...), survey the Sacrifices, that they had no blemish that might disable them
from being presented to God. If in the Olympic games or masteries Chrysostom.
hom. 17. ad he^.
the Crier made Proclamation, If any man come out and accUse this Combatant or
Antagonist, that he is a thief, a slave, etc. being a dishonor for a
Gentleman, a Freeman to enter lists with such a fellow. If the old Druids in
France had a form of Excommunication Caesar. Commentaries.
out of their Society, and it was accounted a mighty punishment. If the Essens
a Sect among the Jews in Christ's time, had it in Use to cast out of their
Society such as were offensive, as Josephus tells us. If the Synagogues had a
form of dissynagoguing offenses, Grot. de imp. page 232.
though they abUsed it, as all Church Censures are, when they spare the
carrion-Crows, and vex the Doves; I say, if all this, and much more, why then
should this be accounted a new and unreasonable, either Doctrine or practice? I
end this point with a reQuest, That every one of you would rather labor and
study to prevent all occasion of using this course, than to remove the old
Landmarks.

. 8. Who may not be denied this Ordinance.
That though this Sacrament be a barred Ordinance, denied to some, yet it
cannot be denied to any baptized visible Professor of the Gospel, but upon
such grounds, and in such manner and order as God has appointed or allowed;
And this takes off the odium and terror of the former point; This settles and
quiets all mistakes of them, For God is not the Author of confusion, but of
order and peace in all the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14. 33. Let all
things be done in order, ver. 40. And therefore the Apostle, when he had
enjoined Timothy, To rebuke them that sin before all, that others may fear, 1 Timothy 5. 10. does in the next words lay a serious charge upon him, To Observe
these things without preferring one before another, and to do nothing by
partiality. Would you call that a well-governed City, a well-ordered hoUse, or
rather a Cycleps den, where every one may cast out another, and he himself, as
the Rabbis in the latter end of the Jewish State, ridiculously excommunicated
one the other; As promiscuous access is not to be allowed, so neither
promiscuous denial; As one may intrude and usurp the Lords Supper rashly, so he
may be as rashly forbidden; As there is an ignorant and scandalous rushing in,
so there is an ignorant and scandalous thrusting out; The door may be opened
and shut both, errante clave: If, I say, that a gangrened leg or arm may and
must sometimes be cut off, Does it follow that for every sore before healing
plasters be Used, we must run to the Knife or Axe? Or if, I say, a robber or
murderer may be put to death, must I therefore have him to the next tree
without further trial or judgment? The case is plain, but particularly handled
thus.

1. It cannot be denied to a repentant sinner, one that does renew his purpose
of amendment, and after his fall with Peter bewails it bitterly, whatsoever his
sins have been, for which he has been punished or censured; Repentance does
dissolve the bands, and pull away the bar from the door, repentance prevents
the punishment, I Will cast them into great tribulation, except they repent, as it
prevents, so it restores a man, as Ezekiel. 18. 30. Repent, so iniquity shall not
be your ruin. This was the Novatian rigor and error, they would not allow
lapsed Christians that had fallen into sin, the benefit of repentance and
restoring to the holy Table, but leave them to Gods mercy, for to the peace and
communion of the Church, they must not return; But the Orthodox Churches did
allow repentance to be medicinal; Yea the very Church Censures were not
intended to be mortal, but to be medicinal, viz. that sin might be destroyed,
but the soul saved, 1 Cor. 5. 5. and here is a difference between civil
sentences of death, and Church Censures. If a man be condemned to die for
felony, his repentance does not acquit or restore him from the sentence of
death, but it restores a man to his Church-priviledge that had lost it; it is
Tabula post naufragium, like a plank or board after a Shipwreck which saves
from drowning him that gets to it.

Object. Some may object, That this is an obvious and easy Engine to open any
door that is shut; for if a man make a verbal profession of his repentance, and
say, I repent of my sins, and that is to my self, you know not my heart, I
demand my right.

Answ. The Discipline of the Church is not to be exposed to mockery, nor is it
a mere external Pageant; I will know, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 20. not the
speech of them that are puffed up, but the power, For the Kingdom of God is not
in word, but in power; Hypocritical and superficial expressions signify
nothing, but the powerful work of grace and regeneration which changes the
heart; and becaUse the Objection may be made by some ( ex animo) intending to
show with how easy a word, as Nollem factum, or I repent to blow the door open
to himself, therefore I answer it, That though I should rest in a serious
profession of faith and repentance, which is not pulled down again by a wicked
life, or scandalous sin; As Philip rested in it, when the Eunuch answered
him, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, Act. 8. 37. and so was
baptized; yet when a man lies under the charge of our censure, for some
scandalous sin the case is otherwise; for as it is in such sins as are with
damage to another, it is not enough to profess repentance, but there must be
Zacheus his repentance, that is, restitution and reparation of injury, if one
be able; so in scandalous sins, whereby the Church is injured and offended;
There was always in the ancient Churches a certain Discipline (as Chemnitius
says) whereby the repentance of men Depraeparat. p. 95.
was explored and tried, whether it were serious, slighty and superficial,
Sayings served not the turn, the Church had received a wound, the mouth of the
enemy was opened to blaspheme, and therefore it was her honor to be satisfied
in that reparation, which was made by repentance, that God might regain his
visible honor by the repentance which he had lost by the scandal, and there is
ground for it, 2 Cor. ^. 6, 7, 8. where the incestuous person lies humbled and
overwhelmed with great sorrow, and therefore the Apostle writes to the Church
to be content to comfort, to forgive him, and to confirm their love toward
him. This is no dallying matter, when the fall is scandalous, the repentance
must be serious; Peter thrice denies Christ, and Christ asks Peter three times,
Love thou me?

2. A visible professor of Christian Religion, that stains not his profession
with a wicked course of life, or some scandalous act, cannot be debarred his
right of Communion with the visible Church in her privileges; Many are in the
external Covenant and Kingdom of Christ, who are not truly regenerate, nor
lively members of Christ himself; inward grace makes a member of the Church
invisible, and the profession makes a visible. The Sacraments are given to the
visible Church, we cannot discern or judge infallibly, who is regenerate, who
an hypocrite, a visible Judge is not to go by an invisible rule, You shall know
them (says Christ) by their fruits: He does not say, You shall know them by
their sap; It Is one Question, Who is a true member of Christ's body, and truly
in Christ? It Is another Question, Whom we may communicate with? It Is one
Question, Who comes and eats, and drinks unworthily? So do hypocrites: It Is
another Question, Who may not come at all? and those are visible unbelievers,
and scandalous persons, usitatissima phrasi (says Chemnitius) in the most
usual phrase of Scripture they are called holy and Saints, who are Saints by
calling, Disciples of Christ, separated from infidelity and Heathenism unto the
worship of God by their faith of the Gospel* It must be evidence of some fact,
or disorderly walking which is proved, that must give ground to discommon or
dis-franchize a reputed Member, Who ever heard of witnesses to prove a man
unregenerate? Oh but in judgment of charity at least, he must be truly
regenerate! I would all the Congregation were holy; That Is the best corn-field
that has fewest weeds or tares, but (as I conceive) the Church is to proceed
by an infallible Rule, not a judgment of charity; Charity gives a good
temperament unto our judgment, and holds the balance mercifully, but God has
set a Rule to judge by, If one that is named a brother be a fornicatour, or
Idolater, or a railer, or drunkard, 1 Cor. 5. 11. It is the visible Rule of his
own word, who may, and who may not be debarred our fellowship or society;
Charity may hold the scales, but the scales are Gods word, which tells us, who
are inter* Commoners and Covenantors, and Sacramento tenus, Communicants,
whether they be truly regenerate or no, for I have no Rule to judge that, and
he may have right in foro externo, becaUse he answers to the visible Rule of
judging, for he is a brother called; he is, as the Apostle says, within, and
not outwardly scandalous. The Kingdom of heaven is likened to ten Virgins,
whereof five were foolish: The Bridegroom might shut out the foolish, but the
wise could not forbid them to attend or trim their Lamps, Mat. 25.

3. No secret sin that lies in the bosom of the heart, is a sufficient ground
of a man's being debarred or prohibited by the Church to come to this Table. It
may be a caUse of a man's eating and drinking unworthily, but of his debarment
to come, it cannot be; It may be a caUse of forbearance to come, not of
prohibition; and the Reason is, De secretis non judicat Ecclesia, secret sins
are without the Churches cognizance: Our Savior tells us, Matthew. 5. 28. He that
looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her in his
heart; but that adultery is not punishable by any, but him that knows the
heart. The Schoolmen teach, That if a Priest have men's Durand. l. 4. Did. 9.
Quaest. 5.. 7. Ales. part. 4. Quaest. 49. number. 1.
secret sins under seal of Confession, he may not forbid the person in the
face of the Congregation, for then he is not Corrector, but Proditor. Christ
knew Judas his rottenness, his theft was acted, his tReason intended, and now
in hatching, yet he suffered him. I know it is a great Question, Whether Judas
received the Lords Supper? But that indeed is not the Question, but this,
Whether he was debarred or forbidden by Christ, or no? And there is no foot
step of proof for it, I say, that is the Question in this point; and yet to
speak a word of the other. It runs current by general vote of Antiquity, ten
for one, That Judas Vide Seldom. de Synedriis lib. 1. cap* 9. Vasquez. Tom. 3.
Disp. 217.
did receive the Lords Supper. Hilary is quoted against it, but he also, as
Vasquez truly Observes, is against his communicating in the Passover too; Now
we find he sat down to the Passover, Matthew. 26. 20. and was hinted by Christ
at the very Table to be the Traitor, One of you, verse. 21. and there is no
mention of his deserting the company so early; that word of connection, Luke 22.
21. But behold the hand of him that betrays me, is with me on the Table,
speaks very fair for it, that the connection may be preserved with former words,
Those that are against it, as some learned men are, answer the Text by
anticipations, Muscul. de ^^na and multi.
and give their Reasons, That it is not likely Christ would eat with such an
hypocrite, etc. But Reason is no demonstration in matter of fact, as a learned
man says, The great stresse lies upon one word, Joh. 13. 30. Judas taking the
sap went out immediately; This sop, say they, was given at the Paschal Supper
before the Lords Supper, whatsoever it was, it was an index of the Traitor,
and* given to distinguish him, therefore not a common giving it to all, as the
common custom was, and wonder it is that the Apostles should interpret Christ's
words, Do it quickly of buying things for the feast, which is a sign they
dreamed of no Excommunication by those words, nor yet wondered that there
should be such haste to provide and cater, as that he must rise from the Table,
while the Paschal Supper was eating, which Paschal Supper and the Lords Supper,
was, as it were, all one to them, not distinguished, but by the signification
put upon the bread and wine, just when they were delivered, being indeed the
Paschal Rites, and no other, viz. materially, and therefore I see not but (...)
here may signify, as it does, Matthew. 13. 5. (...), The seed in stony places
sprung up forthwith, not so soon as sowed, but by Reason of shallowness of the
earth, and heat of the rock, sooner then ordinary seed, and so Judas went out
forthwith, not before the end of the Paschal Supper, which was also the end of
the Lords Supper, both being at once, and concluded by one hymn, but before the
long speech, Vasquez. Tom. 3. Disp. 217. cap. 2.
which was continued after Supper by Christ, John 13. and Joh. 14. for he left
Christ and the other together in the room, and before that last Sermon was gone
about his intended plot, and this as it is the common, so also (as I suppose)
the true opinion, which is hinted, as the consent of the Church of England, in
the Exhortation before the Communion, where you find these words, If any of
you be a blasphemer Confessio Belgica.
of God, an hinderer or slanderer of his Word, an adulterer, or be in malice,
or envy, or any other grievous crime, bewail your sins, and come not to this
holy Table, lest after the taking of that holy Sacrament, the Devil enter into
you as he entered into Judas, and fill you full of all iniquities, and bring
you to destruction both of body and soul

But this example pleads nothing for admission of openly notorious and
scandalous sinners; for though Christ knew Judas, yet his sins had not yet
scandalously broke forth, and therefore he was present, as a secret sinner, of
whom there could be no just accusation, nor evident proof, and so no object as
yet of any ecclesiastical censure in an ordinary and orderly Tom. pars 3. Qu.
81.
way, as Aquinas says.

4. No private trespass against a private scandal given to a Christian
brother, is the immediate object of this debarment from public Communion, for
in such cases there is an order, viz. The golden Rule of Christ is to be
Observed, Matthew. 18. 15. Go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone,
if he hear thee, thou have gained thy brother; if not then, take one or two
more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established;
If yet he hear not, or neglect, Tell it to the Church; The business here to be
done, is not so much to resarciate the damage or injury done to thee, or to
make him pay what he owes, that belongs to Westminster Hall, not the Church,
but to gain a brother to repent, that is the work. And here we may complain of a
great neglect of this duty of private reproof or admonition: Men would have
their private offenses brought upon the public stage, at first dash they
expect the Church should proceed to do their work at first instance, they
forget that, Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart,
thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. The
Church would have less to do, if this course were held, the matter would be
stopped, the offendour gained by this private plaster, which if it do the cure,
what need we go to the Chyrurgion: Men have their own private plasters, and
until the sore rankle, they call not the Chyrurgions to counsel: Men are apt
to run to the Church or Minister with private whispers, and what can they do
by Gods Word upon private whispers, just nothing, go and do your own duty: Let
Christ's order be Observed, He will not have a member of the Church made a
Publican or Heathen at first dash, there are three neglectings to hear before
that be, If he hear not thee, If he hear not two or three, If he hear not the
Church, but if he do hear thee, then no end of bringing two or three; If he
hear two or three, then no telling of the Church; If he hear the Church, then
is he no Heathen or Publican unto thee: How rashly and passionately do many
separate from the Church, becaUse she cannot, does not cast out her members
upon their private whispers, let them go and separate also from the
Commonwealth, becaUse she does not banish or put to death upon private
information. Do they neglect their own duty to their brother, and will they
make the Church a Heathen and a Publican to them, for not doing that which by
Christ's order they cannot do?

5. The proper, and adequate, and immediate object of this debarment from the
Communion of the Church, is a scandalous person, that holds either a course, or
has committed the act of a scandalous sin, And what call you that? It may be
explained thus:

1. Some atrocious or grievous sin, of first magnitude, If any that is called
a brother be a fornicator, idolater, covetous, etc. 1 Cor. 5. There is a list
with an Et catera, Gal. 5. 19. where they are called, Works of the flesh, and
they that do such shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; As also 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, nor
fornicatours, idolaters, adulterers, abUsers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, and such
were some of you. These the Papists call mortal sins, they bring scandal on the
Church, provoke God, blot out our comfort, waste the conscience, etc. but there
are quotidian sins of daily incursion, common to all godly men, infirmities,
which like little flies are not to be knocked down with so great a hammer, whose
absolute cure can hardly be expected, or performed by such as are subject to
the like passions themselves; divorce or banishment are too great, but for such
offenses as are directly contrariant to the respective societies of marriage or
Commonwealth.

2. It must be an open and manifest sin, else it is 1 Cor. 5. 1.
not scandalous, (...), It is reported commonly fornication, and such
fornication. Chrysostom says, he speaks (...), concerning manifest sins,
when he charges his Ministers to admit no scandalous offendour: Now to render a
sin manifest or notorious, I suppose first it is requisite,

1. That it manifestly be a sin, and this is quaestio juris, for a thing may
be commonly cried down under the name of an enormous crime, and yet indeed be
very doubtful, I instance usury, where the Question is, What it is? Then,
Whether this in Question be usury? Then, Whether all usury be sinful? For
there are great names of learning and godliness, who upon considerable Reasons
do deny it.

2. That it be manifest, that the sin be committed; for it is one thing to
know simply, and another to know judicially, and known it must be, either by
evidence of fact, or confession, or conviction, if it be, and yet appear not,
it is as if it were not, De non existentibus and non apparentibus eadem ratio,
if it come to that pass, that the offendour put himself upon conviction, then
the process must be Secundum allegata and probata, in the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word must stand (says our Savior upon this point) If I
were to judge the fact, which I my self do know, but yet it is not proved, I
durst not make a censure, but should rather, Exuere personam judicis, and
induere personam testis; And as Jerome says, Cont Ruffin. lib. 2.
A single witness is not to be believed, Ne Catoni quidem, No, though he were
Cato; You would be loath to lose your horse, your goods, but upon sufficient
conviction, and I hope, you think that to lose your right to the Sacrament, is
a greater loss. I like well of that of Durand Lib. 4. Did. ^. Qu. 5.. 7. Aug.
in 1 Cor. 5. If any be a brother.
out of Austine, We cannot prohibit a Communione, any man, but he that either
confesses his sin, or is convict of it before the secular Judgment, or in
the face of the Church. You see what a sufficient hedge the Scripture and
Reason has made about the right of a Communicant.

Sixthly, No private person by any private Authority, can dispossess a visible
member of his right of Communion; As in the Commonwealth Justice is necessary,
but private persons do not bear the Sword. It Is unReasonable that a man laying
claim to the Ordinance should at any man's private discretion be denied, What
inconveniences and mischiefs would this fill the Church of God with? How full
of scandals? This would not heal scandals, but make them. Nor can I warrant or
encourage any private or single Minister ordinarily to assume the power of
jurisdiction, to cast out of the Church, as it once did Diotrephes, 2 Epist. of
John verse. 10. and I say ordinarily, becaUse Saint Paul delivered to Satan
Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 20. For the Pastor is not Dominus, but
Dispensator Sacramentorum, (as Alensis says) not the Head of the Sacraments,
but the Steward; And it would go very ill with the best Communicants many
times, if the power lay in that hand. He that preaches against them would make
no bones to forbid them the Table, and they that least deferved it should feel
the severity most; but our Savior his Rule is, Tell the Church; and that
Matthew. 18.
rebuke which was given to the incestuous Corinthian, was inflicted by many, 2
Cor. 2. 6. It Is true, The Minister may alone perform the executive part, and
pronounce the words, as the Crier does the Proclamation, and peradventure
withdraw his hand from reaching forth the Sacrament to a scandalous person, but
that is no act of Jurisdiction, or casting out the scandalous person, as I
shall (it may be) show anon.

Seventhly, The Church it self does not ordinarily cast out a meritorious
sinner without previous Admonition, and hearty seeking of a lost Sheep; for
there are few that would cut off an unsound Leg or Arm, before they had tried
all ways; And our Savior says, If he neglect to hear the Church, (Matthew. 18.
17.) as implying, That the Church deals with him by Exhortations and
entreaties, such as may overcome his obstinacy, rather then punish it, and had
rather heal him than cut him off. And so in the first general Position, I
fortified the Sacrament against undue Intrusion: And in this second I have
fortified the Right of the Communicant against unjust invasion.

And having showed you the truth of this Point in two general Positions; The
first was, That this Ordinance is barred, and lies not open to all that may
intrude. The second was, That the right of a visible Churchmember is hedged
in, and cannot be hand over head invaded, and taken away from him. Now I shall
shortly show you what Use may be made of all this.

CHAP. XVIII. The Uses which are to be made of the two last Theses.
viz. the Gospel or preaching thereof, and that which God has made several, we
may not make common, that is, this Sacrament; As he cannot allow this Table to
any that are not of the hoUse, so neither can we turn out of the hoUse such as
have right to come to this Table: Some are displeased that they should not have
the same right to the Word, and to the Table; No, for as thou art a sinful
man, thou have a right, and duty to hear the Gospel, though an Heathen, but not
to this Sacrament, till thou be a Christian, and duly qualified professor of
Christ: Are you not pleased that God gives you a nearer and more inward
admittance unto Communion and fellowship with Christ, than to Jews and
Infidels, and such as are called Christians, but little better than they? Would
you not have him make more of his children, than of common servants? While you
would raise up a right unto wicked men to Gods inner Ordinance, you do but
depresse and lay low the difference and favor, which he vouchsafes to his
Covenant people; A King may send a Proclamation of pardon to rebels, while the
Sword is in their hand, but he seals it not to them, or invites them to his
Table, till they submit and accept conditions.

The King said to his servants, bind him hand and foot, that has not the
wedding garment, and take him away, Matthew. 27. 13. The King said it, Let all
the Lords servants take heed of casting out any, but upon the Lords warrant,
and upon his command. I should tremble that my self, or any else should make my
Office serve my private spleen, neither can any man lose his right upon my
supposition or suspicion of scandalous sin, but clear and convictive evidence.

And what I say of private grudge, I would be understood to say of private
differences in opinion, speculative or practick, provided they be such as godly
men do ordinarily dissent in; or (as the Apostle says) Such things wherein the
Kingdom of God consists not, Romans 14. 17. For verse. 3. Let not him that eats
despise him that eats not. Let not him that eats not, judge him that eats,
and the Reason is given, verse. 4. He is another man's servant, to his own Master
he stands or falls. Such discord need break no music, we may as soon make all
faces alike; as all judgments, and we should not be so proud as to think all
are Blackmores besides us. For God has received him (says the Apostle, Romans
14. 3. therefore let us receive him, and let him receive at the Lords board,
and yet I would have no man think, that I dare speak in favor of, or invite
heresy to the Lords Table; For as there is a great difference between our
daily sins, and those we call scandalous, or flagrant, and atrocious, so
there is also between many errors of judgment, and pernicious heresies; And
if we compare such heresies with scandalous sins of moral life, you shall
find, that heresy is more infectious and pestilential, though the other may
be as mortal; So the Plague is more to be avoided than the Dropsy: Heresy
overthrows the faith of other men more easily, than drunkenness does their
morals by the example; By scandalous sins we open others mouths to blaspheme,
by heresy we our selves blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1. 20. And you find that it is said
of heresies, as it is of Adultery, Murder, They that do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 19. And if there be any thing higher, it is
said, They bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2. 2. and therefore
they are as far removed from this Table, as any other.

Jam. 2. 4.
respecter of persons, and a judge of evil thoughts; Nor would I stretch out my
hand to a Parliamentman, and withdraw it from a Scavenger on the same terms;
Nor should a godly man, Flagranti in crimine, under the scandal of
drunkenness, or adultery, find any more welcome than another man under the
same sin, until repentance made some difference; For still I go upon the
same Rule or principle; The Table is not ours; We make not the Feast; We are
not Lords and Masters of the Ordinance, but Stewards, Servitours, Dispensers,
that must act ad voluntatem Domini.

walk disorderly, as the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11. Many that desire to
make a fair show, and do (...), set a good face on it, Galat. 6. 12. but are
rotten at the core, etc. They complain, Why are they suffered? Why are not
they cast out* Why do they remain spots in our feasts, as Jude says, etc? And
it cannot be denied, we plead not for hypocrites, we are not Advocates and
Patrons of foolish Virgins, they come unworthily, though they come, and that is
bad enough, but why do they come at all? The Answer is, That violence must not
be offered to that Rule, Order and way, which God has set down for the
prohibiting of any visible member from his right. It Is fit that thieves and
robbers, and cheaters were either reformed or purged out of the Commonwealth,
but yet it must be in the course of Law, or else the remedy would be a
mischief; That in the mouth of two or three Witnesses* (says Christ, Matthew.
18. 16.) every word may be established. It is not a thing to be done at random,
as I have showed; Every sore leg is not presently to be cut off, there may be
as sore a one under a silk stocking: The Church sins, if she neglect her
duty; but I must tell you, That you must do your duty first. Have you (in
private offenses) gone first to your offensive brother, and told him of his
fault in private, and then if he be not gained, have you born witness against
him? And has he been convinced of his sin by due conviction? Or does he
stand out against conviction and admonition? And is he Obstinate, and does
persist in his sin? One may murder a Felon, he should happily die, but he dies
innocently, if he die by a private hand; A man that deserves to be cast out,
may be cast out injuriously, viz. a non judice. I confess the Argument is
plausible, That the Church, the livelier and purer it is, the better it is, So
the Corn-field is best that has no weeds; The Corn that is clean dressed from
chafe and cockle is the purest, but it is rare to find such a field, or to
find such a floor in the Garner, so it is, but not in the barn-floor. I like
holiness which is of Gods making, not that which is of man's making. The
Novatians, or Cathari, the Donatists also pretended both to a holiness above
all the Churches of God in the world, but there is (as Calvin observed, none of
them left in the world to be seen, whereas the true Churches of Christ
continue, and I hope shall continue, though they be like Israel going forth of
Egypt, that had a mixed multitude among them, as the Scripture speaks.

CHAP. XIX. What must be done where Discipline cannot be executed for want of
Administrators.


Quest. 1. The first Question is this, What is to be done in such case, wherein
the former Doctrine is impracticable, by Reason that the Church or particular
society, whereof thou art a member, be not in capacity to exercise such
Discipline, for want of such due Administratours as may bring to execution the
aforesaid order of Debarment from, or Admittance to the Lords Table?

Before I answer this great Question, I must tell you that I have caUse to fear
least it be said of me, as Cicero said of Cato, His opinion of, and affection
to the Commonwealth is excellent good, but he is offensive, Quia loquitur
tanquam in Repub. Platonis, non tanquam in faece Romuli, becaUse he speaks as
if he were in Plato his Commonwealth, not as in the dregs of Romulus: So you
may say, that I speak as if I was in the Primitive Church, and not in the dregs
of corruption, which profaneness and superstition have brought in upon us; but
notwithstanding the Clock that goes false must be reduced by the Sunne-dial,
and not that by the Clock that erres; We may justly complain of, and bewail the
evil genius of the times and men, that if they can hear novelties every
Lordsday from some ambulatory Preachers, and they also can vapor up and down
with two or three Sermons calculated to serve any Meridian, do not either look
for, or prize a settled condition of Ministry and Sacraments in the Church, but
rather cry, So would we have it, Let every man do that which is right in his
own eyes; and we little think that so many breaches and distractions are
amongst us, becaUse we seek not the Lord after the due order. It was an old
complaint, that the coming in of the world into the Church was the decay of
Christianity, while Emperors were Heathen, and persecutions of the very name
Christian, were frequent, the Discipline was vigorous, when men came in to
Christianity with no other resolution, than to suffer for it, and made account
to save nothing by it, but their souls, the Discipline was able to keep them in
compass, but when Christian Emperors came in, and set the broad gates open to
the world, then they thronged into Christianity for fashion, interest,
preferment, as all do now upon custom, example, education, and hence is the
decay and corruption of Discipline, Atheists, Epicures, Libertines, every one
under form and color of Religion, providing immunity and impunity for their
own lusts, which having said, and thereby pointed with my finger to the sore,
which I cannot heal, I shall answer to the Question.

Hezekiah his Passover in the second month, 2 Chronicles. 30. Many in the
Congregation were not sanctified, verse. 17. Many came out of the Tribes of
Israel, which had not cleansed themselves, they did eat the Passover otherwise
than it was written, verse. 18. Here you see it was not so well as it ought, but
it was as well as it could at that time, and therefore Hezekiah prayed, The
good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, though he be
not according to the purification of the Sanctuary, and the Lord healed the
people, verse. 20. And therefore to speak more particularly to the point; I
cannot counsel, but bewail the intermission of the Lords Supper in such
Churches where there are a number of worthy Communicants, at least visibly,
though there be no power of juridical exclusion of the unworthy. The Helvetian
or Switzerland Churches claim to be Churches, and have the notes of Word and
Sacraments, though this order of Discipline be not settled among them, and I am
not he that shall blot out their name: There is an express command, Do this,
and a very great obligation; There is an excellent benefit of this Ordinance,
which if it stir up the thirst of Gods people to desire, or rather claim it
at the Ministers hand, I see no ground for the refusal: I know the Sacraments
of ordinary Use were intermitted in the wilderness, wholly or mostly, and they
were recompensed with extraordinary, 1 Cor. 10. but that arose on another
occasion than this I speak of; for alas, How many Churches in England, or if
you will, good Christians in them, shall everlastingly be deprived of this high
Ordinance, and the benefit of it, shall lie under the temptation of separation,
shall lose this mark of a Church, and shall in effect be equally debarred of
this Communion with Christ, as wicked men are, and that also not for any
default of theirs, but for their unhappiness of being planted in a Vineyard
that wants a wall or hedge?

themselves with other Churches of God, that the unity may be preserved of the
body of Christ, for the Arch is firm by the mutual support of the stones, and
their joining to the top-stone; For the Church is a body or society with which
God has deposited his Ordinances, and given it power to meet and assemble
themselves together for performance of them, and it were a wonder that they
should not have a power of exercising them in a right manner.

I do not arrogate unto the Church any the least power of outward force or
coercion, for that belongs to him that bears the Sword, who if he do not give
effect to the censures of the Church, yet they have their effect by the consent
of the Church it self, Ex Disciplina confederata, as they say, which is that by
which he that consents to be of that body is subject to the Laws and Rules of
it, and is cut off, if he prove a rotten member. To give light to this point,
How stood the Discipline of Synagogues, from which I am apt to think our
Christian Churches took much of their pattern? They had a power to discommon
their own members, and it seems to me that their (...), or agreement among
themselves was that which gave effect to their censures, Joh 9. 22. And what is
the government of Colleges, Corporations and petty Courts in
Countrey-villages, where the Bylaws and amerciaments and penalties are by
agreement, north warting the municipal Laws of the Commonwealth: He that will
enjoy the privileges and freedoms of such a body, must be subject to the Rules
and Laws of that society; and so the Christian Churches under Heathen Emperors
could do no more but disfranchize their own members from the privileges of the
Church, of which body they had by their own consent come in to be members, and
so submitted themselves to them. The Emperors gave not this power to the
Church, but God who gave them his great Charter to be a City and Corporation of
his own, did eo ipso, give them this power, without which they might be a
Cyclops den, or chaos, but not a regular Society; And upon this ground (as I
conceive) the Apostle reproves the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. and 1 Cor. 5. for not
doing those things to prevent scandal, which they were empowered and enabled to
have done as a Church of Christians: And if any man had been of such stomach or
disposition in those times, as not to have cared a straw for those
Church Censures, so long as the Civil power touched him not in purse, body,
liberty, it was enough to proclaim him fitter for to be a Heathen than a
Christian; For it is admirable to consider, as it is most evident, That a Church
censure, a Suspension from the Communion of the Church wrought more sorrow, and
trouble, and heartbreaking, than the fire and faggot of the persecution: In
conclusion and upon the whole matter, as he said of the Romans, they must
redire ad casas, return to their poor shepherd cottages again: So I say, that
in case of this necessity, when the Civil power contributes not assistance or
furtherance to the Church, she must consider the case of the primitive
Churches, and what intrinsecally belongs to her to do, as a corporation or body
of Gods making, with no other power of self preservation from scandals of
members, but purging them out, nor from injuries of forreiners, but suffering.

3. Every particular member of the Church ought to withdraw or refrain from
such conversation with a scandalous brother, as may either give occasion of
scandal to others, or infection to himself. The Apostle allows civil commerce
or intercourse with Heathens and Infidels, if we live among them, and the bonds
of natural and civil relations or duties must not be violated on pretense of
Christianity, but an arbitrary, familiar and intimate society or fellowship
with them that live or act scandalously, does but soil our selves, harden them,
offend sober Christians. It Is a caution much inculcate in Scripture, Withdraw
from every brother that walks disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Have no company with
them, that they may be ashamed, verse. 14. Turn away from such wicked formalists
as have no power of godliness, and under the form of it are so wicked, 2 Timothy
3. 5. With a brother that is scandalous, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 9, 12, Them
that caUse divisions and scandals mark, and avoid them, Romans 16. 17. These, and
the like expressions some Learned men draw into consequence, to prove that
which we know rather the name of, than the nature of the thing,
Excommunication: Others understood Grot. do Imp. p. 231.
by them Nullum actum privato majorem, no act greater than private avoidance of
company, which is that I now speak of; For in the primitive times, when the
Heathens Observed of Christians, how they loved each other, and when the
Christians, had in Use certain remarkable testifications of this love, by their
feasts of love, and holy kiss, etc. It was a mark or note of reproof and shame
to be shunned and avoided by the brethren, for scandalous sin, and it was
medicinal to him that was so avoided, and in that regard a duty in conscience
and charity to be performed; and I would that all distances created amongst
brethren by passion and envy were reduced to this, then we should find, that
though we had not power to separate an offender from the Church, yet the
separating of our selves from him, would work much good, and be in some measure
an Excommunication; For it is certain, that a great part of the effect thereof
lies in the non Communion or withdrawment of the people from him that is
scandalous; and as certain, that if we flatter and encourage the sins of men
by our samiliarity and fellowship, Excommunication it self would be but a lost
Ordinance, and of no effect; For it is my opinion, That if Excommunication,
greater and lesser, as they are called was in full proportion reduced into
practice, yet except the people that are members of the Church did make
conscience of imparting their fellowship to such as were cut off, it would be
little better then a wooden dagger, and rather serve to create passion and fury
than humility and shame in them.

Better that a millstone was hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea,
than that a man with an impure conscience take and eat this morsel, says
Cyprian, or the Author De Caena, and so Chrysostom pours out himself in his
Homilies and Sermons on this point with great sharpness, and accounts this
which is done with the voice a seclusion or keeping of men back ( Hom. 13. ad
Hebraeos) and so it is and Page 467. Homil. 83. in Mat. Hom. 86. ad pop.
Antioch. Tract. 62. in Jo. Amb. ad Heb. 10.
may justly be called, for it is a ministerial prohibition of the unworthy;
Chrysostom compares this sin with theirs that slew Christ; Austin, sin of
Judas; Ambrose, with the sin of the Jews; Basil makes the Question, Lib. 2.
de Bapt. cap. 3. Whether it be (...) without danger to come not purged from
filthiness of flesh and spirit; and answers it by the unclean persons coming
to holy things, making that uncleanness (...), typically to denote moral
uncleanness, which I rather note for his sake that slights this Argument. And
therefore let all Ministers be stirred up to Use this prohibition the more, and
the rather when other is wanting, in discharge of his duty to God and men's
souls, which though it be not better liked than the practical seclusion, yet
men are more patient under it, I hope out of conviction of conscience, and not
becaUse they may, notwithstanding this, lie still in the crowd without that
particular mark, which the actual seclusion sets upon them.

Hookers Pref*
Turk, Jew or excommunicate person should intrude unto the Table of the Lord,
in which case, viz. of Excommunication. Calvin says, He would die rather than
reach forth his hand to give the Sacrament to such an one. It Is true, you will
reply, This may be done in the case of such as are debarred by the Church, but
not in the case of a scandalous sinner, not yet so judged? For answer to which
Objection, I say, That indeed there are men of great renown for learning and
holiness, that hold, If a M. Ball. Trial, p. 205.
Minister know a man unworthy he must yet receive him, becaUse he cannot
manifest it to the Church. If a man's unworthiness be notorious. and yet not so
judged by them that have authority, he must administer the Sacramental Signs to
him, not as one worthy or unworthy, but as one as yet undivided from them. And
the truth is, the Minister alone, singly as a Minister, has not by warrant of
the Word, the power of Excommunication or Suspension in his hand, as Grotius de
imperio, p. 230.
is generally holden; nor will I dispute; but this with holding of his hand
from actual giving of the outward Signs, is no act of censure, no Suspension of
the person, no casting of him out, but as those that allow it say, An Act of
liberty, as a Physicians not giving drink to an hydropick person, or the
withholding his own Sword from a furious man, for the time of his rage, and (as
says the Authors last cited) a Minister may do this by the same right whereby
he does by Doctrine declare such a man's incapacity, or whereby a private
Christian withdraws his fellowship or society; Nor otherwise can Chrysostom
charge to Ministers to hinder the unworthy, which he presses in his 83. Homil.
on Matthew, on pain of being guilty of their blood, be understood; for it must
be meant of such scandalous sinners known to them, but not so judged by the
Church, they being kept from access, or sight of the holy mysteries in his
time by the censure of the Church; and I as little doubt of the judgment of
many learned men, or of the intention of the Church of England in the Rule
given to the Minister before the Communion in the case of some emergent scandal
at the present time; nor do I conceive that any learned man would deny this
liberty to a Minister, to withhold his hand from some mankiller, drunkard,
perjured, etc. that has been convicted before the Civil Authority, though no
censure of the Church be against or upon him: Nor is that charge given to
Timothy very far from proving it, Lay hands suddenly on no man, Be not
partakers of other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5. 22. If the Rule of Analogy or
proportion may be here allowed, and I believe, that had not the profit of the
Courts more swaid then point of conscience, this Suspension of act had not been
a crime; For the Schoolmen generally allow the Dhrand. part. 4. Did. 9 Quaest.
5. aliique.
Minister to deny the Sacrament to any that is in mortal sin, if it be but
notorious by evidence of fact. And so much for this point, which I have spoken
the more unto, becaUse it is a Question that may often come to hand, even in
our times, and the places in which we live, and only with this intention, that
I would have the Sacraments on their wheels, and yet so that their male
administration bring not epidemick judgments upon us, as the receiving
unworthily did on the Church of Corinth.

CHAP. XX. Whether a Godly man lawfully may, or ought to stand as a Member of,
and hold Communion in the Ordinances of God with such a Congregation as is mixed
(as they call it) that is, where men visibly Scandalous in Life and
Conversation are mingled with the Good in the Participation and Use of Divine
Ordinances? Or, Whether this Mixture of Heterogeneals do not pollute the
Ordinances, and the Communion to the Godly, so as they are concerned to
Separate from such Communion*.
of people of our times, and the spirit of Separation which so easily puts them
upon wing to practice and plead for separation, as they did for Divorce upon
every caUse, Matthew. 19. 3. There are many make but a humor of it, being
ignorant of the greatness of the sin of renting asunder the Unity and Union
of the body of Christ, which Chrysostom aggravates Homil. 11. in Ephesians.
and recites a saying of a holy man before his time, (he means Cyprian) (...),
which might seem a very bold speech, and that is, That the blood of Martyrdom
cannot wash off this stain, which many account an ornament, not a sin. Among
other principles of Separation, this which I have now to speak unto, that we
must excommunicate our selves from Gods Ordinances (if men of wicked life be
not excommunicate) for fear of pollution by them, is Donatistical, and urged by
Parmenian the Vide cap. 21. Epist. ad Parmenianum and alibi.
Donatist, and answered by Austin many hundred years ago, and now retrimed and
revived, being called a new truth, as we commonly call a new fashion, that
which lately come up, though about forty year ago, or in our memory, it was a
fashion laid aside and rejected. And the truth is, That the Reason of this
Separation seems plausible to easy capacities, such as the Apostle calls Romans
16. 17. (...), the simple, becaUse it pretends to set up holiness, both of
Ordinances and people, but if it be weighed by the standard of Scripture, will
be found too light, and the two sorts of complainers directly opposite to one
another, will be found erroneous, both them that complain of any hedge at all
about the Sacrament, and they that complain and therefore separate, becaUse the
hedge is not so sufficient as may keep off every undue intruder.

Let us then by Scripture Rule lay down the Answer to this Question, and that
orderly, and in certain Theses.

inheritance, his peculiar tReasure above Levit. 20 24. 1 King. 8. 53.
other people, and they also do and ought to separate themselves from communion
with Devils in idolatrous service and worship, Nehem. 9. 2. Come out from among
them, and be ye separate, 2 Cor. 6. 17. This is not necessary to be a local
Separation for present. There was a mixed multitude of uncircumcised people, No
just Proselytes (as Mr Seldom says) with Isreal's De Synedriis cap. 2.
in the wilderness after their separation from Egypt, but this separation is
moral or foederal, God calls them, propounds the terms of his Covenant, they
professedly submit and accept, Exodus 19. 5, 8. and now they are separate, set
apart, sanctified by dedication unto God and his service, and are called no
more Heathens, Infidels, but Saints, Gods people, believers, Christians, or the
like.

Exodus 19. 5, 8, 9. and the same people when they heard the particular Laws of
that Covenant, professed again they would do them, Exodus 24. 3. and so it became,
as we say, Done and done on both sides, and yet he that should affirm all
these, though newly baptized to be truly regenerate, were very wide of the
truth; for there are many reputative members that are in the visible Society
and fellowship of the Church and it is Ordinances, that are but Jews outwardly,
and they are, says the Apostle, no Jews, and yet they are circumcised and eat
the Passover, and communicate in Ordinances, and (if we will not be captious
in words) are true members of the visible Society, yet no members of Christ's
mystical Body, nor yet can they be dispossessed by us of their right unto
Ordinances; for we have no judgment of their spiritual and inward Estates, nor
any Command, nor any Rule to dispossess them, nor any example of God himself,
who lets the corn and chaff lie together in area, and separates them locally in
horreo, as Austin speaks; and this body howsoever consisting of members
heterogeneall, yet being taken together in gross or in the lump, has very
sublime and honorable compellation, both in the Old Testament, A holy Nation,
a Exodus 19. 5, 6, etc.
Kingdom of Priests, Gods special tReasure; and in the New, The Kingdom of God,
the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 25. 1.
for so the Gospel net, that contains both good and bad, is called; and so the
whole knot of wise and foolish Virgins, and yet it is plain, that in this
Kingdom there are children that are to be cast out, and scandalous persons for
Doctrine, and them that work iniquity for Practice that are to be gathered out
at last, Mat. 13. 41.

more easily find in the world a body that has never a frecken or spot, than
a Church without corruption, and yet both a body and a Church be beautiful for
all that. The Scripture gives us a perfect delineation of the Church, as it
ought to be in Rules of faith and holiness, but yet shows us plainly, that it
being Gods pleasure, that the Net should gather both good and bad, and the
servants inviting to the marriage did bring in both good and bad; it must needs
be consequent, that many of those that are called are not chosen, That all that
are of Israel, are not Israel. Had not this mixture served more to Gods glory,
even the glory of his inwardly discriminating grace, it is likely it had not
been: So that as they say of the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, these Languages may be
pure in books, but hardly to be found purely spoken by any Nation now in the
world, so are the rules of faith and life pure and perfect in the Word, and yet
not so perfectly Observed by the visible Church. And if a man suppose that a
number or Colony of really holy persons might be picked out of the Churches, and
embody themselves into a Church, Are they sure this would be answerable to
their fancy? Did not the Donatists dream so of themselves? And what may one
think of their children in time? Does not the purest seed we sow come up with
straw and chaff? If they hold Communion with the visible Church, Is it not all
one? If they do not, Is it not worse and more clearly without warrant?

body, the poisoning of Springs and Rivers that run through a Nation, is worse
than a sore finger in the body, or a ground of thistles in the Nation, and
there are degrees of this corruption, the Doctrine in some remote points, hay
and stubble upon the foundation, the Worship in some rituals or rites of men's
invention or custom. How many Scripture Churches do ye find thus corrupted,
and yet no Separation of Christ from the Jewish Church, nor any commanded to
the godly of Corinth, in the Provinces of Galatia, or those of Asia in the
Revelation? I must in such case avoid the corruption, hold the Communion, Hear
them in Moses chair, and yet beware of their leaven; but if corruptions invade
the fundamentals, the foundation of Doctrine is destroyed, the worship is
become idolatrous, the leprosy is gotten into the walls and substance of the
hoUse, and which is above all, If the Church impose such Laws of their
Communion, as there is necessity of doing or approving things unlawful, or I
am ruined and undone, then must I either break with God or men, and in that
case, Come out of Babylon: The Churches of Protestants so separated from them
of Rome; it was a necessary and just Separation, the Laws of their Communion
were ruinous to the soul, if we hold it; to the body and life, if we held it
not.

Israel was, have their Ordinances according to the pattern in the Mount; If it
may be said, as Peter to Christ, John 6. 68. when some Disciples separated
themselves, Thou have the words of eternal life; If as Christ said in matter of
Worship, John 4. Salvation is of the Jews, than, as he said, Whether shall we
go? Why do we separate? And yet I would not be mistaken by the simplest man, as
if I accounted it separation, if a Christian hear a Sermon, or receive the
Sacrament in another Congregation; For he that takes a meal at another Table
does not thereby separate from his own hoUse; or if a Christian at liberty to
dispose his dwelling, shall remove and sit down under more fruitful
Ordinances; I account not this secession a Separation, no more than if being
sickly, and having not health in the City, he remove his seat into the Country
for purer air, becaUse in so doing he removes from the City, but renounces not
his freedom therein, nor disclaims in like proportion the Communion of the
Church.

. 7. Of Separation.
Adams family there be a Cain, in Noah's a Cham, in Christ's a Judas; and if Cain
go forth, yet Adam does not, Noah does not, Christ does not; Let them be
separated, let not me separate my self; Let the wicked be discommon'd, not the
godly, for the godly are in the right, and may stand in it as a man at his own
table in his own hoUse, or in his own ground; If others that ought not do
intrude, it is they that must be excluded, for they are trespassers, not he
that is owner and in his right. It Is very true, say you, but they are not cast
out. I answer, There may be sufficient: caUse to cast out Obstinate sinners,
and yet not sufficient caUse for me to leave the Church. I find that God
accepts of such that sigh and cry for all the abominations that are done in
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9. 4. That God commands us, To have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5. 11. That he
wills us, To withdraw from them that walk disorderly, and commends it, 2 Thessalonians.
3. 6. That he bids his people, Plead with their mother plead, Hos. 2. 2. These
are duties for private Christians to perform in this case; but I find not
that they must separate from Communion in Ordinances upon that caUse. For I
pray you consider,

1. Happily there is no Rule in the Word, or no proof by sufficient evidence of
the fact, or no competent Authority by which such a sinner, as thou instancest
in, may be cast out, And shall this be done disorderly? Shall one disorder be
rectified by another?

2. Thou for thy part have no power to cast him out, and every member must not
usurp and snatch the power of Excommunication to himself, for then as he usurps
the Sacrament, so thou usurpest the Keys, he unworthily, thou unlawfully.

3. It may be the sin of the Church that such are not cast out, but is that
sin a just caUse of thy Separation? I have a few things against thee, thou
have them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, thou have them that hold the
Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, says Christ to the Church of Pergamus, Revel. 2.
14, 15. Thou suffer that woman Jezabel to seduce my servants, and commit
fornication, says he to the Church in Thyatyra, verse. 20. but upon the rest
that are free, I put no other burden, Hold fast till I come, But where is any
separation commanded in this case? Not any: And for the Church of Laodicea,
whose temper was so loathsome, as her self is threatened to be spued out; from
which (says Mr Brightman) who would not think of flying very quickly, meaning
by his parallel the Church of England; yet becaUse Revel. 3. 30. The Lord
stands at the door and knocks, is present with, and by his Ordinances to all in
this Church, therefore does that holy man mightily inveigh against their wicked
and blasphemous error (so he calls it) that fell away from this Church; Will
they be ashamed (says he) to sit down there where they see Christ not to be
ashamed? Are they holier and purer then he? Can they deny themselves to be
believers in Christ before their separation from us? Came it not by our
preaching, etc? Adi locum.

And indeed the Argument is considerable, If God afford his Communion with a
Church by his own Ordinances, and his Grace and Spirit; It would be unnatural
and peevish in a child to forsake his Mother, while his Father ownes her for
his Wife.

Fourthly, The presence of wicked men at Gods Ordinances pollutes not them that
are neither accessory to their sin, nor indeed to their presence there. If
the Ordinances be polluted by the unclean, to themselves it is polluted, not to
me, He shall bear his own burden; He eats and drinks damnation to himself, 1
Cor. 11. 29. I come to the Sacrament, it is my duty and my right, Shall I sin
in separating from Ordinances, becaUse he sins in coming to them, and the
Church sins in not excluding him? The wickedness of Eli his sons made men
abhor the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17. but they transgrest in so doing,
shall I go forth from the marriage feast having a wedding garment, becaUse one
comes in thither without it? Must not I offer my gift at the Altar, becaUse
another comes thither that should first go and be reconciled to his brother?
Shall I leap out of Noah's Ark, becaUse a Cham is in it? Shall I separate from
Gods children in Communion of Gods Ordinances, when it is not arbitrary, and at
my liberty to do so, becaUse I see a sinful intruder, and do my private duty
by mourning, that such a one may be taken away from among us, 1 Cor. 5. 2. and
yet perform my public duty also. And therefore to avow Separation upon this
ground, is,

Corinth, had polluted the communion of the whole Church, and some one like
sinner in another had done the like, had not all been polluted, and a ground of
separation laid through all points of the Compass, till we had separated
through the whole circle.

2. An adventurous and bold assertion, that carries farther than we are aware;
for why then did not Judas being to Christ a known wicked man, pollute the
Communion to our Savior at the Passover and Supper? And why did not the
wicked Jews pollute Christ's Communion in the Ordinances of God in that Church?
And how could all the holy servants of God and Prophets in the Old, or the
Apostles and Christians in the New escape this pollution, it being well known
that there were hypocrites, and such as being vicious under form of
godliness, as 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. which remained in Church Communion*

3. A great mistake, for it grows hence, that as Parmenian said, Si corruptis
sociaris, etc. If you be Lib. 3. c. 21.
joined or associate with corrupt men, how can ye be clean? And Austin answers,
True: If we be joined in society with them, that is, commit sin with them, or
consent, or favor them in sin; but if a man do not this, Nullo modo sociatur,
he is no way joined with them, for it is not the local contact or conjunction,
but the moral conjunction that defiles, and we are as morally separate and
severed from them when they are at the Lords Table, as if they were in place
distant. It Is they that join with us in our profession, not we with them in
their sins; if their profession be hypocritical, that infects not us, for
spiritually infected we are not by contagion but consent; nor do we profess
our selves to be of one body with them, any otherwise 1. Cor. 10. 17.
than all that communicate with hypocrites do, viz. upon supposition, that they
are as they profess members of the body, which if they be not our profession
is not false, but theirs is, and yet I confess, that those are best Churches,
where the presumption of godliness in the members, is most Reasonable.

Salvian long ago, Praeter paucissimes, De Guderu. l. 3.
etc. Besides some few that serve the Lord in Spirit, quid est omnis caetus
Christianorum, Free our Communion from this exception by amendment of their
lives, and that the godly would, as the School says, Abuti alieno peccato,
make good Use of other men's sins and their own; for even they are mixed persons
(as I may say) having flesh and Spirit, as well as our Churches are mixed of
good and bad, and that they would stir up their graces to be the better for
other men's sins, and perform the duties required of them at such a time, and
not give way to thoughts of Separation, which pulls a good stake out of a rotten
hedge, where it did more good by standing, than by removal, For unto the pure
all things are pure, but to them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing
pure, Tit. 1. 15. whereby it is plain, that what is impure to them that are
defiled, is not made impure to them that are pure, and so I conclude with this
recapitulation.

The Separation of the Church from wicked men and infidels, by Gods calling and
Covenant with it, is as necessary as the profession of faith and holiness. The
Church her Separation, or casting out of Obstinately wicked men from her
communion, is defended for the recovery of lapsed members, and the avoidance of
infection of, and scandal to her self. The secession of those good people from
the Idolatry erected by Jeroboam to worship at Jerusalem is allowed, 2 Chronicles.
11. 16. The negative Separation, or the not communicating in the worship of
Baal, not so much as by knees or lips of those seven thousand in Israel, is
liked of by the Lord, 1 King. 19. 18. The avoidance of private familiarity with
scandalous sinners, is often commanded, ut supra. The flying of Gods people out
of Babylon, where Idolatry is maintained by force and tyranny, is called for
and required. The Separation of heretical and vicious members from the Church
is branded with a black coal, Jude v. 19. These be they that separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, which above all men they pretend
unto. But the Separation of the godly from Gods Ordinances, becaUse of the
corrupt lives of some in the Church, is no where by any syllable of Scripture
allowed or countenanced, being contrary to the example, and not warranted by
command of Christ or his Apostles, and it is a vain pretending to a holiness
above their Rule or their example; All that I would is an order in the Church,
I should rejoice to behold, as says he, your order, and the stedfastness of
your faith, Col. 2. 5. which too many too much slight and undervalue; for as
one said, Order in an Army kills no body, yet without it the Army is but a rout,
neither able to offend or defend; so happily order in the Church converts no
body, yet without it I see not how the Church should attain her end, or
preserve themselves, in begetting or breeding up souls to God.

CHAP. XXI. Whether the Lords Supper be a converting Ordinance?
Whether the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be a converting Ordinance? There is
a conversion of a regenerate man, from some Luke 22. 32.
fall or sin, as in that saying, When thou art converted strengthen thy
brethren, and so a man that is godly may be often converted, that is, raised up
from lapses and backslidings. Of this the Question is not; for this is but as
the blowing in of the candle, when the flame is gone out, by exciting or
wakening the fire that yet glows in the weeck of the candle, which may be done
by this Sacrament; But the Question is, Whether God does offer or exhibit the
first grace, for conversion of an unbeliever or unregenerate man; for as
Davenant rightly says, The first faith must be given to an unbeliever, as the
first light is that which comes into mere darkness.

This Question is but an upstart among us, which has risen on occasion of
seclusion of some from this Sacrament, and indeed quite overthrows it, if the
Sacrament be a converting Ordinance; for upon this ground we may invite the
most wicked to the Table, as well as to the Word, namely for conversion; and it
were a great sin to prohibit any from the appointed means of their conversion.



That, it is the Doctrine of Whitaker, that as the Word is the mean and
instrument of grace, so is the Sacrament, in general, the one is applied to the
ear, the other to the eye; This is the difference, The Word begins and works
grace in the heart ( For faith comes by hearing) but the Sacrament is objected
to the eye, and does not begin the work of grace, but nourishes and incReases
it, for faith is not begotten by the Sacraments, but only augmented. Thus he.
The Doctrine of physical operation is exploded by all the orthodox, Sacraments
do not work grace, as a plaster cures a sore, that is a blind conceit of
ignorant souls, but God by them, or in their Use imparts grace, as he did
healing by the brazen Serpent. Now God by Baptism solemnly represents and seals
to his people their planting into Christ, We are planted by Baptism into the
likeness of his death, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. And by one Spirit we are all baptized
into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and therefore Baptism is called, the Sacrament of
our implanting, ingraffing, incorporating into Christ, and so is a Sacrament of
initiation, Ye are all children of God by faith in Christ; For as many of you
as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 2^. God was
pleased to have his Covenant sealed by Baptism, as to the first grace of that
Covenant, as by Circumcision also under the Law, and so we are solemnly listed
and admitted to be his, and called by his name; But then as to the grace of
education of his children up unto maturity and ripeness by confirming them,
and strengthening and causing them to grow, etc. He has ordained another
Sacrament, which is called the second, becaUse it presupposes the first, as
Passover did Circumcision, and that is the Lords Supper, of which learned
Hooker says, The grace Eccles. pol. l. 5. page 536.
which we have by it does not begin, but continue grace or life, no man
therefore receives this Sacrament before Baptism, becaUse no dead thing is
capable of nourishment; That which grows must of necessity first live: And to
this purpose all our learned Divines have given their suffrage; And the
Papists, though Council. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 2. and 7. Can. 5. and 11. Bellarm.
de Euch. c. 17. l. 4. Catech-sub fin. Confess. cap. de Sac. c. 29.
they differ from us in denying remission of sins in this Sacrament, in
favor to their Sacrament of penance, yet they hold it to be an Ordinance of
nutrition, and so do all their Schoolmen; and so does the Church of England,
The strengthening and refreshing of our souls, etc. I need not number Authors
or Churches. It is so plain a case, that I wonder they that have stood up in
defense of it as a converting Ordinance, have not taken notice of it; There is
an Army to a man against them, and the ancient Christian Churches are so clear
in it, that they admitted no convert from the Heathen to either Baptism or
Supper, till they had testified their faith and repentance, nor were they
called fideles, till they were baptized and admitted to the Supper, whatsoever
knowledge, faith or repentance so ever they showed before.

Let me first clear the state of the Question, and then give you the Reasons.

For the first.

First, I do not deny that a man having some knowledge of the Gospel, and
visibly professing it (for I do not think that any does imagine that the very
popping of the elements into a mere Heathens mouth may convert him) may be
truly and really converted at the Sacrament, for who shall lock up the hands of
the Spirit, so as the Laver of Regeneration, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost? Tit. 3. 5. The work of the Lord, and a man's eating and drinking may not
be together; Or do we think that this time and conversion are incompossible?
No, I think not so: Nor do I Question or doubt that the Word of God adjoined to
the Sacrament, it being accompanied with the Gospel-promises, and the lively
painting forth of Christ may not work coversion, for why the word out of a
Pulpit, and the word at a Table, or in any other place, should not have this
same effect, I see not; You will say, This is the clothed Use of the
Sacrament, the administration being accompanied with the Word, and so still it
is the Word that converts. But what will you say to the naked Use and
application of the signs, that is, the act of distribution, Taking, Eating,
Drinking, Do these convert or confer the first grace? I answer, I am not
curious in delivering the very nick of time of man's conversion, I affirm not,
that so it is, nor deny that so it may be, The wind blows when and where it
lists. This yet is not the Question; "But whether there be found any declared
intention, any institution and appointment of God, that this Ordinance shall
convert souls, or has made it apt for that purpose, so as we may look for such
efficacy from it by virtue of Gods institution thereof to this end? For it is a
merely positive Ordinance, and the effect or efficiency must be expected in
virtue of the appointment and institution, and I cannot assent, that the
institution of the Supper promises this effect.

Greg. de Valentia, and others of the Schoolmen, De efficacia Euch punct.
distinguish between the primary, and per se effects of the Lords Supper, and
these that are per accidens, not of institution, among which he instances the
conferring of the first grace, and so Vasquez says, that he does not hold,
That this Sacrament conveys Vasquez. Tom. 3. Disp. 205.
the first grace by virtue of institution or appointment to that end, and yet
cites Bonaventure, that the first grace may be given here secundum
misericordiam of Gods mere mercy, not secundum institutionem according to the
institution of the Ordinance; And this I say in answer to the Question. But
does it follow hence, that therefore all may come, be invited, or admitted,
becaUse we say that which God can do, not what he has promised or declared
that he will? Prater intentional or accidental effects give no ground to seek
them at such a caUse as is not ordained to work them, though happily some have
been converted at that time. Must a man that seeks a Kingdom be sent to seek
his fathers Asses, becaUse Saul heard such news at such a time? Must we run a
man through with a sword to save his life, becaUse one did so once, and let out
a secret impostume? BecaUse some Minister has been converted at his
Ordination, Is therefore the laying on of hands instituted for that purpose?
BecaUse a man has been converted at his marriage, where the Sermon and
benediction have wrought on him: Is therefore marriage a converting Ordinance?
I might add a great deal more for illustration of this point, if I Questioned
your apprehension.

Secondly, There is difference to be made between the qualifications of a man
to his admittance to this Sacrament, and the qualifications of him unto the
inward grace, benefit, or effect of it: If one be a baptized person, a knowing
professor of the Gospel, against whom there lies no bar of notorious
ignorance or scandal, though it appear not that he is truly regenerate and
sincere in grace, yet he has admittance, he claims upon such a right, as the
Church cannot justly disallow, no more than an Israelite circumcised and clean
could be debarred the Passover; but as to the effect and benefit of the Supper
to his soul, there is required more than so, even true faith in Christ, and
regeneration, that he may exercise such graces as the benefits are promised
unto, and come to the Seals of the Covenant with the condition of the Covenant;
The wise Virgins cannot forbid the foolish from waiting with them, for they
have lamps as well as they, but the Lord shuts the door against them from
entering in with him, for their oil was out. Glory not in this, that the Church
admits you to the Table, but labor for the grace to feed upon the dainties set
upon it, many have the liberty to Use it, that have not the benefit or effect
of that Use; many have a hundred times tasted bread and wine, that never once
tasted the body and blood of Christ.

.4. Reasons proving the Lords Supper not to be an Ordinance appointed for
conversion.


Tom. 3. Disp. 205. c. 4.
The first is that of Vasquez, No effects can be ascribed to this Sacrament,
which fall not under the signification of it; they cannot, do not exhibit any
grace, but what they signify or figure out; the sign and the thing signified
are not such strangers, as that one thing be signified, and another wrought;
The Rock that followed them does not set forth Christ for meat, nor does the
Manna set forth Christ for spiritual drink, What can be expected in
Circumcision, but the cutting off native corruption or concupiscence? What in
Baptism of water, but the washing away the sordes or filthiness of our
nativity, or fleshly birth? Now the: conversion of a sinner is not signified in
this Sacrament, or sealed, there is no outward element that sets it forth to
us, and why so? BecaUse it is instituted: in bread and wine, eating and
drinking, and is it not evident that all this speaks growth, nourishment,
comfort, strength, but it speaks not the giving of life? Does bread and wine
give life to one that is dead? Can they congruously signify the first grace of
spiritual life? It Is against sense and Reason: but life is preserved and
cherisht, and continued by them, and therefore this Sacrament is set forth
(says Durand) Durand. lib 4. Did. 7. qu. 1.
under the form of nourishment; If you say, But here is Christ set forth, who
is our life as well as our meat, he gives, and he maintains it in us, True, but
he is set forth in this Sacrament as the one of these, he does both, he begins
life in us, but in this Ordinance, which is a Supper, his body and blood are
set upon the Table for refection and nourishment of men that take, and eat, and
drink, and they are living men: Meat is not set before dead folks, My flesh is
meat indeed, my blood is drink indeed, says Joh. 6.
he, and so is Christ here set forth. As the Use of corporal food is not
congruous, but to one that lives corporally: So, etc. Durand. ubi supra.

This Sacrament by the institution of it appears to presuppose those that reap
the sweet and benefit of it to be converts, and in grace, namely to have faith
in Christ, and to be living members, and if this be presupposed by this
Ordinance, then it is not first wrought by it. They must be in Christ, that
have benefit by it, for them it is instituted and ordained, not for such as are
out of Christ to bring them in, but for such as are in Christ to bring them up
in him; To my apprehension that is clear, 1 Cor. 12. 13. We are by one Spirit
baptized into one body, and then, we are all made to drink into one Spirit, and
that is it which ye often read in Divines, That the Baptism of Regeneration is
presupposed to the Supper of Communion, they are children whose bread this is,
living members, and not wooden legs that are capable of this benefit; Unto
admittance to the outward Ordinance, Regeneration is not necessary, but unto
the inward benefit and effect it is pre-required in some measure, and
presupposed. The fatted calf is for the returning Prodigal; They are the
friends of God that seed at this Table, Communis mensa symbolum amicitiae,
says Estius, who also Observes that ad cibi sumptionem vita Estius in 4. sen.
cap. 12.
requiritur in sumente, Life is presupposed to be in him that takes, and eats,
and drinks, spiritual life in him that does it spiritually. It is a communion
of Christ's body, and that presupposes union; The grass communicates not with
the stock, until it be knit, Why shall we think it strange that God should
provide some Ordinances for those that are in grace already, wherein he and his
may have communion and fellowship, and his very provission shows for whom he
provides? It Is absurd to give meat and drink to dead folks, for they are no
more nourisht by it (says Bellarmine) than stones; Christ promises Bell. de
Euch. cap. 18. lib. 4.
to sup with him, and he with me, When? When the door is opened, the voice
heard, and Christ let in first, Revel. 3. 20. And so ye see the grace of
Conversion is presupposed to the benefit of this Ordinance.

Object. If any reply, Here is Christ represented to us in his riches of Grace,
his death and Sacrifice, and therefore this Ordinance may as well convert as
confirm, and beget, as bring up.

Answ. The institution must limit the Use of Ordinances; This Ordinance of the
Supper is a representation of Christ, but quo modo of Christ, dying, not rising
or sitting in heaven, so it exhibits Christ, but how? as meat and drink, and
the end is not conversion, but Communion, so Christ was typified in the brazen
Serpent, but how? as lifted up to heal the pierced soul of every one that
believes in him, becaUse Christ is all in all things, for every Use, yet in
such and such an Ordinance, he is of limited Use, and limited by the
institution to be received to such an end, or else all Ordinances may be
confounded and humbled together.

That the Word is the only instrument of God to beget faith, or work Each
Sacrament represents some respect or mode of the Covenant, but seals the whole
Covenant. Ames. Medulla.
conversion, and there are many expressions of Scripture, tending to prove it.
But you will say, I do but beg the Question in affirming it only to be so, and
so having said enough already, I will not now stand to prove the exclusive, but
only in a word, say, That the Word is the great Charter of Gods Covenant; His
Covenant is to make us his, to entertain us as his, and so the Word is a seed
of our new birth, and the milk or meat of our spiritual growth. Unto this
Covenant or Indenture hang two seals, the one seals our engraffing and
implanting unto Christ, and that is Baptism; the other seals our fellowship
with, and building up in Christ, and that is the Lords Supper, the whole
Covenant is sealed by both, but respectively, the one looking at our first
entrance and admission, the other to our progress and consummation, and both
the seals are applied only to them that are in Covenant for their certioration
and comfort that they are lifted into the service of Christ, and that they
shall be kept in constant pay.

leads on the denomination of it, and so have also shown you, that upon this
ground mis-laid and mistaken, we cannot allow of all unconverted men's coming or
invitation; The Word is indeed a converting Ordinance, and therefore those that
believe not, that oppose themselves, that are dead in sins, may be admitted
and invited to it; If they come not with faith, they may come for faith; If
they come unclean, they may yet come to be cleansed; but the Lords Supper is
not of that nature. It is a more inward Ordinance, and presupposes some
foundation laid by the Word, that it may have effect; the converting Ordinance
must go before the confirming; the qualifications of a receiver are not the
same with the necessary qualifications of a hearer; and (which I conceive
Divines mean in part by requiring Baptism before the Supper) the grace properly
sealed in Baptism is necessary to the obtainment of that grace which is
properly sealed in the Supper; As Christ washed his Disciples feet before he
celebrated and administered this Sacrament. It Is true, God has showed us, that
we should not call any man common or unclean, as Act. 10. 28. that is, legally,
or unclean by his Nation, as if the distance and partition wall between Jew and
Gentile was yet standing, but morally unclean there are still, and we may call
them so, or else we must call evil good, and this uncleanness is not proper to
the sinners of the Gentiles, but even Jews by nature; Christians (as I may say)
by nature are many of them unclean, wherein I would not confirm them, but
endeavor to wash them from it.

And there is yet another offer made to prove an universal access to this
Table, without limitation or restriction aforesaid, and that is this, That the
Sacrament seals to the veracity of God, the truth of his Covenant, the Articles
thereof are true and firm, and the offer of them by God is serious and in good
earnest to induce our faith thereof, and our acceptance; this Ordinance was
appointed as a testification of the truth, and reality, and of the offer of the
Promises unto us, and therefore why may not all come, here is no seal to a
blank; The seal is to Gods Covenant, not our inherent graces; The Promises are
true, the offer real whether we have faith or no.

Take, Eat, Drink, are part of the sealing Use, or the applying Use, and which
puts this out of doubt, it is said, That this bread we break, This Cup we bless
is the Communion of the body and blood of Christ; And what is that but
participation? For as Chemnitius observes, Chem. exam. de Praeparat. ad caenam.
The great thorn in a weak believer that disquiets him, is this, Christ is
indeed full and sweet, the Promises true and precious, but have I any share?
Have I any portion in them? Have I any right or interest? Now this is that
which is sealed to a believer; and of it self though no man believe it, seals
(as was said before) the truth and reality of the Promise, and of Gods offer;
for I shall not deny that. Now if a man through want of faith be not capable of
this effect or Use of the Seal, it is not for mere want of that capacity that
he is prohibited the Lords Table, for then all unregenerate men, and all that
are not converted should be forbidden, which we teach not, but it is for
scandalous and enormous sin persisted in with Obstinacy and scorn, it is
becaUse he has not so much as a little beam of light, to know what he does, or
what danger he runs upon.

Bell. de Euch. cap. 18. lib. 4.
being but still the same grace, for this is a mere fallacy, and a strain
beyond Reason; degree of grace may be bestowed, and without that Faith, does
not impart any grace at all; As the life maintained by meat and drink is the
same life; Does it therefore follow that meat and drink may convey life into a
dead man, becaUse it maintains it in a living? No: It Is true, the same life in
a dead man would make him live, but the life maintained in a man by meat and
drink is therefore maintained, becaUse there is a life in the man that can eat
and drink, receive nourishment, by which the meat is made nutritive and lively,
which otherwise could not be; And so there must be life in the Patient, else
the Plaster or Medicine, if applied to a dead man, would not recover or
strengthen life: I deny not but if the Sacrament could convey the same grace to
a dead man, as it does to a living, that dead man would live, but that it
cannot do, becaUse it works by way of nourishment, which the dead receive not.

Quest. If niceties may be heard, we shall have no end; Suppose (says one) a
godly man fall into scandalous sin, and therein lie impenitent, Why do you
not forthwith admit him to the Sacrament, which, you say, may help toward his
conversion from a fall, though it convert not a man from the state of nature?

Answ. I answer, That this Ordinanee does excite and quicken grace, by which a
Christian may recover his fall; and yet, if I say, such a Plaster is good to
heal a sore, it will not follow, that therefore it must forthwith be applied,
for there is proud flesh, and a rotten core first to be eaten out with
corrosives, and then the Plaster may be Used: So if there be such or such a
sin under which a godly man lies, there is another 1 Cor. 5.
Ordinance of God first to be applied, for destruction of the flesh, for to
bring shame and confusion, and that is the casting of him out, the putting of
him away from the society of the faithful, and when that corrosive has
wrought, than the Sacrament is to be applied for his strengthening and
refreshing.

Having acquit my self of this Digression, I now return to the Point which I
propounded and explained, before I took the turn which I have travailed, and
am now in the ready way again.

CHAP. XXII. Of Worthy and Unworthy Receiving; With some Cautions to prevent
mis-judging our selves in the Case.
That this Sacrament may be received worthily, and it may also be received
unworthily, I mean de facto, worthily and unworthily refer to the manner of
communicating; The Apostle expresses but the one of them, being led thereunto
by the occasion at present, but having precisely laid down the institution of
the Supper, which regulates the manner of receiving, he said enough to make us
know what it is to receive unworthily, and consequently (for the right line is
judge of the crooked) what to receive unworthily; and therefore after he had
laid forth the institution, he brings in this 27th verse with (...), Wherefore,
or so that, as concluding the manner of receiving from the very nature, Use and
end of the Ordinance.

I know worthily and unworthily are opposites, and sometimes competent to the
same person at the same time, or in the Use of the same element, either the
bread or the Cup. Upon which last words you may ask me, May a man receive the
bread worthily, and the Cup unworthily? And I answer, That the reading of this
Text dis-junctively, Whosoever shall Estius in loc.
eat this bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, which some of the
Papists contend for in favor of their dry Mass, has occasioned the starting
of that Question, which yet I will not contend about in this place, but leave
it to such resolution as may be given by the sequel of our discourse, for I
naturally abhor the crumbling of Scripture into crumbs, when it is delivered
to us, as the bread in this Ordinance is, not by crumbs, when it is delivered to
us, as the bread in this Ordinance is, not by crumbs, but by the piece. Three
things I would have you bear in mind.

1. That these words refer to the manner of communicating, and consequently
to the act, or actual receiving of the Sacrament; and therefore the Text says,
He that eats and drinks unworthily, these adverbial expressions denote the mode
or manner of the act, and cannot be applied to any man out of the very act.

2. That yet they connote some aptitude, or inaptitude, some fitness or
unfitness of the person from whence this manner of the action does proceed, as
acts refer to some habit or disposition, whence they arise, and so we call a
worthy or unworthy Communicant, one that has or wants such qualifications, or
such frame of spirit as is apt to bring forth suitable actions, and these
qualifications denominate the person antecedaneous to the act, as we call a
valiant man, before we fight; a worthy Communicant, though not in the act; we
need no place of Scripture to name a Communicant worthy or unworthy, for if it
denominate the act worthily, unworthily, then Logic and Reason will suppose an
aptitude or disposition of the person whence this act comes.

3. That howsoever in our English Use, and so in the Latin, we mean by
worthiness and unworthiness of some person or action, an extraordinary
perfection or excellency, or an extraordinary poorness and baseness, yet here
the words must be interpreted relatively, that is, in relation to the
Ordinance, and so they import no more then fitly, condecently, answerably,
becomingly, or contrarily. If the manner of eating or drinking be answerable
to, and becoming of the Ordinance, being such as the exigence and nature
thereof does demand or bespeak of us, then we receive it worthily; for as you
cannot tell, whether a man act a part well, unless you know what part it is,
the (...) or decorum whereof must be observed; and as a picture may be very
curious and lively, and yet very false, if it answer not the prototype; so that
eating or drinking, which is according to the Ordinance or demands thereof is
worthily, and that which is not answerable is unworthily; and thus the word is
to be interpreted, when we read of walking-worthy of God, worthy of the
Gospel, or as it becomes Saints, etc. So that to receive this Sacrament in
that holy manner, and to that end with such spirit and affection, as the
institution or nature of the Ordinance, is to receive worthily, Certa norma est
ipsa institutio, Exam de praepa. ad Euchar.
says Chemnitius.

I have recommended to you the sense and meaning of the words, and before I go
further will infer from them two or three Corollaries, or Cautions requisite to
stand in the front of my following Discourse for prevention of mistake of my
words.

I would not measure or judge of my eating and Caution 1.
drinking worthily or unworthily, by the success I find afterward, but by
the manner of my receiving; for these words refer not to the success or
after fruit, but the manner of the present act, as I have shown you. This Rule
prevents a great deal of perplexity and trouble, which Christians create in
themselves to their discouragement, falsely concluding that they have not, happily
never have received worthily, becaUse they find not the after-fruit answerable
to their expectations, they find not such elevations of spirit, sensible
joys, powerful conQuest over their particular lusts and corruptions, not that
vigor and incRease of some particular graces, which they in their expectation,
have (as it were) limited God to bestow upon them by the Use of this Ordinance:
I do not take off a Christian from waiting on God in the Use of this Ordinance,
for those benefits and graces which it is properly ordained to impart: but I
deny the conclusion thence inferred, therefore I have not received worthily,
for it is the spiritual manner of the performance of the act, must be Judge of
that, and not the sensible fruit and benefit actually enjoyed, for thou may,
as I may say, wrestle with God, as Jacob did, and yet go away halting, that was
no sign of prevailing, yet the Text tells us, by his strength he had power with
God, he prevailed; Oh but he went lame away, True, but he wept and made
supplication to him, Hos. 12. ^, ^. The Apostle Paul does not find fault with
his prayer, becaUse it prevailed not at first for removal of the thorn, nor
with God neither, but he had his eye opened to see the Use of that thorn, like
a corrosive to eat away the proud flesh growing, and that contented him, the
stay of the thorn was answer to his prayer, when he saw the Use of it, and was
supported under it, 2 Cor. 12. 8. We look for Gods answer to us in our prayer,
or in his Ordinance, as that man that looked for the Sun rising toward the
East, whereas he that looked Westward for it on the top of the high Tower or
Steeple, saw it first: To see and to have the Use of a sin or corruption, is
a better answer of an Ordinance many times, than to be quit of it; For (as
Austin says) Proud hearts have need of sins as proud sores of eating
plasters; And therefore to answer this point nearer home, and nearer the case
it self. The Apostles that were near Christ at this first Sacrament, within few
hours after it betrayed their weakness, they fled from him, they hid
themselves, and the strongest of them took the greatest fall; Shall we say they
communicated unworthily, becaUse the success was so bad? No, for we must not
measure altogether by that Rule, but by the manner of receiving; if such graces
and affections be then set on work, as the Ordinance does bespeak; It Is well
observed, that the recording of the sins of holy men in Scripture, is as
profitable and Useful to the Church, as the record of their graces or heroical
acts; For as we look upon their graces, we are ashamed of our selves, and
instructed to imitation, as we look on their sins and failings, we are not
discouraged unto desperation, and the Scripture it self directs us to some such
like Use, Jam. 5. 17. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, viz.
to like afflictions, and to like fruit trees. It Is Gods part of the Covenant to
finish our faith and support our graces, to revive our spirits, and subdue our
corruptions. It Is our part to believe and walk humbly with God, not only in our
conversation, but the Use of his ordinances; Let us mind our own part, and
take comfort in the acting of grace at least, if we have not the desired
benefit and fruit of Ordinances to comfort us; For were I to Choose, I had
rather exercise grace in my communion with God, than enjoy a sensible rapture;
I speak it to improve a Christian in his gracious actings, though I know
withal that at last the fruit will fall into his bosom; for he that goes out
weeping, and bears precious seed, shall doubtless come again with joy, and
bring his sheaves, Psalm 126. 6. And again, Hosea 6. 2. After two days he will
revive us, in the third (as Christ was raised) he will raise us up, then shall
we know, if we follow on to know the Lord; in the mean time before this fruit
be ripe, the very running of the sap is a certain sign the Tree lives. And so
I have given you a measure or rule of judging, whether you receive worthily.

Secondly, Think not that the Sacrament conveyes or contributes any thing to
you as a medicinal potion or plaster; Does the Physic work, and so the
plaster, by an inherent or inward virtue in it self, not by any virtue in the
Phyfician or Chyrurgeon? So ignorant and superstitious people look on the
Sacrament, they think it saves them, and does them good, they know not how, and
so regard the matter more than the manner of receiving, they mistake Gods
manner of working by Sacraments, and therefore regard not their own manner of
receiving them, and are so fond, as if they could eat and drink away their
sins, and had by very receiving this bread and wine quit all old scores, and
were fresh to begin upon a new account, as the Papist thinks of his auricular
confession.

you by a familiar similitude; A man has an Estate, the Wool, the Wine, the
Corn that grows out of that Estate clothes him, refreshes him, feeds him, but
the Seal that confirms and assures this Estate to him, does no otherwise
cloth, or refresh, or feed him, than as it confirms that estate to him, out of
which all these do rise: And by this you may plainly understand how grace is
conveyed by this Sacrament, which does seal up to you, and assure you of
Christ, and the Covenant of promises in Christ, out of which all these graces
grow and flow: Do ye understand this? Then it follows,

1. That for any man to imagine that the very eating and drinking this bread
and this Cup should cure and heal his soul, is as fond as to think the very
seal or wax of a Deed should either seed or clothe him, for in that case it is
not a seal, but a piece of wax, how infinitely do our common people undervalue
this Sacrament, that make but a piece of holy bread of it, which is an
exhibition of the body of Christ, as they that value a seal by the worth of the
wax, and not by the Estate thereby confirmed.

2. That it is absolutely necessary to bring to this Sacrament, that grace which
is necessary to the receiving of Christ himself, Quid paras dentem? What does
the providing of teeth to eat (says Austin) What avail is all outward
preparation? The thing that is exhibited to us is Christ his body broken, his
blood shed, Christ dying, Christ a Sacrifice offered up to God is here
commemorated, and is here offered, and that inward grace which is necessary to
receive and close with Christ, must be brought with you; That grace is found by
and from the word, and that grace must be Used here, and exercised. The
Covenant requires it, and the Seal is the Seal of the Covenant; You cannot take
the Seal and leave the Covenant, you cannot enter Covenant without faith and
Repentance, you do but expect that the Seal should seal a lie to you, if you
expect remission of sins to be sealed without your faith in Christ. It Is
impossible that the Word and Sacrament should be opposite, as that the Covenant
and Seal thereof should disagree. As therefore if one would know what a Seal
conveys or confirms, let him read the Deed, and the Conditions of it, and
there it is learned, So if you would know what the Sacrament seals to you, hear
what the Word says, Mercy and Grace to a believer in Christ, and to no other,
which he that will receive from this fountain, must bring his vessel with him,
for qui fide vacuus, for as manducat non intus Chem. Exam. etc.
dente non mente, August.

Thirdly, Be not frighted with the sound of this Corollary 3.
Word worthily, or worthy Communicant, but labor to understand the least and
lowest manner of receiving worthily; for we wrong our comforts, when we make
that which is the measure of growth to be the measure of truth of grace, and
judge of the life of the tree, not by the bud, but by ripe fruit, and here
consider,

which relishes not the palate, nor bears any show in the world. If Aristotle
describe blessedness, what a deal of humane perfection and accomplishments of
fortune does he crowd into it, for which he is derided by other Sects? But if
Christ describe blessedness in the Gospel, what do you hear of, but poverty of
Spirit, purity of heart, meekness, mourning, suffering for righteousness
sake, wherein there is no more show of blessedness to a worldly man, than
there was in Christ of Majesty to Herod and his men of war? So perfection in
Gospel-phrase is a disclaiming thereof, and sense of our imperfection, Phil. 3.
12. And the Spirit of glory rests upon you that suffer, 1 Pet. 4. 14. And your
worthiness is rather the sense of your unworthiness: Thus the Gospel
construes these high sounding words, and the Reason is, becaUse the Gospel
placing our righteousness and our happiness in the having of Christ, and
taking every man utterly off his own bottom, does thereby come to a new
reckoning, that is not Used in the whole world, and accounts them full that are
most empty, rich that are poor, blessed, that are in their own sense, or
outward condition, miserable, possessing all things, that have nothing; and so
in this point in hand, according to Luther's paradoxal expression, which our
Whitaker approves, is Est optime dispositus, qui est pessime dispositus, He is
most worthy that is most unworthy, viz. that is sensible of his unworthiness.

2. If this worthiness of a Communicant should Whitak. de Sacram. p. 658.
be imagined to signify any meritorious or proud congruities of our virtues,
works, righteousness, it would be the greatest unworthiness that could be;
What should such proud creatures come to a Sacrament or memorial of Christ's
death, for that being no sin with them to be expiated by that death? Thou
say, I am rich, I stand in need of nothing; go anoint thy eyes that thou
may see, Revel. 5. This Pool of Siloam is for such as have infirmities. Nor
does the Gospel require perfect faith, or perfect repentance or grace, for
that is against the nature of this Sacrament, which is to last no longer than
our imperfections and infirmities last, that is, until Christ come. So as
there is no better Argument of our imperfection, than the command of growing in
grace, so neither is any a fit patient for this medicine, but the weak and
impotent, the doubting and complaining soul. The Gospel knows not the name of
attainers, nor the thing. Not that I have attained, or were already perfect,
Phil. 3. 12. This meat and drink is for growing children, which as the old
Physician ( Hippocrates says) must be often-nourisht. How long might a man
examine himself before he find this temper in himself, that he wants nothing?
there can be no wonder that such a one is above Ordinances, especially this,
which though it be one of the highest Ordinances of the Church, yet is
accommodated to the Use of the lowest believer; The Apostles communicated in it
before the Spirit was sent down solemnly upon them, they were but ignorant and
raw, when Christ said, Take, Eat, Drink ye all of it.

3. If thou have the seminals of grace mixed with a mass of corruptions (as
gold at first is mixed with much earth) there may be worthiness, despise not
small things; Natural generation, begins in a small thing, a little drop, and
so Regeneration. If there be sense of sin, if thirst after Christ, there is
something, Thou art discouraged with thy daily lapses, why drink of this wine
for thy often infirmities; Thou art overborn with strong lusts, come, and eat,
and drink to nourish thy weak graces, keep them alive to fight, though they do
not conquer and triumph. Thou can not say, thou have faith, but can thou
feel thy want of it, and mourn for it? This smoke comes from some invisible
spark: Thou art not (thou say) in Covenant, and the Seal belongs not to
thee; But art thou willing to be in it, and come into the bond of the Lord? Is
it the longing of thy soul to be engaged into the ways of God, and
disenthrall'd from the sweet bondage of sin? In a word, Let thy sins and
corruptions be strong and violent, thy wants many, thy weakness great: Let
them be as thou say, as thou fear, yet if there be a groaning sense, a
longing desire of remedy, affections piercing of, and breathing after Christ;
If there be a seed of God in thy heart, which is kept alive in the midst of so
much corruption, by no less a miracle than if a spark be kept alive in the
sea, then surely there is a Gospel-meetnesse in thee to be partaker of this
Supper; Here is Christ cooked ready to thy weakest and lowest faith in obvious
materials of meat and drink: Let not the pride of any worthiness bring thee,
nor the sense of unworthiness keep thee back.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Worthy Receiving, etc.
offered up unto himself a Sacrifice Ephesians. 5. 1.
for a sweet smelling savor, that he should account them to eat and drink
worthily, who account not themselves worthy to eat and drink; Merit and
worthiness have both their due place; merit belongs to the Sacrifice, Christ
Jesus, worthiness to the Communicant who eats and drinks in such manner as
becomes the nature, and is answerable to the Use and end of this Ordinance.

I shall come up to the manner of receiving worthily, by certain orderly steps:
As

. 2. Of Preparation to this Sacrament.
manner is so contrary, as worthily and unworthily, and the effect of the
Ordinance much depending upon the manner of receiving it, and the benefit so
great, as communion of Christ's body, the danger no less than of condemnation;
Reason will tell us, that there is a preparation requisite, that the fruit may
be of the Tree of Life, and not of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, Eat
and die. It Is either too much blindness or boldness to rush upon this
Ordinance without preparation. Nature induces not a new form without preparing
the matter. Art as it helps, so it imitates nature, else that which is
medicinal may be mortal; Our Savior did not only Use, but honor preparations,
when he fasted and prayed in order to his great work; To the Passover there
belonged (...), a solemn preparation; the Lamb was taken up on the tenth day,
the leaven was enquired after and purged out, which if they have now no
obligation, yet they have a meaning; and you Use to have Sermons for
preparation, which are but preparatives to preparation, they do but light the
candle, but you must, as that woman, Luke 15. 8. Sweep the hoUse, and seek
diligently, else Sermon-preparation may (as I fear it often does) go without
soul preparation: That word verse. 28. And so let him eat, Gerard. de Sac.
Caena. c. 23.
tells us plainly, that somewhat must go before. The Papists distinguish of
preparation, sufficient and probable, but that which is probable may be
insufficient, and so no man be certain that he comes worthily. A fit dispute
for such as would have meritorious preparations, so much sanctity as indeed
needs no Sacrament, which therefore, they say, takes away only venial sins.
I would not bring so much to the Sacrament, as to look for little from it;
Those that came to the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. wanted the Sanctuary
purification, yet they prepared their hearts to seek God, The good Lord pardon,
says Hezckiah; Here was a preparation, with a Dominus misereatur, The good
Lord pardon. I look for no preparation that shall not stand in need of mercy:
If I see so much in my self, as makes my self empty, and that emptiness does
make me a thirst for Christ, then I shall not dispute my preparation, but deny
my worthiness, and yet come.

. 3. Of the outward manner of Receiving.
worthily and unworthily, as I have often said, express the manner of our
receiving this Sacrament, and that manner is either outward or inward; The
outward manner is either duly to Observe the outward Rites that are prescribed
without mutilation or addition, whereby the face of the Ordinance is defaced,
and looks not like it self; or (which I intend) such decent outward behavior
as is suitable to the holiness and reverence of the Ordinance; and if I be not
deceived, the Apostle in this place taxes the rudeness and irreverence of the
visible carriage, or rather miscarriage of the Corinthians in the handling or
celebration thereof, and therefore expostulates with them, verse. 22. Have ye
not hoUses to eat and drink in? Does that freedom of behavior become the
Congregation, which you Use at your own Tables? Is quaffing and jollity a
becoming deportment? Is it not scandalous and offensive to Use that liberty
here, which is rather fit for an Ordinary, or a Tavern? Let me speak freely to
you, we have almost lost that reverence, devotion, gravity, decency which
formerly and anciently adorned the public Ordinances and Administrations, and
our experience may teach us, that while we decline the extreme of curiosity,
superstition, pomp and starelinesse, we incline to the other of irreverence,
profaneness, loosnesse, sordidnesse; While we talk of worshipping God in
Spirit and Truth, we exempt our bodies from adoration, and both forget that our
bodies are part of Christ's purchase, and the Rule that is inferred thereupon,
Glorify therefore God in your body and in your spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 20. For do
we not profane our eyes by wandering, our tongues by talking, our faces by
laughing, and the Ordinance of God by all? I would there were not caUse to wish
that our public meetings had more composedness of outward behavior, but when
sometimes, and in some places the Pulpit looks like a stage, and the hoUse of
prayer like a Playhouse; we may justly fear least a Corinthian rudeness come
up to the Lords Table also, and think it needful to reprove such lightness,
as is offensive to serious devotion or common gravity. The Moralist his Rule to
remedy lightness of carriage; is to set Socrates, or some grave man before
your eyes for the rudeness of the Scene was shamed and bridled by the presence
of Cato. We have a better rule, set God before you, with whom we have to do,
who has also promised to be in the mids of two or three that are congregated
in his name; Consider that the Angels are Spectatours and Guardians of your
Assemblies, for that I take to be the plainest sense of that saying of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 10. and that other phrase, verse. 9. of discerning the body
of the Lord, does denote, not only a knowing that the Lords body is
represented by the bread (as it is commonly interpreted) but such a minding of
the body of Christ here represented and exhibited to our faith, or may produce
a difference of our behavior and carriage in the Use of this Ordinance from
that which we Use in eating of common bread, wherein men otherwise-knowing (as
these Corinthians) might fail and be defective. In short, becaUse a loose
carriage is ordinarily an argument of a loose spirit, therefore I have said
this to compose the outward behavior of Communicants to a suitable comeliness
and decency in the Use of holy Ordinances, Hoc agite is the old word.

. 4. What is requisite to make a man fit for the Sacrament.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him come, does clearly prove, and then
that this fitness or habitual qualification is the having or exciting of those
graces which are to be exercised and set a work; As a soldier is accoutred and
furnished with such weapons, as in fight are to be exercised and Used, and
therefore a Christian that would try or know his own fitness or worthiness,
confiders first what graces are to be set on work in the act of receiving, and
then examines whether he have them beforehand or no: Plain sense and Reason
shows, that a dead man is not fit to eat and drink, becaUse he cannot exercise
any act of life, without which he neither eats nor can be refresht, and
therefore we must conclude, that there is an habitual fitness required to be
in the person that communicates worthily.

. 5. The pitch of fitness must not be set too high, nor too low.
magis and minus, as Christians themselves are of diverse elevations, some are
smoking flax, some are shining lights.

If we set it too high, besides that Infants in grace, and low statured
Christians cannot reach it, we do but discomfort and dishearten our selves,
for we take a false measure, and becaUse we find not that we can cut out to
that measure, we are at a loss, and happily if we would follow it home, we might
cast out every one of the Apostles from the first Supper, who were certainly
very raw Christians, and of as low a form as we are, being after that time
upbraided by Christ with their unbelief and hardness of heart, Mark 16. 14.
And if we should do so, we should censure our Savior of too much indulgence,
who reproved their sin, and yet received them to his Table, Luke 22. 19, 24.
I have no warrant to set the mark so high, that the least of Gods children
qualified, should not reach it; for I confider, that this Sacrament was
ordained for the Church, during the estate of imperfection, and for remedy of
weakness and infirmity, not like the Tree of Life, which man was debarred
from, for his sin in the forbidden fruit; and as Luther said, A child may
receive a Ring as well as a Giant, and the least Candle points upwards as well
as the greatest Torch. Great Masters of Families (as the Prodigal Observed)
allow the meanest of their domestic servants to come to the Tables end, and
eat of their bread. Many sins, many backslidings, if there be contrition and
godly sorrow, serve for bitter herbs to eat the Passover with; Many wants and
weaknesses may be accompanied with vehement desires, hunger and thirst: Low
graces may occasion low hearts, when God makes the disease a preparative, why
should we refUse the medicine?

If we set the pitch of this fitness too low in some empty forms of Religion,
or some eminent works, and moral virtues, or some conceited perfections which
feed our pride, we shall take in many that have nothing of Christ in them;
Gospel-qualifications are most suitable to a Gospel Ordinance; We are not
prepared for Christ by ostentation of works, but sense of misery; The sense of
unworthiness is our worthiness; A little vessel that is empty, will receive
more than a great one that is full; A broken Christ requires a broken heart: To
be rich, and full, and righteous in the Gospel-Dictionary, do signify
Obstructions, and impediments of our happiness; where the naked are clothed,
the hungry are fed, the ungodly are justified, the weary are refresht, the sick
are healed, the stung with fiery Serpents are recovered, the returning lost
child is feasted, and they that thirst do buy wine and milk without money and
without price; And hence it follows,

That no unregenerate man that lies dead in trespasses and sins, without a
seed, a spark of Gospel Grace, having no initials of true Repentance and Faith
in Christ, can be in capacity to eat and drink the Body and Blood of Christ
worthily, and with effect, for such a one is a stranger to the Covenant, and
uncircumcised, and therefore expressly debarred this Passover, Exodus 12. 43.
Where there is no life there can be no reception of nourishment. He that is
void of the Condition of the Covenant cannot receive the benefit, nor eat the
Supper that wants the Wedding Garment. This is a severe point, and disclaims
the greatest part of men from eating and drinking worthily, becaUse they have
no ticket of grace renewing or regenerating, they are not Disciples indeed,
they are branches in Christ by external ingraffing, John 15. 2. but have not
the life of Christ in them; They that are not in the body of Christ, do not eat
his body, says Austin; They that are not members of him do not spiritually
feed on him, Panem Domin, they do eat as Judas, not Panem Dominum. Ego hoc
axtoma teneo, says Calvin, that without the Spirit Christ is not received in
this Sacrament. The Papists go no less, Catholici omnes (says Vasquez) all
agree in this, That it is necessary for a worthy Communicant to be in the state
of grace and sanctification, and therefore howsoever any person be furnished
with endowments of nature and education, famous for eminent works and virtues,
adorned with civil and fair conversation, yet without something of Christ, some
work of the Spirit, some seed of Regeneration, he cannot eat and drink
worthily, and with effect; And this Doctrine is the rather requisite to be
taught, becaUse men may flatter themselves in that they have past the test, are
admitted with approbation to this Table, and allowed the liberty thereof, for
all this may be, and yet your case no better than Saul's, that would needs be
honored before the people; than Judas's who was not thrust out from the
Sacrament, than his who was let in by the servants to the feast, but cast out
by the King for want of his Wedding Garment. You enjoy a privilege to eat and
drink, but what? judgment and condemnation to your selves, Oh consider it, The
Lord of this feast will come to view his guests, he will turn out some that the
servants let in, he will say, Friend, How came thou in hither? He answered
not, Lord, I was called in, I was admitted in by thy servants, No, He was dumb,
he had nothing to plead, he had not a Wedding Garment, For he is not a Jew that
is one outwardly, Romans 2. penult.

. 6. What is requisite to our Receiving Worthily.
Take, Eat, Take and drink; and as the eye, the hand, the mouth are now in
actual imploiment, as to the Sacrament, or outward part, so faith which is the
eye, hand, mouth of the soul, and all the affections are to be actually
employed, as to the inward thing, the body and blood of Christ; Not the having
of an eye, but looking up to the brazen Serpent healed the biting. It Is not
enough to have faith, but we must believe. Now that the Sacrament is in Use,
now must our graces be in Use too. Now that God actually offers and presents
Christ's body and blood to my faith; Now let the hand of faith go forth and take
Christ in. Awake my faith, and see the atonement of my sins in the broken body
of my Savior! Awake repentance, and hear the strong cries, and see the
doleful agony of him that bears our chastisement! Awake my memory, and call to
mind that Egypt wherein I was, and the blood of the Passover which removed
the destroying Angel from my soul! Awake all that is within me to bless and
praise the Lord. Oh let this Cross crucify my lusts and passions! Let this
death stay my reigning sins, as Joshua did the Kings of Canaan! Now let the
Altar smoke with the Sacrifice of a loving heart inflamed with holy fire of
Gods love to me; Now the wax is warm, Oh let the Seal be stamped fair that I
may see the impression always after! Now that God shows forth to methe death
of his Son for me, let me show forth that death of Christ to God again, as
that which I stick unto, and abide by, for my righteousness and peace with
God. Alas, if my graces be now asleep, they are next a kin to dead; We might
have sweet, we might have fruitful Sacraments had we but lively graces; Graces
upon their wing, not lying sullen, and benumbed with cold, therefore blow up
your graces, as the Apostle his phrase is, blow the smothering fire, the embers
into a flame by pertinent meditation; Be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that
this King of glory may come in; And that I may speak to the comfort of a godly
soul, Let grace run forth at what tap it will, so there be but vent, whether at
the uppermost of high praises, or at the lower of melting humblings; If the
fire flame, rise high, thou have more comfort; If it smoke, God will not
quench-it, and that is some comfort: Some have a finer taste, and relish their
meat with higher gust and more delight than others, and yet others be nourisht
as well, as much as they; So happily some receive Christ with greater
delectation, and yet thy soul may be nourisht as well as theirs.

CHAP. XXIV. That a Godly man may receive the Sacrament unworthily.
HAving shown you the qualifications of a worthy Communicant beforehand, and
that the actual exercise of grace is requisite at present for receiving
worthily, I make this Observation.

That a man who is in a state of grace, and so godly, may yet receive the Lords
Supper unworthily, and without effect, not for want of habitual fitness or
qualification, but for want of the actual exercise of grace at present, or
becaUse of some distempers which overtake and surprise him in the act of
communicating. This Point it may be at first sight looks strangely, but upon
consideration will be found too true; For if we look back to the Passover, we
find, that an Israelite circumcised, and so qualified to eat the Passover,
yea a true Israelite might be unclean at the present time, and so incapable of
keeping it; And we have at home in this Text, an example and a proof of this
Point. These Corinthians are looked upon as, and supposed to be (and no doubt
some of them were) godly and regenerate persons, who yet contracted epidemical
judgments upon them, Many sick, weak, etc. and that for a sin they little
thought of, their undue and unfit coming to the Lords Table; they are
distinguished from the world, verse. 32, Of whom its said, (...), verse. 30. For
this caUse you are judged of the Lord, and chastened; and hence the word (...),
is contended to import only temporal judgment in this place. I confess this
Point is controverted and disputed, and more abroad than at home amongst us.
Vasquez seems to me to hold, That it is enough that a man be in a state of
grace, and that every godly man receives worthily, or else should sin
mortally; But it is no new Doctrine with us, That a regenerate man may sin
mortally (as they speak) or commit a sin meritorious of condemnation; We must
not lessen regenerate men's sins, which in diverse respects are the greater,
becaUse the person is regenerate; Even they that are babes in Christ, may
be-carnal, and walk as men, 1 Cor. 3. 3. And therefore Cajetan on the other
side requires actual Devotion, as necessary to the fruit of this Sacrament; and
his Argument is, BecaUse the Sacrament works according to the manner of its
signification; And therefore as meat and drink to the end they may nourish, do
require that we cooperate by some act of life, to receive and digest them; so
there is necessary some act of inward grace to meet with and receive this
spiritual food, that it may nourish and refresh us; and I hold the Argument
good and firm; Nor do I find any privilege of a regenerate man, that he
cannot commit this sin: He may be under a spiritual Apoplexy or stupidity, as
David for a time seems to have been: He may be overgrown with a crust, a
coldness, a security, and so unfit by disease, though not by death.
Chrysostom saw this truth, when he speaks of some that may not eat, becaUse
not initiated, (...), and others, though they be members, yet are (...),
unclean. It Is true, It is proper to the godly to receive worthily, but it is
proper, Soli sed non semper, only they do so, but not they always, and
therefore I turn my speech to you, and desire that you be not rendered secure
and negligent by this false principle, that a regenerate man cannot receive the
Sacrament unworthily, for this is the ready way to fall into that sin which
you imagine your selves free from, by taking you off from that
self-examination, that trimming of your Lamps, that purging out of the old
Leaven, that blowing up of your Graces into act, which is so requisite unto
your meeting with your Lord in this Ordinance.

I know that for the most part those do charge themselves with this sin of
receiving unworthily, that have least caUse; The worthiest Communicants are to
their own eye the worst; They never acted their graces lively at the Sacrament;
They never felt the present delights and fatness of this Ordinance; They have
been always encumbered with doubts, with fears and distempers, and have often
gone away with more anguish of spirit than they came, and a world of such
complaints there are; and I confess it is not ordinary that gracious persons
do stand in good opinion with themselves, but yet Jacobs going away halting
from God, was not an argument that he had not prevailed; Sick people may be
nourisht and strengthened with that meat which they cannot taste or relish in
their mouth; Grace is more apt to see sin than it self; for the eye does not
see it self, and the more it grows in light, the more tender in sense: In
spirituals it is true: But I shall speak a Paradox, Those diseases we feel and
are sick of, seldom prove mortal, that is, when the affections melt with
sorrow, and not the conscience amazed with horror, though I would not nourish
complaints against my self, yet I had rather have the sense of Paul, Romans 7.
wherein he complains of himself, than his confidence, when he said, I verily
thought I ought to do, etc. and I think a proud confidence both a greater caUse
and sign of unworthy receiving, than humble fear and sense of imperfection,
for even this is a grace to be exercised at the Lords Table.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Graces which are to be exercised and set on work in the Use
of this Sacrament.
examine himself, he should leave us in a wilderness and wide world, for he
tells us not of what, but that the Ordinance it self is the Rule of this
examination, and does bespeak those graces which make us fit to come unto it.
This is the way that Chemnitius goes, whereby to find what those graces are
which enable us to receive the benefit and effect here to be expected: And to
me it seems an excellent way, For hereby the Communicant (as I have often said)
is made suitable to the Ordinance, and the examination is kept within its
bounds: So that if any should quarrel, and say, You require such things of us,
as you have no warrant for; You lay burdens of your own invention, we appeal to
the Ordinance it self, and require nor more, nor less than may be deduced from
it, and demonstrate; We know that in all Sacraments there is Analogy or
proportion, and so in this, the elements broken bread, and wine pouned forth,
or the body and blood of Christ, the actions of Taking, Eating and Drinking the
outward elements, do denote the acts of a Communicants soul, receiving and
feeding upon Christ, and such acts there must be to answer unto the outward
actions. So as if you tell me of any sensible object, it is easy to show what
sense it belongs unto, for if it be light or color, it belongs to the eye, if
it be any sound, it belongs to the ear, etc. So this Sacrament being surveyed
and studied, it is not hard to find what graces are to be set on work
accordingly: And this Rule, that I may not guess at random, I shall follow in
the ensuing Discourse.

First, It Is necessary that the Communicant have knowledge of the Nature, Use,
and End of this Sacrament, and that is demonstrate thus: Here are outward
elements and actions, which do signify some other thing, as namely, the body
and blood of Christ, as himself expounds it, offered by God unto, and to be
received by the Communicant, and therefore there must be knowledge to discern
and understand this mystery that is hidden under a visible outside, to wit, the
Sacrifice of Christ's body, which is represented, and the confirmation of the
Gospel Covenant by his blood; for without this knowledge a man comes
blinde-fold, eats and drinks as a bruit, takes the dish for the meat, and is no
otherwise refresht than a thirsty man would be by eating and sucking a
sign-post, which does but signify that there is wine within. It was a childs
Question, Exodus 12. 26. What mean you by this service? And I would our ignorant
people would so play the child, for they do but eat the shell, and gnaw the
bone of the outward service, becaUse they know not the meaning of it; So the
carnal Jew knew not the meaning of the Rites and Types then Used, nor saw both
Law and Gospel in their Sacrifices, both which they were full of; I confess
the knowledge of this Sacrament draws with it the knowledge of our lost estate,
(as Passover is not understood without Egypt) in sin and misery; For where
Christ appears bloody, there sin must needs appear deadly, and those
fundamentals and grounds of Christianity, which are but the A. B. C. of
Religion, must be known, but it is not the knowledge of a Scholar, but the
knowledge of a Christian, which we plead for, so much as may serve to look into
the entrails of this Sacrament, and may lead on the affections to value, prize,
thirst after Jesus Christ, whom if we see not, we cannot desire or love, Visus
est prima amor is linea, fight is the first line of love, nor can we believe in
him, until we see, John 6. 40. Whosoever see the Son, and believes in him,
shall have everlasting life. I should not charge a poor Christian with any
great rate of knowledge, for the quality is more to be regarded than the
quantity; If he know both sin and Christ by taste, as well as by sight, if he
have a distinguishing and favoury knowledge of the things of the Spirit, and
there be, as it is in embers, a great heat, though but little light, then is it
good, though not great. I know that Questions demodo in all points of Divinity
are hard to answer. It Is well if we can answer a Question aere. I may know what
sin is, and yet not tell how it enters, and comes at first into my soul. The
Apostles took Christ at this time for their Savior and Lord, the true Messiah,
but how he should execute all the parts of his Office, they did not clearly
understand, and yet did at and drink with him at his Table.

Take ye, Eat ye, Drink ye, and that inward act, which answers to this outward
action, whereby we do receive Christ that is exhibited we call faith; when
Christ is tendered to us in the Word, we believe ex-promisso; when offered in
the Supper, we believe ex pignore; There we have a promise, here a pawn or
pledge: This faith is the taking hand, which goes forth to the offering-hand of
God. This taking, eating, drinking, are but faith appropriating and applying
Christ: You say, you believe, What believe you? That God offers Christ to your
faith; What Is a poor man the richer for believing that one offers him a
shilling? What Is a condemned man the better for believing that a pardon is
offered to him? This is but a faith of the truth of the offer; But do ye
receive Christ offered? Do you close in with* Christ? Do you take him into you?
Here is the best Covenant, sealed with the best blood that ever was; You
believe this to be a truth, but come not in to this Covenant, that says does
but serve to your just condemnation; It is the Christ-receiving, not the truth
acknowledging says that brings salvation to you. If men did but know what
saving says is, we should have either more or fewer believers, more, for they
would renounce that superficial thing cahed faith, and buy gold tried in the
fire; Fewer, for they would not count themselves to believe by that faith which
they have; A woman may believe a man to be rich and honorable, and real in
his suit, yet that belief does not make a marriage, but actual consent to take
him for a husband; For says gives as well as takes, it gives a man up to
Christ, as well as takes Christ to be a Savior. It is not true faith that
blows hot and cold out of the same mouth, and cries Hosanna to Christ a
Savior, but yet I will not have him reign over me: This Sacrament presents
Christ to faith thus, It presents Christ himself, his body and blood, not the
benefits of Christ apart and abstract, but Christ himself. It presents Christ
for intimate union with us, as the nourishment is to the body: It presents him
really, as the bread and wine is really taken and received: It presents him
crucified and suffering, as if he was now dving and bleeding, in whom faith
finds reconciliation, remission, justification and redemption, so is it acted
and exercised in this Ordinance.

sins, which had they been charged on us, had sunk us into the bottom of
perdition, and who that sees this shall not tremble at the fearful wrath of
God, which Angels and men could not stand before? Who shall not mourn over
Christ, whom we have pierced, as it is said of them, Zech. 12. 10? Who can love
the knife that slew his friend? I mean the sin that our Savior bore in his
body on the Tree: This consideration here presented to you, if you follow
Christ from the Garden to Golgotha, should me thinks affect the soul of a
believer.

1. With tender meltings of godly sorrow for sin.

2. With fresh purpose of amendment of life.

1. With godly sorrow for sin; To hear the strong cries, and see the
streaming blood of Christ; for can there be a greater demonstration, either of
Gods Justice toward sin, or of his goodness to a sinner? They say an adamant
will be broken by blood, but alas the heart of man has lost ingenuity, or else
the blood of Christ would make us love sin as bad as the terrors of Mount
Sinai, yea and to love it less, and hate it more; Fear may break a man, but
goodness melts him; The terrors of the Lord may amaze and leave a man as hard
still, but godly sorrow makes tender, and changes the disposition of the soul,
Revive then the sense of your sin, even pardoned sins do revive godly sorrow,
and the more, becaUse he tastes goodness and grace to him unworthy; the sweet
of the Passover is lost for want of bitter herbs.

2. With fresh purpose of amendment, a needful grace to be renewed at this
Sacrament; we should eat this Passover with shoes on our feat, and slaves in
our hand, ready to march out of Egypt; We cannot eat the Passover and stay in
Egypt still; God confirms his Covenant, and we must restipulate with God to
cast out and execrate the old Leaven: Let Us carry wounded sins from this
Table; Bring wonded hearts, and carry away wounded sins: Let Us learn to die
to sin, by seeing Christ die for sin, Mutet vitam qui vult accipere vitam,
says Austine, The Covenant of Grace is sealed. Let us seal a Covenant of
Obedience; By the merit of Christ's death we are purchased to be Gods, not our
own; By the power of his Death we are slain, dead to sin: But here I must
break out to meet with our common purposers and resolvers, which (if ever in
their lives) do now, when they come toward the Lords Table, flatter God and
themselves with a new beginning of a new life, from this time they are
resolved, that the ear that has heard them, shall hear them swear no more; The
eye that has seen them, shall see them drunk no more, etc. I would these
green cords would hold, but we find this righteousness is but a morning dew,
their Sampson lusts, when they awake break all these cords, And why? BecaUse
these purposes arise from a fit of conscience, not from a principle of life or
love, and so they prove but Lucida intervalla, they return to their madness
again, when the fit takes them. I would such men would resolve to be ashamed
of these resolutions, which so often leave them in the dirt, that self
confusion may carry them out of their own strength, which selfe-resolution
does but arm them with, and therefore does not stand; For he that has the
Falling Sickness may resolve to fall no more; but in vain, until the disease
be purged.

These are the principal, the staple graces to be exercised in this Ordinance,
there are others which are included in these, which I but name: As

Peter 2. 2. but it is called vehement desire, 2 Cor. 7. 11. in difference from
the sluggards desires, which are but wishes, and which every man pretneds unto,
though it be plain they are but of Balaam's temper, who desired to die the
death of the righteous, but loved the wages of unrighteousness; God helps his
people much by giving them good desires, both for that they make prayer warm,
and give great comfort in the midst of sad complaints, yea they bring us to the
Word, and to the Sacrament, where the want which occasions the desire may be
supplied; Keep them alive, and they will keep you alive; Sharpen and whet them
as men do indifferent stomachs with vinegar; Sense of sin, and desire of
grace are excellent preparatives to this Supper.

For we are all partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10. 17. If we eat together
all of one loaf, let us love them with whom we have this fellowship and
Communion. The Love-fea^^s of the Primitive Church are read of, but alas they
are lost; I mean not the feasts, but the Love, and in stead thereof, In joelix
lolium, unhappy feuds, quarrels, divisions, rents abound, as if we were not
children of one Table. Corinth is come into England, I hear that when you come
together in the Church, there are divisions among you, 1 Cor. 11. 18. Ours are
wider divisions, we do not come together in the Church, one Table is profane
to another, and yet the Apostle faith, If I have all Faith, If I suffer death,
without Charity, I am nothing, it profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 2, 3. It Is
almost Popery to speak of Charity; By this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another, says Christ: And this was the old mark,
but truly it is almost worn out; Oh let us revive it at this Sacrament; where
God seals the pardon of our Talents, Let Us learn to forgive the pence of our
brethren. Of all sins, the Apostle interprets the Leaven to be purged out, of
malice, 1 Cor. 5. 8. Purge out malice; For Love is the cement of this
Fellowship and Communion of members, which are supposed to have one life,
becaUse nourisht with the same nourishment, that is Christ.

Sixthly, The last grace I will speak of, which is here to be exercised, or
call it rather a duty, if you please, It Is Thankfulness, without which the
memorial or remembrance of Christ's death is but a dry and fruitless
commemoration. Humility makes thankful; The Samaritane Leper returned to give
thanks; He was more remote from expectation of cure, and therefore the more
thankful; The sense of our own unworthiness, and of the great disproportion
between Christ and us, may raise up our thanksgiving to a higher flame. The
lowest hearts rise highest in gratitude, pride and merit are unthankful.

And so I have shown you those graces, which being exercised, do fit us to
receive worthily, and set the heart in tune to this Ordinance. The Lord
satisfy you with the fatness of his hoUse, and make you drink of the river of
his pleasures, Psalm. 36. 8.

CHAP. XXVI. Motives to quicken Endeavors to a fit or worthy Participation of
this Ordinance.
modus orandi, or manner how the Sacrament works, or contributes to spiritual
grace, is not of vulgar disquisition. I signified to you last day, that
Questions de modo in all parts of Divinity, are usually difficult to unty. All
confess that Sacraments work by institution of God, as the brazen Serpent
healed the fiery sting, but that is yet too short; For does Gods institution
elevate the nature of the Sacrament to produce the effect? Then is that effect
plainly miraculous, and the faith of miracles should be required; Or does the
institution of God appoint the signification and Obsignation of the Sacrament
in such and such an Use of it? This indeed is according to rule of Schools and
of our Divines, Modus operandi sequitur modum significandi, and then it is
plain, that there must be somewhat in the Communicant, both to understand their
signification, and to receive the Obsignation and sealing by the Use of them,
for otherwise they are but (...), empty names, as an Hebrew word to an English
ear, and hence it is that, I say, the capacity must be excited and awakened for
the fit participation of this Sacrament, or else it is nothing to us but bread
and wine, and the spiritual benefit is lost.

That you may have always at hand (as a fyle to sharpen your endeavors.) some
brief Motives and Reasons to awaken you; I shall briefly recite and offer to
you these few.

Motive I.
1. That as your coming worthily may yield a great improvement of your
spiritual state, so your coming unworthily may add much to your guilt and
condemnation; The same passage through the red sea was safe to the Israelites
by faith, the Egyptians assaying to do the like were all drowned, Heb. 11. 29.
Let no man say, Why may not I receive good by the Sacrament, as well as any
other, for the Egyptians (...), trying conclusions were drowned; The same
Sacrament, like the Cloud, is to one the refreshing shadow, to another the
consuming fire; The bread as broken, is the Communion of the body of Christ, 1
Cor. 10. 16. and yet, he that eats unworthily, eats condemnation to himself, 1
Cor. 11. That which is Manna to a believer, is to a Judas poison, as the
Ancients speak, and all this is vitio sumentis, through the sin of the receiver
who eats Quails under wrath, Psalm. 78. 31. and sits down to Haman's feast,
Esth. 7.

Motive II.
2. Though a Christian is not altogether to judge of his receiving worthily by
the fruitful success and benefit which he finds, but by the exercise of his
grace, and by his sacramental disposition, yet the fruit does not follow,
except there be a right Use, and worthy participation of the Ordinance. Some
are so childish, and such spiritual sensualists, that if they have not sensible
and sweet joy or comfort, or a present removal of their thorn, they conclude
they come unworthily. It Is our fault, that as Israel in the wilderness, we
limit God to give that we desire, or else murmur and think we have nothing: So
it is in this Sacrament, and so in our prayers we are passionately desirous of
serving even our own lusts, Jam. 4. 3. The after-fruit cannot be the measure of
our worthy receiving, but the present gracious frame of spirit, and exercise of
our graces: As by fair and beautiful children we cannot judge of lawful
marriage, but by consent declared, and ritely given at the present time, and
yet the fruit and benefit comes not, but in and by the way of receiving
worthily, we judge of our selves to be fit guests by the wedding garment, not
the sweet taste of the Supper, and yet we cannot sit down and eat, except we
have the wedding garment. We love a sweet willing disposition in a child,
ready to do what it can, than always to be crying for plums. God highly prizes
those that set on work their obediential graces, to Observe the Law of any
Ordinance, and perform it: for if we can lust for quails, and yet murmur at the
way of the wilderness, we are too like the carnal Israelites; There is in all
spiritual joys, comforts and raptures, two parts, the one is the fruition of
the sweet of them, the other is the serviceable Use of them to oil the wheels,
and with more freedom to perform hardest duties of obedience. Now if in this
latter respect we improve or seek them, it is far the better to like in any
Christian, for it is Gods part or share, The joy of the Lord is your strength,
yet duty is the door by which reward enters, as reaping comes by sowing, They
that sow to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6. 8.

Motive III.
3. There is a sacramental disposition requisite to a Sacramental Communion,
and it is a very spiritual disposition, as the Communion is spiritual: This
disposition is not one single grace, but a complexion or temperament made up of
diverse ingredients, which are not all distinctly and eminently acted by every
man at this present, but some of them, as occasion and necessity may require. I
have already shown you them in general, and told you, that they are bespoken by
the Sacrament it self, and as it were deduced from it. This Sacrament affords
us the communion of Christ's death, where his body broken, and blood shed are
set before us; Here we communicate of a dying Christ, in heaven we shall have
him as a Tree of life. This is that epulum foederale, or Covenant-feast made
for confederates, God is one party, and the faithful are the other, and both
parties of confederates do ( sic dicam) partake of the same foederal Sacrifice,
Christ Jesus, the blood of the Sacrifice is offered up to God. The same blood
in the Sacrament is offered and given to us, as it is said, Exodus 24. 6. Moses
took half the blood and sprinkled it on the Altar, and he sprinkled the other
on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant. If we understood the
Ordinance, we should easily agree, that a sacramental disposition is a very
spiritual disposition, and requires the very purest addresses that we can make
to it, where God himself entertains his people with no other cheer than which
satisfies himself, and will have them taste of that which he himself is pleased
and delighted with, that is (I say again) Christ Jesus. Now in this so near
approach to God, ye have an excellent Rule, as in all other approaches, Levit.
10. 3. I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, the case was, that two
Priests had taken strange or other fire, not Gods fire from his Altar, but
other fire, common fire, and so themselves became the Sacrifice, for God will
not be slighted. If we bring fire, and it be not his own but ours, we may be
consumed by it, but he not pleased. To which end and purpose, that we be not
found in this case, and under this wrath, I shall endeavor to show you that
strange fire, or those false and insufficient qualifications which men draw
nigh to God in this Sacrament withal, to their own hurt and prejudice.

CHAP. XXVII. False and insufficient Qualifications for the Receiving of this
Sacrament.


II. A man may be humiliatus, not humilis, humbled not humble; The Angels that
sinned were tumbled down into a lower place without any abatement of their
God-opposing pride, man-opposing malice: If God pound thee in a mortar by
crosses, pains, miseries, dreadful horrors of conscience, yet pride lives, an
argument whereof is, thou will not adventure thy soul on free grace without
something to recommend thee to it, and he that has nothing else will have his
misery to be his worthiness, and the murmurings which a broken estate, and
broken body and spirit do belch forth, what are they but fumes and smoke of
pride: Cut a Be in pieces, yet she puts forth her sting; There are many long
for humbling breaches, smarting sorrows, and it may be their intention is good,
but the bottom is merit and pride most commonly, they would make their
humiliations their Christ: Alas, if God should charge but one sin in his full
weight on thee, it would break thee as a great stone an egge-shell. Did it not
so in Angels? Who would be a Pharaoh, Cain, or Judas? Is not broken iron,
broken ice hard still as ever? But true humility is a Leveller, there are (2
Cor. 10. 5.) two things (...), Every high thing, and that is taken away, and
(...), every device, and that is brought into captivity, not only to the
salvation, but to the obedience of Christ; The metal must be melted as well as
broken, and it is enough melted, when it will run into the mold, and take the
impression: Is the will conquered and changed to receive Gods Image, Submit to
Christ his righteousness, and to his Sovereignty, to receive the promises, and
take up the yoke of crosses and commandments? Art thou humbled for sin and
hate it, humbled under thy own righteousness, and castest it out? Art thou
willing to take Christ a Savior and a Lord, to have him, and be his, not on
terms of thine own* but terms of the Covenant? Draw nigh to God, this is not
strange fire, for it has melted thee, and not only tormented thee.

III. Thou find in thy self a faith, whereby thou assentest to the goodness
and veracity of God, the truth and all sufficiency of Christ, the whole tenor
of the Covenant, and Doctrine of the Gospel. I say with James Chap. 2. 19. Thou
believe that God is one, (...) thou do well, (...), so believe the devils;
They have so great knowledge and conviction, that they believe more than we do,
becaUse they know more, but this faith has no seat in the will, or at least
draws it not to election of the good things believed to be; A man may be called
an orthodox believer, by virtue of this faith, and it is sides recta, not vera,
a right faith not a true, sana, but not salvifica, sound faith, but not saving,
if thou bring this faith only, thou shall receive only the outward sign, for
it is a seeing eye, but not a receiving hand, and many shallow effects it may
have by virtue of the general mercies and promises of God, but the Sacrament
says, Take, Eat, and therefore there is besides this a Christ-receiving or a
Christ-accepting faith, for not to those that believed by mere conviction, John
2. 23. did Christ impart himself, but to as many as received him, Joh. 1. 12.
Weakness of faith in our times is properly said of this manner of believing.
It Is the receiving hand that shakes with the palsy; Few complain of weakness
of faith historical, nor of the hardness of it, becaUse it is not encountered
with discouragements, sins, temptations, as saving faith is, becaUse the whole
adventure of the soul lies upon it, and God knows when we come to shoot the
gulf, and to renounce all false hopes, or true fears, and cast our selves on
Christ, we do it with great difficulty, for without Gods attraction it is
impossible; and this is the faith which we must be exercised in, and which is
confirmed by this Sacrament, and a rare faith it is, even in the believing
world; For it gives up man to Christ, as well as receives Christ; And the
dis-interessing of self-love, and the interessing of Christ into pre-eminence
and government is very rare and infrequent; For I count that no receiving of
Christ, which divides him, and takes so much as self-love would serve it self
upon, but brings not every thought into captivity to the obedience of him.

IV. If thou find in thy affections any appearances or seeming impressions of
grace, be not over-credulous till the bottom be searched, for there lies
abundance of self-love, and self-interest, even when there is a good
countenance and fore-side; as in the zeal of Jehu, which carried in the
forehead of it, The Lord of hosts, but there was a byas within that wheeled
toward his own interest, I shall name but four, and that briefly.

which is upon special and distinguishing grounds, for that love of God which
is over-topt by self-love, is not accounted love of God, but rather a lust of
serving our selves upon him, which is the last resort of the love of most men
to God, but it may be distinguished thus, If it arise from the sense of that
distinguishing love of God to thy soul, whereby he has drawn thee to Christ
out of the pit of common perdition, and that without any worthiness in thee,
or contributions of thine to that inestimable grace, yea notwithstanding that
contrariety and opposition to him, wherein thou wast above many others engaged,
the very thought whereof does ever inflame the heart unto a man's dying day: If
it be a love to God for his holiness and his sanctification of thee to bear
his Image, and to be like him: If it be a love of complacency and friendship,
to delight thy self in God, and to affect Union and Communion with him: If it
produce a willingness to confederate with him, and to be in league, against
all interests of the flesh and world: I love my master, I will not go out free,
or be at my own freedom.

2. The second affection is desire of grace, and of spiritual things. I
conceive there may be a carnal desire of things spiritual, and carnal prayers
for spiritual gifts, namely to consume them upon our lusts of pride and
vainglory, which is the desire of Simon Magus; a desire to die the death of
the righteous, which was the wish of Balaam, a desire of forgiveness of sin
to be freed from condemnation by mere self love, a desire of heaven too, to
open unto us, for happiness not holiness or communion with God, a desire
comfort to anguish of conscience, and that rather for ease, than for grace, a
desire of grace it self, as a necessary bridge unto, or sign of salvation;
Give us of your oil (say they) for our lamps are out; Many fallacies may be in
our desires, and yet I account them, when they are refined from dross, to be
most comfortable signs of spiritual life, for Christ makes thirsting after
rightcousnesse the character of a blessed man, Matthew. 5. and the Apostle makes
them a fruit of repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 11. and a sign of regencration, 1 Pet.
2. 2. if they arise from a taste of the graciousnesse of God, and carry on to
the sincere Word for growth in grace, and be spent in endeavors of obedience,
and exercise of communion with God, equally longing to be Christ's, as to have
Christ: He that shall deny to a poor soul the comfort of such desires puts out
the spark that smokes in the wick of the candle, when the flame is gone out
before.

3. The third affection is fear, the fear of the terrors of the Lord, and
those punishments which according to his threats wait upon sin. Estius
propounds the case, Whether a man under servile fear may come to the Lords
Supper? And answers, No, but with distinction, the fear of wrath may be Used as
a bridle to curb the insolency and luxuriency of the flesh, by saying hell and
damnation close to it, and so the regenerate, whose flesh is impetuous, may
make Use of this fear to restrain the propension of it, but then if this fear
be merely of punishment, so that were it not for that, he would with all his
heart give himself over to commit iniquity with greediness, then it is plain,
that the willingness to sin lives, and this horror of conscience nothing at
all changes the inclination of the will, no more than the whip or chain does
the nature of a Fox or Wolf, and the case is no other than that of a child
that will colly himself with the cole that is black and dead, but dare not touch
the fire* cole which burns his fingers, and there is no comfort in such
restraints from sin, nor have such fears any spark of grace in them.

4. The fourth affection is sorrow for sin, which may be worldly and carnal,
and no other than Pharaoh his, Take away this plague; or the pangs of a whore
that returns to folly; But there is a sorrow according to God, which works
repentance unto salvation, and brings forth those seven fruits, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
which change the frame of the heart, a happy mother of so many good children:
These are the pangs of a godly soul, and it is one of the first steps unto, or
parts of the Resurrection of a Christian from his false, and is caUsed not
merely by wrath, but as Peter's weeping was by the looks of Christ; The
reproofs, the frowns, the offense of a gracious God, thaws the heart into
melting tears, and would do so, though there were no hell; As a meek child
needs no other hoUse of correction than his fathers looks. I am loath to be of
that opinion which banishes godly sorrow out of Religion; For if I were so
happy as to want new matter and occasion for it, yet sometimes to review old
forgiven sins, and the rather, becaUse forgiven with fresh bleeding heart, does
excellently keep down swelling of pride, and gives a fresh and new relish to
Christ Jesus, so the overflowing stoods do enrich the adjacent grounds, and
make them fresh and green. And so much concerning these affections.

V. The fifth Consideration is of purposes of amendment, which we named before,
among the preparatives to this Sacrament, which there are few but have at one
time or other, and men do exceedingly befool and flatter themselves in them;
For we have known that upon conviction of conscience and shame, for many years
together by fits and moods, and for the skinning over some gallings of
conscience, men fly to purposes of repentance, and put them on, and bind
themselves by vows or other bonds, to do no more, and yet experience tells us,
that Sampson did not easilier break the cords that bound him than these men do
break their purposes, and cancel all bonds and resolutions, and so a sick man's
purposes are very often no other than the vows of a Mariner in a storm at sea,
who for the time will be or do any thing, but when the danger is blown over,
they are as they were. You ask, What such are to do? And the answer is ready,
Resolution without mortification is to little purpose, the lust must be
mortified that carries the sway and dominion; For as the purposes of a man in
his lucid intervals, or of one that has the Falling sickness to fall no more,
is to little purpose, without some application to the disease that still lies
within, and will return and break all dams that are made by the stream of it;
so are resolutions upon conviction of conscience without effectual exercise of
mortification by setting upon that root and lust which between whiles does but
sleep, and will awaken again. Let the patient see and search his sin, and
apply the corzy of the Law, and Use those sharp medicines which eat out a
rotten core, and follow that sharp work of mortification, or else all is to
little purpose.

VI. The last thing I mentioned was thankfulness, a grace proper to the
Eucharist, which signifies thankfulness, and is the denomination of this
Sacrament, wherein thanksgiving is so eminently required and exercised, and it
rises either from the general ground, or from the special; The general is Gods
Philanthropy, which shows it self in a sic dilexit, by giving Christ a Savior
to us, and not to the Angels that sinned, and is worthy to fill our hearts and
mouths with admiration to all eternity; But the special ground is Gods
incorporation of us particularly into Christ by giving that differencing grace,
which distinguishes not from Devils, but from reprobates and hypocrites, and
all that are called, but not chosen, which is a mark of special favor*
Thanksgiving for this shall be the work of heaven, where we shall better
understand and look upon our former misery, as a fyle to set off and illustrate
our glorious redemption, and to this tune ought our hearts to be set here, For
in this rejoice not, that the devils fall before you, but that your names are
written in heaven; and we have caUse while we are in this lower orb to be
thankful, for the least mustar-seed of faith and grace, whose work is to set a
byas upon the will, to Choose God, and set up his interest above all interests
of self or world, and he keeps this spark alive in worst times by no less a
miracle than a spark of fire in the sea, and that he inables this little grace
to fight and combat (and that is in Scripture to conquer) against the
powerful fears and oppressions of the world, and the powerful allurements of
lust, and ease, and pleasures of sin, which is a Sunshine that usually puts
out our fire more easily than cold and nipping frosts, which rather make it
hotter, and this is the meaning of that phrase, He will not quench, etc. till
he send forth judgment unto victory; The smoke ends in victory.

Motive IV.
After this digression, the fourth Motive or Consideration follows, exciting
endeavor to come to this Sacrament in a sacramental disposition, and that is
taken from the benefit or fruit of it to a worthy receiver; for the exercise of
grace is well rewarded, and the labor and pains bestowed in preparation or
trimming of our Lamps, is paid to us in the fruit and benefit of this
Ordinance; And therefore, since as Bellarmine acknowledges the Question about
the effect is of so near a kin to the preparation unto this Sacrament, I shall
briefly touch the point of the fruit and benefit thereof, and that in these two
points, 1. That there is a great benefit and fruit of this Ordinance. 2. What
that fruit and benefit is.


CHAP. XXVIII. The fruit and benefit of Worthy Receiving.
Socinians, the Orthodox, yet that there is a benefit, few will deny; and if it
be denied, the sensible experience of many godly Christians does attest it, to
which experience the Apostle sometimes appeals, saying, Gal. 3. ^. This only
would I learn of you; and for others that will not own their experiences, or
have them not, Reason may convince them, That as God made no Useless creature,
so he ordains no fruitless institutions, that this Ordinance being instituted
for the Use of his select people and confederates, and that at such a time as
our Lord Christ had the very powers of darkness to encounter with, therefore
it is an Ordinance of some moment, which began at the death, and stands in
force until the second coming of Christ, and if nothing else could be said,
this is enough. That the guilt and danger of receiving unworthily being so
dreadful, there must in Reason be some proportion of benefit and fruit to the
receiving worthily, which Reason may convince any rational man, that there is
not only a good, but that good is of very great proportion and degree, and that
ye shall not come for fruit to a barren fig tree.

I have Reason to demonstrate both these points: 1. That there is a benefit. 2.
What that is.


Reason (I say) to show that there is a benefit.

. 2. That there is much benefit by Worthy Receiving.
Abraham by a Law to sacrifice his son, yet I conceive that Gods standing
Ordinances and Laws, do not only oblige a duty, but intend a benefit, and
thereby invite obedience, as it is said, Deuteronomy. 10. 13. What does the Lord
require of thee, but to keep his Commandments for thy good? And that therefore
there is a benefit of the right Use of this Sacrament, by which we may lawfully
be excited and impelled to Observe the Ordinance, as we climb the tree for the
fruit that is upon it; It Is true, an unworthy Communicant reaps no other
benefit than somewhat that is like that which the Apostle calls, the advantage
and profit of the Jew, Romans 3. 1. Romans 9. 4. viz. Tabulas and sigilla foederis,
the Tables and Seals of the Covenant, but the Reason that he receives no inward
and spiritual fruit, is not becaUse there is no water in this Well, but becaUse
he has no bucket to draw it forth; For God offers and holds forth Christ and
the benefits of the Covenant, his hand is not empty, but our hand is full of
sin and self-righteousnesse, that we cannot receive it, for they that will
receive must bring a capacity. It Is a known truth, He that means to receive a
benefit which is conveyed by way of Covenant, must bring the Condition of that
Covenant in his hand, as he that comes to a table brings life and stomach.

I know there are some, and they godly, that fear, or happily will boldly affirm,
that they were never sensible of the benefit of this Sacrament; They hear of
good fruit, but they have not tasted it, and therefore their edge is dull and
flat to the receiving of it. To which I answer this, That if there be an
exercise of the graces required in the act of receiving, they may not deny the
fruit of the Ordinance, becaUse they are not so clearly sensible at the
present, for happily they limit God to the present time, or confine their
expectations to some particular fruit, as elevation of heart, sensible comfort,
clear assurance, or the like, which becaUse they find not, they think they
have nothing. I have showed you before, That God answers the expectations and
satisfies the necessity of his people by giving some other grace than we would
have, or have our eye upon, as Paul's prayers were answered in sufficient grace,
not the removing of the thorn; We cry for comfortable signs, and God gives
obediential and serviceable graces; We look for spiritual gifts, he gives
humbling grace; We would have conQuest of sin, God gives power to encounter
it; We look for lively grace, and God keeps grace alive; We expect at present,
God afterward gives us it; in bodily nourishment it is not possible for a man to
tell what degree of nourishment he received by such a meal, yet he finds that
he lives, and is strengthened, and he may be nourisht by that which he does not
relish with delight. As for those that upon pretense of spirit and spirituality
have cast off Ordinances, as fruitless unto them, I should wish they would
consider, whether they be not rather besides their wits, than above Ordinances,
seeing Christ himself does not only by his institution but example, commend
this Sacrament unto us, as a standing Ordinance, for the whole Church until he
come, and so has commended the Ministry also, till we all come to a full
stature, Ephesians. 4. 11. I would know how that spirit which has carried them to
the pinnacle of the Temple, and has set them above Ordinances, or that
witnesses to them without graces, can be proved to be the Spirit of Christ, and
if they would show us how they can live without meat and drink too, there would
be some hope that they might be starved into their senses and right minds.

What that benefit is, and I have Reason to show what it is.

1. BecaUse superstitious and carnal persons do expect what they have no
warrant to expect, perverting the Use of this Sacrament to other intents and
ends, than it has by institution of Christ; The sick man too superstitiously
conceives that the opus operatum is a viaticum, that will pay his fare for a
present passage into heaven, or that it is like a Popish shrift that blots out
all sin, and wipes off the old score. If in stead of making the right Use we
idolize the brazen Serpent, and worship it, what is it but superstition? which
to avoid, the only way is to mind the institution, and the end thereof, or
else we shall look for that which God never intended to convey by it, as Eve
was deceived in the fruit of the Tree she are of.

2. BecaUse commonly men have confUsed thoughts of a benefit, but they know not
what; They think it is good for something, but they know not what, and so do as
it were take physic merely upon trust, not knowing what is in it; Hence is
that awfulnesse of this Ordinance with all men, they must be holy now at this
time, they must not follow their wicked and loose ways; They are going to the
Sacrament, and they go with an ignorant reverence, not knowing what is either
the fruit or the danger of it. So much for the first.

. 4. What the Benefit is.


I answer generally, and then more particularly. 1. Generally.


1. The benefit of the Sacrament is of an higher nature than these creatures
are able to convey, and therefore they are stamped and made instrumental by an
institution of God; It had been both vain and superstitious to have expected
spiritual benefit by the Use of these elements, had not the word of institution
given a new relation to them, which without it they have not. There might a
similitude or representation have bin borrowed to signify the sufferings of
Christ, but that would not have made a Sacrament, any more than marriage
representing the mystical union of Christ and the Church is therefore a
Sacrament; There must be a promise and a command of God added to the visible
creature, whereby the Use of it to such a purpose is warranted and authorized,
therefore we must look higher than the outward elements, or their power; An Axe
is more than iron; A Seal is more than wax; Gods institution renders the
creatures of bread and wine (which as Bellarmine notes, though two elements are
but one instrument or seal) Useful to spiritual effects, not by elevating
their natures, as the iron or wax being instruments are not elevated to any
efficacy, as physical instruments, but by appointing their Use and working by
them, therefore that Question, How can bread and wine, How can water reach or
touch the soul is impertinent? for it refers to a natural causation; but moral
relation needs no contact, there is a benefit follows upon the right Use of
them, which comes not through them tanquam per canalem but from God by the Use
of such means, as an estate is conveyed from the donor by a seal of wax.

2. The benefits and blessings promised in the Covenant of Grace are sealed,
and the graces of the Covenant are improved in a believer by this Ordinance,
Christ, Christ crucified, or rather in crucifying, together with such benefits
as are immediately sealed in his death, reconciliation, redemption, remission
of sins, as on Gods part offered to a sinner, are here Obsignate and sealed:
And faith in Christ, repentance from dead works, etc. are here exercised,
excited, confirmed, renewed, the main fundamental and essential benefits and
graces which are in most necessary order to salvation, are here in act, not
such things as some Christians have, and some have not, But the common
necessaries of the Covenant, both on Gods part and ours, without which no
Christian can be saved; And therefore I cannot but wonder, that many
well-meaning souls should fix their eyes on such benefits or gifts to be given
in this Sacrament, as are not (...) to a Christian, but eminencies of some, and
not of all; they look for gifts of prayer, of memory, freedom from passions,
some Parts or Endowments, which they see others excel in, and if they gain not
these, they gain nothing, they are unworthy, etc. Alas that you should so
mistake, I tell you, Covenant-benefits, Covenant graces, the radicals, the
vitals, are they which receive improvement here; here is Christ offered, and
faith is quickened; here Christ crucified is exhibited, and here repentance is
renewed, the main benefits that God can give, the main graces that we can have,
such as are essential, without which salvation is not. This I would have
Observed for the honor of the Ordinance, and the quickening of address to it.

And another thing also, viz. That when you hear us Use the words exhibit,
convey, confer, afford grace or spiritual benefits: You are to understand,
that this is not per modem emplastri, seu medicae potionis, not as a natural
agent, but per modum sigilli, or Sacramenti, in a way proper to a Sacrament; As
we say, an estate passes by the Seal, that is, is assured or confirmed, or as
we say the promise or contract passes by a Ring, words which every one
understands; and doubtless the benefit and fruit of the Sacrament is afforded
in a peculiar way; As the Word, besides begetting grace, does also incRease and
confirm, but not in the same way as the Sacrament does; as it may be the same
bargain that passes by promise, by oath, by earnest, by seal, yet these are
several ways of certioration; so it is the same grace that is nourisht by the
Sacrament, as by the Word, but the way is diverse; That of the Sacrament is by
way of sign and seal, that of the Word by way of Promise or Covenant-agreement;
nay the two Sacraments themselves do differ in their proprieties, Baptism seals
the Covenant by way of initiation, and the Lords Supper by way of nutrition or
augmentation. God did not make or multiply Ordinances at random without their
distinct and peculiar Use, for the exhibiting to us the same Christ, the same
graces, the same benefits, as men have several ways of assurance making, one
to another.

. 5. What is done to a Worthy Receiver by Christ.
1. What is here done. 2. What is hence received.


For the first, There is here done by Christ two things, and answerably two
things by a believer in Christ.

Two things principally are here done by God, or by Christ. 1. Christ crucified
is really exhibited to the faith of a believer. 2. The gracious Covenant which
God has made in Christ is sealed to a believer.


1. Christ crucified, together with all those benefits More particularly.
that ensue upon his death, is really exhibited to a believer; for there is not
a mere representation, or empty figure, but a real and true exhibition of
Christ himself, as broken for our sins. The word accipite, Take ye, Eat ye,
does evidently confirm it to us; If there were only a resemblance or figurative
representation, then See ye, were more properly said, but Take, Eat, this is my
body, plainly shows, that Christ himself is here given to a believer. I think
we look so much on the representation, that we forget the exhibition, and
therefore should labor to conclude, that Christ himself, as in the state of a
redeeming Savior is truly and indeed holden forth and presented to our faith,
as verily as any benefit can be offered and holden forth by one man to another.
This body and blood was really offered up to God for us, which is in this
Sacrament really offered and applied to us by our faith: Answerable to this
exhibition of Christ himself, the believer performs an act of Communion, 1 Cor.
10. 16. partaking of the body and blood of Christ in a spiritual sense, for
spiritual nourishment, incRease and building up; for the new creature is fed
and maintained by Christ, and by virtue of union with him, we have communion,
as the Vinebranches by their union with the Vine, receive sap and nourishment;
So as we have not graces without Christ, nor benefits without Christ, but first
in order of nature we have union as members of him, and then of his fullness we
receive; For a Christian is like a branch that has nothing of its own, but
what it receives from the root, as it self springs from the root, so the
incRease and growth of it is from the root also; He is as the Moon, which, as
appears in the Eclypse, has no light of it self, but incReases and comes to
full; as it receives from the Sun; Let no man think that a believer has no
further Use of Christ after his first believing and receiving of him, for then
this Sacrament would not be Useful, the effect whereof, as Durand says, is
not absolutely necessary to salvation, as if one could not be in a state of
salvation without it, becaUse it serves for confirmation of one that is already
in a saving state; and it is plain, that a great part of Christ's Office is
exercised in preserving and continuing of them in him, who are already members
of him, and therefore is the finisher as well as author of our faith, for we
live in him, and from him, and our grace is maintained by emanations from
Christ, as the light by continual emanations from the Sun, and therefore this
Ordinance of Communion of Christ, and the exercise of such acts of communion
are of prime Use and benefit, as the branch that shoots from the Tree, grows
and lives from that root which gave to it the first being by a contrived influx
of sap into it. And this is the first combination of Gods act, and of ours.

2. The second combination is, The gracious Covenant which God has made in
Christ, is sealed to a believer; The common nature of a Sacrament is to be a
seal of Justification or Righteousness with God by faith in Christ, Romans 4.
11. As a seal refers to some Covenant, so the Sacrament refers to Gods Covenant
with man, which is this, That God promises to accept into favor, and into his
propriety all that do believe in, and receive Christ, and to bestow upon them
all the blessings and benefits thereof. God gives Christ in way of Covenant; He
covenants with Christ our Lord, that he should give his soul an offering and a
Sacrifice for sin, and in so doing should see his seed, Isa. 53. 10. So
Arminius in this point is orthodox. Of this Covenant the death or blood of
Christ is the Condition which Christ accepted and performed.

The Covenant of God with us is, That all that believe in Christ that died, and
receive him for their Lord and Savior, shall have remission of sins, etc. and
of this Covenant the blood of Christ is the ratification, as the Testators
death ratifies the Will or Testament, for it is blood that does (...), dedicate
the Testament, Heb. 9. 18. and so in the words of this Chapter, This Cup is the
New Testament (or Covenant) in my blood, viz. (...), dedicated thereby, and
this blood we receive in this Sacrament, as the Seal of the gracious Covenant
made with us; So that if doubts arise concerning the reality of God, and
surenesse of this Covenant that speaks so much grace and mercy, we look upon
and take hold of this Seal of blood, and are thereby settled, and therein
acquiesce.

Answerable to this act of God, the believer accepts of, and submits to this
Covenant and the Conditions of it, viz. to believe, and to have God for our
God, and thereof makes a solemn profession in this Sacrament, giving up himself
to Christ, as Lord and Savior, restipulating and striking hands with him, to
be his, and so binds himself, and does as it were seal a counterpart to God
again, and not only so, but comes into a claim of all the riches and legacies
of the Will or Covenant, becaUse he has accepted and here declares his
acceptance of the Covenant. The Seal is indeed properly of that which is Gods
part of the Covenant to perform and give, and is no more but offered, until we
subscribe and set our hands to it, and then it is complete, and the benefits may
be claimed, as the benefit of any conditional promise may be, when the
condition is performed; And least you should stumble at that word, I must let
you know, That the Will accepting and submitting to the conditions, is the
performance of the conditions required, and so the gracious God that might pro
imperio, require duty and allegiance of his creature, condescends to us to
enter into a Covenant of Grace with us, and vouchsafes us the honor of coming
into Covenant with him, that so he might settle and maintain a communion and
correspondence between himself and his people, and there might be a mutual bond
of engagement each to other, which is solemnly professed, as often as we meet
with God in this Sacrament, becaUse we are so apt to disbelieve and waver about
his promises, and to halt and decline from our obligations to him. And this is
the second combination of action, according to that which is to be remembered at
every sealing day, (the Sacrament is a sealing day) Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Thou have
avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, etc. And
the Lord has avouched thee to be his peculiar people, as he has promised
thee. So much for the first, What is here done.

. 6. What is here Received by the Worthy Communicant.


I will not say that which some affirm (but it is Apocryphal) of the Manna
which the Israelites did eat, that it had the taste that every man desired; But
this I may say, that as Calvin of himself, When I have Instit. l. 4. c. 17.. 7.
said all, I have said but little, the tongue is overcome, yea the mind is
overwhelmed; I say then in one word,

1. Christ is here received, the body and blood of Christ into intimate Union,
as the nourishment of our souls. What is more ours than the meat we eat? What
is more nearly joined to us, than that which becomes part of our selves? The
Scripture by the language it Uses has even overcome our apprehensions; A man
may eat the fruit that has no interest in the Tree, but here the believing
eater grows into the Tree, he that drinks, drinks the fountain, he comes to a
closer Union with the conduit-pipe of all grace, the flesh of Jesus Christ; You
know the best meat and drink does you no good, except it be made your own; nor
is Christ of worth, except he be ours, he is, as if he were not. Toll meum,
toll Deum, we must be happy by a Christ within us, Know you not that Christ is
in you, except you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. There was a crowd touched
Christ, but virtue went out of him to none but one that touched him by faith; So
there is a throng about the Table, but none receive Christ, but those that by
faith take and eat his crucified body. If Christ himself be here received, what
spiritual grace is there that is not in him.

It is somewhat a gross conceit to ask, How Christ in heaven, and a believer
on earth can be united? For man and wife are one flesh, though a thousand miles
asunder; And we know, that as the Apostle says, Col. 2. 19. there are bands
and joints whereby the Head and every Member, the root and every branch are
united, and they in this mystical union are Spirit and faith. He that is joined
to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. And so according to that strange
expression, We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians.
5. 30 A phrase which signifies that the humane nature of Christ is the root of
this Union, but not to be exagitated by too subtle curiosity, becaUse
mystical.

2. A believer in Christ may here receive remission of sin, not venial
only, as Papists teach, but deadly and mortal: Oh, but we may not come with
such sins! Yes, with repentance and remorse for them; We may bring our sins
to the head of our Sacrifice, and put them thereupon by Bellarm. de Euch l. 4 c
18.
confession. Bellarmine resolves all the difference between Papists and
Protestants about the effect of this Sacrament into this, That the Papists
deny, the Protestants hold remission of sin to be given here, and the Papists
do it in favor of their Sacrament of Penance, that one Sacrament may not rob
another, but Scripture tells us, Matthew. 26. 28. This is my blood of the New
Testament which is shed for many for remission of sin; Shed for remission,
that is true, says Bellarmine, not given in the Sacrament, a mere evasion, for
we drink the blood that was shed, even that which confirms the New Testament,
which promises remission of sin. The great Argument wherein he triumphs
before the victory, is, That a believer has remission of sins before he
comes, viz by his faith in Christ, and that is true, Nemo cibum Christi accipit
nisi actu sanatus, but in this Sacrament the pardon passes Obsignante sigillo,
before a believer is pardoned by the Covenant; and here that pardon is sealed,
and sealed it cannot be, except it be before, for the pardon of forgiven sins
is sealed, as Abraham received the sign of circumcision, the seal of the
righteousness of faith, which he had before, Romans 4. 11. And this is needful
for relief of our doubts, and fears, and waverings; For this is the great
Question of anxiety, which troubles the soul; Are my sins pardoned? Are my
sins blotted out? And God has, says Chemnitius, instituted this Sacrament for
solution of this Question, to the weak faith, Ecce signum, Behold the Seal,
believe upon the Word, believe upon the Seal of God. Luther gathers it by a
gradation, The Cup is put for the Wine, the Wine signifies the blood, the blood
is the blood of the New Testament, Matthew. 26. 28. The New Testament contains
the gracious pardon of sin to a believer; And if remission of sin be an
Article of the Covenant, the Seal must reach it* Therefore all that have
wounded their souls with grievous sins be wounded again with sorrow, put off
the purpose of sinning, bring repentance and faith, touch the hemme of Christ,
receive here the pardon of sin, Question not the Seal or truth of it.

3. That I may not divide into further particulars, there is by this Sacrament
a communication of a greater proportion of Gospel Spirit, For we have been all
made to drink into one Spirit, 2 Cor. 12. 13. which Spirit plentifully bestows
his several fruits and graces, for the growing up of a member into Christ the
Head in all things, Ephesians. 4. 15. from whence we have not only those Auxilia
actualia, actual influences, and aids of delight, comfort, evidence, sweet
tastes, powerful motions and impressions, which Vasquez calls, grace
sacramental, and says, That Gratia Sacramentalis non est gratia habitualis,
sed auxilia quaedam actualia, which I conceive is an error; For though a man
have a sweet taste and transient delight in meat or wine, yet there is also a
permanent and abiding nourishment proceeding from that he eats or drinks: So
here the very habitual graces are nourisht, strengthened, excited: It may be a
man at present does not feel that strength he does receive, nor is sensible of
the intention of his graces: For the same Vasquez says, Intentionem habituum
infusorum sub experimento humano cadere non posse; And it is true at present
time; But the growth of grace manifests it self in time; We do not see our
selves or others grow, but that we are grown is plain enough; nor do we see
how much the light incReases by every step of the Sun rising higher; for our
growth is graduall, and by imperceptible instances and degrees, when power of
resisting temptations, mortify lusts, which before were too hard for us, does
appear, we may see our growth, as we see our shadows are shortened, but how
much in a minute we see not, and may say, That the graces which this Ordinance
requires and excites, are thereby strengthened and enlarged, and therefore the
Rule is good, What Grace thou would have strengthened by this Ordinance,
that do thou set on work, and exercise in it, for that is Sowing to the
Spirit, as the Apostle calls it; And I make no Question but a believer shall
find the benefit of this Sacrament in his obedience also, for the fuller the
Vessel is, the faster it will run out at the tap: If the habits incRease,
the fruit of obedience will be proportionable; We mend a barren Tree at the
root, sweeten the sap there, and the Tree is more fruitful; When Jacob had
seen the sweet vision in Bethel, then he lifted up his feet, Genes. 29. 1. it
put mettle into him.

So much for this Point, the Benefit of this Sacrament, which being dis-Used,
as at this time, is a great loss to the improvement of Christians, though they
see it not. The Christians in persecuting times, when a storm was coming, then
were they most diligent to frequent this Table, to lay in store for a hard
Winter, and fortify their resolutions. And let this Benefit be a Motive to the
Use of Preparation, which was the Reason I have handled it in this place, for
there is no Promise, no Benefit to one that comes to this Table unworthily.

CHAP. XXIX. The Sinfulness of Eating and Drinking Unworthily.
Antithesis or opposition between worthily and unworthily is such, as if you
know the one, you know both, as he that knows what a right line is, knows what
is a crooked or oblique; Worthily to eat is in such manner as is answerable and
suitable to the nature, end, and Use of the Ordinance, and unworthily to eat is
contrary, that is without a sacramental or Supper-disposition, and otherwise
then is fit, that these holy mysteries be handled and entreated, as I have
before proved.

The Point I shall take up is this,

To eat the bread and drink the Cup of the Lord unworthily, is a sin of an
high Nature, and of consequence dangerous. It is a fearful sin, and attended
with fearful effect. It is of a high nature, as appears by that peculiar guilt
which is contracted, he shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, it
is of fearful consequence, He eats and drinks judgment to himself. Thou
see, says Chrysostom, (...), In loc.
what a terrible word the Apostle speaks, speaks, nay thunders, so as may awake
the secure soul into a trembling. The example of Nadab and Abihu, their being
made Sacrifices themselves, was enough to give warning to all after them
against offering of strange fire, and was the occasion of that excellent Rule
which God gave at that time to be observed in all our near approaches to him, I
will be sanctified of all that come nigh me, Lev. 10. 3.

There are four things to be opened:

1. The sin it self, viz. Eating and drinking unworthily.

2. The caUse of the sin, Not discerning the Lords body.

3. The aggravation of the sin by the object and peculiar nature of it, viz.
A guiltiness of the body and blood of Christ.

4. The danger that attends or follows upon it, He eats and drinks judgment to
himself.

Eating and drinking unworthily, and it is a peculiar sin or transgression of
the Law of this Ordinance; One may do what the Law requires, and yet sin
grievously, if the manner of doing be vicious and corrupt; Men may be content,
if the matter by their Law required be done, whether with a good will or an
evil, but God is not so, who values the disposition of heart, when the thing in
command sometimes is not done; so he hearkened to Hezekiah his prayer for them
that prepared their heart to seek God, though not legally purified, 2 Chronicles.
31. 19. and is highly displeased when the command, Do this, is Observed, but it
is done unworthily, and therefore they say, he is pleased with been, not merely
with bonum. The Ordinance it self is the Index or Touchstone of unworthiness:
Here is Christ offered and presented to thee, and thou have no faith; Christ
broken, bleeding for sin, and thou have no repentance; Christ for spiritual
nourishment, and thou have no appetite. The Covenant is sealed, and thou art no
confederate, strengthening and refreshing grace conveyed, and thou art a dead
man; Communion of Christ's body and blood, and thou art no member in Union with
him: How unsatiable art thou to the Ordinance, and therefore eatest and
drinkest unworthily.

unworthily] may he taken two ways, Privative and Contrary; Taken privatively,
it is as much as not worthily, not suitably to the Nature and Use of the
Ordinance; Taken contrarily, it is as much as wickedly, so we say, a man deals
unworthily that is basely, unjustly, injuriously.

In the first sense,

He that has no spiritual grace, and therefore cannot exercise it, or he that
has some, but does not exercise it, may come unworthily, for the words, Take
ye, eat ye, do denote, and so require the exercise and acting of our graces,
such as have no grace can exercise none, as a dead body without life cannot
exercise an act of life, it cannot take and eat. Hear what the Schoolman says,
Statum gratiae, etc. that a state of holiness and grace is necessary to the
worthy receiving of this Sacrament; And I believe the ancient Fathers were of
this sense by the order of Baptism, the Sacrament of Regeneration going before
the Supper an Ordinance of corroboration, and this Rule speaks plainly, no man
unregenerate receives this Sacrament worthily. It Is a Doctrine of hard
digestion, but hard wedges cleave hard knots, make that the point of your
examination.

Corinthians were most blown up of any, and they are punished for eating and
drinking unworthily; Let no Christian be secure, as if he could not come
unworthily, and so neglect the trimming of his Lamps. The best swimmers are
soonest drowned; I would not crush the least spark of grace, I mean by having
grace, that spark in the flax, and by exercise the very smoke of that spark,
Christ would not let them be drowned, whom he calls (...), o ye of little faith,
he exercised his faith that Matthew. 8. 26.
said, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief.

In the second sense taken contrary, unworthily is

He that comes to this Table with a conscience imbrued in guilt without
remorse, or lives in practice and custom of foul sins and lusts, we have such
as come out of the adulterous bed, newly stepped off the alebench; their hands
are full of bribes and extortions, their mouths belch out lying, swearing and
revenge, they come to the Sacrament in superstition to be shriven, to sin
again, not in repentance to be forgiven, to go away and sin no more, their
prosanenesse dreams of a cure, not of a conQuest, they are willing to leave
their sins upon Christ's back, only while they go and fetch more; There is a
wretched crew of such Communicants, that make conscience of the Sacrament, and
make no conscience of those sins they live in. Judas came impudently, and in
the purpose of horrible sin, Parta timeat qui paria audet, says Novarine,
Let them fear the like, that dare do the like; God was not pleased with them,
that did eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, the
Reason is given, they were idolaters, and committers of fornication, and other
enormous sins, 1 Cor. 10. And who, you will say, can come without sin? I
say, there are remaining sins in the regenerate, but not reserved sins: If
you hold the course and custom of those sins, which your conscience cannot
but tell you of, you do but add the sin of receiving unworthily to the rest
of your sins, and blow up the fire of Gods wrath the hotter against you; why
then (you say) better stay away then come, to load our selves with more guilt?
If you will not come, becaUse you will not repent, and cast off your sins,
you proclaim your just condemnation, in preferring your sins before Christ
Jesus. If ye come without true repentance, you eat and drink your own
damnation, nothing can lead you out of this labyrinth, but repentance and
conversion: Therefore as the Prophet said to some that desired the day of the
Lord, To what end is it for you? It Is darkness and not light; so shall I say to
many that are forward to rush into the Lords Table without fear. To what end is
it for you? The bread and wine ye eat and drink is but your own condemnation:
Unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to Amos 5 18.
take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and art not
reformed, Psalm. 50. 16, 17?

CHAP. XXX. The CaUse of this Sin, viz. Not discerning the Lords Body.
not discerning the Lords body, ver. 29. The word (...) signifies to make
difference between one thing and another; Act. 15. 9. Heb. 5. 14. and in this
place to discern and put a difference between two, and those two things, as the
common stream runs, are common bread and wine, and this Bread and Cup of the
Lord, which are employed to another Use and end than promiscuous and common
bread at your own tables, for this is called the Bread of the Lord, the Body of
Christ in respect of signification and Use, I find no fault with this
exposition, (...), etc. says Justin, We receive not this Bread as common
bread, nor this Cup as common wine, which has no other Use than to refresh the
body, I say, I find no fault, but why may not, Not discerning the Lords Body
signify thus much? Not minding the body of Christ signified by the Bread, but
looking all upon the shell or sign, and not the kernel or inward thing, which
should be regarded with greatest intention: Let me not offend in the terms of
this distinction.

. 2. What it is not to discern the Lords Body speculatively.


The speculative discerning is the notion or knowledge of the signification of
the outward elements.

That the Bread and Wine do represent Christ's Body and Blood, That the Bread
broken represents his Body broken etc. This is an easy piece of knowledge, as
easy as to know that a picture or figure do represent such a man, and there is
no great measure of knowledge to construe all parts or rites of the Sacrament
into a true meaning.

In this sense not to discern the Lords body is directly to inhere and stick in
the bread and wine, as bread and wine, and to take the picture for the man: It
may be there be some such brutish ignorants, that discorn not the meat from
the dish, nor the marrow from the bone, such as these are, are fit to be
excluded, becaUse where there is no Analogy holden, there can be no Sacrament.
The Analogy, I say, between the outward Sacrament, and inward thing, must
either be known, or it is to us no Sacrament; For a similitude, resemblance, or
Analogy, must be between two things at least, and therefore those that in a
blind and brutish ignorance know nothing, but the outward part do not
properly receive a Sacrament, but are like the carnal Jews that knew not the
meaning of their Sacrifices, or of those types of Christ which they had; The
brazen Serpent was Christ, the Rock they drank of was Christ, but many of them
dreamed not of him in the Use of them. I do not believe these Corinthians, men
of such knowledge, were such bruits, for the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 16. speaks to
them as wisemen, who knew this, saying, The Bread we break, Is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ, etc. Therefore

. 3. What it is not to discern the Lords Body practically.
discern the Lords body; So we would say of one whose carriage is wanton and
loose in the presence of his fathers corpse lying in presence in a coffin or
beer, you do not mind, you consider not who lies there, becaUse if he did,
another countenance and carriage would beseem him, and so the Corinthians are
taxed here for such carriage of theirs, as proclaimed they had no serious
thoughts, no sad and fixed mind upon Christ bleeding and broken, for that
consideration would have bespoken another frame of spirit, and form of
behavior. The result of this explication is,

The Apostle gives us a twofold caUse of eating and drinking unworthily.

1. If we understand not, know not the Analogy or resemblance of the bread and
wine to the body and blood of Christ, but stick in the rind or shell, and feed
only on the husks, as upon common bread and common wine, and resting in that,
as knowing not the Use or end, which makes the difference, which renders all
brutish ignorant people unworthy receivers, And how should I make them know
the danger that know not thus far of the Use of this Ordinance? Willingness
to be taught would help it, if they were not more willing to run blindefold
into the pit, than proudly unwilling to discover their fillinesse and
ignorance, and if they be unwilling, It Is no cruelty but charity to keep a
blind man from running into a pit.

2. If we understand the meaning of the outward elements by rote or notional
knowledge, but do not seriously and with a fixed intention consider and look
wishly upon Christ's body and blood represented, offered, and to be exhibited to
our faith, for this will compose our outward behavior and inward spirit; this
bespeaks faith, repentance, affections suitable; this composes us unto
reverence and serious behavior: Imagine the very Body of the Lord Jesus was
presented to your eye, broken, bruised, bleeding for thy sins under the
stroke of Gods terrible justice, and so offered unto thee for thy salvation,
Would not thy soul raise up all affections, and muster up all it is forces, to
receive him, to open to him, to thirst after him, to admire and praise him? And
does not God in this Ordinance really hold him forth to thee as such, and so to
be received? The nature of the feast to which we are invited, teaches us how to
dress our selves; To a funeral we come in mourning, to a marriage in a
wedding garment; The very minding of the body of Christ teaches men to come
worthily, that is suitably, and the not minding of it with fixed intention is
the caUse that we come loosly, carnally, and so unworthily.

CHAP. XXXI. The Aggravations of the Sin of Unworthy Receiving.
He shall be holden guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, or God will judge
and repute him guilty of the body of Christ unworthily received and entreated,
or guilty of the unworthy handling, or of the contempt and violation of Christ's
body and blood, the memorial of whose death is profaned by your irreverence,
and this appointed means of your participation of it is undervalued; What a
high sound is there in these words, He shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord? and the eclypsis is left open to be filled with some fearful word,
guilty of neglect, of contempt, of profane violation of, and injury to this
body, the body of our Lord. For the right understanding of which phrase,

. 2. What it is to be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord.
Lutherans, do hence infer, That the very Body and Blood of Christ is eaten
and drunk by the mouth of the Communicant, which they call Sacramental eating,
and the reason is, How else is an unworthy Receiver guilty of his Body? We of
our Confession that hold the Corporeal Presence of Christ under the Bread
impossible, as well as false, do therefore infer, That that Body which is not
corporally there cannot be eaten, and therefore the guiltiness of Christ's Body
is not by the oral eating.

2. We expound it thus, Whatsoever irreverence, slightness, neglect or
contempt is Used by any in the celebration of this Ordinance is reputed and
adjudged to redound to the very Body and Blood of Christ: As it is TReason
against the State to embase their coin, to abUse a Picture is dishonor to the
person, to hang a man in effigy, or subvert ones Statue (as the Romans Used)
are interpreted to the disgrace of the man whose they are; And thus it is here,
by Reason of that near relation and analogy which this Bread and Cup have to
Christ himself, so the uncircumcised man-child, Genesis 17. 14. is said to have
broken my covenant, and therefore the Fathers reckon an unworthy receivers
sin to be like that of Judas, the Jews, the Soldiers, that abUsed and
dishonored the very Body and Blood of Christ; and this is a peculiar guilt
that attends upon the celebration of this Ordinance, wherein Christ condescends
to come so near us, by offering his Body and Blood to us, and this
condescension to be neglected and refUsed; Think of this, and measure not the
sin by your own apprehension of it, but by the account which God makes of it,
who accounts all them that come unworthily to vilify the Body, the sufferings
of his Son our Lord, and to despise the Seal of that gracious Covenant, which
we make our selves believe we do not do.

The result from hence is,

That after illumination and taste fall away, they crucify to themselves again
the Son of God, and put him to open shame, Heb. 6. 6. And they that sin
wilfully after the knowledge of the truth, are said to have trodden under foot
the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant a common thing, and to
have done despite to the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10. 19, 26. A mere Heathen is
out of capacity of guiltiness of these high sins; He is not guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, which was never offered to him in this Sacrament.
No aggravations of sin are like to the aggravations of the sins of wicked
Christians, their guilt is not of so high complexion that never knew of Christ;
either we must be saved, or we cannot be so easily damned, the weight of sins
against Christ is heavier than of those that are merely against the Law of God;
We are the earth that drinks in the rain that comes upon us; If we bear briars
and thorns, we are nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6. 7, 8.

2. How many do that, they think least of, and are guilty of that, they once
imagine not themselves to be guilty of: but few of a thousand will own this
guiltiness of the Body and Blood of Christ, and yet as often as they do or
have eaten and drunk at this Table unworthily, so often they have incurred and
renewed this guilt? Do not they say at the last day, When saw we thee an hungry
or in prison? Did the Jews think they pierced their true Messiah? There are not
many Christians in name and profession such, that can be convinced, that they
hate and despise Christ as much as the very Jews that crucified him, which yet
may be demonstrate by clear arguments. The Jew honored the name of the
Messiah, and expected great things of him, and yet hated and rejected him
blindfold; and so we call Christ Savior and Lord, and besprinkle him with
sweet water, but his reign and government over us, we utterly despise and hate,
and prefer a sordid lust far before him.

CHAP. XXXII. The Danger of this Sin.
He eats and drinks judgment to himself; if he be a godly man that eats and
drinks unworthily, or happily also damnation, if he be an hypocrite, for the word
(...), may respectively extend to both. A strange phrase it is to eat and drink
judgment, but it is allusive, and per mimesin, as sure as he eats of the Bread
and drinks of the Cup unworthily, so sure is judgment to follow thereupon, or
to accompany it, for he eats judgment, but it is to himself, not to others,
except they be partakers in his sin, which may be diverse ways; So as we have
reason to insert in all our prayers, Lord forgive our nostra aliena, our other
men's sins, but without partnership in the sin we need not fear share in the
judgment, He eats it to himself; and therefore that argument of the Donatist,
which is rise now a days, Si corruptis sociaris, etc. If you be joined with
wicked men, how can you be clean? If you pray with them, hear with them,
receive the Sacrament with them, was answered by Austin, True, says he, if we
be joined, but that is not in bodily presence locally, but by consent or
allowance, and so we are no more joined then Christ and the Apostles were
joined with Judas at the Passover or Supper, who I believe was not defiled by
his presence, as neither were those guests that came in to the marriage by the
presence of him that had no wedding garment; It Is true, example may defile by
contagion and infection, but allowance and consent defiles by accessarinesse
unto the sin.

. 2. The Application.
Israelites saved, and the Aegypians attempting the like were drowned: Thus
Christ also is a precious stone to believers, a stumbling and a crushing stone
to unbelievers, and the Word is a savor of life, and a savor of death; Some
men's eyes are opened by it, and some are shut; The same Ark is to Israel a
glory, to the Philistims a scourge; Here is honey in the same rose to the Be,
and poison to the Spider, and it is according as you eat and drink worthily or
unworthily. We read in Scripture, that when people cried to Christ for cure,
usually he put it upon their faith, According to your faith, and, If thou can
believe; and we never read of any one that cried, that he was put by for want
of faith; for if they gave never so little account, Lord, I believe, help my
unbelief, it was accepted. The benefit of this Ordinance is according to your
Faith, Repentance, and if you can give but any account of them to God, you may
drink Christ out of this Rock, but if you be in sins of love and delight, and
come in your wickedness, you take the Sword by the point, not by the haft, and
you shall smart for your presumption.

Secondly, The horrible thunder of the Apostle in this place, is not to
deter, but to prepare Communicants; An humble soul is affrighted with the
terror, and dare not draw nigh this fiery Mount, but it is not spoken to
affright from the Sacrament, but to enforce a due preparation; When the
destroying Angel rode his circuit, the Israelites lay secure within the line of
blood: This blood here offered will protect thee from this condemnation
threatened, if thou fly to it. But

Thirdly, The ignorant that are without knowledge, and the scandalous without
repentance, who are by the common vote of men excepted against, as unfit
Communicants, they may know that this is a dreadful eating and drinking, which
is accompanied with such a guiltiness, and wi^h such judgment, and yet this
fiery Sword will not keep them off, they will be rushing in to this Tree of
Life. It is not envy, malice, or partiality, but it is charity to entreat you
not to lust so eagerly after those Quails, which while they are in your mouths,
the wrath of God is like to fall upon you, both of you have marks enough of
condemnation upon you; Desire not to add more, be sure the King will survey
and view his guests, you cannot escape in the crowd; What if you be taken from
the Table, and cast into utter darkness? It concerns me to give you warning;
If you take the Alarm, and first labor for knowledge, and seek repentance
by the means appointed to beget them, and to beget you unto God: Well, If not
then, it concerns the Church to show you mercy in making stay of you from
falling into the fire. For,

Fourthly, The eating and drinking of the Lords Bread, and the Lords Cup
unworthily, is a sin dangerous to Commonwealths and Churches, for it brings
judgment, Epidemick judgment, so it did upon this Church of Corinth, (...),
For this caUse many among you are sick and die: Happily they had some common and
mortal sickness or mortality, and knew not the caUse of it. Happy we, if we
knew the particular caUse of Gods angry visitations, sin in the general we
acknowledge, but we own not our particular sins; We have had many, and
great, and common calamities, but are fallen from assigning them to the abUse
of the Sacrament, and yet we must confess that what has been a door at which
judgments have entered may be so again: Howsoever, I think, that rationally I
may excite public Authority to restrain or to make provision of restraint for
such sins as are pernicious to Commonwealths, in bringing forth public
judgments, which eat up and consume the people, and such is this sin, as I
have shown: I know no Powers can command or compel faith or saving grace, but
it is a sure fallacy to infer from thence, that he may not restrain sins
that bring public judgments, or not bring the people to the means of faith.
It Is a saying, that a man cannot make his Horse drink without he will, but yet
he may have him to the water. God directed the fourth Commandment to
Governors, and Parents, and Masters, and thereby either supposed they had, or
else gave them a Power or Commission to see the Sabbath kept within their
Jurisdictions, not I confess to force the Ger Toshab, or Proselyte of the
gate, to undertake the whole Religion of the Jew, but only the seven
Commandments, as they call them, given to Noah, and not to violate the Sabbath:
If he will live among them, he must Observe the Sabbath.

Secundum allegate and probata; Secret surmises, or doubtful presumptions, are
no ground of just sentence; though a man do eat and drink unworthily, yet he
cannot always be debarred, while he stands a visible member, and is not proved
or alleged guilty of some sin that may dismember him. Judas was not cast out
from the Supper for a Thief or a Traitor, becaUse that he was so, yet it was
not visibly and duly proved against him. Sin is not scandalous, till it be
known: If it be known to me, I must perform the office of a brother before I
tell the Church: And if it was known to me, that a man was not regenerate, I
durst give him the Sacrament, yea I must, until he be orderly convict of sin
that may debar him, for the Rule of Gods Word is best Reason, and that Rule
establishes an order, If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee a Heathen
and a Publican, until then, and upon my private knowledge, he is not to be a
Heathen unto me. But of this enough before.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Examination in order to this Sacrament.
1 COR. 11. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of this Cup.
But let a man examine himself. In which words we observe two things, First,
That Admission and Access unto the Lords Table is given with a proviso, in
these words, (...). Secondly, That God affords the Use of the Lords Table to a
professed Christian upon fore going self-examination.


The first of these [ And so] I have been all this while in handling, though
not in terms, yet in effect, and have taught you, That no man may come hand
over head, at all adventures, for that the Sacrament is not a Common without
hedge or bar, but a Several, enclosed, as appears by this short word [ And
so] The celebration of this Ordinance requires some previous preparation, and
bespeaks some due and competent qualifications of the Communicant therein. This
medicine that it may have its effect and fruit, requires a preparative; One
duty prepares unto another, I Will wash my hands in innocence (says the Psalmist)
and so will I compass thine Altar: The unclean under the Law had their
Purifications before they drew near to God in his holy Ordinances, for, says
God, I will be sanctified in all that draw nigh to me. I hope you are not only
convinced of this, but well satisfied in it, by what I have delivered to you,
and therefore I will not draw the Saw, and say over again what is already
settled.

. 2. Of Self-Examination.
The Lord affords the free Use of his Table to a professed Christian upon
foregoing Self-examination. This is the proviso of this privilege; Here is
Admission, and Access here is free, both invitation and allowance, But let a
man examine himself, and so, etc.

1. Let a man (...), that is, (...), Every man, as the Hebrew language
sometimes expresses it self? What, every man an examiner? Yea, of himself, For
what man knows the things of a man, but the Spirit of man which is in him? 1
Cor. 2. 11. a partial examiner, you may truly say, but it is at his peril; The
Rule whereby he must proceed is impartial, man that has a Reasonable soul has
this power above bruits, which have not that we call conscience, that he can
make reflection upon himself, he can accUse, testify, judge of, and call
himself to account; But is every man in the world meant here? The word examine
rightly interpreted will answer that Question, in the mean time I think it has
this restraint, every man, or every one of you, and of them that are such as
you Corinthians, visible professors of Christ, incorporate by Baptism.
Churchmembers, that have all outward qualifications unto this Sacrament, every
such man, Let him examine himself.

2. Let every man examine, (...), as we try metal or gold by the touchstone, or
by the fire, so the Greek version of the Septuagint Uses this word, Prove. 17.
3. God tries the hearts, he tries man by tentations, afflictions, as gold by
fire; man tries himself, as gold or silver by the Touchstone, the Rule and
Standard of this examination is the word of God, called a Canon, as a man that
will not trust the fair looks of a piece of money, rubs it on the stone, and
thereby discerns it, whether true or spurious; so not trusting the superficial
outsides and form, which flatters us. We must bring our selves to the
standard, and thereby judge whether we be dross or gold.

3. Let every man examine himself, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, prove
your own selves. Chrysostom 1 Cor. 11. 28.
takes this word signantly, (...), etc. He does not bid one (says he) to
examine another, but a man himself to prove and search himself: And Paraeus on
the place, speaking in opposition unto, and detestation of the Popish Auricular
Confession, says, Non dicit Sacerdotes probent, etc. He says not, Let the
Priests examine and dive into men's consciences, but every man himself, not that
we refUse any just trial, but we abhor their tyranny and superstition. I know
men are backward to have their wounds searched, and very partial and indulgent
to themselves, but if conscience be set on work in the duty, this unpopular
Tribunal, this (...), as Chrysostom calls it, is the most excellent, for a man
is within himself, others are without him, and he that is within may search the
hoUse better than he that stands without; Our secret hypocrisies and heart
lusts may be discerned by our selves, not by another, and there is no man's
heart but stoops most of all, and is laid flat in the dust under
self-conviction, self-judgement, Therefore let a man examine himself.

And so I have opened the words, Let a man examine himself, which if any one
cannot do, as infants, stupid ignorants, men besides themselves, or will not
do, becaUse he hates the light which discovers him, or does not do, becaUse
worldly employments possess him, or dare not do, least he create trouble and
pain to himself, then he has not performed the provilo, which is, And so let
him eat of this Bread, etc.

Quest. There may be in some of your thoughts, as What if Judas by reflection
upon himself find that he is conceived with a tReasonable intention, which he
minds to pursue, and to bring forth? What if any man upon examination of
himself find himself without any spark, and without any desire of grace? What
if he be a scorner of all godliness, and purposes so to be, a vicious and
flagitious slave of sin, and will not be made free, Shall he come and eat
this Bread, becaUse he has examined himself? Shall he plead his privilege,
becaUse he has examined himself?

Solut. If this were so, then Examination, is required for Examination sake,
but that is not so; for self-examination is a duty, (...), tending to a further
end, and that is our meetnesse and fitness to come to this Table, it is to
find a sacramental disposition (...) is that we may find (...), as a learned
man says, Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord, that is
the end and effect, Lam. 3. 40. Prove your selves whether ye be in the faith,
examine whether Jesus Christ be in you, 2 Cor. 13. 5. So here, Let a man
examine himself, that is, Let him prove in himself a disposition of fitness
and meetnesse, and so let him come, as a man that tries gold at the stone, he
will not take it, becaUse he tries it, for he finds it copper, but if it be
indeed true gold; So one will not go abroad, becaUse he has beheld himself in
the Looking-glass, for he may find deformity and filthiness, but becaUse he
has corrected all inconcinnity by the glass, and composed his dress; And so
except we will prevaricate the holy Ghost intends a fitness and meetnesse
found by this self-examination, and then, and so, Let him come and eat, etc.
The garment is not made by taking measure, nor the wedding garment by mere
examination.

For the clearer opening of this point of self-examination, I might thus
distinguish, There is a selfexamination required of all men, of all Christians,
of all Communicants.

That which is required of all men, is, To search and try their ways in order
to conversion or repentance, Lam. 3. 40. Let us search and try our selves, and
turn unto the Lord, which if diligently done they might know and own their
misery, and find an absolute necessity of conversion, the want of this is the
Reason that men lie so fast asleep in security, and pursue their beloved sins
without check or control, Jer. 8. 6. No man repented him of his wickedness,
saying, What have I done? Every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth
into the battle; And how is that? He mocks at fear, and is not affrighted, He
says among the Trumpets, Ha, ha, Job 39. 19, etc. It would take off their edge
and metal; If men did but consider and believe how directly their ways point
toward the eternal damnation of their souls. The Rule of this Examination, or
the glass which makes this reflection is the severe Law of God which involves
all sinners under a curse.

That which is required of all Christians is to prove their own works, whether
they be wrought in God, in order to their own comfort, Gal. 6. 4. Let every man
prove his own work, and so shall he have rejoicing in himself* And this is the
sweet and immediate reward of all sincere duties, which leave a sweet taste, or
savor behind them, Heb. 11. 5. Enoch before his Translation had this
testimony that he pleased God: This is that reward, which God gives his people
before their translation* as first fruits before the harvest, the unspeakable
comfort of a sincere duty; Nor only his works, but a Christian is to examine
his spiritual estate, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Whether you be in the faith, Know ye not
that Christ is in you, we should not only be, but know we are, and this by
examining, The Rule of which examination is the Gospel, which gives marks and
evidences of it.

That which is required of all Communicants is, to examine their fitness and
meetnesse, which is their worthiness to come and eat at the Lords Table, and
the Rule of this Examination is the Ordinance it self, or the institution of
it, as I have before showed, for the graces to be exercised in it, and bespoken
by it, are the Rule by which we must examine our selves, whether we have them
in us or no, and this self-examination, this particular whereof the Sacrament
it self is the Rule, is that I have to insist upon, and therefore I am not
bound by the Law of the Text to fly so great a compass, as to handle the
commonplace of self-examination in all his latitude, neither will I do it, but
only premise certain general practical positions, whereby we may be either
moved unto, or directed in the performance of this unpleasing duty,
self-examination, and they are these.

. 3. Practical Positions to move us unto, and direct us in the duty of
examining our selves at all times.
Luke 15. that he came to himself; Self-knowledge is the School-mistress of
humility; We are proud, becaUse we know not our selves; He that knows not
himself must needs be proud; He that knows himself loathes himself; He that
knows his sins, sees necessity of Christ; He that knows his wants, prays; He
that knows his weakness, fears and flies to the Rock; He that brings knowledge
of himself to a Sermon, gathers out of the garden those herbs that are
medicinal to him; He that knows his own temptations, avoids the occasions that
Use to ensnare him; He that knows his own experiences, hopes with patience,
when he sees no light: It Is true, the heart is deceitful, and who can know it?
But we need not taste all the water in the Sea to know it to be brackish, nor
taste every crab to know the tree; We know the earth well enough, though we
never dug to the center; no man is bound to number all his sins or
thoughts, God has taught us, that all a natural man's imaginations are only
evil, continually evil; It Is enough to know our selves judgingly, so far as
may occasion us to know Christ savingly, whose riches are unsearchable, and
cannot thoroughly be known, and perfectly.

Secondly, A man may be deceived in his spiritual estate all his life time, for
want of self-examination in a due manner, by a right Rule we are full of
selfflattery, and of hypocrisy; we disguise and extenuate our sins, we set a
varnish and good aspect on our works and virtues; Before his conversion Paul
Romans 7.
thought himself alive, and that he was in the right, afterward he calls it,
Confidence in the flesh. After a Phil. 3.
man comes into the opinion and profession of Christ, he may be in the case of
the Church of Laodicea, Thou say I am rich, and know not that thou art
naked; The Jew outwardly, thinks he is a Jew inwardly; The foolish Virgins do
not see but that they are wise. I know there is a Rule of certain discerning,
but if we put not our selves into the scales, we may seem to our selves to be
good weight when we are too light. I do not think that all hypocrites are
discovered to themselves, which is the saddest mistake that can be in the
world, never to be convinced, till we hear that word, Depart, I know ye not;
Not that I think that any sincere heart, that is willing to come unto the
light, and cries with the Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 23. Search me, O Lord, and try
me, does ever perish in this deceit, for such a one has Christ, and therefore
has life; and we are not saved, becaUse we know we have him, but becaUse we
have him, Some are in Christ, but do not perfectly own it. It Is a safe error,
but they that think they believe in him and do not, are not saved becaUse they
think they do, but damned becaUse they do not, and this is a dangerous error.
The Lord put it into your hearts to examine your selves, and prove your selves,
the only way I know to get out of this flattering mistake.

Thirdly, Men that live in the bosom of the Church, are by nothing more kept
out of Christ, than the opinion that they have him already. They have a faith
which keeps them from faith, and a believing that holds them fast in unbelief.
Dr Whitakers approves that saying of Melancthon, That historical faith
infinitely differs from justifying faith, and therefore (which I would have
Observed) the Corinthians whom the Apostle exhorts to examine themselves,
Whether they were in the faith, whether Christ Jesus was in them, were not
Heathen Corinthians, but the Church, professed Christians already, and such as
had a faith of profession, and then that Text will prove, that those that have
some faith may be in the Apostles sense reprobates, becaUse they are not in the
faith. It concerns us all, that are professed members of the Church as they
were; Can faith save you, says James, Chap. 2. meaning a superficial,
opinionative, inoperative faith? Alas he tells you of believing devils, that by
confession of all are damned; Let not this faith keep you from Christ, which
does not close you with him, you may be a graff to the stock with a string, but
it will not knit and live, becaUse it is not engraffed in: So you may be
reputed Christians and believers by an outward profession and agglutination, by
that faith you have, but never live spiritually or eternally by it, becaUse
Christ Jesus is not in you; All the terror of the Lord draws no blood; All
invitations of the Gospel move not, And why? BecaUse you lie under the shell
and shelter of this faith and believing, which defeats the operation both of
Law and Gospel, till God open your eyes to see through it, and bring you to see
the need of a Christ accepting faith.

Fourthly, There are but two spiritual estates, and all men while in this world
must be in the one or other, not in both at once, and they are usually known by
the names of nature and grace, or as Scripture usually, darkness and light,
death or life; This is a compendious Rule, and brings this work of
self-examination into a narrow room upon this interrogatory, Art thou in the
state of unbelief and unregeneration, or translated into the Kingdom of Christ
Jesus? Art thou in the narrow, or in the broad way? There is a great latitude,
and many varieties and degrees of men in each of these, but from Rahab to
Abraham, from O ye of little faith, to O woman, great is thy faith, all are
under the line of life, and so from the best flower in natures garden to the
sharpest thorn, all under the black line of death; The discovery is the sooner
made, becaUse the partition is but into two, goats and sheep, walking in two
several ways, to two several ends: You will say, Unto which of these will ye
reckon them that are in transitu, as it were, in the birth, in the passage? I
should say, that as we reckon the daybreak to the day, and the embryon of a man
is reckoned to humane kind, and the contracted woman is called wife; so though
I love not to distinguish of these moments, yet if any daybreak of light, any
seed of faith or good desires, any little of Christ appear in any, I should
reckon them to the happier part the regenerate, for they are smoking flax, and
bruised reeds under the sweet promise of Christ, to be blown up, and to be
strengthened, and so would I have them comfortably in their self-examinations
to reckon themselves: As likewise all men in the world may compendiously reckon
themselves under sin and wrath, and in state of damnation, upon and by the
argument, which is the convictive argument of the holy Ghost, Joh. 16. 9. All
men are under sin that believe not in Christ, Of sin, becaUse they believe
not in me, and it reaches all the world: Not believing in Christ proves every
man under sin, if not propter infidelitatem, for their unbelief, therefore
Thomas and other Schoolmen deny it, as to them, that never heard of Christ, yet
ratione infidelitatis by Reason of their not believing, The wrath of God abides
upon them, as all confess, and as the Scripture speaks. These four things may
serve as motives to this duty of self examination, and there are two more that
rather look like directions therein.

Fifthly, The Rule of this self-examination must be (according to the
properties of a Rule) a known and certain inflexible Rule, that is not partial
to or against us; for how shall we proceed from examination of our selves to
judge our selves, verse. 31. if the process be not regulated, so as the
judgment may be true and certain; therefore the word of God must be that Canon
or measure, by which, if we will not be deceived, we must be tried, for that
must judge us another day; by a false standard, or a false touchstone, or false
rule we discern nothing; and therefore when thou go about this work, banish
all thy own flattering Reasons, all other men's foolish and fraudulent comforts
and counsels; Let the Word of God sit upon thee, and stand or fall before that
Tribunal; See thou not how the Pharisee flattered himself, judging himself by
his own traditional exercises? The young man flattered himself, All this have I
done; Paul shows upon what confidences he flattered himself, and indeed every
man will be in good estate, if he may judge by his own fancy, flattery or
conceit, but false mediums beget but fallacies in conclusion, and our souls are
betrayed and undone by Lesbian rules, a sincere heart will not stand to that
test, knowing that flesh and blood may speak good to me, as the false Prophets
to Ahab, and the word of God speak evil, as Michaiah did unto him; God is not
pleased that any man should bear false witness against, or for himself; We may
neither proudly and partially acquit our selves upon false and flattering
persuasions, nor on the other hand deny the least evidence of grace, and of the
Spirit in our selves, wherein the godly do often deserve blame by slighting and
undervaluing the work of grace in their hearts; There are proud self complaints
as well as self flatteries; The Word is the most impartial Judge of our state,
or of our actions.

Sixthly, It Is necessary to stick upon the work of self-examination, until we
bring it to an issue, and be able to make a judgment upon our own selves, for
we are apt to pull off the plaster, when it begins to smart before it has
done its work, and are unwilling to set up all our Reasonings, and bring them
to a non plus, and so we never know our selves, never judge our selves;
sometimes a man is Sermon-shaken, and his heart begins to tremble, and to
Question with it self, and if he would but follow the stroke he might come to
find out his condition, but he lets the iron cool again, and like Felix when
he trembled, he dismisses Paul till another time; This the Apostle shows us in
these words, Jam. 1. 24. he goes away from the glass, and straightway forgets
what manner of man he was, and therefore he says, we must look into the
glass, and continue therein, resolving to be deaf to flesh and blood, friends,
carnal counsels, and by the Rule of the Word to bring the Question to an issue,
whether pro or con, for us, or against as.

. 4. Considerations about examining our selves in order to the Lords Supper.


1. The Rule of this self-examination is the very Ordinance according to
Christ's Institution heretofore recited; You see the Apostle does not
particularly number or rehearse what the graces, or what the requisites are
upon which interrogatories the examination must be made; He says not, Let a
man examine himself of this, and of that, but Let a man examine himself; The
Reason is that which I learn from Chemnitius, That if the Ordinances Chem.
exam. de Euchar.
be the Rule by which the examination is to be made, then it will follow, that
what such a representation of Christ's death and sufferings, and such a
demonstration of Gods offended Justice, as is here made, what such an offer and
exhibition of Christ his body and blood unto us, for communion thereof, does
bespeak and require of us; That frame of spirit, those affections, those graces
are requisite unto the Communicant, which what they are has been already
deduced from the nature of the Ordinance it self, and by me declared.

2. They being known what they are, it follows that a man examine himself,
whether they be in us, for else we cannot come suitably to the Ordinance, nor
take and eat the body and blood offered to us, the effect and fruit of
self-examination being to know our own selves, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Whether Christ be
in us, Whether we be in the faith; To know what graces are required, is no
point of self-examination, but whether we be in some measure furnished with them
or no, and by the duty enjoined it is easily inferred, That a man may know
whether he have those graces, for else all examination was unprofitable and
vain, and known they are by reflection and insight into our selves, as a man
knows his thoughts, his own purposes, his meaning, and can tell them to another
being asked; so we may know the graces and workings of the Spirit in our
hearts, Qui credit fidem suam videt in Austin. de trin. l. 13. c. 1.
cord suo, says Austin, that is, except such a darkness and smoke be within,
that they appear not, as sometimes clouds arise and cover the face of the Sun,
but that is not for want of an eye, but for want of clearness in the object,
and then if there be a vapor upon the glass, it makes no reflection; And there
is great Reason that a man should not only have the graces required, but should
by self-examination know that he has them, becaUse otherwise he might
blindfold, and at all adventures rush upon the Ordinance, and eat and drink
damnation to himself.

3. BecaUse a man can only then be said to know he has the graces required,
when he does discern and distinguish them from all counterfeits or semblances
that are like, therefore is self-examination necessary; For as gold has
copper, a counterfeit of it self: so have all true graces some thing like
themselves, and called by their name, which are not right, but some slighty ore
lying nearer day; As there is a faith called which is not faith, a repentance
not repentance, a love of God which is not the love of God, a sorrow for sin
which is not godly sorrow, there is meekness, not a grace, but a moral virtue,
etc. And therefore examination of our selves is both necessary and difficult,
that we take not Leah for Rachel, and so come to the Lords Table to no more
purpose than he that goes to the market with a brass shilling, which he thinks
to be good money.

4. Then we have this privilege, And so let him eat of this bread, etc. When
we by examination find that we have, though but a seed or spawne of those
right and genuine graces which are differenced and distinguished from all
semblances and counterfeits which are called by the same name; If every faith
confessing Christ were saving; If every nollem factum, I am sorry, were true
repentance; If every man's saying dolet, it grieves me, were godly sorrow, there
are few or none that could be called unworthy, but there is a difference that
makes distinction between semblance and truth, which few do find in
themselves, becaUse they rest in generals and equivocals. I have in a Sermon
upon this point formerly given the Characters of true grace, and need not say
it over again at this time. Let every man examine the truth of his graces by
these Characters, and so make Use of this privilege, Let him eat etc.

And if I might give you the Iliads in a nut-shell, these are the differences
and the characters.

. 5. The Differences between true Grace, and what is not such.


1. Nature begins all his actions from, and refers all unto self, pride,
profit, pleasure, glory, common honesty of men to men; Grace has this
Character, it turns the face of, and sets a by as on the heart, whereby it
intends, aims to seek to please, to know God, and therefore discovers that we
saw not, that emptiness of, and enmity to God which is in us; In a word, it
sets up Gods interest above self, which nature cannot do.

2. Between knowledge and knowledge. There is a special knowledge of God and of
the Word, which is large and beautiful, but the character of true knowledge is
affection, as the light that is joined with heat and assimilation of a man to
that he knows, forming 2 Cor. 3. ult.
and conforming to the image of God, We are changed into the same image; We
shall be like him, for we shall see him, 1 John 3. 1.

3. Between faith and faith. There is a Christ confessing, a Christ
acknowledging faith, Alii cogitant pij credunt, says Austin, but the character
of true faith is, That it accepts of, and closes with Christ himself, both as a
Lord and Savior, and that upon Gospelterms, to deny self, and take up his
Cross, and be his, and this faith is inseparable from holiness, or a godly
life, never to be found in a wicked or unregenerate man.

4. Between Repentance and Repentance. There is a Repentance like that of
Judas, full of anguish, a tormenting anguish of spirit; But the character of
repentance unto salvation, is the rise of it from godly sorrow, which feels
love, the nature of it is a purpose to sin no more, but to cleave to God, the
effect of it is fruit unto holiness; Conviction, contrition, conversion, make
it perfect.

5. Between Love and Love. There is a love of God arising from self-love, so
one Publican loves another, as a Benefactour: But the character of true love
is, that it rises from sense of his first and saving love to us lost sinners,
and carries us on to desire him, to delight in him, to have fellowship, to be
in friendship with him, and to be like him.

6. Between Desire and Desire. There is a desire of salvation to be out of
hell, a desire of grace merely as a sign and security for heaven to ease our
painful anguish; But the character of true desire is sanctification as well as
salvation, grace, not merely for a bridge to heaven, but for Union, Communion
and Conformity with, and unto Christ Jesus.

I will proceed no further, this is a taste of what I before delivered; These
are the graces of a Communicant; These are their Differences and Characters;
These lead you on to the privilege granted, And so let him come and eat, etc.

Great Use may be made of this point, and the Use is rather to be made by you
than me, for so the Text, Let a man examine himself, but I will point you to it
in a word or two.

. 6.
So let him eat. Let me exhort you to perform this work carefully,
conscionably. I have said enough, to move you, enough to direct you, the
benefit is great, the danger great, the means to obtain the benefit to escape
the danger is this; If you find sin labor to bring repentance; If you need
a Savior, come and take him as freshly bleeding, but bring thirst and faith
with you; Have an eye to the Serpent on a pole, rest your souls as the Dove did
upon this Ark, a crucified Christ; but do not deceive your souls, by a slight
performance; Call your lives and ways to the bar; Examine, judge your selves;
Do not neglect, becaUse no body sees you, there is a God will search out your
sin, and judge also; You have great employments, make opportunity, you are in
suits, one Ordinance of God does not disable another, you may lawfully pursue
your right, and yet pursue peace, and keep charity; If you suffer wrong,
forgive, it is glorious; If you do wrong, Leave your gift at the Altar, and be
reconciled first, that is more glorious; Set apart time, set apart your selves,
Commune with your heart in your closet in silence, no man casts up his accounts
in a crowd or throng, you need no other business while you do this; Seek of
God by prayer and fasting a selfsearching heart, and do it as if ye were to
die; make the accounts between God and your souls even, and seQuester your
selves to that purpose; for so when you cast up your accounts, you Use to shut
up your shops.

2. That Donatistical principle of separation from Congregations or Churches,
wherein there is a mixture of worthy and unworthy, does from hence receive some
check; for a man is to examine himself concerning his fitness, and if he eats
unworthily he eats damnation or judgment to himself, and therefore a private
member has here no call or warrant to examine the fitness of others, nor do
they that are unworthy eat judgment to him, but to themselves; But of this I
have already spoken at large.

. 7. Of the Ministers or Elderships examining Communicants before Admittance.


1. I do not enforce it upon this Text, which does not intend an Examination
merely by propounding Questions, but a finding out of our spiritual estate, and
of that whole fitness and meetnesse required of us in order to our access to
the Lords Table; That in question was an exploration by Question, touching
knowledge, competent or sufficient; This in the Text is required before every
Sacrament, that but once in order to first Admission, and therefore as I prove
it not by this Text, so I must needs say, it is not disproved by it; And
therefore they that infer from hence against all Examination by others, must
necessarily destroy all catechizing, whether by parents, masters or others,
which cannot be; Every man is bound to examine himself, but not bound from
examining others that are under his charge, for then he should be bound from
his duty, and therefore it holds not negatively, that no man may examine
another, and so both parts may let this Text rest.

2. The Church of Christ did never hold her self unconcerned in the admittance
of members into her society. In the primitive Churches; when men of years came
in unto the Church from Idolatry and Heathenism, they passed a severe test, and
were catechized a long time before they became competents for Baptism, and at
their Baptism had Questions propounded, and by them answered, as touching their
faith and purpose of life, and having past the test, then it was needless at
the Supper, except they fell into gross sin, but that case and ours is
different, when all are baptized in infancy, and therefore must be catechized
and instructed in the fundamentals of Religion, and have the test of the Church
before they come to the Lords Table, or else never.

3. Therefore in all Gospel Churches, we may find footsteps of this
exploration, look into the Romish and Popish way, they have auricular
Concession, which is a mixture of tyranny and superstition, but the people must
pass this test, which did not they ignorantly take for an easy way of pardon
of sin, they would be sensible of as extreme slavery; and it is Paraeus his
Observation, That this Confession was of old instituted ad hanc probationem,
for this trial or probation of men's fitness to this Sacrament. The Lutherans
have such a way of Examination and Confession too, as Chemnitius confesses; And
the Augustan Confession, as Bellarmine notes, is plain for it, Nulli
admittuntur nisi prius explerati; And so in England it was ordered, That no man
should be admitted that had not learnt his Catechism, etc. I do not bring these
instances to any end, but to cry down the ignorant opinion of novelty and
strangeness; For if we in England had followed our own Rule, it had not been
such a stranger as it now seems,

4. The intent and end of this Examination in question was, partly that thereby
the Church might know her own members, and their due qualifications, partly
that there might be a help to prepare, and put into the way such as could not
examine themselves; For if the Church should afford her Communion to all at all
adventures, to what scandal and contempt should she prostitute her self and the
Ordinance, there would be no wisdom in making her Communion like that of a
common Inn, where known and unknown are all alike; Nor would there be charity
to suffer blind folks to run into an open pit, and rush on the sword-point; You
may Observe how willingly a patient will answer a Physician Questioning him
about his bodily estate; And a clyent his counselor Questioning him about his
title or caUse, becaUse both are in order to advise, and help of them that
cannot help themselves, and such is this, if it were so well interpreted; but
misrepresentation and prejudice judges otherwise, for men look upon it as a
dominion over their faith, not a help to their weakness, especially if they see
a distance kept, and authority assumed; They look upon it as an arraignment,
and take themselves to come to a Bar or Tribunal to be examined upon
delinquency, which kind of distances I like not in such a business as tends to
society and communion, where poor and rich are all one in Christ Jesus; And if
any man through mistake have conceived, That this does but set up a Tribunal
upon him, to dive into his bReast, to extort his secrets like an auricular
concession, I blame him not of his backwardness to appear, for so should I, for
I abhor both that tyranny, and that superstition, but if no more be but that
the Church would know my faith or help my ignorance, I see not but I may
conclude with Mr Hooker, a man I know of reverence with you in his fifth book
of Ecclesiastical Polity, when in answer to Mr Cartwright upon this point, has
these words, The Examination of Communicants when need requires for the
profitable Use it may have in such cases, we reject not; And so Paraeus, Examen
publicum aut privatum non respuimus 1 Cor. 11.
modo absit, so as tyranny and superstition be kept out.

Give me leave upon those words of Mr Hooker to infer and say,

1. To them that ask for a direct precept or injunction for this in the New
Testament: I answer, That it is a point of order, not of faith; It Is of
profitable Use, says Hooker, not of absolute necessity, for then I must be
examined too, and it would extend to all the world, as well as us, and yet you
exact it not at Ministers hands, nor men of known sufficiency, Therefore it is
not of absolute necessity, but of order, I mean not of necessity to worthy
receivers.

3. In some cases profitable; and I must tell you we were in a singular and
particular case here in England; for you know men and women had been by Law
compelled to receive the Sacrament so often in a year, which compulsion, to
discover Recusancy, with the neglect of catechizing, brought in a world of
people blind and unworthy, the Remedy and Reformation of which inveterate
abUse, and the prevention of Separation from our Churches (had no order been
appointed) which must have universally followed by the necessity of the thing,
and instigation of them that lay on the advantage, were such Reasons as could
enforce no less; Nor do I know how possibly otherwise the matter could be
remedied or radrest, not intended to despise any that had right before, and had
been long admitted.

3. The principal thing is, that the end of this Examination be obtained,
though the form or manner be not punctual, as namely, That a man have competent
knowledge of this Ordinance, and be so known to have, whether by good testimony
of others that are able, or by our acquaintance, or by conference, or he is a
learned man, a knowing man, a Minister of the Word, which may be justly
presumed to have due knowledge, as Paul presumed that Agrippa believed the
Prophets. I say in these cases, the end of Examination is attained: Nay, if one
should come and declare himself by confession of his Christian faith, and
purpose of life without any Question propounded or asked, I should not so dote
upon Questions and forms of Examination, as not to pass such a one for a
knowing man, becaUse I have attained the end of all Examination, which is, I
know, that he has knowledge competent, not that I would encourage any man to
break a wholesome order, or establishment; for the Scripture requires, and the
Apostle enjoined to see order in the Church, Col. 2. 5. But that I would
principally intend the thing it self above the form, not denying the right
which he has by his knowledge and profession, nor thrusting him upon a
separation merely upon a form, except in one case, that a man intend to break a
public order, and to destroy it by his example; As if a man tear my hedge upon
a just occasion, I take no offense, but if he purpose to let all the Swine into
my corn, I should oppose him.

4. I could wish that all Examination were bounded and limited to such
Questions as are of necessity to this Sacrament; There were printed some few
Questions and Answers, as the rule and bounds of it some five or six years
since; For I dare not trust the discretion of all men without a gage; And if
any man should ask me such a Question as is not necessary, or for a Scholar to
know, or to pry into my secrets, I should, though I could answer, crave excUse.
I am afraid of, and terribly hate auricular confession, I love no step toward
it, and therefore I would not answer upon my own liberty.

5. Though some will say, I can declare my self to my Minister, but not
otherwise. I confess the Pastor has the greatest account to make of his
people, and is most concerned: But what if the Church will not trust him with
that report, as all Ministers are not to be trusted with it, such is their
loosnesse in this point, and too much facility? And were I to Choose, I had
rather do it under the eye of witnesses, especially in conversing with women,
who though in one regard, their modesty hinders to speak before others, yet in
other regards is matter of occasion to them that are ill minded, which must
needs be avoided, providing things honest, not before God but men.

6. Lastly, Let men lay conscience to the point, and set by passion and
prejudice, both examiner and examined, and in humility and meeknes deny
themselves, to keep up some face of order in these broken times; Let your
thirst to this Sacrament carry you through a thorn-hedge, and I on the other
hand shall stoop low, rather than a thirsty soul should want the Sacrament, or
be thrust on the Rock of Separation, and so we shall meet at the end, though
differ in the way. It should be a very sorry answer indeed, that I would not
make the best of, and (I hope) you would not make the worst of any error or
infirmity in me, I know Order in an Army (as he says) kills no body, yet
without it they are a Rout, and not an Army.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
ABUses in Ordinances no ground for separation. 30 Actions in the Lords Supper
of Christ. 76 Communicants. 95

B
BRead must be broken, and why. 88 Benefit of worthy receiving 314 1.
Generally. 1. It is of higher nature then the Elements of themselves can
convey. 319 2. Blessings of the Covenant are sealed, and graces of the Covenant
improved. 320 2. Particularly. 1. What God conveys: 1. Christ and his benefits.
322 2. The Covenant sealed. 324 2. What believers receive. 1 The body and blood
of Christ. 326 2. Remission of sin. 327 3. Communication of greater proportion
of Gospelspirit. 329
C
COvetousness caUse of Judas TReason. 47 Counsel of God fulfilled by wicked
instruments. 58 Consecration of Elements, by what words. 81 Cups diverse in the
Passover. 79
D
DIscipline, what to be done where it cannot be duly administered. 223
Discerning the Lords body, what it is. 338 Danger of unworthy eating. 345
E
ELements, what they signify 73 Must be taken severally. ib. Were severally
blessed. 77 By what words consecrated. 81 Ought to be consecrated only by a
Presbyter. 83 Changed only in their Use 85 Whether given by Christ immediately
to all. 91 Inward signification of them. 117 They work not physically. 267
Examination of our selves required to right participation of the Lords Supper.
352 Examination. 3. 1. Of Men. 356 2. Of Christians. ib. 3. Of Communicants. 357
Motives to, and Directions for it. 358 Examination by Elders. 370
F
FAsting not necessary before the Lords Supper. 29 Fitness for the Lords
Supper, wherein it consists. 278 May be set too high or too low. 279
G
GRaces to be exercised in Communicants. 289 1. Knowledge of Nature. Use, End
of this Ordinance. 290 2. Christ-receiving faith 292 3. Repentance. 293 4.
Spiritual appetite after Christ. 296 5. Love to fellow members. 297 6.
Thankefulness. 298 Grace that is true how differenced from counterfeits. 367
Guilty of the body and blood of Christ, what. 342 Ground of worthy receiving,
and of the Churches admission different. 343
I
JEwish writings and customs needful to expound the New Testament. 2
Institution best rule for Reformation. 34 Words of it explained. 111 Irreverent
carriage reproved. 277 Judas intended not Christ's death. 57
K
KNowledge of the Nature, Use and End of this Ordinance required in a
Communicant. 290
L
Lord's Supper, Elements of it taken from Passover. 2 Who capable of worthy
receiving. 20 Occasional circumstances not obliging. 22 Christ the Author of
it. 48 Why instituted at night. 63 After Supper. ib. Little before betrayed. 66
An Ordinance of Fellowship. 98 What it exhibits. 120 An inner Ordinance only
for believers. 140 The End of it, the remembrance of Christ. 141 Occasions of
the neglect of it. 148 How Obstructions may be removed. 153 How our minds
should be exercised in it. 156 The great work of it, to show Christ's death. 167
An Ordinance to be repeated. 171 Must continue till Christ come. 174 A barred
Ordinance. 182 Who ought to be debarred 191 Not a converting Ordinance by
Institution. 247 Yet may occasionally convert 250 Love feasts, how abUsed. 30
M
Mixed Communion no ground for separation. 234 Motives to endeavors after right
participation. 300 Motives to self-examination. 358
N
NEcessity of teaching and learning the true meaning of the Lord's Supper. 161
P
PApists must have faith of miracles. 86 Passover represented Christ's death. 3
Why so called. ib. Whether a Sacrifice. 5
Christ our Passover. 6 It looked Backward as a remembrancer. 8 Forward as a
type. 8
How it resembles Christ sacrificed. 9 Christ in the Sacrament. 13
Preparation for the Lords Supper. 274
Q
QUalification for worthy receiving false and insufficient. 304 Qualifications
of remembrance of Christ's death. 143
R
REmembrance of Christ's death. 143 To whom it is made. 145 Rites and gestures
spurious in Lord's Supper. 101
S
SAcrament and Sacrifice how differ. 5 Sacrament must resemble the thing
signified. 104 Consists only in the Use. 106 Scriptures necessity. 40
Separation not grounded on AbUses in Ordinances. 30 Mixed Communions. 234
Sign taken for thing signified 7 Sins of Judas and Disciples how differed. 61
Sins scandalous, what. 212 Sins notorious, what. 213 Socinian error. 120
T
TRansubstantiation, its rise. 128 Arguments against it. 130
V
UNworthy receiving a great and dangerous sin 332 The caUse of the sin, Not
discerning, etc. 337 Aggravations of the sin. 341 Danger of it. 345 Dangerous
to Church and State. 348 A godly person may receive Unworthily. 285
W
WOrthy and unworthy receiving. 45, 180, 263 Worthy receiving not to be
measured by success. 265 What required to it. 283 Benefit of it. 314 Who
capable of it. 20 False qualifications for it. 304
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 27 r to suffer; p 4. l. 18 Gerard. p. 5. l. 2. r. paterfamilias.
p. 6. l. 3 prius prosunt. p. 8. r.. 5 and 6. p 8. l. 28. r. not only hrist. p.
9 l. 7. r. this life-giving death of. p. 22. l. 15. r. and blessing p. 33. l.
14. ^. Hebrewish; with whom the, etc. p. 37. l. 24. r. the Lord; I have
received of the Lora that which also I delivered. p 44. l. 31. r. (...). p. 5^.
l. 13. r. Author, from him therefore. l. 22. r. Schoolman says) l. 23. r. were
contained p. 58. l. 13. r. says Ames p. 77. l. 16. r. Post-coenium. p. 85. l.
17. r. Marcion, l. 18. 1. body? l. 20. r. humane, l. 22. r. being? p. 93. l.
32. r. (...). p. 95. l. 12. r. Thus, Every. p. 143. l. 14. r. Benefits,
Benefactors.


