THE Victualler's Friend: OR, The Use of a New-Invented GAUGING-ROD, Contrived
Chiefly For the Advantage of Victuallers in and about London.

Whereby they may not only Discover the want of Measure from the Brewer (either
in Beer or Ale) but likewise what quantity they want.

LONDON, Printed for H Newman, at the Grasshopper in the Poultry, and Given
Gratis to those that Buy the Rod.

THE USE Of a ROD, etc.
THAT which Induced me to Contrive this Necessary Rod for the Use of
Victuallers, was the Talk of the Brewers Raising their Drink, and some of them
pretending to Cut their Measure, by reason of the Duty laid upon Malt: As to
the Raising their Drink, it is no Crime, though very Unreasonable; for when Malt
was 28 Shillings a Quarter, the Victualler had his Drink at the same Rate as
now; and if Malt was 12 Shillings a Quarter, I believe Drink would be neither
Cheaper nor Stronger. But, as to Short Measure, the Statute to the Contrary
will Protect the Victualler (if Discovered) from any such Loss. So that I have
contrived a Rod, whereby any Man, let him have but the Sense of a Boy of 7
years old, may Discover, whether any Barrel is according to the Statute or not,
and how much it wants of Measure. Likewise how much Drink is in the Barrel,
when it is not full, as in Case of 3 Firkins of Ale in a Barrel.

Note, There is a Statute which obliges the Brewer to Tun Ale into Beer
Barrels, and every Beer Barrel to contain 36 Gallons. Now there is but 32
Gallons to a Barrel of Ale; So you are to have 24 Gallons of Ale to 3 Firkins,
Tuned into a Beer Barrel.

The Dimensions of a Beer Barrel.
LAy the Rod over the Broadest part of the Head, putting the end of the Rod to
the inside of the Staves, and if the opposite in side of the Staves be Just at
the Notch Marked H. on the Rod, the Head is Right.

Then put the Rod straight down at the Bung, and if the Inside of the Bung
come exactly to the Notch at 36 the Bung is right: then lay the Rod along the
outside of the Staves, and if the Staves be as long as from the end of the Rod
to the Notch at L. the Barrel holds 36 Gallons.

Another way to know if a Barrel be True, and how much it holds and wants of
Drink.
PUt the Rod in at the Bong slaint-ways, till it touch the under-part of one of
the Heads, and if the Inside of the Right-hand-part of the Middle of the Bong
touch the Notch at D. the Barrel holds 36 Gallons; and if it touch at any of
the other Notches below D. for every Notch it wants a Gallon.

To know how much Drink is in the Barrel, either of Beer or Ale.
SUppose you are to Gauge 3 Firkins of Ale in a Beer Barrel, you are to put the
Reed (which you have with your Rod) into the Barrel, as far as you can, then
put in the Rod and the Small Cork (which hinder the Yeast to enter the Inside
of the Rod) will come out: when you have so done, put your Rod down into the
Reed, until the Rod touch the bottom of the Barrel; then pull out the Rod, and
if the Liquor wet the Notch at 24 there is 3 Firkins of Ale, or 24 Gallons; and
if the Liquor wet the Notch below the Notch at 24 you have but 23 Gallons; and
for every Notch below the Notch at 24 you want a gallon of drink.

Likewise for Beer, put the Rod and Reed into the Barrel, the same way as
before, and if the Liquor wet the Notch on the Rod at 36 you have 36 Gallons,
but if it wet any of the Notches below that at 36, for every Notch you want a
Gallon of Beer.

Advertisement.
ANy one that has occasion to have their Beer Gauged in their Cellar, in case
of Wholesale, or the like, may hear of the Author of this Rod, at Mr.
Newman's, Bookseller, at the Grasshopper in the Poultry; he will engage to
discover what Quantity of either Beer or Wine is in any sort of Cask, to a Pint.

Advertisement.
THere is a Book, Entitled, Every Man his own Gauger: Wherein, not only the
Artist is shown a more Ready and Exact Method of Gauging than any hitherto
Extant. But the most Ignorant, who can but read English, and tell Twenty in
Figures, is Taught to find the Content of any sort of Cask or Vessel, either
full, or in part full; and to know if they be right sized. Also, what a Pipe,
Hogshead, etc. amounts to at the common Rate and Measure they Buy or Sell at.
With several useful Tables to know the Content of any Vessel by. Likewise a
Table showing the Price of any Commodity, from one Pound to an Hundred Weight,
and the contrary. To which is added, The True Art of Brewing Beer, Ale, Mum; of
Fining, Preserving and Botling Brewed Liquors, of making the most common
Physical Ales now in use, of making several Fine English Wines. The Vintner's
Art of Fining, Curing, Preserving and Rectifying all sorts of Wines, of making
Artificial Wines, Distilling of Brandy and Spirits from Malt, Malasses, etc.
Together, With the Complete Coffee-Man, Teaching how to make Coffee, Tea,
Chocalate, Content, and the Richest, Finest Cordials, etc. Of great Use for
common Brewers, Victuallers, Vintners, Wine Coopers, Distillers,
Strongwatermen, Coffeemen, and all other Traders. Price 1 s. Bound.

FINIS.
THE VICTUALLERS FRIEND.


