THE DECLARATION OF THE HOLLANDERS Concerning Their joining with the Royal
Navy, in their present Expedition for England, under the Command of His
Highness JAMES Duke of YORK, Lord High Admiral of the said Fleet.

And their Resolution and Protestation thereupon.

Likewise, The Prince of Wales His landing in Holland, and the beating up of
Drums for Volunteers in Rotterdam, under the Command of the Lord Hopton, to
assist the King of ENGLAND.

Also, A Message sent from the Lord General Hambleton, to Major General
Lambert, declaring the Grounds and Reasons of his marching into England, and
their Resolution to settle the Peace of King and Kingdom, according to the
Covenant.

July 17 With Major General Lamberes Answer thereunto.

Printed in Holland, and reprinted at London 1648.

THE DECLARATION OF THE HOLLANDERS Concerning Their joining with the Royal
Navy, in their design against England, to assist the Kings Majesty, and to
establish Him in His Rights.
SIR,
THE Royal Navy (as some calls them) are still in Gorith Road, and have not
as yet weighed Anchor, nor hoysted sail for England; for they are detained
here, and will not be permitted to go, until such time that they have given
satisfaction for their present Freight, as Victuals, Beer, and other
Necessaries, which does amount to a very considerable sum, but its very
probable there will be a speedy reconciliation amongst them, for several
Invitations are sent to his Highness the Prince of Orange, to invite him to
the assistance of the said Ships, and its thought he will incline and adhere
thereunto, for no means are left unassayed to accomplish the same, and diverse
Merchants, and others, are very active therein.

The Captains, and other Officers of the said Ships are very acti^e to advance
their Design, and uses their utmost endeavors, for a fair correspondency
betwixt the Hollanders and themselves, who by their insinuations and
suggestions, has drawn diverse to comply with them, and to adhere to their
confederacy, and has declared their Resolutions to join with his Majesty's
Ships in this present Expedition for England for the settling of the King in his
Royal Throne, and restoring of the Royal Progeny to their just Rights and
Privileges; saying, They are bound both by the Laws of GOD and Man to assist a
Christian Prince in the time of his greatest distress and calamities.

But the major part are of different opinions, and will not engage against
England, but does use their utmost endeavors to prevent and obstruct the
Designs and Engagements of the said Party, who does hold compliance with the
English Royalists, and have declared their sense and resolut on touching the
King and Parliament, protesting, That they will be no ways isntrumental to
foment new differences, neither shall their hands be dipped in the innocent
blood of England, nor their hearts accessory to any such commotions, for the
engaging their Neighbor Nation in a most bloody and second War.

Neither will they give any assistance therein, either by sending of Forces
into England, to involve her in blood, or by contributions of Moneys or other
Necessaries for War, to keep the sword from sheathing, and to die it in a more
purple and scarlet object; but have further declared, That they will use their
utmost endeavors to prevent the effusion of blood, and to cure the wounds, and
stop the sluice which now flows, and lies weltring within the Bowels of
England, that so she may no longer be imbrued in blood, but speedily cured of
her domestique Disease, and that her out-parts may be preserved and kept as a
Bulwark of defense, to with stand and oppose all opposition whatsoever.

We desire much to hear of the Results and proceedings betwixt the Parliament
and the City, and of their concurrence, touching a Personal Treaty with the
Kings Majesty.

We hear that the Prince of Wales is landed in these parts, and diverse other
Lords with him; but what their intention or design is, we cannot as yet
discover, only we have a supposition, that they intend to increase their
number, and to raise what Forces they can, and then to take shipping for
England.

Yesterday two Drums beat up and down this City for Volunteers, and
Proclamation was made in several places. That all Gentlemen soldiers, who had
a desire to serve the King of England, under the command of the L. Hopton,
should repair to the sign of the Prince of Orange, in Broad-street, and there
receive entertainment.

Here is great preparations for the entertainment of the Prince of Wales, who
is said to be coming from Callice, attended by diverse Lords and Gentlemen, but
their design is not yet known.

Diverse old Soldiers and Commanders are come out of France and other parts, to
this City. They give out, an if they had a Design for England, and we are the
rather conduced to believe the same, by reason of the Revolted ships still
lying in Go^ith Haven, who it is supposed are to transport the said Officers
and Soldiers into England.

The Duke of York has declared his great unwillingnesse to engage in the said
ships, until such time that He can be accommodated with money, arms, and
other Furniture belonging to War.

Sir, I have here sent you enclosed a brief Abstract of the present proceedings
of the Royal Navy, touching their present Design for England, viz.

An Abstract of the proceedings of the Royal Navy.
We hear, that they have set forth a Declaration, declaring the grounds and
reasons of this their Engagement, and their resolution to maintain the Ancient
Government and known laws of the Kingdom of England, and to preserve and
defend the Kings Majesty's Royal Person, and to endeavor the re-inthroning of
him in his Royal Palace at White Hall.

But it is believed, the Bud will be blasted in the Bloom, for they are like to
get little assistance from hence, the Hollander is sensible of the miseries of
war, and the happiness of peac, and therefore is resolved to maintain Unity
with England, and to keep their sword sheathed, rathen then to assist a
perfidious party who have revolted from the trust reposed in them. Thus having
communicated to you that which is most observable in these parts, I desire to
be a participator of your intelligence in England, and remain

Your most affectionate friend, J. Vandelet.
Rotterdam 12. July 1648.
An Express from the North.
SIR,
MAjor Genesis Lambert has received a letter from D. Hamilton, intimating, that
the P. of England had not given satisfaction to the Parl. of Scotland in their
desires sent unto them, for effecting whereof he was to come with an Army into
the Kingdom of England, in which enterprise, he expected no opposition from
him. Gen Lambert returned him answer, That as to non satisfaction from the
Parl. of England, he had not to say; but as to his ^omming in an hostile way
into England he had authority from Parl. to resist any power not raised by
them, and therefore declared, that he and his Army would oppose, and fight with
them, as traitors and enemies to the Kingdom of England, and that this great
breach of Covenant between the two Nations, he doubted not but would be
revenged upon them to their utter ruin, etc. This Letter together with the
Answer, was read in the House of Commons, July 12. and the Commons voted, that
they approve what Maj. Genesis Lambert had sent, in answer to the said Letter of
D. Hamiltons.

It is reported, that the said Duke Hamilton with his Army have entered England,
and are joined with Major Genesis Langdale, and that another Party are to cross
Tweed, commanded by Major Genesis Monroe, who are to march in two Bodies, and to
advance with expedition toward the South; which indeed they might easily do,
were it not for those resolute Heroicks in the North who are resolved to stop
their passage, and to fight with them, be they three to one, as appears by
their late resolution sent to the Scottish Army, intimating, that if they
prosecuted their Design against this Kingdom, they would give them a field
with 10000. men, against any 30000. they should bring.

FINIS.

