Theoremata Theologica: THEOLOGICAL TREATISES.

Octo Theses Theologicae: Eght Th^ses of Divinity.

1. Animae Humanae Productio: Production of Man's Soul. 2. Pura Dei
Praedestinatio: Divine Predestination. 3. Verum Ecclesiae regimen: The true
Church regiment. 4. Praedictiones de Messia: Predictions of Messiah. 5. Duae
Christi Genealogiae: Christ's two Genealogies. 6. Apocalypsis patefacta: The
Revelation reveled. 7. Christi regnum in Terra: Christ's Millenar reign. 8.
Mundi hujus dissolutio: The Worlds Dissolution.
Scandala si tulerit Criticus quicunque; legendo:
Seria nil nisi me velle movere sciat.
If Critics ought in reading shall offend:
Know that I naught but weighty things intend.
Compiled or Collected by ROB. VILVAIN.

Price at Press in Sheets 3. s.

LONDON, Printed by R. Hodgkinsonne (for the Author) and are to be sold at his
House in Thames Street near Baynards-Castle. A. D. 1654.

Prefatio pro Theologis: A Foretouch for Divines.
SI Medicus crepidam Medicinae transiat ultra,
Parcite Theiologi: nil nisi vera cupit.
It a Physician beyond his Art aspires,
Bear with it Divines: he naught but truth desires.
Justa pro se Vindicatio: A just Defens of himself.
DUm velut Echo sonans aliena reverbero verba,
Just nemo potest insimulare probri.
While I shril Eccho-like others words relat,
Of wrong none can me justly criminat.
Mendae omissae emendandae: The Errats to be emended.
This work has few faults, and those of no moment; which every Ey can soon
espy, and Pen emend: so it shall sav the Author a labor to specify them. Who in
lieu thereof, has published extempore a pety Pamphlet of Chronography (3. d.
price at Press) well worth perusal, which he that will may annex to this
Theologic Theory, or buy by it self, or leav as he lists, being both of one
Paper and Letter.

Anglica Prosa minus vitiis obnoxia Preli,
Carmina quam latio scripta lepore sient.
A^tamen hocce libro mendae evascre minutae:
Quas lector calamo rectificare potest.
English Prose is to Press-faults less inclined,
Then Verses are in Latin phrase inscrited
Yet in this Book some small faults have passd by.
Which Readers may with Pen soon rectify.
coat of arms of the University of Oxford ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS.
SAPIENTIA ET FELICITATE

THEOREMATA THEOLOGICA: THEOLOGICAL TREATISES.

Summa octo Theorematum: A Summary of eght Theses.
OCTO Theiologi sublimia dogmata tractant:
Quae tenue hoc liquido stamine pandit opus.
Divines of eght high Mysteries do treat:
Which this slight work does with clear style repeat.
Octo a Theiologis Theoremata tradita constant: Alia^.

Ordine quae certo scripta sequente l^bro.
Eght Theories handled by Divines there are:
Which in set rank the following works declare.
1. Humanae Thesis est Animae Productio prima:
2. Qui Deus Adamum praedestinat, altera tangit:
3. Tertia qua forma est moderata Ecclesia pandit:
4. Quarta Propheteias de Messia explicat omnes:
5. Stemma Genethliacum describit proxima Christi: Natural and legale.

6. Maxima sexta aperit mysteria visa Joanni:
7. Septima agit Christi de regno mill per annos:
8 Extremum mundi excidium postrema remonstrat.
Man's Souls Production in first file does proceed:
The next shows, How of Adam God decreed:
The third in what form Church is ruled, declares:
The fourth al Prophecies of Messia explaneth:
The fifth describes Christ duple Pedigrees:
The sixth unfolds John's deepest mysteries:
The seventh Christ's thousand years reign does debate:
The last this Worlds destruction does relate.
Questiones Emergentes: Questions on the Theses.
An. Anima cujusque; Hominis post Adamum sit ex traduce? Praedestinatio sit ex
puro Dei placito and absoluto Decret^? Regimen Ecclesiae sit Monarchicum,
Aristocraticum, vel mixtum? Propbetiae de Messia venturo, praestitae sint in
and per Christu^? Duae Christi Genealogiae in Evangeliis, sint verae and
perfectae? Apocalypticae Revelationes futurae, sint certo praenoscendae?
Christus regnabit in terris cum Martyribus per mill annos? Mundus hic
materialis annihilabitur post ultimu^ Judicium?
Whether Every Man's Soul since Adams, be generated by the Parents Souls?
Predestination proced from Gods pure pleasure and absolut Decree? Church
Government be Monarchic, Aristocratic, or mixed of both? Al Prophecies of
Messiah to com, were fulfilled in and by Chist? Christ's two Genealogies in the
Gospel (natural and legal) be perfect? The Apocalyptic Revelations to com, can
be certainly foreknown? Christ shall reign on Earth with his Martyrs one
thousand years? This material World shall be annihilated after the last
Judgment?

Epistola gratulabunda: An Epistle gratulatory.
To the Right worshipful my dearest of Friends John Mainard Esquire, Sergeant
at Law.
Honored Sir,
I Presume to prefix your Name before this Book, not in expectance of
perfunctory protection (tho you best able to plead or patronize a good cause,
and a bad will bewray it self wors by defending) since every Author must answer
for his own faults: but partly as a Testimony of my true gratitud for all former
favors; and partly that it should try the touchstone of your exact censure:
whose intellectuals having attained 50. Yeer^.
the Jubilee of your age; are now arrived to the zenith of perfection. Such
sublime speculations here handled, soar abov the Sphere of your and my
Profession: yet since our Theological teachers have tendered them to public view,
with manifold jarrings or janglings among themselfs; we both may boldly like
the Bereans take leav to try whether these things be so: specialy such as
concern our Souls salubrity or salvifical felicity.

I am sufficiently conscious by much mutual amity and acquaintance, of your
rare rational endowments (for which you are bound to bless God the giver of al
Goodness) as sharpnes of invention, soundnes of Judgment, suddennes of
Apprehension; fastnes of Memory, firmnes of Entelechy, and fluentnes of
Expression or Elocution (which I would not enumerat, were they not evidently
eminent to every ey) with other strong practic parts fit for your Faculty;
which make you desirable of most men. Howbeit I will not accumulat Eulogies ^ho
diserved, lest it may render me suspect of flattery, from which I was ever
free: but wish you abundance of divine Grace, to dispens his Gifts like a
faithful Steward for the general good of this Commonwealth: and even so
abruptly conclud with zealous wishes of welfare to you and yours, who will still
remain ready to serve you with the utmost of my Faculties:

Your most entirely devoted at al Essais Rob. Vilvain.

Hunc, mihi vir multis titulis Charissime; Libr^^
Pro magnis meritis consecro jure tibi.
Non patrocinium cupio, non ambio grates:
Tantum ego grati ^nimi pendo tributa mei.
Sir, many wais most Dear; this book I to you
Devot, for great demerits justly du.
I crav no Patronage, nor seek thanks to find,
But only tribut pay of gratful mind.
Non adulatorem simulo, aut mendacia ^ingo:
Sed refero meritis inferiora tuis.
I play no Parasits part, nor lies invent:
But some things much beneath your merits vent.

Proloquium ad Lectores: A Preamble to al Readers.
THIS sacred work selected from the learned lucubrations of diverse deep
Divines, I presum to present as borrowed Feathers from sundry rare Birds: having
a faculty or facility to abstract and abbreviat Authors, that the owners
(muchless others) shall scarce know they are collected from them; which has
much steaded me in compiling these Theological Theories. For I am by Profession
a Physician (no Prophet, nor Prophets Son) utterly unfit and unworthy to meddle
with such mysterious matters. The first Thesis was penned in young years, but
since polished with intent to be published: and latly augmented by Mr. Woolnots
labors. The next is taken mostly from Mr. Plaifers Appello Evangelium. The
third from Dr. Tailor and Mr. Thorndike. The fourth from Mr. Smiths Arrow
against Atheists. The ^^fth from Bishop Cowper of Galoway. The sixth from Mr.
Mede and a German Doctor. The seventh from Mr. Baily a Scot. The last from Dr.
H^k^w^s apology. In all which I can claim but industry in collecting, brevity in
compiling, perspicuity in penning, and fidelity in rendering ^ch Authors
intentions: leaving the censure of al to the Readers, who are chief Carvers or
Comptrolers. I have gathered almost all the gleanings of every Thesis or Theorem
together, which lay seattered in several ^^elds, and brought them into this
Barn, that every one may the easier thresh out what grain will serve ^is turn.

Happily I shall seem somewhat saucy to put my sickle into other harvests: but it is
a time when al Laborers are bid welcome, and I plow with others Heifers. If any
dislike the doctrins (as diverse wildistast, what most Men approv, or
contrarily) let them blame those whose Echo I am: but if ought be misrelated,
misprised, or maliciously torted, let it be laid to my sole charge. For I ven^
lale or nothing of mine own, nor dare positivly d^fine, or peremptorily decide
any point. So if any except against the dogmats or documents, let the Authors
answer it; unles I be found a falsarian, which every one may compare, whether
it ^^ done fully, fairly, and faithfully. Some h^ply will disgust the first, as
dissonant to the general received Tenet of Soul-Creation: yet is it only
alteratratly debated, not actualy determined. Many may no less snar^ at the
next decried by Presbyterians: yet is it defended by diverse Zealous Protestants.
The like virulence will be spued out against the third, as Demetrius the
Silversmith at Athens persecuted St. Paul, because the great Goddess Diana was
contemned: yet the History only is handled de facto, not de jure. The two next
will pass current among al Christians; but gainsaid by Jews and Infidels, who
are of no regard. The sixth cannot be greatly branded tho not generaly
believed. The penultimat may be traduced by Anabaptists and their adherents,
who dream of a dry Summer, that Christ shall reign gloriously on Earth 1000.
years before or at the Day of Judgment. For the last, some will like, some dislike
according to their various palats. For partiality like mortality reigns over al
Mankind, which none can cast off, no not with a furc; so long as we fare in
this fleshy fabric: yea the soundest sincerest Jud^ments are so blinded with
self conceit, that they cannot possibly see it in themselfs, yet discern it
palpably in all Men else. I am very cautious (as others are captious* to discuss
al points modestly and moderatly, rather relating others opinions then mine own
resolutions: who can be content Men shall censure freely, if they leav
uncharitable despite and displeasure. For there is no ground in reason or
Religion, why ^ne should be angry with another for dissenting in opinions: such
there ^e so many differing fancies and affections, as Faces and Complexions. If
two cannot see with one ey, let them not scratch out each others eyes, lest both
become blind as Beetles. Al are wedded to their own wills, and overween their
self-worth by nature, which is tolerable being indeclinable: but to break the
bonds of charity, is contrary to the common rules of Christianity and damnable.
Listen how the Catholic Moderator checks al contenders about Articles of
Religion, and givs good counsil in these metres:

Why for Opinions interkil we thus,
Whose truth not force, but Reason must discus?
Reason, whose chief force in Opinion lies;
Reason, whose falls gloss often deceives the wise.
God does in peace, lov, concord, unity dwell:
Hate, envy, malice consines are to Hell.
If then Gods Vision thou desire to attain,
Shun strife, teen, discord, scorn, and proud disdain.
My chief comfort in this case is, what some censure or condemn, others will
confirm or commend: but Caesar's jacta est alea is the best bulwork of a resolut
spirit. If any be apt to quarrel, he shall fight a Sciomachy with his own
shadow, and be answered in supine silence: for his teen will be spent on a
senseless stock that regards it not, nor will accept his challenge, being
supernnited to fight combats. So many Sects swarm abroad, and al so partial to
their principles; that if any shall seem to cross their Tenets, they are ready
to gnash their teeth, and stone him with bitter censures or calumnies (as the
Jews served Stephan) which is the dismal destiny of al writers: but I hope for
better things from the godly. For why should Lutherans hate Calvinists, or they
Lutherans; Presbyterians Cavaliers and Independents, or either of them
Presbyterians, only upon discordance in points of Religion? St. J^hn exborted
Catechumen Christians, Filioli^ diligite invicem: little Children, lov one
another: for lov is a Christians cognizance or Character and fulfilling of the
Law: yea the chief Commandment (next to lov God abov al in the Gospel unity in
opinion is to be wished, tho hardly hoped: but amity in common conversation
should be embraced, and charity in Christian profission chetfly practiced:
without which none shall ever enjoy eternal ^liss or beatitud. For we have one
Creator God the Father, one Redeemer God the Son, and one Sanctifer God the
holy Ghost; in which three Persons and one God we al beleev with one Faith one
Baptism, and one Profession: let us not then hate in heart for diversity of
opinion. If any can cure Peoples spiritual pride or philauty in themselfs;
carnal affection or partiality toward their Faction; and Infernal hatred or
prejudicacy against others (al three or either) he shall be more famous then
Apollo, Aesoulapius, or Hippocrates; and have far mo Patients for the Vertigo,
Cardialgia, and Icteritia, (a Cephalical, Cardiacal, and Hepatical malady) then
all the Emperics, Mountebanks, or Land skippers in this Land: but Iprofes my
self no Physician for such deplored diseases. Overweening expectation is a
main Enemy to al writers; but factious emulation and previous prejudication
much more: when men prepostrously devov others works to Vulcan or Stercutins,
yer they see the Sun. Preachers may vent what virulences they list in Pulpit,
as Authors can at Press: but with this difference or dissonance,

Dictio Praeconis tenues cito, transit in auras:
Scriptorum at remanent dogmata saepe diu.
A Preachers wordst' empty Air turn again,
But Writers works oftimes do long remain.
Al Men are apt to er, but the modest ready to acknowledge and amend it, if
detected or displaied; as I vow in presence of our great God freely to do, if
any shall fairly show it, nor ever will be found a Beast perversely to persevere
therein. I will serve no Person, Sect or Faction for fear, favor or flattery; but
only deliver my private personal Judgment (how weak or worthless soever)
sincerely, according to verity or verisimility: This, such as know my constant
resolut disposition, will easily beleev; but others may take it on trust til
they shall have time to try the contrary. All the Theses are too redious, but there
prolixity consists more in multitud of matter then words: for I could have made
the Work twice so voluminous with half the toil: but do study brevity to spare
the Readers Purs and Pains. The Speculations are somewhat sublime, but style
facil and familiar, fit for vulgar understandings. Let every one take or leav,
and take al in good part,

Farewell.
Rustica Ruricolae, Fabrique Fabrilia tractent:
Tangere nec Medicos dogmata sacra decet.
Let Clowns the Plow, and Smiths their Forge attend:
Nor should Physicians to things sacred bend.

Articuli Fidei Anglicae: 39 Articles of our Faith.
THE Articles of Religion concluded in Convocation, and confirmed by Act of
Parliament under Queen Elizabeth Anno 1562. but ratified or reestablished under
King James by the same duple authority Anno 1604. which are here presented to
satisfy or gratify al, lest men like Lynces should seem sharp sighted to look
into the Confessions of other Reformed Churches abroad; and Lamiae or blind
Beetles at home, in being ignorant of our own Principles and Doctrins: the
general Catalog of which follows in order.

1 Of Faith in the holy Trinity. 2 Of the Word which was made Man. 3 Of Christ's
descent into Hell. 4 Of his Resurrection. 5 Of the holy Ghost. 6 Of the
Scriptures sufficience to salvation. 7 Of the old Testament. 8 Of the three
Creeds. 9 Of original birth-sin. 10 Of free will. 11 Of man's justification, 12
Of good works. 13 Of works before justification. 14 Of super trrogation. 15 Of
Christ alone without sin. 16 Of sin after Baptism. 17 Of Predestination and
Election. 18 Of obtaining salvation only by Christ. 19 Of the Church. 20 Of the
Churches authority. 21 Of general Councils. 22 Of Purgatory. 23 Of ministering
in the Congregation. 24 Of speaking there in an unknown tongue. 25 Of the
Sacraments. 26 Of the Ministers unworthines, which hinders not their effects.
27 Of Baptism. 28 Of the Lords supper. 29 Of the wicked, who do not eat
Christ's Body and Blood 30 Of both kinds. 31 Of Christ's Oblation finished on the
Cross. 32, Of Priests marriage. 33 Of Excommunicat Persons, how they are to be
shunned. 34 Of the Churches Traditions. 35 Of ^omilies. 36 Of Consecrating
Bishops, etc. 37 Of the Civil Magistrate. 38 Of Christians goods which are not
common. 39 Of a Christian man's Oath. The Particulars insu.

Article 1. THere is but one only true living God, everlasting, without body,
parts or passions, of infinite power, wisdom and goodness: maker and preserver
of al things both visible and invisible: in unity of which Godhead there be
three Persons of one substance, power, and eternity; the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.

Article 2. The Son who is the Word of the Father begot of him from everlasting
(the very eternal God of one substance with the Father) took man's Nature in the
womb of the blessed virgin of her substance, so that two whole perfect Natures
(the Godhead and Manhood) were joined in one Person never to be severed, whereof
one Christ consists perfect God and very Man: who suffered, was crucified,
dead, and buried to reconcile his Father to us, and be a sacrifice not only for
Original guilt, but also for all actual sins of men.

Article 3. As Christ died for us and was buried: so it is to be believed, that
he went down into Hell.

Article 4. Christ truly rose from death and took again his body, with flesh,
bones, and al things pertaining to the perfection of Man's Nature: wherewith he
ascended into Heaven, and there sits til he shall return to judge al men at last
day.

Article 5. The holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, is one
substance, majesty, and glory with the Father and Son; very eternal God.

Article 6. Holy Scripture contains al things necessary for Salvation; so that
whatever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby; is not required of any
man to be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought needful to salvation.
By the name of holy Scripture we understand those Canonical Books of the Old and
New Testament, whose authority the Church never doubted of, and the other Books
(as saint Jerome says) the Church reads for exemple of life and instruction of
manners, but does not apply them to stablish any Doctrine. All the Books of the
new Testament, as commonly received, we receiv and reput them Canonical. See
their names and number in the holy Bible.

Article 7. The old Testament is not contrary to the New; for in both
everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only Mediator
between God and Man, being both God and Man; Therefore they are not to be heard,
which fain that the old Fathers looked only for transitory promises, though the
Law given of God by Moses touching Ceremonies or Rites do not bind Christians,
nor the civil precepts of necessity to be received in any Christian
Commonwealth; yet no Christian man whatever is free from obedience of the
Commandments caled moral.

Article 8. The three Creeds ( Nicen, Athanasius, and that commonly caled the
Apostles) ought thoroughly to be received and believed: for these may be proved
by most certain warrants of Scripture.

Article 9. Original sin stands not in imitating Adam (as the Pelagians vainly
talk) but is the fault and corruption of every man's Nature, that is engendered
of Adams offspring: whereby man is far gone from original Righteousness, and
inclined to evil: so that the flesh lusts against the spirit, and therefore in
every person born into the world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnationthis
infection of Nature remains, yea in the Regenerat, whereby the lust of the flesh
(caled in Greek (...)) which some expound the wisdom, some the sensuality, some
the affection, some the desire of the flesh, is not subject to the Law of God,
and though there is no condemnation to them that beleev and are baptized, yet
the Apostle confesses, that Concupiscence has of it self the nature of Sin.

Article 10. The condition of man after Adam's fall is such, as he cannot turn
or prepare himself by his natural strength and good works to Faith, for we have
no power to doc good or pleas God, without his grace preventing us: that we may
have a good will, and working when we have that will.

Article 11. We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, not for our own works or deservings:
which is a most wholesome doctrine very full of comfort.

Article 12. Albeit works (which are fruits of Faith, and follow justification)
cannot put away our sins and endure the severity of Gods judgment, yet are
they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring necessarily from
a true lifely Faith: insomuch that by them a lifely Faith may be so evidently
known as a Tree discerned by the fruit.

Article 13. Works done before the Grace of Christ and justification of his
Spirit, are not pleasant to God, for as much as they spring not from Faith in
Jesus Christ, nor do they make men meet to receiv Grace, or (as School-writers
say) deserv Grace of congruity: yea rather because they are not done as God has
willed and commanded to be done; we doubt not but they have the nature of sin.

Article 14. Voluntary works over and abov Gods Commandments (caled works of
supererogation) cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety, for by them men
declare they do not only render to God so much as they are bound to do for
themselfs; but do more for his sake then of duty is required, which shall
transcend to sav others: whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done al
which is commanded, say we be unprofitable servants.

Article 15. Christ in truth of our Nature, is made like to us in all things
except only sin; from which he was clearly void both in Life and Spirit, he is
the Lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of himself once made, took away the
sins of the World, and no sin (as saint John says) was in him: but we although
baptized and born again, yet offend in many things, and if we say we have no
sin, we deceiv our selfs, and no truth remains in us.

Article 16. Not every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism, is sin
against the holy Ghost, and unpardonable: wherefore the grant of Repentance may
not be denied to such as fall into Sin after B^ptism. After we have received the
holy. Ghost, we may depart from Grace given and fall into sin, and by Gods grace
we may rise again and ^mend our life's: therefore they are to be condemned, which
say they can sin no more so long as they live here being once justified, or deny
place of forgivnes to such as truly repent.

Article 17. Predestination to life is Gods everlasting purpos, whereby before
the worlds foundation, he constantly decreed by his Counsil secret to us, to
deliver from curs and damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ out of
mankind; and to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as vessels made
to honor. Therefore they which are indu^d with so excellent a benefit, be caled
according to Gods purpos by his Spirit working in du season: they through Grace
obey the caling, are justified freely, made sons of God by Adoption, like the
Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, walk Religiously in good works,
and at length by Gods mercy attain everlasting felicity. as the godly
consideration of Predestination and Election in Christ, is full of sweet,
pleasant, unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as feel the working of
Christ's Spirit, mortifying the works of the flesh and their earthly members,
and drawing up their minds to high Heavenly things: as well because it does
greatly establish and confirm their faith of eternal Salvation to be enjoied by
Christ, as bicaus it fervently kindles their lov toward God: so for curious
carnal persons lacking his Spirit, to have the Sentence of Gods Predestination
continualy before their eyes, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the Devil
thrusts them into desperation or rechlesnes of most unclean living, no less
perilous then despair. Farthermore we must receiv Gods promises, as they be
generaly set forth in holy Scripture, and that will of God is to be followed in
our doings, which is expressly declared to us in his word.

Article 18. They are also to be had accursed, who presum that every man shall
be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be devour and
diligent to frame his life according to that Law and Light of Nature: for holy
Scripture sets out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby we must be
saved.

Article 19. Christ's visible Church is a congregation of faithful men, in which
Gods Word is purely preached, and Sacraments duly administered according to
Christ's Ordinance, in all things of necessity r^qu sit to the same: As the
Church of J^^usalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred, so has that of Rome,
not only in their living and matter of Ceremonies, but also in many matters of
Faith.

Article 20. The Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and authority
in controversies of Faith: yet is it not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing contrary to Gods Word, nor may it so expound any place of Scripture, that
it be repugnant to another; wherefore tho the Church be a witness and Keeper of
holy writ: yet as it may not decree any thing against the same, so ought it not
to enforce any thing besid it, as an Article to be believed for necessity of
Salvation.

Article 21. General Councils may not be gathered without command and will of
Princes: when they are gathered (being but an Assembly of men, and al not
guided by the Spirit and Word of God) they may er, and some times have erred in
matters pertaining to God. Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to
Salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unles it may be declared that
they are taken out of holy Scripture.

Article 22. The Romish Doctrins touching Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping both
Images and Relics, and Invocation of Saints, is a fond thing vainly invented
and grounded on no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to Gods word,

Article 23. It is not lawful for any man to undertake the office of public
Preaching, or ministering the Sacraments before he be lawfully caled and sent to
execut the same: such we ought to judge lawfully caled and sent, which be chosen
or caled to this work by men that have public authority given them in the
Congregation, to call and send ministers or laborers into the Lord's Vineyard.

Article 24. It Is flatly repugnant to Gods word and primitiv Churches practis,
to have public Prayer or Sacraments ministered in a tongue not understood of the
People.

Article 25. Sacraments ordained by Christ, be not only ba^ges or tokens of
Christian men's profession; but rather sure witnesses and effectual signs of
Grace and Gods good will toward us, by which he works invisibly in us: and not
only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith in him. There be two
Sacraments ordained by Christ in the Gospel; viz. Baptism and the Lords Supper:
those fiv commonly caled Sacraments (Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony,
extrem Unction) are not properly Gospel Sacraments; being such as have grown up
partly of corrupt interpreting the Apostles, and partly are states of life
allowed in Scripture; but have not like nature of Sacraments with the o^het two:
for they have no visible sign or Element ordained by God. The Sacraments were
not instituted by Christ to be gazed on or carried about; but that we should
duly use them, and in such only as receiv them worthily, they have a wholesome
effect or operation: but they that receiv the same unworthily, purchase to
themselfs damnation, as saint Paul says.

Article 26. Though in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with the
good, and sometime have chief authority in ministration of the word and
Sacraments: yet since they do not the same in their own name but in Christ's,
and minister by his Commission or authority, we may use their ministry, both in
hearing Gods word and receiving the Sacraments; nor is the effect of Christ's
Ordinances taken away by their wickedness, nor the grace of Gods gifts impaired
from such as by Faith rightly receiv the Sacraments ministered to them: which
are effectual by reason of Christ's institution and promiss, tho they be
ministered by evil men. Nevertheless it apperta^^s to the Churches Discipline,
that inquiry be made of evil Ministers, and that they be accused by those which
have knowledge of their offenses; and finaly being found guilty, by just judgment
be deposed.

Article 27. Baptism is not only a sign of Profession, and mark of distinction;
whereby Christians are dis^erned from others not Christened: but is also a sign
of Regeneration or new birth, whereby as by an instrument, they that receiv
Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church: the promises of sins f^rgivnes,
and our adoption to be sons of God by the holy Ghost, are visibly signed and
sealed, Faith confirmed, and Grace increased by virtu of prayer to God. The
Baptism of young Infants in any wise is to be retained in the Church, as most
consonant to Christ's institution.

Article 28. The Lords Supper is not only a sign of Christians lov, which they
ought to have among themselfs, but rather a Sacrament of our Redemption by
Christ's death: so that to such as worthily receiv the same, the Bread which we
break is partaking of Christ's body, and the cup of Blessing is a partaking of
his Blood. Transubstantiation or change of the substance of Bread and Wine,
cannot be proved by holy Writ, but repugns the plain words of Scripture,
overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and givs occasion to sundry
superstitions. Christ's Body is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper only after
a spiritual heavenly manner; and the mean whereby it is received and earen is
Faith. This Sacrament by Christ's Ordinance, was not reserved, carried about,
lifted up, or worshipped.

Article 29. The wicked and such as be void of life by Faith, tho they do
carnaly and visibly press with their teeth (as saint Austin says) the
Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood: yet in no wise are partakers of Christ;
but rather do eat and drink the Sign or Sacrament of so great a thing to their
condemnation.

Article 30. The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to lay people: for both
parts of the Lords Sacrament; by Christ's Ordinance and commandment ought to be
administered unto al Christian men.

Article 31. The Offering of Christ once made, is that right perfect
Redemption, Propitiation, and Satisfaction for all sins of the whole world, both
Original and Actual, and there is no other satisfaction but that alone. Wherefore
the Sacrifices of Masses, in which it was commonly said the Priests did offer
Christ for quick and dead, to have remission of pain and guilt; are blasphemous
fables and dangerous deceipts.

Article 32. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are not commanded by Gods Law either
to vow the estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage: but it is also
lawful for them, as for all other Christian men, to marry at their own
discretion; as they shall judge it to serve better to godliness.

Article 33. That person which by open denunciation of the Church, is rightly
cut off from the unity thereof and excommunicat, ought to be taken by the
multitud of the whole Faithful as an Heathen or Publican, til he be openly
reconciled by penance, and received into the Church by a Judge that has
authority thereto.

Article 34. It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be one or
utterly like in all places: for they have bin diverse and changed at al times,
according to diversity of Countries, Times, and men's manners; so that nothing be
ordained against Gods word. Who ever does willingly or purposly on his private
judgment openly break the Churches Traditions and Ceremonies, which be not
repugnant to holy Writ; but be ordained and approved by common authority; ought
to be rebuked openly, that others may fear to do the like, as one that
offends against the public Order of the Church, and wounds the consciences
of weak Brethren. Every particular or National Church has authority to
ordain, change, and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church ordained only by
man's authority, so that al be done to edefying.

Article 35. The secund book of Homilies (whose several titles are joined to
this Article) contain Godly wholesome doctrins, and necessary for these times; as
the former book does, set forth under Edward 6: therefore we judge them to be
read in Churches by all Ministers diligently and distinctly, that the People may
understand them. Their names are these: 1 Of the right use of the Church. 2
Against peril of Idolatry. 3 Of repairing and keeping clean Churches. 4 Of good
Works: first of Fasting. 5 Against Gluttony and Drunkenness. 6 Against excess in
Apparel. 7 Of Prayer. 8 Of the place and time of Prayer. 9 That Common Prayer
and Sacraments ought to be in a known tongue. 10 Of the reverend estimation of
Gods Word. 11 Of Alms doing. 12 Of Christ's Nativity. 13 Of Christ's Passion. 14
Of Christ's Resurrection. 15 Of the worthy receiving the Sacrament of Christ's
Body and Blood. 16 Of the Gifts of the holy Ghost. 17 For the Rogation days. 18
Of the state of Matrimony. 19 Of Repentance. 20 Against ^^lenes. 21 Against
Rebellion.

Article 36. The Book of consecrating Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of
Priests and Deacons set forth under Edward 6, and then confirmed by Parliament,
contains al things necessary to such consecrating and ordering; nor has it
ought that of it self is supersticious or ungodly. Therefore whoever are
consecrated or ordered according to the Rites of that Book, since the secund
year of that King to this time, or hereafter shall be consecrated or ordered
according to the same; We decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and lawfully
consecrated and ordered.

Article 37. The Kings Majesty has chief Power in this Realm of England, and
his other Dominions; to whom the chief Government of all estates (whether
Ecclesiastic or Civil) in all Causes does appertain, nor ought to be subject
unto any foreign Jurisdiction. Whereas we attribute chief Government to the
Kings Majesty (whereby we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be
offended) we giv not to our Prince the ministering of Gods word or Sacraments;
which thing the Injunctions also sometime set forth by our late Queen Elizabeth,
do plainly testify. But that only Prerogativ, which was ever given to al Godly
Princes in holy Scripture by God himself; which is, That they shall rule al
Estates and Degrees committed to their charge (whether Ecclesiastic or
Temporal) and restrain with the Civil Sword al stu^born and evil doers. The
Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England. The Laws of the
Land may punish Christian men with death for heinous grievous offenses. It is
lawful for Christians, at commandment of the Magistrate, to wear Weapons and
serve in Wars.

Article 38. The Goods of Christians are not common touching the right, title,
and possession of the same, as Anabaptists falsely boast: yet every man ought of
such things as he has, liberaly to give Alms to the Poor according to his
ability.

Article 39. As we confess vain and rash swearing to be forbid in Christian
men, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: so we judge that Christian
Religion does not prohibit, but a man may swear when a Magistrate requires it in
a cause of Faith and Charity; so that it be done as the Prophets teach,
according to Justice, Judgment, and Truth, for the composing of strife.

Articuli Lambethae cusi. The Articles of Lambeth.
An Appendix of nine Articles touching Praedestination; agitated by John
Archbishop of Canterbury, and others An. 1595. at Dr. Whitakers instance,
against three Propositions of Dr. Baro a Frenchman, Lady Margarets Professor at
Cambridg.
Article 1. GOd from eternity predestined some men to life, and reprobated the
rest to death or damnation.

Article 2. The moving or efficient cause of Predestination to life, is not any
foresight of Faith, Perseverance, good Works, or any thing in the persons
praedestinated, but only in the Will of Gods good pleasure.

Article 3. Of the Predestinat there is a prefined certain number, which can
neither be increased nor diminished.

Article 4. They that are not predestinat to salvation, shall necessarily be
condemned for their sins.

Article 5. True livly justifying Faith, and sanctifying Spirit of God, is not
extinguished, does not fall off, nor vanish in the Elect, either finaly, or
totally.

Article 6. A man truly believing or endued with justifying Faith, is certain,
by or with full persuasion of Faith, of his sins forgivenes and everlasting
salvation by Christ.

Article 7. Saving Grace is not given, nor communicated, nor granted to al men,
whereby they may be saved if they will.

Article 8. No man can come to Christ unles it be given to him, and unless the
Father draw him; nor are al men drawn of the Father, that they come to the Son.

Article 9. It is not in the free choice and power of every man to be saved.

These Assertious or Positions, like many mo, are obtruded in general, obscure,
ambiguous terms, subject to diverse interpretations.

Animadversio apposita: A useful Animadversion.
THe first Proposition is true de facto, but treats not of the order and manner,
why God elected some and reprobated the rest; which is the debate.

The second designs the moving efficient cause of election; but mentions not the
object (whether it be man simply, or man a sinner, or man repentant, or man
persisting obstinat and obdurat) which is all the question: for Gods foresight
is no efficient cause of his Predestination, but his Will.

The third of a set number not to be increased or diminished, is a very verity
in regard of Gods infallible foreknowledge and immutable Will.

The fourth is a bifront Janus most ambiguous; for if it suppose
non-praedestination to necessitat condemnation for sin, it puts non causam pro
causa: but if it make non-praedestination a mere negativ in God, and supposes
sin unrepented the cause; God may in true Justice condemn the sinner that
neglects the remedy; for every one perishes by his own default, as Preachers
inculcat daily.

The fifth is generally granted, That the elect do not fall away finaly or
totaly: but who they are no mortal man knows, and al men may fall.

The sixth in a true sens is true, That Believers, being reconciled to God by
repentance, may be certain of their present condition by a full persuasion of
Faith; yet must not presume of infallible perseverance, since many Saints
through frailty have fallen dangerously.

The seventh is true in part, That effectual saving Grace is not given to al,
that they may be saved if they will: but sufficient is offered to al (and that
seriously or intentionaly) if they will use and not refuse, reject, or resist
the means, working out their salvation with fear and trembling.

The eighth is to be rightly expounded, that no man can com to the Son unless
the Father draw him; and al men are not drawn by him: but it is because he
foresees that they be obdurat, and will not com when caled; for his prescience
is the condition (not the cause) of proceeding.

The last is indubitat, that it is not in every man's nay in no man's free choice
and power to be saved without Grace; but by help thereof, and use of the means
prescribed in the Gospel, any man may be saved, if he will cooperat with Gods
Grace, and not wilfully reject the same.

Dr. John Rainolds at Hampton Court Conference (beside many mo both before and
since) petioned, that these 9 Lambethian Articles might be annexed to the other
39 by public authority; but could never obtain it, because their meaning or
construction was very dubious or dissonant to the true sens of our Churches
seventeenth Article, which handles the point of Predestination more plainly and
perfectly then these.

It Is said that Dr. Whitgift Archbishop granted this discussion to gratify Dr.
Whitakers importunity, and pacify that present Cantabrigian fury; but left it
in such doubtful terms, that no prejudice might occur to the said Article of
Predestination predefined.

THESIS I.
Animae Humanae productio: Production of Man's Soul.
1 A solen Question; Whether every Man's Soul, since Adams, be created or
procreated? THE Case is clear for creating Adams Gen 2. 3.
Soul; God breathed into his nostrils the Spirit of life; whereof S. Austins
Axiom (respect still had to this first Souls production) is infallibly true; it is
created in infusing, and infused in creating. Of Eve it is said, God in a deep
Genesis 2. 21. 23.
sleep took one of Adams ribs (closing up flesh in its stead) and the Rib he
made a Woman. The learned say it was no dead bone, but animat, the material
part being extended to a shapeful human body, and the spiritual at the same
instant diffused over the whole and every part, to make a perfect Woman; so
caled, because taken totaly out of Man sans mention of any Soul infusion: It
appears not that the Soul therein died, nor can her Soul be caled part of his
more then her body, though both extracted from him: nor can two be confused,
but the same transfused in all and every part (as the Souls Nature is) whole in
the whole, and whole in every part of the body.

Of Christ S. Luke speaks: God sent the Angel Gabriel to a Virgin espoused to
Joseph, who said Hail Mary; lo, thou shall Luke 1. 26. to the 36.
bear a Son, and call his name Jesus. Then said she, How shall this be since I
know not a man? He answered, The Holy Ghost shall com upon thee, and power of
the most high overshadow thee; therefore that holy thing to be born of thee,
shall be caled the Son of God: So the manner of his conception was metaphisical
or miraculous without male-seed ineffably and incomprehensibly by the Holy
Ghost: yet was he according to his whole humanity conceived, formed, fostered in
the womb, nine Solar months or 39 weeks (the usual time or term of women's
gravidation) as other Embryons, being like to us in all things, save sin only,
from which he was privileged, because the Vessel divinely purified: So that if
other Souls be created, his was; if generated, his was likewise. The debate
then concerns al mankind and every individual Soul; which is a perplexed knot
to unty, and intricat Maze to tread aright. This blindness bewrais our innat
ignorance, who scars know what a Soul is, whence it proceeds, or how it is
produced; Nosce teipsum being the hardest lesson to learn, which none ever well
attained.

Ignorant Homines, quae sit Natura Animai: Lucretius.

Nata sit, an contra Nascentibus insinuetur?
An simul intereat nobiscum morte dire^pta?
An tenebras Erebi visat, vastasque lacunas
An Pecudes alias divinitus ingrediatur?
What the Souls nature is, men know not well;
Nor whether bred, or in Babes infused, can tell.
Whether by death, with us, it quit does quel?
Or else goes to the dark deep Cells of Hell?
Or by Gods power, in other Creatures dwell?
God knows himself, and ^hen al things intuitivly in himself; but man other
things bette^ then himself: yet how can one take measure of any thing (says
Pliny) that is ignorant of himself? To pass by all abstrus virtues of Vegetals,
arcane miracles of Minerals, admirable properties of precious Stones, and view
their outer surface or color only: Who can tell why Grass is green, a Ruby red,
or Pearl pale? But what strange strife has been about the principles of our
Nature, and production of both Parts? For the corporeal, how do Physicians and
Philosophers jar or jangle about the seed, whence it should proced? Archelaus
asserts it a milky slime or mud drawn from the earth: A cold muddy conceit.
Pythagoras, the scum or froth of our best blood: A frothy fancy. Alcmaeon, part
of the Brain: A brainless buz. Plato, a distilling marrow of the back bone.
Democritus, a substance extracted from al members. Zeno* Man's spirit and spoil
of his Soul. Epicurus, a fragment both of Body and Soul. Hippocrates, a portion
of radical moisture. Aristotle, an excrement of the last concoction in the
solid parts. Others, blood refined by heat of the Genitals. Al which are lame,
not expressing the efficient, matter, or form: For seed materially consists
both of Blood and Spirit, concocted into a white frothy humor by the Testicles
(which Females have latent, tho not prominent) for the use of procreation; and
from them (not of brain, back bone, or other part) soly derived: But whether
females send or spend any operativ geniture, is much controverted. The
Perepatetics deny it: But Galenists contest, that no conception can be without
concurrence of both Parents seed, which is indubitably the truest Opinion.

The spiritual part affords much more matter or fuel of altercation about the
Soul: 1. What it is? Aristole refels diverse Tenets; but his own description
halts at last: it is easy to say Galens Crasis: but in general, an essential
quickening form, which givs Plants a life vegetant, Beasts a sentient comprising
the Former, and Men an intelligent including both; as a Pentagon contains a
Tetragon, and that a Trigon. For Souls being Forms, and those relativs, not
subsisting alone; but, as parts of compounds, are hatdly defined or disquired.

2. What manner of substance it is; whether corporal or incorporeal? for God
only is simply immaterial, and al things else, in some sort corporal, tho not
visible; as neither is pure Air. Hence diverse Divines aver Angels to be
corporeal, because finit and limited to place; being bounded, as it were, with a
superfi^ies, that they cannot be ubiquitants every where or elswher at once:
Much more then Men's Souls, which live in Bodies. The Schools say a Body is in
place circumscriptivly, a Spirit definitivly: be it so: but is not definit so
to be here, as not to be elsewhere? Do not Spirits ascend, descend, and change
place? Is not their motion made in time, tho very swift? Are not these acts
proper passions of a Body, though impalpable, invisible, imperceptible? God
then is a Spirit in creat, purely immaterial; Angels creat comparatly material;
and so are Souls separat, much more those in Bodies. But what manner of
substance, whether aereal, etherial, or subtler sublimer essence, none, save
the Father of Spirits can define or determine.

3. How it attains or acquires knowledge? Whether by remembrance Plato affirms,
supposing a precreation, which is improbable? Or by the senses service, as
Aristotle asserts, which is ignoble? Or by her own inbred seeds of
understanding, which is most honorable? the senses conduce much to manure the
mind and improv science; but our Soul of it self apprehends, judges,
retains, reasons, resolves without instruction, though better or wors,
according to the various temper or symetry of the brain, her chief organ: For
it is absurd that so divine an essence should rely on vile deceitful sens, which
only comprehends accidents (color, sound, savor, odor) not the forms or nature
of things, much less Natures secrets, or universal insensible objects. Nay if
science com from sense, then such as have sharpest sight, hearing, etc. should
be wisest or wittiest, which often befalls contrary; and men born deaf, dumb, or
blind, are of acutest entelechy: therefore that principle of Peripatum (Nothing
is in the intellect, which was not first under sens) can scars stand sound: for
though it be furthered by sens, yet it depends not thereon; since the senses are
subordinat, and know nothing without it.

4. How many Souls cohabit in one body, whether three or die with the body; but
intellectiv livs eternaly. The most orthodox allow only one invested or endowed
with the faculties forenamed, which die not with the body tho their acts and
operations ceas for want of fit organs: as the power of seeing remains when the
eyes ere dimmed or torn out. Nor does diversity of faculties and functions
derogat from the Souls unity, more then different offices or operations in the
Sun to soften, harden, melt, dry up, etc. else there must be many Souls in the
Microcosm, and Suns in the Macrocosm: but as the Sun suffers no decay, when
during an eclips it neither shines nor warms: so the Soul dies not nor her
faculties, though after separation she uses no faculties being destitut of
organs. Zanohy holds the Souls unity consisting of three essential parts;
whereof the Vegetal being first infused, at coming of the Sentient perishes
(others of his opinion say vanishes or removes) and that upon access of the
Rational, which is harsh doctrine to digest: For hereby a duple death must insu
by destruction or departure of those two first Souls. Indeed they are distinct
essences in Plants, Beasts, and Men; but subordinat subservient faculties to
Man's Soul, and cannot subsist without it.

5. Whence it coms, or how it enters this earthy mansion, Sparta, scope, or
subject of this subsequent speculation. For as there be three productions of Man
(beside the common) foretouched* First, Without natural Father and Mother, as
Adam created by God. The secund, From a carnal Father without Mother, as Eve
out of Adams Rib. The third, Of a Mother without human Father, as Christ of the
Virgin Mary, by the Holy Ghost. So are said to be three several origins of Man's
Soul. 1. By infusion, as Adams. 2. By transfusion, as Eves. 3. By Traduction or
procreation, as al their Posterities since; which is the debat here to be
discussed, but hardly decided or defined.

Diverse dissident opinions occur which shall be fully and fairly vented or
ventilated, specially the two principal of Creation and Traduction. They are
reduced to three general heads: 1. The efficient, whence Souls com, whether of
God, Angels, or Men? 2. The matter whereof, whether of something or nothing? 3.
The time when, whether from eternity or eviternity? The particulars shall be
handled promiscuously.

1. Pythagoras and Plato thought Man's Soul to proced Opinions.
from the Worlds Soul of celical immortal substance; but created by God in set
number, not to be augmented or diminished; which in du time descend to be
united with bodies designed for them. These, being separat, pass into other
bodies, as the Jews deemed, or dreamed, when some said Christ was John Baptist,
or Elias, or one of the Prophets, who were dead.

2. Origin, the father of fancies or fopperies, held, That God created al at
once, keeping them in a Treasury to be sent into bodies prepared for them;
because he rested from al creatific Works the seventh day, and does not still
form new Souls. His reason is better then his opinion.

3. Philo, the Maniches, and Priscillianists, from the Stoics, suppos them al
created at once of Gods own substance; because he breathed into man's face the
Spirit of life, divina particulam aurae; which is not meant his own Spirit, but
a new created by his word, Fiat: which Moses expresses Catanthropopeian by
breathing.

4. The Massilians, from Philaster, maintain them to be made by Angels of Fire
and Spirit; but God is sole Creator.

5. The Traductis are of two sorts: Some hold the Soul is corporeal, and begot
carnally, as the Body; whom saint Austin justly condemns. 6. Others, that it is
a Spirit spiritualy derived from both Parents Souls, with the Seed, like light
from light:

7. So Apollinaris, and many Godly Bishops defended, with most of the Western
Church, as S. Jerome testifies: whom sundry modernists ( Hunnius, Magirus,
Goclenius, Brightman, etc.) follow.

8. The Infusiasts also are bipartit; Some imagine them created without (as
Aristole intimats) and after instilled; which is generaly exploded. 9. Others,
within the Body, That it is created in infusing, and infused in creating. The
two last of each side shall be sifted, but all the rest excluded.

S. Austin and Eucherius hang in bivio between both, who neither deny lineal
traduction from Parents Souls, because al are tainted one from another; nor
jugial creation de novo and nihilo, because universaly received; but conceiv it
cannot be evidently evinced out of sacred Scripture. Many of no mean mark in
the Traductists Tenets.
literary Republic assert, That the Soul is produced or procreated from
Parents, by an Animific virtu conveied with the Seed imparted successively from
the first Soul; which had a power, property, or prerogativ given by Gods
general blessing ( be fruitful and multiply) to beget a spiritual and immortal
substance like it self, in a mortal material Body; but contamined with the
stain of that sin, which was contracted by our Protoparents primitiv
disobedience (in whom al Mankind offended, as the Root) against the Creators
command and commination: so Traduction, if duly weighed, does no way wound or
weaken its immortality: For God who inspired an immortal essence into a Casket
of Clay, gav it a faculty or energy to produce the like endued with the same
immortal authoquality, no less inseparable (though not essential) then
Rationality or Risibility; according to the received Rule, Naturae sequitur
semina quodque suae. This is the ground work, or chief Ancher-hold, whereto they
stick like Limpets to a Rock. But on the other part, how that primeval
pollution of our first Parents prevarication (which at once defiles both Body
and Soul) linealy transcending through the loins of Mankind, should infect a
spiritual pure-made Soul (wherein no corporal thing can impress) unless it be
derived from Parents polluted Souls, is a very hard Theory to conceiv or
comprehend: Nor do the many coined curious distinctions of Schools satisfy the
scruple, if strictly scanned; though Cobweb-Lawns will suffice to Partialists.
It Is a lepry inseparably hereditary, which may be sullied or slubbered over
with palliativ salvs: But all the wiles or wavings of men's wits in the world,
cannot clearly cure it, if it be created pure; which traduction easily
skinneth. The Souls immortality on one side, and original sins traduction on
the other, are two difficil tasks to reconcile; but neither repugning to
evident Scripture, nor to any Article of Faith which concerns salvation. Indeed
the first Council of Bracarum in Spain, censured Priscillianists for holding
with Origin, That al Souls were created together and sinned in Heaven; but the
Apollinarians, Tertullianists, or mere Traductists, never were condemned of
error or heresy, for asserting the Souls traduction from Parents Souls, which
ever had pious Patrons in the Church; nor does any absurdity arise therfrom.

The Infusiastists build on these foundations. 1. That our Infusiasts Grounds.
Protoparents personal sin becam natural or universal by derivation from the
Root 2. That God in his prohibition and commination (Of the Tree of knowledge
thou shall not eat; for in the day thou eatest, thou shall die the death)
infolded an implicit Covenant for all his Posterity to be liable thereto, as
Traitors Children are tainted: Hereof Saint Paul says, As by one Romans 5. 12.
man sin entered into the World, and death by sin: so death went over al men,
since al have sinned; viz. in him and by him: for when the Parents eat sour
grapes, the Childrens teeth were set on edg; and the whole race of man liable to
duple death: damnati S. Bernard.
antequam nati, forlorn before born. 3. The Soul sinned in consenting and
lusting, the Body in tasting and eating: so both are guilty. 4. Neither Soul
nor Body apart is the adequat subject of sin, but both united, or the whole man:
the Body subjectum a quo of derivation, the Soul in quo of inhesion, the whole
de quo of predication; to whom al accidents of both parts are denominatly
ascribed. 5. It cannot properly be styled sin, til the Souls infusion, because
the Embryo is inanimat and imperfect; but the rational Soul must first animat,
yet it can be styled sin. For whatever is not capable of Gods Image (as seed is
not) is not liable to its privation; because the habit and privation belong to
the same subject. 6. The Principium a quo is derived by seed from Parents,
begetting a depraved disposition in Man, whereto a polluted womb ads more fuel;
which by the Souls union breaks forth into a flame, and sets the whole house on
fire; both parts together corrupting and being corrupted by a kind of
emanation. So before it is infused, we are said to contract sin from Parents, as
Infants draw diseases (Stone, Gowt, Lepry, etc.) that is, the impression or
inclination only. 7. This sin is no simple privation, as blindness which
deprivs sight for ever; but potential only, including a positiv propension
thereto. 8. There be three degrees of purity. 1. Absolut of God. 2. Subordinat,
according to the creatures capacity, of Angels and Man in innocence. 3.
Comparat, when being created pure, they decline from it: So our Souls being
formed subordinatly pure, soon degenerat by natural concupiscence; being, in
respect of Adam and Angels, less pure, because procliv to sin. 9. The manner of
imparting it from Adam to al Posterity, is rather to be believed (says Doctor
Whitaker) then inquired, and better inquired then explored; but easier explored
then expressed: For its nature is most arcane, and the conveiance much more
obscure. 10. Parents Souls work to frame the whole compound Man, not by giving
being to the new Soul, but by preparing a place to unite it with the Body: So
they may be said to concur in its production cuasaly, by disposing the Body to
receiv it; not formaly by procreating it, as Peter Lombard and his School
Sectators define.

These are their curious Cautions, and best bulworks of defens, yet al too
little. To the Question, Why God sends a pure Soul into a polluted prison? They
say, because she has a natural necessary pronenes thereto, being ordained to
unite with a Human Body, and both guilty of Adams sin. For it is not created a
simple Spirit to subsist by it self, but in the Body with relation to it: which
being derived from Adam, draws the guilt of his sin by that preparation and
union, without carnal traduction; so she becoms guilty both privativly and
positivly; yet God no Author, Actor, nor Abettor therein. This sin then folows
creation by accident: for at Adams Souls infusion, was men's sana in corpore
sano; but in every union since is sin. So we must distinguish between Gods
making and Adams marring: for he creats every Soul in substance sound; but
concupiscence (which S. John sais, is not of the Father) 1 John 2. 16.
creeps in instantly by Gods desertion; since every Soul (even before it is
infused) is virtualy guilty of Adams fall, as he was Father and Fountain of al
Mankind, both in morals and naturals; because God covenanted either explicitly,
as Cumel contests; or implicitly, as Sotus says; that he should stand or fall
for himself and al his Offspring, by his proper power of unrestrained Free Will.
The Schoolmen dissent diversely, whether original sin be positiv, privativ, or
mixed? If positiv, whether Re or Ratione? whether God does necessitat the act
or entity, and Man the defect or obliquity? whether he pacted explicitly with
Adam, or implicitly only? but such subtle nicities shall be left to the Schools.

Zanchy the best Patron of Soul-creation, ads mo Propositions. (...). 2. de
Hom. ^reat. c. 5.
1. That God decreed al things eternaly to be executed in time, and creats no
mo nor fewer Souls then predecreed, and as they become stained by union. 2. That
his Decrees are just and immutable, nor is it unjust to unite pure Souls with
sin-tainted Bodies. 3. Though he made al Decrees at once, in respect of
himself; yet must they be effected or executed successivly in respect of the
things: as his decree to permit sin, and deriv it by one to al Mankind;
subservs to the decree of Election and Reprobation. 4. When Adam received
integrity, he had it as the root of al, whence his righteousness is styled
original; and we were created in him just after Gods Image. 5. His disobedience
and fall was semblably ours; because the Precept ( Thou shall not eat) belongs to
al in him the Stock-father. 6. His transgression being the Head, is justly
imputed to us, as Members, and the coruption of Nature or proclivity to evil
inflicted as the penalty thereof. This Saint Paul plainly proclaims in the
Antithesis betwixt Adam and Christ: whose Romans 5. 15.
righteousness whereby we are justified, has two parts. 1. The Grace or gift,
which with remission of sins by his obedience is imputed ours. 2. Regeneration
or Renovation of Nature as the effect. So original sin is Adams disobedience
imputed to us together with its guilt; and corruption of Nature not only a sin,
but a punishment on al, which sinned by his fall. 7. When the Soul is said to be
stained by union with the Body; it is not meant properly by any Physical
impression: but so soon as both are united, a man is formed, to whom the guilt
of Adams sin is instantly imputed; and by it a propension to al evil inevitably
folows, because the Command and Commination was given to al Mankind in A^am.
Thus he is driven to decline sins inhesion, inferring that the Soul is not
infected by the Body, as Wine by a mu^y Cask; but by union of both a Man is
born Adams son, to whom his disobedience is only imputed: but the corruption or
contagion imposed as a pu^^shment by divine decree, and not by any action of
the Body. This is a kind of Gallimaufry; how sound, let Divines define: but
certainly original sin is inherent in the principles of Nature like Gehezais
lepry in all Adams Progeny, and not imputativ only.

Hinc lolium infoelix, ^vae hinc oriuntur a^verbae.
Hence baleful tares do sprout,
From hence sour Grapes grow out.
The grounds thus laid, and materials brought in place, the building will be
better framed: But for fuller disquisition, the Infusiastists Arguments with
the Traductists Answers shall first be fairly filed: then their Objections with
the others Solutions orderly mustered.

Arg. Dust (says Solomon) shalreturn to earth, as it was; Eccls. 12. 7.
and the Spirit to God that gav it: Ergo every Soul or Spirit coms from God.

Answ. This evidently relats to the first creation of both: for no man's body
since Adams is made of dust as his was; but of Seed and Blood; and God gav or
inspired his Soul, whence al others derivativly or secundarily com, and shall
return to the original Giver, as the body shall to earth its Mother: so this
provs the Souls immortality; but no way disprovs the Traducibility: since every
particular Soul proceds mediatly from God the first Fountain.

Arg. The Lord (says Zechary) spread the Heavens, laid the Zech. 12. 1.
Earths foundation, and formed Man's Spirit within him: Ergo God created it in
the Body.

Answ. This is the pregnantst place, and best proof in all sacred Scripture, for
intrinsecal infusion by creation: but intends apertly (as the former did
covertly) the protoplasm or primordial production: for when God spread the
Heavens, and founded the Earth, he then formed Man's Soul within him, but ever
since ceased to creat either new Spirits or Souls: so this is no plain evidence
for jugial creation of every particular Soul.

Arg. S. Paul makes an Antithesis between the Father of Heb. 12 9.
our Bodies, and Father of Spirits: Ergo God is sole Author and Creator of
Souls; not the P^^^^ts.

Answ. God is the Father of Spirits, as well in regard of Angels and Saints
(which is not the Apostles aim) as spiritual regeneration there intended,
without reference to Soul-creation: yet because he breathed the first Soul
(whence al since are derived) he may be caled the primitiv Father of Souls,
though one immediately beget another.

Arg. God, in Isaiah, says, I have made the breath, meaning Isa^ 57. 16.
Man's Soul, which he originaly breathed in: Ergo he only creats it; nor is it
carnaly generated.

Answ. This is meant in S. Paul's sens; in him we live, mov, and have our being:
or it may be referred to the first Souls inspiration, without successiv
creation.

Arg. Zedekiah swore to Jeremy, As the Lord livs that made Jer. 38. 16.
us these Souls, I will not s^ay thee: Ergo it is evident that he makes al men's
Souls.

Answ. Some interpret it by Synecdoche (like the seventy Souls issued from
Jacobs loins) the principal part for the person; as the Lord livs that made us
both: some literaly of life, as the Lord livs by whom we live, I will not bereav
thy life. Yet the words may be granted to imply the Souls creation (though he
meant not properly or purposly the Souls production) rather then persons or
life's: for it is a greater emphasis in the Oath, as the Lord lives who created
our Souls, I will not take away t^ine which he created: Howbeit in this sens, he
could not destroy the Soul it self (sav only sever it from the body) but life
the effect thereof. Take it either way, or any way, the words may be aptly
applied to the Souls primitiv creation, sans exception or contradiction.

Arg. Godfashions Men's Hearts (says David) and understands Psalm. 133. 14.
al their Works: Ergo he forms our Souls, there understood by Hearts; as it is
usual in Scripture.

Answ. The inference is infirm; for by Hearts here, is meant the Will and
Affections; but by fashioning disposing. Other Scriptural Texts are pressed;
but of no moment.

Arg. Whatever is generated shall be corrupted, which is an irrefragable
principle in Philosophy and Theology: Ergo Man's Soul, if procreated must be
mortal.

Answ. This authentic Axiom properly concerns compounds, which are the ad^quat
subjects of generation and corruption; not principal parts, which are only
ingenerated or congenerated; but it is verified in all things bred of a
corruptible matter, else not: For God the Son is bego^ of his Father, and the
holy Ghost proceds from both; yet eternal, without beginning: so Angels and
Man's Soul were created ex nihilo, yet eviternal without ending: but all the rest
entire composed of the common Chaos (Heavens, Elements, Meteors, Mixtils,
Vegetals, Animals, and Man's Body) which are corruptible in whole or parts; and
of these that Maxim is rightly understood; not of Men's Souls, which are
generated of Parents Souls, having al a divine faculty by divine blessing to
beget an immortal essence like itself.

Arg. It Is a disparagement to Man, the noblest Creature, that his divine part
should proced of impure seed like Beasts: Ergo this opinion is to be exploded.

Answ. It Is his chief dignity, that he has power of or in himself to beget
both parts specialy one so noble and divine; else were he wors then Beasts in
that behalf: nor does it proced of seed; but from an Animific virtu of the
Parents Souls conveied with the seed. If then it be immortal, as undoubtedly
it is, what skils it in that respect, whether it be created or generated? and
what difference, whether God be immediate Plastes, or giv man power, with his
general blessing, to produce it by successiv propagation, having the same power
of immortality which the first had by himself infused; and power to beget the
like incorruptible essence by his special benediction?

Repl. If any Animific virtu be conveied with the seed, then must it be reduced
to act instantly, at first conception, which is most imperfect; or gradualy,
which argues divisibility: But both those are absurd, and abhorrent in Nature:
Ergo no such virtu can be conveied with the seed, much less proced from it.

Answ. Both Soul and Body are begot in an instant, as every conception is made:
but as bodily lims and lineaments are gradualy shaped and strengthened from weak
waterish rudiments, to more maturity: so the Soul exercises her vegetativ
funct^ons of nutricion, sensitiv of motion, and intellectiv of reason da^ly by
slow degrees, as organs are apparated or accommod^^ed; which argues no
divisibility: For all things in Nature (as God proceeded at Creation) attain to
perfection by divisible degrees; yet no division in the Forms or Souls, which
are conceived in a moment.

Arg. If there be virtu in or with the seed, to beget a Soul; then when it is
shed, spilt, or spent upon barren or gravid wombs, so many Souls are lost;
which is harsh and horrid to hold: Ergo no such Animific energy is conveied
with the seed; but al Souls proced from God.

Answ. No Souls are lost, by loss or sterility of seed; but only a power or
possibility to produce and procreat them: which being not reduced into act
perishes or is frustrat: so is the said virtu void to beget so many Bodies,
and prepare them for reception of Souls; which is alone, and no absurdity
arises of either, but presses both sides alike.

Arg. If Souls be begot, then every efflux, shift, and abortiv is a Man: But
what manner of Man will such a shapeless senseless substance be at the general
Resurrection, when every one shall resum his identic numerical Body? Ergo the
generation of Souls is subject to sundry absurdities in Nature and common
Reason.

Answ. Such as hold Infusion at time of conception (as Traductists inferences
violently enforce) are liable to the same difficulties: so are they that set it
at quickening: for if it miscarries the day after (which a few hours distance
makes no difference) what manner of Man will that be? cannot God perfect the one
so well as the other? do not al bodies turn to dust? do not Divines say al
shall rise in such stature as at Christ's age? Why not then the first coagulation
so well as an inform infirm Embryon? cannot omnipotence extend a Body into any
dimensions, so well as amend al imperfections? These are arcan mysteries, known
only to him that knows al, and can do al in all: But Insusiasts are equaly
engaged to answer it, since the power to prepare a Body for the Souls union is
defeated or destroyed, and by consequence so many Souls lost, which by divine
preordination should be created and infused: but it crosses not Traduction;
and men must be wise to sobriety, not searching into Gods secrets.

Arg. It Is improbable, that impure material seed should be the conduit to
convey a power of producing so pure a substance or divine Spirit: Ergo, etc.

Answ. No more then that the Body, a mere putrid mass, should be the seat or
subject of the Soul it self, which is a divine, immortal, immaterial essence.

Arg. Spirits do not multiply or beget one another; nor can Angels propagat or
generat, because Spirits: but Man's Soul is a Spirit, so scripturaly styled:
Ergo, etc.

Answ. Simple Spirits cannot propagat, and Angels are individuals, subsisting
alone: but human Souls organized and united to Bodies wherein they exist, being
so ordained to preserv the race of Mankind. Some distinguish that Compounds
generat, and principal parts only propagat: but this is a vain evasion, no
veritable satisfaction: for propagation properly pertains to Kinds, generation
to Individuals, and both to Compounds: nor are the terms convertible in the
abstract; for every generation is not propagation: but in the concret or
subject, what ever is generated is propagat, and reciprocaly. To apply it,
neither Soul nor Body is truly said to beget or be begot; but the whole Man, who
begets and is begot completly, but the parts incompletly.

Arg. Marsilius Ficinus prescribes three sorts of production. 1. The making of
Man's Soul from nothing into being, caled Creation. 2. The mutation of a
lifeless Body into an Animal by the Soul, hight Formation. 3. The change of an
Embryo into the whole Compound, clyped Generation. The object or Terminus of
Creation, is immortality, of Formation a Soul; not considered simply, but as in
a Body; of Generation an Animal, consisting of both. Now (says he) in every
Generation is a decision of something from the Begetter, which a Soul has not;
because it admits no division nor decision: Ergo it cannot generat.

Answ. The Traductists exclud the first branch, except with reference to Adams
Soul soly; yet grant immortality to be the Terminus in production of al. The
other two they apply to Compounds only, wherein the Soul sends no material seed
or substance by decision* as the Body does; but only a procreativ virtu with
the spirit of seed, to produce the like spiritual substance: the manner whereof
is inscrutable, as is also original sin: for Man is Natures miracle and Epitom^
of al Creatures; yet differs from al, having an immortal spirit in a
corruptible casknet, and his generation wonderful.

Arg. Beasts Souls die, because bred of seed or with it: Ergo if Men's Souls be
engendered in the same sort, by or with the conveience of seed, they must
likewise perish.

Answ. This is non causa pro causa; for Beasts souls die not soly, because bred
of seed; but specialy because formed at first entirely of the common corruptible
Chaos: But God made man's Body of dust, whereto it must return; but infused or
insp^red a Soul, which is immortal or eviternal, like Angels, partaking the
same divine origin.

Arg. If the Soul proceds from both Parents Souls, then either two grow into
one, or their Souls are extracted, and they remain Soulless; or part of their
Souls passes, and so are divisible: But al these are gross enormites, and
neither possible: Ergo Traduction is no way tolerable.

Answ. Al these inferences are impertinent: for both Parents concur to beget the
Body too; yet two grow not together, nor are they impaired: but God ordained in
course of Nature, that both Sexes shall cooperat in generation: so from their
Bodies flows a material seed with a corporific virtu, to beget a Body; and from
their Souls proceds an animific power with the seeds spirit to produce a Soul:
both which conjoining, is called Prolific in regard of the Compound: yet neither
are the Parents Souls nor any part of them (no more then their Bodies)
extracted or exhausted; but only an energy, issuing from them to generat a new.

Arg. The Soul exercises her essential operations, to Will and Understand,
without help of bodily organs, as appears being separat: Ergo it needs no
Parents seed to its production: for as every thing works, so is its essence and
contrarily, as Aristotle avers: who concluds man's Soul not to depend of the
body, L 2. de genesis Anim. c. 3.
because it works within it.

Answ. The Soul, while it is in the Body, uses its organs in her chief
operations of Will and Intellect, though when separat she needs them not: nor is
Parents seed the efficient of producing, to depend thero^; but only the instrum
ut to carry virtu of producing a new Soul with the seed which impeacheth not
the exerci^e of her chief operations without organs in the Body: nor is there
any sap or solidity (...) this Argument against Traduction, any way however
wrested.

Arg. The Soul dies not with the Body: Ergo it is not generated with it: For
there is the same reason of generation and corruption; since the Souls presence
is the cause of life, as the Suns is of light; and absence of death, as his is
of darkness: so if the Bodies procreation cause the Souls production, its death
must be her perdition.

Answ. This is pithier then a former; viz. whatever is generated shall be
corrupted: But the Bodies generation does not cause the Souls production, since
it is generated with it, not by it: and though it giv the Body life, as the
essential Form; yet dies not with it, as not proceeding from it; but from the
Parents Souls.

Arg. Aristotle asserts, That the Mind or Intellect alone coms from without,
and is of divine origin: Ergo not generated by Parents, as Bodies be.

Answ. It Is thought those words (Sola men's foris adve^it) were foisted into the
Text without any coherence to antecedents or consequents: for no man by mere
reason can conceiv the mystery of Soul-creating: nor do they infer infusion;
for that is done within the Body: Happily he might learn of his Master Plato,
that al Souls were created at once, and descend daily into Bodies designed for
them: but he taught the Souls immortality more confidently (being Natures
principal Secretary) by many evidences of common reason: which if any
Traductist or other Sectist shall doubt or deny, he is wors then an Ethnic or
Atheist; since both Natures light and Scriptures lore so evidently demonstrat it
to every ey: nor does Traduction oppose it.

Arg. Scaliger holds the Soul to be created apart, and infused after du
organization; because if it be introduced at the instant of conception, that
first coagulation must be a Man, which is most absurd: Ergo it is not infused
til the time of quickening; much less engendered by way of Traduction.

Answ. His opinion is no Oracle, and the reason resolved before; That it is no
more absonous to call the first coagulation a Man (imperfect or incomplet) then
a weak waterish Embryo at instant of quickening: Or that a Beasts soul being
begot by seed, should denominat the first rudiments of conception a Beast,
being brought gradualy to more maturity, til time of parturition; but the
quickening is or may be retarded by many human contingents.

Arg. The S^hool-men say, That Eves Soul was created, else Adam would have added
she is Soul of my Soul, so w^l as bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, being
a n^erer relation then those carnal ones, as Divines define: Ergo as their two
first Souls were created, so consequently are al others from generation to
generation.

Answ. So say they, but other learned Clercs gainsay: Scaurus ait, Varus negat,
utri creditis? yet the consequent halts, since their two productions differ from
al else because neither had two Parents, and al else, except Christ, begot by
carnal coition: but specialy because created within the first six dais,
wherafter God rested from al creatific works. To the Antecedent and reason
thereof, it is answered, That she was formed entirely of an anima^ Rib, and the
Soul therein becam hirs by divine operature as the Text seems to speak; for it is
said of Adam, God made Man ( me^^ing the material part) of dust; not made dust
a Man as if both parts came from dust: But of Eve, the Rib made he a Woman
(entirely both Body and Soul) not the Woman of a Rib, as importing the material
part only. Al parts were built of that bone; why not then the Soul too by
diffusion, so well as the integrals by extension? but since Scripture is silent,
let it pass in suspens.

Repl. If Eves Soul came of a Rib, and had no divine origin; then either women
have no Souls (as some Dotards dream) or those material, which will s^ars relish
their palats.

Answ. Not so, nor so: for that Rib had a Soul, which God, by diffusing made
hirs, as he did her B^dy by distending the material part: so both savor of
their several principles; one of spirituality and immarcescibility, the other
of materiality and mortality; but both apt or able to beget alike substance
endowed with the same qualities

Arg Christ's Soul was not traducted from Adam; for then it should be tainted
with his sin, which is blasphemy to assert: E^go not ours, since he is like us
in all things except only sin.

Answ. He was the Woman's seed and Son of Adam according to his whole humanity,
and his Soul produced in the same sort as ours (wh^^her by creation or
generation, is the main Question) being lik^ (...) things (...) sin. For ours,
if cre^ted, are infused no less (...) his; and his by union with a polluted
Body, no freer from sin then ours: so this Stork bites both before and behind
alike: for if he took from his Mother inanimat flesh only, his Soul must thereby
be stained (though created pure) as others are defiled: but one salv shall heal
both sores: for albeit she was conceived in sin and Luke 1. 47.
needed a Savior, as she her self confesses (which Dominicans grant, and
Franciscans deny) yet was sanctified from al stain, and purified from guilt by
the wonderful working of the Holy Ghost; being made a clean Vessel to receiv
and conceiv that holy thing caled the Son of God, even the immaculat Lamb
without spot, slain before the beginning of the World; who could contract no
pollution from her that had none, being perfectly purified, though he should
assume both Body and Soul from her.

Repl. Zanchy says, Some Traductists forced by this Argument, confess, That
Christ's Soul was created, but al else traducted; but the production is like:
Ergo al created.

Answ. Happily he dreams so; but there is no necessity of any such confession or
concession; for the Argument is already plenarily satisfied. Certes Christ had
his whole human Nature from his Mother, by the Holy Ghosts miraculous operature,
in the same manner (by creation or generation) as others have from Parents.

Arg. Three Sects or Septs of Heretics held Traduction. 1. Luciferians, by
Souls transfusion. 2. Marsilians, who denied al Creation. 3. Tertullianists and
Apollinarians, who assert that Souls generat Souls, as Bodies do Bodies: Ergo
Traduction is an Heretical Tenet, condemned by the Church.

Answ. They were condemned Heretics; but Traduction no condemned Heresy, nor a
matter de fide; and inserted for aggravation (as crossing the common received
opinion) to fill up a number, which was usual: yet the two first erred
circumstantialy in that point: But al Heretics held some verities, and the best
Orthodoxists some falsities; since al Mortals are obnoxious to manifold errors.

These are the Infusiastists chief Arguments, with the Traductists Answers
sincerely exhibited: Next follow the Traductists Objections or offensiv
weapons; and Infusiastists defensiv Solutions, taken from their best Armories.

Ob. God bid Man bring forth fruit and fill the earth: but this Ge^. 1. 28.
Precept concerns the whole compound, conflated of Soul and Body: Ergo both
parts proceed from Parents.

Sol. Man is said in some sort, to beget the whole, because by producing and
preparing the material part, he is Author of the union, wherein consists the
whole Humanity, which suffices to univocal generation, though the principal
part be not product by him: How satisfactory this is, shall be left to
Arbitrament.

Ob. God ceased from al creatific works the seventh day, (...). 2. 2.
whereof the infusing of man's Soul was one: Ergo he does not creat multituds of
Souls every moment.

Sol. He ceased from creating Compounds and Species or Kinds; but not from
forms or Essential parts, such as Souls be.

Repl. If he creat al individual Souls (there being numberless births every
instant in the vast univers) then he concurs as a particular Agent or third
Parent: but he is only universal Father of al Creatures: Ergo no particular
third Parent in Man's production.

Sol. God is Omnipotence and Infinity in the Abstract, who can creat millions
of Souls (so well as Worlds) in a moment, by his word Fiat; yet is no particular
Agent or Parent: so the Sequel is denied, since his Word and eternal Decree does
al in all, without any particular concurrence.

Repl. The Souls supposed creation necessarily concurs to Man's generation: But
God is sole Agent therein, using no subordinat: Ergo a particular third Parent:
for if Parents be particular Agents, who only prepare the matter for union; why
not God so too, who creats the Cause, without which no union can be?

Sol. Parents are particular Agents according to Natures ordinary course, but
God metaphysical and extraordinary; yet no particular third Parent.

Ob. If God concurs in every generation (whether lawful or lustful) to creat a
Soul; then he assists al Adulterous, Incestuous, Spurious coitions and
conceptions, which is horrid to imagine or impose; for a Pagan Poet tells us:

Non vacat obscoenis rebus adesse Jovi. Ergo, etc. Jehov is not at leisure To
wait on each man's pleasure:

Sol. He concurs to the Entity or Naturality, not to the Obliquity or Morality
of evil acts, which is no way horrid to hold: for he givs the earth virtu to
multiply al Grain, whether stolen or ones own; yet is not Author or accessory to
the stealing: so he decrees ^o infuse new created Souls into human prepared
Bodies, however begot in Adultery, In^est, or Fornication; yet is no Author,
Actor, or Assistant in the sin.

Ob. Jacobs offspring are by Synecdoche (taking the principal part for the whole
person) styled seventy Souls which came out of his loins: But why are Souls
specialy named, unless they, so well as the Bodies and persons transcend from
Parents?

Sol. It Is said to be, because the preparation of matter for the Souls reception
and union proceeds from them. Be it so: yet this resolvs not, why their Progeny
are caled so many Souls, unless those issu from their loins.

Ob. God created Man in his own Image, and Adam begot Seth in his own likeness:
but this Image and likeness consists soly in the Soul, or in the Humanity; not
in the Body: Ergo Adam begot that part wherein Gods Image chiefly consists, if
not soly resides.

Sol. This is soon resolved: God created Man in his Image of righteousness and
true holiness, as S. Paul expounds it: but Adam begot Seth in his natural
similitud both of body and whole humanity; not of Soul only.

Repl. S. Paul indeed speaks of spiritual Regeneration, by casting off the old
Man and putting on the new in righteousness and true holiness: But where does he
call it Gods Image wherein Adam was created? However, even that spiritual Image
consists soly in the Soul; and Adam begot Seth in his natural likeness: Ergo the
subject of both resemblances, is sp^cialy (if not soly) the Soul; as by
comparing the words (Genesis 5. 1. 3.) plainly appears.

Sol. Seths likeness to Adam consist^ in his whole Nature, which he dispositivly
begot ( totum Hominem, non totum Hominis) by preparing the matter for the Souls
introduction; and consequently the whole Humanity, by union of both parts;
though he had no interest in production of the Soul*

Repl. Adam begot Seth in a triple sim litud (beside that of sin) viz. of Soul,
Body, Person: which personal likeness of Ch^^dren to Parents is also triple. 1.
Specifical, as Men, which mostly follow the Mother because she suppeditats most
matter (both blood and seed) in generation; and for another reason glanced at
by Aristole, that the Male ingenders in another, the Female by another in it
self: for if a Ram couples with a shee-Goat, they produce a Kid of soft hair;
but if a Buck Goat with an Ew, a Lamb of hard wool, as Athaeneus avers. 2.
Sexual, as Male or Female, which proceds from permixtion of both Parents seed
according to predominance: for both have a hot, vigorous, masculin sperm; and a
cold, weak, Feminin at several times, as Hippocrates tells. So if both bring
Masculin, they beget brav Spirited Boys; if the Woman's be weak and Man's strong
yet prepondering, they get a Son, though less lifely: If the Woman's be masculin
and Man's feminin, yet prevailing, they also procreat Males, but weak and
womanish: the like in Females: If both Parents seed prove feminin, they engender
dull Wenches: If the Man's masculin and Woman's feminin, but exceeding; they breed
bold Girls of middle temper: If the Fathers feminin and Mothers masculin, but
predomining, they produce lusty lifely Virago's. So the diversity and dominion
of Parents seed, makes the difference of Sex. 3. Individual, which is seen in
peculiar properties of vigor, favor, feature, stature, complexions, and
conditions, arising usualy from the formativ faculty, and casualy from Parents
phantasy: for the seed flows soly from the Testicles of both; yet al parts
impart a plastic power by subtle spirits to the Sperm; which, according to
either Parents prevalence, produc^th a similitud in particular parts: Hence some
resemble Father, some Mother, some both in several members more then others: yea,
many are like their ancestors, whose fashioning virt^ lurks in seed sometimes
four descents, as Aristotle attests, like a Loadstone which draws four or fi^
needles appending. So Nicaeus a Poet of Constantinople, born of white Parents
was Maurish as his Grandsire; and Helides by an Ethiop had a fair Daughter like
her Father: so Children conform to Parent both in Body and Mind: Ergo the Soul
is Traduced.

Sol. This multiloq^y may be answered briefly: That the manners of the Mind, and
personal conditions of Children semblant to Parents, follow the temper of Body,
as Physic and Philosophy teach; which argues not any traduction of the Soul,
but a several disposition of bodily Organs.

Repl. One once a^swered al Bellarmins works with two words, Thou lie: but
there be sundry Virtues and Vices of the Will (which no way rely on the Bodies
temper) proper and peculiar to some Stock or Race; as whole Families by lineal
descent or natural disposition, are addict to generous qualities and various
sports, whereto Mantuan ap^ly alluds:

Qui viret in foliis, venit e radicibus humor:
Sic Patrum in Natos abeunt cum semine morcs.
The leass fresh juice does from the root proceed:
So Parents manners pass to Sons by Seed:
Ergo the Soul is the seat or subject of such Virtues and Vices, transcends
from Progenitors to their Progeny by Traducal propagation.

Sol. Such hereditary properties follow the bodily temperatur of some principal
Organs (Brain, Heart, Liver, Spleen, Gal) more or less, as Aristotle says,
Mores Animi seq^untur temperamentum corporis: but not from the various
inclination of the Soul.

Repl. Manners of the Mind may be somewhat inclined by bodily temper: but
Childrens complexions oft-times by matches differ more from their proper
Progenitors then strangers; ^et symbolize in the Souls secret sympathies with
them: Ergo thosinnat resemblances proced from it rather then from bodily
temperature, which is only accidental.

Sol. In Man's frame or fabric are sundry secret sympathies of principal parts,
on whose temper the manners of the Mind and Faculties of Soul depend; wherein
Children may resemble their Progenitors; though in countenance, complexion, or
constitution, more like to strangers: so there is no certain or convincing
Argument for Traduction to be taken from such variable observations.

Ob. If aformativ faculty in seed, to build the Body, proced from Parents
Souls; then does also an animific virtu to produce the Soul: But al sides grant
the one: Ergo the other folows. For if Parents Souls impart to it a power to
prepare a place; that power is able to beget a Soul.

Sol. The formativ animific (or rather Prolific) faculty preparativ to sit the
matter for union, proceds from Parents Souls; but not procreativ to beget a
Soul; being only able to build the bodily part, and make it ready for reception
of the Soul, when it shall be infused.

Repl. This seems a mere Postulatum without proof, not rendering any reason why
it is able to prepare a place, and not procreat the Soul: For what belongs to
every Kind cannot, sans derogation or disparagement, be denied to the noblest
Creature: but the entire production of Individuals with their principal parts
(both matter and form) pertains to al Species else: Ergo to Mankind also.

Sol. It Is no disparagement, but a dignity, that God deigns to creat in Man a
divine part: yet he may be said to beget Individuals entire for perpetuity of
his Kind; viz. praeparando and uniendo, though he begets not the Soul it self:
hic murus abeneus esto: this is the main Anchor-hold.

Ob. David says, Man is conceived in sin; which either is Psalm. 51. 5.
impressed before the Souls infusion, or the Soul corrupted at conception and
first creation; or an inanimat Embryo the subject of sin; or else the Soul is
traducted, which salvs and sa^isfies al scruples: but the three first are
absonous: Ergo the last alone authentic.

Sol. Some say Parents sin, committed in procreation, is there meant: but that in all lawful Marriages is sanctified; and who can call that polluted which God has
cleansed? Others fly to the Souls infusion at first conception; which must eeds
be, else it will not hold water. But most say the very seed is defiled with an
hereditary stain (as it is with the seeds of sundry diseases) which is not
properly sin, til the Soul be infused, being the sole subject thereof. ^trum
horum mavis? for men will never agree in this intricat Maze.

Ob. Al Accidents follow their Form, nor can subsist without their Subject: but
vegetation is visible and vigorous in an Embryo, before the quickening or
motion: Ergo the Soul or Subject must needs be there at conception, and
consequently traducted or generated.

Sol. Zanchy answers (how orthodoxly, judge ye) that in building L. 2. de Hom.
creat. c. 5.
Man's Body, as it has first the form of blood, next of milk, then of flesh,
and last a human shape: so at first is no Soul, but only an energy in the
spermatic spirits to produce a vegetant Soul, when the Embryo livs as a Plant;
then that Soul perishing, the Sentient is generated, and that livs as an
Animal: which being also extinct, the Rational succeds or supervens, not
produced from the same energy, nor from Parents Souls; but created and infused
by God. This implies a duple death, upon extinction of the two first Souls.
Others say the Vegetant powers arising from seed, spirits, and blood, are
cherished by warmth of Natures Garden, the Womb, til time of motion; but ever
after the new infused Soul exercises al functions, til it brings the Embryo to
birth and perfection. Thus they are puzzled touching the time when it is infused:
but certainly the quickening is very uncertain.

Repl. The proper source and principal subject of al such Faculties is a Soul;
not seed, spirits, or blood: Ergo either the seed had a Soul begetting energy,
or they were faculties of the succeding Soul, and so subsisted alone without a
subject; or else are Creatures distinct and remain divided: but the two later
assertions are gross absurdities; and the first rests irrefragable, that the
seed carries an animific virtu or Soul-begetting energy from the Parents Souls
by natural traduction, which best salvs the propagation of original sin.

Sol. Some say those Faculties predepend on the Seminal Form til infusion of the
Intellectual: yet how can that, being inanimat, be the subject of vegetation or
motion? Or if it were a Soul, how did it vanish? it died not, as Zanchius
dreams; nor is swalowed up of the succeding Soul; nor can there be any coition
or coalition of Souls. Others forced by these pressures, hold it is created at
conception (which is more tenible of the two) exercising her functions
gradualy, as organs are apparated and accommodated. For that time is fixed; but
the quickening sooner or later according to the Embryos vivacity and other
various contingents: but God is not tied to creat Souls upon al human
casualties, til his set appointed time: yea Christ's conception, at the Angels
salutation ( Ave Maria) is called his incarnation, which is the production of his
whole Humanity: and his Mother went immediately to her Cousin Elizabeth then
impregnant of John Baptist; who being filled with the Holy Ghost, caled her,
the Mother of our Lord: so that he was then Luke 1 43.
perfect God and Man at first conception, and the Babe leaped in her Womb for
joy; being before quick as plainly appears.

Ob. Man's Soul is impure at first conception, and the whole Man polluted; for,
what is born of flesh is flesh, says Christ; but God John 3 6.
creats nothing impure: Ergo the Soul is not created, but conceived and
generated impure from the Parents Souls.

Sol. God creats the Soul in substance found, sans stain; but corruption or
contagion caled Concupiscence, is not of the Father (says S. John) but of the
World: for the guilt of original sin is imputed to the whole Man, so soon as
both parts are united.

Ob. Adams Rib was made a complet woman, and the Soul therein becam hirs, no new
being infused: Ergo every Soul is not created.

Sol. The Schoolmen say Eves Soul was created and infused, though it be not
expressed: yet the extraordinary creation of the first Woman extends not to the
ordinary production of al others: nor is it clear that the Rib was animat, or
the Soul thereof made hirs.

Repl. In this case it holds: for the Infusiasts infer, that al Men's Souls are
created, because Adams was: Ergo it folows of al Women from Eve.

Sol. The reason is not semblable: for he was the root of al Mankind, Male and
Female; therefore al our souls infused, as his was: but not she of Womankind: so
it skilleth not whether hirs was created ex nihilo, or diffused from that
animat Rib, since it is not reveled.

Ob. Christ took his whole Humanity from the Virgin, by the Holy Ghosts
overshadowing: Ergo both Body and Soul came from her.

Sol. He took only Flesh from her, which includs the whole Humanity; because when
the Body is prepared, God has decreed to infuse a Rational Soul. This is soon
said gratis; but by what warrant? or where does it appear, that God so decreed?

Repl. Flesh animat is Man's whole Nature, not inanimat: Ergo the Flesh which he
assumed had a Rational Soul at first conception.

Sol. Some say that Flesh was potentialy animat, to be endowed with a Soul in du
time. Others which hold Soul-creation at conception, grant it was actualy
animat: But as she is caled Mother of God, in regard of the Hypostatic union,
though he had only his Humanity from her. So Parents may be said to beget the
whole Man, in relation to the union, which God has decreed in du time; though
they beget only the bodily part apt and apparated to entertain the Soul; which
suffices for denomination.

Repl. The reason reache^h not right. since Men are Parents to Children, because
the whole Nature is derived from them, as Christ's Humanity was from the Virgin:
but she is styled Deiparent; not in respect of his Deity, which depends not on
her; but for the said hypostatic union of both Natures in one Person; having
his humanity entirely from her: Ergo the Godhead shall be better tied to his
whole Manhood by Traduction of both parts, then barely to cloth him with
inanimat Flesh. Beside, she is caled Mother of God for the hypostatic union
actualy in being; but Parents are said to beget a whole Man, in regard of the
union to com.

Sol. He had his whole Humanity from her in manner foreshewed: For when the Body
is accomplished and accommoded, the Soul shall be necessarily instilled or
infused in du time; which is all that can be answered in this point, of the whole
Humanity derived from Parents.

Ob. The Woman's seed shall break the Serpents head: but Christ fulfilled this
promiss and prophecy, chiefly in Soul; which descended into Hell, to lead
Captivity captiv, and bind the strong Man in his own Kingdom; as his body
triumphed over Death in his dominion the Grave, by his tridual Resurrection:
for how is he the Woman's seed unless he had his whole Humanity from her? Or how
can the Body break the Serpents head? Or how could this victory be achieved,
if his Soul had not descended? Ergo he assumed his Soul also from the Woman by
the Holy Ghosts cooperation.

Sol. Diverse Divines deny Christ's descent into Hell in Soul but that may rest in
debat, since it concerns not the production, sav only to show that by it he brok
the Serpents head. Touching the promiss and prophecy, it was performed
principaly by his Soul (or rather person) and that derived potentialy or
preparativly from the Woman, in manner foretold; but primitivly and actualy
from God the Creator or Infuser.

Ob. To bind up sundry bunches of sour Grapes in one bundle: If the Soul be
created pure, how can it be defiled in an instant, by inanimat flesh, not
capable of sin? Or why does God cast his own workmanship into a stinking Prison
purposly to be polluted? Or how can a spiritual substance be stained by a
material mass? specialy since sin inheres soly in the Soul; which is primarily
guilty by willing or consenting, and the Body only in obeying; the one activly
as efficient, the other passivly as Instrument. Upon this ground of the Soul
created pure, and in capacity to be polluted by lifeless flesh Pelagius built
his branded Tene^, That Children are born free from original sin: And S.
Austin, seeking to crush this Cockatrice in the Eg (like such as bow or bend a
stick back to bring it right) broched another error, That al dying unbaptized,
are infallibly damned or deprived of Beatific vision. being liable to the lack
or loss of Heavenly happiness; though not to the pain of Hellish torments,
whence be is styled durus Infantum Pater. Lastly our Protoparents personal sin,
becam like sap derived from the root participatly ours; not by imputation, as
Zanchy contests, but by true inhesion; infecting the whole Nature: which
hereditary corruption or con^agion is contracted linealy from Parents loins:
Ergo the Soul, as seat, source, and subject, is ex Traduce.

Sol. This Gordian knot many have essaied, few extricated, or cut it asunder
like Alexander; who shadow it with a vele of windy words, but no real
resolution. Some say the seed is stained ex traduce; which, like levan, sours
the whole lump; and the Soul supervening, receivs stain from it, as new Must put
into a musty cask, which the best Divines disclaim: For there can be no proper
physical action of material upon immaterial, and the Soul shall be polluted
passivly only, which suffices not to make it guilty, unless it be a voluntary
Agent: yea, the similitud halts; for there the Vessel taints the Wine; here the
Soul was first soiled, and principal efficient: there both be material; here the
chiefest spiritual; nor can inanimat flesh be capable of sin, before it has a
Soul. Zanchy and others hold, That as Christ's righteousness, so Adams guiltines,
is ours imputativly only; but Natures corruption ensuing, a just punishment by
divine Decree. Out alas! this sin is a lepry cleaving clos to the flesh, and
consequently corrupting our whole Nature; or else could not beget and bring forth
such a serpentin spawn of actual sins. Peter Moulin professes plainly, that
the Soul is not vitiated by the Body; for to incarcerat an innocent Creature,
his own operature, in a plaguey Bridewel purposly to be infected, repugns Gods
Justice and Goodness: but sin being a spiritual vice of the Will, first seizes
the Soul before the Body becoms accessory: as Adam first sinned in Will and
Consent yer he stretched his hand to touch or cast: so sin passes from the
Soul to the Body; not contrarily. For the manner of spreading, He says God
creats the Soul spotless, but destitut of supernatural light, which Man lost by
his fall: hence flows or folows perverseness of Will, purblindnes of Mind, and
proclivnes to al evil, even from inordinat self lov not guided by metaphysical
illumination; and the temper of Body does much incens or increas this contagion
according to every complexion; yet are not humors the causes, but incentivs to
sin; nor do impress or imprint on the Soul, but only incline it thereto. Quot
homines, tot sensus, so many men, so many minds; but al driven to sundry
shifts, how sin can be propagated without traduction of the Soul; which being
granted will soon satisfy al scruples.

Repl. This last devise, being newest, takes best; but is scars soundest: for
sin is an effect of natural corruption, which is more then a defect of
supernatural illumination; and a positiv depravation of Will, far beyond
deprivation of Grace. Man indeed lost metaphysical light by his fall; yet if our
Souls be created spotless, they must at first infusion be sinless: so all the
doubts rest entire, how they can so suddenly contract this hereditary
pollution, diffused over our whole Nature, unless the Soul bring that stain with
it? for we are for lorn before born, being conceived in sin, or at least
infected in the Womb: Ergo Traduction (which salvs al scruples, and is subject
to none) is the safer Tenet; nor can God otherwise be cleared from being Author
of sin: for if he creats it pure, why did he decree to pollut it presently,
since he coula hinder it? Al which inormities, with the like, are voided by
Tradaction.

Sol. Let it serve or suffice for answer, That Gods Will was so to dispose it;
and who can comptrol it? But to shun an inconvenience, and run into an evident
exploded error, is a remedy wors then the Malady. To answer the last branch
first, God decreed to make Man a freewild Creature ad utrumlibet; yet imposed a
command to try his obedience, and foreknew he would prevaricat; but determined
to permit or not prohibit it; which was his Will so to do: If any ask, why he
willed not to hinder it (since Qui malum non prohibet cum possit, praecipit)
either by forbearing the Command, or by inabling man to keep it, or by
refraining to creat more Souls for Hell, as if he delighted to torture his
Creatures? S. Paul checks such curious Inquisitors with an Interrogation; O
man! Who art thou that pleadest Romans 9. 20.
with God? Who has known the Lords mind, or bin his Counsiler? O the depth of
the riches of his Wisdom and knowledge; how Romans 11. 33, 34.
insearchable are his Judgments and his ways past finding out? but still just in all his ways, and holy in all his works, as David sings. Touching the rest; It Is
true, that sin is a spiritual vice of the Soul or Will; not of Body, sav passivly
or organicaly only; which stains the Soul at instant of infusion by subtraction
of spiritual light; whereof being destitut, it precipitats into al evil: for the
Sun is not Author of darkness, but light; yet by withdrawing his raise induces
darkness. So God is no Author of Sin, but Grace; yet by withholding his Spirit,
sin instantly folows in a depraved Soul: so says S. Austin, God hardened
Pharaohs heart; not by impressing of obstinacy, but suppressing of Grace:
howbeit the manner how the Soul is so soon infected, and the Body by it, is
inscrutable, and known only to the Father of Lights; which is a free confession
in this Case: But to say it was his Will to creat every Soul pure, to be
presently polluted, is more then can be warranted by his reveled Will in the
Word: For it presupposes a Postulatum to be granted, that Man's Soul is created
pure, and instantly contracts sin, though the manner utterly unknown.

For upshot, the Traductists can better shift the scruple of Immortality then
Infusiasts salv or solv that of original sin; yet may they not claim the Laurel
of Victory, since Verity lies in obscurity.

Arduares haec est, and sic sub Judice lis fit.
This thing is hard and high,
So in suspense let it ly.
Thus the Infusiastists Arguments and Replies are 25. so are the Traductists
Objections and Replications equal in number, with the Answers of each part to
the other: but which are the most ponderous or prevalent, let the learned
Readers judge indifferently and impartialy between both.

The sum of the Traductists Tenets is, That God ceased from Summary of both
sides.
al Creatific Works (both Specifical and Individual, Compounds and principal
Parts being al his Workmanship) the seventh day: That he gav Man a benediction
to multiply like other Animals, which beget their own Souls; but theirs mortal,
because first formed of the corruptible Chaos; and his immortal, as being
breathed or infused immediately by God: that his Soul by that blessing had a
privilege or dower to produce a like immortal essence, though not existing by
it self, but in a mortal Body. That an Animific virtu is conveied with the
Spirits of Parents seed, to beget or build up a Soul, as light diffuseth light:
That this Soul is the seat of sin, being a spiritual vice of the Will, as the
Body is the subject of material accidents; but Man the denominativ or
predicativ subject of both their qualities: That this sin is propagated from
our first Parents (by explicit or implicit Covenant) to al their Posterity with
the Soul, which is produced successivly from Parents Souls, with the same stain
of sin.

The Orthodox opinion is fixed on the foundations: That as God primarily
inspired Adams Soul, and afterward Eves; so he jugialy creats every Individual:
That the new-made Soul instantly at infusion (whether at conception or
quickening) acquires the guilt of our Protoparents sin; but the manner how,
inscrutable and inexplicable: That this generical sin folows Soul-creating by
accident, because God gav Adam Free Will, to stand or fall for himself and al his
Offspring; having predecreed to creat a number of Souls, to be infused into
Bodies in du times: That though God be the Souls sole Archiplast; yet Parents
properly beget totum Hominem (non totum Hominis) in regard of preparing the
matter or mansion by the Formativ Faculty, whence the union necessarily insues
by divine decree. That Man begets Man, because he supplies one part entire, and
concurs to the union (though not essence or existence) of the other: That Man's
Soul is not generated as Beasts, which perish with them; but have a sublimer
origin from the Father of Spirits, and shall live for ever: Lastly, That this
Soul, though created pure, is at the instant of union guilty of original sin;
not by imputation, but inherent corruption.

S. Austin Bishop of Hippo durst not presum to decide the debate, both parts
being so probable: But Doctor Goodman, In a Trea^^^ of Man's fall.
lat Bishop of Gloucester assums to atone them by a motly moderation; that the
Soul is both created and generated: for God concurs in man's production, being
to become his Son by adoption (yet every one is not so) and Man cooperats by the
ordinary way of propagation: so in respect of God it is Creation, which implies
a beginning different from Natures course; but in respect of Man, a usual
generation: so it is created ex Traduce in respect of God, and procreated ex
Traduce by Man: thus he.

This mixed mungrel action obveled in a mist of words, is a mystery beyond
common capacity, and the terms contradictory, tho shadowed with the word
Respect: For how can one thing be both created and procreated? Or how can
Creation be ex Traduce? the phrase plainly imports, that the Soul proceds ex
Traduce from Parents; though in respect of Gods concurrence, as universal
Agent, it may be caled extraducal creation. So let it pass for a rare piece of
new coined Logico-Philosophico-Theology. But the two forecited Opinions rely on
real principles, though very dubitable and disputable. Six Questions are
previously agitated. 1. What Seed is? 2. What a Soul is? 3. Whether it be
material? 4. How it attains knowledge? 5. How many are in Man? 6. Whether it be
created or generated? which last is barely debated or discussed; not boldly
decided or determined.

Spiritus an jugiter genitus sit, five creatus
Quim Deus infudit? lis violenta manet.
Whether Man's Soul, which God breathed and created,
Be still infused, or bred? it is much debated.
In dubio lis est, an Men's ex Traduce nata Aliter:

Sit cujusque Hominis, sive creata magis?
It Is doubt whether each Man's Soul be generated
From Parents Souls, or rather by God created?
Particula in nobis divinae Spiritus aurae, Alias.

(Quaeriter an genitus, sive creatus?) inest.
The Soul's in us a Part, by God inspired:
Whether begot, or creat? it is inquired.
Nescit Homo, an sua men's generetur, sive creetur? Secus.

Se tamen ostentat noscere cuncta, miser.
Poor Man knows not, if's Soul be bred or molded?
Yet boasts, that he has al things else unfolded.
Appendix Additionalis. An additional Appendix.
THe ensuing Theory is taken mostly from Mr. Henry Woolnots Treatis, entitled,
The true original of Man's Soul; which is brifly extracted. God has a duple
voice; one speaking in Scriptures, which is his written word of Grace: another
in the Preamble.
Creatures, which is his wrought Word of Nature. For as Natural Works are his
ordinary power, and miraculous extraordinary: so Nature is his ordinary Voice,
and divine Oracles extraordinary. What God spoke in his Word, he has wrought
in the World, whose Words and Works agree: for secret things belong to him; but
reveled to us and our Children. Where he has no tongue to speak, we may not have
an ear to hear, nor heart to inquire: but as Creatures we must submit to our
Creator, and as Christians beleev where reason cannot reach. Now to the Question.

The Rational Soul, whether produced immediately from Thesis.
God, or mediatly by Man, is of immortal Nature: yet stained with our first
Parents first sin, by propagation: but how can we know how it is made, before it
be in being, since we cannot conceiv what it is being made? For though we know
it is a spiritual substance realy subsisting in a Body; yet what manner of
metaphysical matter it is made of, none knows: No marvel then, if we be ignorant
of the origin, which is harder to explore: For it is spiritual; and such are
difficiler to discern or disquire then corporals, subject to sens: specialy
since ours is an incomplet Spirit or part of a Creature; Man being composed of a
mortal Body and immortal Soul: the one endued with senses to receiv al
corporeal Images; the other furnished with a faculty of Reason, which from those
Images draws discurses and consequents, whereby it gets knowledge of causes and
effects, whereof Sens is incapable. Hence it happens, that when we discurs of
spiritual Natures, which transcend Sens, we are put out of our usual way, and
wander, as half lost, in incertainty, without any exact knowledge to content the
Mind. Whatever excellences be in inferior Natures, are much more perfectly in
superiors: as those of other Animals more eminent in Man, chiefly in his Soul;
those of his Soul more conspicuous in Angels; and al perfections of al most
trascendent in God. So the knowledge of inferior Natures, is comprehended in
superior; but not contrarily: Nor can any, sav God (who has no superior) know
it self purely or properly, but only by reflection; as the Ey, which sees al
things, cannot behold it self, sav in a Glass: Nor can we know our own Soul,
but as it is showed in a myrrhour of the Works: and as by it we know other
things; so by them we have a glimps of it.

To omit several Opinions of Pagan Philosophers and Christian Opinions.
Heretics: The orthodox jointly agree, that Man's Soul is either immediately
created by God, or mediatly generated by Man: both which are bipartit.

In point of Creation, Hilary, with others, hold it to be formed without the
Body, and then infused. But the general Tenet is, that it is created and infused
in the Body, which runs most current.

So for propagation: Some suppose it a corporeal substance, and begot in bodily
manner; which is generaly exploded. Others hold it spiritual, and so produced,
like light from light; which was the mind of most Western Doctors: but S.
Austin and Eucherius stood in suspens between both, inclining chiefly to
Creation.

The case is very dubious and difficil: For how can Spiritual substances beget
one another? If it be daily created of nothing, how can it stand with Gods rest
from farther creating, or his settled course of al things to multiply their
Kinds? it is a silly sh^ft to say, That he rests from creating new Kinds and
Compounds; but not from Individuals or principal Parts: for the words imply no
such limitation, nor any place else in Scripture: so it is spoken gratis, without
warrant, and a bare begging of the Question, or mere fiction: for they grant it
true in all things else, except only this their own exception; which they obtrud
without reason, when Moses makes it general of al Gods Works. A greater
obstacle occurs, how it can stand with original sins propagation? This made the
Pelagians and Anabaptists (who hold Soul-creation) to deny there is any such
sin, sav by imitation: yea diverse Divines, seeing the absurdities arising
therhence, assert Traduction. This makes the chief Patrons of Creation stagger,
who decline it as a curious Question, since they cannot giv sufficient
satisfaction; exhorting to Faith beyond Reason, and forbid farther
disquisition: for if the Soul flow immediately from God, how is it defiled,
being created sinless? the Body cannot do it, being drawn into sin by it: Nor
can this contagion com from the union, since that is Gods Work; who will not put
a Soul in it self simply good, and his own workmanship, into an unclean Vessel,
purposly to make it guilty of death and damnation, for another fault: shall not
the judge of the World do right? it is a poor position, that it is created in
infusing, and infused in creating; which is al one as to say, it is made in
marring, and marred in making: Nor is it safe to say, God so willed or decreed,
since it cannot be proved; and being unjust, is justly disproved. It stands not
with his Justice, that Adams sin should be imputed to us or reputed ours, sav
as it is our own by sinning potentialy in him as the root; nor is it ours by
imputation (sav only in respect to propagation) but inhesion: for if we were
simply sinless (as a new created Soul is) his sin cannot justly hurt us. God
may punish al for Adams sin; yet not soly for it, since he says, The Son shall
not bear the Fathers iniquity: Ezekiel. 18. 2^.
but because by his sin they becam sinful, or rather sinned in him; they are
justly punished for their own sin: so propagation is the sole source of
original corruption. Now if we receiv the worst part only from Adam, which is
not the subject of sin; since not the parts, but whole Person sinned: How can a
Man be guilty of sin (if his Soul com immediately from God) sav only by
propagation? Or how can Adam be our Father, if the whole Man descends not from
him? One cannot be a proper Father of the whole, unless he beget both parts: for
to supply mere matter (which is elementar) makes not a Father, since the Form
only denominats; which if he does not generat, he can no more be a Father then
to Fleas and Lice, which are bred of his Body: Nay, if Fatherhood consists
chiefly in giving the Form, God is rather the true Father, from whom the
principal part proceds, then Parents which beget the baser. The Soul is Man's
essential part, without which he is no Man: How then can he procreat a Creature
like himself, if he produce not the Soul? specialy since al agree, that he
propagats such an accident as sin, which inheres in the Soul as its sole
subject. Can he propagat an unnatural accident Sin, which cannot be without the
Soul; and not a natural essence the Soul, without which can be no Sin? The
faculty of propagation pertains to the Soul so well as Body, yea has its chif
seat in the Soul soly; for the Body is as a Pen in the Writers hand, but the
Soul principal Scribe or Secretary: since then such as the cause is, such is the
effect; the Soul must produce a Soul, and whole Man a whole Man; not an inform
lump, which without a Soul is neither Man nor Beast: but the Soul still
accompanies the Seed at first conception, and gradualy builds the Body, fitly
framing all the organs from the first rudiments to full perfection: Nor can such
effects be done Exer^. 6. 55. 5.
but by a Soul, as subtle Scaliger provs. He allegeth many mo Arguments against
Infusion, and answers al advers Reasons; but because they are already produced
on both parts, it is nausity to serve forth twice sod Coleworts: but having
refuted Infusiasts, and rejected Traductists, he vents his own novel Invention.

His Grounds are these: 1. God created three sorts of spiritual A new opinion
Natures. 1. Angels so sublime, as they cannot join with Bodies. 2. Beasts
Souls so material, as they cannot be separat from Bodies. 3. Men's Souls, in a
mean, which can both live without Bodies after death, like Angels, and unite
with Bodies in this life like Beasts Souls. So he ordained, That Angels shall
neither increas nor decreas: Sensitiv Souls both increas and decreas: But
Rational increas or multiply, not decreas or perish. Hence he infers, that
Angels are crated immediately by God only: Beasts Souls procreated mediatly one
from another: But Men's Souls partly produced by Gods immediate power, and partly
by mediat propagation, or such a production as coms nearest to creation.

2. Man's Soul is endued with power to use bodily organs in attaining knowledge
of al sensible things: yea our knowledge of God arises ordinarily from Sens
ordered by Reason; which is a mean between Beasts sens and Angels Intelligence.
Therefore God united the Soul with a Body, which it naturaly desires, being
incomplet without it, nor knows ought ordinarily but by it. As then al ordinary
faculties and works are done mediatly by corporal Natures; so is their origin
or Offspring, or else could not have such sympathy with a Body. Yet as the Nature
and Works thereof are some way extraordinary, without and abov al Elementar
Natures: so God proportioaly has a supernatural extraordinary work in
producing it different from al others.

3. Elementar Natures cannot be produced without a more excellent external
efficient then themselfs, viz. the Sun and celical bodies, by their light,
motion, and influence: for so al sublunars depend on them for being, beside the
matter whereof they are particularly compounded, and peculiar Forms: but the
Soul having a Spiritual kind of composition, nobler then the rest from Parents
by seed, requires a spiritual extern efficient beside it self, which must needs
be God the Father of Spirits; since Stars being bodies, cannot produce Man's
Soul, to which they are far inferior.

4. Human conception often fails, and is not so frequent as in other Creatures:
which argues it is not of Nature alone, but by Gods more special power and
providence, then in other generations. If then he acts more in Man's conception,
why shall not the Soul be produced then, without a duple task of creating and
infusing at quickening? When Rachel rashly cried, Giv me Children, else ^ die;
Jacob wisely answered, Am ^ in Gods stead? so it is said of Ruth, The Lord gav
her conception, who only opens and shuts the Womb: but it is no where said, he
creats Souls: For he sets a constant course with his conserving blessing
concurring, that like shall produce their like.

5. As God eternaly decreed of Man, both who shall com into the World, how many,
and when: so he works in his conception more then in all others; which must
needs be as immediate efficient of his Soul, whereby he blesses or blasteth
conception, ordering it by a special providence, according to his decree:
contrarily, sundry inconveniences arise from creation, that some Children are
fully formed; which dying before the Soul is infused, cannot com to Judgment,
that God may be glorified; and so his work shall be frustrated.

6. It Is evident in promiscuous copulations of Men or Women with Beasts, that
Gods efficient power is joined with the Souls propagation; since such bestial
births are not endued with Reason, nor shall com to Judgment, though their
sensitiv Entelechy is sharper and subtler then other Animals; as Apes and
Baboons are supposed to spring primitivly from such unnatural mixtions or
conjunctions. Nor is the Soul immediately created by God sans natural means,
since Children begot in Incest or Adultery have it; which God shall seem to approv
or further, when he might hinder it, being not bound to infuse Souls. This
Reason may be retorted, since he is not bound to assist at such coitions, being
a most free Agent, and not a Natural: so he cannot be an external efficient, as
the Sun is in other generations.

7. Since Nature by divine Ordinance, produces daily out of dead Elementar
matter admirable powers of Seeing, Hearing, Phantasy, Memory, belonging to brute
Beasts; the manner whereof our Reason cannot conceiv: how much more can the God
of Nature produce out of Man's more excellent Nature others like to it, though
we cannot comprehend the manner how? Nor is corporal Seed (which is of far
purer temper and subtler Spirits then in other Animals) an unfit Instrument to
propagat a Rational Soul; specialy since the Spirits in Seed are of sublime
Nature, which have near affinity with the Soul.

8. God has set a natural order, That a whole Man shall beget the whole, both
Body and Soul: yet not one the other, nor Soul a Soul alone, or Body a Body;
but the Soul a Soul immediately by the Body; and Body a Body by the Soul; but
both jointly a whole Man: for they are Individualy united, and their operations
concur: so Man propagats like other Animals, but by Gods immediate power in
manner aforsaid.

9. The Soul being not produced simply by Natures power, nor made of mere
corporal matter, transcends the common condition of al corporeal Creatures, and
is in it self immortal, having God the extern efficient to produce it.

10. The Soul being propagated from Parents, is polluted with Natures stain
contracted from Adams sin; which is derived from Parents to Children, with the
whole Man, as the adequat subject of it; yet God in no fault: since our Souls are
not corrupted by him, but from our Parents and our selfs. If any cannot conceiv
how one Soul produces another (which is the hardest knot) let him consider how
it can be united to a Body and organized with it, which will allay the
difficulty: For if Angels have aereal bodies (as many Ancients deem) or at least
are not pure Spirits, compared to God; much more may Men's Souls have such a
spiritual composure, as merely resembles Matter and form in Bodies, which may
well accord with the manner of propagation prespecified, and no way repugn the
Souls divine essence. If this way oppugn Reason, yet it is safer then that which
repugns Religion.

By this Card our Author, sailing betwixt Scilla and Charybdis, Conclusion.
discovered Pachinus (a middle Promontory in Sicil, as Columbus did Cuba) viz.
that as the Sun is external efficient in the general generation of al
Sublunars, beside their internal particular principles: so is God in the
special production of every Man's Soul, beside the peculiar Parents Souls
working virtualy in the seed, as his pretended premises prove:

Which he farther confirms thus. 1. There is no diametral Conformation.
difference between Soul and Body, but they may be naturaly coupled together:
For though the Soul be not visible; yet has it a spiritual substance, not
simply pure, but the lowest degree of Spirits, prone to unite with corporeal
natures, and so may be propagated with them, as united to them. 2. Every
Nature, the more excellent it is, has a nearer union with the first Being, on
which it depends, and is more immediately moved by it: whence it folows, that
the Soul being more excellent and nearer to God then any corporal Creature; in
which he works more immediately then others, after they are made: so he does in
the first production of it. 3. Nothing is generated but has some extern
efficient Cause, which in Coporeals is the Celical bodies: whence it is said the
Sun and Man be get a Man, as the Sun and Lion a Lion: But the Soul being a
Spirit, and made at first by God, can have no other extern efficient sav the
same immediate power: So it may more truly be said, God and Man generat the
Soul; God as efficient, and Parents as his procreant instruments, to produce
what, how and when he pleases, according to his eternal Decree: Nor is it
absurd, that Man has two extern efficients; but rather an honor that God and
Nature concur to his generation. 4. Mortality proceds not from natural
generation, but divine malediction: for had not Man sinned, his Body should be
eviternal so well as Soul: Ergo if it were compounded and generated in a
corporal way (which is not so) yet it folows not to make it mortal. 5. Whatever
has being immediately from God, cannot be annihilated but by his immediate
power, which is the true cause of immortality. Hence the Body being produced soly
by Natures power, does die or perish; yet the Soul produced by immediate act of
the Deity, can never die but by the same power which gav it life.

Thus it appears, that though the Soul be produced as aforesaid; yet is it
immortal: since it is neither made of corporal matter, nor generated in mere
natural manner: Nor is God faulty, though we be sinful; since being wholly in
Adam, and actualy one with him; our whole Nature is so defiled, and Gods pure
ordinance in producing Souls depraved; that a total corruption passes in the
very conception, and we stained with original sin at our very first being.

To clear the Case, he frames some objections against this middle way. 1. Ob. If
the Soul be resolved into a first principle of Adams Soul, whence al are
derived, as Mixtils are into Elements; it must needs be mortal as al such are:
Ergo it is not so derived, or else it is mortal.

Sol. The comparison is unlike: for Mixtils are compact of Elements into which
they resolv; but Men's Souls not compounded of Adams (no nor Bodies) nor one of
another; but of the same nature, and so simple as his. Nor does it follow, if
the Soul be compounded like Elements, it must inevitably be mortal: for death
and corruption coms not from composition or propagation, but merely from
malediction for sin; the wages whereof is death.

2. Ob. If God cooperats with Man in producing Souls, he no less rests from his
works then in jugial creating them of nothing: for the thing is the same, and
terms little differing: Ergo this novity of a middle way, to make God the
external efficient, is very vanity and of no validity.

Sol. Here is no creation of nothing, but production of a thing from former
principles: Nor does it repugn Gods creatifie rest, to concur in other works of
providence, government, and the Souls spiritual acts; nor in assisting its
production as an extern efficient, which tends only to preserv Mankind;
specialy since it has no mediat manner in ordinary course of nature, sav only
Gods immediate concurrence in extraordinary manner.

3. Ob. If Man cannot generat his like without Gods special extraordinary help;
he is in this behalf inferior to Beasts, as Traductists urge against Creation:
Ergo, etc.

Sol. Not so: for Beasts beget also by the Heavens help, as exterior
efficients: If then Man's Soul for excellence has a far sublimer supercelical
efficient: And he acts so much in generation of his like, as other Creatures
do in theirs; it is rather a dignity abov al, then any disparagement at al. So
this exception holds against jugial creation, wherein Man no whit concurs, which
may seem a derogation: but not against natural propagation.

4. Ob. If God be immediate extern efficient of our sin-polluted Souls by
natural propagation; he is Author or accessory to sin, rather then by creation:
Ergo, etc.

Sol. Nothing less: for he is only external efficient of the Soul, not of sin;
which coms from corrupt Parents, who supply the internal matter of the whole Man,
wherein sin consists, since generation is not of Parts, but Persons; it being his
just ordinance in nature, That as the Tree is, so shall the fruit be. Since then
he made Man perfectly good at first, to beget Children perfect like himself;
who prevaricated and polluted al his Progeny or Posterity: God performs his
part still to confer his efficient power in the perpetual production of Mankind:
And as he first infused his Soul, so he still concurs in producing it, though
not in the same sort: yet sin is merely accidental in respect of him, who is
neither Author nor accessory: but it is propagated in generation by the first
Man's fall or fault, through the loins of perpetual posterity one from another.

It rests to present some gleanings, gathered from the said Corollary.
Treatis, which tends to this Theory. 1. Creation is a metaphysical production
of a Thing out of Nothing immediately by God: so the first Chaos (caled Heaven
and Earth) was made of mere nothing, and the rest mediatly out of it: but Adams
Body of Earth mediatly, and his Soul immediately of nothing, by a middle way of
Production.

2. Propagation is a Natural act or faculty, whereby a living Creature begets
his like, for continuance of the Kind: this is the proper perfection of every
Animal (Vegetant, Sentient, Intelligent) being the most excellent faculty
ingrafted in Nature by Gods special charge and blessing of Increas and
multiply; which is duple. 1. Equivocal, when Plants or Animals are bred of
putrefaction; as Weeds, Magots, Eeles, etc. 2. Univocal, when each Animat brings
its like; as Wheat Wheat, Whale a Whale, Eagle an Eagle, Lion a Lion, Man a Man.

This is done by the seed of generation, which contains the whole Nature to
continu the Species for ever; whereas Individuals are al mortal or momentany. So
Man's seed, Natures quintessence containing the whole Kind, is lodged in a place
fit for propagation of another conspecifical: which generation being Man's
perfection; he cannot be said propagat either part, but the whole, or a third
consisting both of Form and Matter. Hence our propagation from Adam, is a
deduction of the whole Man, according to Natures course, in turning our potential
being into act, which derivs his Nature to us: but if the Soul be fetched from
Heaven, and Body from Earth; how shall both ends be brought together; or what
shall this mixed action be caled? Simple Creation it cannot be, nor pure
propagation; but a Mungrel like a Mule. For Creation and Propagation differ
divesly. 1. One is Gods work by himself, of mere nothing; wrought by his sole
Word and Will: the other Natures of some preexistent matter according to each
Creatures kind, by Gods ordinance settled in Nature. 2. That is done in an
instant by an infinite essence which requires no time; this by previous
preparations or gradual perfections which take time, tho the very conception is
acted in a moment. 3. One is performed without any motion or mutation; but in
the other the same matter is changed or varied into several forms. 4. In the
first, things are not made of one substance with the Creator; but in the last,
both have the same substance. 5. In Creation privation preceds the habit, power
act, and darkness light: but in Propagation contrary, habit foregoes privation
(as sight blindness) act power, and light darkness.

The Reasons that Man's Soul cannot be propagated by course of Creation are these.
1. It impugns Gods Justice, to put a 1. Reason.
pure innocent essence into a condition to be instantly damned for another
sin; which it must be, if an Embryo dies before born and baptized. To this it is
said the new Soul is guilty by union; which is a greater aspersion on divine
Justice, but no salvo: for if it be in no fault, why shall it be guilty and
punished for Adams fall? If it be replied, That God so eternaly Decreed; this
farther aggravats: nor does it appear that he so Decreed; which to aver without
warrant, is most heinous: for if he Decreed (as Supralapsarians harshly hold)
that al should sin and suffer death in Adam, it is requisite to be by just means:
which if it may be done by Traduction rather then Creation; yea by that way and
not this; then is that to be counted Gods Decree. Can Justice it self deal
unjustly? surely in equity is no iniquity. God promises and proclameth, that a
faultless Child shall not suffer Ezekiel. 18. 20.
for his Fathers guilt: why then shall a good Soul be so deeply punished for
another sin, to whom it is scars kin? since Adam that sinned was no simple
Soul, but a Man.

2. If the Soul be immediately created pure, it cannot be polluted Adam. If it
should be granted, that the Soul is polluted by yielding to bodily lusts; yet
this is actual sin, not original corruption: Nor can it com from a pure created
Soul. To this it is said, That at the instant of Creation, God bereavs al
supernatural gifts for Adams laps, which though it put not evil into the Soul;
yet original sin necessarily flows or folows. This seems uncouth, that God shall
at once do and undoo, or make and mar so soon as it is made; or giv goodness
and take it away instantly. Nay if it be created in infusing, it is void of
supernatural gifts, and so cannot be deprived of what it never had. But if it
be created without those gifts which to us are supernatural, he creats it evil;
as al Men are without such; nor can a Soul be good without them. If then God
makes it so that it must needs be evil, he makes it evil; since he makes it that
it cannot be good: Yet if all the premises be conceded, it is never the near to
salv original sin; since this is not to sin in Adam, but to become sinful for
him: So it results, that the Soul if created good, cannot possibly contract
Adams sin: nor can al Men's wits or wiles clearly show, how a Soul created pure
can be polluted; and al shifts hitherto devised, are silly Cobweb Lawns,
pervious to every ey. The last refuge (that it coms neither by Soul nor Body,
but by union of both; since by it we become Sons of Adam, and so his sin made
ours) is Mr. Calvin's curious conceit, but scars satisfactory: For it is a
spiritual Lepry which hereditarily infects the whole Man, with all parts and
powers. If then the Soul at first union be pure and Body polluted, the Child
shall be half holy and half sinful: Or if both be clean at first, how can union
make both or either unclean? for when two good are conjoined, both become
better. Hence some say Adams sin is only imputed, not inherent; and so we only
reputed corrupt. Indeed Christ's righteousness is realy ours by imputation; and a
voluntary institution, as a Covenant of Grace differs from ordinary Justice in
course of Nature; since it is free to show mercy without cause, but not to punish
without du desert: Nor can this sin be justly imputed to al, unles the whole Man
be propagated; for it is a real infection of the whole Nature both Body and Soul.

3. As by Gods Ordinance original sin passes from one to al and as that sin
overspreads the whole Man; so both parts being infected must needs be
propagated. Again as this sin is seated specialy in the Soul; so it is chiefly
propagated according to Natures course. Hence three points rest to be proved. 1.
That original sin passes only by propagation, as Scriptures universaly
testify. By one man death passed upon al, because al sinned in him: and it is
imputed to his Posterity, because al were in him as the Root or Stock, and al
descend out of him; so his sin becoms ours both by imputation and propagation;
but by the first because of the last: For it is not another sin imputed, which
is not ours, but that made ours by propagation actualy, which before was only
potentialy. This is clear by the Antithesis between the first and secund Adam;
as in one al die, so in Christ shall al be made aliv: The one being Root of
Mankind, in whom al are by Nature; the other Head of the Elect, in whom they
are al by Grace. Such then are deceived, as deem Adams sin only imputed, like
Christ's righteousness; since this last is the Creators voluntary Institution and
work of mere Mercy; but the first a necessary operation of the Creature and
work of Justice. So the Antithesis holds true thus: As in Christ we fulfilled
the Law, suffered death and attained salvation, being members of his Body by
Grace: So in Adam we eat the forbiden fruit, becam Satan's bondslaves, and were
in state of damnation, being al members of his Body by Nature. So Christ derivs
his righteousness to his Children by spiritual regeneration, as Adam did his sin
to al Men by natural generation: Ergo as Christ's righteousness is not imputed
but by means of regeneration, whereby we become members of his Body: So Adams sin
cannot be imputed but by generation, whereby we descend from him as his members.
If Adams sin be simply imputed, because we are Men as he was, who received or
lost for himself and al Mankind; then must it be imputed to Christ as Man, so
well as to us; which is not so: for our sinning in him, and being sinfully
propagated from him, makes us liable; which Christ was not, because sanctified
in the womb, by the holy Ghost, at first conception: but al else derived from
him, and his sin to us through one another loins. 2. Original sin cannot be
propagated, unles the whole Man and both Parts be; which necessarily flows from
the premises: for except the whole Man descends from him, the whole cannot be
infected; since neither Soul nor Body alone is the subject of sin, but the
Person. Or if the whole be not the subject, it is not properly sinful. The Law
likewise is given to the whole, and the Person punished or rewarded. 3. The whole
Man cannot be propagated, unles the Soul be; since the whole consists of its
parts. To say the Soul coms from Adam quoad existentiam and unionem, non quoad
essentiam, is sly Sophistry, not real or rational: for then Man contributs but
the worst part, not the whole nor half: Nor is it true, that Adam is cause of the
union; but rather God, if he creats the Soul. Nor if the Soul be infused, can
any tell how long time after conception; during which space the Woman works
alone. But if the whole Man be said properly to proced from Adam, because the
body does; much more may it be verified to com from God, because the Soul does:
so the union rather to be ascribed to God, as the noblest suprem Agent, then to
Man the baser and inferior. If then the whole Man and both parts be not
propagated, it results that we were in Adam wherein we are not, viz. the Person:
that we sinned in him without that, without which he could not sin, viz. the
Soul: That the whole Man was in Adam yet never came from him: That we lost in him
which we never had of him, viz. original righteousness: That he shall still be full
of Souls which he never had: That the whole person proceds from him, yet not
that which makes the whole.

4. Christ's Soul was not created; but his whole Humanity Adams specified in
Scripture. Christ is caled the seed of the Woman, and David's seed* according to
the flesh: which imports the whole Humanity, as opposed to his Deity. but if his
Soul was created, the imputation of Adams sin to al Men, must be likewise
l^able to him as Man. Ad hereto, That the Soul and Body (as it is in all others)
were conceived at once: for the divine Nature being immediately united to the
Soul, and by it to the Body; the Soul must be produced in the moment of
conception with the Body; or else the Deity was first united to a brute Body,
which is brutish to imagine. The truth is, his Soul being united with the Body
into one Nature at first conception, becam one Person with the eternal Word, by
a miraculous working of the holy Ghost, who purified the Womb, that the Birth
becam exempt from sin. So his whole Humanity (Soul and Body) was deduced from
Adam, and separated from the Virgin by the holy Ghost: But a Soul cannot be
produced by Natures ordinary course (no more then a Body) without concurrence of
both Sexes Souls: yet being performed by supernatural power; it is a true Soul,
and so is the Body; both which joined in one Person make a perfect Man; as Eve
was a very Woman, though taken out of Man; and Christ true Man, taken only out
of Woman. For in Man's quadruple production, ^^ a duple concordance: Adam made
immediately by God, without Man or Woman: Eve mediatly out of Man, without
Woman: Christ immediately out of Woman, without Man: but al else mediatly by
both. It Is said the holy Ghost sanctified part of the Virgins substance,
assumed by the Godhead, to make Christ's Person: which terms are true, if well
understood: For by part of her substance is meant, the whole Nature, or both
parts, (not Body only) whereof his Humanity was framed. By sanctifying is not
meant clensing that portion from sin; but consecrating it to that holy purpos,
indowing it with gifts fit for so divine union: yet was it free from sin, or
rather never sinful, by reason of this union. For all substances were created
exceeding good, and depend immediately on God: Nor is sin essential to Man's
Nature, but accidental, cleaving to the person by Adams fall; and not properly
in the substance of Human Nature. Nor are evil actions or affections styled
simply sinful; but the Man: since sin consists not in any pravity of matter; but
in the corrupt Will or intent of the dooer: Nor is there any Law to punish parts
or substances, but persons or malefactors. So it is clear that Christ's
substance, or whole Humanity, taken from the Virgin in such miraculous
metaphysical manner, was not stained with sin, because not propagat by ordinary
generation: For if it had bin sinful, it could never be cleansed, nor any Man
saved: since there is one only Mediator, whose blood cleanses us from al sin;
which the holy Ghosts sanctifying cannot do, without virtu and reference to
his redemption. If then his substance never was sinful, the holy Ghost did nor
clens it from sin; but only separat what in it self was sinless, from a sinful
Person, that it might unite and subsist with a divine Person: For his Soul and
Body, though derived from Adam, like others, could not be propagated, because he
was conceived extraordinarily without Maleseed, by severing some of the Virgins
sinless substance from her sinful person, and uniting it to Gods person. Lo
here a summary of this sublime mystery; but a Labyrinth which he traceth forth
and back, to show that Christ's Humanity, being taken from sinless substance,
could not be sinful.

Thus three dissident Opinions have bin alterutratly agitated. Censure.
1. For the Souls jugial creation, which is most general. 2. For natural
propagation from Parents Souls, as Lamps deriv light one from another, which
seems more rational. 3. for a mixed production, betwixt both, which is merely
Mathematical. It Is a witty novity, or castle in the air; yet likely to take
better with most Men then old received Tenets; being happily borrowed from Dr.
Goodmans crotchet, but much changed: howbeit if both deny the Souls creation,
there is no necessity to make God an extern efficient in its production;
specialy since al inconveniences may be salved by simple Traduction, so well as
any other way. Nor is there any warrant, that God concurs in extraordinary manner
to propagat Mankind, more then any other Creatures; but leaves al indifferently
to Natures course, first instituted by him, with a general benediction to
increas, multiply, and propagat their several Kinds. Indeed his disposing
providence is universal suprem efficient of al things, that a Sparow cannot fall
to ground without it: but that he is special Agent in Man's generation, more
then other Creatures (as the Infusiasts and Mr. Woolnot contest) has no
grounds. God is said to keep the keys of the womb, which he opens and shuts at
free pleasure: So he keeps the keys of the Clouds and al other works of Nature:
But to make him a particular efficient with Man in the Souls production (as the
Sun and celical bodies are superior subordinats in other generations) is
asserted gratis, without grounds; nor will Ipse dixit serve to induce a credulity
for such a novity. He tartly taxes the Infusiasts, for asserting God to creat
new Souls, and ascribing it to his eternal Decree, without warrant in his Word;
yet he does the same, having no author concuring, as they have. God created al
things with a Word, which was no weary work; and could make millions of Worlds
(as he did myriads of Angels) in a moment: but his Will was to proced gradualy,
taking six days time to accomplish one: which having ended, he rested on the
seventh from al such works (whereof creating of Man's Soul was one) for ever, and
sanctified or set it a part for a Sabbath, in memory of his rest; enjoining it
afterward by a Law to be observed by Man for ever. If then he creats Souls
continualy, how does he rest from al such Works? Or how can it be said, that hw
will at last Judgment creat new material Heavens and Earth, when the old shall be
destroyed? Or lastly, that he still assists Man as an extern efficient in every
Soul production, which emulats creation? If any will seek the premises of this
Postscript in Mr. Woolnots said Treatis, he shall so soon find a needle in a
Bottle of Hay: so various are our garbs both for style, structure, method, and
matter, one from another; as will appear in all the rest of the Theses.

Nostram Animam ex nihilo negat Author hic esse creatam:
Externum efficiens vult tamen esse Deum.
This Author our Soul made of naught denies:
Yet God to be extern efficient implies.
Si po^erit summus Pater omni assistere partu; Allter.

Sie Animas potuit Voce creare novas.
If God assists al births when propagat,
He can so well with his Word new Souls creat.
The Case is clear as the Sun, to salv immortality: For Adams Soul by Gods
immediate infusion, Eves by transfusion from his, and al others since by
traductiv derivation (either immediate or mediat) from both theirs; like light
from a Lamp, which never wastes by kindling one another; together with Gods
command and benediction to increas and multiply their Kinds in each kind; have
acquired that excellent dower or prerogativ of indubitat immortality, beyond al
exception and evasion.

THESIS II.
Pura Dei Praedestinatio. Divine Predestination.
THis is a profound point and very ponderous: for better clearing whereof,
certain previous Propositions shall lay a foundation.

1. Providence is Gods general Government of al 1. Proposition.
Things: Predestination his special care over free Intelligent Creatures,
Angels and Men. Of it are two parts or branches: viz. Election to Life or
Salvation; and Reprobation to Death or Damnation. Election (as our Churches
seventeenth Article defines) is Gods choosing of some in Christ out of Mankind
before the Worlds foundation; and his everlasting purpos secret to us, to
deliver them from Curs and Damnation, and bring them as Vessels of honor to
eternal Salvation, by the same Christ in whom they are chosen. So Reprobation
must be his secret will 2 Cor. 13. 5.
not to deliver from Curs and Damnation those whom he has not found in Christ;
but to pass them by and cast into everlasting fire, as Vessels of dishonor. Now
this Theorem or Treatis concerns the manner and means of Gods proceeding in both;
which must be the Basis of this great stupendous structure to be raised or
framed.

2. Gods Attributs or expressions of his Essence (Omnipotence,

3. Omniscience or Prescience is twofold, as Schools define. past, present, to
com (necessary or contingent) and what might Nota bone.
have bin, if he had pleased to giv them being: yea the very events of all that
shall be done by himself or any Creature from eternity to eternity. This the
highest pitch of knowledge in an Intelligent Nature to work with Wisdom, and
therefore worthy of the wisest Agent; specialy in the first contriving and
ordering of al things concerning contingent events of free Creatures. Hereby he
foreknew Adams fall, before he decreed to creat or permit him to fall: or to send
his Son for a ransom, if he should fall; upon which he contrived the whole work
of Man's Redemption. This pure prescience being previous to Predestination in
order of Nature (according to our weak apprehension) yet al coeternal to God;
did not look to the mass of Mankind as to be created incorrupt, nor as lapsed
in Adam; Nor to Christ believed or not believed on: but beyond al to the first,
middle, and final estate of each particular person, and universal of al Men. 2.
Of Vision, which is of things to be done in time, with all acts and events
thereof, which depend on his free Will and Pleasure. Aquinas speaks of both: God
knows al things which neither are, were, or ever shall be by his simple
understanding: but the rest that have bin, are, or shall be, after what sort
soever, by the science of Vision. This distinction Zanchy, Junius, and other
learned Reformists approv to be authentic in the very terms.

4. Gods power or Omnipotence (who can do what he will

5. Gods Will (which comprehends his Lov, Mercy, Goodness, Counsilor, but Will
King, and both himself; who works al according Ephesians. 1. 11.
to the Counsil of his Will, as S. Paul says. By it he orders al things causing
or allowing what shall be, in what manner, Romans 9. 18, 19.
and to what end. Hence S. Paul ascribes al to it, as suprem universal cause,
into which al inferior are resolved, as the prime spring. This is absolut and
independent: for til God passed his Decrees, al things were known but as
possible, if he would giv being or not. There be other distinctions of divine
Will, according to several objects, as that of Sign and good pleasure used in
Schools: but to giv God a duple different Will in himself (secret and reveled)
as if he willed openly in his word to sav al; yet decrees to reprobat most part
in his hidden Counsils, is most abhorrent: For he is a God of Truth, no Lier,
Dissembler or Mocker, using simplicity and sincerity in all his sayings, which
are yea and Amen: Nor will he make general promises in his Gospel to al
Believers, yet bar them by a clos clandestine decree of his secret Will, that
they shall not beleev: but it has diverse objects, or one placed in diverse
times: as it is his reveled Will there shall be a day of Judgment, yet he concels
the time. So the Gospel of Salvation was his secret Counsil before the World
began; but since opened to the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc. which can
no more be caled his hidden Will. Indeed it is said, Secret things belong to God,
but the reveled to us Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
and our Children; which provs a diversity of objects, but no duplicity of
Wills; warning us only to attend what is reveled in his Word (as his general
promises prescribed) and not pry into his privy purposes, to inquire who are
elect or who reprobats, lest, like Thales, in gazing at the Stars, we fall into
the Pit: for this is a perilous precipice of carnal presumption.

6. The Gospel is a manifestation of Man's Redemption by Abram at Haran, that in
his seed al families and Nations shall be blessed: Then to Moses in Egypt and
the Wilderness, when God instituted the Passover and several Sacrifices as Types
or Figures of the holy Lamb, slain before the World for the Worlds sins:
Afterward to the Prophets: And lastly to the Evangelists, who wrote our Saviors
whole life and death, after his Incarnation or appeerance in the flesh, which is
the mystery of our Redemption.

7. Gospel Grace is Gods free Mercy offered to al lapsed

8. Gods Decree is duple. 1. Primary, Proceeding from his Decretum; 1
Absolutum. 2 Condition^tum.
without restraint any way. 2. Secundary, Depending on his Omniscience; whereby
foreseing Adams fall (as he did the evil Angels Rebellion) he in mere Mercy
ordained a remedy, to send his only begotten Son to be a Sacrifice for all: but
with condition of belief in him, and true repentance for sin; both which are
equaly eternal, flowing from the Fountain of the Deity, who wills what he
will, and does what he wills. Hence proceds Predestination, which is his
secundary conditionat Decree, depending on Prescience: whereby he freely elects
some to lif, being al liable to death in Adam; and rejects or passes by the rest
to perish in their disobedience.

9. Sin is of two sorts. 1. Original (so caled by S. Austin)

10. God eternaly Decreed to creat al things in time, endued means of faith,
repentance, and obedience, as are prescribed in the Gospel.

11. God commands no more of Man, then he givs power or Adam had by Nature, and
al others by Grace: if then he requires since Man's fall faith, repentance,
obedience, and perseverance to work out our salvation by his Grace; certes he
givs ability to beleev, repent, obey, and persever by cooperating with it; but
does not cross-bar it by any contrary decree, which were mere mockery far from
Mercy: for if one ly on the ground bound hand and foot, it is mockery to bid him
rise or run away; but mercy to loose or let him go: The Case is quadratly
semblable and aptly applicable. Our good God is no mocker, but al Mercy; nor
respecter of persons, but receivs all that call on him.

12. God delights not in the death of a sinner, but would have Josuas twelv
stones parallel to Jos. 4. 20.
Isreal's twelv Tribes, set up in Gilgal for a memorial of Jordans retroversion)
for a fair foundation, the fabric will be the better finished: but because Mr.
Plaifer well versed in this point, has handled it at large in his App^li^
Evangelium* the chief contents shall be sincerly abstracted or abbreviated, and
applied to common capacities, sans ambiguity.

He reckons fiv dissident Opinions touching the order of 1 Opinon.
Predestination. 1. Calvin, Beza, Piscator, Whitaker, Perkins, etc. hold, that
God eternaly Decreed to creat a set number of Men, whereof he elected some to
everlasting life, and reprobated the rest to eternal death of his free will and
pleasure; only to show his Grace, Goodness, or Mercy on the one; and his
Justice, Power, or Dominion on the other. To which end he Decreed sin should
enter on al, that he might justly punish most part for sin; and to send his Son
for redemption of the Elect in Mercy by free Grace.

This peremptory position, is generaly condemned by Papists, Refutation.
Lutherans, Arminians, and diverse Reformed Divines, as perilous and erroneus;
because it makes God the prime Author of sin* rejecting Men before they were
evil by an antecedent absolut Decree, without respect to Adams future fall, but
elects some before they are considered as sinners, sans respect to the ones
faith or the others failing; as if prescience had no place in Praedestination.

2. The Synod of Dort, Peter Moulin, and many English 2 Opin.
Theologists defend, That God eternaly decreed to make Man holy and good;
giving him perfect Free Will: but foreseing he would by Satan's tentation fall
into sin, if he hindered it not; decreed to permit it, and out of this lost
lapsed lump, chos a certain number to salvation, suffering the rest to perish
in sin, whom he passes by of free pleasure, but punishes for just demerits.
Yet decreed to send his Son to redeem or sav the elect, and his Spirit to call
or sanctify them, that they may be glorified. The first sort are styled
Supralapsarians, having no respect to Adams fall, decreed to send his Son: so
they grant prescience in order to preced Decree. This opinion freeth Gods
justice on Infants dying unbaptised (which the first does not) who have no other
desert of death but original sin.

This Tenet is scarce veritable or warrantable, which Refut.
to defend divine justice, supposes mankind corrupted, before any Decree of
election passed; which seems needless: because there be good and bad Angels
without any corruption or fall, and Christ was not in the lapsed lump, yet as
man elected to life. It also supposes Original sin to be cause of Reprobation,
which is remitted to many Reprobats condemned for actual sins, as Doctor
Whitaker avers, it likewise teaches, that Christ is sent to sav the elect
only, as dying for them alone; who are to be caled by the Word and Spirit: but
Reprobats being outwardly caled (who are barred from obeying) are more deeply
condemned for refusing it; yet have no power to embrace it, which is harsh
doctrine.

3. Doctor Overald a late learned Bishop, coined a new 3 Opin.
Tenet, That God decreed to creat man good, but foreseeing his fall, appointed
his Son to die for all, and to call men by his Word, offering Salvation to al:
with common suffi^ient Grace to work Faith by the ordinary means, if they be
not wanting to themselves: but knowing our infirmity that none would beleev by
the common Grace; decreed to ad a more special effectual to whom he pleased,
being chosen according to his purpos: whereby they shall not only be able, but
actualy and necessarily beleev, being drawn by the Father irresistibly.

This is plausible, but scars solid: for that common Grace Refut.
which savs none, is not Gospel Grace offered to al, nor deserves that name; nor
indeed is any such, since it never produced the effect: Nor can a special
superabundant Grace be it, since it is rejected by none to whom it is offered: but
true Gospel Grace is received by some, and refused or resisted by others. These
three Opinions infer a kind of despair into men's minds, because none shall be
saved by that special Grace given to a few according to Gods secret purpos;
which whether he intends to giv or not, the general promises cannot assure to
any Soul.

4. The Lutherans with some Papists maintain, that God decreed 4 Opin.
to make Man a free Creature; but permit him to stand or fall; and to send his
Son upon foresight of his fall for redemption of al, by a general conditionat
Decree of Faith, Repentance, Perseverance; with a special absolut of electing
such as he knew would beleev and persever under the means: but to pass by and
damn the rest, whom he foresaw incredulous and impenitent; making Prescience or
Prevision the occasion on which his Decrees proced.

This is faulty in some points: 1. Because there is no such general Refut.
conditionat Predestination. 2. Because the special Decree of Election makes Men
chus God first, rather then God them, which is preposterous. 3. Because the
Decree of Justification and Condemnation is confounded with election and
Reprobation, which S. Paul distinguishes. 4. Because it allows no more Romans 8*
19.
Grace given to the Elect then Reprobats, nor greater cause of gratitud. Yet
this opinion rightly extends the objects of Prescience, not only to Adams fall;
but to Christ Incarnat, and believed on in the World: to the last end of all that shall persever in Faith or unbeleef. This suits with Scripture, which
builds Predestination on Foreknowledg simply and properly taken at large:
promising salvation to al believers which shall persever to the end. These four
opinions (each of which has some pieces of truth) giv great light to this deep
dark mystery: for the first 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2*
holds forth Gods power or dominion: The next his Mercy and Justice: The third
his Truth and special Grace: The last his Wisdom and Prescience: Yet al, with
S. Paul, acknowledge his Judgments inscrutable, and ways past finding out; the
depth Romans 11. 32.
whereof none can fathom.

5. Arminius (startle not, he is no Bugbear; but a lat learned 5 Opin.
Protestant Professor at Leyden after Junius) taught, That God by his infinite
intellect knew al things as possible to be, if he would giv them being: and
among al conceived this visible World, with all Mankinds race, from first to
last, every one in order, government, and event; yet only as possible, if he
pleased: That some things might be necessary, some voluntary; some Causes, some
Effects; some as ends, some as means; some his own acts, some of free Creatures;
some good, some evil; some as rewards, some as punishments: That he knew how to
order and vary al, or any part or person; so as other effects or ends might be
produced then these now extant, if he otherwise willed: But deemed it good for
manifestation of his Power, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, to put this Worlds frame
and order of Mankind (then only as possible) in execution or being. That he
foreknew if he should do it, some particular persons would by this order of
means be brought to eternal life; and others by neglect or disorder go to
perdition through their own fault, if Justice be done upon them. That
foreknowing al, he determined of his absolut Will and Pleasure to say F^at* and
execut al which he intended in du time: and in so doing predestined some to
life, some to death eternaly. In reference whereto, S. Luke styles the Elect
such as are ordained to eternal life; and S. Jude calls Reprobats Acts 13. 48.
those that were of old ordained to condemnation. Under Jude verse. 4.
this order is comprised the Creation of Man righteous, permission of his fall,
correction of his fault, means of redemption by Christ, caling and converting
of a sinner; his Faith, Repentance, Perseverance, Blessings, Chastisments,
Trials, and what else is found in order of any Man's salvation; or aversions and
aberrations from that order, whereby Men com to perdition.

Hence Predestination is defined to be a Preparation of Gods Definition.
benefits, whereby al are delivered which are freed: Or (as Fulgentius fuller)
the preparation of Gods Works which in his eternal Providence he foreknew he
would do, either mercifully or justly. Here two things are to be observed in
the Decree of Predestination: 1. An act of Gods understanding, in respect of
things not in being, caled Prescience; which in order of Nature preceds al
Decrees, as prespecified. 2. An act of his Will, which is proper to
Predestination: for God works according to the Council of his Will, as S. Paul
speaks. These two acts Ephesians. 1. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2. Romans 8. 28.
being coeternal, have priority of order only, not of time; and Prescience put
as the first link by S. Peter and Paul. This Tenet of simple Prescience
previous to Predestination, advances al Gods Attributs more then the four
former: 1. His Wisdom and Knowledge in foreseing not only his own Works, but
those of free Creatures, and al circumstances of each, how to govern them for
his glory, in permission of sin, and obedience or resistance of Grace, that he
may judge the World righteously* 2. His power in creating and governing al
things, bringing light out of darkness, life out of death, happiness out of
misery. 3. His goodness in making al good, and overcoming evil with good. 4. His
universal Grace and Mercy in preparing a wa^ of Redemption for all Men, who were
become slavs to sin and Satan; and ordaining means to apply or accomodat the
same. 5. His truth in extending his promises to all that shall keep the Covenants
or Conditions: for he is truth who speaks no other then as he ordains, nor
intends otherwise then as he speaks. 6. His Justice in punishing all that use
not the rectitud of their Nature, or benefit of Redemption offered. 7. His
special Grace or singular lov in confirming them (as he did the good Angels)
whom he foresaw would use his Grace if it were given, in embracing the means
which should bring them to Glory: showing less Grace to those whom he foresaw
would fail by their own incredulity, ingratitud or obstinacy; whom he could have
cured by bettering his benefits; but decreed to make Vessels of wrath by their
own deserts. 8. His dominion and sovereign Lordship, in that being suprem
Ruler, he orders al after his free pleasure; choosing or refusing whom he will,
because they wilfully forsake him: as Irenaeus says, the Father excels in
Wisdom, because he savs whom he ought, and judges such as are worthy of
judgment: to be counted cruelty, considering his foregoing preventing goodness.
9. It excluds Stoical Fate, which the three first Opinions making Man's
salvation or damnation necessary by an antecedent absolut Decree, cannot
possibly decline: whereas this, by placing it in order after Prescience, makes
both infallible to his knowledge (which, as simple science, is no cause) but free
and contingent to Man; who must work out his salvation by coworking with divine
Grace; or incur damnation by refusing his Mercy extended to al. 10. It makes
Gods Election absolut, immutable, and irrevocable, whereby he chooses Man; and
not contrarily: but the fourth opinion is liable to these imputations. 11. It
diverts despair on the one side (which too many fall into, supposing themselfs
decreed to damnation) and prevents presumption on the other, which some
confiding too far on infallable certitud of salvation and final perseverance,
have become their own Butchers to accelerat their glory; as may be showed by
sundry instances in both kinds. 12. It ministers much matter of comfort to the
Godly, which walk in the wais leading to life; confirming their saving Faith in
Christ and lov toward God. Lastly, It magnifies the deepnes of Gods Judgments,
and inscrutablenes of his Counsils: for who can conject, why he loved Jacob and
hated Esau; or decreed to elect Peter and reject Judas; or savs one and suffers
another to perish, who could dispose them to contrary ends? al which proceds
from his Prescience; since none is rejected, but upon prevision of refusing life
offered; and there is sufficient Grace in the means of conversion, to Remedy the
weakness or perverseness of depraved Nature: Nor is any decreed to salvation, but
upon foreseen readiness to accept life offered: and Gods general promises have
conditions, which Men by his Grace must observe on their part, if they will
partak the benefit.

For God decreeing to make Man a free Creature in all his Corollary.
actions, and foreseing his fall, whereby he forfeted that liberty of Will for
himself and Posterity in all spiritual supernatural Graces; permitted Men to use
or abuse it in all other matters of this life (Natural, Moral, Civil) as Man had
before his laps: Whereby, according to his first precept or privilege of increas
and multiply; Parents beget Children in a corrupt Nature, but better or wors
disposed and inclined: which is greatly altered and addicted to Virtu and Vice
by better or wors education, good or il company and diverse other concurring
circumstances. This makes some by pious tutorage become more apt to embrace Gods
Grace and cooperat with it, which draws willing, not nilling minds. But others
by bad breeding, il company, and other lewd incentivs, grow obstinat and
obdurat, like deaf Adders which will not be charmed. Al which God in his infinite
Omniscience foreseing, chos some to be Vessels of honor, and passed by the rest
to perish in the suds of their sins, through wilful impiety, infidelity, and
impenitency: for S. Paul makes Prescience Romans 8. 29.
the prime link of Predestinations golden Chain.

Next follow some particular points appendent to be briefly agitated, viz. Gods
Knowledge, Will, Providence, Predestination, Election, Reprobation before Time:
Creation, Government of Man under the Covenant of Works, Man's fall with its
effects, Man's Government under the Covenant of Grace: by Caling, concurrence of
the Word and Spirit, Conversion, Grace, Freewil, with both jointly,
Regeneration, Perseverance, and last Judgment, al done or to be done in Time.

This is a large field, which tends to unfold the verity of this mystery. 1.
For divine knowledge, S. James says, known to God 1 Divine Knowledge* Acts 15.
18. 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2.
are al his works from everlasting: S. Paul, whom he foreknew, he
predestined: S. Peter, To the strangers elect according to Gods foreknowledg.
Some interpret Prescience by Precognition, presupposing lov or approbation,
rather than simple science: but this is a very verbal nicity; for the Greek
word (Prognosis) properly imports foreknowledg, but approbation arbitrarily: as
when it is said, God knows (i. approves) the way of the righteous; Psalm. 1. 6.
yet it folows not from the bare word: for if Peter and Paul make foreknow and
predestinat, or foreknow and elect or approv al one; then they refer the act of
his Understanding to the Will (yet our Will is guided by the Intellect, and that
by Judgment) imputing to Foreknowledg what properly belongs to Predestination
and Election: fith approbation is more discovered by the Act of Will, which is
to Predestinat and Elect; then by that of understanding, which is to foreknow.
Yet if with Origin, they will join Prescience with his good liking or approving
the subject foreknown, as capable of choosing; it shall be granted: for in
Scripture only the elect are styled Praesciti, not Reprobats; though they also
are foreknown simply, but not with approbation, which hinders not his simple
foreknowledg, nor infers any argument, that men are chosen for any good
approved in them; nor that they must be chosen because good in Gods knowledge:
For God might see many Worlds of Men (to be created, if he pleased, whom he
has covered in darkness of never being) so eligible as those whom he has
chosen; since to be eligible and elect are two distinct things, which do not
follow one another. For clearing whereof, his duple knowledge of simple
Intelligence (which is of al things possible or comprehensible by his
Omnipotence) and of Vision (which is of things that shall be by his Decree
depending on his Will) must be well weighed.

Here two doubts occur: 1. Whether the objects of these 1 Doubt.
Knowledges (possible and future) be divided, so that possibles pertain soly to
pure Intelligence, and future to that of Vision? as if the same things cannot
be first known as possible to simple Intelligence; and after as future (the
divine Decree intervening to make them future) to be objects of Vision.

This is easily resolved, That knowledge is no cause of things, Resolution.
unles his Will concur: for it is not from his knowledge that things are, but only
that they may be. Zanchy says, God created al things, having the Idea, form,
or model first in his mind: for what Artisan does any thing, whose pattern he
conceived not before? So S. Austin, God made nothing ignorantly, as no Artist
L. 11. de Civ. c. 10.
or Architect does: whence we see a kind of miracle, yet truth; that this World
could not be known to us unles it had bin; but unles God had known it before it
was, it never had bin. Dr. Prydeaux in his Scientia media says, That God is
cause of al things which he framed, not simply in himself; but by his Will
adjoined: For his knowledge of pure Understanding respects al things possible;
that of Vision only future, which causes al to be by concurrence of his Will.
So simple Intelligence preceds al acts of Will, whereby the same things respected
as possible, are now looked on as future; because the act of his Will
supervening, makes them to be future in their times.

2. The next doubt is, whether future, contingent, conditional 2 Doubt.
things (specialy free acts of a created Will placed in this or that order) be a
subject of Gods simple Intelligence? because such as dislike the Jesuits
Scientia media say, that the object hereof is null, and therefore the knowledge
taken away: for all acts of Free Will are determined by divine Decree; so that
God no otherwise foreknows they shall be, then because he decreed them to be.

This middle Science partakes more of simple Intelligence Resolut.
then free knowledge; which sees no more then a possibility of things in
futurition only, upon a supposition if God make them to be by his word Fiat.
For all agree, That before God decreed to creat, he had a certain absolut
knowledge of al things (present, past, future, contingent, necessary) together
with all their connexions; and after knows conditionat things to com: but the
Question is, whether he knows them by pure Understanding (which foreruns al
Decrees of his Will) that they shall absolutely be; or by Vision while they lay
suspended under Gods freepleasure, whether they should be or no? for God by his
infinite essence knows what shall be necessarily, and what shall com to pass by
his Will. Bellarmin best resolvs both doubts, That God by his simple
Understanding knew Man would fall if he were made, before he willed to creat
him; for things necessary are in God first, then the voluntary: but it is
necessary for God to know al things possible, else he cannot be Omniscient, and
Voluntary only that he should decree to make Man. If then God has a simple
Intelligence, he can show it in no act more then Predestination: for as it is
the first and highest act of his Will, so is that of his understanding; and the
wisest Agent wills nothing but what he perfectly knew and understood.

Now the first Opinion excluds al use of Prescience, referring Application.
al to his free Pleasure, which with all their fine distinctions and similituds
can hardly free him from being the Author of sin. The secund acknowledges his
simple Prescience of Man's future fall, if he were created, before he decreed to
creat: but why they should not extend it to al Men's free acts so well as to that
one of the first Man's, no reason can be rendered. God foreknew if Christ were
sent to the Jews, they would despise him; if Peter should be tempted, he would
deny him, even before he decreed to send Christ, or to creat Peter. But if it
be asked, Adam or to the fall of al in him, or to Christ's mission, or to Men's
faith beginning and persevering to the end? Surely it is universa and singula)
even to the Worlds end, which agrees best with all his Attributs. This is al
they intend, who refer Christ and faith in him to pure Prescience, before the
act of Electing or Predestinating, not staying at the knowledge of Man's foreseen
fall: not that they make Believers faith any Cause of Gods Predestination; but
only an object of his simple Prescience, concurring with his good pleasure and
Will, to make some Vessels of honor, and some of dishonor. Howbeit People are
taught to admire or adore some Men as Oracles, and abhor others as Scorpions,
whose Tenets they know not.

2. Touching Gods Will, which Predestinats or decrees 2 Gods Will.
what of those infinite things presented by his understanding shall com into
being: for unles both Will and Power conjoin, their being known is not enough to
be: For Gods Will being in it self one and simple (not duple, secret and
reveled) may be considered diversely, as conversant about diverse things. 1. Some
as to be done by himself, or his own power; as the World to be created of
nothing; his Son to be sent made of a Woman, etc. which never fa^l, because he
works alone. 2. Some which he wills to be done by his Creatures, either Natural
Agents, as Flowers to grow by Sun; or Voluntary, as righteous Works to be
wrought by sinful Men, but with his concurrence or cooperation: this often
fails by the Creatures failing which he wills to work it; yet permits and not
hinders the failing, as he could do. 3. Some which he wills and does of himself,
or with others; as all the good we have in Nature or Grace: part whereof he does
as leading or antecedent of his free goodness, caled the Will of his Mercy; part
as following, led or urged, upon occasion of evil in the Creature; as to forsake
punish or destroy; which is the Will of his Justice. These may well cohere; as a
Merchants chief will is in a storm, to sav al his goods; yet by a secund will,
casts some into Sea. So God wills al Men to be saved, as his Creatures; but
permits some to perish, as impenitent sinners. The first act of Gods Will in
choosing things to be; and refusing the rest, of infinite variety, which might
have bin if he would, concurs with his simple Intelligence; there being an act of
his Will even in knowing; as David says, God has done whatever pleased him:
but the secund, whereby he decreed al things which concern Creation, Election,
Reprobation, etc. presupposes pure prescience, as previous in order of Nature,
according to our apprehension.

3. Of Providence concerning Gods Decree or Will in all 3 Providence and
Predestination.
things sav about Man; and Predestination, whereby he decrees touching Man the
principal part of his Providence (as Fortune concerns Man, and Chance al things
else) which last is an act of his Will from eternity, decreeing the ends of al
Men, and means which he foreknew would bring them to those ends of Life or
Death. So by Predestinating some to those means, which he foreknew by their own
obstinacy (not by any insufficience of the means, since others by the same
attain it) will not bring them to Life, becoms a negativ Reprobation, by their
own default or disobedience, or by their fault who have charge over their Souls:
but that God hinders it not or givs not effectual Grace (which he knew would
sav them if given) proceds soly from his just Will and free pleasure. Nor can
this be rightly nicknamed Postdestination (as some aspers it) since it folows his
simple science: and knowledge is not of things absolutely to be, but
conditionaly, if it pleas him to say, they shall be.

4. Anent Election and Reprobation, wherein God uses 4 Election and Reprobation.
both Knowledge and Will; as the Scriptures sometime style the Elect from one of
those whom he foreknew; sometime from the other, those whom he predestined
according to purpos or Will: Romans 11. 2. Romans 8. 28.
hence they may be described either way; viz. Election is a foreknowledg of
Gods benefits, whereby a man will be saved, if they be given him: Or election is
Gods purpos and Will to giv Man those benefits, by which he knows he will be
saved, if given him. So Reprobation is a foreknowledg of Gods benefits, under
which a Man, through his own ingratitud will perish, if no other be given or will
be given: Or it is Gods Decree, to giv a Man no other benefits then those, under
which he foreknows he will by his own wilful ingratitud perish, if no other be
given. Here Prescience looks precisely on Man's ingrat neglect of saving
benefits, and Gods will denies to giv any new, or more then those which are
ineffectual by their abuse or neglect. So God has mercy on whom he will, and
hardens whom he pleases: giving to one Grace of repentance, and leaving the
other in his corruption, by withholding those Graces, which he knows would sav
him, if granted. Not as if he gav not sufficient to life; for he received the
Graces given in vain, and God would confer no more: for to harden is not ^o
subtract al Grace sufficient to salvation, but to bar or withold that high
hidden Grace of his Power and Will, which he knows would convert and sav, if
given; but that it would be refused. Thus Man first hardens his Psalm. 95. 8.
Exodus 8. 15.
own heart (as Pharaoh did) by refusing Grace offered; and God secundarily, in
not adding or increasing stronger Graces, which would mollify if given. But if
they were extended to al, none could perish; for it is his pleasure to exercise
Justice on wilful despisers of his sufficient Grace by making them Vessels of
wrath; and mercy on those whom he foresaw would obey his Call. Let profound
Hooker put a period to this point: That L. 5. part. 5.
which moves God to work is goodness; which orders it, Wisdom; which perfects
it, Power; al things produced in their times were eternaly in him, as a work
unbegan in the Artificer, which he after frames: therefore whatever we behold
in this World, was inwrapped in the bowels of divine Mercy, writ in the Book of
eternal Wisdom, and held in the hands of Omnipotent power, the foundation being
yet unlaid. So al things in that respect are his Offspring (as S. Paul says)
being effects in Acts 17. 28, 29
their highest Cause, who also is actualy in them, and the assisting influence
of his Deity their Life. Let hereto saving Grace be added, which begets a
special Offspring of Men, to whom he givs the gracious name of Sons. We are by
nature Adams Offspring, and God in creating him created us al, and so many as
descend from him, have the root from which they spring: But al are not Sons of
God, nor any one sav by Grace and favor. The Sons of God have his own Natural
Son as a secund Adam from Heaven, and such as descend from him have the root
from which they spring, whose true Progeny they are by spiritual birth. God
therefore loving his Son eternaly, must needs lov eternaly and prefer them
before al others, which since spiritualy sprung from him. These were in God as
their Savior, not as their Creator only: It was the purpos of his saving
Goodness, saving Wisdom, and saving Power, which inclined toward them, such as
were eternaly in God by intended admission to Life, have God by vocation or
adoption actualy abiding in them, as an Artisan is in the Work, which hand is
presently to frame. We are therefore in God eternaly through Christ, according
to that purpos, whereby we were chosen to be made his, through the knowledge had
of us, and lov born toward us from everlasting; but are actualy no longer in
God then from the time of our adoption into the body of the true Church, or
fellowship of his Children: for he knows and lovs his Church; so that al which
are in it, are thereby known to be in him. For our being in Christ by eternal
foreknowledg saves us not, without actual adoption into the society of Saints
here: for we are in him by actual incorporation into that Communion, which has
him for their Head. Thus he.

5. Things done in Time are; Creation of the World, which was 5 Creation.
Gods first act of Power, to execut in time his eternal Counsil and Decree: It
is his whole frame of building perfected and furnished Romans 1. 20.
according to the model of his Mind, wherein he made manifest the invisible
things of his Wisdom and Goodness to his own Glory. Abov al he made Man to a
more excellent end it his own Image, so far as was fit for a Creature to
partake of divine Nature, that was to be good but mutable. This Image o^
likeness appeered in three things: 1. Understanding. 2. Holiness or Righteousness.
3. Immortality and Blessedness. The two first as perfections, the last as his
end; being subalterna^ one to another; viz. Understanding to Righteousness, this
to Blessedness, which is Righteousness reward, and it the work o^ willingness.

6. Government of Man under the Covenant of Works, 6 Government
which is the secund temporal act of Gods eternal Counsil; that Man might use
his perfections, and attain the end: wherein God, as suprem Lord, was to
command; and Man, as Vaslal, obey. Yet it pleased his Goodness to com into
Covenant with him, as a free Rational Creature ( Do this, and thou shall live)
caled the Covenant of Works. For the Natural moral Law, written in Man's heart,
comprised al works to be done by him: but the positiv prohibitiv Precept ( not
to eat of the Tree in the midst of the Garden) only a trial or experiment of
his obedience, and exercise of the moral Law duties in that one particular;
because Man was to observe them, and God to perform the Promiss or Covenant of
life, if he kept them faithfully.

7. The fall of Man; who being tempted of Satan, broke that 7 Man's fall.
one Mandat, and so becam guilty of al, because he consented willingly, having
strength enough to resist it: But God foreseeing it, decreed to permit and not
hinder it, though he could. 1. Because he would not impair or imped the liberty
of Will given him. 2. Because it would the more manifest his own Goodness and
Glory, by providing a remedy for forlorn Man's ransom or redemption. 3. Because
he knew it would oblige and make Man more thankful and careful to observe a new
secund Covenant of Grace circumscribed with easy conditions.

8. Effects of the fall; whereof part is within Man, as original sin, 8 The
effects of Man's fall.
comprising the loss both of primitiv righteousness and supernatural
perfections; beside a decay of his natural faculties: Part without him, as the
curs of the ground, the subject of his Labor; the miseries of this life; and
death, both temporal and eternal. These effects fell on Adam and al his
Posterity: since he was not as one single person only; but Mankinds whole Nature:
for God might justly have rejected and condemned all the race in him the root,
which brought so bitter fruits: Yet he promised Mercy to all that will return to
him, and prescribed means of remedy, If they will apply them, being offered by
Grace in his Son Christ Jesus, who died for the sins of al Mankind in general.

9. Government of Man under the Covenant of Grace; 9 Covenant of Grace.
which God ordained to restore him, being falen, that his end of creating might
not be quit frustrat by Satan's fraud, though he L. 3. 0. 33.
permitted it. Irenaeus says, God ordered Man's salvation at his good pleasure,
that he might not be overcom by the Serpents craft, to destroy al Mankind; nor
his skill impaired to sav whom he willed. To this end he decreed, that the
Woman's seed shall break the Serpents head; whereby he might be reduced from Hell,
and set in a fair way to Heaven; on condition of a new Covenant, tending to the
same ends of righteousness and life; which, partly by the remains of Gods Image,
and partly by supply of his propitious help, he was capable to observe; else were
the Covenant vain. It Is caled a Covenant of Grace; yet true or real, wherein both
parties are to perform their parts. 1. God to send his Son and Spirit for Man's
relief, to forgiv his sins, imput righteousness, and giv life to all that shall
obey his Son and Spirit: Jer. 31. 33.
So Jeremy says, This shall be my Covenant, says the Lord: I will put my Law
into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts: I will be their God, and
they shall be my People. This is a Covenant of Grace, because freely pacted with
Man a sinner, whose salvation is wrought rather by God then himself; being more
in receiving then giving, and in believing then doing. 2. Man is to humble
himself for his sins, to God the Creator; to beleev in Christ the Redeemer, and
be led by the holy Spirit the Sanctifier. This part is unfolded in the Gospel,
requiring Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience: Which Covenant was made to al
Mankind in Adam and Eve as the stock of al their Seed. For some remnents of Gods
Image (Life, Knowledge of good and il, liberty of Will in Natural, Moral, and
Civil things; Conscience accusing or excusing) are still left after the fall:
which, though given at Creation, and so belong to Nature; yet to retain them,
is of Grace, both by giving capacity to contract or Covenant, and to be a
beginning of his restoration; but since these alone be not able to raise him or
recover righteousness, or keep the new Covenant by his old remains, God being no
hard Task-master or Covenant maker, supplies by his Spirit what is farther
needful to keep it, since none is bound to impossibilities. Upon this keeping
the new Covenant, depends the eternal Bliss or bale and woe of every Man, which
he must obediently observe.

10 Caling.
10. Dispensation of the Covenant by Caling; which is a proclaming thereof from
time to time, by preaching the Word; else it would soon be forsaken, forgoten,
and slighted. This S. Paul Romans 8. 30.
conjoins with Predestinating, as he puts Prescience before it: which is
defined to be a revelation or proclamation of the Gospel Covenant, injoining
repentance toward God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; promising remission
of sins, and life eternal to all that obey. It consists of two essential parts
or divine acts, to make one complet work of Vocation; viz. the extern preaching
of the Word (whereto belong Sacraments, Blessings, Corrections) and intern
operation of the Spirit, accompanying or assisting the outer means. This Caling
has bin dispensed diversely by Gods Wisdom and good Pleasure, according to the
difference of Times.

1. In the old Testament, before Christ's coming; as an outward means and
measure of the Spirits operation, with effects suitable to both: When the bounds
were narrower, the Word obscurer, the Sacraments more mysterious, the Spirit
more sparing, and obedience slenderer then under the new Testament: for from
Adam to the Confusion of Toungs, the caling was universal, being al one
language under the righteous Patriarchs: But afterward God permitting Men
(which forsook their Religious Ps. 147. 19, 26.
Fathers) to walk their own ways; renewed his Caling or Covenant with Abram
and his Seed, contracting the bounds Ephesians. 2. 12.
of his Church. The Gentiles then were al under wrath and Satan, without God in
the World, Aliens from the Covenant of Promiss. For as the Church excommunicats
ungodly persons, so God excluds unworthy Nations for many generations, to
punish their ingratitud and contempt of his Word; or to make future Ages cleav
faster to him by default of former, being left to themselfs. The mystery of
whose Judgments (why he one while shuts out Gentiles, admitting the Jews; another
extruds the Jews, receiving the Gentiles) is admirable and inscrutable: Romans 11.
25. 33
But why he left al to Covenant with Abram and his Seed, no reason can be
rendered, sav only his free Grace, not of Works, but Rom 9. 10, 11.
of him that caleth.

2. Under the new Testament, after Christ's coming: which outwardly has the
Word and Sacraments, exhibiting Christ with his benefits more clearly: And
inwardly more abundant measure of the Spirit intended to multituds of Nations,
with greater fruits of men's conversion then under the old Testament. This is
termed the caling of the Gentiles, when Jews were shut out, til their time shall
com. Here Gods Judgments are to be admired, why he witholds from the Jews his
inward illumining Spirit and softning Grace, which he grants to Gentiles?
keeping still his word or outer Caling, from many Nations which never heard of
Christ, no more then the old Heathen: But we that be under the Grace of Gods
caling, must be more thankful for it, and more careful that it be not conferred
in vain upon us. Diverse Divines make Caling duple: 1. Outward of the Word only,
common to Reprobats, and never obeyed with truth of heart, being ineffectual.
2. Inward of the Spirit joined with the Word, peculiar to the Elect and never
disobeied, which is effectual. This is not orthodox, since there is but one
Caling both of the Word and Spirit, as Body and Soul; which is effectual in it
self to al under it: but if it fail, the fault is in the Caled, which obey it
not: For the Spirit goes not so with the Word; as to make Man perform what he
can by natural strength, since it is given to help Natures failings; but to keep
it waking and attentiv: So if the Spirit be not present with the Word to some,
it is because they are not present to it, through their stupid supine security.
Nor is the concurrence of Word and Spirit natural, necessary, or inseparable;
but free or arbitrary in Gods good pleasure. For as Grace is annexed to the
Sacraments, so is it to the Word by divine ordinance: Hence the Church, before
Sermons, prais for the Spirits illumining power, to concur with the Word; which
God expects he should ask, who is to pray for himself and others. Another
defect why the Spirit does not still work with the Word is, when it is not duly
and diligently asked. Some also are past Grace, given to Reprobat sens; to whom
the Spirit is not present with the Word for former contempt or neglect in their
Visitation, when God caled; who now givs them up to blindness and hardness,
holding back the light of his Spirit and dew of Grace from the Word preached in
their hearing; though Men know them not in particular, and so admit al.

We must distinguish between the word Caling, Persons Caled, and operations of
the Spirit with the Word in them. The Word is duple. 1. The Law, which has two
parts; viz. the 1 The Law.
Precepts, to accuse or convince; and the Curs for all transgressors thereof, to
wound or kill. The Persons Caled by Gods Minister, using the Law, are al natural
unregenerat sinners; or Regenerats relapsed into grievous sins; who are either
ignorant of their evil estate, to whom Law-precepts must be preached, to make
them know their sin; or know it but are secure and senseless of their carnal
condition; and to such the curs must be denounced. The Spirits operations on
these by Laws ministry, are to open their eyes and prick their hearts with fear
of the Curs: which effects the Spirit, with the letter of the Law, ordinarily
produces, by working on those remains of light left in the mind, and of
Conscience accusing: which works are wrought in many Reprobats, who have some
initial parts of Grace, as Papists grant.

2. The Gospel which has a Precept to repent of sin showed 2 Gospel.
by the Law, and beleev in Christ, who givs life where the Law-Curs kills;
with a Promiss of sins remission, and eternal life Acts 2 38, 39.
to all that repent and beleev. The Persons caled in the words of the Gospel are
al sorts of sinners; but convict, terrified, wounded, Mat. 11. 28.
full of compunction, and self-condemning; wrought by the Spirit in preaching
the Law. The Spirits operations on such by the Gospels ministry, are to open
their eyes to see the light of Gods mavelous mercy toward sinners; of Christ's
infinite lov in dying for them, the inestimable merits of his death; the
powerful Gifts, Graces, and aids of the holy Ghost: To pour into sinners hearts
hope, which shall stay them from desperate sinning: To inspire the Grace of
prayer, that they may escape the wrath to com, and receiv Gods favor: to beget
repentance and work Faith; that they rely wholly on him, and cast themselfs into
the arms of his goodness, to be saved by him. These Graces the holy Ghost is still
ready to work by the Gospel in a repentant sinner, humbled and prepared by the
Law: for what proportion of power the Spirit had in the Law on Unregenerats, to
humble them; the same it has in the Gospel on the humbled, to work hope and
infer the other Graces of Prayer, Repentance, Faith, Justification,
Mortification, Vivification, and new Obedience. Howbeit if the Spirit is not
present in preaching the Law, to giv Unregenerats strength of new obedience,
because it is present to convince and condemn their wickedness: Nor is it present
in preaching the Gospel to one not yet penitent or believing, to giv new
obedience or work Peace, Joy, and Lov, as it does in Believers; for such
degrees com not per saltum. The sum is, Gods Spirit is annexed to his Word for
such Gifts and operations, as the hearer is a fit disposed subject to receiv:
for God works by order of things antecedent or preparativ; which, if they find
no admission, the subsequent are suspended. Hence coms the frequent just
separation of the Spirit by the word by the great Pastor of Souls, who sercheth
the heart and renes. To prove this point, that Gods Word in the Law and Gospel,
is perfect and powerful to convert Souls, read Psalm. 9. 7. Joh. 17. 17. Joh.
20. 21. 2 Cor. 3. 8. Heb. 4 12. where the Gospel is caled the ministration of
the Spirit* not of the Letter; because it givs what it commands: but the Law
commands and givs no help: for, the Law was given by Moses (not hearts to
receiv it) Joh. 1. 17.
but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, says S. John. To prove that Caling is
al one to them that obey not and obey, Christ's words are clear; Many are caled,
but few chosen: Here Mat. 22. 14.
two sorts are specified; some caled, but not chosen; and some caled and chosen
of those many; yet the Caling one of both: which is not by the outward Word
alone, for by it none are chosen; but by the Word and Spirit in common: So the
few chosen excelled not in number or Caling, but in obeying when the rest
refused, as the Sun hardens clay and melts wax. Christ says, The Ninivets shall
rise in judgment with this generation Mat. 12. 41.
and condemn it: If Jonas preached without the Spirit, how did they repent? If
Jesus preached without it, how is he greater then Jonas? If refusers be not al
equaly caled, how can Ninivets rise in Judgment? they can answer, we were not
caled like you, by Gods voice speaking to the heart; but by Man's, barely to the
ear: If God had excited us as he did you, we would repent as you did. The Jews
exemple confirms the same, being yet uncaled; not because they live without the
Gospels sound, since they convers scatterdly with Christians, and may hear
Sermons or read Scriptures: but because they persist obdurat, and reject the
illumining softning Spirit, often offered: therefore the distinction of Caling
into outward ineffectual; and inward effectual is false or frivolous. Bare
preaching may be a commanding, like the Law; not a Caling, as the Gospel: for
God may still require obedience as a natural duty, since he created Man able; but
because the new Covenant calls Men to Faith and Repentance, being unable to rise
or recover of themselfs; it were a mock, and no call to say, turn, repent,
beleev, and live, unles some Grace be prepared to do it. The effect of this
Caling is ascribed to one cause chefly, the Spirits operation; yet there be mo,
and if any fails, the effect falls: for obedience to Gods Caling is an act of
Man's will, under aid of the Spirit, which is often refused or resisted, and Grace
offered in vain; since God does not cross the course of the secund Causes,
established at first. It also makes Gods Covenant differ from al other, in
which no party performs al, but each a part for himself: whereas here God is made
to perform al pacts and promises for both; who only undertakes to make his
conditions feasible, and afford his help so far as is needful, as Isaiah
intimats: For it is not safe to rely soly on Isai 59. 21.
Gods absolut Will, as if we were tied to nothing; or to gul our selfs, as if
God required nothing of us: For this Covenant of Grace has some conditions for
Man to fulfill, which by Gods universal Grace he is able to do, as shall be
showed.

11. Conversion of a Sinner (which is the end of Gods Caling 11 Conversion
Men by the Word) is the obedience of him that is Caled; for he must hear and
obey, else no conversion. The terms a Quo and ad Quem, are from Satan's power to
God, viz. in his mind from darkness to light; in will, from Idols to serve the
living God, Acts 26. 18.
and in his whole life from unrighteousnes to holiness. This conversion is duple:
1. When a natural Man is regenerat and made a Member of Gods Church, as the
Gentiles, being Aliens, were converted. 2. When a Regenerat faling into sin
returns 1 These. 1. 9* Acts 1^. 3.
by repentance; as Peter, being converted after his Ap^stasy, was bid
strengthen his Brethren. The prime principal Cause of Luke 22. 32. Lam. 5. 21.
conversion is Gods holy Spirit working on a sinners heart, both at beginning,
middle, and end: The ordinary instrumental, is the word preached: the adjuvant
means are the cross that chastens, Jer. 31. 18.
blessings which draw or allure others prayers, and exemples of Men already
converted. The main scruple is, what part a sinner to be converted bears in it,
being a living rational subject, whether he be Activ or merely Passiv? whether
he can further or hinder it? whether, supposing two equaly Caled, one may be
converted and not the other? if so, whether it rises from God or Man?

12. Gods Grace is all that proceds from him of free favor, 12 Free Grace
universal.
tending to a sinners salvation: whereby is not meant the remains of Nature (as
some light of Reason, sens of Conscience; though these by Grace, were left after
the Fall) nor the Law describing the righteousness of Works, though the Preacher
of Grace uses it to prepare a sinner for Christ; nor the bare outward Word of
the Gospel, though called the Word of Grace, because internal Grace goes with it:
but only the inward illuminations, teachings, tractions, motions, operations,
inspirations, and gifts of the holy Ghost, merited by Christ for Adams sons, in
their time and order, to raise them fallen, and sav them lost; which S. Austin
terms the Grace of Christ. For in Man is no merit of Grace, but only an
occasion of God to show it; which yet he is free to receiv or refuse: Nor is
the good use of former Graces any merit or cause of giving mo; which are so
freely given as the first, else Grace were no Grace. This Grace being one in
essence, has diverse denominations, according to the difference of relations
and effects: the most usual distinction is into preventing, working, or
exciting Grace; and following, coworking, or helping: but to divide it into
sufficient and efficacious, is an idle buz: For how can it be Grace or
sufficient, which never produces any effect? since if it become effectual, it
loses the name of sufficient, and is one with the other; for all Grace in it
self is sufficient or efficient alike; but the defect in the subject or some
other cause: Yet Grace may be caled effectual from the event as issuing from
Gods special mercy guided by Prescience, not else. Lapsed Man has a necessity
of Grace, as S. Austin maintains against Pelagius, who denied original sin, or
any loss to Adams Offspring by his fall; holding Mankind so sound as God made
it, as there needs no Grace: al which are gross errors. For Man without God, can
do no good, because the Commandments are beyond his strength without Grace, to
which nothing is impossible: and it is most just the Creature should rely on the
Creator, that he may still apply to him. The Air is not a lucid body like the
Sun; for then it would continu so still in absence of his light: So Man is
illightned by Gods presence; but in his absence immediately darkened, whom we
forsake wilfully. The power of Grace is glorious, such as wrought in Christ
when he rose from the dead; whence our conversion is Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.
caled a new Birth, a new Creation, and first Resurrection. For the power to
Will good, is created again as at first; since our endeavors are vain unles they
be stirred, and void unles helped, as Bernard says. The habits of Faith and
Lov are no more in our Romans 7. 18.
power, then a blind Man can giv himself sight: he may have present to will; but
to do what the Law injoins he finds not, except the Spirit help him: So that
when we are ready to receiv Phil. 2. 12. 1^.
Gods mighty power, he works and givs our desire: hence S. Paul exhorts to work
our Salvation, having power given to work, by him which works both to will and
do. Yet when Man wilfully resists his power, he yields out of will, not
weakness; and lets him fall into a reprobat sens, who will not necessitat or hold
up any in obstinat disobedience: for that power which builds up supernatural
things, does not destroy natural; such as is the liberty to disobey being
before the Fall.

Touching universal Grace, Origin extends it to al Men and Devils, whom S.
Austin refuts. Huber held universal Election, 2 de Civ. (...)
that Christ's death brought al into state of Salvation, whom the Lutherans and
Synod of Dort condemn. Andradius and other Papists say, that Ethnics have
sufficient saving Grace by Natures light; which if they use well, Gospel Grace
shall be reveled to them.

Al which are evident errors, but three Orthodox: 1. That 3 Pregn^^ Points.
as Christ took the Nature of Man (not of Angels) so he paid the price of
Redeeming al Mankind, as our common Catechism teaches; I beleev in God the
Father, who made me and all the World; in God the Son, who redeemed me and al
Mankind; and in God the holy Ghost, who sanctifies me and all the Elect. 2. That
the promiss of the Gospel is universal to al within hearing, and may be
seriously profred to al Men, as it is preached to Pagans: for our Church wills al
to receiv the Promises, as they be generaly held forth in holy Scriptures. 3.
That with the Promiss and Word of the Gospel, there goes ordinarily sufficient
Grace of the Spirit, to work belief and obedience in all under the Gospel: but
that al do not obey, proceds from Men, being wanting (...) Cor. 2. 1, 2.
to Gods Grace; not for any defect on his part, as S. Paul plainly provs. Now
whereas it is said, how Christ laid down his life for his Sheep, for Gods
Children, and for his Church; but elsewhere, that he died for all, Men interpret
as they list or like: yet must such Texts be cautiously and conscientiously
construed, lest they clash one against another. It may well cohere, that God in
mercy to Mankind, sent his Son to die for all, being no accepter of persons;
willing primarily to sav al: but foreseing the fruit or success of his death,
that some would thankfully embrace it, and the rest not, he accepted even those
few, and sent his Son by a secundary will to sav them in whom he would glorify
his bounty; who could have changed the course of his Graces and Government to sav
mo, if he pleased. Hereof S. Chrysostom speaks; it is meet every one be no less
thankful, then as if Christ came into the World for his sake only, since he would
not refuse it even for one: so mightily he lovs every particular with the same
measure of affection, as he does al Mankind: therefore he was offered a Sacrafice
for our whole Nature, which he assumed into his Person; being sufficient to sav
al; but will be useful or available only to Believers: yet was he not scared
from this dispensation for the paucity; but as the Feast was prepared for Luke
14. 16. etc.
al, yet such as were invited would not com; the Lord did not presently take
away what was provided, but caled in all sorts of Guests: So does God. S. Austin
says, as to the valu or virtu of the price, so far as concerns al Mankind;
Christ's blood is a Redemption of the whole World: but such as live without Faith
and the mystery of new Birth, are Aliens thereto. When therefore by that one
Nature of us al, which he took for all our sakes, we are truly said to be al
Redeemed, yet not al freed from captivity: for the cup of immortality has
enough to profit al, yet to such as will not drink, it is nothing profitable.

13. Free Will is more debated then well discerned, how far the 13 Freewil.
Liberum ad (...).
prints remain since Adams fall. It Is a natural power in a Rational Creature to
will or nil, choose or refuse, be it good or evil. This is looked on with great
prejudgment, and by Dr. Abbot sometime Bishop of S^rum scornfully styled Tomsons
strumpet: but sundry Fathers stiffly defend her as the Handmaid of Grace,
against the Manichees and other Heretics. It Is a true saying, If there be not
Grace, how shall God sav the World? and it is as true; if there be not Free Will,
how shall he judge the World, since al shall be judged according to their free
works? Free Will to good was a faculty in the first Man's Soul, corroborat^d or
guarded by the gift of super^atural Grace, which God conferred to make him will
good more cheerfully and constantly: but he by wilful disobedience lost this
indowment, and the very freedom of will to any good of the highest kind: as to
lov G^d abov al, to work righteousness of the Law, or do any spiritual act
suitable to those, as to repent, beleev, obey: yet some freedom to Human, Natural,
Moral, Civil acts remains still, with outward good acts of Religion, as to
frequent the Church, hear Sermons, kneel at prayer, etc. which any Man can do
as he learns Sciences in Schools. So al freedom of will to spiritual
supernatural good is forfeted in Man's Nature fallen, unles it be renewed or
restored by Grace of Christ, which goes with the Gospel: but if the Son make us
free, we shall be free indeed; else not.

There is a triple spiritual good, whereto freedom is restored by Grace: 1. That
which the Law commands, as righteousness and true holiness: in this Free Will is
lost, and not immediately restored by Grace, til after one is justified and made
a new Creature. 2. That which is suppositivly, not simply good; when sin is
committed (as Aristotle says, blush^ng is good ex hypoth^si) as compunction,
terror, sens of guilt, conscience accusing: freedom of will hereto remains in a
sinner, who is often stru^k with fear, as Adam fled and hid his head. 3. That
which the Gospel commands, as to repent and beleev: herein Man has no Free Will
left, but the same Gospel brings freedom two ways: 1. By framing the
Commandments so facil or feasible to the wills weakness, as may be a proportion
between it and them; whereby Gospel Grace shall apply or accommodat the work to
the Workman, or task to the Laborer. 2. By giving the Will so much help or power
as is requisite to enable a sinner, though it be a task so hard and heavy as the
works of the Law. To repent of sin, beleev in Gods Mercy, and rest on his Sons
merits, seem to be acts very mercifully prepared, as fittest to a sinners weak
condition: yet this way of freedom is not so evident as the later, which
prevents the will, and prepares it by infusing Grace, to will spiritual good
required, in that order or proportion as is prescribed to depraved Nature
assisted by Grace, which brings power with it to quicken the dead, strengthen
the impotent, and loosen the Captiv: whereby Gospel Precepts are made liable to
be obeyed by Man lapsed, which the Law does not enable: so that none can be
excused in disobeying them, for want of power to repent or beleev.

Free Will on the left hand to evil, is under Gods Grace or notwithstanding it;
whereby one may will good, or decline to evil. This in Adam was a single innocent
possibility or a Creatures mutability toward evil; since God only is immutably
good. So Adams supernatural Grace given to corroborat him, did not immobilitat
his will to evil: for he is prais-worthy, who can transgress and will not; not he
that is good, and can be no other; as some say Grace cannot be resisted. This
natural freedom to evil (caled resistentia connata) remains in Man falen, and
is not removed by Grace; but there is added resistentia adnata, or a precipitat
proclivity to evil, by thraldom to Satan's tyranny and dominion. So the natural
freedom to sin, is not in it self evil; but the use and practis only: yet
prones to evil, and servitud to sin, which is in us since the Fall, is evil.
These differ so much as a mortal man living, and one actualy dead: The first
Grace takes not away in this life, but essais to remov the other, and to weaken
or restrain it; preserving the natural freedom to evil still. This Doctor Baro,
in his learned Lectures on Jonas accuratly unfolds, which must be carefully
heeded in this dark Theory.

Free Will (as Doctor Charlton in his abstruse Treatis inscribed, The darkness of
Atheism dispeld by Natures light shows) is not taken in Tullies sens, for a
liberty to live as every one lists; nor as the Civil Law intends, for freedom
from servitud: but for what is properly in Man's power or disposing, to elect or
reject what object he will, good or evil: which concerns only Man's natural
condition; whereto in equity, the reward of Piety or Virtu, and punishment of
Impiety or Vice is soly du. This liberum Arbitrium is not only an assent or
approbation, but an adhesion to that abov others, which the Mind or Intellect
shall chus: for the essence of it consists primarily in the Rational faculty,
and dependently on the Will; which in it self is blind or undiscerning, except
guided by the Intellect to inform and conduct it. Some Divines say Man's will is
most free, when it is so fixed on the chief Good, as it cannot will Evil, because
the dilection and fruition of that is voluntary, and therefore free. This is an
evident error, by confounding spontaneous and voluntary actions: for a
spontaneous is a blind impuls of Nature, grounded on no foregoing deliberation;
as Fire spontaneously mounts up, Bruts mov from place to place, Infants suck;
without ratiocination or liberty of will: but a voluntary arbitrary action
depends on previous deliberation, dijudication, and delection; which is free
indifferently to Good or Evil: So that if the appetit be restrained only to
Good; it may act spontaneously (as a stone movs downward) but not arbitrarily
ad utrumlibet. They say the appetit confined to good is volent, and therefore
free: but this volence is a mere libence, free from coactiv violence; no true
liberty to chus several objects; and therefore not arbitrary, because barred of
indifferency. They reply, that it is the perfection of Free Will so to embrace
Good, as not to be capable of evil. True, it is the perfection of Man's will or
appetit, so to enjoy true Good (specialy the chief) that nothing can divorce or
divert it to seek any counterfeit: Yet this is not the wills liberty to either;
nor incident to Man in this life, being a beatitud of Souls separat, which have
no other object sav the true Summum Bonum, nor other appetit then a full fixed
dilection thereof.

Thus Will is guided by the Intellect, and this by Judgment which it givs
concerning Good and Evil objects; that this is good and that evil, or this more
and that less good. So when the will is averted from one and converted to
another; that mutation proceds from mutability of Intellectiv Judgment, which
is now for one thing and anon for another: for the Intellect makes use of some
notions caled simple apprehensions, whereby it givs judgment of their Natures;
as it has a prenotion what Honey is, and what sweetness; yer it can judge Honey to
be sweet: But though in matters of speculation it relies on this simple
Judgment, nor can infer farther by necessary consequent: yet in objects
reducible to action it has a compound notion caled Proposition or Enunciation,
immediately annexed to the former simple notion and superadded as a Conclusion,
which is caled Practical Judgment: as when it judges Honey sweet, it ads a
secund complex notion, if sweet it is to be tasted; and infers instantly a
Conclusion, that Honey may be tasted. Now because practical objects are
singulars, the Intellect givs judgment that this present Honey is sweet; and
secundly infers that it is to be tasted, whereto the will assents and chooses it.
Hence Aristotl^ L. de motu Animal. c. 7.
allows no distinction between an action or execution, and a Conclusion; because
this resulting from two Propositions is the very action, which he provs by
several exemples: So this Conclusion which is the action it self, whereto the
execution coheres, is caled Practical Judgment. This action or execution of a
Judgment cannot succed, unles the appetit or will concurs: so that every
judgment or notion of Good has annexed an appetition of that Good; and every
judgment of Evil, an aversion from it. So soon then as the Intellect judges a
thing to be sweet, and therefore to be tasted; up rises the appetit and wills
actual degustation of this sweet presented, where both Intellect and will
conjoin. Thus when the Intellect givs judgment of Good (which is the Wills
proper object) the Will is instantly incited to desire fruition, which folows on
the heels of Judgment, as a shadow attends the Suns body: so that if the one
judge it good, the other desires it; if evil, the Will declines it. Now because
the Intellect is mostly fickle or inconstant in judgment, the Will no less
wavers or varies in appetition: so that when the one to day judges a thing
good and to morrow evil; the other affects it to day and abhors it to morrow: so
the Will conforms wholly to the Intellects judgments concerning Good or Evil.

Good is duple: 1. True or real. 2. Seeming or counterfeit. So evil is either
realy so, or gilded with the specious show of Good. Hence Cicero aptly compares
it to a Balance, which if Geometricaly adjusted by dimidiation, is indifferent
to be depressed at either end or extrem, and so forced from its equilibry, or
depressed at that side on which the greater weight is laid: As the contrary end
may be depressed by over-poising it with a greater weight: Semblably the
Intellect is in it self indifferent, and inflected to that object, whereto the
greater appeerance of Verum and Bonum.
Truth or Good adheres; as it can upon a greater appeerance of either reflect
to a secund, being still led by verisimility: for the Will is as the Needle, and
Intellect the Magnet, by whose verticity it turns parallel to the point of Good,
whether real or apparent. Or the Will is as a Mariner, and Intellect the compass
by which she steers. For the Wills indifferency is but a shadow or representativ
of that indifferency congeneal to the Intellect; and consequently the
determination of that indifferency in the Mistress, causes a like
determination of indifferency in the Maid, to this or that object. For oftimes
our Minds are equilibrated betwixt two judgments, or waver between two objects
equaly attractiv: which fluctuation rises, because the weights of reason are
equal on either side, that the Mind can acquiesc in the election of neither.
Hence three excellent consequents occur. 1. That so often as the Intellect having
embraced true judgment, quits it to pursu a falls one; so often something intervens,
which diverts the genuin appeerance from a good object to an evil one, and so
causes a mutation of the Intellects assent or judgment. 2. That the change of
the objects appeerance, is sole immidiat cause of the Intellects varying in
judgment and assent. 3. That the Will is hereby obliged to conform to the
Intellects guide or conduct; whose flexility flows from the others flexibility.
So it is in vain to attempt a change of the Wills appetition, til care be had to
change the Intellects judgment: Or to make the one constant in appetition,
unles the other be settled in judgment. Thus he of Free Will in general.

14. Of Grace and Free Will jointly, which cooperat in every 14 Grace and
Freewil. Phil. 2. 13.
spiritual work: wherein three Principles or Axioms are to be declared. 1. That
in all their operations at our first conversion, or in every good work; Grace
is still prime principal Leader from first to last: But Man's Will never works
first, not alone; being as a wheel in a Mil, which is kept going by the waters
motion, and that staying it soon stops: So is this kept working by Gods Grace,
which flows from his goodness or desire of our salvation. 2. That when Grace
works on Man's Understanding, Will, or Affections; it preservs the natural
powers, properties, and motions of a Reasonable Creature: for it destrois not
Nature but helps it; nor does Nature repel Grace, but receivs it. Though then
the habits of Faith, Hope, Charity be infused by God, and not acquired by human
industry; yet are inspired after the manner of Acquisits; because instilled by
means of hearing, praying, meditating, reading, studying, and endeavoring. For
so says S. Austin, not I, but Gods Grace (...) Great. and (...). ^^b. c. 5.
with me: that is, not I alone, nor his Grace alone; but both jointly; since he
that made thee without thee, will not sav thee without thee. 3. That in all
operations of Grace, Man's Will is to rely on God, as the Creature on the
Creator; Receiver on the Doner; Weak on the strong; Imperfect on the
Perficient; and Supplicant on the Lord: as the Earth depends on Heaven for
rain, heat, and influence: which when Man neglects, rejects, or forgets; he is
dry, void, and barren of al spiritual fruits, by his own fault.

The imperfect work on Mat. 6. says, Lo, how appositly Homil. 14.
Christ speaks: he says not Father sanctify thy name in us, bring thy Kingdom
to us, thy Will be done of us; lest God should seem to sanctify himself by Men,
or bring his Kingdom on whom he lists, or make his Will be done of whom he
pleases; and in that regard be an accepter of persons: Nor did say, Let us
sanctify thy Name, take thy Kingdom, do thy Will; lest it should seem to proced
from Man only: But he speaks indefinitly or impersonaly, Holowed by thy Name,
thy Kingdom com, thy Will be done, to show how needful the work of both is;
because Man has need of God, and he is helpful to Man in performing
righteousness: For as Man can do no good without Gods help, so he works no good
in Man except he be willing: as if he had said, if ye do these things, if ye
pray for these, ye are worthy of such a Father, who will giv them.

To try the truth, take these four Propositions. 1. Man's Will, without Grace, can
and does Will and perform spiritual good: this is Pelagius's Heresy, condemned
by the whole Church. 2. Man's Will, without Grace, cannot will good; but being
enabled by it, can after, sans farther Grace, both will and perform alone: this
is the Massiliens or Semipelagians error. 3. By or through Gods Grace working
on the Will, it can both will and do good; but not without it, nor can continu
without farther assisting Grace: this is truly orthodox, which subjoins Man's
Will to Gods Grace in willing and acting good. 4. The Will, by or through Grace
working on it, cannot but will and perform good: this S. Austin held in heat of
arguing against Pelagians and Massiliens, who fell too far into the extrem, like
such as bow a crooked stick back to make it straight, as S. Chrysostom
compares. S. Austin asserted, that Grace affords such help to the Predestinat,
as they were not only unable to persever without it; but by means of it could
not chus but persever.

The state of the Question (which if rightly put, is like an Hebr. 6. 16.
Oath to end strife) consists about the manner and measure, how Grace works on
the Will, or with it? whether the Will cooperats, as the third Proposition holds;
or whether it so works that the Will must needs concur, as the fourth avers? For
explaining whereof, Grace meant in the third, shall be styled efficient; that in
the fourth (which works necessarily or infallibly, causing the Will to consent)
efficacious, Which in true terms is, whether Grace be resistible, or not? If it
be so prevalent or Of resisting Grace.
prepotent, as it carries the Will to obey willingly (if that be willing which
cannot do otherwise) the fourth is true: But if Grace be only an efficient,
adjuvant, prior Cause; and Man's Will prepared by it, a cooperant secund Cause in
the work of Conversion; which may fail, resist, or disobey; then the third is
more authentic. To prove it for brevity sake, read Acts 5. 32. Acts 7. 5. Romans
10. 16. 2 Cor. 9. 13. Gal. 3. 1. Gal. 5. 7. 2 These. 5. 8. Al which places are
most plain, that one may disobey Gospel Grace. Dr. Ward, a stif Stickler for
effectual Grace, defines thus: We freely confess, that neither operating, nor
cooperating Grace, at Conversion or after; does take off from Man's Will the
power to resist, if it will: for resistibility is natural born with us, and
inseparable from the Will, as a nativ faculty: but it is not questioned simply,
whether God in the work of Conversion or any other does mov the Will resistibly,
for that is granted: only the manner of resistibility is in controversy; wherein
we say, when God works in the Will ipsum Velle to will, Grace produces non
resilience, which is effected by certain knowledge and prevalence of delight, as
S. Austin says. Therefore we avow actual resistance to be taken away for that
time, since it is impossible such should stand with effectual Grace: for two
opposits (the Will to be wrought on by effectual Grace, and to resist it at
once) cannot coexist; which were to make the Will obey and resist at one
instant. These shif^s pass current among Partialists: but he says all the
Controversy is about the manner or resistibility, which indeed is none at al:
for all grant resistibility or power to resist, is not removed by Grace: the
Question only is of actual resistance or manner of not resisting: wherein none is
so silly to say, that when the Will yields actualy to Grace, there is then any
renitence; since contingence is not when things are in Esse, but before they
were so, whether they might not possibly be otherwise: that is resist, when it
did obey? so the debat lies in resistibility before the act of good or evil,
not in it: for a Regenerat may sin resistibly, not in the very moment of
willing it; but because he could have resisted yer he willed it. So a Convert
obeys Grace, or wills his conversion resistibly; because yer he willed it,
he could have resisted: else why does S. Paul so seriously exhort not to resist
the Spirit? Sin may be resisted, but not after consent: so may Grace, but not
when the Will ha^h embraced it: for to be actualy received, and then resistible,
cannot cohere. Howbeit if nonresistence be granted, it is dub^ous what the cause
is, and wherein it consists; whether in effectual Grace, or effectual Will? for
what is said of the one, may be verified of the other; since when it obeys, it is
impossible it should will to resist; but it may before. Nor can any tell by the
very act of obeying, which is cause of nonresisting: for put either to remov
resistance, it is surely gone by consenting: and it seems Will is ^h^ proper cause
which ends resistance. 1. Because effectual Grace is n^men sine re, which cannot
determ in the Will without destroying it, whose nature is to determine it self. 2.
Because to resist or not, are special acts of the Will: as to convert, repent,
beleev, belongs to Man, who converts, repents, believes; for God promises only
to circumcise Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
the heart; and Man is bid to circumcise his own heart: so De^t. 10. 16.
God promises to put a new Spirit into Man; and Men are injoined Jer. 4. 4.
Ezekiel. 11. 1^.
to make them a new heart and Spirit, both being evangelical. So the promiss
implies or supposes an impotence in us to do supernatural acts; tendering Gods
power, assistance, and operation to encourage us: but the Precept imports some
power in us, under his assisting Grace, to endeavor or do somewhat toward those
acts, which appeer to be ours, because they savor of our imperfections. Hence
we still accuse our selfs, complaining on the weakness of Faith (Lord, I beleev,
help my unbelief) coldness of lov, pride of heart; yet God givs Faith, Lov,
Humility, who is al perfect. Why then do we not rather magnify his Goodness and
Graces, if he does al; then ingratly disgrace them, as being impotent or
imperfect? sav only because we have impaired or made them defectiv by being
wanting to Grace.

Let sweet Bernard, a magnifier of Grace, end this point: Grace so operats with
Free Will, as it only prevents in the first act, and accompanies in the rest;
but is so far preventing, as it even cooperats with Grace; yet so, that what is
begun by Grace alone, is perfected by both alike: so they work jointly, not
severaly; together, not by turns in particular degrees: not partly Grace,
partly Free Will; but each jontly performs the whole. Free Will does al, and Grace
al; but as the whole is wrought in the Will* so is it wholly done by Grace. Thus
he; which is the t^u state of the whole debate.

This will better appear by consistence of Grace and Free Will in Man's four
estates. 1. Of Nature sound. 2. Of Nature lapsed. 3. Of Nature renewed. 4. Of
Nature glorified: which sh^l be particularly agitated, together with the order
of a sinners Conversion.

Man, at Creation, had to will or nil naturaly: by supernatural Grace to will
more fully, which took not away the natural power to nil: by Sin both natural
and supernatural power to will well is lost; but to nil naturaly remains, and to
nil supernaturaly augmented: By preventing Grace to will is restored; to nil
both naturaly and supernaturaly remaining still: by assisting or recovering
Grace both to will and do; but to nil naturaly and work contrarily by augmented
nilling: by Grace of Regeneration to will and do, more fully augmented; but
natural nilling remaining, and augmented nilling diminished: in state of Glory,
Man by the beatisic Vision wills and does perfectly, al nilling being removed.

Hence it is clear, how Grace and Free Will concur or cohere in Nature sound,
depraved, renovated, and glorified: For Man under Nature corrupted without the
Law, has his Mind bound, Will obstinat, Life impure, Conscience stupefied;
being the most wretched Son of wrath, yet not knowing his misery. Man under the
Law (as it refers to Grace) acknowledges his sin in Mind, and has compunction
of Conscience by the spirit of fear, being less miserable because conscious
thereof. Man under Grace Caling, preventing, working, learns by the Gospel the
Mercies of the Father, Merits of the Son, Helps of the holy Ghost, whereby he
conceivs hope of salvation; desiring as a sick Patient, to be cured, having no
power to do it. Man under Grace of Regeneration being helped wills, willing
believes, believing is justified and saved: whose endevors are vain, unles
helped; but being heales, takes up his bed, and the Just livs by his Faith.
Man, under protecting and perfecting Grace, is joifully thankful for it
received, watchful over his wais, strong to resist Satan, fighting against
tentations, fervent in prayer, rooted in Faith, and persevering in holiness. Lo,
thou art healed; sin no more, lest wors betide thee. Obdurat Sinners (whose
Freewil resists divine Grace) are of several sorts. 1. Al such as be out of the
Church uncaled, of whom it is said, whom he will Romans 9. 18. Rom 2. 12. Deuteronomy. 29.
19.
he hardens, and those that sin without the Law, shall perish without the Law. 2.
Those which harden their hearts against the Law, who hide, excuse, or defend
their sins, presuming on peace and impunity. 3. They that being wounded by the
Law, despair of Evangelical Mercy, and commit al wickedness, as Cain and Judas.
4. Such as receiving hope of salvation by the Gospel, abuse the riches of Grace
to wantonness, and d fer repentance or conversion. 5. All that being ingrat for
Grace received, and given over to security or carnal lusts, neglect prayer; or
shaken with fear, deny the Faith; or tempted by Satan, fall into heinous sins:
who are in danger of damnation, unles they Ezekiel 18, 26, 27
return to God by a new act of Faith and Repentance to be justified by him. In
every of which degrees, Gods severity has just occasion to desert Man, and not
proced to procure his conversion, or assist his Will; but if he does, it is of
superabundant Grace.

Here some doubts occur concerning Caling or Conversion, what part a sinner to
be converted bears in it? Whether he is activ or passiv, and how far? Whether
he can further or hinder it? Who puts the difference, God or Man? To these it is
briefly answered: 1. That he is passiv, in having the Law and Gospel preached
to him; but activ in hearing or attending. 2. That he is passiv in receiving
impressions of fear by the Law, and hope by the Gospel; but activ in nourishing
them, by coworking with Grace, or cashiring them from his heart by disobeying.
3. He is passiv in admitting good thoughts, holy desires, and power to will; but
activ in ruminating on those thoughts, cherishing such desires, and endevoring
to exercise that power offered by Grace to assist his Will. 4. He is still passiv
in praying, yet a willing Patient, thirsting after Repentance, Lov, or what else
he prais for; but activ by help in producing of the acts thereof, out of those
gifts and habits infused into him. 5. He is both passiv under Gods power
protecting him, being a Believer converted; and activ in watching over himself,
with Gods Grace concurring to guard and defend him.

S. John says, he that is born of God keeps himself: whereon S. 1 J^h. 5. 18.
Austin descants, he takes not away Freewil in saying keeps himself: who keeps
us but God? yet he does not keep the unwilling: therefore when thou joinest thy
Will to God, thou keep thy self, not of thy self, but by him that coms to
dwell in thee. Something is ascribed to thee, because thy Will concurs: but so that
thou may still say with David, Lord, be thou my helper: If thou say, be
thou my helper, thou must do somewhat, else how can he help? Thus a sinner is
never first, but secund; no leader, but follower in every degree: at entrance a
mere Patient, at next step a willing Patient, in progress an Agent helped by
Gods adjuvant and cooperant Grace, saying, like a sick Man, since you have cured
me, lift me and I will rise; stay me and I will stand; lead me and I will com. God
shield us from such madness (...) 2. ad Bon. c. 9
as to make our selfs first and God last in his Gifts and Graces; says S.
Austin to Pope Boniface. It Is a question when, Cain and Abel were bred both
alike in Religion, but the difference was in themselfs, that God accepted Abels
sacrifice and rejected Cains. Pharaoh and Nabuchadnezer were by Nature both
Men, by dignity Kings, and held Gods People in bondage: One then occasioned
their desperate ends, only that one sensible of Gods hand groned under the
memory of his iniquity; the other by his Free Will fought against Gods merciful
verity, as S. Austin says: Who also puts a Case of two (...). and (...) l. 12.
de civ. c. 61.
Equals tempted by one fair Woman; whereof one yields to lust, the other
persists chaste: where is the difference, sav that one would, the other would not
lose his chastity? the Ninivets repented at Jonas preaching; but the Jews
refused at a greater then Jonas: If God put it, how shall they rise in judgment
against these? yet S. Austin wrests S. Paul's words ( who makes 1 cor. 4. 7.
thee to differ from another? or what have thou which thou did not receiv?)
to Dona gratum facienti^, as Faith, Charity, repentance, Conversion; which
plainly intend Dona great is data, as Knowledge, Eloquence, Toungs. For in Gifts
necessary to Salvation, God wills no difference between Believers and
Unbeleevers, but would have al beleev and obey the Gospel. So the defect proceds
so much from the Unbeleevers disobedience (whereof God is not the Author) as
from Believers obedience. To want the Gifts of Toungs and Prophesying is no sin
or shame, since they were given suddenly without means: but to fail in Faith and
the rest requisite to salvation, after means afforded, is sin; since men used not
such diligence as they should* the difference in measure of Gifts coms from the
Giver, but the different using from Man; as the Lord gav one Servant fiv
talents, Mat 25. 15.
another two, another one; but they employed it diversely (which was from
themselfs) and were regarded or rewarded accordingly.

Ob. If Man makes the difference in receiving or using Grace, then God does no
more for the Elect then Reprobats; nor have Saints more cause to be thankful then
the wicked; but one may glory against others, that he did more then they: al
which Scripture ^on^emns: Ergo it proceds from God.

Sol. If it be granted *which is not so) that God does no more in the Grace of
Vocation for the Elect then Reprobats; yet in Predestination h^doth
incomparably more; because foreknowing the different success of his Caling and
ends of the Caled; he decreed to confirm it unto some which would be saving to
them, and leav the rest to that which would not be saving through their
disobedience, when it was in his power to alter it. So in the preparation and
execution of his gracious Caling, his election and lov to them appeers
singular, who have infinite cause of gratitud abov Reprobats; ^et have they reason
to thank God for preparing that Caling, whereby they might be saved so well as
others, being to blame their own refusal only. Nor was God bound to alter their
Caling, as seeing the event would prove evil by their own fau^t; for then none
had perished. Here is much inequality in Lov and favor, but still a liberty
left of Man's Will under Grace: that of two equaly caled one may obey and not
another; or unequaly obey, when both being often Caled, one obeis sooner then
the other. For there is infinite variety in most, yet God indifferent to al, and
damns none but by their own default.

Touching thankfulness, Grace is not therefore Grace, because given to one and
denied to another; but because it is given to the unworthy (for it were not
lesss, but greater if extended to al) so that my thanks are du to God, because
he had mercy on me unworthy; not because he shows more mercy to me then others:
Nor are my thanks the less, because many mo partake with me in the benefits; but
should rather be greater, if millions mo were partakers then be.

Salvianus says men ow a general debt for Christ's passion, and al Mankind sans
exception bound thereto: yet none ows the less, because others ow the like: For
though the debt be general, yet it is special too, and every particular equaly
engaged: since as Christ suffered for all, so he did for each; and bestowed
himself on al, as he did on every one: wholly for all and wholly for each
individual. In which regard as al ow themselfs wholly to him for it, so does
every one wholly; sav that each ows more then al Mankind, because he reaps so much
benefit as al Men. This is a good rule, but beware of the Pharisees comparativ
form of thanks, too rife now adais: Lord, I thank thee I am not as other Men.
Indeed as some put the Case of Mankind like a cru of Rebels, of whom the King
pardons such as he lists, and executs the rest, those pardoned ow more thanks.
But the Scripture states it thus: God mercifully proclaims a general Gospel
pardon to al Rebels, on condition that he which submits and yields his Sword,
taking a Ticket of his pardon, shall go safe; but such as refuse or stand out
shall be destroyed. Such as submit, magnify his Mercy and griev for their Felows
obstinacy, justifying the execution done on them. Those that in the first way
amplify Gods Grace for sparing some simply, prejudice his Truth proclaimed to
al: But such as advance his Grace for sparing al on fair, facil, feasible
conditions exhibited in the Gospel; set his Favor forth, Mercy, and Truth much
more. It may more literaly be laid thus. If a King having al his Subjects in
his power and pleasure to destroy for Rebellion, shall publicly proclaim pardon
to all that will submit to his Son, on such conditions as they shall be able by
his gracious assistance and acceptance to perform; knowing that some will
tractably obey, but the rest persist obstinat or obdurat in their Crimes: he
then is bound by promiss or Covenant to pardon the penitent; but resolvs to
punish the rest according to their deserts.

Here both his Mercy and Justice is equaly or eminently extended to al, without
respect of persons: but the difference consists in the new obedience of one
sort, and old obstinacy of the other: yet does not the Cause depend on the
effect (as some fondly object or cavil) but the Monarch, according to his
merciful Proclamation freely pardons the penitent, and justly destrois the
impenitent.

As to glorying that one does more then another; Let him that glories glory in
the Lord, or not glory: for Gods Gifts are duple. 1. Immediate from himself soly
(as Toungs, Miracles, Prophesying) of which Paul speaks, What have thou which
thou have not received? and if thou have received, why boastest thou? 2.
Mediat, which proced from Gods Grace and Man's Will jointly (as Faith,
Repentance, Obedience) being both Gods gifts wrought by Grace; therefore no
glorying but in the Lord, as S. Paul says: and duties owing by us upon peril
of 1 Cor. 15. 10. Phil. 4. 13. 1 Cor. 9. 16.
salvation, which proced from the Will helped by Grace; and in that regard no
glorying: as S. Paul says, though I preach the Gospel, I have not to glory; for
necessity is laid on me, and woe is me if I do not: So woe to al which beleev
not in Christ. To receiv as a Gift not only excluds glory, but includs duty:
for in doing al which is commanded, we do but our duty being unprofitable
servants. Christ says, does the Master thank his servant, Luke 17. 9.
because he did what was bid? I trow not. Yet we may glory with S. Paul, in the
testimony of a good conscience; as Samuel 2 Cor. 1. 12. 1 Samuel 12. 13 Neh. 5.
15.
called witness of his integrity; and Nehemiah recorded his own sincerity. Howbeit
whatever our natural parts be, or labor and industry beyond others, or how
prosperously soever it succeds; who is so void of piety as not to ascribe it to
the fountain of al good? God builds the house more then al Laborers, keeps the
City abov al Warders, givs more increas then al Planters or Waterers; yet
Builders, Warders, Planters, Waterers have al subordinat Offices, which being
neglected the House is unbuilded, City unguarded, and Plant unmanured: Because
God does most in converting, and Man nothing in comparison, but al by him; the
Saints may rejoice and say, not unto us Lord, not to us; but to thy name giv
the glory. Yet (not unto us) implies something to be done by us, whereof we must
not glory, being our duty.

Nor should those poor things of Man's Will (to wish or will, labor, endevor, yield
or obey) be once named when Gods Grace is praised or works pleaded: yet
sometimes a necessity compels thereto. For Men, under color of piety, to magnifiy
Gods Grace and reprov Natures Parasits, become disparagers of Free Will and
Flatterers of Grace; whereby Satan seeks to subvert Gods truth and righteousness,
destroying true Piety and Religion in Men; by bringing a stupid sloth on some, a
remorsless infidelity or impenitence on others, and an invincible desperation
or obduration in most; which is the genuin Offspring of that Doctrine, which
deprivs Man's Will of al freedom in matters of salvation, by turning the Gospels
general promises into particular limitings of special Grace, effectual only to
a few secret ones by direct absolut Decree; leaving the rest forlorn or
destitut of true Grace, though caled by the same word of the Gospel.

Melancthon speaks hereof before Arminius was ever heard of: Loc commun. de
Praedest.
Let us remov from S. Paul such Stoical disputs as destroy Faith and Prayer:
for how could Saul beleev or pray, when he doubted whether the Promiss belonged
to him, or when the fatal Table of Destinies had prepossesled him? for it is
decreed thou shall be a Castaway. If Free Will avail nothing, til I perceiv
Regeneration wrought in me by the Spirit; I will be indulgent to my
self-unbeleef and other vicious affections of the flesh.

This Manichean imagination is flat falsehood, and our minds are to be drawn
from it, and taught that Free Will with Grace avails much. Thus he, who also in
point of discrimination says: When Promises are universal, and no contrary or
contradictory Wills in God; there must needs be some cause of difference in us: as
why Saul was rejected and David received, some disparity in those two caused it:
yet still remember that the doing some good or il action, is not to be conceived
to be by mere natural strength of Will, but as it is helped by divine Grace:
beware lest in shunning Scilla thou fall not on Charybdis.

15. Regeneration is caled by some the first Resurrection, and 15 Regeneration.
Conversion a new Creation: who assert that Man does no more to his new
Creation then he did at first; nor to his Regeneration then Generation; nor to
his Resurrection from sin then Lazarus did in raising his dead body. Hence
Pemble says, that the seed of spiritual life, and habits of Faith and Grace,
are infused like a new Soul, before Men be supernaturaly illumined: since
illumination goes before the act (not habit) of Faith and sanctifying Grace in
the Soul. So Mr. Tailor on S. Paul's words ( whoever is in Christ, is a new
Creature) infers that Grace cannot be resisted, because no Creature can resist
his Creator in framing him. Such dangerous dogmats they grand Rabbis instill
into their credulous Disciples. This savours too much of Enthusiasm, and in our
spiritual Nativity as in the Natural, are many preparatory dispositions, not al
by infusion: nor are Arguments taken from Allegories (which is too rife among
Sectists) authentic, if extended beyond Scriptures true sens. Saint Paul's words
( if any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature) 2 Cor. 5. 17.
are not strictly to be sensed; for new Creation is meant of qualities, not
substance: else if literaly pressed, a kind of Transubstantiation in Man's
Conversion may be better maintained, then Papists do of Christ's body in the
Eucharist. Chrysostom expounds it well; That new birth is not the substance, but
dignity of Grace: for it intimats the universality of this change in qualities
to be so diffused over the whole Man, as one shall not know him to be the same:
whence it is more bluntly caled Resurrection, to show the great mutation or
variation. So Saint Paul describes the old and new Man by alteration of
quality: Gal. 3. 9. 10. Gal. 5 6. 1 Cor. 7. 19.
it is faith working by lov which makes a new Creature, and to keep Gods
Commandments. It respects also the necessity of this change, in opposition to
our first birth in Adam: Except a John 3 3.
Man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God, says Christ: but by Faith
we are new born to righteousness and holiness, as in a secund Adam. There is a
supernatural Principle of this change or Conversion, even God; for he makes us,
not we our selfs, in both creations. So says S. Paul We are his workmanship,
Ephesians. 2. 10.
created in Christ Jesus to good works. Each Creation and Generation has a
proper peculiar manner: for he that made us without us, will not sav us without
us. In the one is a change a non Ente ad Ens, from a rude inanimat Chaos; In
the other a non Tali ad Tale, in a living Rational Creature. There God wrought
immediately, here by means; there no Creature ever said, Creat or renew me, Lord;
here David cries, Creat Psalm. 51. 10.
in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me: There it never
was said to any, Make thy self: here God says, Make you a new heart and
spirit, for why will ye die? There no Ezekiel. 18 31.
Creature was ever blamed for not being, or being as it is; but here to keep on
the old Man or not put on the new, is reputed a notorious fault to them which
profess Christ and the Gospel.

Nazianzen says, It was a sickness in his time, not to estimat In Apologe^.
good or bad men by their manners and conversation, but from Faction: for those
things which in such a Man pleased to day; if he turned to morrow another way,
were disliked: and what was commended yesterday, shall be condemned to day. How
well this agrees with our age (indeed with all times since Adam) let the world
judge and apply as they list.

Under Henry 8. was a Book published by the Clergy (whereof An. Reg. 35. A. C.
1543.
Archbishop Cranmer was chief) and confirmed by Parliament, styled A necessary
Erudition for a Christian: wherein Freewil is declared to remain in Man after
Adams fall, as these Texts testify; Be not overcom of Evil: Neglect not the Grace
in thee: Lov not the World: If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments: al which doubtless were in vain, if Man had no power or faculty,
with help of Grace, to understand the Commandments and freely obey them: but it
wills not any good acceptable to God, unles helped by Grace; willing what is il
of it self. Hence some Divines define it to be a power of Reason and Will, by
which Good is chosen with assistance of Grace, or Evil without it. Next it
shows the disparity between our Protoparents Free will to obey or disobey, and
their Posterities; which is prone only to Evil, unles illumined and made free
by special Grace, or supernatural working of the Holy Ghost: which Gods goodness
offers to al; yet they only enjoy it, who by Freewil accept the same. Nor can
they, being so helped, accomplish or perform things for their saving health,
but with much labor and endevor: For though Reasons light remains, yet it is
much dimmed or darkened, and hardly discerns inferior things of this life; but
utterly unable to understand spiritual belonging to a better. So though there is
left a freedom of Will in works of this present life; yet to act high and
Heavenly, it is of it self insufficient, and being wounded or maimed, needs help
Psalm. 119. 18.
to heal and repair it. Hereto David reflected, Open thou my eyes, that I may
see the wondrous things of thy Law: and Jeremy, Heal me, Lord, and I shall be
made whole. S. Austin avers the same, That Free Will is in Man since the Fall,
which no Catholic can deny: But in spiritual desires and works to pleas God,
it is so frail and feeble, that it cannot begin or perform them, unles it be
prevented and excited by Grace the principal Agent, without which Man can do
nothing good or Godly, as these places prove: Without me ye can do nothing: No
Man coms to me except John 15 5. John 6. 44. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
the Father draw him, and unles it were given of my Father: We be not
sufficient of our selfs to think any good. So Free Will must be helped by Grace
preventing, but being so enabled may freely cooperat with it; and being by the
same sustained, may persist or increas in Grace. Surely it is soly by it, that
we be first inspired, incited, or moved to good: But to resist tentations and
go forward in goodness; is both of Gods Grace and our own Free Will jointly.
Lastly, when we have persevered to the end, it is Gods free gift and Mercy to
Crown us with glory, who has graciously ordained to reward Men after this
life, according to the good works done by his Grace. Therefore al are to be
monished (chiefly Preachers) that in this deep dark point, they neither so
teach Gods Grace as to exclud Free Will; nor extol Free Will to impeach Grace.
Thus they very orthodoxly. Here is no Free Will to spiritual good without Grace,
nor Grace so prepotent or violent but may be resisted or refused: yet enough to
glorify Gods goodness, and convince Man's ingratitud. Al which is sound Theology,
and shows that they were learned in those dais.

16. Perseverance or Assurance to the end, is Gods special 16 Perseverance.
gift or Grace; because no Man of himself alone can continu against al assalts
of the World, Flesh, and Satan: yet no doubt the Elect do finaly persist in
Faith and Sanctification by Grace; else they are not of that number, whom God
infallibly foreknew will so persever. Nor is the Question whether every Believer
may lose his faith; for many fall from some degrees, and not lose al Graces at
once, retaining only such as be essentialy necessary to Salvation? but it is
whether true Faith working by Lov, can be lost? for there is a strong, vigorous,
rooted Faith, which cannot fall or fail: and a feeble, green, tender (yet true
salvific) which may. Such was Peter's, which a silly Damosel shattered: but
after the Holy Ghost given at Pentecost, his Faith and Lov were so
corroborated, as he despised the Whips and wounds of al Persecutors; yea death
it self by preposterous crucifixion of his heels upward.

Hence two Questions arise: 1. Of Men not Elected, whether Two Questions.
some such do not attain true Faith, Repentance, Justification, Sanctification;
yet lose them, and not finaly persever, but perish? 2. Of the Elect, Whether
some of those do not sometimes fall into heinous sins (Theft, Adultery, Murder)
and if so, whether they be then justified or in state of Salvation? For
perseverance is of two sorts or degrees: either continued by constant holding
Faith and a good Conscience to the end, which is rare: or interrupted with falls
and risings, or renewings by Repentance, which brings Salvation at last.

For the first which are not Elect, it is said, He that endures to Mat. 24. 13.
the end shall be saved. Here he that has Salvation promised, if he persist
finaly, is supposed to be in a right course wherein he should continu, and so be
saved: but it implies that he may possibly fall from Faith, or wax cold in Lov,
and not be saved. Hereof S. Bernard says, falendued with Lov had persevered,
our Lord in vain exhorts his Disciples to continu therein: for if they did not
yet Lov, he would not say continu, but be in Lov: or if they did Lov already,
he needed not exhort to perseverance, according to some Opinions: Else where he
says, such have no root, who for a while beleev, but in time of tentation fall
away. Whence or whether do they fall? even from faith to unbeleef. I ask, could
they be saved in that Faith, or not? If they could not, what prejudice had our
Savior, or Satan profit by their faling away? S. Jerome says, If every one
born of God cannot sin nor be tempted, why does Christ warn us to fly
tentation? Some say such Exhortations, Precepts, and Promises are used to uphold
Perseverance: But if it be infallible, they are used in vain; unles obedience
to them be in Man, who failing on his part, those means often fail. David knew
the two Commandments, as means to restrain his two sins; but they failed
through him. Peter's forewarning of his denial was a means to humble his
confidence, but he made no use of it. Others say, In regard of our weakness we
may fall, and means must be used for support: but by Gods Election, and Christ's
Mediation, we shall stand sure. True, But the Question is of those which it is
uncertain whether they be Elect or no? Or if a few means be infallible, al
other supplies are superfluous, and we may securely rely on them.

Ezekiel speaks more plainly to the purpose: If the wicked Ezekiel. 18. 21, 26, 27.
will turn from al his sins, and keep my Statuts; he shall surely live, and not
die. When a righteous Man turns from his wais, and commits iniquity, he shall die:
Again, When a wicked Man turns from his iniquity, and does what is lawful and
right, he shall sav his Soul. What evasion can be here, if the comparison be well
observed? For if it be denied, that a righteous Man can fall and die; it may also
that a wicked can turn and live, which is to giv the Holy Ghost a ly. If the
wicked there meant or mentioned be truly and legaly wicked, then are the
Righteous truly and Evangelicaly Just: For legaly just none but one ever was.
If then any wicked Man ever turned from sin and lived; a justified Man may turn
from his righteousness and die, else Ezekiel speaks untruth.

The Dort Divines answer not this place, being too hard a knot: but say to
others, that the Apostles speak of initial degrees of Faith, from which Men a
little entered may go back: But not of true justifying, from which they that have
attained cannot finaly fall. Let the Touchstone try the truth: It Is impossible
Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
(says S. Paul) for those who once being illightned, tasted of the heavenly
Gift, and partaked the Holy Ghost, and tasted Gods good Word and powers of the
World to com; if they shall fall away to renew them unto repentance. He speaks
not of non. Entities nor of Novices, but such as were illightned and tasted the
heavenly gift, Gods good Word, and powers of the World to come, and partaked
the Holy Ghost: which metaphors of Sens (tasting, seeing, etc.) imply in
Scripture no slight superficial sens of spiritual things. So S. Peter: If after
they have escaped the 2 Pet. 2 20, 21, 22.
Worlds pollutions, through knowledge of the Lord Jesus; they be again entangled
and overcom; the la^ter end with them is wors then the beginning: For it had
bin better not to have known the way of righteousness; then having known, to turn
from the holy Commandments delivered to them: But it happened to them according
to the true Proverb, the Dog returned to his vomit, and the washed Sow to her
walowing in the mire. To escape the Worlds pollutions through knowledge of our
Lord Jesus, is no small fruit of the Spirit; but a full, clear, certain fruition:
whence it is so hard or impossible for such as fall from so great a measure of
Grace to be renewed by Repentance; but from De Cor. and Gr. c. 6.
lesser lapses ordinary. S. Austin says, It Is much to be marveled, why God
givs not perseverance to some of his Children whom he regenerated in Christ, and
gav Faith, Hope, Lov; when he forgivs so great wickednesses to others, and
confers the grace of Sons on them: he wonders why God did not snatch such away
as lived Godly from the evil to com, lest their il inclinations should cause a
change. So he holds, if those Men had dyed while they lived justly and piously,
they had been saved: Ergo their Faith was more then initiated, and they more
then outside Christians. As God first calls Man before he folows; so Man first
falls from God before he forsakes, who is still ready to receiv al into Grace
upon true repentance. So says our sixteenth Article: After we have received the
Holy Ghost we may depart from Grace and fall into sin, and by Gods Grace rise
again and amend our life's. Therefore they are to be condemned which say they can
no more sin so long as they live here, or deny to true Penitents place of
forgivnes.

Touching the terms of faling totaly and finaly, it is certain only to Gods
Prescience, but unknown to us: for the Faithful may fall, and God alone knows,
whether they will repent or rise again; but we must still work with fear and
trembling. If they cannot fall, why does Christ bid us pray, Lead us not into
tentation, but deliver us from evil? or why does our Liturgy say, Suffer us not
at last hour for any pains of death to fall from thee? For the Elect those of
Dort grant, that a Regenerat faling into grievous sins, is not actualy
reconciled til he repent; but in state of damnation, and unapt to enter into
Gods Kingdom: but they ad, 1. Though the Regenerats so sinning be guilty; yet
they shall be in Gods purpos absolved: True, So they were before they believed.
2. That God deals not with them in rigor: No more does he with many Reprobats
falen from Faith, whom he would bring to repentance by long suffering. 3. That
they have not lost Jus ad Regnum, but usum Juris: as a Lepet loses the use of
his house, not right: But similituds are no sound Arguments. Has an Elect
committing murder jus ad Regnum? then S. Paul speaks falls: I tell you, they that
do such 1 Cor. 6. 9.
things, shall not inherit Gods Kingdom, but all that have right James 2 10.
shall inherit. 4. That their universal Justification is not made void by
sinning: surely their absolution from former sins is not frustrated; but this
new sin which makes them Sons of wrath and guilty of the whole Law, needs
Absolution and Justification from it: But universal Justification is no
remission of sins past, present, and to com: For what need then Repentance? 5.
That their state of Adoption remains immovable: True, In Gods purpos, not in
act; but that they may fall. 6. That some seeds remain, by which Life may spring
again: It may for sooner then in an habituated Sinner; Yet this alters not the
Case, if he be guilty of death, no more then a Noblemans crime, who has many
friends to beg his life. S. John says, Whoever is born of God, 1 John 3 9.
commits not sin; for his seed remains, and he cannot sin because born of God.
Hence Calvinists infer, if Gods seed remain in a Regenerat and he cannot sin
(deadly) then can be no intercision of his Justification. Certes, his scope is
not to prove, that those born of God cannot fall from righteousness to sin, or that
a Member of Christ cannot become the member of an Harlot by Adultery; and he
that has bin the member of an Harlot, become the Member of Christ by
Repentance: But he means, that to be born of God and commit deadly sin cannot
consist; nor can any be a Member of Christ and an Harlot at once being Asystats.

S. Jerome writing against Jovinian (who abused this Text, as Men do now)
interprets thus: S. John says, He that is born of God commits not sin, because
ye should not sin; not that ye cannot; but so long as ye commit not sin, ye are
Gods Children: yea such as persist his Sons cannot sin. For there is first a
faling from God, before we fall into sin, since those two cannot cohere.
Tertullian tells how some say, They have God sure enough in Heart and Mind, yet
show no sign in their actions, and so commit sin, thinking their fear and Faith
safe: as if they committed Adultery, yet deemed their chastity not impaired; or
poisoned their Parents, thinking to do God good service. Thus while they
continu in sin, notwithstanding their fear; they shall be cast into Hell,
notwithstanding their Faith. Bishop Ridley says S. John means, He cannot sin
so long as Gods seed abides in him; but Faith, Hope and Charity cannot stand
with evil living, nor without good Works. David, while he stood guilty of a
duple crime, could not be in state of Regeneration; nor Peter, til he repented
his denial: Yet some say it was salvo amore and fide; because as we are born but
once, so we are new born no oftener. This metaphor holds not; for S. Paul says,
Little Children, of whom I travel in birth again, til Christ be formed in you:
meaning so often as we fall into heinous sins, we must still be renewed by
Repentance: but Men will expound Scripture as they list.

As to the certainty of Perseverance, Election, Salvation; this concerns not
God, whose knowledge is infallible, and purpos immutable; but us, while we live
here. For deciding or defining whereof, weigh these three conclusions: 1. That a
Believer, being in present state and use of holy means, tending to salvation,
and out of tentation in the peace of a good Conscience through Faith in Christ;
may, by the testimony of the Holy Ghost, have a comfortable assurance of
Salvation, which begets trusty fervent lov and thankfulness to God: specialy
when he is near the end of his race or point of death. So S. Paul by
inspiration says, I am now ready to be offered up: I have sought a good 2 Timothy 4.
6, 7, 8.
fight, finished my course, and kept the Faith: Henceforth is laid up for me a
Crown of righteousness. This place Lutherans press against Papists, who will have
al by doubting, and none certain of his present condition, no not at best: But
he that has right knowledge of God, true Faith, steadfast Hope, lifely Lov, and
awful Filial fear, with an holy trade of Life; he may rejoice in God, with
comfortable confidenre and affiance of perseverance to the end. 2. That for
time to com (specialy when we have probably a long race to run, and diverse
dangers of wild wonton Youth to pass) we cannot have infallible certitud of
future or final persevering; but must confide in Gods Grace 1 Cor. 10. 13.
and Goodness, that he will assist, if we apply al our indevors to De Civ c. 11.
12
continu in it. Hereof S. Austin speaks, We call them blessed whom we see live
well with hope of future immortality, and without such crimes as make shipwreck
of Conscience: who, though they may rely on the reward of Pe severance; yet are
not sure of persevering. For who knows certainly he shall continu in doing
righteousness to the end, except he be assured by some revelation from him, who
is not pleased in his just secret judgment to inform al touching this point,
though he deceives none? S. Ambros thus: David says not, I offer the sacrifice
De bono mo^^ c. 3.
of Prais, but will offer; showing or signifying that to be a perfect sacrifice,
when every one freed from the fetters of this Body, shall stand before the Lord
and offer himself a Sacrifice: For before death can be no perfect Prais; nor
can any be truly extold in this life, when his latter times are so uncertain.
S. Bernard Sermon. 1 in Se^. tuag.
also: Who can say I am one of the Elect predestinat to Life, or in the number
of Sons; since we have yet no certainty? but we may be comforted with hopeful
affiance, and not tormented with despair or doubting: for some signs or marks
are given, that such may be sure they are Elect which have them: for this cause
it is necessary to be still in awful fear and humbled under Gods hand; since we
know in part what we are at present, but not what we shall be, which is
impossible to know: therefore Let him that stands take heed lest he fall; for
presumption is so perilous as desperation. 3. That certitud of salvation cannot
be infallible in this life, as S. Austin attests: What De Cor. and Gr. 13.
Believer, so long as he livs in this fleshly Tabernacle, can presum to be
predestinat? it is needful to be conceled in this life, where puffing up is to be
shunned; since so great an Apostle was buffeted by Satan, lest he should be
puf'd up. Many such things are spoken for the usefulnes of this secret, lest
any shall presume: for even he that runs well may fear, since it is hid whither he
shall go.

Much more he vents to the same effect: For Gods Promises in Christ are
certain, but made with conditions; so that we may miss of the end, if we fail
in the means to fulfill our Covenants; since no Man shall be crowned til he fight
it out and the battle ended; triumph not before the victory. Gods Decrees are
known soly to himself, but secret to us, who must rely on the Promises by
performing the Covenants. If we may be fully assured of true Faith, that it
cannot fail, but we shall infallibly persever to the end, through al frailties
and tentations; then Gods Counsil is not secret to some, nor his Decree unknown:
which is high presumption to arrogat or affirm; since we must still work it out
with fear and trembling. This is a Cavaliers Creed or confidence in the point
of final perseverance, and salvations infallible certainty; who holds the
middle betwixt two extrems of despair and presumption: but had rather be a meek
humble Publican, then a proud presuming Pharisee; Lord, be merciful to me a
sinner, and grant me Grace to continu in thy fear til the end.

17. The last Judgment is the execution of al Divine Decrees 17 Last Judgment.
concerning Men: For Predestination of the ends, is a foreknowledg and
approbation of the last Judgment to Life or Death; which execution shows the
Decree, as a building being erected and finished declares the Architects plot
or devise; for this Judgment exhibits the consecution of those ends: So if we
grant (as we must) that God proponed an end, viz. the glory of his Mercy or
Bounty, in giving some life eternal; and glory of his Power and Justice, in
inflicting eternal death on others; he has attained his end in the last
Judgment: So if we admit Note.
(as we must) that God prescribed means for Men to aspire or attain to eternal
life; or for lack thereof to incur everlasting death; those ends are executed
also in the same Judgment: Romans 6. 23:
Howbeit if we grant (as we do) that Life is given both as a 2 Timothy 4. 8. Rom
9 21. 22.
Bounteous Gift and reward of Righteousness; as also that eternal Death is
imposed both as the wages or punishment of sin, and a demonstration of Gods
sovereign dominion, yet with Justice and Equity. No ordinary understanding can
conceiv, how a Decree of these things could be made from eternity, without
Prescience; si^h Life is a reward and Death a punishment, which no Justice can
prepare without foreknowledg of good or evil deserved. This is called simple or
natural Intelligence, as Life is a Gift of Gods free goodness, and Death a
Declaration of his dominion, being both an attainment of his own glory. Hence
it is clear, that Prescience (which is Gods first, highest, simple
Understanding) is to be put in the definition of Predestination, which too many
separat or dis-join.

Let Prosper decide this point: If we consider al Men together, Ep^g^. 28.
whereof some may be saved in Mercy, others damned in Truth; all the Lords wais
are distingu^shed by the end: but if we look only on the Saints, these wais are
not discerned: for Truth is not distinguished from Mercy, nor contrarily; since
the Saints beatitud is both from reward of Grace, and retribution of Justice.
So he makes eternal Death a retribution of Justice, which cannot eternaly be
decreed without Prescience of sin: which Calvinists ground on Gods pure
pleasure, as Lord over his Creatures, without respect to foreknowledg: But for
Election to Life, being his free Gift, they more confidently ascribe to his
mee^ Will without Prescience; which they have more color for, if the Saints glory
were only a Gift of Grace, and not also a retribution of Justice. But God makes
it a retribution of Justice upon foresight of their laboring to attain the end;
and a gift of free Grace too, knowing what will bring them to happiness, if he
grant them those benefits: whereby he shall also attain his end, even the glory of
his free Lov in giving eternal life to whom he will; which is the true harmony:
This Judgment being ex praeteritis, Predestination must be ex praevisis: for
the judge ordained by God is the Lord John 5. 22.
Jesus; that al may honor the Son, as they do the Father; John 3. 19.
because as the Father created, so the Son redeemed Mankind, even the
universality: The grand crime for which the World shall be judged is, that Men
loved darkness more then light, and John 12. 48.
Christ's Word shall judge him at last day, whoever rejected or contemned Marc.
16. 16.
Christ. Since the Gospel is preached, the rule of judging is, He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved; he that 2 These. 1. 7, 8.
believes not, damned. Which S. Paul more fully explicats, When the Lord Jesus
shall be reveled from Heaven to recompense 2 Cor. 5. 10.
those that have suffered for his truth, and in flaming fire take vengeance on
them that know not God nor obey his Gospel. The severity of this Judgment (to
render vengeance) the specification Romans 2. 16.
of persons ( we must, al appear before his seat) the assignation of causes to
be judged ( the very secrets of Men's hearts) with the manner of judgment, when
such as have sinned without the Law, shall perish without the L^w having a Law
written in their hearts; but those that have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by
the Law; semblably, such as have not obeyed the Gospel, shall be judged by it.

All this argues, that original sin (which is one just cause of death) shall be
alleged against al who have no other cause of condemnation but this, as Infants
which die having not this sin purged by the Laver of Regeneration, either in act
or vow of the Church, but to lay it unto them that live to ripe years of knowing
God and obeying the Gospel, or happily had forgivnes of sins sealed by Baptism;
this seemd strange to Doctor Whitaker, that any shall be Reprobated for sin
remitted: so it is strange that any should be condemned for such sins as he was
not Reprobated for, since the sentence of Reprobation is the hardest and
heaviest that can be, which draws with it the sentence of Condemnation: Surely
such sins as the wicked shall be judged of at last, are the same they were
Reprobated for at first, being Jude v. 4.
eternaly foreseen; specialy their final impenitence and inobedience: else what
needs this exact differencing of Causes? or how are the guilty more burdned to
hear their several crimes, if al be rejected in the common Case of Mankind
lapsed, and unable to rise, having no Savior to die for them nor Spirit to call
them, nor help to heal them; but are excluded or debarred by Gods absolut
irrespectiv Decree? God will overcom in Judgment; yet not by pleading his
Sovereign power or Prerogativ, and silencing Men with his dominion (else was
Abram too bold to expostulat, Shall not the Worlds Judge do right?) but by
Justice and Equity, rewarding every one according to his works, else he would
not put himself on trial, Judge I pray between me and my Vineyard; what more
could I do, then I have done? God will Isai 5. 3.
convince the ungodly, putting them to silence and shame by their own stubborn
ingratitud against his abundant Goodness, Patience, and long suffering; not by
his own plenipotence or Prerogativ. Sadolet to an Objection (We being born of
corrupt original, are by Nature made to perdition, that those whom God passes
by and caleth not, might have no just cause of complaint) answers thus: I conceiv
that Christ Jesus sitting in Judgment for his Father, on them whom he has
con^emned, will not so pass or pronunce Sentence, since ye proceeded from Adams
corrupt loins, and contracted your Parents guilt, do I condemn you to endless
torments; but will say Go ye cursed into everlasting fire; for ye saw me hungry,
and fed me not, etc. which are not the common sins of al Mankind, but
particular faults of each several person, which shall be alleged, and whereby
they shall be judged; lest in that sharp torture and grief they presume to ask
Mercy of God, who denied it to their poor Brethren begging it.

Mr. Plaifer handles al these deep points at large, well worth a serious survey;
which are here succinctly summed up, and conduce much to the main subject. If
any mislike his Tenets (as many of different Judgments will) let them seek
satisfaction of him, who can best resolv al scruples: But if I have misprised
any material circumstances through insciousnes, not wilfulnes; let me bear the
blame, who undertake to be his faithful echo. Now for fuller application and
farther addition, take what folows in a more confused manner. To found
Predestination on Prescience of simple Intelligence, best consorts with all
conditions, consequents, and circumstances thereof: whereby al divine Attributs
are best accorded and advanced: the sole scruple rests, which Opinion best
agrees with the Holy Ghosts true meaning? For all Sects arrogat to sens the
Scriptures best (if they may be Judges or Interpreters) to preach the Gospel
purest (if faith be given to their bare words) and to administer the Sacraments
sincerest (if their new cuts daily varied may pass for current coin) as three
main marks of their Church, caled the little Flock, when al others censure or
condemn them for falls Teachers as every one does each other, and al tort or
distort Gods Word to serve turns. Howbeit, for trial of truth, the chief Texts
shall be brought to test or touchstone: for Prescience these places are
pregnant: S. James says, Known unto Acts 15. 18.
God are al his works from everlasting, S. Peter, To the Elect, 1 Pet 1. 2.
Romans 8. 29, 30.
according to the foreknowledg of God the Father. S. Paul, Whom he foreknew he
pred^stinated; whom he predestined, he caled, whom he caled, he justified;
whom he justified, he glorified. Again, Blessed be God, who has blessed us in all heavenly things Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.
through Christ as he has chosen us in him before the Worlds foundation: Ergo
we are eternally Elect by Faith in Christ foreseen, which preceds
Predestination.

To conceiv rightly the manner and order of this high mystery, according to Gods
Mind reveled in his Word; we must consider something of his Nature who
predestinats, and therein revere his infinite ^intellect, just Will, matchless
Mercy, and sovereign Dominion; with something of Man which is predestined,
whom it pleased the Almighty to make more excellent then any of his visible
Creatures; to consist of Spirit and Flesh, being inferior to Angels, and
superior to Beasts: for he is a Rational free Creature; yet not so absolutely
sufficient of himself, and wholly independent to be under none (which is proper
soly to God) but free in his own Nature to will or nil, choose or refuse, and
rule his own acts: whereby he was capable of holiness or sin, obeying or
disobeying, to do good or evil; and thereby a subject of Prais or Punishment,
Bounty or Justice: which no Creature can properly be, that is not perfectly
free in Will, and loos at liberty from al necessary restraint.

Ob. Some opposits object, that Adam happily had such perfect Free Will; but by his
Fall that absolut liberty to al things is lessened, and to Spirituals lost:
Ergo, etc.

Sol. It Is granted, but with Proviso, That God foreseing this fall and loss,
with intent not to prevent it, prepared sufficient Graces of his powerful
Spirit, to repair or restore what was decayed, by giving a new Command or
Covenant, fit for Man's infirm wounded Will; and those Graces of his holy Spirit;
which he would be still ready to supply by preventing, assisting, protecting,
and preserving, if he be not wanting to his duty: For Gods Wisdom is not so
weak to make such a noble Creature only for show to Angels, or to set him in
the World for a day or two, and banish him for ever into Hell fire, under the
slavery and tyranny of Rebellious Fiends, of his own free Decree, without
foresight of any deserts good or evil; which is the Manichees error, horrid to
conceiv of so gracious a God, who created him purposly to be the subject of his
righteous Judgment. It Is a true saying, If there be not the Grace of God, how
shall he sav the World? If no Free Will in Man, how shall he judge it? We must so
defend the one, as not destroy the other, which will well consist together.

Hence it folows, That a just Decree before al time what shall be done to every
one at end of time; cannot possibly be conceived to be made but by Gods simple
Prescience of every Man's works, rendering to each accordingly. Now because that
Decree passes from a Sovereign Lord of absolut Will, who will be Debtor to none,
but al to him; it folows also that this foreknowledg on which the Decree is
founded, must needs be (according to our utmost capacity) Gods natural simple
intelligence of al things while they were but as possible, before any Decree
made for their being. To which knowledge when his omnipotent Will was joined, an
^m^t^ble inevitable Decree passed (like Laws of Medes and Persians) that things
should be as now they are, necessary or continge it; means or ends, causes or
effects, such as Prescience previously apprehended: so every Man's salvation is
soly from God, and others perdition wholly from themselfs, which divine
Prescience neither furthers nor hinders. The disput is not of predestinating al
things that are and rejecting the rest; but only of Angels and Men: in what
manner or order some were ordained to life, and al else reprobated? this proceds
from Gods simple knowledge which preceds Predestination; not from that of Vision
or sight (which is of things that either have had or shall have being) which
folows and is founded on it. By this God understood if he would endu some
Creatures with Reason and a free Nature; 1. He should best show forth in them
his Wisdom, goodness, mercy, justice, fidelity, and al his sublime properties:
2. That such Creatures will vary in their choices; some cleaving to good, some to
evil (as Men are moraly virtuous or vicious) which he foresaw not only in
general, but every particular person if created and put to trial: yet it rested
in his free pleasure, to creat and try, or hinder their choices. 3. That of
such whom he knew would prevaricat if permitted free, he might justly punish
them for disobeying; or could fit means to restore and reconcile them, yet
decreed neither. 4. He conceived it juster or equitabler to punish rebellious
Angels being created individual and most intellectual; but to spare Men in
mercy being to multiply their kind and made more frail; specialy if seduced by
subtle Spirits. 5. He foreknew if he should ordain sufficient means to raise al
Men lapsed; that some would gratfully receiv his bounty to their salvation, and
others wilfully or ingratly reject it for the pleasure of sin to their
perdition: holding still the determination what to do or permit in his full
power. 6. He knew if he should condemn the contumacious, and favor such as
returned to him; he should deal justly with the one, mercifully with the other,
and judge al righteously. Al these things with every circumstance (as they are in
being from beginning of the World to the end) God understood as under condition
or supposition, it he should pleas to put them in execution: which after du
deep deliberation in his eternal counsil (to speak still after our shalow
apprehension) his divine Will and Wisdom was to pronounce this mighty Word or
Decree, Fiant, let them be. He could in a moment have framed millions of Worlds,
but proceeded gradualy to perfect this one in six dais, that his Majesty might
be the more magnified: whose Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Grace, Goodness, Power, and
Dominion be glorified through al generations.

These are the Lutheran or Arminian Principles, who make simple Prescience the
basis of Predestination: which if indifferently weighed with a single impartial
ey, will not seem half so heinous, as it is prejudicatly proclaimed in Pulpits and
Pamphlets. Let Tertullian put the perclos. It Is no good nor solid faith L^de
Exhert. Castit.
which refers al to Gods Will and absolut decree, flattering the world with
saying al is done soly by it: but we must understand there is some power in us,
which God expects to accomplish our salvation. For to say God has determind of
us without any reflection on our works; is to make a Pillow for some Men's sloth,
and prepare a precipice for others despair. He sleeps too securely that thinks
to carry his happiness in a Wallet: we must ever work, or shall never receiv
wages: for doubtless God will recompens according to every Man's works. Calvinists
(both Ante and Postlapsarians) ascribe Predestination to Gods pure pleasure by
absolute antecedent Decree; without respect of foreseen demerits in his simple
intelligence: whose principal proofs shall be produced in heaps to shun prolixity.

Ob. Touching divine Decree in temporal things Job says, Joh. 14 5.
Man's dais are numbered or determined, and bounds appointed Ps. 139. 16.
which he cannot pass. So David, in thy Book are al my members Written: So
Christ, not a Sparow shall fall on the ground without Mat. 10 29, 30.
your Father: and the hairs of your head are al numbered: Ergo al depends on
divine Decree.

Sol. These Texts tend al to the Registry of Gods simple Prescience and
Providence: which tho they be no causes of any effects, yet are certain in the
events, and cannot be frultrat: but make nothing for absolut Decree of a
prefixd period to our dais Dr. Charlton debats this point acutly and accuratly,
part whereof shall be decurted. God the giver of life, sole moderator, but not
Author of death: for all natural motion proceds from one first mover God; whence
S. Paul says, In him we live, mov, Acts 17. 28.
and have our being. The term Life is taken either for the period of every Man's
dais, caused by a sensible decay or dissolution of al ligaments which chain the
Soul to the Body; or by an extinction of his vital flame upon consumption of
the Radical fuel, when no preternatural causes interven to anticipat the
dissipation of that elementar temper, on which Life's subsistence necessarily
depends: or else for the end of every Man's Life in general, by what means or
whenever; be it by diseases or violent accidents, without respect to the
gradual decay and consequent cessation of natural temperament in old age. From
the first acception arise 2. Questions. 1. Whether this term of Life
circumscribed by a natural deflux of the Body (which is a kind of mature facil
faling away of Natures ligaments, like ripe Apples, be definitly fixd by divine
Ordinance to leav every in dividual in his own moderation, without prescribing
or procuring, that this decay of temperature should have more or less duration,
then what may naturaly occur from the more or less durability thereof? 2. If
Life be thus fixd by Gods decree not to prolong it beyond the point of its
natural durability; whether he can without altering his own established course
of Nature, being moved by Men's prayers or pity (as he added 15 years to
Ezekiahs dais) correct those depravities procured by excess, sickness, or other
extraneous means, and so hinder the dissolution thereof? That is, whether if God
has predetermined that none shall exced the term, to which the durability of
his individual temper or strength of constitution may probably extend; his
special Providence does not permit, that the temperament may be vitiated,
impaired, or ruined by putrefactiv destructiv preternatural causes obvenient,
and so not hold out to that point of time, which otherwise by its primigeneous
nativ condition it might have reached unto: For the secund acception of Life in
general by what means of dissolution soever (sickness, surfeit, shipwreck,
suffocation, famine, war, wounds, or other-wais) this question occurs, whether
the immature p^^e^natural period thereof be so precisely prefixd; that no Human
prudence or providence can prevent or prolong it, nor fortuitous accidents
accelerat or prevert it? In brief, whether the Catastrophe of each Man's life be
prefined in the Book of Fate or Divine Decree? Life is said to be fixd in a
duple sens: 1. In respect of some absolut Decree antegredient to Gods Pres^ience
of al secund instrumental causes; so that Man cannot possibly prorogue it
beyond, or fall short of that fatal term. 2. In respect of some conditionat
Hypothetic Decree; whose alteration or accomplishment is superseded by the
electiv liberty of man's Will, either as guided by supernatural light of divine
Grace to pursu the real true good; or seduced by delusion of its own sensual
judgment, to wander in the devious tracts of error, and so chus seeming falls
Good. Now it skils not, whether this conditionat Decree be grounded on certain
prenotion of al concomitant circumstances and corollary relations, concerning
Man's election of adhering to good and evil Objects; and his consequent virtuous
or vicious course of life? Or whether it be made without any such infallible
prenotion or volition, yet with a positiv deliberat sentence certainly to be
executed in du time, when the right use or abuse of Freewil shall be fulfilled.

Hence arise 3. Opinions: 1. Some hold the term of every 1 Opinion.
very Man's life, with all causes and clauses conducing to be flatly fatal or
immovable, by Gods irresistible Will and Decree; according to the vulgar saying,
his time is com; this is a Stoical devise used as a spur to excite magnanimous
spirits against dangers of death, that every Man's destiny is writ with
invisible indeleble characters in his forhead: which al Mahometans maintain
doctrinaly, and many Christians ignorantly.

But it is in it self impious if not blasphemous; to confine Confut.
Gods chief attribut of infinite Omnipotence, within the definit lists, laws, or
limits of secund causes: and it derogats from the liberty of Man's will, leaving
nothing in his power to elect or eschew, nor to act or shun. For if Fatal
necessity be defended, al our actions shall be but so many accomplishments of
ineluctable Destiny; and results of Counsil the decrees of Fate; so al human
pru^ence is palpable folly, (...) study of Wisdom painful vanity, and al Laws
mere tyranny: si^h they enjoin only what must h^v^in done otherwise, or
restrain what would else be checked by coercing fatality. Thus shall al pra^ers
be fruitless, vows hopel^ss, exhortations to good needless, d^hortations from
evil frivolous, and acts of piety or devotion superfluous: with a ^^yriod of
other incongru^ties appendent, if absolut fatality be admitted; which is
inconsistent to the rules o. Reason and Religion.

2. Others assert a fixed fatality of every Man's life 2 Opin.
a posteriori, not to be extended beyond the natural condition of each
particular constitution; but not a priori, since it may be contracted or
abbreviated, as it is commonly (but simply) said, one may shorten tho not exced
his time appointed by divine D^cree.

Certes God made no such absolut decrees for the length Confut.
of any Man's life; but leaves every Man free to be his own Carver in all temporal
mundan affairs.

3. Diverse defend, that Man's life may be lengthned or 3 Opin.
shortened more or less of what it usually is in most Men, by the right use or
abuse of means: according to Gods prenotion or Hypothetic determination,
leaving the means to every man's Freewil.

This is perpendicularly proved by many plain places and Confirmat.
pregnant instances extant in holy Writ; but none that have any color for a
fixed fatal period. Solomon says, The Prove. 10. 27.
fear of the Lord prolongeth dais, but the wickeds years shall be shortened. For
God promises long life to them that honor their Parents, and generaly to al
such as shall keep his Commandments. Yea he said to Solomon, If thou will 1
Kings 3. 14.
walk in my wais as thy Father David did, I will lengthen thy d^is. And David
definitly says, Bloody and deceitful Men shall Ps. 55. 23. Ps. 102. 24. Ps 6.
4, 5. Ps 30 Ps. 8^.
not live out half their dais. Again, Take me not away in the midst of my dais.
The like he prayed in sickness, That God would not cut off the th^ed of his Is^:
and givs thanks for preserving him from death. Ezekiah hearing imminent death
denounced, prayed with tears, and had his life prolonged 15. years. Jonah from
God threatened destruction to Ninive within 40 dais: yet upon repentance they
were preserved. Contrarily sundry exemples are current of such as have bin cut
off for their sins: so was the whole stock of mankind (except 8. Persons) in the
universal Deluge: so all the Israelits (except Josua and Caleb) were buried in
the Desert: so Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with their families were swallowed
quick of the Earth, beside many mo. To Jobs place pr^cited he answers, that it
means not the term of particular Men's life's: but in general of mankind, that
his time comparatly is very short, being cycled within a small circle of months
and dais. In which sens it runs parallel with that of Moses, The dais of our
years are 70; and Ps. 90. 10.
if by reason of strength Men com to 80, yet is their life but labor and sorrow:
for it is soon cut off and we fly away. So David Ps. 39. 5.
says, Lo, thou have made my dais as an handbreadth, and my age is nothing
before thee: verily every Man at his best state is altogether vanity. Nor does
Job show by what manner of ordinance or decree God made that definition of dais
and months, but most probably refers to his infallible prescience of every
Man's future demeanor, upon the Hypothesis of his good or il use of Freewil.

Ob. It Is objected, That it matters not whether Gods prescience preced his
preordination of any future event and so founded upon prevision; or else be
subsequent to Preordination, which is the basis of prevision: for it folows
both wais, that the term of life is intransibly fixd, since divine Prescience
can no more be defeated then decree.

Sol. Indeed Prescience whether it preced or succed Decree, is ever certain,
precise, or infallible in event by necessity of consequence, not of consequent:
that is from the Hypothesis or conditionality, tho not from the efficacy or
causality. For if God infallibly fo^eknows (as he does) that the period of Man's
life shall be by such means or manner; then it will assuredly be so: yet his
prenotion has no influence on our actions, as the Schools say. For divine
Prescience Prescien^e is duple: 1. Antecedent to Preordination, whose Object is
a future thing without any previous Decree: hereby God eternaly foresaw al
things to com, both necessary by the impuls of natural causes, and future
conti^g^nts depending on Freewil, sans relation to any after Decrees. Hereof
Rabbi Isaac Bar Sesac says, God from eternity disposed al mundan affairs, and
foresaw al effects which should ensu in time, even the action of Freewil,
whether to be done or not. Hownbeit Man does not any thing in time because God
foreknew it: but contrarily because Man will do this or that in time, therefore
God eternaly foreknew it would so com to pass. 2. Subsequent to Gods Decrees,
which has for its Object a thing to com and presupposes it so fully as the
former, together with the manner or Order of its futurition as fixd and stable,
being so constituted by an antecedent preordination. This last is also duple:
1. Conditionat, That if a Man being born of a sound durable constitution, shall
observe good courses tending to health, and use fit remedies against maladies;
God foresees he shall live long: but if he take contrary courses, God foreknows
he shall be subject to diseases and die untimely. 2. Absolut, whereby God
certainly knows that such a Man will chus a prudent course of life, and fit means
to prevent or cure diseases, whereby he shall live long in health: or that another
will live intemperatly, or neglect means and shorten his dais. Both which suppose
a certainty of divine Prescience touching the precise period of every man's
life, as also the order or manner of its futurition and al concurring causes.
Among which the most energetical is the right use or abuse of h^s own Freewil,
in whose power it was to prolong or abbreviat that term forward or backward: so
far is Gods prenotion or prevision from excluding a temperat diet and phisical
remedies; that it necessarily includs it, else God foreknows he will be accessory
to shorten his own dais like a F^lo de se. For if Man has no Freewil, to use
or refuse sitting means, Gods Prescience is uncertain, since it determins
nothing, but presupposes al: nor does he by any Decree subsequent to
Prescience preordain, that this or that Man shall recover of such or such a
sickness, unles he shall use the means ordained by divine providence: but if he
wilfully or negligently rejects it, he hastens his own Catastrophe.

The result of al is, that God foresees al things and the manner of means how
they will com to pass; yet does neither cause nor compel any necessity of the
event. Next for the absolut Decree of Predestination, their main arguments shall
be mustered up together.

Ob. S. Paul says, The children being not yet born, nor having Romans 9. 11, 12,
etc.
done good or evil; that Gods purpos according to election might stand, not of
works, but of him that caleth, it is written: Jacob have I loved, but hate^
Esau. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will: So 't^s not of him
that wills or runs, but of God that shewe^h mercy. For he has mercy on
whom he will, and hardens whom he will; as he did Pharaoh to show his power in
him. Thou will ^ay ^h^n, why does he yet find fault? for who can resist his
Will? nay but O Man, who art thou that reply against God? Shall the thing
formed say to the Former, why made thou me so? Has not the Potter power over
his Clay, of the same lump to make one Vessel of honor, and another to
dishonor? What if God to show his wratk and make his power known, endured with
long suffering the Vessels of wrath prepared for destruction; and to manifest
the riches of his glory on the Vessels of mercy, which he had prepared to
glory? Isaiah cries, though Israel be as the Sea sand a remnent only shall be
saved: Ergo al depends on Gods absolut antecedent Decree of pure pleasure.

Sol. The Lutherans refer al to simple Prescience, whereto they stick like
limpets: nor is any warrant in holy Writ for absolut irrespectiv Decree, or to
exclud Prescience from Gods proceedings: but this place of S. Paul is one of
which S. Peter speaks, that Many misunderstand to their condemnation. God loved
Jacob and hated Esau, before they did good or evil: but not before he knew what
both would do: for Men are prius d^mnati, quam nati; sed non quam noti. God
knew Adam the root and al particular branches of Mankind: what their
affections, actions, and ends will be, so well for matters of this life as that
to com, if he should Decree to creat them and passed permissiv Decrees
accordingly. He knew Moses and David would be Men after his own heart: Christ
knew Peter at a silly D^mosels challenge would deny him, and upon his look
repent bitterly: how Saul would obey his call, and of a bloody persecutor become
a bold blessed Professor. God is Exodus 8. 15. 32.
said to harden Pharaohs heart by witholding his Grace, who first hardened his
own by disobeying, which he would not mollify. So he deals with all obstinat
obdurant sinners, who first refuse or resist Grace offered, nor will use the
means prescribed: but how far he uses Prescience in all these works, he self
only knows. The similitud of the Potter shows, that none has cause to
contest or complain against God; since every one by lapsed Nature is liable to
condemnation, and it is his mere mercy to sav any. The elect are caled vessels
of honor and mercy, but Reprobats of dishonor, wrath, and fury: both which
presuppose sin, specialy disobedience and impenitence in these, whom God endured
with long suffering (as he did the wicked of the old World) but being despised,
showed his wrath and power on them. The salvation of all that are saved, and
perdition of al which perish, is rightly referred to his Will as suprem
universal cause, mover, disposer and Governor of al; who could have ordered them
otherwise if he pleased: yet must this chief Agent be considered, not as doing
al by himsef alone; but suffering other created Natures to use their free
faculties, as his Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Dominion shall judge fit to apply them
holily and righteously after his own Nature.

Thus he prepared some to life, some to death, as their several ends; but by
intervent of their own acts foreseen so well as his; who proceds in his purposes
so blamelesly, as a Potter in making of the same Clay some Vessels for better,
and some for baser uses or services. For though there be much neernes between
the Potter and his Clay to dispose at his pleasure; yet is much more between God
and his Creatures. So whom he chose in Christ and willed to sav by him
(supposing his own acts of giving his Spirit to them, and their readiness to
receiv and obey) such are Vessels made to honor: But those whom he rejected and
decreed to destruction (upon like supposal of their acts, in despising his
Promises and abusing his Graces) such are Vessels made to dishonor and
damnation: For such supposals are necessary here, since Mankind is not like a
lump of Clay, senseless and reasonless; but a free Intelligent Creature, made to
work or procure his own ends both good and evil: good by working with God, who
seeks Man's good; or evil, by forsaking and faling from him in this work: But
because God could have altered or amended his whole mass or any parcel, which the
Potter perhaps cannot alwais do in his; therefore he has a far nobler power
over Mankind then a Potter of his Clay to make Vessels of honor or dishonor:
whereby al is resolved to his Will, as the prime suprem Cause, which allows al
subordinats to work according to their Natures, and applies them to his own
glory: Nor does the Potter destroy or cast away his vessels; no more will God
his Creatures sans cause.

Ob. S. Peter says, the Jews took Jesus of Nazaret, being Acts 2 23.
delivered by Gods Counsil and foreknowledg, whom by wicked hands they
crucified and slu: Ergo, etc.

Sol. It was done by Gods Counsil, but foreknowledg conjoined: for the
execution of divine Decrees has two parts. 1. An absolut operation to produce
al good things: 2 Permissiv of any evil to be done by others, which he turns to
good ends. So Joseph told his Brethren, ye purposed evil against me, Genesis 50.
25.
but God disposed it for good to preserv his People alive. Semblably he turned
the Jews malice with Judas treason to Man's salvation: but it is not said that he
in secret counsil Decreed either; but only permitted and turned it to good.
Calvinians distinguish betwixt the Entity of every act which is good from God;
and Obliquity which is evil from Man: instancing in a bias Bowl and halting
Horse, whose deviations proced not from the Caster or Rider. The Lutherans say
such distinctions and comparisons are poor palliations, like Cobwebs to catch
silly Flies and partial folowers. For God decrees no evil (either Entity or
Obliquity) but only foresaw al in his pure Prescience, and determined in his
secret counsil to permit it only. For Decree is the act of his sovereign will
which no creature can resist at any time: but he offers sufficient Grace
indifferently to al, which may be refused or resisted by any, and is by too
many; who have Freewil on the left hand to evil, as al sides unanimously agree.
Some say Grace flows from God by two Fountains of Purpos and Preaching: but that
of Purpos flows also from Preaching: for Faith comes by hearing. S. Paul
reconciles both, making Gods foreknowledg the first link which leads al: for
though his general lov be the sole source, whence Preaching, Caling and promiss
of Grace proceds even to the Elect; whose caling he chiefly intended, as if he
sent his Word only to them: yet published it to the rest also, that his goodness
to al may be manifested. So Preaching is the Fountain of conveying Grace to
them that receiv it, and might be to the rest which reject it; since Gods purpos
from Prescience, is the Fountain of Grace to such as have it; but those who have
it not (to whom also the Word is preached) want it by their own disdain or
disobedience foreknown; not for default of divine Predestination. For Quos
praescivit preceds praedestinavit, as Quos praedestinavit does vocavit,
justificavit, and glorificavit, which are the successiv links of that Heavenly
golden Chain leading to life everlasting.

Non decet Ingenuos jurare in verba Magistri:
Dogmata nec pigeat discere falsa retro.
Free Men should not swear their Teachers Word to observe
Nor griev to unlearn falls Doctrins, or back swerv.
Ne placido errores exugite lacte latentes:
Nam cum Vino Homines saepe venena bibunt.
Suck not up errors hid in Milk most fine;
For Men drink poisons oftimes mixed with Wine.
Reprobatio ex praevisis. Reprobation foreknown.
HItherto the bright side of Predestination or Election, has bin soly showed:
now the black Globe of Reprobation shall be succinctly surveied. Mr. Calvin (who
first broched Instit l 3. C^ 3. 54. 57.
the absolut Decree of Adams Fall, for which Lutherans so bitterly brand him)
vents those peremptory positions: That he fell away according to Gods knowledge
and ordinance; who decreed that he should perish by his own faling away: That
al Adams Sons fell away by Gods Will, by whose secret Counsil Man's fall was
ordained: That Men have nothing in agitation, Inst. l. 2. c. 17. sec. 11.
nor bring ought into action, but what God by his secret direction has
decreed: That Devils and Reprobats are not only held fast in Gods fetters, as
not to do what they would; but Inst. l. 2. c. 4 3
are forced by his bridle to do as he will have them: That God not only hardens
Men by leaving it to themselfs; but by appointing their Counsils, ordering
their deliberations, stirring up their Wills, and confirming their purposes by
the Minister of his wrath Satan, to destroy them: That he prepared S^hon King
of Ammorits, by hardening his heart, because he intended his ruin: Inst. l 14 c.
18.. 1, 2.
That the distinction of a permissiv decree, is a fiction of the flesh, and
they play the fools that use it as a subterfuge to shift off this seeming
absurdity. His contemporar Colleague Mr. Beza, and al his rigid Sectators
(styled Supralapsarians) agree in all Points.

Visne Deum ex placito Reprobos addicere paenae?
Durus hic est Sermo: quis ^olerare potest?
Wilt make God punish Reprobats of's pleasure?
This is an hard speech: who can it endure?
Ob. He objects, That to permit Man's Fall, and to Will or In Genesis c. 3.
Decree it, is al one in effect: because what he could hinder if he would, must
com to pass by his Will in not hindering it, since he had power to prevent it:
Ergo he willed it. This al his Disciples vouch as irrefragable verity.

Sol. By their leaves this folows not: for though the Proverb be true in Men, Qui
non vetat cum possit jubet: yet in this case it holds not with God, but
crosses his chief desig^ or Decree to make Man a free Creature ad utrumlibet,
to stand or fall: which could not be if he had limited the liberty of his Will,
and not permitted him to choose either way. So they say to foresee what will com
to pass, and to decree it, is al one: which is untru. The Decree of Reprobation
(both in the privativ act of preterition, and positiv of punishment) depends on
Gods simple Prescience, which anteverts al Decrees concerning the Worlds
Creation or disposal of Man, both for matters of this life and a better; who
had absolut Free Will in all his actions, being not barred or blocked up by any
absolut antecedent Decree of pure pleasure, as those rigid Rhadamants pretend.

The Supralapsarians present Man to God in the Decree of Reprobation abov or
beyond Adams fall: as if without any respect of foreseen sin (original or
actual) in the Creature, he decreed to glorify his Sovereignty in the eternal
rejection and damnation of most Mankind as the end, by their wilful
disobedience and final impenitence as the means. The Sublapsarians to shun some
inconveniences incident to that assertion, fall a little lower, and exhibit Man
as guilty of original sin, for which God freely decreed the greatest number of
Men to eternal pardition, only to show his Power and Justice. The difference is
small, not sufficient to cause a breach betwixt them, as they confess* nor is any
reason to jar about circumstances, when they accord in substance. For both
conspire that Gods moving cause of Reprobation is Gods Will, and not Man's
wickedness: So their final impenitence is utterly inavoidable by Gods absolut
antecedent irrespectiv Decree, which both sides hold.

This prefractory position is oppugned by many Reasons. 1 Reason.
1. Because it is a novity which has no footing in antiquity: for the upper way
was never taught by any, no not the stoutest asserters against Pelagians; nor
the lower til S. Austins time: but al concurred, that Men might possibly be
saved which in event were damned; and to have repented, who died impenitent;
since no Decree of God lais any necessity of perishing on Adam or his Posterity.
Hence Prosper, S. Austins Scholar, says that almost al Ancients consent, how
God decreed al Men's ends, according to his foresight of their actions. Minutius
Faelix presents Pagans, upbraiding Christians, that they held al events
inevitable; framing an unjust God, who punished their indeclinable destinies,
and not Men's voluntary iniquities: for as others ascribe it to Fate, so you to
God. He answers, That Christians Fate is Gods Decree, grounded on his
Prescience, which determins retributions according to Men's foreseen actions. S.
Jerem, a stif Anti-Pelagian says the same, that al depends on Gods
Foreknowledg; for whom he knows will be righteous, he lovs before he coms out of
the womb, and hates the contrary. For his lov and hatred rises from foresight
of future things; else he loves al things, and hates nothing what he has made:
yea he says God chooses whom he sees to be good. The result is, That God
makes no Decree to damn or sav; but what is built on foreknowledg of Men's
actions. S. Austin and Prosper held chief Patrons of absolut Decree the
Postlapsarians way, let fall words to this effect; viz. That Apostats ly not
under a necessity of perishing, because they were not predestinat; but were not
predestinat, because God foresaw they would prevaricat; that because God foreknew
they would perish by their own Free Will, therefore he did not predestinatly
sever them from the Sons of perdition: That God withdraws not from any Man
ability to yield obedience, because he is not predestinat; but did not
predestinat upon prescience of his faling from obedience. So Fulgentius says,
Those whom God foresaw would die in sin, he decreed should live in endless
punishment.

The Council of Arles against Pelagians, denounces these Held A. C 490
Anathema's. Cursed be he that shall say, a Man which perishes might not have
bin saved: Or that a Vessel of dishonor may not rise to honor. The Valentine
Synod says, The Wicked perish not because they could not, but because they would
not be good, and by their own fault remain in the mass of perdition. Again,
That Gods power predestinats any to evil so as he cannot be good; we do not
only not beleev so great an evil, but with all detestation denounce such
accursed. So did the Arausican Council. These are only Human testimonies, which
are no rules of Faith: yet gray Antiquity and grav Assemblies must be more
approved then green Novity or corner Conventicles: specialy since Calvin and
Beza acknowledge, that the common Opinion of conditional respectiv Decree, had
many great A. betters in all Ages, who aspers Origin as the Author.

2. It shuns the test or touchstone of trial, which is a shrewd 2 Reason.
suspicion of falsity: for in the Disput at Momplegart between Beza and Jacobus
Andreas, with their Associats, having argued the points about Christ's Body and
the Lords Supper; Beza flatly refused to touch Reprobation, lest the Ignorant
should take scandal, being unacquainted with such high mysteries. At closing up
of which Colloquy, Frederic Earl of Wirtenberg earnestly exhorted his Lutherans
to declare the Calvinians for Brethren, by giving hands one to another: but
they denied it, saying, They would pray God to open their Eyes and do them any
offi^e of charity, but not giv them the right hand of Fraternity, being found
guil^y of gross enormous errors, naming this as chief. At Hague Conference, the
Contra-Remonstrants would not condescend to argu this point with the Arminian
Remonstrants, but resolved rather to break off then begin it. At Dort Synod,
the President warned the Remonstrants to debat the point of Election, but not
touch the harsh string of Reprobation; yet both are parts of Predestination,
the well or il stating whereof, does much concern Gods glory and good of
Religion: Nor can one be rightly handled without the other, specialy since al
uprores then rose about Reprobation; which doctrine was deeply challenged of
error, and bound to be cleared. Nor was it to be discussed among the simpler
sort, who might happily stumble at it, but by profound learned Men, who as
threshing Oxen were to beat out the Corn, and bolt out truth couched in the
bare letter of Scripture. Vives says, True Religion is not gilded, but gold it
self; which being scraped shows the brighter: let us not then fear lest our
Faith when it is said open appeer filthy; but let falls fucacious Religions be
afraid of this. The Jew is loath to argu his Law with Christians; and Mahometans
are forbid to disput the Alcoran; because their Doctrins are brittle as glass,
broken with every touch: But a Christian fears no examination, nay provokes his
Adversary to combat: thus he. Truth seeks no corners as error does, but dares
abide the sifting: So says our Savior, Every one that John 3. 20, 21.
does evil hates the light, lest his deeds be reproved: But he that does truth
coms to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest to be wrough in God. S.
Paul describes an Heretic to be a Selfcondemner, Titus 3. 11.
as rufusing trial. He is deemed as a silly Sciolist, who is loath to be
opposed; and those Opinions falls, which would walk in a mist or dwell in silence.

3. The obloquy of it: for it is odious to Papists, who revile 3 Reason*
our Religion in this point: opprobrious to Lutherans, who for this causcal us
damned Calvinists; protesting they will rather return to the Papacy, then admit
the Sacramentary or Predestinary pestilence, as Sir Edwin Sandys reports: who
says the Greecs deeply disgust it, deeming it very injurious to Gods goodness
and directly opposite to his very Nature. The Jews also detest it, that God of
his pure pleasure should affect the extrem misery of his chief Creatures, to
show the severity of his Justice in tormenting them: or that the calamity and
casting away of most part, should redound more to his glory, then the felicity
of them al by his Mercy: thus he. Yea Hemingius leaving his Lutheran side,
joined with Calvinists in the Sacraments and some other points; but would never
subscribe to this. Mousieur Moulin says, If God Reprobats Men sans
consideration of sin, or ordained them to sin; yet it is a wise Man's part to
concele rather then utter such things; because, being vented or defended, they
giv great scandal, and fill Men's heads with scruples; beside the advantage which
our Adversaries take to defame true Religion: such be the fruits of holding this
absolut Decree.

4. It has affinity with the exploded error of Stoics and Manichees, 4 Reason.
though differing from both: For Stoics held al actions and events fatal,
either by the Heavenly Bodies impositions, or dispositions of Natural causes;
that one thing must necessarily follow another and be as they are, though God
would have some things otherwise. The Manichees maintain al Men's actions to be
determined, the Good by a good God, who created al things Good; and the Evil by
an Evil, who is Author of al evil. Now the Asserters of absolut Decree defend,
either that al actions (Natural, Moral, Good, Evil) and al events are simply
necessary; or else that al Men's ends are unalterable by any power in their Wills:
which in effect is the same. For in vain is freedom in actions and means, if
the end be decreed and determined; since al actions are for the ends sake, to
attain it by them, and involv the means which forego that end: as if a Man be
predecreed to damnation; he must needs sin, else he cannot be damned. In these
three Opinions two things may be noted. 1. The substance or formality, which is
an indeclinablenes of Men's actions and ends, wherein al consort, that
insuperable nenecessity predominats. Hence Melancthon charged the Church of
Geneva with Stoical error, caling absolut Decree the Tables of Destiny. 2. The
circumstance or ground, wherein they differ: For Stoics draw this necessity from
the Stars or first matter; Manichees from two first Principles eternal and
coeternal: but Calvinists from Gods peremptory Decree. The two first in some
respects have the better of this last: for it is safer to deriv necessity of evil
from an evil God or Natures course, then from a good Gods decree. The first was
condemned by the best Philosophers, the next by all the Fathers: specialy for
the main matter, because it made al things and events necessary, plucking up the
roots of virtu, planting vice and leaving no place for reward or punishment:
What then shall be said of the last, who realy maintain the same?

5. It dishonours God, charging deeply with Men's eternal damnation, as prime
principal cause thereof by his voluntary disposition 5. Reason.
antecedent to al deserts in them, which they cannot possibly decline by reason
of his absolut irrevocable Decree. This is contrary 1. to Scripture, which
makes God al mercy, and Man sole cause of his own ruin. See Hose 13. 9. Lament.
3 33. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Wis. 1. 12, 13. and elswher. 2. It repugns Gods Nature, who
is merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness. See Ps. 86. 5. Joel
2. 16. Jonah 4. 22. Micah 7. 18. 3. It Is advers to sound reason, which cannot
but impeach such a Decree of extrem cruelty, far from the Father of mercy. For
what natural Parent can resolv to beget Children, and after birth living a
while with him to hang up by the tongue, tear off their flesh with scourges, pull
it from the bones with burning pinsers, or put them to other hideous tortures;
only to show his power and authority over them? Yet wors by infinite degrees is
imagined of God, if he should of free pleasure ordain so many myriads of Men
made after his own Image to everlasting fire, only to show his sovereign
dominion over them. Abram held it high injustice in Genesis 18. 25.
God to destroy the righteous with the wicked even temporaly, and expostulats
with an Absit, far be that from thee, O Lord. How deeply then would he detest
any thought, that he will destroy millions upon his own absolut decree eternaly?
Far be it from our God.

6. It charge God with all sorts of sins committed since the 6. Reason.
Creation, as sole Author or Abettor, being a necessary product of his absolut
Decree: yet David says, he delights not in wickedness. (...). ^.
So S. James, Let none say he is tempted of God, for he tempts James 1. 13, 14.
no man to evil: but every one is drawn by his own concupiscence. 1. John 2. 16.
S. John tells us, That the lust of the flesh, lust of the ey, and pride of life
is not of the Father, but of the World. This Tenet makes God wors then the
Devil, whose tentation may be resisted; but Gods powerful effectual Decree
cannot be frustrated. Prosper says, If this were charged on the Devil, he may
in some sort clear himself, since he can compel none to sin, what madness then is
it to aspers that on God, which cannot justly be imputed to Satan? Tertullian
says, He cannot be accounted Author of sin, who is Avenger and Condemner of
it: nor can he be a just holy God (says S. Basil) nor Judge of the World, if he
decree sin: since it is al one to say God is Author of sin, and to aver he is not
God. The defenders disclaim this Tenet in direct terms, being so harsh to
Christian ears; but deliver it in truth by necessary consequence. For they
avouch the Decree of Reprobation to be absolut and inevitable; nor can
Reprobats be saved, tho they do all the works of Saints, since God created them
to this very purpos, that they should sin, else he could not attain his
principal ends, to manifest his mercy in saving the elect, and execut his
justice in damning Reprobats; who are eternaly decreed to sin even to death.
Thus say Piscator, Marlorat, Zanchy, and many mo. This is by clear consequents
to make God the Author of sin: which is ordinarily imputed to those who have not
such interest or influence in production of it, as this assertion ascribes to
God. The Devil is caled the Father of lies, and semblably of al sins 1. John 3.
8. 10.
else, as sinners are styled his Sons, and sin a work of the Devil; which the
Son of God came to loos. Yet the Devil only eggs or excites Men by outward
suggestions and inward tentations to sin, which is al he can do: but if God
necessitats by his absolut Decree, and after determinats by his powerful secret
working in Men's Souls, and disposing or overruling their Wills, that they cannot
but sin and perish; he does infinitely more, then barely suggest, entice, or
persuade; which is horrid to imagine. So wicked Men are reputed Authors of their
sins, because they plot, purpos, choose, and commit them as immediate Agents: but
if God overrules their projects and purposes by an uncomptrolable decree, that
they must needs do as they do and die; tho they would fain do otherwise and
be saved; he is chiefly the Author, and they only secund Actors or subordinat
Instruments under him. Happily they have free power in it self, but no free use to
do as they list, since God determins their actions by his Omnipotent Will.

Evil Counsilors and Allurers to sin, are also esteemed causers, and punished
with others which commit crimes by their instigation: as J^zabel was guilty of
Nabaths murder for counsiling and contriving it: but they say God does even
enforce it by an Almighty Decree, which cannot be resisted: therefore he is much
more the chief author and actor then mere abetter or accessory. If a King shall
procure a Subjects ruin by plotting his offens (as Henry 7. is said to seek
Edward Earl of Warwicks destruction, by contriving his escape out of London
Tower) al men will charge him as Author of his crime and death: much more God,
if he design the sin and damnation of Reprobats. So says Moulin, who will not
abhor a King that to hang a man by Law, plots to make him a Thief or Murderer,
that he may seem to do it justly? For he shall not only make an innocent
wretched, but wicked too, and destroy him for that offens whereof he is Author.
So dissembling Tiberius decreeing Sejanus Daughter to death, caused the Hangman
first to deflower her; because their Laws forbad Virgins to be strangled: yet
was he chief Author both of her rape and ruin. If then God Decrees to damn
millions upon millions, and shall cause or permit the Devil first to defile them
that he may justly destroy them; is not he the chief cause of their sins so well
as sufferings? Al Men grant God to be sole Author of Men's conversion and
salvation: yet does he no more in procuring it, then these Men ascribe to him in
reprobation and damnation. For he absolutely and antecedently from eternity
decreed to sav the elect, and by irresistible means to work faith, repentance,
and final perseverance for their salvation and accomplishment of his Decree:
semblably he peremptorily decreed (as they say) to damn Reprobats, leading them
on by an insuperable power and immutable providence from sin to sin, til they
have made up a full measure; and in fine inflicts vengence for acting what he
appointed. What difference then in these courses, or why shall not God be reputed
Author of the ones sins, so well as of the others salvation? The Fathers held it
a parallel case, an therefore made sin an object only of Prescience, bending
their Arguments against this perilous position of an absolut, antecedent,
irrespectiv, irresistible, enforcing Decree of Reprobation. Dr. Usher relating
the Church ^^st of Got^^s^. p 138.
of Lions answer to Seotus against Gotteschalc, has these words: whoever says
there is a constraint or necessity of sinning laid on any Man; he grossly and
grievously blasphems God, making him to be the Author of sin: nor can all the
quaintest wits in the world avoid it. Howbeit to show fair play, and scan this
point at full; al their Defenses, Devises, Shadows, Similituds, Evasions, and
Elusions shall be amply agitated and aptly answered.

It Is said there is a duple Decree: 1. Operativ, by which God 1 Devise.
positivly works his purpos; and this would infer him to be the Author of sin.
2. Permissiv, by which he only Decrees to let it com to pass; and this does not
make him Author of sin, which is all that they maintain. If it be al, it is well:
let that be tried.

Adam in the hand of his own Al^s 14 16.
counsil to stand or fall. So he suffered the Nations to walk in their own wais*
And still suffers al Men to slide into sundry sins: not because he stands in need
of sin to set forth his glory, but because he is suprem moderator of al* knowing
how to bring good out of evil; and specialy because he made Man (as Tertullian
tells) a free creature undetermined either way in his actions, til he determins
himself, and may not be hindered from sinning by Omnipotence, because he
ordained otherwise. Nor does a permissiv Decree cause sin being merely
extrinsecal to the sinner, which has no influence on it. If they intend
nothing else in good earnest then a bare permission, it is granted: but their
main conclusion falls to ground, and the debat at an end. Hence their chief
Coryphees reject this distinction as a fiction of the flesh, and make God to
decree sin efficatiously with an energetical working will; blaming those that
refer ought to Gods prescience only. Permission properly is an act of Gods
consequent judiciary Will, by which he punishes Men for abusing their freedom
in committing sins day by day, which they might have declined, and it is caled
his longsuffering* proceeding to punish with a slow unwilling pace. See Ps. 81.
11, 12. Ezekiel. 18 39. Romans 1. 21, 24. Rev. 22. 11. but Permission by them
intended, is an act of Gods antecedent Will exercised on innocent men lying
under no guilt; whom he eternaly preordains to sin and punishment. So true
Permission about whomever exercised, is only not to hinder them from faling
which are able to stand, and supposes a possibility in the party permitted to
sin or not: but in their sens it is a withdrawing or withholding of Grace
needful to shun sin; and so infolds an absolut necessity of sinning: as the fall
of Dagons house followed Sampsons plucking down the Pillars which supported it.
So Maccovius says, Permission is a subtraction of divine assistance necessary
to prevent sin: so Dr. Whitaker, Permission is a privation of that aid, which
b^ing present would have prevented sin. So Pareus, That help which God witheld
from Adam, made that he could not so use his indowments as to persever; which
he says is the doctrine generaly defended by their side. So their Permission of
sin being a subtraction of necessary Grace, is equivalent to an actual
effectual procuring and woking of it: for a deficient cause in things necessary
is truly efficient: so this devise is a very figleaf to cover the ugly nakedness
of their Opinion.

Others consider two things in every evil act: 1. The matter 2 Devise.
or Entity, whereof God is Author. 2. The form or Obliquity which proceds from
Satan, as in a lame Horse.

This distinction halts wors then the Horse: nor holds in all Adams eating the
forbidden fruit, and Saul's sparing Agag, which in others had not bin sin. NOE
will it serve their turn: for they make Gods Decree cause of al those means which
lead to damnation: therefore of sinful actions as sinful, and not as bare
Entities; since they deserv death not as simple actions, but as transgressions
of the Law. As to their sly Simile, that Master or Owner, who shall first resolv
to kill his Horse, and after lames him that he may have color to do it; is cruel
to his Beast, and Author both of his halting and death: so if God first decree
to cast Men into Hell, and then bring them into a state of sin that he may
effect his purpose justly; he must needs be Author of sin, so well as the
actions to which it cleavs, since he intends destruction. These are horrid
aspersions.

Some coin a third evasion, that the Will is determined to an 3 Devise.
object two wais. 1. By compulsion against its inclination; so God forces no
Man. 2. By complying with its natural appetit or liking: So God may lead a Man
to what he would, yet not be Author of sin, but only necessitats it. When Men
sin, it is true they cannot choose, and as true they will not but sin: so it is not
Gods Decree, but their own wicked Will, which is cause of their sin and death.

The Fathers and Schoolmen make Compulsion and Necessity Mat. 10. 20. 1 Cor.
15. 10. Gal. 2. 20. where the work is wholly imputed to the principal Agent.
Adams Will in innocence was whit paper or a clean-Table, equaly inclined to good
or evil: So if God decreed his Fall (as Supralapsarians say) that necessity was
a coaction: but al others by depraved Nature are disposed to evil, yet
determined by divine decree both Elect and Reprobats Wills. Though then Man's Will
works with Gods Decree in sinning; yet si^h it does it by the commanding power
of his irresistible Decree, the sin cannot so rightly be attributed to Man's Will
the inferior, as to Gods Decree the superior Cause. Yea that which makes a Man
sin by necessity with and not against his Will, is cause of his sin in wor^ sort,
then he which constrains him against his will: as he that by powerful persuasion
draws one to k^l himself, is more g^osly the cause of his self-homici^, then he
who inforceth him to it, because it makes him consent to his own death. So if
Gods Decree makes Men sin, and willingly too (which is both to act and will
evil) he has a deeper stroke in the sin.

Another shift is suggested, that sin is considered as sin, and 4 Devise.
so God does not destinat Men to it: Or as a means to manifest his Justice, and
so he does decree to punish it; yet is not the Author of sin.

This is a silly slide, for a good end cannot justify an il actions: Robin Hooa
did; or commit whordom to beget Children for the Church, as the Harlot did
which was mother to three famous School-Doctors, or the like; be his end never
so good, he sins hainously; since it is a violation of Gods Majesty, and
directly opposite to divine Good; as S. Paul says, We must not do evil that
good may insu. If then God wills evil for ends never so Romans 3. 8.
good; yet since he decrees it with a powerful necessitating Will, he is Author
of it. For sin simply is a means of punishment: If then he wills it as a means
of punishment, he wills it as simply sin by an absolut Decree: Absit omen.

This Position loads him with three indignities. 1. Want of Wisdom, which must
needs be weak if he can find no way to glorify his Justice but by bringing in
sin, which his Soul hates; that he may manifest it in punishing 2. Want of
sincerity or plain dealing: as Tiberius, purposing to destroy Drusus and Nero
(sons to Germanicus) provoked them to revile him, that so he might justly put
them to death. So if God, appointing Men to eternal perdition, decrees they
shall sin, that so they may be damned; he dissembles like that Tyran, and
destrois them under color of Justice, for such sins as he draws them into,
appointing it as a means of their ruin. 3. Want of Mercy, as if he delighted in
blood; who rather then he will not destroy Men's Souls, decrees them to live and
die in sin, that he may destroy them. Justin Martyr says of Pagan Princes, They
feared Apol. l. 2
lest al should be just, that they might have none to punish; which is the
property of Hang-men, rather then good Princes: far be such foul enormities
from the God of Truth and Father of Mercies. Thus we see, Causa patrocinio non
bona pejor erit.

7. It overthrows Religion and good Government: 1. Because 7 Reason.
it makes sin no sin in deed, but only in Opinion. The Proverb is, Necessity
has no Law, and Creatures or actions swaied by it, are free from Laws. Lions
are not forbid to prey, Birds to fly, or Fishes to swim, nor any thing to do
its kind since it is Natural or Necessary, they can do no otherwise: But Laws
are given to Rational Animals which have liberty of Will; yet not to such as have
no use of Reason; nor to Men that can use it, sav in those actions that are
voluntary: For none is forbid to hunger, thirst, sleep, weep, laugh, etc.
because those actions and affections are necessary, being trangressions of no
Law, and 1 John 3. 4.
consequently no sins; as S. John concluds. Justin Martyr says, if it be
destiny (as the Fathers call absolut Necessity) that Men are good or bad, they
be neither good nor bad: So Virtu and Vice will seem nothing but in opinion
only, which is great Injustice and Impiety: For to what purpos was the Son of
God made Man and a Sacrifice for sin? Why was Ministry ordained or Heaven and
Hell appointed? Faith, the Word, Sacraments, and al Religious Rites are mere
Fables, if sin be nothing. 2. Because it bereavs al conscience of sin: for if it
pleas or profit Men, why shall they fear the perpetration which they cannot
shun? or why weep and mourn, having sinned, if they be necessitated? since sin
is an effect of that irresistible Decree or nothing, tears may be so well spared
as spent. 3. Because it cancels the guilt of sin, since no fatal offenses can
justly be punished either temporaly or eternaly; but Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26.
Necessity must bear the blame. God gav a Law, If a Maid be forced to
incontinence, she shall not die, being rather a sufferer then sinner. Tertullian
says, The reward of good or evil cannot justly be given to such as are so by
necessity, and not freely. So Nemo sit fato nocens.
S. Jerome, Where necessity swais, there is no place for retribution. So S.
Austin, We place Men's nativities under no constellations, that the Will may be
freed from al hand of Necessity. So Epiphanius, If Stars impose a necessity of
sinning, they may with more Justice be punished then Men: shall it then be said
that Gods Decree does the same? Prosper says, Gods Judgments cannot be just,
if Men sin by his Will or determination. So Fulgentius, It Is great Injustice if
God punish one whom he does not find, but makes an Offender. Epiphanius
refuting the Pharees (who held the Souls immortality and resurrection of the
Body, together with fatal necessity) says it is mere madness to grant a
Rusurrection and day of Gods righteous Judgment; yet to say there is any
fatality or necessity in Men's actions: for how can they cohere? which implies,
that God necessitats none to sin or damnation. Nor can his Judgments be just,
if Men be held by the Adamantin chains of necessity under the power of sinning;
teach or preach in words what any can to the contrary: For by that position al
our actions are Gods Ordinances, and imaginations branches of his eternal
Decree: yea al events in Kingdoms and Stats necessary issues of divine Destiny:
which will makes al pillars of Piety and Principles of Policy totter or tumble
to ground; the best Laws cannot restrain one sin, the greatest rewards promot
one Virtu, the powerfullest Sermons convert one sinner, the humblest devotions
divert one Judgment, nor the strongest endeavors effect any more then what will
be done without them: Gods Decree does al in all. Prosper says, Whoever holds
that Men are urged to sin or damnation by Gods Predestination, as by inevitable
necessity; he is no Catholic. These Men preach clean contrary in show, and
dehort from sin with terrible threats of vengeance: sed eui bono, if Men by
Decree be necessitated to do it, and have no possible power to decline it?
Lazarus at Christ's call came forth, but being bound could not walk, til he was
loosed and let go. Nor can Men repent or com to Christ, so long as they ly
fastened with the fetters of necessity, under a fatal Decree, deprived from al
power of Free Will, til they shall be set at liberty by Gods cooperating Grace.
The Arausican Council says, That any are predestinat to sin by divine power;
we not only not beleev, but with greatest detestation denounce Anathema to such
(if any be) as will beleev so great an evil; which shall shut up this point.

The Sublapsarians or Disciples of Dort Synod (who, like Lapwings, hide their
heads, thinking the whole Body safe; suppose Sublapsarians censured.
themselves more flight-free from scandal then Antelapsarians) hold, That God
looking on the lost lump of forsorn Mankind in Adams foreseen Fall, decreed of
free pleasure to send his Son in time to say some Elect Vessels by Ordinances
prescribed in the Gospel; but to leav the rest in the suds of their sins to
perish everlastingly. This Tenet shall be more pointly touched or taken in task,
which is faulty in many manifest respects.

1. It repugns sundry pregnant places of holy Writ: As I 1 Reason.
live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in a sinners death, but that Ezekiel 33.
11.
the wicked turn from his way and live: Ergo he does not decree of free pleasure
they should perish. He delights not in the death of wicked Men, much less of
Innocents liable only to Original sin, to seal up so may millions of millions
under it vincible damnation, merely to show his sovereign dominion. Saint Romans
11. 2.
Paul says, God has shut up al under unbeleef, that he might have mercy on al:
Here are two Als of equal extent: al Unbeleevers, and al Objects of Mercy;
implying that Gods will is to have mercy on al Unbeleevers, if they will turn from
infidelity. If then every Man is under Mercy, God has no antecedent John 3 16,
7, 18.
Will to exclud some from al possibility of obtaining it. God so loved the World
as he gav his only begotten Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish:
Ergo he loved al lying in the lump of sin, sending his Son to be a Savior; but
hated not most part lying in laps predecreed to Reprobation. Some slily expound
the word World for a World of Elect or Believers only: which is no where so
taken; but either for all Men, or al living in some certain place, or at some
certain time, sans distinction of good or bad: Or if it be any where restrained,
it is applied to wicked Men wedded to this World. Yet if it be somwher limited
to the Elect, it is not so here; for then the words would bear a senseless sens:
God so loved the Elect, that whoever believes in his Son should not perish:
which imports two sorts of Elect, some that beleev and shall be saved, others
which beleev not and shall perish: but Believers and Uunbeleevers (saved and
damned) includ al Mankind; which S. John calls elswher the whole World, as an
exposition of the former. S. Paul 1 John 2. 2. 1 Timothy 2. ^
says, God will have al Men to be saved, and com to the knowledge of the truth:
Ergo his will is that al shall have the means of knowledge and be saved, but none
shut up under unbeleef. Some by All understand al sorts of Men, but not al
particulars in each sort; which is a silly shift. Indeed it is sometimes so taken,
but not here, as the context shows: for in the first verse a duty is injoined to
make prayers and supplications for all Men, and then a motiv annexed, God will
have al to be saved. The duty extends to every particular, we must in charity
pray for all, even Tyrans, Persecutors, profane Persons: Ergo the motiv intends
al individuals, or else reaches not home to enforce the duty. Others answer,
That God intends al to be saved by his reveled Will, but millions damned by his
secret. O beware of ascribing two several Wills to God, who is no dissembler;
since one must needs be good, the other bad: For if his Word be his reveled Will,
and repugnant to his secret Mind or meaning; it must be untru or simulatory,
and consequently a ly. S. Peter says, The 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Lord would have none perish, but al com to repentance. Some fully it, That he
means only the Elect or Believers; but the context flatly contradicts it: For
the next preceding words speak of patience or long-sufferance toward Men, which
must be Reprobats rather, who die in their sins: as the same Apostle tells, That
Christ in spirit preached to the spirits, which in Noah's dais 1 Pet 3. 19, 20
were disobediens, and now in prison or Hell for it. Yea Reprobats are the most
proper objects of his patience: as S. Paul says, He uses much patience and
long-suffering to them that Romans 2 4.
go on in sin, that he might lead them to repentance. Again, he suffers Rom 9
22.
with long patience Vessels of wrath prepared (not decreed) to destruction. See
Isai 5. 2. Isai 65. 2. So S. Peter's words intend Reprobats so well as others, or
rather them then others; that God will have none to perish by his power or
pleasure, except by their own fault or folly. This is confirmed by some
conditional passages: If thou seek him, he will be found; but if then ^
forsake him, he will cast thee off. So God said to Cain, If thou do^ ^
well, shall thou not be accepted? but if thou do il, sin lies at door. S. Paul
says, The just shall live by faith; but if any draw back, Heb^. 1^. 38.
my soul shall (...) no pleasure in him. By which conditions it is clear, that
God forsakes no Man simply considered in the fall, til he first forsakes him.

The result is, That he rejects none by previous Decree, sav such as he foresaw
would cast him off by continuance in sin and contempt of Grace: For Gods acts
in time, are regulated by his Decrees before time: as it is said, He works al
according to Ephesians. ^. ^^.
the Counsil of his Will. For there is an exact conformity between the Rule and
thing squared by it: therefore whatever God does in the World, he purposed
before the World, and by actual casting Men off when they grow rebellious or
impenitent; we may be sure he decreed to do it for foreseen rebellion and
impenitence. Some obscure Texts may seem to favor the Opinion of free pleasure,
as Men mis-interpret them; which by presupposing prevision are rightly
reconciled: But S. Austins rule is, we must not contradict plain places, because
we cannot comprehend obscure. And Tertullian teaches, that a few places are to
be understood after the current sens of most part, and not contrary to it; as
in this case for the most part it seems to be.

2. It crosses some chief Attributs of God (Mercy, Justice, 2 Reason.
Truth, Holiness) which are his perfections, whereby he exercises his acts among
Men conform to them: For they are the same in God with those virtues in Men, but
infinitely differing in degree; since what is just, true, holy, or merciful in
Men, is superlativly so in God: Else cannot Man be properly made after his
Image, nor renewed in Regeneration after the same; or made Col. 3. 10.
partaker of divine Nature: but it is commanded, Be ye perfect, Mat. 5. 48.
as your havenly Father is perfect; and holy, as I am holy: Nor is sovereign
power or dominion an Attribut moraly good in it self, since it may be showed in
cruel unjust acts so well as contrary: But our good God is Justice in the
Abstract, and will not exercise it tyrannously contrary to his other Attributs.

1. Now absolut Reprobation repugns his Holiness, making him the chief cause of
sin in most Men, since he brings them into a state of sin which they cannot
decline: For all are guilty of Adams transgression, and Natures corruption; yet
not by natural generation, so much as by divine Ordination: as Calvin ^ 3.
Inst. ^ 23. ^ 7^
faith, Al Men are held under guilt of eternal death in the person of one Man:
which cannot be ascribed to any natural cause; but must com from Gods wonderful
Counsil, who would have it so. Doctor Twiss says the same, The guilt of
Original sin is derived only by imputation, the stain only by propagation, and
both merely by Gods free constitution. So says S. Bernard, Adams sin is
another, because we knew not Sermon. 1 Dom. ^. past. 8. Epi^^.
of it; yet ours too, because by Gods just (though secret) Judgment reputed
ours. This agrees with reason; for if we incur guilt of the first sin and
Natures corruption only, as being in Adams loins when he sinned; then are we
guilty of al his other sins, being virtualy or potentialy in his loins after
the fall so well as before: But Scripture intitles only the first sin which
entered the World and invaded al Mankind. Yea Children should be guilty of al
their Progenitors (specialy the next Parents) sins, as being in their loins
when they sinned more immediately then in Adams: yet Children partake not their
Parents guilt nor punishments, unles they hate God like them, and imitat their
Exodus 20 5.
sins. God swears that the Proverb (The Fathers have eaten Ezekiel 18 2, etc.
sour Grapes and Childrens teeth are set on edg) shall be used no more: the Soul
that sins shall die: But if a Man be just and do right, he shall surely live. The
Son shall not bear his Fathers iniquity, nor Father his Sons; but the Soul only
that Sins shall die. Wretched would be our case, on whom the ends of all the World
are com if children should be guilty of al their Progenitors sins, or liable to
their plagues and punishments: who can bear it? Yet it is asserted, that God
decrees to leav Reprobats in this impotent irrecoverable condition, affording
no ability to rise from sin by Grace; which Decree he executs in time of his
Free Will and Pleasure, leaving them under a necessity of sinning by the act of
absolut Reprobation; both Negativ, which is a flat denial of Grace; and
Positiv, which is a preordination of them to endless torments. Some grant common
Graces to Reprobats, but not sufficient to sav them: So says Lubbert, God
reveles not the way of salvation to Reprobats, nor givs Faith and Regeneration;
but leaves them in sin and perdition: Nor does afford them any sufficient means
of salvation, with an intention of saving them.

These two Positions (that God necessitats Reprobats to sin, and leaves them in
the snds) make him chief Author of al their sins; for a Cause of the Cause, is
Cause of the thing produced, Causa Cau^^, ^^^ Causa Causati.
whether Negativ or Positiv acts: Ergo if God be chief Cause of their
impenitence by want or withdrawing supernatural Grace; he is true cause of their
sin according to the saying, He that forbids or hinders not what is in his
power, bids and furthers it, as they say God does effectually will it. It Is a
poor pretext that God by withdrawing his Grace is only accidental, not a direct
proper cause of their sins: For an accidental is when the effect is beside the
Agents intention or expectation; as if one in digging his ground finds gold:
But when an effect is expected, intended, or contrived, the cause cannot be
caled accidental: as a Pilot witholding his care or skill from a Ship, when he
knows it will perish by such neglect, is cause of casting it away. So if God
detains Grace necessary, not as ignorant what will insu; but precisely determins
Reprobats ruin by their impenitence; he becoms a true direct cause of their sins;
which no wiles of wit (sav among their partial poor blind Disciples) can
possibly decline.

2. It opposes Gods Mercy, which is his Nature in the Abstract: See Exodus 34
6. Mat. 7. 11. Mat. 23. 37. 2 Cor. 1. 3. Ephesians. 2. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 1 John 4. 16.
But such matchless Mercy cannot stand with a peremptory Decree of absolut
Reprobation: which if God does of free pleasure, he is rather a Father of
Cruelties then Mercies, and a Destroier then Savior. What Parent will destin
their Children to eternal death and torments for one only offens, and that not
committed by them, but by others and imputed to them? Is Gods Mercy abundant if
limited to a few Elect, scarsone of a hundred shall be inevitably saved? Ponder
these points duly: 1. That Adams sin is personaly none sav his, but a sin of
Nature not committed or consented to by any of his posterity; which is derived
by traduction, but made the sin of Nature by Gods arbitrary imputation, not
ordinary generation. 2. That God (as it is generaly believed) pardoned Adam who
freely committed it: Can it then stand with his Mercy to punish others for the
same sin not perpetrated by them? 3. That his only Son was sent into the John
1. 29:
World, and suffered death for the sins of the World; which might suffice to
satisfy his wronged Justice for all Mankind, and open a way of salvation to
every Man, without respect of persons: But to damn a world of Reprobats by free
Decree, only to show his dominion, no way savours of Mercy: for he is far
crueler to them then any Creature else, or to the very Devils; who are damned
for their own personal pride and rebellion: but Reprobats by an absolut Decree
for another crime. The one know their doom and expect it; but the other are
deluded with hope and made beleev the matter is in their own hand; so that if
they perish, it is not for want of Mercy in God, but o^ will in themselfs: Yet by
their doctrine al depends on the peremptory punctilio of Gods arbitrary absolut
Decree. So Devils are in better case, because they are not injoined to beleev in
Christ, nor to repent, fast and pray as Reprobats are: Nor punished the more
for not believing, as Men are: In all which regards their condition is far more
ruful then cursed Fiends, who are made the tormentors over them. Concerning
other Creatures, the very basest have a being (though despicable) which is
better then no being: Yet who would not wish, if he might choose, to be resolved
into nothing, then in such doleful direful condition? yea, that they had been
Toads or Serpents then Men? Or what Parents will procreat, if they be persuaded
they shall beget Children Firebrarnds for Hell, and Slavs to Satan? yet not for
their faults, nor have they power to help it. Let Prosper shape the period: He
which says God will not have al to be saved, but a few predestinat persons only;
he speaks harshly of Gods high inscrutable Grace. Some say Gods Mercy by this
absolut Decree is sufficiently showed to the Elect, and Justice to Reprobats:
but the one is clothed with partial respect of persons, and the other clouded
with extrem rigor or severity, as shall appeer.

3. It is incompatible with divine Justice: See Ps. 145. 17. Prove. 16. 11. Isai
5. 3. Ezekiel. 18. 25. but the absolut decre^ of Reprobation cannot consist with
it; since it makes God punish the righteous with rebellious, and innocent Men
with bad Angels. For Antelapsarians say expressly, That God decreed Man's Fall or
Fate considered without sin, and therefore innocent. Postlapsarians vouch the
same by consequent, That he lais a necessity on every Man to be born under
original sin, decreeing to Reprobat most part for that sin: so they make God to
do (...). 3 Inst. c. 23. 7. 23.
by two acts, which their brethren impute to one. Calvin contests, That God may
with equal Justice decree Men to damnation the first way so well as the last:
for all are made guilty of Adams sin by Gods Decree only; why then not he by the
same? These kind Patrons of divine Justice will seem to stumble at a straw and
leap over a block: why else will they not grant that of one Man, which they do
of al? hence we may see what to judge of this opinion: That God cannot justly
ordain Men to destruction sans consideration of sin: for which is greater to
impute another sin to one and punish him for it with eternal death; or to
ordain Men to perdition simply without looking at sin? but they say he may do
the one without wrong to Justice: Ergo the other. So says Doctor Twiss, If God
may decree Men to Hell for Adams sin derived to them by his sole constitution;
he may so justly do it without any such ordination. Indeed it is al one to
decree a Man's misery, as to involv him in a sin which shall make him miserable:
but neither is just nor agreeable to the Judge of the World. Is it justice to
require Faith in Christ of those to whom he has by flat decree denied it? Yet
so they fain God to do. For Zanchy says, Every Man sans exception (even
Reprobats) is bound to beleev, that he is chosen in Christ to salvation, or else
he sins grievously: as Christ says The Spirit shall convince the World of sin,
because they believed not in me. This they generaly hold; yet absolut Reprobats
John 16 9
cannot justly be bound to beleev, because barred by divine Decree, and have no
power to do it: shall any be tied to impossibilities? If al be immutable more
Medorum, their endevor is vain, and al preaching vain. For it is not Gods
serious Will they shall beleev, whom he does not furnish with necessary power;
but rather the contrary, that they shall not beleev. The Devils have no part in
Christ or the new Covenant, and therefore not bound to beleev in the one, nor
punishable for transgressing the other: no more can God justly require Faith of
Reprobats, or destroy them for not believing, if they have no more part in
Christ or the Covenant then Devils; which will make the doctrine ( that Christ
died for all Men) a flat^ly. What can be more injust then to punish Men for
omitting to do, which his own Decree makes impossible for them to perform?

Some answer that Gods Decree is just, tho it seem hard to 1 Defens.
Man's erring understanding.

This is false, and the contradictory true, that nothing is truly God calls Men to
be judges of his wais and Ezekiel. 18. 25.
works: judge ye house of Israel, are not my wais equal, and yours unequal: The
high mysteries of Christ's Incarnation, birth by a Virgin, resurrection of the
Body, and such like, which are proper objects of Faith; God never offers to
Men's trial, but rather derides those which presume to judge them by Reason,
because they be supernatural, and Man no competent judge by natural
understanding: but he makes him judge in the equity of his Decrees and Wais, who
is able to discern what is just in divine acts.

Others say the Scriptures define these Decrees to be 2 Defens*
Gods Will, which is the rule of righteousness: Ergo they must needs be just.

This Rule is much abused by the Patrons of absolut Reprobation: Jerome says,
God commands nothing sav what is honest, but does not make things honest which
are abominable: implying that he does not will a thing and so make it good; but
wills it because it is antecedently good. So Zanchy makes Gods justice
antecedent to his will, and therefore the rule of it, rather then regulated by
it: nor can God will ought which is not just in it self. So Gods Will is no rule
of justice to himself, but to us; who must square al our thoughts, words, and
works by it as suprem rule of them. Nor are these absolut decrees of salvation
and damnation any parts of his reveled Will in Scripture, which to assert is to
beg the question. This is al their ground to gain credit (as al sects use to
do) but a falls foundation, unles they may sens it as they list. For absolut
Reprobation repugns right reason, and begets absurdities which no Truths does:
since sundry truths are reveled in holy Writ abov reason, but none contrary to
it. Faith and Reason, Scripture and Nature are Gods excellent gifts, which
never diametraly differ, tho there is a disproportion between them: if then
absolut Reprobation be unjust, it cannot be justified by Scripture. Therefore to
say Gods Will is the rule of Justice, and this a part of his reveled Will (both
which propositions are untru) is but a sly evasion and colorable collusion.

They say farther, That God is not bound to restore Men power 3. Defens.
to beleev, having lost it by their own fault: as a Master is not tied to renew
his Servants stock having misimploied it.

It Is true, God is bound to none, being a most free dispenser Adam a spiritual
Law to obey, he conferred such strength answerable to do it: as S. Austin
says, he had a power or possibility not to fall, tho not such as he could not
fall. To apply al, If God entered into a new Covenant with Men, which he needed
not, and required obedience of al; promising eternal life to those that observe
it, and everlasting death to such as disobey: then no doubt he is bound to
restore ability of believing unto al, nor can justly punish the disobedient
without it: no more then a Magistrate having put out an Offenders eyes, can
require him to read, and put him to death for not reading: so it is injustice in
God to punish such for not believing, as he makes unable to beleev.

4. It oppugns Gods truth and sincerity, who is a God of truth without any
fraud or falsehood. See Deuteronomy. 32. 4. 1 Samuel 15. 9. John 14. 6. Romans 3. 4. God
lovs those that are true of heart, and hates Hypocrites with his heart: but
absolut Reprobation makes him a Lier and Dissembler; since he openly injoins
such to repent and beleev, whom he secretly intends shall not so do. S. Peter
says, Repent and be baptized every one, and ye shall receiv the gift of the
holy Ghost: for to you and Acts 2. 38, 39.
your Children is the promiss made. He makes the Precept and Promiss of equal
extent, both universal: for the one is a motiv of obedience to the other. Every
one (even Reprobats) is persuaded he is under the gracious offer of eternal
life, or else would not strive so much to leav some bosom sins, or do hard
duties: but by this Tenet most of those to whom God offers Grace and Glory, shall
attain neither, as Piscator pronounces. Zanchy says, Every one caled ought to
think he is elected, else he accuses God of lying. So says Bucer, A Man must
beleev he is predestinat, or else makes God to mock when he caleth. Thus they
seem sollicitous that others shall not make God a mocker, yet they do it most
of al. For if a Creditor resolvs to let his Debtor rot in prison; yet shall
profer, promiss, yea and swear to remit all the debt, upon certain conditions
which he bars him to fulfill: would we not reput him a rank deluder or
dissembler? It Is easy to apply it. Al divine comminations are as Caveats to
avoid the evil threatened: but if Men's perdition be peremptorily predecreed, it
cannot possibly be prevented, which is plain delusion: yea his passionat wishes
that al will repent and be saved, are colorable collusions: See Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Ps.
81. 11. Isai 48. 18. So are his mournful expostulations. See Isai 5. 3. Jer. 2.
31, 32. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Yea his melting commiserations, will al seem but as
Absolons feast, Joabs congee, Judas kiss, or the Crocodiles and Hyaenas tears:
for in all he says one thing and means another. Nay the whole ministry is mere
mockery without true meaning. For God seems thus to speak by his Ministers: O
Reprobats (once dearly loved in your Father Adam, now implacably hated by mine
own irrevocable decree, and sealed up under invincible sin to damnation) repent
and beleev in my Son if you will be saved: I would not have you die, nor any to
perish; but al com to repentance. If your sins be red as Scarlet, I will make
them whit as Wool: I have cried and caled that you might be converted: I have
long waited and knocked at the door of your Hearts for entrance. O that you had
a Heart to fear me, and keep my Commandments that it might go well with you for
ever. Can God speak thus (if he decrees they shall not beleev, or repent, or be
saved) without deep dissimulation? Or why does he delude them to use the means
in vain?

It Is said God wills or wishes their salvation seriously, A Defens.
yet not absolutely; but on condition if they repent and beleev: Ergo tho they
perish, God is sincere.

This shift falls too short; God will have al saved conditionaly if they beleev
and repent: as S. Austin says, He would have al

3. It Is contrary to the use and end of Gods good gifts, 3. Reason.
both of Nature (as Creation, Preservation, Health, Strength, Wisdom) and of
Grace; which are means either to purchase salvation (as Christ's coming to be a
sacrifice on the Cross) or Acts 14 16, 17.
to apply it, as the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, Gods long suffering,
the inlightning of Men's understandings, with many mo: for God bestows the gifts
of Nature to encourage Acts 17. 26. 27.
and enable Men to serve him and sav their own Souls, as S. Paul shows. Prosper
says, Every Creature is made or ordained specialy, that Mankind might by sight
of them and taste of so many blessings, be drawn to lov and serve God. So he
confers the gifts of Grace to the same end: For Christ came into the John 3. 17.
John 12. 47.
World, not to be a rock of Offens at which most Men should stumble or fall, but
to shed his blood for the salvation of al, even those who for their wilful
infidelity and impenitence are not saved. Christ says, the Son of Man came to
seek and sav what Luke 19 10.
was lost: Ergo to sav every particular. S. Peter says, God having Acts 3. 26.
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, and turn every one from his
iniquity: Ergo the end of his coming was to sav al and every Man, so well those
that reject, as those that receiv him. Yea the Ministry of the Word is appointed
for the same use, as an Instrument to convey the Spirit of regeneration unto all that live under it. See Isai 59. 21. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Titus 2. 11.
1 Pet. 1. 23. Prosper says, Al such as say, that al to whom the Gospel is
preached (even those that obey it not) are not caled to Grace; they utter
untruth: which he provs by Isai 5. 2. Mat. 23, 37. John 5. 34, 40. Touching the
end of Sacraments, see Marc 1. 4. Acts 2. 38. Romans 6. 3. Gal. 3. 27. Ephesians. 5.
26. Titus 3. 5. To the same end is Gods patience and long suffering exercised
among Men, to work out their repentance and salvation. See Romans 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3.
9. Where both Apostles declare, that God forbears Sinners (even such as despise
the riches of his Goodness) purposly that they may repent and be saved; because
he would have none perish. Gods other gifts (knowledge, faith, fortitud,
repentance, temperance, humility, chastity) are bestowed on Men, that they may
attain life eternal; for Reprobats are endued with many of them. See Mat. 13.
20. Heb. 6. 4. Heb. 10. 26, 29. 2 Pet. 2. 20. Al which Graces are not given to
abuse them, or to do others good and not themselfs; but that they may obtain
salvation. Some Scriptures seem to oppose this: as where it is said, God reveled
himself to the Gentiles Romans 1. 20.
by the Creatures, that they might be without excuse. So Simon says of Christ,
that he is appointed for the faling and Luke 2. (...)
rising again of many in Isarel. S. Paul says, I preach Christ 1 Cor. 1. 23. 2
Cor. 2. 16.
to the Jews a stumbling block. Again, To them that perish we are the savor of
death to death. These places in general, point out the end which is often effected
by them, not what is primarily or principaly intended in them: since they may
occasionaly produce such effects in some Men by their voluntary rebellion,
contrary to the Doners intention. Physicians minister medicines for the Patients
good, which sometime by misguidance turn to his hurt: so Gods blessings intended
for Men's eternal welfare, tend to their perdition by il employing them. So the
event does not vary the intent, since no sinful event is properly under Gods
decree, but under his prescience or permission at most.

Now by this Tenet of absolut Reprobation, al gifts both of Nature and Grace
have another end: for either God intends them not to such (tho they enjoy them
being mixed with the elect, to whom only they are directed) or if he does, it is
only to puff them up abov the common rank of Men, to make their L. 3. Inst. c
24.. 13.
ruin greater. So says Calvin, God sends his Word to Reprobats that they may
be made more deaf; sets up a light to make them blinder, and affords a remedy,
that they may not be healed. Beza says, Let it not seem absurd, that God
offers Grace to some Reprobats, not to this end that they should be saved; but
that they may be less excusable and more punishable. Maccovius says, God
knocks at Reprobats hearts, who neither can nor will open: not that he may
enter, but partly to upbraid their impotence, and partly to increas their
damnation, nor can any other conclusion rise or result from this doctrine: for
how can God intend the gifts of Grace for their salvation, whom he has
irrevocably decreed to damnation. Hence it infers, that God merely deludes
miserable Men, whom he calls to salvation in his Sons name by preaching the
Word; yet intends their perdition: and that Ministers are falls Witnesses, who
preach salvation to many conditionaly, whose damnation is decreed absolutely. If
a state closly contriv, that no Dutch shall be Denisens, yet publicly proclaim,
to giv them high privileges on condition to become free; do they not conterfet
or cosen the poor people to make them su or seek in vain? Semblably, may not
Reprobats rightly plead? Lord, will thou punish us for not believing in thy
Son, being caled by preaching to beleev; when thou have decreed to leav us in
Adams sin without al power to beleev? How can thou justly charge us with sin
or increas our torment for not believing in him, whom thou resolved st from
eternity we should never beleev in? Certes that Ministry givs Men a fair
excuse, which is given only to leav them without excuse, as the Patrons of
absolut Decree proclaim. For the Sacraments signify nothing, seal up nothing,
and confer nothing to such as are not saved; but are mere blanks or empty
Ordinances: yet not by their fault, but by Gods irresistible Will: nor are al
other gifts tho never so glorious of any avail to promot their salvation in
Gods absolut intention; nor given out of lov but mere hatred, that they may use
them il and prepare to themselfs a greater damnation. For he that receivs most,
of him shall most be required: so they be but as snares to entrap Men's Souls,
like baits on barbed hooks to beguil Fishes: since they are lifted up thereby,
that with the load of their goodly indowments they may sink the deeper into
Hell. So they have no cause to lov the Doner, but hate him rather; since such
favors are like a griping Usurers bounty, or Jaels courtesy to Sisera.

4. It Is prejudicial to Piety and Promoter of prophanes, 4 Reason.
cutting off the very sinews of Religion: for it takes away al hope to attain
happiness by godliness, and fear to sustain any hurt by wickedness; since al is
ordered by absolut Decree. Hope is the sole spur to stir Men on to virtu, and
fear the chief bar to withdraw them from vice: For our Savior in hope of Heb.
12 2. Mat. 10 32.
the joy set before him endured al shame of the Cross: who by it hardened his
Disciples to suffer for his sake. By this the godly in all ages have bin excited
to well doing. See Acts 24 15. Phil. 3. 26 Colos. 1 9 Titus 2. 12, 13. Heb. 11.
per totum. Al noble Heroic acts have sprung from the hope of eternal glory. He
that eareth and thresheth, must do it in hope says S. Paul: 1. Cor. 9. 10.
For hope (says Aquinas) conduces to action, as appeers in Soldiers,
Mariners, and al Professions. The hope of Heaven then is chief incentiv to
piety, and fear of Hell a main bar to impiety: yea fear promots a good action
accidentaly; because Men fearing the evil of mischief or misery annexed to the
evil of sin think they are never safe, til they attain a contrary state by
doing well. Now by an absolut Decree, Hope and Fear are bereaved: for hope is
properly versed about some good to be attained by industry, not which must be
of necessity; and the object of fear is an evil that may be avoided: but by
this Decree Heaven and Hell are no possible objects, but necessary: for the
elect shall infallibly enjoy the one, and Reprobats impossibly escape the other:
since Men have no power to alter their eternal state being prefined by eternal
Decree. Al Gods decrees are immutable, irreversible, and irresistible: so that
al Men's indevors are in vain to alter or avoid them. See Isai 46. 11. Ps. 115.
3. Romans 9. 19. It Is absolutely decreed the Devils shall be damned: so it were
folly in them by prayer or tears to alter it: Man's Soul is simply decreed to be
immortal, and it is vain for any to attemp the abolition. It Is ordained, that
The Sun shall rule the day and Moon the night: what power then can divert their
course? so if no power be left in Man to attain eternal life or avoid death; but
he must needs take what is destined or designed; he strivs in vain either way.
For if the Decree be absolut, the Minister preaches and People hear in vain.
Not one Soul can be saved by either of their means which is decreed to Hell; nor
one damned designed to Heaven. It Is frivolous and fruitless folly to be
studious or sollicitous in what cannot be altered, amended, or avoided: as
Christ said to his Disciples, why take ye thought about such Luke 12. 25, 26.
things? It Is a misery to toil about impossibles, as Sisyphus is said to roll up
a stone to the top of an high hill in Hell, which instantly falls down again. If
this perswation be rooted or rivited, that both salvation and damnation depends
on absolut Decree; Ministers may be fit instruments for Politic States to deter
People from enormous Offenses: but can do no spiritual good, nor draw one Soul
to God. It Is said the Defenders of this Doctrine are pure pious Men, which open
no gap to loos life; but others pervert the truth to their own damnation. So
the Epicures in defens of their dogmat (that the chief Good consisted in carnal
pleasure) said most of their Sects were honest Men: but Tully tells them, that
this proceds rather from their courteous disposition, then curiosity of
Opinion: therefore the force of honesty prevailed more with them then the folly
of pleasure, which they pleaded for. Another Apology is made, That though they
teach absolut Election and Reprobation; yet design not who is elected or
rejected; but exhort Men to work out their salvation, and get assurance of it
by good works; whereby they excite or encourage, not stifle or curb holy honest
duties. Indeed they do so: But the ignorance of a Man's particular state alters
not the case; for if I know the Decree is absolut both wais, why should I be
sollicitous of either; since it can do no good nor hurt? nor can this knowledge
at best be infallible in this valley of frailty, but is obscured with many
clouds of incertity, in the point of undoubted perseverance.

5. It Is a Doctrine full of despair, both to them that stand and 5 Reason*
those that fall; to Men out of tentation and in it: But the Gospel of glad
tidings is a sweet store-hous of comfort in our worst condition under al
changes: as S. Paul says, These things Romans 15. 4.
are writ that by patience and comfort of the Scriptures we might have hope. Now
absolut Reprobation procures tentation: for since there be many mo Reprobats then
Elect, the Devil can easily persuade one he is one of the most rather then
fewest; or at least that al his labor is lost, since the Decree is irrefragable
and irrevocable. Bucer says, To doubt whether we be predestinat or no, is the
head of every tentation: for he that doubts cannot confide he is caled or
justified: So every Man must presume he is elected. To what end then is S.
Paul's exhortation, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling? it is a
Gorgons head to affright or amaze the Tempteds fancy, that the strongest
arguments of consolation applied with the best art, cannot avail. Gods lov to
Mankind, Christ's death for all, the caling of sinners without exception of
persons, and al other motivs are easily eluded by this Opinion. Suppose a
Minister and tempted Soul talking thus:

Tempted. Woe is me, I am a cast away, utterly rejected from A Dialog.
Grace and Glory.

Minister. Be not danted poor afflicted Soul, God has not cast thee off, he
hates nothing which he has made, but lovs al Men and thee among the rest.

Temp. God hates none as his Creatures, but many as sinners; and lovs al Men
with a general lov, affording his outward temporal blessings only* but not his
special lov of eternal life, which he shows to a very few his chosen ones,
whereof I am none.

Min. Yes he lovs al so as to desire their eternal good, who would have al to be
saved and none to perish, nor thee in particular.

Temp. Al is taken for all sorts or calings of Men (high, low, rich, poor,
bound, free) some of al which shall be saved but not al Individuals of those
ranks, nor me in particular; or if he wills in his Word to sav al, yet by his
secre^ Will he decrees millions to be damned, whereof I am one.

Min. Nay but Christ came to seek and sav what was lost, and is a propitiation
for the sins of the whole World: Ergo for thy sins to sav thee.

Temp. The word World implies a World of Elect, whereof I am none; not al
Mankind: yet if he died for all, it was only dignitate pretii, by the worth of
his ransom; not voluntate propositi, by the intention of his redemption, that
al should be saved.

Min. God made a universal Covenant with Man in the Mediators blood, intending
it to be shed for all, and promises to sav every one that believes, excluding
none, except they refuse.

Temp. God purposed his Son should die for all, profering and promising remission
of ^ins to every one: but on condition if they will repent and beleev, which he
decrees that far the greatest part shall not do.

Min. God means truly, that al who are caled shall repent and beleev, that they
may be saved; being caled by the preaching of the Word to knowledge of the Truth.

Temp. God has a duple Call; an outer by the Word preached in Men's ears; an
inward by irresistible working of his Spirit in the heart, which he vouchsa^s
to a few secret ones only, whereof I am none. Thus no sound solace can accru by
this Tenet.

The sole solid grounds of comfort to a dejected Soul are Gods lov to Mankind,
Christ's death for all, and the new Covenant of Grace: which three he that
applies wisely, may easily releas or reliev the Tempted: But such as hold
absolut Reprobation ^oc. Com. p. 526
cannot do it. Melancthon says, The universal promiss of Grace and Salvation
is a Christians sole Bulwark in this combat of tentation: let us not therefore
leav Christ and seek for an Election out of the Word. Again, As it is needful to
know that the promiss of Salvation is free; so it is necessary to take notice*
that it is universal; against some dangerous doctrins of Predestination. This he
thought to be the only true Balsam to cure a wounded Soul: for these three Gods
Lov* Christ's Death the universal Promiss) are directly contradictory to the
tentation, which cannot stand with an absolut antecedent Will, Intention, or
Decree, to cast off the greatest part of Mankind of mere free pleasure, as if
it were his sport or delight, what ever quirks or quiddities are vented or
invented to sully or shadow it. If two contradictories cannot be true, he that
proves the truth of one, disproveth the untruth of the other: as he that
confirms this Proposition (God will have al to be saved, beleev, repent, and be
redeemed) to be true; makes it ^leer to every understanding, that the
contradictory (God will have most Men to be absolutely and inevitably damned) is
flatly falls: and so raises or relieveth a tempted Soul from distress: For
demonstrat to a Man who fears himself to be an absolut Reprobat, that there is
no such, but every one that repents and believes shall be saved; therefore his
fear is fancy, and doubt a dream: then you driv out one nail with another and
expel the terrible tentation.

This is the pure Nepenthe of a sick sorrowful Soul, and Alexanders sword to
dissolv the Gordian knot. Now the maintainers of absolut Reprobation, cannot
use it against the Replies of the tempted, because there is a plain contradiction
betwixt them. For if a Minister com to comfort one that thinks himself a direct
Reprobat, how can he usurp the universal promises (that God will have al to be
saved, that Christ died for all) since he holds the contrary conclusion, that God
will have most part to be damned, and have no part in Christ? for the Tempted will
reply, That God would have al to be saved by his reveled Will not by his secret:
and Christ died for all sufficiently, not intentionaly: or if he intends it,
it is with a condition, which he purposed most Men should not perform: what then
am I the near, if I be none of those to whom it is intended? All that the
Minister can reply is, Be comforted, you are a Believer and sorrowful sinner;
therefore no Reprobat. But all this the Tempted will deny: how can he then
convince him to be a Believer or truly penitent? But the universal Promises will
persuade Men to Repent and Beleev. Piscator confesses, That no sure comfort
can be instilled into the Souls of afflicted Reprobats; but the Elect in this
case may be comforted: yet must it be with the sens of sin, and desire to be
freed of it by Christ: which proofs are only probable at best, and to Men in
tentation no comfort at al; since al depends on a bare peradventure, that the
tempted is one of the Elect, which none knows but God. For Hypocrites make so
fair show of sanctity, faith, and repentance as the best Zelots: yea such as be
sincere may fall through frailty; and who can be assured he shall finaly
persever? So those of this judgment are miserable comforters or unwelcom
Physicians to Men in such heavy afflictions.

If Men censure according to their fancies or Factions, they are Partialists,
esteeming all the Gees of their little Flocks to be Swans, and abjure, abandon,
or anathematize al others as Reprobats. There be hundreds of Sects among
Christians, which challenge to be Gods Chosen, renouncing all the rest; yet happily
al in error one way or other: how then can they judge aright being no searchers
of the heart? yea there be too many Weathercocks and Ambodexters in every Sept,
which shift stations with every wind, and turn with the tide: how then can any
discern* Elect from Reprobats? But surely he that repents and believes
(persevering to the end) shall be saved, and impenitents damned. So the whole
result depends on divine Prescience, which preceds in Natures order to Gods
condition at Decree of Election and Reprobation, as is showed.

Ob. Some say God is Sovereign Lord of al Creatures, who are wholly his: Ergo he
may dispose of Men at his pleasure, and do with his own what he will.

Sol. The Question is not, what an Almighty Sovereign can do to poor Vassals,
who can cast away al Mankind so well as any particular person: but what a just
power of a righteous Judge still clot^ed with goodness may do: which is utterly
incompatible with his Attributs or Properties to damn any of his mere will or
pleasure; no fault of theirs preexisting in his eternal Decree. His Justice is
a constant Will to render every one his proper du; vengeance to whom vengeance
belongs for obstinacy and impenitence, not of free pleasure. S. Austin says,
God is good and just: he may without desert free Men from punishment as good;
but cannot condemn any without il deservings, because just. Goodness is an
inclination in God to communicate it to his Creatures, so far as he can without
wronging his Justice: Ergo if he be good to al Men as Scriptures make him; he
cannot of himself, without any causin the Creature, provide al kinds of eternal
torments for it, before he decreed to make it and confer any good upon it.

Ob. Mr. Perkins presses, That Men may slaughter Beasts sans cruelty or in
justice: Ergo God may much more appoint so many of us as he pleases to Hell
torments for his glory, yet be just still: for there is greater disparity or
disproportion between God and us, then betwixt us and Beasts.

Sol. Is the comparison equal? Men have no authority of themselfs to slay
Beasts; but God of his bounty gav it them to G^^. 9 2 3.
eat, and by consequent to be slain, which may rather be reputed his doing then
ours. Nor is any equality between the Objects compared, much less betwixt the
acts; for Beasts are void of reason and liber^y in their actions, being made
only for Man's use or service, whose beings vanish with their breaths: but Men
endued with Intellect, able by the Creators bounty to discern betwixt good and
evil, according to their congeneal principles, being made for his sole service,
according to his Image of purity and eternity, to enjoy his blessed vision and
society for ever. It folows not then, that if God may appoint Beasts to be
killed for Men's use; he may with like equity destinat Men of his own Will to
damnation without desert; for he required of his People many thousand Beasts
for sacrifi^e, but not one Man; chalenging the Firstlings of clean Creatures
for burnt Offerings; but the first born of Men were to be redeemed: which shows
how highly he priceth Man's blood abov Beasts. Yea where he givs Men liberty to
kill Beasts, he flatly forbids both to shed Man's blood, because he made him in
his own Image: but there is G^^. 9 6.
far wider difference betwixt the acts temporal slaying and eternal tormenting.
Man may kill a Beast by his own power, as Lord over him; but cannot prolong his
life purp^sly to torment him, without savage tyranny: So God being suprem Lord
of al, may of free pleasure kill a Man (yea annih^^at him, since he made him of
nothing, and takes but away what he gav without cruelty or injustice, to show
his power: but may not predecree to torment him in Hell for ever, and inflict an
infinite evil on an innocent Creature, to whom he gav only a finit good; without
just cause.

Repl. Some (who will rather speak against common sens, then forgo their
principles) reply, That any being, even in Hell, is better then no being: because
the one has somewhat which is good, an Entity; but the other none at al: Ergo
if God takes away an innocent Man's life and turns him to nothing, of free
pleasure to show his power; much more may he preserv him for ever in torments,
and maintain the good of entity sans injust cruelty.

Sol. This twist Doctor Twiss spun, and no small fools follow his clu: But say
sooth, is it a truth to trust on, or will a bare denial serve for an answer?
Indeed simply to be of it self, is better then not to be caeteris paribus: but
in a case of such infinite disparity, it is incomparably happier never to be then
so to be, as the damned know to their cost, and al else cannot but confess, if
it were put to choice. Holy Job tired out with temporal torments Job. 3. 11, 12.
of bodily sores, seriously (not simulatly) wished he had never been born or
had being, and cursed his birth day. Some say he spoke out of human passion in
the present sens of his pain, yet any being is better then none. A ^illy shift:
surely he preferred the loss of al being, before such a wretched being; as it is
usualy said, it is better die once then be still dying; and Sal^mon Eccles 4. 1,
2, 3
thinks the same. Yea Christ in this very case says of Jud^s, Woe to that Man
by whom the Son of Man is b^tra^^d; it had Mat. 26. 24.
bin good for him he had never bin born: As if he should say, the Traitor shall
be damned, therefore it had been happy, if he never had received life. He speaks
not according to Men's opinions (as Dunses being put to a non plus say of
Aristol^, Loquiturix aliorum sententia) but realy. Will not every one choose to
vanish into a thousand nothings, rather then be intolerably tortured in body
for ever, or afflicted with the gnawing worm of Conscience? But the fear of
annihilation can never do what the terror of Hell does. For carnal Epicures
excite one another to enjoy the present pleasures presented, upon a falls
persuasion, that they shall have no being after death: How much more then would
they walow in sin and sensuality, if they conceived to have a being in Hell
better then no being at al? But ungodly livers, sensible of Hell, tremble at the
thought of it, as the most terrible of al terrors; and sometime refrain from
their darling sins, which fear of being annihilated could never do. Seneca
speaking of one who so feared death, as he desired to L. 17. Epist. Ep. 107.
endure any extremity if he might live, calls it a most sordid wish; because in all
evils he feared that which was the end of al evils, even the privation of his
being. So certes they must be conceived and censured senseless stocks or stones,
who think a tormented being in Hell, a lesser or lighter evil then no being at
al. Sir Fr. Bacon refuts this Mathematical Position (as he calls it) that there
is no proportion between something and nothing; therefore the degree of privation
is greater then that of diminution: whereto he excepts that it is falls in sundry
cases, specialy this of Hell; where a total privation far excels a diminution.
Some evils and pains happily being but small or short, are less then annihilation,
and one had better bear them then lose his being; because he may afterward
attain so many desirable things, as will more then countervail his sufferings:
but if his torments be many and matchless (yea endless too) that he cannot joy
in the good which remains, leaving no more but a poor comfortless entity; it
were ten thousand times better for him to have no being. The ground of this
reply ('It Is better to be then have no being) is a sly sophism a non distributo
ad distributum; true in some cases, but not in all particulars. S. Jerome
expounding Christ's words of Judas says They plainly import, that it is better
have no being then an everlasting tormentful being.

The result is, That the unavoidable damnation of so many millions, cannot be
absolutely or antecedently intended by God with out high in justice. For
Plut^rch speaking of Pagans (who to pacify their Gods fury, sacrificed Men,
Women and Children) says, It had been far better to deny the being of any God,
as Diagoras with others did, then confess he delights in Man's blood: so we may
say, it is better be an Atheist and deny God then make him a Soul destroier.
Eusebius speaks against Pagans cruel Gods, If they had any spark of goodness,
they would be disposed to do good, and desire to ^av al Men; but not delight
in their slaughter: and concluds them to be Devils or evil Spirits; because they
would do good if they were good, as the Evil use to do evil. To end al
Prosper says, God created al Men, but none for this end, to be damned: the
reason why we are created is one, and why damned another.

Al which premises considered, let none confide or presume A Christian Cav^at.
too far on the certitud of Election, that he shall infallibly persever til the
end; but still work out his salvation with fear and trembling: Nor let any
diffide or despair upon denunciation of Gods absolut Decree, that he is
rejected or Reprobated; but rely on his general Promises, and use the means
prescribed in the Gospel; still laboring by prayers and tears for farther
degrees of divine Grace, whereby he shall be saved infallibly, rather then any
overweening presumptuous Pharisee; since the end is attained by the means. I
profes my self no Divine, nor fit to handle such high Theological Theories; but
have only gleaned or gathered some scattered ears of Corn from several fields
brought into one Barn, that every one may take what he likes best.

To say with Supralapsarians, That God decreed Man's Fall Summary.
of free pleasure to show his power is perilous. To define with Sublapsarians,
That God upon foresight of Adams fall, elected a few and reprobated the rest,
without respect to his Prescience of their obedience or disobedience, no less
erroneous. To hold with Doctor Overald, That God offers sufficient Grace to al,
but more abundant effectual to the Elect, frivolous; since the want of efficacy
is in every self. So to maintain with the common Lutherans, That God from
foreknowledg of every Man's works, decreed to sav some of free Mercy; and pass by
the rest to perish in their sins, is obnoxious to exceptions, because it makes
him an accepter of persons. But to assert, That God upon simple Prescience of
Adams fall, and every Individuals demerits in receiving or refusing Grace, if he
should creat them; decreed the means and manner of Redemption, with the
Covenants or Conditions prescribed and proclaimed in the Gospel, which seems
most veracious to conspire best with all divine Attributs.

In fine, Prescience of pure simple Intelligence, preceds al Divine State of
the Theorem*
Decrees in order of Nature: whereby God regulated the whole work or Mystery of
Predestination, both concerning Angels and Mankind: But his knowledge of Vision
or Seeing folows his Will and Decree: Which if Calvinists intend by excluding it
from Election and Reprobation, their Tenets may in some sort seem true or
tolerable touching pure pleasure: but then it is nihil ad Rhombu^^, since the
first only of simple Prescience has place in Predestination, and not the last
of Vision. So those doleful discords betwixt Brethren, are slight Sciomachies
with Ghosts and Goblins, grounded on mutual mistakes of each other; while
Lutherans say God founded al his Decrees on pure Prescience; and Calvinists
refer it to his free pleasure, without respect of Vision or Prevision.

Dicere nil superest: hic terminus ultimus esto.
Naught more rests to disclose:
Be this the last perclose.
Scire praeit, sed velle suo venit ordine certe.
Decretum sequitur velle perenne Dei.
To Know preceds, but to Will coms orderly:
Gods Decrees follow his Will continualy.
Novit ab aetern^ Deus omnia tempore danda: A^i^t^.

Postea d^crevit, quae fabricare velit.
God knew eternaly al in time to be:
And Decreed after, what he would frame free.
Ordine Naturae Omnisciens prius omnia vidit, Al^a^.

Quam quid decrevis mente creare, Deus.
Al-knowing God did al in Nature see,
Yer he in Mind did to creat Decree.
An lapsu praeviso Elohim praedestinet Adae,
Aut m^ro ex libito? lis gravis orta fuit. S^^^^.

Whether God predestind knowing Adams Fall,
Or of mere Pleasure? great strif did befall.
Simpliei in intuitu, certo omnia praesciit, ant^ Sive.

Quam statuit Mundum fabrificare Deus.
In simple intellect God al foreknew;
Yer he would make the World, what would insu,
Antea qu^m Decreta fe^at, Deus omnia praescit: (...)

Progreditur constans ordine namque suo.
God foreknows al, before he does decree:
For he proceds in's order constantly.
Quos Deus aeternum praescit, praedestinat; hosque Aut.

Eligit aut reprobat pro bonitat^ sua
God foreknows and foredooms eternaly:
And elects or rejects for's clemency.
Vul^ salvare aliquos, reliquos damnare Jehovah: (...)

Sed cur sic voluit, non been causa patet.
God some will sav, and the rest damn to Hell:
But why he will, the cause appeers not well.
THESIS III.
Verum Ecclesiae Regimen: The Churches true Polity.
It Is a known verity, That Paternity was the prime H^story.
val Polity among the Protopatriarchs, both in sacred and secular matters: as
Adam is said to be ordained a Priest by God, because Cain and Abel only brought
their offerings, til they were ordained to that office by their Father; and so
in succession one from another. Which form continued in the Postpatriachs, til
their Progeny becam a Nation under Moses and Aaron: who promulged Laws by
divine dictat both for Civil and Spiritual causes. For the Israelits had
distinct Courts of different persons: one for Church matters ^aled an
Ecclesiastic Consistory; another for Commonwealth causes termed a Temproal
Judicatory. Moses speaks of both in general: He that will not hearken to Deuteronomy.
17. 1^. 2 Chr. 19. 5.
(or obey) the Priest or Judge, shall die: but Jehosophat put a more precise
difference, who appointed through al Cities secular Judges, (whereof Zebadiah
was chief) and at Jerusalem a Spiritual Court of Levits, Priests, and Elders,
over whom Amariah high Priest presided: so Jeremy was condemned by Jer. 26 8,
16.
the Priests Consistory, but acquitted by the Princes Judicatory. Yea tho by
Antiochus tyranny, and the Jews slavery under sundry Nations, no evident
distinction appeers in the new Testament, yet some prints of both remain;
specialy where the chief Priests and Elders are cited as two diverse Courts: the
Mat* 21* 23. Mat. 26. 3.
secular caled a Council, the spiritual styled a Synagog. For the Ecclesiastic
was to discern things holy and unholy, clean from unclean, and to determine
Appeals in difficil debats; being as a representativ Church. Hence Christ said,
Dic Ecclesiae; Mat. 1^* 17.
because excommunication pertained to them. In civil Courts of seventy Judges
(being the suprem Sanedrim) two sat chief: viz. the Nasi as Lord chief Justice,
and Abbethdin as Father of the Senate: so in the Consistory, the high Priest and
his Sagan or secund (like a Bishop and his Suffragan) as suprem: but the high
Priest was not necessarily chosen Nasi, unles for eminent worth and
extraordinary Wisdom. For they had two civil Courts: 1. The grand Sanedrim or
suprem Senate: 2. The lesser or inferior; which in after ages had subordinat
branches: whence Christ said, Who ever is angry with Mat. 5. 12.
his Brother causlesly, shall be culpable of Judgment; meaning the lesser Court:
who calls him Racha in scorn, shall be liable to a Council or chief Consistory:
but he that calls him fool maliciously, shall be guilty of Hel-fire. The Sanedrim
excelled the rest. 1. In number of Judges being seventy besides the Exodus 24.
(...)
Nasi or Prince; as God at first institution said to Moses, Gather to me
seventy Elders Rulers of the People, and let them stand at the Tabernacle with
thee, implying seventy besides him: but the lesser consisted of twenty three at
Jerusalem, and three only in small Cities. 2. In place, for the seventy sat
within the Temple-court in the paved Chamber or Pavment, John 19. 1^:
where Pilat gav Judgment. 3. In power, for the Sanedrim received Appeals from
al, but from them was none. 4. In causes to be tried, For the seventy Judged al
matters of life and death, yea a whole Tribe; the high Priest and falls Prophets:
but the twenty three lighter crimes, and those of three only pecuniary mulcts,
whippings, and pety punishments. Many make doubt, whether in Christ's dais they
had power of life and death; since they said, We cannot do^m any to death? John
1^ 31.
Late Jews say al capital censure was inhibited forty years before the Temples
destruction, which is about Christ's Baptism: but Josephus says Herod
suppressed the Sanedrim before: L. 14 Antiq. c. 17.
yet those words to Pilat prove not as if they had no such power; for he bids
them take and judge him according to their Law: Yea they pressed or pleaded, we
have a Law, and by it he ought John 19. 7.
to die: but the holiness of the time (being the Passovers vigil, and preparation
of the Sabbath) made it unlawful to meddle with matters of blood. Indeed the
Romans bereaved al power to judge civil capital crimes, but suffered them to try
transgressions against Moses Law, as Blasphemies or the like, and such they
cried that Christ committed in caling himself the Son of God: but with Barabas
and the two Theefs they had nothing to do. For Gallio when Paul was brought
before him said, If it were a matter of wrong or wickedness, O ye Jews, reason
Acts 18. 14.
would I should hear or bear with you: but being a question of words, or names
in your Law, look ye to it: Distingue res seu causas, and Concordabunt
Scripturae. Among them (who were Gods chosen People, and sole Church) were
three orders of Ministers in the temple, over whom the high Priest (being
Aarons first born) was chief. 1. Priests, Aarons younger Progeny: 2. Levits,
Levies posterity: 3. Nephenims who hewed wood and drew water; being Gibeonits
doomed to that drudgery by Josua for their craft or cunning. At (...). 9 (...)*
Consecration, the high Priest was anointed with Chrism (...). 8. (...) ^0.
powered on his head which ran down his beard and borders of his robe; but the
Priests only sprinkled with this oil and blood of the Sacrifice. At
ministration in the Sanctuary the high Priest wore eight sorts of raiments,
which the Rabbis call golden Vestments; but the Priests only four. They
differed also in office, For the high Priest entered the Holy of Holies once a
year, the Priests never; the high Priest might mourn for none; but Priests
might for Father, Mother, Brother, Son, Daughter, and next of Kin: the high
Priest had his Sagan or Substitut, the Priests none. These were the forms of
Church government under the Law, whereto that of the Gospel was in part
conformed. Christ had sole Evangelical Ministry (being our Apostle, Prophet,
Evangelist, Bishop, Pastor, Doctor, Mat. 10 1. etc.
Deacon) in himself: but chos twelv Apostles Assistant parallel to the twelv
Patriarchs and twelv Princes of the Tribes; sending them to preach, heal and
cast out Devils: to whom when the harvest grew great, he added seventy inferior
Disciples, Luke 10. 1. etc.
like the seventy Fathers of Families and seventy Elders of the People: whom he
sent by couples into Cities where he meant to com; giving them power to preach
the Gospel, heal the sick, tread on Serpents ^o Scorpions and subdu Enemies.
These two orders S. Paul calls Apostles and Prophets placing Prophets E^hes. 3.
(...)*
after Apostles as inferiors: for from the seventy, Matthias was chosen
Apostle, and Presbyters or Elders succeeded the seventy, but Bishops or Prelates
the twelv as al Apostolic Ancients agree. This was the first model of Church
regiment under Christ the chief Shepherd: who before his Ascension made the
twelv general Shepherds, to supply his stead by a triple charge to Peter. These
had equal eminent authority or jurisdiction John 21. 1^. 16. 17.
jointly and severaly: to lay on hands at Ordination and confirmation, to
command, contermand, censure, bind, or loos: which before their deaths some of
them devolved on Bishops as their indubitat successors. At first the whole
weight of Church affairs lay soly on them: but upon the Greecs complaint, how
their Widows were neglected, they ordained by imposition of hands (which severs
Men to sacred functions) A^^* (...) 1* 2 (...).
seven Deacons to distribut offerings and serve Tables. Afterward upon the
Disciples dispersion at Stephans death, arose Evangelists, whose duty was to
preach, but no distinct order. Then that the Church so planted might perpetualy
be watered, they ordained Priests or Presbyters like the seventy Disciples, for
constant attendance in all places. Lastly to contin^ the Government which rested
in themselfs; they appointed Overseers (Greecly Episcopi, by S. John Angels,
vulgarly Bishops to supply their steads after them: to whom the chief charge
(to command, correct, ordein, oversee) was committed or conferred specially for
suppressing of Schisms* which spread in the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Galatia,
Philippi, Colossi, Thessalonica, and Indea. For S. Paul first constituted Titus
Bishop of Cret, and Timothy of Ephesus with their territories: whose pattern S.
John and other Apostles followed.

If then this office was necessary in those times (being the best remedy to
repel Schisms, as S. Cyprian and Jerome testify) how much more in after ages,
when Sects so swarm, and Ambition, Avarice, Pride, Philancy, Envy, Emulation,
Discord, and Division multiply daily? this power then was not personal in the
Apostles alone, not temporal to end or expire with them, nor common to inferior
Disciples: but perpetual to abide til our Saviors secund coming, and confined
to Bishops for redress of al exorbitant enormities; specialy Schisms and
Heresies. What single Presbyters did ever exercise any act of jurisdiction in all the Scripture or prime Churches? In a family are diverse officers, but one
Oeconomus or chief Steward: In a Ship many Mariners, but one Master: in a Camp
sundry Captains, but one General: so in a Church of large extent several
Ministers, but one Bishop, he is to take charge of al Churches (as Titus did
of al Cret a goodly I Will) to see Presbyters do their duties, to correct what is
faulty to confirm what is orderly, and reform abuses. He is chief in ordeining
Presbyters: as S. Paul had company at Timothy's ordination, yet he sole
ordeiner (which none can deny) as Christ shall be sole Judge at last day, yet The
twelv Apostles sit (...). 19 28.
on twelv Thrones to judge the twelv Tribes of Israel. It Is a Luke 22 30.
silly Sophisters squib to say, Bishops are caled Elders, and contrarily: Ergo
both are one Order or Office. Indeed such names at first were promiscuous, but
functions still distinct; as every greater contains a lesser: So Apostles were
styled Presbyters or Elders, Deacons or Ministers, Doctors or Teachers,
Prophets, and Evangelists. Yea that title was enlarged to Barnabas, Paul,
Andronicus, Epaphroditus, Titus, Timothy: so Presbyters are clyped Prophets and
Prelates; yet Chrysostom says, can be but one Bishop in a City. Semblably
Bishops are styled Apostles, Elders, and Deacons, while ter ms or titles were
common: but never in after ages, as Theodore^, Jerome, Oecomenius, and the
Fathers aver: Distingue tempora and concordabunt res; nor does community of
name argu identity of nature or office.

Thus episcopat is of divine right; if not primary or immediate from Christ, as
in ordaining the twelv to includ their Successors: yet secundary or mediat from
the inspired Apostles, who substituted Bishops to succed. For as our Savior in
some sort instituted his own day, to be sanctified weekly in stead of the
Creatific Sabbath, by actual rising from death; which his Apostles celebrated
by their practis of meeting to break bread every first day: So he may be said
to ordein Prelates and Presbyters (who are of equal right) Analogicaly, by
choosing twelv Apostles, and seventy Disciples, whose rooms those two orders
supplied; yet the Lords day is not so subject to mutation by Man, since it has
a moral right by the equity (not Letter) of the fourth Commandment; which Men
and Angels cannot alter: But the other two orders may, if the end for which
they were instituted be changed, else not. Al which premises will plainer appeer
by particulars drawn from primitiv fountains, which flow from the Rock of
Faith, and shall not be falsified in the least point.

The Apostles sent to Teach and Baptize al Nations, had the whole world in
common for their general Dioces: but some attended special Churches as Rulers or
Overseers, and in fine set Bishops of 1 (...).
ruling Elders or Bishops in their Chairs or Charges: For James the Just (caled
the Lords Brother, because born of Mary Cleopas the blessed Virgins sister)
resided and presided at Jerusalem as his proper Sea; partly of his own
authority, and partly by the Apostles appointment: as appeers by Paul's coming
thither Acts 21. (...).
to consult with him and his Presbytery: For at the Proto-Council, Peter as
prime Apostle, was Prolocutor; but James* Act^ 15 19* ^0
as President, gav diffinitiv sentence, to which al submited or subscribed.
After 30 years residence he was cast from a Pinnacle, and his brains pierced
with a Fullers burling Iron; whose Brother Simeon succeeded by the Apostles
assignment. They also planted Churches elswher, as Paul and Barnabas ordained
Elders Acts ^4. (...).
in every Church: but no Bishops are mentioned, because yet they created none
til afterward to rule in their rooms. For S. Paul caling the Elders of Ephesus
to Miletum, bid them Take Act. 20. 17.
heed to themselfs and the Flock, whereof the Holy Ghost made them Overseers;
naming no particular Prelat sav himself as Head over them. Hence grew these
Schisms saying I am of Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 12.
(...) of Apollos, etc. because no ruling Elders were then settled, as S. Ambros
aptly observes. The reason why he yet set no Superintendents is, because he self
took care or rule of al Churches: whence Tertullian terms Corinth, Ephesus,
Philippi, Thessal^nica, and the rest of that rank, Apostolic Churches, because
he presided over them. But in process of time, as occasion served, they
ordained Episcopal Supervisers to supply their steads; for 2 Cor. 11. 28.
Paul being caled by the Spirit to attend the West parts, passing Acts 19. 21.
through Macedonia and Achaia toward Jerusalem, and so to Rome (never to see
the East again) sent Titus to Corinth, and going by Sea, put in at Cret to
preach the Gospel: where meeting 2 Cor. 8. 6. 16. Ep scopat ^^^cted.
Titus back from Corinth, he left him there to ordein Elders in every City,
while he went to Epirus and Illyricum, before he came to Rome. About that time
he besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, who attended him first into Macedon,
but at his return resided there.

He was indeed an Evangelist, yet a Bishop too: as Philip who converted
Samaria, was a Deacon and Evangelist; yet asterward Bishop of Tralleis in
Thracia. Some cavil, That Saint Paul trusted Titus and Timothy with a temporar
Commission only, because he employed them elswher: but the rules prescribed for
continued government to al Bishops clearly convince that filly shift: For his
Instructions how Elders and Deacons Titus 1. 5.
should be qualified, plainly purport them to be Superiors to those whom they
shall so ordein and rule: Thus S. Paul leaving two of his Disciples in two
principal places to plant Presbyteries, and propagat Churches, gav a pattern or
platform to al, who acted accordingly. For S. John reputed longevest of the S
John ordained Bishops.
Apostles, wrote long after to the Angels (or Bishops) of the seven Asian
Churches, most of which are named by Apostolic Men in Ecclesiastic Histories.
Such (says Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius) S. John constituted Bishops in
diverse Cities, after his return from Patmos Exile, planted whole Churches, and
ordained Presbyteries in several places, as Paul and Timothy used to do. The
like did other Apostles before their deaths in diverse Dioceses, as Dorotheus,
Demochares, Eusebius, Petrus de Natalibus, Volateranus, and many mo contest.
For Gaius, and after him Onesimus, suc^eded Timothy at Ephesus: Apelles, and
after him Polycarpus becam Bishops of Smyrna: Lucius of Laodic^a: Clemens first
of Sardis (which are four of the said seven Churches) and after of Rome; as
Ignatius, Tertullian, Irenaeus, and other Fathers positivly aver: To whose
authentic affirmation more Faith is du, then to thousand Novelists negativs,
wholly possessed with prejudicacy, philauty, and partiality.

The next Apostolic See is Antioch, where Believers were first 2 Antioch.
caled Christians; which Church Peter and Paul jointly founded, as Ignatius
attests: For two Christian Congregations coexisted there; one of the
Circumcision, whereof Peter took charge; another of converted Gentiles, which
Paul by mutual agreement supervised; who being employed elswher, committed the
charge of both being concorporat in one to Evodius Antecessor of Ignatius.

These two are also accounted Cofounders of Rome 3 Rome.
Church by Irenaeus: but writers differ much about their successors. Some set
Linus and Cletus (or Anacletus) next after them, and some Clemens: which dissent
in circumstance cannot frustrat or falsify their consent and harmony in
substance, as partialists infer. Happily there being two Congregations (as at
Antioch) of Jews and Gentiles, Clemens Peter's Disciple succeeded him in the
first, and Linus Paul's Deacon in the last; til both uniting in one devolved on
the Surviver Clemens, as Mr. Thorndike probably conjects, by comparing
semblable cases. However, there was afterward a constant succession of Bishops
(most part Martyrs) til Constantins dais, as al Ancients agree: But none are so
absurd to say they were al bare Presbyters, as if those great Cities had one
only Minister to Officiat. In the Apostles dais before S. John died, Denis
Areopagit S. Paul's Convert becam Bishop of Athens, as Denis Bishop of Corinth
avers.

Lastly, S. Marc was made Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt 4 Alexandria.
(happily by S. Peter, whose Disciple he was) as S. Jerome says; That from Mare to
Heracla and Dionysius in his dais (mark well Epest ad Evag.
the words) the Presbyters still chos one in higher degree and dignity, to be
Bishop. It was long after yer Corinth had any, which caused such Schisms or
strifes among the Elders: yet many Apostolic Men ( Titus at Cret, Timothy at
Ephesus, Clemens at Rome, Denis at Athens) presided in Neighbor Sees; who in
time placed Bishops at Corinth and other Cities: which is a pregnant pedigree
of Episcopal History for the first Century of Christ. Afterward when question
aros, which Churches should have Bishops, which not? It was regulated by the
greatness of Cities, or multitud of Presbyters requisite to such charges; and by
slow degrees settled through the world. Hence Sardinia Can 6.
Synod ordered, That no small Towns shall have Bishops where a few Priests may
serve; but only Populous places that deserv one, or anciently had one. And the
Chalcedon Council provided, That Can. 17.
when the Emperor established a City (annexing the Territories adjacent or
appendent) it should have a Bishop; which made Itaely so full of Bishops, because
so Cityful. Now as Presbyters assisted the Apostles, who caled them
felow-Elders, though not equals: So they assisted Bishops in sacred matters;
specialy of Ordination, as Ignatius informs. So says Cyprian, He did nothing
of himself without Counsil of his Clergy, and consent of the People. And S.
Ambros, That nothing was done in the Church without the Elders advise. Hence
Bishops and Elders are often caled by the same names, yet of distinct degrees;
because both concurred in functions; being styled Priests Sacerdotes.
in respect of divine service; Elders in regard of age or gravity; and
Presidents or Prelates in relation to their rule. Thus their Phaesbytert.
Antistices.
titles were often confounded, but Orders and Offices still distinguished; which
no brass-brow can gainsay. S. Ambros renders a reason, why S. Paul instructing
Timothy, passes from Bishops to Deacons; because every Bishop is a Presbiter
and Deacon, not convertibly; but he chief over both.

Many maintain, That Presbyteries primarily consisted part of Clerics, part of
Laics; as the Jews Sanedrim had some Priests and Levits, some Elders of the
People: but it is falls; for that was a mixed Judicature of spiritual and secular
persons (like our old high Commission Court) because al causes of Church and
Commonwealth passed under their censure: whereas the Church is subject to the
State in Temporals; but in Spiritual things of the Soul and service of God,
Christ intrusts none sav those to whom he commits the Keis of his house, wherein
simple Laics may not meddle.

Rustica Ruricolae, tractent fabrilia Fabri.
Let Clowns to Ploughing bend,
And Smiths their forging tend.
Those then that deny any of these things, must renounce al History, Authority,
and Antiquity: but Men are so wedged to their Tenets, that they will seek al
shifts which their wits can invent, contrary to common sens, as the sequel shall
show. Some Objections occur.

Ob. S. Paul says, That the Elders which rule well, are worthy 1 Timothy 5. 17.
of duple honor; specialy if they labor in the Word and Doctrine: Ergo there be
two sorts of Elders, some mere Rulers, who meddle not with the Word; some
Preachers or Dispensers thereof.

Sol. Cujus contrarium verum est: for how can these labor in the Word and
Doctrine, if they be Lay Elders? it is a fallacious inference to dis-join what
the Holy Ghost conjoins: for he speaks only of spiritual Elders, which were
both Rulers and Teachers, no Laics; nor can such labor in the Word: surely S.
Paul knew no such: and St. Peter in general exhorts al Elders, 1 Pet. 5. 1^.
being also an Elder, to feed the Flock, which no Laic can do; nor is any so
impudent or ignorant to aver, that he or any of the Elders were Laics; only he
a superior, and the rest inferiors; yet al of one rank: but no Lay Elders
extant or couchant in the new Testament: for Church and Commonwealth are two
distinct Oeconomies having several Officers: avaunt then al invasion into each
others Jurisdiction. Indeed they had diverse Romans 12. 5. Ephesians. 4. 11.
Gifts or Graces of Prophesying, speaking Toungs, Ministering, Teaching,
Exhorting, Commucating, Ruling: some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, some Doctors, but no mere Laics: such were Chimaera's
or Catamountains. 1 C^^. 12. 28.
The Gifts of the spirit to edification are the word of wisdom, knowledge,
faith, healing, miracles, prophecy, discerning of spirits, interpretation of
toungs: But this provs not Ruling Elders to differ from Bishops, nor any to be
Laics; but flatly disprovs it. St. Paul warns the Elders to be wary of grievous
Wolfs, ^ct^. (...) 29.
which will not spare the Flock: so his Elders that ruled well, were spiritual
Overseers: and to labor in the Word by converting some, and confirming others,
is the main office of Presbyters ab origin: For the Office of Presbyters is
both to teach and govern, of Prelates to govern and teach; but no Laics to do
either in the Church: Gods Word has not a word tending that way; nor mentions
any Ministerial Orders or Officers, sav Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons: But
Evangelists had only a mission or Commission to preach; no Ordination distinct
from Presbyters and Deacons.

If any Laics ever Ruled in primitiv times, what becam of them, that no Records
remain of their names, nor nois or notice of their suppression? sure the Laiety
was far too potent and politic to be discarded or degraded by the Clergy. Is it
probable or possible, that the whole Church would or could conspire, to smother
or strangle in the birth such a sacred Institution of our Lord Jesus and his
holy Apostles? Or would Laics so tamely take it? Nay is it credible or
conceivable, that al ancient Fathers, Ecclesiastic writers, Oecumenic Conncils
should so impiously combine, to extirp or extermin its entity and memory, that
no one witness appeers in any History; unless by some who partialy and
preposterously wrest obscure word, and bring their meaning with them, as they
serve sacred Scriptures, whereof they will be sole Interpreters? If any one can
name any one such, he shall carry the cause. Let Christians consult with common
sens upon these things, ye^ they credulously resign up their Reason to every
Sectist. Bishops in those dais did nothing without Presbyters advise or assent;
but by degrees assumed and arrogated al rule to themselfs (as happily Presbyters
would, if they had prevailed) of which usurpation St. Jerome and other Godly Men
complained, pressing them to communicate many matters with Presbyters, as Moses
did to the Sanedrim: but of Lay Elders like the Sanedrim, ne gry quidem in all
the Scripture or Antiquity; which is irrefragable indeniable verity. The
Apostles used no Laics service, but ordained Deacons even to serve Tables; much
less would they make them Partners ^n Church government.

Ob. Some say Presbyters alone may ordein, because St. Paul 1 Timothy 4 14.
exhorts Timothy not to neglect the gift in him, which he had by Prophecy, with
laying on hands of the Presbytery: Ergo the Elders of themselfs ordained him.

Sol. Speak seriously and sincerely; Does any beleev this to be true, or only
wish it were so? Certes S. Paul ordained him 1 Timothy 1. 6.
Deacon, Presbyter, and Bishop (though assisted by Elders) as heself avers:
which words no way prove, that they can or did ordein alone without an Apostle
or Bishop in chief. Hence some render them, Neglect not the gift of Eldership
(or Episcopat) given by my Imposition of hands, which carries so fair a color
as the former gloss: but however construed they prove not that Elders ever
ordained him of themselfs without St. Paul^

Repl. It Is urged, That every Presbyter is a Father, so well as Prelates: for St.
Paul says, Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort 1 Timothy 5. (...).
him as a Father, and the younger Men as Brethren: Ergo Presbyters are Fathers,
and ordein young Novices as Sons or Brethren.

Sol. Is not this to wrest, wrench, or wiredraw Scripture on the rack and
tainter hooks to a wrong sens? every poor blind ey can see, that the Apostle
apertly denots Elders in years (even Laics) not in Orders: for the next words
are; the elder Women as Moth^rs, and younger as Sisters; which cannot be meant
of spiritual Elders, unles they will make old Presbyteres^es, and young
Diaconesses: Nor if they be formaly caled Fathers for gravity, does it follow,
that they may ordein Sons: But St. Paul descends afterward to Ecclesiastic
Elders, advising him to receiv no accusation against such under two or three
ve^s. 19. 20. 21.
witnesses; with a strict charge to do nothing partialy in preferring one
before another, nor to lay hands suddenly on any: al which argu his eminent
Episcopal authority over all the Elders, whereof were many at Ephesus, yet could
they not lay hands on any without him: what can be cleerer? He that has ears,
let him listen what the spirit speaks, To the Angel or Bishop of Ephesus: Rev.
2. 2, 3
I know thy works, labor, and patience; how thou triedst them which say they
are Apostles and are not, but have found them liars: and for my names sake have
labored and not fainted. These are no functions for every Elder to try fall
Prophets or censure them, but only for the chief Angel, whereof was only one in
in each of the seven Asian Churches, to whom he directed his Episties: For
Bishops as Fathers ordained Presbyters, but not they Bishops; nor can Sons
ordein Sons without a Father or Bishop; who is superior both in precedence of
place and preeminence of power, as is proved.

The twelv Apostles and seventy Disciples had equal charge Luke 10. 1.
or Commission to preach the Gospel, cure Diseases, and cast out Devils; yet
the twelv superior to the seventy, as al know. Some too boldly say, Both were
one order, because caled Disciples: sit liber Judex, let St. Luke decide it:
After this (relating to what he premised of the Apostles) he appointed other
seventy Disciples also: If other then not the same: nor does community of
general title argu identity of special order or specifical Office: For Apostles
were caled Disciples, but the seventy no Apostles, and Matthias one of them was
chosen Apostle, as to an higher degree: yea Dorotheus flatly avers, that they
were subordinat to them, and many afterward made Diocesan Bishops, who
succeeded the twelv; and Presbyters the seventy, as al Ancients ( Jeronimo non
exempto) unanimosly vote and inform.

Men who have forfeted their Faith, or resigned it to Faction, fear not to vent
untruths among the Vulgar; being sure the simpler sort will be seduced for lack
of learning, and their Proselits apt to accept shadows for substances, or
counterfeit copper for current Coin: But St. Austins saying to Julius the
Heretic, will well suit such Sectists; Has time so confounded al things? is
darkness turned to light, or contrarily, that Pelagius, Celestin, and Julius can
see; but Hilary, Cyprian, and Ambros become blind? semblably, are al Fathers,
Councils, and Ecclesiastic Writers blind Beetles, not to perceiv how primitiv
Churches not long before their dais were governed: but Calvin, Cartwright, and
Knox such Lynces to see so far into a Milston, what was acted so many ages
before their births, without any Perspectivs of Human Histories? a strange
instinct, if not inspiration. Let St. Austins admonition shape the conclusion:
It Is fit Christians should prefer Antiquity before your Novities, and rather
adhere to their solid Judgments, then to your shalow fancies.

The Answer to nine Questions propounded at last Parliament to the Assembly of
Divines touching Jus Divinum in Church Government, is built on the proofs or
Principles precited. 1. That Elders and Elderships in Scripture were sacred
Officers representing the Church. 2. That Christ has a temporal Kingdom,
whereof secular Magistrates are Vicegerents; and a spiritual committed to Church
Officers: as it is said, Aaron and his Sons shall wait on the Priests Office: and
a Bishops Numb 3. 10.
Office is a good work: for they are contra distinct, and may 1 Timothy 3. 1.
not confound their powers. Say that Magistrates must guard the Church by
positiv Laws, yet not rule in it; nor they to meddle with secular affairs. 3.
That no Independent congregational Elderships are Jure divino. 4. That Christ
gav the Keis to his Apostles and their spiritual successors; but not to Mat. 16
19. Mat. 18 18. John 20, 23.
al Members of the Church. Al which are true Positions, if the head Rulers be
included; else it is no Church Government of divine Institution. For no
Societies, Companies, Colleges or Corporations can be complet without their
several Heads, as right Episcopacy is a regulated Presbytery, but single
Presbytery without a Bishop (who may not be secluded or separated) Episcopat
beheaded. It Is said, That in the black Month a headless Horse wanders the
streets with a chain about his neck; which happily now is fulfilled, if the
Church become an Anarchical Acephalon, and the World an Antipodical Anarchy.
That answer has two main defects: 1. In not declaring the whole truth, that the
Apostles were Heads or Presidents over al Presbyters, and before their deaths
deputed Bishops to be ordinary Rulers (themselfs being extraordinary) in their
steads. 2. In not explaining, whether Lay Elders may be admitted among
Church Officers, which seems to be a mungrel mixture? But al Sects learn that
craft of Satan, to concele what makes most against them. Certes Episcopat and
Elderships are Correlats; nor can there be a true Presbytery without a Prelat.
Whence Mr. Calvin at Geneva, when they reformed Religion, and had expelled
their Popish Prelat Sovereign of the State, offered to readmit him, if he would
renounce the Papacy: but upon refusal, erected this new form of Ministers and
Laics to draw in joint yoke together, to pleas his Popular Patrons. He wished
(as his felows did) to have Protestant Prelates as in England; or Superintendents
(which are analogical Bishops) as elswher; for they are truly Christian, yea of
Apostolic Institution; not Antichristian, unles Antichrist be the head; and
many hundreds suffered Martyry under Pagan tyranny, beside some here in the
Marian persecution: therefore such aspersions savor more of ignorant malice
then true charity: for it may sincerly be said sans scandal, that Episcopacy
stood established in this land ever since the dawn of Christianity under Lucius
a Brytish King almost An C. 180.
1500 years, both by ancient and later Laws from age to age. So that if the
primitiv form of Church government be retained, it cannot be exiled: for if
Titus, Timothy, and the rest were ruling Elders over Presbyters, it should be
so still; yet it is not simply unalterable, if weighty causes require an
abolition. Epiphanius rightly reputed Aerius an Heretic (though it be no point
of Faith but Faction, and such since styled Schismatics) for opposing
Episcopacy: since if it should be granted (which can never be proved) that it is
a mere Human Ordinance of Apostolic Men: yet possession and prescription of
1500 years sans violence or usurpation, is enough to instal it in a firm right
free from extirpation, if their be any sure settled state on Earth. For St.
Jerome, no friend to that Order for his teen against John the proud Patriarch of
Jerusalem (under whose Jurisdiction he lived long at Bethleem Juda) freely
agniseth; that the peace of particular Churches cannot be conserved without it,
being the best means to suppress Schisms, Sects, and Heresies, which swarm like
Locusts in the open Sun. Many abuses are crept up, specialy in committing too
much power to Lay. Chancelors; and detracting diverse privileges from
Presbyters; beside excessiv avarice of some Bishops which reigns in scarlet
Robes so il as in lawn sleeves; al which may be reformed, and pristin procedings
restored, without weeding out pure Wheat with Tares, Cockles and Darnel; which
wise Husbandmen will not do: but what disorders may grow upon its utter
eradication (as al alterations are perilous) none but Gods alseing Ey can
foresee.

To sum up al, these are Oraculous verities: 1. That Christ Summary.
during life kept al rule in his sole power, but after Resurrection commended
it to his Apostles by a Triple charge to Peter, Feed my Sheep. 2. That when
Believers increased, they erected Elders every where to officiat under them. 3.
That before their deaths they ordained some Disciples as Superiors over several
Churches and Presbyteries. 4. That such were styled Prelates (set over) and
Bishops or Overseers. 5. That Peter and James Apostles; Marc and Timothy
Evangelists; Gaius and Lynus two of the seventy Disciples; Titus, Onesimus,
Evodius, Clemens, Lucius, Apelles, Denis Areopagit, Polycarp, Ignatius,
Anacletus (Apostolic Men) were actual Bishops in several Sees, as Ignatius,
Tertullian, Irenaeus trusty Trustees avow. 6. That in after ages Bishops were
chosen by Presbyteries, not occasionaly like Presidents or Moderators in
Councils; nor annualy as Majors of Cities; but perpetualy for life, like
Masters of Colleges to govern their Dioceses. 7. That such continued in all
christian Churches by the titles of Bishops or Prelates, til Luther styled them
Superintendents. 8. That after-Records or Catalogs of Episcopal continued
successions, are extant every where beyond cavil or contradiction. 9. That al
Elders or Presbyters (with Deacons, Evangelists, etc.) were Clergy Men by
imposition of hands, til Calvin occasionaly admitted Laics Joint Rulers in show
with Clerics: which form has since crept into a few Churches, as novities still
find vulgar intertainment like new Brooms. 10. That there is no semblable color
for conterfet Lay Elders to meddle in Church matters; nor ever were any such
except Churchwardens to keep the common Stock, Goods, and Utensils safe. What
needs more light at noon* The blind are never the better, nor will deaf Adders
be charmed. So far the History.

Gaudenus de Episcopatu: Gauden about Episcopat.
In his Hicrospistes or Defens of English Ministry and Ministers. LEt Dr.
Gauden a learned Divine (full of piety, and free Appendix.
from partiality) moderat the matter: who in his Elegant Apology for the
Ministry has these passages in sundry places. He dotes not on any dross or rust
which ancient venerable Episcopacy may in many revolutions of ages easily
contract, and be as easily cleared: nor likes these rigid reformations, which
some rash, envious, ambitious Presbyters driv on: who know not how to shav their
Fathers Beards without cutting their Throats, pair their Nails without cropping
their Hands; nor as unskilful Chemists refine from dross without consuming what
is Precious: nor as blind Empirics purge bad Humors without casting into bloody
Fluxes.

Our Lord Jesus Christ the true Messiah (Son of God, Angel of the new Covenant,
the great Apostle, Bishop and Father of our Souls, Author and Finisher of our
Faith, Suprem Lord and King, Eternal high Priest. and unerring Prophet of his
Church) was sent by G^d the Father to perform al Prophecies, fulfill al
righteousness, and settle a visible Ministration of holy things in his Church:
who came not in his own Name as Man to be Mediator, or to take the Honor of
Prophet, Priest, and a King over it; but had his Mission from the Father by
evident Witne^ from Heaven, both before and at his Birth: but more eminently at
Baptism by the visible Shape of a Dov, and audible voice; This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased: being anointed with gifts of the Holy Ghost abov
al as Head of the Church. These were attended with infallible Signs and Wonders,
while he taught the Mysteries of his Kingdom, and instituted holy Rites to
distinguish his Church from the World, by those Seals and Pledges of his lov, in
dying for the Faithful, when he shed both Blood and Water on the Cross. Which
having personaly accompiished as to the meritorius part of his Ministry, he
being no more to convers in a visible Human presence on Earth, did after his
Resurrection commit the Keis of his Kingdom to the twelv Apostles aforechosen,
as Stewards or Ministers of his Household, instructing them on what fundation of
Faith to build his Church, and by what Sacramental Signs to confirm Believers;
bidding them to Teach and Baptize al Nations, to ordein Disciples that should
succed, and so breathed on them: promising to send his Spirit (as he did after
his Ascension) and to be with them til the Worlds end. This cannot be meant of
their Persons who shortly died, but of their Survivers or Successors in the
Ministry to whom the same Authority and assistance belongs by divine durable
Charter or Commission: for publication and confirmation whereof the Holy Ghost
came on them in shape of fiery Cloven Toungs, filling them with miraculous gifts
fit for the first planting of the Church and al Ministerial power derivable to
others, for propagation and perpetuity thereof. Which whole fram or Fabric was
the proper effect of his Prophetic Wisdom for instructing his Church; an Act of
his Kingly power in governing it, and the fruit of his Priestly care for a
right Liturgy, or Officiating to be still continued by an holy Succession of
Evangelical Ministers in his Name; to Teach, Guide and Govern it in all holy
Duties. He made Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers for the work
of Ministry, and edyfying of his body: who had diverse gifts, as be several
parts in our body; so that al are not Prophets or Pastors which are Believers
or Members, as every bodyly part is not an Ey, tho it partakes the same Soul,
as Believers do the same Spirit in differing ministrations: of which Gifts
those only are to Judge, whom the Spirit sets Successivly in the Church with
power to ordein others: without which divinely constituted Order began by
Christ, derived to the Apostles, and delegated to their Successors; the Church
long ago had bin a Monster made up of confused excrescences or heaps of
Heresies, Sects, Schisms, and blind Baiards, as such misshapen prodigies start
up daily: who having cast off Sacred Order, do in their varieties exced the
promiscuous productions even of Afric.

The Apostles accordingly first filled up Judas place by Lot out of the seventy
Disciples; and took care to ordain others which should so do after them;
distributing their own labors into several Churches; some of Circumcised Jews,
others of Gentiles, among whom they exercised Divine power and Authority with all
fidelity, as Christ's Ambassadors, Heralds, and Laborers in his Husbandry, or
Espousers to make a Marriage between Christ and the Church: which office none
without do delegation might presum to perform. During which primitiv purity,
they ordained Elders in every City and Country, charging them to fulfill the
Ministrey and feed their Flocks (both in true Doctrine and good Diciplin) over
whom the Lord had made them Overseers by the Apostles assignation. Some of which
had charge to settle a Succession of such as should be apt and able to teach
the Word of Life, that Christ's Institution might be kept unblamable, til his
secund coming, by an holy Order or Office of Ministers duly made by solen
imposition of sacred hands, as a visible token of their peculiar designation to
this function. Thus beyond al doubt or disput (which none but Atheists or
Infidels will deny) Christ's holy Ordinance was carried on successivly for three
generations: 1. In the Apostles: 2. From them to Elders and Rulers: 3. From
them to others which were ordained Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, as is
evident in the new Testament. The next succession is clear by testimony of
Clement and other Apostilic Men beyond exception or evasion: al which entering
by the Door, are as true Shepherds, Stewards, Fathers, Rulers and Watchmen over
the Flock: being caled the Light of the World, Salt of the Earth, Fishers of
Men, Stars in his right hand, Angels of the Churches, etc. who are charged to
Preach the Word in season and out; to feed Lambs, to care for the Flock, to
fulfill their Ministry, to exhort, command, and Rebuk with all Authority; to whom
Christ gav many peculiar privileges and promises of special assistance. Hence
it is clear as the Noonday, that some (not al) and those ordained (not volunteers)
are sent successivly by Christ's authority, to do the work of the Ministry:
which dreadful imploiment injoined, with a bitter Woe if neglected, the very
Angels will not undergo unles sent, nor then without horror: much less should
sinful Men (to whom a duple Woe is du) desperately dare to intrud being unsent,
uncaled, unordeined, and unfurnished; which is proud presumption. As then some
are duly invested with Ministerial power, and strictly injoined to use it for
the Churches good: so al others not empowered (tho never so well gifted) are
flatly forbid to usurp that sacred Office, or confer what they never received
on others: which neither Melchisedec, Moses, Aaron, Samuel, nor any of the
Prophets; no nor Christ, John Baptist, the Apostles, Evangelists, or any true
Bishops and Presbyters ever durst to arrogat, without divine mission or
commission mediatly or immediately derived from Christ. This Ministerial
Ordination, has continued abov sixteen Centuries by lawful succession even to
wonder, amidst al Persecutions, Confusions, and changes of Human affairs. For
Christ promises to be with his Church and Ministers to the Worlds end, and
Hel^gates shall not prevail against them. This laying on of Hebr 6. 1, 3.
Hands in Ordination, is reckoned among the fundamental Principles of Religion,
joined with Faith, Repentance, Baptism, Resurrection, and last Judgment, nor
can Confirmation be duly done to the Baptized, and Catechized, sav by such as
are ordained thereto: which to gainsay, is as if Men should reject those other
grand Articles forecited. Surely al divine Ministrations of Preaching,
Celebrating the Sacraments, and other Ordinances necessary to the being (so well
as well being) of a Church, had ceased long since, if God had assigned no
peculiar Men to hold forth the great Salvation, which leaves Men excuseless:
since they are taught by such as have special Characters or Letters of Credence
from Christ: if they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, or Men sent by him;
whom will they beleev? There be four sorts of Laborers in Gods harvest: some sent
by him soly, as Moses, most Prophets, the twelv Apostles, St. Paul: some by Gods
assignation, but Man's Ordination; as Aaron, Josua, Elisha, Timothy: some by
Ordination of the Church, yet of Christ's institution; as al Evangelical
Ministers duly ordered: some not sent by God or Man; but run or rush in of
themselfs, as falls Prophets, Deceivers, Intruders, Sectists, and al Satan's
Disciples: who boast of extraordinary Enthusiasm as Angels of light saying,
Thus says the Lord; When he never sent nor spak by them. For no Believer
though endued with great Gifts and Graces (as St. Ambros had before he becam
Bishop) ought to assum Ministerial power: for then every Christian of both
Sexes (as there be sundry She-Preachers, which pretend to the Spirit in these
licentious times) may claim the Keis to themselfs, and dispens Holy things to
others, or rule Christ's Household in his stead; which repugns common Reason; as
if every domestic Servant or Scullion should challenge the Stewards place, or
every Member arrogat the office of Eyes, Tongue, or Hands; because they belong to
the same Soul, Body, and Head. Since then no Natural Moral, or Religious gifts
or abilities can instate any to be a Magistrate, Judge, Ambassador, or public
Officer; unles he be invested by the Fountain of Civil power. So there should be
a right derivation of Spiritual Power from Christ Jesus as Head; either
immediately as the Apostles had, or mediatly as Bishops and Presbyters since;
who without fraud, force, or unjust Usurpation received it from the Apostles by
Prayer, Benediction, and imposition of Hands in Christ's name. Which pregnant
truth morosely to deny, is as if an Hog should answer al Arguments with
grunting. Yea to act against so strong a stream of authority; befits only
Ranters, Seekers, Shakers, and Enthusiasts; or Jews, Turcs, and Infidels: but
not sober Christians or Members of the Church, which ever enjoyed a true
succession of ordained Ministry: whereby the Gospels light is continued to this
day amidst al Pagan persecutions, Heresical confusions, and Schismatical
Fractions bent to undermine it. Al Nations by Natures lore owned some Deity, and
had peculiar Persons to execut Religious Rites; nor did ever any sober Men
reject Gods service for Ministers faults, frailties, or infirmities. For a
Divine must be distinguished from the Man, since Gods power works with human
weakness, nor need we be more nice or nauseous. Lastly there is a necessity of
ordained Ministry, since none of free accord will undergo so hard and hazardous a
task in times of primitiv Persecutions, to hold forth the doctrine of a
crucified Savior (as al carnal Men deemed it) unles they had the duty of
divine caling laid on their Consciences. Yet however in the Gospels Halcyon
serenity, many new Teachers, out of avarice or popular ambition, rush rashly
upon it, which the best Men durst not weild without weeping (as St. Austin did
when he was made Presbyter) and trembling: those rigid storms of yore, would have
quenched the now so forward flashes of these Sparks; when to be a Prelat or
Presbyter, was to expose themselfs to fire and faggot, wild Beasts jaws, and a
thousand tortures.

So unles divine authority had imposed, and special Grace assisted, together
with promises of eternal Glory; doubtless the glorious Gospel of salvation had
yet this time bin buried in oblivion; fith none had heard or believed that
report, if none had dared to preach or publish it, as Men sent and ordained
did. Nor would any else be so fool hardy to hazard al worldly interests (honor,
estate, liberty, life) on such an uncouth, unwelcom, unsafe message; unles they
had bin conscious of a special duty laid on them by divine authority, derived
in that solen sacred Ordination of Ministry: Whence St. Paul denounced a Woe to
himself if he preached not the Gospel. For every one that can handle the Hod,
Hammer, or Trowel, is not instantly an Architect: Nor can every gifted Man
supply the place of such a Workman as has both Materials, Tools, Art, and
Approbation. There is great ods between plausible cunning to draw Disciples, and
sincere conscience to make folowers of Christ; between intruding popular
Masters, and true ordained Ministers: betwixt clambring over the wall like
Robbers or Plunderers, and entering at door as true Shepherds of the Flock or
owners of the Family: between conterfet Cranks and approved Ambassadors of
Christ. For the Gospel Ministry is a dreadful employment to discharge it duly,
which requires peculiar Workmen fit for so high a Function; nor is it less
weighty now then of old: When Ministers must contend with blunt rusticity bold
barbarity, Schismatical curiosity, fantastical novity, Heretical subtlety,
disguised Hypocrisy, superstitious vanity, Factions fury, politic prophanenes,
and al sorts of spiritual wickedness. Nothing old can pleas, though never so
true; nor new com amiss, though never so falls: a new Church way, new fangled
Ministry, new ordered Sacraments, new sensed Scriptures, and what not? Every
one sings, In nova fert animus. With such proud, silly, scornful Sophisters
(who need Teachers, yet dare to teach) must Ministers encounter, who cast off
al Church Order and Government: so it is most requisite to keep such unruly Bulls
of Basan under. Rashness is no part of Fortitud, nor confidence a character of
courage, nor Confusion any ingredient of Charity, nor Faction a support of
Faith, nor disorderly walking fit fuel of holy flames Psalm. 122. 3.
in Christians hearts: For the Church is compared to a City at unity in it
self; and to an Army with Banners: which holy allusions Cant 6. 3.
argu, that there is to be exact government in all affairs: but the enemies of
reformed Ministry (who affect subtleties more then solidities) become Ministers
Rivals, from whom they had those pretended Gifts; and like Balaams Beast,
presume to teach their Masters, trampling their feeders under feet: but such
Sectists or Seducers make Ministers most necessary to oppose their fury, repel
their folly, and reform novity, which else like wild Bores would destroy the
Lords Vineyard, if these faithful Watchmen did not prevent them. Thus much in
general of the whole Ministry: now more nearly concerning Episcopacy, which is
assaulted at first entry.

Ob. If it be granted to be of divine Apostolic Institution at first, yet it
has since declined into Antichristian Apostasy, under Popish Primacy, being
linealy derived from it: Ergo both Bishops and Ministers, like links of one
chain or branches of the same Tree, are to be lopped off.

Sol. Indeed Bishops have constantly and continualy ordained Ministers full 1600
years: but Popes of Rome usurped Antichristian Supremacy in the West (as they
would over the whole world, if they could catch it) about 1050 years yet al
sacred Ordinances used or abused by them, must not be abandoned as
Antichristian; for then we may seek new Scriptures, Creed, and Sacraments, with
another Gospel and Messiah, so well as Bishops and Ministers; since al these have
been defiled by their depraved doctrins and superstitions. Nor was the Church
Catholic (against which Hel-gates shall never prevail to blot out Christ's name)
wholly ruined by Antichristian superstructures, that the main fabric must be
pulled down and made Nehustan, instead of repairing or restoring it to pristin
purity: For so Christ reduced divine worship to his own House, when avarice had
made it a Den of Theefs. Nor did the Jews Priesthood ceas for the Priests
enormities: Nor the dialectic teaching part fall from Moses Chair, though the
Scribes and Pharisees fat therein, teaching Men's traditions: Nor do the
Sacraments or Evangelic Ordinances fail by any Papal alterations or additions.
Hence al Godly Reformers (specialy in England) were content to cast out al
corrupt doctrins, vain customs, impure mixtures, and superstitious vanities
which Papal novity had built on the foundations of Christian Religion, laid by
the ancient Architects al over the World; reserving the Scripture Canon, with all sound Doctrine, holy Discipline, Sacramental seals, and other duties of
Prayer, fasting, etc. according to the clear sens of Gods Word, and practis of
primitiv Churches: yet were they not so silly or giddy to reject al which the
Popish party received or retained; but only refined gold from dross, the pure
from vile, which they had from Christian Predecessors (Martyrs and Confessors)
in that once famous Roman Church by du succession, though since much
degenerated. No Christian in his right wits (whose Conscience is guided by
science and zele tempred with Charity) will or should reced from them, farther
then he finds them to deviat from the rule of Faith, held forth by Apostolic
Precepts, and primitiv Precedents: But in matters of extern prudential order,
every Church has like liberty to use or refuse such Ceremonies as each thinks
fit. In some points we may convers with them as simply Men: in some imitat them
as Secular or Ecclesiastic Rulers: in many, join with them so far forth as they
hold the truths of Religion and Fundamentals of Faith: But their misexpositions
of Scripture, with all Antichristian additionals, we utterly detest, disclaim
and disavow.

For instances: We celebrat the Lords supper with the same Lords Supper.
Elements, but renounce that sens of Christ's words on which they raise the new
doctrine of Transubstantiation; since it is contrary to Gods providence both in
Natural and Spiritual things; which change not the substance, but only the
relation or use from Natural to Mystical: contrary to Scripture phrase in like
expressions, where things related by religious Institutions, are mutualy
denomined without essential changes: contrary to common Reason and four of fiv
Senses testimony, which are the proper Judges of sensible objects: contrary to
Christ's way S^ght, Smell, Taft, Touch.
or end of strengthening a Receivers Faith, which is not done by what is harder
to be believed then the whole Gospel mystery beside: for nothing is less
credible then that Christ sitting at Table gav his own very visible Body to be
eaten by his Disciples, and al Communicants after; when as he still sits as Man
at his Fathers right hand in Heaven. These with like fancies full of absurdities,
and consequential Idolatry of Bread-worship, and sacrilegious detaining the Cup
from Laics (contrary to Christ's express Drink ye al of this.
words, and primitiv Churches practis for many ages) we flatly abjure or
abandon; yet receiv it with the same pious veneration of purest Antiquity; but
do not determine the manner of that mysterious Union: endevoring for the Graces
which may make us worthy partakers, when we receiv that dreadful (yet most
desirable) seal of our Faith: not by eating his flesh grossly with our mouths;
but by receiving him spiritualy into our Souls: Yet by the same Faith we realy
partake his merit, death, body, and blood to eternal life, before we receiv him
by the said Sacrament (yea though we should never have opportunity so to do,
which yet we may not neglect) since it is the same object received by the same
Instrument, to the same end; but in different degree and way: yet the same
Savior of the World.

For Baptism, we retain the words and form; but discard the Baptism.
superfluous superstitious dresses (Salt, Oil, Spittle, Insufflation) which
deform that duty, though not destroy it; nor do rebaptise those baptized by
them. Semblably we hold the Scriptures Scripture.
true Canon as Oracles of God, delivered by divine inspiration; according to the
true testimony of the old Jewish and later Christian Church: but cashire some
Apocryphal Additions of the Romists and Remists from being Rules of Faith: yet
allow most of them as useful morals for instruction of life. In private Prayers
and public Liturgies, Papists use the Latin language Public Prays.
under pretext of uniformity; with many vain Tautologies which we dislike: but
approv the holy custom of public Assemblies to worship God by Prayers and
Praises in the Mother Tongue, as St. Paul commends and commands.

In some particulars we dissent both in judgment and practis: Other Poin^^.
as in their profitable Purgatory, popular Image Worship, Orisons and Oblations
for the dead, Invocations of Saints and Angels, Auricular Confession, works of
Supererogation, Indulgences, and al such bran brought in by avarice and
ambition; being but Human superstructures, not warranted by the Word, nor
confirmed by general consent, Precept, or practis of al Churches.

Touching the Popes claim of universal Supremacy, Infallibility, Papal Primacy
and Superiority over al Churches and Councils; we flatly forbid the Banes as
unjust Usurpations, got by Princes favors, or Popes fraud, flattery, power, and
policy: yet grant a Priority of place (as Peter had among the Apostles) either
in his Roman Dioces as Bishop, or in Councils as Bishop of that ancient
imperial Metropolis; as other Patriarchs, Primats, and Prelates have precedence
by antiquity of their several Sees.

For the sacred Function of Ministry, we hold the ancient form Ministry.
derived from the Apostles to Bishops and Presbyters, to preach the Word,
celebrat Sacraments, reconcile Penitents, anathematise Delinquents, use the
Keis in Jurisdiction or Government: excluding al others from these duties as
impudent Intruders, who are no^ ordained by just Commission. We renounce al
imaginary power or Will Worship annexed to the Office by Human superstition,
with all spurious spawns of Men's inventions, Scriptureless Opinions, and
groundless Traditions, dashing those Babylonish Brats against the stones; yet
still foster the Sons of Sion or Israel of God in all divine Institutions, which
were long led Captiv and laid in Antichrists Dungeon, within the Walls or
Suburbs of Babylon. In a word, we hold the true Faith, holy Mysteries, Catholic
Orders, constant Ministry, and commendable Customs continued in that Church:
nor do deem it a matter of Conscience or Prudence to debar any thing divine,
though delivered by Men's impure hands: For divine Ordinances are incorruptible,
nor can pollution of Men's Minds or manners defile them; no more then
putrefaction pollut the Sun when it shines on Carrion: we may be corrupted, but
holy Ordinances like God are still the same, when restored to primitiv purity.
We must not cast away Gods provision though sent by Ravens; nor abandon al
Romish Tenets of saving Truth, though Trent Council anathematised some Truths.
Popes were ever too wary to abject or abrogat true Religions Essentials
(Scripture, Sacraments, Ministry, Church Polity) on which the overgrown
structures of Pontifician pomp, pride, profit, power, and policy through
Peoples credulity are raised or sustained. Nor can ought conduce more to their
content, then that rash Reformers should reject al Rites of Religion retained
by them. They know how meager a Sceleton or mere shadow it will show (both for
Doctrine, Discipline, Duties and manners) if fanatic Reformers reject al
Principles as Popish: Or if some Men's rapacious avarice may prevail to bereav
Ministers maintenance, leaving them nothing to live on but bare scraps of
arbitrary grudging contributions.

Certes Church-reformation is to be carried with all accurat rigor in clear
points of saving Truths; but with much eandor, charity, and circumspection
toward Christians in other things, wherein we differ or dissent. It Is a laudable
Schism to separat gold from dross, not retaining both in confusion, nor
rejecting both in passion: whereby they shall not only reform abuses, but invite
Men to embrace or approv our well tempered zele, making them see their own
defects or deformity: For Reformation is best done, not by cutting off
Religions head; but by taking off the Visors which hide its beauty; since Men
will best see their errors, not by tearing out their eyes, but by fairly
removing the films or beams of prejudice and pertinacy, which obvele or hinder
their sight. By this shield of moderat charity, proving al things and holding
what is good, we justly defend al Reformed Churches from the sin and scandal of
Schism; when we truly declare to separat no farther from them, then we are
persuaded they have swerved from Christ and the Catholic Church. We are bid to
com out of Babylon, but not to run out of our wits; to act as Gods People with
meeknes and charity, not with fiery fiercenes and cruelty, like sons of Belial
running from one Antichrist to another: For Papists have much of Antichrist in
some kinds, and so may many mo in others: either by innovations, confusions, or
chiefly uncharitablenes. For if nothing savours more of Christ then Charity;
nothing has less of Christ then the contrary; which many Men mistaking for
zele nourish a Cockatrice for a Dov, and a Serpent for a Phaenix. This freeth
us from the brand of Schismatics, such as the Novatians and Donatists were
(like our modern Sectists) who so claimed to be a true Church, as to exclud al
others from communion or accord. Some cry out upon Papists cruelty (which has
bin too barbarous) yet they use more both against them and their Brethren;
longing for such a Kingdom of Christ as shall consist in War, Blood, and
Massacres against al except those of their own side or Sect. We may not imput
the errors or enormities of every Popish Doctor to all that Profession, nor take
them at the worst; since there is much difference between their public disputs and
private practices; nor are their deathbed Tenets alwais conform to their Chairs
or Pulpits: Yea many are much more modest and moderat then hertofore; wherein we
ought to rejoice: But for the People most are ignorant of those Disputs, wherein
to er wilfully is dangerous: which if they hold, being so taught, yet it is
under perswation or lov of Truth; retaining the foundation of Christ crucified,
and expecting salvation by his sole merits; of whom we should judge charitably,
that God in Mercy accepting their lov to truth which they know, will pardon
particular errors, which they know not to be such: judge as you will be judged.
We are loath or should be, to differ from any Christians, unles Conscience tells
they are in evident error: who like not Faction, nor delight in separation; nor
hold any bloody Tenets against those of advers Opinion; but wish like charity
from them, that we may be al united to Christ and his Church.

True Reformation is but a return to Gods way, by retaining such Principles as
pertain to al Believers: for we may use the Temples holy Vessels if restored
from profane hands of quaffing Balthasaer, being still pure silver. So our
Ministry is Ez^a 7. (...) non (...) Ministe. i^m.
holy and divine, if refined from superstition (as al other Ordinances are)
though derived through corrupt channels of the Romish Church. Hence our
Reformers did not dig new Wels of Ministerial Ordination (as Papists falsely
aspers, which Mr. Mason refuts) but purified the puddle water according to
Apostolic Institution; not requiring more of any ordained in the Church of
Rome, then to renounce their superstitious errors. Which done, they were
admitted to exercise the Ministry received, both truly as to the substance, and
duly to succession, without reordination. For though that Sword had contracted
Rev. 2. 12.
rust, yet was it the same with two edges, which came out of Jesus Christ's
mouth: nor may it be broken or cast off because rusty; but cleared, cleansed, and
furbished from dulnes or bluntnes. Ministers may still continu Gods Laborers,
though Loiterers, Mat. 26 40.
as Christ owned his Disciples, when they could not wake or watch one hour in
his heavy horrid agony. Our Antiministerial Antagonists have less color to argu
it Antichristian from Papal usurpation; then there is Reason, Scripture, and
Experience (beside common consent of al Reformed Churches) to prove it
Authentic: For if envy, teen, and avarice did not blind their bloodshot eyes,
they might clearly see some mighty works wrought on Men's Souls by the Ministry:
without which those cavilling calumniators had not bin so much Christian as they
boast to be; nor so able to contend with specious shows of Piety against the
learned Ministry, with whose Heifers they plough, having nothing but what they
received from them, and are most ingrat wretches to their pristin Teachers.

We know that many Churches beside Reformed (Gallican, Popes Primacy began A
604.
Venetian, Grecian, Russian, Asian, African) deny the Popes universal Primacy
of power, being bought by proud Boniface 3. of proditorious Phocas the
Parricid, abov 1000 years ago; who by Divine Right had no Jurisdiction farther
then his own Dioces or Patriarchat, limited by general Councils: where four
other Patriarchs (of Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, Constantinople) had equal
authority assigned in their several Precincts or Provinces, as al know. This
Antichristian arrogation (which gav first hint of revolt to Henry 8.) our
Bishops and Ministers still abhorred, so much as their Adversaries do the
Genevan Presbytery: But it may be feared, lest their preposterous zele or
prepensed malice, may prove the Popes best Engine; if they can so far prevail to
cashire al learned, laborious, duly ordained Ministers, which God forbid: For
then our Church will become a falow unfenced Field, fit for Papal subtlety; which
he will Plough with an Ox and Ass co^yoked (politic Jesuits with fanatic
Donatists, Seminary Priests with gifted Brethren, Friars mendicant with
Prophets predicant) who condog or comply in consortship under diverse disguises,
as is well known. So that no wise Men judge otherwise of this conjuncture, but
that Jacobs hand is in the py, and Ahitophel assistant in counsil with Absolon;
whose sly plots and practices against true Ministry good Lord confound.

Reformations may bend so far on one hand, til they meet on the other;
forsaking that rectitud of the mean, in which the truth and honor of Religion
consists. Antichrist (which some fear in name and in others, more then in the
thing or themselfs) is at both ends of extrems: of Prophanes, defect, and
confusion on one side, and excess of superstition on the other. Every Man may
suspect Antichrist in his own bosom, since the Kingdom of Christ and Antichrist
is specialy within us: but it is better for the Church to retain what is Christ's
though in common with Antichrist, then passionatly to cast off al under color
of detesting him; since Men may fall into sacrilege (which is too frequent) while
they seem to abhor Idols. It Is the same evil Spirit which rents the Church by
Schisms, and that which casts into the fire of persecution, and water of
superstition: But as the Spirit of Idolatry may be cast out for a fit; so he
may soon return with seven Devils wors then himself. Papal darkness and Mat. 12.
4^.
Human eclipsings, are no warrant to extinguish the light of true Ministry set
up by Christ: Nor can Men pleasure Satan more, then to put out the Churches
Candles instead of snuffing them: but some hate our Ministry, not for lighting
their Lamps at the Popes Taper; but for out-shining their dimnes: for it is
madness to cut their Fathers throats because they were once sick, or descended
from diseased Parents, if they are become in sound perfect health. Vulgar
Spirits are uncouth Reformers, who beat down or break in pieces with Axes and
Hammers, having no Chissels or finer tools to clens and polish: as some pull down
Crosses to set up Weather-coeks, and batter Church windows, because painted in
time of Popery. Man's usurpation cannot prejudice Gods dominion, nor Human
traditions or additions vacat divine Commands, nor Antichrists superstitions
cancel Christ's Institutions; nor the heady intrusion of some on Churches rights,
cause Christians to remov the ancient Landmarks of true Ministry, du order, and
good Government fixed by Christ. It Is much more madness to abolish the use of
holy things, then to lerat some abuses with it: but right reforming is a staid
sober restoration of ancient venerable sorms; which is never well handled
unless Men have honest hearts, good heads, pure hands, and clear eyes to discern,
direct, and dispose it: but when al meet, they will seriously, sincerely, and
succesfully do the work of Christ and his Church. Christians have no cause in
Reason or Religion, to reject our reformed Ministry for any succession from,
relation to, or communion with the Roman Church or Clergy; no more then the
Objectors have to pull out their eyes, because Papists see with theirs: or destroy
themselfs, because issued from Popish Parents or Progenitors; For we may so well
refuse al Leagues, Treaties, or common Commerce with them, as al Rites of
Christianity; and even that as lawful Ministry or holy succession originaly
derived from Christ and his Apostles. So far of Ministry in general: now of
Episcopacy.

Ob. Some at first brunt oppose, that our Ministry being conveied Epict^pacy.
by the hands of Bishops (who are not of Christ's planting, and now supplanted
by power) the whole order, as slips or branches of one stem or stock, must needs
fall or fail together with the trunck of the Tree: Ergo both to be annulled.

Sol. Lo how these Antiministerials cudgel Presbyters with the same staf, which
some of them put into Vulgar hands to beat their Reverend Fathers, and banish
Episcopat: but what ever those rigid Reformists secret or sinister intentions
were; surely they wanted the Serpents wisdom to sav the main Head, whence life,
motion, and direction descends to al parts; whereby the lesser hurts or bruises
might easily be recured. For the envious and ambitious zele of such
Antiprelatical Spirits aspiring to step up into their steads, has produced sad
events, and given their Enemies great advantage: so they have work enough to
keep the Lepry from their own Heads, which they told the People had so foully
infected Bishops hands, as could never be cleansed unles cut off: but al mortals
are apt to do amiss, and it is never too lat to rectify miscarriages. Most Men
confess (nor can impudence gainsay it) that the Order or Office is lawful,
whereby al Christian Churches were Governed: however some inconveiniences (yea
mischiefs too) arise from corruption of finful Men in all Professions. Tho then
Episcopy has bin much shaken or depressed by power, passion, or private ends,
to the impairing and indangering of the whole fabric or function: yet wise Men
may after this thick dust of disput see, what is of God therein, and regulat it
by paring off what is depraved or deformed, and restore it to primeval purity.
It Is now no need to fear or flatter Bishops faces, whose glory is gone; but mere
matter of Conscience to testify truth: since those of different judgments take
freedom to bespatter them so unjustly and unsavourly; as they hoped by their il
breath to blast that venerable caling, and render it odious or execrable to
weak Christians, which to wise Men was ever like Aarons Ointment poured out.
Nor does it lose divine fragrance by the fracture of il times, which
passionatly break the Alablaster boxes of civil protection, which preserved it
for many ages from vulgar insolence and Schismatical violence. The like liberty
is lawful to vindicat it by pregnant places of Scriptural precepts and
precedents, secunded with Catholic custom and practis of the Church, and
confirmed by the Laws of this Land.

To omit the main controversy of its lawfulnes, and to whiten two Walls with one
Trowel; two points principaly shall be handled: 1. To remov a popular Odium or
Plebeian passion and prejudication; taken up by weak (yet happily well minded)
Christians, against Bishops Presidential authority over Presbyters. 2. to
justify the holy Ministerial Ordination duly done by their hands. One rub
rises from their lat disasters, whom if Arguments and Words could not, yet
Arms and Swords have suppressed. For vulgar minds are apt to judge those unjust
that are unprosperous, and cursed who are punished, as Turcs use to doom. Yet
in true sens, their many miseries may no more be urged against their Persons or
Places then Jobs afflictions; which Satan never alleged against his integrity.
Many wish that al Prelates and Presbyters were chief Suff^rers: yea that the
Word, Sacraments, and al holy Ministrations should ceaf, but Religious Rites
must not be mesured by Men's passions or prevalences, nor any secular sanctions.
For there were pious Prelates preposited abov Presbyters, before any Civil power
protected them; and by Gods Grace may so continu, maugre al oppression or
persecution. The things of Christ and true Religion may not be received or
refused, as Ushered in or crowded out by Civil power: nor does Christ steer his
Ship by that compass: since at the same rate of Worldly frowns, we should have no
Scriptures, Sacraments, sound Doctrins, or holy Ordinances; but al had bin
turned into Heathenish barbarity, Hereticla errors, and Schismatical
confusions: if conscience to God and Christ had not conserved these sacred
things, by the pious patience of holy Bishops and Ministers, whom wicked
Worldlings ever hated: seeking to destroy root and branch through the sides of
Episcopacy. Bishops Government as referred to the chief office of Ordination,
is no way Popish or Antichristian, as too many ignorantly or maliciously
chatter: tho the pride, ambition, or avarice of some Prelates, might make them
justly odious, because contrary to Christ's precept and pattern: whose place
Bishops as chief Pastors or Parents among Presbyters, have alwais since the
Apostles eminently held in the extern polity or Regiment of the Church. So that
the ancient Presidentship over the Clergy in several Diocesan precincts, as it
was justly exercised in p^rer times, is no less Christian, then several
Churches in all ages and places of the World: Yea far beyond any form, which
has not charity to brook or bear regulated Prelacy, suting with Scripture and
Antiquity. For Lutheran Superintendents are Bishops in truth tho not title: yea
the most learned Genevins ( Calvin, Beza, Moulin, Salmatius, Bochartus,
Blundel) acknowledge Episcopat a pious institution, succeding in the Apostles
steads, by the Churches counsil and Consent. So far is any sober, impartial,
uninteressed Man from dooming or deeming it unlawful; unles they be blinded
with blockish ignorance, or possessed with peevish arogance. Certes, the
learned Presbyterians are best Friends, and blind Zelots bittrest Foes to true
Episcopat: who want science, prudence, humility and charity; which is the best
condiment of Christianity. Orderly Presbytery which admits one to Preside, is a
lesser Episcopy to oversee particular Flocks: yet not to expel or extirp
Bishops; nor is headless or many headed Presbytery necessary by divine right:
but primitiv Prelacy (which imports one grav worthy Person chosen by consent,
and assisted by counsil of sundry Presbyters to preside over them) is to be
preferred before al other forms for many weighty Reasons ensuing.

1. Because al Apostolic Ancients ( Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Polycarp,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Irenaeus) jointly attest, that one still Episcopized in
every City. For at first a few Presbyters served in each by Apostolic
appointment: but as converts increased, they constituted several Colleges,
Companies, or Consistories as the Churches Colonies; which one Supervisor as
Captain or Commander overruled. Aerius upon envy against Eustachius, who got a
Bishopric from him, was the first that pressed Clerical parity, contrary to
the Churches old Order: but if the Apostles had not instituted it, how could al
Churches uniformly conspire therein all the World over? For tho at first the name
was common to al Church Ministers (even Apostles) yet after their deaths, it
was peculiarly confined to their Successors in place and power.

2. To avoid scandal of other Churches, which for far a major Peter Martyr,
Zanchius, Vid^lius, Gerard, Gro^^us, D^o^at and Alsted agree.

3. To preserv the power of Ministerial Ordination and Succession, which some
sober Presbyterians (specialy Blondel) hold to be best strengthened by Episcopy:
because it was the universal way, whereby Ministry and Christianity have bin
derived to this day: the resecting whereof is most advantageous to al Cavillers
against Godly Ministry.

4. True Episcopat never had had a free, full, or fair hearing, Epist ad Evag.
Presbyters and Deacons according to S. Jeroms parallel.

Now Christ and his Apostles in their institution much regarded Judaic customs:
as to Baptize with Water, to use Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, to
solemnize Weekly the Lords Day in the Sabbaths stead, to giv Pastors and
Teachers power of the Keis: nor is any express precept or evident precedent
against Episcopat, either commanding parity, or forbidding Luk 11. 25. 26.
orderly superiority in Church or Commonweal, Christ indeed inhibits his
Apostles (who were coequal or coordinat) to exercise dominion like secular
Princes: which is a Rule for all Churches not to use any preeminence by
ambition, tyranny, violence, or usurpation on the Bodies, Estats, Life's, or
Liberties of Men in Worldlings way: yet such courses (beside factious
emulations) are so incident to some insolent Presbyters, as to the proudest
Prelates. Our Saviors sens is plain, that what ever parts, power, place, gifts,
or Graces any Minister has abov others; he should use them with humility to
Gods Glory and the Churches good: laying aside the levan of imperious
oppression: but the very Apostles (who had a priority of place with parity of
power among themselfs) exercised superiority of jurisdiction over al other
Disciples and Believers, who obeyed them as Fathers, doing the like to Bishops
after them. St. Paul being to leav the World, left a pattern of
Church Government (which was constantly pursued) in ordeining Titus and Timothy
Bishops, giving them personal power to ordein, censure, rebuk, or silence al
Elders and Deacons under their charge. Which Blondel confesses, to be a
perpetual precedent for Church regiment. It Is a poor cavil to say they were
Evangelists designed to Preach, not to govern; since that takes not away their
power of rule: for then no Presbyters can Preach except they be Evangelists;
nor being such can preside in their Consistories. At the same rate we may argu,
that none but the chief Appostles may feed Christ's Lambs or Sheep, because he
committed the charge by a triple command to Peter the chiefest. Or that the
power to ordein Elders by laying on Hands, to receiv accusations against them,
to rebuk, censure, silence, excommunicat and restore, belong soly to Apostles
and Evangelists: whereas a succession is necessary for Church societies so well
as civil: as that vehement charge laid on Tymothy (to 1 Timothy 5. 21. 1 Timothy 6.
14.
keep th^s things unpartialy and unblamably, til our Lord Jesus Christ com)
plainly shows. For he declining daily to death, could not do it, but only
transmit the pattern to posterity, which he performed by a public way of
Government. This prime practis both in the Apostles dais and after, is seen in
the seven Asian Churches, and in others registered by Fathers, Councils, and
Histories. What ensuing times observed, is evident among al Christians of the
Eastern, Greec, Muscovit, Abyssen, and Indian Churches which retain Bishops to
this day. For no Presbyters ever exercised Ordination or Jurisdiction by sole
peculiar power, without presence and presidence of an Apostle or Bishop.
Presbytery is named but in two Texts of Scripture: (one being falsely alleged
for ruling Lay Elders) which are not preceptiv or institutiv, but only
narrativ: without expressing any joint power, office, or authority of
Presbyters with Presidents; much less without or against them. St. Jude puts
foul marks on such Jude v 8, 11. 19.
As despised Dominion or speak evil of Dignities; denouncing Woe against their
seditious practices; who are cruel like Cain, covetous as Balaam, and ambitious
as Corah and his accomplices. Such factious disturbers of Order prescribed by God
in his Church St. Peter calls Presump^uous, Selfwilled, and dispisers 2 Pet. 2.
10.
of Dignities: Whom these Apostles would not so sharply check, unles there had
bin some eminences in the Church so well as among the Jews; which those mutinous
Men confronted or contemned. For they were too wary to oppose Civil powers,
whole Sword was too keen: but the Ecclesiastic Orders, Dignities, and Dominions
were obvious or obnoxious to al turbulent tumultuary Spirits: who under vele of
Christian liberty, and pretensions of the Spirit (the better to set off their
Schisms and separatings) oppugned authority, even in the Churches Infancy.

5. Common Reason requires a power and polity in the Jerome owns as the ground
of that Government to repres^ Schisms: nor can such a Paternal preeminence
prejudice any, in preferring one worthy Person to rule the rest: so that his
Presidential priority be kept within du bounds of humility. For woeful
experience shows, how the want hereof has occasioned many main mischiefs by
swarms of Sects both here and elswher. If any allege vulgar dislikes of
Episcopat; this makes most for it; since what the many-headed multitud most
decry (who will cry Hosanna and Crucifig^ with one breath) wise Men most approv:
yea the best Christians seeing the misery of change, rather desire regulated
Prelacy then any other Church-Polity. For headl^ss Presbytery and scattered
Independency are disliked by moderat Men as a remedy wors then the malady. 1.
For the novity, because neither was heard of in 1500. years, and the last scars
of twelv years standing: nor have they the vote of any general Council, or
practis of the Catholic Church. 2. They have prevailed here to justle out
Episcopy by force in broken bloody times; being planted not by Preaching or
Patience under persecution; but by the Sword; and watered with their Brethrens
blood, as Ro^ulus founded Rome; or as T^^i^ Tarquins Wife drov her Chariot over
her Father Servius mangled Corpse: whereas Prelacy was decreed in all the World
(as St. Jerome In Ep. ad Titum.
avows) with wisdom, peace, and charity, by consent of Churches. 3. Because
neither of these two wais has such plenary approbation as the old had in all
Parliaments and Convocations since this Nation Christianized. 4. Since the same
or wors inconveniences obtruded to Episcopy in its declining age, appeer in the
bud or prime of these new wais: so much pride, avarice, ambition, vanity,
uncharitablenes: with more prophanes, Atheism, Heresy, Blasphemy,
licentiousnes, faction, bitterness, contention, confusion then ever attended
Episcopacy: beside needless scandal given to other Churches; that Men say with
the old Woman, Veterem effodit Antigonum. 5. Neither of the new models can
produce so evident precept or precedent, as Episcopat does, no nor promiss from
God, that they shall be free from those enormities odiously objected against
Bishops which may befall to al things managed by Men liable to manifold faults,
failings, and frailties in all Degrees, Calings, or Professions. But this
Government of a Paternal president among Presbyters, has far surer grounds
from Scripture and Antiquity, then any newfangled form or fashion; as having
the preponderating privilege of uniform universal Polity practiced by all
Churches in purest times; whereto neither of those can with any face pretend.
It Is strange how impudently many Men cite or rather rack some broken pieces of
Ignatius, Tertullian. Origin, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Ambros, Austin, and other
Ancients in favor of single Presbytery: when al are clearly contrary for right
regular Episcopacy, which is only pleaded for. Whatever some Fathers are wrested
or wrenched to speak for Ministerial parity, or Popular independency; it is only
to reprov some Prelates arrogance, ambition, and tyranny: who usurped sole power,
neglecting Presbyters advise and assistance; or when some Ecclesiastic Officers
oppressed the People, whom primitivly both Bishops and Presbyters duly regarded
in all public concernments of the Church. It were needless and endless to excuse
their Personal errors or exorbitances, which are apt to attend al power among
Men: yet no wise Man will reckon them genuin effects of that reverend Order;
since their Accusers would be worse if they had parrallel power: for there is
nothing useful or laudable in any other way, which is not inclusivly and
eminently in that order: nor any error or enormity therein, which is not
incident and impendent to Presbytery or any other Polity; though that perhaps
purer in primitiv then later ages. So what Pope Pius 2. said of Clerical
Celibat (he saw some reason why marriage should be prohibited to Priests; but
much more why it should be permitted) the same may be applied to right
constituted Episcopacy: nor can Presbytery or Independency show any such true
title of divine right; which infolds all the good of both those, and superads
unity of order beyond both for the common good. Some press the National Covenant
against it, as if that were a sufficient battery beyond Scripture, Reason,
Antiquity, Civil Law, and Catholic custom; al which approv it: But some chief
composers confess, that their main scope or sens was against Bishops corrupt
government and tyranny, to reform what was decayed or depraved, and retain what
was sound or sincere. However, since that Covenant is no divine infallible
Oracle, but a civil Engine of sinful passionat Men for self ends (on whose heads
the arrow fell, which they shot against others) al its words and intentions must
be reduced to the rule of good conscience, right reason, and holy writ: nor
should Antiquity and the Fathers stoop or submit to partial Novelists (many of
whose acts are found faulty or factious:) Nor does it make ought for headless
Presbytery or heady Independency; no nor against pure primeval Prelacy. For some
stif sticklers for Presbytery, seeing the mischiefs of late changes, confess,
they know nothing unlawful therein, but many godly Men held it inconvenient: so
this long bloody debat results on the judgment of Prudence, not Conscience; of
Policy, not Piety. Yet to cloak their malice, they cunningly soddered Popery
and Prelacy together, implying both to be inseparable Birds of a Feather, then
which nothing is more rediculous, falls, and slanderous: For many good Bishops
at Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria preceded Rome, and sundry afterward in other
Provinces, equal to the Bishop of Rome, and not depending on him, as be diverse
at this day: Nor is the Pope Founder or Fountain of Episcopat, nor caled or
counted Antichristian as Prelat or Patriarch of one Province; for then al
Bishops are Antichrists, and Christ's whole Church for 1500 years Antichristian,
which is barbarous to conceiv, and blasphemous to contest. The Pope becam
Antichrist upon another score, when Boniface 3. with his successors, usurped
the style of universal Bishop, or Gods Vicar General; which his penultimat
predecessor ( Gregory 1.) foredoomed to be Antichrists Forerunner. So that very
title ( Vicarius Dei generalis in terris) carries the number of the Beasts name
(666) in Roman numeral letters Rev. 13. 18.
(D. C. L. V. V. I. I. I. I. I. I.) as every ey may see. Semblably that
Covenant contains just 666 words, as he that tells them exactly shall surely
find; which may seem ominous in both. Most Bishops of Rome before Boniface,
were humble Men, and very many holy Martyrs; who abhorred the name of universal
Bishop or Head of the Church as Antichristian: but those since grew proud
presumptuous persecutors, introducing sundry superstitions, contrary to Christ's
Institutions and Canons of the Catholic Church; for which abuses our Church
with others refused their communion.

So reformed Bishops cannot be branded as Popish or Antichristian, without
breach of charity and contrary to verity; since many of them have bin Martyred by
Popish tyranny. If then the Pope is not Antichrist as a Bishop; nor Episcopat
Antichristian; it is a poor, peevish, popular calumny of malicious Men against
our Ministry, that they are ordained by limbs of Antichrist, which is false,
futilous, and fucatio^s. Yet it concerns al Presbyters ordained by them, since
al derived from one original root (branch after branch) of pretended Papal
Prelacy. Our Bishops ordeining Ministers in presence of Presbyters, by their
joint laying on of hands with fasting and prayer, did but their duty injoined
by 1500 years prescription, with consent of Princes, Prelates, Peers,
Presbyters, and People in Parlements: so they cannot be punished in that
regard, nor charged as a private crime, which is done in obedience to public
command; much less abolished in that behalf, since they had our Churches
warrant, and vote of al others which retain that order, beside the good liking
of those that have it not. Why then are Bishops extruded? is not covetousnes the
root of al evil? But Presbyters, two or mo, have no warrant to ordein or
exercise any Jurisdiction without a Bishop in chief; nor is a Bishop forbid to
ordein and rule assisted by Presbyters: but simple Presbytery Acephalon
Anarchy. Civil Magistrates may regulat the exercise, but cannot confer the
Office of Bishop or Presbyter, which flows from a spiritual Head Christ Jesus:
nor can Acts of Parliament with justice or honor dismount the Canons of
Oecumenic Councils, Catholic Customs, or Laws of the Church. If it be said or
supposed, that the lat Parliament only restored, and Presbyters resumed their
power of Ordination, which Bishops unjustly usurped; why did they never claim
it here or elswher for all past ages, til last factious tumultuous times? If
they crav only a joint right with Bishops, yet subordinat; they may enjoy it
still, giving their Betters preeminence for orders sake: but their fond ambition
to ingross al without and against them, has lost al power to both, and marred
al by overweening. There were many excellent Prelates ancient and modern, whose
incomparable worth while some puny pety Presbyters scornfully or scurrilously
vilified, they seem as so many Daws perching on Paul's pinacles, or like living
Dogs bearding dead Lions. Nor do such impotent impudent toungs tuned to vulgar
ears against Episcopal caling become Men which pretend to piety, learning,
goodness, gravity, charity, civility, or common christianity. Bishops personal
faults can no more be excused then Presbyters or any others in the exercise of
their Functions: But some malcontents, like water violently pent up by
Fludgates, violently break forth, and bear away the whole sluice of Government;
which might be better managed or moderated by du bounds set to both.

Ordinary Ministers seem as younger Brothers (who lived handsomely or happily
under their Fathers tuition) scattered or exposed to al injuries and miseries,
that many as prodigal Sons, are fain to feed on the husks of popular favors;
who may not repine at the measure offered by others, which they insolently meted
to their Fathers, Elies scandalous Sons annulled not their service or
sacrifices, much less the Priestly Office, which depends not on the persons
administering, but Gods authority commanding, and right investiture into the
Function. So that the misdemenors or miscarriages of Bishops and Ministers, may
blot or blemish the beauty; but not bereav the being of Religious duties or
their calings, no more then lapses after Baptism do unbaptise any Christian.
Wherher Bishops ordained Presbyters by divine Apostolic right; or exercised
Ordination, Confirmation, and Jurisdiction only by ecclesiastic custom in order
of place among Presbyters? it needs no curious debat: But certes true Episcopat
is every way lawful, and Ministers regularly ordained right Pastors, maugre al
Traducers malice or gainsaying. Nor was Christ's Gospel or Ordinances any other
way dispensed and dispersed, sav only by succession of Episcopal Ordination:
which custom was ever deemed to be derived from Christ by his Apostles, with a
command of continuation. Ignatius (...) Ep. a^ Ep^.
compares the harmony between a Bishop and his Presbyters, to the strings of a
well set Harp; yea to the accord between God the Father and Son as Mediator; where
the samenes of divine Nature is an order of Priority in relation. If the pipes
of Ministerial power, first laid in the Head-spring, be stopped or defiled (as
all that passes through earthen vessels will in time) which have flowed so long
in a du course of Ordination; they must not presently be cut off, or dammed up,
nor the water diverted by Independent Wels and broken Buckets: but rather
cleansed and repaired to carry holy Water like the Temples Vessels in their
primitiv purity; which is easily done, if pride, policy, and mundan interests
be separated from those of Christ and his Church, by cashiring al sordid
sinister ends of self-profit in Church Reformations; O utinam. If Ananias and
Saphira were smiten for dissembling; how much more shall such sacrilegious
spirits, which rob the Church instead of reforming? As to Presbytery, the
Vocation is valid and venerable, if in juncture with Bishops, like Tortesses,
which are safest under that shel: but some proud Presbyters casting it off,
stripped themselfs of their strongest shield; being become naked, feeble, and
contemptible, fit to be trampled under Rustic feet.

One rub rests touching Peoples right to chus and ordein Ministers; Peoples
Right.
which some say is essential, and Ministry invalid without it: But this pretext
relies on a falls liberty, which sundry sorts of Sectists jugging together like
Partridges in small Covies of fained Churches or Bodies, assum to appoint their
own Ministers, and will have none sav such as shall comply with their humor:
whence their Chaplains flatter them to arrogat a power in all Church affairs,
which belongs not to them: For they have no such right, either eminently as the
Executioners power is in a Judge; or virtualy, as life in the Sun; or causaly,
as heart in Fire; or derivativly as the chief Magistrates power is in mean
Constables and other Officers: so it can only be exorbitantly, as Corah claimed
to make Priests and Rulers in Moses and Aarons rooms; and Wat Tyler under
Richard 2. for Gods Word yields no such precept or precedent in the Jewish
Church, for People to chus Priests, or meddle with matters of holy concernment:
Nor did Christ alter any thing in extern manner or Ministry, as to venture it on
the rock of vulgar rudenes or rashness, which attends their weak heads and wild
hands in Religious Rites; but commended that care to his chosen Apostles and
their Successors, whereof Plebeians are incompetent and incapable. If they
should be supposed sufficient to try Ministers ability; yet have they no right
to Ordein, no more then a wise Man can send an Ambassador in his Princes name;
since it is delegated soly to such as Christ has designed to dispens Ordination,
and not to the multitud, be their gifts or graces never so good or great. The
People sometimes recommended Men to be Ordained, or accepted such Acts 6. 5.
as the Apostles or Elders appointed: but it never was derived from them as the
Fountain, nor conveied by them as fit conduits* by which this holy stream of
the Sanctuary is to flow. Wise, modest, humble Christians, are of al most shy
to undergo such bold things, as having no call or command from Christ or his
Church; nor can expect a blessing on their rash attempts: yet in our Church no
Orders were conferred without the Peoples presence and Presbyters coassistance.

If People had sole power to ordein Ministers, what sorry choice would they
make, how weakly would they examine, how wildly ordein, and what slovenly hands
impose? for they are more pleased with familiar rusticity then learned gravity,
and prefer a confident Mechanic to the ablest Divine. People may so well be
Preachers and Baptisers, as Ordein any to be their Teachers; who may so well
exercise the Ministerial power as confer it on others: But if al have right to
the Keis as Stewards or Ministers of holy things; then it is not true, That
Christ gav some to be Apostles, Pastors and Teachers: so every part may Ephesians 4.
11. 1 Cor. 12. 22.
challenge to be an Ey; which piece of profane confusion no Church ever
allowed. The Peoples presence at Ordination or acceptance of their Minister, is
a matter only of human prudence and civil compact for that particular place:
but no owning of power derived from Christ by Church Rulers, to officiat for
their Souls good: Nor does it indow him with any power, but only appropriat him
to take care of such a People. For though Believers in primitiv times, did often
express their lov to Bishops and Presbyters by their presence and cheerful
concurrence in matters tending to public peace and good Government, so far as
modest discretion deemed decent: yet they never presumed to claim hands in
ordination, but only requested the Rulers, that such as they approved may be
set over them, which was sometime granted, sometime not: but to ordein of
themselfs, Saul and Vzziah had so much right to offer Incens, as they to do it.

Al humble Christians look to the rock whence they were hewn, and pit wherout
they were dug; who did not make Ministers; but they sent by Christ, made
People Christians. Such as sat in darkness had light brought them, and were
found of God by his Ministers sent as Shepherds to the lost Sheep which sought
not God. So there is no cause for People to embrace that fury, folly, and faction
which would lay al in common: since Levellers can allege nothing to repeal the
divine approbation of Ministry, which has continued a peculiar peaceable
possession to Church Officers by Christ's Institution for sixteen Centuries
without cessation, in a constant successon of Ordination. We grant People in a
particular Parish or Congregation, may desire a special Man to be their Prelat
or Pastor (as those of Milan did St. Ambros) but cannot chus by their proper
power, much less Ordein: as Soldiers may petition the General for one to be
their Captain; but cannot chus, creat, or constitut any without Commission.
They may so well set up a new Christ or new Gospel, as new Ministry or new
Ordination; which Christ has done once for all times and places to the Worlds
end, without Peoples interest. A wise Spaniard said, It Is better in a State to
prefer corrupt Men then silly Sots: the one like a Thief in a Vinyard, will only
take ripe Grapes til he be satiat: but the other as an Ass eats ripe and green,
treads down al with his heels, and being filled, tumbles in it to spoil al:
such is the unskilful Vulgar in Church affairs.

Quest. Some scornfully ask, what can Bishops confer in Ordination more then
other Men, what charm is in their prayers or imposing of hands, to invest
Church power; or how can they giv the Graces of the holy Ghost? why do they
claim to be caled Clerics as peculiar to that Tribe, and contemptuously call
others Laics; since all the Lords People are the lot of his Inheritance, being
spiritualy anointed to be Kings, Priests, Prophets.

Answ. These Scarrows are soon repelled: 1. Touching the term or title of Clergy
and Laity (which captious Critics imput as pride in Ecclesiastics to incens
People against them) this distinction was ever used ab initio, as al ancient
Fathers, Councils, and Histories ratify: nor is the one upbraided as a badg of
vainglory to the Ministry; nor the other aspersed as a brand of infamy to the
People: but only to difference both calings, as it is in our Laws and Language.
Nor is it avers to Scripture sens, which calls them Pastor and Flock, Doctor and
Disciple, Ruler and Ruled, yea al Faithful in general, are styled Clerus (a
Church) or portion of the Lords heritage: but Ministers in special Clerus
Ecclesiae, a lot given by the Lord to his Acts 2. 6. Acts. 13. 2, 3.
Church, as consecrat apart to his service. So the Apostles chos Matthias by
lot: and the holy Ghost after said, Separat Barnabas and Paul for the work
whereto I have caled them; who having fasted, praid, and laid on hands, sent them
away. Gods Ministers disdain not to be counted or caled his People, as Children
of one spiritual Father; and brethren of the same Family of Faith: Nor will
humble Christians covet to be clyped Clerics, or scorn the appellation of Laics
to avoid confusion of Calings: who account or acknowledge true Bishops and
Ministers as their Fathers, Overseers, and Instructers. Men may so well bogle at
the words Trinity, three persons, and Sacraments; which are not found in the
letter, but truth and sens of Scripture: Nor is Logomachy or word-war fit for
wise Men, being a mere Sciomachy or shadow-fight, like stumbling at straws and
syllabical scruples. No Religion bars convenient compendious terms to
distinguish degrees: but these word-Carpers have a malicious meaning, to make
People abandon both Name and Thing, even the Office and Ordination. 2. To the
demand, what charm is in Bishops hands or prayers to confer the holy Ghost,
more then in others so well or better gifted? It may so well be asked (as
Atheists and Apostats use) what virtu is in Baptism water to wash away sin,
regenerat sinners, confer Grace, or represent Christ's blood more then in other,
as proud Catabaptists contested? Or what efficacy in Bread and Wine at the
Lords Supper, more then in the same Elements at usual Tables or Taverns? How
does the form of consecration by using Christ's words ad or alter them? At this
rate of carnal reasoning, Men may cavil at Christ's Deity and Humanity for the
outward poverty of his life and death; which made many doubt or deny him to be
the true Messiah. So this fond, futilous, frivolous question falls to ground*
with its own weight or weakness; as if there, were more light in lat modern
Meteors, then in the great Lamps (Sun, Moon, and Stars) of Scripture, Church,
and ancient Christians: who with the same holy humble Faith, as they beleev
Jesus to be the promised Messiah (maugre al which blind Jews and babarous
Infidels obtrud) do also religiously reverence al his holy Orders and
Ordinances, how poor or plain soever, settled in his Church. Nor does the means
of outward appeerance weaken their duty or devotion: who live by Faith, see with
the ey of Faith, and act with Faiths hand in all divine mysteries: For God makes
foolish things effectual by his spirit and Grace, to those high holy ends for
which they were ordained. So it is not any Magic charm which makes common
Accedit Verbu^ Elemento, and fit Sacramentum.
Elements become Sacraments, being consecrat by Ministers; nor in Bishops hands
and prayers to ordein them; but his powerful Word and Spirit: who commands the
duty, confirms the Order, and givs a blessing to Ministerial Ordination, so well
as to al other Ordinances.

The result is, That Ordination makes nothing to Ministers Natural, Moral, or
Spiritual endowments; nor does it confer any Physical power, no more then the
Office of a Judge, Ambassador, or martial Commander, to their personal
abilities: but invests them alone with authority to exercise those Functions,
which none else may presum to perform, who has not that order of Office
consigned to him: Nor can any power in Men make a Gospel Minister though never
so gifted, to consecrat holy duties, sav only such as are set apart or separat
thereto by du Ordination. The benefits thereof are manifest and manifold: 1. For
Gods glory and salvation of Men's Souls, by believing true Ministers testimony,
that Jesus Christ is sole Savior of the World; who began this Ordinance, and
sent some special witnesses to proclaim him by a constant continual succession
in all ages and places til his secund coming. 2. It evidenceth the Churches care
and fidelity, both in preserving the divine Oracles, and in celebrating holy
Mysteries as Seals to confirm Christians Faith; beside the exercise of wholesome
Discipline committed to the Churches chief Pastors and Rulers. 3. It givs
persons rightly Ordained a real power derived from Christ, which Mat. 28 20. 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2.
none has of himself; as St. Paul bid Timothy, lay hands suddenly on none, but
commit the things he had heard of him to faithful Men, who shall be able to
teach others also: viz. by perpetual succession, and public Commission. 4. It
binds the party Ordained more strictly to discharge his duty by study, prayer,
conference, meditation to keep and improv those gifts or Graces, for Gods glory
and the Churches good. 5. It givs true Ministers comfort, courage, and
confidence (as sacred unction did to the Prophets, and Christ's solen Commission
to the Apostles) to preach; not as popular Scribes, or precarious Pharisees;
but as St. John Evangelist authorized by Christ; whose Ministry, like John
Baptists, was not of Men (though transmitted by Men) but from Heaven; whereby
they can rebuk with authority, and do al duties of their Ministry. With this
confident conscience, they can speak boldly in the Lords name, not fearing Men's
faces, no nor the force or fury of Devils: nor will forsake their Flocks when
Wolfs com, as Hirelings and Self-Intruders do; but in times of public
persecution, chus rather to be exemples of cheerful suffering, in expectance of
Christ's promised assistance and reward. 5. It conservs order and decorum in the
Church, fortifying their function with du respect or regard: so that neither
Person nor Office is easily despised, when divine Ordination is duly performed.
For it conciliats much lov, aw, and reverence from al true Christians; raising a
just vencration to duties rightly celebrated by those of whom Christ says, He
that receives you Mat. 10. 40.
receives me, and who so despises you despises me, and him that sent me.
This makes them esteemed as Prophets, Apostles, or Angels sent of God: yea
Christ resents their injuries as his own, and the very dust of their feet
becoms a dreadful Witness against proud contemners: who deeming them to be but
of civil courtesy, make no bones to degrade them; that they may prefer a rabble
of their own Parasitical Preachers, before any of Christ's sending or the
Churches ordeining. Such are fittest for their sinister end^, who will act in a
levelled way by the same insolent irreverent spirit of popularity, which is
most prevalent with the Enemies of Ministerial power and Ordination. The Devil
is best pleased with such pragmatic Preachers, who do Satan's work under our
Saviors livery: which is to extirpat true Ministry and al conscience of
Religion, that so having by these Nimrods hunted out the race of ancient holy
Order and Succession; he may erect a Babel of Confusion. 7. It givs great
satisfaction to al true Believers in point of duty discharged, and comfort
obtained by holy Ministration: when they are assured of the Ministers mission
and officiating in Christ's name; which none can pretend to without a ly, sav
those rightly ordained: but other impudent intruders, have no plea from Scripture
or Church custom to justify their acts, or perswad sober Christians to regard
them. The old Greec Liturgies prayed at Ordination of Bishops and Presbyters,
that God would bestow on them such Gifts, as the holy Ministry might be
unblamed and unblemished for the Peoples comfort. St. Paul asks, How shall they
Preach unles they be sent? Which Romans 4. 10*
implies that none can cheerfully or comfortably do it without du divine
mission. No Churches or Christians were ever eminent for sound knowledge,
Orthodox truth, or holy Life; except where true Ministry, by right Ordination was
countenanced and continued: for the more defectiv or neglectiv they are therein;
the more overgrown they are with ignorance, error, Schism, novity, and
licentiousnes: when Men make themselfs or others Ministers in new ways.

To sum up al, right Ordination confers no intern inherent Summary.
Grace or sanctity (for Judas was an Apostle and Demas a Disciple, yet both
dissemblers) but only outward gifts fit for that function, to discern or
distinguish them from common Christians: having al their efficacy or authority
from the first Fountain, in the same way of subordinat succession, which Christ
prescribed, the Apostles performed, and al Churches practiced: nor can any
Upstarts or Pretenders to new Lights, claim the power of Ministry without du
Ordination in the old way: to which no Man's ostentation of Gifts or admiration
of Auditors can contribut ought to eithers comfort; but much to the sin and
shame of both, as perverters of Christ's Ordinance and perturbers of public
Peace. Yet every ordained Man in a mere outward form, is not a true worthy
Minister: for there may be Hypocrites (as Magus was) who have no real abilities,
nor honest purposes; but aim only at base advantages, as Intruders also do.
The Ordeiners too may be deceived in judgment of charity, or corrupted by human
frailty (which folows al Flesh more or less) to pervert this holy Institution,
since nothing is free from abuse: but they can have no comfort in that sacred
caling, unles they discharge their duty with honest hearts to Gods glory and
salvation of Men's souls, for unworthy Ministers unduly Ordered, are like Ships
slightly builded, which cause their own loss and all that sail in them: so
disorders in ordeining, are a great detriment or disparagement to Religion, as
unskilful cowardly Officers are in Armies. Such Laics as in brutish violence or
popular insolence arrogat undu power, or abrogat where it is du; commit more
heinous sin then Simon Magus, who modestly offered Money for a part of
Ministerial power: but to wrest the Keis of Gods house from his ^^u Stewards, to
whom the chief Master committed them (which Magus never essaied to do) is
Cyclopic fury and Geti^ barbarity: much more to transmit them unto Bois,
Lacquies, Me^hanics, or base Buzzards; who not conscious of any just
Ministerial power, can make no conscience to do that duty being most unfit for
it; tho they presum to Preach and ordein whom they pleas; both being fitter for
Stocks and Prisons, then to feed Flocks or frequent Pulpits. Thus far Dr.
Gauden, but far more copiously and curiously, in his learned lucubrations
worthy of most piercing perusal; whereof the quintessence only is here briefly
presented.

For upshot, It appeers that Episcopat was instituted by Conclusion.
Christ Analogicaly in his Apostles, but apertly by them in such as they
appointed to succed with precise rules of Ordination and jurisdiction over
Presbyters and People committed to their charge: which primitiv pattern the
Catholic Church through al ages in all places perpetualy prosecuted or practiced
til these last worst times: but single Presbytery and Lay Elders specialy
without any Bishop in chief, is a lat devise set up for a shift in case of
necessity, as some of the Authors and Fautors acknowledge: wishing they were so
happy to have Protestant Prelates, as England enjoyed about 100. years together
(except a quinquennial Eclips) since Edward 6. of blessed memory began A. C.
1547.
the Reformation. Al which particulars with many mo, are previously and
pregnantly proved in the premises, which shall not be vainly reiterated. These
points are presented to public sifting or scanning sans scandal or scurrility;
with hope of like liberty (still allowed to Scholars) as the Adversaries ever
exercised against Episcopat freely, if they kept their Pens from treason and
sedition (as Penry in his Martin Mar Prelat did not) even when Prelates most
swaied or domineered. For no Sect can or dare say al their Tenets are
infallible Truths: why then will they not patiently permit them to be tried by
the Touchstone of Gods Word, for the better ventilation of verity, without
bitterness or asperity?

His positis, quis non frendet vel cornua tendit?
Foelix, a tergo quem nulla Ciconia pinsit.
These things thus laid, who will not push or winch?
He Is happy, whom no stork behind does pinch.
Supplementum mutuatum: A supply taken from many.
These were Adversaries or Antagonists to Presbyterians, who may be fit
Accusers, but no good Judges: nor shall any of their railings or revilings be
produced, but only such probable testimonies as concern matters of Fact,
Doctrine, or Discipline; laying aside al uncharitablenes. Whereas Christ has
three Offices of King, Priest, and Prophet; they differ under which to darrain
their Discipline. They say he is considered as Son of God or secund Person in
Trinity: so al Persons and Princes (Believers or Infidels) are his Vicerois in
their Dominions: or as Mediator, Head, or Governor of the Church: so al
Pastors, Teachers, and Elders are his immediate Vicars or Officers; but civil
Magistrates only Patrons and Protectors; the one in Spirituals, the other in
Temporals. To this they al stick as limpets to astone, but dissent in
particular points of the foundation. Cartwright confines Christ as Son of God
coequal with the Father to be Ruler of Civil Stats; but not as our Savior or
Redeemer: the Humble Motioner says he has power over al Principalities in
Heaven and Earth, not simply as secund Person, but as Son of God Manifested in
the Flesh; having sole authority not only as God and Man, but as mere Man.
Cartwright contests, that Christ in governing secular Stats has no Superior:
the Motioner says, As he is King of Kings and Lord of Lords; he receivs this
power of the Father: to whom Beza assents, that God governs the World in person
of his Son as made Man; and al power given him in Heaven and Earth is spoken
properly of his Humanity. If then Christian Princes have power under him as
Mediator God and Man, nay as Head of the Church; their Presbyteries or
Elderships have not sole stroke in spiritual matters of Rulership. Snecanus
stiffly holds, That St. Paul speaking of Christ's body, intends (...) ^or. 15.
24. E^h. 1. 20 21. Co^^s 1. 1^, 17.
civil Magistrates as Church Officers jointly with Aldermen, and it is great
rashness to exclud them; accompting such for Adversaries and Anabaptists.

Ob. Cartwright opposes, that Christ being sole Head of Romans 12.
all the Church and every particular Congregation which has a well ordered
Eldership; is never severed from his whole Body 1 Cor. 12.
nor any part of it. Ergo there needs no subordinat Head or Governor over any
Christian Church.

Sol. This Sophistry is soon retorted thus: Christ is our Priest, Prophet,
Pastor; who is never absent but able to perform al such functions: Ergo we need
no Ministerial Officers or Presbyters: as if he sitting personaly in Heaven,
had not set such to Preach and preside here visibly on Earth.

Repl. He enjoins, If the civil Magistrate has right to rule in Christ's Body
the Church; it shall have two Heads, which were monstrous: Ergo it is absonous.

Sol. There is a Ministerial Head or Spiritual, so Christ is soly over the whole
Church; which to claim (as the Pope does) is Antichristian usurpation: and a
Magisterial or Temporal, which imports only a secular Ruler, as al Princes are
in their Dominions: so a like inference may be made, if the Commonwealth belong
both to Christ and civil Magistrate, it shall have two Heads, which were as
Monstrous: but neither is necessary. Princes may be Christ's Substituts or
subordinat Rulers, even in Spiritual causes better then base Rusti^s or
Mechanics admitted to be Elders. It Is a true Tenet, that Christ constituted his
Disciples to assist in his Priestly Office: on which score we defend against
Papists. that every ordained Minister is so well his Vicar as the Pope, having
equal power to Preach, pray, and dispens Sacraments: but the Author of
Ecclesiastic and civil Polity, denies Pastors to be Ch^^sts Vicars as he is p.
68.
Priest (for so the Pope the Devils Vica^ assums it) but only as a Prophet:
which is a novel Paradox disclaimed by his Brethren. For F^nner finds only two
Offices, making Prophecy part of his Priesthood: so it results, they be his
Vicegerents for Regiment only as Kings, and al would fain be so, if they could
deriv a Roial right. They urge against Bishops how his Kingdom is not of this
World; yet place it in the Consistorian Eldership: for Beza says Christ as
King and Head of the Church, rules it by Pastors lawfully caled, which
Cartwright and Fenner confirm. Sonnius says, Christ executs his Regal Office
by the internal government of his Spirit, and external of the Ministry: how
then do Lay Elders being no Priests nor Prophets hold their regency? For
Christ is suprem Sovereign, the Presbytery his Kingdom, and Spiritual Elders
his Vicerois: so Laics are but pety Princes like the idle Kings of France mere
shadows or Ciphers. Beza De Presb. p. 188.
says every Eldership is Christ's Tribunal: which is parallel to the Canonists
parasitic position, that the Pope and Christ have but one Consistory. For as
Papists prohibit al Appeals from Christ's Vicar: so they hold it heinous to
appeal from the Genevan Consistory being Christ's Tribunal beyond comptrol. So
what they deprav or disprov in others; they-selfs practis and patronize.

1. They blame Bishops (as they do the Pope) for meddling Criminations.
with many matters, and Lording it over others: alleging our Saviors saying,
Vos vero non sic, and St. Peter's precept, Luke 22. 26. 1 Pet. 5. 3.
not as Lords over the Clergy: which is meant of abusiv ambition. Yet their
Elderships undertake a Sea of affairs in ordine ad Christum like Papists, which
they hook in within the compass or cognizance of their Consistorian Commission.
Al Crimes (says Knox) which deserv death by Gods Law (Murders, Adulteries,
Sorceries, Blasphemies, Heresies, railings against the Sacraments) incur
Excommunication: in which Cases Summons must be sent to the Offenders Parish,
or if he has no settled abode, to the chief Town of that Division, to appeer
and answer at a set time; or show cause why Excommunication should not be
denounced: but if he appeer not, he is to be Excommunicat nexts Lords day; not
for contempt, but as guilty of the fact: so if Malefactors in France fly, they
are hung up in figure. This is round work to Excommunicat for superseding one
Citation in Causes of Life and Death, judging him guilty untried. How if the
Magistrate pardon this Murderer? Yet will not they receiv him upon repentance
under 40. dais trial, and satisfaction given the next Allies of the party
slain. So they take on them al kind of power.

Al other offenses, not capital (Lechery, Ebriety, Swearing, Cursing, Scolding,
Fighting, Fencing, Sabbath-breaking, wanton words or gestures, neglect of
Sermons and Sacraments, suspicion of pride or avarice, superfluity of Fare,
riot in Raiments, Dancing, Dicing, hanting Taverns, Tippling houses, Theaters,
May-poles, Morrices, and al Merriments, with many mo) are left to the
Elderships discretion. So are contentious persons which ve^ their Brethren sans
cause, wherein they will be sole Arbiters. How can these Men know unless they
examine the facts, and be skilled in the Laws of the Land? Or who will run to
temporal Courts, if he may be righted at Consistory Bar? Nay if he does, he
shall surely smart for it. Beza says, Al sins are subject to their censure, as
being scandalous to godly Men: for if one wrong me in goods or good name, he
commits a duple crime; one in wounding my heart by breach of Gods Law, and
giving il exemple; wherein I must complain to the Elders to work his repentance:
another in damaging my fame and fortunes, which Magistrates must right. Is not
this a brav devis to enlarge their Jurisdiction, when al actions of the Case
com within their compass, and al persons must be Informers to their Court? If I
complain to the Consistory that one has wronged me, and they enjoin him to ask
me forgivnes; how can he commence a Lawsuit against me? He may (quoth Beza)
but it is an il sign of repentance or true remission. Is not this a bar to civil
Justice? The wrong is confessed and forgivnes asked; there needs no trial of
Fact, but the Magistrate may award damages and tax costs, which is al he can
do. Avaunt then Common Law and Chancery: the Consistory alone can do al.

All the ground of this Divinity is drawn from the Jews Sanedrim, which
Cartwright says Christ transferred to his Church as a pattern for the Elders.
Beza concurs, That the Priests were Lawyers, who decided any doubt arising
among the Judges. If it be asked, what they had to do in causes merely Civil?
He learnedly resolvs, That matter of Fact is Civil, which the Judge sentenced;
but al points in Law the Ecclesiastic Elders decided or determined. Is this
probable or veritable? Doubtless the Jews had not two Courts (one of Fact,
another of Law) nor any Nation else: but in difficil Cases both of Law and Fact,
Appeals were made from inferior Courts in the Country to the Sanedrim at
Jerusalem, which handled Civil Causes so well as Ecclesiastic. Nay Travers and
the learned ^iscours hold, That the Elders may deal in Civil Causes, as they
did under Pagan Princes before they Christianized: for they receiv no more
authority by their conversion then they had before, nor may meddle in Church
matters; yet they may in Civil. 2. They found fault, That Primats and Prelates
were made privy Counsilors of State; much more to be admitted Members of
Parliament and Convocation: yet Beza was of the State Council at Geneva, and
prescribed to Scotland, That in stead of Bishops some grav Presbyters may be
present in Parliament to advise in spiritual matters, as Judges do in Law. Yea
Field supplicated here, That twenty four learned Divines might have votes in
Parliament, excluding Bishops: but for the Convocation (if it were such as
should be, meaning their Eldership) the Parliament may establish nothing
pertaining to Gods worship without their direction. 3. They contemn or condemn
al ancient Councils, and caled our Reformation of Religion done by Convocation,
a Deformation; branding the 39 Articles, Injunctions, Canons, and Church
Ceremonies as contemptible; but extol their own Synods (Classical, Provincial,
National, General) as parallel to the Gospel, and authentic Oracles of the holy
Ghost. 4. They inveied against Clergy Men to be Commissioners in the lat high
Commission Court; yet sued in Scotland, That forty Ministers should have
Commission to suppress their Enemies of Religion. So Field petitioned here,
That his twenty four Doctors might have power under the Great Seal to censure al
Sects, Heresies, Errors, Contempts, Misdemeanors against Gods Word and their
Ecclesiastic Laws: to depriv any Pastor not doing his duty after their wills; to
examine Witnesses, imprison Malefactors, and certify their names to the Lords of
the Council for farther punishment. 5. They disliked the High Commission should
send out Pursevants to summon or imprison Men: yet the Genevan Consistory has
a Beedle to cite Men, whom they incarcerat at pleasure. 6. They exclamed aloud,
because subscription was required to the Articles of Religion, Communion Book,
and Canons: Yet the Disciplinarians at their clandestin Conventicles in joined
it to their Decrees or Devises: nor can any be chosen a Church Officer, unles
he first subscribe to their Discipline. 7. They task the Oath ex Officio used in
certain thief Causes; because Men may not be compelled to accuse themselfs; and
no accusation is liable against an Elder, under two or three witnesses: yet
when Henrig a Presbyter refused to swear (touching dancing at Widow Balthasars
house in Geneva) alleging that place, Calvin jeered at it, and extorted
confessions upon Oath, deprived Henrig, exofficiated one of the four Sinders,
and imprisoned all the rest. 8. They brand the Common-Praier Book as culled out
of the Popes Portuis; The Ceremonies, Surplice, and other ornaments as
Antichristian rags; contesting it is better to conform with Turcs then Papists.
If it be answered, that we must try al things and hold what is good, using those
things lawfully which were abused superstitiously; al will not serve or satisfy:
yet when they are charged with Donatism, Anabaptism, or Papism, in perturbing
the public peace, for saying the Sacraments are not sincerely Ministered, that
we have no lawful Prelates or Pastors, and Princes may not meddle with
Ecclesiastic matters; Cartwright a chief Champion answers for all his felows,
That in the filth of such Heresies some good things are found, which they receiv
or retain, as the Jews did the holy Arc from profane Philistims. 9. They decry
University Degrees (as the Anabaptists did in Germany, whom Melancthon confuts)
caling them childish Ceremonies borrowed from the Pope: But Junius a
Consistorian contests they are decent and lawful, which ought not to be
abrogated for any abuse, or abandoned because borrowed from Papists: Yea
Cartwright sued to be Doctor of Divinity, which was denied; and the strictest
sort took Academical Degrees sans scruple, and diverse swalowed Lawn sleeves
without choking. 10. They reprov others for urging the authority of Councils.
Fathers, and Schoolmen: yet if any seem to fit or favor their Cause, they
magnify them highly: as Beza stiffly pressed St. Austin, Chrysostom with others
against Erastus, giving general Councils glorious titles, when they served his
turn, or else slighted them* and Cartwright calls such citing of Fathers a raking
of ditches* 11. They allege against Bishops preeminence over Ministers, that
both are caled by one name, and therefore one Function* when it is answered, That
community of title takes not away ^^stinction of Offices, since even Princes are
styled Deacons Apostles, and Priests, yet far disparat in power; this will not
content: Yet Erastus proved, That the name Elder is ever appropriat to
Ecclesiastics, not to Laics; Beza borrowed that distinction for his defens, how
the name of Bishops and Elders are common, but their Offices not al one; nor is
it a good consequent, every Bishop is a Presbyter, Ergo every Elder is so: for all names of Ecclesiastic Officers (Deacons, Apostles, Prophets, Prelates,
Pastors, Presbyters) are sometime used generaly or promiscuously. 12. They
aspers our State for suffering Bishops to retain some parts of the Canon Law,
crying out it is Popish and Develish: yet if ought sit their humors, they
secretly stole it out of the Decretals; as in their draught of Discipline more
then seven parts of eight are borrowed from it. Hence Viret finding how Princes
by cashiring the Canon Law, assumed Ecclesiastic power to themselfs; condemns
their rashness or rigidnes who depraved the same. Thus by this Jury of
Criminations it appeers how palpably partial al mortal Men are in their own
behalfs: yea their factious folowers will hardly beleev half, and justify the
other moity as proceeding of piety. Next shall be showed how they wrest the
Fathers to their own sens.

Ignatius wills, That nothing be done in the Church without (...).
the Bishops consent, who as Prince of Priests has power over al: Can ought be
plainer? Yet Cartwright counterfets, That by Priests he means ruling Elders
(Lay ones he never know) by Prince the Moderator chosen to propone matters at
one meeting only: and by power over al, his authority over the Elders in the
same Parish (when no such precincts were yet bounded) just after their new cut.
Justin Martyr styles every Bishop Prelat, as preposited over Priests and
People: Cartwright consters it, That he was Prelat of the People, not over
Presbyters: or at most a Moderator to propos matters only. Yet if he was
superior over Ministers, how fondly is it inferred to be lawful, because he was
so? for even in those dawning da^^ some things deviated from the Gospels purity,
as the name Prelat common to al Elders, was appropriat to one: Thus like
Wind-millers, they make every wind serve their turns. Ire^^^^ says the Apostles
appointed Bishops in those Churches which they planted: Beza clean contrary to
his mind and meaning, interprets it of Pastors, Doctors, and ruling Elders, not
constituted by their authority, but chosen by the Parishes. For when any
Officer was elected, the Apostle present consecrated him to the Lord by laying
on hands in the name of the Presbytery. Jerome testifies, That from St. Marc to
his time a Bishop was placed in higher degree abov Presbyters, as a Captain in
an Army: Cartwright seeks strange shifts to shadow it: 1. That the Presbyters
did it without Marcs order. 2. That the words from Marcs time, are exclusiv, as
if that superiority began after his time, which is flatly falls: for he calls
Marc Bishop of Alexandria, and his successors superior in degree o^ dignity. 3.
That in saying it was so at Alexandria, he implies it was not so elswher. Is
not his a goodly gloss? 4. He cries ou^ against the pravity of those primitiv
times; which is a more ingenuous agnition, but a silly shelter or Sanctuary:
for no wit of Man can evade or exclude it. Jerome says farther, It was ordered
by Decrce of the whole World; That to suppre^^ Schisms, one should be chosen by
the Priests abov the rest: Beza boldly givs him the ly (which the testy old Man
if he the^ lived, would retort in his throat) that it was not so. Many Ancients
(Iren^us* Cyprian, Tertullian, Jerome, Ambros, Austin) call Bishops the Apostles
Successors: And Ecclesiastic Writers draw long Catalogs of their names in
several Sees; which those Fathers urged against upstart Heretics in their dais:
but when Papists press such succession at Rome and elswher; we deny not the
truth of it, but answer that personal succession is very effectual, if
Doctrinal concur; and those Fathers in urging the first, had a special ey to the
last; because such Heretics oppugned some points of Apostolic Doctrine. Yet
Cartwright and his Cru contend, that by Bishops are meant Parochial Pastors,
styled the Apostles Doctrinal successors: and al Episcopal Catalogs are of
Parish Priests. Yea Sadeil excluding al personal succession, grants Doctrinal
to Laics, if they hold the Apostles precepts and walk in their paths: O dainty.
When swarms of Authors are cited, that Timothy was Diocesan of Ephesus;
Cartwright givs the ly to al, because St. Paul says, he was Evangelist: So was
S. Marc, yet a Bishop. When for Antiquity of Archbishops Clemens, Anacletus,
Anicetus, Epiphanius, Ambros, etc. are urged, together with St. Austins rule,
That where a name is so old and origin not extant, it should seem Apostolic:
Cartwright calls the citing of ancient Authors a raking of Hell, and says those
times were not pure Virgin-like; branding Clemens, Anacletus, and Anicetus as
conterfet cranks (happily some forgeries were vented in their names) and slights
Epiphanius, that he wrote according to his time: but rejects Ambroses Book de
dignitate Sacerdotum as foisted. When for the Office of Archdeacon Damasus,
Sixtus, Sozomen, and Socrates are quoted; Cartwright answers, That Damasus
spoke in the Dragons voice, the best ground bears thistles, and those times were
corrupt.

Thus they either wiredraw the Fathers words to their own fancy, or deny their
authority, which are easy evasions. When Ignatius terms a Bishop Prince of
Priests, and Cyril and Tertullian High Priest: Cartwright cursedly censures,
that such Proctors presum to put our Savior out of his Office: yet they are
only styled his Substituts on Earth, when al confess it to be the joint judgment
of the Catholic Church and Councils, that Bishops are the best remedies to
repel Schisms and Heresies: Beza and Cartwright cry they are al deceived; for
there were great controversies and contentions still under their regiment. It Is
true, for Christ foretold it will be so still til the end. When a cloud of
primitiv witnesses is produced for the lawful use of Holy dais: Cartwright
complains, That Truth is measured by the crooked yard of time; and appeals from
authority to Scripture, whereof he will be sole Judge and Interpreter. When the
whole stream of Fathers and Councils is urged to prove the Churches power in all
indifferent things not prescribed by Gods Word: he carps how he is pestered
with human authorities, instead of the Prophets and Apostles, shaking them off
(as St. Paul did the Viper) with one blast, that the things asserted are now
questioned, as if their cavilling were sufficient. When Cyril says, That Moses
Law to punish Adultery with death is out of date: he comptrols his Opinion as
corrupt. May it not more justly be said?

Nomine mutato, narratur fabula de se. The Tale, change but the Name,
Of them is still the same.
When Theodoret testifies, That Chrysostom Patriarch of Constantinople had the
charge of other Churches in Asia, Thracia, Pontus, beside his own See, and
Sozomen says he deposed thirteen Bishops for Simony: Cartwright cogs an
answer, That he had no other care over them then al Godly Ministers ought to
have over al Churches in Christendom: or if he took rule over them, he was a
proud Prelat like the Pope; yet happily he deposed those Bishops by consent of the
Presbytery, not by his own authority: al which bewray gross ignorance contrary
to known truth. When the first Nicen Synod (which placed Patriarchs over
Primats) is urged for the antiquity and authority of both: Cartwright scofs at
it as no famous Council, taxing diverse Decrees of error, specialy in points of
Discipline: yet al Churches receiv them as authentic; and Arrians or other
Heretics may so well cavil at the Doctrins. When Antioch Council, caled fifteen
years after, Decreed, That inferior Bishops shall not act without their
Metropolitan, sav what pertains to their own Dioceses: He glosseth that a
Metrapolitan was only set over a chief City, and the name makes no more
difference then to say a Minister of London and Newington: but by Dioces is
meant a Parish (so he still translats the Greec word, because it bears a
Parochial and Episcopal division, though generaly used for the later) where a
chief Minister had some Mercat-Town with vicine Villages appendent to his
Church, as at Hitchin and elswher: Sic parvis componere magna solebat. What
fine, foists and brazen bolts are these to bolster a bad cause? When Athanasius
avers, That Denis Patriarch of Alexandria (to which Jurisdiction Egypt,
Thebais, Mariota, Lybia, and other Provinces pertained) had the Churches of
Pan^apolis committed to his care: as Epiphanius says the same of Peter another
Patriarch, to whom the Archbishop of Miletus was subject: Cartwright consters
it of a voluntary care (not authoritiv) which every Minister ought to take of
Churches round about him. When Theodoret Bishop of Cyprus says, Heself had
Government of eight hundred Churches: Cartwright checks him for a vain boaster,
upbraiding his writing against Cyril, quid ad rhombum? When the Councils of
Nice, Antioch, Carthage, and Sardis declare, that only Bishops have authority to
excommunicat: Cartwright from Calvin the chief Coryphee declares, That in so
doing they fomented ambition.

Thus they speak Magisterialy from their Chair what they list, which their
partial poor blind Proselits hold for Oracles. When Mr. Fox provs Archbishops
to be abov Bishops, and them abov Ministers: Cartwright givs a dor, That he
writing a Story was more diligent to deliver what is done, then how well or il
done. Yea, he censures al learned Men under Edward 6. that they knew only in
part, and being sent out in the morning dawn, yer the Gospel Sun was risen
high, might oversee much, which some not so quick eyd can better discry: for
what they had in acutnes of sight, others enjoy by cleernes of the Suns light.
He prescribes two learned observations: 1. That in the Nicen Synod and others
within two hundred years after, many Canons and Cautions were made touching a
Metropolitan in every Province what honor or title he shall have; what limits of
Jurisdiction; and what place to sit in; which shows that it was opposed in those
dais: intimating, that some Schismatic Spirits opposed the Ecclesiastic
Hierarchy then as Disciplinarians did since, which is no warrant so to do. 2.
That among Pastors, Elders and Deacons in every Church, one was chosen by the
rest to propone matters (whether doubts to be debated, censures to be decreed,
or elections to be determined) who gathered voices, and was the common mouth to
moderat the whole Assembly. A learned lesson to show that Episcopal Government
jumps just like Germans lips with Genevan Presbytery, as if they should shake
hands; who shape al to their own cut, as an old Dotard at Athens deemed al
ships his own which came into the Haven.

Howbeit they differ diversely among themselfs: For Cartwright (...)
draws the Elderships origin from Moses and Aaron, who assembled the Elders at
Gods command, which he interprets of Laics: but Gallaesius of Preachers:
Pe^^itan, Ber^ram, and Siniler of Civil Rulers, Senators, and Princes. Beza
brings proof out of Moses Pentateuch, Chronicles, and Prophets: But Calvin the
Founder says, The Jews Sanedrim was founded after their Captivity, being then
inhibited to creat a King: yet the seventy being instituted by Jethros advise,
were a lawful Polity allowed by God, to censure manners and Doctrins. The titles
given to Ministers in the new Testament (Acts 10. 28 Acts 26. 16. Romans 15. 16.
1 Cor. 14. 32. Phil. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 2.) Beza, Junius, and Cartwright ascribe
to their Elders, which Calvin applies to al Ministers. Thus they run some into
Egypt before the Law, some to Mount Sinai in the Wilderness, some elswher to seek
their Eldership, yet cannot find it: but agree like Sa^sons tail-tied Foxes.
Where any mention is made of Elders, Congregation, Church, Court, Bishops,
Rulers, Thrones, Christ's Kingdom etc. Beza, Junius, Danaeus, Cartwright, and
that cru imagine it to ring a peal for their Presbyterian platform, suting the
Scriptures to their tunes. For as poor folks beget Children, but know not how
to keep them: so Sectists breed or broch new Opinions, and seek Scriptures to
maintain them; who (as Hilary says) care not what the words mean, but put
their own meaning on them.

Lastly, Listen how highly they prais themselfs, and Hyperbolicaly Eudog^es.
extol their Discipline. We have Christ and his Apostles, with all the Prophets
for us: We striv for everlasting truth which God has left, and may not leav
it: the matters we meddle in, are according to Gods Will in his Word: We
propound his Cause faithfully, and for it are persecuted: We are his poor
Servants, painful Ministers, zealous Professors, feeders of his Flock, Christ's
little ones, the foolish things of this World chosen to confound the wise: of
immortal seed, lawful successors to those, who by Faith quenched the violence of
fire: unreprovable, modest, most worthy Watchmen. We hold nothing not taught in
Scripture, but what old and new Writers affirm, and exemples of primitiv times
confirm: We seek not to pleas Men or pleasure our selfs; but patiently abide,
til the Lord bring our righteousness to light, and just dealing as the noon day.
We merit prais of the Law and of Gods Church, seeking only to do good: our
zele is parallel to that of Moses, Elias, the Prophets, John Baptist, Paul, the
Apostles, and Christ. Our side detests sin and wickedness: our Ministers suffer
al evil at Magistrates hands, for refusing to do evil at their commands;
professing to obey God rather then Men. Brav Men by their own report: but do
not al Sects say the same, like the Pharisee who prayed, O God, I thank thee 1
am not as other Men? Now hear Luke 18 11.
their Eulogies of the Discipline. It Is the only band of unity, bane of Heresy,
punisher of sin, cherisher of righteousness, pure, perfect, and full of goodness:
ordained for Gods honor, the Peoples health, and al Nations happiness. The most
beautiful order of Government, substantial form of Christ's Regiment, and best
Gold to build Gods Church: which will make her a chaste Spous, bright as the
morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with
Banners. The establishing of this Presbytery is the full placing of Christ in
his Kingdom, and Scepter whereby he rules among Men, caled by St. Paul, The
ground pillar of truth. It is the blade of a shaken sword in the Cherubins
hand, to keep the Tree of Life, and chief Throne of al excellence, wherein God
sits.

The Temporal Empire is a subaltern under-Court, to decide Causes by dictat,
direction, or mandat of the Ecclesiastic Consistory, which is Keeper or
Overseer of the Civil: The Spiritual Jurisdiction so far excels the secular in
degree or dignity, as ou^ Soul surpasses the Body, or Heavenly blessings
transcend Earthly benefits. Such Ministers as prefer Civil Magistrates to
Ecclesiastic, flatter them lucre and belly fare: but the Presbyterial
Consistory is Christ's Tribunal, from which is no appeal: whereto the mightiest
Monarchs are liable, being al Sheep equaly subject to their Shepherds. It Is the
safest Shield for a State to prevent Sedition and Rebellion, to cut off
contention and Lawsuits; to draw diverse from other Trades to study Divinity,
restoring Men from blindness to sight, darkness to light, prophanenes to purity
and piety. Then will be unity in the Church (when can ye tell, if al Sects still
swarm so?) Papists quail, Anabaptists wail, and Atheists fail: but the People
shall find perfection of Justice, the Nobility be righted, and the Commons
comforted: then will God cloth our Priests with salvation, and satisfy the Poor
with B^ead: His Saints shall shout for joy, and al ends of the Earth fear him.
Sir Thomas Mores Vtopia is a mere Anarchy, compared to this peerless Polity of
Presbyterial parity. But their sometime best beloved Brethren (Brown, Barow,
Greenwood) vilify them, and deprav that Discipline ten times more then these
boasters magnify both: whose derogations, detractations, and defamations, for
modesty sake shall be superseded, to shun scandal, slander, and scurrility.

Two Questions were of old debated by Divines chosen on Upshot.
both sides: 1. Whether the word Bishop was ever used in any Church for every
Pastor and Presbyter, or for one only who ruled both Priests and People within
his precincts? 2. Whether the name Elder was ever taken in the new Testament or
by the Fathers for mere Laics, or Ministers only? the resolution of both which
shall be referred to the premises, which every Man having perused may easily
decide or determine; to avoid prolixity and Tautology.

Presbytery is of divine right, as instituted by Christ in caling Summar^*
and sending seventy Disciples to preach; and confirmed by the Apostles in
Ordeining Elders every where: so is Episcopat of equal right on the same score
of Christ's choosing twelv Apostles, and their substituting Bishops to succed in
Government: but Presbyterial Polity without Prelates by a motly mixture of
Ministerial and Laical Elders; is a mere novity devised for a shift by Mr.
Calvin in case of necessity, when the Genevans had expelled their Sovereign
Bishop and were destitut of Ecclesiastic Discipline. This is irrefragable verity
in point of fact, maugre al contradiction.

These three foregoing Theses are transacted too tediously: but in the first,
Traduction of every particular Soul from Parents; in the secund Gods Prescience
of simple Intelligence, which in Order of Nature preceds al Decrees; in the
third a joint Government of the Head with the Body (which is monstrous to sever
them) will salv al scruples that can be objected or imagined; which no other way
can possibly promiss or perform.

Quale sit a Mundi genesi, per secula Cleri
Continuum regimen, praevia scripta probant.
What Church-rule from the Worlds birth still has bin
Through al times; may by previous proofs be seen.
Antistes Caput est Cleri, sed Presbyteratus Se^u^*

Corpus Episcopii: J^s utriusque patet.
A Bishop is Clergies Head, but Presbytry
(Both's right is clear) Body of Episcopy.
Historia haec recitat, qua recta Ecclesia forma,
Praesidibusque quibus tempus in omne fuit.
How through al times the Church was governed,
And by what Rulers, in Story is rehearsed.
Spirituale fuit Regimen pro more Monarchae: Alite^*

Sic Deus instituit, Christus idemque tulit.
Church Government was set in Kingly frame:
So God ordained, and Christ upheld the same.
Saera Dei Coetus Politia est condito ab Orb, Ali^^.

Vsque ad Apostolicos rite redacta dies.
Gods Churches Regiment from the Worlds Creation,
Is rightly drawn down to The Apostles station.
Presbyteris in Clero ascitus Episcopus omni, (...)

Semper Apostolico j^re supremus erat.
Bishops in all Clergies were set Superior
To Priests, by Apostolic right still Inferior.
Schismatisi suncti rite Haereticique vocantur, (...)

Qui male Praelatis opposuere suis.
All that opposed their Prelates wrongfully
Are Schismatics and Heretics called justly.
THESIS IIII.
Praedictiones de Messia: Predictions of Messiah.
There be manifold manifest Prophecies in the old Testament of the Messiah or
Savior of the World (styled by Jacob Shiloh) of whose coming in the ^^^sh the
Prophets foretold, which was fulfilled in the fulness of time. Whereupon the Jews
ever since expect his glorious reign on Earth like a King, in great extern pomp
(as Mahometans vainly look for their Pseudoprophets return) and Millenars apply
it to Christ's secund coming with his Martyrs and many eminent Saints raised
from death; which shall reign with him here victoriously 1000. years: at whose
first approach the Jews shall be converted, and acknowledge him their true Messiah.
Al which predictions concerning Messiah to com, were accomplished in and by
Christ at his first coming to suffer for the sins of Mankind; nor is any else to
be expected, til his last coming to general Judgment: as shall evidently appeer,
by comparing thirty two Prophecies with St. Matthews Parallels in the Table
subscribed.

Isai 7. 14. Mat. 1. 23. Mich. 5. 2. Mat. 2. 6. Isai 11. 1. Mat. 2. 15. Jer.
31. 15. Mat. 2. 18. Judge. 13. 5. Mat. 2. 23. Isai 40. 3. Mat. 3. 2. Isai 9. 1.
Mat. 4. 15. Levit. 14. 4. Mat. 8. 4. Isai 53. 4. Mat. 8. 17. Isai 61. 1. Mat.
11. 4. Isai 42. 1. Mat. 12. 17. Jonah 1. 17. Mat. 12. 40. Isai 6. 9. Mat. 13.
14. Psalm. 78. 2. Mat. 13. 35. Isai 35. 5. Mat. 15. 30. Isai 62. 11. Mat. 21. 5.
Zech. 9. 9. Mat. 21. 5. Jer. 7. 11. Mat. 21. 13. Psalm. 8. 2. Mat. 21. 16. Isai
5. 8. Mat. 21. 33. Ps. 118. 22. Mat. 21. 42. Ps. 110. 1. Mat. 22. 44. Isai 8.
14. Mat. 21. 44. Zech. 13. 7. Mat. 26. 31. Isai 53. 11. Mat. 26. 54. Psalm. 41.
9. Mat. 26. 23. Lamen. 4. 20. Mat. 26. 56. Isai 50. 6. Mat. 26. 67. Zech. 11.
13. Mat. 27 9. Psalm. 22. 18. Mat. 27. 35. Psalm. 22. 2. Mat. 27. 46. Psalm. 69.
22. Mat. 27. 48.

Nothing was done by Christ, which the Prophets foretold not; nothing foretold
by them which he fulfilled not: for he says, al things written of me have an
end; couching al in that one Word on the Cross, Consummatum est it is finished*
Al Prophecies spoken of him are accomplished, al Lawish Ceremonies which
prefigured him abolished, his own sufferings performed, and Man's salvation
perfected.

For all particulars of his Passion are precisely pointed out: he must be
apprehended, so says Jeremy: The Lords Anointed was taken in their nets: How?
To be sold: For What? Thirty Silver pieces: What to do? To buy a Field: So
says Zechary, They gav thirty Silver pieces the price of him that was valued,
and gav them for the Potters Field. By whom sold? By that Child of perdition to
fulfill the Scripture: Who was he? One that eats bread with me: So says David.
What shall his Disciples do? Run away; as Zechary says; I will smite the
Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered. What shall be done to him? he must be
scourged and spit on: So says * ^aiah, I hid not my face from shame and
spitting: What more? He shall be led to death: So says Daniel, The Messiah shall
be slain: What death? He must be life up as Moses did the Serpent: Whither? To
the Cross: So says Moses, Hanging on a Tree: How lift up? Nailed to it: So
says David, They have pierced my Hands and Feet: With what company? Even
Theefs: So says Isaia, with the wicked was he numbered: Where? Without the
Gates, So says the Prophecy. What shall become of his Garments? They divided
them, and on my Vesture or Coat cast lots, says David: How must he die?
Voluntarily: Not a bone shall be broken: Why? It was prefigured in the Paschal
Lamb, and performed in him the true Passover as a Sacrifice for sin. How then?
He must be thrust in the side with a Spear: so says Zechary, They shall see him
whom they thrust through: What shall he say? Eli, E^^ Lama Luke 23 34.
sabactani, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? as David speaks: how
shall he resign his Soul: Into thy hands I commend my spirit; so says the
Psalmist: What uttered he of his Enemies? Father, forgiv them: So says Isai,
He prayed for Psalm. 22. 1.
transgressors. Lastly, that al predictions might be verified, he said, I
thirst; not for any necessity of Nature, but to fulfill divine John 19. 28 30
Decree in Scripture. Then he cried, consummatum est* If any Jew or Infidel,
seeing this admirable harmony, or concent of al circumstances, shall demand like
John's Disciples, Art thou Acts 1. 11.
he, or shall we look for another? The two Angels appeering at his Ascension,
answer with an Interrogation; Ye men of Gallile, why stand ye gazing or gaping
into Heaven for another Messiah? this same Jesus, now taken up, shall so com as
ye saw him go into Heaven. In him only are al Phrophecies fulfilled; and by him
all that was predicted to be done finished. No other Spirit could foresee or
foresay such things should be done; nor any power possibly do them so
foreshewed, sav only Jesus Christ the Son of God and Savior of the World.

2. Touching legal Observations, Christ is the end of the Law: both Moral,
which he kept perfectly by himself, and satisfied plenarily for us: and
Ceremonial, which was referred to him, observed of him, and abolished by him.
For all Lawish Ceremonies (Circumcision, Passover, Tabernacle, Temple, Laver,
Altar, Shewbread, Tables, Candlestics, Vails, Holy of Holies, Arc,
Propiciatory, Pot of Manna, Aarons Rod, high Priest; his Order, Lineage, Habits,
Inaugurations, Washings, Annointings, Sprinklings, Offerings, Sacrifices, and
other Rites) looked at Christ; which had their virtu from him, relation to him,
and end in him. They al died when the Temples vail rent; the Obligation of the
Ritual Law being cancelled, and the way into Heavenly Jerusalem opened: for the
shows yielded to the substance, when he said, Al is finished.

3. His sufferings from the Cratch to the Cross are infinite and inexpressible;
his whole life being a perpetual passion: he humbled yea emptied himself to
become Man, suffering more herein then al Men can: for if Man should be turned
into a Beast (as Pythagoras dreamed) into dust, into nothing, it is no such
disparagement, as God to be made Man. What Man? if Monarch of the World to
tread on Kings necks, trampling al Crowns and Scepters under feet, it had bin
some port or pomp: but he came in form of a Servant, and becam the contempt of
Men, yea a worm and no Man; the shame of Men and scorn of the multitud. He was
born in a Stable, cradled in a Cratch or Manger, carried a Child into Egypt to
avoid Herod's butchery, basely bred in his Foster-Fathers Cotage, lived poorly
and obscurely, endured al extremities of hunger, thirst, cold, and other
calamities during minority: but coming to Virility and showing the power of his
Deity, he was transported and tempted by Satan, derided of his Kindred,
traduced by the Jews, persecuted by the Elders and Pharisees; restless,
harborless, comfortless: sold by his own servant, apprehended, arraigned,
condemned, crucified: But where? not in a corner; but at Jerusalem the Ey and
Heart of the World, where he wrought a world of Wonders: Wherabout? in Calvary
among stinking sculs and execrable Malefactors. When? At the Passover, where
Proselits resorted from al parts to receiv the type, and reject the archetype:
who instead of eating the Paschal Lamb, slu and sacrificed the true Passover.
With whom? Betwixt two Theefs. He that thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, is made equal to Robbers. What suffered he? A cursed, lingering, tormenting,
ignominious death, even on the Cross, being made a curs for us: a curs wors
then the shame, but both wors then the pain, and scorn worst of al. His
Cross-Companions, had no irrision, inscription, or insultation over them, but
death only: he death with disdain, disgrace, and derision; the Jews, Soldiers,
and Theefs twitted or triumphed over him. Al his senses were windows to let in
sorows: his Eyes beheld the tears of his blessed Mother and Friends, with
manifold despits of his Foes: his Ears heard the blasphemous railings and
revilings of the Multitud: His Nostrils smelt the noisome sent of dead Men's
bones: His Touch felt the nails: His Taste bitter Gal: Was ever sorrow like his
sorrow? That Head which Angels adored, is harowed with thorns: That face fairer
then the Children of Men, is smeared with filthy spittle and furrowed with
tears: Those Eyes brighter then the Sun, are shadowed with death: Those Ears
inured to heavenly Harmony, are filled with scofs and scorns: Those Lips that
spoke as never Man did, are wet with Gal and Vinegar: Those hands which swaied
Heavens Scepter, carry the Reed of reproach, and are fastened to the Tree: Those
Feet to which al powers of Hell were a Footstool, are nailed to the Footstool
of the Cross: That whole Body conceived by the holy Ghost, is scourged, wounded,
mangled: yet all this but the outside of his sufferings: but the innner part or
Soul of his pains, is so far beyond those sensitiv torments, as the Soul
surpasses the Body, or Gods wrath Man's malice. What the infinite sins of
innumerable Men, committed against an infinite Majesty, deserved in infinite
durance; all this he in a short space of his Passion suffered or sustained; which
made him cry, My God, my God, why do thou forsake me? he was affrighted with
terrors, perplexed with griefs, distraught with both. It was not so much for
millions of Men to despair, as for him to fear: yet never was any so afraid of
Hell, as he of his Fathers wrath for our sins and in our steads. Thus his
Incarnation, Nativity, Birth place, Life, Death, Burial, Resurrection,
Ascension, sitting at Gods right hand; with many mo circumstanees of Judas
treason, and reward, the Jews rejecting him, and crucifying among Theefs; were
al divinely foretold of the Messiah to com, and directly fulfilled in or by
Christ, to whom only they fitly and fully agree: For he is the Woman's Seed
which should break the Serpents head, and in whom al Nations of the Earth shall
be blessed. The other testimonies touching the time and truth of Messiah
coming; that he shall be of David's lineage, born of a pure Virgin, perfect God
and Man; yea a Spiritual eternal King (no Temporal or Terrestrial) make up a
cloud of witnesses to convince the Jews, that Jesus Christ is the only true
forepromised Messiah: to whom be rendered al Glory, Honor, Prais, and Power for
ever. Al which might be infinitely enlarged, but for brevity omitted.

Supplementum Pietatis. In the Practice of Piety.
THe Souls Soliquy (at end of the Practis of Piety) in contemplation Conclusion.
of Christ's Passion, shall shape a Catastrophe to these divine Meditations. What
have thou done sweet Savior, to be betrayed by Judas, sold to the Jews, and
led bound as a Lamb to the slaughter? What evil did thou commit, to be openly
arraigned, falsely accused, and unjustly condemned? what was thy offens, or whom
did thou ever wrong, to be so pitifully scourged with whips, crowned with
thorns, scoffed with flouts, buffeted with fists, and beaten with stafs? Lord,
what did thou deserv to have thy face spit on, thy hands and feet nailed, thy
self lifted up on a cursed Tree to be crucified with Theefs, to drink Gal and
Vinegar? yea, to have thy innocent heart pierced with a spear, and precious
blood spilt before thy blessed Mothers eyes? sweet Savior, how much wast thou
afflicted to endure all this, when I am so affrighted or amazed but to think of
it? which made thee cry as if God had forsaken thee, being al for Man's sake
forsaken of God. I inquire for thy offens, but can find none, no not any guile
in thy mouth: thy Enemies are challenged, and none dare rebuke thee of sin: the
Officers sent to apprehend thee testify, That never Man spak like thee: thy
suborned Accusers agree not in their witness; the Judge publicly cleared thy
Innocence: his wife warned him by a dream, that thou was it a just Man, and he
should do no injustice to thee: the Centurion confessed thee of a truth to be
the Son of God: the Thief hanging with thee, justified thee to have done nothing
amiss. What then Lord is the cause of thy cruel ignominy, passion, and death?
It Is I am the cause of thy sorows, my sins of thy shame, my iniquities of al thy
sufferings. I committed the fault, and thou art plagued; I guilty, and thou
punished: I deserved death, and thou crucified. O the depth of Gods lov, and
unmeasurable measure of his Mercy: the wicked transgressed and the just
apprehended: the guilty escaped, and Innocent arraigned: the Malefactor
acquitted, and Harmless condemned: the Servant did the sin, and Master bore the
stroke: I committed the crime, and thou hangedst on the Cross. O Son of God,
who can condignly express thy lov, commend thy pity, or extol thy prais? I was
proud, and thou humbled; I obstinat and thou obedient; I ate the forbidden
fruit, and thou hangedst on the cursed Tree; I played the Glutton, and thou
fastedst; I tasted the sweetness of the Garden, and thou drankest the biternes
of Gal: fond Eve smiled when I laughed; but blessed Mary wept, when thy heart
bled and died.

Now gracious Lord, since thou have endured all this for my sake; what shall I
retribut for all thy benefits? I ow already for my Creation more then I am able
to pay, being bound with all my powers to lov and adore thee: If I ow my whole
self for creating me of nothing; what shall I render for giving thy self to
redeem me at so deer a ransom, when I was wors then nothing? Surely Lord, if I
cannot pay such thanks as I ow (for who can pay thee, who give thy Graces
without respect of merit or regard of measure?) it is the abundance of thy
Blessings which make me a Bankrupt, being so far unable to pay the principal,
as I cannot satisfy any part of the interest: For Lord, thou know since the
loss of thy Image by our first Parents fall, that I cannot lov thee with all my
might and mind as I should; therefore as thou first did cast thy lov on me
being a Child of wrath and lump of the lost World; so now I beseech thee shed
abroad thy Grace through al my faculties and affections, that though I can
never pay such merit of lov as thou meritest; yet I may repay in such manner as
thou deignest to accept in Mercy: that in truth of heart I may lov my neighbor
for thy sake, and thee abov al for th^ne own sake. Let nothing be pleasant to
me, which does not pleas thee: suffer me not to be a cast away, whom thy
precious blood has bought: Let me never forget the ineffable benefit of my
redemption, whitout which it had bin better never to be then to have any being.
Since then thou have vouchsafed thy holy Spirits assistance; suffer me Heavenly
Father (who art Father of Spirits) by thy Sons mediation, to speak a few words
in the ears of my Lord. If thou despisest me for my iniquities, as I deserv;
yet show Mercy for thy Sons merits who suffered so much for me. Behold the
mystery of his Incarnation, and remit the misery of my transgression: so often
as his wounds appeer in thy sight, let my sins be hid from thy presence: so often
as the rednes of his blood glisters in thy eyes, let my sin be blotted out of
thy Book. The lust of my flesh provoked thee to wrath, O let his chastity
procure thy Mercy: that as my pollution seduced me to fall, so his pureness may
reduce me to thy favor. My disobedience deserves sharp revenge, but his
obedience merits much more Mercy: for what can Man deserv to suffer, which God
that made Man cannot merit to be forgiven? When I ponder the greatness and
grievousnes of his Passion, I see the saying true, That Jesus Christ can into
the World to sav the chiefest sinners. Dare thou then, O Cain, cry, thy sins
are greater then can be forgiven? thou lie like a murderer: the Mercies and
merits of one Christ are sufficient to sav millions of Cains, if they will
beleev and repent. For all sins are finit, but Gods Mercies and Christ's Merits
infinite: therefore, O Father, for his bitter death and bloody passion, pardon al
my sins, deliver me from the vengeance they have deserved, and let his merits
make me partaker of thy Mercies. My importunity shall never ceas to call and
knock with the Man that would borow the Loafs, til thou open the gate of thy
Grace: If thou will not bestow the Loafs, yet Lord vouchsafe the Crumbs of thy
Mercy, which shall suffice thy hungry Handmaid. Lastly, since thou requirest
nothing but to lov thee in truth of heart (whereof a new Creature is the truest
outward testimony, and it is so easy for thee to make me such, as bid me be so)
Creat in me, O Christ, a new heart, and renew a right spirit within me; then
shall thou see how, mortifying old Adam and his corrupt lusts, I will serve thee
as a new Creature in a new life, after a new way, with a new tongue, new words
and new works; to the glory of thy name, and gaining of other sinful Souls to
the Faith, by my devout exemple. Keep me for ever, dear Savior, from Hels
torment and Satan's tyranny: So when I shall leav this life, send thy holy Angels
to carry me (as they did Lazarus Soul) into thy Kingdom: receiv me into that
most joiful Paradise, which thou promisedst to the penitent Thief, who at last
gasp so earnestly begged mercy and admission into thy Kingdom. Grant this, O
sweet Savior, for thy names sake, to whom I ascribe (as is most du) al Prais
power and glory for evermore.

Postscriptum sacratum: A very pious Postscript.
THis Appendix is annexed chiefly to the premises, out of Mr. Henry Smiths
Arrow against Atheists, to this effect. The main marks of Messiah to com, were
manifested in Christ alone: specialy how the Jews should not know or acknowledge
Psalm. 12. 22* Is^i 53. 3.
him, but reject and refuse him to the end he might be done to death for Man's
salvation, according to Gods determinat Decree. For if they had received him as
the true Messiah, surely he had not bin so: But because they denied, derided, and
put him to death; doubtless he was so. Al particular Promises and Prophecies
pointing out the Messiah, were fulfilled in him or by him: as that the Woman's
seed should break the Serpents head; that a Virgin should bear him; the Birth
place Bethleem; al Infants thereabouts slain for his sake; Kings to adore him
with presents of Gold and other gifts: he should be presented at Jerusalem for
the greater glory of the secund Temple; fly into Egypt, and be caled thence: a
Star should show his coming into the World: John Baptist (caled Elias, because
he came in his Spirit and Power) should go as a Messenger or Usher to prepare
the way before him, and cry in the Desert: that he should be poor, abject, and
despised of Men; preach with all humility and meeknes of spirit; do many
miracles, and heal al Diseases: be slain for Men's sins; betrayed by his own
Disciple which dipped in the dish with him; be sold for thirty silver pieces,
with which a Potsherd field must be bought: the Traitor to be cut off; and
another take his Office: he should ride into Jerusalem on an Asses Foal; be
apprehended, arraigned, beaten, buffeted, scourged, spit on; his hands and feet
nailed, his side pierced; he to drink Vinegar, and be crucified among
Malefactors; his clothes divided, and lots cast for his Coat; but not a bone
broken: he should rise from death the third day, ascend into Heaven, and sit at
his Fathers right hand as a Conquero^* Al which were pointly verified in him,
or perfectly performed by him.

The time of Messiah coming, concurs soly in Christ: for Daniel foretold how in
the fourth Monarchy the eternal King Dan. 2. 39 44.
shall com, and build Gods Kingdom through the World; which befell under Augustus
Caesar, founder or establisher of that Agge 2. 8.
Empire. Agge foreshewed, that the desired of al Nations shall com, and the
secund house filled with greater glory then the first: for Herod built and
beautified it outwardly in great pomp, and Christ graced it inwardly with his
glorious presence: yea Malachy Mal 3. 1.
says, He shall com during the secund Temple; and Daniel, Dan* 9. 26.
That it shall not be demolished til Messiah be slain, who foretold its
destruction. Jacob told his Sons* That the Scepter shall not Gen 49. 10.
depart from Juda til Shiloh com, which is the Gentiles expectation. Al which
circumstances completly cohere with Christ's first coming in the appointed time.
He must be an everlasting Psalm. 89. 3. 4.
King: for God says, I have sworn to David my Servant* I will prepare thy Seed
for ever, and build up thy seat to al generations; which cannot sort to
Solomon; for his Kingdom was rent by Jeroboam, and after suppressed by
Nabuchodonosor: nor can the words (for ever) be applied to any temporal King,
but eternal, which must descend from David's loins and lineage. This Premist Jer.
23 5, 6.
God confirms saying, Behold, the dais com that I will raise up to David a
righteous seed, and he shall reign a King to do judgment and justice on Earth:
in his dais Juda shall be saved, and Israel dwell safely; and this is the name
men shall call him Our just God. To whom can this consort sav to the Son of God,
caled Catexock^n the Son of David, who was his Father in the flesh and bore his
type or figure? Hence Ezekiel and Hose style the Messiah David, Ez^k 34 33.
Hos. 3. 5.
being to descend of his seed: I will set over them a Shepher^ even David my
Servant; he shall be their Shepherd and I will be their God, and my Servant David
a Prince among them. Now because the Jews look for Messiah to be a Temporal King
to reign in Judea, and subdu their Enemies (as Chiliasts deem or dream he shall
do at next coming with his Martyrs) the confutation of their fond conceit will
be a strong confirmation of the contrary: For their expected time of the
Messiah (as the Mahometans of their falls Prophet) is long ago expired, yet no
such Terren King ever reigned there, and it repugns Scripture. Daniel calls him
An eternal King: and Micheah says, He shall Dan. 2. 44. Dan. 7 14. Michah 4 7.
Ps 7^* 5, 8, 11, 17.
reign for ever: yea God says to his Son, Ask of me and I will giv the Heathen
for thine inheritance, and utmost parts of the Earth for thy possession:
meaning that Messiah shall be universal King to rule over Jews, Gentiles, and all the world by his spiritual power. He shall endure with the Sun and before the
Moon from generation to generation: he shall reign from Sea to Sea unto the
lands end: al Kings shall adore, and al Nations serve him: al Tribes of the Earth
shall be blessed in him; and al People magnify Genesis 12. 3.
him for ^ver. Yea God told Abram, That in his seed (the Messiah of his seed)
al Nations shall be blessed. Isaiah sets down Gods Commission to Messiah: It is
too little that thou be my Isai 49. 6.
Servant to raise up the Tribes of Juda and convert the preserved of Israel: I
will giv thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou be my Salvation to the
Earths end. What can be cleerer that he shall be a Savior both of Jews and
Gentiles? it is therefore a fond fancy that he shall be King of Judea only to subdu
their Enemies. The Prophets foretell how he shall com riding on an Ass, and of no
reput, that he shall be led as a Sheep to the slaughter, or a Lamb dumb before
the Sheerer; and they shall look on him whom they pierced; that he shall be slain
as a sacrifice for sin, and broken for our iniquity; with whose stripes we are
healed, and such like. Where then is his pomp, if he was to be poor? where his
earthly reign, if he must be despised? where his able resistance, if he must
suffer as a Sheep led to the slaughter? where his worldly conquest, if he was to
be crucified? nay, how can the Jews deem or dream he shall be so potent or
triumphant, when they must be the Men to pursu his death, and look on while
they pierced him, as their own Prophets predict or premon sh? add herto how
their Rabins testify, that the Messiahs Mother shall be Parthenos a pure Virgin,
and he not begot as others by carnal coition, but by the holy Ghost, and his
name Jesus. Yea the whole stream of Scripture runs, that he must not be mere
Man, but God also: as Isaiah says, Isai 7. 14. Isai 57. 4. Isai 9. 6.
He shall be caled Immanuel, God with us; wonderful Counsilor, the mighty God,
Prince of Peace, the everlasting Father, the issu of the Lord, and fruit of the
Earth: in all which both Natures are implied. Jeremy says, He shall be styled
God our righteousness: and God says of him, Thou art my Son, this day (i* Jer.
33. Psalm 2. 7, 8.
from al eternity) have I begot thee. Yea David calls him Lord: The Lord said to
my Lord, sit on my right hand til I make thine Enemies thy footstool: al which
pregnant places are cleerer then the Sun: therefore it is a senseless surmise,
that he should be a mundan Monarch.

Quae de Messiae adventu cecinere Prophetae*
Praestita per Christum cuncta fuere been.
What of Messiah Prophets did foretell,
Were by Christ's coming al performed well.
Ali^^r:
Quae de Messia veteres retulere Prophetae,
Perspicue in Christo praestita quaeque patent.
What of Messiah Prophets old informed,
Do clearly al appeer in Christ performed.
Ali^^.
Ordino retrogrado: quae Christus facta peregit,
Cuncta libris Vates praemonuere suis.
Bacward again: Al things which Christ atchived,
Were by the Prophets in their Books premised.
S^^u^.
Quam been convenient praemissa Prophetica Christo?
Quam been complevit singula Christus item?
How well to Christ those Prophecies agree?
How well by Christ al things accomplished be?
THESE. V.
Christi duae Genealogiae. Christ's two Genealogies.
FOur Evangelists wrote Christ's life, acts, death, and resurrection, This Thesis
is taken mostly from William Cowper, Bishop of Galloway in Scot^and.
at several times and places; who jointly agree in Story, which argues the
truth of their testimony: but two only record his Genealogy diversely, not
adversly; which shows the sweeter symmetry. St. Matthew, a Jew, reckons Joseph's
natural pedigree, and Mary's legal; because they regarded not women's Parentage:
But Luke a Gentil born, reports her Natural Prosapy and his legal, to whom both
Sexes are alike. So between both the two Descents are completly displaied to
satisfy al Men, and stop Maligners mouths. Matthew descends from Fathers to
Children, denoting that we com from God by his divine word: Luke ascends from
Children to Parents, implying that by the same word Incarnat we return to God:
for we came from God the Father only by Christ his Son, as Sons of Creation
common to al Flesh; and can go to him by no other then Christ Redeemer, as Sons
of Regeneration proper or peculiar soly to his spiritual Kindred.

Christ's Genealogy deorsum, is sorted into fiv sections: 1. From Adam to Noah.
2. From Noah to Abram. 3. From Abram to David. 4. From David to Zerobab^l. 5.
From him to Christ. In the first and secund to Abram, St. Luke runs alone: In
the third to David, both march mutualy: In the fourth to Zerobabel, they take
different races from David (Matthew by Solomon, Luke by Nathan) meeting in
Salathiel; where they take two steps jointly, and part again: the one shaping
his course from Zerobabel by Abiud to Joseph; the other by Rhesa to Mary; but
both concur in Christ, being supposed Son to Joseph, and genuin of Mary. This
is the general Genethliacal series of both, very obvious to al, specialy to Men
versed in Pedigrees; the several sections shall render the reason of al.

The first to Noah contains ten Fathers: Adam Seth, Enos, 1 Section*
Cainan, Mahalale^l, Jar^d, Enoc^, Methuselah, Lam^ch, Noah: al which Matthew
omits, and next ten too; because his chief aim was to convert his Countrymen,
and so begins plausibly with Jesus Christ the Son of David* son of Abram: for
it was current among al them, that Messiah should be the Son or Seed of David;
and Abram was their first believing Progenitor after four descents of
Idolaters: But Luke a Pagan Physician Convert, seeking to win al Nations, drew
the line twenty links higher; one teaching to seek our Savior in Abrams seed,
the other, that al Believers of Adams Progeny have property in Christ. Here
obsery, That Adam, Christ's first forefather after Notae.
the flesh, is caled Gods Son by Regeneration so well as Creation: for as at
beginning Adam Gods Son is Christ's first carnal Father; so at Christ end Gods
eternal Son becam the Son of Man. A marvelous mutation, that Man made by God,
should become Father to him, who being God, was made Man, to make Men the Sons
of God. Lo, what a binding stone the Lord Jesus is, which knits together not
only Man with Man (Jews and Gentiles) but Man with God: not by personal union
proper soly to himself; but spiritual communion common to all the Faithful. We
beleev Adam was a true Man, yet not begot by Man, nor born of Woman, but formed
by God of the Virgin Earth, as Irenaeus calls it: And Eve a very Woman, yet had
no Father nor Mother, but made of Adams rib. Why then, can any doubt that
Christ was a true Man, though not begot by Man, but framed of David's seed in the
Virgins womb by the holy Ghost? for it is fit since the first Adam was molded by
Gods hand, the secund should be made by the same, without Man's concurrence;
that he might have a semblance or similitud of production like the first. Thus
Gods Son becam the Son of Man, of David, of Abram, of Adam: why then do we not
beleev that the Sons of Adam and Abram following the Adoption shall become the
Sons of God? For it is stranger that God should be made Man in shape of a
Servant, to suffer death on Earth; then that Man shall be exalted to reign in
Heaven: yet the first is done; why then does any diffide of the last, since he
died not in vain?

The next to Abram compriseth ten Fathers: Sem, Arphaxad, 2 Sect.
Salah, Heber, Peleg, Reu, Sarug, Nahor, Terah, Abram: but Luke superads Cainan
after Arphaxad from the septuagints version (however crept in by Transcribers
mistake) not found in Moses Canon, which is the sole foundation of authentic
Note.
authority. Here note, that of Noah's three Sons (Mankinds sires or stock
Fathers after the Flood) God chos Sem the secund to be Christ's Father after the
Flesh: who tho Sem had sundry Sons, yet passing by all selects Arphaxad, and
contracting his Covenant into narower lists or limits, confines it to Hebers
family, being content to be caled the God of Genesis 9. 26. 27.
Sem; which is the first time he is named the God of one more then another. Yet
let not us of Japhets lineage be danted, or dismayed, but rely on his promiss
pacted with Sem to perswad Japhet to dwell in his Tents, or allure his posterity
to embrace the Covenant made with Sems family, which is since fulfilled. For he
dwelt in Sems house from their first being a Nation under Moses abov 1600.
years, and in Japhets from their union into Christ abov 1600. mo: having
visited us also in the ends of the Earth. So though our Parents be not among
Christ's Progenitors (after the Flesh, which is the Jews privilege) by natural
generation; yet being united by Faith, we com of him by spiritual affinity
through the Grace of regeneration, from which they are excluded without true
repentance and reception.

The third to David includs thirteen Fathers: Isaac, Jacob, 3 Sect.
Juda, Pharez, Ezram, Aram, Aminadab, Naasson, Salmon, Booz, Obed, Jesse,
David. Where mark how it is said; Jacob Note.
begot Juda and his Brethren, not Abraham, begot Isaac, and his Brethren: to
show that al Abraham's Sons tho Circumcised belong not to the Covenant, nor did
God choose their Posterities to be his Church or peculiar People, as he did
Jacobs Sons and their Seed. For to them pertained the Adoption, Glory, Romans
(...). (...).
Covenant, giving the Law, Gods Service, and Promises. What a Prerogativ is
this? Al Jacobs issu partake of external Adoption, not so al Abraham's: to
import, that Gods caling is free being Debtor to none. Therefore such as are
outwardly caled, should be much more thankful for his mercy; since he has
passed by so many of Adams and Japhets families far more famous then us with
whom he deigned to Covenant: remembering that sundry are externly Adopted, which
are not elected by Grace.

Here is a doubt or demand, why Thamar (who subtly Juda) Rahab by Nation a
Canaanit, by Conversation a Courtezan; and Bathsheba guilty of Adultery with
David, if not accessory of her Husband Vria's death, are numbered among Christ's
carnal Mothers: but Sara and Rebecca renowned for conjugal chastity omitted?

Three special reasons are rendered: 1. To humble the Jews, Abraham's Offspring
but followed not his Virtues deeming their prosapy a sufficient patrociny for all
vices: to which end their Parents crimes are purposly pourtraied, that al may
know how true Nobility lies not in preemmence of Blood or Birth; but the Graces
of mind and Men's personal manners, which make a Man. Hence Nazianzen replied to
one that upbraided his mean descent, my Parentage perhaps is a reproach to me;
but thou to thy Progenitors. 2. To comfort poor penitent Sinners: for Christ
came not as a Judge to chastise Men's misdeeds, but a Physician to cure our
maladies; who assumed our Nature to clens us from sin. 3. To set forth Christ's
great Glory, who took no holiness from his Ancestors; for if they al had
excelled in piety, it had bin little for him to be holy: but discending from
sinners yet born sinless; he is manifested to be the chief high Priest, holy,
Heb. 7. 26.
harmless, und^filed, seperat from sinners, and higher then the Heavens.
Therefore Papists pretending his honor in asserting the blessed Virgin to be
conceived sans sin; do indeed dishonor him, as if he had holiness of Nature
from her, and could not be born sinless unles she had bin so conceived. Cannot
the holy Ghost discern David's seed from sinful contagion? Yes, he sanctified
and separated it from sin to make it the Lords Body. St. Bernard blamed the
Chanons of Lions for instituting her Fest of sinless conception, taxing it as
presumptuous novity, and termed it Mother of temerity, Sister of superstition,
and Daughter of levity. For it is Christ's peculiar perogativ (who must sanctify
al) to be conceived free from sin. Hence he concluded, that the glorious Virgin
will gladly want such honor, whereby sin seems to be advanced, and fucatious
sanctity introduced. Another point to be pondered is, that Salmon begot Booz by
Rahab a Canaanit, and Booz Obed by Ruth a Moabit both Gentiles, yet Christ's
Mothers: which may comfort Gentiles, That God is no Accepter of persons, but
whoever Gab. 3. 28. Acts 4. 12.
calls on his name (the only Name under Heaven Christ Jesus) shall be saved.

The fourth to Zerobabel Records a Role of Fathers; where 4 Sect.
Matthew draws a line by Solomon, Luke by Nathan his whole Brother. Here a doubt
occurs, how Christ could descend from both? Which is resolved, that the Jews
provided if a Man died Issuless, his Brother or next Kinsman must marry his
Wife to raise up seed. Now Solomon's race ended in Jeconiah the 1 Chronicles. 3. 17.
eighteenth after him; who died Childless, as Jeremy foretold: yet it is said he
had Sons, meaning Successors. For Salathiel Son to Neri steps in as Heir,
styled by Matthew Jeconiahs Son, viz. Legal and Regal. For they reckoned a
duple descent: 1. Natural by direct generation one from another. 2. Legal by
collateral succession of next Kin. Hence grew the Evangelists several
intentions: Luke drawing Christ's natural line from David, to show how he is his
Son after the Flesh: Matthew the Legal, to specify how for default of Jeconiahs
Issu he succeeded in David's throne as true Heir and King of the Jews rightly so
caled. Nor can they name any of their Nation nearer in succession; yet wilfully
cried, we have no King but Note,
Casar a foreign Conqueror. So tho Christ was not Salomons natural Son, nor is
promised to be; yet was his Legal or Regal by Salathiel, and David's genuin by
Nathan. Here the sudden decay of Salomons Kingdom for ten Tribes in Rehoboam,
and the two other in Jeconiah with all his Roial race; warns al how ominous the
sins of carnal and spiritual whordom be. For Solomon to stablish his posterity
and satisfy his Luxury, multiplied Wifes and Concubins contrary to Gods
command, who made one Woman for one Man to be one Flesh: but to pleas them,
permitted Idols in a holy Land, and at last fell to Idolatry wors then Harlotry:
which was perilous to his own Soul (had not God given Grace to repent) and
pernicious to al his posterity.

The last concluds al from Zerobabel (Son to Pedaiah, 5 Sect.
Grandson to Salathiel) to Christ: where Matthew recompts by Abiud (alias
Hananiah 1 Chr. 3. 19.) Joseph's Forefathers in number nine: but Luke from Rhesa
(alias Meshullam secund Governor after the Captivity, whom Philo calls Rhesa
Mesciola) numbers Mary's Progenitors eighten just twice so many. At end of
which line rests one difficulty; because Matthew calls Joseph Son to Jacob, Luke
to Eli: which is fairly reconciled; for Jacob was his Natural Father, Eli
Legal. So in Christ's Natural line deduced from Mary by Luke, Joseph only is not
Natural Father, but so supposed as he says. Hence it is clear, how meet he was
to do the work whereto he was consecrat. For Zechary calls him Gn^mith Jehovae
the Lords fellow: Zech. 13. 7. Job 19. ^5. Isai 7. 14.
which St. Paul int^rprets equal with God in regard of his Deity: but Job Goel
my Kinsman, in respect of his Humanity, as foretelling his Incarnation: in
which sens he is styled Shiloh, signifying that skin or tunicle which incloseth
Embryons. Isaiah terms him Immanuel, God with us, implying both Natures in one
Person. Jobs title Goel (from Gaal. i. Redemit vel vindicavit) imports a
Redeemer or Revenger: for by the Law to redeem an Inheritance belonged to the
next Kinsman, as also to revenge his Blood: so our Heritage being lost by sin,
and Adams Offspring slain by Satan; our next Kinsman (a Son of Adam) coms to
ransom the one and expiat the other: yea to perform what no Typical Redeemer or
Temporal Revenger ever could do. For Men might kill him which slu their
Brethren if they found him out of a Refuge City; yet could not restore them to
life: but Christ flu the Murderer Satan found out of refuge, and as a peerless
Conqueror gav life to his Brethren, even all the Sons of Adam that shall beleev
in him.

One rub rests, to be removed, how Joseph's Ancestors can

Surely they are not properly so termed, since he was but supposed (...)
Father: yet inserted for special purpos to stop or satisfy al Cavils,
exceptions, and objections. For if only Mary's descent had bin displaied, Men
might say, what matters it for his Mothers Prosapy? His Father was a Carpenter
basely born and bred. If Joseph's soly, others would object, what is that to
Christ, who issued not from his loins or lineage? But when both their stock
Fathers are so evidently drawn from Jess^s root; the mouth of malice and
malediction must needs be mus^ed or bungd up, nor can detraction derogat or
deny his Regal right from David. Thus tho the two Evangelists vary in manner of
Account or form of words; yet they agree pointly and precisely in the matter
and truth of things, without the least clashing or contradicting one another. A
Series or Synopsis of the premises, will make al circumstances more obvious to
every Ey, or common Capacity.

St. Luke draws Christ's Golden line of Genealogy (on Summary.
which runs the whole Book of God) comprising 77. Generations. 1. God, 2. Adam,
3. Seth. 4* Enos, 5. Cainan, 6. Mahalaleel, 7. Jared, 8. Enoch, 9. Methusalem,
10. Lamech. 11. Noah, 12. Sem, 13. Arphaxad, 14. Salah, 15. Eber, 16. Peleg.
17. Reu or Regu, 18. Sarug, 19. Nahor, 20. Terah: In both which Sections he
walks alone: in the third St. Matthew and he go hand in hand, reckonig the
natural line to David by direct descent. 21. Abraham, 22. Isaac, 23. Jacob, 24.
Juda, 25. Pharez, 26. Ezrom, 27. Aram, 28. Aminadab, 29. Naasson, 30. Salmon.
31. Booz, 32. Obed. 33. Jesse 34. David, 35. Nathan, 36. Matatha, 37. Mainan,
38. Melea, 39. Eliakim, 40. Jonan, 41. Joseph, 42. Juda, 43. Simeon, 44. Levi,
45. Matthas, 46. Jorim, 47. Eliezer, 48. Jose, 49. Er. 50. Elmodam, 51. Cosam,
52. Addi, 53. Melchi, 54. Neri, 55. Salathiel, 56. Pedaiah, 57. Zerobabel. In
this fourth Section from David he runs apart, except in the three last links,
whom St. Matthew cites, caling Salathiel J^conia^s Son as successor or next of
kin: but Luke styles him Son to Neri being so by Blood and Birth. In the last
Section these 58. Rhesa, 59. Joanna, 60. Juda, 61 Joseph, 62. S^m^i, 63.
Mattathia, 64. Maath, 65. Naggi, 66. Esli, 67. Naum. 68. Amos, 69. Matta^h^as
70. Joseph, 71 Joanna, 72. Melchi, 73. Levi, 74. Matthat. 75. Eli, 76. Mary,
77. Christ. Thus he recites the Natural line only, sav that he says Joseph was
of Eli (not Son) that is belonged to him as Son in Law, having espoused his
Daughter Mary Christ's Mother. Now Matthew handles the Legal Regal line, to prove
him lawful King of the Jews, or next of kin from Jeconiah, to sit on his Father
David's Throne. So if Lukes twenty first Patriarchs be annexed to his Genealogy;
both will be complet from Adam to Christ in their several wais or intentions,
which are diverse, but not advers one to another. Matthew in the Legal line
cites these after David, Salom^n, Roboam, Ab^^, Asa, Jehosopha^, Joram, Ozia,
Joatham, Achaz, Ezekiah, Manasse, Amon, Josia, Jehoichim, Jeconiah, Salathiel,
Zerobabel, Abiud, Eliakim, Azor, Sadoe, Achim, Eliud, Eleazer, Mattham, Jacob,
Joseph Christ's supposed Father. Where next to J^coniah, he reckons Salathiel and
Zerobabel before Abiud: but omits three successiv Kings of Juda after Ozia
(Joas, Amazia, Azaria) beside Athalia the usurping Queen; and P^daiah
Zerobabels Father: purposly to make a Tesserad ecad of just fourten generations
in each of his three spaces or Sections: which is no falsity or forgery to cut
off or abridg some links of the long line. From Adam to David the Parents are
one: but from David to Joseph, Matthew numbers twenty seven, and Luke to Mary
twenty three in their differing reckonings.

Al Penmen of the holy Ghost (Prophets and Evangelists) Note.
pursu the right line of Genealogy, til they com to the promised Shiloh: but if
they divert (as intermixing Cains offspring with Seths, Japhets and Chams with
Sems, Nahors with Abraham's, Ismaels with Isaacs, or Esaus with Jacobs) it is
only obiter and obliquely to clear the History of the golden line, This is a
true exact Examen or explication of al material scruples in this Genethliacal
mystery.

Now folows a sincere succinct Chronology of the premises Chronology.
in order. The first Section from Adams Creation to Noah's entry into the Arc,
contains 1656. years: the next til Abrams birth 353. the third til David's
initiation 942. the fourth til Zerobabels return from Babylon 545. the last til
Christ's birth 535. in all 4031. curent, or 4030. complet: as is punctualy and
Christus natus A. M. 4031.
particularly proved from year to year, in a clear Chronography or Examination
of times; to be prefixed as a previous Precognit to two larger Tomes of general
lucubrations shortly intended to the Press.

Here mark well, how as the World waxed elder, Man's life Note.
grew shorter; and mo generations multiplied proportionaly in later ages then
former. For in 1656. years before the Flood fell, were only ten descents to
Noah: in the next 353. to Abram (which contains little more then a fifth part of
the first ten mo: in the third to David (942.) thirteen, which in proportion is
far lesser then the foregoer: in the fourth to the Captivities solution (545.
years) twenty three, which is many mo then any before: in the last to Christ
Nativity (535. years) 20. which suits near with the foregoing. Al which make
but 77. generations precited, from the first Adam to the secund in 4030. years
complet. Now compare any one race of Diluvium A. M. 1656. Incendium A. C. 1656.
Monarchs from Christ's birth til A. 1656. two years hence (which some suppose
will be the Worlds Conflagration, as the Inundation befell A. M. 1656.) we shall
find many mo successions proportional to the years then in pristin ages or
Progenies. For if we reckon the Roman Emperors (excluding such as ruled jointly
and al Usurpers) from Augustus to Ferdinand now reigning, there have bin 146. If
Bishops of Rome Canonicaly chosen and confirmed, from St. Peter* to the present
Pope about 246. which is 100. mo then the other, and transcend those ten
Antediluvian generations almost twenty fold: but because some Emperors were soon
slain, and all the Bishops elected old, the parallel is unequal: therefore take
some instances of other Realms, which may better balance it. To begin with this
Land (which being tributary to Rome, had no set succession of Kings til the
Saxons came) let us compare the West Saxon Kings, from Cherdic the Founder (who
entered A. 494.) to the Norman conquest A. 1066. we shall find 36. successors in
571. years: and from the Conquest to King Charles decollation (in 582. years)
25. mo; in all 61. to which if 56. Emperors from Augustus to Anastatius (in whose
time Cherdic intruded) be supplied, al make 117. since Christ's birth. In France
from the founder Pharamond (who entered A. 520.) to this present, succeeded 63.
Kings in 1134. years: so allowing 57. Emperors from Augustus to Leo Isaurius
when Pharamond initiated for the said 520. years preceding; it computs 120.
Monarchs since Christ til now, hence it appeers, that in the old Worlds 1656.
years were only ten descents; but in these last have bin in France 120. which is
twelv times ten: and in England little less, according to the prescribed
proportion of computation. If reference could be made in private families, the
case would be cleerer.

One obstacle occurs, how in the elder age of 353. years from Doubt.
the Flood to Abram be ten generations, and in the younger to David of 942.
years (which is almost triple the time) but 14. as if Men lived longer after
Abram then before; yet David says Man's common age in his time was 70. and he
died at that pitch.

This is a Gordian knot hard to unty: for either we must Resolut.
suppose the Evangelists balked some descents, or that they received imperfect
mutilat pedigrees, or conceled some links for secret ends; or that their
Transcribers (which is too usual) committed some slips; or lastly that there were
revera but 14* generations from Abram to David in 942. years, which is scars
probable or credible: wherein let deep Divines dive deep to attain the mystery,
which it is not safe for Sciolists to essay, lest they sink in stead of
swimming, and drench themselfs. St. Matthews Genealogy from Juda to David, is
taken from the Book of Ruth and Chronicles, wherein can be no error; sav that
Transcribers mistake or misprise some Names: as Ezrom for Hezron, Aram for Ram,
Naasson for Nashon, Salmon for Salmah, and Jesse for Ishai: weich are but
Syllabical, no material faults. Howbeit since Naasson or Nashon a Judait Son to
Numb. 1. 7.
Aminadab, was one of those that numbered the People at Isreal's Exodus from Egypt;
from which to David are computed 437. years, yet but four generations (Salmath,
Booz, Obed, Jesse or Ishai) the main difficulty seems to rise hence or rest
here: how there can be so few descents in so long distance, unles some be
suppressed or superseded, which seems most likely? For upward from Abraham's
death to Nahshons numbering the People; were eight generations (which is duple)
in like 437. years; and downward from David to Josia in the same space sixteen
successions in the Kingdom of Juda, which is quadruple: yet we are assured,
that al links of this Golden chain are solid and sincere in substance, though a
few purposly conceled, or casualy left out, if not lost. If any can bring a
more sovereign Balsam to salv this sore, he shall carry the Garland of the best
Leach.

Hunc scrupulum solvas, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.
Salv this doubt, and to me
Great Phoebus thou shall be.
Candidus imperti, si quid scis verius istis.
These Annotations and observations touching the previous Pedigrees, are not so
prolix as perspicuous, considering the darkness of this Subject.

^temma Genethliacum Christi, per secula cuncta.
Panditur, a Mundi condition prius.
Christ's Genethliac stock is before dilated,
Through al times, since the World was first created.
Matthaeus vary and Lucas sata stemmata Christi, Aliter.

In Geneallogiis explicu^re suis.
Matthew and Luke have expressed diversely,
Christ's true descent in their Genealogy.
En Genealogiam Christi d^ stirpe Davidis, Alias.

Qui Deus ex pura Virgin^ factus Homo est.
Lo Christ's descent from David's lineage sure:
Who true God was made Man of Virgin pure.
Symmetria insignis, Christum de stirpe Davidis, Secus.

Est in Evangelio, rite fuisse satum.
That Christ from David's stock drew his prosapy,
There Is in the Gospel a most clear symmetry.
Matthaeus vary Christi, Lucas que recensent Sive.

A Davide, suo stemmata quisque modo.
Matthew and Luke Christ's pedigree do display
From David's loins, each of them his own way.
Fl^s de Jesse fuit, Davidis sanguine Christus: Catastrophe.

Sicu^ Evangelii Biblia sacra probant.
Christ Jesses Flower, from David's blood did spring:
As Gospels sacred Books plain proofs do bring.
THESIS VI.
Apocalypsus patefacta. The Revelation Reveled.
THe Apocalypse is a sublime speculation of Prophetic Preamble.
Visions, reveled by Christ to John Evangelist exiled at Patmos by cruel
Domitian (Author of the secund primitiv persecution) Son to mild Vespasian, and
Brother to merciful Titus, termed Mankinds delight, whom it is thought he
poisoned to enjoy the Empire. Al Prophecies, specialy Apocalyptic, are deep
d^rk mysteries, seldom descried or disclosed til finished and fulfilled: But
because Mr. Joseph Med^ late Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridg (where he died
An. 1638. aged 53) a most rare Phoenix for all learned Languages and liberal
Literature, has set out an exact Key of Synchronicisms or ch^onical Symetries,
and most accurat Comment on most part of the Text somewhat amply, yet very
obscurely: they shall be more concisely contracted, and clearly complicated for
every common capacity; to guide their steps in this intricat labyrinth: where some
things must be premised or predeclared, for better understanding of it.

Clavis Appellativorum. The Key of Terms or names.
THe seven spirits standing before Gods Throne (after caled, Precog^^^s. ^ev.
1. v. 4.
seven Lamps of burning fire, Rev. 4. v. 5. and the Lambs seven horns* and
seven eyes, Rev. 5. v. 6.) are faithful zealous Ministers of the Word, which wait
before the Throne of God and Jesus Christ.

The seven golden Candlesticks, are seven Churches in lesser ^^ib. v. 11, 12,
20.
Asia there named; Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia*
Laodicea; to whom John is bid by God to write in a Book what he saw.

The seven Stars which the Son of Man held in his right hand Ibid. v. 16, 10.
(out of whose mouth went a sharp two edged Sword, and his Face shone at the
Sun) are the Angels of those seven Churches, al Diocesan Bishops.

The whit Stone given to him that overcomes, with a new Rev. 2. v. 17.
Name written which no Man knows sav he that receivs it; betokens purity of
Faith and integrity of Conscience. Happily it relats to an old custom at Rome, to
giv Men acquitted a whit stone, and the condemned a black, that their Officers
might dispose of them accordingly: whereof Ovid.

Mos fuit antiquus, niveis atrisque Lapillis;
His damnare reos, illis absolvere culpam.
'Twas an old wont whit and black Stones to giv:
These damnd the guilty, those did the fault forgiv.
The twenty four Elders sitting on twenty four seats, clothed Rev. 4. v. (...).
in whit with gold Crowns on their Heads round about Gods Throne; are holy
Prelates, for number answering to the Priests and Levits twenty four courses of
attendance in the Temple.

The four Beasts in midst of the Throne and round about it Ibid v. 6, 7, 8,
(being full of Eyes before and behind to show sagacity, each of which had six
Wings implying agility to execut Gods commands) are the Israelits four Ensigns
at their incampings in the Wilderness: 1. Like a Lion, for Juda's Camp on the
East: 2. A Bullock for Reubens on the South: 3. With a Man's face for Ephraims
on the West: 4. A flying Eagle for Dans on the North side.

The Book written within, and sealed with seven Seals on the Rev. 5. v. 1:
back side (which the Lamb only was found worthy to open) shows the various
changes and chances of the secular Roman Empire til the end or dissolution
thereof.

The Lamb slain from the beginning, Which stood in midst of Ibid. v. 6.
the Throne; and of the four Beasts and Elders (having seven Horns, and seven
Eyes) is the Lord Jesus Son of God and Man, That takes away the sins of the
World by his Death.

The seven seals which the Lamb opened in order, are plagues Rev 6. per totum.
or punishments inflicted by God on the World: wherein he uses the ministry of
Angels.

The one hundred forty four thousand which were sealed of Rev. 7. v 3. to 8.
Isreal's twelv Tribes (twelv thousand or twelv times one thousand in each) are
Christ's elect Church, caled afterward undefiled Virgins, which follow the Lamb
wherever he goes Rev. 14. 1, 5.

The great multitud which none could number (clothed with Ibid. v. 9, 14
whit Robes and Palms in their hands) are the numberless Nations, Kindreds,
People, Tribes and Toungs, which came out of tribulation singing praises to God.

The seven Angels with seven Trumpets given them (which Rev 8. v. 1, 2.
sounded in order when the seventh Seal was opened) are holy heavenly
Messengers, sent to denounce Gods heavy Judgment on the Earths Inhabiters.

The great Star burning like a Lamp or Torch which fell from Ibid. v. 10, 11.
Heaven into a third part of Rivers and Fountains (caled Wormwood which made
the Waters bitter that many died) is Augustulus Romes last Emperor: who fell
from his high Throne, and bittered a third part of Waters, being a Prince of
much baleful bitterness, anguish, and affliction to al his folowers.

The Angel flying through midst of Heaven, and crying aloud Ibid. v 13.
Woe, Woe, Woe to the Earths inhabiters; is an Usher or forerunner of three others
ready to sound great Woes.

The Locusts or long winged Grashopers, coming from the bottom Rev. 9 v. 3. etc.
less Pits smoke; are Mahometans derived from Arabia the Country of Locusts,
which plagued Egypt.

The King of Locusts (caled in Hebrew Abaddon, in Greec Ibid v. 11.
Apollion the destroier) is the Angel of the bottomless Pit, styled before
Satan the old Serpent, the Dragon, the Devil; and afterward the Accuser.

The four Angels bound at the great River Euphrates (which Ibid. v. 14. etc.
the sixth Trumpeting Angel loosed) are the Tures four Sultanies or Signiories:
who lay long confined near that River: but long ago let loos into the Eastern
Empire, which it has since swalowed, with much of West.

The little open Book which a mighty Angel (Christ) had in his Rev. 10. v. 2, 30.
hand, and made John's belly bitter, being bid to eat it; declares the Churches
destinies.

The Temple or inner Court to be measured, is the primitiv Rev. 11. v. 1.
Churches State under persecution of Pagan Emperors, before Constantines
conversion.

The outer Court not to be mesured, but given to the Gentiles Ibid. v. 2.
(who shall tread the holy City under foot forty two Annal months or 1260.
years) is the same Church given to new Idolaters or Image-worshipers caled
Gentiles.

The two Witnesses clad in sackcloth, which shall Prophecy Ibid v. 3. 4 5.
1260. annal dais (being two Oliv trees and two Candlesticks) are Patrons or
Preachers of divine truth: caled two because in the Law every Word shall be
established by two Witnesses, and in regard of Gods two Testaments which they
use in prophesying. These are compared to three famous Pairs in the old
Testament viz. Moses and Aaron in the Wilderness, who turned Waters into Blood;
Elias and Eliseus under the Baalitic Apostasy, who shut Heaven from rain; and
Zerobabel with Jesua at the captivity, who recovered the Jews liberty.

The great City (spiritualy caled Sodom and Egypt, afterward Ibid (...) 8.
great Babylon and the Whore) where our Lord was crucified; is Rome, in whose
Street or Province (for so street is often taken) they shall be slain, as our
Savior also suffered.

The Woman traveling with Child, clothed with the Sun (of Rev. 12 v. 1. etc.
Righteousness) having the Moon (the lawish Pedagogy, and Ethnic Idolatry) under
her feet; and on her head a Crown of twelv Stars; is Gods true primitiv Church
then in continual parturition of spiritual Children.

The great red Dragon with seven Heads and ten Horns, and Ibid. v. 3. 4.
seven Crowns on his heads; whose Tail cast a third part of the Stars to Earth,
watching the Woman to devour her Child,; is Heathen Rome worshipping the Devil,
which subjected three parts of the then known World to her rule or Empire: whose
rednes denots her embruing in Saints blood, laying wait for the Child, as
Pharaoh did for Israel, and Herod for Christ.

The Manchild who was to rule al Nations with a rod of Iron, Ibid v. 5.
is mystical Christ (or Son of the Church) formed in his Members as shall be
showed.

The Woman's Child caught up to God and his Throne, is not Identice v. 5.
Christ Theanthropos the Virgin Ma^ies Son (as many mistakingly maintain) who
is properly and personaly lift up to Gods Throne, sitting at his right Hand:
but mystical Christ (or anointed) Son of the Church, analogicaly advanced to
the imperial Throne, as al higher Powers are of God: which is meant and realy
fulfilled by Constantine and his Christian Successors.

The Angel Michael, who with his Angels fought against the Ibid. v 7.
Devil and his il spirits; is not Christ (as some suppose) but one of the chief
Princes or seven Archangels specified by Daniel, caled the great Prince, which
stands for the Children of Gods People; being a principal Patron or Protector
of the Faithful against Satan, whom he here overcam: to whose honor the primitiv
Church consecrated September 29. day.

The great Eagle, whose two Wings were given the Woman to Ibid. v. 14, 15.
fly into her place in the Wilderness to be nourished for a time, times, and
half; is the Roman Empire divided into East and West: which protected her in an
Erimitical estate from the Dragons fury in perfect tranquillity, for 1260. annal
dais: but tossed with a flood of Heresies cast from the Serpents mouth to
seduce her.

The Beast rising out of the Sea with seven Heads and ten Rev. 13 v. 1, 2.
Horns, having on his Horns ten Crowns, and on his Heads the name of Blasphemy;
is the secular Empire, which had Blasphemous new devised Idolatry on his seven
Heads at Rome: which was shared into ten Kingdoms or dominions, and al
worshipped the Dragon, because he gav his power, seat and great authority to this
Beast for worshipping or serving him.

The Beast coming out of the Earth, which had two Horns like Ibid. v. 11, 12,
a Lamb, but spoke as a Dragon; is the Spiritual Roman power or whole Papacy:
whose two horns of a Lamb, signify (as Mr. Mede opines) the power of binding and
loosing: but as others aver) the two Keis and two Swords born before the Pope
to typify his spiritual and temporal Jurisdiction; which seems properer and
probabler: but his Doctrins are the voice of the Dragon.

The Image of the ten-horned Beast, which was wounded and did Ibid. v. 14, 15.
live or reviv; is the West Empire or seven headed Beast of Rome, which lay
suppressed long, but restored by Pope Leo 3, who ereated Charlemaign Emperor,
and his Successors enjoied it for six descents, til it was translated into
Germany.

The Beasts mark or name (which is al one, as it is after caled Ibid. v. 16. 17.
the mark of his name, Rev. 14. 11.) without which none could buy or sell; is
Papal Ana^hema or Excommunication (as Master Mede maintains) which excluds Men
from civil Commerce, company, and communion; but this, by his leav, is a
prohibitiv brand to exclud such as have it; not permissiv, to admit such as have
it, and repel only those that have it not: Nor can it be applied as a name or
mark. Why not rather Roman Catholic, being a name which all the Beasts Folowers
arrogat as their pecul^ar mark or badg? nor can any sav such communicate.

The number of his name (666) being the number of a Man, Ibid. v. 18.
because set in numeral letters, is the two horned Beast, whose name (wherein that
number is infolded) is (...) which grew up when Theodosius divided the Empire
into East caled Greecs, and West clyped Latins or Rome, which name ((...))
subducting the letters of number (as Hebrews, Greecs, and Latins use in
Chronograms) by fatal instinct make 666. Vicarius Dei generalis in terris
(subtracting the Roman numeral letters) import 666: but this is a periphrastic
title, no personal name as the other.

The Lamb standing on Mount Sion, and with him 144000 Rev. 14. 1, etc.
undefiled Virgins, having his Fathers and his name written in their foreheads,
who follow the Lamb wherever he goes; is the Lord Jesus and his impolluted
Church, which hated spiritual whordom or Image Worship, and continued constant
in the true Faith amidst Papal p^rsecution, as a pure Virgin under Babylon;
being the Apostle^ genuin Progeny.

The name or mark of the Lamb and his Father; is the sign of Iden^ice.
the Cross in Baptism, as a Seal of their Faith, and Ensign of Christian
Profession, to discern them from Infidels; maugre the malice of al Snarlers,
Scoffers, or Slanderers.

The Harvest ripe to be reaped, into which the Son of Man Ibid. (...). (...).
thrust his Sickle; is the cutting down of mystical Babylon, or destruction of
the Romis^ Beasts whole dominion.

The Vintage or Winepress of Gods wrath without the City, Ibid. v. 17. ad finem.
from which came blood to the Horsbridles, by the space of one thousand six
hundred furlongs; is the final fatal perdition of the Beast and falls Prophet,
with all their Accomplices, Comrads, and Confederats; which shall be acted or
accomplished with horrid slaughter at the battle of Armageddon, one thousand
six hundred furlongs (or two hundred miles) without the City: but whether in
Palestine or the Popes Territory, is not reveled.

The seven golden Phials of Gods wrath, which seven Angels Rev. 15* v. 7.
having the seven last Plagues, received from one of the four Beasts; are so
many degrees of punishments preceding the Antichristian Beasts ruin, even as it
grew up gradualy to greatness: as there must be a parallel proportion in all things.

The three unclean Spirits of Devils like Frogs, coming Rev. 16. v. 13* 14.
out of the mouths of the Dragon, Beast, and falls Prophet working miracles, are
Papal Emisaries or Ambassadors sent to sommon the Kings and Potentats of the
whole World to the battle of that great day of God Almighty: wherein the Dragon
shall assist the Beast and falls Prophet, with all his warlike powers, worldly
plots, and wily policies: but the seven Angels poured out their seven Phials of
Gods wrath.

The Woman in rich attire (sitting on a Scarlet Beast full of Rev 17 v 3. etc.
names of Blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns) on whose forehead was
writ a Mystery, Great Babylon, Mother of Harlots, drunken with the blood of
Saints and Martyrs of Jesus; is Romes Papacy which rides on the Empire in the
seven headed City; being both but as one head (the seventh and last) consisting
of the Temporal and Spiritual State; which is even the eighth, yet one of the
seven reigning jointly together.

The Man which sat on a whit Horse in Heaven, caled the Word Rev 19 v 11, etc.
of God, who was clothed with a Vesture dipped in blood, having on it and on his
thigh a name written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords; is our Lord Jesus, who
shall smite the Nations, ruling them wi^h a rod of iron, and subdu al with great
slaughter.

The Beast and falls Prophet which shall be tormented in a lake Rev 20. v 10.
of fire and brimstone for ever; is the whole Papacy and Antichrist the Pope,
head of that State or Society.

The holy City, new Jerusalem, prepared as a Bride adorned for Rev. 21. verse. 2
her Husband; is the Company of Elect ever ready to receiv her Bridegroom or
best beloved Lord.

The Lambs Bride or Spous that great City holy Jerusalem; is Ibid. v. 9, 10.
Christ's Militant Church on Earth; which jointly with the triumphant in Heaven,
makes Christ's Spous.

These new notions of names (forty four in number) never vented til now, will, if
well digested, make the meaning more obvious in most mysteries. Many mo
circumstantial terms are sparsed in the Text, which are amply unveled in the
ensuing Commentary: but this short Index shall serve to lead strangers steps in
this Labyrinth.

Analysis Apocalypseos: The Apocalypse Analyzed.
THree principal parts are considerable: 1. The Preface, Analysis* Part 1.
which is both general of the whole Prophecy, noting the Matter, Penman, and
Profit; and special relation to the seven Asian Churches, and in them to the
Catholic Church: wherein is a nomination of the person writing, and those written
to; with a salutation of them and description of Jesus Christ. 2. The John
wrote; and for future as it shall be at last day. The Triumphant is declared both
for the inchoation at general Judgment, and duration to eternity. 3. The
Conclusion, which confirms the whole Prophecy: John from the Lord: 2. By Christ,
who testifies it to be true, and amplified by John's earnest request on the
Churches behalf: 3. By John who denounces direful judgments on all that shall ad
to, or take from it; with a salutation to the Saints at end of al.

The particulars of the Church Militant exhibit two points. 1 Vision. Chapter 1. 2.
3.
1 A Vision of seven golden Candlesticks, and seven Stars, signifying the Asian
Churches. 2 A description of those Churches in seven Epistles directed to the
Bishop-Angels of those seven Seas; in all which is one current constant form
observed: which imports 1 A description of Christ Jesus suitable to his Vision:
2 A narrativ of the good commendable, or evil culpable in every Angel and
Church: 3 Promises or menaces proportional to their Virtues or Vices: 4 An
exhortation to attend things written to the Churches. The Churches State for
future (specialy in Europ) is more mysticaly unfolded: which is to premonish
her of grievous persecutions by Tyrans, Heretics, and lims of Antichrist;
against al which the holy Ghost givs many comforts: That God will be with her in all distresses, whose tribulations shall terminat in short space: but her Enemies
shall perish, and she in fine set safe or secure in the life to com: al which
things are pointly or precisely expressed in six Visions one after another.
These are comprised in two Prophecies or Systems Ch 4 (...) 11.
of Visions contemporar: the first begins with the sealed Book: the last lasts
to the end of Apocalypse: taking in some passages of five Trumpets: viz. the
little Book, the measuring of the Temple, the out Court not to be measured, and
fate of the two mourning witnesses.

The Churches future estate is reveled in a mysterious Vision (...) Vision. Chapter
4.
of a Book fastened with seven seals; wherein is comprised a preparatory to open
them, which displais Gods sitting on a Throne in Heaven, with his Ensigns or
Emblems of Majesty: viz. twenty four Elders and four Beasts, Lightnings,
Thunders Voices, Trumpets, seven Lamps which are his seven Spirits, a Sea of Ch
5.
glass like Crystal, and Songs of prais by them al to him that sits on the
Throne. The sealed Book held in his right hand (which none was worthy or able
to open sav the Lamb) showed to John the Churches future state til the worlds
end. In the seventh seal are Chapter 6.
presented seven Trumpets, and in the last seven Phials of Gods wrath, full of
the last seven plagues or punishments. The first Seal shows a whit Horse: the
secund a red: the third a black, his Rider bearing Balances in his hand: the
fourth a pale, his Rider death, with Hell following at heels: the fifth the
Martyrs Souls under the Altar crying for vengeance, which had whit robes given
them with promiss of complet glory, when their fellow Brethren should be
fulfilled: The sixth sets forth Gods direful Judgments on the Churches Enemies,
attended with dreadful signs: viz. A great Earthquake, the Sun becam black, and
Moon as blood, the Stars fell to Earth, Heaven departed as a scrole, and every
Mountain and I Will moved out of their places. Herat Kings, great Men, chief
Captains, Bond and Free (even al Persecutors) fell to despair, hiding in Dens,
desiring the Mountains and Rocks to cover them from the Lamb.

The seventh contains more Mysteries then any: viz. A Vision 3 Vision. Chapter 7.
Chapter 8.
of seven Angels with seven Trumpets, as shall be specified: but the holy Ghost
comforts the Church, and an Angel seals Gods Servants in the Foreheads as a
sign of their deliverance. At opening whereof was half an hours silence in
Heaven, betokening great things to com; and the Angels addressed to sound. The
first sounded, And Hail mixd with Fire and Blood insued: which burnt a third
part of al green things. At sound of the secund, A mighty Mountain burning with
Fire was cast into Sea, and a third part becam Blood. At the third, A great
Star caled Wormwood burning as a Lamp fell, making a third part of Rivers and
Fountains bitter, that many died of them. At fourth, A third part of Sun, Moon,
and Stars was darkened: that the day and night for a third part shined not. Here
intervens as a preparatory transition to the three last Trumpets, An Angel
flying through midst of Heaven, crying a loud, Woe, Woe, Woe to the Earths
Inhabiters by reason of the three Angels yet to sound. The fifth sounded (which
is the first Ch 9. 1 Woe.
of Woe) And a Star fell from Heaven to Earth: and he opened the bottomless Pit
with a Key, whence arose Smoke darkning Sun and Air; out of which came Locusts,
whose effects are notably described, together with their King Abaddon or
Apollyon. The sixth (or secund Woe) sounded, which 2 Woe. Chapter 10.
loosed four Angels bound at Euphrates, who were prepared to slay a third part
of Men: their Army being two hundred thousand thousand Horsemen, which are
largely described, with their woeful effects. Here a mighty Angel (Jesus Christ)
descended with a little Book in his hand open: who set his right Foot on the
Sea, and left on Earth; swearing with lifted up hands by him that livs for
ever, there should be no more time: but at sound of the seventh Trumpet, the
mystery of God shall be finished, as he declared to the Prophets. This Angel
cried loud, as if a Lion roared, or seven Thunders uttered their voices: which
John was about to writ, but a voice from Heaven bid him seal it up, and eat the
little Book (which in his mouth was sweet as Honey, but made his Belly bitter)
that he might Prophecy. Then ^b 11.
was John bid to mesure Temple, Altar, and Worshipers with a reed, but not the
out Court; for the Gentiles must tread the holy City under foot forty two
Months: and he gav his two Witnesses power to Prophecy, one thousand two
hundred sixty dais clad in Sackcloth; but the beast rising from the bottomless
Pit shall kill them, whose dead Bodies shall ly in the street of the great City
three dais and half unburied: who shall reviv and ascend to Heaven to their
Enemies great grief and terror. The seventh 3 Woe.
(or third of Woe) sounded, which finished Gods mysteries, and his Churches
miseries: then were great voices heard in Heaven saying, the Kingdoms of this
World are become the Lords and his Christ's: to whom the twenty four Elders sung
a gratulation attended with Lightnings, Thundrings, Voices, Earthquake, and
great Hail. Here the first Prophecy or System of Visions (which contains
chiefly the fourth Empires condition) ends: after which the secund (contemporar
with the former of Seals and Trumpets) folows: foretelling the Churches future
state til the last day. Herin three principal points are handled (...) 1. Her
tribulations 4 Vision.
by several Enemies: 2. Her deliverance by their destruction: 3. Her happy
condition after deliverance. Most Interpreters make both Visions one continued
Prophecy, yet not so properly; tho in substance near one. The Churches
persecutions Chapter 12.
by several Enemies; are pourtraied in this fourth Vision: but the parturient
Woman's pursuit by the Dragon most pointly; who waged war with the remnent of
Her seed. The Dragons Chapter 13.
instruments are the Beast with seven heads and ten borns rising from the Sea;
and that coming out of the Earth which had two horns like a Lamb, but spoke as
a Dragon. The events Chapter 14.
of this persecution, is the Saints victory by their constant confession of
Christ even to death; which is amplified by the causes and effects.

The Vision of seven Phials full of Gods wrath, and the seven 5 Vision.
last plagues poured out by seven Angels; declare the Churches Chapter 15.
deliverance by her Enemies destruction. The first poured his Chapter 16.
plagues on the Earth: the next on the Sea: the third on Rivers and Fountains:
the fourth on the Sun: the fifth on the Beasts seat: the sixth on Euphrates: the
seventh into the Air, whose effects see in the context.

In the sixth Vision many mysteries are manifested, being before 6 Vision. Chapter
17.
but obscurely mentioned: which point out the Rise, Reign, Seat, Vassals,
Success, and final fall of Antichrist with all the Churches Enemies. Here behold
the great Whores judgment and event: wherein a lifely description of the Whore
to be judged, both by visional representation of a Woman sitting on a scarlet
Beastful of Names of Blasphemy (having on her forehead a Name written, A
Mystery, Babylon the Great, Mother of Harlots and Abominations) and by real
explanation, that the Beasts seven Heads are seven Hills, and ten Horns ten
Kingdoms. The Instruments which shall destroy the Whore are those ten Horns or
Kings, who shall hate and make her desolat or naked, eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire. The promulgation Chapter 1^.
of Babylons perdition, is performed by three Angels: one declares the
certainty, it is falen and become the habitation of Devils: another warns al Gods
People to com out of her for fear of her plagues setting forth her V^ssals sad
laments crying; alas, alas, that great City: the last seals up her ruins
irrecoverablenes, under the type of A great Millstone cast into the Sea. Then
follow gratulatory Chapter 19.
exultations of the Heavenly company singing Halelujah to God, both for the
Whores judgment, and preparation of the Lambs Wife to marry with him: together
with the Lamb and his Armies total conquest over the Beast, falls Prophet, and
earthly Kings with their Armies: whereto al Fowls are invited to eat their flesh.

The last Vision shows the event of the Whores judgment, 7 Vision, Chapter 20.
which is triple: 1. The Saints safety by chaining up the Dragon or Devil for
one thousand years in the bottomless pit: 2. The Martyrs living and reigning
with Christ one thousand years; but the rest of the dead lived not again til
those years were finished: 3. The Saints miraculous deliverance from the Nations
(Gog and Magog) by fire from Heaven to devour them; when their Deceiver is cast
into a Lake of fire and Brimstone; whereupon folows the general judgment of the
dead (small and great) according to their works. So far the Church Militants
future state on Earth: next folows the Triumphants happy condition in Heaven
for ever: which is gloriously decyphered with the Water of Life and Tree in
midst of the Street, as the Text Chapter 211 Chapter 22.
shows.

The conclusion with its three parts, is Analyzed at first among the three
chief Heads of this Prophecy, which shall not be Tautologicaly repeated or
reiterated.

Mr. Dury in a prolix Preface to the German Divines Clavis, has prefixed an
ample Analysis, which is abundantly abridged, and annexed for variety of wit.
The Title tells, that the Book Chapter 1. v. 1.
is a Revelation of Jesus Christ, who is the Subject Matter, since the sole
scope is to make him manifest. This Title contains three things: 1. the Author
God, who gav it to Christ: 2. The use for which he gav it, to show his Servants
the things that shall shortly befall.: 3. The means by which Christ's
manifestation is put forth to this use. 1. He sent and signified Ibid v. 2. 3.
etc.
it by an Angel to John: 2. The Preface directs either generaly to al Churches
that bear record of Gods Word and Testimony of Jesus, and al things he saw;
which will make them blessed that read, hear, and keep the same: or specialy to
the seven Asian Churches of Jesus Christ: who is described: 1. By the
properties or effects of his first coming in the Flesh, who is the faithful
Witness and first begotten of the dead, Prince of al earthly Kings; which loved
us and washed our sins in his Blood; making us Kings and Priests to God his
Father: 2. By the properties and effects of his secund coming with Clouds: when
every Ey (even those that pierced him) shall see him, and al Kindreds wail because
of him. 3. By a narrativ of the Visions, which extends from chapter 1. v. 9. to chapter
22. v. 6. 4. By the conclusion comprised chapter 22. v. 6. ad finem. Here consider:
1. The certainty, importance, and use of it: 2. The effects which it wrought in
John, who was ready to worship the Angel, but bid to forbear: 3. The command
which he had not to seal the Prophecies, with the reason of it: 4. The
authority thereof is repeated, because Jesus sent his Angels to testify these
things in the Churches; because it is ratified by the Spirit, Bride, and al
Believers; because the perfection is such, as no thing may be added or
subtracted on pain of eternal plagues and perdition. The Contents of the
Prophecy are triple: 1 The things which John saw in the first Vision: viz. 1
Vision. Chap. 1.
Christ's presence with his Churches, who is their Mediator and high Priest, as
walking in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks; their King, as holding
their seven Stars or Angels in his right hand; and Prophet, as out of whose
mouth went a sharp two edged sword of Gods Word. 2 The things which then were;
Chap. 2, 3.
viz. the seven Churches to whom John, by Christ's appointment sent Epistles;
wherein al perfections and imperfections, promises and menaces, admonitions and
reproofs, exho^tations and precepts, are intended to al Churches and Pastors so
well as these; since no Prophecy is of private interpretation: for the proem and
period of every Epistle is, Let him that has an ear h^ar what the spirit says
to the Churches. 3 The things to b^fal hereafter, Chapter 4 t^l ch 22.
which transcend from the Churches on Earth to the Kingdom of Heaven, where John
saw the things which must be hereafter. The secund Vision shows, 1 What the
Churches constitution 2 Vision.
in Heaven is; how ordered about Gods Throne, and set in his presence: 2 What
the administration of affairs in Heaven, and Chap. 4.
the Churches government on Earth by Jesus Christ is; who a spotless Lamb flain
meritoriously, purchased that honor to open Chap 5.
the sealed Book of Gods Counsils; being his seven Eyes of Wisdom, and seven
Horns of Power, able alone to discharge such a trust: 3 What changes chanced in
the World, and the Chap. 6.
Churches condition at opening of the first six seals; where is showed, how at
preaching of the Gospel great troubles and terrible Chap. 7.
wars arose among Men, wherein Christ's Martyrs ly as Sacrifices under the Altar
crying for vengeance; but are comforted that they shall be avenged after a short
season, and their Enemies terrified at first executing of the Lambs wrath upon
them: Yet lest judgment prepared should fall on his Friends, a preventiv Chap. 8.
provision is made to seal and sever them from the rest, that no hurt, heat or
hunger shall annoy them. 4 What destruction betides or is brought on the World
at opening the seventh seal, and what glory to the Saints: which last includs
all that folows to the end of this Book. Here seven Angels with seven Trumpets
declare Gods Judgments on the Earth; but the three last remarkably differ from
the four first, which giv warning of great Woe thrice threatened by tripetion to
the Earths Inhabitants: but the four first tend to depriv the World of a third
part of their comforts, as in trees, green grass, the Se^, with all Animals
therein, Ships, Rivers, Fountains, Sun, Moon, Stars the light of day and night.
The three Wo-Trumpets Chap. 9.
produce heavier plagues, both by Locusts (which shall so torment Men, that they
shall seek death, but not find it) and Euphratean Horsemen, which shall slay a
third part of Men; yet the rest repented not.

The third Vision of A mighty Angel coming from Heaven, 3 Vision. Chap. 10.
clothed with a cloud and Rainbow on his head (his face like the Sun and feet
as pillars of fire, who stood on the Sea and Earth) had a little Book open in
his hand, which John being bid eat up, and enabled him to Prophecy. The three
past Visions show three substantial Note.
differences of things reveled to John, and three main changes of his Spirit in
receiving them: the first contains Christ's ministration of his Offices on Earth
among his Churches: the next of his Offices in Heaven over all the World, to
preserv and propagat his Church: the last of his Offices both in Heaven and
Earth, to finish al wickedness in the World, and to perfect his Churches
felicity. In all which manifestations, he is presented suitable to the things
reveled: 1 As a Man in dealing with Men: 2 As a Lamb offered to God in dealing
with God: 3 As a mighty Angel to encounter Satan with his Angels and powers of
darkness in the World. The matter of this Vision is Chap. 11.
to show, when and how the mystery of God, spoken by the Prophets shall be
finished? wherein 1 John had a Reed as a Red given to mete the Temple, Altar,
and them that worship: 2 The out-Court is given to the Gentiles, who shall tread
on the holy City forty two months: 3 The two sack cloth witnesses had power
to Prophecy one thousand two hundred and threescore dais: 4 The Beast rising
from the bottomless pit shall slay them, but after three dais and a half, they
revived and ascended to Heaven in a cloud, which terrified their Enemies: 5
Great joy was in Heaven, because this worlds Kingdoms are become the Lords and
his Christ's; that he may reward his Saints and Servants. There follow several
subordinat Visions, which concern the Church typified by a woman, Chap. 12.
and respect 4 times: 1 Before she fled into the wilderness, who brought a
Man-child, which the Dragon waited to devour; but he was rapt up to Heaven, and
the Dragon with his Angels cast to Earth by the Angel Michael: yet he
persecuted the Woman, and made war with the remnent of her seed. 2 While she
abode there, where two Beasts occurred; one rising from the Sea with seven Chap.
13.
heads and ten horns, and on his horns ten Crowns, with the name of Blasphemy
on his heads: A secund coming out of the Earth, who had two horns like a Lamb,
but spoke as a Dragon: he did great wonders making fire descend from Heaven,
and deceived them that dwell on Earth; bidding them make an Image to the other
Beast, which was wounded and did live; and caused such as would not worship it
to be slain: He also made al receiv a mark in their right hands or foreheads,
that none might buy or sell sav he that had the mark, name, or number of his
name, which is 666. During these Beasts joint reign, the Churches state on mount
Chap. 14.
Sion, and Gods imparting his Will to the World (touching the everlasting
Gospel, Babylons future fall, punishment of the Beasts folowers, and gathering
the Harvest and Vintage) are declared. Gods Judgments on the Beast, are poured
out in seven Chap. 15.
golden Phials of his last plagues, by seven Angels coming out of the Temple in
Heaven, clothed with pure white linen, and their breasts girded with gold
girdles. The first poured his on the Earth, Chap. 16.
and a noisome sore fell on the Beasts worshipers: The secund poured his on the
Sea, which becam as blood of a dead Man: The third his on Rivers and Fountains,
which turned to blood: The fourth his on the Sun, which scorched Men with fire,
that they blasphemed Gods name: The fifth his on the Beasts seat, whose Kingdom
was darkened, that Men gnawed their toungs for torment: The sixth his on
Euphrates which was dried up, that the way of the Eastern Kings might be
prepared: The seventh his into the Air, whence followed Voices, Lightnings,
Thunders, and such a mighty Earthquake, as the like was never seen by Men; and
huge hail (...) every stone weighing a Talent, and Men blasphemed God (...) of
this plague. There came three unclean Spirits of Devils, lik ^^ogs from the
mouths of the Dragon, Beast, and falls Prophet; which by lying miracles gathered
the Kings to battle of that great day of God Almighty at Armageddon. Next the
judgment and mystery of Babylons great Whore, sitting on a scarlet Beast with
seven Chap. 17.
heads and ten horns, is showed to John; that the seven heads are seven hills,
and ten horns ten Kings. After it Babylons destruction Chap. 18.
is declared, and great lamentation of several sorts made for it, as may there
be read. 3 As she came out of the wilderness, Chap. 19.
great gratulations are given to God for perdition of Babylon, and preparation
for the Lords marriage with his wife: then the Armies of Heaven on whit Horses,
under conduct of Christ ( caled the Word of God, who had on his vesture and
thigh a name written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords) made war with the Beast,
falls Prophet, and Kings; whereto an Angel invited al Fowls to eat the flesh of
the slain; but the Beast and falls Prophet were taken, and cast alife into a
lake burning with fire and brimstone. 4. During her reign with Christ (after
she came out Chap. 20.
of the wilderness) one thousand years; when Satan being loosed a little space,
shall deceiv the Nations ( Gog and Magog) to gather them to battle: but fire came
from God and devoured them. Lastly, A new Heaven and Earth (caled the holy
City, new Jerusalem, Chapter 21. Chapter 22
coming down from God) prepared as a Bride for her Husband; is pourtraied at
large.

These Analyzes in a prosal method or manner, are plainer better, At end of his
Annotations
and briefer for the vulgar sort, then such as are set in Sections and
Subsections: but Dr. Deodat has a very ample one on the Apocalypse, in
substance the same with the 2 former, or very little varying, which he that
lists may survey. Now to my main task. The Author of Apocalypse, is John the
Divine, Christ's best Introduction.
beloved Disciple (Son to Zebedee a Fisher Man, and Brother of James the
greater, whom Herod the King ^lu with the Sword) who wrote the fourth Gospel,
and three general Epistles: but not John a Presbyter in those dais, as Eusebius
and Dionysius Alex: deem; nor any other of that name, as al Ancients agree: for
he only was exiled to Patmos A. C. 97, where those Rev. 1. 9, 10. Rev. 1. verse.
1, 2, 11.
Visions were presented on the Lords day, to which he gav that appellation,
mis-named by many the Sabbath, without any Scriptural warrant, nor did any of
the Fathers so style it. The Authority also is every way divine, being indicted
by Christ Jesus, Authority.
as God gav it him, and sent to John by an Angel, that he should communicate it
to the Churches; who wrote it in a Book, and sent it to the seven Churches of
minor Asia. So John imparted it to the Churches, an Angel to John, Christ to
the Angel, and God to Christ Jesus: what can be a more divine Origin or
Pedigree? Specialy being an inspired Prophecy? For Moses the Man of God and his
peculiar Favorit, had the honor to Pen the first Book of the old Testament, and
John Christ's chief favorit the last of the new Testament, so the one commands
old Israelits not to ad or take from Gods Word; Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
and the other threatens al, which shall ad to the Words of his Prophecy, that
God will inflict the plagues written therein: but Rev. 22. 18, 19.
if any shall detract, God will take away his part from the Book of Life and holy
City.

The Excellence of it apppeers many wais: for the style is Excellence.
most statly and sublime; the matter full of Majesty and Mystery: the
expressions pathetical and pithy: some mystical in dark Visions, to exercise the
Judgments of the wisest; some more facil or familar to succor the infirmities
of the weakest. Much more might be added ingeneral: but I hasten to Mr. Medes
Clavis and Comment, whom Dr. Twiss highly admires saying, he has sundry rare
notions styled Specimina or Essais, wherein he excels; specialy in rendering the
Revelations right sens, which is most Tropical or Figurativ. As in the mystery
Rev. 12*
of the battle in Heaven, and casting Satan to Earth; he shows that Stats and
Kingdoms in the politic World, are resembled in Scripture suitable to the
Natural: wherein Heaven and Earth denot the Nobility and Commonalty. For Heaven
consists of Sun, Moon, and Stars of greater or lesser magnitud: as in a Realm
is a King, Queen, Nobles, and other officers of diverse degrees: but on Earth,
is much more variety of Creatures: as Trees, Herbs, Flowers, Fishes, Beasts,
Serpents: so among People of any Community no less difference of Trades and
Professions.

He destinguisheth the whole Prophecy into the Book closed Division.
with seven Seals, comprising an History from the Gospels first preaching to
the Worlds end, which sets forth the fates or fortunes of the Roman Empire: and
the little open Book, which includs the doings or destinies of the Christian
Church. The first presents the seven Seals and seven Trumpets: for the seventh
Seal produces the seven Trumpets. 1. The first six Seals contain the story of
the Empires condition or continuance til Constantin; when there being a
marvelous metamorphosis from Pagan to Christian; this change is compared to the
Worlds end, and by giving of a new, which is very semblable. 2. The seven
Trumpets (which contain the seven Rev. 9.
Seals) represent Gods judgments on the World, for opposing the Gospel, and
oppressing the Saints. 1. By Ethnic Emperors, for which the dition or dominion
was gradualy rent into ten Kingdoms. Which is unfolded in four degrees thereof,
being the subject of the four first Trumpets. 2. The other three are termed Woe
Trumpets, denouncing divine judgments on the Antichristian World, or degenerat
Stats of Christiendom: 1. By Sarrasens in the first Woe Trumpet: 2. By Turcs in
the Rev. 11. 15.
secund: 3. By the Worlds end in the last.

Medi Clavis and Expositio: Med's Key and Exposition.
HIs Clavis contains sundry Synchronicisms or concurrences The Key.
of things in one time, set forth under the Seals. For there is a Quaternion of
Prophecies Synchronizing in equality or identity of Time: 1 Of The Woman's abode
in the Wilderness for a time, times and half: 2. Of The seven headed Beast
restored and ruling forty two months: 3. Of The out-Court or holy City trodden
by the Gentiles so long: 4. Of The two Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth one
thousand two hundred sixty days: al which three times signify the same. For
chronical identity hinders not, but one may be before or after another, tho
they agree in term of years: therefore the coevity shall be proved by other
characters, that they belong to the self same times.

1. The times of the Beast and Woman's mansion in the Rev. 12. 6. 14.
Wilderness, begin at one instant; viz. the Dragons foil, when he was cast to
the Earth: for when Michael threw him from Heaven, the Woman escaped: Ergo they
identicat.

2. The times of the Beast and Two Witnesses testimony Rev 11. 7.
being also equal, expire together at end of the sixth Trumpet: Ergo they
commenced at once, and synchronize throughout.

3. The Witnesses times and the Court or holy City possessed Ibid. v 2. 13, 18.
by the Gentiles forty two months, which conspire, as al grant: Ergo they
synchronize most exactly and equaly.

4. The Woman in the Wilderness, the Beasts dominion, treading down the holy
City, and two Witnesses prophesying jointly concur: Ergo al four synchronize.

5. Now for the next Synchronicism; The two hornd Rev. 13. v. 3. to 15.
Beast (wherein the false Prophet is Head) complies with the seven-Headed or ten
Hornd Beast (caled the other Beasts Image) which when his deadly wound was
restored to pristin estate, was to rule forty two months: and those being ended,
he did great wonders, exercising al his power in the seven Headed Be^sts
presence: but both are taken and cast alife into a fiery Lake burning Rev. 19 v.
20.
with Brimstone: Ergo both sympathizing in their rise and ruin (whereof one used
the others power in his presence) contemporize throughout. Where Note, that
whatever is ascribed Note.
to the Septicep Beast of the evil he committed, or worship given him; was done
after his instauration or cure of the wound: but the ten Horns belong to his
first Head, or restored estate, as the Angel informs saying; There are seven
Kings: Rev. 17 10.
fiv are falen, one is, and the last is not yet com, which must continu a short
space: so the sixth was then in St. John's dais, but the Horns not then com:
Ergo it must pertain to the seventh or last Head.

The two hornd Beast and falls Prophet are one, as Irenaeus App^ndix.
observed: as by comparing Rev. 13. v. 13. to 16. with Rev. 19. v. 20. will
clearly appeer. The septicep ten-hornd Beast, Rev. 13 12, 14.
is caled the Beasts Image Rev. 14. 9, 11. Rev. 15. 2. Rev. 16. 2. Rev. 19. 20.
Rev. 20. 4. For this Beast acknowledging the false Prophet to be his restorer,
is ruled by his Will as suprem Lord, and called his Image: not whose similitud he
bears (for in that respect he rather resembles the seven headed Dragon, nor of
his estate before the wound, after whose exemple he blasphemed God, and made war
with the Saints) but that which the two hornd Beast speaking as a Dragon
restored, and claims for his own; the Genetiv being passivly taken to signify
the Possessor: as the Beasts mark is not stamped on himself, but on those that
worship him. For the Beasts Image whereto the false Prophet gav life, caused al
which would not worship it to be slain. There be but two Beasts pourtraid in the
Apocalypse, and where the Beast and falls Prophet are named together, the Image is
not cited being both one. For it is that Rev. 15. 2.
Beasts Image (whose Name and number is specified) viz. the two-hornd, who is
the others prime principal founder.

6. The times of the great Harlot or mystical Babylon and Rev. 17. 3.
septicep ten hornd Beast synchronize: for the Beast carries the Whore sitting
on him, whose ten Horns or Kings, take authority with him at once when he was
restored: but when his body came to be dissolved, they hated the whore making
her naked and desolat, whose flesh they burnt with fire.

7. The hundred forty four thousand Virgins sealed, contemporize Rev. 14. 1.
with the Whore and Beast; for they deter men from al Communion with him, or
his Image or mark: being so opposite to him and his folowers, when the bonds of
holy Soldiers persevered in allegiance to the Lamb, bearing his name and his
Fathers in their foreheads, as other Apostats did the Beasts mark in their
right hands or foreheads. Thus the Capitulation.
ten hornd Beast revived, synchronized with the Woman in the Wilderness, with
treading the holy City under foot, and the Rev. 12. 7.
witnesses mourning in sackcloth: so does the two hornd Beast with the ten
hornd, and the Whore with both: as also the company of sealed Virgins with the
Whore and Beast: al which make a singular synchronical symphony of al with all
and each.

8. The inner Court measured with a Reed, the VVomans parturition, the Dragons
watching her, and his fight with Michael Rev. 13. 1. 2. 3.
temporize: for so soon as she brought forth a Manchild (who was to rule al
Nations with a rod of Iron) she fled into the Desert to be nourished for a
time, times, and half, or one thousand two hundred sixty days; and immediately
insued that battle in Heaven: when the Dragon and his Angels were cast to
Earth: then he resigned his place and great authority to the cured septicep
Beast, whom all the world wondered at, and worship the Doner Dragon: Ergo the
Courts measuring, the woman's Childing, the Dragons waiting, and his Duel with
Michael synchronize, even at the very Epoche of St. John's repeated Prophecy.

9 The pouring out of seven Phials by seven Angels, synchronize Rev. 15. 2, 3.
with the Beasts downfall and Babylons destruction; for which the Victors sing
Moses triumphant hymn.

Thus far of the nine chief Synchronicisms: Now the Apocalypse contains three
parts: 1 The Vision of seven golden Candlesticks or Asian Churches, which takes
up the three first chapters. 2 The Prophecy of seven Seals and Trumpets, from
Chap. 4. to 10. verse. 8. 3 The Prophecy of the little open Book, Rev. 16. 10, 19
or body of Prophetic Visions, which John being bid eat up, from Chap. 10.
verse. 8. to the end of al. That this is a repetition of the Prophecy, appeers
by the Angels words to John; Thou must Prophecy again ((...)) to many People,
Nations, Toungs, and Rev. 10. v. 11.
Kings: which are plainly distinguishd from the rest of Prophecies.

He has other synchronicisms of Seals, Trumpets, and Phials too tedious and
invious or obscure: beatus qui intelligit. Howbeit some confused collections
shall be exhibited to be better sifted or scanned.

1 The seventh Seal touching the first six Trumpets, is the Rev. 8.
same with the two Beasts; which concur with the company of one hundred forty
four thousand Virgins, being opposite to the Rev. 7.
Beasts reigning: this initiats with the sixth Trumpet or beginning of the
seventh; for since the witnesses mourning one thousand two hundred threescore
dais, ends with the sixth Trumpet, or as the seventh begins; the Beasts forty
two months must needs expire then also, and by consequent the Beasts tyranny
is confined in the compass of the first six Trumpets: For the Vision of
witnesses being the first repeated Prophecy; the most wise Spirit runs through
(as a Weaver does his warp with Rev. 11.
his woof) the whole body of repeated Prophecies, to connect them aptly with the
Seals. The Beasts overthrow, Cities fall, Note*
slaughter of Men by an Earthquake, are not meant of the Beasts utter
destruction, but end of his authority and reigning forty two months; which the
Beasts and two witnesses synchronicisms being granted, must determine together:
For the Beast shall remain a short space, but so unlike former, as scars to be
reputed the same; which soon after, under the seventh Trumpet, shall be
absolutely abolished.

2 The seven Phials of wrath (being so many degrees of the Rev 16. 10.
Beasts fall or fate) synchronize with the inchoation of his destruction: but
his Kingdom fell so fast the sixth Trumpet yet sounding (which put a period to
his power of forty two months over the Saints) that he cannot be quit ruined
til the fifth Phial be poured out, when his seat shall be shaken and kingdom
Rev. 10. 6.
darkened: Ergo fiv Phials were poured out, yer the sixth Trumpet ceased: for
the seventh Phial of consummation concurs with the seventh Trumpets initiation,
which also sounds the termination.

3 The thousand years of the Dragons binding and shutting up in the Rev. 20.
the bottomless pit with a seal set thereon, that he should no more deceiv the
Nations; concurs with the seventh consummation Trumpet and Beasts confusion:
for the use was to seal up a place or prison sure, as Darius did the Lions Den
with a ring, and the Jews Christ's Sepulcher by sealing the stone. Some suppose
his casting down to Earth and shutting up is the same; but it is not so. For his
ejecting from Heaven hindered not his doing harm on Earth: but being clos
prisoner in chains he cannot Rev. 12.
wander to do hurt; nor do the things related agree, since during the first
six Seals, and under the six first Trumpets of the seventh, he was free or
loos: Ergo his shutting up for one thousand years falls under the seventh
Trumpet: For he was not bound at the battle, nor while the woman staid in the
wilderness, nor during the ten hornd Beasts reign; since his Scholar, the false
Prophet seduced People with signs and wonders all that Rev 9. 11.
time. Yea the Locusts King (caled the Angel of the bottomless pit) is the very
Dragon or Satan then not sealed when the sixth Angel poured out his Phial, and
seventh ready to pour his. For three unclean Spirits like Frogs, came out of the
Dragons, Rev. 16. 13, 14.
Beasts, and falls Prophets mouths, which wrought wonders, and went to the Kings
of the World: Ergo the thousand years of his being bound, belong to the seventh
Trumpet. So the war when Satan, after a thousand years, is loosed a little
space differs from that when the Beast and falls Prophet are cast alife into the
burning Rev. 20. 10.
Brimstone Lake. For the first war is waged by him that sat on a whit Horse
(caled Gods Word) who smot the Nations with a sharp Sword, and was followed by
Armies in Heaven on Whit Horse^: But in the last at Armageddon, God sent fire
from Heaven to devour them, and Satan is cast into that Lake where the Beast and
falls Prophet are before: For he is first clapped close in prison a thousand years
and then loosed; but now condemned to be incessantly tormented for ever. Since
then the war with the Beast and falls Prophet differs from this last, either
it is to be waged during those thousand years (which cannot be, since Satan was
then bound) or before, as it must needs be: Ergo those years commence at or
after the Beasts casting into a fiery Lake, or rather together at one time.

4 The thousand years of Christ's Imperial reign (at coming Rev. 20. 4.
whereof, the triumphant Elders sang gratulatory Hymns to God) being immediately
at conquest of the Beast and Babylon, which contemporize with the seventh
trumpet: For this Kingdom is given to the Saints as a reward of their faith and
constancy, because they did not worship the Beast, nor his Image, nor receiv his
mark. This is that Kingdom caled Christ's, who Rev. 11. 15.
shall reign for ever: which the Angels foretold, that the mystery of God should
be finished at sound of the seventh Trumpet, as the Rev. 10 6, 7.
Prophets declared. Then neither the Beasts forty two months, nor the witnesses
mourning one thousand two hundred threescore dais, nor a period of a time,
times, and half (no nor time it self) shall any more remain.

5 The new Jerusalem, the Lambs Bride, and seventh consummation Rev. 21. 2.
Trumpet, or time of the Beasts and Babylons confusion synchronize: for new
Jerusalem is the Lambs Bride or beloved City, which immediately at the thousand
years end is compassed by the last troop ( Gog and Magog) of Satan then loosed
for a little space: Ergo it was extant before at sound of the seventh trumpet.
At pouring out the seventh Phial, when the Beast is destroyed, there came a loud
voice from the Rev 16 (...) 17.
Throne saying, it is done: so he that sat beholding new Jerusalem descend from
Heaven said to John; Lo, I make al Rev. 21 5, 6.
things new, it is done: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and end: Ergo new
Jerusalem begins at the Phials last term, It is done; when the whore was
dispatched, and so symbolizeth with that time which ins^eth the Beasts
perdition. For one of the Phial Angels showed John the whores condemnation while
the Rev. 17.
Phials were pouring out, and one at least behind: which Angel showed him the
great City holy Jerusalem (or Lambs Bride) descending from God when it becam
glorious, the Phials being ended, and Beast with Babylon destroyed: Ergo it
began with the seventh trumpet.

6 The numberless multitud of al Nations, Kinreds, People, and Toungs bearing
triumphant Palms, who are Citizens of new Rev 7 9. 16. 17
Jerusalem (that shall hunger or thirst no more; for the Lamb shall lead them to
living Fountains of water, and God shall wipe al tears from their eyes) concur
with the seventh trumpet, or space of time from the Beasts destruction.

These are his several sorts of Synchronicisms, which I have put in so plain
English as my small skill in such sublime speculations can perform: whereto heads
this brief period or perclose.

After Christ's thousand years reign, and Satan's condemnation (...).
to eternal fire, folows the general Resurrection and final Judgment. After new
Jerusalem folows Paradise with the tree of Life in midst, like Eden; having a
River on each side Rev* 20. 11, 12, 13. 14. Rev. 22. 12
of the street: which is the worlds consummation, and conclusion of this
Revelation, when God will giv every Man as his work shall be. Such a Key of
Synchronicisms (or Apocalyptic compass) will open all the hid mysteries of this
Book; with which no part of the old Testament (no not Daniels Visions or
Vaticinations) can compare for certainty or singular structure, to find out the
right interpretation by concent or harmony of times, and concurrence of things.
Lord, open every Man's ^ys, that he may discern thy wondrous works of wisdom.

Commentarii Compendium: The Brief of his Commentary.
NExt ensues his cu^ious Comment, which contains two Comment.
principal parts: 1 Of the seven Seals and seven Trumpets: 2 Of the little Book,
both being vastly tedious and imperspicuous: but some sporadical excerptions
shall be presented more plausible and perceptible; craving pardon for not
abbreviating al particular parcels.

He begins with the Apocalyptic Theater) where John behold Part 1.
al as on a Stage) which is that imperial Heavenly Session of God and the
Church: exactly framed after the form of old Isreal's incamping in the
Wilderness: both which he compares Rev 4. Numb. 1. 52.
at large well worth perusal, but too prolix to capitulat. He omits the Vision
of seven Asian Churches in the three first chapters, and parts the rest into
two Prophecies: 1. Of the Seals, which comprehends the Empires destinies: 2. Of
the little Book which concerns the Church or Christian Religion; til in fine
both be united in the Church, and this Worlds Kingdoms Rev. 11. 15.
become the Lords Kingdoms, and his Christ's. The scope of the sealed Book is to
show the distances of ensuing times distinguished by characters of events: in
what order of changes and chances (the Roman Empire running on) Christ should
vanquish the Gods of this World with whom he waged war: Rev. 5.
who must reign til he has put al Enemies underfeet: viz. al terren power and
authority, as St. Paul expounds. The first 1 Cor. 15. 24. 25.
six Seals distinguish diverse different times of the Empire then flourishing;
til Christ shall suppress the Heathen Gods or Idols in all those dominions.

The first shows the origin of Christ's victory, when 1 Seal. Rev. 4 7.
the false Gods fell, and the worshipers being pierced with the Gospels arrows*
submitted to Christ the conqueror: who has not yet fully overcom, but laid a
fair foundation of Victory to be gradualy finished. The discloser of this Seal
is The first Beast like a Lion, showing one on a whit Rev 6. 1. 2.
Horse, with a Bow and Crown given him: this is Christ or some Emperor (happily
Vespasian) by whose conduct the war is waged, and victory won; as the following
Seals are disposed or directed by Emperors.

The secund shows murders and intestin slaughters, which 2 Seal.
the next Beast like a Bullock discloseth, by One riding on a red Horse with a
great Sword: which was Trajan a mighty warrier born in Spain: who made the
third bloody primitiv persecution, and the Jews raised fierce wars in Lybia,
beside many momutinies in most parts of the Empire.

The third shows a voice saying, A measure of Wheat for a 3 Seal. Rev. 6. 5. 6.
penny, and three of Barley for a penny: see thou hurt not the Oil and Wine: by
which most Men deem dearth and famine to be meant; yet he rather resembles it to
the severe justice then executed. The discloser is The third Beast with a Man's
face, by one on A black Horse, with a pair of Balances in his hand: which is
Septimius Severus an African: in whose reign was no noted famine, but famous
justice, whereof the Balance is an Emblem. The pricing of Victuals seems to
sound thus: take not Wheat or Barley from any til du price be paid, and keep the
like law in Oil and Wine: that is defraud none, nor steal or purloin for this
Septimius and Alexander Severus (both of one name) shortly succeding, were most
strict justiciars denoted in this third Seal. See Aurelius of the first, and
Lampridius of the last.

The fourth shows Killing with the Sword, Hunger, Pestilence, 4. Seal. Rev. 6.
7. 8.
and Beasts of the Earth: whose discloser is The fourth Beast in shape of an
Eagle, presenting one whose name was Death, and Hell followed; who rode on a pale
Horse, having power over a fourth part of the Earth. This is Maximinus a big
barbarous Bubulc born in Thracia, under whom the Sword raged every where. For in
this Seals compass of thirty three years, ten lawful Caesar's (whereof Maximin
one) were slain by the Soldiers, besides thirty usurpers; as Orosius tells:
whereof Galienus the last exceded all the rest far in savage ferity, as
Trebellius Pollio informs. In the same age also the pestilence prevailed for
fiften years over all the Empire, as Zonaras testifies. Lastly followed famine in
most ruful manner: for all was wasted by those wild Beasts, and tillage abandoned:
so that a fourth part of the Earth (or Empire) perished.

The fifth and sixth Seals have no Beast to usher them, nor any 5 Seal.
sitting on Horses; but must begin where the chance of the Rev. 6. 9. 10. 11.
foregoing Seal left: viz. at Aurelians reign A. 268. when the fiften years
pestilence ceased, In which the Souls of them slain for Gods Word and Testimony
which they held, lay under the Altar crying aloud; how long Lord holy and true,
d^ost thou not judge and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on Earth? These had
whit Robes given them, and were bid rest a small season, til their
felow-Servants or Brethren which were to be killed, should be fulfilled. This
denots the grand persecution by Dioclesian, which was longer and crueler then
al former, as Orosius observes. Rev. 14 1. 4.
For in Egypt only were massacred 144000. suitable to the Virgins number, as
Ignatius relats: beside infinite multituds in all other Provinces.

The sixth ( at whose opening was a great Earthquake, the Sun 6 Seal. Rev 6. 12.
ad sinem.
becam black as hairy Sackcloth, and Moon red as Blood) begins when the fifth
ended A. 311. when Constantin initiated, the persecution ceased, and heathen
Idols with their Priests, Temples, and Sacrifices vanished: which is the
finishing or fulfilling of Christ's victory founded in the first Seal. By the
Earthquake is understood the change of things turned topsy turvy: which tends
not to the Empires Politic state, as the former Seals did; since it is not yet to
be dissolved: but as it is subject in a Religious respect to Satan and his
Angels; which was now broken in pieces with great nois. The Suns blacknes and
Moons rednes (betokening their Eclipses) design the Dragons downfall with all
Pagan Priesthood. The Stars fell to Earth, as a Figtree casts her fruits being
shaken by a mighty Wind: Heaven departed as a Scrole roled together: viz. the
Stars appeered not, as letters rold up in a Book are not seen. This is taken
from Isaiah: The Heavens shall be roled up as a scro^e, and al their Isai 34 4.
Host fall as a leaf from the Vine, and Fig from the Figtree. Al Mountains and
Islands were moved from their places, ^. Men of eminent quality and inferior: or
by Isles may be meant their Temples environed with Walls like ro^ks. Those Ethnic
Temples Constantin only shut up; which Julian soon opened: but Theodosius quit
demolished, and abolished al relics of Idol. worship. The Kings of the Earth,
great Men, rich Men, chief Captains, mighty Men, bond and free hid themselfs in
dens and rocks; saying to them, Fall on us, hide us from his face that sits on
the Throne, and from the Lamb. For the great day of his Wrath is com, and who
shall be able to stand? This shows that al Christ's Enemies ( Maximian, Galerius,
Maxentius, Martimian, Licinius, Julian Emperors; with Eugenius and Arbogastes
Tyrans) shall perish most miserably, and the Lamb get a signal victory. For most
persecutors feeling Gods judgments heavy on them, confessed Christ to be only
true God, and gav him glory.

Here betwixt the sixth and seventh Seal, is interposed a Vision Int^rslice.
Rev. 7 4.
of Gods Servants sealed ( viz. 144000. which are the elect faithful Church)
contemporizing with those said six sails. This Vision is twice cited: 1. At
entrance of the Trumpets, where 144000. of al Isreal's Tribes are s^aled for
their preservation amidst the Trumpets destruction: 2. In opposition to the
Rev. 4 1. 4. 5.
Beasts reigning, where they are caled Virgins, in whose mouth was found no
guile, being free from fault before Gods throne; for prais of their alleigance
to God and the Lamb; when the rest of the World revolted and received the
Beasts mark. Hence it is clear, that the Prophecy of the Beast, synchronizeth
with the Trumpers: yet no further then going forth of the sixth; when the
Beasts forty two months ended with the Witnesses Rev. 11. 14.
1260. dais. Now touching the first Vision of the Sealed, where their
preservation is handled. After this I saw four Angels Rev. 7. 1. Jer. 49. 36.
stand on the Earths four corners, holding the four Winds; that no wind should
blow on the Earth, nor Sea, nor any Tree. The Angels (who are not the same with
the Trumpeters) had Jer. 51. 1. 2.
power to restrain the winds or tempests of war: for the Parabol of winds among
Prophets, imports martial motions, hostil D^n. 7. 1. 3.
invasions, and violent impulsions: which those Angels could curb out of what
coasts or corners soever they rose: til it pleas God to giv leav or liberty,
that wars shall rage and reign for Rev. 7. 2. 3.
correcton of sin. I saw another Angel (happily Christ) ascend from the East,
having the Seal of the living God who cried loud to the four Angels which had
power given (by setting the Winds free) to hurt the Earth and Sea; saying, hurt
not Earth, Sea, nor Trees til we have sealed Gods Servants in their Foreheads;
to sever them from the plagues of others (as some at Jerusalem were marked which
must be preserved) lest they should be damnified. For it is a wonder, how in
that Empires grand vastation by barbarous Aliens to Christ; the Church could
continu amidst those storms (when al conspired her ruin, and the Beast polluted
al places Rev. 7. 4 etc.
with falls worship) untainted and unstained. I heard the number of the Sealed
which were one hundred forty four thousand of all the Tribes, viz. twelv
thousand of each, or twelv times twelv thousand in all. Here the Gentiles Church
to be fenced with Gods Seal, is figured by the type of Israel; the twelv
Apostles aptly answering to the twelv Patriarchs: nor is it done without good
cause; specialy since the Church, since the Jews rejection, is to be gathered of
the Gentiles, and fitly styled surrogated Israel: whom God owned a while, til
the fulness of the Gentiles was com in stead: Hence S. Paul says, The Jews Romans
^11. 11. ^5
fall brought salvation to the Gentiles, and their casting off was the Worlds
reconciling. Not that else they should not be caled in du time (for all the
Prophets proclaim it) but not by way of substitution or surrogation to the
Jews, unles they had first renounced Christ: So St. Paul tells them; It was
necessary the Acts 13. 46.
Word should be opened to you first: but since ye reject it, and judge your selfs
unworthy of eternal life; Lo we turn to the Gentiles.

This number of 12, multiplied by 12 times 12, is an Ensign of Apostolic Race,
or Prosapy: for as the Beasts number (666) denots those which follow him: so the
Apostles number designs their legitimat offspring. The Analogy of new Jerusalem
Rev. 21. 12. 14. 16.
shows the same: in the frame whereof, the dimensions of Gates, Foundations,
Courts, compass of Walls, Longitud, Latitud, Altitud, express the number of 12 or
multiplication by 12. Of the Tribe of Juda, Reuben, Gad, Aser, Nepthali,
Manasses, Sim^on, Levi, Isachar, Zabulon, Joseph, Benjamin were sealed twelv
thousand in each; which Tribes are no where in Scripture so reckoned, yet
diversely registered: for Dan and Ephraim are here excluded, and in the rest no
birth-order observed: but the last mixed with the middle, and younger Sons of
Handmaids set before the elder-born of Wifes Sons. This no doubt Judge. 17.
Judge. 18.
is done for some mystery hid in so unusual order: for Dan and Ephraim are
rejected from this type, as being chief Coriphees of the Idolatrous Apostasy
under the Judges: Ergo unfit to present Professors of true Religion: yet to
complet the number, L^vi is set for Dan, and Joseph tacitly supplies Eph^aim:
but the Wifes and Handmaids Sons promiscuously interserted, and Handmaids
Children adopted for their Dames; to show or signify that both bond and free
are al one in Christ. Since then Leahs Sons (Natural and Adopted) are duple to
Rachels: in the first six are four of Leahs (Juda, Reuben, Gad, Aser) and two
of Rachels, Nepthali, Manasses: So among the last six, four of Leahs (Simeon,
Levi, Isachar, Zabulon) and two of Rachels, Joseph, Benjamin: but on both sides
those are preplaced or preferred, which holy Writ commends for some memorable act
touching Gods Worship or Zele. As Juda is prime, because Josua 22. 21.
Christ issued of that Tribe: Reuben next for their sacred protestation about
the Altar of Witness built on Jordans bank: whereby, and because first born, he
must stoop to none sav the Regal Tribe. Gad is third, being Reubens companion
in that famous action: as also in that Eliah and Jehu Destroiers of Baalism
descended of that Tribe. Aser fourth, because the widow of Sarepta (who fed
Eliah) and the Prophetess Anna (who proclaimed Christ at his presenting in the
Temple) sprung of this Tribe. Leahs last quaternion ( Simeon, Levi, Isachar,
Zabulon) are not so renowned as the rest or blasted with some Crime. Among
Rachels issu, Nepthali and Manasses lead the Family: for from the first sprung
Barach Siseras Vanquisher; from the last Gidion subverter of Baals Altar, and
Elisaeus the Prophet: But Nepthali more noted, because his Seat is Galile and
chief City Capernaum, where Christ most conversed. Yet Joseph and Benjamin,
being youngest, bring up the Rere: But Ephraim, guilty of much Apostat Idolatry
in Jeroboam and Achab; beside that Saul a Benjamit hated David a Judait.
Censure.
Thus the order of the sealed Tribes is explicated; which is a curious Cobweb
of wit, if of so much worth, or congruous to the holy Ghosts intention; but
it is briefly, plainly, and truly presented, to satisfy al subtle or serious
speculators.

Under the six foregoing Seals, the Empires state yet flourishing til Idols
should fall, is described by intestin Chances: Now succeds the seventh or last
Seal of the seven Trumpets; wherein 7 Seal.
the destinies of its decay are displaied: for they sound Alarms to the fatal
battle, for the blood of so many Martyrs slain by Roman Emperors. Now though
they becam Christians, yet that staid not Gods hand from avenging those which
cried under the Altar; no more then Josiahs godliness did from destroying the
Kingdom of Juda, for the Idolatries and murders of Manasses. At opening this
Seal was silence in Heaven half an Rev. 8. 1. 2. 3. 4 5. 6.
hour: when seven Angels had seven trumpets given them: and another standing at
the golden Altar with a golden Censer, offere^ much Insens with the prayers of
the Saints. Then were Voices, Thundrings, Lightnings, and an Earthquake being
al prepatories to those trumpets. Al Divines know, that the works of divine
Providence are executed by Angels or Messengers, and those seven prepared to
sound: but the four first Plagues of less moment or extent then the rest: which
rest mostly on the Western World or Bishop of Rome, who was to be Head. For the
Empire with other Kingdoms, is tacitly resembled to the Worlds body; whose parts
are Earth, Sea, Rivers, Heaven, Stars which every Monarchy resembles. The
often repetition of a third part (as of Trees, Earth, Sea, Rivers, Heaven)
implies the Empires extent over a third part of the then known World in St.
John's dais: as afterward the seven headed Dragon with ten horns ( i. that
heathen Empire) drew a third part of the Stars (or Princes and Rulers under
Rev. 12. 3. 4.
his Dominion) with his tail, and cast them to the Earth. The Rev. 12. 7. 8. 9.
10. 11. 12.
first Angel sounded, and Hail and Fire mixd with Blood fell on the Earth, and a
third part of Trees was burnt up, with all green grass. The secund sounded, and
as it were a great Mountain was cast into the Sea, which turned a third part
into Blood, and a third part of al Creatures therein that had life died, and a
third part of Ships destroyed. The third sounded, and a great Star (caled
Wormwood) fell from Heaven, burning like a Lamp; which fell on a third part of
Rivers and Fountains, making them bitter, that many Men died of them. The
fourth sounded, and a third part of the Sun was smiten, with a third of the
Moon, and Stars: so as a third part was darkened, and a third part of the day
shone not, nor of the night.

The first Trumpet entering at the Roman Idol Government 1 Trumpet.
(which was shaken at end of the sixth seal) being ready to strike the first
blow, destrois a third part of the Earth with a Isai 28. 2. Isai 30. 30.
terrible tempest of Hail, Fire, and Blood: which was the impetuous irruption
of Northern Nations, wasting the Nobles and Commons. For Hail in Prophetic
notion indicats hostil assalts: but lightning and fire is joind with it (as
David does) Ps. 18. 12. 13.
whereto blood is added, to show great slaughter ensuing. Trees in Prophetic
Parabols imply great Lords and rich Men: as Oaks of BasanIsai 2. 13. Cedars
Isai 14. 8. Firtrees Zech. 11. 2. in all which places Princes and Potentats are
pourtraid: but green grass imports the Commons. To apply it, the Woe of Applicat
this Trumpet began at Theodosius death A. 395. when Alaric with a vast Army of
Goths and other Barbarians, broke in upon Macedon, and raged fiv years; but
then betook to the West, committing most savage spoils and slaughters in all
parts: as Epist 3.
St. Jerome an Ey witness woefully relats. At last he invaded Italy, and besieged
Honorius at Hasta: whose Lieftenent Stilico levying puissant forces, resisted
his fury, and repeld him to Pannonia; who by composition retired to Illyricum
in the East. Soon after Rhadagaiso a Scythian with 200000. Goths, Sarmatians,
and Germans attempted Italy and besieged Florence: but Stilico subdued and
beheaded him. Immediately a swarm of Vandals, Alans, Marcomans, Heruli, Suevi,
Almans, Burgundians, and other barbarians broke into Galle, Spain, and Africa;
as St. Epist. 11.
Jerome also dolefully declares. This is that direful Hail storm mixd with fire
and blood: for sundry writers ( Achmetes and others) aptly resemble War by such
Meteors and Metaphors.

2 Trumpet.
The next Trumpet (the Empire being enough wasted on the Earth thereof) assails
the Sea with a far greater stroke, killing the living Creatures, and destroying
Ships. For Rome the Metropolis being once or twice taken, and burnt with hostil
flames; the Enemies possessed the out Provinces at pleasure, and set up several
Kingdoms: which is signified by the Sea of that Jer. 31 36. Isai 19 5. Ezekiel 31.
4. Ezekiel. 14. 19 Rev. 16. 3.
Politic World. So Babylons dominion is expressed, where the Lord threatens to
dry up the Sea and springs. The Assyrian Kingdoms amplitud is described by the
same Metaphor: the deep or Sea has exalted her. It Is said of Pharaohs Kingdom,
the waters shall fail from the Sea thereof, or his Dominion shall be bereaved. So
the four great Beasts or Kingdoms rose from the Sea, which implies largenes of
Dominion Dan. 7. 3. Now a third part of the Roman Sea becam blood, which denots
slaughter of Animals, and inanimats ruin too: therefore the Sea becoming blood
by a great Mountains fall, betokens violent destruction, as a Beast is butchered
bleeding. For so it is said in the Phials, that the Sea becam as the blood of a
dead Man or one slain. The like mystery of a Mountain meant by a City, is
applied to old Babylon, even a Mountain burning Jer. 51. 25.
with fire as here. For point of History, Alaric after Stilicos death returned
as a Ram, and took Rome; creating Attalus A. C. 410.
the Hun Emperor: whom he soon deposed, and reinthroned Honorius. Immediately
insued a total renting of the Empire, which was shortly shared into ten Stats
or Soveraignties: 1. Brytans, 2. Saxons in this I Will: 3. Francs in Galle: 4.
Burgundians in Belgia: 5. Visi-Goths in Aquitain and part of Spain: 6. Sueds in
Gallaecia: 7. Alans in Lusitania: 8. Vandals in Africa: 9. Almans in Germany:
10. Ostr^-Goths in Pannonia beside Greecs in the East Empire, which is counted
one of the ten, when the West was dissolved; in all which befell notable changes.
Howbeit the number of ten is not taken so strickly, as if should be no mo, nor
fewer, nor other: but that it should be severed into about ten. So after
Alexander, four Kingdoms are predicted ( Macedon, Asia, Syria, Egypt) Dan. 8.
22.
yet a fifth of Thracia was added by Lysimachus, which ended with his life.

The third Trumpet is of a Star falen from Heaven (burning 3 Trumpet.
like a Lamp) on the third part of Rivers and Waters, named Wormwood; making
the waters bitter, whereof many died. This is meant of Hesperus or west Caesar:
who after Gensericus K. of Vandals had sacked Rome, fell headlong to ruin;
struggling a while with death, under the obscure Emperors Avitus, Majoranus,
Severus, Anthemius Olybius, Glicerius, Nepos, Augustulus: who were Princes of
baleful bitterness, and perished by mutual Massacres or Trecheries. Augustulus
(which is an ominous diminutiv of the first founder) was expeld by Odoacer K.
of Heruli but when the west Empire lay A. C. (...). A. C. (...). Note.
buried 324 years, P. Leo 3. surrogated Charlemaign to be Emperor: because under
this coverture of Caesar revived (or the Beasts sixth Head still reigning) the
Pope may not be reputed seventh or last which is Antichrist; as is too evident
to every judicious Ey. This Papal Caesar pertains not to the Heads of the Roman
Beast, but to the Horns or Kingdoms, into which it was to be torn: being ready
to resign his room to the last seventh Head. By the Star burning as a Lamp, the
blazing Star Lampadios is described: and such is the Hesperian Caesar great in
dignity, but of short durance; whose coming must continu but a short space.
Isaiah says of Babylons King, How art thou falen from Heaven, O Lucifer Son of
the morning? Isai 14. 12.
For by Stars great Princes, Powers, and Potentats are figured.

The fourth sounded greater calamities of darkning the Sun, 4 Trumpet.
Moon, and Stars of Roman Majesty which before shined dimly under Ostro Goth
Kings. For after the Consulship failed, and Totila demolished a third part of
Rome; it was in some sort restored A* C. 542.
by Belisarius and Narsetes Justinians brav Commanders: but now this Worlds
Queen was stripd of al Consular power, Senate, and Magistrates, which as Stars
gav great light: yea becam inslaved to the Exarchat of Ravenna her Handmaid
vassal. (...). 1. 1. Jer. 31. 35.
O deep darkness, how does the City sit solitary that was full of People? How is
she become a Widow? She that was Queen among Nations and Princess of Provinces;
how is she made tributary? This is that smiting of Sun, Moon, Stars that they
could giv no light by day or night. For when Senate, Consuls, and other Officers
were suppresd, what could be but a total Eclips, such as never was before? Next
follow three Trumpets of Woe (so styled, because an Angel flying through Heaven
cried Woe, Woe, Woe to the Earths inhabiters) which are the most grievous of al.
For when those of the Christian Empire had defiled themselfs with Idol-Images of
a new stamp, during the four former Trumpets sounding; God sent those new
plagues to punish a duple sin: one for the Martyrs deaths under Heathen Rome;
the other for Iconolatry under Christians: as it is Rev. 20.
intimated, that they worshipped the Devil, and Idols of Gold, Silver, Brass,
Stone, and Wood.

The fifth or first Woe Trumpet is of Locusts rising from the 5 Trumpet. Rev. 9.
1. 10 12,
smoke of the bottomless Pit: which is meant of Mahometans seduced by their
Pseudo-prophet to the perdition of many Nations. This smoke obscured the
Gospels light latly shining Exodus 10* 13 14.
abroad, whose professors rightly resemble Locusts in many respects. For those
which plagued Egypt came from Arabia, where Mahomet spread his Hellish smoke, and
the Arabs likened to Judge 7. 12.
them for multitud. They are also styled Sons of the East relating to Egypt,
where the ^sralites learned so to term them. Achmetes refers Locusts to troops
of Enemies, which devour ordestroy Countries. These are compared to Scorpions
for power and fo^m having tails like Scorpions: so they were Locusts-Scorpions,
which had power in their teeth, and poison in their tails. These were forbid to
hurt grass, trees, or any green thing (as the common sort do) but only M^n not
marked with Gods Seal: so no Natural but Symbolical vermin are here implied.
They were like Horses prepared to battle, with Men's faces and Women's hair; but
had Lions teeth with brest-plats of Iron, and sound of their Wings as Chariots
of many Horses running to battle. Al which import armed Soldiers, as the
Sarrasens erected a vast Kingdom by war; yet subdued not the East Empire like
the Turcs. For while the former Trumpets sounded, a new pontifical State
started up from the ruins of the old Politic; but Sarrasens subverted neither:
whose Kingdom crept up to so sudden greatness as never any: for Mahomet was but a
Merchant (as Romulus a Shepherd) whose Kingdom in one Century subjected
Palestine, Syria, Armenia, minor Plin. l 6 c 28. l. (...). c. 29.
Asia, Persia, India, Egypt, Numidia, Barbary, Portugal, Spain, and part of
Italy: beside S^cil, Sardinia, Corsica, and other Isles; whereas 500. years
expired, yer Rome subdued al Italy. They had long hair like women, as Arabs
then and still use: whose durance to destroy was but fiv months, as Locusts com
at Spring and die in Autumn, leaving Eggs in the Earth to increas their issu They
had a King (the Angel of the bottomless Pit, caled ^n Hebrew Abaddon, in Greec
Apollyon, destroier) which imports them Infidels or Children of unbeleef
subject to the Prince of the Air, as St. Paul says: whereas Ephesians. 2. v. (...).
Christians are freed from Sarans power, and converted to God. This Prince called
before the Devil, old Serpent, Satan, Dragon; is here new named Abaddon: whereas
Mahometans profes to worship one sole God Demiurgus Maker of the univers; to
whom they giv the Epither Abdi or Abada i. Eternal: whereas the holy Ghost givs
this King a title of semblable sound but opposite sens Abaddon the Worlds
destroier, instead of Demiurgus the Maker.

The sixth, or secund of Woe, has a voice from the four horns 6 Trumpet. Rev.
9. 13. to 2^.
of the golden Altar saying, Loos the four Angels which are bound at the river
Euphrates. These Angels being Patrons of those parts, metaphoricaly signify the
confining Nations, which breaking in upon the Roman Regions, stopped a few ages
near this River, but are now loosed. They may probably imply the Turcs four
Sultanies or Signiories ( Asia minor, Aleppo, Damascus, Antioch) but because
Antioch lying a little remot from Euphrates, lasted but fourten years, being
surprised by Boemund in the holy war; some instead reckon Bagdet beyond
Euphrates in Persia. Such was their State at first irruption under Trogulbecus
or Tongrolipix, who took Bagdet An. 1008. Seididruddulas or Cutlumuses Nephew
to Tangrolipix, founded the Asian Kingdom An. 1012. Siarfuddulas subdued Aleppo
An. 1079. Tagaddaulas another Nephew of Tangrolipix surprised Damascus at the
same time. Al which Angels were long limited to those parts with manifold
changes, and now at last let loos; being prepared for an Hour, a Day, Month,
and Year, that they might slay the third part of Men.

This loosing befell, when the Tartars abolished Bagdets Caliphship A. C. 1621.
An. 1258. and the Turcs were cast as it were with a sling into the Empires
territories on this side Euphrates. For the Latins (who staid their incursions
two hundred years) were about that time driven out of Syria and Palestine. Then
the Turcs shared lesser Asia, til Ottoman grew great: whose Son Orchanes entered
Europ, and his fith Successor Mahomet 2. took Constantinople; which is that
slaughter of a third part of Men here intimated; as the time (a Day, Month, and
Year) plainly indicats. For a Prophetic Day implies one year, a A nice
observation if v^ri table.
Month thirty, a year three hundred threescore and fiv, in all three hundred
ninty six. Now Tangrolipix was inaugurated King of Persia An. 1057. and
Constantinople sacked An. 1453. just 396. years asunder. Happily the very hour
(which in that proportion makes fiften dais) agreed also with the event, if
Almachinus had recorded the Month of his Inauguration so well as the year. They
are said to be Horsemen (as Turcs and Persians are mo then Foot) in number two
hundred thousand thousand; which intimats huge Armies, as David says, The
Charets of God are Psalm. ^8 17.
twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: such vast Armies the East Nations
bring into field. I heard (says John) the number of them, viz. by voice; for
he cannot see numbers in Vision: and so must other places be understood, which
appeer not by Vision. Ezekiel in his Prophecy against Gog the land of Ezekiel. 38.
2, 3.
Magog, chief Prince of Mesech and Tubal (from whom Tures descend) describes
them to be Horsemen armed: for Persians and Parthians take name of Paras a Horse
or Horsman: But Turcs, since their long plantations there, are by Nicetas and
others caled Persians: So these Euphratean Horsemen are Turco-Persians. They had
brest-plats of fire, Jacinthian smoke and brimstone; which is no where else in
Scripture: Ergo it may well allud to Guns: and the Horses heads were like Lions,
out of who^ mouths issued fire, smoke, and brimstone, by which a third part of
Men was killed. For the Turcs used Guns (latly before invented) See
Chal^^^dilas.
at siege of Constantinople, and slu a third part of Inhabitants; as their
Successors did since at Corinth and other Cities. Such sharp sawces make meats
seem more savoury, and Mr. Mede has many such unvulgar unparalleld
Annotations. The Horsmens power was in their mouths and tails, having tails
like Serpents, and heads, with both which to do hurt. So Sarasens are said to
have sharp tails of Scorpions; which is true of Turcs, who had tails of Serpents;
signifying their Mohammedan subtlety or imposture, whereby both did more mischief
then by the Sword. The rest of Men which were not killed by these plagues,
repented not of their works, that they should not worship Devils and Idols of
gold, etc. which can neither hear, see, nor walk: Nor of their Murders,
Sorceries, Fornication, and Thefts. This is manifestly meant of Christians in
the Roman Empire, which worship Images made of those metals and materials: for
none but they do (...) on this side Euphrates. These indeed are no Devils or
unclean Spirits, since no Christians will 1 Timothy 4. 1 2 3.
wittingly or willingly worship such: But Demoniacs or Deastri, dead Men
Deified, whom they make Mediators of Intercession between God and Men.

The seventh Trumpet (or third of Woe) is ready to sound: but 7 Trumpet, Rev. 10
v. 1, etc.
a mighty Angel came from Heaven clothed with a Cloud, a Rainbow on his Head,
his Face as the Sun, and Feet pillars of Fire. He had in his hand a little Book
open; who set his right foot on the Sea, and left on Earth; crying loud, as
when a lion roars, and seven thunders uttered their voices. John was about to
write it; but a voice from Heaven said, seal up these things which the seven
thunders uttered, and write not. Then the Angel lifted his hand to Heaven, and
swore by him that livs for ever; that Time shall be no more: But in the dais of
the seventh Angels voice, when he shall begin to sound; the mystery of God
should be finished, as he declared to his servants the Prophets. The sound of
this seventh Trumpet should succed the sixth, but is superseded by the little
Book intervening: yet lest ought be omitted in the interim to fulfill the
Prophecy of Seals; the holy. Ghost shows the last trumpets event in general:
viz. that at sound thereof the Roman Beast being destroid, and the last heads
time com to an end, the mystery of God shall be finished, as he foretold his
Prophets. For so it is declared to Daniel, that the fourth Dan 7. 13. 14.
Beast being slain, the Son of Man or King of Saints should rule over the World
and the gracious promises of restoring Israel be fulfilled. The finishing of
which mystery is Christ's glorious Kingdom, which arose or appeered at sound of
the 7 Ttrumpet: when the grand acclamation of Voices in Heaven was heard
saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Lords and his Rev. 11. 15.
Christ's, who shall reign for ever. What can be cleerer? Ergo the Time which the
Angel swore shall be no more, is the period of al four Monarchies in general, or
Roman in special; which is one effect of a time, times, and half. This
consummation of Gods mystery is the matter of the seventh trumpet attended with
seven thunders, which uttered their voices while the Angel proclaimed it, and
synchronize with that trumpet: But John is bid to seal up those things of the
thunders, being inscrutable til the proper times that God shall revele it. This
trumpet discovers the mystery reserved to another place: but both Prophecies of
the Seals and little Book, are concluded with one issu, which this trumpet
exhibits: the full opening whereof is deferd, til a full passage be made to the
little Books new Prophecy, and then the seventh trumpets mystery (which is the
Catastrophe) is aptly and amply declared, as shall be showed. Hence this business
is undertaken by no other Angels, but by that excellent one, who held in his
hand the little Book eaten by John. If that Angel be Christ (as his Roial attire
and furniture imports) this suspending the last sound in favor of the other
Prophecy, agrees to none so well as him: but if it were Michael the great
Prince, or another Angel clothed in linen, and his Dan. 1^. (...). Dan. 1^. 6.
^oins girded with fine gold of Vphaz, as appeered to Daniel; the case alters
not, being from God.

Here the first part or Prophecy of Seals ends touching the 2 Part.
Empires affairs: the next or nobler concerns the Churches fate to be agitated.
John proceds herein: The voice which I heard Rev 10. 8, 9^ 10, 11.
from Heaven spoke to me again saying, Take the little open Book in the Angels
hand, who oat it up as he was bid; whereby he was prepared to Prophecy again
before many People, Nations, Toungs, and Kings: but the mystery to be reveled,
was sweet as honey in his mouth, and the secret part of the Churches woeful
condition bitter as Aloes in his maw: the representation is taken from Ezekiel.
The Prophecy proceds, which begins from Ezekiel 3. 1, 2, 3.
his work about Gods Temple^ which presents the Churches duple state by two
Courts; one measured, and another cast out. There was given me a reed like a
rod, and the Angel said, Rev. 11. (...)
measure Gods Temple, and Altar, and them that worship: but the Court without
measure not; for it is given to the Gentiles, who shall tread the holy City under
foot forty two Months. Here the primitiv state of Christ's Church conformable to
Gods Word, is described by measuring the inner Court: the type whereof an Angel
showed to Ezekiel. The outer Court not to Ezekiel (...).
be measured, sets forth Gods holy City or Christian Church: which must be
given to new Idolaters, caled Gentiles, because they defiled it with
Antichristian Apostasy forty two annal months, as shall be fully handled in the
Story of the two horned Beast contemporizing herwith. Jerusalems Temple had two
Courts: 1 Inner, where the burnt Offerings Altar stood at the 2 (...)
Temples entry, which was open only to Priests and Levits. 2 Outer or great
Court, common to the People, called the Court of Israel.

The first, termed Thyasterium, or Altar of Sacrafice, John is bid to measure:
but ths outer is given the Gentiles to profane forty two months. If it be
said, it is the holy City, not out Court, which must be trodden under foot: It Is
answered, that both are one, and called the holy City, because People assembled
here for holy Services. To those Herod, at rebuilding the Temple, added a third
for Gentiles and unclean persons, who were prohibited the two others. I will giv
power to my two witnesses, V. 3, 4, 5.
who shall Prophecy in sackcloth one thousand two hundred threescore dais: these
are two Oliv Trees and two Candle sticks standing before the God of the Earth.
If any will hurt them fire proceds from their mouths to devour their Enemies;
and if any will hurt them he must thus be killed. These mourning witnesses are
Preachers or Patrons of divine truth; which shall bewail the filthy pollution of
Christ's Church Idolizing like Gentiles: as Monitors to desist from their
abomination, and guids for the Saints to persist pure. They are named two
according to three famous Pairs in the old Testament; viz. Moses and Aaron in
the wilderness; Elias and Elisaeus under the Baalitic Apostasy; Zerobabel and
Jesua at the Babylonish Captivity: For they sympathise with those types in
number, power, and acts: as the state of the Church when these Prophesied suting
with that of Israel, is resembled to the wilderness, Baalatism, and Babylon. V.
6.
These have power to shut Heaven, that is rain not during their Prophecy (as
Elias and Elisaeus had) and to turn waters into blood (as Moses and Aaron had)
and to smite the Earth with all plagues so often as they pleas. These are caled
Oliv Trees and Candle sticks standing before the Lord (like Zerobabel Prince of
Juda, and Jesua the high Priest) whom God anointed to restore Zech. 4 3 11.
the Jewish Church under Captivity, as Zechary alluds, This Prophecy, til the
seventh trumpets sounding, is not presented in Vision; but dictated by an Angel
personating Christ. The witnesses are caled two, as the Law requires to confirm
every word; and in regard of Gods two Tables or Testaments, which they used in
Prophesying. They shall Prophecy one thousand two hundred threescore dais, being
forty two months: which are not natural dais, nor three dais and half (when
they shall ly dead) so meant: because the Beast whose time they contain,
contemporized with the hundred forty four thousand sealed, and they with the
six first trumpets, which cannot run out in so short a space as 1260. dais. If
any ask, why the Gentiles profanation Note.
is measured by months, and the witnesses defending Gods pure Worship by dais?
it is because Idolatry is the power of darkness or night, which the Moon rules:
but true religion compared to light or day which the Sun governs: So Paul is
said To turn the Gentiles from darkness to light, from Satan's Acts 26 18.
power to God. Since then Months are measured by the Moons motion, but dais and
years by the Sun; the Beasts blasphemy is still reckoned by months, and the
Woman's stay in the wilderness by dais or years. Zechary likens the two Oliv
trees to the Zech. 4. 14.
two anointed ( Zerobabel and Jesua) which stand by the Lord; but he mentions
only one Candlestick signifying the Temple of that time; and John two implying
happily the East and West Church, as it was divided during the witnesses
mourning. These did not avenge or afflict their Enemies by war and weapons, but
by fire from their mouths, or denouncing Gods wrath on the abusers of his
Ministers, As the Lord speaks to Jeremy, I will make my Words in thy mouth fire,
and this Peo-ple Jer 5. 14.
Wood to devour them. Eliah brought true fire from Heaven on Ahazia's Captains
(as Moses and Aaron did on Corah 2 Chr. 10. ^2.
and his accomplices) but the witnesses fire is symbolical or spiritual, as Egypt
and the wilderness is after so taken. They had power to shut Heaven that it rain
not: both being mysticaly meant, one for the power of the Keis to shut it
against these new Idolaters; the other for the dew of Gods Word, that it shall
not descend or destil on them: For they debar them from hope of eternal life,
promised only to true Worshipers, til they shall return to serve one God by one
Mediator Christ Jesus, according to their Covenant in Baptism; and put an end
to the mourning witnesses Prophecy: As Elias restored not rain to Israel, til
Baals Prophets were destroyed.

When they be about to finish their testimony, the Beast ascending Verse. 7.
from the bottomless pit, shall make war against them and kill them. This is
their destiny at end of their Prophecy, suitable to our Saviors passion: for
having ended his preaching in three years and half, as the witnesses did their
testimony; he is slain by this Roman Beasts Deputy under the sixth Head: who on
the third day after in a great Earthquake rose from the dead, and forty dais
after being received in a Cloud ascended into Heaven. Al which he resembles to
the witnesses slaughter: that as they bear the likeness of those three famous
couples in their function: so they should conform to their Lord Christ that
faithful witness in suffering. When they were about to finish their testimony,
having brought part of the holy City (or Province) to renounce Idolatry, and
cleans the Temple within themselfs; they began to put off sackcloth, yet were
not wholly freed from fear: for the Roman septicep Beast chasing at their so far
prevailing, shall make war and kill them. The first part touching their mourning,
has bin performed since beginning of Reformation til this present: But the
last of war is to com. Brightman thinks it already accomplished in the
Smalcaldian war by Charl^ the fifth: Others apply it to the lat German war, and
it were well if such doleful disasters were past: but it cannot be, since the
tragic times of the Gentiles trampling on Christian Religion forty two months
cannot be fulfilled so long as the Beast reigns; nor the dais of the witnesses
wailing, which contemporize with them: whose killing next, foregoes Romes ruin,
as the Crier of the Phials (to the fifth of which this ruin belongs) apertly
declares. For this destruction is the last, which shall be more grievous then
any yet, and a sign that the (...) ^1 ^0.
witnesses VVoes shall instantly end with Romes ruin; as Jerusalems siege by
Cestius Gallus before the sackage by Titus, was foretold by Christ to be a
Forerunner of their utter desolation: so is this of Babylons fall. Slaughter
signifies Death, whether taken properly or metaphoricaly and analogicaly. For
it is a civil death, when any being settled in a Politic or Ecclesiastic State,
cease to be as he was, and he is said to kill him that bereavs it; in which
sens diverse are killed daily. So in sacred style to live is to be, and to die not
to be: as we die to sin and Satan when we ceas to be their Slavs; and live to
Christ, when we become his (...)
Sevants. To apply it, Such as is the witnesses resurrection after three dais
and half, such is the slaughter: but that is analogical, since no proper can be
til Christ com to Judgment; Ergo the other. So this death may be a dejection
from the Place or Office which they enjoied in the Reformed Church, or not
leading a Prophetic life to preach or exercise their spiritual Function as
yerst, which often haps in distracted times. This Note.
last war of the Beast, is not like the former waged with the Rev. 13 7.
Saints, who had it given to overcom them: for why should it be said peculiar
to this last time, if familiar before? But the former was against Saints in
general, this with the Prophets ( viz. Bishops and chief Ministers) in special,
as is evident by event. For that was with success, where the Beast prevailed
over every Tribe, Tongue, and Nation: this with his sudden fatal fall or ruin.

Their dead Bodies shall by in the street of the great City (spiritualy (...)
styled S^dom and Egypt) where our Lord was crucified. This City is Rome, caled
great being Queen of the World, and still Queen with whom the Kings of the Earth
commit Fornication, and the Inhabiters made drunk with the wine of her
abomination: as it is said, the Woman which thou saw is that Rev. 17. 2. (...)
great City: and this Epithet is often given her, as great Babylon, the great
Whore, etc. But he that deems Jerusalem meant, had need of Ellebor to purg his
brain: for no Jerusalem was then extant, nor the old ever caled great, til that
title is ascribed to new Jerusalem. Rome is spiritualy styled Sodom for Luxury,
Rev. 21. 10.
and Egypt for Cruelty: whereby the holy Ghost intimats, that wherever Sodoms
plagues, or Egypts punishments are specified; they are mysticaly meant as here.
So that great City is certainly Rome; but what street means, is not so clear:
for it cannot be taken literaly, since our Lord was slain in no street of Rome
or Jerusalem, but without the Gate in Golgatha. Street also is taken in the
singular number, as if it were only one; yet in a City are many. The witnesses
Carcases lay in the street where they were slain, which the People, Kinreds, and
Nations triumphantly beheld, not suffering them to be buried: but Men seldom
make war within the City walls, but in open fields or Provinces of a State.
Whence it may be inferred, that the street where our Lord also was crucified,
intends some Province pertaining to Romes dition or dominion, as Jerusalem then
did; which sens the word (...) will well bea^. Many interpret it of Christ's
suffering by Romes power, which may be probable; but not so fitly or fully as
of the place which is more persuasible being their Province.

The People, Kinreds, Toungs, and Nations shall see their Verse 9.
dead bodies three dais and half, but not permit them to be put in gravs. It Is
a doubt, whether this be cruelty done in despite and disgrace by Enemies, to
deny them burial, or courtesy of Friends and Favorers, to provide for their
rising again? nor can it be decided but by fulfilling the Prophecy: For in the
first sens it must be a type or token of ignominy intended by the Beasts
folowers against them: In the last it is a rescu of Reformists, whereto the
text-phrase rather inclines: for in the ensuing verse it is said of the Enemies,
they that dwell on Earth shall make merry and send gifts one to another: but here
People, Kinreds, Toungs, and Nations; which denots diverse dispositions. The
time (three dais and half) cannot imply natural dais: for how could Nations
diversely dissit know it so soon or send gifts one to another? nor is any time
allotted to the killing of them; but to their lying dead, being slain. So how
long the war shall last, or time limited to kill the Prophets; must appeer only
at fulfilling this Prophecy: which is to be reveled by the event or iflu; else
we shall only grope in the dark upon uncertainties.

They that dwell on Earth shall rejoice over them, and send Verse. 10, 11.
gifts one to another; because these two Prophets tormented them that dwell on
Earth: but after three dais and half, the spirit of life entered into them, who
stood on their feet, and great fear fell on all that saw them. Such as was the
witnesses death, such is their rising or restoring to pristin estats, even by
God wonderful in his works; not by human power as the words plainly purport.

They heard a voice from Heaven saying, Com up hither: and Verse. 12.
they ascended in a Cloud, in their Enemies sight. They shall not Isai. 14. 13.
only be restored to their places, but promoted to more eminent preferments:
for so ascending in a Cloud signifies, as Achmetes from Persian and Egyptian
Mysteries interprets. This reflects on Reformed Churches, which shall be
punished for reproaches offered to Christ in vilifying his Prophets or Preachers,
and sacrilegious surreption of revenues whereby they should be honestly and
honorably maintained: but now they shall be promoted to higher places according
to their Ambassy or Function.

The same h^ur was a great Earthquake, and a tenth part of V. 13.
the City fell, and there were slain seven thousand names of Men: but the rest
being affrighted gav glory to God. By Earthquake is meant a great commotion of
Nations, and alteration of Politic affairs: in which a tenth part of the City
fell, and seven thousand names of Men (or Men of name and note) slain. For
understanding whereof, two points are to be previously proved: i. that every fall
of the decaying Beast being contained in some of the Phials; this destruction
belongs to the fifth because the same subject of plagues is in both: there styled
the Beasts Seat or Throne; here the great City, which is both the Beasts seat.
So the destruction here described, preceds the Beasts utter abolition at the
seventh Trumpet or last Phial; and nothing intervens sav the departure of the
secund Woe, which is the plague from Euphrates at the sixth Phial: Ergo Rev. 18
21
this false into the fifth. 2. This fall of the great City, is the same with that
of Babylon; because it was to forego the Beasts final perdition, and Christ's
imperial reign to begin with the seventh Trumpet. The fall of a tenth part, must
be squared by this rule Rev. 17. 16.
and tried by this touchstone. Philip Nicolas a learned Lutheran, thinks the
Decarchy denots ten Kingdoms subject to the Empire, which shall fall from Rome;
because it is said the ten Kings which submitted to the Beast, when Gods Word is
fulfilled, shall hate the Whore, make her desolat or naked, eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire. This is plausible, but not punctual: for Decaton or tenth
part, cannot import a Decarchy or ten King^: but is rather a title of Tribut or
Tiths, which the Pope receivs either out of the Beasts Kingdom, or the Cities
large possessions by way of Lordship. Which tenth of the City by this commotion
of Nations shall fall or fail; when he shall lose his Patrimony and Prerogativ.
For tribut is a Symbol of dominion, and under that notion most Provinces paid a
tenth of other fruits to the Empire. Howbeit this exposition is not altogether
authentic: for the Word (fell) which refers to the Earthquake, implies Babylons
ruin rather then loss of Tributs or Tiths: therefore a tenth part of the City,
intends a true tenth: yet not any part as it is at this day; but whole Pontifical
Rome, which is only a tenth of the old Imperial, as it was in St. John's dais.
For Lypsius a curious Critic says it was almost circular; the semidiameter
from the golden Pillar in the Market place, to the utmost buildings being
reckoned seven miles, and whole compass of that semidiameter 42. whence he
demonstrats all the plot to be 126. but Rome now only 13. in circuit, which is a
tenth part of what it was then. For explaning whereof he sets a sexangular Schem
which he that lists may survey. Rome was VValled by Pope Adrian 1. and Leo 4.
much whereof is unhabited, and no Suburbs: but the old extended every way with
continued buildings. If this sens be taken, a true tenth part only remained at
time of the Earthquake; the other nine being falen long before. For partly by
Barbarians often sackings, partly by devouring time, partly by thunderbolts,
partly by fire and other casualties; but specialy by the Empires decay or
desolation; a tenth part only was fataly reserved to the Pope, who was to be
Head of the new Empire, and Mother of Christian Harlots: but this left must by
the Earthquakes concurrence, and witnesses resurgence be quit demolished. Yet
happily a tenth part is not so strictly taken by Geometric rules: Isa. 6. 13.
but as God said to Isaiah of Jerusalems destruction, a tenth shall remain and
return, which was not exactly so. The seven thousand slain in the Earthquake,
are not counted by pole; for they seem far too few for the great destruction
intimated elswher: but by the City buildings. A duple ruin of Babylon is
described: 1. The Beasts Metropolis at the fifth Phial: 2. The Citizens and
State, even Pope, Cardinals, and al others: who when Rome is fired, remov
elswher til pouring out of the last Phial; when the greatest destruction that
ever was of any Rev. 16 19
Land, People, or City, shall betide. Hereof it is said, Babylon Rev. 18 v 19.
the Great came in remembrance before God, to giv her the Cup of his fierce
wrath: yet that burning and overthrow postdated, Rev. 19. v. 20.
preceds the full final ruin of Beast and falls Prophet, which succeds. Some seek
to unty this knot, that Babylon cited in the last Phial is Constantinople: but
the holy Ghost calls not two Cities by one name; and it is more probable, that
Babylons first destruction is Romes ruin by fire without much bloody slaughter,
and seven thousand may suffice to be slain. So names of Men may import Men of
name, since such Hypallages are usual in Scripture: as the silver of shekels for
shekels of Levit. 5. 3. 15.
silver, the uncleannes of a Man, for a Man of uncleannes, the Romans 9. 31.
Law of righteousness for righteousness of the Law: so name almost in all tong^s
signifies renown, and Children without name base or ignoble. Hence Beza
concerning Christ's exaltation abov every Name, expounds it of his worth or
dignity. In this sens names of Men imply Men excelling in eminence, such as are
the Popish Clergy, of whom shall perish seven thousand a few more or less. There
is a third interpretation, that by names of Men are meant Companies,
Corporations, Cities, Boroughs, or Societies which have their names so well as
Men: but we may not rashly resolv future things, whose chief commentary is
event: nor is name tied to any one certain signification.

The secund Woe is past, and lo a third coms quickly. The fifth V. 14.
Trumpets Earthquake, ended with the secund Woe of the sixth, and the Witnesses
mourning prophecy is to finish together with it, being al synchronicals. If
then the sixth Trumpets Woe or plague be the Turcs over flowing from Euphrates
into the Empire done long ago; this end of the same plague must be a drying up
of the said water at pouring out of the fifth Rev. 16. 1^. etc.
Phial: whereby the way is prepared for the East Kings to com in: but lest a gap
be left between either Trumpet, the seventh seems to begin: so that wondrous
preparation of the Dragon, Beast, and falls Prophet for the last war in
Armageddon with its issu; should be set here at beginning of the seventh to
which the war pertains.

Hence a doubt occurs not to be slighted: since there is one term Doubt
of the Beasts forty two months, and witnesses one thousand two hundred sixty
dais (which expired with the sixth Trumpets plague or secund Woe) it may be
asked, why the Beasts months are reckoned no farther; since after that term much
of the Beast remains unabolished til the seventh Trumpet begins?

This is done either because the Jews conversion being as a Resolv.
new Kingdom then commenceth; or because in the Beasts continuance special
consideration is had to the Empire of Rome-City: which being the Beasts throne
is overthrown in that great Earthquake: so the Beast being driven from his
Metropolis, shall as it were change his form and be no more a Kingdom of seven
Hills, which is another signification of the seven Heads.

At sound of the seventh Trumpet or last Woe, Christ's imperial V. 15. 16. 17.
18. 19.
reign in that great day of Judgment is touched: the interpretation whereof he
suspends til the end of al; that he may handle the prophecies pertaining thereto
jointly together. To make up the Body of the open Book, the other prophecies of
Ecclesiastic affairs, com to be knit to the same: among which the Woman in
travel (or Church laboring to bring forth Christ as spiritual Head of the
Empire) is chief: which after 300. years persecution she effected in
Constantin; but her Enemy the red Dragon watched to devour the Child.

There appeered a great wonder in Heaven, a Woman clothed Rev. 12. v. 1.
with the Sun, the Moon under her foot, and on her head a Crown of twelv Stars.
Lo a glorious Image of the primitiv parturien: Church; which shined by the
faith of Christ the Sun of righteousness: treading under foot the Worlds
rudiments (both Lawish shadows, and Heathenish superstitions) and triumphing in
the Ensigns of Apostolic Offspring. Most Men make the Moon a Type of terren
transitory things, which the Church contemns as below her self. This is true,
but no where so noted in Scripture, which should be our warrant. Indeed most
Fests where Typical worship was celebrated by Sacrifices (as new Moons, Paschal,
Penticost, Tabernacles, and Ecclesiastic year) were ordered by the Moons
motion; which may resemble Mosaical worship put under foot by reveling of
Christ: who blotted out the hand writing of Ordinances, and nailed them Colos.
2 14.
to his Cross, as St. Paul speaks. So since God made the Sun a great Light to
rule the Day, and Moon a lesser to govern the Night; she may be a symbol to
signify the power of darkness or Satan's worship, and his spirits in Idols:
whereby the matter may be referred to Baptism, by which the Church being
illumined trampled on Idolatry, renouncing the Devil and al his works. Hence
such as abjured, turned to the West where night begins; as contrarily al
Professors of Christ's Faith and holy Trinity, looked to the East, where Sun
dispelling darkness begins the day.

She being with Child, cried traveling in birth and was in pain V. 2.
to be delivered. The Church universaly and separatly taken as an Idaa, is a
Mother: but in relation to Children continualy begot in her, is said to travel
or bring forth. See Isai 54. 1. Ezekiel. 23. 4. Hosea 2. 45. The throws or
torments in travel, are painful pangs or paroxisms of persecution, which the
infant Church suffered in parturition. For tribulations are usualy resembled to
sorows in Childbearing Isai 66. 7. Jer. 30. 6, 7. Mat. 24. 8, 9. Marc 13. 8.
and elswher.

Another wonder appeered in Heaven; lo, a great red Dragon V. (...). (...).
with seven Heads and ten Horns, and seven Crowns on his Heads: his tail drew a
third part of the Stars, and cast them to the Earth. This is a type of heathen
Rome worshipping the Dragon, who drew a third part of Stars with his tail to
Earth: or subjected three parts of the Worlds Rulers to his Empire. The
effigies of a Dragon points out his Pagan worshipers Enemies to Christianity,
as the Serpent was to the Woman's seed: but his rednes notes his embruing in the
blood of Saints. This type represents Pharaoh the old Synagogs cruel enemy
bearing Children in Egypt; as the Roman Dragon was of the Christian Church
Ezekiel. 29 3.
bearing her Children. For Ezekiel calls Pharaoh the great Dragon lying in midst
of his Rivers: and David says, thou brokest Ps. 74. 13. 14.
the heads of Dragons (Egyptians) in the waters. The Dragon stood before the
Woman ready for delivery, to devour her Child so soon as it is born: as Pharaoh
laid wait for old Israel born in Egypt, and Herod for Christ in Judea (which
places are sited in Afric and Asia) so the Roman Dragon in Europ watched for
mystical Christ, which the Church was to bear, that he might soon slay him
after birth.

She brought a Manchild, who was to rule al Nations with a V. 5.
Rod (or Scepter) of Iron. She bore mystical Christ formed in his Members (not
the Son of Man) as St. Paul says, My little Gal. 4 19.
Children, of whom I travel in birth again, til Christ be formed in you. Here a
Christ is pourtraied (as Prophetic types use) not properly Theantropos; but
analogicaly a Son of the Church; who* was to rule al Nations with an Iron
Scepter or Sword; since they were not Citizens or Denisens, but Enemies Rev. 19.
15.
or Aliens: As it is said, Out of his mouth went a sharp Sword, that he should
smite the Nations; for he shall rule them with a rod of Ps. 2 9.
iron. Which words are taken from David and applied to mystical Christ or a
Christian Man, to whom Christ the Head promises like power, under name of the
Church of Thyatira. Rev. 2. 26.
Her Child was caught up to God and his Throne: Real Christ is literaly lift up
to Gods Throne; but mystical here meant analogicaly to the Roman Throne, as
Constantin and his Successors were: for all power and their Thrones is of God.
If any ask how mystical Christ rules with an iron Scepter or Sword of war? It Is
in a duple way: 1. Divine, against Devils, Princes of this world, which is
stoutly waged. 2. Human, when Constantin crushed Maxentius, Maximian, and
Licinius Christ's Enemies. This Child was not lift up to Gods Throne so soon as
born (for he was to rule) but when he was ripe and ready for a Kingdom: so true
Christ entered not his Kingdom so soon as born, but at thirty years of age fit
for Priesthood or spiritual Government.

The Woman fled into the wilderness, where God prepared a Verse. 6, 7, 8.
place to be fed one thousand two hundred threescore dais. This Prophecy is
afterward somewhat fuller repeated and described, whereto it shall be deferred.
There was war in Heaven, Michael and his Angels fought with the Dragon, who with
his Angels fought, but prevailed not; nor was their place found any more there.
Here is showed, how the Woman escaped the Dragons wait by Michaels rescu; who
being conqueror cast him down to Earth: whereby her Son was lifted up and she
departed to a Desert. This war was waged while the Woman traveled, not after
she was delivered, as many misdeem: for the battle befell before the Woman fled
(which was after her dilivery) and Rev. ^2. 10, 11:
her Sons taking up to Gods Throne. Michael and his Angels having with them
Christ's Martyrs and Confessors fought: for in the triumphant song it is said,
they overcam by the blood of the Lamb, and word of their testimony, who loved
not their life's to death. Semblably the Dragon and his Angels took with them
the Roman Tyrans in their Train which worship them. This Michael is not Christ
(as some suppose) but chief of the Princes or seven Archangels specified by
Daniel: viz. that Dan. 10. 13. Dan. 12. 1.
great Angel said to stand for Gods Children; whom Christ King of Angels and
Men opposed to Satan's black Guard raging against his Saints. For Angels are
sent to defend the heirs of Salvation, whom they invisibly protect against evil
Spirits: So in this war of the primitiv Church against the Dragons worshipers,
the Angels under conduct of their Chieftain, acted both in strengthening Martyrs
against Tyrans threats, and mitigating or sweetning their torments; beside many
mo wais of weakening the Enemies spirits, and dejecting their minds; that
oftimes they desisted, or granted truce for a time: til in fine after two
hundred years war of persecution, it pleased Christ to giv full victory: the
Woman's Child being lift up to the Imperial Throne, and Satan's Kingdom subdued:
as it is said, the Dragon prevailed not, nor was his place found any more.

The great Dragon, that old Serpent caled the Devil and Satan, Verse. 9.
which deceives the whole World; was cast out into the Earth, and his Angels with
him. He and al his Fiends being before worshipped as God, was cast down from the
top of Divinity to the Abyss of curs, contempt, and contumely. For as God
executed judgment on the Egyptian Gods at Isreal's delivery Exodus 12. 11.
from their tyranny; so he does here: they prevailed not or were overcome,
which is al one Hebraism; and they cam^ no more there.

I heard a loud voice in Heaven: Now is com Salvation, Verse. 10. 11.
strength and Kingdom of our God, and power of his Christ: for the Accuser of
our Brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night; but
they overcam him by the Lambs blood. These words being most clear sans Allegory
or ambiguity, are a Key to interpret the whole Vision. For hence appeers, that
the Child's lifting up to Gods Throne, is an introduction to Salvation,
strength, and Kingdom of God, and power of his Christ into the Imperial throne:
that the Enemy ejected is the Accuser, who traduceth the faithful day and
night: that the forces used by Michael and his Angels were Martyrs and
Confessors, who overcam by the Lambs blood, freely yeeldding their life's to
death. Satan, caled before Dragon and Devil, is now new named Accuser, as the
Hebrews term him: But contrarily the holy Ghost is Paraclet or Advocat: the one
Destroier, the other Defender. This title best agreed to those times, when
Christians were accused by Roman Idolaters of Thyestean Fests, Oedipean
Incests, Medean Murders, Adultery, Treason, burning of Houses, Poisoning,
Plagues, Famine, and al heinous crimes or hidious calamities which happened: but
it aims chiefly at Satan's trial of Job by tribulations, as Pagans did
Christians by persecutions.

Rejoice O Heavens, and ye that dwell in them: woe to the Inhabiters Verse. 12.
of Earth and Sea; for the Devil is com down to you, having great wrath, because
he knows his time is but short. Though the Dragon was cast from the throne by
Constantin, yet People continued his worship, specialy under Julian Apostat:
but soon after Christianity prevailed, and all the Empire was washed with
Baptism: which made Satan rage and seek by all stratagems to undermine the
Church. This while the woman dwells in a Desert: who being freed from Heathen
tyranny, til the seventh trumpets sounding, and Christ's secund coming, lay not
hid or invisible; but lived in a middle condition like the Israelits before they
entered Canaan; who escaped Pharaohs slavery, yet attained not the Land of
promiss. So Christians escaped Pagan bondage, and served Christ freely: Yet as
the Israelits Apostatized to worship a golden Calf, Baal Peor, Balaam, etc. So
Christians fell to semi-Idolatry or Iconolatry. The Woman's abode in the
wilderness forty two months, answers to See Numb 33.
the Israelits so many mansions in the Desert, not without a tacit typical
mystery.

When the Dragon saw he was cast to the Earth, he persecuted the Verse. 13. 14.
15
Woman which brought forth a Manchild: to whom were given two wings of a great
Eagle, that she might fly from the Serpent into her place, to be nourished for
a time, times, and half a time: but the Serpent cast out of his mouth water as
a Flood after the Woman, that it might carry her away. Satan is cast down, but
not cast out: who staying below, essaied to oppress the Woman by what wais or
wiles he could. She began to fly, but came not instantly to the Desert, as
neither did the Israelits: for Pharaoh pursued them into the red Sea; and the
red Dragon her with a Flood of water: quam been cuncta quadrant? the great
Eagle is evidently the Roman Empire: her two wings the East and West Caesar's,
under whose protection she fared in an Eremitical Estate three years and half;
expressed before by one thousand two hundred threescore dais, to comply with
Daniels times. This Eagle in Esdras typifies the fourth Kingdom, and 1 Esd. 11.
16, 17
the twelv feathered wings the twelv first Caesar's from Julius to Domitian.
Thus Israel was freed from Egypt on Eagles wings, as the Lord says, Yea have
seen how I bore you on Eagles wings, Exodus 19, 14.
and brought you to my self. By water cast out of the Dragons mouth, is meant
Words and Doctrine: as Solomon says, The Prove. 18. 4.
words of a Man's mouth are as deep waters, wisdoms Welspring Prove. 15. (...).
as a flowing Brook. So water here is pestilent poison of Heresies, specialy
Arrianism against Christ's Deity, which grew up in Constantins dais, and spread
far under his Successors: totus mund^ miratus est, se tam subito factum
Arrianum. This was the Flood of water issuing from the Dragons mouth, like to
carry away the Woman: for it is wonder the new initiated Emperors seeing such
dismal discords, had not fallen from the Faith (as Julian did) to their old Dagon
the Dragon, as finding most unity in impiety.

The Earth helped the Woman, which opened and swalowed the Verse. 16. 17.
Flood cast from the Dragons mouth. That is, the Orthodox Oecumenic Synods
drank up that Diabolical Deluge, as dry thirsty Earth does water, which is a
fit figure thereof; specialy since Earth is often put for the Inhabiters.

The Dragon was wrath with the Woman, and went to wage war with the remnent of
her Seed, which keep Gods Commandments, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.
This is an entry to the next Chapter, and as a Prolog to a new Tragedy raised
by the Dragon against the Woman: who at first footing in the Desert, was
encountered by two Beasts, not so hideous in shape as the Dragon whom she most
dreaded; which history must be unlocked or unfolded.

I stood on the Sand, and saw a Beast risa up from the Sea, having Rev. 13 v.
(...)
seven heads and ten horns, and on his horns ten Crowns, and on his heads the
name of Blasphemy. The Dragon, seeing he could not prevail by his new Arrian
devise, nor reign as yerst in his own name; being divested of the Empire;
covertly erected a Vicarian Kingdom, to raise a new deputed form of Monarchy
then beginning. It Is a twofold Beast (ten horned, and two horned nearly allied)
representing the Secular and Spiritual State which reign jointly. The first is
the ten Kingdoms, into which Barbarians shared the Empire, when the Dragon was
expeld. This is the septicep Roman Beast* under the course of the last Head;
which after bore the Whore: being here described by ten Kingdoms: wherein he
shall (as he did before) blasphem the only true God by Iconolo-Idolatry: for as
the number of seven Heads is the Roman Empires Ensign; so the name of Blasphemy
is a note of Idolatry. The ten Crowns set on his horns, show he shall be subject
to the last head and swayed by it, as will clearly appeer in the sequel.

The Beast which I saw was like a Leopard, his feet as of a Verse. 2.
Bear, and mouth as a Lion; to whom the Dragon gav his power, seat, and great
Authority. These three Beasts are resembled by Daniel to the three first
Monarchies (Lion to the Assyrian, Dan. 7.
Bear to the Persian, Leopard to the Grecian) al which this last Kingdom
resembles in a certain confused mixture: For in Body it was a Leopard like the
Grecian, which was divided into four parts, as this into ten: in Feet a Bear
like the Persian, which managed State affairs by Magi, as this does
Ecclesiastic by Moncs or other Shavlings: In mouth a Lion like the Babylonian,
which made Edicts to worship golden Images on pain of death; as this denounces
death to such as shall refuse to adore theirs. Some interpret these Beasts
literaly of proper cruelty, which this last Beast shall exercise, and the text
will bear both senses. Now that the ten horns are meant only of the last seventh
course, and not promiscuously of al, as most deem; is thus demonstrated: The
horns which flourish and vanish with their head, could not be of the fiv first,
because they (as the Angel attests) passed in St. John's age, together with the
courses of those Rev. 17. 10. 12
Heads: Nor the sixth, because that reigning then, the time of horns was not
com, as the said Angel apertly avers: Ergo they remain to the last Head. Such
then as distribut the ten horns among seven heads, giving one to some and two to
others at pleasure; are in evident error, crossing the plain text and Angels
interpretation, because they belong soly to the seventh Head, as aforesaid. By
power which the Dragon gav, is meant his Militia or Army, as the Septuagints
use the word Phara^h^ Host, and God is caled the Lord of Hosts. Now Satan's
Hosts or Forces, are evil Angels and Idols the Devils Receptacles. Those he gav
to this last Beast, together with his seat and great Authority: viz. that
universal dominion which he exercised in shape of a red Dragon, but in far
unlike form; that he might beguile the Woman's Seed in the wilderness; for he
demeaned not as before, nor professed to be as he was (a sworn Enemy to
Christianity) for then they would shun him out of inbred antipathy which God at
first set betwixt them: but when he put Genesis 3. 15.
off a Serpents skin, and showed as a Leopard or Panther (which Beast the
Dragon loths, but al else lov to look on for his beauty and sweet smell, as
Isodor informs) it was easy to deceiv the L. 12. (...). (...).
Church, being secure from his old form, not deeming or dreaming such close
Idolatry should be professed or practiced in an Empire which pretended
Christianity and demolished Idols, under a new masque of Image worship.

I saw one of his heads (the sixth) as it were wounded to death V. (...).
(by Michael) and his deadly wound was healed (by the salv of this substitut
authority) and all the World wondered at the Beast. That the 7 headed Dragon or
Heathen Rome, was the Beast of the 6th head whereon the old Serpent sat, is
clear: because the 7th succeeded next in the same Seal, to whom the Dragon gav
his Rev. 17. 1^*
Seat. For it is said after, that fiv are falen, and one is (the sixth in St.
John's time) and the other not yet com: for though the Beast still appeered
septicep, and the heads kept order one after another; ye the Beast with all his
furniture of heads and horns is presented under any State: So that the same
Roman Kingdom may be every where signified under several sorts or courses of
Government. The last ten horned Beast began at healing of the sixth Beasts
wound, but not before; as the series shows: For what ever evil he did, or
adoration was given him; al is said to befall after curing of that wound: for
the whole world wondered at him being healed; but none of those blasphemous acts
against God are cited before.

They worshipped the Dragon which gav power, and the Beast Verse. 4.
saying; Who is like the Beast? who can make war with him? They worshipped not
the Beast simply, but as the Dragons Deputy, or Dragon under the Beasts
disguise. For to worship the Beast unles as the Dragons Idolatrous Vicegerent,
was no more impious then to obey any temporal authority: therefore the Beast
signifies his Kingdom, whose worship is subjection to it: that is, they freely
obeyed him, as if none could resist his power: but to worship him in a
religious capacity, as he resembles the Dragon, is blasphemy against God.

There was given him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies, (...). 5.
and power was given him to continu forty two months. The Beasts condition or
constitution is exhibited before: now rests to show how he exercised the power
delegated by the Dragon, viz. blasphemy and cruelty. This Vision agrees with
Daniels Prophecy of the same fourth Beast and his last course D^^ 7. v. 8.
here specified: but the things declared to him more succinctly, are here
dilated more largely. He had a mouth speaking great things says Daniel, which
John calls blasphemies: by which Idolatry is implied, being the highest
contumely against God. He shall also continu to blasphem forty two months:
during which space the Gentiles shall trample on the out Court or holy City. For
since this profanation tends to the same impiety with the Beasts blasphemy,
both may signify the power of darkness or night measured by months or the Moons
motion; and not by dais or years after the Sun: else why does the holy Ghost
infer it immediately upon the Beasts blasphemy, unles the time be referred
thereto? Ergo the Beasts 42 months begin not at this wrath and war with the
Saints, but at his Blasphemy: So the meaning is, that he continued to blasphem
so long. That by blasphemy is intended Idolatry or spiritual fornication is
plain: 1. Because Babylon the Beasts Metropolis is caled Mother of Harlots with
whom the Kings and Inhabiters of the Earth Harlotized. 2. It Is such blasphemy
as may fall into the courses of the next Foregoer or rather all the Heads, which
are charged with it; but no blasphemy can be laid to his Antecessor, not to al
in common sav only Idolatry. 3. The word blasphemy imports Idolatry in many mo
places Isai 65. 7. Jor. 23. 15. 17. Ezekiel. 20. 27. Deu. 31. 20. 2 King 19. 22.
Prove. 14. 31. Ps. 44. 16. Psalm. 69. 10. in all which to rebuke, reproach, and
blasphem God is al one sens.

He opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blasphem Verse. 6.
his Name, Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. What was spoken of
blasphemy in general, is here specificated by a triple Idolatry: 1. He
blasphems Gods Name or Peson by Image Worship, ascribing it to Stocks and
Stones. 2. His Tabernacle or Christ's Humanity, wherein the Deity dwells
personaly: which Temple or Tabernacle is blasphemed by believing his Body to be
daily made of bread; because transubstantiating John 1. 14.
Priests cause it to be adored for his true Tabernacle. 3. He blasphems Heavens
Inhabiters (Angels and Saints) in caling John 2. 19. Hebr. 9. 11.
Idols by their (...), which is also a contumely against Christ their Lord: for
they are made Mediators or pretended Intercessors with him against their wills
(as Patrons or Pleaders for mortal Men in Heathen manner) and many feigned
miracles fabled, fast^ed, or fathred on them, which is more blasphemy.

It was given him to make war with the Saints and overcome Verse. 7.
them; and power was given him over al Kinreds, Toungs and Nations. This is his
other part of power viz. persecution; whereby he provs himself the Dragons
Deputy. Daniels words Dan. 7. 2^*
are, he made war with the Saints (the Woman's Seed) and prevailed against them.
The Beasts whole reign is a war against the Saints; but this is waged with
bloody slaughter: as it is said verse. 10. He that kills with the sword, must be
so killed: For here the Secular Beast (not Spiritual) is meant, which must be
so handled. He made not this war in Infancy, but in maturity; A. C. 1^^^.
about the twelfth age from Christ's nativity. The first war fell heavy on the
Albigenses, Waldenses, and other Professors; of whom were slain only in France
(as Peronius tells) about a million of Souls: who were massacred by mighty
Armies levied against Sarrasens: which bloody broils lasted seventy years. Many
mo slaughters befell elswher for three hundred years after: yet about An. 1500.
sundry Stats, Kingdoms, Countries, and Churches fell from the Beasts dominion:
against whom cruel wars were raised, which continu to this day, and shall not
ceas til the Beast be destroyed. So this persecution, for number of slain, far
exceds all the primitivs: for from the Jesuits A. C. 1580.
origin in thirty years space, Baldwin computs nine hundred thousand L. de
Anti^^^. c. 16.
Orthodox Christians done to death by Executioners: yea Duke d' Alva boasts,
that he executed thirty six thousand in Belgia: and Vergerius vaunts, that the
Inquisition consumed a hundred and fifty thousand in thirty years by several
tortures. They excuse it, that the Clergy does it not, but Magistrates: yet they
condemn them for Heretics and make the others their Hangmen. For so it is said
here of the Secular Beast, that he shall make war and overcom the Saints: but of
the Ecclesiastic, that he shall cause so many as will not worship the Beasts Image
to be slain, and not kill with the Sword or by his own hands. His power reached
over all the Roman dominion with so great persecution, that no Kindred, Tongue, or
(...) can resist his impiety: yet al particular Men are not included in this
generality: for very many in all ages (as God said he had seven thousand 1 Kings
19. 18.
in Israel that never bowed knee to Baal) kept their Covenant with the Lamb:
but al entire Kinreds or Stats served the Beast: so those few dispersed in the
Beasts Provinces, made for a while the intemerat Virgin Church.

All that dwell on Earth shall worship him, whose names are not V. 8 9.
written in the Book of life of the Lamb slain before the Worlds foundation.
Lest any presuming on a catholic consent of Kinreds and Nations which follow the
Beast, or deterred with grievous persecution; shall think they may run safly
with the multitud, the holy Ghost here reads their doom: that their names are
not registered in the book of Life. Hereto is an Apostrophe annexed of
attention: If any have an ear let him hear ( i. al godly Christians listen
deeply and devoutly) to what is foresaid (not what folows) of their unhappy
condition which follow the Beast.

He that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity: he that Verse. 10.
kills with the sword must be so killed: here is the patience and Faith of the
Saints. This is a consolatory close, that God will be their avenger, to afflict
their Adversaries with such measure as they mete: whereof they being confident,
are no whit daunted with tribulations, but patiently, faithfully, and
constantly endure al, expecting revenge from God.

I saw another Beast com out of the Earth, which had two horn^ Verse. 11*
like a Lamb, but spoke as a Dragon. He proceds from the Secular Beast of
C^sars, to the Spiritual or Pseudoprophetical of the Pope with his Clergy;
which exercises the government and blasphemies of the former. He has two
horns like a Lamb, boasting of his power to bind and loos by deputation; but
speaks Idolatry and slais the Saints as a Dragon: for he is Author or Founder
of the ten hornd Beast, by reviving the West Empire; but succeds the Dragon for
ferity and blasphemy under the Visour of Christianity: using his Authority as
high Priest, and takes on him as Head or Monarch thereof, no less then of his
Clergy: with whom jointly he makes up the Pseudoprophetic Beast or seventh Head
of the Roman State in the City sited on seven Hills. The Pope single (though a
falls Prophet) is not that Beast, but joind with his Clergy; which make a
company composed of many members, as a Beast has. These by fained signs and
miracles (specialy thunderbolts of Excommunication, as a divine revenge)
gradualy subjected the Kings risen up in the dissipated divided Empire to their
yoke; who tamely submitted their necks, and put on the Image of the old Empire
now crushed. So that the Caesarean Head being wounded, not only revived in that
Image; but at the false Prophets pleasure, punished with the Secular sword (as
he with the Spiritual) al disobedient murmurers. This Beast coms out of the
Earth, not from the Sea as the former, which had another pedigree: for Sea
signifies many People in one dominion, and an Army in war: but Earth, Upstarts
of low condition, springing Terr^ f^^^i.
up secretly as Herbs sans nois or notice. He had two horns like a Lamb,
pretending to bind and loos as Christ's Vicar General on Earth: but speaks as a
Dragon, patronizing Idolatry (as the Dragon did) by Decrees and Canons; and
seeks to destroy the Lambs true worshipers.

He exercises al power of the first Beast before him, and causes Verse. 12*
the Earth with them that dwell in it to worship the first Beast, whose deadly
wound was healed. This two hornd Beast uses as high Priest the Dragons
fiduciary power entrusted to the former Beast: which consists in Idol-worship;
being the ten hornd Beasts Chaplain in Religious Rites: causing the Earths
dwellers to worship that Beast, stiling it the holy Empire. The words (before
him) may import preceding, or in his presence; it skils not which. For whatever
power the first Beast had, he agniseth the high Priest Author, by whose means
the Earths Inhabiters worshipped him: who being cured of his deadly wound, rose
out of the Sea; but by what wais or wiles he did it, rests to be declared.

He does great wonders, making fire com from Heaven on Verse. 13. 14.
Earth in sight of Men, and deceiv them that dwell on Earth, by reason of those
miracles which he had power to do in sight of the Beast: saying to them that
dwell on Earth, they should make an Image to the Beast, which was wounded with a
sword and did live. The Pontifical Pseudoprophetic Beast, persuaded the Nations
by wonders or miracles to reestablish the ten hornd Beast; whereby the Dragons
power revived, and to frame the Beasts Image slain in the sixth Head. Which
being formed after his pleasure, that wound which the Dragon received seems
recured, and the Beast renewed by substituting new Idolatry and tyranny like
the former: For the Beast of the last Head is the others Image slain in the
sixth. He said they should make the Beasts Image which was slain and did live or
reviv: which words belong not to the Beast whose Image was to be framed, as if
the false Prophet spoke it; but to the Angel reporting the event, how the slain
Beast revived. For the Dragon gav the Secular Beast his Power and great
Authority: which healed his wound by imprinting his form of worship on a Beast
of another Religion; placing his Angels or Devils (not as before, by those
titles of professed Enemies to the Lord Jesus, but under Christian colors or
cognisances) to be worshipped as Saints and good Angels: but who worships Idols
under any name or notion, he worships Devils. Yea, to complet the slain Dragons
full Image, the Pope arrogats or assums divine titles, as diverse Emperors 2
These. 2. 4.
Devil-servers had done: For he sits as God in the Temple of God, showing
himself to be God. Yea he makes fire com down from Heaven on Earth: which
Graserus interprets by a Proverbial Hyperbole, that he does such or so great
wonders, as may emulat Eliah's; whereby he vindicated Gods worship. Which
exemple of fire the Jews use for all wonderfulworks, wherein Gods Glory is more
conspicuous. This is plausible; but it rather relats to that which folows,
showing how the false Prophet induced Men to make the Beasts Image: viz. he
caused al to receiv a mark, that none might buy or sell sav he that had the
Beasts mark, name, or number of his name, verse. 17. 18. This he effected both
by seducing miracles, and enforcing Excommunication: For it is said, He deceived
them by wonders which he had power to do, that they should make the Beasts
Image in manner aforesaid. The Ecclesiastic Anathema, forbidding common
Commerce, is aptly resembled to fire from Heaven or Lightning; for it delivers
over to everlasting fire, as a punishment 2 P^t 2. 6. Jude v. 7.
proceeding from God, usualy caled a Lake of fire or Asphaltites, where Sodom and
Gomorrha were consumed by fire raining from Heaven. The wonders were fained
cures fastened on Angels, Saints, Images, and Relics: but specialy by their
breaden God, said to driv out Devils. Al which the two hornd 2 These. 2 9 10
Beast, with his false Prophet pretended to do, as St. Paul foretold; That the
Man of sin shall com after the working of Satan, with all signs and lying
wonders, and with all deceivablenes of unrighteousnes. Touching the Lightning of
Anathema, it is used in all ages; specialy about advancing Iconolatry: For when
it was A C. 7. (...).
first agitated (which continued with fierce fervor one hundred twenty years)
Leo Isauricus, a stif opposer of it and Saints Intercession, was basely branded
by the Popes Parasits (as Conscanti^ is ni^k-named Copronymus for the same
cause) and struck with Anathema-thunder by the Pope: who absolved his Subjects
in Italy from their fealty, and strov to bereav his Exarchat of Ravenna, with
other dominions; whereby he animated Iconolaters in the East, and scared the
West Monarchs from daring or doing the like. With the same Lightning he blasted
the Albigenses, etc. for oppugning Idolatry in the Lateran Synod under Alex. 3.
So another Lateran Council decreed, That such Lords temporal as refused to quel
them, should be Excommunicat by the Metropolitans and other Comprovincial
Prelates: absolving their Vassals from fealty, and exposing their Lands or
Territories as a prey to other Princes.

He had power to giv the Beasts Image life, that it should speak, Verse 1^.
and cause so many as would not worship it to be killed. Nebuchadnezar decreed
the same of his Image: but if this had not received life, the slain Beast could
not reviv in him; no^ was the former Dragon-Worshiper idle, but activ and stout
to fly on his Enemies; as this Image ought to be, in which he should reviv.
Therefore the false Prophet had power not only to allure People to make the Image
of the last course; but to inlifen him, whereby he may by Edicts injoin such
things as shall support his dignity, and punish Opposers by temporal death. For all power of the Image or Secular Beast, is derived or delivered by the
Pseudoprophetic: who denounces sentence of Heresy against al which resist his
Authority, and the other must execut it. This is commonly caled a delivery over
to the Secular Power, which is but his Hangman, because he will not seem or deem
to defile his holy hands with blood. The like use other Sects or Septs make of
Civil Magistrates.

He caused al great and small, rich and poor, free and bond, to Verse. 16. 17.
receiv a mark in their right hand or forehead: that none might buy or sell, sav
such as had the mark or name of the Beast, or number of his name. The mark is
his name, as it is caled the mark or name, and afterward the mark of his name.
This allud^ Rev. 14. 11.
to an old custom of marking Servants with the Masters name, specialy in the
foreheads; but Soldiers of their Captains in the hand. So the Lambs Folowers
being contrary to the Beasts, had his name and his Fathers in their Foreheads.
The number of his name is the same with himself, but called the number because
brought into letters of number; God so disposing it: but the mark and number
differ, if the interpretation be directed after the analogy of other places:
For the mark shows to which Lord they belong that bear it: but the number
indicats from what stock they spring that are marked: as the number of twelv
made in the multiplication of twelv Virgins, is a symbol of Apostolic lineage or
Offspring, as shall be showed. The Beasts name which includs the number, is
(...) imposed soon after the Revelation was writ. For at the Empires division
by Theodosius, and rising of the ten Kings; the Roman falls Prophet, and West
Inhabiters under him, were styled Latin by fatal instinct, which very name,
subducting the numeral letters (as Hebrews and Greecs use) make the mystical
number 666. noted by the holy Ghost: which provs the Beasts prosapy, who vaunts
himself to succed the Apostles; but indeed descends from the Dragon: for the
Apostolic number 12, will never cast into 666. however multiplied: but from the
number 6. (which belongs to the red Dragon and Beast of the sixth Head) neatly
and naturaly. For the whole sum how great soever, is compact out of six by
units, tens, and hundreds: as if the Dragons whole seed, were diffused through
this last Beasts whole Body with all his Ministers.

Here is Wisdom: let him that has understanding count the V. 18.
Beasts number, which is the number of a Man, even 666. The Virgins number one
hundred forty four thousand contrary to the Beast, is altogether Apostolic,
begot of 12. multiplied by twelv times twelv thousand: for the reason or result
of contraries is contrary: where both the name written and number of the company
is expressed: but here the name is conceled, or left to be collected and
conjectured from the number, wherein lies a mystery. The forbidding to buy and
sell is a brand of Papal Excommunication, excluding commerce or company with
such. To receiv the mark of the Beasts name, is to acknowledge Note.
him Lord and obey his authority: but to receiv his number is to embrace his
impiety derived from the Dragon. Now tho none can have the mark of his name or
obey his authority, unles he partake his number and impiety: yet may a Man
admit the number or impiety, and abandon his name or authority. As the Greecs
hold the Dragons impious Idolatry with the Latins, as first erected or
established in the secund Nicen Synod by a Pope, who labored earnestly to reviv
the slain Dragons Image: yet reject his authority, and will not bear his name or
yoke as formerly: but made a Schism (as it is styled) from the Latin Church,
which has lasted abov 700. years, maugre al brute Anathemas.

Let me intrud or interpose a few words: Excommunication Animadvers.
is a prohibitiv brand to bar all that have it from commerce, company, and
communion; but no permissiv badg to admit any, nor can be caled a proper name.
Now Roman Catholic is the general appellation which al own, and the Oath of
Papal Supremacy (caled reconciling to the Church of Rome) a common mark or
cognizance; without which none may buy or sell spiritual wares among them. Quam
been convenient? These two terms (Roman Catholic and Papal Supremacy) applied to
the name and mark of the Beasts folowers; I must own how fit or unfit soever:
humbly submitting them with all else to public censure. No Symbols, similituds,
nor allusions run on al four feet; but are obvious to various applications,
which may and do differ in diverse circumstances, as here happily it happens. For
the Beasts number, Vicarius Dei generalis in terris (DCLVVIIIIII. 666.) is the
Beasts true paraphrastical title, and right number thereof: but no proper name,
nor number of a Man as (...) is: nor are the numeral letters collected from the
original Greec (wherein John wrote, as the others be) but from the Roman Latin,
which is a considerable case. Let Readers ruminat on it, and judge deliberatly.

I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on Mount Sion, and with him Rev. 14 V. 1.
one hundred forty four thousand having the name of the Lamb and his Fathers in
their forheads. The company of Virgins which follow the Lamb standing on Sion,
and elect Gentiles put in place of Israel mentioned at beginning of the seventh
Seal (for it is described in a duple Vision, to conjoin the prophecy of Seals
with that of the little Book) signifies the Church, which in midst of Papacy
continued constant to the Lamb as a Virgin under Babylon; being the Apostles
genuin progeny: who were not confined to any set station, but followed the Lamb
wherever he did go. By the number one hundred forty four thousand (12. times
12000.) it appeers, that the same company is specified both whers, being the
Apostles true Offspring, which bear the number twelv as an Emblem or Ensign of
their peculiar prosapy or pedigree. Mount Sion was David's Kingdoms Throne or
Roial mansion, caled his City: because he got it from the Jebusits, and walling
it built a Tower, Streets, and Courts. It may here parabolicaly imply that part
of the Earth, which Christ having vanquishd made his Churches habitation; viz.
the Christian World: where she keeps her faith and chastity undefiled, when the
Beast polluted al with adulteries and slaughters. The name Lamb is left out in
most English Bibles, and his Fathers only inserted: but the best Translators
have both, and the matter requires to read it so. For the allusion to mark
Servants and Soldiers, belongs to the Lambs folowers; that they should bear
his name so well as his Fathers in their foreheads at Baptism being signed with
the Cross. At which time they giv faith (personaly or by Sureties) to renounce
Satan and al his works and worship: which in Apocalyptic phrase is to abandon
the Dragon and his power, with all his Angels or Devils. In this Sacrament we
solenly profes faith to the Lamb and his Father: for it is the Lords Seal, as
the Ancients call it. Origin says, let us bear the immortal laver in our
forheads: which when the Devils shall see they tremble. St. Austin terms it the
Roial mark of our Redeemer: which Seal is defaced or obliterated by Idolatrous
superstition, as Tertullian, Isodor, and many mo teach or testify. The Persons
Rev. 7. 4.
sealed both before and here are the same: but the reason for the end of
sealing different: for there the matter of protection is treated, here of
fealty: yet it is needless to seek another Seal beside Baptism, which performs
both: because with it God ads his Grace, whereby he owns them as his, and takes
them into tuition: the one is handled in the other Vision of the sealed, the
other in this. Hence Clemens Alex. calls Baptism a perfect safeguard, and
Nazianzen a seal. S. Basil says, unles the Angel take notice of thy mark, how
shall he fight or defend thee from the Enemy? hereby says Nicetas, we are kept
safe from Satan's snares. Thus Baptism is the seal, and sign of the Cross the
mark of the Lamb, as al agree.

I heard a voice from Heaven as many Waters and a great Thunder: V. 2. 3.
and the voice was as of Harpers playing with their Harps. They sung as it were
a new Song before the Throne, and four Beasts, and Elders: and none could learn
it, but the one hundred forty four thousand which were redeemed from the Earth.
The voice as of many Waters and Thunder, signifies a great multitud: Rev. 19 6.
such as was the Levits singing with musical Instruments: for it is after caled
the voice of a great multitud, as of many waters and mighty thunderings. Daniel
describing the Son of Dan. 10. 6.
God says, the voice of his Words was like a multitud: which St. John calls
many waters. The Singers were Celical Angels glorifying the Father and the
Lamb, as they did before, when he unsealed the Prophecies. The Song is styled
new in both places, being different from that sung before Christ was sent, and
for the new benefit of his coming granted to no foregoing ages, but only to the
last times; the form whereof is expressed Rev. 5. 13.
before: viz. to him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb be blessing,
honor, glory, and power for ever, Amen. Which agrees with the Evangelical Hymn
after Christ appeered in the flesh: where to him that sits on the Throne and the
Lamb jointly redemption, power, riches, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and
blessing are devoutly ascribed. None could learn that song so long as the Beast
bore sway in Christendom, sav such as be of the one hundred forty four
thousand, who only sans spot of Idolatry glorify the Father on Earth, as Angels
do in Heaven; as Christ teaches us to pray.

These are not defiled with Women, but Virgins: they follow the V. 4.
Lamb wherever he goes: these are bought from among Men, being first fruits of
God and the Lamb. Women here meant in a Prophetic phrase, are Christian Cities
addicted to Idols, whose Queen is great Babylon Mother of Harlots, with whom
Kings and Nations commit fornication: but the Lambs company convers not with
such, being Virgins free from Idolatrous Incest or pollution. These follow the
Lamb or faithfully cleav fast and never forsake him: in what City or Country he
shall set up his Standard, thither they follow. These are bought out of the
profane multitud, to be a peculiar People like first fruits (which imply al
things exempt from il uses) to God and the Lamb.

In their mouth was found no guile: for they were without fault. V. 5.
No ly was found in them: but al Christian Idolaters are Liers, who say they
worship God the creator, but giv it to Creatures as St. Paul says, They turned
the truth of God into a ly, worshipping Romans 1. 25.
the Creature as the Creator. Hence Amos calls Idols lies: but these true
worshipers were faultless, and no ly found in their Amos 2. 4.
mouths.

I saw another Angel sly in midst of Heaven, having the everlasting V. 6.
Gospel to preach unto the Inhabiters on Earth, and to every Nation, Kindred,
Tongue, and People. After a description of the Company folows the history of
things done by them, and their leader the Lamb against the common Enemy, which
is duple: 1. Of Admonition to the Beasts folowers, presented by three Angels.
2. Of Revenge, by a Parabol of Harvest and Vintage. The Monitor Angel is caled
another in respect of those foregoing musical Angels, whereof this Prcacher was
none. Where note that in such Visions, the Angels represent them Note.
whom they govern: but this lofty Flier seems to be more eminent then any
Rulers of Men; being employed to declare his Gospel caled everlasting: not so
much in respect of time to com, as that past: viz what was promised (touching
the Woman's seed to break the Serpents head) at beginning of the World; as St.
Paul says, that which God promised before (or Titus 1. 2.
when) the World began, is eternal life.

He said with a loud voice, fear God and giv him glory: for V. 7.
the hour of his judgment is com: worship him that made Heaven, Earth, Sea, and
Fountains of Waters. This Angel knowing Gods Kingdom to be at hand, when
Judgment must be executed on Idols and Idolaters (the Devils being cast down
and despoiled of the Roman Throne) exhorts al Nations, Kinreds, and People to
become Christians, to worship God only as he is declared in the Gospel, and
beware of Idols. Surely Iconolatry is analogical Idolatry, tho not identical
with Heathen. Fear God and giv him glory; for the hour of his Judgment is com:
viz. wherein Christ by his Cross has spoiled Powers and Principalities,
declaring by his Apostles and Evangelists to the Nations (which through so many
ages he suffered to walk in their own wais) that they should turn from Idols, or
at his coming suffer eternal death. Why then do Christians who profes faith in
this Judge, return as it were by a back door to adore Idols or Devils under new
names; having no Textual warrant of precept or precedent so to do? St. Paul
Acts 14. (...). 15, 16.
cried to the Lycaonians, we Preach, that ye should turn from these vanities to
the living God, who in times past suffered al Nations to walk in their own wais:
but now the time of his Judgment is com. The Instruments used to denounce Gods
judgments, were holy Bishops and Confessors: who first opposed Martyrs
Relics, as appeers in the story of Vigilantius and others: but A. C 720.
afterward more conspicuously in the Greec Church against Image Worship; which
many zealous Emperors ( Leo Isauricus, Constantinus Iconomachus, Leo Armenius,
Michael Balbus, Theophilus) stisly opposed: yet in fine it prevailed by the
power and policy of the two horned Beast and falls Prophet. For tho some
condemned Images, yet many favored invocation of Saints: under which notion
Iconolatry crept up closly, which Constantin with diverse orthodox Fathers
impeached of error. For the nominal honor of Saint given to Apostles, Martyrs,
and Confessors was never denied (til in this last ignorant age by giddy
Sectists) as a Christian compellation; but only the real invocation and
intercession, which drew on superstitious adoration of their Images: yet to
decry the name of Saints to such is no less erroneous, though not so enormous.
The cry of this flying Angel sounded in the West so well as East: for the Synod
of Francfort, under Charlemaign, of almost three hundred A. C. 790.
Bishops, condemned Image Worship, and the secund Nicen Council which
established it. So the Synod of Paris, summoned A. 825.
by his Son King Lewis, declared it to be impious, and rejected that Nicen cru
as superstitious. Now listen to the secund Angels proclamation.

There followed another Angel crying, Babylon is falen, is falen; Verse. 8.
that great City, because she made al Nations drink the Wine of the wrath of her
fornication. He declares the foundation of Babylons ruin to be laid: wherein he
imitats Isaiah touching Isai 21 9.
Babylon in the same words, is falen, is falen; when the Medes and Persians
were about to destroy her. The Ministers of this cry against mystical Babylon,
were the Waldenses and Albigenses: who by word, deed, and death declared Rome
to be Apocalyptic Babylon for her Spiritual whordom of Idolatry, wherewith she
intoxicated al Nations. These Champions began her downfall: for multituds of Men
in all her Provinces gradualy started or revolted. By poisoned Wine is meant the
amorous phil^ry or sorcery of her spiritual fornication: but the Wine of her
wrath alluds to mortiferous potions usualy given to Malefactors, specialy among
the Grecians in ancient times.

The third Angel followed saying aloud, if any worship the V. 9. 10. 11.
Beast and his Image, and receiv his mark in forehead or hand; he shall drink
the Wine of Gods wrath mingled with the Cup of his indignation, and shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone in presence of the holy Angels and the Lamb:
and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. They have no rest
day or night, which worship the Beast and his Image, and receiv the mark of his
name. This Angel proceeding farther then the two former, forewarns the Beasts
folowers, how dreadful dangers hang over their heads, unles they speedily shun
his society. The chief Minister of this cry was Luther with his Sectators and
Successors, who began that great glorious Reformation: when whole Stats,
Kingdoms, and Provinces (not single Men as before) cast off the Beasts yoke
with all his abominations. Here is threatened a terrible punishment (look to it
Romish Catholics) if they persist in their old drunkenness, they shall drink the
Wine of Gods wrath mixed with bitterness (Myrrh, Aloes, Gal, Frankincens, or
Wormwood) such as the Jews gav them that were put to death, and offered to our
Savior. Here the first Angel admonished them to worship God aright: the next
menaceth ruin to Babylon: and this denounces judgment to al his Folowers.

Here is the Saints patience: Here are they that keep Gods Verse. 12.
Commandments and Faith of Jesus. This cry is the Touchstone to try the Saints
patience in so long expecting the Beasts punishment: not being dejected or
discontented at his prosperity, nor deterred with his tyranny, in obedience to
Gods Commands and Faith of Jesus; by abondoning the Beasts communion and
renouncing his Image, mark or cognizance.

I heard a voice from Heaven saying, Write, blessed are the Verse. 13.
dead which die in the Lord henceforth, says the Spirit, that they may rest
from their labors and their works follow them. This declaration most Men refer
to the preceding words, as a comfort henceforth to the Saints in the Lord: but
they rather tend to the subsequent matters, as a warning of the Judgment and
Resurrection to com under the seventh trumpet. As if he said, Now is the time
wherein those that die in the Lord, shall rise to a blessed life eternal. This
interpretation seems best for three reasons: First, because the day of death is
never caled a reward; but Judgment and Resurrection is. Secundly, because a
Voice from Heaven imports some notable matter ensuing: nor is any command given
to write, sav only at beginning. Thirdly, because R. v. 11. 11. 18
it agrees with the seventh trumpet, wherein the cause of those that die in Christ
shall be judged, and God shall reward his Servants which fear his name: as here
it is said, Blessed are the dead from this time, that they may rest from their
Labors, and their works (or a blessed reward) follow them. Both expositions
intend specialy such as die for the Lord, viz. Martyrs, who giv their life's for
Christ, rather then other Saints or Confessors which die in the Lord and put
faith in him: for so the context evidently evinceth or argues by the Saints
patience in suffering persecution even to death.

I looked, and lo a whit Cloud, and on it one sat like the Son of Verse 14* 15.
16
Man, haveng on his head a golden Crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle: and
another Angel came out of the Temple crying aloud to him that sa^ on the Cloud,
thrust in thy sickle and reap, for time is com and Harvest is ripe: and he
thrust in his sickle, and the Earth was reaped. By Harvest three things are
meant: viz. Cutting of Corn, gathering it in, and threshing it out. Hence a
duple Parabol of contrary sens is used in Scripture: one of killing or
destroying by cutting down and threshing: as Jeremy says, Babylon is a
threshing floor, it is time to thresh her: Jer. 51. 33.
yet a little while, and Havest time shall com. So Isaiah speaks of Isreal's
overthrow by Tiglatpeleser: It shall be as when the Harvest Isai 17. 5.
man reaps the ears of Corn with his arms. Another of saving or restoring by
gathering in used in the new Testament: as Christ says, The Harvest is great,
but the Laborers (or Gatherers, such as shall be saved) are few. Now which of
the two is here presented, rests to be sifted or scanned by order of things
done. The treading of the Winepress at Vintage (which succeds this Harvest) is
the same with that bloody slaughter executed by him which sat on the whit Horse;
where it is said, He treads the Wine-pr^ss of the fierce wrath of Almighty God:
Rev. 19 11. 15
which provs that the two Prophetic Parabols here (no other interveining)
signify the same matter: or if diverse, yet some way, tied together: since then
Harvest there goes next before Vintage here, and the preparation of the Lambs
marriage, and Babylons destruction, preceds that cruel slaughter there: it must
needs follow, that the said preparation and destruction are this Harvest, or
belongs to the same with it, or the Harvest with them. If Babylons destruction
be the Harvest, it agrees to the type of cutting down and threshing, suitable to
Jeremies foretelling old Babylons fall by the same figure: but if both Harvest
and Vintage (which end the year) set forth the consummation of things, the
Harvest preceding in time; then both may signify the period of Roman tyranny:
where Harvest may denot the Cities overthrow as first fruits, and Vintage
ensuing the Beasts who. Kingdoms ruin. Happily Harvest may imply that preparation
to the Lambs marriage or adorning his Bride, or something to be done thereat:
which probably is the Jews conversion, and gathering of Israel so long looked
for. These are they in our Man. 22. 1.
Saviors Parabol, who being invited to the Kings Sons wedding refused to com:
but being now ready make have. For the Gentiles cannot be this Bride, since they
have bin the Lambs Spous abov one thousand six hundred years ago. With this
conversion or return of Israel (who shall be ascited as part into the Lambs
Virgin company) shall be joined the Turcish Empires cutting down, typified by
drying up of Euphrates at pouring Rev. 16. 12.
out the sixth Phial, that the way of the East Kings may be prepared: For the
time of this Phial pointly agrees with the Brides preparation, being set between
Babylons overthrow and the Enemies last slaughter. Christ's Church (which by
Isreal's conversion will seem dupled) shall have each a peculiar Enemy: one the
Roman Beast of uncircumcised origin; the other the Mohammedan Empire of
circumcised Offspring, derived from Ismael, which was ominous and odious to
Isaacs Issu: the abolition of both being to be accomplished at Christ's coming.
So Harvest may resemble the first, and Vintage the last. Joels Joel 3. 1. 2. 13.
Prophecy (whence this duple type is taken) treats of Isreal's conversion
saying, In those dais when I shall bring again the Captivity to Juda and
Jerusalem; I will gather al Nations into the Valley of Jehosaphat, and plead
with them there for my People and heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among
Nations, and parted my Land. Then folows by Hypotyposis; put ye in the sickle,
for Harvest is ripe: com get ye down for the Press is full, the Fats overflow,
and the wickedness is great. Now though both notions of Harvest (one to gather
in, the other to cut down and thresh) comply to Isreal's gathering into the
Churches Barn, and subduing the Enemies with slaughter: yet because the Churches
vindication is here handled, the sens of cutting and threshing is to be
preferred. The Lord is Christ the King styled the Son of Man, whose power next
appeers.

Another Angel came out of the Temple in Heaven, having (...). 18. 19. 20
also a sharp sickle: and another from the Altar which had power over fire, and
cried loud to him that had the sickle saying; thrust in thy sharp sickle, and
gather the clusters of the Vine, for her grapes are full ripe. And the Angel
thrust his sickle into the Earth and gathered the Vine, nnd cast it into the
great Winepress of Gods wrath: and the Press was trod without the City, and
blood came out even to the Horsbridles, by the space of one thousand six hundred
furlongs. Here a Vintage is described, which Parabolicaly in Scripture
signifies bloody slaughter: and this is the same with that great carnage
expressed by the same words, which shall be in the war of that great day at last
Phial. For Rev. 19 15.
both are the ruin of one Enemy, and each shall befall at last on the Beast and
falls Prophet, with all their Accomplices and Confederats. If then this Vintage be
that slaughter, it must fall on the said Enemies. So the Vine or Vineyard is the
Beasts Dominion, the ripe Grapes his Assistants full of blood-guilt ripe for
judgment; the Vessel or Wine Press the place of slaughter caled Armageddon or
destruction: but where this place or pitch^ field shall be, is not reveled, nor
may be curiously inquired. Yet the holy Ghost points out its dimension to be
one thousand six hundred furlongs without the City; but within the Region or
Territory thereof. St. Jerome computs Palestin to be 200. Epist ad Dard
Italian miles long (which make one thousand six hundred furlongs, eight to a
mile) whence many conject or conceiv, that there shall be this great battles
Cockpit: specialy since it has an Hebrew appellation; which such as beleev
Antichrist shall com from the East or descend of Dans Tribe, easily credit: but
we who find him seated in west- Babylon, can hardly relish it: unles we deem
(as diverse do) that after Romes demolition he shall divert into the East, as
some of his sworn Vassals suppose he shall reside at Jerusalem before the day of
Judgment. For it is not probable he will freely lead an Army (as he persuaded
Princes to do) into Palestine leaving so many Enemies behind his back. Some
find a place in the West of like extent (one thousand six hundred furlongs) viz
St. Peter's Patrimony, which from Rome to the farthest mouth of Po and Marshes
of Verona, is about two hundred miles long, where happily the blow will be struck.
The Cutter of clusters is not the same with the Wine Press treader; but have
several workmen: for an Angel with a Vine-dressers sickle cut the clusters and
gathered the Grapes: but Christ the King with a troop of Rev. 19. 11. 13. 14.
Heavenly Horsemen trod the Press, clothed in a vesture sprinkled with blood,
whom the Armies in Heaven followed on whit Horses. Nor is the Grape-gatherer
said to tread the Press, but only to cast the cut Clusters into it; and then
the King coming with his Heavenly troop of Horse, trod the Press without the
City. Then blood came from the Wine Press to the Horsbridles for one thousand
six hundred furlongs space: So the sum may be, the Angel Vintager with the
Saints help, shall lop off the Clusters belonging to the Beast, and so force
them into Armageddon; where the Lord Jesus shall tread them in a Wine Press: as
St. Paul says, The Man of sin shall be destroyed by the Lord with 2 These. 2. 8.
the brightness of his coming. What can be cleerer? yet no infallible certainty,
sav bare conjecture, can be had before the event makes it evident.

Here our Author, Atropos-like, cutsoff the web of his curious Comment,
modestly pretending he will not meddle with Prophecies yet to com unfulfilled:
but left a few fleeces or fragments formerly scattered among friends; which
concern other mysteries contained in the last eight Chapters. Some of these he
promiscuously and preposterously presents by peecemeal, observing no such
precise order of Chapters and paragraphs as before: which shall be pithily
abstracted.

Mystical Babylon, the Metropolis of Antichristian Apostasy, is the City or Sea
of Rome sometime Christ's spotless Spous; Romans 1. 8.
whose Faith was famous over the World: but since becam an Harlot and Mother of
Harlots; causing other Cities or sig^iories to commit fornication. For though
she be guilty of other Heresies (as whores be of sundry Vices) yet this
spiritual whordom so much laid to old Isreal's charge, is the grand Apostasy
wherewith the great whore is marked.

This Vision is plainly showed to John by one of the Phialbearing Rev 17.
Angels, and the interpretation reveled (which is not Verse. 8.
usual) to be literaly taken as there dilivered. 1. The Woman sitting on the
Beast, is that great City then reigning over the Kings of the Earth. 2. The
scarlet Beast carrying the whore, is the same showed before in another shape;
viz. the Roman Verse. 10. 11.
Empire. 3. The Beast with seven Heads or Romes seven Hills, and seven forms of
Governors in that State: whereof fiv (Kings, Consuls, Tribuns, Decemvirs,
Dictators) were falen before John's time: one (of Caesar's) then extant, which
was to be changed into Christian Emperors of short continuance; seeming to be
the eighth, yet indeed the seventh; which is the Bearer of this whore not yet
sprung up, being not under the course of the last Head, the Popedom. If then the
sixth Beast (Pagan Emperors) reigning at Rome in John's age, ceased to be as it
was abov twelv hundred years ago: that which now swais there, is the seventh and
last Ruler, which he saw bear the whore. Verse 12. 13.
4. The Beasts ten horns are ten Kingdoms not then risen, into which the body
of the Roman Beast should be rent in this last course, by the wound of this
Caesarcan Beast: al which should jointly confer their authority on the Beast
that was to be cured Verse. 14. 16.
or restored under the Rule of that last Head now past. 5. Those ten Kingdoms
which shall grow together under the false Prophets Government, being their Head,
shall fight with the Lamb, but be overcom by him. That war was waged long ago,
and is still in action or agitation: the Victory being in some sort achieved,
but shall be accomplished much more gloriously. For some of the ten Horns or
Kings, shall at length hate the Whore whom they so long bore, and shall make her
desolar, naked, eat Verse. 4 5.
her flesh and burn her with fire, as the Angel interprets. 6. This Whore held
in her hand a golden Cup full of abomination and filthiness of his Fornication,
and on her forehead was a name writ, Mystery etc. This needs no explication,
being taken from the common custom of Stews-Strumpets, who drank philtres or
amorous potions to their Paramores in a Cup of gold: and the Cells or Chambers
had several whores names set on them, as Seneca, Martial Juvenal, and other
Authors inform; yea those of most note had their name set in their foreheads; as
Juvenal seems to intimat of the insatiat Empress Messalina, who assumed the
name of Lycisca an infamous Prostitut.

-- Nuda papillis
Constitit auratis, titulum mentita Lyciscae.
She stood with bare gilt Paps bestained,
And by Lycisca's name her self fained.
So this name (Mystery, Babylon the great, Mother of Harlots and Abominations
of the Earth) may fitly be applied either to the Whores person fastened on her
forehead; or to the place set on her Brothel house the City Rome where she
resides.

Concerning the seven Phials of Plagues poured out by seven Rev. 15. V. 2. 3.
Angels, preceding Antichrists ruin: where before any particular narration of
Angels or Phials be made, another Vision is exhibited together with them: how
the Church being cleansed from Idolatrous pollutions in the sacred Laver or Sea
of the Temple (not made of brass like Salomons, but of Glass or Crystal) sung a
triumphant hymn of Moses for her victory over the Exodus 15. 1.
Beast saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and
true are thy wais, O King of Saints. Then the clothing or preparation of the
Angels with the Phials, are described more particularly. The seven Angels came
out of the V. 6.
Temple clothed in pure whit linen. having their breasts girded with golden
girdles; viz. in their Priestly habits. 1. The pouring Ezekiel 44 17.
out of Phials signifies the Antichristian Beasts ruin: for as the Roman
Kingdoms first state was to be subverted by the plagues of Trumpets so this
last by Phials: which argues a great parity between both, since this last bears
the Image of the former Roman policy. 2. The seven Phials are so many degrees
of its ruin: for as the Beast gradualy grew up; so he is to be destroyed by
degrees. 3. On what ever any Phial is poured, that suffers some damage thereby;
since it is the effusion of Gods wrath. 4. The Earth, Sea, Rivers, Fountains,
Sun, Beasts Seat, Euphrates, Air, import something in the Antichristian Beast
semblable or suitable: for all Phials are poured on the Beast or somewhat of his,
which touches his safty or utility. 5. The Beasts whole Body or Antichristian
Univers is covertly compared (as it was in the Trumpets) to the worlds System:
whose principal parts are Heaven, Earth, Sea, Rivers, Lights. 6. Because God
uses Angels as Ministers of his Providence in governing the changes of Human
affairs; therefore such things as are to be acted by many, are attributed or
ascribed to an Angel as the guide and Ruler thereof. These be his previous
cautions touching the Phials, which follow in order.

The first Phial is poured on the Earth, and there fell a noisome Rev. 16. V. 2.
grievous sore on Men which had the Beasts mark, and those that worshipped the
Image. This is poured on the Beasts whole body the Earth: which denots the
People or common sort of Christians, as Antichrists Footstool: on which basis
the Papal Hierarchy being built, reaches, like Babels Tower, to the very
Skies. This Phial filled the Beasts Folowers with fury, like incurable Ulcers not
to be cicatrized. Which was fulfild by the Waldenses, Albigenses, Wicklifits,
Hussits, and other pious Professors; who renounced the Beast, caling Rome
apocalyptic Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist: which so inflamed his Sectaries
with sores of indignation, tyrannizing many years with Fire and Sword. Yet al
in vain: their Ulcers were cureless like Exodus 9. 8 9.
Egypts biles and botches sprinkled with dust and ashes; whereto they mysticaly
comply by way of Analogy.

The secund is poured on the Sea, which becam as blood of a V. 3.
dead Man, and every living Soul died in the Sea. This is the whole cru or
circuit of Papal Communion; containing al Nations, Kingdoms, Dioceses, conjoind
in spiritual society, though dis-joined severaly. This becam cold or congeled
as a dead Man's blood, when the Pontifical Sea is dismembered: which Luther and
other Reformers performed, when they drew off whole Lims of People, Provinces,
Princes, and Potentats from Papal communion.

The third is poured on Rivers and Fountains of Waters, which Verse. 4. 5. 6. 7.
becam blood: thou Lord art righteous, because thou have judged thus: for they
have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou give them blood to drink.
The Rivers and Fountains of the Beastian world, are the chief Champions of
Antichristian Jurisdicton: whether Ecclesiastics (Priests, Jesuits, Moncs,
Friars) or Secular Governors, who uphold the declining Papacy. For their
Emislaries were justly done to death in England, as they unjustly served the
Saints. Yea the Duch began to revenge that blood which Duke d' Alva and the
Spanish Inquisition cruely spilt to fulfill this Phial.

The fourth is poured on the Sun, and Men were scorched with Verse. 8 9.
great heat; who blasphemed Gods name, which has power over these plagues: but
repented not to giv him glory. To know what Sun signifies in the Antichristian
world, we must search what Heaven imports: which is either the Popes universal
Authority, or any eminent Monarchic power in the Beasts world. Now in it are
sundry Stars of several magnituds (Kings, Princes, Dukes, Prelates, Free States)
yet but one Sun, which seems to be the German Emperor (the King of Spain being
the Moon) who has bin of the Austrian Family two hundred years. This is the
Sun on whom the fourth Phial shall be poured to his conversion or confusion.

The fifth is poured on the Beasts Seat (Rome City) and his Verse. 10. 11.
Kingdom was dark, and they gnawed their toungs for pain; blaspheming the God
of Heaven because of their pains and sores: but repented not of their deeds.
Here the holy Ghost uses no Allegories, because great light shall then arise to
the Prophecies by this evident sign: whereby will appeer what Phials are past,
and what to com. This destruction of Rome seems to be intimated before; but the
name Pope shall not quit perish: only his Rev 11. V. 12. 13.
glory and greatness shall be clipped, that they shall bite their toungs through
teen, and curs God persevering still in the Kingdom of darkness to despise light.

The sixth shall be poured on Euphrates, and the water dried Verse. 12*
up, to prepare a way for the East Kings. These Kings seem to be the Jews which
shall be converted: whom happily the Beasts Folowers will misdeem to be Antichrists
Army, rising from Don as they dream; and so shall be hardened in their error. To
prove that the Jews are meant by East Kings, this reason is pregnant: because
this is the penultimat Phial, and unles they be then converted, they must needs
perish with Christ's Enemies (among whom they yet abide) at the day of universal
Judgment, which the seventh or last Phial shall bring on them: Isai^h says, The
Lord shall destroy the tongue of the Egyptic Sea, and with a Isai 11. 15. 16.
mighty Wind shall shake his hand over the River, and smite it in the seven
streams, and make Men go over dry shod. There shall be an high way for his People
left from Assyria, as it was to Israel, at their Exodus out of Egypt: but this
Prophecy seems not so pregnant for Euphrates and Assyria, as for Nilus and
Egypt. Now by Euphrates the Turcish Empire is mysticaly meant, which borders
Eastly on it; who shall be these new Converts chief obstacle, and the Beasts best
bulwork: but this Euphratean deluge shall be dried up or destroyed: yet whether
by the Jews, or other Aliens, or their own intestin discords, is not reveled.

Verse. 17.
The seventh or last is poured into the Air, and there came a great voice out of
the Temple of Heaven from theThrone saying: It is done. Hereby is meant the
power or Prince of the Air, even Satan: who fosters not only the Beasts
dominions, but al Christ's Enemies in what Coast, Climat, or Country soever: for
as the Beast had his Spirit or Life from him at first; so the last Fortunes of
al his Folowers and Worshipers shall depend chiefly on his charge or conduct: as
appeers by the preparations of so many Aids and Allies for war, to be procured
in this last Phial by his Diabolical devises. Who bestirs by all means possible,
both of his Lieftenents (the Beast and falls Prophet) and by his own Artificies;
to raise this universal Army in the last danger of his Kingdom.

Verse. 13. 14.
For there came three unclean Spirits (Devils working miracles) like Frogs, out
of the Dragons, Beasts, and falls Prophets mouth; which go forth (as Emissaries
with Summons) to the Kings of the whole n orld to gather them to the battle of
the great day of God Almighty. So the Prince of the Air musters al his Forces
and Fautors to assist those two at this last exigent: on whom being pent up in a
Coop at Armageddon, This last Phial shall thunder; not with arm of Flesh, as
formerly; but an Heavenly voice of revenge: whereby the Beasts total downfall
shall be consummat: not only within Babylons walls, as before under the seventh
Trumpet; but of the whole City wherever scattered or dispersed: Yes, of al
Kings, Cities, or Stats which committed filthiness of fornication with her Idol
falls Gods: together with other foreign Tyrans joining in opposition against
Christ's holy Spous or Church.

V. 19 20. 21.
The Cities of the Nations fell, and God gav Babylon the Cup of Wine of his
fierce wrath. Every Island fled, and the Ma^ntains were not found: a great Hail
from Heaven (every stone a Talent weight) fell on Men, who blasphemed God because
of the Hail; for the plague was exceeding great. Mr. Mede proceds no farther to
the excution of these threats on the great Whore, sitting on the seven-headed
Beast with ten horns: who with the false Prophet, are to be cast into a burning
Lake for ever, as it is expressed in the 17. 18. and 19. Chapters: but treats
tenderly with much modesty of Christ's 1000. years reign on Earth with his
Martyrs and some chief Saints, at his secund coming to Judgment: which last day
he makes one continued act with the triumphant millenium of his reign, to
decline a third coming of Christ, as common Chiliasts assign without warrant.
But this sublime speculation shall be suspended or superseded to the next Thesis
peculiarly addicted or appropriated to this Subject. This 1000. years reign
after the Martyrs resurrection (but before the day of Judgment) is specicified
in the twentieth Chapter of Apocalypse whereon the Millenars build their Doctrine;
beside some other obscure places in the Prophets: which shall be fairly yet
briefly debated or discussed in the Theory immediately ensuing.

Commentarii Compendium: A Compend of the Comment.
THe Comment contains two Prophecies: 1. The sealed 1 Part.
Book: 2. The little Book open. In the Seal- Prophecy is described the celical
Imperial Session suitable to Isreal's incamping

The twenty four Elders signify Bishops resembling the Rev. 4. 4. etc.
Priests and Levits in their twenty four courses.

The four Beasts are Isreal's Ensigns: 1. Like a Lion: 2. A Rev 6 per totum.
Bullock: 3. With a Man's face: 4. A flying Eagle. They were full of Eyes to show
sagacity, and each had six wings implying agility. The first Seals opener, a
Lion, showed a whit Horse and his Rider armed: viz. Christ (the Lion of Juda)
from the East; who laid the foundation of conquest over the Dragon, when
Oracles ceased. The next a Bullock, presented a red Horse and his Rider;
denoting Trajan a Spaniard from the West; whose reign was Bloody. The third with
a Man's face, exhibited a black Horse and his Rider, importing Septim: Severus an
African from the South; who held Balances in his hand, indicating justice in
the Empire. The fourth an Eagle showed a pale Horse with his Rider; which points
out Maximinus a Thracian from the North: in whose time and some Successors, the
Sword, Famine, and Pestilence (messengers of death) raged every where.

The fifth (no Horse nor Rider) enters with A. C. 268.
Aurelian til Rev. 7 4 to 10
Dioclesian; presenting the primitiv persecutions. The sixth declares a strange
shaking of Heaven and Earth, signifying the change or conversion of Heathen
Rome by Constantin. But before the seventh, care is had for the Church, to seal
a company of one hundred forty four thousand viz. of every Tribe twelv
thousand. In which type is an unusual reckoning; yet such as best resembles the
profession of true Religion, miraculously preserved in midst of the old and new
Idolatry. The twelv Apostles aptly answer Isreal's type: the number twelv being
the Ensign of Apostolic race, which by multiplying sets forth their progeny.
Hereto is added by representation of innumerous Palmbearers, a most ample state
of every Nation, People, Tribe, Tongue which praised God.

The seventh seal contains seven Angels with seven Trumpets Rev. (...) 7. to 12.
sounding alarm to the Empires ruin by sevenfold plagues; the four first of
less extent. The first wastes the Empires terraetenures by terrible* incursions
of north Nations like hail mixd with blood and fire: who destroyed a third part
of al green things (the Empire swaying a third part of the known World) which
began at Theodosius death by Alaric, Rhadagaso, and others. A C 395. A 410. A
455. A 476. A ^42.
The next assails the very Empire, expressed by the Sea, when Al^^ic sacked
Rome. After which it daily declined, til Gensericus took it, and then began the
ten Kingdoms. The third casts down the Western Caesar (omniously named
Augustulus) who being a baleful bitter Prince, is resembled to a Star caled
Wormwood. The fourth bereavs the light and luster of Roman Majesty with a third
part of Sun, Moon, and Stars (which shone bright before under Ostrogoth Kings)
when Romes Consulship with all Pomp of other Officers c^ased.

Then follow three Woe Trumpets: the fifth being the first of Rev. 9 per totum.
Woe, sends hostil bands of Arabians (Sarrasens likened to Locusts) who not only
spoiled the soil from A. 830. to 980. (150. years or 5. annal Months) but
poisoned Men's Souls with Mahometism like the venom of Scropions, having a King
called in Hebrew Abaddon, in Greec Apollyon destroier. The sixth or secund Woe
Trumpet, loses four Angels before bound at the River Euphrates, being the
Turcs four Sultanies, as they were long so divided, til Ottoman united them
into his Monarchy. This is to be accomplished in a Prophetic Day, Month, and
Year ( viz. 396. years) from A. 1051. when Tangrolipix took Bagdet, til Mahomet
2. surprised Constantinople, slaying a third part of Men A. 1453.

Their number of Horses is computed two hundred thousand Rev. 10 (...) to 11.
thousand: their Ordnance, Powder, and Munition explicated by smoke, fire, and
brimstone then invented. The seventh or third Woe Trumpet is suspended til the
little Books Prophecy which contains the Churches destiny, and John bid to eat
it; which was sweet in mouth, but bitter in belly: who is commanded to prophecy
again before many People, Nations, Toungs, and Kings. This comprehends the
consummation of Gods mystery: the event whereof is declared by a mighty Angels
Oath, at whose loud cry seven Thunders uttred their Voices; which John is forbid
to write, and bid to seal up.

The measured Court displais the primitiv Churches state conformed Rev. 11. 2.
to 13.
to Gods Word contrary whereto is the Court not to be measured, being not his
operature; but to be profaned by renewed Idolatry or Antichristian Apostasy,
which shall reign forty two Annal months. During this space, two Witnesses clad
in sackcloth testify Gods truth, and exhort to repent 1260. dais (or years)
equivalent to forty two months of profanation. These denounce Gods Judgments,
which begin at pouring out the Phials, and debarring the Idolaters from hope of
eternal life. Their fate is after finishing their testimony, to suffer
semblably with Christ, as the Roman sevenhead Beast shall inflict on them. These
must die mysticaly, lying unburied three dais and half: but then shall be
restored to pristin place or eminenter estate and dignity. Upon a Commotion or
change of Politic affairs, the City Rome (being but a tenth part of what it
was) shall be overthrown at fifth Phial, and seven thousand Men of mark and name
(the Clergies or Companies of Men) slain. This is the end of the sixth Trumpet
when Kings of the East (the Jews) shall erect a new Kingdom, and the two hornd
Beast (the Papal Clergy) with Antichrist the false Prophet (the Pope) driven
from Rome, before the great battle.

The Vision of the open Book, goes through the whole course 2 Part.
of Revelation; to show its connection with Seals and Trumpets: Rev. 12. per
(...).
after which insu many great mysteries. The Roman Empire worshipping the Dragon
or Devil, persecuts Gods Church (represented by a Woman in travel of mystical
Christ) 300. years: but when Constantin cast him from the Throne, he and his
Successors enjoied it: which chance or change contemporizeth with the sixth
Seal. The Woman being delivered of a Son, dwells in the Desert forty two months:
or a time, times, and half; or one thousand two hundred sixty dais: typifying
the Churches middle condition; as being freed from Pagan persecution, yet still
tossed with a flood of errors and Heresies cast from the Dragons mouth.

A new tragedy of troubles pursues her, who lighted on two Rev. 13* per (...)
Beasts at entering the Deserts porch: one tenhornd rising from the Sea, viz.
the secular Empire shared into ten Kingdoms: another two hornd coming out of
the Earth, which is the Ecclesiastic State or Pope and his Clergy. Both reign
with near alliance together, under the seventh Head of the old Beast,
exercising the Dragons cruelty, and under color of abolishing Idols, introduce
Iconolatry, or new devised disguised Idolatry; termed Blasphemy against God,
his Name (when ought is divinely worshipped beside him) his Tabernacle ( viz.
Christ's Humanity wherein the Deity dwells) by transubstantiation; and them that
dwell in Heaven (Angels and Saints) whom they John 2. 19.
adore in derogation of Christ's sole Mediatorship of Intercession.

The company of one hundred forty four thousand Virgins R^^. ^4 per (...).
following the Lamb (forecited at the seventh Seal to connect the two
Prophecies) signify the Church in midst of Papacy, persisting faithful to the
Lamb and his Father; who are the Apostles genuin progeny multipled by twelv.
Then follow three Angels sharply warning all the Beasts worshipers to withdraw
from those Idolaters, lest they perish eternaly. The first monisheth to worship
God soly and sincerely, which the Greec Emperors ( Leo Isauricus and others)
fulfilled, when they suppressed adoration of Saints, Images, and Relics. The
next threatens mystical Babylon for spiritual fornication, with inevitable
destruction: which the Albigenses and Waldenses Ministers of this Cry performed
by Word, Deed, and Death; boldly proclaiming Rome to be Apocalyptic Babylon,
and Pope the false Prophet. The third denounces horrid hidious torments easless
and endless to all the Beasts train that shall abide in his obedience. After this
folows the Churches vindication against his Enemies, under the types of Harvest
(which intimats the Brides preparation by the Jews conversion, and Turcish
Empires confusion) and also Vintage, which is the Beasts dominion; the Grapes
being his folowers: but the Wine Press Armageddon, the Shambles or Slaughter
place specified in the seventh Phial. Where the Grapes being gathered together
by the Angel Vintager, with the Saints help; shall be trod by the Lord Jesus at
his coming: but both are obtained by prayer of the Church Universal.

Next seven Angels having seven gold Ph^als full of Gods Rev. 15. per* tot^m.
wrath (at whose pouring out the pure Church sung a triumphant Hymn of Moses and
the Lamb) signify the Antichristian Beasts ruin, with the sevenfold plagues or
degrees thereof; for whatever any Phial is poured on, suffered prejudice thereby.

The first is poured on the Earth or common sort of Christians, Rev. 16. per
tot^m.
fulfilled by the Waldenses, Albigenses, Wiklifits, Hussits, and others. The
next on the Sea or Popes jurisdiction accomplished by Luther and other
reformers. The third on Rivers or Ministers and Maintainers of Antichristian
Doctrins; happily Priests and Jesuits by Laws executed in England or elswher. The
fourth on the Sun or German Empire still in executing. The fifth on the Beasts
Throne ( Rome) which shall be shortly effected. The sixth on Euphrates to
prepare a way for the East Kings or Jews conversion, by removing the Ottoman
Empire, a main obstacle. The seventh into the Air or Satan Prince thereof: which
infolds al Christ's Enemies to be levied under his conduct, and shut up in
Armageddon for the great battle.

After that mystical Babylon the great Whore, is described to Rev. 17. per
totum.
John: resembled to a Woman in rich attire, sitting on a scarlet Beast (the
Empire) having seven heads (seven Hills or seven sorts of successiv Rulers) and
ten horns or Kingdoms, as the Empire is divided: which may seem another Ruler,
but is the same; being that great City, reigning over the Kings of the Earth.
The gold Cup in her hand, alluds to Whores Stews where such pranks are played.

Afterward another Angel shows Babylons fall, with great Rev. 18.
lamentation made by Monarchs, Merchants, Mariners and mighty Men: who bid Gods
people com out of her; lest partaking of her sins, they receiv of her plagues.

Then the Saints prais God for his judgments on the great Rev 19.
Whore, and avenging their blood: after which folows the Lambs marriage with his
Wife; and the Fowls are caled by another Angel to the supper of the great
slaughter; when the Beast and falls Prophet were taken, and cast a life into a
Lake of fire burning with brimstone.

The seventh Trumpet with the thousand years pertaining Rev. 20.
(granted to new Jerusalem Christ's Spous on this Earth) signifying the day of
Jndgment, is circumscribed with two real resurrections; 1. As the morning
beginning with the Judgment of Antichrist and falls Prophet, the chaining of
Satan the Devil, and casting him into the bottomless pit for a thousand years,
after which he shall be loosed a short space. 2. As the Evening, ending with the
general Resurrection and Judgment: when the wicked shall be cast into Hell to be
tormented for ever; and the Sai^^s translated into Heaven, to reign with Christ
their King for evermore.

Mr. More (who translated the whole work into English) made this compend of the
Comment (not the Key of Synchronicisms) which is here much alter^d, abridged,
and accommodated to vulgar capacities, being made most pervious and
perspicuous; differing mainly from the Translators pattern, and more conform to
the Authors prototype.

Monitio pro Catholicis: A warning for Catholics.
HEnce results a caution or Conclusion to al Roman Catholics, worth serious
observation; which concerns nearly their eternal bliss or bale, joy or pain: 1.
That Rome is mystical Babylon or great whore, with whom the Kings and Earths
Inhabiters commit spiritual fornication; and from whom we are bid to depart,
lest we partake of her plagues: al so plainly proved or pourtraied, as cannot
be comptroled or contradicted. 2. That Iconolatry flatly forbid by the very
letter of the secund Commandment (which is therefore expunged, and the last
bipartited, being otherwise before) is Analogical Idolatry or Devil-worship;
though not the self same with Heathen, but disguised under new names or notions
of Angels and Saints: which are made Mediators of Intercession; yet those
blessed Spirits hear not their Orisons, and hate such honors as derogatory to
our Kingly Redeemer, who is sole Intercessor between God and Man. 3. That the
whole Papacy or body of Religion under the Pope as Head, is the Beast with two
horns like a Lamb (whose Vicar he pretends to be) but speaks as a Dragon in the
Doctrins of new devised Idolatry and Men's Traditions. 4. That the Pope is the false Prophet and seven headed Beasts Image (which he caused to be caled the
holy Roman Empire) whose Seat, Power, and Authority he assumes. 5. That Roman
Catholic (which is contradictio in Adjecto, since no particular Church can be
caled Catholic or Universal) is the Beasts name, and Oath of Supremacy (whereby
Men are reconciled to the Pope or Church of Rome) his mark, without which none
may buy or sell spiritual wares: both being badges belonging to the Popish
Profession. 6. That (...) (Latin o^ Roman) in numeral Greec Letters makes 666,
the number of the Beasts name (which the holy Ghost bids Men to observe nearly)
and precisely points out who he is. 7. That the Papal State is the Rev. 17. 5. 6
Woman richly clad (on whose forehead was writ a mystery, Great Babylon drunken
with the blood of Saints) sitting on a scarlet Beast with seven Heads and ten
Horns: which can be no other then the Roman Empire, and those States over which
the Papacy bears sole sway. 8. That the real destruction of mystical Babylon
and consummation of the Beasts whole Kingdom, with all their Accomplices or
Confederats; is the Harvest ripe to be reaped, into which the Son of Man shall
speedily thrust his sickle to cut it down: And the Vintage or Wine Press also
of Gods wrath ready to be poured on them. 9. That the whole Papacy with
Antichrist, Head of that Society, is the Beast and falls Prophet, which shall be
tormented in a Lake of Fire and Brimstone for ever, whereto to the Devil is to
be cast. 10. The Papal Emissaries (Priests, Jesuits, Friars, and other
Shavlins) are the three unclean Spirits of Devils like Frogs, coming forth from
the mouth of the Dragon, Beast, and falls Prophet to work miracles: who are sent
to the Kings of the whole World, to gather them unto battle of that great day of
God Almighty in Armageddon.

Al which premises are largely and lucidly proved in the previous Comment if
impartialy perused, and imprejudicatly pondered. Else ask your Ghostly Fathers,
on whom ye rely for the food of life (lest they giv poison for milk) what other
Babylon or great whore is meant but Rome? or which is the great City that made
al Nations drink the wine of her Spiritual Fornication? What Beast with seven
Heads and ten Horns on whom the Whore rides, beside the Roman Empire? Who is
the two hornd Beast like a Lamb, which spoke as a Dragon; and who the false
Prophet or Antichrist but the Pope? What Image of the seven hornd Beast is there
except the two hornd; or who revived that Image sav Pope Leo 3? What other name
or mark of the Beasts Folowers so apt as Roman Catholic and Oath of Papal
Supremacy? What fitter number of the name (666) then (...)? Whether Iconolatry
be not larved Idolatry or Diabolatry; and whether be any warrant for it in all
Gods Word? What woman else richly attired, sitting on a scarlet Beast with seven
heads and ten horns can be typified, if not Rome; or on whose forhead is writ
Mystery, sav in the Popes triple Diadem; or to whom do the words (great
Babylon, Mother of Harlots, drunken with the blood of Saints) any way consort
or correspond, but only to the Papal power, which has shed the innocent blood
of many millions merely for matters of Conscience and Religion?

O then lay these things deeply to heart, as ye tender your saying health. Com
out of Babylon betimes while it is caled to day; lest siding with her in the
same sins, ye partake of her everlasting plagues and punishments. What plainer
description can St. John giv of the woman in glorious garments? Here is Rev.
17. 9 12, 13. 18.
the Mind which has Wisdom: the seven Heads are seven Mountains on which the
Woman sits, and ten horns ten Kings, who receiv power one hour with the Beast:
these have one mind, and shall giv their strength to the Beast: The Woman is that
great City, which reigns over the Kings of the Earth. If then ye will be wise to
salvation, search the Scriptures seriously and sincerely (which are therefore
interdicted to Laics, lest they should see) what the Woman is which sits on
seven Mountains and many waters, importing multituds of People under her power?
or what the mighty City Babylon mentioned Rev. 18? al Read Rev. 18. incessantly.
which chapter is worth perpetual perusal. Her Merchandise there specified is
Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Pearls, fine Linen, Purple, Silk, Scarlet,
Thyin Wood, al sorts of Ivory Vessels, of precious Wood, Brass, Iron, and
Marble: Cinnamon, Odors, Ointments, Frankincens; Wine, Oil, fine Flour, Wheat:
Beasts, Sheep, Horses, Charets, Slavs, and Souls of Men. In her was found the
blood of Prophets, Saints, and all that were slain on Earth.

Now ruminat hereon: what City else makes Merchandise of Men's Souls, or is drunk
with Saints blood? It Is too too evident to every ey. Therefore listen what the
Angel says aloud: If any Rev. 14 9 10, 11.
worship the Beast and his Image, or receiv his mark in forhead or hand: he
must drink the Wine of Gods wrath, poured out without mixture into the Cup of
his indignation, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in presence of
the holy Angels and the Lamb: and the smoke of their torments ascends up for
ever and ever. They have no rest day or night, who worship the Beast and his
Image, or receiv the mark of his name: That is, be reconciled by the Oath of
Papal Supremacy. The holy Ghost in all these Prophetic predictions, does not
pourtrai Chymaeras or Mathematical fictions, but real places and persons, which
can no where be found in Vtopia or all the World over, sav only in that great
City, which has for so many ages reigned as Empress over Nations, both in her
temporal capacity and spiritual. This Rev. 18. 4.
then is a fair forewarning to the Beasts Folowers, or Roman Catholics, how
dreadful dangers hang over their heads, unles they speedily shun his society;
as al Gods People by voice from Heaven are bid to do. O then renounce her
communion for fear of this direful commination, since it so much behovs your
eternal bliss: God of his goodness grant, that we may at last be brought into
one fold or unity of Faith under one Shepherd of our Souls, the sole Mediator
al sufficient between God and Man. Which effect, if it shall pleas God to produce
in all or any that shall read these lines, the labor is happily employed.

For a surplusage, hear Mr. Medes deep dis^urs touching the Supplement.
origin of Idolatry, or Doctrine of Devils. Belus, Bell; or Baal, son to Nimrod,
was the first mortal Man made a God, or Deified by his son Ninus: from which
first Bell or Baal al other Demons were denomined Baalims; as the Romans styled
their Emperors Caesar's from Julius; the Egyptians their last Kings P^olomes
from Lagus; and other Nations theirs in like sort. Plutarch tells, that Men's
Souls after death took diverse degrees; becoming first Heroes as Probationers to
a Demonship, and after Demons, or a sublimer dignity as they deserved: but
Heroes and Demons diffred only in antiquity, the elder Heroes being caled
Demons, and contrarily. Soul-Demons or Mortals Deified after death, are like
Saints whom Papists adore, and their Images as Heathen Idols: but the other
Numens (Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Moon) parallel to Angels. The Gentiles plead or
pretend they worship not stocks and stones, the works of their own hands, but
the Heroes or Souls in them; as the Israelits adored God in the golden Calf. So
Papists assume the same Apology for Iconolatry: that they worship not the
Image, but thing represented.

Nam Deus est quod Imago docet, sed non Deus ipsa:
Hanc videas, sed mente colas quod cernis in illa.
It Is God which the Image shows, but that no Deity:
Look on that, but adore this not seen by ey.
This is a poor palliativ plaster, but both are Idolatry of the same bran. For
Heathen Demons were a middle sort of divine Powers, betwixt their Sovereign
immortal Gods, and subordinat Men Deified after death; whose office was to be
interceding Agents between those Celical Gods and Terrestrial Men: in lieu whereof
People erected Statues, Images, Temples, and Pillars to them; yea, adored their
Relics and Sepulchers. Semblably Papists Semi-Idolaters Deify Angels and
Saints, adore their Images, erect Churches to their names, worship a breaden
God for Christ, and set up Crosses like Demon-Columns. Hereof St. Paul
forewarns: The Spirit speaks expressly, 1 Timothy 4 1. 2 3.
that in later times some shall fall from the Faith, attending to seducing
Spirits, and Doctrins of Devils or Demoniac dogmats: But the chief is that
grand general Apostasy into Analogical larved Idolatry, styled in the Apocalypse
spiritual Fornication, and Rome mystical Babylon: because Idolatry was first
founded at old Babylon built by Nimrod (where his son Belus and Grandson Ninus
with their Successors resided) but since revived in a new form at Rome. These
Demons or Deastri (says the Apostle) through lying hypocrisy, have seared
Consciences, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats. These
indeed are parts of their demoniac Doctrins; but the principal is Idolatry
disguised under the conterfet color of Iconolatry.

Ob. The sole exception to this exposition is, That Demon or Devil in Scripture
sens, is still taken for an evil Spirit or foul Fiend; never for a good Angel or
Saint, though Profane Authors use both promiscuously: Ergo to invoke those
glorified Spirits as Intercessors on our behalfs; or adore their Images, or
consecrate Churches to their honor; deserves not to be branded as Doctrine of
Devils: specialy since holy Men yet living are so honored, and their prayers
desired, which was ever commended, but never condemned in any Church.

Sol. It Is true, the Scripture still takes Demons or Devils in the wors sens,
because Gentiles deemed their worthies Deified Souls for Demons, which were
wicked Spirits seducing Mankind; using the word for what they are in truth:
since no good Angel or blessed Soul will freely admit or assume such divine honor
derogatory to their Creator, nor accept Men's Invocations. So the worship of
Angels or Saints, and their Relics, Pillars, or Images may properly be caled
Doctrine of Devils; since it is spiritual whordom and renewed Idolatry: whereby
they make like evil Demons or Devils; what fained fashions or conterfet colors
to delude people soever they set, to varnish this superstition. This is his
mellifluous morsel to chaw the cud on, which who shall piously digest, it will
turn to feed his Soul, by abandoning this disguised abomination.

Germani Doctoris aucta: A German Doctors supply.
A Late Silesian Divine Anonymal, set forth a Book caled Clavis Apocalyptica,
with a confused Comment annexed: who is Mr. Medes Ape, if not a Plag^ary (as
many of his Countrymen be) from whom he borows the Title, Method, and most
speculations (citing him twice or thrice) both in the Synchronicisms and
Explications: but varies in some circumstances applied to his Country, and
comfort of his exiled Brethren; assuring their Redemption to draw nigh, even at
end of A. C. 1655, which is his single or singular crotchet, as will appeer in
the book briesly contracted.

God in his faithful Fatherly providence, to comfort the Preamble.
godly and warn the wicked, prefixed certain times in the old Testament, how
long he would forbear to punish. For before the Flood he set one hundred twenty
years to repent, and then destroyed al impenitent sinners with a Deluge of
waters. After it, he declared to Abram, That his Seed should be a stranger in a
Land, and serve them in affliction four hundred years, but that Nation he would
judge, and they should go out with great substance: which promiss at period of
time he truly performed, drowning Pharaoh with all his Host. Indeed ^e destroyed
Sodom and Gomorrah without prefining time because their si^s were so
transcendent, and they obduratly impenitent: but prescribed forty dais to
Niniv^s destruction, which was averted by mature repentance. He assigned
seventy years to Babylons captivity: which being accomplished, he stirred up
Cyrus spirit to releas the People. In Daniel seventy annal weeks (four hundred
ninty years) were determined on the Jews, in which time Messiah should be cut
off, and Jerusalem desolated, which were effected in their times. Even so there
be set seasons appointed to Gods Church in the new Testament, how long she shall
be persecuted, and when delivered: which is expressed in these places of
Scripture. 1. The Saints shall be given into the fourth Beasts hand for a time,
times, and dividing of a time. 2. An Angel asks, how long it shall be to the end
of these wonders? another answers for a time, times and half: So John says, The
Woman (Gods Church) shall be in the Desert a time, times, and half. 3. The two
witnesses shall be clad in sack^loth one thousand two hundred threescore dais.
4. The Gentiles shall tread the holy City under foot forty two months. 5. The
Beasts blasphemies shall continu forty two months: which three sorts of numbers
(a time, times, and half, one thousand two hundred threescore dais, forty two
months) are one, and explain each other: taking thirty dais to a month, and
expounding dais by years; both which the Prophets and Saint John used to do.
6. These three times begin and end together. 7. Daniels one thousand two hundred
ninty dais of the Sacrifices surreption and setting up abomination, begin
thirty years sooner then the one thousand two hundred threescore; but end both
at once A. 1655. now next ensuing: For three years and half make forty two
months, and one thousand two hundred threescore dais, after twelv months (each
of thirty dais) and three hundred sixty dais in a year. So al exactly comply or
correspond.

The Hebrew year contains twelv months, in each thirty dais, in all three hundred
sixty: but our Julian fiv mo with six hours. One day Propheticaly implies a
year: as Daniels hebdomad is D^^. 9. 24.
seven years, and his Vision or Vati^iny of seventy weeks seven times seventy,
or four hundred ninty years. On these two grounds the whole fabric of future
Chronical computs consists. Dan. 7. 35.
It Is said, the Saints shall be given into the fourth Beasts hand t^l a time,
times, and dividing of time: i. one year, two, Dan. 12. 7.
and half: so an Angel swears by him that livs for ever, it shall be for a time,
times, and half a time. Semblably John says, The Rev. 12. 14.
Woman (Gods Church) shall be nourished in the Wilderness (of Persecution) from
the Serpent for a time, times, and half: which is fore-expressed ( verse. 5.) by
one thousand two hundred Rev. 11. 2. 3.
threescore dais: as the two witnesses shall be clad in sackcloth so long: but
it is said the Gentiles shall tread the holy City Rev. 13. 5.
under foot forty two months; and the Beasts blasphemies shall continu the same
space. Al which sorts of sums are one, and suit each other. For the fourth
Beasts three times and half in Daniel make forty two months, or one thousand
two hundred threescore dais, according to twelv months and three hundred sixty
dais in a year. So the Woman's hiding for a time, times, and half, or forty two
months, or one thousand two hundred threescore dais uniformly or sinchronicaly
signify one thousand two hundred sixty years. Some suppose natural dais (not
annal) are meant, which make three years and half or forty two Hebrew months,
or one thousand two hundred threescore dais simply: which cannot be, since the
holy City has bin calcitrated, the Witnesses prophesied, the Woman nourished,
and the ten hornd Beast blasphemed long ago: nor is it possible to accomplish
al things there spoken in so short a space. It Is written, your Children shall
wander in the wilderness forty Number. 4. 33.
years, after the number of forty d^is, in which ye searched the Ezekiel. 4 6.
Land, each day for a year. Again, thou shall bear their iniquity forty dais: I
have appointed each day for a year. John Napier, and most Expositors jointly
agree, that Prophetic dais are meant, which imply years. So three times and
half, forty two months, and one thousand two hundred sixty dais being univocal
or consignificant, begin and end together: as the Beasts three times and half
commence with the Woman's. For when the red Dragon was cast to Earth by
suppressing Heathen Idolatry; he persecuted the Woman by the ten hornd Beast,
to whom he gav his Power, Seat, and great Authority: but she fled and was fed
in the wilderness one thousand two hundred Rev. 13 2.
threescore dais. The Beasts time and two Witnesses expires with the sixth
trumpet: Ergo they began together.

So the Gentiles trampling on the holy City and two Witnesses time initiats at
once: but since the Angel in Daniel speaks Dan. 12 7 11.
of three times and half, and after of one thousand two hundred ninty dais,
which are thirty mo then one thousand two hundred sixty precited: many make
doubt, whether both signify the same? Most Authors assert them for one, but the
Text infers it not, and futures were only obscurely reveled to Daniel. For
three times and half concur with one thousand two hundred threescore dais,
which is the duration of the Beasts dominion: but one thousand two hundred
ninty is the terminus a quo of another Chronical computation to commence thirty
years before it, and expire both together: So the two sums speak darkly of
several subjects. The words are these, indoctos doc^o: From the time that the
daily Sacrifice shall ceas, and abomination of desolation set up, there shall be
one thousand two hundred ninety ^ais. Now listen how he assoils it: this time
begins under Julian Apostat A. C. 363. (or as some Chronologers comput A. 365)
when the greatest devastation of Jerusalems Temple happened (to fulfill Christ's
prediction, that not a stone should be left on Mat. 24 2.
a stone) as Cyril, then Patriarch of Palestin, acknowledged. For tho the daily
Sacrifice or Jewish Service ceased when Titus sacked Jerusalem, yet was it not
quit abolished: since the Jews under Constantin celebrated the Passover there,
having hope to rebuild the Temple, which Julian, to despit Christians,
encouraged them to do, furn^shing them with meat, money, and materials: At
which time God sent such th^nder, lightning, bals of fire, and Earthquakes; as
disgorged the foundations, kill^d diverse workmen, and deterred al to persist:
which was the abominable desolation foretold by Christ from Daniel. So the one
thousand two hundred three score annal dais, must inch^at thirty years later (
A. 395. at Theodosius death) but terminat together A. 16^5. (next year) as shall
be showed.

Here we must consider, whether the Characters set on the 1 Character.
said sums may concur or cohere? which are three: 1. The Roman Empires bip^rtit
division in these words; To the Woman R^^. (...). (...)
were given two wings of a great Eagle* to fly into her place in the Wilderness.
The two wings are the Empires two parts, as Theodosius shared it between his two
Sons An. 395. to which Era al three characters coincide: but then the
Barbarians broke in, treading the holy City under foot, and the Woman fl^d into
the Desert.

2. The holy City is given the Gentiles to tread on forty 2 Character.
two months. At Constantins conversion, the Woman's new born Child was set on
Gods Throne, and the Dragons worship got a great b^ow; but Theodosius cast him
to ground: yet at his death, the holy Cities cal^itration commenced under his
two young Sons; when Goths, Huns, Alans, and others under conduct of Alaric,
swarmed in on al sides, first of the East Empire, and after of the West; who
took Rome, An. 410, destroying Churches, and persecuting Christians in all
places.

3. A Beast rose out of the Sea, having seven heads and ten 3 Character. Rev.
13. 2.
horns, and on his horns ten Crowns. Old Heathen Rome is resembled to a red
Dragon, with seven heads Hills, and ten horns Provinces: and upon his heads in
Rome City seven Crowns, or seven sorts of suprem Rulers forenamed: but the
Christian Empire has ten Crowns on ten horns, (not seven on seven heads) being
the ten Kingdoms into which it was parted. Now the beginning of this Beast was
when it first rose out of the Sea, under Alaric. An. 395. but the ten horns
were not full grown til threescore years after An. 455. when ten Kings or
thereabout reigned distinctly. So al three characters (1. the spreading of the
Eagles two wings, when the Woman fled. 2. The ten hornd Beasts rising out of
the Sea at Ala^i^s entry. 3. The Gentiles treading the holy City) comply or
contemporize at once An. 395. but Daniels abomination (which is to continu one
thousand two hundred ninety dais, being not the same with the Woman's flight)
befell under Julian thirty years sooner An. 365. yet shall determine both together
An. 1655. as aforesaid. For all Writers date the downfall, distraction, and
destruction of the fourth Monarchy at Theodosius death, the last single entire
Emperor: after which it declined, decayed, or decreased daily.

This is very obvious or p^rspicuous; but he makes the six 6000. years of the
Worlds continuance to end at the same time A. 1655. by his wrested calculation,
wherein Chronologers infinitely vary: which argues partiality of a Man wedded to
his own opinion. Yet the comparison of 1656. years from Man's creation to the
Floods initiation, corresponds somewhat semblably to our next year 1655.
consummar, or 1656. inchoat (that the first destruction by Water, may
symphonize or synchronize with the last by Fire) if any faith may be given to
such Chronical conjectures. Howbeit we may make this use of it, as Christ bids
us, Watch, Pray, and lift up your Heads; 1 These. 5. 2* 3.
for your redemption is at hand: but such as live securely (as assured of their
salvation) speaking peace and safety to their Souls; Sudden destruction shall
com upon them, as travel on a Woman With Child, and they shall not escape. The
day of the Lord shall com as a Thief in the night: therefore watch and pray, for
great things and terrible revolutions are at door to befall at end of A. 1655.
wherein this Author is most confident, who proceds thus. It rests to be showed:
1. What hitherto has bin fulfilled: 2. What at present is effected: 3. What
shortly is to be expected, which is chiefly contained in the 11. and 16.
Chapters. The Revelation describes the State of Christ's Church in the new
Testament and what shall betide the fourth Monarchy under which it subsists.
This description includs three Periods of time.

1. The Dragons Ethnic Kingdom, when seven Crowns 1 Period.
stood on his seven Heads, being publicly adored, and Christians persecuted by
Pagan Emperors: to which reign Constantin Rev. 12. 3. Rev. 13. 1. 2.
put a Period A. 312. and the Church triumphed til Theodosius died A. 395. At
which time the Devil left his shape of a Dragon resigning his Host* Seat, and
great Authority to the Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns, which rose from
the Sea.

2. Antichrists Vicarian Lieftenentship under the Dragon 2 Period. Rev. 12. 15
16.
from A. 395. til A. 1655. now near. During which space, the Pope or falls
Prophet blasphemed Gods name, and persecuted his Saints for one thousand two
hundred sixty years: but when the Dragon was cast to ground, he cast water out
of his mouth as a Flood to carry away the Woman: that is, he stirred the North
Nations to invade the Empire and infest the Church: but the Earth swalowed the
Flood, for they embraced Christanity, and erected sundry Kingdoms. The Dragon
seeing Idolatry could not be publicly erected, resigned to the Bea^t risen from
the Sea (on which, the great Whore or Antichrist the Dragons Deputy* Vicar
crept up in those wars, rode) his seat, power, and authority: viz. his host of
Devils or Idols, wherein Ethnics worshipped him; which his Antichristian Vicar
still continues under the name of Saints. Hereof St. John speaks, Rev. 13. 3, 4.
all the World wondered at the Beast, but worshipped the Dragon which gav him
power, and the Beast also, saying; who is like him, or able to make War with
him? This Lieftenentship is to last forty two months or one thousand two
hundred sixty annal dais: which beginning A. 395. must end A. 1655. as is said.

Then folows the Churches true peace or prosperity at last 3 Period. Rev 20. 1,
2, 3.
Period: for at sound of the seventh Trumpet, the seventh Woe came on the Empire,
and the seventh Phial of Gods wrath was poured o^^; wherewith the Churches
Enemies are cut off, and the Devil shut up in the bottomless Pit for one
thousand years: so that nothing but true tranquillity can insu. Hence the Church
Rev. 11. 15.
exults with great voice saying, the Kingdoms of this World are become the Lords
and his Christ's, who shall reign for ever.

To these three times al three Parts of the Apocalypse are Analysis.
squared: for the Son of God des^ribes the state of his Church and what shall
befall the Empire in a triple manner: 1. By seven Epistles chap. 2. and 3. 2. By
a Book sealed chapter 4. 5. 6. 7. 3. By a little open Book chapter 10. to the end. He
also appeered to John in several shapes: 1. As a Son of Man chapter 1. who suffered
in the fi^^t Period. 2. As a Beast like a Lamb with seven Horns and seven Eyes
chapter 5. which fights in the secund Period. 3. As a strong Angel clothed with a
Cloud chapter 10. who reigns having al things put under his feet in the third last
Period. As a Son of Man in m^^st of seven golden Candlesticks, he declares the
Churches condition in general by seven Epistles; whereof the two si^st belong to
the first Period: the ^iv last to the se und: but the Promises chapter 2. and 3. to
the last. As a Lamb he opens the sealed Book (Gods hidden Decree) implying the
Roman Empires estate distinctly, under which the Church is built and subsists
chapter 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. and 9. viz. in the Politic State for the first Period, til
A. 395. (which by opening the six first Seals is performed) the Ethnic Emperors
condition is showed in the first fiv; but the fall of Paganism in the sixth,
from Constantin to Theodosius death. In the secund Period from A. 395. to 1655.
when the seventh Seal is to be opened, seven Angels with seven Trumpets,
declare by seven Judgments then executed the Empires ruin Chapter 8. 1. By
Barbarians A. 395. 2. By Romes first sackage A. 410. 3. By suppressing the West
Empire in Augustulus A. 476. 4. By abolishing al public Offices A. 552. 5. By
Sarrasens, as the first Woe tells chapter 9. 1. to 12. 6. By Turcs chapter 9. 13, to 19.
7. By Papists palpable Idolatry, Murders, Sorce^ies, Fornications, and other
abominable sins; as in the secund Woe chapter 9. 20, 21. In the third Period at
entry of A. 1655. the seventh Angel sounds, and Judgment is executed with the
third Woe on the Churches Enemies, whereby Gods mystery is fulfilled chapter 10. 9.
As an Angel covered with a Cloud, having a little Book opened which John
swalowed; he foretells what shall befall the Ecclesiastic State in all three
Periods. 1. The Church is built up under persecutions chapter 11. 1, 2. 2. It Is
gloriously beautified with the Sun, having the Moon under foot, as despising al
mundan things; and a Crown of twelv Stars (the twelv Apostles) on her Head chapter
12. 1. 2. 3. The red Dragon raises many Heresies and troubles; but Constantin
(as Michael) overcam him, and expeld Heathenism v. 9. In the secund Period,
these seven Synchronicisms are set forth. 1. The holy City trod down by the
Gentiles chapter 11. 2. 2. The two VVitnesses mourn in sack* cloth v. 3. to 10. 3.
The Woman fled into the Desert chapter 12. 6, to 14. 4. The ten hornd Beast
blasphems God, and makes war with the Saints. 5. The two hornd drivs a pety
ped^ing trade chapter 13. per totum. 6. The company of one hundred forty four
thousand sing a new Hymn and live blamless chapter 14. 1. to 6. 7. The Whore of
Babylon (or Papal Hierarchy) rides and rules the ten hornd Beast of free accord
chapter 17. Herupon God forewa^nd her by declaring his plagues and punishments chapter
15. and 16. but when no redres folowd, he past sentence to confound her. Hence
in the third Period, the Churches joy or ovation over her Enemies total ruin is
displaied: with her wished peace or tranquillity chapter 19. These are the general
Contents of al: but many mo important particulars relating to our times occur;
which shall be summarily collected for the Churches comfort specialy the two
Witnesses History chapter 11. and description of the seven Phials chapter 16. which two
being of nearest concernment, shall be most accuratly agitated. For the first
explicats the entrance of the third Prophetic part from the little Book,
comprising al three Periods as an abridgment of the whole Revelation. It
consists of two Parts: 1. What is reveled to John by word of mouth, how things
shall obvene; as in the first Period at erecting the Church; in the secund under
the Antichristian Vicar, by two Synchronisms of the Gentiles calcitrating the
holy City forty two months, and the Witnesses mourning one thousand two hundred
sixty dais. 2. What is realy represented to him by a sudden change in Vision,
at beginning of the third Period. These are the terms of our undertaken task.

In the first Period under the Dragons reign, the Son of God Exposition.
causes his Temple or Church to be built, the place of Sacrifices be measured,
and charily protects his Servants in these A reed like a rod was given me, and
the Angel said; arise, Rev 11. v. (...).
measure Gods Temple, and Altar, and them that worship therein. Since then the
building and gathering Christ's Church, is commended by measuring the Jews
Temple; the form thereof must be considered, to attain the true meaning of the
Text. It stood 2 Chr 3. 1 3 4. (...) King. 6. 16.
on Mount Moriah: the length sixty Cubits, breadth twenty, height one hundred
twenty. It was divided into two parts: 1. The lower westly twenty Cubits long
and twenty broad called Sanctum Sanctorum (Holy of Holiest) into which the high
Priest alone entered only once a year, 2. The forepart eastly forty Cubits long
and twenty broad, styled Sanctum the Holy Place; whereto only Priests entered,
termed here Gods Temple. Before it were two Courts: 1. The inner called the
Priests, where the Altar for burnt Offerings stood, twenty Cubits square and ten
high; which is here called Thysiasterium. 2. The outer or great Court compassed
with a whit Marble wall in circuit four furlongs or half a mile, which none but
purified Israelits might enter; excluding al unclean Jews and Gentiles. About
this Herod walled in a large place for the unclean together ^zek 40. Z^ch. 2.
1. (...).
with Heathens. By this Temple the Angel represents the Churches condition: for
by measuring is meant building and propagating: by the Altar the true Professors
persecution, to be slaughtered as sacrificed Sheep: but measured or bounds set,
beyond which Tyrans cannot go til vengence overtake them. By those that worship
therein, Kings and Priests are meant, who are a Royal Priesthood in the inner
Court.

Next folows the Churches State in the secund station of V. 2.
Popery from A. 395. til A. 1655. into Synchronisms: 1. Of the Gentiles treading
the holy City under foot forty two months: whereby Gods extern worship is
implied, consisting in Ceremonies, which he rejects. Here we must refl^ct^on
the Heathen Nations invasion: for from Constantins conversion til Theodosius
died, the Church triumphed over the Gentiles; and demolished the Dragons
Idolatrous Temples: but immediately the Barbarians broke in, whereby the holy
City was trod on, and Antichrist had occasion to show himself. For in stead of
Idols (Saturn, Jupiter, Mars) Saints Images were gradualy introduced. 2. Of the
two Witnesses prophecy in Sackcloth, one thousand two hundred sixty dais: by
whom is meant faithful Teachers and Rulers of the Church: which number of two
is small, yet sufficient to testify truth Deuteronomy. 17. 6, 10, 15, Mat. 18 16. John
8. 17.

The Angels Words (to my two Witnesses) imply, that he Verse 3. 4 5. 6.
is the Son of God. They were clad in sackcloth, but the Whore in Purple and
Scarlet deckd with Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones. These were two Oliv Trees
and two Candlesticks, Z^^ha. 4 14.
as Zerobabel and Jesua are described. If any Man will hurt them, fire proceds
from their mouth to devour their Enemies, who must thus be killed: as at Elias
request fire from Heaven 2. King. 1 10. 12.
consumed two of Ahaziahs Captains with their fifty Men each. These have prower
to shut Heaven, that it rain not during their Prophecy (as Elias also had) and
power to turn Waters into Blood; and to smite the Earth with all plagues as
Moses and Aaron had: whereby God declares, what Mercies he showed his Servants
of old; which he will extend to Believers in the new Testament and will giv them
faithful Teachers like Jesua and Zerobabel to inlighten them as Candlesticks
with pure Doctrine; and assist them as Oliv-trees with powerful consolation
beside zealous Eliahs and Elisha's, who shall oppose the Whore Jezabel, Baals
Priests, and other persecutors: but at last a Moses and Aaron to bring them out
of al affliction.

When they have finished their testimony, the Beast which ascends Verse 7. Rev
17. 8. 11.
from the bottomless Pit (viz. which rose from the Sea with ten horns, whereof
the Angel says, the Beast which thou saw, was and is not, and shall ascend
from the bottomless Pit) shall make War against them, overcom, and kill them.
This Beast that was and is not, but is the eighth, and one of the seven; is the
Heathen Empire, where the Dragon reigned, or was openly worshipped: but is not,
being no more adored in public: yet ascends again out of the Pit by the ten
honrd Beasts means, or kingdoms erected in the Empire; when a new holier form
of Idolatry is established, and the Dragon with the Beast disguisedly afresh
worshipped. This is the eighth Head, but one of the seven: for the Rider (the
Woman-whore) in the divided Empire, governs the civil State: so the ten hornd
Beast (or seventh Head) and Ecclesiastic Popish Regiment make one, as it were
the eighth: but because the Woman sits as one Rider; therefore the two last forms
(Ecclesiastic and Politic) are reckoned or reputed one, as the Angel says, the
eighth is of the seven. Hence it is clear, the Beast rising out of the Pit, is
the spiritual Papal Government using the Temporal Sword of terren Princes:
which Woman-Beast shall kill the Witnesses, or depriv them of Ecclesiastic
preferments and Politic emploiments (called a civil death) by persecuting
Evangelical Professors (which is his own case) at the Popes instigation.

Their dead Bodies shal^ly in the Streets of the great City, spiritualy Verse. 8.
caled Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was crucified. The City is Rome the place
of persecution; as the Angel says, Rev. 17. v. 18
the Woman is that great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth, caled
Babylon: by which name Viega, Bellarmin, and other Jesuits own Rome: but by the
City and Streets the whole Popish Empire is designed; as it is elswher compared
to a ten hornd Beast, and to a Sea with Rivers and Fountains. Rome-City and
Papacy is spiritualy or mysticaly styled Sodom, by reason of their Paederestia
or unnatural sin, not only committed, but commended in a privileged pamphlet
penned and published by John de la Casa Archbishop of Benevent: as Isaiahs
words intimat, Their countenance does witness against them; who declare their
sin as Sodom, they hide it not. She is also like Egypt in blindness and hardness
of Heart; beside their oppression of Gods People. She resembles Jerusalem in
killing the Prophets; refusing to receiv the Son of God: but rejects, reviles,
and crucifies him in his members, as every ey sees. A City has sundry Streets
and Papacy diverse dominions: wherein the wars and persecutions for sixty years
last past, must be exactly examined. The Oriental Antichrist (Turc) does not
persecut Christians for Religion: the Occidental (Pope) has no Streets or
Provinces under his power, wherein have happened any remarkable persecutions, sav
only the Germam Empire or chief Horn. This is that great Cities principal
Street caled Catexochen the Street, being a bare Sceleton left of the West
Empire or fourth Monarchy: having yet seven Heads (the seven Princes Electors)
and ten Horns (the ten Circles or Provinces) as it is divided. In this Street we
must seek the war and shall find it; if we weigh well what is past since A. 1595.
til now. For the Pope, since Luther began to reform, alwais aimed to extirp
Gospel Professors; for which end he caled the Council of Trent: but this took
no effect in Germany, til the crafty Jesuits incited credulous Princes by
fraud, flattery, and calumby to persecut Protestants. Which began A. 1598. in
Styria, Carniola, and Krain the success whereof there and elswher (specialy in
Bohemia and Austria) is too well known to the World: but the last act lacks to
be executed in Silesia, which being finished, this war shall have victory and
execution end: at which time the three years and half are to begin, wherein the
Witnesses dead Bodies shal^ly in the Streets. This Author seems to be a
Silesian Minister living in Polonia; who draws al to the Meridian of his
Country, and comfort of his exiled Brethren.

Some of the People, Kinreds, Toungs, and Nations shall see their Verse. 9.
dead bodies three dais and half; not suffering them to be put in gravs. These
are foreign Nations met in the German war for Religion: but by a Treaty of
peace, the Protestants were circumvented, and liberty of Conscience denied,
with all their proper privileges, which produced manifold miseries. Hence it
appeers that the three annal dais and half (before the appointed one thousand
two hundred sixty terminat) can agree to no other; but when the said Silesian
pacification shall be finished, persecution stinted, and expeld Evangelists
restored; al which shall be at end of An. 1655. Most Expositors refer the last
words of not putting them in grav, to their Enemies despite, who bar their
burial: but they are used or uttered tropicaly (as their quickening or rising
must be taken civily) not properly or literaly: for their Enemies are caled
they that dwell on Earth. So foreign Nations will not wholly lay down the Sword,
but cast a watchful ey on al emotions in Germany, and not permit Protestants to
be totaly destroyed or laid in grav underground, as he perswads them to do.

They that dwell on Earth (Papists who have their Heaven here, Verse. 10.
for the just are strangers or Sojourners) shall rejoice over them, make merry,
and send g^f^s one to another, because those two Prophets tormented them that
dwell on Earth. They are said to torment, because they scan or sift their Enemies
Doctrine and Conversation by the touchstone of Gods Word, cross their gross 1
Kings 18 17
Idolatry, and exprobrat their filthy Sodomy. So Eliah and Michah tormented
Ahab: Jeremy the Priests and Pseudoprophets: Jer. 27. 9. 14. Amos 7. 10. Mat.
8. 29.
Amos the People: Christ the Devils. This their Foes nickname Sedition to color
their own oppression.

Thus far John writes what the Son of God declared by word of mouth; whereby a
sudden change insued in the Vision, representing a like alteration in the
Empire. For he sees what after the end of three years and half befell the
witnesses; and what unexpected events shall betide. Here the last period begins
An. 1655. when all the Gospels Enemies are quelled, and true peace to Gods People
redintegrated.

After three dais and half, the Spirit of life from Godentred Verse. 11.
into them. Those dais expire An. 1655. when the treading on the holy City
forty two months, the VVitnesses mourning one thousand two hundred threescore
dais, the VVomans abode in the Desert so long, and the Beasts blaspheming
forty two Months conterminat or expire at once together. Then also the term of
Nebuchadnezars Image* and period of al four Monarchies Dan 7. 12. 25. D^n. 12.
11.
for a time, times, and dividing of time shall concur: as also the one thousand
two hundred ninety dais of abomination which makes desolat, being al true
synchronicisms. Ezekiel Ezekiel. 37. 14.
has a like expression, where God on the Jews behalf, at Babylons Captivity
says, I will put my Spirit in you, and ye shall live, I w^l put you in your own
Land. The like God will do to al exiled Professors, restore them by unthought
of means to their own Land, and render their functions: yea giv them greater
dignities then ever they had before. They stood on their feet, or possessed their
Places and Stats: but great fear fell on all that saw them. Papists had great joy
at the issu of this war: but shall now tremble no less, when the exiled
reposses^ their hereditary Fortunes and honorable Functions. A lifely exemple
hereof is extant Wisdom 5. worth reading or review. See Wisd. 5.


They heard a great voice from Heaven saying, Com up hither. Verse. 12.
They shall ascend in a cloud, and their Enemies shall see them. Heaven signifies
the Church: the voice implies, that after three years and half God will raise a
chief Protestant Potentat as a Patron, to the Papists terror; who shall open a
free course to the Gospel: caling aloud by his Diploma or Letters Patents to al
Exiles; Com up, resum your pristin preferments and emploiments. So they shall
suddenly ascend in a cloud to their charges, with great glory and authority.
Their Enemies who before exulted at their afflictions, inflicting al sorts of
plagues; shall fare as Jeremy threatened Chaldea and Babylon, Jer. 50. 10. 1^.
that al which go by shall hiss at them.

At the same hour was a great Earthquake, and a tenth part Verse. 1^.
of the City fell: viz. a fearful Commotion or Combustion in the Empire: but a
tenth part intends either the whole Papacy, or one of the Empires ten streets,
or Rome City, which is now but a tenth part of what it was, as Lipsius provs.
In the Earthquake (...). 3* Admirand.
(or war) were slain seven thousand Men (or a mighty multitud) but the remnent
were affrighted, and gav glory to God. The rest of Papists stood amazed, and
acknowledged Gods just judgments on them.

The s^^ und Woe is past. This imports not as if al were ended Verse 14.
at Romes destruction and the rest precited; but intimats specialy Rev. 8 1^.
Rev. 9 1. to 19.
the Turcs ruin: For an Angel flying through midst of Heaven cried, Woe, Woe, Woe
to the Earths Inhabiters, by reason of 3 Angels trumpets yet to sound. The
first happened by Sarrasens, the next by Turcs, as generaly granted: whence those
words ( the secund woe is past) are unanimously interpreted, that instantly
after Romes ruin, and the German Empires revolution, the Turcs East Empire shall
fall. Behold, the third Woe coms quickly; al three fall on the Empire, but the
last ensues.

The seventh Angel sounded, and Voices in Heaven said, the Verse. 15. 16. 17
Kingdoms of this World are become the Lords and his Christ's, who shall reign for
ever. Here begins the seventh or last plague poured on Babel, wherein the
Evangelical Churches great joy is briefly described: because they have got a good
Head, Rome destroyed, Germany revolted from Popery, and the Turcs Empire ended.
This joy is set out by John Rev. 19. as David reflects on it Psalm. 93. 1. Psalm.
97. 1. Psalm. 99. 1.

The Nations (Papists) were angry, and the wrath is com to Verse. 18. 19.
cut off or destroy them. This act is confirmed by a duple sign: 1. Gods Temple
was opened, and there was seen the Ark of his Testament. 2. There were
Lightnings, Voices, Thunders, Earthquake, and great Hail. The contents whereof
are elswher explicated, where the Son of God with Celical Armies appeer on whit
Horses: but the Beast and Kings of the Earth are utterly Rev. 19 11 to 21
destroyed. The time of the dead to be judged, and that thou should reward
thy servants the Prophets, Saints, and them that fear thy Name; and should
distroy those which destroy the Earth. This Judgment is darkly described, being
before caled the mystery Rev. 10 4. 7.
of God, and uttered by seven thunders, which must not be written. This is also
after rehearsed in Christ's thousand years reign, which the Author declines to
define, yet inclines to it. Rev. 20 4. 5 6.
As in the secund part of Apocalypse, seven Judgments are given on the Roman
Empire by seven trumpeting Angels in the secund Period; so here in the third
are described seven Plagues to be poured out by seven Phials on the same. The
seventh at end of the one thousand two hundred threescore years concurs with
An. 1655. and fills up Gods wrath. The seven Plagues fell on the Politic State
presaging its fall: but the seven Phials are poured on the Ecclesiastic too,
declaring both their punishments. Those began An. 395. but these under the sixth
Judgment, a little before the total final ruin. The seven Plagues proced from
the Lord holding a Cup of red wine, who poured it on his little Flock: but now
the ungodly shall drink the dregs Psalm. 75. 8 9.
wrung out, as David denounces. Those seven Angels with the Rev. 15. 5. 6. 7.
seven Plagues, came out of the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in
Heaven: and one of the four Beasts (the Lion of Juda) gav the seven Angels
seven golden Phials full of Gods Wrath: the event or effect folows.

I heard a great voice out of the Temple saying to the seven Chap. 16. V. (...)
Angels, Pour out the Phials of Gods wrath on the Earth: viz. Earths
Inhabiters, who rejoiced at the Beasts Victory: or on the whole world, which
wandered after the Beast, worshipping Rev. 13. 3. 4.
both Beast and Dragon: so the Popish Empire is plainly understood.

The first poured his Phial on the Earth, and there fell a noisome Verse. (...).
grievous sore on the Men which had the Beasts mark, and them which worshipped
his Image. Earth implies the whole Empires extent: but reflects on the peaceable
part, and on the Beast coming out of the Earth; which is the Pope and his
Clergy: who prevail not by open Power, as the Sea-bred did by war; but crept in
slily and softly as grass grows out of the ground without nois or notice. This
Phial was poured at time of Reformation: but when true Professors opposed
Papists, reproving their falls Doctrins and foul deeds: a noisome sore of fierce
wrath, hate, and enmity fell on the Men so marked against al Protestants, since
they could not seduce them by words or wiles, nor subdu by the Sword.

The secund poured his on the Sea, which becam as blood of a Verse. 3.
dead Man, and every living Soul in the Sea died. By Sea is pointed out the ten
hornd Beast rising from the Sea, and his troubled state; which fell on al parts
(specialy Germany) with much bloodshed: and al Men engaged in the war through
the Provinces, died in that Flood of waters.

The third poured his on the Rivers and Fountains of Waters, Verse. 4.
which becam blood. Waters, both in Scripture and among al Authors, signify
Kingdoms: the Roman Empire is compared Rev. 17. 1. 18.
to a Beast with ten horns, and to a City with streets; but here to a Sea with
Rivers, which are the Popish dominions: for the great Whore sits on many
waters: the Fountains are Kings with their Peers and Parlements: but how this
Phial has bin poured on Great-Brytain, and the Head-spring become blood still
sprouting out, is evident to al Men: but though those that are the Voice or
Trumpet in those actions cannot be excused; yet we must say with the Angel here,
Lord, thou art righteous, Verse. 5.
because thou have judged thus. How France feels Gods wrath of the third Phial,
and how much more it may, time will discover. Verse. 6.
For they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them
blood to drink, being worthy. This more particularly concerns France, where such
floods have been shed within a hundred years last past: but how other Realms
shall fare, time will revele.

I heard another from the Altar say, even so Lord God Almighty, Verse 7.
true and righteous are thy Judgments. This voice ca^ from the Thyasterion, where
Martyrs Souls incessantly prais God.

The fourth poured his on the Sun, who had power given to Verse. 8.
scorch Men with ^ire. Most Expositors understand the Sun of Righteousness,
wherewith the woman is clothed: but this repugns the plagues poured on the
Popish world or Earth, opposite to the Church-Heaven, Gods faithful Children,
whereof the Lord Jesus is Head: so we must search what Sun signifies elswher in
the Apocalypse. The Sun becam black as sackcloth of Rev. 6. 12.
hair: which imports the ruin of Imperial dignity in Heathen Church-Heaven by
Constantin. The Suns third part w^ Rev. 8 12.
smiten: that is, the old Empires small remaining splendour shall vanish. An Angel
stood in the Sun: meaning a potent Evangelical Rev. 19. 17. Rev. 21. 23.
Prince gathered Forces against Papists. The City had not the Sun or Moon to
shine in it: or needs no temporal Potentat to govern it. If we compare these
texts with the Sun here, it must import the Supporter of the Pop^sh State, who
givs splendour and strength to al, as the Sun does in Nature: for he had power
given to scorch Men with fire, even those of his own side.

Men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed Gods Verse. 9.
name, which has power over these plagues: but repented not to giv him glory.
When the Sun or Supporter of Papacy shall ly down to rest, Gods wrath will
extremly blast Papists: the Lord Psalm 21. 9.
shall make them like a fiery Oven; yet will they not relent to giv him glory, but
blasphem his name st^l.

The fifth poured his on the Beasts Seat, whose Kingdom was Verse. 10. 11.
full of darkness: and they gnawed their toungs for pain. They blaspemed the God
of Heaven, but repented not. So soon as the ten hornd Beast rose from the Sea,
the Dragon gav him his Power and Seat of residence, Rome, which he retained
with the two hornd Beast, like Hippocrates twins, ever since, and reign over
the Kings of the Earth: but now by the fifth Phial his Kingdom is darkened, yet
not quit demolished or dissolved, which shall be done at pouring out the last
Phial.

The sixth poured his on Euphrates great River, and the water Verse. 12.
was dried up to prepare the way of the East Kings. Euphrates signifies the
Turcs which border on it: but drying up the water implies their ruin or
overthrow, as the Prophets use that phrase Isai 19. 5. Isai 44 27. Jer. 48. 34.
Jer. 50* 38. Jer. 51. 36. Ezekiel. 30. 12. Ezekiel. 31. 4. the drying up is a
preparation to the great work which shall be performed at pouring out the
seventh Phial: for as the red Sea was divided for Israel to pass, Exodus 14. 12.
Josua 3. 17.
when Pharaoh pursued; and Jordan dried up for them to go into Canaan: So here
Euphrates is mysticaly dried (i. the Turcs destroyed) to make way for the East
Kings, meaning the Jews conversion. Next folows the seventh Phial, the seventh
Angel sounded, the seventh plague (or third and last woe) fell on both Beasts
which sit in the City sited on seven Hills, caled seven Heads; the preparativs
thus pourtraied.

I saw three unclean Spirits like Frogs com out of the Dragon, Verse. 13 14.
Beasts, and falls Prophets mouths: these are the Spirits of Devils working
miracles, which go forth to the Kings of the whole World, to gather them to the
battle of that great day of God Almighty. Al three are Companions or fellow
Commoners, which stick close together; and now at end of their reign send
abroad Agents or Ambassadors (croking Spirits) which work miracles. For when
Rome the Popes Seat, and Turcs Empire shall be suppressed, and Jews converted;
the Devil, the whole Papacy, and falls Prophet seeing their end at hand, will stir
every stone, and send out their chief Emissaries to al Popish Princes,
persuading them to raise war against Protestants in that great day of Almighty
God. The time of Constantins subduing the Dragon and supplanting Idolatry, is
Rev 6. 17.
called the great day of Gods wrath: but this (when the Beast with falls Prophet
are to be cast into a fiery Lake, and Dragon shut up in the bottomless pit)
styled the great day of God Almighty; being before termed the time of the Dead
that they shall be judged: but by the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ clyped Rev.
11. 18.
Catexochen, That Day, which he spares to explicat.

Behold, I com as a Thief: blessed is he that watches and Verse. 15. 16.
keeps his garment, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. He gathered
them into a place caled Armageddon. This is the sudden pouring out of the
seventh Phial and Plagues on the Papacy, for which Men are warned to watch: but
the place of Papists Rendevous caled Armageddon (Mountain of Lamentation) 2
Chr. 35. 24. 25.
alluding to the place where good King Josiah was slain and much bewailed: which
argues that Papists shall mourn for the issu of this war, as the Jews did for
that direful defeat at Megiddo.

The seventh Angel poured his into the Air: and a great Voice Verse. 17.
came out of Heavens Temple from the Throne saying; It is done, The preceding
Phials were poured on particular Places or Persons (1. On the Popish State and
Religion in common: 2. On the Politic State by the German war: 3. On peculiar
Popish Kingdoms and their Heads: 4. On a strong Pillar of Papistry: 5. On Rome
City: 6. On the Turcs Territories) but this Ephesians. 2. 2.
last universaly on the Air or whole Body, and Satan Prince of the Air with all
his Spirits; because he is worshipped together with the Beast. At pouring out of
which Phial, the time draws nigh Mat. 24. 28.
foretold by Christ of his coming to Judgment.

There were Voices, Thunders, Lightnings, and so great an Verse. 18.
Earthquake, as was not since Men were on Earth; so mighty and great. Here
begins the Execution on the Devil and his Army, with his Vicar and his
Dependents; even on the whole Papacy and its Kingdoms. In the Air are heard
terrible Voices, Thunders, and yellings of Devils: on Earth War and rumors of
War: in all parts Tumults, Seditions, Insurrections, Massacres, and horrid
Bloodsheds, such as never were heard of before.

The great City was divided into three parts. Rome City is specified Verse. 19.
in the sixth Phial; but here the whole Papal State signified: which is shared
among three Chieftains, typified by the triple Crown, the Dragon, Beast, and
falls Prophet: For these generals shall levy or lead forth the Battle, as each
severaly raised their Forces before, and now join ready to fall on. But with
what success? The Beast and falls Prophet being taken, are cast Rev 19. 10.
a^ife into a burning Lake of brimstone; but the Dragon (Generalissimo) shut up
in the bottomless pit for a thousand years. Rev. 20. 1. 2.
The Cities of the Nations fell: that is, Idolatry, Sodomy, and other
abominations practiced under Popery are altogether abolished.

Great Babylon came into remembrance before God, to giv her Verse. 20.
the Cup of Wine of his fierce Wrath. God sat still long, seeming to take no
notice of the Beasts blasphemy and tyranny: but when the prefixd time of forty
two months expired, remembers her, fills full the Cup of Wine of his fierce
wrath, and punishes after her demerits. Every Island fled away, and the
Mountains were not found: viz All that depend on the Papacy (the remotest Isles
and loftiest places by Land) shall ^ly away, vanish, be vanquished, and seen no
more.

There fell on Men a great Hail from Heaven, every stone Verse. 21.
about a Talent weight: and Men blasphemed because of this plague; for it was
exceeding great. These great H^^lstones denot Gods grievous punishments; the
weight of a Talent, his heaviest Judgments: yet Men ceased not to blasphem his
holy name. Here the Author ends his Explications; but answers sundry scruples,
doubts, and difficulties emergent; which shall be curtly explained. In this deep
dark discurs diverse Objections occur, which will require debate and resolution.

1. Whether the Text not torted, but literaly or tropicaly Doubts.
referred to the times, has bin rightly unfolded? 2. Whether the Figures or
Images which make these mysteries obscure, be cleared by other places of the
Apocalypse and Prophets, from whom they are taken and applied to Things, as the
Text and Times require? 3. Whether what is past or now in acting, should be
serchd in the Acts of the Roman Empire, to see what may be more sutably applied
another way, without disturbing the method o^ harmony? 4. Whether the Text does
tell what is to be expected at end of Gods determined time, on the fourth
Monarchy and Papacy? viz. when the forty two months or 1260. years expire.

Hence rises a main rub, whether the Epoche or beginning An. 395. at
Theodosius death? This is proved in the previous Prophetic Key, by certain
characters or marks to be summarily repeated. 1. Because Daniels Epoche of 1290.
dais falls exactly on An. 365. when the Temples grand desolation happened under
Julian: so the 1260. must com 30. later An. 395. since they shall end together.
2. Because at the Empires bipartition An. 395. the Roman Eagle got two wings,
and the Barbarians broke in; driving the Woman into the Desert, where she must
be fed three times and half, or one thousand two hundred threescore annal dais;
the period whereof falls An. 1655. 3. Because the treading of the holy City (or
Church) forty two months, begins at that Invasion, and ends alike. 4. Because
at that Invasion, the ten hornd Beast rose from the Sea, and soon clipped the
Eagles wings: that in threescore years ( An. 455.) al ten horns or Kingdoms
visibly appeared. Hence Authors date the Prolog of the Empires decay at
Theodosius death: and Ecclesiastic writers from St. Paul's words agree, That
Antich^^st shall arise, ^ The^. 2 6 7.
when the Empire begins to fall: generatio un^^s, est corrupti^ alterius: So
Tertullian, Iren^us, and many mo define. 5. Because the two hornd Beast (west
Antichrist) came out of the Earth silently An. 395, when he assumed a primacy or
preeminence both in Civil and Spiritual affairs; which he never before
arrogated over other Church^s. For Aeneas Sylvius (afterw^rd Epist. 28^ Can. ^6
Pope) writes, That til the Nicen Synod, small respect was showed the Roman Sea;
but every one lived to himself. In the third Carthage Council An. 390. a Canon
passed, That the first Bishop shall not be styled chief Priest or Prince of
Priests, but Bishop of the first Sea. For Innocent, first A. C. 404.
usurped authority over Princes and Prelates (as Presbyters will have suprem
Magistrates submit to them like Sheep to their Shepherds) who Excommunicated
Arcadius Emperor of Constantinople, and removed Chrysostom the Patriarch:
busily bestirring to get a primacy over al African Churches. His successors (
Zosimus, Boniface 1. Celestine 1.) attempted the like Hist. l. 7. c. 3^
aspiring, as Socrates storieth: but Siricius first forbad Priests to marry,
which St. Paul calls the Doctrine of Devils. 6. Because the two Witnesses at end
of those one thousand two hundred sixty years shall be subdued and slain, but two
accidents shall befall after the seventh Trumpets sounding ( Romes dest^uction,
and determination of the secund Woe) so that happily the Witnesses shall be raised
(he flatters himself and his Brethren) before A. 1655. for small circumstances
are not regarded in great Prophecies.

Hereto may be added some new Arguments: 1. St. Austin Proofs.
writes, how the Gentiles reported that St. Peter prophesied Christian Religion
should dure but 365. years; which he reputed a Heathen fiction: yet happily he
predicted the continuance without interruption should be so long. For Christ at
30. years was baptized and began his Minist^y: which being added to 365.
foretold by St. Peter, make 395. at which time Antichrist appeered, the holy
City was calcitrated, the Witnesses mourned, and the Woman fled, as is plainly
prespecified. 2. That the 6000. years of the Worlds durance from the Creation
(equivalent to the six dais works, every day 1000. years) expire next year
1655. which he strangely strivs and strains to justify: but that Rabinical
prediction is a frivolous fiction, and his computation a ridiculous distortion;
for that 6000. years falls short A. 1655. about 315. years by the best account.
3. The year of the Flood began A. M. 1656. which concurs with A. C. 1655.
complet or 56. current; when the Dan. 7. 11. Rev. 19. v. 20.
Churches Enemies shall be destroyed with fire, as the old World was by water:
this indeed is a brat of many Men's brains, which happily Men shall shortly see
dashd against the Stones. 4. The Roman Monarchy initiated when the Suns
Eccentricity was greatest: whence Astrologers ( Aueis nulla fides) infer, that
it shall end when it is least; which some refer to last year 1653. but this bare
guess is notum per ignotius. 5. The Turcs have two Prophecies (to be read in
the Author) touching their Empires expiring: that this young Achmet the secund
(Son to Ibrihim) shall be the last Emperor. For surely strange alterations have
happened since Achmets death A. 1617. who contrary to custom having three young
Sons, caused his Brother Mustapha to succed, a precedent never known before:
but he after nine Months reign deposed, and Achmets eldest Son Osman set up:
whom the Janissaries strangled with his Wife and two infant Sons A. 1622. Next
succeeded his Brother Morat or Amurat the fourth who died Issuless A. 1640. and
after him Ibrihim (or Abraham) whom the Janissaries also bowstringd with his
three Wifes A. 1648. but advanced his sole Son Achmet aged six (now twelv)
years: who reigns at their devotion or disposing; and is like to be the last,
if such fopperies be worthy of faith.

By all which premises it is probable: 1. That the two Chronicisms Inferences.
character (1290. and 1^60.) are incident to A. 365. (of Julian) and 395. (of
Theodosius) as foresaid. 2. That the Terminus a quo of Daniels 1290. years, can
be applied to no other then A. 365. when God blew up the foundations of
Jerusalems Temple. 3. That the Epoche of those 1260. yeer^, must be referred to
A. 395. because both numbers necessarily expire together. 4. That the ten-hornd
Beast began from A. 395. til 455. because the Eagle got two Wings A. 395. and
his ten horns appeered A. 455. 5. That in all Roman Histories, no year suits so
semblably to al Characters as 395. Erg^ we may stick to it and expect the event
A. 1655. specialy since killing the two Witnesses eventualy provs the thing. Some
are shy to put a Period of these Prophecies so precisely at A. 1655. but let
such consider: 1. That the Angel held up his hand to Dan. 12 7, 11. Rev. 10 5,
6, 7,
Heaven and swore by him that livs for ever, it shall be for a time, times, and
half, or 1260. years, and from the Temples abominable desolation to that time
1290. 2. That the Son of God lifted his hand to Heaven, and swore by him who
created Heaven, Earth, Sea, and al things in them; that time shall be no longer,
or there shall be no delay, nor any time intervene: But at the seventh Angels
voice or sound of his Trumpet, the Rev. ^. 18.
mystery of God shall be finished, as he declared to his Proph^ts. These things
says the Son of God, whose eyes flame as fire and his feet like fine Brass. These
things says he that is boly and true, that Rev. 3. 14.
has the key of David etc. These things says Amen, the faithful true Witness,
and beginning of the Creation of God. Who then will not beleev him? Since then
according to Gods decree Anthichrist shall rage or reign but three times and
half or 1260. years (which terminat at end of A. 1655.) Let us look up and Luke
21. 28.
lift our heads on high, for our redemption draws nigh.

Ob. Some Objections occur: such mere mysteries may not be pried into, specialy
of things yet to com: for diverse deep Divines and solid Scholars have been lost
in this labyrinth: Ergo it should remain as a book sealed til the event or
accomplisHment be reveled: as Christ to his Disciples curious question of
Isreal's kingdoms restoration answered, it is not for you to know the Acts 1. 6,
7.
times and seasons which the Father has put in his own power, much less for us.

Sol. The Apocalypse is full of dark deep mysteries, which will ^y hid til the
event detect them, by applying Histories to see or search the effects therein
meant or mentioned, yet it folows not that we must lay it aside, and not
inquire what is already accomplished or shortly to be expected; specialy
touching the time when the Churches Enemies shall be destroyed and it restored
to rest, for Daniel observed by Books what the Lord told Jeremy, Dan. 9. ^,
Rev. 1. 3.
that he would accomplish seventy years in Jerusalems desolation: and John
says, Blessed is he that reads, and they which hear the words of this
Prophecy, to keep the things writ therein, for the time is at hand. It Is a book
of memorable Acts, which foretells what shall betide Gods Church and the Empire
under which it subsists: being written to be read, and such styled blessed as
read it, for many things are already fulfilled, and by comparing those past with
the Apocalypse, we may the better descry what to look for yer long: but he that
forbears to read, or is not versed in Roman Histories, nor knows how to
distinguish Revolutions or Changes, but confounds Apocalyptic numbers, making
many Epoches (whereas they synchronize, containing only Relativs and
correlativs) or carelessly slights the numbers as an arcane mystery; to such it
remains a Book unopened full of obscurities: Is qui nil dubitat, nil capit inde
boni. Men must dig Diamonds out of Rocks, and never be daunted or deterred with
difficulty: many learned have mistook for these causes. 1 Most primitiv
Interpreters apply things to their times which had no relation, and some
modernists follow their steps (as wild Gees do their leaders) misleading others
out of the way. Secondly, a right method is not used: for in the Apocalypse al
things are orderly set, as they shall befall; the synchronisms following one
another, and revolutions exactly distinguished; as Histories do in describing
human actions and affairs: but too many Expositors pervert this course,
thinking to set things as succeding one another, which being Relata belong to
the same time: Who place before Babylons fall what shall be after, not knowing
where they stick, nor how to wind out. Thirdly, they confound the Civil and
Ecclesiastic State, often applying Monastic matters or Antichrists actions to
Monarchic, and contrarily. Yet that the Revelation shall remain a Book sealed
or shut up, repugns the very Text: for the seven Epistles were never sealed,
the Lamb opened the sealed Book: the other was a little open one: and Rev. 10.
2. 8. Rev. 22. 10.
at end an Angel says to John, Seal not the Prophecies for the time is at hand.

Now tho Daniel was bid to close his Prophecy, yet was it Dan. 12 4. 9.
but til the time of the end: for it was unsealed after by John's Revelation.
Christ spak of times and seasons occasioned, that John 2. 4, 8, 9.
it is not for men to know what God conceals: as he said to his Mother, my hour
is not yet com: yet soon supplied the Wine out of Water. Here we tak time in
general, which is determined on Antichrists blasphemies and tyrannies, in what
year it shall begin or end (which God has reveled, as is showed) not month, day
or hour, which the Father keeps in his own power: So tho no infallible
certainty in all circumstances can be had; yet many most pregnant conjects are
prefined.

Ob. The chief O jection is, that al Divines and Statesmen set the period of
the fourth Monarchy and Papacy at Christ's secund coming either to reign a
thousand years (as Chiliasts cry) or to judge al flesh (which Master Mede makes
one day or time) but there is no certainty of confining the Catastrophe to A.
1655. Ergo it is presumption for you so to do.

Sol. The Apocalypse mentions no such matter, but clean contrary: Rev. 19. 1. to
20.
for upon Romes destruction great joy was heard in heaven, and the Son of God
(who at opening the first Seal went forth to Conquer on a whit Horse) appeers
again on the same, whom the Armies followed on whit Horses, clad in clean whit
linen. These are Martyrs, who having whit Robes given them, Rev 7 14.
came out of great tribulation and washed their robes; being caled, chosen, and
faithful. Against them the Beast and Kings of the Rev. 17. 14.
Earth made war: the issu whereof was, that the Beast and falls Prophet (Empire
and Popedom, or rather popish Clergy and Pope) shall be cast alife into a Lake
of fire burning with bri^stone: Rev 20. 1, 2, 3.
but the Dragon had Quarter, who is only shut or sealed up in the Ibid. v. 11.
to 15.
bottomless pit for a thousand years that he should deceiv the Nations no more,
nor excite them against the Church. In the interim Gods faithful Children have
rest; but the last judgment is described afterward: hereto agrees Daniel's
Image representing Dan. 2. 34 35.
the four Monarchies, til the stone smot it on his feet (which was not when the
fourth began, for feet and toes were not then til the end thereof) and broke it
in pieces, but the stone becam a great Mountain or Kingdom (when al four
Monarchies are grinded to dust) which shall break in pieces all the rest. Daniel
in this Monarchic Vision beheld til the Dan 7. per totum.
Thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of dais sat (not for the last
universal Judgment, for that is committed to the Son, but in particular over
the Churches Enemies in the fourth Monarchy and Papacy) which Daniel saw til
the Beast was ^lain, and his Body given to the burning flame, and the power of
the other Beasts came to an end for a term was set how long e^h should last: and
the Saints shall be given into the fourth Beasts hand (so long as the Whore
rides the B^ast) til a time, times, and dividing of time: but at end of these
three times and half, the judgment shall sit, and his power totaly abolished;
yet the World not destroyed: but al kingdom, dominion and greatness under Heaven
given to the Saints of the most High* whose kingdom is everlasting, and al
dominions shall serve him. Saint Paul's words ( The Lord shall destroy him 2 These
2. 8.
with the brightness of his coming) are expounded in the Apocalypse: but it seems
the two judgments ( chapter 19. and 20.) are Rev. 19. 11. etc.
different, and not reduced to one self time; since one thousand years
intervene; for the two great Guests (the Beast and falls Prophets) are lodged in
a Lake of fire and brimstone: but their Host the Devil associated to them a
thousand years after at end of the World, when the last judgment is immediately
held: Weigh al well, and God giv thee wisdom unto Salvation.

The Author intimats, that Christ shall com to destroy the Churches Enemies A.
1655. finito, and bind the Devil in chains a thousand years; at end whereof he
shall judge the World: yet protests he will not presume to penetrat too far into
these secret sublime mysteries, which he borows from Master Mede. He exhorts us
out of the Apocalypse, to address our Rev. 3. 20. 21.
ears and hearts to the Son of God: Who stands at door and knocks saying: If
any will hear my voice and open door, I will sup Rev. 1. 3, 6, 8.
with him and he with me: to him that overcoms will I grant to sit Rev. 22. 7,
14.
with me on my Throne: as I overcam, and sat down with my Father on his Throne.
Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of this Books Prophecy: nay blessed are
they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of life,
and enter the Gates into the City. To him which is, was, and is to com, the
Almighty, be glory and dominion for ever, Amen.

The sum of al his Explications is: 1. The last act of Reformation Summary.
and releas of Protestants in Silesia Rev. 11. 7. 2. The three years and half,
when the Witnesses bodies ly in the street Ibid. v. 8, 9. 3. The continuance of
war in those Kingdoms, til the Martyrs innocent blood be avenged. 4. The sudden
fall of a strong Pillar or Protector of the Papacy. 5. The exaltation of an
Evangelical Head or Protestant Patron. 6. A Reformation in Germany. 7. The
destruction of Rome City. 8. The end of the Turcs Empire Rev. 11. 14. Rev. 16.
12. 9. The Jews Conversion Ibid. 10. The Papists sedulity to gather their
utmost forces Rev. 16. 13. Rev. 19. 16. 11. The total ruin of all the Papacy
Rev. 16. 18. 21. Rev. 19. v. 20. 21. 12. The fulfilling of Gods mystery Rev.
10. 7. Whereby the Devil is shut up in the bottomless Pit: the Son of God takes
possession of the Kingdoms: the Church fares in peace and tranquillity: al
which he writes to comfort his afflicted Countrymen, and draws al Chronical
lines to one Center of A. 1655. as the common gulf: which is a conjectural
crotchet, no certitudinal conclusion, whereon Men may rely. One year and half
will bewray the verity or vanity thereof to Gods glory and Men's satisfaction: who
must still wait and watch; but not sift or search into his secret hidden
Counsils. The future contingents which he proposes to be shortly expected A.
1655. are these: 1. Romes final ruin: 2. The Papacies total confusion: 3. The
Jews conversion: 4. The Turcs Empires abolition: 5. The Churches restoration:
6. Christ's readvention: al which materials he has from Mr. Mede.

Neither of them handle the Lambs mystical marriage with Rev. 19 7.
his spiritual Spous: which Dr. Preston compares to civil carnal Nuptials in
^iv respects. 1. As Parents consents is requisite in the contract: so God the
Father has freely given his Son to us, and us to him. 2. Both Parties must
mutualy consent to be wedded: so Christ the Husband (as the Man still is Suitor,
tho the Woman most needs it for her perfection) first invites us to this match;
and the holy Ghost prepares our hearts to intertain it. 3. Both make a
Covenant: Christ on everlasting one, to bestow himself and all that is his
(salvation, remission of sins, grace glory) on us; if we giv our selfs entirely
to serve him. These are but the Espousals: 4. There folows a solen union or
celebration of Marriage between both: which is done in Baptism, when as we
promiss in We^lock to take each other renouncing al other; so here we vow by
word of mouth or sureties, to forsake the World, Flesh, and Devil with all their
Works, cleaving soly to Christ both in prosperity and persecution; and keep our
Souls chaste to him, not prostituting them to unclean lusts or service of any
Creatures. 5. The Nuptial consequents correspond in both, which is an
inseparable union of hearts, and communion of goods: my Beloved is mine, and I
his: what Christ has is made ours, and our his: our debts become his, as al his
riches, righteousness, honors, and privileges ours by imputation. O what a
blessed condi^on is it to say with the Spous in the Canti^les, I am my
Beloveds, and his desire C^nt. 7. 10.
is toward Me? He feeds me among the Lilies: O let his precious Blood make my
scarlet sins so whit as Wool, or as the Snow in Salmon. In this piece are mo
tedious repetitions then in all the work else: which is done purposly to make it
more obvious or perspicuous unto every common capacity. Quae placuere semel,
decies repetita placebunt.

Sunt patefacta sacro mysteria magna Joanni:
Quae Deus in seclis efficienda d^cet,
To holy John great mysteries were told:
Which to be done in Times, God does unfold.
Medus vir celebris, nulli bonitate secundus;
Artibus, Ingenio, Judicioque; praeit.
Quaeque revelavit mysteria magna Joanni
Christus, in illius sunt patefacta libro.
Mede was a rare Man, for goodness next to none;
In Learning, Wit, and Judgment chief alone.
And what high hid things Christ to John declared,
Are in his Apocalyptic Book explaned.
Mira brevi obvenient, Germanus praedicat Author:
Si modo venturis est adhibenda fides.
Mira canit, quae anno simul efficienda propinquo:
Vix credenda tamen, dum patefacta forent.
Strange things, says a German, shortly shall befall:
If faith to futures may be given at al.
Wonders he tells, which next year done must be:
Yet scars to be beleevd, til cleared we see.
THESIS VII.
Christi regnum in terra: Christ's millenar reign.
THis is a very dubious dogmat or difficil debat, raised Preamble.
in the Apostles dais; which some Orthodox Fathers defended, but others decried
and detested: the chief grounds whereof on both sides, shall be sincerely
delivered; specialy from Rob, Baily a Scot on the Negativ, part, and Joseph
Mede a most learned Divine for the Affirmitiv. Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo
discrimino agetur.

Cerinthus a prime pestilent Heretic hatchd this Cockatrice, Pedigree.
which Papias an Apostolic Man fostered, and Justin Martyr much favored: whose
steps other primitiv Fathers (specialy Lactantius) mor or less followed: yet in
after ages the Catholic Church and some Oecumenic Councils condemned it. So it
lay long buried in obscurity or oblivion, til some late Anabaptists and
Independents their Allies raked it out of grav. Howbeit al Protestants rejected
it since revicton, til Alsted returning from Transylvania, renewed some parts of
this poison; which Piscator (a Man more heady and humorous then judicious)
swalowed: but they disagree in diverse points, as Sectists use to do. These laid
the foundation, but Mr. Archer advanced the main fabric: which Mr. Buroughs in
his London Lectures on Hosea, pressed as a most comfortable Article of
Christian Religion, to be instilled into the hearts of al true Believers. Sundry
other Sectators published or proclaimed it with Trumpets: who like
Presbyterians, (which wherever they find Elders named, think it rings a peal
for their motly Discipline) wrest the one thousand years mentioned by David,
Peter, and John to Christ's millenar reign in person on Earth before or at the
general Judgment, straining Scriptures to serve their turn.

Cerinthus to justify his invention, fathered it on St. John; as Fiction.
if Christ whispered it to his best beloved Disciple, not to be divulged for an
Apostolic Tradition: nor is it probable, that if John received it as a secret,
he would revele it to that vile Heretic; whom he so hated, that seeing him com
into a public Bath instantly left it, bidding his Disciples com off, lest the
house fall on them: which befell accordingly on Cerinthus and his folowers with
some others, crushing them to death. That John imparted it to him, is a fond
fiction: but whether he delivers it in the Apocalypse a grand question.

The Chiliasts teach, that Christ in his Human glory shall Positions.
com from Heaven into Palestin (some say A. 1655. now at hand, or 1695. at
farthest) where the Jews from al parts shall resort to rebuild Jerusalem, and
follow him as the true Messiah: who is to reign with all his Martyrs and some
select Saints raised from death, one thousand years before the general
Resurrection. During which Millenium, he shall go in person to subdu al stubborn
Nations, except a few lurking in corners. Then shall the Church of convert Jews
and Gentiles live peacably from any Enemy and free from sin: without the Word,
Sacraments, or other Ordinances in all Worldly delights; eating, drinking,
getting Children, and enjoying al lawful pleasures, til those years expire, at
end whereof the Infidels remaining in numberless Troops, shall besiege new
Jerusalem: but Christ with fire from Heaven shall destroy them al, and
immediately descend to the last Judgment at general Resurrection of good and
bad, according to their works. Master Buroughs in his Treatis Chap. 37.
called Moses choice speaks thus: If the opinion be true (which I dare not deny)
of Christ's coming to reign a thousand years on this Earth before the last Day,
there are riches of glory prepared for the Saints here: else cannot I expound
many places of Scripture, specialy Rev. 20. 5, 6, 7. The rest of the dead lived
not again til the thousand years were finished; which is the first
Resurrection: blessed and holy is he which has part therein, on such the secund
death has no power: but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, to reign
with him a thousand years: this is usualy interpreted of rising from sin to
Grace, and reigning with Christ for ever in Heaven: but cannot be the true
meaning; for this reign must be before the Judgment day, since Satan must Rev.
20. 7.
be loosed at end of it. O then the riches of glory, which those that suffer for
Christ shall have, being to be raised and reign with Christ! For it is said, I saw
Thrones, and they sat on them, and Rev. 20. 4.
Judgment was given to them: and I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for
the witness of Jesus and Word of God; which had not worshipped the Beast, nor his
Image, nor received his mark on their forheads or hands, and they reigned with
Christ a thousand years: so the more any suffer for opposing Antichrist, the
more glory shall they have when Christ coms to reign on Earth, for I am
confident he shall reign personaly ( Mar^ tha^.
I will not say in his flesh as others aver, but spiritualy) far more gloriously
then he has done: Thus he, but more plainly in his Comment on Hosea; yet he
needs an Interpreter to show, how Christ can reign personaly, if not in the
flesh, which is never separat from his person: or how far more gloriously then
yerst, for he came not first to reign. Tho. Goodwin transcends the Talmudists,
that at Christ's coming to reign, the Lion shall feed with the Kid, the Leopard
and Lamb, Serpent and Child shall so sympathize as not to hurt one another: man's
life shall be so long, as an hundred years old shall seem a Babe; with like
fancies as fabulous Poets or Romanzers devise, but L. 7. de divine praemio. A
model of the Millenium.
without divine warrant: only they are taken from the smooth Penman
Lactantius, who being intoxicat with this conceit thus descants. The Son of
God shall com to judge both quick and dead: but when he has abolished wickedness,
and restored the Saints to life, he shall live with men and rule them righteously
a thousand years: then those alife shall multiply infinite generations, exceeding
Methuselahs age; whose offspring shall be holy and dear to God; the rest to be
raised, shall rule over the living as Judges, and al Gentiles shall not be
destroyed, but some reserved to Gods victory, that the just may triumphantly
subdu them in perpetual servitud, as the Israelits did the Gibeonits. At that
time the Prince of Devils Author of evil, shall be bound in chains a thousand
years, when righteousness shall reign, that no hurt be perpetrated against Gods
people: the just shall be gathered from all the Earth, and when judgment is
ended, the holy City shall be in midst of the Earth, where God shall abide with the
reigning just; then shall darkness be dispeld from the world, and the Moon shall
shine as the Sun never to be lessned; but Sun seven fold brighter then now; the
Earth shall show her fecundity, and bring forth fruit freely: the Rocks and
Mountains shall destil Honey; Wine shall flow from Fountains, and Milk run in
Rivers. The World shall rejoice, and al Nature be glad, being manumised from the
dominion of sin, impiety, and al error. Beasts shall not feed on Blood, nor
Birds on prey; but al things quiet and amicable: Lions and Calves shil eat at
the same Cratch, Wolfs shall not woorry Sheep, nor Dogs hunt, nor Eagles or
Hawks do harm: Children shall play with Serpents. Finaly it shall be as Poets
tell of the golden age in Saturns time, but they erred, because true Prophets (to
whose Eyes divine Visions were presented as present) foretell future contingents
as if they were already acted; which Prophecies when fame had spread, profane
men not witting why they were uttered, or when to be performed, thought them to
be anciently accomplished, which yet could not be completed while Man reigned:
but when wicked Religions are extinguished, and Sin extermined, then shall the
Earth be subdued to God, and al these things com to pass; yea men shall live long
and happily, reigning together with God. The Kings of Nations shall com from the
Earths ends with gifts to adore the great King, whose name shall be reverenced
and renowned to al People under Heaven, and al Princes bearing sway on Earth:
so far this fine Orator; and with such confidence, as if he received it by
special Revelation: but later Chiliasts are contrary to him, who say Christ's
millenar reign shall anteced the day of judgment; but Lactantius, that Christ
shall first Judge the World. Master Archer a most acut Lynx, but boldest Bayard
of al (who shoots at blind man's Buts) conjects from Daniels words; From the
time that daily Sacrifice Den 12. 11. 12.
shall ceas, and abomination which makes desolat be set up; shall be one thousand
two hundred ninty dais: blessed is he that waits and coms to one thousand three
hundred fifty fiv dais; this is forty fiv mo then one thousand two hundred
ninty, and both Prophetic dais or years, these (says he) began under Julian
Apostata, who revived Paganism, and incited the Jews to rebuild their Temple:
but God defeated it by an Earthquake and Subterraneal fires, which cast up the
foundations, as Christ foretold. So by his calculation the first sum (1290.)
should expire A. 1650. now past: and the last A. 1695. 46. years hence. But if
that shall elaps too, his Disciples like the Mahometans will date it to a farther
day. He has another cringe, that no Soul ever entered the third Heaven (no not
Christ's, how then can he sit at his Fathers right hand?) But a Celical or
Elementar Paradise, as he promised the good Thief: nor shall any Saint go
thither til the last Judgment pass. For H^l he says al Christians have erred
except himself: for Hell whereto Reprobats now go, is not the place of fire
prepared for the damned at last day; but a temporar prison in the Air, Earth,
or Sea to confine their Souls til the Judgment day: when they shall be sent into
a most spacious Hell, containing all the created World; or what else is beside
Gods mansion. Lo the audacity and temerity of Sectists! Who bear or boast as if
they were inspired or of Gods Cabinet Counsil; affecting novities tho never so
falls, frivolous, or fanatical.

These great Clercs like Arrius and other learned Heretics, Refutation.
mislead many ignorant Idiots, specialy in dark mysteries: but such squibs end
in an Ignis fatuus of their fantastic brains, for they have no sound proof that
Christ shall reign on Earth a thousand years, but that the Saints shall reign
with him in new Jerusalem, which is no terren place, but caled by Saint Paul
Heavenly Jerusalem the City of the living God: and by Joha that Hebr. 12. 22.
Rev. 21. 2 10.
great holy City, descending down from God out of Heaven; prepared as a Bride
adorned for her Husband the Lamb.

The contrary Reasons are these: 1. Christ ascended into Ergo not to reign a
thousand years before that day, for to say he shall descend to reign, and ascend
after a thousand years to com again, is against the Scripture, which warrants
only two comings. Master Mede to shun this Scilla falls into Charybdis of a
strange singular crotchet; making Christ's secund coming to judgment one
continued act with his millenar reign: because Saint Peter speaking of the
judgment day and perdition of ungoly men, subjoyns immediately or interruptedly,
that one day with the (...) 3. 7. 8.
Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, which he says
is meant precisely of that particular day, but the same Apostle elswher says,
God shall send Jesus Christ, when Acts 3. 19 20 21.
the times of refreshing shall com, whom the Heaven must receiv til the
restitution of al things, as he has spoken by all his Prophets. This time of
refreshing and restitution Chiliasts conceiv to be his millenar reign: for they
say none but Martyrs and some privileged Saints shall partak the first
Resurrection: which is Dan. 12. 13.
such a singular prerogativ, as Daniel could not obtain it but by special
promis; but it shall be when the Jews refreshing by Christ's presence shall com,
viz. at the general Resurrection. For Christ says, I go to prepare a place for
you, I will com again John 14. 2, 3.
and receiv you to my self, that where I am, there ye may be also: this plainly
provs, that he will com back but once at last day, to tak his Disciples with him
into Heaven, not to dwei with them here a thousand years or for ever. Saint
Paul says, God Ephesians 1. 20.
set Christ at his right hand in Heavenly places til the last day: so David.
Sit at my right hand til I make thine Enemies thy footstool; Ps. 110. 1. etc.
which shows he shall not com thence til al is subdued to him at last day. See
Psalm 110, it is short, but expounds four chapters of the Apocalypse (16. 17. 18.
19.) clearly.

2. All the godly or elect at Christ's secund coming shall 2. These 4. 16, 7.
those then living shall be caught up in the Clouds together with them to meet
the Lord in the Air: Ergo he coms not to reside with them, but to carry them
with him for ever.

3. Christ says his Kingdom is not of this World, but the Luke 17. 21.
or Temporal consisting in worldly Pomp, Power, Pleasure, Armies, Victories,
Slaughters, Triumphs, or such carnal courses as Chiliasts conceiv or vainly
confide.

4. The Church Militant is a amixd multitud of good and as Scriptures speak:
Ergo it shall not consist a thousand years soly of Saints; which need no
ordinary helps, as they dream.

5. None know the day of Judgment nor direct time of it,

6. Jerusalem shall never be restored, no more then Sodom Samaria, as the
Prophets inform: but eternal life in new Jerusalem is the reward of just Men at
last day, as St Paul Ezekiel. 16 53, Amos 5. 3. 2 Timothy 4 6.
tells: Ergo none shall reign on Earth with him in a rebuilt new Jerusalem, much
less he with them here.

7. Antichrist is to be cast alife into the Lake burning with Rev. 19. Rev. 7.
20.
Ergo he shall not be totaly destroyed til last day, as is showed.

8. The reward of Mattyrs is eternal life in Heaven: Ergo

9. The holy Martyrs Souls rest under the Altar in Heaven, Ergo shall not return
to reign here a thousand years. Archer seeing how absurd it is to bring Rev. 6. 9.
back Souls til last judgment, rovs at random, that no Soul shall enter the
third or highest Heaven til then, but abide in a sublunar Paradise with Enoch
and Elias; yet how knows he their Mansion is sublunar, or can that be under the
Altar? To silv which scruple, he frams a new Moon-calf-model of Heaven, Hell,
and Paradise after his own Pythagorean Noddle.

10. Antichrist is to continue til the last day of Judgment: Ergo he shall not
be fully or finaly abolished before those thousand years commence, as Chiliasts
say; who agree not together whether those Saints during the millenium shall beget
children, as others then living must multiply incredibly, nor how al shall be
sustained with food and raiment; whether miraculously or by industry? Such are
Sphynx Riddles, and many mo Reasons may be alleged, but let these suffice. Now
to answer their arguments, the chief arrows in their quiver follow: who like al
other Sects and Factions, cul out the obscurest places of Scripture either
misunderstood, or misapplied, or misinterpreted, putting their own sens on
them, which shall be sincerely scanned.

Ob. To begin with their best Basilisc of battery: Saint John Rev. 20 4, 5.
says, I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, who
lived and reigned with him a thousand years, but the rest of the dead lived not
again til those years were finished, this is the first Resurrection: Ergo they
shall regin so long.

Sol. The Apocalypse is a most misty mistical Prophecy, and this the darkest
part: which treats of the Resurrection only obiter or occasionaly; whereas first
Resurrection in all places else is spiritual of the Soul from the grav of sin to
Grace; and the very words apply to the Souls (not Bodies) of those that were
beheaded, for holy Writ has no first Resurrection of the Body; but we must
seek the true meaning where Resurrection is purposly handled: and much more is
here included or intruded in the premises then the conclusion can bear, for no
Ey able to pierce a Milston, is able to espy Earth in all the Context, nor that
Christ shall reign with the Martyrs, but they with him: to the true meaning of
the words, the very next much conduce: They shall be Priests of God and Christ,
and shall reign with him: Now his Priesthood is spiritual as his Kingdom; so al
Christians are Priests, but not to offer bodily Sacrifices; and al Kings but
not to rule men's temporal stats: else there would be more Kings then Subjects in
those thousand years, since not only the Martyrs, and a few privileged Saints;
but all the godly (millions of millions that must be born in that space) must
reign as Kings, nor can it in any property of speech be applied to Christ's
personal reign on Earth, since it is eternal not to be measured by time: but if
it be referred to his regal office of Mediator, that is far longer then a
thousand years, for if al his Monarchy past from his birth til now (1654 years)
be cut off, whith repugns al Scripture, since he still sits on David's Throne
ruling his Church as King, yet the future cannot be confined to so short a
scantle, since sundry secular Stats, Signiories, or Soveraignties have lasted far
longer; hence master Archer makes the millenium the evening or last daun of his
personal reign, contrary to master Mede, assuming to the morning many mo; as if
Christ by his omniscience and opening the Books of every Conscience, cannot
dispatch Judgment in a moment, but must employ thousands of years, as men will
presum to appoint him. Saint Paul has three parallel phrases; If Children then
Heirs Romans 8. 1^.
of God, and joint Heirs with Christ: if we suffer with him, that we may be
also glorified together: here we are Heirs, Sufferers, and glorified with him;
yet none imply his personal presence with men here, but our spiritual communion
with him in Heaven; the case is semblable of this Millenar reign which is meant
mysticaly and metaphoricaly of the Saints eternal reign with Christ; this is
the King-key of all the Fabric, and therefore so amply answered.

Ob. Daniel says many (not al) that shall sleep in the dust of Dan. ^^. ^
Earth shall awake: some to eternal life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt: but al shall rise at last day: Ergo this is meant of the Millenar
reign and real first Resurrection of Martyrs and some special Saints to Earthly
glory.

Sol. He had need of clear Crystal Specticles or Galilaeus great perspectiv who
can see such a meaning: for the Prophet speaks soly of the last Resurrection,
which Martyrs shall not partake, as Chiliasts teach; nor the wicked of the
first, til those one thousand years end. The Word (many) so hotly pressed, provs
not that al shall not rise at once; but that those which rise shall be many. So
Dr. Deodat senseth it well to the Original: the multitud of them that sleep in
dust shall awake. For all and many are oftimes Synonyma signifying the same, as
several subjects prompt and plain precedents prove.

Repl. Daniel ads, the wise shall shine as the Firmament, and Ibid. v. 3.
Saints as Stars: but at last Resurrection they shall shine as the Sun: Ergo he
means the first.

Sol. He expresses no absolut but comparativ glory of Saints: As St. Paul
says, there is one glory of the Sun, another of Moon and Stars: so is your
Resurrection. Nor does it follow that such are said to have so much glory here,
may not be said elswher to have more. Shall the Saints Bodies during those one
thousand years shine as the Firmament and Stars; yet eat, drink, sleep, go to
wars or wors? Surely so great glory cannot sort or suit with such sordidity.

Repl. The first Resurrection is promised to Daniel as a prime privilege ( Thou
shall stand in the lot at end of dais) but the last Ibid v. 13.
common to al: Ergo etc.

Sol. This inference is improper and impertinent: for Mr. Archer holds how all the Godly shall partake the first Resurrection so well as Daniel: nor is any
sound reason to includ him rather then Moses or David. The truth is, no
Resurrection is their imported; but a free promiss, that Daniel shall live in
peace and prosperity (as he did) al dais of his life til the end. So bold are
Sectists to scru Scriptures and seduce Idiots

Ob. Daniel says from the time daily Sacrifice shall ceas and Ibid. v. 11. 12.
abomination which makes desolat be set up; there shall be one thousand two
hundred dais: blessed is he that coms to the one thousand three hundred thirty
fiv dais. Mr. Archer taking years for dai^ (as is usual) makes them to begin
under Julian Apostata, who invited the Jews to reedify their Temple, til not a
stone was left on a stone: so by his comput, the first Sum (1290.) completed A.
1650. the last A. 1695. as he presumes.

Sol. In this confident assertion no part is sound, for what warrant has he to
take years for dais? Yet so writers use. Or what reason to begin them with
Julian? Indeed he opened Pagan Temples and set up Idolatry: but caused not the
Jews daily sacrifice to ceas, but desired to promot it, had not God prevented;
nor erected any abomination in Christian Churches. Daniel designs only two
times, when solen sacrifice shall be put down, and abomination set up: viz. by
Antiochus and Titus, not so late as Julian: nor is the Earthquake story
authentic, but application to Christ's prophecy most audacious; since it is
intended to Titus time, as the Text plainly provs. Daniels words declare the
short durance of Antiochus desolation; viz* a time, times, and half: which is
three years and half, or 1290. simple dais: and from it, til a plague shall fall
on his Person 45. mo (1335.) which betided precisely to Antiochus (as the
Maccabees and Josephus testify) but nothing to Julian.

Ob. David says, when the Lord shall build up Sion, and his Psalm.
glory appeer: Ergo Jerusalem shall be rebuilt by God, and Christ reign
gloriously there.

Sol. This is to snatch at shadows or semblance of words: but the Text treats
of Babylons captivity, and the Saints earnest longing to see Sion restored;
which is promised that the Lord shall get glory by it: but of Jerusalems
rebuilding or the Lords appeering there in glory; ne gry quidem nor ground.

Ob. Peter says, The day of the Lord will com as a Thief 2 Pet. 3. (...).
in the night: in which the Heavens shall pass with a nois, and Elements melt
with heat, the Earth with all Works therein shall be burnt up. Nathless we
according to his promiss, look for a new Heaven and Earth wherein dwells
righteousness: Ergo al old Creatures shall be consumed with fire, and new
substituted for the Saints use, far more glorious and righteous^ as some presum
to model.

Sol. Several Sects diversely and dangerously distort this Text: but the
Apostles answers some Scoffers which ask, Where is the promiss of his coming? Not
to reign one thousand years (as Chiliasts fondly imagine) but to judge al flesh,
as is evidently expressed: which is after those one thousand years, or at last
end of them. Yea many words ( That day will com as a Thief, 2 The^. ^. 7, 8.
in which the Heavens, Elements, and Earth shall be burnt up) clearly convince
Christ's coming to Judgment: the last words whereon they most rely ( A new Earth
wherein dwells righteousness) as if they cannot mean the Judgment day, because no
righteous Men shall then dwell on Earth: the Original runs, we in whom
righteousness dwells, look for a new Heaven and Earth. For the habitation of
righteousness refers to just Men, who expect the performance of promiss: but if
they be read as we translat: righteousness relats soly to the Heavens ( in
quibus Coelis, not in qua Terra) since one Pronoun respects not ^oth
Substantivs, as Junius observes. Yea Archer agniseth, that no righteous Soul is
to inhabit Heaven in those one thousand years, nor any after within the verge of
created Heaven; for a^ that space shall be Hell as he holds: so al tends nothing
to a Millenar reign.

Ob. Isaiah says, I creat new Heavens and a new Earth: but Isaiah 65. 17, 21,
^2.
the old shall not be remembered nor com to mind. They shall build houses and
inhabit them, plant Vineyards and eat the fruit of them: for my elect shall long
enjoy the works of their hands: but these things cannot be done after the last
Judgment: Ergo etc.

Sol. The Prophet means not, that after Heaven and Earth is burnt or new
created; Men shall build or plant: but Mr. Buroughs expounds it by a Metaphor,
that God in later dais shall do such glorious things for his Church, as if he
made al new: which is far from burning the old, being no more then what Peter
brings from Joel 2. 30. I will show wonders in Heaven and Earth; Blood, Fire,
and pillars of Smoke: which was accomplished at Pentecost, when the holy Ghost
descended. (...) 12. 26, 27.
Nor more then that in Haggai 2. 6. Yet it is a little while, and I will shake
the Heavens, Earth, and Sea: which was performed at Christ's first coming, and
the Apostles preaching to the Gentiles: whereof Isaiah speaks in the cited
chapter, as St. Paul Romans 10. 20.
expounds the first verse. I was found of them that sought me not: but to
interpret it of his secund coming, will make the Jews suspend their faith, til
those promises of building and planting be fulfilled.

Ob. It Is said God has not subjected the World to com to the ^^b. 2 5, 8
Angels; but now we see not al things put under him: Ergo Christ is to have al
put under him. This is not yet done at his first coming, as the Words are
clear: nor shall be in the life to com, for then he must resign the Kingdom to
his Father, so by consequent it must be exe^uted during his interstitial
Millenar reign; when he shall triumphantly subdu al and al sorts of Enemies.

Sol. The World to com there meant and mentioned, is the time of the Gospel;
which was not ministered by Angels like the Mat 28. 18
Law on Sinai, but by the Son of God; this new world differed more from the old
then the Earth after the Flood from it before, and began at Christ's first
coming, but manifested at his (...) 1 31.
Resurrection, when al power in Heaven and Earth was given him, being set abov
al Principalities: yet the full accomplishment is not til last day, when Death,
Hell, and Satan shall be made his footstool. All this cannot be verified of the
interstitial Millenium: for yer that inchoats, many things must terminat, which
cannot be subjected, nor his chief Enemies subdued, since Death shall still have
dominion; Satan only bound in the bottomless pit, not cast into the burning
lake, and Hell not utterly trod under foot.

Ob. Jeremy says, They shall say no more the Arc of the Lords Jer. 3. 16, 17.
Covenant, nor shall it com to mind or memory: then they shall call Jerusalem the
Lords Throne, and al Nations shall gather to it, nor shall they walk after their
hearts imaginations: Ergo al past things shall be forgot, and Israel return to
Jerusalem which shall be a Throne of Glory, and al Nations join to them: al
which can be fulfilled at no time sav in those thousand years.

Sol. The old things to be forgot are lawish Ceremonies, not Gospel Ordinances:
the Arc and Temple were by Christ's first coming removed: the walking of Juda
and Israel together, with the Nations conjoined, imports the caling of Jews and
Gentiles to the true Church Heavenly Jerusalem: For so says Isaiah; It shall com
to pass in the last dais, that the Lords Isai 2. 2, 3.
house shall be established in the Mountain top, and al Nations shall flow to it:
for out of Sion shall go a Law, and the Lords word from Jerusalem. The last dais
were the Apostles times, who from Sion and Jerusalem blew the Gospel; Trumpet
to al people: as Jeremy speaks; I will giv you Pastors according to my Jer. 3 15.
heart (Christ and his Apostles) which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding. The walking after Gods heart implies no freedom from sin, but a
state of grace, wherein God givs new hearts and writes his Law therein. their
main ground (that Jerusalem new built shall be a Throne of Glory, being before
Jer. (...)
but his footstool) is a groundless crotchet, for Sion, Jerusalem and the Arc,
are caled in the old Testament not only Gods footstool, but his Throne; and in
the new Testament not only his Throne, but footstool. Thus like other Sects
they sens the Scripture literaly or tropicaly as they list.

Ob. Daniel says, In the dais of these Kings God shall set up a (...). 2. 44.
kingdom never to be d^stroyed; but shall stand for ever: Ergo Christ shall have
an everlasting kingdom, and Jerusalem enjoy endless joy on Earth.

Sol. What a precious inference is this? so Preachers quote Texts, and people
turn their Bibles, but may go beyond Seas to seek their glosses. Daniels
everlasting kingdom is merely spiritual and celical, as the Angel said to Mary,
The Lord shall Luk 1. 32* 33.
giv him his Father David's Throne, and he shall reign over Jacob for ever: This
kingdom for the matter is everlasting, being the Glory which the Saints shall
enjoy for ever with Christ in Heaven; but for the manner of administration, he
shall resign it to the Father, when the work of Redemption is perfected: but no
Millenar Earthly kingdom as they dream.

Ob. Saint John says, He was clothed with a vesture dipped i^ Rev. 19. 13* 14*
15.
blood: Ergo Christ shall slay his Enemies and embru his vestments in blood,
that none shall be left to trouble the Church during that Millenar reign.

Sol. So they say, but the next words speak contrary: for his Armies in Heaven
(not on Earth) followed on whit Horses, clothed in fine whit linen, not bloody:
yea his war-weapon is a sharp sword out of his mouth, not in his hand: who shall
rule the Nations with a rod of Iron, and tread the winepress of Gods wrath. In
a word, these bloody battles are not ascribed to Christ literaly, as appears by
a parallel place: Who is this that coms from Isai 63. 1. etc.
Edom with died garments from Bozra? meaning Christ by reason of the slain
Edomits, when in property of speech he had no body or bloody raiment, being
seven hundred years before his birth.

Ob. It Is said the City had no need of Sun or Moon, and the Rev 21. 23. 24.
Kings of the Earth bring their glory to it: Ergo Jerusalem there meant shall
shine in great temporal glory, and terren Princes be subdued to it at Christ's
coming to reign a thousand years.

Sol. Indeed Heavenly Jerusalem is there meant, and al such places or passages
are Allegorical, to show the Churches condition on Earth, and Saints state in
Heaven: which is elswher expressed by Metaphors of gold, precious Stones,
Fountains, Fruits etc. but to interpret them literaly of any City on Earth, is
like the Athenien Dotard, who deemed every ship that came into the Harbor to be
his own.

Ob. Zechary says, he that is feeble among them at that day, Zech. 12. 8, 9.
shall be as David, and David's house as God: I will seek to destroy al Nations
that shall com against Jerusalem: Ergo the Saints who are to reign with Christ
shall excel in glory, and he will destroy al Jerusalems Enemies.

Sol. Excellent inferences: Ergo Potlid. The Prophet plainly speaks of gifts
poured on al Saints of the new Testament by the spirit of supplication, which
makes the least of them like David; yea greater then John Baptist, as Christ
declares: but Mat. 11. v. 11.
what is this to earthly Jerusalem, or Chiliasts Mathematical Kingdom? Surely
there is no soundnes in it nor semblance for it in all Gods book. Other places
are heaped up, which like Bay leafs cast into fire, make much crackling in
Pulpits and Pamphlets: but if all the former be shadows, the rest will vanish
into vapor.

Ob. The word Day in Prophetic phrase or Hebrew Idiom signifies some space of
time, not simply twelv or twenty four hours: as the day of tentation in the
Wilderness is forty years long: the Day of Babylonish captivity seventy: Giv us
this Day our daily Bread, purports our term of life, and it is sometimes used for
Eternity, this day sh^lt thou be with me in Paradise: Ergo the Day of Judgment
is to be taken in the same sens.

Sol. The antecedent is granted, and consequent shall not be denied: for none
can tell how long that Judgment shall last, specialy since time shall be no more,
as the Angel swore. Yet Mr. Mede makes it a continued act with the reign of
just one thousand years. For as Rabbi Elias confines the Worlds continuance to
6000. years: so he puts the Millenium of Messiahs glorious reign, to be a
periodical consummation of al things, when shall be a Sabbath of Eternal rest.
Why then do common Chiliasts assign one thousand to that reign, either before,
at, or after the Judgment day? Let them render a reason of the one and the
other will soon be resolved, why Day implies a larger space (more or less) then
twenty four hours: because al time to God is but as a Day to Man. In the interim
many puzzeling questions may be proposed to them.

1. Whether the holy Martyrs and chosen Confessors to com Interroga^s.
with Christ, shall multiply their generations in subordinat successions, like
the Saints then living here? If so, then must they marry and giv in marriage,
which scars suits or sorts with glorified bodies.

2. Whether those then living shall surviv al those years, and not taste of death;
but be only changed at last day? If so, then shall they exced Methusalah and all the Protopatriarchs in longevity.

3. Whether their Progenies shall be al elect vessels, being none of Gog and
Magogs race which are to be destroyed both Bodies and Souls? If so, then is
Christ's Flock no little Fold, since their Offspring will multiply incredibly in one
thousand years.

4. How so many millions of millions can be maintained; whether miraculously as
Elias was, or by industry as al others? If so, then must every particular
person provide for himself, since al servitud will be cashired.

5. Where such numberless multituds shall inhabit, whom the Earth can hardly
contain, much less sustain? Whether al must cohabit in new built Jerusalem, to
eat and drink at Christ's Table, where Infidels shall assiege them; or scatteredly
abroad where they shall be subject to the Enemies swords? Whether they shall be
invulnerable and incorruptible to slay those with whom they wage war, yet never
be hurted? How they shall live so gently with all sorts of Serpents and wild
Beasts, yet hold hostility with Men? Lastly how the natures of al Animals shall
be so miraculously Metamorphosed, as not to fear Man's face, nor to feed on
prey* but al live familiarly one with another on the same foods? Beside sundry
such scruples touching eating, drinking, sleeping, voiding excrements, and
other works of Nature simply in themselfs sinless. Happily they will answer with a
vulgar Proverb. One Fool may ask mo questions then many wise men can resolv:
therefore let this by business be buried in silence, lest they sting my long
ears,

Stulte, cave quid agis: noli irritare Crabrones.
Fool, what thou do take heed,
Stir not the Hornets breed.
Be wise or wary: too many such nests are roused already, and mo will be, when
thou ministrest more matter of wrath by future provocation.

Mr. Burton and some of his Brethren, allege a few Fathers Fathers.
to countenance the Chiliastic cause: yet no Sects so much slights or scorns the
Ancients as they: but infinite authorities may be mustred to the contrary, were
it not lost labor. For deaf Adders will not be charmed, nor self wedded Sectists
informed or reformed. Such as desire to know the primitiv Churches verdict
herin, may consult St. Austin L. 20. de Civ. Dei. and L. Vives commentary: but
let al wise sober Christians reject such vain doctrins or delusions, which tend
not to amend manners, or sav their Souls: expecting with patience our blessed
Saviors secund and last coming in the Clouds to Judgment, not to a temporar
reign (to begin A. 1650. 1655. 1695. or ad Graecas Calendas) being still
prepared like wise Virgins with oil in their Lamps to meet the Bridegroom, and
sing St. John's Epithalamion: Even so com Lord Jesus: the grace of our Lord Rev.
22.
Jesus Christ be with you, Amen: which being the last per close of holy Bible,
shall be the final upshot or Catastrophe of this harsh Scene: sav a Supplement
touching their chief Coryphee, Mr. Mede, who is much more cautious and curious
(tho alike Mr. M^^^.
veracious) then the rest. Therefore his scattred speculations shall be carefully
collected and faithfully presented to public examen: whose principal proofs are
almost al answered plenarily in the premises.

1. The Millenar doctrine was so general in the next age after Apostles, that
Just. Martyr says both he and al Orthodox believed it: yea Irenaeus,
Tertullian, Lactantius, Cyprian and others defended it from St. Peter's words,
One day with the Lo^d is as a thousand years: but it was soon decried or
discarded, being not rightly understood, or corrupted in some circumstances,
which drew Men diversely into Factions: so that the Antichiliasts being pressed
with pregnant proofs from the Apocalypse which they could not answer; suspended
that Book from the Scripture Canon, til they found shifts of a spiritual and
corporal Resurrection, and other such to elude those places, and then allowed it.

2. Justin in his Dialog to Trypho a Jew speaks thus: You ask, whether we
seriously confess Jerusalems restoration, and expect the gathering of Israel
with their Tribes, Patriarchs, and Prophets; or g^ant it only to gain us? I
answer, That many pious Professors, with my self, sincerely assert it, but
others not so Orthodox deny it: For some profane Atheists and Heretics (who
blasphemed the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying there is no
resurrection) gainsay these things: but we know and beleev both a Resurrection
of the Body, and a thousand years reign in Jerusalem; which shall be reedified
and enlarged, as the Prophets testify. Isaiah says, There shall be a new Heaven
Isai 65. 17. 22
and Earth, the dais of my People are as a Tree of Life, Which last words
plainly point out the thousand years: For God said to Adam, In that day thou
eatest of the Tree, thou shall die: but he did not accomplish a thousand years.
We also know that saying one day is as a 1000. years, to be to the same
purpose. For a certain Man, with us caled John (one of Christ's twelv Apostles)
prophesied by Revelation, that Christ's faithful Members should fulfill those
years at Jerusalem, when the last Judgment and general Resurrection shall be of
al jointly together: Ergo it is no new Opinion.

3. The Rabins say the World shall dure six thousand years as it was created in
six dais) and the seventh thousand shall be the great day of Judgment or reign
of Messiah. So R. Ketina: the World lasts six thousands years, and in one it
shall be destroyed: of which it is said, the Lord only shall be exalted in that
day: Isai 2. 11. 17. Psalm. 90. 4.
David says a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday: which later
Rabbis understand of the general Judgment to be a thousand y^ers, and then
ensues an eternal Sabbath: but they differ (as Christian Sects do in diverse
dogmats) at what Millenium this day shall be. The School of R. Elias makes the
Judgment day the last Millenium of their six thousand: but others assign a
seven thousandth for that day. Hence St. Jerome charge Chiliasts with Judaism,
as a chief brand of error: yet to hold their Opinions in true Tenets (as of
Paradise, Gehenna, the World to com, etc.) is not culpable; no more then to
maintain the Trinity with Papists: but to reject al, will harden and exasperat
them. The 92. Psalm is entitled, A Song for the Sabbath, wherein is nothing but
rest: so Tradition agrees, that as every seventh year is a time of releas, so
the seventh Millenium shall be the Saints rest or reign, and the worlds releas.

4. Christ's coming is immediately to follow Antichrists confusion: and the
seventh Trumpet with those thousand years, and other appendent Prophecies,
forego the great day of Judgment which the Jews so much celebrat, and Christ
with his Apostles commemorat. This is no short space of hours, but of many
years in Hebrew dialect; circumscribed with two real Resurrections, as peculiar
precincts. Which day begins at the morning Judgment of Antichrist, and other
the Churches Enemies then alife, by the Lords glorious appeering in flames of
fire; but ends at the general Resurrection and Judgment after the thousand
years reign: when Satan shall be loosed a short space, and the wicked cast into
Hell torments; but the Saints translated into Heaven to reign with Christ for
ever. This St. Peter 2 Pet. 3 7. 8. 13
calls, The day of Judgment and perdition of ungodly Men: adding immediately,
Beloved, be not ignorant that one day (there newly named) with the Lord is as a
thousand years: apertly intimating, that the very Judgment day shall be a
thousand years; when he and his Brethren the Jews look for new Heavens, and a
new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness according to his promiss. Where was this
promiss (being before John saw the Apocalyptic Vision) except in Isaiah? I
creat new Heavens and a new Isai 65. 17.
Earth, and the former shall not be remembered or com into mind. Isai 66. 22.
Again, As the new Heavens and new Earth which I will make, shall remain before
me; so shall your seed and name remain: which is a main evidence how God will
rebuild it.

5. This is that Kingdom ready to judge the world, as St. 2 Timothy 4. 1.
Paul says: I charge before the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge quick and
dead at his appeering, and his Kingdom: For at last 1 Cor. 15. 24 28
general Judgment he shall resign the Kingdom (of his Church) to God the Father,
that he may be subject to him who subdu^d a^ to himself, that God may be al in all. So far is he from entering a new Kingdom: Ergo that which shall neither be
before the Lords appeering, nor after the last Judgment, must needs be between
both, which is the Millenar reign. This is a sly subtle Argument.

6. This is the Son of Man's Kingdom which Daniel saw, to Dan. 7. 14 27
whom was given dominion, glory, and a Kingdom; that al People, Nations, and
Toungs, should serve him: when dominion and greatness of Kingdoms under Heaven
shall be given to the Saints of the most high, as the Angel interprets. This
cannot be after last Judgment, since he must then resign, not receiv a Kingdom:
but his and John's is the same, because they begin at one term, the destruction
of the fourth Roman Beast: viz. that in Daniel, Dan. 7. 11.
when he was slain and his body given to the burning flame: that in John, when
the Beast and sals Prophet are cast alife into Rev 19 v 20.
a lake burning with fire and brimstone. As also because both their Judgments
are alike, which by comparing will appeer. For Daniel says, I beheld, til the
Thrones were set, and Judgment given Dan. 7. 9 10 22 Rev. 20. 4.
to the Saints, who possessed the Kingdom. So John, I saw Thrones, and they sat
on them* and judgment was given to them, who lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years. What can better conform or cohere? For whatever the Jews, or
Christ and his Apostles delivered touching the great Judgment day, is taken out
of Daniels said Vision: viz. that Judgment is to be accomplished by fire,
Christ to com in the Clouds in the glory of his Father, the Saints to judge the
World with him, and Antichrist abolished with the brightness of his coming.
Lastly* This is that large Kingdom showed to Nebuchadnezar in a statu of Dan.
2. 34. 35.
4 Kingdoms: not that of a stone cut out of the Mountain, while the series of
Monarchy remained; for this is Christ's Kingdoms present state: but the stone
which becam a Mountain, when al Kingdoms were utterly defaced or destroyed:
which must needs be his Millenar reign.

7. The Roman Empire is the fourth Kingdom reveled to Daniel Imagine confusa,
but not according to the distinction of Facts, or specification of Fates, as it
was to John: nor is it strange to see a thing unveled in general; yet most
particulars sealed or conceled. For the surrogat Call of Gentiles in Jews stead,
was showed to Peter and other Apostles: but the particular Fates and Stats not
known, til Christ reveled them in Apocalyptic Visions. For the order of times
and course of things to be acted, was reserved til John's revelation. The
Mother-Text whence the Jews ground an expectation of the great Judgment Day
(whereto almost al descriptions in the new Testament refer) is Daniels said
Vision of a Session, when the Dan 7. 9, 10. etc.
fourth Beast was to be destroyed: but the grand Assizes resemble their
Synedrion or chief Court, where the Pater Jud^cii had his Assessors sitting on
semicircle seats before him. I beheld, says he, til the Thrones were pitched
(not cast down, as late Translations render) and the Ancient of dais (Pater
Consistorii) did sit: and the Judgment (of the whole Sanedrim) was set, and the
Books opened. Here the name and form of Judgment is cited, and twice after
repeated: 1. At amplification of the V. 21. 22. ^6.
wicked horns tyranny, when judgment was given to the Saints of the most High.
2. In the Angels interpretation, That the Judgment shall sit and take away his
Dominion, to consume and destroy to the end: Where note, that Cases of Dominion,
Blasphemy, Apostasy, or the like belonged to the Sanhedrim: whence St. Jude and
the Jews call it, The great day of Judgment, Jude v 6 7.
and describe it by fire, because the Throne was a fiery flame, and wheels as
burning fire: a fiery stream issued out before him, and the Beasts body was
given to the burning flame. The like expressions are in the Gospel, where this
day is intimated or inferred, the Son of Man shall com in the Clouds in the
glory of his Father with his holy Angels: thousand thousands ministered to him:
as Daniel says, I saw one like the Son of Men coming in the clouds to the
Ancient of dais: Hence St. Paul, learning that the Saints shall judge the world,
because Thrones were set and judgment given them, confuted the Theslaloniens
falls fear of 2 These. 2. 2 3.
Christ's coming then at hand: because that day cannot be, til the Man of sin
first com and reign his appointed time, as Daniel foretold; whose destruction
shall be at the Son of Man's appeering in the Clouds, but not before. For Daniels
wicked horn or Beast acting in it, is Paul's Man of sin, as the Church from her
in fancy ever interprrted.

8. The Kingdom of the Son of Man and Saints of the most High in Daniel, begins
when the great judgment sits: but Christ's Millenar reign is the same with
Daniels: Ergo it begins at the Great judgment. That both are one self Kingdom,
appeers thus. 1. They both began at the fourth Beasts destruction; Dan 7. 11.
^2, 2^.
that in Daniel when he was slain, and his body given to burning flame: That in
John, when the Beast and falls Prophet Rev. 19 20, 21.
( Daniels wicked horn) were cast alife into a lake burning with brimstone. 2.
Because John begins the Millenium at the same judgment Session; for both say
they saw Thrones and those that sat on them; and the Saints lived or reigned
with Christ the Son of Man. If then those years begin with the judgment day, it
cannot consummat til the end: for Gog and Magogs destruction, and general
Resurrection is not til then: Ergo the thousand years are included in that
judgment Day. Hence it results, that what Scripture speaks of Christ's Kingdom
at his secund coming, or at Antichrists confusion, is of necessity the same
which Daniel saw should be then: and consequently the Millen reign is included
between the commencement and consummation of that great Day. So those sayings of
St. Luke concerning Luke 17. 20 19 11 2^ 31
Christ's coming in Clouds with power and great glory (concluding, when ye see
these things com to pass, know that the Kingdom of God is at hand) refer to
Daniels Prophecy, being no where else found in the old Testament: for Christ calls
himself often the Son of Man, as he is styled in that Vision of the great
Judgment, whereof we must at his secund coming expect the accomplishment. 3. The
Apocalyptic thousand years, follow the times of the Beast and falls Prophet, as
the series shows: which if we deny we must disclaim Rome to be Babylon, the
Papacy the two hornd Beast, Antichrist the false Prophet, and the Apocalypse
Canonical: as the Opposers of old Chiliasts were driven to do.

9. Those thousand years are yet to com: but what the manner or condition of that
Kingdom means, Men much differ. Most say Antichrist shall not be fully or
finally destroyed til Christ com to judgment; which may be asserted without
holding that this shall be before that Day, as common Chiliasts contend: for it
may be a third time during it, which shall continu so long: At entrance whereof
the Beast and Antichrist must perish: for this is not a Day of few hours, but a
continued act of diverse years, wherein Christ shall destroy al his Enemies,
beginning with Antichrist, and ending with the general Resurrection; which is
his Millenar reign in new Jerusalem. So there is one only Millenium, which
begins at the Beasts perdition: when Satan shall be bound in chains and cast
into the bottomless pit (being before only cast from Heaven or the Imperial
Roman Throne in Constantins time) not to peep out til the thousand years expire.

10. The first or secund Resurrection are proved to be both real: 1. The place
of the first Resurrection seems plainest for Rev. 20. 4, 5.
allegory, since it refers to the Martyrs rising. 2. It Is said, Those that were
beheaded for Jesus lived and reigned with him a thousand years; but the rest of
the Dead lived not again til that time was finished: Ergo if one be literaly of
them which lived not again til the thousand years end; the other must be so too
of those that lived and reigned when that time commenced, caled the first
Resurrection. 3. Though the Jews had no direct distinct notice of two
Resurrections, sav only in gross, to be at the judgment Day: yet they expect
such wherein some which rise shall reign sometime on Earth: as it is said, The Souls
of the Wisd 3. 1. and (...).
righteous shall in time of their Visitation judge the Nations, and their Lord
shall reign for ever. So the twenty four Elders sing, We shall reign on Earth. 4.
The whole Church after Apostles Rev 5. 10.
held, as Justin informs, that the first Resurrection belongs soly to Martyrs
and chief Confessors as a special privilege; which made Men much more affect
Martyry, and induced prayer for the Dead, that they might partake that
Resurrection, as Tertullian tells. Thus we are bound to beleev the matter: but
the manner of the Saints thousand years reign with Christ in new Jerusalem, is
not so clearly unveled.

11. New Jerusalem and the Nations walking in the light of it, are not one: for
new Jerusalem is not the whole Church, but the new Worlds main Metropolis: The
Nations which walk in her light shall be happy and glorious; but changable and
liable to great commotions at end of those thousand years: whereas those in new
Jerusalem shall be manumised from al mutation; on whom the secund death has no
power, and God shall wipe al tears from their eyes. Christ's words prove ( God said
to Moses, Mat. 22. 32. Exodus 3 8.
I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: he is not God of the Dead but of
the living*) that they shall possess Palestin the Land of promiss in person*
which yet they never enjoied but as Strangers or Sojourners: For the Covenant
is made to each so well as to their seed: viz. to Abram Genesis 13. 15. Genesis 15. 7.
Genesis 17. 8. to Isaac Genesis 26. 8. to Jacob Genesis 35. 12. to al three jointly
Exodus 6. 4, 8. Deuteronomy. 6. 18. Deuteronomy. 11. 21. Deuteronomy. 20. 30. Now this promiss is not
yet performed to them, nor shall be while they ly dead: Ergo they must be raised
to inherit the promised Land: from which places the Rabins proved the
Resurrection against the Sadduces. This St. Paul intimats saying, Abraham
looked for Hebr. 11. 10.
a City whose builder is God. Again, now they desire a better Country, that is
an Heavenly or from Heaven; for God has prepared for them a City. This
probably is new Jerusalem, said to com down from God out of Heaven, prepared as
a Bride adorned for her Husband. Zacharias in his Prophetic Benedict us says,
to Luke 1. 72.
perform the mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant:
meaning how he will herafter remember to fulfill his Covenant to them of
possessing the promised Land in persons, which is not yet done: so they must
live bodily at first Resurrection to enjoy this promiss actualy. Christ says,
many Mat. 8. 11. 12.
(not al) shall com from East and West, who shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven: but the Children of the Kingdom shall be
cast into outer darkness. This seems to imply their Kingdom of new Jerusalem,
which shall dure one thousand years.

12. Christ's Kingdom the Church where he reigns in his Church is one thing, and
that where the Saints shall reign with him another: the first began at his first
coming, which he shall resign to the Father: the last is to commence at his
secund, and continu one thousand years on Earth. Hereof see Dan. 7. 14. Luke 9.
11, 15. Luke 21. 31. 2 These. 1. 5. 2 Timothy 4. 1. For the Millenium (caled by the
Jews and St. Juae the great Day Rev. 11. 15.
of Judgment, or Judgment of the great Day) is the seventh Chiliad current,
which Christ shall consummat with the general Judgment. This is his grand
Assizes beginning with the seventh Trumpet: the process whereof John describes
by a duple Rev. 20. 5. 6, 12.
Judgment and Resurrection, beside the millenar reign betwixt both. The morning
shall be of Antichrist and his adherents, whom Christ shall confound at his
coming, and then shall be 2 These. 2 8.
the first Resurrection: the Evening on the remnent of his Enemies ( Gog and
Magog, whose number is as the Sea sand) which shall end with last universal
Resurrection: when the last enemy Death being totaly vanquishd, he shall yield
up the Kingdom 1 Cor. 15. 24. 28.
(his Church) to the Father, that God may be al in all. This is the one thousand
years Sabbath, in which the Saints shall reign with their King on Earth, and
ever after enjoy an Eternal rest in the highest increat Heaven, not in a new
material World of Heaven and Earth, as some suppose. So says Irenaeus, the L.
5. c. 28.
World was created in six dais, and in 6000. years shall consummat: at end of
which coms the 7000th. or Sabbath to the Saints. These are his sublime nicities
or self-singular novities, if Ipse dixit may pass current for warrant. He has
many mo, but these the best: which shall suffice to shun prolixity.

His best basis of building (beside what is before answered) Epilog. 2 Pet. 3.
7, 8.
relies on St. Peter's words of one thousand years as one day: which he stiffly
presses to be the precise day of Judgment immediately forenamed: yet David's one
thousand years as yesterday, and Peter's one day as one thousand years, do not
denote so many solar years in special, as they dote or dream: but only in
general, that no time dimensions (no not thousands of years) are any way
considerable to God, who is al Eternity, and his works not to be measured by
transitory time. St. Ibid. v. 9, 10.
Peter's words are directed as an apt answer to Scoffers, who instantly ads: The
Lord is not slack concerning his promiss (ac Men count slacknes) but long
suffering to us ward, and unwilling that any should perish; but that al should
repent. But the Day of the Lord will com as a Thief in the night, wherein the
Heavens shall pass away with great nois, and the Elements melt with servent heat
etc. Which clearly indicats, that God will certainly perform the promiss of his
coming, and is not slack: for one thousand years to him is but as one day. So
those words do not relat to the preceding Day of Judgment (which he touches
obiter or occasionaly only) but is a mere answer to the said Scoffers, which is
his sole scope or subject, as al Orthodox exposiors agree.

Medi Paraphrasis acuta: Medes witty Paraphrase.
TO set a fairer gloss or garnish on his Devise, he givs a Paraphrase on 2
Peter 3.
pretty Paraphrase on the whole Chapter, which shall be curtly contracted. St.
Peter exhorts the believing Jews, to Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.
mind the holy Prophets words concerning Christ's coming to Judgment, which also
the Apostles confirm: but forewarns that in the last dais shall com Scoffers
which walk after their own wais or wills saying, where is the promiss of his
coming? For since the Fathers fell a sleep, al things continu as they were from
the Creation. These last dais are the times of the Churches Apostasy under
Antichrist, as St. Paul speaks; in the later times some shall depart 1 Timothy 4. 1.
from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits and doctrins of Devils.

They consider not, how the Heavens were of old by Gods Word, Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8.
and the Earth standing out of the Waters (the great Deep) and in or amidst
them (the Clouds or Floodgates hanging about it) whereby the World then (in
Noah's dais) perished: but the Heavens and Earth now are by the same Word kept
in store reserved unto to fire against the Judgment Day (which Irenaeus calls a
flood of Fire, as the Prophets express it by fiery flames) and perdition of
ungodly Men. But beloved, be not ignorant of this, that one day with the Lord
is as one thousand years, and one thousand years as one day. As if he should
say ( Glossa corrumpit Textum) whereas I mention the Judgment day, lest ye may
mistake it for a common day; know that one day with the Lord is as one thousand
years, and contrarily, for the Prophets speak of Christ's coming indefinitly in
general, not distinguishing first and secund, which the Gospel from Daniel more
clearly teaches, but we being rightly instructed in both, must apply each to
its proper time. The Jewish Doctors writing of this Day, cite David's words, one
thousand years, in thy sight are as yesterday: yet is not that Day named: but
St. Peter specifies it, and immediately subjoins his words, seeming rather to
respect the Jews saying of that day then David's. For they are usaly taken as an
argument why God is not slack in his promiss: since it is not a question, whether
the time be long or short to God (in whose eyes millions of years are as
yesterday) but to u^, who measure by dais and hours. Justin Martyr and Irenaeus
apply St. Peter's words pointly or precisely to the Judgment Day or great Day of
the Lord, which is to last or continu complet a thousand solar years.

The Lord is not slack in his promiss (tho this day be deforred) Verse. 9, 10,
to the end.
but long suffering toward us (which is cause of th supposed slacknes) not
willing that any (of Isreal's seed) should perish, but that al should repent (as
he exhorted them at Jerusalem to do, that Acts 3. 19. 21.
their sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall com, til the
restitution of al things which God speaks of by all his Prophets) or else they
must perish with the rest of Infidels. For that Day will com as a Thief in the
night, when the Heavens shall pass away with great nois (as crakling of fire)
and the Elements melt with fervent heat: the Earth also and works therein shall
be burnt up. Since then al these shall be dissolved (or abolished) what persons
ought ye to be in all godly conversation? (Which should suit to our faith)
looking for that Day of God to com; if we will sbun the peril of it. Nathelesse
(whatever those Scoffers say, who doubt or deride the promiss) we according to
it, expect new Heavens and Earth (a new refined state of the World) wherein
dwells righteousness (as Isaiah speaks, chapter 60. 20. 21. chapter 65. 17. chapter 66. 22.)
wherefore beloved, since ye look for such things, be diligent to be found
spotless and blameless of him in peace: accounting his long suffering for
Salvation: as our beloved Brother Paul according to the wisdom given him, has
writ to you: who in all his Epistles (wherein are some things hard to be
understood, which the unlearned and unstable wrest to their own destruction, as
they do other Scriptures) speaks of these things viz. Romans 2. 4, 5, 6, 7. 1
Cor. 1. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 3. 13. 2 Cor. 7. 11. Phil. 1. 10. Ph. 2. 15. Ph. 3. 10.
Col. 3. 4. 5. 1 These. 2. 12. 1 Th. 3. 13. 1 Th. 5. 32. 2 Th. 1. 8, 11. 1 Timothy
6. 14, 25. Tit. 2. 12. 13. Heb. 12. 14, 28, 29. For better understanding St.
Peter of the Worlds conflagration or combustion, consider these circumstances.

1. That the old Hebrew (the Scriptures language) has no one word to express
the univers of superior and inferior Bodies (caled in Greec Cosmos, in Latin
Mundus, in English World) but Heaven and Earth jointly: so when St. Peter says
(the World then being perished by water; but the Heavens and Earth now are
reserved to fire) he might convertibly utter, the Heavens and Earth then
perished by water, as the World now shall by fire: so a new Heaven and Earth in
Scripture notion imply a new World.

2. That no other World or Heaven and Earth shall perish by fire; then what
before perishd by water, as the antithesis argues: which is the sublunar, whose
Heaven is Air, and Earth the whole Geographic Globe: both which were vitiated or
defiled by the deluge, and the Creatures destroyed or much depraved. Such a
World then and no other Heaven or Earth shall suffer a secund flood of Fire for
restoration, as it had before a deluge of Waters for corruption. This is a
witty novity (as there be sundry such now adais) but scars Orthodox: since it is a
Catholic Tenet, that the Ethereal Heavens with all their Starry host shall be
burnt up.

3. That the Word (...) (translated Elements) is not distinguished from Heaven
and Earth there named; because Heaven includs Air, and Earth Water: so three
Physical Elements are implied, and Fire (if it be a fourth, or not rather a
quality of intens heat inherent in another Body) must burn the (...), and can
be none of that to be burnt. So it must be rendered the whole Host of them, or
Furniture belonging to them, as (...) signifies the works or Host of the Earth
which shall be burnt. Gen 2. 1.
For Moses says, The Heavens and Earth were finished, with all the Host of
them, which the Septuagints style Furniture. So the meaning is, the Heavens and
Host thereof, with the Earth and works or Furniture therein shall be fired. The
Scripture specifies three Heavens: 1. Empyreal of Glory, whose Host or Army are
invisible Angels and blessed Spirits. 2. Ethereal or Starry, whose Host are
shining Stars and Planets. 3. Aereal or Sublunary, whose Host are either visible
as Meteors and Fowls; or invisible, as evil Spirits and Fiends, with their
Prince of the Air Satan the Devil. To apply it: St. Peter cannot intend the
Empyreal, which is increat and impassible; nor Ethereal, which is of vast
immensity and sublimity, in regard whereof this lower world is but a point or
Center: nor did those two receiv any curs for Man's sin, or contagion or
contamination by the Deluge; nor do any of Gods enemies dwell there to defile
them: So it rests, That the Aereal only, with all their Host, shall be burnt up
at last day. These Heavens then shall melt with fervent heat, being a metaphor
taken from refining Metals, which is his meaning: who expounds dissolving by
melting or purifying, as the Septuagints still interpret that word by refining:
but when the Aereal is so refined, the Ethereal Lights will shine to them on
Earth far more glorious, as passing their raise through a purer medium; so that
the world shall seem renewed. As to the word (passing away) it is an Hebraism
signifying any change of a thing from the old Estate: so al imply a secession
from their pristin condition; but no utter abolition by Fire, more then the
former destruction by Water. If any ask, whether the Host of invisible Spirits
shall suffer by it? It Is answered, That they shall not be burnt as the visible;
yet shall be exiled or excluded from those lofty mansions into lower Dungeons, as
St. Jude intimats: The Angels which lost their Jude v. 6.
first estate and left their habitations, he has reserved to everlasting
chains of darkness, at the Judgment of that great Day. There is another
exposition to the same effect: for Christ describing Mat. 24 29.
the coming of this day, uses prophetic expressions, that the Sun shall be
darkened and Moon giv no light, the Stars shall fall from Heaven, whose powers shall
be shaken; this cannot be construed literaly, since some Stars are bigger then
the Earth, and cannot fall on it, nor can be darkened, being essentialy lucid
bodies; so the meaning may be, the World is either Mundus contin^ns, viz. the
whole frame of Heaven and Earth; or contentus, viz. the Inhabiters and kingdoms
therein; so the Heaven of this politic world, is the Sovereign part thereof, whose
Host and Stars are the ruling powers or Magistrates, and Earth the Pezantry or
Plebeians, together with all terren creatures serving man's use; such acceptions
are usual in the Prophets, as Poets strains are to us. If this notion of the
contained world be admitted, the whole Host of Heaven and Earth (high and low,
Princes and Pesants, Men and Beasts) shall be consumed at Christ's coming to
judgment: but whereas at the Flood the Contained only perished; yet the
Containing was also corrupted or contamined: In the destruction by fire it shall
be contrary: For the world of wicked ones being destroyed, the Heavens and
Earth Containing shall be purged or purified for the righteous to possess. This
exposition is not so proper as the former: yet if there be some whom neither can
satisfy, but will needs have the Fire totaly to annihilat this visible world: it
may be answered, that the judgment Day shall last a thousand years (so says he
but none else) and this Fire not be at beginning (when Christ's Enemies with
Satan's Kingdom shall be destroyed, and then a restoration) bu^ at end or evening
shall be an utter annillation of the whole Creature: so Saint Peter's words may
bear thus: however Heaven and Earth shall in fine perish by Fire; yet before
that be, we look for new (or the worlds restoration) to anteced this
abolition, according to his promiss. Howbeit this suits not so well with his
chief scope, nor with the Prophets promiss pointed at; which specifies such a
Fire only as shall forego a restoration, and not cause a final abolition of the
whole Univers with all therein; nor has it any ground in Scripture: or if any
such annillation shall be, it stands with reason to be by Gods immediate hand or
power (as he first framed it of mere nothing) without help of any Agent or
Instrument, rather then by Fire. These are his self singular speculations:
Quisque suo sensu, sed Medus maxim abundat. His wit reaches beyond the Moon,
and diveth beneath the bottom of the great Deep; being indeed incomparably
piercing or profound: for the familiarly conversed in the darkest deepest
mysteries of al Prophecies (specialy the Apocalypse) and was most ready in all
learned languages (Hebrew, Syriac, Chalde, Perfic, Arabic, Greec, Latin) and in
the Jewish Rabbis or Doctors, wherein he superexcelled, nor was any part of
abstruse literature strange to him or hid from him: yet his gay gloss (how
specious soever it shows) that as God created the Univers of nothing by his
bare word Fiat; so if his will be to dissolv it into nothing, he would do it by
his sole word sans help of Fire: this is of little solidity; for he made only
the Chaos or rude Lump of simply nothing, as the common stock of all the rest
whereof they were compact, so at last dissolution he will consum them al by Fire,
but the ashes or relics left at last like the first Chaos, shall be quite
annihilated by his bare word, Cesset or Desinat, that is, as Saint John renders
it; Let their place be found no Rev. 20. 11.
more, so the proportion holds pointly or perfectly, between the first Creation
and final Consummation of this World, as the next Thesis shall show.

His other cringe concerning Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to Moses, and Christ's
inference, He is God of the living not of the dead; do not argu, that those
Patriarchs shall be raised to possess the promised Land in person a thousand
years with or under Christ: but only that they now live in blessed condition
with God, and shall rise at last day to inherit eternal glory (both in Body and
Soul united) in the highest Heaven: whereas damned Reprobats ly dead in Hell,
whose God he cannot be caled.

The City which Abraham looked for whose builder is God, must needs be Heavenly
Jerusalem clyped his Country: which is prepared for all the faithful: not any
new material Metropolis to be made in Palestine or any place of this Earth; as
they dream. Zacharias words of performing his mercy promised to our Fathers,
and remembering his holy Covenant, clearly concern Christ's first coming so often
promised in the old Testament whereof John Baptist then born was the faithful
forerunner. Lastly Christ's words (many shall com from East and West to sit down
with Ab^aham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven) cannot in property of
phrase possibly purport any terren temporal reign: but Men are too prone to
strain Scriptures after their own sens, how violently or untruly soever. God
giv us al grace to be wise to sobriety, and not wrest his holy Word according
to our own Wills: which may turn to our damnation, and perdition of sundry silly
seduced Souls.

For the main Thesis of Christ's Millenar reign, Mr. Mede Opinions.
says Eusebius a strong Adversary to it, fains one Gaius to father it on
Cerinthus: but none knows any such Man sav himself. Surely he was a sincere
Historian not given to foisting or faining, and Cerinthus generaly reputed the
original Author, nor is any other alleged. He farther says St. Jerome did h^s
best to decry or disgrace the Tenet: but he usualy misrelated things out of
peevish, petulant, partial passion: yet durst not damn it, because many
authentic Authors and Martyrs maintained it. Contrarily Justin Martyr an
Apostolic Man, ascribed the origin hereof to St. John, and told Tryp^^ that none
but Heretics gain said it. Now for later writers, Piscator holds, that the
Saints of the first Resurrection shall reign with Christ a thousand years in
Heaven: but Alsted, Mr. Mede, and almost al else on Earth. Yet Piscator, Alsted,
and the rest agree, that it shall be at Christ's secund coming to reign, before
his third to Judgment: but Mr. Mede finding no warrant for a third coming,
dissents from them al, making the Day of Judgment one continued act with the
Millenar reign: which is a devise of his own subtle wit, never broched before.

Sic a principi^ est fratrum concordia discors:
In varios sensus lis furiosa trahit.
Thus Brethren from beginning il agree
Who into different minds distracted be.
My private resolution in this point, and that other (whether Christ shall reign
personaly on a new Earth for ever, resigning his Kingdom of glory where he now
sits to his Father?) Must needs amidst such a copious cru of learned Clercs,
who have diversely debated it both wais; be very amphibolous or ambiguous: as a
giddy Ostrich, which having laid her first Eg at rovers on the sands, regards
not how she lodges the rest, nor on what heap she sits on brood: so that I may
truly cant out these two dubious Distichs.

Me trahit in dubios aliorum assertio sensus:
An reget in Mundo hoc Christus, an Arce Poli?
Nec patet, an terris regnabit mill per annos
Cum superis, sanctis, Martyribusque; suis?
Others Opinions make me doubtful, whether
Christ shall rule in this World, or Heaven for ever?
If he shall reign on Earth one thousand years
With Angels, Saints, and Martyrs; it not appeers.
Touching the Argument or Contents of the Premises, they are couched or
concluded in a few familiar verses like the former.

Impius asseruit Christum annis mill Cerinthus
Persona in terris velle manner sua.
Vile Cerinth said, Christ will in person reign
One thousand years, and here on Earth remain.
Velle Redemptorem regere annis mill, Chilarchae Alite^.

Judicii in terris asseruere die.
Chiliarchs affirmd, that Christ on Earth will sway
One thousand years at the last Judgment Day.
Mill annis Christum, Chiliarchae in somnia produnt, A^ias.

Hic cum Martyribus velle manner suis.
Vain Chiliasts dream, that Christ with his Saints will stay
One thousand years, and here on Earth bear sway.
Regnare in terris mill annis velle Chilistae Secus.

Christum cum sanctis, dogmata f^lsa tenent.
That Christ with his Saints one thousand years will reign
On Earth, bold Chiliasts doctrins falls maintain.
De christ* imperi^ Chiliastae mill per annos ^^ve.

Ante Diem extremum, somnia vana canunt.
That Christ one thousand years on Earth shall reign
Before last Day, Chiliasts vain dreams do fain.
THESIS VIII.
Mundi hujus Dissolutio: The Worlds dissolution.
THe wisest Heathen held, that this World shall have an end even by fire; as St.
Jerome and L. Vives vouch. Eusebius says the chief Stoics ( Zeno, Cleanthes,
Chrysippus) defended this doctrine: yea Seneca a Master of that Sect says, fire
shall be the end of it, as moisture was the beginning: the Stars shall war
together, and what now shines in comely order, shall burn in one fire or flame.
Numaenius says, good Souls continu til al things be destroyed by fire: this
Ovid provs from their Prophets or Poets Records.

Juppiter in fatis reminiscitur affore tempus: L. 1. M^^am.

Quo mare, quo tellus, convexaque Regia Coeli
A^deat; and mundi moles operosa laboret.
Jov called to mind that Time by fate shall be:
When Sea, when Earth, and Heavens convexity
Shall burn in flames, and the Worlds Axeltree.
In the means or manner of Dissolution, D^ines diversely differ^ Opinions.
some approv perfectiv renovation, some supplementiv substitution, and some
destructiv abolition or annullation. They also vary in sundry subaltern
circumstances: some say al Creatures shall be restored to pristin perfection as
before Man's fall; some that the Heavens shall be reserved and al else annihilated:
some that Heaven, Air, and Earth shall be refined, but al beside confounded: some
that the whole visible Machin with all works therein (except Angels, Devils, Men,
and Hell expressly exempt) shall be totaly resolved to nothing, as it was first
framed of nothing. The issu or result is, whether a new World or none? The
grounds or reasons of which several Opinions shall be succinctly scanned.

To begin with Annihilators arguments, sundry Texts are Scriptures.
alleged in favor of it.

1. The Heavens shall perish and be no more, but vanish like Isai 51* 6.
smoke, and wax old as a garment. 2. All the Host of Heaven shall be dissolved,
and roled together Isa^ 31. 4.
as a Scrole: they shall fall down as a leaf from the Vine, and a faling Fig from
the Figtree. 3. Man lies down and rises not, til the Heavens be no more:
(...) 14. 12.
meaning til the general Resurrection 4. The Heavens shall perish, but thou
shall endure etc. Ps. 102. 26*
5. The Heavens shall pass away with great nois, and Elements 2 Pe^. 3. 10. (...)
melt with ^eat: the Earth with all works therein shall be burnt up. 6. St. John
consorts, Heaven and Earth sted away, whose place Rev. 20. 11*
was found no more. Al which phrases (to pass away, perish, vani^h, be no more,
be burnt up, ^old together as a scrole, fall down as a Vine leaf or Fig from the
Tree, melt with heat, fly away, and no place found for them) strongly imply, if
not enforce annihilation, or at least impugn a perfecter condition and new
substitution.
The Reasons for it are these: 1. This World was made of Ergo it shall return to
nothing.

2. Al Visible things were formed for Man (as he for Gods glory) who will not
need them, when he is translated to a far better mansion: as when a House is
built for Inhabiters, if it be decreed to be no more inhabited; it is in vain to
repair or trim it better then before: much more to pull it down or build a
fairer.

3. If God intended a restitution of the old, or substitution of a new: he
could do it by changing the qualities, as it shall be with the faithful found
alife at last Day: when corruption 1 Cor. 15. 52. 53.
shall put on incorruption, and mortal immortality (which is analogical Death
and Resurrection) without burnning it up first.

4. If they say his will is so to do, where is their Warrant? It Is his will to
destroy it by fire: but not reveled in holy writ, nor can be resolved by human
wit; what, how many, or whether any Creatures shall be restored to pristin
integrity? Nor whether they shall propagat to infinity, or persist to eternity?
Yet many bold Baiards or Buzzards bring blind Brats of that kind.

5. If the World be renewed or perfected, it shall have no end: But it is said,
the end of al things is at hand* the Worlds ends are com upon us: Ergo this
World shall be abolished, and no new substituted. Indeed some thing Analogical
shall supply the stead in far transcendent manner: viz. the third increat Heaven
for the Materials, and that which David Tropicaly Psalm. 27. 15.
terms the Land of the living for this Earth: which are proportional to our
future state of glory, as these confort to our present condition of misery and
mortality. For in lieu of these created Heavens, which sometime give light, and
anon leav us da^k, We shall be translated to a Celical Paradise (styled new Rev
21. 12 13.
Jerusalem) where is light infinitely brighter then the Sun: for Gods Rev. 22. 5.
glory lightens it, and the Lamb is its light. There shall be no night or need of
Candle or Sun: for God givs light, and they shall (...) 60 19 20.
reign with him for ever. So says Isaiah, the Sun shall no more be thy light by
day, nor Moon giv brightness: but the Lord shall be thy everlasting light, and
God thy glory. Thy Sun shall never go down, nor Moon be hid: but thy mourning
shall end. These Texts imply that Sun and Moon shall be no more, since the Saints
sh^l not need them, having God to stead them; who is a Sun that never sets, and
Moon never hid: his Vision being an everlasting light of glory. For we shall see
God by intuition face to face as he is, and know him as he knows us. One that
stands by a friend to view his face fully, needs no Picture or looking Glass to
behold him: nor does Christ's Vision in his Humanity, require other Creatures to
improv the Saints glory; since he is Author and they coheirs of endless
felicity: but the rest being made for the Church Militant, can no more conduce
to Triumphants happiness, then a Candle in open Sun shine. For (...) (...). 13.
10.
when that which is perfect is com, then that which is in part shall be done
away. So there will be no use of a new World to be substituted, or old
restituted; but space, time, al things infinite, immens, eternal, In natura
nihil datur infinitum: post nil nisi infinitum: the Worlds conflagration
apertly refuts renovation: for it cannot be brought to better condition, since
God saw al was good: then what needs burning to bring it in the same form?

6. Many instances are extant of annillation: as Christ abolished the essence
of Water to make it Wine: the Dov in which the holy Ghost appeered at Christ
Baptism, was seen no A C. 1572.
more: the new Star in Cassiopeia gradualy vanished: the sound of wind is
annihilated: the Relation of Father and Son at Fathers death is extinct: the
time past exists no longer: yet the three last are real accidents, and the
three first substances. Why then may not this mundan Machin be utterly
abolished, if it pleas Omnipotence so to dispose? For the debat rests on his
mere will reveled in his holy Word.

7. Their clashing contradiction is a plenary confuta^son: for some say no
mixtils or Animats shall subsist, but only C^lical bodies and two Elements, yet
can show no cause or color, why they rather then the rest; or how the world
shall be more glorious, being as a bare house unfurnished and unhabited; since
variety makes it Mundus or comely: some that al creatures shall be restored so well
as men; yet know not how to stow them (as two were of each kind in the A^c) in
the world, unles they fain it of infinite capacity: some that such only shall be
reserved as are extant at last day; that is good luck and bad (as all the world
is now ruled) for why they rather then the rest? since al shall be incinerated,
so well as those already corrupted: some that none now or then existent, are
capable of restitution or resurrection, but new shall be formed of rare kinds
(like those in the Lunar world) to serve the Saints in a new material world to
com. Touching this Earth, some say it shall be refined like gold in the fire, and
bettered or beautified tenfold for the Saints mutual commerce: some that it shall
be a mansion for such as neither deserv Heaven for their good deeds, nor Hell
for heinous crimes: some that it shall be the habitation of unbaptized Infants,
which they hold better then Saint Austins dark dungeon.

These are al carnal conceits, or ungrounded unwarranted Phantasms, since the
kingdom of Heaven is styled the Seat of blessed Spirits; where they shall reside
as in their proper place of perpetual possession; not as an Inn to lodge in for
a space, and at last leav it for ever; nor shall they have a City house and
country Grange to remov from Heaven to Earth at pleasures, as some sottishly
surmise, but shall enjoy a Heavenly habitation and beatific Vision for their
eternal inheritance, which will be no boot to change for an Earthly mansion;
though they should enjoy Christ's personal presence to boot, which they also have
still in Heaven.

Most Greec Fathers with many Latin assert annihilation: Authorities.
Hilari says, this Heaven caled Firmament shall pass away and not be; but that
invisible wherein God dwells abides for ever. Clement fains his Master Saint
Peter to tell Simon Magus, that there be two Heavens, one superior, increat,
eternal where blessed Spirits inhabit: another inferior, visible, studded with
stars, which at last day shall be abolished. Saint Jerome says those two Fathers
Opinion was most approved, as cohering with Saint Paul's saying, The things seen
are temporal, but those not seen 2 Cor. 4. 18.
eternal: meaning that al Visibles shall perish to nothing* but invisibles abide
for ever in infinity. Dr. Hakewil cites sundry late L. 6 Apol. sub ^^nem.
Protestant Professors as Patrons of annillation, viz. Luther, Melancthon,
Bucer, Beroaldus, Bartolinus, Vorstius, Junius, Rivet, Hunnius, Tilenus,
Cassanius, Meisnerus, Polanus, Martinius, Brentius, Wollebius, Gerard,
Arnobius, Frantzius, and others, whose pregnant testimonies to that purpose he
produces worthy of exact perusal, which to recit or capitulat, consorts not
with my affected brevity, who must hasten to answer the Ronovators and
Substitutors Arguments.

Ob. Saint Peter says, The Heavens must contain Christ, til the Acts 3. 19 21.
times of refreshing and restitution of al things, which God has spoken by all
his holy Prophets: Ergo al shall be restored.

Sol. The Syriac Interpreter renders it, til the end of al times or worlds
consummation: but the times of restitution or refreshing, signify the
complement of our Redemption: for (as Calvin comments) because our restitution
or redemption is yet imperfect, while we groan under the bond of bondage; we
shall be restored to liberty at last day when it is perfected: but speaks nothing
of the Worlds renovation after it is burnt, nor can it be wiredrawn or wrested
to any such construction if rightly sensed.

Ob. David says, God laid the Earths foundations, that it Ps. 104. 5.
should not be removed for ever: So Solomon, One generation passes and another
coms, but the Earth abides for ever, Ergo Eccles. 1. 4.
shall not be annilled.

Sol. These places are stiffly urgd against the Earths diurnal motion with more
color then to oppugn abolition; yet truly against neither; for the intention
is, that by Natures course it is laid to remain for ever, without decay or
diminution in the whole like other elements; had not God decreed to dissolv it:
but the parts of them al are subject to jugial alteration and corruption. the
word (for ever) is so long as Time or the World lasts, so caled in comparison
of man's mortal condition: as circumcision is styled perpetual.

Repl. The Lord says, Lo I creat new Heavens and Earth, Isai 6^ ^7. Rev. 21. 1.
for the former shall not be remembered: So Saint John calls them new; for the
first passed away and there was no more Sea: so Saint Peter: The Heavens shall
pass away with a nois, and Elements 2 Pet 3 10. 13.
melt with heat; but we look for new Heavens and Earth: Ergo being burnt, they
shall be refined and renovated, or new created and substituted; but not al
utterly abolished or annulled.

Sol. See how partial Sectists are; it was pressed last, that the Earth abides
for ever; now that it shall be renewed or a new surrogated: but truth lies in
the kernel of genuin sens, not in the shel of words, surely they are not meant
literaly of material Heavens and Earth, or if they be, it tends rather to
annillation then restitution o^ substitution; for Isai says, The former shall
com in mind no more: Saint John, They passed away and there was no more Sea:
Saint Peter, The Heavens shall pass away with a nois, and Elements melt with
heat, how then renewed? such as constru to perish, pass away, be no more, etc.
of the worlds instauration or melioration, and not of annihilation, must answer
where in Grammar it is so taken; for in Philosophy and Theology renovation
diametraly differs from destruction. Beza applies Isais alleged words to the
Churches State or Christ's kingdom: which also alluds to the Saints condition in
Heavenly Jerusalem; as Saint John's immediate ensuing words import: I saw the
holy City, new Jerusalem Rev 21. 2.
coming from God, prepared as a Bride trimmed for her husband; which intimats
their continual cohabitation or her eternal Mansion with God her Bridegroom. So
Saint John and Peter by new Heavens intend the Saints glory in new Jerusalem
with God or the Lamb, and not any material new Heavens as al authentic Authors
expound.

Rep. Isaiah says, The Moons light shall be as the Sun, and Isai 30. 26.
Suns sevenfold as of seven dais: Ergo at last day al things shall be perfected
in far greater glory, not totaly abolished to be no more.

Sol. The Prophet speaks Mysticaly and Metaphoricaly (as often elswher) of the
Church under Christ, which he calls a new Heaven and Earth: as the new Heavens
and Earth which I will Isai 66. 22. 23.
make shall remain before me; so shall your seed and name continu from one Moon
to another, and from Sabbath to Sabbath shall al flesh com to Worship before me
says the Lord. All which Texts our Expositors aptly apply to Christ's kingdom,
when his Church shall be renewed, but no new world implied: so those words of the
Moons light as the Sun, and Suns seven fold, are meant of the Churches
restoration, whose glory shall septuply exced the Suns splendour, as Junius
interprets, which consorts to our engllsh Annotations: for by the glory of those
excellent Creatures, is showed the super eminent beatitud of Gods children in
Christ's kingdom the Church; but tend nothing to a new, real, material World.

Rep. David says, Thou shall change them as a Vesture, Ps. 102 26. 27.
and they shall be changed; which Saint Paul repeats of these material Heavens
and Earth: Ergo they shall have a perfectiv alteration, Heb. 1. 11. 12.
no destructiv annillation.

Sol. Both indeed speak of these Heavens and Earth, but neither of any perfectiv
renovation; since both say they shall perish by the word Balah, which properly
purports Brought to nothing: for change is many wais, as in quality better or
wors; in quantity bigger or less; in substance by generation and corruption:
but mostly by annihilation, which is the greatest mutation ab ente ad non Ens,
even to nothing. So Bellarmin blunders on that Psalm. God only is unchangeable,
who brought the Heavens from no being to be, and will reduce them, from a being
not to be; concluding al other Creatures in the same condition. Bartholinus
observes that mutation is often taken for annillation: as Can. 2. 11. the Winter
is past, i. quit extinct Isai 2. 18. the Idols shall utterly abolish. Now the
Heavens also may be said to be changed in respect of us, who shall be translated
from a material visible World, to an immaterial invisible Kingdom; from a
terren possession to a Celical Paradise, styled new Jerusalem and a new Heaven.
The approved Annotations interpret al Texts of new Heavens and Earth Tropicaly,
touching Christ's Kingdom or Church. See Psalm. 110. 3. Jer. 31. 36. Jer. 33. 26.
Joel 2. 28. Hebr. 12. 28. and elswher.

Ob. St. Paul says, The fashion of this World passes away: 1 Co^. 7. 31,
Ergo the extern form only shall be altered, but the essence or substance not
abolished.

Sol. Are these handsome inferences? The Apostle asserts nothing of the material
World, but only denots the vanity of mundan matters, that al passes away like
a tale that is told, as Calvin and Junius interpret.

Ob. Christ says* some shall sit at my right hand, some at my left: Luke 22. 30.
ye shall eat ana drink at my Table in my Kingdom: Ergo the Saints shall sit and
eat corporaly at his Table in his Human Kingdom.

Sol. This is a gross carnal conceit of Chiliasts and other Novists (addle
devisers) who hold a new World shall be created for Christ's personal Kingdom,
where he shall reign or reside for ever, resigning the highest Heaven to his
Father: as if Infinity could not contain al things. Christ speaks of eating and
drinking at his Table Tropicaly (as al sober Orthodox agree) deriving it from
his last Supper, which he newly instituted before those words were uttered:
signifying the effect of it, that thereby they shall participat eternal life in
his Heavenly Kingdom, not at Jerusalem a thousand years before the Judgment, as
common Chiliasts conceiv; nor after it for ever in a new created World to com,
as other Opinionists deem or dream.

Ob. St. Paul says, The Creatures shall be delivered from corruptions Rom 8.
21, 22, 23.
bondage, into the glorious liberty of Gods Children: for the whole Creation
groans and travels in pain together til now and not only they, but we also
which have the first fruits of the Spirit: even we groan within, waiting for the
adoption, to wit redemption of our body: Ergo al Creatures shall be restored.

Sol. This is like a Rabbets head left last to slay, as requiring most labor:
for such obscure places al Sectists obtrud, as Men lov to fish in troubled
waters. It Is most abstruse of any in the new Testament as St. Austin avers:
whereto many apply St. Peter's words, That in Paul's Epistles some things are hard
2 Pet. 3. 16.
to understand, which the unlearned and unstable wrest (as they do other
Scriptures) to their own destruction. It Is a good cavest for bold Buzzards, not
to build doubtful doctrins on dark Oracles without good guids, unles they be
found or founded on Faiths analogy elswher. The first words (The Creatur shall
be delivered from Corruptions bondage) may best be done by annillation, being
thereby freed from Men's abuses, and farther possibility of decay; tho not
restored to perfecter estate, as the letter seems to say. The next (Into the
glorious liberty of Gods Children) may be safly expounded together with their
liberty, or by reason of it, or at same time with it. So St. Chrysostom best
skild in his Mother tongue, interprets the particl (...) (into) by (...)
(together, for, or by reason of) that they shall be freed by means of the Saints
liberty. Semblably St. Ambros says, it shall be at the same time together, when
the Saints shall attain their glory: which two Expositions seem soundest to salv
al scruples. For dumb Creatures cannot be coheirs with the elect of eternal
bliss, by redemption or resurrection of the body (as the bare words imply)
having no saving faith in Christ. Those words (Not only they, but even we which
have the first fruits of the Spirit, groan within our selfs, waiting for the
adoption, even the redemption of our body) plainly distinguish between the
Saints state, who groan and wait for the redemption of the Body: and al other
Creatures, which groan only to be delivered from corruptions bondage, together
with the liberty of Gods Children, or at the same time, or by means of it.
Which deliverance may best be atchived by a total final abolition, when they
shall no more be subject to slavery, abuse, and villainy. This clearly resolvs al
difficulty, to interpret the particile (into) by together with the liberty of
Gods Children; according to those two orthodox Fathers authentic exposition.
Such as assert any other liberty of restoration or melioration, must answer al
foregoing Arguments for annihilation; or show sufficient cause why some shall be
restored and not al: since St. Paul names the whole Creation or every Creature,
Kinds and Individuals. To say, Mixtils, Vegetals, and Bruts shall partake the
glorious liberty of eternal felicity with Gods Sons or Saints; is a Brutish buz
which no sound sober Divines dare own. He uses the phrase of delivery from
corruption rather then annihilation, as parrallel to Man's manumission from like
bondage. Marlorat (who is for restitution) comments thus: hence it appeers,
into how great glory Gods Sons shall be exalted, since for their sakes al
Creatures shall be renewed with them, as they were cursed for Man's fall and
fault. Yet shall they not partake the same measure of glory; but a better
condition after every capacity: yet what that shall be in Inanimats, Plants, and
Beasts is curiosity to inquire; since the chief part or pitch of corruption is
annillation. This implies that they may be freed from bondage of corruption
(not simply from corruption, as Regenerats are released from sins reign) by
utter abolition, which he calls a chief part or pitch of corruption: but
renovation is the Acme of perfection. Now if the Text be taken literaly, how
can mute Creatures groan or travel in pain? But say it is meant Metaphoricaly of
their Natural appetit to be freed from bondage: yet how can they enjoy a like
liberty of Gods Sons for whom Christ died? Or grant too, that no identity is
intended, but only an analogical proportion by exemplar resemblance: yet how
can they partake a redemption of the Body, which having bin the Souls
receptacle here, shall be reunited to it for ever? It Is sown a 1 Cor. 15. 23.
corruptible Body, raised incorruptible: sown in dishonor, raised in glory:
sown in weakness, and rises in power. Which is evidence enough for restitution
of Human Bodies: but al Creatures else being compact of the common Chaos (which
was made of mere nothing) shall probably revert to nothing: this seems to suit
best with Faiths analogy and Scriptures harmony, which tends more to utter
abolition then restitution or substitution; for all at last day shall be
delivered from corruptions bondage, when Gods sons shall be, and for their
sakes; tho the manner diametraly differ: viz. the one by Redemption of the body,
the other by deletion of the whole substance. So says Saint Ambros, the
Creature traveling in pain, has this comfort, that it shall rest from labor
for ever, when al shall beleev, whom God knows are to beleev. Howbeit if it be
granted, that al shall be Individualy raised, yet it folows not that a finit
containing World shall be restored, or new created: but rather al turned to
infinity (so well as time to Eternity) for such infinity of Creatures, as has
bin since the World began. In brief, St. Paul intends the time when they shall
be delivered, not the terminus or thing into like liberty with the Saints.

This Question is very difficil to decide by Scripture; nor is Perclose.
defined by any Synod, nor any Article of salvific Faith. Paraeus declines the
decision; but says some points are plainly asserted, Romans 8. 20, 21.
which must be believed: as that al Creatures are subject to vanity for man's
sin, that al shall be delivered from bondage 2. Pet. 12. 13.
of corruption into the glorious liberty of Gods Sons, or rather for and
together with it, that good Angels shall abide with the Saints: that the Elect
shall enjoy eternal glory with Christ: that the created Heavens, Elements, and
works therein shall be burnt up: that a new Heaven and Earth must be expected,
wherein dwells righteousness: but other clauses; how dumb Creatures shall partak
the liberty of Gods Children? whether by renovation, or abolition? How many
sorts of Creatures shall be released? Whether al, a few, or none? How Heaven and
Earth shall be dissolved by fire? whether as Gold is refined, or utterly
annilled, being of no farther use? what manner of fire it shall be, material or
immaterial? what shall be the condition, use, place, quantity, quality, glory of
the new Heaven and Earth, if any such shall be? Al which with other like Saint
Austin says it is better to leav hid in doubt, then litigat about incertanties;
since they may be debated with danger, but left in suspens sans harm or hazard:
he holds that al scruples are safest satisfied by annihilation: that the fire
shall be material, as the old world was drowned by ordinary water: so says
Aquinas and most Schoolmen, but on no good grounds: yet al agree, it shall not
work as a natural Agent, but divine Instrument, to consume the whole mundan
Machin with all things therein, as God eternaly decreed; therefore it behovs al to
decline the fury of it by turning from our sins, and returning by repentance to
God in Christ. Master John Down a pious Pastor of Insto (sororal Nephew to
Bishop Juel) had a smart bout by Pen with Doctor Hakewil his intimat friend,
for the worlds renovation; specialy touching the true sens of that dark precited
Text: but in fine approved Annihilation; peruse it pondrously, but I forbear to
abridg it for the prolixity. Surely of al three opinions (about Restitution,
Substitution and Annillation) the last brings best Cards or fairest Colors,
both of Scriptures, Reasons and Authorities:

Judicio extremo, post ultima secula, Mundus
Ignibus extinctus materialis erit.
At the last Judgment, when Time is finished,
This real world with fire shall be extinguished.
Non renovatus erit praesens, nec conditus alter Alit^r.

Cosmos: cum veniet sero suprema dies.
This world shall not renewd be, nor new formed;
When the last day at length shall be performed.
Mundus hic, ut perhibent passim sacra Biblia, postquam Alias.

Vertitur in cineres, ann^hilatus erit.
This world, as Scriptures speak, after it is burned
To ashes, shall be into Nothing turned.
Quod fuit ex nihilo factum, post secula tandem Secus.

In Nihilum hoc Mundi, grande adigetur Opus
This worlds huge work, which was of naught compounded;
Shall into Naught at last day be confounded.
In cineras Mundi redigetur maxima moles: Sive.

In Nihilum cineres mox adigentur item.
The worlds huge Mass int' ashes shall be brought,
Those ashes too shall soon be turned to Naught.
Inchoat hicce liber primaeva ab origin Mundi: Epiphonema.

Cum Mundi excidio terminat istud Opus.
At the Worlds origin that Book inchoats:
With the Worlds period this work terminats.
Incipit a Mundo primus liber iste creato: Aliud.

Cum Mundi exitio desinit hicce liber.
That first Book took rise at the Worlds creation:
This last takes end with the Worlds annillation.
Juvenci carmina de mundi conflagratione.
Immortale nihil mundi compage tenetur:
Non Orbis, non Regna hominium, non aurea Roma:
Non Mare, non Tellus, non ignea Sydera Coeli.
Nam statuit Genitor rerum irrevocabile tempus.
Quo totum torrens rapiet flamma ultima mundum.
In Mundan machin naught's immortal found:
Not golden Rome, not realms, not the Globe round.
Not Sea, not Earth, not Stars within Heavens bound.
For the Worlds founder fixd time does propound,
When the last fire shall the whole World confound.
FINIS.
SVPPLEMENTA SVBJVNCTA SUPPLEMENTS SUBIOYNED Supplementum de Festis: A Supply
about holy Dais. Festa Christi sacranda: Christian Fests sacred. Natalis
Christi Festum: Christ's Birth-days Fest.
The two debats (touching Name and Thing) about, celebrating Essay. Christ was
fairly agitated.
THe name, term, or title (Christmas, Christide, State of the Question.
Christ's Nativity or Birthday) may indifferently be used sans scandal, as men
pleas; being mere tittle, tattle or word-war: but the thing or matter of most
concernment is, whether it be lawful, useful, or behooful to set apart,
solennize, and sanctify one day or mo annaly in memory of Gods greatest mercy
to Mankind; for sending his only begotten beloved Son to sav sinners: by
assuming our Nature into his Person, and suffering death for us? Specialy since
his dear Spous the Church has instituted and enjoined it to be religiously
(not riotously) observed by all true Christians. Which causless controversy shall
be succinctly and sincerely discussed with all modesty and moderation on both
sides, not declining to by diverticles. The Opposers chief Objections follow in
order.

Ob. The true time, set season, main month, and direct Day is utterly unknown,
or cannot certainly be prefined or prescribed: Ergo the thing is not to be used.

Sol. The consequent halts on al four feet: for the thing is pious and imposed
by authentic authority; tho the time dubious or disputable: nor is the
antecedent veritable or irrefragable; for all ancient Tradition tells, that it
befell at the Hyemal Solstice then sited on December twenty five; but now
removed farther forth full twelv dais and eight hours: because we following the
Julian Calender without reforming, take in ten minutes and forty four secunds
every year more then the Suns true revolution allows: which in one hundred
thirty four years complet a day; yet still December twenty five tho not at
Solstice. So the Gregorian Calendar subtracting ten dais (which should have bin
twelv) keeps so long righter before us. Hence Luke 1^ 8, 9.
our Saxon Ancestors caled it Midwinter day (as John Baptists birth day is
caled mid-Summer, being just six Solar months or half a year asunder; and known
to be Estival Solstice by his Fathers then waiting in the course of Abia)
implying that day: John 3. 30.
for Christ was born as dais were beginning to lengthen, and John at shortning:
whence John says, He must increas, but I decreas alluding (as some surmise) to
the time of both their births. Justin Martyr makes it most manifest by Augustus
Caesar's Censual Role (which grand general Tax accited Joseph and Mary to
Bethleem) that he was born December 25. about Winter Solstice: which Tertullian
the best Antiquary, precisely ratifies. Chrysostom says they received it from
most accurat Observers dwelling at Rome, who had it traditionaly from their
Antecessors up to the Apostles: whereto Origin, Cyprian, Austin, L^o, and al
Ancients agree. Leo says Christ's generation is the Churches initiation, and
the Birthday of the Head a beginning of the Body. For the Church in imitation
thereof, consecrated Fests to the Apostles, Martyrs, and some Confessors: which
in process of time multiplied beyond du bounds but most of them expunged by our
Mother Church since the In Ni^omedia.
Reformation. Dioclesian burnt twenty thousand Martyrs on Christ's birth day
December the twenty fifth, as true Records testify, which are proofs sufficient
for the season, month, and day, yea far better then al their negativ cavils to
the contrary: yet to gratify them, it shall be granted gratis that the time is
uncertain, if they will freely and fairly confess the Thing (which impudence it
self cannot deny) to be lawful, That Christians may without offens keep holy
one Anniversary day appointed by the Catholic Church, in memory of our Saviors
manifestation in the flesh.

Ob. The bug. Bear title (Christmas) is taken from the Popish Mass: Ergo the
thing represented or celebrated, must needs be superstitious, idolatrous and
antichristian.

Sol. The word Missa (Mass) is derived from missio sending, because at
celebration of the Eucharist, al non-Communicants were dismissed or bid go
forth: but used by the Church to signify sacred service long yer Popery was
hatched or Antichrist appeered: and al superstitious Ceremonies crept up since,
are crushed or cashired by our Church. Mass in old Saxon language imports a
Fest or Holy Day, as Verstegan informs; yet more probably Fests had that
appellation from Mass: but no matter of moment lies in words (no more then to
call our week dais by their old Heathen names) which may be altered or innovated
at the imposers wills, and al words mere wind free or far enough from Popish
superstition and Antithristian Idolatry.

Ob. Many Ethnic customs remain still among the Vulg in our Land: Ergo the
thing which occasions them is to be abolished as Ezekiah demolished the brazen
Serpent.

Sol. The inference is infirm, for good grain must not be cast out with weeds:
nor is the brazen Serpent a semblable instance, which the Israelits made an
Idol, and burnt Incens to it, but rude People adore the true God with some
mixture of foolish fashions, now mostly left being better taught. Yet the
Antecedent argues, that this levan has continued ever since their conversion:
and is a proof beyond exception of its Antiquity, and that it was still
celebrated on December 25.

Ob. Sundry superstitious Rites, of Carols, Wash^ils, Riots, Drinking, Dancing,
Dicing, Carding, and profane sports borrowed from the mad Saturnalia held in
December. for the honor of Saturn and Ceres (to whom they sung filthy Cariles like
these Carols) are retained still: Ergo such scandals should be suppressed root
and branch.

Sol. Let al just scandals and abuses be rooted out, as most are: but the
impeachment is impious, invented by the Scripture Almanac maker; that because
Pagans did such wicked pranks to falls Gods, Christians do the same in serving
the true God. Indeed the Saturnalia were held in December, but Ceres Cariles in
April: and what is either to Christmas? Nor may common Carols (which are sacred
songs like holy Anthems suited to the Seasons) be compared with Heathen Hymns:
but Washails are rude ridiculous revellings almost antiquated. Such attendant
abuses may be redres^ed or repressed by Ministers prudence and Magistrates
penalties: without which the Lords day would be profaned like the rest. The
Church only appoints prayers and praises to God, not allowing any abuses: nor
are riots practiced on Christmas day (which was ever sanctified very devoutly
with divine Service, Sermons, and Sacraments) when al Houskeepers fed at home
temperatly: but al excess done on the dais appendent, which is reasonably
restrained. Drinking, Dicing, and al exorbitant enormities may be decried by
preaching, or discarded by punishing: but civil Dancing, moderat Carding, and
harmless country sports for recreativ mirth to show Peoples rejoycings
tolerated. It Is preposterous to use the Mattock, when a prunning Hook will
better rectify. For noxious surcles may be pared or pruned off, yet the main
Tree or thing preserved from rooting up. Lastly for Belly fare, there is modus
in rebus, and much ods betwixt gurmandizing superfluity and gratuitous
hospitality, with charitable feeding the poor: which yet through general
poverty and parsimony is greatly abated; that there is more cause to complain of
defect then exuberance that way. Howbeit those rigid Rhadamants lov luscious
luxurious feasting at al times else (specialy on Ashwendsday, Good Friday, or
other fasting dais) more then any Christmas Men used heretofore. Yea the Scots
at first Reformation, cashired al Popish customs and ceremonies, except their
beloved Grece-Cup (which was to serve in at end of meals al liquor^ then used)
whereof each drank what he listed.

In sum, Christmas harmless sports in sit seasons are lawful, Summary.
good fires behooful, holy Hymns useful, New-yeers gifts fruitful, begetting
mutual amity among Neighbors; and plentiful fare without surfeit or ebriety
cheerful: whatever Sectists cavil in their Chairs or Pulpits to the contrary.
It folows not that every thing which Pagans or Papists do, is Heathenish or
Popish: for Gentiles do many excellent things by Natures principles (which
Gospel Principles confirm) that are commendable in Christians: so Papists
retain sundry points of Doctrine, Discipline, and manners, which Protestants may
imitat.

Ob. Such Fests are not warranted by Christ's precept, nor Apostles practice,
nor any authentic authority: Ergo it is Wilworship fitto be extirped or
extermined.

Sol. The Lords day has no warrant of precept or practice in Scripture; yet
lawful, necessary, and generaly (tho not specialy) Moral by the first words of
the fourth Commandment: but neither this nor Christmas wants authentic
authority of the universal Church through al ages: nor is one wilworship more
then the other. For will worship (as St. Paul Col. 2. 23.
shows) has no Scripture warrant general or special, but only the vain will or
phansy of Men: as worshipping Angels, and placing an absolut necessity of
holiness in things indifferent. The general rule of St. Paul (Let al be done
decently in order) 1 Cor. 14. 40.
is sufficient warrant without particular precept, precedent, or practice for
Christ's Spous to ordain occasional Fests, in themselfs lawful and laudable,
tending to Gods glory and Peoples good; as some are often appointed among us
upon emergent occasions or occurrents. So the Jews freely observed an annal
Fest of dedicating the Altar instituted by Judas Machabeus, 1 Man. 4 ^9.
after the Temple had bin Idolatrously polluted by Antiochus Epiphanes: which
yet is not specified (much less sanctified) in the old Testament or Canon of
Scripture: but Christ honored it with his presence; as he did their septidial
John 10 22.
marriage Feasts with his first transubstantiating miracle of turning Water into
Wine in Cana. So the Catholic Church or any particular may constitut or
celebrat set dais for pious purposes (yearly or extraordinary) if they shall see
good cause.

Ob. Tatling Tradition tells, that Christ was born Dec. 25. then at Solstice,
immediately after Midnight, as the dais began to lengthen: but the Church of
England celebrated the Birth day full twelv dais after the Hyemal Solstice: Ergo
her Account was erroneous.

Sol. This is already answered to the first argument, and the reason rendered
of that deviation, because we follow the Julian Calendar sans reformation: but
tho the Church of England does not observe the true precise time of the Winter
Solstice; yet she celebrats the true day (Dec. 25.) according to the Julian
Account still, which is sufficient: nor is the time so exactly to be regarded,
as the thing or benefit to be remembered.

Ob. No Magistrates can make Dais holy, nor impose them Gal. 4 9.
to be necessarily or perpetualy observed: For the Apostles call such
observances weak beggarly Elements, the yoke of bondage, Gal 5. 1.
and rudiments of the Law, which destroy Christian liberty: Ergo Col. 2 20.
they cannot institut Fests.

Sol. Indeed they cann^t make dais holy, or impose them to be observed under
pain of damnation, which d^strois Christian liberty; and is a proper privilege
of Gods power: nor are dais properly holy inherently, no more then Churches or
Elements of the Sacraments, which yet are called holy being appointed or
appropriated to Religious uses: so Magistrates may sanctify or set apart certain
dais to holy services for Gods glory; having free full power to order things
indifferent. The Jews ordained occasional Fests, which Christ and his Apostles
observed with their presence: so our Magistrates appoint dais of Humiliation and
Thanksgiving, which People are bound to keep holy: much more Christmas day for
many reasons. 1. God promised it when he said to the Serpent, John 8. 56.
The Woman's seed shall break thy head: 2. Christ says, Abraham rejoiced to see
this Day: 3. Jacob foretold it, that the Scepter Isai 7. 14.
shall not depart from Juda til Shiloh com: 4. Isaiah says a Virgin shall
conceiv and bear a Son called Immanuel: for unto us a Child is born, to us a Son
is given; the Prince of Peace: at whose birth was public Peace through all the
Roman world. Saint Paul calls it the fulness of time, when Men and Angels Gal. 4.
4. Luk 2. 10, 11* 13.
were filled with ineffable joy and admiration. The Angel which told the
Shepherds of his birth, had a multitud of heavenly Host praising God saying,
Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace, good will toward Men. Clement
an Apostolic man bids Christians keep Fests diligently, and in the first Constable.
Apost* l. 5. c. 1^.
place Christ's birth day, which al primitiv Fathers and others from age to age,
til our mad-brain days, have most devoutly celebrated; yea on the very twenty
fith of December, whose exemple and exhortations in their sacred Sermons,
Homilies, and Treatises, the late reformed Churches of Helvetia, Bohemia,
Bremen, Auspurg, Savoy, Poland, Hungary, Scotland, France, Belgia, Palatinat,
(beside Denmarc, Sweden, and al Lutheran Churches in Germany or elswer) follow
both by practice and Precept.

Ob. The Lords Day sanctified weekly in memory of Christ's Resurrection, is
sole-sufficient in stead of al else: Ergo to ad any on work dais without
warrant, is superstitious will worship, specialy since it is commanded six dais
thou shall labor, but keep holy the (or a) seventh day.

Sol. Those harsh terms of superstitious will worship cast on Ana^^me (...) the
Service Book.
Christian Fests, are causless calumnies, being their common brands or badges
bestowed on our public Liturgy which they call rank Atheism, a proud Strumpet, a
cursed Mass of superstition, full of Serpents, bathed in the blood of Bodies,
Souls and Estats; the relics of Popish dregs; the very (head not st^mp or
l^^) of the Dragon; the juggling or conjuring of Magicians, and character of
Antichrist; who say our thirty nine Articles are stuffed with Popery and
Arminianism: but scorn the book of Homilies as most course contemptible
kitchin-stuf. If to rail or revile be sufficient, who cannot be eloquent? and
how easy is it to cast such base dirt in their dearest mothers face, which may
fitly be retorted: they reviv the Petrusians Heresy, who decried al Christian
Fests, to introduce Atheism, which in milder language is styled Libertinism.
The Lords day is most necessary and must be done, yet the rest not left undoon,
since al tend to one end; nor is it so sole-sufficient to shuffle out the right
religious celebration of al other Festivals, for where is it said we shall
sanctify that only, or why do we ordain others upon occasions: the Ascension
was Christ's last act of appeering on Earth, yet may it not exclud the
commemoration of his Resurrection, no more then that can includ the celebration
of al antecedent blessings or benefits imparted by his Passion, Circumcision,
Nativity and Conception; let God be glorified in all his wondrous works; yea
those Annal Fests were instituted by the same authority that the weekly Lords
Day, tho this happily first by the Apostles meeting thereon A. C. 324.
to break bread (which yet they did at other times) but Constantin published
the first Edict or Law for strict observing of it: (which Decree enjoins also
an Anniversary celebration of other Fests consecrat to our Saviors name, as
Eusebius and Sozomen relate; those words of the fourth Commandment ( six dais
thou shall labor) are only permissiv (thou shall have leav to labor six dais)
not preceptiv to enjoin it; since the sole intention is to sanctify the seventh.

Master Fisher who writes judiciously of this subject says, Of Gospel
Festivals.
that the moral part of the fourth Commandment in the first words ( Remember
to keep holy the Sabbath Day) injoyns only a Sabbath (no precise particular
time) to Gods public service; but the Ceremonial commands the seventh day
(since abrogated) on which God rested to be hallowed: yet the Lords Day is not
appointed to be sanctified by the Letter of that Commandment, nor is it moral:
no nor does the Gospel giv any warrant to keep it weekly.

St. John specifies two times of Christ's appeering to his Disciples John 20. 9.
19.
after his Resurrection: 1. At evening the same day he Luk 24 29. 33. 41. 42.
rose, when they assembled with the doors shut for fear of the Jews, and had
broild fish with an Honey comb for supper: but they met not to celebrat his
Resurrection, as new Sabbatarians teach: nor had they any Praying, Preaching,
or other Divine duties there mentioned. For Mary Magdalens going to the
Sepulcher with Spices, and the two Disciples traveling John 20. 26.
to Emaus, clearly convince it in their reput to be a or commonday. 2. After
eight dais (or when eight dais were complet) which happily was the ninth: so it
falls on the secund third of next; but cannot be on the first day of the week,
unles they say (as some do) that after eight dais must be interpreted before
eight dais ( viz. on the seventh) which is preposterous. In all the Acts of
Apostles is no appointment of holy Assemblies on the first day abov the rest.
St. Paul being to depart next morrow, came together with the D^sciples at Troas
on the Acts 15. 28. 29.
first of the week to break bread (which al grant was Sunday night) and
continued together til Daybreak: must we therefore keep the Lords day from
Sunday night til Monday morning, or rather from Saturday night to Sunday night,
as they say, surely they then met daily to Pray, Preach, and break bread
without distinction of one day before another: and that assembly was in the
night, when the Lords day was past. In all the sacred Epistles of Paul, James,
Peter, John, Jude is not one syllable of the Lords day: those words ( there
remains therefore Heb 4. 9 11. 14.
a rest to Gods People) are not meant of a temporal weekly rest, but a
spiritual eternal in the Heavens; where Christ Jesus our high Priest is gone
before us, into which Men must striv to enter by Faith: being begun in this
life by ceasing from sin and doing righteousness; but finished or perfectly
continued in the life to com. Indeed St. John's speech ( That he Rev. 1. 10.
was in the Spirit on the Lords day at I Will Patmos) shows there was a day then so
caled: but whether it were a Festival, whether weekly or Annal? And if weekly,
whether the first of Christ's Resurrection, or sixth of his Passion (which the
Greecs kept weekly til Constantins Edict, and Patmos is a Grecian Island) is not
expressed, nor is the weekly celebration of it commended or commanded in sacred
Scripture. Yet it is very ancient even in the Apostles dais, grounded on the
foresaid words, and generaly received in all Churches: so it is a custom,
constitution, or tradition of the Catholic Church; but no Doctrine or Article of
Faith prescribed in Gods Word, as al Orthodox Authors agree. The Church set it
apart in stead of the seventh day on good grounds.

1. The Morality of the fourth Commandment requires set dais or times for Gods
public service: so the Church according to the liberty wherewith Christ has
made her free, consecrated the first day among other Annals to be weekly kept
holy, without any affi^mation of morality, which is but the blind zele of some
men. 2. The equity of a seventh day under the Law, moved the Church to assign a
like proportion of the first day every week to be Religiously hallowed, howbeit
she has sufficient Reasons to refuse the last day and choose the first: 1. that
by not observing the Sabbath, Christians might be and they are freed from the
yoke of the Ceremonial Laws. 2. that herby a difference or distinction might be
put betwixt us and the Jews. The like two motivs or inducements she has to
choose the first. 1. Because God began the Creation on that day. 2. In memory of
our Saviors Resurrection, because thereby he mightily declared himself to be the
Lord, in which regard it is caled the Lords Day; yet it is so spoken by way of
affirmation, not appropriation; as if he declared himself to be the Lord at
Mat. 1. 23.
no other time, or no day else to be termed the Lords. 1. For he mightily
declared himself to be the Lord by being born of a pure Virgin, as no mere man
ever was, and that is so well to be caled the Lords day; yea he self expressly
calls it his day, John 8. 56.
Semblably in sustaining Gods wrath, for the sins of the World, he mightily
declared himself to be the Lord, and the Passion day may be so styled. Again by
ascending into Heaven in his Apostles view, he mightily declared himself to be
the Lord, and that is also the Lords day. 2. Christ by his Resurrection
occasioned the first day to be kept holy; whence some Writers say he changed the
Sabbath into that day: not as if he were Author or Institutor, and did actualy
set it apart to be hallowed; but only was Causa sine qua non or occasion of it:
as it is said here, the Papists made Nov. 5. an holy day, yet the Parliament
inacted it. 3. That Christ's rising is a part of Man's redemption, but not the
whole work: but his Incarnation, Birth, Passion, Ascension have their several
shares so well as the Resurrection. Since then to be conceived, born, crucified,
buried, rise again, ascend into Heaven had not bin sufficient singly, unles al
had concurred: the Nativity day when he was openly manifested to Men, being
celebrated in memory of a work so wonderful as the Resurrection; and the day
instituted by the same authority of the Church; is to be equaly esteemed as the
weekly Lords day: nor is this more or otherwise appointed to rejoice in then
the day of his Birth. To this effect he which is not absolutely authentic in all
circumstances; but he bows a crooked stick back to make it straight, and
pregnantly provs the lawfulnes, usefulnes, and behooful^es of celebrati^g
Christmas with other Gospel Festivals: which is all that I aim at, sans
comparing any to the weekly Lords day, which may seem odious or scandalous to
such as have bin otherwise taught, trained, or tutored. Howbeit to contemn it
wilfully when it was established both by Spiritual and Secular Laws to rail or
vilify it, to work upon it and restrain from Church (which was too too frequent
and familiar in times of yore) must needs censure and condemn for peevish,
pervers, malicious ignorance, or wild zele sans knowledge. For it is a violation
both of the fourth Commandment (which they allege for Morality of the Lords
day) since it was a day of rest appointed by lawful authority for Gods special
Service: and also of the fifth, since they despise and dishonor their Mother the
Church: in which respect Christ compares such to Pagans and Publicans: Mat. 18.
17.
beside the breach of al order and decency in Divine worship, which St. Paul so
much commends to be observed 1 Cor. 14. (...).
by all Christians. Pardon the prolixity of this Solution.

Ob. Some idely prattle, that new years gifts and gratulations (God giv you a
good year etc.) savor of gross Gentil superstition: Ergo, etc.

Sol. They are mere civil courtesies (no Religious Rites) like presents sent to
great Persons or private friends; and parallel to common salutations (good
morrow, good night, good speed) which are liable to no superstition, so that
mote is removed: but if they would conscientiously cast out the beam of
fastidious prejudication, profanation, and defamation with all uncharitablenes
remaining in their own eyes; they should more clearly descry or discern good
from evil, light from darkness, and verity from falsity.

Ob. Others cast a captious bone in my Dish, that our state has cashired set
Fests, together with Monarchy, Prelacy, Liturgy, solen service at Burials,
Marriage by Ministers, and other Religious Rites: Ergo it is presumption to plead
for or protect any one of them.

Sol. This is a two edgd Sword sharp on both sides, where a rude hobling verse
must be remembered: contra Argumentum e^siserum contendere noli, but this in
point of Evangelical Fests, concerns Magistrates and Ministers, not private
persons. For if they dare to celebrat Christmas or other holy dais, I will
presume to be present by way of devotion, without wilful disobedience to
Superiors; so well as at their arbitrary exercises of Thanksgiving or
Humiliation; appointed publicly by the State, or privately in particular
Congregations upon selfdevised Edw. 6. 5. 6. (...). 3. Eliz 1. c. 2. made A.
1645.
occasions. Two Parliments have inacted a du celebration of Christmas with other
Fests, which still stand enforce: for one only ORder condemns holy dais not
warranted in the Word (yet Nov. 5. stands still, as it is fit it should) which
cannot annul an Act; since it is a Maxim in Law, that every thing must be
dissolved the same way it is made. Nor is Christmas contained in those general
words of that Order, being warranted by the general words of Scripture,
instituted by Apostolic Churches, and practiced in the Reformed. Yea the
procurers of that Order (who wronged many private Men, and very unjusty took
from me a Manor bought of the Dean and Chapter of Exceter, worth twelv
thousand pounds) were since routed or thrust out of the House, and publicly
declared to be a Party or Faction Apostats from their first Principles, Parl.
Declar. Sep. 27. 1649
bearing only the name of Patriots and Lovers of Religion, but indeed needed
Reformation. The authority of Divines assembly Antipol. 256.
is of no validity: for Edward, their Favorer says, That an Assembly chosen by
Magistrates (as that was by Parliament) has no power by any primitiv pattern to
draw up a Government or Directory of worship, for so many Churches (being about
10000. Parishes in England) whereof most part had not one member present. Mr.
Fisher says, that Presbyterists decry Preaching or administering Sacraments on
Christmas day, or any other sav the weekly Lords day: yet they Lecture any day,
or make Fests and Fasts at their pleasures: nor will permit any to communicate,
unles (...) be confessed or approved by the Pastor and his Pr^sby^ery. They
Preach and Teach, that it is unlawful to eat Min^d Pyes, Plum broths, or Brawn
in December: to trim Churches or Houses with Holly and Ivy: to stick a C^llar
of Brawn or Roast Beef with Rosmary: to play at Cards or giv money to Tradesmens
Boxes, or send a couple of Capons or any other Presents at Christmas: to use a
Ring in Marriage, or cover a Hers with a whit Sheet. Al which with many mo such
pety fopperies, they call Popish Antichristian superstitions: yet they most
sottish in so saying and seducing poor People into a dangerous detestation of
observing our Saviors Birth day Fest.

Here I desire al to take notice once for all, that in a larger Folio work
intended to the Press so soon as this hand can transcribe it, I no where meddle
with state affairs, nor tax the suppression of any Religious Ordinances, which
were high presumption to do: for who made me a comptroler of others, specialy
my Superiors? But only defend the lawfulnes of them, leaving al to their free
disposal. I am a plain welmeaning Man, who claim a Scholars privilege to
dispute de omni Ente, for better ventilation of verity: but in the preceding
Theological Treatise, produce nothing sav what very learned Orthodox Authors
prescribe publicly in Print, which is a sufficient warrant. The things in
themselfs are the same under al mutations of State, and used latly in our
Mother Church: nor should good writers turn their tunes with every Wind. I
maintain Monarchy to be the best form of civil Government, and Episcopy of
Ecclesiastic: I hold set Prayer best in public Congregations, and sacred Fests
fit for special occasions; beside solen seasons of fasting for our sins; but
prefine no rules in those behalfs. I like divine Service and Sermons at Funerals
for the Auditors edification, desiring the like shortly at mine own; and
dislike dumb shows: but we may not be our own Carvers or Chusers, and Inferiors
must submit with all meeknes, modesty, and humility, as I ever have done, I
approv Marriages by Ministers in public Churches before those by Magistrates in
private places: since it is a sacred Ordinance of God in Paradise, and not simply
civil or carnal. Generaly I prefer venerable Antiquity ratified by our Church,
to phantastic fanatic novities of modern devisers in all Adiaphorals. Let those
that lov Monarchy, Prelacy, Liturgy, Burial Sermons, Marriage by Ministers, and
harmless holy dais; hold their Opinions still: but such as will have none, shall
have none with my good will; so every one may ride his own Hobby-Hors. If Adders
will not be charmed nor Panthers tamed, let them remain wild or wilful still. One
punctilio rests, whe^in I would gladly be right understood: that I somwher
blazen the personal virtues of some Sovereign Princes, and brand others Vices
(as Henry 6. and Richard 3.) which al Histories do for Men's instruction: but
never handle their Regal perfections or imperfections. For it is often seen (as in
those two, with many mo) that a good Man is an il Magistrate, and contrarily:
which writers may display for the general good; but I have more moral manners and
Serpentin sublety then to meddle with State-matters that are too high for me.
If they shall depress or discard Ministry, Tiths, Glebes, Patronages,
Universities, Hospitals, Corporations, Common Law, Chancery, or what else (as is
done to Monarchy, Prelacy, Cathedral Churches, Liturgy, holy Fests, Civil Law,
high Commission Court, Service at Burials, Ministerial Nuptials) I shall sit
silent in a corner, to condole such reverend ruins: but will never put Pen to
Paper against the Authors, Actors, or Abettors having no authority so to do:
only I vent my Opinion in point of retiocination (not resolution) touching the
lawfulnes or usefulnes of them (as others do theirs) sans scandal or offens to
any, unles, gauld Jades will winch. This is the common Character or cogniscance
of a so caled cursed Cavalier, which I cannot but own or acknowledge how odious
so ever.

Couste qui couste: non est mortale quod opto
Let cost what cost it may:
No mortal thing I weigh:
Howbeit I claim the privilege of Conscience promised and proclaimed to al
except Popery and Prelacy, which concern me not. For what crime, cause, or color
of hate can be alleged against such simplicians as never acted on any side, nor
were ever questioned for Delinquents (as I was not, yet twice imprisoned both
by Sea and Land) sav that they dissent in Judgment or Opinion? So do al Sects,
Septs, and F^ctions one from another, yea among themselfs in each; which is no
Moral vice nor civil fault: Quot homines, tot sententiae; so many fancies as
faces. The Catholic Moderator checks al contenders about points of Religion,
and givs good Counsil in a few Rythms to this effect.

Why for Opinions inter-kil we thus.
Whose truth not force, but reason must discus?
Reason whose chief force in Opinion lies;
Reason whose falls gloss often deceives the Wise.
God does in lov, peace, concord, unity dwell:
Hate, envy, malice confines are to Hell.
Now to return from this Apologetic digression, those ten foregoing cavils are
their best Basiliscs of Battery: which are cast or couched into Enthymems for
easier capacity, and both Propositions in each falls or fucatious: but the
astructiv Arguments follow built on surer foundations.

1. The universal Church in all ages, both institued these Fests 1 Argument
in Oecumenic Councils by precept, and injoined them to be observed by all
Christians in practice: who annaly celebrated Christ's Birth day, and others for
his sake: which is so good or better warrant, then any particular Churches or
Congregations can pretend to erect Fests or Fasts: yet those very lawful and
laudable.

2. The Lutherans celebrat Christmas with some other Festivals 2 Arg.
still: and sundry Calvinists wish it had bin never decried or disused among some
of theirs.

3. Our Church since the first plantation of Christianity, 3 Arg.
has constantly celebrated them with all Religious Rites of divine Service,
Sermons, and Sacraments; specialy Christmas day.

4. Diverse Divines (who in youth decried them most fiercely) 4 Arg.
have of late waxing wiser defended and solemnized them to their great glory:
which palinodial reca^tation both in Exp^rt^ (...)
Pulpits and practice (like St. Austins Retractation) is a stronger proof on
their behalf, then the best Bulrushes prealledged against them. It Is true that
the hearts inward holiness in thanksgiving for this chief work of our
Redemption, is a most acceptable sacrifice to God: yet may not extern worship
in Congregations and other lawful exultations be rejected or vilipended.

5. The disusing or despising them, is a ready step in the 5 Arg.
vulgar to Atheism or Irreligion, when no solen Service or Sermons are used.

6. Their nauseous contempt or explosion, is an act of affected 6 Arg.
Apostasy from the Catholic Church, and of Schism or separation from our
Reformed Mother, which al obedient Sons should detest or decline; for Aerius
first branded set Fests, and levelled Prelates with Presbyters for which pride
with other heresies, he was justly condemned and cast out of the Church.

7. The Church of Smyrna soon after the Apostles dais, 7 Arg.
celebrated Polycarpus Martyry: praying that God would permit them to consecrat
the Birthday (so they call it) of his blessed death, with joy and gratulation
at their holy conventions: to bestow that lov on Martyrs which is du for
Christ's sake, whose disciples and imitators they were. This pointly provs the
antiquity of set Fests dedicated to Apostles and Martyrs, which exemple the
Smyrniens followed. Yea Christians from the Gospels very dawn met at Martyrs
Monuments to serve God yer Churches were erected, and from such Assemblies
Churches had their origin.

8. The end or necessity of Christ's Nativity is triple: 8 Arg.
1. That Gods promises and his Prophets predictions might be fulfilled: 2. That
God by it might manifest his lov to Mankind: 3. That al lying under the Law
might be redeemed: else eternal death had passed on al Men, since al sinned.
Hence we are bound to render sincere thanks for these inestimable benefits, by a
triple outward expression of gratulation: 1. In Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual
Songs: 2. In providing plentiful fare for our family, inviting needy Neghbors
to our Tables, and large liberal alms at our Doors: 3. In harmless mirth,
music, and sports of recreation for Gods glory (every Man more or less
according to his ability and quality) but not in profane pleasures, riots,
surfets, excess, drunkenness, chambering or wantonness; as too many heretofore
have done.

9. If we may every 5. of Nov. (as the Jews did in the Fests 9 Arg.
of Purim) declare our joy for a temporal deliverance of the State: much more
may we with prayers and praises record Gods special spiritual mercy in Christ's
Birth, being a great joy to al People.

Al Fests lat celebrated in our Church, are consecr^t to Christ's honor or for
his sake, as shall appeer by exact enumeration of each in order of the several
Months. 1. the Circumcision, Jan. 1. 6.
when he fulfilled the Lawish Covenant in his flesh. 2. Epiphany or Apparition,
either in memory of the Star which led the wisemen to the house where he was (as
is commonly conceived) one full year after his birth: or from the holy Ghosts
appeering in shape of a Dov at his Baptism thirty years after (whence the
Churches in Egypt celebrated both birth and Baptism on one self day) or rather
from both: for those Magi came along journey from Persia or Arabia, which they
could not finish in the first twelv dais, and immediately after their departure
Joseph warned from God by an Angel in a dream, fled with Mat. 2. 13 14.
his wife and the Babe into Egypt: but at her Purification forty dais after his
birth they were al three at Jerusalem, and went Luke 2 22.
back to Bethleem, where the Magi found them in a private house, for the Shepherds
(not they) found him at an Inn in a Manger Luke 2 7. 12.
wrapped in swaddling clothes; so they returned not to their City Nazaret (as
most men from Saint Luks ambiguous words Luk 2. 39.
mistake) til their coming from Egypt, as the current conte^ure Mat. 2 2. 9.
of Scripture makes it clear. The Star indeed appeered to the M^gi twelv dais
after his birth in their own Country, but they took their journey almost a year
after, when it reappeered to their ineffable joy, and led them to the house (no
In) having bin before at Jerusalem to enquir where the King of the Jews was
born: Yea H^rod being deluded by their not returning, slu Mat. 2. 16.
al males born in Bethleem and coasts thereof from two years old and under,
according to the time he had learned of the wisemen, which evidently implies
that Christ was abov a year old at the Epiphany of the Star, and immediately
carried into Egypt. Now his Baptism is referred to that same day ( J^^. 6.)
which Alias Syriacus an Arabic M. S. and others call the benediction of waters:
hence our Church appointed the first Lesson of that day Isaei 40. touching John
Baptists mission, and the secund Mat. 3. which ^nds with Christ's Baptism; but
the Gospel is Mat. 2. about the Stars appeering, which appertly argues, that
it is called Epiphany from both. Some call Christmas day Epiphany because he appeered
then to the world, but Circumcision and Purification may so well have that name;
because at the first he appeered in the Synagog, at the last in the Temple,
which is Feb. 2^. 24.
not so proper, plausible or persuasible. 3. The Virgins Purification, when he
was publicly presented in the Temple, and proclaimed by Simeon and Anna to be
the Messiah. 4. Matthias, who after Christ's Ascension was chosen Apostle by
Lot, March 25.
in Judas room. 5. The blessed Virgins Annunciation, when the Angel Gabriel
declared his Conception or Incarnation by the holy Ghost, which together with
her perpetual virginity, is ratified by a remarkable Story if true, which may be
doubted.

The Rabies kept a Register book in the Temples Archivs of A rare story.
al their Priests elections with their Parents names, and Deathdais: so when
Jesus began to preach at Jerusalem, one of them died, in whose place they had
none fit to surrogat; but hearing well of him, sent for his mother (her husband
being then dead) and asked who was his Father? she said, I am still a very
Virgin; but in Youth as I was devout at Prayer, an Angel told me I should
conceiv a Son by the holy Ghost, and he to be caled Jesus; whom at the set time
of women I brought forth, without throws of travel or torments, which some
women yet alife then present (whom she named) can testify: The Rabies wondering
at it (who bore him no malice then, til the fame of his divine miracles excits
their teen) accited the said women, who attested the same; whereupon they chose
him, and inscribed these words on their Registry. In the place of such a Priest
we have by joint consent of the whole Society elected one Jesm Son of the living
God by the Virgin Mary. This book since the Temples destruction by Titus, is
said to ly hid in Tyris (some say Tiberias) but the Tradition is current among
the chief Jews, as a late London convert relats in Print, howbeit the truth may
be suspect, because no parcel or particle appeers in the Gospel, that he was of
their company, but ever an Enemy; yea al Jews blasphemously brand her for a
whore, and him for a Bastard; utterly denying any such Tradition, which will
make most against them. 6. Marc an Evangelist, who penned his life, April 25.
acts, miracles, death and resurrection. 7. Philip and James the lesser caled
the Lords brother, both being his Apostles and May 1. June 24. ^9.
Martyrs. 8. John Baptists birth day, who was his Messenger or forerunner, to
prepare the way before him: he preached and baptized, being caled by Isaiah the
Voice of one crying in the Isai 40. 3.
Wilderness. 9. Peter and Paul both chief Apostles and Martyrs at Rome in one
day: the first crucified with his head downward the last beheaded, but whether
in one year of Nero writers vary. 10. James the greater (Brother to John, sons
of Zebedee) July 2^.
an Apostle and Martyr, slain with the sword by Herod the king (miscaled
Agrippa major) not the Tetrarch, who slu John Baptist. 11. Bartholomew, who was
his Apostle and Martyr. 12. Aug. 24. Sep. 21. 29.
Matthew, who being a Jew born, and Publican or Tole Customer by profession,
becam an Apostle and Evangelist. 13. Michael an Archangel who figured Christ,
and fought for his Oct. 18. 28.
Church against the red Dragon (or Devil) and his Angels. 14. Luke a Physician
of Antioch, one of his Evangelists and Penner of the Apostles Acts. 15. Simon
Zelotes and Jude the Lords Brother or Cosen German (whose Mothers were Sisters)
being both his Apostles. 16. Al Saints, which is a day Nov. 1. 30.
dedicated to his Apostles, Martyrs, and holy Confessors in general, even al.
17. Andrew Brother to Peter, who was his Dec* 21. 2^. 26. 27. 28.
Apostle and Martyr. 18. Thomas Didymus, who was also his Apostle and Martyr.
19. His Nativity, which too many through peevish ignorance make a stumbling
block and laughing stock; being self-proud, supercilious, and super-singular:
but show themselfs most ridiculous to play on such poor Oaten Pipes of thread
bare Arguments, which make Men's ears glow to hear their harsh gaglings. They
style the celebration of it superstition, Heresy, Heathenism (terms without
truth) and a malicious Minister in London publicly preached, that any A 164^
Fest consecrat to Christ's honor, name, or memory is no better then that which
the Israelits made to the molten Calf: so like a Calf spoke the Man, there be so
good Records that Christ was born Dec. the twenty fifth as that William the
Conqueror was Crowned King of England on that very day. Yea Magistrates had so
good power to injoin Fests heretofore, as any Modernists have for theirs, or to
suppress the old. 20 Stephan one of the seven Proto-Deacons and prime Martyr
actualy and arbitrarily, who gladly gav his life to preach or publish him for
the true promised Messiah. 21. John his best beloved Apostle Evangelist,
Analogical Martyr: who suffered cruel torments and was exiled, being ready to
lay down his life. 22. Innocents of Bethleem Juda, who in deed (not desire)
were slain by Herod the great in Christ's stead, tho not for his sake. These are
all the fixd Fests: but his Resurrection is sanctified weekly in lieu of the
seventh day Sabbath, and yearly too at Easter: his Ascension 40. dais after.
Which are al except the holy Ghosts decent at Pentecost, and Trinity seven dais
after consecrat to the three Persons in Deity. The last with some Appendices are
Movables, and three of them ( Easter, Pentecost or Whitsunday, Trinity)
celebrat on the Lords day. All the rest which relish of superstition (invention
and exaltation of the Cross, the blessed Virgins pretended sinless Conception
and supposed Assumption, al Souls in Purgatory, beside Tho. Becket a Pseudo
Martyr, and many mo of like bran) we utterly reject, renounce, or repudiat.
What harm then in all this, since it tends soly to sanctity? Yes say Malignants,
because Papists ordained, prescribed, and pro phaned them. Indeed they abused
(not appointed) them, being instituted before by the primitiv Church, as is
plentifully proved: but such as they superstitiously superadded, are abrogated
and abandoned. Yet what if Papist ordained al, shall we receiv or retain none?
If they go on their heels, shall we walk on our heads? If they profes one God in
three Persons, shall we beleev three Gods in one Person? Let pious institutions
be embraced, but al impious abuses or Ordinances exiled and extermined.

In sum, I prescribe no Fests to be sanctified, nor find fault Sum^ary.
with their suppression; but only assert the lawful Religious use of them:
freely agnizing that the state or such as sit at stern, have lawful human power
to annul or abrogat them, and to restore or reestablish them, with other
Adiaphoral Ordinaces; except Articles of Faith, wherein we must obey God and not
Man: so far am I from taxing or traducing our Superiors actions that I do and
will obey them in all indifferent things (either Religious or Civil) which do
not trench on a good conscience. Yet if they will be pleased to redintegrat the
public Liturgy and principal Festivals (which stand ratified by several Acts of
Parliament unrepealed) they shall make glad millions of good hearts in this
Commonwealth, which greatly griev at this interruption (rather then abolition
or suppression) of them. On whose behalfs (since it is no Mony-matter, nor can any
way prejudice the State) this poor Distich may humbly be presented.

Gratum Opus Angligenis, si restituatur ut olim
Publica forma Precum, Festaque sacra; foret.
If Common-Praier Book could as of old be had*
And sacred Fests; English hearts would be glad.
Let incomparable Bishop Andrews words, concerning the In a Sermon on John 8.
50.
chief Sovereign Queen of Festivals, close up the Catastrophe: There is no day
so properly Christ's as that of his Birth, which by comparing it with others will
appeer. For the Passion day is not so truly or peculiarly his, because two
Theefs suffered with him at the same time, place and manner: nor Resurrection
day, since many mo rose then too, and went into the holy City, appeering unto
many: nor Ascension day, for that Enoch and Elias ascended bodily long before
him: much less the Circumcision day, which was common to all the Jews
Male-Children: but the Birth day of a pure Virgin by power of the holy Ghost;
is soly his without Fellow: none ever so born none born such God and Man in one
Person. Therefore as no Fest else, it is attended (as Christ he-self was) with an
Apostolic retinu of twelv Holy days. Thus this sweet singer of England, or
golden mouthd Chrysostom descants.

The final result rests on two questions: 1. Positiv, whether Up^^or.
it be lawful for Gods Church and al obedient Members to set apart or sanctify
one day of 365. in a year, for the memory of our Saviors manifestation in the
flesh; as the Jews did the Altars dedication, and our State the deliverance of
that Devilish Powder Plot, which no sober Christian can deny? 2. Comparativ,
whether it be superstition thankfully to celebrat one day annaly with public
worship, in remembrance of Man's redemption; or rather wilfully to scorn,
slander, profane, and contemn it? If these two be laid in the scales of
unbiassed impartial judgment, the pious veneration will far preponderat the
impious irrision in all good Men's eyes. Shall we set apart or sanctify diverse dais
of Thanksgiving and Humiliation for Temporal benefits of Victories or other
occasions; and cannot be content to afford to allow one for the greatest
Spiritual blessing of our eternal Redemption from the power of sin and slavery
of Satan; began by his blessed birth, and finishd by his bitter death and
burial, with other consequent glorious works of Exaltation: viz. his
Resurrection, Ascension, and continual intercession at his Fathers right hand
in Heaven? God shield us from such guilt: whereto these two Heroics may be aptly
applied.

Absit tale nefas: pudet haec opprob^^a nobis
Aut dici potuisse, aut non potuisse refelli.
Far be such crime: it is shame should be imputed
These scandals to us, or could not be refuted.
For sh^me then, let Pulpits ring no more of such rediculous reasons prealleged
not worth a Fig: which if a young Sophister should urge in Schools, he were
worthy to be hissed out; as being unwo^thy to be answered. Dr. Hammond a deep
Divine (from whose learned lucubrations I have pickd some precited materials, as
he and al writers borow from others) in his Resolution to certain modern
Quaeres whereof this concerning Christmas and other Fests is the last) answers
sixten addle interrogatories of his Antagonist in this point, which he that
lists may peruse: but to requite his pains, proposes three pithy Quaeres at
end of that Treatise, whereto three mo shall be superadded.

1. Whether the Church Catholic or any particular (specialy (...)
n^^rest the Apostles age) has sufficient power to make one or mo dai^ sacr^d
and let apart from servil works to Gods service, in memory of some eminent mercy
conferred on his People; to be yearly celebrated with true piety: which shall
bind al dutiful Children to obey and observe them?

2. Whether the annal Fest of Christ's Birth, being both lawful 2 Q^aere.
and laudable, in the right religious use weeding out al abuses (ordained by
the Catholic Church) may justly be abolished or abandoned by any Church or
State (much less private Persons without regard to the universal: since it has
so long continued sans comptrole or contradiction by any?

3. Whether it be a good ground in Conscience or Common 3 Q^^^ e.
reason, to cancel or cashire so pious a constitution, under a fucatious color
of causless superstition: because some pedissequent dais have bin rudely profaned
or misspent in riotous revellings by wicked persons: specialy since it is founded
in honor Th^s three are (...).
of our Savior, and commemoration of his chief mercy?

4. Whether an express warrant of Christ's precept or his 4 (...)
Apostles practice, be necessarily required to ratify every Religious Rite of
the Church? Or whether late Reformists walk by that Rule of Scriptural
authority, in sanctifying arbitrary dai^ of Thanksgiving and Hamiliation, with
many mo Ordinances, Customs, and Ceremonies which they use?

5. What warrant is there to annul the seventh day Sabbath, (...)
or surrogat the Lords day in stead; sav only that the Apostles sometimes meet
on the first day to break Bread? Yet the observation of this is no abolition of
that: specialy since they still frequented the Jews Synagogs on those dais to
convert them. Or what for the Name, sav that St. John says, He was in the
Spirit at Patmos on the Lords day? Yet is there no irrefragable evidence that it
was the first day. O^ what for Pedo B^p^s^, exc^pt that the Apostles Baptized
whole Families, in which most probably (not infallibly) were some Infants? The
bare letter reaches not so far to assert a precise precept or precedent for
either: but we rely on the Churches testimony, tradition, interpretation, and
authority for all three with many mo. Why not then in this point of holy Fests
instituted and i^tended soly to our Saviors honor and service; wherein is no
danger but much devotion and sanctity?

6. Whether Quis requisivit (who required it) be rightly 6 Q^^^e.
applied to such cases, specialy the three precited? Or whether it may not be
better retorted, who requires these irregular Fests and Fasts appointed by
particular Churches, or private Congregations; upon arbitrary will worship or
ordinary occasions? Have not Church Governors so much power or authority as
modern Innovators? Consider that those great Clercs had far cleerer judgments to
discern truth then silly shalow Sciolists: and know that in all matters or
mysteries of Religion, it is safer to offend by way of piety, humility, and
devotion then in proud self-lov, contempt, or despication. To take a sober
reckoning on the other side, what warrant have Ministers to examine Communicants
before the Lords Supper, and repel whom they l^st? Christ at first institution
(whose pattern they pretend to follow in all particles) did not examine his
Disciples, nor bid them so to do: but admitted Judas to partake it at his own
Luke 22. 21.
peril, knowing him to be a Traitor and Reprobat. St. Paul 1 Cor. 11. 28.
exhorts every Man to examine himself, and so eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup: but neither he nor any of the rest practiced examination of others:
so there is no precept, practice, or precedent for this modern innovation. Yes
say they, St. Peter bids al be ready always to render a reason of the hope in
1 Pet. 3. 15, 16.
them, with meeknes and fear. True: but speak sincerely, is this given as a rule
for Pastors to examine Communicants; or rather for All Christians to satisfy
Infidels or others? Read the next words, having a good Conscience, that whereas
they speak evil of you as of il doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse
your good conversation in Christ. Here is no cloak or color for examining
Communicants: therefore beware how ye wrest or wiredraw Scripture to serve turns.

Hos scrupulos, solvas, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.
Clear these points, and to me
Great Phoebus thou shelt be.
This brief Essay or Epigram being a Theological Theory, Corollary.
is purposly premised as a Prodrom or Pattern of 670. such (some larger, some
lesser) to be published by Gods grace in two Folio Tomes, so soon as they can
be transcribed and impressed: whereof the Enchiridion now com forth jointly with
this work, is as it were the Table or Catalog, containing the Arguments of them
al. Thus writers toil and travel in vain, to pleas or profit variously disposed
Readers, led wholly by Opinion, Affection, or Prejudication, most of which will
rather retribut sharp scofs and scurrilous censures, then deserved thanks or
commendations: but it is best Buoy-like to bear up amidst al boisterous billows
of spite and scandal, maugre Men's malice and al envious or venomous toungs. To
shut up al with two homespun verses:

His Epigramatibus facies non omnibus una,
Nec diversa subit: quales soluere Gemelli.
These Essais have not al one face to see,
Nor much unlike: as Twins are wont to be.
Sitne superstitio Natalis Festa sacrare
Christi, inter varios lis odiosa fuit.
There Is hateful strife amongst some, whether to keep holy
Christ's Birthday Fest, be superstitious folly?
Scaurus ait, renuit Varus: utri credere vultis?
Tam facile est lites conciliare graves.
Scaurus says, Varus gainsaith: which will ye
Beleev? So easy it is great brawls to agree.
In dextram potius pietate offendere praestat,
Quam laeva opprobriis spernere Festa sacra.
It Is better right hand-wise by zele to offend,
Then Holy dais left-like with scorn vilipend.
Discite quod verum est moniti, nec temnite Christum:
Sed colite aeterno Festa dicata Deo.
Learn truth that is taught, and do not Christ defy*
But Fests ordained to eternal God apply.
Though my silly reason and shallow resolution (specialy in Vale^^ct^^^.
Dotage) be no way regardable or reliable on in the learned Common wealth, yet
to satisfy some special Friends who earnestly entreat it, I will openly
unmasque, or declare my judgment in six controversal points, but very briefly
and bluntly.

1. Touching Man's Souls production; I hold Traduction against the universal
Tenet of Infused by Creating, and Created in Infusing.

2. For Predestination to eternal Life or Death; I beleev it to be with
reference to Gods prescience of pure simple Intelligence, not of his free
Pleasure to show his Power, by any absolut irresistiv Decree.

3. Concerning Church Government; I defend Episcopacy for the best form of
Ecclesiastic Polity, as instituted by our Savior analogicaly, and by his
Apostles actualy or apertly: but continued in all Churches ever since, til Mr.
Calvin changed it in case of necessity.

4. About Christ's Millenar reign on Earth immedialy before, in, or at the last
day of judgment, and general Resurrection of al human flesh; and for his
eternal personal reign on a new Earth, resigning his kingdom of Glory to his
Father: my Opinion amidst such a copious cru of learned Clercs, who debate it
diversely both wais, must needs be amphibolous or ambiguous, like a giddy
Ostrich, which having laid her first eg at rovers on the sands, regards not
where she lais the rest, nor on what heap she sits abrood: but do rather
declare then incline to the former, and profes my self advers to the later.

Me trahit in dubios aliorum assertio sensus,
An reget in Mundo hoc Christus, an Arce Poli?
Others opinions make me doubtful, whether
Christ shall rule in this World or Heaven for ever?
Nec patet, An Terris regnabit mill per annos,
Cum Superis, Sanctis, Martyribusque suis?
Whether he shall reign on Earth one thousand years,
With Angels, Saints, and Maryts, 't not appeers.
5. As to the Worlds final dissolution, whether it shall be by a refined
renovation of the Old, a created substitution of a New, or a predecreed
abolition into Nothing? I stand stif for the last against al Opposers or
Oppugners.

6. Anent Christmas and other holy harmless Pests forecited, I suppose them to
be both lawful and needful among profane people, who should be compeld to
Church in season and out of season (as the Spaniards at first drov uncatechised
Indians like herds of Cattle to Baptism) for the service of God, yet al too
little among stupid carnal Gospelers; for all which assertions with others on
the by, I have rendered strong sufficient Reasons from other men's works in the
particular Theses, Treatises, or Theorems: but the three middle (of Prophecies
concerning the Messiah to com: Christ's two Genealogies, and Revelation reveled)
are no Polemical points, nor will require farther explication or exposition;
therefore take this dry Distich for a final Farewell.

Quid volo, scire voles? sic stat sententia nostra:
Qua data, hoc addo tibi: Lector, Amice, Vale.
Wilt know what I hold? So sounds my judgments knel:
Which given, I bid thee, Reader, Friend Farewell.
Protestatio Verissima Protestation.
A most true Protestation.
Tu Domine Omnipotens, mea qui praecordia nosti;
Spargere velle nihil me nisi vera vides.
Thou, Lord Almighty, who my heart do know;
Know that I naught but truth abroad would sow.

AN END.
Additio de Anima Humana: An Addition of Man's Soul
WHile my Pen was busy to transcribe the Prolog.
previous Theorems, I met with Mr. Hobbs learned Leviathan of a Commonwealth:
and among diverse Paradoxal points or positions (as who cannot devise new
dogmats, and colorably defend his devises?) Found four flatly opposite to so
many of my Theological Theses or Tenets: which I thought fit by way of
vindication to enumerat, but not by way of refutation to recriminat; being far
too weak to encounter so strong a Champion, as a Dwarf to a Giant.

1. That Man's Soul is no special Entity, Essence, or Existence distinct from
the Body: which after separation by death shall subsist in Heaven or Hell til the
general Resurrection of al Flesh, and particular reunion of every individual
Soul with its own identic Body: but only the Breath, Life, Energy, or
Accidental quality thereof; as is in other animats or animals so denomined of
Anima, not Vita: yet the Body shall rise at last day the self same living Man it
was in this World.

This novity crosses clearly my first Thesis concerning the 1 Thesis.
Souls origin or production: wherein I maintain with the current stream of al
Orthodox writers, that it is an essential part of Man so well as the Body: but
after death or dissolution of one from the other, a distinct individual,
immaterial (tho no simple Spirit) and immortal substance; which shall immediately
by Gods particular Judgment partake of Heavenly jois or Hellish torments; and
in fine reunite with its own Body at general Resurrection. The whole controversy
is largly debated already, needing no vain repetition: but the Souls Verity,
Unity, and Immortality shall be farther proved by a few select places of sacred
Scripture, promiscuously collected and congested together for the present
occasion. God breathed into Genesis 2. 3.
Adam the Spirit of Life: or infused a living Soul, as it is generaly
interpreted. Which cannot be simple life, since Zechary expounding it says, The
Lord spread the Heavens, laid the Ze^h. 12. 2.
Earths foundations, and formed Man's Spirit within him: which provs intrinsic
infusion. Semblably says Solomon. Dust shall (...). 12. (...)
return to Earth, as it was, and the Spirit to God who gav it: which cannot
imply life or Breath, since that only cease or vanishes, but returns not to
God, who first infused into Adam a substantial Spirit, whence al others are
successivly derived. David speaking of Christ says, My flesh shall rest in
hope: (...) 16. 9 (...)
for thou will not leav my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy holy one to (...) (...)
26, 27.
see corruption. This is meant of our Saviors condition after his Passion (as
deep Divines define) that his flesh in the Grav shall rest in hope: but his Soul
descend into Hell to conquer the strong Man (Satan) in his own Kingdom; not to
be left there: nor the whole compound see any corruption, being to rise speedily.
The blessed Virgin says, My Soul does magnify Luke 1. 46, 47.
the Lord, and my Spirit rejoice in God my Savior: which two pathetical terms
(Soul, Spirit) she would not use of life or breath (a blast, bubble, bawble)
nor can Christ be caled her Savior in that respect, since her life did not
depend on him. Christ says, There was a rich Man clothed in purple, that fared
Luk 16. 19, 20.
sumpt^ously every day: and a beggar named Lazarus, who lay at his gate full of
sores: Lazarus dying was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom: but the rich Man
tormented in Hell flame. This he whiffles off slightly, that it is a Parabol: yet
many learned Men take it for a true story, because the beggar is named: nor would
Christ so pointly pourtray Abraham's bosom, the rich Man's dialog with him, and
Hel-torments (no not in Parabols) to teach People old wifes fables, if al were
falls figments: or that Men's Souls did not live after dissolution from the body;
which was his main scope to instruct, or to what end else did he propone it? Yea
elsewhere he bids Men not to fear them which kill the Body, and cannot kill the
Soul: but to fear Mat. 10. 28.
him which is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. How can this be
eluded? Here are two distinct parts directly specified, Body and Soul: nor can
the last be life, for he that kills the Body, is able and actualy does take away
that too at once together with it: nor would he ad fear him which is able to
destroy both Soul and Body, if he meant life only.

Christ said to the penitent Thief on the Cross, Today (instantly Luke 23 43.
(...)
and immortaly) shall thou be with me in Paradise; which must needs intend both
their Souls; since their Bodies were to be buried that night. Indeed many able
interpreters expound to day eternaly: yet al apply it to their Souls which shall
live with God for ever and ever. St. James bids his Countrymen with Jam. 1. (...)
meeknes to receiv the word, which is able to sav their Souls: not their life's,
for Gods word cannot sav them. Many mo places may be alleged, beside Reasons
and testimonies of Authors, if any refutation were intended: but since he says
the contrary to his Assertion (that Soul and Life signify the same) cannot be
proved by Scripture; these few pregnant Texts shall serve to vindicat the truth.

Politia Ecclesiastica: An Ecclesiastic Polity.
2. THat the Church is no different or distinct Economy or Corporation from
the civil Commonwealth; but subject and subordinat to it in all things: nor have
Clergy Men (except they be temporal Princes) any spiritual Government or
coerciv jurisdiction, unles delegated by suprem Magistrates special Commission:
but al their function is to Preach, Teach, administer Sacraments, and do other
Ecclesiastic duties. Which the Sovereign Magistrate may also execut if he
pleases, so well as perform a Constables Office or any other civil faculty: yea
he can constitut what Books of the Bible shall be Canonical, and which
Apocryphal: binding the Subjects to observe the one or other, as he shall dictat,
direct, or determine, under pain of civil obedience or disobedience. For
Ministers are only our Ghostly instructers and Schoolmasters, not Rulers or
Governors (no not in spiritual sanctions which concern the life to com) whose
precepts are pious Counsils, not positiv commands.

This ^latly contradicts my third Tenet touching Church Government 3 Thesis.
from the Creation to the first Century after Christ's Birth, and consequently
to our times: who defend that for diverse of the first generations, al Rule
(both sacred for Soul, and secular for Body) consisted in Fathers and Elders of
Families: but after when Men gathered (like Partridges in Covies) into several
Societies; public Poli^y grew up to two distinct Bodies, which had sundry
privileges of Rule; but subordinat or subalternat one to another. This is
^atified at large in the unwrested History of both Bodies drawn down from the
first times to our modern ages: which to re^terat will be tedious, if not
nauseous. Yet some few proors or places of Scripture shall be briefly subjoined
as in the former. Moses who first instituted Government over Gods people
Israel, Deuteronomy 17 9 12.
erected by divine dictat or direction two distinct Courts: one for
Church Matters caled a Consistory; another for Commonwealth affairs clyped a
Judicatory: as Jeremy Jer. 26. 8. 16.
was arraigned, accused, and condemned to die by the first; but acquitted and
released by the last. These two in process of time by long slavery of the Jews
to sundry Nations, were much pared or impaired; yet some prints remained til
Christ's coming: Who calls the secular Councils, and spiritual Synagogs: Mat 10
17.
yea if any offend a Man, and he tell him of it privately, but the other will not
hear; Christ bids the party tell it to the Church: Mat. 18 17.
which if he also neglects to obey, let him be as a Pagan or Publican. Mat. 5
22.
He describes both Courts in these words: Who ever is angry with his Brother
causlesly, shall be culpable of Judgment (meaning the lesser Court) who calls him
Rhaca in scorn, shall be liable to a Council (or chief Consistory) but who shall
say thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire. Thus far of Church government
under the Law: which had power to punish Blasphemy, Idolatry, Adultery, and some
other crimes with death.

Now under the Gospel, Christ as suprem Head held al rule soly to himself: but
after his death and departure into Heaven, the Apostles in a joint
Copersigniory governed al: who toward their deceas, appointed Bishops or
Prelates to preside over Presbyters (which were ordained before like the s^v^nty
Disciples sent abroad by Christ, to Preach, Baptize and do other spiritual
duties) for suppression of S^hisms and Heresies sown by Satan in those dawning
dais: Men of pervers minds, Who despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities.
St. Paul being Jud^ v 8 Acts 19. 21.
to leav the E^st and go to Rome, substituted Titus in his stead as Bishop of
Crete (a large I Will) To ordein Elders in every 2 C^r 8 6 16. Titus 1. 5. 1 Timothy
1 3. 1 Timothy 5 20, 21, 22. Tit. 2. 15.
City: so he appointed Timothy about the same time to abide at Ephesus, that he
might charge some to teach no other doctrine. The Rules which he prescribes to
both being before but common Presbyters, plainly indicat that he gav them
coerciv power over other Elders, to over see, censure, rebuke, or silence them,
with all Deacons under their charge; but to do nothing partialy, nor lay hands
on any suddenly. St. J^h^ after his return from Patmos exile, constituted some
supervisors in diverse Cities, planted whole Churches, and ordained Presbyteries
in several places, as Paul and Timothy used to do: the like did other Apostles
in diverse Dioceses; as many ancient writers and authentic Historians truly
testify. Much more might be added for proof of the premises, which is omitted
to avoid prolixity.

De regno Fidelium aterno: Of Saints eternal reign.
THat no elect Saints (when their Bodies shall be raised to life at last day,
according to Gods iterated promises) shall reign in the Kingdom of Heaven or
third Heaven Gods highest Throne; but only here on a new Earth, with our Lord
Jesus Christ as King: not for a thousand years before or at the day of Judgment
(as Chiliasts conceiv) but for ever and ever. For it suits not with the Majesty
of so great a King, that his Subjects or Servants shall have place so high as his
Throne, or abov the Earth his Footstool: which yet is commonly caled the
Kingdom of Heaven, in reference to that place of Eternity where God reigns in
glory.

This diametraly opposes my seventh Theorem, against the 7 Thesis.
Millenar reign of Christ with his Martyrs and some Saints at Earthly Jerusalem:
who hold that Christ shall com in the Clouds to judge al mankind (whose bodies
shall then be raised, and every one reunited to its proper identic Soul)
according to their works: but shall carry his Saints with him into Heaven, there
to reign or remain in ineffable jois eternaly. Which position is proved by these
pregnant places, without descant, division, or distortion. Earthly Jerusalem
shall be never restored, no more then Sodom Acts 6. 17.
or Samaria; as the Prophets inform: but eternal life in new Jerusalem (which
is Metaphoricaly meant of his Spous the Church) is the reward of just Men at
last day, as St. Paul testifies: 2 Timothy 4 6.
Ergo none shall reign on Earth with him, much less he with them in Jerusalem
new built. The holy Martyrs Souls Rev. 6 9.
rest under the Altar in Heaven: but shall not return to reign here on Earth,
either temporaly or everlastingly. For all the Godly at Christ's secund coming,
shall rise immediately to glory 1 These 4. 16* 17.
upon sound of the Trumpet, and these then living caught up in the Clouds with
them together, to meet the Lord: who coms not to reign or reside with them
here, but to carry them with him into Heaven, there to reign and remain for
ever. Now if it suits not with the Majesty of God so great a King, that his
Subjects and Servants shall sit so high as his Heavenly Throne, or abov his
earthly Footstool: how can it consist with the dignity of Christ our King, that
his Saints shall sit at Table (some at his right hand, some on his left) to eat
and drink wi^h him freely and familiarly for ever? Let this suffice for
Scriptural confirmation of the elects eternal reign with our blessed Savior in
Heavenly habitations.

De aeterno Christi regno: Of Christ's eternal reign
THat Christ at the Judgment day and general Resurrection of al Flesh, shall
resign up the Kingdom of Glory (where he now sits in Majesty) to his Father, and
reign personaly on Earth at his Metropolis of Jerusalem (to be new built) with
his Saints eternaly, never to see Heaven again: which is to suscipere gradum
Simeonis, from a C^lical infinite Kingdom to a Terrestrial finit Paradise. Thus
Scriptures seem to have several sens^s, according to Men's various
interpretations of arbitrary authority.

This openly oppugns my last Opinion of the Worlds annihilation, 8 Thesis.
against renovation of the old, or substitution of a new: whereto this Position
of Christ's eternal Personal reign at new built Jerusalem principaly tends: but
I defend, that this present finit World which was at first made of mere
nothing; shall in fine be utterly abolished or resolved into nothing: when it is
once dissolved or destroyed by fire. This is expressly evinced or evidenced by
these texts of sacred Scripture current coin. David says, Heaven and Earth shall
perish: Ps. 102 26. Mat. 24 3^. Job 14. 12.
Christ, They shall pass away: Job, They shall be no more: Isaiah, they shall
vanish like smoke; al their Host shall be dissolved, and Isai 51. 6. Isai 34 4 2
Pet. 3. 10 Rev 20 11.
roled together as a scrole: they shall fall down as a leaf from the Vine, and a
faling fig from the figtree: St. Peter, they shall pass away with great nois:
St. John, they fled away, and no place found for them. Al which phrases (to
perish, pass away, be no more, vanish like smoke, roled up as a scrole, fall
down as a Vine-leaf or fig from a figtree fly away and their place no more
found) strongly imply abolition, or at least impugn a perfecter condition; to
be the place for our Saviors perpetual personal reign with his Saints:
yielding up the Kingdom of Glory (the third Heaven) never to return. It Is a
sorry unequal exchange to quit a Celical, infinite, increat mansion; for a
Terrestrial, finit, created habitation: nor can any of the premised terms
plainly purport or senisibly signify melioration; as if the new Heaven and
Earth shall be bettered or beautified: since in all language of Men or Grammatical
construction, perfection is advers to perdition; and to perish or pass away
asystat to perfection. If the World is to be renewed or repaired, it shall have
no end: but it is said the end of al things is at hand, and the ends of the
World are com upon us. In nature is nothing but time, place, and space: but
afterward al eternity, ubiquity, and infinity: as in Man corruption shall put on
incorruption, mortality immortality, weakness power, and dishonor glory. Many
most pressing reasons and authentic authorities are alleged on behalf of
annihilation in the eighth or last Thesis: which it is not my guise or property
to reaccumulat. Howbeit having gleaned or gathered sundry select speculations
scattered through his whole work (some veracious, some fucatious, some dubious, some
suspicious, some erroneous) I presume to present them in public, sans answer or
animad version.

Specimina diversimoda: Several sorts of Essais.
MAster Hobbs is a great general Scholar, who has an excellent Entelechy to
devise novities; but deems them al verities; and would fai^ have the World dance
after his Pipe, which will never be. For Men may catch Ruddicks or Thrushes in
Pitfals, and Woodcocks in Springals: but bigger Birds are too wild, wily, and
wary then to be snapd in such silly snares. Real inventions if good, are very
laudable; and verbal too, if veritable: but novel Opinions contrary to common
current Tenets of al Authors most suspicious, and mostly erroneous. Not to
linger any longer in the Porch, these which follow are some of his sporadical
Positions. Touching the signification of some words in Scripture, he says they
depend not Chap. 34.
on the writers will or vulgar use, but on their true proper sens in Gods word.

Body and Spirit in Schools language, are styled Substances Body what.
Corporeal and Incorporeal: but a Body naturaly imports that which fills up some
space, room, or place, being a real part of the visible univers: which is an
aggregat of al Bodies, and no part of it but a Body; nor is any thing a Body
which is not part of it and contained or included in it. This Body being
subject to change in various appearance to Animals senses, is caled Substance or
Subject of sundry Accidents: as sometime to mov, sometime to stand still; sometime
hot, sometime cold; sometime of one color, sound, smell, taste, or touch, sometime
of another. Which several seemings (produced by diversity of Bodily operations
on our Senses Organs) we call Accidents of those Bodies: according to which
acception, Body and substance signify the same: so to conjoin or call ought an
Incorporeal Substance, is to destroy each other, as if one should say an
incorporeal Body. Thus much for the interpretation of the word Body.

Now the vulgar does not denomin all the univers Body, but Spirit what*
only such parts as they find by feeling to resist their force; or by seeing to
hinder farther prospect: but Air and such subtle substances not subject to the
Ey, they term wind, breath, or latinly spirits: as that which in any Animal
givs life and motion, is caled the Vital and Animal spirits. Whereas those Idols
of the brain representing bodies where they are not (either in Dream or to a
distempered brain waking) are nothing, as St. Paul calls al Idols: nothing at al
where they seem to be, and in the brain it self nothing but tumult rising from
the objects confused action, or Organs disorderly agitation. Hence some which
search not their Causes, but rely on others knowledge; call them thin Bodies
supernaturaly compact of Air, because the depraved sight judges them Corporeal:
and some term them Spirits or Specter, because the Touch descries nothing where
they appeer that resists their fingers. So the genuin signification of Spirit
in common speech, is either a subtle, fluid, invisible Body; or a Ghost, Idol,
or Phantasm of the Brain: but metaphorical meanings are many. Sometimes it
signifies a Man's disposition or inclination of Mind, as one having a humor to
comptrol others, is said to have the Spirit of contradiction: if one be addicted
to uncleannes, an unclean Spirit: If to peevish perverseness, a froward Spirit:
If to sullennes, a dumb Spirit: If to holiness, the Spirit of God. Sometimes any
eminent ability, or extraordinary passion, or diseas of Mind; as great
prudence, is clyped the Spirit of Wisdom, and mad Men are said to be possessed
with a Spirit. These are all the acceptions, and when none can answer or satisfy
that words Sens in Scripture, it falls not under Human understanding, and Faith
consists not in our Opinion, but submission: specialy where God is said to be a
Spirit, or where by Spirit is meant God. For his Nature is incomprehensible; and
we know not what he is, but that he is.

The Spirit of God moved on the Waters: If God heself be Spirit of God. Gen 1.
v. 2. Genesis 3. 1.
ascribed to him: but the like words are used at the universal Deluge; I will
bring my Spirit (Wind, Air, or moving Spirit) and the Waters shall be
diminished: Both which may be caled Gods Spirit, being his special work.
Pharach calls Joseph's Wisdom Genesis 41. 38.
the Spirit of God: And God says, Speak to all that are wise hearted, whom I
have filled with the Spirit of Wisdom, to make Exodus 28. 3.
Aaron garments to consecrat him.

2. Isaiah speaks thus of the Messiah: The Spirit of the Lord shall abide on
him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding; the Spirit of Counsil and
Fortitud; the Spirit of the fear of the Lord. Isai. 1. 2. 3.
Where is manifestly meant so many Gifts or Graces of God, not Ghosts or Goblins.

3. Extraordinary Zele and courage in defens of Gods People, Judge. 3. 10. chapter
6. 34. chapter 11. 29. chapter 13. 25. chapter 14. 6. So it is said, The Spirit of God came
on Saul 1 Samuel 11. 6. 1 Samuel 19. v. 20.
( against the Amonits) and his Anger was kindled greatly: no Ghost but a
vehement heat of vengeance. So Gods Spirit came upon him being among the
Prophets that praised God in songs: which was no Ghost, but a sudden unexpected
zele to join with them in holy Hymns or musical harmony.

4. A falls Prophet said to Michaiah, which way went the Lords Spirit from me to
thee? This cannot be any Ghost: for Micai 1 Kings 22* 24.
declared the event of that Battle before, as from a Vision, not from a Spirit
speaking in him So though Prophets spoke by Gods Spirit or special gift of
Prediction: yet their knowledge was not by any Ghost within them, but by some
supernatural Dream or Vision. Was not that inspiration by God?

5. It Is said, God made man of dust, and breathed into his Nostrils Quaere.
(Spiraculum vitae) the breath of life, and he was made a living Soul. This
breath only signifies life* not any Individual inspired Soul. As Job says, So
long as Gods (...) is in my Nostrils: that is, so long as I live or breath. So
Eze^^^l, The Spirit of Life was in the wheels: not any Soul, but they had life.
Again, The spirit entered Ipse dixit. Job. 27. 3. Ezekiel. 1. 20.
into me (not any Ghost or Spiritual substance possessed his Body) and set me
on my feet: meaning I recovered vital strength to go.

6. God says, I will take of the Spirit upon thee, and put it on them (the
seventy Elders) and they shall bear the burden of the People with thee.
Whereupon two of them ( Eldad and Med^d) Prophesied; whom Josua, not knowing
they had authority, Moses fo forbid: but he refused, wishing God N^mb. 11. 17
25.
would put his Spirit on all the People to make them Prophets: or giv them
authority subordinat to his own. So Josuae was full of the Spirit of Wisdom,
because Moses laid his hands on him: viz. ordained him to prosecut the work of
bringing Gods People into the promised Land; which he-self began but could not
D^ut. 34 9.
finish. So Saint Paul says, If any man has not Christ's Spirit (not his
Ghost, but submission to his Gospel) he is none of his. So says St. John,
hereby ye shall know the Spirit of God: every Spirit which confesses that Jesus
Christ is com in the flesh, is of God; Romans (...). (...). (...).
meaning the Spirit of Christianity or main Article of Faith, that Jesus is the
Christ; but not of any Ghost or Goblin. Those words ( Luke 4. 1.) Jesus full of
the holy Ghost, are expresd or expounded ( Mat. 4. 1. Marc. 1. 12.) by Spirit:
which means zele to do the work for which God the Father sent him into the
World: but to interpret it of the third Person in holy Trinity, is to say God
was filled with God, which is most improper o^ insignificant. Spirit literaly
implies a thin real substance, and metaphoricaly some extraordinary ability of
Body, and affection of Mind: but to translat it Ghost (which imports imaginary
Inhabitants o^ Men's Brains) there is no reason or Censure.
cau^. By his leav Saint Lukes words ( full of the holy Ghost) which the other
Evangelist have not) refer to Christ's Person: for it folows he returned to
Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness: al which three relat
alike to Christ: but our Interpreters generally expound this of the third
Person in Trinity: nor is it incongruous to say, God-Man was ^d by God: but
it is more presumptuous if one Writer w^l seem wiser then al his Felows.

7. The Disciples seeing (...) walk on the Sea, supposed him Mat. 14 26 Marc 6
49.
could not be a delusion of the Brain incident to one at once, or a very few
surprised with like fear; but a Body only compact ^^cts 12. 15.
of Air. When Saint Peter was excarcerated by an Angel, and the Maid said he
kno^kd at door; the rest thought hi^ mad, and said it was his Angel; which is a
corporeal substance compact upon occasions: else the Disciples followed the Jews
and Gentiles Opinion, that there be real Apparitions or Specter, which the one
styles Spirits or Angels (Good and Evil;) the other Demons both evil and good.
For God can form subtle substantial Bodies, to use as Ministers or Messengers
(so Angel signifies) in extraordinary metaphysical manner.

Cannot the Devil do the like? Did he not assum the similitud ^^are.
of Samuel, when the Witch of Endor caused him to confer with Saul? for Samuels
Soul it could not be, though Saul surmised it to be h^s Ghost.

Such Angels so formed are Corporal substances, which take up room as Air does,
and mov from place to place in time: but are no Spiritual Ghosts in no place or
no where, or definitly here as not to be elswher; seeming somewhat, yet be
Nothing. For those thin Substances, though invisible as Air, have the same real
dimensions (greater or lesser) as material grosser Bodies. Thus the Spirit of
God is taken: 1. For Wind or Breath: See the seven Marginal ^gures.
2. For extraordinary gifts: 3. For vehement Affections: 4. For the gift of
Prediction: 5. For Life: 6. For subordination to Authority: 7. For Aerial
Bodies.

Now for Angel: it is generaly a Messenger, or spicialy Gods Angel what.
Messenger, which relats any thing that makes known his extraordinary presence
or power; principaly by Dream or Vision. The Scripture speaks not of their
Creation, but calls them ministering Spirits: and Spirits (as is said) sometime
signify thin imperceptible Bodies, as Air, Wind, vital or animal Spirits:
sometime Images of the phansy in Dreams and Visions; which are no real
substances, but intentional or accidental appeerances in the brain: yet when
God raises them supernaturaly to signify his Will, they are termed his
Messengers or Angels.

Were not multituds of real individual Angels created by Q^^^.
God (as Divines deem or define) to wait on his Will? Or are the Good only
formed on occasions, and dissolved again? If so, then does not God ceas from
his work, but creats new, thin, Aerial Bodies continualy.

Here he has a large discurs, that the Jews from the G^ntils (not by any proof
or pressure in the old Testament) h^ld those apparances (which God sometime
raises in Men's ph^^sy for his service, caled Angels) to be real substances or
permanent Creatures whereof some which they thought beho^ful or beneficial, they
caled Angels of God: but such as they deemed hartful, evil Angels, foul Fiends,
Spirits, or Devils. For they ^s^ e^ed Pythonists, Madmen, Lunatics, Epilectics
or the like Demoniacs. Then he shows, how the word Angel in the old Testament
is only an Image supernaturaly raised in Man's imagination, to signify Gods
presence in executing some supernatural work: but no permanent Creature or
incorporeal Ghost, Touching Angels names in Daniel (Michael, Gabriel) by the
Dan. 12. 2.
first is meant Christ under the title of a great Prince: but the last was a
supernatural Vision, by which Daniel deemed or Dan. 8. 16.
dreamed (as diverse do) that two Saints talked together, and one said to the
other; Gabriel, make this Man to understand Dan 9. 21
the Vision: but God needs not to difference his servants by names, which are
helps only for weak, short, mortal memories: nor can it be proved in the old
Testament that Angels (except when they are put for Men made Messengers or
Ministers of Gods Will, Words, or Works) are permanent or incorporeal
individuals, as the Schools say. The chief places alleged in the Mat. ^5. 41.
new Testament are these: Go ye cursed (says Christ) into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. This indeed provs their permanence, but
not immateriality: sich no simple 2 Pet. 2. 4.
spirits are patible of material fire. St. Paul says. know ye not, that we
shall judge the Angels? St. Peter, if God spared not J^d^ v. 6.
the Angels that sinned, but cast them into Hell? St. Jude, the Angels which
kept not their first estate, he reservs in everlasting chains under darkness,
unto the Judgment of the great Day. These prove both the permanence of
Evangelical nature, and immateriality also. For as incorporeal is taken for not
Body (not for a subtle invisible Body) an incorporeal substance is a
contradiction: and to an Angel or Spirit in that sens incorporeal substance, is
a Cambridg Bull, and in effect to say, there is no Angel or Spirit at al. He was
of Opinion, that Angels were only supernatural apparitions of the Phansy,
raised by God to notify his presence and precepts to Mankind, specialy to his
chosen People: but confesses, that upon so many pregnant places and Christ's
plain words he believes there be real, substantial, permanent Angels: yet not
incorporeal, immaterial, indefinit, or nothing. It Is well he sees his error in
this point, which argues he may overween in others: and it were to be wished he
would review sundry strange singularities, to retract what he finds faulty or
erroneous: but not seduce or lead on the silly sort, who are apt to clasp any
shadows.

Was not the Angel Gabriel, who audibly annunciated to Quaere.
the Virgin Mary her present Conception by the holy Ghost; Rev. 12 7.
the same with Daniels so caled? And Michael who with his Angels fought against
the great red Dragon and his Angels the same?

Inspiration literaly (as Spirit is a thin Air) implies a blowing Inspiration.
into Man some thin air, vapor, or wind; as one fills a bladder with his breath:
but if Spirits exist only in the phansy, it is but the blowing in of a Phantasm:
which is improper or impossible to say of such things as only seem to be
somewhat, yet are nothing. The word is used in Scripture Metaphoricaly soly: as
when God inspired into Adam the breath of Life; vital Genesis 2. 7.
motion is meant.

Why not rather his rational Soul the fountain of Life and Quaere.
motion; which was infused at creating, and created in infusing, as St. Austin
asserts?

St. Paul says, Al Scripture is given by inspiration of God: 2 Timothy 3 16.
speaking of the old Testament which is true of the new Testament, but it is a
Metaphor, that God inclined the Spirit or mind of those writers, to pen
infallibly true as they did by his special dictat or direction. St. Peter says,
Prophecy came not in old time by 2 Pet* 1. 21.
Man's Will; but those holy Men spoke at the holy Spirit moved them. Here holy
Spirit signifies Gods voice by supernatural Dream or Vision, which is not
inspiration: nor when Christ breathed on his Disciples saying ( Receiv the holy
Spirit) was that John 20. 22.
breath the very holy Ghost; but only a sign of those spiritual Graces he gav
them. So when it is said of our Savior (or others) he was full of the holy
Spirit: it is not meant any infusion of Gods substance, but accumulation of his
gifts: whether supernaturaly attained, as the fiery cloven toungs sat on the
Acts 2. 3, 4.
Apostles, filling them with the holy Ghost; or ordinarily acquired by
industry, as Men get learning by study: which in all Cases are Gods gifts alike.
Thou then that have received more then others, must be most thankful: Infusion
and inspiration are not taken properly, as if good or bad Spirits entered into
Men; but only for Gods imparting his Graces or Virtues: which are not to be
poured in as Bodies into Barrels; but instilled ordinarily or supernaturaly.

Gods Kingdom is taken by most Divines metaphoricaly, Kingdom of God. Chap. 35.
for eternal felicity after this life in the highest third Heaven which they
call the Kingdom of Glory: or sometime for sanctification (the earnest of it)
clyped the Kingdom of Grace: but properly in Scripture it is Gods real Monarchy
or Sovereignty over any Subjects by their own consent or Covenant: so the
Israelits peculiarly chose God for their King, upon his promising them the Land
of Canaan: but very seldom metaphoricaly, and then it is used for dominion over
sin in the new Testament only: because such a dominion every subject in Gods
Kingdom shall have, without prejudice to the Sovereign. From the Creation God
reigned over al Men naturaly by his might, and commanded his peculiar Subjects
by voice, as one Man speaks to another: prohibiting Adam to eat of the Tree of
knowledge; and upon disobeying exiled him out of Eden from enjoying eternal
Life, whereto he was created had he not sinned. Genesis 7. 7.
Afterward he punished his Posterity for their Vices (al sav egth Persons in
whom his Kingdom consisted) with a deluge Genesis 8. 18.
of Waters: but his first Kingdom by solen compact, was with Genesis 17. 7, 8.
Abram in these words: I will establish my Covenant between me and thee and thy
Seed after thee for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee and them: and
will giv thee and thy Seed all the Land of Canaan (wherein thou art a Stranger)
for an everlasting possession. In memorial hereof he instituted Circumcision
Exodus 19 5, (...), 8,
caled the old Covenant, as the sign or Sacrament thereof. The same Covenant God
renewed by Moses at Sinai (they being newly become a Nation) which is expressly
styled (tho the name of King and Kingdom not before used) a Kingdom of Priests
and holy People: for they promised to do as the Lord commanded: which argues
their peculiar consent, compact, or covenant: but all the Earth is the Lords by
power, property, and precedent. So it is a clear case, that by Gods Kingdom is
meant a civil Commonwealth instituted by Subjects consents for regulating
their behavior, both toward God their King in obeying his Laws; toward one
another in point of Justice; and toward Forreners in peace or war. This was
properly a Kingdom, when God was King of Israel (which befell to no People else)
and the high Priest after Moses his sole Lieftenant or Viceroy: whence it is
forecaled Regnum Sacerdotale a 1 Pet 2 9.
Kingdom of Priests: and by St. Peter Sacerdotium Regale a Roial Priesthood:
since none but the high Priest might enter Sanctum Sanctorum (only once a year)
to inquire Gods Will 1 Samuel 8 7 etc.
of him. Many mo places prove the same: as when the Elders greiving at Samuels
Sons corruption, required a King to rule them Like al Nations; God said they
did not reject Samuel but himself, that he should not reign over them. Thus God
was their King, and Samuel only delivered what he dictated. So says 1 Sa^. 12.
12
Samuel, when ye saw Naash King of Ammon com against you, ye said to me, a King
shall reign over us, when the Lord God was King. After they had rejected God and
broken the Covenant by that revolt or rebellion, choosing another King: the
Prophets foretold his restitution, that it shall be in Zion David's Throne at
Jerusalem on Earth. See Isai 24. 23. Ez^k. 20. 33, 37. Micah. 4. 7. So says
the Angel Gabriel of Christ: He shall be great, and caled the Son of the most
high, and the Lord Luke 1. 32, 3^.
shall giv him his Father David's Throne: and he shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom shall be no end. This is a Kingdom on Earth,
for whose claim Christ was crucified as an enemy to Caesar; and on his Cross
inscribed: Jesus of Nazaret King of the Jews; being in scorn Crowned with
Thorns. So it is said of the Disciples, That they did contrary Acts 1^. 7.
to Caesar's Decrees saying, there is another King one Jesus. Therefore Gods
Kingdom is real, no metaphorical Monarchy, and so taken in both Testaments.
When we say, For thine is the Kingdom, power, and glory: it is understood by
force of our Covenant, not by right of his power. So it were frivolous to pray,
Thy Kingdom com: unles it be meant of Gods Kingdoms restoration by Christ;
which was interrupted by the Jews electing Saul. Nor is it proper to say, the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand or thy Kingdom com, if it had still continued: for
Gods Kingdom of Power is every where.

In sum, Gods Kingdom is a civil Monarchy, which consists Summary.
in the Israelits obedience or obligation to observe those Laws which Moses first
should bring from Sinai, and what the high Priest afterward shall deliver before
the Cherubins in Sanctum Sanctorum: which being cast off by electing Saul, the
Prophets foretold should be restored by Christ; and we daily pray for its
redintegration, thy Kingdom com: acknowledging the right of it in adding: For
thine is Kingdom, Power, and Glory for ever. Amen. The proclaiming hereof was
the Apostles Preaching, whereto Men are prepared by Gospel-Teachers: and to
promiss obedience to Gods government is to be in the Kingdom of Grace: because
God givs such power to be his Subjects gratis, when Christ shall com in Majesty
to judge the World, and actualy govern his own People, which is caled the
Kingdom of Glory. If Gods Kingdom (caled for its gloriousnes and celsitud the
Kingdom of Heaven) were not a Government which he executs on Earth by Vicars or
Vicerois, who deliver his commands to the People; there needs no digladiation,
who it is by whom God speaks to us: nor would Priests trouble themselfs with
spiritual jurisdiction, nor any suprem Rulers deny it them.

From this literal interpretation of Gods Kingdom, arises Holy what.
a genuin Exposition of the word Holy: signifying what in Monarchies Men call
public or the Kings property: who is the public Person or Representativ of al
his Subjects. As God King of Israel, is styled the holy one of Israel: and the
Jews Gods People a holy Nation. So the Sabbath (Gods day) is a Holy day: the
Temple (Gods house) a holy House: Sacrifi^es, Offerings, Tiths (Gods Tributs)
Holy duties: Priests, Prophets, Anointed Kings (Gods Ministers) holy Men: the
celical Spirits (Gods Messengers) holy Angels, or the like. For wherever holy
is taken properly, there is still somewhat signified of property got by consent.
For all Mankind is Gods Nation by property of power, but Israel only an holy
Nation by Covenant. In saying Hallowed be thy Name, we pray for Grace to keep
the first Commandment, to have no other Gods but him.

The word (Profane) is usualy taken in Scripture for common: Profane what
and consequently the contraries (holy and proper or peculiar) must signify the
same thing: but figurativly, such as live godly giving themselfs to devotion (as
if they forsook the World) are caled Bonhoms.

That which God makes holy by appropriating it to his own Sacred what.
use, is styled Sacred or Sanctified: as the seventh day in the fourth
Commandment; and the elect in the new Testament are said to be sanctified, as
endued with the spirit of godliness. That too which Men dedicat or giv to God
for his public service (Churches, Chapels with their Utensils, Priests,
Victims, Oblations, external Rites of Sacraments etc.) is styled Sacred or set
apart to God. Now there be diverse degrees of sanctity or holiness; when things
are sequestered or consecrated for Gods nearer service th^n others: as all the
Israelits were a holy People peculiar to God, yet Levies Tribe more holy, and
Priests among Levits more: but the high Priest most holy, so Judea was a holy
Land, but Jerusalem the City of general worship more holy, the Temple holier,
and Sanctum Sanctorum holiest of al places.

A Sacrament is a separation of some visible thing from common use, consecrated
to Gods service; for a sign of our admission Sacrament.
into his Kingdom, or a commemoration of the same. Circumcision was the sign of
admission in the old Testament, Baptism in the new: but the commemoration in
the one was eating the Pascal Lamb once annaly, to mind them of the night when
they were delivered from Egypts temporal bondage; and celebrating the Lords
Supper in the other, whereby we are remembered of our deliverance from sin and
Satan by our Saviors crucifixon. The Sacraments of admission (Circumcision and
Baptism) are used but once to every one, because we are admitted no oftener: but
those of commemoration (Passover and the Lords Supper) often reiterated, because
we must be often minded of our deliverance and allegiance. There be other
Consecrations which in ample acception may be styled Sacraments, as the word
implies a sacred institution for Religious uses; as Ordination, Matrimony, and
many mo: but as it imports an Oath, Promiss, or Covenant of Allegiance to God;
those precited are soly so named. A Commonwealth cannot possibly consist, where
any sav the Sovereign has power to giv greater rewards then life, or inflict
Chap 38.
grievouser punishments then death: but since eternal life excels temporal, and
endless torments exced death of nature; it is worthy to be well weighed of all that will obey Authority to avoid the calamities of confusion and civil war;
what is meant in Scripture by eternal life and endless torment: as also for
what offenses and against whom committed, Men are to be eternaly tortured, and
for what actions to enjoy everlasting life.

Adam had enjoied it in the terren Eden Paradise for ever, had he not broken
Gods commandment to eat the forbidden fruit; who had the Tree of Life allowed
to eat: but so soon Eternal Life; Genesis 3. 22.
as he tasted the one, God thrust him out of the Garden, lest he should take of
the other and live for ever. So if he had not sinned, he should live on Earth
perpetualy: but mortality seized on him and al his posterity for this first
sin. Since then he forfeted eternal life by sin; he who is to cancel that
forfeture, must recover it by righteousness: which Christ Jesus did by
satisfying for the sins of all that beleev in him; and so recovered life eternal
lost by Adam to al believers. So says St. 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.
Paul, since by Man came death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the dead: for
as in Adam al die, so in Christ shall al be made alife. Touching the place where
Men shall enjoy eternal life, the precited Texts seem to set it on Earth: for if
al forfeted it in earthly Paradise by Adam, they shall enjoy it on Earth by
Christ: else the comparison were not consonant nor complet. So says David, God
commanded the blessing on Zion, Ps. 133 3.
even life for evermore. So St. John, to him that overcomes, Rev. 2. 7.
I will giv to eat of the Tree of Life in the midst of Gods Paradise: Rev. 21.
2. 10.
This was the Tree of eternal life on earth. Again, I saw the holy City new
Jerusalem coming down from God as a Bride adorned for his Husband. As if he
should say, new Jerusalem Gods Paradise (or rather the Church Christ's Spous)
shall descend from Neaven at Christ's next coming to Gods people, and Acts 3. 11.
not they ascend to it. So the two Angels in whit clothing said to the Apostles
looking at Christ ascending: This Jesus who is taken up from you into Heaven,
shall so com as you see him go up into Heaven. As if they had said ( Glossa
corrumpit textum) he shall com down to govern them under his Father eternaly on
Earth (he coms to Judge, not to Rule) and not take them into Heaven. This
conforms to the restoration of Gods Kingdom began under Moses, which was the
Israelits Politic Mat. 12 30.
government on Earth. Christ says, In the Resurrection Men neither marry nor
giv in marriage, but are as the Angels in Heaven: This describes eternal life
like that which Adam lost at point of marriage. For since Adam and Eve (if they
had not sinned) had lived on Earth eternaly, yet could not continualy propogat
Progenies: because if immortals should immortaly procreat as Men do now; the
Earth in short space could not afford Foot-room to stand on, much less food to
sustain them.

How then can a new created Earth (except extended to Quae^e.
i^finit immensity) contain al Mankind (which are unimaginable multituds) born
and to be born since the Creation?

These with sundry such quirks surpass the reach of reason to resolv. The
comparison between life eternal lost by Adam, and recuperated by Christ's victory
over death holds thus: that as he lost it by sin, yet lived long after: so a
faithful Believer recovers it by Christ. though he die (...) natural death for a
long time, even til the general Resurrection: for as death is counted from
Adams condemnation, not execution: so is life reckoned from the absolution, not
from the Resurrection of those elected in Christ Jesus. Such are his specious
speculalations favoring of singularity.

That Men after the Resurrection shall live eternaly in Heaven Ascension into
Heaven.
(caled by St. Paul the third Heaven) is not evident in Scripture: by the
Kingdom of Heaven is meant Gods Kingdom who dwells in Heaven; which was Isreal's
People: whom he ruled by Judges, Prophets, and high Priests as Lieftenents, til
they rebelled and required a mortal King like other Nations. So when our
Savior by his Ministers shall persuade the Jews to return, and accomplish the
fulness of Gentiles: there shall be a new Kingdom of Heaven, because God (whose
Throne is Heaven) shall be King: yet it folows not that Man shall ascend to his
seat of happiness, or higher then his Footstool. No Man John 3. 13.
has ascended into Heaven, but he that came down from it; even the Son of Man
that came down from Heaven. Where note that those are St. John's words, not Christ's
as all the rest were; who was not then in Heaven. So David says, Thou will not
leav Ps 16. 10.
my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy Holy one to see corruption: which St. Peter
provs to be spoken of Christ's Resurrection; not of Acts 2 31, 34.
himself; because David is not ascended into Heaven. If any answer, it is true
they shall not ascend in bodies til the Resurrection; but their Souls enter
Heaven so soon as they die: As Christ confirms, Who provs the Resurrection by
Moses words Luk 20. 37, 38.
at the bush; when he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: who
is a God of the living, not of the dead. This cannot be construed of the Souls
immortality, since Christ there treats only of the Bodies resurrection or
immortality of Men who shall live again. He means those Patriarchs were immortal,
because God in mere grace confers eternal life on the faithful (who tho dead live
still to God, being writ in the Book of life with those that are absolved of
their sins, to reviv at resurrection) but not by any property consequent to
Man's essence or Soul. For to make it a living entity independent after
separation on the Body; and in it self immortal: or that any Man is immortal
(except Enoch or Elias) has no clear warrant Job. 14. 10, 12.
in the word. Job complains of Man's mortality by nature, Man dies and wastes
away: yea givs up the Ghost and where is he? Down he lies and rises not, til
the Heavens be no more. Which 2 Pet 3 7. 13.
St. Peter shows shall be at the universal Resurrection; when the Heavens and
Earth shall be dissolved by fire: but new expected according to promiss, wherein
dwells righteousness. So where Job says, Man rises not til the Heavens be no
more: it is as if he said, immortal life (for Life and Soul in Scripture sens is
the same) begins not in Man til the Resurrection or day of Judgment: and the
cause of it is Gods promiss (as St. Peter tells) not Man's specifical Nature or
Essence. Now since Gods Kingdom is a civil Commonwealth where he-self is
Sovereign, by virtu first of the old, and now since of the new Covenant: it
evidently appeers, that when Christ shall com again in Majesty and Glory, to
reign existently and eternaly; his Kingdom shall be on Earth, as God was in
Israel. So Gods Enemies and their torments after Judgment shall be on Earth: for
the place where al remain til the Resurrection, is usualy styled in Scripture
under ground, in Latin Infernus or Inferi, Greecly Hades; where Men cannot see
or die: implying the Grav so well as any other deep place: but the damneds place
after Resurrection, is not designed in all holy writ by any note of situation,
but only by their company: where such wicked Men were, whom God in miraculous
manner had cut off.

Touching Hell, it is no real place in any part of the created Hell what.
World, but a Metaphorical word signified by wicked Men there being: 1. It Is
caled Infernus, Tartarus, or bottomless Pit from Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
swalowed alife into the Earth. 2. It Is said to be under water, because the
Giants (mighty Men in Noah's dais, caled Greecly Heroes) were drowned in the
Deluge. 3. Because Sodom and Gomorrha consumed by Fire and Brimstone, becam a
bituminous Lake, it is caled a Lake burning with fire and brimstone, which is
the secund death. So Hell fire is expressed by Sodoms fire indefinitly Rev 21. 8.
taken for destruction: as it is said, Death and Hell were Rev. 20. 14.
cast into the Lake of fire: or destroyed: for after the last day Men shall die
no more nor go into Hades. 4. It Is termed from Egypts triduan deep darkness,
utter or extern darkness; viz. without the habitation of Gods elect, which is
full of Light. 5. Near Jerusalem is the Valley of Hinnon: in part whereof caled
Tophet, the Jews most Idolatrously sacrificed their Children to Moloch: where
they cast out their Carrion; and to clens the Air, made continual fires: whence
Hell is caled Gehenna or Valley of Hinnon: and from those incessant Fires, came the
name or notion of everlasting unquenchable Fire. Now none is so senseless to
expound any of these literaly, as if the damned after rising from death, shall be
for ever under Earth or Water (both which are but one Globe like a Pins point
compared to the Heavens) in a bottomless Pit: or that they shall be eternaly
punishd in Gehenna the Valley of Hinnon: or shall live in utter darkness not one to
see another: or be scorched for ever with Fire and Brimstone: Ergo the meaning
is Metaphorical, and must be disquired by the nature of the Torments and
Tormenters.

The Tormenters are termed Satan or Enemy, Diabolus or Tormenters.
Accuser, and Abaddon or Destroier: which significant titles set not forth any
individual Persons like proper Names; but only an office or faculty, and are
very Appellativs: which should not be left untranslated (as they are) because
thereby they seem to be proper names of Demons; and Men sooner seduced to beleev
the Doctrine of Devils then Pagan Religion contrary to Christ's. So because the
Enemy in Gods Kingdom of the Jews, is meant by Enemy, Accuser, and Destroier;
if Gods Kingdom after the Resurrection shall be on Earth, the Enemy and his
Kingdom must be there also; as it was when the Israelits deposed God and chose
Saul: since Gods Kingdom was in Palestin, and the Nations round about Enemies:
whence it appeers, that Satan signifies any Enemy of the Church.

Metaphoricaly it may: but is not Satan properly or literaly Quaere. Rev. 12.
(...).
a foul Fiend Enemy to Mankind, as the great red Dragon that old Serpent was,
who deceived Eve and since the whole World? Are all the Dialogs between between
God and Satan about Job conterfet Chimaeras? When the seventy rejoiced that the
(...) 10. 17. 18 20.
Devils were subject to them, Christ said, I saw Satan as lightning fall from
Heaven: but rejoice not that the Spirits are Mat 12. 24. (...) Cor. 5. 5.
subject to you. Here Christ calls Devils Spirits, and names Satan as one: yea
Beelzebub is named Prince of Devils Excommunication 1 Timothy 1. 20.
is caled a delivery to Satan: is this meant only a Jailor or temporal Enemy.

Hell torments are sometime caled weeping and gnashing Torments.
of teeth: sometime the worm of Conscience: of time fire where Dan. 12. 2.
the worm dies not, which is never quenched: but by Daniel shame and contempt.
Al which Metaphoricaly denote great grief or discontent of Mind, from sight of
others felicity, which they lost by their own disobedience and incredulity: but
because others felicity is known only by comparing it with their own misery; it
results that they shall suffer such bodily pains and calamities, as Men that live
under cruel Governors, having God the King of Saints their eternal Enemy. Yea
beside al torments of Body and Mind, they shall likewise endure a secund Death.
For tho the general Resurrection be evident, yet it 1 Cor. 15. 42
no eternal life promised to Reprobats: St. Paul to the question with what
Bodies Men shall rise says, It Is sown in corruption, and raised in
incorruption; sown in dishonor, raised in glory; sown in weakness, raised in
power: but Glory and Power, cannot comply to wicked Men's Bodies; nor the name
of secund Death apply to such as can never die but once. Howbeit tho a
calamitous everlasting Life, may Metophoricaly be termed eternal Death: yet can
it in no property of speech be styled a secund Death.

Everlasting fire prepared for the Damned, is an estate wherein Secund Death.
none can live after the Resurrection without torture of Body and Mind: in which
sens it shall endure for ever unquenchable, and the torments endlesss. Yet it
folows not, that he so cast in shall so endure or resist it, as to be eternaly
burnt and tortured; but never die or be destroyed. Yea tho many places prove
everlasting fire and torments (into which Men may be cast successivly one after
another for ever) yet none assert, that any individual Person shall perennaly
abide or endure therein: but he shall have an everlasting secund Death. For when
Death and the Grav (Hell) have delivered up the Rev. 20. 13, 14.
dead in them, and every Man judged according to his works; Death and Hell shall
be cast into the Lake of Fire: this is the secund Death. Hence it is clear, that
every Reprobat condemned at general Judgment, must suffer a secund Death, after
which he shall die no more.

But what is meant by Mind so often iterated, if not Man's Quaere.
Soul.

The jois of eternal Life, are comprised in Scripture under Eternal Life.
the name of Salvation or being saved: which signifies to be secured, either
respectivly against special evils, or absolutely from al, as want, sickness,
death. Now because Man was made immortal or immarcescible, and fell from it by
sin; it results that to be saved from sin, is to be freed from al evil and
afflictions acquired by the same: Ergo Remission of sin and Salvation from
death and misery is al one. As when Christ Mat. 9. 2, 5.
cured a Paralytic Man saying, Friend be of good cheer or comfort, thy sins be
forgiven; the Scribes said within themselfs, he blasphems: but he asked,
whether it is easier to say thy sins be forgiven, or arise and walk? Yet he used
that form of speech to show he had power to remit sins: which implies that it is
al one to the saving of the sick to say thy sins are forgiven, or rise and
walk. For since death and misery are punishments of sin, the discharge of it
relea^eth the other two; being absolut Salvation, such as the elect shall enjoy
after the Judgment day, by Christ Jesus favor, who for that cause is caled our
Savior. Touching particular Salvations, from enemies or miseries, it is
needless to treat: but because the general Salvation must be in the Kingdom of
Heaven; there is great debate or difficulty about the place.

Because Kingdom is an Estate ordained by Men for security Kingdom of Heaven.
against enemies and want, it seems this Salvation (which sets forth our Kings
glorious reign by conquest, not a safety by escape) shall be on Earth. For where
we expect Salvation, we must look for Triumph, Victory, and Battle in order:
which cannot be supposed in Heaven, and where else, we must search the Scriptures.
Isaiah largely describes it To be at Jerusalem Isai 33. 20. etc.
a quiet habitation, a Tabernacle not to be taken down: The Savior is Our
Lord, Judge, Lawgiver, King: The condition of the saved is, The People that dwell
therein shall be forgiven their iniquities. By this it is clear, that it shall be
in Jerusalem, where God shall reign at Christ's next coming, and fill up the
Salvation of Gentiles, which shall be received into his Kingdom for ever. Isai 66
20 21.
Isaiah more expressly declares it, That the Gentiles (who had any Jews in
bondage) shall bring them from al Nations on Horses, Charets, and Litters to
Jerusalem the place of Gods John 4. 22.
worship: As our Savior told the Woman of Samaria, that Salvation is of the
Jews, or begins at them. As if he should say, ye worship God, but know not by
whom he will sav you: we know it shall be by one of Juda and not a Samaritan.
This Romans 1. 16, 17.
St. Paul explains, The G^sp^l is Gods power of Salvation to every one that
believes: to the Jew first, and also to the Greec. Joel 2. 30, 32.
So Joel describing the Judgment day says, God will show wonders in Heaven and
Earth, Blood, Fire, and Pillars of smoke: whereto he ads, In Mount Zion and
Jerusalem shall be Salvation. Obad. v. 17. etc.
So says Obadiah, On Mount Zion shall be deliverance and holiness, Jacobs house
shall possess their possessions: which he particularly points out by The Mount
of Esau, Land of Philistines, fields of Ephraim, Samaria, Gilead, and Cities of
the South: concluding thus: The Kingdom shall be the Lords. On the other side,
no plain pregnant place provs the Saints Ascension into Heaven, sav that it is
caled the Kingdom of Heaven: which was because he governed the Israelits by
commands sent to Moses from and after sent his Son (as he will again) thence: or
else that his Throne is Heaven, and Earth his Footstool: but that his Subjects
or Servants shall sit so high as his Throne, or abov his Footstool; suits not
with the glorious Majesty of so great a King.

Al these Kickshews of arguing from similituds (which he John 14. 2.
House of Heaven. This says Christ, has many mansions, being infinity it self:
whereas not a tithing pa^^ of Mankind can possibly find place to stand on a new
Earth or finit world. Three Worlds are specified in Scripture: 1. The old
before Noah's flood, whereof St. Peter speaks: 2. The present, of 2 Pet. 2. 5.
which Christ says, My Kingdom is not of this World: 3. That to com: of it St.
Peter says, We according to his promiss look for new Heavens and Earth: which
is that World wherein Christ coming in the Clouds with great, glory shall send
his Angels to gather the Elect from the four Winds or utmost parts of the
Earth, to reign over them under his Father everlastingly. Thus he:

But where is the World to com taken for a Real material Quaere.
World, as the other two be?

It Is not Cosmos or Mundus venturus; but Seculum, vita, vel Aevum futurum, the
Time, Life, or Age to com. Nor is there any warrant in all Gods word for those
last words, that Christ shall reign over the Saints ( ^iz. on Earth) under his
Father everlastingly: but that they shall reign with him 1000. years, as
Chiliasts contest.

Touching Understanding, he says it is only imagination Understanding.
raised in Man or any Animal that can imagine, by words or signs: which is
common to Man and Beasts. As a Dog by use understands his Masters call or check;
with sundry strange tricks by (...) calture: so do diverse other kinds: yea some
(...) to speak: but understanding peculiar to Man, is not only to know one
another will; but his thoughts or conceptions, by the consequents of things
Names into affirmations, ^e^ations, and other forms of speech: of which he will
treat elswher.

For Witchcraft, he holds it to be no real power: yet are Witchcraft.
Witches justly punished with death, for their falls belief that they can do
such mischief, and a will or purpose to act it: their Trade being nearer to a
new Religion then a Craft or Science. Such as are content to be poor, may
easily resolv to Censure.
be honest: so those that hold Hell to be no real place, and Devils mere
Metaphors, must of course deny Witchcraft: yea many who pretend to be wise pious
professors, are too incredulous of Witches; contrary to the faith of al Gods
People Exodus 22 18.
(both Jews and Christians) who will not suffer a Witch to live as God commanded.
The best is, only private persons deny it: but al public Princes and Christian
Commonwealths make strict Laws against it. Saul destroyed Wisards and such as
had familiar Spirits: yet in distres, caused a Witch of Endor to raise Samuel,
as the spectre seemed) with whom he consulted. Sergeant Glyn (who at last Lent
Assizes in Cornwall, condemned eght Witches upon pregnant presumptions and
personal confessions) can scientiously satisfy any Man, that there be such
impious confederats with Satan: else al Laws and Magistrates that question them
for their falls imaginations, or intentions to work mischief (if they can do
none) were most unjust, and to execut them bloody.

De Regno purae Caliginis: Of pure Darkness Kingdom.
BEside al Sovereign powers Divine and Human precited, Ephesians. 6. 12. Mat. 12. 26.
Mat. 9. 34. Ephesians. 2. 2. John 16. 11.
the Scriptures specify rulers of this Worlds Darkness; even the Kingdom of
Satan and Principality of Beelzebub over Devils or Phantasms in the Air: as
Satan is styled Prince of the power of the Air, and Prince of this World,
because he rules in this Worlds darkness. So they under his dominion, in
opposition to the Faithful (caled Children of the Light) are properly Children
of Darkness.

The Kingdom of Darkness is a confederacy of Deceivers, who Kingdom of Darkness.
to get dominion over Men in this World, devise erroneous doctrins, to
extinguish the Light both of Nature and Scripture: p. 333. etc.
thereby to seduce silly Disciples, and so disprepare them for the Kingdom of
God to com.

Fabula narratur, mutato nomine, de te: Let the name changed be The tale is
told of thee.,
The darkest part of Satan's Kingdom, is without Gods Church among such as
beleev not in Christ: yet does not the Church (like the Land of Goshen) enjoy
al Light necessary to the work injoined by God: but as Men born blind have no
Idae^ of any bodily Light; nor can any conceiv greater then he has perceived
sometimes by his own senses: so is it with the Light of the Gospel and
understanding too, that none can imagine any greater degree thereof then he has
attained. There be four causes of spiritual Darkness:

1. By abusing or abolishing the Scriptures Light, for weer 1 Cause.
not knowing the Scripture: the chief is (whereto almost all the rest are
consequent or subservient) wresting it to prove Gods Kingdom so often cited, to be
the Church or multitud of Christians now living, or that shall rise at last day:
but the Kingdom of God was first erected by Moses ministry over the Israelits
(so says he, but none else) called his peculiar People: which after ceased when
they refused to be longer governed by God, and chose Saul. Since which time God
had no proper Kingdom by pact or covenant; but only as he ever was, is, and
shall be, universal King of al Creatures; ruling according to his absolut Will
and infinite Power. Nor are any now under any King or Kingdom by pact (sav our
secular Sovereigns) til Christ shall com again to reign eternaly on Earth.
Succedaneal to this said error is, that Christ (now in Heaven) has some one Man
or Assembly, by whose mouth he speaks, givs Laws, and which represents his
Person. This regal power under him the Pope claims generaly over all the Church:
but in particular stats the Pastors or Presbyteries of those places: which
begets such darkness in Men's understandings. Hence results another error, that a
Christian Kingdom had need to receiv his Crown by a Bishop: as if the claus of
Dei gratia depended on that Ceremony. So al Ecclesiastics assume the title of
Clergy, caling al others Laity or People simply. Hence also arose the
distinction between Emperors Civil Laws, and Popes Canons: which last were but
bare Canons or Rules voluntarily received by Princes, til Charlemaign becam
Emperor: but afterward as the Popes power increased, becam commands or Laws,
and Emperors allowed them. For the Pope pretending al Christians to be his
Subjects, makes it capital for any not to be of Roman Religion: but tolerats
Jews, Mahometans, and Pagans to enjoy their own Rites, if they offer no
scandal. A secund abuse of Scripture is turning consecration into conjuration
or enchantment: for to consecrat is to offer, giv, or dedicat decently and
devoutly any thing to God; by separating it from common use or profane, to be
holy and peculiar for Gods service by his Ministers hands: but when Papists
pretend to change the nature or quality of a thing (as in the Lords Supper to
make Bread and Wine by saying this is my Body, this is my Blood, to be Christ's
very Body and Blood) it must either be Gods extraordinary work (which it is not
being done daily and frequently) or a vain impious conjuration: whereby they
would have Men beleev a change of Natures contrary to the testimony of their
sight and other senses.

If the Egyptian Sorcerers (who turned their Rods to Serpents, and Waters to
Blood, or at least to seem so) had made no change in show, but only outfaced
the King, that they were Serpents which looked like Rods: would not al Men tax
them for Liers? Thus Priests tell the People, that they have turned Bread into a
Man, nay a God; requiring Men to worship it, which is gross Idolatry. The words
(this is my Body, or represents my Body) can extend soly to the Bread which
Christ consecrated with his own hands: for he said not, the Bread whereof any
Priest shall say (this is my Body) shall be instantly transubstantiated into it:
nor was this doctrine harched in the Church of Rome, til under Innocent the
third not 500. years ago: when the Popes power was at highest, and Peoples
darkness heaviest; that Men could not see the Bread they eat, specialy being
stamped with Christ's figure on the Cross, as if the very wood was
transubstantiated, which they ate together with the Body. So at Baptism they
use many Charms in name of the holy Trinity, with the sign of the Cross at
naming each Person: as in consecrating holy Water the Priest says, I conjure
thee Creature of Water in the name of God the Father Almighty, and Jesus Christ
his only Son our Lord, and by virtu of the holy Ghost; that thou become conjured
Water to driv away all the Enemies powers etc. The like is done in Benediction
of Salt and Honey mixd therewith: but the chief charms are reserved for the
Children to be Baptized, as appeers in their Ceremonies. The like are used in
Marriage, Visitation of the Sick, extrem Unction, consecrations of Churches and
Churchyards to expel Phantasms, Faieries, and imaginary Spirits: al which
belong to the Kingdom of Darkness, being effects of our natural ignorance.
Another error is from misinterpreting the words eternal Life, everlasting
Death, and secund Death: of which three in order.

Adam had an estate to live for ever, not by nature in himself Eternal Life.
or any part of his; but by eating the Tree of Life, which he had leav to do,
so long as he obeyed God: but was thrust out of Paradise so soon as he sinned;
lest he should feed thereon and live for ever. Now Christ's death is a discharge
of sin and restitution of Life eternal to all the faithful who beleev in him,
and to them only. Yet the general doctrine of Divines is, that every Man has
eternal life by nature of his immortal Soul: so that the flaming Sword at
entrance of Paradise, may hinder him from tasting the Tree of Life; but not
from immortality which God bereaved. Nor shall he need Christ's sacrifice for
recovery of the same: since not only the faithful or righteous, but the wicked
and Heathen shall enjoy eternal Life without Death, much less a secund
everlasting death. To salv or shadow this, they say by secund everlasting
Death, is meant a secund everlasting Life (but Torments) which is a figure
never used sav in this very case.

Is not secund Death an eternal being both of Body and Quaere.
Soul in Hel-fire under Satan?

This tenet of the Souls immortality, is founded on some obscure places of the
new Testament, which yet in a different sens (of his own mint) are clear
enough, and unnecessary to Christian Faith. For suppose when a Man dies nothing
remains but his Carcas; cannot God who made clay a living Creature by his word,
raise it again by another word? Yes, but not to the same life, which vanished to
nothing: whereas the Soul being immortal persists identical. Soul in Scripture
still signifies either Life or a Living Creature, and Body jointly with Soul a
Body alife. As God says, Let the Waters produce Reptile animae viventis, the
creeping thing with a living Soul; we translat that has life: Again, God
created Whales and omnem animam viventem; in English every living Creature: but
of Man, God made him of dust, and breathed in his face the spiracle or breath
of life; and factus est Homo in animam viventem, and Genesis 8. 21.
Man was made a living Creature. So God said when Noah came out of the Arc, I
will no more smite omnem animam viventem, Deuteronomy 12. 23.
every living Creature. Eat not the Blood, for it is the Soul or Life: But if
Soul signified a substance immortal existing after separation from the Body; it
may be said of any other Animal so well as Man.

Is it said of any other, that God having made the Body of Quaere.
Earth, breathed into his face spiraculum Vitae the Spirit of Life? Which al
interpreters expound of creating and infusing the Soul together. He goes on:
the Souls or Life's of the Faithful (which being accidents that annihilated when
the Bodies died, must be new made) are by Gods special Grace (not of their own
Nature) to remain in their raised Bodies for ever after Judgment. Where it is
said in the new Testament that any shall be cast Body and Soul (as if they were
distinct Quaere.
parts) into Hel-fire; it imports Body and Life (how can Life be cast being a
bare accident?) That they shall be cast alife into Rev. 19 v. 20.
Gehenna. So it is said The Beast and falls Prophet were both cast alife into a
Lake of fire burning with Brimstone.

This dark doctrine of the Souls subsistence after separation, opens a sluice to
let in the superstitious superstructures of Purgatory and Indulgences; Ghosts
or Goblins and Exorcisms; invocating of Saints (yea Heaven and Hell too) with
some others. For Men before Christ's coming, being taught from the Greecs
Demonology, that Men's Souls were distinct substances, which after separation
must subsist somwher by their own Nature: the Doctors of the Church long
doubted where they resided til the general Resurrection, supposing they lay
under the Altars: but finding that Martyrs Souls of them slain for Gods word
(if they have Souls, why not others?) Quae c.
Lay under the Altar; the Church of Rome for their profit Rev. 6 9.
erected Purgatory. Surely they do al for profit to maintain their pomp,
pride, power, and prodigality.

Beza to prove Gods Kingdom began at Christ's Resurrection Mat. 16. 28.
and continues still; urges his words: Verily I say to you, some of them which
stand here shall not taste of death, til they have seen Mat. 16. 28. Marc 9. 1.
Luke 9. 37.
Gods Kingdom com with power: Ergo either Gods Kingdom came shortly after, and
is now in this World; or else some then standing by Christ are yet alife.

Sol. This is a dark difficil place, which provs nothing necessarily: but if
Gods Kingdom began at Christ's Resurrection, why do we still pray thy Kingdom
com? Therefore it is not meant thereof. Yea after his Resurrection, the Apostles
asked, Will thou now restore the Kingdom of Israel? He answered, It Is not for
you to know the time or season, which the Father has put in his own power: but
ye shall receiv power by the holy Ghosts coming on you, and shall be my Witnesses
in Jerusalem, in all Judea, and utmost part of the Earth. So he told them his
Kingdom was not com, nor shall they foreknow when it is to com. Christ said to
Peter of John, If I will that he tarry Jo^n ^1, v. 22.
til I com, what is that to thee? Which bred a belief that he should not die:
yet the truth of it was neither confirmed nor confuted by those words; but left
as a dark saying, and so must this. Howbeit since Christ's transfiguration is the
next Act handled by all three Evangelists; happily he calls that Gods Kingdom,
which some there should see, being a representation or vision of his glory and
Majesty as he shall com in his Kingdom: which cannot be proved to begin til the
day of Judgment.

Where is it proved, that any terren Kingdom shall commence Quae^e.
then?

Then shall the Faithful rise with glorious spiritual Bodies inlifened, and
become Christ's Subjects in his Kingdom: where they shall not eat, drink, marry as
they did in their natural Bodies; but live happily in their individual Persons
for ever. The elect then alife shall be suddenly changed, and their Bodies made
spiritualy immortal: but Reprobats shall rise to receiv punishment: yet not
eternaly in their individual Persons, nor can any place prove it. As after the
Resurrection the Elect shall be restored to Adams estate before he fell: so
Reprobats shall be in the same condition that Adam and his Posterity were since
his fall: sav that God graciously promised a Redeemer to such as should repent
and beleev; but not to those that die in their sins impenitent, as Reprobats do,
so they may live as they did before with gross corruptible Bodies (as al Men now
have) and happily beget Children continualy, which no 1 Cor. 15.
Scripture gainsais. St. Paul treats only of the Resurrection Luke 20 34. etc.
to life eternal; not a word of that to pnuishment: nor Christ, who says the
Children of this World (which live in the estate Adam left them) shall marry, and
generat successivly (by an immortality of Kind, not of Persons) who are not
worthy to be counted among those that shall rise and obtain the World to com
(that is life to com, not a terren World) which alone are Heirs of eternal
life, equal to Angels and Children of God. So a secund eternal death remains to
Reprobats; when after the Resurrection shall com a time of torment or
punishment: which by succession of sinners, shall last so long as the kind of
Man by propagation shall endure, that is eternaly: but not so every single
Person; nor shall the Tormenters be F^ends or evil Angels. Touching the Souls
natural immortality, that it is a spiritual substance subsisting by it self
after separation; he answers some objections.

Ob. Solomon says, Dust shall return to Dust as it was and Eccles. 12. 7.
the Spirit to God that gav it: Ergo God created the Soul distinct Spirit.

Sol. He shows how Man's Body made of dust must return to dust: but God only
knows what becoms of his Spirit, Chap. 3. 20.
Breath, or Life. He has a sentence of semblable sens: Al (Man and Beast) go
to one place: al are of dust, and turn to dust. Who knows (except the
Omniscient) that Man's Spirit goes Ibid. v. 19.
upward, and a Beasts downward? Since it is said, That which befalls the Sons of
Men, betides Beasts: as one dies, so does the other: yea they have al one breath
(before spirit) so that a Man has no preeminence abov a Beast, for all is
vanity. He praises Ch^p. 4 2, 3.
the dead beyond the living, and ads: Better is he which has not yet bin, nor
seen the evil work done under the Sun then both the dead and living which
cannot hold current, if Man's Soul be immortal, that no Soul were better then
it, only for a little oppression in this life. Lastly he says, The living know
they shall die, but the Dead know nothing (naturaly, before the Body shall rise)
nor have any more a reward, for their memory is forgot. Al which places prostern
the Souls immortality, and by Spirit is meant Breath or Life, as often foresaid.

Ob. Christ says, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are living: Ergo their Souls
separat subsist still; for their bodies lay buried many ages before.

Sol. This purports Gods promiss and certitud of their Resurrection; not any
actual life: as God said to Adam, on the day he should eat the forbidden fruit,
he shall certainly die: so from that day he was a dead Man by Sentence; but not
by actual execution til 930. years after.

Ob. The wicked shall rise to Judgment, and go into everlasting fire, torment,
or punishment; where the worm of Conscience never dies: which is caled a secund
everlasting Death, and general everlasting Life in torments far wors then
Death, as appeers in the new Testament: Ergo etc.

Sol. All this is true: yet it no where appeers, that the Damned shall live in
torments everlastingly: for God the Father of Mercies and fountain of Goodness,
who does al what he will and holds al Men's hearts at his disposing, working them
to will and do; without whose free gift no Man has any inclination to good, or
repentance of evil: will not punish Men's transgressions committed by inevitable
ignorance, natural frailty, or wilful obstinacy sans end of time, or with
extremity of torture, more then Men can conceiv or imagine. Then he proceds to
answer Bellarmins places or proofs in both Testaments touching Purgatory: which
he that lists may read p. 346. etc.

The next Cause of spiritual Darkness is heathen Demonology 2 Cause.
or doctrine of Devils, as St. Paul calls it: which their Poets as principal
Priests diffused, divulged, or dissipated over the World: witness Hesiods goodly
Genealogy of Gods. For they caled al Spirits (good and bad) Demons: but the
Jews gav the name Demon only to evil Spirits; stiling the good (which Prophets
or others inspired had) the Spirit of God. So they caled Lunatics, Maniacs,
Lycanthrops, Epileptics, Hysterics, or the like direct Demoniacs possessed with
evil Spirits. They said unclean Persons had an unclean spirit, dumb Men a dumb
Devil: aspersing John Baptist and our Savior himself to have Devils: but Devils
specified in Scripture are mere Diseases.

If any ask, why Christ did not cross, comptrole, or teach

He answers, that Christ's command to any Diseas, is no more Ipse dixit.

Was that legion of Devils, who besought Christ to enter (...)
into the Gergesens Swine, and carried a whole Herd headlong into Sea, only a
Diseas? Can Metaphors discurs or do such mischeef? When Christ cast out a dumb
Spirit, the traducing Pharisees denied not the dispossessing or matter of fact:
but said he did it by Beelzebub Prince of Devils: can Christians then deny it?

Christ (says St. Matthew) was led by or of the Spirit into Man 4. 1. Ma^^ 1.
12. Luk 4. 1.
the Wilderness: which Spirti drov him into the Desert, says St. Marc: but Luke
that he being full of the holy Ghost (which descended on him as a Dov newly
before at Baptism) was led of the Spirit into the Wilderness, al which imply the
holy Ghost: nor can this be a possession of one substance by another, since
Christ and the holy Ghost are one self same substance. It Is said after, the
Devil took him up into the holy City, and set him on a Pinnacle: but anon after
carried him on a very high Mountain, to show him all the Worlds Kingdoms: but
certes the Devil did not transport him by force, nor is any Mountain so high to
show him one Hemisphere of the World* The meaning then must be, that Christ
went into the Wilderness freely, and the carrying to or fro was a very Vision: as
St. Lukes words (in the Spirit) apertly indicat or demonstrat.

Ob. Satan entered into Judas Iscariot, who communed with Luk 22 3. 4.
the chief Priests and Captains how to betray Christ: Ergo Satan is a Spirit.

Sol. Satan signifies Enemy; who is said to enter into Judas, when he
entertained a tra^terous hostil intention to sell his Lord and Master: for Satan
cannot be said to enter before he harbored any such hostil design; and it is
impertinent to say he entered in afterward: therefore his wicked plot or purpose,
and Satan's entering was one and the same thing: but Incorporeal real Spirits be
none.

Why then did not Christ and his Apostles instruct silly

Because such questions are more curious then salutiferous: Canaan, did not
instantly destroy al Neighbor Nations; but left some as thorns in their sides to
awaken their industry and piety: so Christ in conducting us toward his Heavenly
Kingdom, did not destroy al difficulties of natural questions; but left them to
whet our industry, intellect, and Judgment: his chief scope being to show this
one Article, that he is Christ Son of the living God, sent to sacrifice himself
for sins, and at next coming to reign gloriously over the Elect, and to sav
them from their Enemies eternaly.

There be Angels or Spirits (good and evil) but not incorporeal, Confession.
such as Men suppose they see in the dark, or a dream, or vision, which the
Latins call Spectra and took for Demons, Yea there be corporeal Spirits (subtle
and invisible) yet not that they possessed any Man's Body: and Saints Bodies
shall be such viz. spiritual as St. Paul calls them. Howbeit the doctrine of
incorporeal Spirits prevailed in the Church and Introduced Exorcism, which is
not fully extruded. Then were many Demoniacs, but few mad Men: now many mad
Men, but few Demoniacs: which proceds not from any change in Nature, but only
of Names.

It may be asked whether the bad Spirits (be they comparatly (...)
coporeal, or incoporeal) shall realy torment the damned with fire for ever, or
what else they do?

Another Relic of Gentilism (not brought in, but left Images.
when they gav their names to Christ) is Image Worship: not instituted by Moses
or Christ, being mere Ideas, Idols, Phantasms, Conceits, or Representations of
extern Bodies extant in their Brains from the Organ of Senses; though they seem
realy without us, being like things in a dream; which intruth are nothing, as
St. Paul tells. For tho their metal or mattet (Gold, Silver, Copper, Stone,
Wood) be somewhat; yet the very Figure or Sculpture which they honored or
adored, was a mere figment, having no habitation existent of it self; but only
in the motions of Men's brains: the worship of which is in Scripture flat
Idolatry or Apostasy from God; who was the Jews sole King, and Moses his first
Lieftenant. His prime Law was, that they should have no other Gods but or beside
himself. The next, that they should make no carved Image of their own invention
to worship it. For it is al one in deposing a King and setting up another,
whether he be set up by a Neighbor Nation or the Subjects. To honor is highly
to valu any Persons power by comparing him with others: but none can compare
with God: therefore we dishonor him by any valu less then infinite. Honor
properly is internal in the heart: but Men's thoughts which appeer outwardly in
words and actions (by praying, genuflexion, obeying, serving) are signs of
honoring, commonly caled worship, latinly Cultus.

Worship is duple: 1. Civil du to Men, as to Kings by Subjects, Worship.
to Masters by Servants, Fathers by Sons, Pedagogs by Scholars, Captains by
Soldiers etc. 2. Divine, which we render to God soly, or things consecrat to
his service. To seek a distinction of Divine and Civil worship in the words (
Latria and Doulia) and not in the worshipers intention, is very fallacy or
foppery. For there were two sorts of Servants: 1. Such as their Masters had
absolut power to kill upon discontent or disobedience; as Slavs with their issu:
who were caled Douloi and their service Doulia, being sold like Beasts. 2. Those
that served spontaneously for hire or hope: termed Thetes Domestic Servants
upon mutual Covenants. Both kinds have their labor appointed by others, and such
styled Latres as work for others. So latria signifies al service in general,
but doulia only of Bondmen: both are used promiscuously in Scripture to signify
Gods service, since we al are his Sons, Servants, and Slaves: in all which sorts
is contained not only Obedience, but worship with fit words and gestures.

An Image is the representation of something visible, finit, Image what.
and figured; which is a quantity every way determiend: so there can be no
proper Image of God, Angels, Spirits, or Souls, since they have no definit
dimensions; but only of visible bodies in fantastic forms, shapes, or seemings.
The species or show of things in water by reflection or refraction, or of the
Sun and Stars in the Air (which are not where they seem to be, nor (...) or
figures the same with that of the Objects) (...) termed Ideas, Idols,
Phantasms, or Apparitions: whence one inward Sens is styled Imagination: for a
man can Fiction what.
fancy shap^^ he never saw, like Dreamers, as Poets fain Centaurs, Chimera's
and other Monsters, so can he frame them in mat^er of wood, clay, stone, metal,
styled Images; not to resemble any real thing, but only some phantastic
Inhabiters of the devisers brain; since there is a similitud of one to the other,
as it is painted, carved, melted or molded in matter by Art; like the Image of
that Idol conceived in nature. Image in an ampler acception implies any
resemblance of one thing by another, as a King is caled Gods Image, and an
inferior Magistrate a superiors; yea Pagans adored such for Gods as had no
semblance of the Idol in their phansy; as an unhewn stone for Neptune, and
Images of the same Saint diametraly differ, yet serve their turn well enough, as
names do in History to present the Persons described. Idol is extended farther
in Scripture Idol what.
to signify Fire, Sun, Star, or any other Creature (visible or invisible)
worshipped as God; but to put worship and Image together diverse doctrins will
occur. To worship an Image, is Idolatry.
voluntarily to do such extern acts as are signs of honoring either the matter
(wood, Stone, metal) or phantasm of the brain, for which it was formed or
figured, or both together as one animat compound of both Body and Soul. To be
bare before a Prince or man of Place, or regal Throne or chair of State, is
civil worship only; but if one shall suppose the Princes Soul in the Stool, and
present a Petition to it, it is divine worship or Idolatry; so to pray to him
for what he can do (tho on our knees) is civil worship; but to pray to him for
fair weather or what else is in Gods power only, it is flat Idolatry. To worship
God in a peculiar place, or turn ones face toward it in Prayer, or toward an
Image, is not to adore the place or Image, but to acknowledge it holy or set
apart from common use, by a new relativ appropriation to Gods service: yet no
more Idolatry then for the Israelits to worship God before the brazen Serpent,
or in time of captivity to pray toward the Temple, or for Moses to put off his
shoos before the fiery Bush as being holy ground, not by inherent sanctity, but
by separation to Gods use; as Christians on the same score serve God in
consecrat Churches: yet to serve God as if he animated an Image or inhabited the
place of confinement, is Idolatry, Moses set up the brazen Serpent by Gods
appointment or commandment, Ergo no Idolatry; but Aaron made the golden Calf by
the Peoples importunity, which was Idolatry; the Gentiles adored Jupiter and
other great men (who happily had done much good) as Gods, which was gross
Idolatry, but Christians worship our Savior as God and Man in one Person by
special warrant of Gods word showing his reveled will, which cannot be Idolatry:
so for adoration of the Eucharist, if Christ's words ( This is my Body) signify,
that he self and seeming Bread in his hand, with all seeming morsels since
consecrated (or shall be hereafter) by Priests, be so many Christ's bodies, yet
al but one Body; then it is no Idolatry: but if they do not import or imply so
much, it is a worship of humane institution and flat Idolatry: Nor is it enough
to say God can transubstantiat Bread into a Body; for so Pagans may plead or
pretend a transubstantiation of their wood, stone, metals into God omnipotent.

Such as make divine inspiration a supernatural entering of the holy Ghost into
a man, and not acquisition of Gods graces by study or industry; are in a
dangerous Dilemma: for if they worship not those Men whom they beleev so
inspired, they fall to impiety in not adoring Gods personal presence: but if
they worship him, they commit Idolatry; since the inspired Apostles refused al
worship: therefore it is safest to beleev, that when Christ breathed on them the
holy Ghost, or it descended on them in fiery cloven toungs, or was given by
imposition of hands; are understood the signs which Godused, or ordained others
to use of his promiss to assist those Persons on whom they were conferred, in
their studies or indevors to preach his Kingdom; and in their conversation,
that it might not be scandalous to any, but edifying to al.

To melt, mould, carv, grav, or paint Images in memory of Friends dead or
living, is no Idolatry; but fancy or folly: but to beleev such things as have no
Eyes nor Ears, do see his actions, or hear his orisons; and he kneels before it
or prais to it, it is Idolatry: nor is Romish worship of Saints, Images, or
Relics less. For the Gentiles at first conversion left it in Origin of
Iconolatry.
the Church, which Popes since countenanced and confirmed. The cause was the
high prices set upon their workmanship, which the owners loath to lose, gav them
new names of Christ, the Virgin Mary, Peter, Paul, or others: which still grew
more and more by imitation. Yet after Constantins time, diverse pious prudent
Emperos, Prelates and general Councils disliked, detested, or deposed them; but
too late or weakly. Canonizing of Saints is another Relic of Gentilism, taken
from Romes Commonwealth, who upon Oath of Julius Proculus, that Romulus after
his death or discerption told him how he dwelt in Heaven, and was caled
Quirinus; made him a Demigod, as they did long after Julius Caesar with many mo
Emperors. So the Popes received their Title, Pomp, and Power of Pontifex
Maximus from the Heathen; as also carrying of Images in Procession: who carried
their Idols in a Charet called Thensa or Vehiculum Deorum, placing them on a
shrine or frame caled Ferculum; as the Senate decreed both to Caesar. In
semblable sort they borrowed their burning of Torches and Waxcandles before
Images and in Churches from Ethnic supersttion: Holy water is derived from
their Aqua Lustralis: the Wakes or Revels from their Bacchanalia: the Carnivals
from their Saturnalia: the Procession in Rogation week, from their Ambervalia:
and some other scandalous Rites from their Religious Relics.

A third Cause of spiritual darkness is the Greecs vain Philosophy, 3 Cause.
specialy Aristotle's: but leisure is Mother of Philosophy, and Commonwealth of
peace or leisure. For the study of Philosophy began in great flourishing Cities
or Stats: as the Gymnosophists of India, Magi of Persia, Priests of Egypt and
Chaldea the first Kingdoms; are held the most ancient Philosophers: but when
seven Men in Greece had got the reput of wisemen (some for venting Moral and
Politic precepts; some for studying the learning of Chaldeans and Egyptians) the
Atheniens having quelled the Persian Armies, and becam Masters at Sea; erected
Schools of Arts and liberal literature to train up their Youth. Plato betook to
teach in certain public walks called Academia of one Academus: Aristotle to a
walk caled Lycaeum in Pans Temple: Zeno to the Stoa where Merchants goods were
landed, and others elsewhere. Hence the place was styled Schola leisure, and the
disputations Diatribae passing of time. This custom prevailed over al Europ,
Afric, and Asia: where public Schools were erected in most Republics. Such were
the Jews Synagogs, where Moses Law was taught every Sabbath: but they corrupted
the Text with falls glosses and fond Traditions, turning their Lawish doctrine
into phantastic Philosophy; of Gods incomprehensible nature and of Spirits:
which they drew from the Greecs Theology, mixd with their own fancies and
fabulous devises of their Ancestors, by wresting obscure places to their purpos.

A University is a cojoining or incorporating of sundry public University.
Schools under one Government, where the Principal are designed to three
Professions (Divinity, Physic, Civil-Law) but Arts only a subservient
handmaid, wherein Aristotle's authority soly is current: so that study is not
Philosophy properly, but Aristotelity: yet nothing can be said more absurdly
then what is vented in his Metaphysics, nor more repugning reason of Government
then what is extant in his Politics; nor more ignorantly indicted then much or
most part of his Ethics.

Is it not said of Erasmus that general Scholar and great Quaere.
Critic, Quantum gloriae detraxit ab aliis, tantum ad se accessisse putavit.

To examine his Metaphysics (which he means Books written Metaphysics.
after his Physics, but others discurses of supernatural Philosophy, it is a
certain Philosophia prima, on which al other ought to depend: consisting
chiefly in right limiting the fignifications of most universal names or
appellations to avoid ambiguity or equivocation in reasoning. Such are caled
Definitions (as of Body, Time, Place, Matter, Form, Essence, Subject,
Substance, Accident, Act, Power, Finit, Infinite, Quantity, Quality, Motion,
Action, Passion, etc.) necessary to explane a man's conceptions concerning the
Nature and Generation of Bodies; which Theory is termed Metaphysics. These mixd
with Scripture to make School Divinity, teach that there be certain Essences
abstract or separat from Bodies caled substantial Forms: for interpreting which
Jargon, take these solid grounds.

1. The univers or Mass of al created things, is corporal or an aggregat Body;
having the Dimensions (length, breadth, depth) of ma^nitud: so is every part of
it a Body with like dimensions: but what is not Body, is no part of it, and
consequently Nothing or No where, because the univers is al in all. Yet it follows
not that Spirits are Nothing or No where, since they have dimensions, though
commonly caled incorporeal.

2. Of Words, some are the names of things conceived, as of al Bodies in the
World; some names of Ideas, Images, and Imaginations of things, which we see or
remember; as Definition, Affirmation, Negation Syllogism, Interrogation,
Promiss, Covenant, and other forms of Speech: some names of names or several
sorts of speech, as Universal, Plural, Singular: some to show the dependence or
repugnance of one name to another; as when it is said a Man is a Body, being but
several names of the same thing Man, by coupling them together with the word,
is, in Latin, est, which signify their consequence, and may be expresd by
placing two names in order without est or is, if it were the custom.

But what then will become of those terms (Entity, Essence, Essential) derived
from it, with many mo depending on them, as commonly applied: so they are no
names of things, but signs which notify how we conceiv the consequence of one
Name or Attribut to another; as when we say a Man is a living Body, we mean not
that the Man is one thing, a living Body another, and Is or Being a third: but
that Man and living Body is one thing, because the consequence is true being
signified by the word Is: so to be a Body, walk, speak, see, and lik Infinitivs
which signify just the same, are the names of just Nothing.

3. This doctrine of separated Essences built on Aristotle's vain Philosophy,
frights men with empty names (as Birds are scared from Corn with a bare
doublet, hat, and crooked stick) from obeying the Laws of their Country, for
hence it is inferred that a Man's Soul or L^f can walk after death, and is seen
among Graves: that the figure, color and taste of bread has being there where
they say is no Bread, but Christ's Body: that Faith, Wisdom and other spiritual
Virtues are sometime poured into a Man, sometime blown from Heaven; which beleefs
lessen Subjects dependence on Sovereign power: for who will obey his Country
Laws, if he expects obedience to be blown into him? or who will not obey a
P^irst that can make God, rather then his Sovereign or God? or who that fears
Ghosts, will not honor such as can make holy water to chase them away? This
Error of separated Essences draws on diverse other absurdities: for if those
forms be real, they must have some place; but because they hold them incorporeal
(they do not, but only invisible) sans dimension, and Place must be filled
with corporals; they are driven to devise a ridiculous distinction, that they
are in place Definitive, non circumscriptive, when circumscription is the
defining or determining of a thing to its place, and so both terms of their
distinction are the same. Touching Man's Essence (Soul) they say it is al in the
whole, and al in every part: who will swalow such gudgeons or beleev these
gulleries? Yet they must who beleev the real existence of a Soul or Spirit
separat from the Body. If it be asked, how a Soul can be tormented with fire
being incorporeal? They only say it cannot be known how fire can burn Souls.
Since motion is change of place proper only to Bodies; they are troubled to
resolv, how a Soul can go hence to Heaven, Hell, or Purgatory without a Body? Or
Men's Ghosts (with Cloths) can walk by night? Happily it is definitive, non
circumscriptive; or spiritualy, not corporaly and temporaly.

Are not inanimats compounds consisting of two consti^ntiv Quaere.
parts (matter and form) which last distinguishes one kind from another, as a
Stone from Iron? And are not animats so differenced by their several specifical
Souls, as a Man, Mous, Marygold? If it be said they differ in external shape of
Body, which is sufficient: how do we differ from Mairmen (in shape not at al)
sav only in rational Souls which they have not, nor any use of Reason more then
brute Beasts? Much more may be alleged.

4. For eternity, they will not have it an endless succession of time; for then
they can render no reason, how Gods Will or Decrees to com, should not be before
his Prescience of the same, as an efficient cause before the effect; or Agent
before the action: but a standing still of the present, caled in Schools Nunc
stans: which they nor any else understand, more then they can Hic stans for an
infinite immensity of place or the like. Whereas we hold a Body having many
parts, to have many places for them: they teach that by Gods Almighty power one
may be in many places, or many in one at once: as if it were a magnifying of
Divine power to say, that which is, is not; or that which has bin, has not
bin. Such incongruities with many mo Men fall into, who disputing Philosophicaly
of divine nature, in stead of admiring or adoring it; heap absurdities one upon
another.

Of Physics or natural Philosophy, they render no secundary Physics.
subordinat causes of events, but empty words: if ye ask, why some Bodies sink
down to Earth, and others ascend? They say from Aristotle it is through
heavines: if ye ask what heavines is: they say an endevor tending to the Earths
Center, or to be below: is not this like a Horsin a M^^, to say Bodies ascend
or descend, because they do? They say it is because the Center is a resting place
for all heavy things where they desire to be: as if stupid inanimats can discern
the place they aim at, or desire rest like animals: or a piece of Glass were
less safe in a window then faling to ground. If y^ ask why the same Body
(without adding or subtracting) seems sometime greater, sometime lesser? They say
it only seems so being ratified or condensed: as if there can be matter which
has not a determined quantity, and one Body greater then another: or as tho a
Body were made without any quantity, and more or less of it put in afterward to
appeer more or less dens or thin.

For Man's Soul, they say it is created by pouring in, and poured in by creating:
what is that? For the cause of Sens, they make an ubiquity of Species (or shows of
objects) which appeering to the Ey make sight, to the Ear hearing to the Palate
taste, to the Nostril smelling, and to the rest of the Body feeling. For the
cause of willing to do any act, they make the faculty or will it self do
sometime one thing, sometime another; making the Power cause of the act, as if on
should assign Men's ability to do any things, the very ^aus of good or evil
acts. Yet oftimes they put their own ignorance to be cause of natural events or
effects; but disguised in other words: as when they make Fortune a cause of
contingents, whereof they know no cause: or when they ascribe effects to occult
qualities not known to them, nor as they s^rmise to any else: or to Sympathy,
Antiphaty, Antiperistasis, specifical properties: which neither signify the
agent producing, nor operation produced, being only Clokes to cover ignorance.

Their Moral and Politic Philosophy, has the like or greater Politics.
absonances, for if any do injury or injustice contrary to Law, they say God
is prime Cause of the Action, but not of the injustice or deviation; this is
vain Philosophy as to say, that one makes a right and crooked line, but another
the incongruity or inconformity. This distinction was devised to defend the
doctrine of Free will not subject to Gods will.

Why not to vindicat God from being Author of sin, notwithstanding Quaere.
his absolut irrespectiv Decree to Reprobat men, who must needs sin: Aristotle
defines Good and Evil by men's appetit, which may seem true, since every one is
ruled by his own list or lore; but in a Commonwealth the measure is false, where
not men's private appetits, but public Law of the State is sole Rule: yet their
doctrine soly practiced, where every one does what seems good in his own eyes. To
make lawful marriage unchaste or impure (as they do who deny it to the Clergy,
under color of continual chaste continence, to attend at the Altar, and
administer the holy Eucharist) is vain Philosophy: whereby they make marriage a
moral vice, and themselfs by abstaining spiritual, like the Angels in Heaven.
From Aristotle's Civil Polity, they call al Commonwealths sav the popular (such
as then Athens was) Tyranny, and al Kings Tyrans: so they termed thirty
Legislators set up by the Lacedaemonians (who subdued Athens) thirty Tyrans, and
Democraty liberty. yet Tyran truly taken signifies simply a Monarch; but when
that Government grew odious in all Greece, it was branded with the Popular
hatred of Tyranny; and when Kings were expeld from Rome, they did the like. So
when the same men are displeased with Democraty or Aristocraty, they nickname
the first Anarchy, the last Oligarchy or Tyranny of a few. Hence rises another
error of Aristotle; that Laws (not men) should govern: as if men will be ruled
by words or paper, and not by men which have power by the Sword to punish or put
them to death, giving life to the Laws: this is a pestilent pernicious error,
whereby they seduce men so often as they like not their Governors to raise war
against them, which the Clergy cherishes. Another error in Civil Philosophy
(which they never learned of Pagans) is, to extend the Law (the Rule only of
actions) to men's very thoughts and Consciences, by examination or inquisition
of what they hold, tho they conform in Words and Actions. Herby they are forced
to answer the truth of their thoughts, or an untruth for fear of punishment.

Another error (not drawn from Heathens) is, that a private Man without the
Co^mon-wealths authority, may interpret the Law by his own Spirit; but are not
Scriptures where they are a Law, made a Law by the Co^monwealths authority, and
consequently a part of the Civil Law? So they which impropriat Preaching to one
certain Order of Men, where the State leaves it free, commit the like error: for
if the State forbids me not to Preach, none else can. If I be among Judians or
Infidels, shall I being not in Orders, think it sin to Preach Christ Jesus, or
expound Scriptures? In such cases of necessity (say they) where is no Ministry,
it may be done without mission: as wherever a dispensation is du for necessity;
there needs none, when no Law forbids it. Ergo to deny these functions to whom
the civil Sovereign denies them not; is to take away lawful liberty.

The Schoolmens writings are mostly insignificant terms or trains of strange
barbarous words, otherwise used then in common Latin language; which would pose
Cicero, Varro, or any Grammarian of ancient Rome. For let any try whether he
can translat them into any modern Tongue: which if he cannot, how can that be
intelligible in Latin, which is not so in other languages? Howbeit this
insignificance of speech is no falls Philosophy; but both a quality to hide the
truth, and make Men think they have it being skild in School-notions; and so
desist from farther search of it in others. He says elswher, what kind of
felicity God ordains for them that devoutly serve him, one shall no sooner know
then enjoy: being Quaere.
jois now so incomprehensible, as the School-mens words beatific Vision
unintelligible: but does not that signify to enjoy the perpetual presence of
the divine Trinity, as Men delight in each others company face to face? Which if
Christ must reign on a new finit Earth with his Saints for ever, none ever shall
do. For beatific Vision is to see the blessed Trinity face 4 Cause.
to face in his eternal mansion.

The last cause of spiritual Darkness, is to mix uncertain Traditions and untru
Histories (like the golden legion of falls fictious miracles in Saints life's) of
Ghosts, Goblins, and Apparitions alleged by Romish Doctors to varnish their
Doctrins of Hell, Purgatory, Exo^cisms, and such like. Which tho some pious
Fathers (Pope Gregory 1. St. Bernard etc.) broched; yet they were Men, and
might take it on trust from others, as Beda also did: but if any speak it of
their own knowledge; it is no confirmation of such vanity, but a detection of
their fraud, fallacy, or frailty. The suppression of true Philosophy by Men that
have no authority, nor sufficient study; may be joind with the introduction of
fals^: for our late Navigators and al learned Men acknowledge Antipodes: as it
appeers daily more, that years, and dais are determined by the Earths motions:
yet such as only supposed it heretofore, were punishd by Ecclesiastic power.
What reason had they? Is it because it is contrary to true Religion? That cannot
be if the opinions be tru^ let the truth be first disquired by competent
Judges, or refuted by such as pretend to know the contrary. Is it because they
disturb Government, or Religion established? Let the Teachers be silenced or
punished by civil Rulers who can chastise disobedience in those that teach even
true Philosophy against Laws: but Ecclesiastics who are subject to any State,
have no proper right to govern; but al what they assum to do, is mere
usurpation, tho they gild it with the gloss of Gods right.

Tully tells, that one Cassius a Roman Judge, if the Witnesses could not make
clear a crime; would ask the accusers Cui bono, what profit the Prisoner
expected by the fact? For no presumption so evidently declares the guilt of an
Author, as the gain which he shall get by the action. So in the foresaid cases
it must be inquired, what gain, glory, or greatness accrued to any by holding
the same? 1. That the Church militant on Earth is Gods Kingdom of glory or Land
of Promiss (not that of Grace, which is but a Promiss of the Land) these
benefits arise to the Clergy: that the Priests, Pastors, or Prelates acquire as
Gods public Ministers or Teachers of the People, a right to govern the Church,
and consequently the Commonwealth, both being the same Persons. Hence the Pope
prevailed with all Christian Princes subjects to beleev; that to disobey him in
spiritual causes, was to oppose Christ himself, whose Vicar he was as St. Peter's
successor: which in effect is to usurp an universal Monarchy over al
Christendom. For tho the Christian Emperors at first constituted them suprem
teachers in all their Dominions under them, by the title of Pontifex Maximus or
chief Prelat: yet when the Empire was divided and after dissolved; he easily
induced People being his Subjects already, to adore him as Christ's Viceroy in
the Church as his Kingdom of Glory: so it may be presumed, that he having the
best benefit by this universal Monarchy, was author of that Theory. Afterward,
when Princes, Stats, and Churches rejected the Popes universal power; the civil
Sovereigns should have reserved their right before they let it go; as England in
effect did: sav that the Clergy maintaining their function under them to be
Gods right; seemed to usurp if not a Supremacy, yet an independence on civil
power: yet seemed only, acknowledging a right in the King to suppress the
exercise of their function at his pleasure. Indeed where the Presbytery
prevailed, tho they abandoned many Romish Doctrins; yet this that Christ's
Kingdom is already com, and began at his Resurrection, is still retained. Yea
they claim power to excommunicat Kings as ordinary Sheep of their Fold, and be
sole Moderators in all matters of Religion where they rule; as the Pope
chalengeth it over al Christians. For to excommunicat a Sovereign, is to rep^l
him from al places of public service, and resist him by the Sword, as they did
in Scotland. So to excommunicat any private Person without the Sovereigns leav,
is to bereav his lawful liberty, and usurp unlawful power over their Brethren.

To uphold this spiritual Sovereignty ( non minor est virtus, 1 Infallibility.
quam quaerere, parta tueri) they use many Engines: 1. To persuade that the Pope
in his Pontifical Chair or public capacity cannot er: so Presbyters would be
believed in Pulpits.

2. That Bishops have not their right, immediately from God, 2 Suo^ection of
Bishops.
nor mediatly from Sovereigns, but soly from the Pope; that they may side with
him upon al occasions: whereas Presbyterians shuffle off Prelates to usurp their
power.

3. That al Clergymen (Seculars and Regulars) are exempt 3 Exemptions of the
Clergy.
from power of Civil Laws: who will be protected by the State, yet pay no part
of public expens to prop their power, nor are liable to penalties: the
Presbyterians wish it to themselfs.

4. That their Priests must be styled Sacerdotes Sacrificers, 4 The Name
Sacerdotes.
which was the Israelits title both of their civil Magistrate while God was
King, and public Ministers afterward; which with mak^ng the Lords Supper a
Sacrifice, puts People in belief, that the Pope has the same power over al
Christians which Moses and Aaron had over Israel, both Civil and Clerical: the
Presbyters are entitled Elders, who were chief Assistants to the Apostles.

5. That Marriage is a Sacrament, which givs the Clergy 5 Marriage a Sacrament.
authority to judge the lawfulnes of it, and consequently what Children are
legitimat: Presbyterians pretend no proper right in this kind, sav only to have
the father at Baptism testify the child to be his own, which is of no great use.

6. That Priests may not marry, which assures the Popes 6 Priests Celibat.
power over sundry Princes: for if a King be a Priest (as many Sovereigns are
Prelates) he cannot marry, nor transfer his Regal right to Posterity, without
the Popes special dispensation: Presbyters are no way guilty herin, who marry
twice, thrice, or four times.

7. That auticular Confession is a Sacrament, whereby they 7 Auricular
Confession.
acquire better intelligence of Princes purposes and Peoples projects in the
Civil State, then these possibly can of their sub^leties, stratagems, or
machinations in the Ecclesiastic Polity: here the Presbyterian parallel cease.

8. That to Canonize Saints and declare Martyrs, pertains soly 8 Saints
Canonization.
to the Pope, which assures his power among simple sottish people, who will
obstinatly oppose their Sovereigns (either hostily or proditoriously) even to
death, if the Pope Excommunicat or pronounce them Heretics, and Enemies to the
Church.

9. That diverse doctrins (Transubstantiation, Penance, Absolution, 9 Doctrins.
remitting and retaining sins) greatly ratify this spiritual Monarchy among the
vulgar.

10. That the devise of Purgatory justification by external 10 Purgatory.
works, and sale of Indulgences do chiefly enrich the Clergy; the subtraction
whereof excited Luther to revolt from the Pope who conferred the Indulgences of
al Germany on his Sister.

11. That by Demonology, Exorcisms, and other bug Bear 11 Demonology.
Rites they keep (or think they keep) people the more under their girdle; as
doubtless men stand in more aw of them.

12. That Aristotle's Philosophy (Metaphisics, Physics, Ethics, 12 School*
po^nts.
Politics precited) and School Divinity taught in every University erected or
regulated by the Popes authority, keep al those errors from being detected, and
make men mistake Ignis fatuus of vain Philosophy for his very Light of the
Gospel. So that Roman Quaere (Cui bono?) descries the Pope to be principal
Author or Fautor of those dark doctrins, from which, Good Lord deliver us.

There be three knots on Christian liberty: (...) Knots untied


1. That which the first Presbyters knit; who assembling to agree what they
should teach, and binding themselfs to teach nothing against their assembly
Decrees, deemed People obliged to follow their doctrins, and forsook there
company (then caled Excommunication) if they refused.

2. That which Presbyters of the chief City or Province got on Parochial
Ministers, caling themselfs Bishops or Prelates. Is Qu^^e.
it not the same office or order which Saint Paul first conferred on Titus and
Timothy, to reside over al Presbyters in Crete and Ephesus? compare them; no Eg
can be liker one another.

3. That which the Bishop of Rome (the Imperial Metropolis) assumed as Pontifex
Maximus over al Bishops in the Empire. These three were ravelled or resolved
here by the same way, but preposterously for order, the last first and first
last. For Queen Elizabeth totaly dissolved the Popes power: but Bishops
retained their Jurisdiction under her, as under the Pope; yet with a claus or
claim of jure divino derived from God. 2. The Presbyterians in Parliament, put
down Prelates with all their pomp (which perhaps they repent since) and so the
secund knot was untied. 3. The Presbyterians soon after were unhorsed or at
least unsadled, and so the last untwisted. So we are now reduced to the
Independence of primitiv Christians, (...)
to follow Paul, Cephas, or Apollos (was not that styled Schism?) as every Man
likes best. Which if it be without raising debate, or measuring Christ's doctrine
by our partial affection to his Ministers Person; is perhaps best: but not
absolutely. 1. Because there ought to be no power over Men's Consciences, fav by
the word it self working Faith in every ones heart, according to Gods purpose.
2. Because such as teach there is great danger in every little error, should not
require a Man endued with his own reason, to follow any others opinion, or most
voices of many Men: which is to hazard his salvation at Cross and Pile. What is
it then for People to Quaere.
obey the chief Civil Ruler in all points of Religion?

Lastly he compares the Papacy (specialy in the point, that Comp^risons.
the Church Militant is Gods Kingdom spoken of in the old and new Testament) to
the Kingdom of Faieries or old Wifes fables teaching Ghosts and Spirits, with
the fine feats which they are fained to play at night. For the Papacy is the
Roman Empires very Ghost sitting triply Crowned on its Grav: for the language
used in their Liturgies is Latin or old Roman tongue. The Faieries in all parts
or places have only one universal King caled Oberon, but in Scripture Beelzebub
Prince of Demons: such is the Pope in his Clergy over the World. The Faieries
are Spirits of Ghosts inhabiting darkness, solitud, or Gravs: so are
Ecclesiastic spiritual Ghostly Fathers, who walk in dark Doctrins, Cells,
Cloisters, Churches, and Churchyards. Faieries have enchanted Castles and
Gigantic Ghosts domineering over al Regions round about: so have they Cathedral
Churches, which by virtu of Holy water and charms called Exor^isms, can turn
Towns into Cities or Imperial Seats. Faieries take Children out of Cradles, and
change them to natural Fools caled Elfs fit only to do mischief: so they
bereav young Men of Reason by certain charms composed of Metaphysics and
Miracles; with old Traditions and abused Scriptures: whereby they become good for
nothing but to execut their Superiors secret commands. Faieries are never
seized on nor brought to answer the hurts they do: so Ecclesiastics vanish
from al Tribunals of Civil Justice. When Faieties are angry with any, they send
Elfs to pinch them: so if the Clergy take teen against any State, they make
superstitious Subjects to pinch their Princes, or one Prince enchanted with
promises to pinch another. Faieries marry not, but their Incubi couple with
flesh and blood: so their Priests marry not, nor are any of the chastest sort.
Faieries hant Daieries, and feed or feast on the fat of Cream, which they skim
from Milk: so that Clergy is crammed with Cream or fat of the Land, by Zelo^s
devotions or donations, and toillest Tiths. In what Shop or Officin Faieries
make their Enchantments, old Wifes resolv not: but the Clergies operatories are
Universities erected and established by the Pope. What coin Faieries use, no
History records: but Popish Ecclesiastics in all Receipts accept the same money
we do; yet being to repay, do it in Masses, Indulgences, and Canonizations.
Finaly Faieries have no real existence, but in the fancies of fond ignorant
Idiots, rising from old Wifes traditions or young Poets fictions: no more has
the Popes spiritual plenipotence (beyond the verge of his own civil Territories
caled the Churches Patrimony) any right or reality, sav only in the Panic fears
of silly seduced People, which stand in aw of his Excommunications, upon
hearing of falls Miracles, Traditions, and interpretations of Scripture. These
are Mr. Hobbs singularities (with many mo superseded) but his special Tenet is,
that God was the Israelits sole King (to whom Moses, Aaron, Josua, Judges, and
high Priests were Lieftenants or Deputies) and they his peculiar chosen People
by Contract or Covenant for many ages: til at last they cast him off, and would
have an Earthly visible King like other Nations: but Christ shall be King over all the chosen People of Believers, at the last day of Judgment and Resurrection of
Men with whom he shall reign personaly in Earthly Jerusalem for ever.

The premises speak him to be a singular Scholar of most acut wit; who has a
rare invention, ready pen, concise style, and elegant elocution: with whose
Apollinean Harp my poor Panlike Pipe cannot contend.

Cedat Apollineae Panis Avena Lyrae.
Let Pans plain oat-Pipe yield
To Phoebus Harp the Field.
In such points wherein he and I differ (specialy Four) I only confirm mine own
Opinion by Scripture, but no way confute his by Arguments: but have selected
sundry excerptions, and subnected some scattered quaeres extempore, for the
Readers better satisfaction to ruminat on. I hope he shall have no just cause, nor
any Author else (such is my sollicitud in exemplifying exactly) for any
falsification, to say with Martial:

Quem repetis meus est, O Fidentine, Libellus:
Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
Fidentin, the Book which thou repeatst, is mine:
But while thou il recit'st, 'gins to be thine:
It rests that according to my common course or custom, I do close up the
Catastrophe of al with an Essay or Epigram applied to Mr. Hobbs.

Domino Hobso Epigramma: An Essay to Master Hobbs.
The seven Distichs in Defens of Man's Soul, Church government, Christ's, and the
Saints eternal reign in Heaven. SIR, having a purpose in my extrem old age, to
publish a few Theological speculations, tho beyond the lists of my Phisical
Profession, that they may remain the Heir of my Brain, since God has bereaved
the Heir of my Body; I met with some strange seeming passages or positions in
your learned Levith^n (which is diversely censured, as al others works are, and
generaly construed to savor of self-conceit) contrary to my tenets, which I was
bound by scholastic ingenuity fairly to vindicat, but not to refut yours, being
far unable to grapple. If you take me for an Emulist or Antagonist, God the
heart searcher knows me to be neither; who would gladly imitat (not emulat)
your accomplished abilities sans sordid envy, and do affect your person with
amicable amity, free from servil flattery. Figulus Figulo invidet (a quality of
base Mechanics) never tainted my thoughts, nor is fit for any free minded
Artist to intertain: but Ais, Aio; Negas, Nego (a property of selfsecking
turn-coat Parasits) becoms no true Scholar, nor ever harbored in my candid Dov
like habitation: the worth of Mut^^m a^^ilium.
your work will shine the better and brighter by this foil, or at least spread
farther. Opposita juxta se posita, magis and melius elucescunt: and my Book
happily will be more esteemed, because it brings such dainty exotic fruits and
excellent flowers from your full furnishd Eden. When Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount
St. Alban intended to divulge his Instauratio Magna to new model al liberal
literature, he sent a MS. copy to crav Sir Thomas Budleis accurat judgment on
it, who after perusal highly commended (as indeed it deserved) both style,
stuf, and structure; but told him the world would never want new Devisers, and
old Readers like Carriers horses could not leav their beaten Road, being more
addicted to antiquity then novity: the application is obvious and superfluous.
Of later ages many Mr. withers and others.
men have translated David's Psalms into English meters, seeking a privilege to
print them with our Bibles, instead of those allowed by Queen Elizabeth, but
could never obtein so base a Monopoly, savoring more of filthy lucre then
Scholastic ingenuity. King James compiled a Translation, but neither he nor his
Son caused it to be inserted in the Bible, since new things seldom excel the
old. I wish you would revise or examine my excerptions (not exceptions) as
Aliens, and not your own; to see what faults you can find in the Positions so
well as misprisions, that fitting retractations may be made by your self, or me,
or both in future Editions, or new Additions; for all men are too partial, and
obnoxious to errors.

To recapitulat, the points that I dissent in are. 1. That man's Summary.
Soul is an immortal substance first inspired by God into Adam, and ever after
produced successivly one from another (though most Divines differ from us both)
by virtu of the general benediction to Increas and Multiply in their kinds; but
not life or breath only, which as an accidental quality or effect of the Soul,
vanishes, cease, and perishes with the Body: That after separation from the
Body by Death, it subsists in Heaven or Hell for ever; whereas al Essential
parts else extinguish with their Bodies.

2. That Church government belongs to the Clergy or Ecclesiastic Hierarchy,
being a Body distinct (but subordinat) from the Civil State.

3. That the real kingdom of Heaven (Gods high Throne) where Christ sits at his
Fathers right hand in glory, shall be the Elect Saints eternal Mansion, where they
shall enjoy the beatific Vision or blessed presence of the sacro sanct Trinity
face to face eviternaly.

4. That Christ shall reign or remain in this Kingdom of Glory for ever
(resigning the Kingdom of Grace or Government of the Church to his Father, that
God may be al in all) but not in any new finit World on Earth: since after the
general Judgment al shall be infinity. Your other Tenets touchig Gods Kingdom in
Israel by contract or Covenant: that Hell, H^lfire, Torments, Tormentors, Satan,
Devil, Accuser, D^sticier, and such like are meant Metaphoricaly (which al
Divines take realy) for the Valley of Hinnon caled Gehenna, B^imstome Lake of
Sodom and Gomorrha, the Churches Enemies or temporal Foes; but no real Fiends
which fell by pride: that Christ never dispossessed any Men of Devils, but only
h^aled their bodily diseases or violent malad^es: that there is no Demonology,
Sorcery, Witchery, or Witches: yet such justly deserv death for their falls
opinion and wi^ked intention to do mischief if they could, which is hard
Justice: that suprem Sovereigns in all Stats (whether legal Successors by long
lineal Ancestry; or late Conquerors and Intruders by power or policy) are to
sway al matters of Religion by their decrees, dictats, or directions: both in
defining the Canon of Scripture, and al Articles of Faith; whereto People must
simply submit or implicitly obey, whatever the civil Magistrate shall impose or
innovat in Doctrine or D^sciplin; which is contrary to what they are taught,
that in such cases of Conscience, they must rather obey God then Men. This the
stubborn English will scars subscribe, whose contumacy was such against our last
King, that they rooted out him and his posterity upon pretext of Tyranny:
wherewith the mutinous male-contented multitud, usualy brand or blast al their
Roial Rulers. Indeed Men ought with the noble Bereans to sift or search whether
these things be so or no: else al Commonwealths shall be still Subject to put on
new Masks or Visors of Religion at their Princes pleasures, as Camaeleons
change colors: whereas Catholic constancy (even with loss of life) was ever
esteemed the best blessed seed to sow Christian soil; either under Pagans or
Papists, as our Marian Massacres make manifest: but versatil wits like
Weather-cocks, can turn every way or with every wind to serve turns: as Proteus
is fained to vary:

Nunc violentus Aper, nunc quem tetigisse timeres, Anguis erit.
Now a fierce Bore fearful to see;
Next Snake horrid to touch he will be.
All the premised Positions with some other suspected Novities, I touch not nor
trench upon: but commend them to the Readers free judgment.

If you will deign to accept these bold addresses or advertisments, from an old
Dotard (who intends them fairly, sans scandal or scurrility) in good part; you
shall show a la^dable disposition and liberal education; according to the true
intention, as they are tendered for the public behoof or benefit of the
literary Republic: if not, I have discharged my duty.

Docte, tuum Nomen colo, magnopereque; recordo:
Si modo veridicus vis humilisque; fore.
Noli Animam violare tuam, nec tollere nostram:
Quam simul Authorum comprebat omne genus.
Nec tunicam spoliato tuam renuendo, Ministros
Jure suo Gregibus posse praeesse suis.
Nec Christo and Sanct is Terrestria pradia finge,
Qui modo celsa Dei Coelica regna tenent.
Nec Tropice reputa Reprobos descendere ad Orcum:
Nec Coelum Electis detrahe post obitum.
Parce mihi, mea si Theoremata redder^ certo
Justis vindiciis sospita ab omne malo.
Audeo non verbis contendere, viribus impar;
Artibus, Ingenio. Literulisque bonis.
Unius haud oculus licet integer, omn^^ cernit:
Multa scienda sapis tu, resipisce tamen.
Learnd Sir, your Name I lov, and weigh greatly:
If you will embrace truth and humility.
Do not your own Soul wrong, nor ours take away:
Which Authors of al sorts maintaind always.
Nor do your Coat desile, right to deny;
That Pastors have power their Flocks to rectify.
To Christ and Saints fain not Earthly mansions,
Who now posless Gods Heavenly habitations.
Nor deem the Damnd go to Hell Tropicaly:
Nor Heaven after Death to the Elect deny.
Spare m' if I to guard these Theses contend,
And by just means from al il to defend.
I dare not striv in words, being short in worth:
In Arts, Wit, and Learning to set it forth.
No one Man's Ey tho sharp and sound al does see.
Many known things you know, yet retractant be.
Postscripta subjuncta: Postscripts subnected.
MAn's Soul at first Creation on the sixth day, was infused 1 Thesis.
or breathed into Adam by God, a Living, Rational, Intellectual Spirit,
distinct from the Body; Invisible, Immaterial, Immortal: having a power, dower
or faculty by his general blessing of Increas and multiply; to beget a
substance (like Light from Light) endued with the same qualities of intellect,
Rationality, and Immortality, as al other Creaturs do in their several kinds.

God can do no wrong, nor ly, nor sin being contrary to 2 Thesis.
his Nature: who is Essentialy and Abstractly Justice, Verity, and Goodness it
self. All that he does is just; but to say it is al just because he does it, is a
pure error: for Justice is a cardinal Moral virtu, the same to God and Man by
Nature; nor can God make an unjust act just because he does it. A Pope in
Consistory having denounced Fiatur (which a Cardinal whispered was falls Latin)
broke forth furiously into these words: in contemptum omnium Grammaticorum
Fiatur. It Is not so with God, who will not make an unjust thing just, nor
untruth truth: but if he should Reprobat Men of mere free pleasure, by absolut
irrespectiv Decree to show his power, Sovereignty, or Dominion over al his
Creatures: it were a flat unjust act, which all the water in Thamis cannot wash
whit because he did it: but to make Man a free Creature able to stand or fall;
and foreseing in his simple intelligence who will embrace the means ordained by
him for salvation, and who refuse or resist his Grace: to elect the one, and
reject or Reprobat the other; is true Justice mixd with Mercy: which is all that
God does in his Decrees of Election and Reprobation.

Before Kings converted to Christianity, the Apostles held 3 Thesis.
al Ecclesiastic power in their hands, and after them such as they ordained to
succed: who appointed others subordinat (caled Elders) to preach the Gospel by
imposition of hands: which imports a giving of the holy Ghost or Spirit of God,
inabling them with gifts fitting to discharge that office: as Moses laid his
hands on Josisa being to succed him. Now the Divine Trinity Mr. Hobbs.
in Unity is, that the Person of God was represented by Moses and the high
Priests in the old Testament, but by Christ during his abode on Earth, and by
his Apostles with their lawful Successors ever since. The holy Spirit whereby
the Apostles spoke is God: the son who represented his Father is God and Man:
but the Father as represented by Moses and the high Priests, is the same God.
Hence those terms (Father, Son, holy Ghost or Spirit) are never used for God in
the old Testament because they be Persons denomined of representing: which could
not be til diverse Men had born Gods Person in ^uli^g or directing under him.
The holy Spirit is sometime styled Paracletus properly Assister or caled to
help; but commonly translated a Comforter: who givs gifts or graces to Men, fit
for such spiritual offices whereto they are ordained.

Presbytery or Ministry is of divine right, instituted by Christ in cal^ng
seventy Disciples, whom he sent as Harbingers to Preach and prepare the way;
and confirmed by the Apostles (to whom they were subordinat) in ordaining
Elders every where. So is Episcopat by the same right of Christ's choosing twelv
Apostles, and their substituted Bishops to succed them: but Presbyterial single
Government without Bishops by a motly mixture of Ministerial and Laic Elders, a
mere novity devi^^d by Mr. Calvin, when the Genevans had expeld their

Sovereign Prelat, which exigent was cause of this change. This is most true in
point of fact.

VLTIMAT END.
Valedictio ad Lectores: A Farewell to the Readers.
Pro libito Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli:
Noster and expectet publica Fata liber.
On Readers pleasure Books do depend:
And let my Book the Fate attend.
Opinion is a lofty Roial Dame:
Whose plumes are raisd on Air of vulgar Fame.
Who Courts her Grace, shall with Ixion find
In Juno's stead, an empty Cloud or Wind.
Let such as list her giddy favor curry:
I like not to be tossd with common whoorry.
Fair Readers which to take or leav are free,
Scorn to return base Censures for a fee.
Let Critics, Momes, and Mimics do their worst:
He that regards their scoss shall be accursed.
My resolution fears not Censors knocks;
Nor shall this Book, unles it fall amongst Blocks.
VALETE: FAREWELL.
Postscriptum dc Formis. A Postscript of al Forms.
Mr. Pemble a late learned Oxford Man, holds (which few else do) that al
inanimat Forms, and two Souls (Vegetant, Sentient) are no distinct substaances,
but only the crasis or temperament of qualities in every Compou^d or Subject.
His grounds or proofs are these: if the Form of a natural Bo^y be a substance,
it must be, either material and corporeal; or immaterial and spiritual: but
it is neither. Some say it is an imperfect substance in a middle degree between it
and an accident; which is a silly shift or shelter. For an imperfect substance
will require a new Predicament; and Peripatetics repute Form most sublime, yea
the perfection of matter in it self most imperfect: but a middle nature between
both, is a mere Chimaera or Catamountain not contained in any Category nor has
it any Entity.

That Form is no material substance, these Reasons evince: 1. That which informs
the matter ( i. so pierces into al parts and principles, as to giv specifical
essence) is not material or corporeal, because one Body cannot penetrat another,
nor material substance matter. 2. Every corporeal thing is of it self
quantitativ and divisible: but a form according to Aristotle is indivisible
void of quantity. 3. Nothing generable or corruptible, is material or
corporeal; since matter according to Aristotle cannot be begot or perish: but al
forms (except Man's Soul) vanish or perish, and new are ingendered. 4.
Principles of Constitution are diverse or distinct in essence and proper
passions, else al things generable would be uniform and homogeneal: but if forms
be material, they differ not from matter sav in some degrees of sub^^ety and
purity; which suffice not to take away uniformity nor diversity. 5. A form is
the fountain or origin of al actions: but if it be material, matter is also
activ, not purely passiv: for it has that activ virtu from matter, not
elswher; or else cannot be a Principle. That it is not an Immaterial spiritual
substance, these pregnant Arguments prove: 1. Whatever is bred of matters essence
must be material, as what is generated of pure Air is Aerial: but a Form is not
material as foreproved, or being Immaterial cannot be bred from the essence of
matter; nor can Principles be engendered one of another. 2. A Form cannot proced
from the accidents of matter, since no substance is bred of accidents, nor can a
Principle be made of any former Entity; since that is the Principle, and Form an
accident being framed of accidents. 3. These accidents are either the matters
passiv power, or illimited quantity, or previous dispositions to receiv a Form:
but the two former cannot possibly be, since they are not generativ: and the
later may concur in the agent to produce a Forms existence; but cannot conduce
to the constitution of its essence being mere Accidents. 4. Forms are not
generated of nothing, for that's Creation: non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi.
To salv this scruple, they devise diverse disguised distinctions: 1. That Forms
are in the matter potentialy, not actualy: this is a contradiction, they are
yet are not, but may be. 2. That they are in their causes not realy, but
eductivly: this is an Antiphrase, for their causes are in the matter, by which
they also may be herafter. 3. That they are in it habitualy, as Science is in a
Scholar asleep: this is preposterous, since Science is actualy in a sleeping
Scholar, tho he does not exercise, nor is habitual inexistence opposite to
actual: but Forms til eduction are not actualy in the matter: as the form of
Air is not in water til it be turned into it; nor the form of Gold in Earth,
til it become Gold: so these evasions are very asystats. 5. Souls are not
Spiritual (except Man's) much less inanimat forms: for what sober Man will say
^av in a Chemical sens, that there is any substantial Spirit in a Stone, Herb,
or Beast? 6. Every divisible substance is material and corporeal; for division
folows quantity as an inseparable companion of matter: but form is divisible,
and no spiritual indivisible substance. 7. No immaterial substance is
corruptible: but al forms vanish and perish. 8. Every immaterial substance is
nobler then any material: but if ^orms be immaterial, it is contrary in them,
since the base matter of a dumb Flea is permanent and can not be destroyed; but
the Soul of a Roial Lion vanishes to vapor, being no spiritual substance. It
rests then that it is an accident or Temperament of qualities, but no substance,
as abundantly foresh^wed. This is farther proved by three Parallels: 1.
Accidents are generated, corrupted, and new produced: so are al forms. 2.
Accidents are diffused through the whole Subject, and penetrat the least
particles of matter: so do forms. 3. Accidents depend on the matter for being
and producing, nor can subsist without their Subject, nor depart from one to
another: so it is with all forms except Man's Souls. Now the chief contrary
objections shall be answered.

Ob. Every substantial compound consists of matter and form: but al natural
Bodies are substantial compounds: Ergo etc.

Sol. Composition is duple: 1. Of matter and accidents, as al corporeal
compounds: 2. Of substance and substance, as Man only, who has a material
mortal Body, and a spiritual immortal Soul: but al else only matter endowed with
several accidents.

Ob. Whatever actuats, specificats, and givs existence to matter, is a
substance: but the form does all this: Ergo etc.

Sol. To actuat is either to giv the matter actual being that it shall be a
substance: or to endu it with effectual qualities: in the first sens it is falls
that a form actuats the matter; since it is a substance subsisting of it self
together with the form; and is more actuated by the form, then it by the
matter: but in the last sens it is true, that a form actuats the matter or makes
it activ. Yet it folows not that it is a substance, since al action and acting
power, may proced from the qualities of an efficient cause: but the matter being
indifferent to al forms by receiving several sorts of qualities; exists in such
or such a species. As a lump of Wax is formed into sundry shapes, and exists in
form of a Creature by taking a new figure, which is an accident: so the matter
subsists of it self, tho not separat from a form: but exists with the form, not
by it: yea that alone exists of it: since forms according to Aristotelians
depend on it both for essence and existence.

Ob. That from which the matter receivs al activity and operations, is a
substance: but so does matter from form: Ergo etc.

Sol. Philosophers seeing matter dull or unable to action, and deeming accidents
too weak to giv it; devised another nature to be fountain of action which they
call form: but they are deceived in so deeming, since accidents will suffice to
make any natural Body activ, without help of another substance. As light being
sole form of al lucid Bodies (Sun, Stars, Fire, Carbuncle) illumins al opacous
obscure Bodies. So heat of fire an intens quality is its form: cold in water,
Earth, Ice, and Winter air, has the same effects to quench fire and condensat
things: yet their forms differ, nor do depend one on another to work those
effects. So the siccity of fire and Earth dries up water having distinct forms.
The like may be said of the humidity in water and air, which works the same
effects under different forms. In semblable sort water and earth by their
gravity descend, as fire and air by levity ascend: yet not by diff^ring forms,
but by diverse accidents only.

Ob. That which essentialy distinguishes one kind from another, is a
substance: so does the form: Ergo etc.

Sol. Every essential distinction is not made by a substance: for accidents
(virtu and heat) differ essentialy: so do substances in their definitions by
accidents. For in every Definition is a Genus (as the common matter) wherein al
agree; and a difference consisting of accidents to distinguish that matter. As
fire is a simple Body most hot and light: water a simple Body coldest and
heavy. Here the differences consist of accidents, yet are essential and
internal: for as accidents are first causes of operations, so are they of
essential distinctions in natural Bodies, and included in their definitions,
without any substantial forms: which plainly provs that accidents or
temperaments of qualities are forms.

Ob. A form has no degree of more or less, nor is varied: but accidents and
their temperaments may be varied and receiv degrees: Ergo they cannot be
essential forms.

Sol. The Major Peripatetic proposition is false: for all forms (of simple
Bodies, Mixed, and Animat) receiv intension and remission of degrees: as when
Earth turns to Water, it requires diverse preparations or predispositions before
it become water: does then the form of Earth all that while remain firm or
unchanged? If not, then it is more or less varied. So al Elements concur in
mixtion, and continu in mixtils: do their qualities remain, or forms, or
rather both? as appeers at dissolution, when they return to Elements: yet not
in intens vigor as formerly, but remitted or reduced to harmonical symmetry.
Zabarel says, forms may be varied with change of kind, not else: as forms of
Elements are so changed, not otherwise. This is mere obscurity fu^ of
contradiction: as if the form of water in mixtils be less a form then formerly,
continuing still the waters form: yet cannot be caled water having changed its
kind and become another B^dy. Therefore it is truer, that Elements forms receiv
intension and remission: which variation provs them to be accidents not
substances; and when their just temperament is taken away, they transcend or
are transmuted into new Kinds. So those are idle questions touching Elements
essential forms, or integrity in mixtils: of generation and corruption in an
instant; as if a form were educed or perished in a moment, with many mo of like
bran. For water is made gradualy in time, by changing its temperament: so in
mixtils (Stone, Apple, Flesh) corruption corns by depraving the temperament:
which if vitiated beyond the utmost degree of proportion, a dissolution folows
by breaking the bonds of union: which is done by mixture of qualities.

Repl. If the temperament be varied, definitions of things must also be
altered: but they are alwais constantly the same, til the forms be changed:
Ergo form is no temperament.

Sol. This is Childish, for definitions are made of things entire or perfect,
and abstracted by imagination of the intellect: but if things be considered as
they are in nature, definitions must be changed as nature varies. Can fading
Flowers, rotting Apples, putrefying Flesh, or sickly Bodies retain the same
definitions of sound? Shall the essence be changed by mutation of accidents, and
not varied with them? Let such as so think feed on corrupt carrion, til they
acknowledge there is one definition of sound food, another of putrid Flesh: or
let them languish so long, til they learn to distinguish between Corpus sanum,
aegrum, and nutrum. What is substantial or material in Elements and mixtils,
that remains invariable: but al accidental or formal is changed, generated, and
corrupted by degrees, as temperaments alter: according to which definitions
must be changed.

Now touching Souls, there be three sorts, Vegetant, Sentient, Intelligent: but
for better explication, he premiseth some Aphorisms. 1. There be three Principles
of Bodies: viz two constitutiv, matter of subject, and accidents or qualities;
and one transmutativ, the contrariety of those accidents or qualities. 2. Matter
is all that is substantial in natural Bodies. 3. Matter is indifferent to receiv
al accidents, yet is not simply the fountain or root of al. 4. The origin of
accidents and subjects is one, viz. Creation and concreation. 5. The accidents
of matter are duple: 1. Some which immediately follow its essence and coexist with
it, as passiv power, quantity or extension, place, and time, or successiv
duration, of which matter is the fountain: 2. Such as make existence in a
specifical kind, as al first and secund qualities: which do not inhere
primarily by necessity of nature, but at the Creators pleasure to distinguish
kinds. 6. Both these qualities are impressed immediately like light in the air,
needing no intermediat substance to unite them. 7. As quantities inhere
immediately in the matter: so the operations and powers of working flow directly
from the qualities. 8. Al first qualities (light, heat, cold, humidity,
siccity) and sundry of the secund (thicknes, thinnes, heavines, lightness,
fluidnes, firmnes) existed the first day of Creation. 9. The material substance
of Heaven (whereof Philosophers know little) is common with inferior Bodies,
being made of one chaos: so are the first accidents; but those of the secund
sort differ, by the discrepant conjunction of first and secund qualities. 10.
There be three Elements (Air, Water, Earth) needful to mixtion, and happily two
will serve. 11. These Elements essentialy differ in their proper qualities given
by God: in the Earth are conjoined cold, siccity, density, gravity,
consistence: in the water cold, moisture, remisser density, gravity, fluidnes:
in the Air remiss heat, weak moisture, levity, tenuity, and fluidnes. 12. Fire
is only intens heat, whether in Elements or mixtils; but no Element, Body, or
Substance. 13. Heat in Air or Mixtils, is partly implanted at Creation, partly
infused or introduced by the Sun, Soil, and Elementar Fire if any such be: but
the implanted soon decais without supply of infused. 14. Composition is duple:
1. Of Matter with both sorts of qualities, as in the Heavens and Elements: 2.
Of Matter so qualified and new mixture of qualities arising from the other; as
in all Bodies else. 15. The union of qualities in Elements is most simple, but in
Mixtils more compound; as it is said of Colors, that whitnes and bl^^^^es, are
made with the various mixture of bright and dark: but middle colors rise from
the mixtures of whit and black. 16. The measure and manner of al Temperaments,
is founded on the first Creation: from which primary pattern if nature dev^at in
excess or defect, a deformed Monster is bred. 17. To beget a like is the
property of al activ qualities in Inanimats and Animats, as God bid them by his
benediction to increas and multiply. 18. The qualities do so diffuse themselfs
and beget others, that they make the matter proportioned to exercise their
forces or functions. 19. The formativ faculty is founded on the very qualities:
which the more simple, so much the more uniform configuration they produce: but
if compounded of diverse qualities, they make more diversity or difformity in
figuring the material parts. 20. Mixtion the less simple, the more subtle; for
it is a great Art to unite so many varieties of unlike qualities into one crasis
or temper: but the more compound the weaker, because it consists of so many
contrary qualities. 21. There is a recripocal propagation of Temperaments in
Animats: viz. of the Seed, and life of the Seed. 22. The Prolifical power in
the Seed, proceds not from any spiritual substance inherent in it; but only
from a subtle temper of qualities in a pure spirituous matter. 23. This energy
is actualy in the Seed still, but asleep or unactiv, til it meet with a fit
Patient or rather Coagent to excite that virtu: as the strong spirits which ly
hid in Barley, Wheat, Plants, Grain, or Seeds are easily extracted by
destillation. 24. In Plants the Earth is a Womb to bring forth Seeds, by
supplying heat from the Sun and moisture from Soil whereby the Spirits in Seeds
swel, and extend the matter to fit proportion of several Figures. 25 In
Egbreeders Male and Female must concur to make them fertile: but to hatch and
inlifen them, any heat natural or artificial (if well ordered) will suffice:
because the yelk is moist enough, and needs only help of heat to rouz up the
whits spirits. 26. In perfect Animal-begetters, both Sexes must actualy join to
make one mass of Seed: which being aptly mixd, spirituous substance of that
mass is blown up and augmented by heat of the Matrix and moisture of menst^ual
Blood: which begins to form the Birth, and in fine brings (...) to perfection.
27. To the generation of living Creatures, Seed is not simply necessary; but a
mixture of in^^fening qualities in fit matter will serve: as sundry Plants
propagat sans Seed, and some Animals of putrefaction.

28. Summarily the Souls vegetant in Plants, and sentient Summary.
in Animals (whether general whereby they become Plants and Animals, or special
specifical which distinguish them into Kinds) are only the nobler Temperament
of more activ qualities in a subtler matter, whether propagated of Seed, or
other wais ingendered; but no substances. This needs no other proofs then those
already alleged to refute the Substantiality of Forms: but why Man's Soul should
be a substance rather then Beasts (many of which are so intelligible and
docible as most of simple People, witness the dancing Horse called Asinago) no
satisfactory reason can be rendered in nature, sav only some dark places of
Scripture.

The result of al is, that no substance ever dies or perishes: for matter is
invariable, and al Forms of Inanimats, together with the Vegetant and Sentient
Souls mere mortal accidents or temperaments: only Man's Soul is a substance or
Spirit infused or inspired at first by God, which is immortal and livs of it
self for ever. These are his Principles of new Philosophy, touching the origin
of Forms and Souls: which let every one relish as his palate affects. Now to
answer Objections.

Ob. If the Soul be only a Temperament, every natural Body that has a tempered
Crasis shall be Animat: but it is not so: Ergo a Soul is no Temperament.

Sol. This Argument consists of mere affirmativs in the secund Figure, and
therefore is a filthy Paralogism: but every Temperament of Inanimats is not fit
for a Soul.

Ob. A Temperament is changed according to age, place, and diet: but a Soul is
not so changed: Ergo it is no Temperament.

Sol. Forms are changed or varied gradualy, as foreshewed: but in the argument
is a duple error. 1. That it does not distinguish between a total essential, and
partil gradual change of Temperament: for in the total is not only a mutation
but corruption of the Soul, and makes nothing to purpose: in the partil is a
change more or less, which does not vary or alter the kind: as a tender young
Plant being removed from its natural Soil to a Foreign, grows better or wors
without changing the kind; yet the unity of Form remains, with an alteration in
the degrees of perfection. 2. That a transition from other Animals to Man is
improper: for if his Bodily temper change, yet the Soul being a distinct
substance varies not: but in all else Soul and Temperament: are one.

Ob. If the Soul be a Temperament, there be in Animats so many Souls as Tempers:
one of the rind and wood in Trees, another of Flesh and bones in Animals: but
in every Animat is one only Soul: Ergo it is no Temperaments.

Sol. The Peripatetics place two Souls at least in every Animat, and three in
Animals; but diverse forms in Inanimats essentialy distinct: so according to
them it is no absurdity to grant plurality of Souls: yet is there no plurality of
substances, but diversity of Temperament.

Ob. If the Soul be but a Temperament of humors and spirits; it could not
bridle the Bodies passions or perturbations: but it does and is not led by
them: Ergo etc.

Sol. This is true in Man's Soul, which sometimes bridles or moderats passions,
and sometimes yields to them: but in no other Animats, whose Soul not only
folows, but is Temperament it self.

Ob. That can be no Accident or Temperament, from which the noblest faculties
and functions of imagining, remembering, and perceiving or judgin ^ensitiv
objects proced: but Beasts Souls have such operations remblable to Man's: Ergo
they are not Accidents.

Sol. Al such operations are merely Organical in a material subject, and depend
on it: the Organ is a pure, clear, activ Animal spirit sited in the Brain as
the seat of Sensation: which Spirit is not only the Organ, but first Principle
thereof. For in all Animal Spirits two things are found, viz. matter and mixture
of lifely qualities: matter is the first Subject and Organ of Sens, qualities
the first cause or origin; and in both commixd consist all the faculties of
apprehension, imagination, and memory which Brutes have. These Spirits are the
sole Instruments of al Sensation: but no substance uses or rules them being
the first cause of Sens. That which they call Soul, must be either material, or
immaterial: if material, it is either purer then the Spirits, which cannot be,
since they are purest; or viler and impurer, but it is absurd to grant that to
the baser, which is denied to the best: if immaterial, let them answer al
arguments alleged against Forms.

Ob. It Is abov or beyond the power of purest matter, endued or invested with
most exquisit qualities to judge, remember, desire, shun, etc. but Brutes Souls
do all this: Ergo etc.

Sol. It Is not, nor is it more strange that such effects should proced from the
Temperament of Brutes Brains, then do other admirable properties (as in the
Magnet and many mo simples) from Inanimats Temperament, which is weaker then
Animals. These are magnalia Dei Gods wonderful works, which Men must admire, not
inquire.

Lastly he treats of Man's Souls origin which was first in intention, Upshot.
and sole scope of this Subject or Speculation: touching whose essence, that
it is a rational immortal substance or spirit; none but Atheists or Sadduces will
doubt: but of the origin is much dispute. Some deem they were al created
eternaly, and reserved in blessed Seats or Stars, til they be incorporated into
Bodies. Some that they be created by Angels. Some that they be generated by the
Soul of the World, and made of Celical Substance. Some that they consist of
Elements. Some that they are framed of Gods own substance. Some that they be
produced by the Heavens as an extern Efficient. Some that they propagat
successivly one from another. Some that they are continualy created and infused
in the Body by God like Adams first Soul, which is the common Tenet. These two
last Opinions (rejecting all the rest as futilous and frivilous) he debats more
freely and fully, which he that lists may contemplat: but being before
abundantly agitated in the first Thesis, shall be suppressed or superseded.

Touching the Vegetativ and Sensitiv Souls, it is probable they Censure.
are a mere Temperament of qualities or life it self; nor does Scripture them
to be substances: but they vanish or perish with the Bodies like forms of
Inanimats, and new engendered or educed from the power of matter by the
efficient Cause. For God made al Creatures in their kinds entire Bodies at once
(both Plants and Animals) but Created Man in his own Image: the Body first of
Dust or Earth from the previous preexistent Chaos like other Creatures; into
which he breathed the Spiracle or Spirit of Life, even a Rational Soul; being
far more divine and immortal then the rest, as al Orthodox writers agree. Hence
it is said, Man becam a living Soul, meaning that his Soul should live for ever;
as he had done in Body too, had he not eaten the forbidden fruit, contrary to
Gods command upon pain of temporal and eternal death: yet afterward in mercy he
ordained a remedy, that the Woman's Seed (even Christ our blessed Savior)
should bruis the Serpents head, by dying for the sins of al such as shall
penitently beleev in him.

Peroratio ad Theologos: A Conclusion to Divines.
Haec quicunque; legent Medici Theoremata sacra; Censuras rigidas parcite
far, precor.
Who shall a Physicians sacred Theses read,
I pray, spare to giv Censures full of dread.
Nunc opus exigitur: Laus Patri debita summo, Christo incarnato, Spirituique
sacro.
The work's now done: to God the Father du prais,
To Christ incarnat, and the holy Ghost alwais.

ALLEUIA.

