A Vindication of the Army, from some calumnious Quaeres, being not so much a
particular answer to those nine several Quaeres, as to the scope of the Author
in them.
By Jo: Harr: Esquire.
THe honest use of making queres was heretofore, to be instructed and attain
satisfaction in those things whereof our reason doubted; not to justify our
own wilful errors, and under color of asking questions to vent opprobrious
calumnies, and rail positively against the sense of other men. The nature
therefore of queres is much mistaken by the Author of those nine against the
Army; for I cannot discern in what point he desires to be instructed himself,
or teach others; but instead of that, in a positive way, and with much
bitterness, he inveighs against the proceedings of those gallant gentlemen, to
whose successful valor, and indefatigable industry (next under God, without
whose blessing all endeavors are fruitless) the Kingdom of England is
indebted to for the rescue of her sinking (and almost lost) Laws and Liberties.

If this Army have well deserved of the Commonwealth, why should any man that
loves the Commonwealth fly so high against them, as by way of prejudice to
censure their intentions worse then their actions show. For no action of theirs
has yet produced any hurt. Can any candid or honest man harbor a suspicion,
that the noble Fairfax and Cromwell, names honored by the very enemies, whom
no success could ever puff up, those miracles of modesty, in whom no
selfe-seeking, no pride or ambition has in the least measure discovered it
self; should now be guilty of such a monstrous ambition as to affect an
arbitrary power, to trample upon the State, to subject the Parliament, and
enslave the nation to their own will?

But it appears by the queres (says he) that they have broken the privileges
of Parliament, and are therefore suspected to aim at wicked ends. I, for mine
own part, do so much honor the Parliament, that I think every Privilege
belonging to it of so tender a nature, as is unfit to be trod upon, or rudely
dealt with: But I confess I do more honor the essence and being of the
Parliament then I do every small punctuality of Privilege, and could be
content rather to see the finger of it wounded (for these contesting times have
taught us such distinctions) then the whole body perish. Some parts of a body
may be a little afflicted sometimes, that the whole may live in the more
health: Neither can I think that this Army which has given so noble a
testimony of their affections to the Parliament, as to preserve the very being
of it; would now violate any part or privilege thereof, unless the safety of
the whole did require such a seeming violation. Let honest Englishmen
therefore suspect no hurt unless they see probable inducements to such a
suspicion; but hope still, that this Parliament whom the swords of so many
Lords and others of the English-Gentry could not cut down, whom the Votes of
that Oxford Assembly (which the King called his mungrill Parliament) could not
at all blast, nor many secret practices undermine, shall be still protected by
Almighty God, and not ruined, but rescued from some inconveniences, which might
have wrought a ruin, if not prevented.

The particular queres are scarce worthy of several answers: but to the first,
wherein he makes it so great a breach of Privilege that the Army printed their
Declarations, and Charge against the Members without leave of the House, I
think it a sufficient answer, that there was no other way to make the
cleerenesse of their intentions appear, and vindicate themselves from farther
jealousies, as their enemies might raise, who have been too apt to throwgh
causlesse aspersions on them. I could rather wish that the London Presses were
not too open in these days, to reproachful pamphlets of our greatest enemies,
which are daily vented against the honor and essence of the Parliament it
self.

The second quere wherein this Religious and deserving Army is in many things
compared to Cade and his fellow Rebels, being so injurious as that it cannot
be answered with patience enough, may with discretion be scorned and passed
over. As likewise the third, wherein he compares this demand of the Members to
another, which was made heretofore, and judged by both Houses to be a great
breach of Privileges, of which because the case is so notoriously different, J
think it not fit to speak at all; nor to say any thing at all to that cavil of
his, because the Members are not particularly charged, because time must
produce that, only to which it is referred.

As for another comparison which he makes in a following quere betwixt the
Armies proceedings, and those which Sleiden relates of the bloody and mad
actions of those Anabaptists in Munster, J hope all judicious men will easily
make a difference, without any vindication of mine, betwixt persons and actions
so extremely discrepant.

As for another imputation of hindering the relief of Ireland, it may easily
appear, and J make no question but it will in time, that the cause of that may
with more reason be imputed to the enemies of this Army, who by unjust
provocations have diverted that important service.

To spare therefore farther expressions in this kind, J shall only stay with
patience, and expect what it will please God to produce of these jarrs, hoping
that it may be such a blessing to this afflicted Kingdom, as may rather
justify the charity of them, who believed well of the Army, then their
suspicions, who are jealous in the other kind.

THE END.

