AENEAS HIS DESCENT INTO HELL: As it is inimitably described by the Prince of
Poets in the sixth of his AENEIS.

Made English by JOHN BOYS of Hode-Court, Esquire

Together with an ample and learned Comment upon the same, wherein all passages
Critical, Mythological, Philosophical and Historical, are fully and clearly
explained.

To which are added some certain Pieces relating to the Public, written by the
Author.

Invia virtuti nulla est via.
-- Ovid. Met. LONDON, Printed by R. Hodgkinsonne, living in Thames street over
against Banards Castle, 1661.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir EDWARD HIDE, Knight, Lord High Chancellor of
England, etc.
MY LORD,
SHould I recount what your Lordship has both done and suffered for your King,
it would not only make our present discourse swel beyond the just proportion of
an Epistle, but also anticipate the pains of those more able penns, which are
designed to write the Story of our times, to which your particular actions will
necessarily contribute ample supply of matter, and in which your single name
will (doubtless) with high honor to your self be often repeated.

That un-envied, because deserved Dignity which your Lordship (through the
grace and favor of your wise and discerning Master) now stands possessed of, is
a clear demonstration as well of your great abilities, as untainted loyalty:
and from hence we must take the true height and prospect of them both. How
happy then is the Prince where so prudent and trusty a Minister has the chief
management of affairs? and how secure the People where so experienced and
watchful a Pilot sits at the helm?

But, MY LORD, whilst I give your Lordship your due Character, I make my self
guilty of a too rash presumption, thus to adventure to interpose between your
Lordship and your more weighty affairs, and with a discourse of so different
and inferior a mixture, to divert your more material and serious Cogitations:
but again, when I consider that your Lordship is the person to whom those, who
by the rigor of the Law are oppressed, make their appeal, and who, by virtue of
your office, mitigate that summum jus, which is indeed summa injuria, I then
begin to resume new spirits, and to hope that I shall find, by your candid
acceptance of this my Dedication, that you carry a constant Chancery in your
breast, as well when out of the Court, as when you sit in Judicature. Had I any
thing better I should with all humilty cast it at your Lordships feet; and did
my abilities bear proportion with my desires, I should make you a more suitable
present: but since that is denied me, I earnestly beseech you to accept this,
(such as it is) as a testimony of that unfeigned reverence I have for your
virtues, both public and private, for your accomplishments both Civil and
Moral; whereof the one denominate you a good Statesman, and the other a good
man: qualifications rarely meeting in one and the same subject. And for this,
My Lord, for the contemplation of your inherent worth I mean (which, with those
who make a true judgment of things, is much more attractive then the splendour
of your adherent greatness) be pleased to give me leave, though obscure,
unknown, and as great a stranger to the world as I am to your Lordships person,
to assume the title of

MY LOKD, Your Lordships true Admirer and most devoted Servant, JOHN BOYS.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THis our Master (the undoubted Prince of all Heroic Writers, whether Greek or
Latin) had, in the compiling of his excellent Aeneis, a double design; the one
was (in the general) to represent heroical virtue in the person of his most
accomplished Aeneas; which he has performed with that acute judgment,
discreet choice, and constant decorum, that not only those of the following
ages, (when the teeth of envy bite no more) but even those of his own time and
profession (in whom emulation might have begotten detraction) did, with a
general consent, give him the precedence, and contented themselves only Stat.
Theb. 12.
Long sequi, and vestigia adorare; to follow him at a distance, and to worship
his footsteps. The other was (in particular) to celebrate the Name and Family
of the Emperor Augustus, in extolling his Aeneas, from whom that Caesar, by the
Mothers side, deduced his Pedigree; that Augustus, who, as he was a favourer of
the Muses, so was he favored by those who were conversant with the Muses, and
especially by the incomparable Virgil, in whose divine writings he has
obtained such a monument, -- Ovid. Met.
quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignes,
Nec poterit ferrum, vel edax abolere vetustas.
A Memento to Princes to cherish men of abilities and parts, from whose pens
they may rationally expect a more lasting and commendable fame, then from all
their trophies and triumphs whatsoever.

And although our most excellent Author never composed any thing but what smelt
of the Lamp, and what discovered as much the exactness of his judgment as the
variety of his reading, yet the second, fourth, and sixth books of his Aeneis
are by the learned preferred to the rest of his elaborate productions, as
having been (as Donatus affirms in his life) revised and corrected by his own
judicious pen, and vouchsafed the imperial ear of his great Patron Augustus;
before whom in an honorable Assembly he, with high applause, recited the same.
The first of these (which contains the destruction of Troy) has been so happy
as to fall into the hands of a Translator inferior only to the Author himself;
I need not add the Gentleman's name, his own worth rendering him sufficiently
conspicuous. The fourth (whose subject is the passion of Dido for Aeneas) has
been equally blessed, as having been made speak English by the united Studies of
two Gentlemen no less eminent then the former. I wish that the whole Aeneis had
learned our modern di^lect from such excellent Masters.

But since the long and pertinacious silence of those Gentlemen, is a
sufficient assu^ance to me, that they intend to wade no further in their begun
undertaking, I have (as ill-fitted as I am) ventured upon the traduction of the
sixth of the Aeneis, a book as far transcending whatsoever our Master wrote,
as my self (his Interpreter) am inferior to those deserving persons I have now
mentioned; a book which (as Servius testifies) is so replete with sublime
speculations, that diverse learned men of former times judged it worth their
pains to write large Commentations upon particular parts and passages thereof.
Neither will we here omit the censure of the judicious Nasimboenus, since it is
a truth tending so much to the honor of our accomplished Author: his words run
thus; Anteponendus est hic liber caeteris sine controversia, in quo splendour,
etc. This book of Virgil is more excellent then any of his writings, as wherein
the very Quintessence of Learning and Knowledge does most wonderfully appear:
if in the rest he show himself copious and grave in his expressions, in this he
is admirable. Nor seven Homers, or all Greece beside, should they summon their
whole strength of wit and learning together, were able to match this sixth book
of the Aeneis. Thus far that learned Critic.

What can be said more? I am sure there is more then enough, to have
discouraged me, not only from the publishing of what I have undertaken, but
even from the undertaking of what I have published. The more excellent a work
is in the Original, the more difficulty it still gives to the Translator. But
since I have ventured upon it, although the charge of a rash undertaker may
(happily) be made good against me, yet my weak performance herein may in some
measure be excused, because (as I have said) the work in it self is so
inimitable.

However, Reader, I hope that although this illustrious Writer appear not in
his native glory and splendor, through that glimmering and imperfect light we
have lent him, yet there may be some weak rays and reflections of him, by which
thou may discern that it is Virgils: and that although we cannot say, as
himself did elsewhere: Aeneid. 3.
Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat.
Yet there is not such a -- Aeneid. 2.
tantum mutatus ab illo.
But that some glimpses, some lines and features will discover the Original.
The truth is, I am a very great admirer of this Author, and therefore my
affection may (happily) prompt me to attempt what the Mediocrity of my parts was
not able to make good: However, Reader, what is wanting herein, I hope thy
candor will supply; in confidence whereof I subscribe my self

Thy humble Servant JOHN BOYS

To my ever honored Cosen, JOHN BOYS of Hode-Court, Esquire upon his elaborate
Translation of the sixth book of Virgils Aeneis; and learned Annotations upon
the same.
VIRGIL'S divine; let him alone for me:
Few can a Translated the fourth.
Waller, or a Translated the second of the Aeneis.
Denham be.
How should I tire to climb up A Poem written by Mr. Denham.
Coopers hill?
How desperate is the chase of Stags, I will
With thanks confess amongst the learned throng,
Those two have done this Poet the least wtong.
He Is hard to imitate in any sort:
He shoots well that comes near, though always short.
When I peruse the pains that some have spent
To show us what the Poet never meant,
How wisely they a constant Art have got
There to exspatiate, where there is no knot:
I am confirmed, as Seldom said of Ben,
Virgil is to be known I know not when.
But since there are essays, it is nobly fixed,
Of all the books to undertake the Sixth.
Dear Cosen, I applaud thy well-plac'd pains,
Of Poetry the fountain, and the veins
Thy learned mind contains; each line I prize;
To Virgil's sense you do the best arise.
But, you're my kinsman; nothing must be good
'Cause we do touch the same degree of blood.
Base! barbarous! humor, not to hold them dear,
But make them furthest off, who are most near.
When I difwaded thee, I was unkind;
In error it is allowed to change our mind.
Do it not; do, but hold; well, let it go;
It is not friendly to suspend thee so:
Well; then begin; for I am much too blame
To be thus over-tender of thy fame.
Fear not Sibylla's cave, but take the honor
To write her rapture when the God's upon her.
Thy Stygian Sloven Charon when I view,
It Is an unruly, nasty God; but you
Have postur'd him aright; what can more please
Then your description oth' Eumenides?
How do you make the infernal Hags to stare?
Not one Snake's missing in their ugly hair.
Juvenal Sat. 8.
Virgil was furnished well, with boy and bed,
Those Hydra's else had fallen from their head.
He that wants means may have a tickling itch
To verse, but never shall soar Virgilian pitch.
Now should some upstart judge thy labors slight,
Turnebus, Servius, and the Dela Cerda.
Jesuit
Do guard thy pen: none may thy sense deny,
Each weighty word has its authority.
But all that is nothing, thine, and every book
Is now, or good, or bad, as it has luck;
None can confront the world; to chastise it
Requires Ben Johnsons face, at least his wit.
He that enough of money has, or land,
Is free; all are not bound to understand.
Charles Fotherby.

To his learned Friend John Boys of Hode-Court, Esquire upon his Excellent
Translation of the Sixth Book of VIRGIL'S AENEIS, and his most exquisite and
choice Commentations upon the same.
LEt the dull Miser brood upon his Earth
So long, until he hatch it to a Birth
Of many Crowns; yet when this Muckworme dies,
And heaps of earth close up his sordid eyes,
His memory will wear away and rust,
And in one Tomb grow inmate to his dust:
But (Sir) your lines become the Thread of life
Unto your fame, which will decline that knife
The fatal Sisters manage, and even be
Spun out in length to an Eternity:
For you have built a Trophie to your name
Shall dull the teeth of time, and from that flame
Which burnt in Virgil, you have raised a light
Both to your self and memory, so bright,
And so enameld over with beams, that we
May those dark notions now even naked see,
Stripped of their Roman dress, that slept so long
Behind the Traverse of a foreign tongue.
Since you with artfull hand his knots untwine,
And with new rays guild over his cloudy shine,
Making your soft and easy numbers meet
At every close with harmony of feet.
As for your Notes, your lines oblige the ear
As much as does your sense the mind endear;
For those severer things, which you indite,
Do this instruct, as they do that delight:
And though not words, but things are your design,
Yet with such artifice you both conjoyn,
That strong conceits you in trim clothing show,
And so, in one, teach both to write and know.
Thomas Philipott.

The ERRATA.
Reader,
THe escapes of the Press (which are either verbal, literal, or in pointing)
impute not to the Author, whose shoulders are not broad enough to bear his own
faults, much less those of others; if any such occur (as indeed they do too
frequently) pray do him that right, as to turn to the Errata, and amend them
as follows. Page 15. line 3. for salace, read solace. p. 22. l. 5. for they
Aloides, the Aloides. p. 41. l. 8. for remigum, remigium. ibid. l. 18. for Avus
se pennas, Ausus se penn^^. p. 43 l. 23. for hallowed, hollowed. p. 44. l. 10.
for Decanus, ^ccanus. p. 55. l. 12. for mediae, media, p. 60. l. 29. for
kni^red words, kindred words. p. 73. l. 8. for to the Furies, to the Furies
Mother. p. 74. l. 25. for guocunque, quascun^^. p. 73. l. 16. for Alter, Alter.
p. 81. l. 16. for repullulave, repullulate. p. 81. l. 16. for kind. bird. p.
87. l. 2. for Beleares, Baleares. p. 89. l. 21. for swage, sway. p. 95. l. 6.
for hand, had. p. 116. l. 9. for Noon, Moon. p. 121. l. 21. for Ephialte,
Ephialtes. p. 123. l. 20. for Elata* Elara. p. 126. l. 10. for therefull,
therefore. p. 157. l. 21. for polices, policy. p. 169. l. 13. for policy,
polity. p. 170. l. 19. for trivivial, trivial. p. 171. l. 4. for City, abode.
p. 174. l 32. for because, became. p. 176. l. 27. for K. Philip's father, K.
Philip, his father. p. 182. l. 22. for unreasonable, unseasonable. p. 204. l.
5. for facesque salignes, fascesque salignis.

AENEAS. his DESCENT INTO HELL.
The ARGUMENT.
Aeneas, (according to the praediction of Helenus in the third Book, and the
Precept of his Father in the fifth,) having Sibylla for his Guide, descends
into Hell, (both delightfully and learnedly here described;) where he is by
Anchises instructed concerning his posterity, and the ensuing wars of Italy.

THis [1] weeping said, the sayls Aeneas.
he bids display,
And (now arrived in the [2] Cumaean Bay)
The prow's to sea, the carved poops to shore
They turn; the ships whilst holding anchors A Sea-phrase
moor:
On Latian ground the glad youth footing set:
These fire do [3] strike; those from the used retreat
Of salvage beasts, the woods, do fuel bring:
A third descries a thirst-allaying spring.
But, good [4] Aeneas to the stately Fane
Of high Apollo, and the mighty Den
Of dreadful Sibyl does repair; whose great
Soul was by Phoebus, with prophetic heat.
Inspired: now Diana's sacred groves
They enter; and her gold-enriched roofs:
When [5] Daedalus (if fame no liar be)
From Minos rage through yielding air did fly,
(An untrac'd path) his course he Northward bent;
And made at last at Cumae his descent:
His wearied wings where, great Apollo, he
Did, with this Temple, consecrate to thee:
The slain [6] Androgeos carved on the gate,
The yearly tribute on the Athenian State
Imposed, and fatal urn you might behold;
With Creets fair Isle, which Neptunes arms infold:
And here thy beastly love, Pasiphae,
Thy stolen delights, and monstrous progeny,
The Minotaur, the Daedalus.
Artist did present,
Of filthy lust a lasting Monument.
Here you that The Labyrinth.
pile epitomized might see
From whose Meanders none themselves could free.
But pitt'ing the Ariade, daughter to Minos.
Queens over-pow'rfull flame,
The subtle mazes of that winding frame
Wise Daedalus discovers, with a clue
Guiding the doubtful steps: in this work thou
(Had grief consented) Icarus thy part
Had had Twice thy sad fate, and his own art
He strove to show: the Father twice let fall
His hand: thus they soon had surveyed all,
Had not Achates with the Sibylla.
Maid appeared,
Who A name of Diana.
Trivia's and Apollo's Fane did guard:
"Who thus bespeaks Aeneas: on these sights
"To gaze it is now no time; for holy rites
"Prepare: sev'n Steers, yet-never-yoaked choose
"For sacrifice: and sev'n unblemished Ewes.
This said, she them (whilst some were busied
About the Rites) into the Temple led.
A mighty [7] vault out of the hollowed side
Oth' solid rock was cut: a hundred wide
Paths to the same Conduct; a hundred gates,
Whence rush as many voices, Sibyls fates:
They now approach; when thus the Si^ylla.
Prophetess,
Behold the God: to him thy self address.
As she thus spoak nor ^ color, face, nor hair
Appeared the same; but, discomposed were;
Rage wholly seizing her inspired breast.
But, when more fully with the God possessed
She was, her limbs extended did appear,
Nor did her voice, as humane, strike the ear.
"Why do thou, Aeneas.
Trojan, vows, and prayers neglect?
"No answer without vows, and prayers expect.
Thus she: but, whilst fear does the rest surprise,
Aeneas to the God himself applies: His prayer.

" Phoebus, who still for suffering Troy did stand:
"Who against Achilles did direct the hand,
"And dart of Paris: often under thy
"Protection have I put to sea: often I
"Over dangerous The Syrtes.
quicksands sailed have: The Africa^s
remote
"And barbarous Nations visited: let not
"The Trojan luck us still pursue: at last
"Let us repose, where we our selves have placed:
"And all ye Deities, who ever have
"Against Troy offended been, now deign to save
" Us the remains of Pergamus: Last thou
"Blessed Sibylla.
Virgin. who things future do foreshow,
"Let (since the fates conspire with my request)
"Us, His Vow.
with our wandring-gods in Latium rest:
"To Phoebus then and Dian' will I raise
"A stately [9] Pile, ordaining annual [10] plays
"To his great name; nor [11] Virgin unto thee
"Shall Temples (fates befriending) wanting be.
"My offspring I shall charge, religiously
"Thy answers to observe: for thy Rites I
"Shall chosen men appoint: only forbear
"Thy fates to [12] writing to commit: for fear
"They do a sport become to the rufling wind:
"Let thy tongue bear the Message of thy mind.
But Sibyl yet unwilling to comply
With the impulse of Phoebus, furiously
Raves in her Cell, and strives out of her breast
The God to cast: who still does her infest
The more; her foaming mouth, and her enraged
Heart over pow'ring, till he both asswag'd.
And now the hundred Gates do open fly
Of their accord: whence issues this reply.
"O thou [13] who have great dangers of the Sea
"Surmounted now at last; know, greater thee
"On Land attend: On the Italian shore
"The Trojans shall arrive (nor be thou more
"For this Sollicitous) but soon repent
"Of their attempt; Mine eyes to me present
"Wars; horrid wars. I Tyber swollen see
"With human gore: nor Simois to thee
"Shall wanting be; Xanthus, nor Grecian Hosts,
"Or an Achilles, who as proudly boasts
" Of his divine extract; nor ever shall
" Juno let her immortal hatred fall.
"What Nations, in thy great extremity
"Shall thou not Court, and to what Cities fly?
"Thou all thy woes again unto a wife
"Shall owe; from Stranger beds this fatal strife
"Shall once more be derived.
"Yet stoop not to cross fates: but still appear
"The more resolved; tbe more adverse they are.
"Thy first supplies (which thou will scarce believe)
"Thou from a Grecian [14] City shall receive.
Thus from her Cell th'inspired Prophetess
In dark [15] ambages did her self express;
Obscurely hinting truths. Thus Phoebus does
Her fury stir, and then the same compose.
When (rage represt) the silent Virgin ceased,
The Trojan Hero from his generous breast
These words did power* No dangers unto me
"Are strange, or, Virgin, shake my Constancy
"'Against worst of accidents I am prepared:
"This boon I only beg (for I have heard
"That here the way to the infernall-king
"Does lead: that here the Acherontick spring
"Its Sulfurous streams does vent) that I my deer
" Father may visit; and with him confer:
"Through fire and sword, him on these shoulders I
"Did bear: through thickest of the Enemy
"Made his retreat: aged, and weak with me
"All dangers on the Land, all storms at Sea
"He did sustain: He also did enjoin
"That I should humbly to thy sacred Shrine,
" And thee repair; and thine assistance crave:
"Then of the Aeneas,
Son and Anchiaes,
Father pity have;
"For in thy power it lies: sure Dia^a.
Hecate
"Did not in vain this Grove entrust to thee,
"If [16] Orpheus could (relying on his skill)
"Deceased Euridice recall from Hell;
"If Pollux could (by his own death) release
"His Brother; and so often between did pass.
"If Theseus, and Hercu^e^.
Alcides did the same,
"Why may not I? from Jove I also came.
In these words he the Altars did [17] embrace,
Whilst she replies: sprung of Celestial race
" Great Aereas son to Anchisis.
Anchisiades: with ease to [18] Hell
"Thou may descend; those Gates are patent still
"But, to retreat, and this world to review,
"That is a task: the labor of some few,
"To Whom Jove grace indulged; whose fames the praise
"Of active Courage to the skies did raise:
"Some of-springs oth' immortal Deities:
"Such have ('it is true) amidst dark woods it lies:
"With black Cocytus lazy stream embraced.
"But, if so longing a desire thou have
"Hell twice to see, and twice that Stygian lake
"To ferry over: if thou will undertake
"A task so uncouth; then thou art to know
"What thou, in order to the same, must do.
"Hid in a thick and shadie Tree [19] a bough
"With golden leaves, and golden stem does grow.
"To Hells-Queen Proserpine
sacred: hardly to be found
"'Midst those dark Coverts which do it furround.
"But none can to those lower parts descend;
"Till from the Tree its golden-fruit they rend.
" This to her to be brought, fair Proserpine,
"As a most grateful present does enjoin:
"Nor wants the ravished branch a golden heir,
"But, is succeeded by a shoot as fair.
"Around thee look, and (when descried) the bough
"With care break off; if fates of thee allow,
"It, willingly will yield; if not, nor force,
"Or sharpest weapon can the same divorce.
"Beside [20] (unknown to thee) unburied lies
"Thy friends dead body: his last exequies
"To him perform: him to his Grave commend,
"Who (whilst consulting here thou do attend)
"Thy Fleet pollutes; this done, black Beeves for thee
"Must to Hells powers an expiation be.
"Then thou shall to those Stygian Realms descend,
"Which, living, none approach: she here does end.
In gesture sad Aeneas leaves the vau't,
Th event of things in his perplexed thought
Revolving, whilst him his still constant friend
Achates [21], alike thoughtfull does attend:
They with themselves debated as they went;
For what dead friend these funeral Rites were meant,
When they no sooner came to the Seaside,
But, they Misenus murdered there espyde.
Misenus; then [22] whom none more Martial fire,
Could into men by Trumpets sound inspire:
As Hectors friend he him accompanied,
Famed for his Art, as for his valor tried.
When him of life Achilles spoiled had,
The valiant Mesenus.
Hero a near friendship made
With brave Aeneas? nor in this did he
Join in a lesse-deserving amity,
But, him, whilst with shrill notes the Ocean he
Alarms; and does the Gods themselves defy.
Triton (his exc'llence envying) betrays;
And drowns amid'st the rock-surrounding Seas.
Wherefore around him all lamenting stand:
The good Aeneas chiefly: the Command
Of Sibyll the whole Company obeys:
And a vast pyre of pyled timber raise:
Unto an ancient wood their course they bend,
Fat Pitch-trees fall; redoubled strokes extend
The yielding Holm; the Ash, the Wedg-riv'd Oak,
And Alder feel the weighty axes stroke.
Aeneas also (whom like arms invest)
By his example does excite the rest:
And, as the lofty Forest he survayes,
From his minds sad reflections thus he prays;
"Oh! That I could this golden bough descry;
"Since too too true it is whatere of thee
"The Prophetess, Misenus, has foretold,
"Oh that I could that golden-bough behold:
He scarce had ended when of Doves [23] a brace
Before him light upon the tender grass:
His Venus.
Mothers birds he knew; and, joy'd does pray;
Be ye my guides, to those groves show the way;
Where the rich bough does with its shade invest
The fruitful ground: nor cease thou to assist
Me (Goddesse-Mother) in all straits: then He,
Making a halt, observes the Augury.
And marks their course; who before him [24] feeding fly,
As far as he could follow with his eye.
Arrived then at Avernus noisome Lake,
With nimble wings, through liquid air, they make:
Until that tree their wished perch became,
Where through the boughs the glit'ring gold did flame.
As [25] Misletoe (of the tree where it grows

No seminal production) verdant shows
In winters cold; as that its yellow leaves
Around its tender branches interweaves.
So the rich metal grew; the Bractea, lamina.
Gold-foile so
Did crackle, when the whispering wind did blow:
Then hastily Aeneas at it caught,
And, when broke off, it to Sibylla brought.
Mean [26] while the Trojans for Misenus mourn,
And, to his ashes the last dues return.
First they a mighty Pyre erect, whose base
Of rived Oak, and oily pitch-trees was:
They with dark boughs the sides, the extremities
With Cypress trim: a top, his armor lies.
Warm Baths then they prepare; his cold stiff joints
Part with the same foments, part them annoints:
Then him, as dead bewayling, on a bed
They lay, over which they purple garments spread,
The usual Hears-cloths; these support the Bier,
Whilst those (their faces turned) flames to the Pyre
Apply: into the same then others do
Sweets, costly meats, oil with the vessels throw.
Then into ashes, when the hungry fire
The Corpse had turned, and did it self expire,
The flames remains, and thirsty embers they
With Wine (upon them poured) do allay:
In a brasse-Urn Choroneus does enclose
The assembled bones, thrice with fair water does
The Th: standers-by.
Assistants purge, them sprinkling with the same,
Then the last words ( lustration done) does name.
But, good Aeneas a fair [27] tomb does rear
His arms his Oar, and trumpet carving there,
Under [28] a lofty Mountain, from his name
Misenus [29] called, to his aeternall fame.
This ended he proceeds: There was a [30] Cave,
To whose deep womb a vast mouth entrance gave,
Surrounded with dark shades, and a black [31] Lake
Over which no birds their flight could safely take.
Such noysom vapors were from thence exhaled,
Hence by the Greeks it was Aornos called.
To this [32] Caves mouth Aeneas.
he four black Bullocks led;
Upon whose heads the Priest wine having shed,
The hairs he (as a praevious offering)
Plucked from between the victims horns, does fling
Into the sacred flames: on Hecate
(In Heaven and hell a powerful Deity)
He calls: their yielded throats these cut, whilst those
In Bowls their blood receive: Aeneas does
With his own hands, unto the Furies Dam,
And her great sister, slay a black-fleec'd Lamb:
To Proserpine a barren Cow: then he
Does nightly Altars, Pluto, raise to thee,
On which, of Bulls, a Holocaust he fries,
Pouring fat oil upon the Sacrifice.
But, when Sol first his morning rays did shed,
The Ground beneath to groan, the Trees o're-head
To shake began: Prose pin^, who by these incantations was raised.
Goddess near
Did draw, of fiends they yells and howlings hear
"Through the dark shades: Avaunt, avaunt, profane
"The Sibylla cries th^s to the Feinds, etc.
Virgin cries, and from these groves abstain;
But, thou with thy drawn steel advance: behold,
It now behooves Aeneas to be bold.
This said, into the yawning (...) she leaps.
His Sibylla.
Guide he follows with unda^^ted steps:
"Gods of dislodged Souls, and silent Ghosts, The Poets invocation.

" Chaos, and Phlegeton, nights dismal coasts:
"Let me relate what I have heard; reveal
"What e're in its dark womb earth does conceal.
Through Plu^s.
Dis [33] his void and empty Mansions they,
In darkness shrouded, grope their doubtful way:
Under a shadie woods thick coverts so
Men by the Moons uncertain glimm'rings go,
When Jove in clouds has wrapped the darkened sky,
And night withdrawn all colors from the eye.
Before Hells [34] base-Court, Sadness with poynant care,
As ever-waking Sentinels appear:
Pale Sickness, peevish Age, Death, Labor, Fear,
Ill-prompting Hunger, sluttish Want dwell there,
(Forms dreadful to behold) Deaths brother Sleep,
Self-hugging Sin; dire War next station keep:
Last the iron beds of the Furies.
Eumenides,
And witless Discord neighboring were to these:
With bloody fillets bound about her head.
Within the Court a shadie [35] Elm did spread
Its aged branches; Here the vulgar tell
That vain Dreams (under each leaf shrouded) dwell;
Beside, of diverse forms there monsters were:
Centaurs [36] stall'd at the Gates: mixed [37] Scylla's there,
Hundred armed [38] Briareus, with [39] Hydra.
Lerna's beast,
Whose fearful hissings the whole place infest:
Chimaer' [40] with flames environed [41] Gorgons there,
And [42] Harpyes, with three-bodied-Elves [43] appear,
Aeneas (whom surprizal made afraid)
As they approach, presents his threatening blade.
And, Sibylla.
had he not by his wise * Guide been told,
That he but apparitions did behold,
Forms without bodies; them he charged had,
And on the Ghosts a vain impression made.
The way hence to infernal [44] Ach'ron leads,
That troubled and unfathomed gulf here spreads
Its enlarged bosom, whence it up does fling
Its noysom sands into Cocytus spring.
A dreadful Ferry-man does guard this pass,
Horrid, old, nasty [45] Charon, on whose face
A wood of snarl'd, and grizly hair does grow:
His eyes (like sawcers) stare, like fire do glow:
Tied on his shoulders hung his sordid coat:
A Pole did steer, and sails advance his Boat,
Wherein his ayrie freight he over did pass:
And (though in years) the Ch^ron.
God yet lusty was,
Matrons, and men, with Ghosts of Heroes stout,
Boys, and unmarried Virgins throng about
These banks, with youths imposed on the Pyre,
Before the face of their lamenting Sire.
Trees do not faster shed their withered locks

In Autumns cold, nor in more numerous flocks
Do Birds from Northern-blasts make their retreat
To Regions blessed with more indulgent heat.
They for praecedence striving, prayed; and did
(Desirous of the Rivers further side)
Stretch forth their hands: But the grim Boat-man those,
Now these receives: but others does oppose
In their desired passage: Here the good
Aeneas (who, at this throng, wondering stood)
"Tell, Maid, does say; what means this confluence?
"What would those Souls? and why this difference?
"That those should from the banks depart, whilst these
"With joyful Oars do sweep the livid Seas,
The aged Priestesse briefly thus replies:
" Anchises son, of the great Deities
"The undoubted offspring, thou do here survay
" Cocytus noisome streams: that Stygian bay,
"By which the Gods do fear an Oath to take;
"But, more that Oath, which they have taken, to break:
"Those troops are such, as yet no burial have:
"That Boat-man, Charon: those he wafts, a Grave
"Have found: None may be ferri'd over this Deep,
"Till in the Earth their quiet bones do sleep.
"A [46] hundred years about these banks they stray:
"This term expired, the passage then is free:
Aeneas stopped, with various thoughts oppressed,
And for their harder fate much grief expressed:
Leucaspes, and Lycian Orontes he
Sad (as deprived fo funeral Rites) did see,
Whom stormie-Winds (both men and ships) did drown
As they fled from their sacked and flaming Troy.
Town.
His master [47] Palinurus here appears, Master of Aeneas his Ship.

Who (whilst from Lybia sailing, the bright stars
He did observe) into the Deep did fall
To him (whom he to mind could scarce recall.
Amidst those shades) Aeneas does begin:
"By what God have thou from us ravished bin?
"Say Palinurus, who has drowned thee?
" Phoebus (who never before deluded me)
"Herein has me deceived: He made believe
"That on Italy.
Ausonia's shore thou should arrive
"Safe from all dangers of the faithless flood:
"What? does the God his promise thus make good?
" But he, nor Phoebus has deluded thee
"Great Chief, or in the surges drowned me.
"The helm (by which, as Steers-man I our Course
"Did govern) from the vessel rent by force,
"Falling, I with me drew: by Seas I swear,
"That none, me lost, could be ingreater fear,
"For thee then I, least void of guide and helm
"The swelling waves thy ship should over whelm:
"Three winter nights by sto^my Auster tossed,
"I floated on the waves: the* Italiau coast,
"(As I a rolling billow did bestride)
"On the fourth morning hardly I descried.
"I safe now gain the shore, to which I made,
"When wet and tired, a savage route m' invade,
"Guided by hopes of prey, as I did climb
"And graspe the craggy Rock: now dead I swim,
"A sport to winds, and waves rol'd to the shore:
"But, by heavens blessed light I thee implore,
"By thy dead Anchises, Ascanius.
Sire, and by thy living * Heir,
"Me from these miseries, great Conqueror,
"Rescue, or me interre; which thou may, do
"If to the Port of Velia thou will go,
"Or if some other way there be, if thy
"Fair Venus.
Mother it to thee does show: (for I
"Believe without the Auspice of the Gods,
"Thou ventur'st not to pass these dreadful floods)
"Help wretched me, me over these streams convay,
"That quietly, in death, repose I may.
But, to him thus the Prophetess replies,
"From whence does this accust desire arise?
"Think, Palinure, unburied to sail over
"The Stygian sound, or to the other shore
" Without thy passe-port will thou go? forbear,
"The stubborn Fates mill not be bowed by Prayr:
"Take this for salace of thy sadder chance,
"By prodigies compelled, the Inhabitants
"Both far, and near, thy Ghost.
Manes shall appease,
"And to thy memory a tomb shall raise
"After thy name to all aeternitie;
"The place shall Palinurus called be.
"This speech, the grief which he conceived, abates:
"He Is pleased that he that Coast denominates.
Wherefore proceeding they do now draw nigh,
The River, whom when Charon did espy,
Tending that way, he [48] rudely thus 'gan speak;
"Who e're thou art, who armed to this Lake
"Guid'st thy bold steps, what is thine errand here?
"Say man, and further to advance forbear.
"Of Ghosts, sleep, drowzie night thou view'st the place,
"No living bodies in our Bark may pass:
"Nor [49] that Perithous, and Hercules
"With Theseus came aboard me, did it please,
"Though from the Gods they were descended; though
"For matchless valor none could them out-doe:
"One Hell's grim Guardian bound, Hercules, who ^ound Cerberus
and trembling drew
"From our great Sov'raigns Throne: the other two
"From Dis his arms his Queen designed to force. A name of Pluto.

The [50] Virgin briefly speaks to this discourse,
"Be not offended, we no treason bear,
"No violence* though we be armed, fear:
"That Cerberus.
Porter may to all a^ternity
"Ly barking in his Den, Pluto was U^cle to Fro^erpine, as well as Husband.
and terrify
"The bloodlesse Ghosts: the Emperesse of Hell,
"May unattempted with her Uncle dwell;
" For piety and arms Aeneas great
"Does seek his father in hells lowest seat:
"If so great piety persuade not, see
"This bough; (the Bough in her vest hidden she
Did then display) He pacif'd replies,
No more; but viewing with admiring eyes
The honored Branch, not seen long time before,
He turns his Boat, and does approach the shore.
Then he (the Souls which here, there scattered sat
Displacing) cleers the Decks; this done, the great
Aeneas he receives: the cras'd Bark sinks
Under the weight; and the waves (leaky) drinks:
At last his freight on the other side the flood
He safely lands amidst the sedgie mud.
Vast [51] Cerberus (who makes those realms resound
With his deep yells) lies couchant on the ground,
In a near Den, whom when the maid did see
Rousing his Snakes, a sop in honey she,
And sleepy juices steep't, to him did fling:
Three mouths at once the Monster opening
It snatched: now his vast sides he does display:
His whole Den covering, as he sleeping lay:
The Cerberus,
Guard secured, the Prince the pass does gain:
And quits those banks, Aeneas.
whence none return again.
Voices [52] forthwith, and lamentable cries,
Of deceased Infants here his ears surprise:
Whom from their mothers breasts, as soon, as born,
Untimely death, and hasty fates had torn:
Next were [53] who wrongfully condemned had been;
For even in Hell is formal Justice seen:
The Urn Minos shakes, Of Ghosts a Court he calls,
Where he, as Judge, sits on the Criminals:
Bord'ring on [54] these, a troop of such appears,
As had been their own Executioners:
How gladly would they (though they did sustain
All wants, all hardships) see blessed light again?
Fates thwart: an unrenavigable sound,
And Styx's nine-fold Moat does them surround.
Not far from [55] hence they on vast plains arrive,
The Mourning fields; this name to them they give.
Here secret walks, and myrtle groves do hide,
For cruel love who (languishing) have di'd.
Nor are their flames (though dead) asswag'd; here he
See the Comment.
Phaedra and Procris, Eriphil' did see.
Of her unnat'rall son the wounds who showed:
Evadne with Pasiphae here were viewed:
Laodomia these accompanied,
With Coeneus, change of sex so often who tried.
Amongst whom Dido (her wounds bleeding yet)
Wandered in a vast Grove, whom when Troy's great
Hero approaching, through thick darkness knew,
(In her first quarter, so the Moon does show,
Veiled in obscuring clouds) he tears did shed,
And thus, to her (through deep resentment) said
"Unhappy Dido! it was therefore true,
"That thou were dead; that thine own hands thee slew:
"Alas! I was the cause, by Stars I swear,
"By the powr's above, by those who govern here,
"Queen, I did thee unwillingly forsake:
"But those divine Commands (by which I take
"On me this journey, through unfathomed Hell,
"These shades, and squalid places) did compel
"Me to that act: nor could I e're believe,
"That for my loss thou could so deeply grieve.
" Ah! stay: thy self withdraw not from my sight:
"Whom shun'st thou? stay: we never more shall meet.
Thus he with tears, and sweetning words allayed
The Queens just grief: whilst she the same bewrayed
In scornful frowns, and looks from him averse;
As unconcerned, at what he did rehearse,
As hardest flint, or Paros, is one of the Cyclades, famous for marble.
Marpesus is a hill there; so that Parian and Marpesiam are all one.
Parian rock: last she
Away did fling, and in a rage did fly
Unto a shadie Grove, where she repairs
To her old Lord, who answers to her cares,
Her dear Dido's first Husband.
Sichaeus: nor did her sad fate
Less pity in Aenaeas breast create,
By trickling tears expressed. Then on his way
He does proceed; and now those regions they
Approach, which by famed [56] warriers hanted were:
Here Tydeus he, Parthenopaeus here,
That gallant youth, and pale Adrastus Ghost,
Here he those worthy Trojans (who had lost
Their lives in fight) beheld: here he did see
Thersil'chus, Glaucus, Medon: here the three
Antenors, Polybete, Idaeus here,
Who in his Chariot armed did appear:
These Ghosts him round, both on the left and right,
Nor could be sated with one single sight:
They must gaze on, and nearer to him stand;
They must of him his journeys cause demand:
But the Greek Peers; And Agamemnon's men
Through heartlesse fear began to tremble, when
They him beheld in his bright armor clad:
These fled, as when toward their ships they made;
Whilst others raise a shrill and feeble cry,
Which, while they yawning strive to speak, does dye:
And [57] here Deiphobus of Priams race,
All over wounds, with cru'lly mangled face,
Face, and both hands, appears; whose bleeding head
Of ears was spoiled, and nose disfigured
With an unseemly wound: in this disguize
Scarce to be known, to him the Aeneas.
Prince applies
"Himself in friendly words: Deiphobus,
"The valiant seed of Teucer, who has thus
"Cruelly thee abused? who on thee could
"Take this advantage? It to me was told,
"That the last night, with Grecian slaughter tired,
"You on a heap of the dead foes expired:
"Then I did raise on the Rhaetaean shore
"For thee an empty Tomb; thrice did implore
"Thy Ghost; thy name and arms still there abide:
"I could no better then for thee provide.
"Then here Priamides: Deiphobus, son of Priam.
not ought by thee
"Has been omitted, friend; thou have to me
"All Rites performed: but mine own Fates, and spite
"of that Greek Helen.
Strumpet me has buried quite
"In these disasters, and bequeathed to me
"These sad memento's: for whilst vainly we
" Troy's Of Troys surviving.
final night in jollity did spend:
"(It too just cause we have to call to mind)
"When the fatal Horse our lofty walls did scale,
"Pregnant with its armed birth, a solemn braul
"Feigning, as chief the unhappy dance she led,
"The Phrygian Dames did the same measures tread,
"Singing wild Hymns in the praise of Bacchus.
Orgies: whilst a blazing light
"Holding, she did her Greeks to the sack invite.
"Then my unhappy bed did me detain,
"Where profound sleep did all my Senses chain:
" Mean while my Helen. Ironice
virtuous wife my arms did hide,
"And stole my trusty Sword from my bedside.
"Then Menelaus calling in, she opened
"The gates; this she a grateful office hoped
"Would to her Men^laus, her first Husband.
lover prove; that thereby she
"Of her past crimes the hated memory
"Should quite abolish: why more words? they forced
"Into my Chamber: with the rest the accursed
" Aeolides rushed in: Ulysses Grand son of Aeolus.
if I aright
"Do pray, just Gods, alike those Greeks requite:
"But, likewise tell, what fates have thee alive
"Brought hither? Did the stormy Sea thee drive?
"Or Gods command? what moved thee, my friend,
"To this dark noysom place thy course to bend?
Whilst thus they talk, See the Comment.
Morn with her rosy wain
Had more then measured the Meridian:
And happily thus they more time had spent,
But, that the S^bylla,
Maid did these delays prevent:
"Thus interposing, Night, brave Prince, does haste,
"And we in tears our precious hours do waste.
"Into two paths this way it self does spread:
"The right does to great Pluto's Palace lead,
"Where the Elysium lies: the left directs
"To Hell, where torments do the damned vex:
Diephobus in answer then replies:
"Let not, great Priestess, anger thee surprise:
"I Will go, in darkness my set time to spend:
"But thee, our Aeneas.
glory, better fates attend.
"This [57] having said, himself he did withdraw.
TO his left hand then Aeneas turning, saw
Vast buildings, which three tow'red walls enclose,
A round which Phleg'tons flaming torrent flows,
Rolling huge stones: The Gate (whose Pillars were
Cut of solid adamant) did bear
The imposed burden of an iron Tower,
And was so strong, that it no humane power
Nor Gods themselves (were they turned Engineers)
Could force: Here fell One of the Furies.
Tisiphone appears,
Gyrt with a blood-stained coat: she at this gate,
An ever-waking Sentinel did wait:
Here groans were heard, clashing of whips here sound,
Grating of iron, with chains drawl'd on the ground.
Aenaeas stopped, and (frighted) to the noise
"Listn'd; what dreadful sights, say Maid, are these?
"What tortures? and what hideous yells invade
"Mine ears? Renowned Trojan, then she said,
"No hallowed person may this cursed place
"Approach, but when by Diana, in hell called Hecate, in heaven Luna
Hecate I was
"Entrusted with A^ernus Grove, then she
"In all particulars instructed me.
"[59] Here Rhadamanth, that stern Inquisiter
"Praesides; compelling to confess what e're
"Crimes cunningly above contrived have bin,
"And, by him unrepented, who the sin
"(In vain concealed) has perpetrated: Here
" Tisiphone [60] does with a whip appear,
"Insulting over the guilty: her foul snakes
"With her left hand the Tisiphone.
Fury at them shakes,
"Her bloody sisters calling to her aid:
"The damned Gate gave way, whilst this she said,
"Groaning on its hoarse hinges: Did thou see
"(She then proceeds) what fearful guards did lie
"At Hells first entrance, and that pass did keep?
"More filthy Monsters crawle within its deep
" And ugly womb, which twice as far descends
"Beneath the Center, as the heaven extends
"Above the same. In this foul Dungeon I
"The [61] Titans, See the Comment.
earths firstborn, did wallowing spy:
"I also then Aloides surveyd,
"Whilst they their vast proportions there displayed.
"These the high heavens did attempt to raze,
"And from his starry throne Jove to displace.
"I saw Salmoneus cruel pains sustain, See the Comment

"Whilst he Jov's lightning did, and thunder feign.
"Drawn by four horses, he through Salmoneus was King of Elis, a Province of
Peloponnesus, whereof Pisa was the capital City.
Pisa rod
"With brandished torch, and would be thought a God.
"Mad man, who' inimitable thunder strove
"To feign with brass, and horn-hoof'd steeds: but Jove
"At him from Heavens high Arcenal let fly
"A shot (with brands and smoking torches he
"Used most to sport) and down to the lowest Hell
"Therewith did in a dismal storm compel.
"Moreover earth-born See the Comment.
Tityus there I 'spyde,
"Whose large dimensions did nine acres hide:
"On his immortal liver (growing still
"As 'twas devoured) a vulture with his bill
"Did ever tire, and (pearch'd upon his breast)
"To his renewed bowels gave no rest.
" Perithous why should I mention? Why
" Ixion, or the bloody Lapithae?
"Over whom a fearful stone (a sudden fall
"Menacing) hangs, whilst they on Torus genialis, is properly the Bride-bed,
and because this used to be richly adorned, geniall here is taken for rich,
st^tely, or magui ficent.
genial
"Couches with golden frames supported, feast,
"But, the eldest of the Furies (here a Guest)
"With threatening torch does rise up from her seat,
"And them forbids to touch the inviting meat.
" Those [62] who their brothers have pursued with hate,
"Their Clients cheated, or their Parents beat;
"Or for themselves alone, who gold did hord,
"(Whose number's greatest) nor a part afford
"To their near friends, whose fates unbridled lust
" Has hastened on, who have deceived their trust,
"And against their King and lawful Sovereign
"(In impious broils engaged) their Swords have drawn,
"Their Doom do here expect; nor ask what Doom,
"Or by what form condemned; As did Sisyphus.
how hither come:
"Some a huge stone do The punishment of Ixion.
roll; some faste^^dare
"To a swift * wheel: unhappy Theseus there
"Does sit, and shall to all aeternity.
"The wretched Phlegyas aloud does cry,
"And through the shades thus constantly advise,
"When warned, learn Justice; nor, the Gods despise:
"Of's Countries freedom this made Merchandise;
"He made Laws, and unmade them at a price:
"This his own daughter bedded: Such were, for a time, the late Traitors, to
whom this verse may well be applied: Ausi omnes imman: nefas; ausoque polite.
Virg.
All have bin
"As happy in success, as bold in Sin:
"Had I a hundred mouths, a hundred tongues;
"An iron voice, and had I brazen lungs,
"I could no way all sorts of Crimes comprize,
"Or tortures, wherewith sinners they chastize:
The aged [63] Priestesse having this expressed;
"Go on (does cry) and perfect now the rest:
"With haste proceed: the arched Gates appear,
"And walls, which by the Cyclops framed were,
"Our golden gift we here must leave: This said,
Through gloomy paths with equal pace they tread;
Their way they soon dispatch; and now draw near
Great Pluto's Gates: Aeneas entering there,
And himself with fair water sprinkling, does
Within the Porch the precious branch depose.
These Rites performed, to [64] joyful places they,
Pleasant green-Groves, blessed seats themselves convey:
The fields with [65] cheerful light the freer sky
Invests: their own both [66] Sun and Stars they see:
Some in green Meads, contending for the prize,
Or on the bright sand their limbs exercise:
Some nimbly foot it to a well tuned song,
The Thracian Orpheus.
Poet, clothed in a long
Robe, the [67] seven notes of music warbling, sings:
This hand does stop; that strikes the answ'ring strings.
Teucers old race, and fair Descendants here,
Brave Heroes, born in better times, appear:
Here Dardanus, sad Troys first founder, and
Ilus with brave Assaracus did stand:
Their empty [68] Charets, arms, erected Spears,
Beholding, at a distance, he admires:
Their steeds unbridled range the fields all over:
With what care they their arms, and Charets, before
They left the living, kept: with what their sleek
And stately Coursers they did keep, the like
Continued was by them, when dead: here he
On either hand a multitude did see
Spending in banqueting their careless days;
Dancing, and singing great ( Poean) the word here used by Virg. is a hymn in
the praise of Apollo.
Apollo's praise
In a sweet laurel Grove, through which the [68] Pa
Does gently with its liquid Crystal flow.
Here those, who for their Country wounds, received
In fight, could show; those Priests, who, whilst they lived,
Were chaste; those For thus Vates is to be rendered; not Poers, (as Mr. Ogilby
has done) ^ee Servius, with whom the ^est of Virgils Interpreters agree.
Prophets who religious were,
And things of Phoebus worthy did declare.
Who had been Authors of some useful Arts;
Who others had obliged by good deserts;
All such in these blessed mansions did reside,
Having their temples with white fillets ti'd:
To whom (surrounding her) Sibylla said,
But, chiefly to [70] Musaeus (by the head
Taller then those, who wondering him invest)
Say blessed Souls, and thou of Musaeus.
Poets best,
Where may we find Anchises, for whose sake
We ventured have to pass the Stygian Lake?
Then briefly he: None here have constant seats,
In shady Groves we have our known retreats:
The flowery banks, and stream-vein'd Meadows we
Do here, and there frequent; but (if so be
You it desire) that hills unforced ascent
(Your readiest way) overcome. This said, he went
Before, as Guide, and from above did show
Delightful plains; then down the hill they go.
But Aged Anchises, in a cheerful vale
Souls, from the rest apart, survay'd, which shall
Heavens blessed light again review: here he
Numbered his own renowned progeny:
Their Gests, and power, what fates should them betyde:
But, when Aeneas coming he espyde,
With tears of joy, and hands erected he
Cries; Art thou come? Has thy known piety
Mastred all hardships? Son, do I thy face
Behold? and does discourse between us pass?
Upon compute I did the time foresee,
Nor have I erred in mine Augurie.
After what storms both on the Sea and Land,
After what hazards, Son, by thee sustaind
Do I embrace thee? Oh! how did I fear
Lest thee the Court of Carthage should ensnare?
But he: thy Ghost, Father, thy woeful Ghost,
Often appearing, forced me to this coast:
Our Fleet rides in the Tyrrhene sea: give me
Thine hand, dear Sire, nor my embraces fly:
He spoke, and wept; thrice his embraces sought
In vain thrice at the fleeting shadow caught;
Like wind which vanished, or a winged dream.
Mean while Aeneas the Lethaean stream,
(Which by those pleasant seats did softly glide)
And fair enclosures in the vale espyde:
About whose banks a multitude did stray,
As buzie Bees do on a Sunn^e day

Upon the flowers brood, and spo^t about
The painted Meadows; with the murmuring rout
The Plains resound: This unexpected sight
To wonder, and enquiry did invite
The stranger Prince, who asked what streams those were?
What those, who in such numbers did repair
Unto the same? The Father does reply;
"Those unhous'd [78] Souls (for whom by fates Decree
"New Mansions are reserved) on Lethes brink
"Oblivion, and thought-quelling draughts do drink:
"Long since I these before thee to present
"Have wished; and to recount, who their descent
"From me derive, that thou may thence the more
"Rejoice, when thou shall touch the wished shore
"Of Italy: The words of Aeneas.
Father can it descend
"Into our thoughts, that Souls from hence ascend?
"That they shall their dull bodies reinvest?
"Are the wretches with such love of life possessed?
" Anchises then: Son, I Will not thee delay,
"But all things in due order here display:
"The [72] heavens, the earth, the watery plains, the bright
"And round-fac'd Moon, the Suns unborrow'd light
"A Soul within Sustains; whose virtues pass
"Through every part, and mix with the whole mass.
"Hence Men, beasts, birds take their Original;
"Those Monsters hence, which in the Sea do dwell:
"[73] But, those Souls there, of fiery vigor share,
"The Principles of them celestial are,
"Unless they from the body clogged be,
"And ill-contrived Organs do deny
"To them their operations, hence Grief, Joy,
" Fear, Hope, and all wild passions us annoy:
"Nor do they their Original regard
"Whil^st shut up in the bodies darksome ward:
"Nor, [74] (though they disembodied be,) are they
"Freed from those stains, which (whilst inhous'd in clay,)
"They did collect: having so long conversed,
"They with much filth from thence must be aspersed.
"Hence to their crimes their pains proportioned are:
"Some are exposed to the all-searching Air;
"Some are in Waters plunged, in fire some tryde:
"Our Purgatory thus we all abide:
"Then through the vast Elysium we are sent:
"But few these joyful Champaigns do frequent:
"Until the fate-praefixed time have taken
"And purged away what e're contracted stain:
"[75] Leaving of spots that heavenly The Soul.
Being clear,
"Of fire a compound, and uninixed Air.
"A thousand years (the destined period)
"Fulfilled, the Mercury who was said with his Caduceus, or rod, both to drive
souls to hell, and to bring them from thence.
God calls them to Lethes flood:
" That all things past forgot, they may review
"The upper world, and bodies reindue.
[76] This said: his Son together with the Maid
Into the thickest of the throng heled:
And mounts a hillock, whence he might discern
Them march in order, and their faces learn.
" The words of A^cht^es.
Lo! now thy future fates to thee I Will show,
"What glory shall to Dardan's race accrue,
"What Nephews shall from Latian stem be born,
"Illustrious Souls, who shall our name adorn.
"That youth (do see?) supported on his Lance
"Shall next to light, See the Comment.
by fates Decree, advance,
" Sylvius an Alban name thy, posthume Son,
"(In whose veins Latium's royal blood shall run)
"Shall next above appear: the same thy dear
" Lavinia.
Consort a king, and Sire of kings shall bear
"Amidst the woods, from whence our princely line
"Derived, shall over long Alba reign.
"That next is Prccas, Se the Comment.
who the Trojan name
"Shall aeternize; then those of no less fame,
" Capys and Numitor: That fourth, like thee,
" Sylvius Aeneas shall surnamed be:
"Alike for piety, and arms extold,
"If ever he the Alban Scepter hold;
"The goodly limbs of these brave youths survey.
"But, who with Civiek [77] wreaths are shadowed, they
"Nomentum, See the Comment.
Gabii, and Fidenae shall
"Found, and erect Collatia's toured wall;
"Pometii, Castrum, Bola, Cora too,
"Shall then be names, though they be namelesse now.
"But, Numitor.
with his [78] Grandsire martial Romulus
"Shall reign: whom Ilia (from Assaracus
" Sprung) shall bring forth: behold! his double crest:
"Him Jove himself does even now invest
"With Deity: Son, under his command
"Renowned Rome shall to the utmost land
"Her Empire stretch, her prowess to the skies;
"And, blessed with a stout race of men, comprize
"Sev'n hills within her walls. With towrs thus crowned See the Comment.

" Cybel' does Phrygias towns in triumph round,
"Proud of her divine offspring, numerous race,
"Which in Olympus all, as Gods, take place.
"But [79] both thine eyes here bend; thy Romans see
"This Caesar is, this the whole progeny
"Of thy Iulus, ready now to ascend:
"This, this is he, whom fates to thee commend,
"God-sprung Augustus; the golden age again
"He shall restore, as in old Saturns reign:
"Beyond the Garamants, and Indians he
"Shall rule, beyond the Stars a land does lie,
"Beyond the walk both of the Sun and year,
"Where Atlas does the spangled axel bear:
"Now from all quarters of the Sea-girt earth
"The Oracles foretell his dreaded birth:
"Both from the Caspian, and Maeotick coast,
"And, from whence Nile into the sea does post:
"Nor did Hercules.
Alcides so much ground run over,
"Tbe brasse-hoof'd hind, and Erymanthian Boar
"Although he slew* and Lerna terrifide,
"Nor the victorious Bacchus, who does guide
"With vine-bound reigns his Chairet, hurrying down
"His Tigers, A Mountain in India.
Nysa, from thy ayrie crown:
"And doubt we of our valor proof to give?
"From Italy shall dastard fear us drive?
" But, [80] who is he, who with the Olive bough.
"And offerings comes? His hoarie locks him show
"To be that Roman King, Numa, born at Cures, a Village of the Sabines.
who (to a great
"Empire From a small Dorp advanced) the State
"On wholesome Law's did build. Then [81] Tullus shall
"Succeed, and the unpractiz'd people call
"To warfare; he (an enemy to peace)
"Disused Triumphs shall revive. Next these
"The haughty [82] Ancus struts: already he
"With pop'lar breath inflated seems to be.
"Would [83] thou the Tarquins, and stout [84]
"The fasces from the kings recovered? He
"The Cons'lar power, and cruel Rods the first Brutus see?
"Shall exercise; his rebel Sons (who durst
"New wars excite) the unhappy father shall
"To punishment for rescued freedom call:
"What e're Posterity'othe fact shall say,
"Him love of fame, and's Country shall o'resway
"But, see the [85] Decii and the [86] Drusi there,
"With [87] Torquate who a blood-staind axe does bear:
"With ensigns laden brave [88] Camillus see:
"But, those [89] two Souls, who alike armed be,
"And friendly now, whilst shrouded in death's night,
"What warr's (when raised to lives more cheerful light)
"What slaughter shall they cause? the Julius Caesar.
Father from
"The Alps shall with his northern forces come;
"The Son to him oppose the armed East: Pompey*

"Brave Souls, proceed not in this dire contest,
"Arm not your Countrey'gainst your selves; but thou
"My Caesar, who truly used his victory with much moderation, and clemency.
offspring, whom heavens for their own avow,
"Forbear, and first thy self disarm:
" [90] He ( Corinth razed, and with Greek blood bedi'd)
"Shall to the Capitol in triumph ride:
"The same (having avenged our native Troy,
"And Pallas profaned Temple) shall destroy
"Argi, Mycaenae (Agamemnon' s seat)
"And Pyrrhus, proud Achilles race, defeat:
"Who [61] Cato would omit? or [92] Cossus thee?
"The [93] Gracchi who? who the [94] Scipiadae?
"Warr's thunderbolts, and Libya's overthrow:
"[95] Fabricius, great in a small fortune? who
"[96] Serranus, thee tilling thy ground? but ye
"Whether [97] O Fabii! do you hurry me
"All ready spent? thou art that Maximus,
"whose wise delays shall raise declining us.
"Some brass shall cast, that it to breathe shall seem,
"Work marble, that you it alive would deem,
"Plead better; better the heavenly motions tell,
"But, Roman, thou learn thou art of ruling well.
"Such be thy craft, in peace thy custom such:
"The loyal cherish, the Rebellious Crush.
"Thus spoke Archises, and to this subjoyns;
"In royal spoils see how [98] Marcellus shines,
"See how he marches raller then the rest:
"The Roman State (tumultuous rout's suppressed)
"He shall from falling keep; he shall inthrawl
"The Carthaginian, and the Rebel Gaul,
"Father A name of Romulus.
Quirinus, He also to thine
"The third spoils (ravished from the Foe) shall join:
And here Aeneas (for before him there
A goodly youth did in bright arms appear
But, sad his look, dejected was his face)
"What is he, Father, who with equal pace
" The other does accompany? his Son?
"Or some of our Descendants? how they run,
"And round him flock? To the other Marcellus.
how graceful is his Mien?
"But, gloomy ^ight does with a cloudy skreen
"His head involve. Tears flowing from his eyes,
The good Anchises thus to him replies.
"The griefs of thine, desire not Son, to know,
"Him to the world the fates shall only show:
"The Roman name, O Gods! too powerful had
"Appeared, had you such blessings lasting made:
"With what laments shall great Romes burial place
"Resound? what funeral pomps as thou do pass
"By his new grave, sad Tiber, shall thou see?
"None ever of the Trojan stem shall be
"Of equal hopes with him; Romes joyful coast
"Of a more worthy birth shall never boast:
"His piety, and antique singleness,
"Or who his matchless valor shall express?
"Whether on foot, or his brave Courser armed,
"None ever had encountered him, unharm'd:
"Deplored youth! (if this sad doom by thee
"Can be eschew^d,) thou shall See the Comment.
Marcellus be:
"Bring Lilies; I will purple flowers strew,
"At least let me return this tribute, due
"To the Marcellus.
deceased, an empty Monument
"Let me erect: thus they together went
Through those void ayrie Wastes; and all surveyed,
Which when the Anchises.
Father had at large displayed,
And his sons mind with the heroic thought
Of future fame inflamed, him he taught
What wars he was to wage, with whom to fight,
Latinus strength, and did at large recite
How he should or encounter, or decline
All hazards waiting on his vast design.
[99] Of Sleep two gates there are: the one of horn.
Whence real dreams to the upper world are born;
The other's made of polished Ivory,
From whence deluding fancies mount the sky:
His Son thus entertaining and the Maid,
Anchises them out at this gate conveyed:
Aeneas to his friends and ships repaires,
And to Cajeta's Port directly steers.
ANNOTATIONS upon the Sixth Book OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS.
Aeneas in these words laments the death of his drowned friend Palinurus; Heu!
nimium coelo and pelago confise sereno,
Nudus in ignota, Palinure, jacebis arena:
Sic fatur lacrymans. --
O Palinure, trusting fair-seas and sky,
Thou naked on some coast unknown mustly:
This weaping said. --
Which Hemistich our Poet translates out of Homer* (...): nor must we lay any
thing of disproportion to our Author, in that he makes his heroic Aeneas to
weep. Homer did the same in the person of Ulysses. Tears are not always the
excrement of a moist brain, but many times the exudations of a generous heart,
springing from a commendable sensibleness of another calamity; and may become
the manly countenance of a Caesar, or an Alexander* whereas (to the contrary)
cruelty and cowardice are terms convertible, and generally the unhand some
inmates of an ignoble breast.

pr^leptically; for Cumae was not then built, Aeneas arrived in Italy anno M^^
d. 28^^. Cumae was built an. Mun. 2953. Simps. Chron.
but a long time after, viz. in the reign of Latinus Sylvius, the fifth in
descent from Aeneas: It was founded and planted by the people of Chalchis, the
principal City of Euboea, a noted Island in the Aegaean Sea, and not far
distant from the Coast of Attica; now known (as I take it) by the name of
Negroponte; whence Virgil gives it the epithetes of Euboica, and Calchidicae,
both expressing its original: It was called Cumae either from a City of that
name in Asia Minor, or (according to Servius) (...), because situated near the
seaside; or from a woman with child, which the Greeks call (...), found there
sleeping by the first Adventurers; and taken (as it also proved) for a good
Omen of future fecundity, though at present it survives only in the fame and
memory of its past greatness, little or no remains thereof being at this day to
be seen.

Virgil has indeed expressed that with more Poetical pomp, which we have but
barely rendered in the English. -- quaerit pars semina flammae
Abstrusa in venis silicis. --
Some think that he speaks here more like a Poet then a Philosopher, ascribing
those sparks (for that he means by those semina flammae, following Homer
herein, who calls them (...)) to the collision of two solid bodies, as the
flint and the steel; and this is Alex. Aphrodisaeus his opinion, denying that
there is any latent or secret fire in either of them. But since We speak
according to the opinion of the Peripa^^icks.
all mixed bodies are compounded of the 4. elements, and by consequence have a
proportion of fire in them, why may we not more rationably conclude that these
semina flammae are potentially in all solid bodies, and brought into act by a
violent and often-repeated collision. Hence Mills and Chariot-wheels often
fire: nor must we conclude to the contrary, because they are outwardly cold: So
is wine, which has a virtuall heat and spirit in it; which appears when
awakened by the natural heat of the stomach. Again, should fire (which is a
substance) owe its birth to the collision of two solid bodies only, then an
Accident (for such is that collision) would produce a substance; but that is,
(...), against the principles of Philosophy: we shall therefore conclude, that
Virgil spoke as well like a Philosopher as a Poet, when he said, -- quaerit
pars semina flammae
Abstrusa in venis silicis. --
Whose opinion we may strengthen by the Authority of Symposius, in silice, who
affirms, Semper inest intus, sed raro cernitur ignis;
Intus enim latitat, sed solos prodit ad ictus;
Nec lignis, ut vivat, eget; nec ut occidat, undis.
Though seldom seen, the sparks within remain,
There sleeping, till repeated strokes constrain
Them to awake; nor want they fuel there,
Or do from water their extinction fear.


Aentas, (as it became his person and dignity) in pursuance of the main design,
repairs to the Temple of Apollo, not far distant from Cumae, and situated upon
the highest part of the Cumaean rock, (whence Virgil gives him the epithet of
altus, or from a Statue of him there found, which, as Servius observes out of
Caelius, was 15 foot long) and to the Grot of Sibylla, which was in a certain
place within the same: she was a Priestesse to the God, and a Prophetess also
by him inspired: but we must note that this Temple, with the adjacent Grove,
was sacred as well to Diana as to Apollo, whose Deities were here jointly
worshipped; whence the Poet says, Jam subeunt Triviae, lucos, atque aurea
tecta.
And Sibyl is by him also styled
-- Phoebi Triviaeque saccrdos.
But because there were many Prophetesses which bore the name of Sibylla* (for
this is a name appellative, denoting any one to whom God pleases to
communicate his counsels; and derived from (...), which in the Aeolick dialect
signifies God, and (...) Counsel,) it will not be altogether impertinent to
make a short discourse of these inspired women, whereof there were ten more
eminently famous, as Lactantius observes out of Varro, in a Treatise of his not
now extant.

1. Sibylla Persica.
and eldest of them was Sibylla Antiqua, surnamed Persica, and Chaldaea, from
the place of her bir^h or abode: she was by Suidas supposed to be the Wife of
Noah; but we may more probably conjecture her to be born of some of his
Descendants in the parts about Babylon. She lived in the time of Heber and
Abraham: with these two as she was contemporary, so she might happily be
conversant, and learn of them what she delivered, and left to posterity.

The second was Delphica, 2. Delphica.
whose proper name was Artemis, the known Greek name of Diana: She lived before
the wars of Troy, which happened in the time of the Judges. Troy was taken
Anno mundi 2820. Ibzan being Judge: 407. before the first Olympiad, and 1179.
before our Savior, who was born Anno Mundi 4001. according to the computation
of the learned Jesuit Gordonus: She was said to be the Daughter of Jupiter and
Lamia: She prophesied of the rape of Helen, of the wars and sack of Troy. It
is said that Homer (who died 272. after the subversion of that City: Gordon.)
took much out of her verses; which she foresaw, and foretold that he should
do: She was called Delphica, because she was a Prophetess to the Oracle of
Apollo at Delphi.

The third was Cumaea, 3. Cumaea.
Daughter of Glaucus, and (as Virgil says) named Deiphobe. This is she to whom
Aeneas in his travels had access: she was also called Cimmeria, from the
Cimmerians, inhabiting betwixt Baiae and Cumae: She was Contemporary with Elon
Judge of Israel; but of her, her Cell, and manner of prophesying, more anon.

The fourth was Erythraea, 4. Erythraea.
so denominated from the place of her birth and abode: Erythrae was a City in
Asia Minor, a Greek Colony, built by the Athenians in the time of Codrus, who
was Contemporary with King David: and this is she whom the primitive Fathers,
Justin Martyr, Clem. Alexandrinus, etc. so often cite, and who spoke so plainly
and demonstratively of our Saviors incarnation, whose Acrostich consisting of
so many verses as there be letters in these words, (...), Josus Christ, Son of
God, Savior, Cicero mentions with much admiration l. 2. de Divinatione: Her
proper name was Herophile.

The fifth was Samia, 5 Samia.
properly called Phyto; she lived (as Eusebius affirms) when Numa Pompilius
reigned in Rome, and Manasses in Samaria, about 700 years before the
incarnation of Jesus Christ.

The sixth was Cumana, 6. Cumana.
who (although almost the same in name with Cumaea, and therefore confounded by
Baronius with her, as the learned Bishop Montague observes, and by Virgil here,
as we shall hereafter prove) was different from her in birth, time, place and
predictions: Her name is said to have been Amalthaea, or, as some will have it,
Demophile: She flourished Ann. Mundi 3388. and in this very year came to Rome,
and presented her books of Prophecy to Tarquinius Priscus, as Gordonus gathers
out of Solinus, Varro, Lactantius: though as A. Gellius affirms, it was to
Tarquinius Superbus, the others Grandson, to whom she addressed her self; of
which story more anon: And this is she whose Books and Oracles are so often
mentioned ly Livie, Halicarnassaeus, and other Roman Writers.

The seventh was Hellespontiaca, 7 Hell^spontiaca
or Trojana; for Troy was not far from the Hellespont: Her proper name was
Symmachia; she dwelt at Gergythus, a Town not not far distant from Troy, where
in the Temple of Apollo Gergythius she delivered her Oracles: She is said to
have flourished in the times of Cyrus and Solon.

The eighth was Lesbiaca, 8. Libyca.
or Libyca, remembered by Euripides, the tragic Poet, as Lactantius affirms:
she lived in the reign of Xerxes, about the year 3534.

The two last are Phrygia and Tiburtina, 9. Phrygia. 10. Tibu ^ina.
of whom there is little or nothing recorded, The first (as her name imports)
was happily an inhabitant of Phrygia: The latter lived at Tibur in Italy, seated
upon the River Anio, or Anien: she was called Albumea, or Leucothea, the white
Goddess.

Virgil here relates who was the first Founder of this Temple, and upon what
occasion it was founded; The Story of P^sip^a^ and (...) us, etc.
but before he enters into a story, the truth whereof might rationally be
questioned, he premised, ut fama est; and this is solemn with this wary
Writer, whenever he reports any thing strange, or beyond the common assise;
as, fama est Enceladi, etc. observed by Scaliger, and propounded by him, as an
example to be followed in the like case: But the story is this; Pasiphae, the
Daughter of Sol, and Wise of King Minos, fell in love with a Bull, which by the
assistance of Daedalus she enjoyed: The witty Artist framed a wooden Cow,
covering it with a real hide, and then shutting the lustful Queen up in it,
left her to the satisfaction of her own filthy desires. The prodigious Domitian
acted that to the life which is here but fabled, as appears by that known
Epigram in Martial, lib. 1. ep. 6. a Writer no less impudent in flattery then
excellent in Poetry.

Junctam Pasiphaen Dictaeo credit Tauro;
Vidimus; accepit fabula prisca fidem:
Nec se miretur, Caesar, longaeva vetustas,
Quicquid fama canit donat arena tibi.
Believe, Pasiphae with a Bull did lie;
We saw 't; that fable's now made history:
Nor, Caesar, let Antiquity be proud,
Thy Shows present what fame has sung so loud.
Minotaur was the production of this horrid copulation which the Poet calls
here -- mixtum genus, prolemque bif^rmem, as being partly a man, and partly a
Bull. This monster was kept in the Labyrinth, and fed with man's flesh; but
Daedalus being accused and convinced to have been the ingenious Pandor to the
Queens lust, was with his Son Icarus imprisoned in the Labyrinth, where he
(providing for their mutual preservation) with wax and feathers made wings for
himself and his beloved Son, and flying out of the top of the House, made his
escape: Daedalus arrived safe at Cumae, but Icarus (an emblem of an aspiring
mind) soaring too high, melted the waxen cement of his wings, and was drowned
near to the Island of Icaria, to which, and the circumfluent sea he gave name.
Daedalus having thus escaped, built this Temple, consecrating both that and his
wings, (for it was the manner of the Ancients to hang up such things as had
been to them either of use or ornament in the Temples of the Gods) to Apollo,
by whose propitious Diety he had been saved. Hic pro nubivago gratus pia templa
meatu
Instituit Phoebo, Sil Ita. Lic. l. 12.
atque audaces exuit alas.
The Daedalus.
Grateful did, for his safe conduct, here
To Phoebus a devoted Temple rear,
And his bold wings put off. --
And this is the story which Virgil premiseth with an ut fama est; but the
History which gave rise to this Fable, is this; Taurus (which in the Greek
signifies a Bull) was (as Servius says) Secretary to King Minos, but
(according to Plutarch in the life of Theseus) chief Captain or General, a
goodly proper young Gentleman, with whom the enamoured Pasiphae was said to lie
in the house of Daedalus, who was privy to the Adultery; and because she
brought forth twins, the one resembling Minos, the other Taurus, she was
feigned to have brought forth that double-shaped Monster called the Mino-taure*
Daedalus as a Confederate was imprisoned, but corrupting his keepers, escaped,
himself in one ship, and his Son Icarus in another; but the un^appy youth
bearing too much sail, was was with his ship overset and drowned, whilst the
more wary Father came safe to his intended Port. Hence, because he was the
first who invented that kind of sail, which the Greeks call Dolon, (by which
addition of Canvas he out-stript his pursuers) he was said to fly. Although
the English would not so handsomely bear it, yet in the Latin the Poet has
ingeniously mingled the Fable of flying with the history of sailing: whilst he
uses these words of ( Enare) and ( alarm remigum) terms more proper for
sailing then flying. We will conclude this history with that imitation of it
which we find in Sil. Italicus, l. 12. a great emulator of Virgil's Muse: but
the truth is, (as Pliny the younger says of him) that he wrote, majore cura
quam ingenio; the verses are these:

-- Cum regna teneret
Dictei regis, (sic fama est) linquere terras
Daedalus invenit; nec toto signa sequenti
Orb dare: aetherias aliena tollere in auras
Avus se pennas; atque homini monstrare volatus:
Suspensum hic librans media inter nubila corpus
Enavit: superosque novus conterruit Ales:
Natum etiam docuit falsae sub imagine plumae
Attentare vias volucrum lapsumque solutis
Pennarum remis, and non foelicibus alis
Turbida plandentem vidit freta. --
His freedom Daedalus (in Creet detained)
By this invention, as fame sings, obtained:
He, that no tracts by his pursuers might
On earth be seen, through the air took his flight
On borrowed wings: He first that Art devised,
And ('midst the clouds his hov'rings body poised)
Made his escape. The sight the Gods did scare.
His Son he also taught through untrac'd air
With feigned plumes to move; but him alas!
(His wings dissolved) on Neptunes wrinkled face
He fluttering saw. --
Daedalus, the founder of this Temple, had adorned the Gate, The story of
Androgeos and the Athenians.
or Porch with admirable Sculpture, representing therein these following
stories: First the death of Androgeos, Son of King Minos by Pasiphae this
young Prince was an active and gallant Gentleman. and particularly famed for
his great skill in wrestling, an exercise in those times in great request: He
had foiled herein some of the Athenian Youth, who maligning him therefore,
treacherously surprised, and slew him, as he was returning home in great pomp
and triumph. The Athenians for this were not only infested with a sharp war
from the injured Father, but also (as Plutarch relates) pursued by the justly
angry Gods with plague and famine: And now no longer able to oppose themselves
to the assaults both of heaven and earth, they make their address to Apollo at
Delphi who advised them to appease Minos, and to make an agreement with him,
till which time they were not to expect a cessation of the divine judgments.
In fine, a peace was treated upon, and concluded; but upon hard terms (as it
always is) on the conquer'ds part, who were by their articles to send every
year seven of their sons, and as many of their Daughters (upon whom the lot
should fall) Captives into Creet, there to remain in perpetual bonds. This
unnatural tribute was constantly exacted, and duly paid for certain years: at
last the lot (amongst the rest) fell upon Theseus, the Son of Aegeus King of
Athens: but he behaved himself so gallantly there at all his exercises,
especially in his incounters with the valiant Taurus (whence sprung the Fable
of his slayling the Mino-taure) that at last he became not only Conqueror of
those who opposed him, but also of those who opposed him not; for he wan the
heart of the fair Ariadne, the Kings Daughter, by whose help he freed himself
and the rest of the captive Children, carrying her also away with him. Here he
also had carved the representation of the Island of Crete, The Labyrinth
with the Labyrinth there built by himself, in imitation of that of Egypt; a
prodigious piece, containing so many windings and turnings in it, that no man
(once engaged therein) could ever extricate himself, unless by the help of a
clue of thread. But of this in the time of Pliny there remained no footsteps.
That which is now showed to Travelers for the Labyrinth, is supposed by Mr.
Sandys to be only a Quarrey, out of which they dug the stones which built
the neighboring Towns of Gnossus and Gortyna: But Virgil, as great an Artist
as Daedalus himself, does with him break off in the story of Icarus.

Whilst Aeneas amused himself with the contemplation of these pleasing objects,
Sibylla brought thither by Achates ( which we must understand (...), Apollo's
Temple, and Sibylla's Grot.
as the Critics term it, there having been no mention made of Achates before)
arrives; and, whilst some were preparing for the sacrifice, leads him with the
rest into the Temple; which the Poet does here describe: For the illustration
whereof set us hear Justin Martyr, an eyewitness, as we find him translated
by the learned Bishop Montague in his Acts and Monuments, Sect. 3. When I was
at Cumae in Campania ( says that holy Father) about six miles from Baiae, I
viewed diligently and curiously a certain place there, wherein stood a large
and spacious Chapel or Oratory, which was hewn out of the main rock, being all
but one stone; an admirable and strange piece of workmanship it was; in which
Oratory (as the inhabitants made report to me, and they had it by ancient
tradition from their fathers) Sibylla gave forth her Oracles. In the midst of
the Oratory they showed me three hallowed places, hewn also out of the same
rock, in which (as they related) she used to bathe and wash her self; which
done she cast her mantle about her, and so retired her self into the inmost
Cell, and Revestry of that Chapel. This, as the former, was also cut out of
the main rock. There, when she had composed her self upon a high advanced seat,
she uttered and gave forth Oracles. Thus Justin Martyr. Hence Virgil not
Poetically, but historically says, that this Temple was latus rupis Euboicae,
id est Cumanae: excisum in antrum, id est, in formam antri: in which also was
that, antrum immane, atque horrenda secreta Sibyllae. Sybils Grot, mentioned at
the beginning of this book, with both these descriptions, agrees that of
Agathias, l. 1. wherein speaking of the siege laid to Cumae by Narses that
gallant Eunuch, he writes thus: Ad orientalem callis flexum antrum quoddam
suberat, ex omni part tactum, etc. On the East Side of the winding of the hill
(where Cumae stood) there was a certain Grot or Cave, covered on every side,
and so hollow, that it had some natural ady^a, or secret places, and a bottom
vast and deep as hell. In this that great Italian Sibyl was said to dwell, and
to deliver her Oracles. She was said also to have foretold to Aeneas, the son
of Anchises, all what should befall him in the ensuing wars of Italy. Thus
far Agathias. Lastly, (if the Reader will not think that we insist too long
upon quotations) we will, as well for the credit of our Author, as for the
farther illustration of this place, give you Gerop. Decanus his words, lib. 4.
rer. Hisp. Virgilius, si quis alius mortalium, non in Homero tantum, sed in
omnibus, etc. Virgil (if ever any man were) exactly read not in Homer only, but
in all other Writers, both Poets and Historians, made the descent of his Aeneas
(whom he composed of Achilles and Ulysses, and adorned with the virtues of them
both) about Cumae and Baiae, near Avernus, where my self entered Sibyls Grot,
and saw her Chapel; which, as it was a thing famous even in Ogyges his time,
so it is not unworthy of admiration for the length and depth of the Cave cut
out of the main Rock, at the inmost parts whereof we found a hot vapor not a
little offensive. And this continued to be seen (as Onuphrius witnesses) till
the year of Christ 1539. in which year all Campania was terribly shaken, rent
and defaced with an earthquake. At Puteoli huge Mountains of gravel, sand and
slime were belched forth, and cast up from the bottom of the Sea; with which
Sibyls Cell and Chapel was totally overwhelmed, utterly ruined and abolished.
Let us hear the relation of Mr. George Sandys, who had diligently surveyed
those parts concerning this prodigious accident. In the year ( says he) 1539.
on the 29 of Sept. when for certain days foregoing the Country was so vexed
with perpetual earthquakes, as no house was left so entire, as not to expect
an immediate ruin: After that the sea had retired 200 paces from the shore
(leaving abundance of fish dead, and fresh water rising in the bottom) a
Mountain of a stupendous height, (called at this day by the Inhabitants the
new Mountain) visibly ascended about the second hour of the night, with hideous
roarings, horribly vomiting stones, and such store of cinders, that it
overwhelmed all the buildings thereabout, and the salubrious Baths of
Tripurgulae, for so many years celebrated; consumed the Vines to ashes, killing
birds and beasts; the fearful inhabitants of Putzoli flying in the dark with
their Wives and Children, naked, defiled, crying out, and detesting their
calamities, etc.

Mountague largely and learnedly discoursing of this, Acts and Monuments, Sect.
3.

Aeneas here makes a prayer and a vow to Apollo and Diana, the Deities of this
Temple; the like he does to Sibylla. He vows to consecrate to Apollo a Temple,
and certain annual Plays: and here in the person of Aeneas, and in favor of
Augustus (who was of the Family of Aeneas, and, as it was amongst the vulgar
believed, the Son of Apollo. See Sueton. in August. c. 94) he alludes to that
Temple which Augustus, in honor of his putative Apollo.
Father, built, and dedicated to Apollo, in that part of the Palatium which had
been fired with lightning; from whence Apollo was called Palatinus; Sueton. in
August. cap. 29. and by the way note, that upon this Palatine Hill (one of the
seven hills upon which Rome was built) stood the Seat of the Roman Emperors,
which from thence was called Palatium, from which all stately edifices have
their denomination of Palaces: Rosin. lib. 1. c. 4. to which word Ovid speaking
of the Assembly of the Gods in Jupiters royal Palace, handsomely alludes, Met.
lib. 1. f. 5. Hic locus est, quem si verbis audacia detur,
Haud timeam magni dixisse Palatia Coeli.
Which Mr. Sandys has as handsomely translated; both of them meaning to pass
a complement upon their Prince, he on Augustus, the best of Heathen Monarchs;
this on K. Charles the First, the glory of all Christian Kings and Martyrs.

This glorious roof I would not doubt to call,
Had I but boldness lent me, Heavens White Hall.
Ludi Apollinares, Ludi Apollinares.
certain Games or Plays which were instituted in the seventh year of the
second Punick war, in honor of Apollo; the original of which and manner of
celebrating them, you may read in Livie lib. 25. These having been for many
years disused, were restored by Augustus. At the first celebration of them (as
it is reported by Macrobius Saturn, lib. 1. c. 17.) a sudden invasion of the
enemy enforced the Roman people to forsake their sports, and to betake
themselves to their arms; in which time of distraction a cloud of arrows was
seen to fall upon the unseasonable invadors, so that they presently returned
Conquerors to their sports; where at their return they found C. Pomponius, an
old man, dancing to a Minstrel, and being very joyful that they had been
continued without interruption, they cried Salva res est, saltat senex; which
speech afterward became proverbiall, and is fitly used when a sudden evil is
seconded with a good event beyond hope and expectation.

Parachronisme; for these words, which he speaks in the person of Aeneas, are
not in the least applicable to this Sibylla Cumaea, to whom they are directed:
(a particular not observed by any of the interpreters of Virgil) but to her who
was called Cumana, who (as contemporary with Tarquinius Priscus, or rather
Superbus, his Grandson, notwithstanding the Authority which Gordonus alleges
out of Solinus, Varro, Lactantius* to which I oppose Pliny lib. 13. c. 13. A.
Gellius lib. 1. cap. 19. Halicarnassaeus lib. 4. with that inscription, which,
if Dela Cerda speak truth, is at this day to be read in the Vatican Library.
Tarquinius Superbus libros Sibyllinos tres, aliis a muliere incensis, tandem
emit) was more then 600 years younger then Cumaea: nor can it be imagined that
she could live from Aeneas his time (at which time she was very old, and
therefore by Virgil styled -- Phoebi Longaeva sacerdos) to Tarquinius Superbus
his reign; notwithstanding she was said by Ovid to have obtained of Apollo for
her Virginity, to live as many years as she could grasp sands in her hand; for
that is but a Poetical fiction; Ovid Met. lib. 14. fab. 4. Therefore what
Virgil makes Aeneas speak here (indeed improperly) to Sibylla Cumaea, is more
properly to be understood of Cumana, whose prophesies were so religiously
observed, and diligently preserved by the Romans. A. Gellius l. 1. c. 19.
relates the story thus. Sibylla Cumana
A certain old woman presenting her self before King Tarquin, surnamed the
Proud, offered him nine books in three Tomes, wherein, as she affirmed, were
contained remedies and redresses, for all evils which should betide the Roman
people; Servius indeed makes the coin to be Philyppei, i. Phillppines; so
called from Philip. King of Macedon, but improperly; for Philip was 150 years
younger then Tarquin.
for these she asked 300 Philippines, a golden Coin then much in esteem. The
King prizing his money above her unrequired Merchandise, laughed her to scorn.
She before his face casting three of the nine into the fire, burned them,
asking the same price for the remaining six; whereat Tarquin concluding that
the old woman was mad or doated, began to be out of patience. Then she having
condemned three more to the same flames, asked him, if he would yet give what
she demanded for the three which were left? The King moved at the constancy of
this strange Guest, and advised thereunto by his Augures, commanded the money
to be given her, who having delivered the books with a strict charge to lay
them up safely, suddenly vanished, nor was ever after seen or heard of These
books so bought were (according to her direction) laid up in the Capitol, under
Jupiters Shrine, in a Chest of stone, and committed to the custody of two men
first, then of ten, and lastly of fifteen; thence called the Quindecim-viri;
which number was afterward increased to 60. (as Servius notes) but still
retained the name of the Quindecim-viri. By the by take this note; amongst the
10. about the time of the second Punick war, Cornelius Rufus was one, (for at
that time there were no more) whom for his great judgment in interpreting
Sibylla's, Prophecies, they sirn^med Sibylla,, which afterward by corruption
was changed into Sylla, which gave a surname to a branch of the illustrious
family of the Cornelii, from whence that great Sylla, called the Happy (though
to his native soil no man more unhappy) deduced his pedigree; Macrob. Sat. l. 1
c. 17.

Halicarnassaeus. These books were so preserved until the Marsick or Social
war, 676 years from the building of Rome: when the Capitol being set on fire,
whether casually or purposely it is not known, these Oracles were also burned
and consumed; wherefore those Sibyline Prophecies which we find mentioned by
Cicero and the priimitive Fathers, and which now pass under that name, are not
the answers of this Sibylla Cumana, (for that is impossible) but such a
collection as the Roman Ambassadors (employed by the Senate for that purpose)
got together at Cumae, Erythrae, and at other places, where any of the Sibyls
had lived. These Commissioners collected and brought home with them (as Varro
and Pliny report) a thousand Oracles in verse, which were laid up in the
Capitol new built; under the charge of ten men first, then of fifteen: nor were
these the Prophesies of any one Sibyl, but a miscellaneous composition of the
answers of sundry of those inspired women.

Sibylla used to write her Oracles in the leaves of the Palmtree (as Servius
out of Varro) which being left at the mouth or entrance of her Grot, the wind
did oftentimes so scatter, that they could never be brought into order again,
insomuch, that when we would show the difficulty of digesting things
discomposed into order, we use Politian's words, Laboriosius est quam Sibyllae
folia colligere: And this is the reason why Aeneas prays her to deliver her
Oracles by word of mouth: but Virgil is the best interpreter of himself; lib. 3.

Insanam vatem adspicies, quae rupe sub ima
Fata canit; foliisque not as and nomina mandat:
Quaecunque in foliis descripsit carmina virgo
Digerit in numerum; atque antro seclusa relinquit.
Illa manent immota locis, neque ab ordine cedunt,
Verum eadem verso tenuis cum cardine ventus
Impulit, and teneras turbavit janua frondes,
Nunquam deinde cavo volitantia prendere saxo,
Nec revocare situs, aut jungere carmina curat:
Inconsulti abeunt, sedemque odere Sibyllae.
There shall thou see the frantic Prophetess
Sing destinies in a deep Caves recesse,
Which she to leaves commits; what verse soever
She writes, in order placed she leaves there;
They firmly keep the place to each assigned:
But when the opened door th'intruding wind
Admits, and does the lighter leaves disperse,
She never re-orders the disordered verse,
Or cares them to rejoyn: Who come to enquire of the Oracle.
unanswered * they,
And Sibyl's Cell detesting, go their way.
Sibylla in her answer compares the difficulties which Aeneas had sustained in
Phrygia, in the late Trojan wars, with those which he was to undergo in the
ensuing wars in Italy, viz. that at Simois and Xanthus (Rivers of Phrygia)
flowed with the blood of the slain, so should Tiber: that as he had found the
Greeks and Achilles descended of the Goddess Thetis his enemies in the Trojan
war, so he should find Turnus, Son of the Goddess Venilia, with his Rutilians
(I will not call them Red-coats) as restless and implacable enemies here; with
whom Juno should also join against him and his weather-beaten Trojans, as she
had done with the Greeks formerly. And lastly, that as the Trojan war proceeded
from a Wife; Causa mali tanti Conjux, namely from Helena, the rightful Wife of
Menelaus, stolen away, and ravished by Paris; so should this mortal quarrel take
birth from Lavinia, Latinus his Daughter, formerly betrothed to Turnus; and by
force of arms (an uncouth way of wooing) sought in marriage by Aeneas. And
thus is the dark Oracle expounded:

Viz. from Evander of Arcadia, a Province of Peloponesus, a known and famous
part of Graecia. The reason of whose quitting his native soil and Kingdom,
Servius affirms to be this: Evander unnaturally slew his aged Mother, by some
called Carmentis, by others Nicostrata; for which fact being expelled by his
Subjects, he came into Italy, where warring with, and conquering the native
Aborigines, he possessed himself of that place where Rome now stands, and there
founded a small Town on the Palatine Hill, naming it Pallanteum; in remembrance
of King Pallas his Great-grand-sire: and this is that urbs Graia obscurely
hinted by the Oracle, but more plainly specified by the Poet, l. 8.

Arcades his oris, genus a Pallante profectum,
Qui regem Evandrum comites, qui signa secuti
Delegere locum, and posuere in montibus urbem,
Pallantis proavi de nomine Pallanteum.
Arcadian strangers, Pallas mighty race
Conducted by Evander, in this place
A City chose to build; and did the same
From's Grandsire Pallas Pallanteum name.
Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse.
Pyrrhus, I say, thy force the Romans shall subdue.
Croesus Halim penetrans magnam pervertet opum vint.
If Croesus Halis pass great wealth he shall overthrow.
See Cicer. l. 2. de divinat.
And such was that wicked riddle (as our Histories report it) of Adam
d'Orleton, Bishop of Hereford, concerning the murdering of Edward the Second;
Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est.
All which according to the pointing of the words had a different, nay a
contrary meaning and construction; whence Apollo is surnamed by the Greeks
(...), i. e. obliquus, (...) from his doubtful and perplexed answers.

Aeneas not only from the opportunity of the place where the descent into those
infernal mansions was held to be, urges his request, but also from that
Topic of example pursues it further: First from Orpheus, Orpheus.
whose story, skill in Music, descent into Hell, with other particulars
ascribed to that ancient Hero, are so well known, that we shall not at all
dwell upon them; we will only give you the mythologie thereof. Orpheus was said
to be the son of Apollo and Calliope, one of the Muses, first in general,
because all good and gallant men were said to be descended from the Gods, and
their souls to be dropped into their bodies from one of the Spheres, especially
from that of the Sun; then in particular for his great skill in Music and
Poetry, as the undoubted son of Apollo and Calliope. But that trees and bruit
beasts were feigned to be attentive auditors of his harmonious Lyre, is, that
by his eloquent tongue and good example he brought the rude and barbarous of
that age to a more civil and sociable way of living.

Sylvestres homines sacer interpresque Deorum
Caedibus and victu foedo deterruit Orpheus:
Dictus ab hoc lenire tigres, rapidosque leones:
Dictus and Amphion Thebanae conditor arcis
Saxa movere sono testudinis; and prece blanda
Ducere quo vellet: fuit haec sapientia quondam
Publica privatis secernere, sacra prophanis:
Concubitu prohibere vago, dare jura maritis,
Oppida moliri, leges incidere ligno.
Horat. de art. Poet. 'Cause sacred Orpheus, that interpreter
Of the great Gods, did brutish men deter
From their enormous living, it was sam'd
That salvage Lions he and Tigers tamed:
Amphion so ( Thebe's founder) with his Lyre
Moved stones, and led men to his own desire
By sweetning words. It was the sapience
Of elder times, to put a difference
Betwixt things sacred and profane, betwixt
Public and private interests: Commixt
And rambling lust by marriage to restrain,
And by sound Laws Republics to maintain.
Euridice from thence, and working effects, contrary to their nature, on the
Devils themselves; but that he, by civilizing, and sweetly subduing the
irregular affections of brutish men (who render the place where they abide a
very Hell) did bring Euridice (which signifies Justice, under which notion the
whole Systeme of morality is comprehended) again among them, who till then
lived by rapine, the stronger oppressing the less able to defend.

Secondly, Castor and Pollux.
he alleges the examples of Castor and Pollux: Jupiter falling, in love with
Leda, and not knowing how to gain access to her, changed himself into the
likeness of a Swan, and caused an Eagle to pursue him, who took Sanctuary in
her lap: Pity in her ushered in love: Beauty and the harmony of the tongue
(expressed by the Swan) were his prevailing solicitors. In conclusion he
mastered his design, and lying with her, got her with child; who that night
also was made impregnat by her Husband Tyndarus. At last she was delivered of
two eggs; of the one came Pollux and Helena, both immortal, because the
progeny of Jupiter: of the other Castor and Clytemnestra, both mortal,
because the Children of Tyndarus. Hence Pollux (an emblem of fraternall
affection) obtained of his Father Jupiter, that since his Brother Castor could
not be altogether immortal, he might be so in part; and that by participation
of his immortality: whence when Castor died, it was granted that they should
live by turns, Castor one day, and Pollux another; wherefore Virgil says,
Itque reditque viam toties. --


The Fables of the ancients (wherein their wisdom and learning was mystically
couched, and purposely, to procure reverence to them and it, concealed from the
vulgar) admit of an interpretation, either Historical, Moral, or Natural,
and sometimes Theological. Thus, because Leda, the Wife of Tyndarus, did
prostitute her self to a certain King, and because they joined there where
fortune had joined them, not in a bed after a royal manner, but upon the
alwayes-prepared pallet of nature, the banks of the river Eurotas, where the
Swans used to couple, she was said to be compressed by Jupiter, (for so the
Ancients, as simple as they were, flatteringly styled their Kings) in the shape
of a Swan: and because a great belly rises in an ovall figure, and the child
is wrapped within the womb, in the Chorion or Secundina, as an egg is within
the shell, she was said to be delivered of two eggs. But Castor and Pollux were
feigned to live and die by turns, because those two stars which make the
constellation of Gemini, and into which they were said to have been changed,
never appear together, but rise and set alternately. (...)
(...). --
Homer. Odyss. 11.

We shall speak of Theseus and Alcides in another place.

It was the manner of the Ancients, when they made their addresses to their
Gods, to lay hold on and embrace the Altars; so Virgil l. 4. speaking of Iarbas
his prayer to Jupiter, Talibus orantem dictis, arasque tenentem
Audiit Omnipotens. --
Whilst thus he prayed, and the Altars did embrace,
The Almighty him did hear. --
Whence Varro derives Ara, an Altar, from Ansa, a handle, or thing to hold by;
for anciently it was written with an s, Asa, as plusima for plurima, and asena
for arena, and Fusius for Eurius; and might easily by the interposition of an n
become Ansa: Varro lib. 6. de ling. Lat.

Seneca, in Herc. furent.

Nec ire labor est, ipsa deducit via,
Vt saepe puppes aestus invitas rapit,
Sed pronus aer urget, avidumque Chaos,
Gradumque retro flectere haud unquam sinunt
Vmbrae tenaces.
To Hell to go it is no pains, the way
(As ships the current drives) will thee convey.
A profound pit, and a down-pressing air
Force to descend; but homeward to repair
Tenacious shades deny. --
This place by the Mythologists is thus interpreted: Hell.
Hell is vice or sin, to which men are naturally prone, and easily fall into;
facilis descensus: but to shake off evil habits, and customary vices, hic
labor, hec opus, few can make a timely retreat, unless those to whom God is
very merciful; quos aequus amavit Jupiter, and are endued with a more
particular and especial grace; aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus, or such as
are Diis geniti, as it were by a new birth in Christ regenerated: for the truth
is, there are so many obstacles, and so many impediments wherewith we are
surrounded, and wherein we are entangled, that it is a very difficult matter to
disingage our selves when once ensnared, as hard as to return from the jaws of
Hell, where -- tenent mediae omnia sylvae,
Cocytusque sinu labens circumfluit atro.


But if you will expound this mystically, and according to Plato's Philosophy,
the meaning is, that the rational soul, or that divina animi particula, which
is the intellect, is so dulled and oppressed by the earthiness of corporeal
matter, that few can raise themselves to the contemplation of divine ver^ties,
and dive into the more abstracted knowledge of heavenly things, unless by
extraordinary endowments of mind, which are granted to none but some few, quos
aequus amavit Jupiter.

Sybylla having told Aeneas what difficulties he was to encounter in his
descent into Hell, The golden Bough.
tells him further, that in case he persist, he must first find out the Golden
bough, and that must be his Passport to Charon, and a propitiatory to
Proserpine. By the Golden Bough, Virtue, Wisdom, and unwearied Constancy are
represented to us, by which we subdue and triumph over the greatest
difficulties: but forasmuch as such endowments are very rare, and perfections
seldom meeting in any one person, therefore this Bough is said catere arbore
opaca, etc. to be hid in a shady tree, and to be environed with thick and
inextricable woods. Servius says, that the Poet here alludes to the conceit of
Pythagoras Samius, who represents the life of man to the letter Y, The letter Y.
made in this form: our infancy, or first age is like the lower part or basis
thereof; and is a mere tabula rasa, as not defaced with vice, so not beautified
with virtue: Our youth is where the bivium or partition begins; at which time
we either make choice of a virtuous course of life, which is meant by the
right hand branch, slender and difficult to ascend into; or decline to vice,
which is to be understood by the left, more broad, and easy to climb. Hence
this golden Bough, (by which, as we have said, virtue is recommended to us) is
that which brancheth out os the right side of the Pythagorean letter Y. of
which Virgil writing thus in his Epigrams, is the best expositor of his own
sense: Litera Pythagorae (discrimine secta bicorni)
Humanae vitae speciem praeferre videtur:
Nam via virtutis dextrum petit ardua collem,
Diffieilemque aditum primum spectantibus offert;
Sed requiem praestat fessis in vertice summo.
Molle ostentat iter via lata, sed ultima meta
Praecipitat captos, volvitque per ardua saxa.
Pythagoras his forked letter does
Of humane life a scheme to us propose;
For virtues path on the right hand does lie,
An hard ascent presenting to the eye;
But on the top with rest the wearied are
Refreshed: the broad way easier does appear;
But from its summit the deluded fall
And (dashed amongst rocks) find there a funeral.
Others say that Virgil here alludes to this following Custom; for although
the mythologie of this fiction be as abstruse and hard to be found, as the
bough it self was said to be, we will do the best we can to interpret it. In
the Temple of Diana Taurica which was in Aricia, a Town of Latium, not many
miles distant from Alba, there was a tree, whence no man might break off a
bough, unless a fugitive; and he on condition to enter into single fight with
the fugitive who was Priest there, usually called Rex Nemorensis, because there
was a Grove adjoining to this place, called Nemus Aricinum, consecrated to
Diana. The Conqueror presided over this Grove and Temple, until such time as
he was deprived both of his charge and life by the like success. We will
conclude our discourse of the golden bough, with that description which
Claudian makes of it, in imitation of the most excellent Maro, lib. 2. de rapt.
Proserpinae.

Est etiam lucis arbor praedives opacis,
Fulgentes viridi ramos curvata metallo,
Haec tibi sacra datur; fortunatumque tenebis
Autumnum, and fulvis semper dotabere pomis.
Moreo're, a wealthy tree (whose shining boughs
Stoop with green metal) in our thickets grows:
This shall be thine, the crop we give to thee;
Thou with the yellow fruit enriched shall be.
Aeneas was to do in order to his enterprise, was to perform the funeral
Rites due to the dead body of his friend Misenus. The story of whose death and
funeral is not added here by the Poet rashly, and without design; For this
Sciomancie, or ceremonies which were to be performed to the infernal Gods,
could not be completed without the intervention of the dead corpse of a man
slain. Hence Virgil feigns Misenus to be murdered by Triton in the manner you
read, though some say that he was for this purpose murdered by Aeneas himself;
though dissembled by Virgil, beause he would not make. Aeneas guilty of so foul
a fact. Homer does the like in the person of Elpenor, Ulysses his friend, upon
the same occasion. And because the interrement of the dead body (by which the
Fleet was polluted) was the proper expiatory for such pollution, and
necessarily previous to his sacrificing to the Manes, and his descent into
Hell; therefore he is feigned to perform these funeral Rites before he puts in
execution the third and last precept of Sibylla, contained in this following
verse:

Duc nigras pecudes; haec prima piacula sunto. Achates is always introduced by
the Poet as Aeneas his constant Companion, and inseparable Associate; and that
not without reason, if we reflect upon the etymology of the word; for Achates
is derived (...) which signifies care and thoughtfulness, the individual
adherent to great men and Princes:

-- qui es fidus Achates
It comes. --
Donatus in Virgils life, that he broke off, as his manner often is, at Misenum
Aeoliden; and that whilst he did recite this book before Augustus he did
substitute ex tempore this Hemistich, with the following verse;

-- quo non praestantior alter
Aere ciere viros, Martemque accendere cantu.
Doves (sacred to Venus, Aeneas his Mother, because salacious and fruitful,
and esteemed a very lucky Augurie) Mythologists understand the two wings of the
soul, contemplative, and moral virtue, which serve as guides to go before us to
the golden bough of true sapience and verity, and to lead us out of those
errors, wherein (without their assisting conduct) we are irrecoverably lost:
and this is that sylva immensa wherein Aeneas is said to be. Others more
Theologically understand by this Wood the World, with those Labyrinths of
temptations, and Mazes of allurements, wherewith (whilst here) we are involved,
and fastly engaged: and by the Doves, the blessed Spirit, and grace of God,
which leads the pious through all wordly impediments to the fruition of
eternal bliss, which is the true golden Bough.

Augurie or Divination which they called Augurium pullarium; Augurium pullarium.
the manner whereof was this: There were certain Chickens kept for this purpose
in a Coop, before which the Augur, called Pullarius, cast crumbs of bread; if
the Chicken lept hastily out of the Coop, and eat so greedily of the crumbs,
that some of them falling out of their mouths, rebounded from the ground, which
they termed Tripudium, then it was taken for a good Omen; and those who came to
consult, proceeded in their intended design. But, if to the contrary, the
Chicken or Pullets came but slowly out of the Coop, went back again, or flew
from the meat, then they took it for an evil sign, and desisted from their
enterprise. The Roman History furnishes us with a pretty tale, and to our
purpose: Claudius Pulcher, colleague with L. Junius Pullus, An. Vrb. 504.
designing to surprise Adherbal, the Carthaginian Admiral in the Port of
Drepanum in Sicilia, before he put to sea, asked counsel (as the custom was)
of the Pullarius; and when the Augur told him, that the Chicken would not come
out of the Coop, and therefore advised him at present to desist till he might
have a more encouraging Augurie, answered, quia esse nolunt bibant, Because
they will not eat, let them drink, and so threw them into the sea: but mark the
event, the Romans never received a more memorable overthrow at sea; for the
Consul escaping with 30 ships, left 93 in the hands of his victorious enemy.
This disaster was generally ascribed to his contempt of religion, and slighting
the Augury: so careful is the Devil, by such examples to assert the credit of
his wicked superstition, and to drill on his followers to their own inevitable
destruction. This story you may read in Livie l. 19. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 4.
Cicer. l. 2. de Not. Deor. and in Suet. in Tiber. c. 1.

Pliny l. 24. c. 6.) is an excrescence or exsudation of the tree on which it
grows; not proceeding from any seminall virtue thereof; whence Virgil says --
quod non sua seminat arbos; but is (according to Scaliger, Exerc. 168.)
produced as horns are in living creatures, from the abundance of excrement, ex
vitali arboris excremento. There is a popular and received error that this
plant is generated from the dung of the Thrush, which gave birth to this
adagie, Turdus sibi cacat malum, or necem; which is spoken of a man, who is the
fond Author of his own mischief: but this is sufficiently refuted by the subtle
Scaliger, ib. Of this there are two kinds, the one common, growing in
Apple Trees; the other more rare, shooting out of the Oak, and therefore called
viscum quercinum, Misleto of the Oak; and this is meant here by the Poet. This
was esteemed sacred, and much ceremony was used in the gathering of it: Plin.
l. 16. c. 44. This s^militude is very apt, both in regard of the color, for
the best sort (as the same Author writes) is extra fulvum, intus porraceum, quo
nihil est glutinosius. Secondly, in regard of the manner of its growing, for it
is an excresence. And lastly, because it was accounted sacred; all which three
properties answer to the nature of the golden Bough.

Virgil (who was generally learned) never shows more exactness, then when he
treats of ancient Rites and Customs; wherefore I have stuck here, as also in
the following description of the sacrifices performed to the infernal Deities,
more closely then elsewhere, to the literal sense, and Grammatical
construction of the Author, because every word has its weight and
significancie; we shall take every thing in the same order it lies here. O^ the
Roman Fune^als.
First, they raised the Pyre, or funeral Pile, which was built of Oak and
Pitch-trees, as most combustible materials: -- piceae flammis alimenta
supremis; Stat. This (according to the quality of the person deceased) was more
or less large. Virgil says here that they did struere ingentem pyram; and
Homer makes Patroclus his Pyre to be a 100 foot in every dimension: (...). It
was built in form of an Altar. By the way, we may observe with Scaliger upon
Festus, the difference of these knitredwords. The preparation for the
interrement was called Funus: 2. the piling up of the wood, Rogus: 3. the
applying of the fire, Pyra: 4 the burning of the Corpse, Bustum: 5. the place,
Vstrina: 6. the Tomb, Sepulchrum: 7. The Inscription or Epitaph, Monumentum.
The sides of the Pyre they did adorn with boughs, atri coloris, of a dark
green; the ends with Cypress, therefore termed here Feralis, all things
appertaining to the Dead being called Feralia. Cypress was therefore used in
Funerals, because an emblem of the Dead; for as the Dead never revive, I mean
naturally; so that tree once lopt, never shoots forth again. Servius, or (as
Varro says) to allay the stench of the burning Corpse by its more powerful and
grateful odor. Thus Statius dresseth up the Hearse of Archemorus:

Tristibus interea ramis, teneraque Cupresso
Damnatus flammis torus, and puerile pheretrum
Texitur. --
Stat. Theb. l. 4. The ^ittle Bier, and bed to the flames destined,
With mourning boughs, and Cypress are intwin'd.
Pyre they used to place the arms of the Deceased; for with great men they
burnt not only their arms, but their Clothes, Horses, Dogs, with whatsoever
they prized in their life time.

Ditantur flammae, non unquam opulentior illo
Ante cinis, crepitant gemmae, atque immane liquescit
Argentum; and pictis exsudant vestibus aurum.
Statius ibid. The flames are precious made, no dust before
Was ere so rich; gemmes crackle, massy Ore
Dissolves, and gold out of the embroidred Vests
Does sweat. --
So Hannibal in the Funeral of Paulus Aemilius.
-- fulgentia pingui
Maurice suspirans inicit velamina, and auro
Intextam chlamydem. --
Annibal.
He to the flames, having his death condol'd,
His purple Vest, [2] The death of P. Aemilius.
and Soldiers Coat with gold
Enriched, commits: --
Silius Ital. L. 10.
Nay the Indians did use to burn the best beloved of the Wives of the Dead,
mingling their ashes together who in their affections had been more nearly
conjoined, When the Pyre was in readiness, before they carried forth the Dead
to the same, they used to foment and bathe the Corpse in warm water, and anoint
the same with oil, that if there were any thing of vitality remaining, it might
be awakned by those warm applications, warmth being propitious to Nature, and
the cause of life as well as the effect. This story is not altogether from the
purpose: Pliny is my Author l. 7. c. 52. Aviola, a man of Consular dignity
(after all Ceremonies previous to his burning, as Lotion, Unction,
Conclamation, etc. are ended) being laid upon the Pyre, no sooner felt the
warmth of the ascending flames, but that reviving, he raised himself up; but
the fire prevailed before the Assistants could succor him, and so he was
burned alive. I will not say that the custom of Lotion sprung from hence,
because it was more ancient: Homer mentions it in the Funeral of Patroclus: --
(...). But if this story be true, you see the effects of warmth. After Lotion
and Unction (from whence happily the Roman Church, which derives and retains many
Ceremonies observed by the Gentiles, borrows that which they term extreme
Unction) followed Conclamation, which Virgil means here by -- fit gemitus, they
set up a general cry, a valediction to all hopes: hence we proverbially say,
Conclamatum est, when we have done our utmost in a business, and cannot effect
it. This done, the Corpse was laid up upon a Bed or Hearse, called here Torus:
over the Body they cast a purple Covering or Hersecloth; for velamina nota is
not (as Servius interprets it) Miseno nota and usitata, his own
wearing-clothes, which happily were (according to the Custom) burnt with him;
but velamina nota, and communiter in funerib. usitata, Clothes or Coverings
known, and commonly used at Funerals, as it is rendered with more reason, and
backed with better authority by the learned Jesuit Ludovicus de la Cerda. We
could produce many instances out of approved Authors to confirm the use of
purple in Funerals, but this one authority out of Suetonius in Caes. c. 84.
shall suffice; Intus lectus eburneus, auro and purpura stratus: J. Caesar was
carried to his Funeral on an Ivory Hearse covered with purple, inwrought with
gold: And now in our days Kings and Princes mourn in purple. The corpse thus
composed, the Hearse or bier was carried by the nearest of kin to the Vstrina,
or place of burning, and there placed upon the Pyre; to which some near friend
also gave fire with a torch ( facie aversa) turning away his face, as
testifying his unwillingnesse and grief to perform that sad and last duty.
As Soon as the fire began to burn clear, their custom was to cast into the
devouring flames all sorts of rich perfumes, termed here thurea dona: So
Statius in the Funeral of Archemorus: Necnon Assyriis pinguescunt robora succis.
The Pyre grows with Assyrian juices fat.
Plutarch relates that 210 baskets full of odoriferous compositions were
consumed at the Funeral of Sylla, Plut. in Syl. beside these they cast in
Dapes, which some interpret to be Adeps hostiar. the fat of the sacrifice: but
Mysinus more warrantably affirms, that they were epulae, quib. mortuo
parentabatur, the remains of the Funeral Feast or Banquet, which Juvenal Sat.
5. calls coena feralis. Ponitur exigua feralis coena patella The ferall Supper
in a little Dish
Is put. --
Virgil makes mention also of oil, which, together with the vessels which
contained it, they cast into the flaming Pyre. Servius gives the reason of this
custom in these words: Diis superis tantum libabant; inferis autem
sacrificantes vasa etiam in ignem conjiciebant. When they sacrificed to the
celestial Gods, they only poured the oil or other liquor into the flames; but
when to the infernal (the same custom being observed in Funerals) they threw
the vessels in also. Beside what Virgil mentions here, Statius in the Funeral
of Archemorus, adds Saffron, Wine, Blood, Milk and Honey. The body thus burnt,
and turned into ashes, they extinguished the flame with Wine; so the same
Statius lib. 6. Finis erat, lapsusque putres jam Mulciber ibat
In cineres, instant flammis, multoque soporant
Imbre rogum: Imbre i. e. vino.
Now all was done, nor did there ought remain
But putrid dust, they busily restrain
The flames with wine. --
So Homer Iliad. 23. (...)
(...) --
They quench the Pyre with black wine, i. e. a deep dark-colored wine, as
Tent, and the like. But here it may be questioned, how they could possibly
separate the ashes of the dead from those of the Pyre, and from such things as
were burnt with the Corpse. Natalis Comes is of opinion that the Corpse was laid
in a stone Chest, and burned within the same, which he confirms out of
Theophrastus. De la Cerda out of Pliny says that the Corpse was wrapped up in a
sort of linen, by the Latins called linum vivum, by the Greeks Asbestinum,
over which the flames could not in the least prevail: we will give you the
place and words of that learned Pliny.
Author l. 19. c. 1. Inventum jam est etiam linum, quod ignibus non
absumeretur; vivum id vocant, etc. There is now in our days found out a
certain sort of flax called vivum, i. e. living (because it lives as it were
in, and is not consumed by fire) I have seen napkins made thereof, red-hot in
the flame, by which they are purged and cleansed better then by water. Hence
the bodies of Kings being wrapped therein, were preserved unmixt from the other
ashes. It grows in the deserts of India, in places scorched with the Sun,
amongst Adders and Serpents, and where there falls no rain: he says that it
does, assuescere vivere ardendo, by growing in a hot and sunburned soil,
contract (as it were) an habit of resisting the flames. It is rare to be found,
and very hard to be woven or spun, by reason of its shortness. Thus far
Pliny. But this is a thing lost long since: See Pancerol. tit. 4. de reb.
perditis. Not unlike to this is that linum Creticum mentioned by Strabo, which
has the same property of resisting the fire: but this was rather a stone then
linen; for it was made of a certain stone which they beat so long with
hammers, till all the terrene or earthy matter was beaten out of it, and there
remained nothing but certain threads or strings, which being dressed and combed
made a very fine sort of linen. The like is made of a stone found in the
Island of Cyprus, called lapis Amiantus: See Salmuth in Pancirol. rerum deperd.
tit. 4. And happily both these were well known to the Ancients, and made use of
by them. But although we cannot positively affirm how it was done, we may
certainly conclude that they had a way, and were very careful therein, to
separate the remains of the Dead from mingling with other ashes. The ashes thus
extinguished, and bathed with wine, were put into certain pitches called urnae,
which were made sometimes of stone, sometimes of earth, and sometimes of brass,
as here; Homer made Patroclus's of gold. The relics of the Dead being thus
gathered up, the Priest cleansed and purified the people (who were thought
polluted and unclean by assisting at the Funeral, as all those who touched or
came near a dead body were) by bespringling them with water thrice, which
number had something of mystery in it, and was by the Ancients accounted
sacred. -- numero Deus impare gaudet. Virgil uses the word circumferre, which
with those of elder times was all one with purgare, which Servius proves out of
Plautus; te pro larvato circumferam, i. e. purgabo; whence he also derives
lustratio, a circumlatione. When this purging or lustration was ended, the
Priest with a loud voice pronounced this word, Ilicet, thereby dismissing the
company, the word signifying as much as ire licet, which the Poet means here by
( verba novissima;) then presently did the company depart, taking their
farewell of the Dead in this form of words, Vale, vale, vale, nos te ordine,
quo netura permiserit, sequemur. And thus much for the explication of this
place.

The whole Ceremony ended, Aeneas causes a stately Tomb to be raised over the
interred remains of the dead, under a Promontory near the seaside, the usual
place where they erected the Monuments of their Heroes, and (according to the
custom) carves (for although Virgil uses the word imponere, it cannot be
understood of his real arms, for they were burned with him) upon the stone
his arms as a Soldier, his Trumpet as a Trumpeter, for, Et lituo pugnas
insignis obibat and hasta. Virg.
he was
Famed for his art, as for his valor tried.
and his Oar, at which he was excellent also; both which Customs Virgil
observes in that of Aeneas to Deiphobus in this very book.

Tunc egomet tumulum Rhaetaeo in littore inanem
Constitui, et magna manes ter voce vocavi;
Nomen and arma locum servant.
Then I did raise on the Rhaetaean shore
For thee an empty Tomb, thrice did implore
Thy Ghost; thy name and arms still there abide.
Servius will have Aerius to be the proper name of the Promontory or Mountain,
before it was called Misenus; but because Aerius is a proper epithet for any
thing which is very high, as Alps aeriae, we have translated it here as an
Appellative.

is called to this day Monte Miseno, of which Mr. Sandys writes thus: Misenus.
This Promontory is of all others the most famous for the clemency of the air,
for the City here once standing, the Manor-houses adjoining, the Roman Navy
here riding, antique Monuments, Grots, Baths, Fish-pools, and other like
admirable buildings, surveying all the Seacoast unto the Promontory of Minerva
(if measured with the winding shore, 54 miles distant) all which in the time of
the Roman Monarchy showed like one entire City, whereof ( Naples excepted)
there is little to be seen which has escaped the fury of fire, water, or
earthquake. Tantum aevi longinqua valet mutare vetustas, so great a change
attends the dark footsteps of Time.

Aeneas here puts in execution the third and last precept of Sibylla, which was
to sacrifice to the infernal Deities.

Duc nigras pecudes, haec prima piacula sunto.
Avernus, which Virgil here describes. Mr. Sandys, who had entered the same,
writes thus of it: On the South-east side of the Lake opens a-to-be-admired
Grot, with a ruined Frontispice, but affording a large and high-roof'd passage
into the Mountain cut out of the main rock; agreeing in all particulars with
our Author. This although called vulgarly, but erroneously, la Grotta de la
Sibylla, was not that Grot whereof we have spoken within the Temple of Apollo,
but another adjoining to the Lake of Avernus, as we have just now said. Here
the Ancients dreamed Hells entrance to be: Here Homer made his Ulysses to
perform his Necyomancie, in imitation of whom Virgil did the same in the
person of his Aeneas. Nay, this present age is so grossly and sottishly
ignorant, as to have the same opinion of the place which the more excusable
Ancients had, only with this difference; they believed this to be the ingresse
or inlet into Hell, and ours the egress or outlet from thence; for (as Mr.
Sandys reports) there are many of the Inhabitants at this day, who believe and
affirm that Christ from thence made his triumphant Resurrection: nor are the
credulous vulgar only of this opinion, but also those who ought to be better
versed in the history and geography of the holy Scriptures. He cites one
Aleadinus a Poet, as an Assertor of this tradition; which he delivers in this
Distich:

Est locus, effregit quo portas Christus Averni,
Et Sanctos traxit lucidus inde patres.
There Christ Avernus black gates broke in two,
And holy Fathers thence victorious drew.
Of this Lake of Avernus the same Author makes this relation, viz. The Lake of
Avernus.
That it is circular in form, and environed with Mountains, and shadowed
heretofore with overgrown woods; a main occasion of those pestilent vapors:
for they being cut down by Agrippa, the place became frequently inhabited on
every side, as approved both healthful and delightful: the water thereof
looks black, so thought heretofore to have been by reason of its unmeasurable
profundity; but later times have found it out a bottom, and that it exceeds
not 253 fathomes: No leaf, or whatsoever falls therein, is ever after seen,
etc. Which description does in all particulars so agree with that which
Aristotle gives of it in his book de Mirabilibus A^scultationibus, that either
Mr. Sandys transcribes his verbatim from thence, or so long a tract, and
interval of time from that great Philosopher to our great Traveller, has made
no sensible alteration. But the major part thereof is now choked up by the new
Mountain: This Lake was called by the Greeks (...), i. e. sine avibus, void of
birds, from whence the Latin Avernus, with some small alteration de^ives it
self. The Poet gives you the reason of this denomination; and it is given by
Lucretius as a general name to all places, over which (by reason of the
noisome and sulphurous vapors) Birds cannot fly: so that Avernus is not
confined to Italy only, but may give name to any place where the same
properties are found.

Virgil describes most exactly the manner of sacrificing to the infernal
Gods, which was as different as Hell from Heaven from that of the supernals,
The manner of sacrificing to the infernal powers.
in time, manner, place, and color of the sacrifice. To these they sacrificed
upon an Altar raised above the ground, whence Altar takes its name ab alto; to
those in a Cave under ground, digging there a hole or pit, which they termed
scrobs or screbicklus into which they let the blood of the Sacrifice run. Thus
Ovid Met. l. 7. speaking of Medea: Haud procul egesta scrobibus tellure duabus
Sacra facit, cultrosque in gutture velleris atri
Conjicit, and patulas perfundit sanguine fossas.
Not far from thence in the hollowed ground two pits
Med^a digs, and sacrificing slits
The throats of black-fleec'd rams; with reaking blood
She fills the ditches. --
So Homer makes Ulysses dig a hole a cubit in all its dimensions. (...). Into
this they did not only let the blood of the Sacrifice flow, but also together
with it poured wine and milk. Tum super invergens liquidi charchesia vini,
Alteraque invergens tepidi charchesia lactis,
Verba simul fundit. Ovid. Met. 7.
Then pouring bolls of liquid wine, commixt
With lukewarm milk, she prays. --
Others add honey, eggs, oil, with an infinite number of the like trash, as the
foam of mad dogs, the bowels of a beast called Lynx, eyes of Dragons, etc. To
the Superi they offered white victims, and an odd number, as always sacred to
the Gods; to the Inferi black and an even (as being by the Ancients esteemed
unlucky) were presented. Virgil comprehends all these circumstances in this one
verse. Quatuor hic (id est, ad os hujus speluncae) primum
Nigrantes terga juvencos
Constituit.
Lastly, these infernal Rites were a^wayes performed in the nightime; this
Law being inviolably observed, viz. to a male Deity or God they still offered a
male, to a female Numen or Goddess they constantly presented a female
Sacrifice, as well to the Inferi as Superi. The Sacrifice now brought to the
place where it was to be offered, the Priest poured wine between the horns,
which was a common ceremony used in all Sacrifices, whether to the powers
beneath or those above; but with this difference, to these they did pour the
wine with the palm of the hand turned upward, supina manu, which the Latins
called fundere; to those with the palm of the hand turned downward toward the
ground, prona manu, by them termed invergere: Servius his words-are these,
Fundere est supina manu libare, quod fit in sacris superis: Invergere est
conversa in sinistram partem manu ita fundere, ut patera convertatur. Virgil
(ever studious of propriety) uses the word invergere: we cannot difference
them in the English, but by a long circumlocution; for fundere and invergere
with us are rendered promiscuously to pour. This Ceremony was used as a
probation of the Sacrifice; for if it did stupescere, stand still and unmoved,
it was rejected as sick and diseased, and consequently unfit for sacred uses;
if otherwise, it was approved, and they did proceed to the next ceremony,
omitted here by Virgil, which was Immolation, from Mola, which signifies a
barley Cake kneaded up with salt, which they crumbled and sprinkled upon the
head and back of the Sacrifice, drawing the knife wherewith they jugulated the
Sacrifice thwart his temples; both which are expressed by Virg. Aen. 12. Dant
manibus fruges salsas, and tempora ferro
Summa notant. --
They salted Cakes present, and with a knife
His temples marked. --
Which done, one cried with a loud voice, Macta est hostia, i. e. magis aucta,
more increased, and rendered more pleasing to the Gods; whence immolare and
mactare, though but one part of the ceremony, signify in the general to
sacrifice. The next ceremony to this in order was to pluck off the hairs (
Virgil uses setae here for pili) which grew between the horns, casting them
into the fire, which the Poet here calls libamina prima, the Greeks (...),
primitias: these three latter Customs are comprehended by Homer in these two
verses: Odyss. 3. (...)
(...).
Water and Cakes he sprinkling prays, and does
Hairs (from the temples plucked) to the flames expose.
Only Homer instead of (...), wine, uses (...), which signifies water to wash
the hands with: but that makes no difference, as to the probation of the
Sacrifice; for water will do that as well as wine. And from hence De la Cerda
deduceth the custom of shaving the heads of the Priests in the Roman Church;
his words are these, Quemadmodum evulsio pilorum fuit indicium victimae jam
devotae, and separatae a profanis usibus; ita hoc quidem indicat clericalis
tonsura. This done, the Priest using certain mystical words invoked Hecate, by
which Proserpine is meant in this place. But for the fuller understanding of
this we must make a more strict and deep research.

Hecate was the Daughter of Perses King of Taurica, and Wife of Aeeta, a
neighboring Prince, and King of Colchis; Mother to Circe and Medea, worthy
shoots of such a stock: She (as were her Daughters) was a famous Sorceresse; a
woman so transcendently cruel, that when at hunting she could find no other
game, she would with her lance or sword kill some of her Attendants. She used
to sacrifice all strangers, whose evil stars had unfortunately guided them
to those parts: lastly, having poisoned her Father, she usurped his Throne. For
which rare endowments and goodly merits she was deified, invoked and sacrificed
to by those of her own damnable profession. Thus have I showed you Hecate in
the true mirror of history; and now you may behold her through the optics of
poesy, where she appears as foul a Monster in her externals, as you have seen
her in her internals: She was said to be half a surlong tall, which is the ^6.
part of a mile, without question the properest of her sex: She had three heads,
the right of a horse, the left of a dog, and the middle of a wild sow; from
whence the Poets gave her the epithets of triceps, triformis, and tergemina:
instead of hair, serpents and vipers hung hissing, wreathing and curling
themselves about her shoulders: She was called Brimo from the ugly howling
noise she used to make. I cannot in particular give a reason why they
represented her thus; only in general, because she was thought to be an
infernal Goddess, and Patroness of Sorceresses and Witches, they imagined
that they could not depaint her with too much horror and terribleness. But to
the purpose: Hecate is a genericall word, applicable to many particulars; for
by it sometimes we are to understand Luna, sometimes Diana, and sometimes
Proserpina: In fine, when it is applied to Heaven, it is taken for Luna, when
to Earth for Diana, when to Hell for Proserpine. So the Sun in heaven is called
Sol, in earth Liber Pater, in hell Apollo: hence Virgil says that she is
Coeloque Ereboque potens, to which he might also have added terra. And from
these three denominations we may more rationally call her triceps,
three-headed, or else from the threefold aspect of the Moon, at the increase,
full, and decrease. At the increase she is said to be in heaven, and to borrow
light from the Sun, at the full to impart her own to the earth; and in the wane
to decline unto darkness, and as it were to the infernal Mansions. Mayenus
gives this reason why Hecate is said to be Coelo Ereboque potens, i. e. apud
inferos and superos potestatem habens, because whilst the Moon is above the
Horizon she gives light to us who are Superi or above in regard of our
Antipodes, and whilst she is beneath the Horizon, she gives light to our
Antipodes, who are inferi or beneath in regard of us. After this invocation the
Sacrificer (whom the Latins call Popa, or Victimarius) slew the sacrifice,
using in this also a different ceremony; ^or when they sacrificed to the
celestial Gods, having knocked the beast on the head, they laid him upon his
back with his throat upward, and so cut it: but when to the Infernals, they let
out his blood, holding his head toward the ground: hence Virgil says,
supponunt alii cultors: See Turneb. l. 15. c. 12. Cultros supponere does imply
in what posture the Victim lay. Nor did the Victimarius always slay the
sacrifice; sometimes those who came to offer slew it themselves, which was, as
the same Author observes, heroico ritu, after the manner of the ancient Heroes.
Homer makes Agamemnon do it, Il. 3. as Virgil does Aeneas here, who did
himself slay, and offer a black-fleec'd Lamb to the Furies, which is Nox, or
the Night; and to her Sister, which is Terra, or the Earth: they may well be so
near akin, for the night is nothing but the interposition or shadowing of the
earth. To Proserpine (because she is said never to have been pregnant) he
offered a barren Cow: to Pluto an entire Bull, or Holocaust, who because he was
deemed (as Not. Comes observes lib. 1. cap. 11.) that divine mind or spirit,
which as the soul thereof was diffused through the whole mass of the earth, and
did there preside, order and govern all things, as Neptune in the sea, Juno in
the air, and Jupiter in the celestial bodies; I say for this reason there was
little or no difference in the Ceremonies used to Pluto, and in those used to
the Celestials; for here, as you see, were Altars, Holocausts, Oil; the only
difference is, that all infernal sacrifices ought to be performed (as we have
said) in the night. But for the better elucidation of this place, and the
fuller understanding of those Rites and Customs used by the Ancients in their
Necyomancy, Necromancie, Sciomancie, and other infernal Ceremonies, read
Statius Theb. l. 4. Sil. Ital. l. 13. Ovid. Met. l. 7. f. 2. * Sen. Oedip. Act.
2. Scen. 1. Lucan. Pharsal. l. 6. out of all which thou may learn the wicked
and ridiculous superstition of deluded Antiquity.

Hell is said to be empty and void, either beause Death and the Grave are never
satisfied, or because there are none but ghosts and shadows there, which being
incorporeall, take up no room, nor fill any place.

Romans, according to A. Gellius l. 16. c. 5. and after him Macrobius l. 6. c.
8. used in their buildings to leave a spacious vacant place, or base-Court
before their Palaces, which divided the same from the street or highway: this
they called Vestibulum, where those who came to salute or speak with the Master
of the house remained a while before they had admittance; whence Vestibulum has
its denomination from ve, an augmentative particle, and stare; as vetus from
ve, and aetas; and vehemens from ve and men's; ve signifying here as much as
valde; ab illa ergo grandis loci consistione, and quasi quadam stabulatione
vestibulum appellatum est. This they used to adorn with Pictures and Statues,
as well to feed the eyes of their expecting friends, and to make their delayed
reception seem less tedious, as to grace and ennoble the building. To which
custom Virgil alluding here, places various forms and monsters, as well
before the Vestibulum of Hell as within the same. Here Reader thou may with
Quintilian observe the excellent judgment of the Poet, and great happiness in
the choice of his Epithets. Others of the Latins have aspired to imitate Virgil
herein, who (though in their attempt not unhappy) yet must submit to this true
idea and prototype of poesy. Thus Claudian. l. 1. in Ruffin. in emulation of
our Master describes an Assembly or Sessions of the like Monsters in most
luculent verses, and is herein inferior to none, unless to him who never
found his equal. Let us not seem to deviate from the purpose, if we make good
our assertion by these following instances: -- glomerantur in unum
Innumerae pestes Erebi, quocunque sinistro
Nox genuit faetu: nutrix Discordia belli,
Imperiosa Fames; leto vicina Senectus,
Impatiensque sui Morbus, Livorque secundis
Anxius, and scisso moerens velamina Luctus,
Et Timor, and coeco praeceps Audacia vultu,
Et Luxus populator opum, cui semper adhaerens
Infaelix humili gressu comitatur Egestas.
Foedaque Avaritiae complexae viscera Matris,
Insomnes longo veniunt examine curae.
Hells numberless plagues meet, all the accursed
Offspring of night; dire War by Discord nursed,
Imperious Hunger, Age on Death confining,
Self-wearied Sickness; Envy still repining
At others good; Sorrow with garments torn,
Fear, hoodwinked Rashness violently born;
Riot wealths bane, which wretched Beggary
(Creeping along) does still accompany;
Last, a long train of wakefull Cares (which hung
On their foul Mother Avarice) does throng.
Neither do those of Seneca in Herc. furent. seem to flow from a less
judicious or poetical strain. Horrent opaca fronde nigrantes comae
Taxo imminente, quam tenet segnis Sopor,
Famesque moesta tabido rictu jacens,
Pudorque serus conscios vultus tegit;
Metus, Pavorque, Funus, and frendens Dolor,
Alterque Luctus sequitur, and Morbus tremens,
Et cincta ferro Bella, in extremo abdita
Iners Senectus adjuvat baculo gradum.
Rough with dark leaves a Yews black head does nod
Over the lake, of lazy Sleep the abode;
Sad Hunger here with thin jaws yawning lies,
And Shame too late shrouding its conscious eyes;
Fear, Dread and Death, and groaning Pain succeeds;
Sickness, with Mourning clad in Sable weeds;
Then armed War; and lastly was espied
Limping Old Age, whose steps a staff did guide.
Nor les us disdain to hear Silius Ital. his Muse l. 13. Quarta cohors omni
stabulante per avia monstro
Excubat, and manes permisto murmr terret
Luctus edax, Maciesque malis comes addita Morbis,
Et Moeror pastus fletu, et sine sanguine Pallor:
Curaeque Insidiaeque atque hinc queribunda Senectus;
Hinc angens utraque manu sua guttura Livor:
Et deforme Malum, and sceleri proclivis Egestas,
Errorque infido gressu; and Discordia gaudens
Permiscere fretum coelo. --
A fourth troop with its Monsters quarters there,
Self-gnawing Sorrow with its plaints doth-skare
The Ghosts; there Leanness joined with Sickness, and
Grief fed with tears, with bloodless Palenesse stand:
There Cares, Ambushments, with repining Age,
And Envy which on its own throat does rage:
Want a deformed Curse, and prone to ill,
With Error reeling; Discord, which does fill
All things with dire Confusion. --


Aeneas within the same, relates what strange apparitions presented themselves
there. And first he says that there was an old shady and vast Elm, the
habitation of vain and ridiculous dreams: Seneca and Silius will have it a
Yew-tree: The Poets in general feigned sleep to reside aloft in a tree, that
from thence it might descend upon Mortals: Hence Val. Flaccus, -- dulces
excussit ab arbore somnos. And Homer Il. 14. makes somnus climb a tree, that
from thence he might shed sleep into the eyes of Jupiter. In particular, it was
feigned to be an Elm, or Yew-tree, because the green thereof being not fresh
and lively, but sad and drawing upon a black, from the very color seemed to
invite to sleep: Whence Ovid in his excellent description of the Palace of
Sleep, Metam. lib. 11.

At medio torus est Ebeno sublimis in antro
Plumeus, Uniculor, Pullo velamine tectus,
Quo cubat ipse Deus membris languore solutis, etc.
Amid the Eben Cave a downy Bed
High mounted slands, with Sable covering spread;
Here lay the lazy God dissolved in rest, etc.
Night and Erebus, and brother of Death, and therefore aptly placed in Hell;
and father of Dreams, which are those Images of things which are formed in our
sleep, by the various discursion of the spirits in the brain, which follows
concoction, when the blood is least troubled, and the fantasy uninterrupted
by ascending vapors. Of these (according to Ovid) there are three sorts, all
brothers and sons of sleep; the first called Morpheus, which signifies form;
the second by the Gods called Icelos, which is similitude, by Mortals Phobetor,
or a causer of fear, in regard of the terrors arising from fearful dreams;
and the third Phantasus, or imagination: all which express the nature and
original of dreams, which also are diverse, according to the meat we eat,
place where we live, the time, the business and discourse of the precedent day,
and lastly the variety of every ones temperament and complexion: Coel.
Rodiginus l. 9. c. 10. gives a more mystical and abstruse interpretation of
this place out of the Platonic Philosophy, to whom we shall refer thee, as
also to Macrobius in somn. Scipionis l. 1. c. 3.

Centaurs were monsters, in their upper part resembling a man, Centau^s.
and in their lower a horse: hence the Poet alluding to their equine nature,
says most properly, Centauri in foribus stabulant, that Centaurs were stalled
or stabled at the gates. They are said to have been begotten by Ixion on the
cloud which was presented to him by Jupiter instead of Juno, whom he sought to
adulterate. They are famed for nothing more then their drunken Counter-skuffle
with the Lapithae at Perithous his Wedding, excellently described by the
ingenious Ovid Met. l. 12. fab. 3. This fiction has an allusion to this
history. The Centaurs were a mountainous people of Thessalie, subject to Ixion,
whose regal City was called Nephele, which signifies a cloud; and because all
Kings are, or ought to be fathers of their people, Ixion from hence was said to
have begotten them on a cloud. These, because hardy and stout (as Mountainers
generally are) the King by propounding fair rewards, invited to destroy the
wild Bulls which infested part of his Country; whence they take their name of
Centaurs, from the Greek words, (...), signifying to gore with a javeling, and
(...), a Bull. They were the first who ever backed horses, who being seen by
the Borderers as they watered their horses at the river Peneus; were supposed
by them (amazed at so uncouth a sight) to have been really such as we have
represented them: and truly an exquisite horseman ought to place himself in
such a posture on horseback, as if ( Centaur-like) he were one piece with the
horse he bestrides. They were indeed a cruel libidinous people, and injurious
to strangers, and therefore the Poets invested their beastly minds with such
monstrous bodies, imposing also such names upon them as did correspond with
their wild and salvage natures.

Scylla's, one the Daughter of Nisus, King of the Megarenses, Scylla.
who betrayed her Father and native soil to his implacable enemy Minos King of
Crete: See Ovid. Met. lib. 8. fab. 1. the other Daughter of Phorcus, begotten
on the Nymph Cretheis: she was Circes Rival in the love of Glaucus, and by her
incantations changed into a most deformed Monster, for infecting the bay where
the beautiful Nymph used to bathe her self with her poisonous juices, Scylla
contracted a monstrous form, her upper parts retaining her former shape, but
her lower were said to be environed with howling wolves, and barking dogs,
attracting and destroying all ships which came near her: Hence the Poet calls
her biformis, thus by him described in his third book: At Scyllam caecis
cohibet spelunca latebris,
Ora e^^^tantem, et naves in saxa trahentem;
Prima hominis facies, et pulchro pectore virgo
Pube tenus, postrema immani corpore Pistris
Delphinum caudes utero commissa luporum.
But Scylla lurking in dark Caves, displayes
Her face, and ships to crushing rocks betrays;
A Virgin to the twist divinely framed,
Her nether parts with shape of Monsters shamed,
Deformed with womb of Wolves, and Dolphins tails.
Scylla was a rock under the Promontory of Rhegium on Italy side, over against
the Promontory of Pelorus on the coast of Sicily, under which the adverse and
equally dangerous rock of Charybdis did lift up its ragged head: The lower part
of this rock was full of holes and concavities (the dogs which are said to
bark, by reason of the noise of the repercussed waters) frequented by Lamprons
and greater Fishes, which devoured the bodies of the drowned passengers. Scylla
was said to retain the form and shape of a woman in her upper parts, because
this rock appeared to be such to those who beheld it at distance: it took the
name of Scylla from the Greek word (...), to spoil, or from (...), to vex,
whence she is said by Virgil (who happily alluded to the Greek) Eccl. 8.
Dulichias vexasse rates. -- And from hence sprung this Fable, and her fabulous
form; but both these formerly-perillous rocks of Scylla and Charybdis have (as
Mr. Sandys tells us, who had sailed those seas) lost their terrors by the
changing of the current, expressed by that marble fountain in Messena, where
Neptune holds Scylla and Charybdis in chains with these underwritten verses:
Impia nodofis cohibetur Scylla catenis,
Pergite securae per freta nostra rates,
Capta est praedatrix, Siculique infamia Ponti,
Nec fremit in mediis saeva Charybdis aquis.
Fast-binding fetters wicked Scylla hold:
Sail safely through our streights; brave ships be bold'
The infamous thief that kept those seas, is taken,
And fell Charybdis rages now in vain.
But if you will draw this Fable to a moral sense; then Scylla represents a
Virgin, who as long as chaste in thought, and in body unspotted, appears of an
excellent beauty, attracting the eyes and hearts of all upon her; but if once
polluted with the sorceries of Circe, id est, having rendered her Maiden honor
to be deflowred by bewitching pleasure, she is transformed into an horrid
Monster; and not so only, but endeavors to shipwreck others (such is the envy
of infamous women) upon those ruining rocks, and to make them share in the same
calamities.

Briareus (which in the Greek signifies strong) was a monstrous Giant, the
son of Titan and the Earth; he was said to have had an hundred arms, Briareus.
and fifty heads, and to belch forth flames of fire out of his mouth; called by
the Gods Aegaeon, as by mortals Briareus, according to that verse of Homer:
(...)
(...). --
Thus described by Virgil Aeneid. lib. 10. Aegaeon qualis, centum cui brachia
dicunt
Centenasque manus, quinquaginta oribus ignem
Pectoribusque arsisse; Jovis cum fulmina contra
Tot paribus streperet clypeis, tot stringeret enses.
Aegaeon (whom an hundred arms fame lent,
An hundred hands; from fifty mouths who sent
Destroying flames) when against Joves power he rose,
As many shields did rattle, swords oppose.
This Giant conspiring with the rest of his rebellious brethren against
Jupiter, was with a thunderclap struck dead by him, and buried under the
weight of imposed Aetna, which is said to tremble and belch forth flames
whenever the wearied Monster changes his posture. The Giants in general are
an emblem of the tumultuous and rebellious Multitude, which from the ignoble
and earthy soul wherewith they are animated, may very truly be styled sons of
the earth. But that Briareus in particular is said to cause Aetna to cast up
stones and flames of fire, whensover he moves, has a physical meaning; and by
him is understood the wind which struggles in the Caverns of the earth, causing
it to vomit forth fire, and to cast up stones against Jupiter, by which we are
to understand heaven.

Bellua Lernae, Beast or Monster of Lerna, a famous Lake in the Country of the
Argives, Hydra.
was that Hydra (so called by the Greeks) or Excetra (the Latin compellation)
a prodigious kind of Reptile with 50 heads, which infested the circumjacent
Plains, killing and destroying whatsoever man or beast came in its way.
Hercules, amongst the rest of his labors, was famed for subduing this Monster,
whose heads as soon as cut off did repullulare, three succeeding in the place
of one, insomuch that Hydra's head in a proverbiall acceptance signifies an
endless labor, or a concatenation, and linking of one disaster upon another;
it is also a type of popular sedition, and a National revolt, which is no
sooner quelled in one place, but that it breaks out with triplicated rage and
fury in another; whence the Vulgar is significantly denominated Bellua multorum
capitum, that many-headed beast, as was this Bellua Lernae. But the historical
sense of this fable (according to Servius) is this; Hydra, which derives it
self from the Greek word (...), i. e. water, was a certain place whence so
great a quantity of water did issue, that it did drown the neighboring
Country; nor could they sooner stop one eruption, but that the hydroraea or
water-flux became multiplied, and overran them with greater violence: which
Hercules perceiving, he fired those places, by which means he stopped that
prodigious dropsy: and that it is possible so to do, we have the authority of
Virgil: -- omne per ignem
Excoquitur vitium, atque exsudat inutilis humor.
Which is the reason he gives why they burn the stubble when the corn is taken
off. Thus Hercules, when by multiplication of blows he could not quell this
Monster, was said to effect this conquest by the application of fire, burning
those heads which no other force could tame. Others say that this Hydra was a
terrible water-serpent, and so fruitful, that they had no way to destroy it,
and its ever-multiplying progeny, but by setting fire to the place where it
hatched its eggs: Meyenus.

Chimaera was a most celebrated Monster amongst the Ancients, Daughter of
Typhon and Echidna, whose upper parts (vomiting fire) resembled a Lion, C^imae^a
the middle a Goat, and nether a Dragon; according to these verses of Homer,
borrowed of him by Hesiod in his Theogonia: (...)
(...).
This Monster was said to have been slain by Bellephoron mounted upon the
winged horse Pegasus. Chimaera (according to Servius) was a Mountain of
Sicilia; but according to the more generally received opinion, of Lycia, out of
whose top there proceeded fearful eruptions of fire; which also was frequented
by Lions; the middle part abounded with good herbage, and was stocked with wild
Goats: the foot thereof (which was sedgie and moorish) was a retreat and
receptacle for monstrous Snakes and Serpents. Hence Bellephoron (who rendered it
habitable) was said to have killed the Chimaera. Others say that this Chimaera
was a certain Pyrate of Lycia, a maritime Province in Asia Minor, who had a
Lion carved upon the head of his Ship, a Dragon on the stern, and a Goat upon
the middle part; who being overcome and taken by Bellephoron (whose Ship was
called Pegasus, and from its swiftness said to be winged) gave birth to this
Fable. But if we look upon the physical meaning hereof, Chimaera represents to
us the nature of rainswollen rivers or torrents, by the Greeks called (...)
there being no great dissonance in the words, which, because they are violent,
and make a roaring noise, are said to resemble Lions, because they bear all
things along with them; Goats, whose nature it is to crop and catch at
whatsoever is in their reach; and Dragons from their Maeanders, or oblique and
serpentine course; which Monster Bellephoron mounted upon Pegasus is said to
kill, because by the heat and virtue of the Sun (the true Bellephoron) the
abundant humor which lent supply to these torrents is drunk up and exsiccated.
But if you will consider it ethically, Chimaera sets before us the life of man,
who in his youth is as an untamed Lion; in his middle age as a wanton and
aspiring Goat, still striving to climb upon the steep rocks, and dangerous
precipices of honor; and in his old age becomes as subtle and crafty as a
serpent. But because there never was or could be any such thing in Nature as a
Chimaera, in our common speech we use by this word to denote any thing that is
a mere Ens Rationis, an impossibility, or a fiction.

Gorgons were 3 Sisters, Medusa, Stheno and Euriale, Daughters of Phorcus and
Ceto, Gorgons.
a sea monster inhabiting the Islands of the Darcades in the Aethiopick sea,
over against the Hesperides. They were said to have had heads like Dragons,
teeth like the tusks of Boars, iron hands, and wings; and lastly with their
aspect to petrifie, or to turn into stone those who beheld them. These Perseus,
son of Jupiter and Danae slew, being armed with the refulgent shield of
Pallas, helmet of Pluto, and with the fauchion and wings of Mercury: they were
called Gorgons from their terrible look; (...) with the Greeks signifying
truculencie, or fierceness of aspect. But because none could without assured
danger of his life look directly upon them, therefore Perseus beholding them in
the Mirror of his shield cut off their heads. From whose blood Chrysaor and
the winged horse Pegasus sprung up: but we must note, that before Perseus went
to the conquest of these Monsters, he did divert to the habitation of the
Graeae, two Sisters, Peph^edo and Enyo, who (according to Hesiod in his
Theagonia) were gray-haired from their infancy, and had but one eye betwixt
them, which they used in common: This Perseus intercepting as they passed it
one from another, made use of it as his guide and Pilot to the Country of the
Gorgons, etc. By the Gorgons are meant sensual delights, which are the assured
destruction and ruin of those who behold or pursue them; and which (although
they may seem to their deluded followers to be full of satisfactory contents)
yet in reality are as dangerous and untractable as Dragons, as fierce and
hurtful as salvage Boars, bruising and destroying with their iron hands;
lastly, for that they are of short continuance, they are said to have wings,
and suddenly to fly from those they have flattered and de^uded: Gaudia non
remanent, sed fugitiva volant. Perseus on the contrary, the son of Jupiter,
is Reason; the image and impress of God, who is the true Jupiter: The
hoary-headed Graeae, Experience acquired by long time, and the concomitant of
gray hairs: Their eye is the discerning faculty of the Soul: The shield of
Pallas, and helmet of Pluto; are our defensive arms, viz. constant good
resolutions, and fixed habits of virtue, whereby we sustain and resist all the
batteries and assaults of sensual allurements: the fauchion of Mercury, our
offensive arms, whereby we do not only resist and repel an invading
temptation, but (in the grapple and encounter, conquering and surmounting the
same) proceed to the highest acts of virtue and true perfection. But forasmuch
as pleasure proves sometimes too potent an enemy to deal and contend withal, a
wise man is said to put on Mercuries wings, that he may (by flying from what he
dares not encounter) elude and disappoint the force of his over-powerfull
adversary, according to the Spanish Proverb, qui en quita l'occasion, quita
el-peccado, he that shuns the occasion shurs the sin. And this is the (...), or
whole armor of a wise man; not unlike to that which is recommended to us by
the Apostle Epes. 6. But whereas* Perseus is said not to look upon Medusa and
the rest, but in the refulgency of his shield, is to hint to us not too
earnestly to behold with our eyes what our hearts are too prone to consent to.
Thus, as from the blood of the subdued Monsters the winged Pegasus took his
birth; so from the taming of our wild affections, and conforming to the
dictates of right reason, an honest and glorious fame (the true Pegasus which
flies through the mouths of men, and celebrates victorious virtue) is produced.
But the truth is, that these Gorgons were a race of warlike women in the coasts
of Libya, as the Amazons were in Asia, whom Perseus warring upon, subdued, and
utterly extirpated.

Harpyes (according to Hesiod in his Theogonia) were the Daughters of Thaumas
and Electra, and Sisters of Iris: they were three, Harpyes.
Aello, Ocypete, and Celoeno. Others say that they were the Daughters of
Neptune and Tellus, of old esteemed the Parents of all Monsters and Prodigies.
They are called Jupiters dogs; in hell Furiae, in heaven Dirae, on earth
Harpyjae: they were said to have the ears of a Bear, the body of a Vulture,
the face of a Virgin, humane hands and arms, but withal most dreadful and
monstrous talons: Thus described by the Prince of Poets, Aen. 3. Tristius haud
illis monstrum, nec saevior ulla
Pestis and ira Deum Stygiis sese extulit undis:
Virginei volucrum vultus, foedissima ventris
Proluvies, uncaeque manus, and pallida semper
Ora fame. --
Then them no Monster's worse, no greater curse
Or wrath of Gods e're sprung from Stygian source.
The fowls have Virgins faces, purging still
Their filthy paunches, armed with talons, ill
And ever pale with hunger. --
These was said to infest blind Phineus King of Thrace, to snatch the meat
from his Table, and to pollute and defile what they bore not away: they were at
last pursued and chased away by Calais and Zetus, the winged issue of Boreas,
to the Islands called Strophades, where they, giving over the pursuit, left
that name to those Islands (...), a conversione, which were formerly known by
the name of Plotae. The moderns call them Stivali. And what are these Harpyes,
but flatterers, Delators, and the inexplebly covetous, who abuse, devour, and
pollute the fame of Princes, blinded in their understandings? whom Zetus and
Calais (said to be winged from their vigor and expediteness in State Affairs,
and the service of their Country) are famed to expel, thereby freeing the
Court and Council of the abused Prince from those pernicious Monsters. But
Avarice is the vice more properly depainted and reprehended by these Harpyes,
which take their name from Rapine, (...), and are said to be Virgins, in that
barren, because goods ill gotten descend but seldom to posterity; to fly, in
that they are swift in extorting; to be covered with plumes, from cloaking and
concealing there prey; to have talons of vultures, from their griping and
fast-holding of their unjustly ravished goods. These qualities are also
characterized in their names; Aello quasi (...). from taking away what was
another; Ocypete from (...) and (...), from celerity and flying; Celeno, from
(...) which signifies black. Thus a covetous man is an Aello or invader of
another, which like an Ocypete, or kind of prey, he does with all violence
and greediness, being a Celaeno, or close and dark in his proceedings. You may
draw this Fable to a physical sense in this manner; by the Harpyes is
signified the nature of the wind, and all flatulent Meteors, which are
therefore said to be born of Thaumas, the Son of Pontus or the Sea, and Electra
the Daughter of Sol or the Sun; for such is the wind which is generated from
the vapors of the sea, drawn up by the Sunbeams, whereof the more gross and
thick parts are condensed into rain, the more thin and subtle extenuated into
wind. Their names also are agreeable to the nature of the wind; for what is a
greater Harpy, i. e. more violent and rapid then the wind? what more an
Ocypete, or swift-flying? what more an Aella, i. e. a storm? for from thence is
Aello also derived; or what more commonly accompanied with Celaeno, i. e.
obscurity, then windy and tempestuous weather? Lastly, as the Harpyes are said
to be winged, what is more frequent in our common speech, then the wings of the
wind, from its extraordinary swift and rapid motion?

forma tricorporis umbrae, which we have expressed by three-body'd Elves,
Geryon.
the Poet understands the Ghost or representation of Geryon, the Son of
Chrysaor and Callirhoe; said to have three bodies, either from the three
Islands (the 2 Beleares and Ebusus, now known by the names of Majorca, Minorca
and Ivica) which were under his dominion and Signiory: Or for that (as Justin
testifies l. 44. c. 4.) there were three Brethren of them, who lived together
in such and concord fraternal amity, as if they had had but one soul to actuate
their three bodies. And may not this Fable be verified in this our age? have
not we our Geryon? is not our dread Sovereign Lord of three mighty Kingdoms?
What is Majorca to England? Minorca to Scotland? and Ivica to Ireland? what in
extent? what in fertility? Why did Antiquity boast so of its Geryon, and shall
not we proclaim our unparrallel'd happiness in our Charles the second? second
indeed to none in all Princely endowments and royal accomplishments, insomuch
that his inherent worth alone and noble personage seem to have designed him for
Empire, had he no other title: (...). But when we consider in what amity and
love, how united and linked together our gracious Sovereign and his two Royal
Brethren live, we cannot but affirm that (according to the mythologie of this
Fable) they seem to have but one soul to actuate their three bodies; the
contemplation whereof strikes fire into my Muse, and forces me into this short
Poetical rapture: Antiquity, what were the reasons why
Thou did so much ascribe to the number Three?
What mysteries (to us yet unreveal'd
Through thy dark Counsels) lie therein concealed?
Three Graces why? and why three Parcae pray?
Oth' world The Ancients divided the World into 3. parts, viz. Europe, Asia,
and Africa (...) our Moderns have added a fourth, v^z. America. vi.
three parts, and Morning, Noon and Night.
three parts of the day?
The Muses three times three? the Trinity
(Highest of mysteries) made up by Three?
Nay, why in hell three Judges did thou seign?
Three Furies why, t'inflict on mortals pain?
If faith assure us that a Trinity
In heaven does sway, if by Mythology
We are instructed that a tripartite
Power does preside over those Realms of night;
Sense I am sure (then faith and story both
An evidence more clear and certain) does
Tell us that earth is destined now to be
Governed by a Royal Trinity.
Great Charles, brave York, and sprightly Gloucester,
The names which to all Nations peace or war
Are destined to dispense, where they or frown
Or smile, they give or take away a Crown.
Three Brethren thus Nature did once obey;
Jove ruled the Heavens, Neptune the raging Sea,
Pluto the parts beneath; their influence
Did to all things or Good or Bad dispense:
And thus the little world (man's body) is
If Aristotle's School teach not amiss)
By three soul's ruled; we the praeeminence
To Reason give, the second place to Sense,
The Vegetative claims the third; and thus
You, Princely Triade, the three souls which us
And this our Western world do swage; it is you,
To whom your friends and enemies both bow,
As those for love, so these for fear: I say
It Is you, who hearts as well as Empires sway.
This blessed union then let naught divorce,
And nothing shall resist your matchless force.
But I am engaged in so pleasing and copious a subject, that I can hardly take
my self off, or return to our fabulous Geryon, from whom we have so far
digress'd; wherefore you must know that he was said to be a most merciless
Tyrant, and therefore slain by Hercules, who having also killed his two-headed
Dog, and seven-headed Dragon, the Guardians of his purple-coloured Oxen,
together with Eurition, the instrument and Minister of his cruelty, is said to
drive away that precious Drove out of those Islands into Greece. This story is
briefly touched by our Author, lib. 8. Aen.

-- maximus ultor
Tergemini nece Geryonis, spoliisque superbus
Alcides aderat, taurosque hac victor agebat
Ingentes; vallemque boves amnemque tenebant.
Alcides, who in Geryon's death did boast
And spoils; that great Avenger to our coast
Did come, and did his Cattle hither guide;
His Herds possessed the vale and riverside.
Spain was anciently a most fertile Country, abounding in all things necessary,
as well for the use and sustenance of man, as serving for superfluous pleasures
and luxury; and in those days was esteemed the Granary of Italy and Rome,
that insatiable Cormorant and devourer of the riches and plenty of the whole
world; as you may read in Justin. l. 44. c. 1. But of all the parts of Spain,
those Islands subject to Geryon were most happy, and so abounding in herbage,
that if they did not sometimes take their Cattle off from feeding, they would
dye either of fat, or repletion; so much is the present soil altered and
impaired, to what it was in elder times; whence the Droves of Geryon (wherein
consisted the sole wealth of that Age) were so famous, that they invited
Hercules (that great Land-looper) to an expedition out of Asia into Europe.

Aeneas having passed through the Vestibulum, or base-Court of Hell, The Rivers
of Hell.
proceeds to the river Acheron, which next receives those who travel into
those dark and irremeable Kingdoms: We shall confine our speculations
concerning the infernal Rivers to this Section; they were 5. in number,
Acheron, Cocytus, Phlegeton, Styx, and Lethe, all mentioned by Virgil in this
Poem. Nor were these fantastical, but real Rivers, and feigned to be infernal
streams, either from the unpleasantness and unwholsomness of their waters, or
for that (losing themselves under ground) they did disappear, and after a long
subterranean course, as if springing from Hell, break forth again. And for
these reasons Pausanias in Atticis is of opinion, that Homer confined them to
Hell, and imposed on them the names by which they are now known. Acheron.
Thus Acheron, so called, as Servius will have it, quasi (...), joyless, or
(...) because it is a River which flows with grief and trouble; is a River of
Epirus, near the Town of Pandosia, in the Province of the Threspoti, flowing
out of the Lake Acherusia, which receiving many smaller streams into its
channel, posts along with them into the Bay of Ambracia, and is now known by
the name of Velichi. There is another of this name in the Country of the
Brutii, a Province of Italy, with a Town so called also, where Alexander King
of Epirus, Brother to Olympias, and Uncle to the great Macedonian Alexander,
lost his life; for being forewarned by the Dodonean Oracle to avoid the River
Acheron, and the Town of Pandosia; and ignorant that there were any other
places so called, passed into Italy, where (partly to shun the danger threatened
him, and partly to satisfy his own innate ambition and thirst of Empire) he
joined with the Tarentines against the Brutii; but meeting there an Acheron and
a Pandosia, he met those fates also which he endeavored to elude, his life and
vain hopes expiring together under the walls of Brutian Pandosia: Justin. l.
12. c. 2. Strabo l. 6. Livie l. 8. But to come to the Mythologie; Acheron
taken, as here it is, for one of the infernal Rivers, was said to be the Son
of the earth, because that Auri sacra fames, that accursed covering of riches,
which are dug and forced out of the bowels of the earth, creates very great
inquietudes and perturbations of mind, signified by this word Acheron,
according to the above given etymology thereof: and because men for the love
of wealth often hazard their souls, and pass the River Acheron into eternal
damnation, Acheron was said to be thrust down into hell for administering drink
to the Titans when they fought against Jupiter: by this are covertly meant the
wicked and rebellious togitations, whereby in assisting and cherishing out
sins, his enemies, we fight against our great Creator; justly repayed with
the worst of punishments, because they have offended the best of Entities. The
water thereof is said to be of a most ungrateful and unpleasant taste, because
the recordation of our past actions, and the account we are to give, cannot but
be very unpleasant and distastefull to us. Lastly, it is the first of all the
Rivers which the Deceased are to pass, because when wicked men are upon the
point of death, an Acheron, or grief of mind does thereupon seize them, both in
regard of those dearly beloved pleasures they leave behind them, and of those
dreaded pains which they expect, as the just guerdon of their former
delinquencies. Acheron amongst the Poets is frequently taken for Hell it self.

Cocytus, Cocytus.
according to Pausanias, is a River of Epire also, near the Town of Cichyrus in
the Province of the Threspoti, and happily may join and mingle with Acheron:
Hence Virgil alluding to the true position and topography of these two Rivers,
may say that Acheron does eructare omnem arenam in Cocytum, fling up its sand
into Cocytus, id est, with its thick and troubled waters, discolor the purer
stream of Cocytus. This is also feigned to be a River of Hell, taking its name
(...), which signifies to weep or lament; this was said to receive a continual
supply of waters from the tears of the Damned; and is therefore called by
Silius, lacrymarum fons: the mythologie of this is coincident with that which
we have given of Acheron.

Styx is a fountain at the foot of Nonacris, Styx.
a Mountain of Arcadia, whose water (by reason of the intense coldness
thereof) was deadly to all who tasted it; dissolving all sorts of metal,
insomuch that it could not be kept or contained in any vessel of gold, silver,
brass, or iron, or any thing else but an Asses hoof: and was thought to be that
poison which by Antipaters means was administered to Alexander the Great, as you
may read in Plut. in his life. This River is mentioned by Herodot. in Erato, by
Pausanias in Arcadicis, by Pliny l. 2. c. 103. and l. 31. c. 2. This also for
its subterranean passage, and the poisonous quality of its waters, is reckoned
amongst the infernal streams, and is called Styx, (...), i. e. hateful; which
in a literal sense may be verified of it, in regard of its nature and
qualities: in a moral, in regard of that hatred which the penitent dying man
has to sin; for as by Acheron we are to understand that sorrow and contrition
which an expiring man conceives for his past offenses; so by Styx is meant that
detestation, loathing and disclaiming which we feel in our souls for the same.
Cael. Rhodiginus l. 27. c. 5. alluding to the etymon of Styx from (...),
hateful, says, that therefore the Gods swore by Styx, or the hateful River,
quia a Diis and hominibus odio habentur qui ad dejurium sunt procliviores,
because the perjured are hateful both to God and Man. This was therefore that
Stygian flood, Dii cujus jurare timent, and fallere numen.
as Virgil says of it here, and of which Homer l. 5. Odyss. in the person of
Calypso to Ulysses writes thus; (...);
(...)
(...).
Bear witness earth, and the wide heavens above,
Yea Stygian waters which beneath do move;
The highest and most serious oath which ties
The blessed Gods, who dwell in starry skies.
Nor could the Gods either revoke that promise, or frustrate that oath which
they had confirmed by the intervention of that sacred name; if they did, they
were for a penalty of their perjury expelled the Council and society of the
Gods for 10 years, and interdicted the celestial drink and food of Nectar and
Ambrosia, as you may read in Hesiods Theogonia. This honor was conferred upon
the River Styx (as the same Author affirms) for assisting Jupiter against the
rebelling Giants. The learned Lord Verulam in his book de sapientia Veterum,
says, that by Styx we are to understand Necessity (which though it has no law
it self, is of all laws the most binding) and Leagues of Princes, which (though
with all solemnity and formality concluded) are easily frustrated, unless the
Deity of Styx, that fatal and irremeable River, be called to witness, and seal
to the Conditions, that is, unless there be a firmer tie then either that of
oath or bed, a necessity of keeping the Articles of agreement, by some mutual
pledges given, or for fear of some loss, danger, diminution of State or
Customs; and then Leagues are held truly sacred, and strictly observed, and as
it were confirmed by the invocation of Styx, when there is a fear of that
interdiction, and suspension from the society and banquets of the Gods; under
which name and title the Ancients signified all rights and prerogatives of
Empire, with all affluence and felicity, which good Patriots study to procure
for their beloved Country.

Phlegeton is a fourth River, Phlegeton.
called by Homer Pyriphlegeton, from (...), fire, and (...)* to burn: This is
merely fictitious; and is said to roll rapid and fearful flames of fire down
its soultry channel. As this flowed with fire, so Cocytus (as we have said) was
swollen up with tears, both which (according to Claudian l. 2. in Ruff.) embraced
the infernal Palace of Rhadamanthus. Phlegeton represents to us the burning
wrath of God against sinners, and is a type of those torments which the wicked
deservedly suffer in Hell in inextinguishable flames.

The fifth and last River of Hell is Lethe, Lethe.
which signifies Oblivion, which whosoever drunk of forgot all fore-passed
actions or sufferings. Pythagoras, and from him the Platonists held and
maintained the transmigration of souls, which after their solution from the
body descended into a certain Purgatory, where after a great many years
purgation they were brought to this River Lethe, of which having drunk* they
forgot whatsoever miseries or incommodities they had suffered, when they were
formerly joined with the body, and thence reverted without any reluctance into
the same: but we shall examine this fancy more strictly hereafter. Lethe is
indeed (as Stephanus witnesses) a River in Africa, flowing by the walls of
Berenice, which is swallowed up by a great gulf, and running under ground many
miles, breaks forth again; which gave occasion to the Country People to think
that this River sprung from Hell: All which Rivers are thus described by Sil.
Ital. l. 13. Punic.

-- late exundantibus urit
Ripas sa^vus aquis Phlegeton, and turbine an^elo:
Part alia torrens Cocytus sanguinis atri
Vorticibus furit, and spumanti gurgite fertur;
At magnis semper Divis, regique Deorum
Jurari dignata palus, picis horrida rivo,
Fumiferum volvit Styx inter Sulphura limum:
Tristior his Acheron sanie crassoque veneno
Aestuat, and gelidam eructans cum murmr arenam
Descendit nigra lentus per stagna palude.
Rough-swoln Phlegeton its banks does burn,
And in its soultry-streames scortch'd stones does turn:
Cocytus torrent then with putrid blood
Does flow, driving along its foaming flood:
But Styx (by which the great Gods, and the King
Of Gods vouchsaf's to swear) black with its spring
Of molten Pitch, its reaking mud, commixt
With Sulphur, tumbles: Acheron the next
More sad then this, with poison swells and gore,
And belching up its noysom sand, does rore,
Whilst, slow with its black waters, through a Lake
It into Hell does fall: --
And this is the vulgar and common interpretation of these fictions. Macrobius
l. 1. c. 10. in Somnium Scipionis, treading in the steps of the more ancient
and primitive Philosophers, (who were of opinion that Hell was nothing but our
very bodies, wherein our souls being included, underwent a nasty, horrid and
irksome restraint) finds all those things in our selves which fabulous
Antiquity attributed to Hell, the Region of the Damned. Hence (according to
their assertion) he affirms that Lethe, or the River of Oblivion, is nothing
else but the errors and mistakes of the soul, forgetting the state, majesty,
and perfect knowledge wherein it lived before it was confined to the loathsome
Dungeon of the body. That Phlegeton, or the River of fire, is nothing else but
that preternaturall inflammation and exorbitant fire of lust, concupiscence,
anger, and other untamed affections, which put the soul out of that equal
temper which is natural to it. That Styx is whatsoever does sink the Soul into
dislike and hatred of its own actions: Cocytus whatsoever causes tears and
grief: Acheron whatsoever deprives us of the joy and content of our lives.
Hence they concluded that the soul was dead so long as it remained in the body,
and that then it recovered its pristine life and liberty, when it by death hand
emancipated it self from the bonds and servitude of the same: Hi vivunt qui e
corporum vinculis evolaverun; nostra autem quae dicitur vita, mors est: Cicer.
in Somn. Scipion.

Charon, which signifies joy, was the son of Night and Erebus, as Hesiod will
have it, Charon.
who makes all the infernal Monsters the progeny of those Parents: see him
here to the life depainted by Virgil, so that nothing can be added to that
genuine and lively Prosopopaea which the Poet has given us of him; we will
only illustrate our description with the like out of Seneca in Herc. furent.
Hunc servat amnem cultu and aspectu horridus,
Pavidosque manes squallidus gestat senex;
Impexa pendet barba, deformem sinum
Nodus coercet, concavae lucent genae;
Regit ipse conto Portitor longo ratem.
A foul old man, frightfull in dress and face,
Guarding these streams the fearful Ghosts does pass;
His beard untrimmed hangs, and you might see
Through his thin hollow cheeks; a knot does tie
His nasty coat; himself with a long pole
His boat does steer. --
Charon was said to be rough and unpleasant to all his Passengers whatsoever;
for seeing all whom he wasted over naked alike, he thought that no one was
better then another, that there was no difference between Kings and Princes,
and between the inferior and rascally Multitude; for death is that great
Leveller which takes away all distinctions of place and degrees: Sub tua
purpurei venient vestigia Reges,
Deposito luxu, turba cum paupere mixti;
Omnia Mors aequat. -- Claud. 2. de rapt.
Before thee purpled Kings (of their late pride
Divested amongst the poorer rout espide)
Themselves shall prostrate; Death does equal all.
Wherefore to win the favor of this rigid and implacable Boatman,
superstitious Antiquity put a piece of money (called by the Latins Naulum, by
the Greeks Danace) into the mouth of the Dead. As by the forementioned Rivers
are hinted to us those troubles of mind, confusions and distractions of
thoughts, which arise from the consideration of having offended a good and
gracious Deity, and from the apprehensions or fear which we have of his
displeasure, and the consequence thereof, punishments proportionate to our
delinquencies; so by Charon, which (as I have said) signifies Joy, we are to
understand, that satisfaction and acquiescence which we find in our selves upon
the opinion of our innocence, or, that which is next to it, upon a firm
resolution of amendment of life for the future; all which joined with an
unfeigned repentance begets in us a hope of Gods mercy and goodness, which
creates serene thoughts and a real joy within us, the true Charon, which wafts
us over those turbulent streams of our late distractions to the Elysian fields
of pacified and reconciled thoughts. Before we conclude this Paragraph. we will
touch upon a Criticism or two. Virgil says of Charon, -- Stant lumina flamma.


Critics to vary somewhat in their interpretations of this place: Stant, i. e.
horrent, Servius; sunt rigida, Scaliger; Plena sunt, Turnebus; non conniventia,
sed patula and irretorta, others; all which put together Meyenus does thus
interpret the Poet, Oculi Charontis inflexibiles, and semper aperti and intenti
stantes, quasi flammas emittebant: we have here, as you see, rendered the full
sense of all these, though paraphrastically, and in more words then the
Original; but (if I may judge) our Author has lost nothing in the traduction:
His eyes (like saucers) stare, like fire do glow. Virgil says of Charon, that
he did Corpora subvectare cymba, a mere contradiction; for he says anon,
Corpora viva nefas Stygia vectare carina. We have therefore both mended the
sense, and reconciled the contradiction, whilst we have rendered it thus,

Wherein his airy freight he over does pass. The Ancients were of opinion that
the unburied could not be passed over by Charon, but that their ghosts wandered
an 100 years about the banks of Cocytus; whence nothing was more solemnly
observed amongst them then the interment of the Dead, which was done either by
a real, or an imaginary sepulture: Cenotaphium*
This latter they called (...), when the rites of burial were observed for the
dead, when absent, as if the Corpse had been there present, and was thought as
effectual as to their transfretation by Charon as the other. Hence Deiphobus
his Ghost (as we shall see anon) was transported, for whom Aeneas had raised a
Cenotaphium, or empty Monument; which the Poet means also when he speaks in the
person of Anchises concerning the young Marcellus; -- fungar inani
Munere. --
And for this reason the Egyptian Kings, when they would express an implacable
hatred and revenge against their offending and executed Subjects, would not
suffer their bodies to be buried, that their punishment might survive their
lives. But whereas the Poet says, that the Ghosts of the unburied wandering
about the banks of Cocytus, were excluded for an 100 years from the Elysium, or
place of rest; this is, I say, drawn out of the mysterious doctrine of the
Platonists, by whom the number of 10 was held in great veneration, and termed
by them numerus perfectus and universus, the perfect and universal number, as
being the first compounded number, and containing in it all the kinds and
differences of number, as even, odd, the quadrantal, Cube, long and plain,
which are the distinctions of those Schools. Hence, as if by Nature preferred
to all numbers, we have ten fingers to count upon; and hence it was the custom
of the Ancients, upon any solemn promise or contract, to join their right
hands, because thereby they did premise this number, as an inviolable pledge of
their sincere and real intentions: and hence our Author (a great Platonist)
insinuates this number of an hundred years, because it is an universal number
arising from ten, ten times multiplied; for ten Denaries make a Centenary: for
the same reason also he allots a thousand years for the purgation of souls, as
we shall see anon, a thousand being an universal number also; for an hundred
ten times multiplied makes a thousand; both which are therefore thought
universal, because they arise from the multiplication of ten, the first
universal: but if you desire to wade further into these abstruse speculations
of numbers. we shall remit you to Cael. Rhodiginus l. 22. lect. antiq. who has
sifted Antiquity herein.

Palinurus, the Master of Aeneas his Ship, Palinurus.
is related by Virgil at the close of the precedent book, which is here again
repeated by himself, because Aeneas till now knew nothing of the manner of his
drowning. In fine, having made a full and perfect relation thereof, he desires
Aeneas to carry him along with him over the River Cocytus, but is reprehended
for his unseasonable and illicite request by Sibylla, because he was as yet
unburied; but withal encouraged, for that ere long those inhumane Lucani, who
had murdered him, should expiate their barbarous assassination, by appeasing
his Ghost, and by raising a Cenotaphium for him on that Promontory, which from
him should bear the name of Palinurus, on which also stood the Town of Velia
here mentioned. But Jul. Higinus, as A. Gellius relates, l. 10. c. 16. is very
severe here against Virgil, accusing him of a very gross mistake against
Chronology; for Velia was not then built, but a long time after, viz. in the
reign of Servius Tulius, by the Phocians, who were expelled their native soil
by Harpalus, King Cyrus his Lieutenant: but this must be salved by the figure
called Prolepsis, as we have noted. 2. concerning Cumae. Turnebus l. 22. c. 1.
excuses the Poet thus, saying, Virgil spoke with a reflection upon the
notation or etymology of the word Velinus, which is the same with Palustris:
Velia, anciently wrote Helia (as Servius notes) coming from (...), which
signifies a fenny place; so that portus require Velinos, is portus require
Palustres. But speculations of this nature are not the principal design of
these Annotations, we shall herein refer the Reader to the Grammarians. We
shall note one thing before we conclude this. Palinurus desires Aeneas to bury
or inter him, tu mihi terram injice. It was a custom among the Ancients, that
whosoever light upon an unburied Corpse (were his haste never so great) was
bound to bury it, or to cast earth upon it. Quanquam festinas (non est mora
longa) licebit
Injecto ter pulvere, curras: Horatius l. 1. Od. 28.
Though haste thee press, it is no long delay,
Thrice cast on dust, and then hye thee away.
Quintilian more positively, Declam. l. 5. Insepultum quodlibet corpus nulla
festinatio tam rapida transcurrit, ut non quantulocunque veneretur aggestu:
hence whosoever omitted this common act of humanity was looked upon as an
execrable person; neither do I conceive that they were bound to dig a Grave,
unless they pleased; it was enough for the discharge of their duty to cast
dust or sand upon the Corpse, which they were bound to do thrice, as Horace
witnesses; which done the party was taken for buried, although it was not
quite covered with the earth or sand they cast upon it: and this is the meanest
and slightest sort of sepulture, yet enough to prevent the hundred years
wandering in the other world; for which reason Palinurus desires this last and
least kindness of his friend, tu mihi terram injice.

Aeneas and Sibylla approaching the banks of the River Cocytus, are saluted by
Charon with rude and Boatman-like language; mark the artifice of the Poet in
fitting the speech according to the person and quality of the speaker, imitated
herein by Senec. in Herc. furent.

-- dirus exclamat Charon,
Quo pergis audax? siste properantem gradum.
Fell Charon cries aloud, whither bold man
Do thou advance? thy hasty course restrain.
Charon terrified by the threats of Hercules transported him, but was for that
fact (as Servius notes) held in chains a whole twelve-moneth; wherefore he had
no reason to be pleased, or to do the like in the person of Aeneas, who for
ought he knew might come upon the same design the other did, who, as the fable
says, Cerberus.
drew Cerberus from Hell; in a moral sense that is, did subdue and conquer all
sensual pleasures, all low and earthy delights: for by Cerberus we are to
understand the earth, which consumes and annihilates bodies, whence Cerberus
takes its name from (...), i. e. Carnivorus, a flesheater. But this Fable of
Hercules, with that of Theseus and Pirithous, Theseus and Pirithous.
took its rise from this following story, which you may read in Theseus his
life, written by Plutarch. Theseus Son of Aegaeus and King of Athens, and
Pirithous King of the Lapithae, were very intimate friends, and sworn Brothers
in arms; both persons of exceeding strength of body, and undaunted courage of
mind: Pirithous had assisted Theseus in the rape of Helena; such exploits in
those days being esteemed acts of gallantry and manhood; wherefore he desires
his friend to do the same for him in a design of the like nature. A^doneus
King of the Molossions had a most accomplished and beautiful Lady to his Wife
called Ceres, Ceres. Proserpina.
with a Daughter called Proserpina, equally deserving. He had a Dog also of a
monstrous size, and Lion-like fierceness, with whom he made those ^ight who
came to ask his Daughter in Marriage, promising to give her to them who should
overcome his Cerberus; for so was the Dog called. But understanding that
Pirithous came not like a Suitor, to request her in marriage, but as a
Ravisher, to steal her away, he surprising both the Gallants, made him
Prisoners; but for Pirithous, he caused him presently to be torn in pieces by
his Dog, and shut Theseus up in a close Prison. In the mean time Hercules
(Theseus his Contemporary and friend, who traveled through the world, seeking
adventures) came also into those parts to combat with this terrible Dog, whom
conquering he carried away captive with him, delivering also his friend Theseus
out of chains. But for a little variety and diversion, let us see the fight
between the imaginary Cerberus and Hercules, as it is lively described by Sen
in Herc. furent.

-- Sensit ut motus pedum,
Attollit hirtas angue vibrato comas,
Missumque captat aure subrecta sonum,
Sentire and umbras solitus. Vt proprior stetit
Jove natus, antro sedet incertus canis,
Et uterque timuit: ecce latratu gravi
Loca muta terret; sibilat totos minax
Serpens per armos: vocis horrendae fragor
Per ora missus terna felices quoque
Exterret umbras. Solvit a laeva ferox
Tunc ipse rictus, and Cleonaeum caput
Opponit, ac se tegmine ingenti clepit
Victrice magnum dextera robur gerens;
Huc nunc and illuc verbere assiduo rotat,
Ingeminat ictus; domitus infregit minas,
Et cuncta lassus capita submisit Canis,
Antroque toto cessit: extimuit sedens
Vterque solio Dominus, and duci jubet;
Me quoque petenti munus Alcidae dedit.
Tunc gravia Monstri colla permulcens manu
Adamante texto vincit; oblitus sui
Custos opaci pervigil regni Canis
Componit aures timidus, and patiens trahi,
Herumque fassus, ore submisso obsequens
Vtrumque cauda pulsat anguifera latus, etc.
As soon as he his footing heard, he does
His Brisles (stiff with brandished snakes) oppose;
With prick'd-up ear (the Ghosts even wont to hear)
Catching the sound; but when Joves Son more near
Approch'd, the Dog sat doubtful in his den,
And both did seem to apprehend; lo! then
Those mute abodes with his deep throat he scares:
About his shoulders wreathed his threatening hairs
Of Serpents hiss; his dreadful voices sound
(Sent through his treble mouth) does even confound
The blessed shades: Then the other in a rage
His Lions spoil devesting, does engage,
And himself covering with that mighty shield,
With his all-conqu'ring hand does nimbly weild
His knotty Oak, his strokes he often repeats;
And now the vanquished Dog his threats abates;
He wearied hangs his Heads, and's Den does quit;
His Pluto and Proserpine.
Patrons both (spectators of the fight)
Did fear, and him resign; they also Theseus, the person here speaking.
me
At the request of Hercules did free.
The Monsters wearied necks then stroaking, he
Them with an Adamantine chain does tie:
No more himself, Hel^s watchful Guardian lay's
His ears for fear, he quietly obeys
His new Lord, and with a submissive mien
His Serpents tail does wag. --
Sibylla (called here Vates Amphrysia, i. e. Apollinea, from Apollo, who kept
Admetus his flocks near the River Amphrysus) with the same decorum replies to
every particular of Charons speech, and answering to all his objections, tells
him the true end and intention of Aeneas in this his undertaking. Meyenus does
thus moralize upon this place: By Aeneas his descent into Hell to advise with
his Father, is meant the study of Philosophy, or a strict search and diligent,
indagation after truth, which is said in abdito latere, to lie in as profound
and difficult a place to approach as Hell it self: By the fatal branch is
hinted to us the wisdom, will, and conduct of the omnipotent and omniscient
God, without which no man can attain to true knowledge; upon the sight of this
bough therefore Aeneas his intentions being known to be just, and approved by
the Gods, Charon receives him into his Boat, and (though with some difficulty)
passes him over the River Cocytus; which place is thus imitated by Seneca in
Her. fur. speaking of Hercules his transportation.

Non passus ullas natus Alcm^na moras
Ipso coactum navitam conto domat;
Scanditque puppim: Cymba populorum capax
Succubuit uni, sedit, and gravior ratis,
Vtrinque Lethen latere titubanti bibit.
Alcmena's Son impatient of delay
The Boatman makes with his own pole to obey;
He goes aboard: under one the boat sinks,
Which thousands could receive, and o'recharg'd drinks
Lethe at both its tottr'ng sides.
Aeneas was landed, the first encounter he had was with Cerberus, Cerberus.
the infernal Dog and Porter, whose Den was opposite to his landing: He was
said to have three heads, and Serpents instead of hair, to be of an immense
proportion, fierce and devouring: thus depainted by Sen in Herc. furent.

Hic saevus umbras territat Stygias Canis
Qui trina vasto capita concutiens sono
Regnum tuetur; sordidum caput tabo
Lambunt colubrae, viperis horrent jubae,
Longusque torta sibilat cauda Draco;
Par ira formae. --
Here by the Stygian Curre the Ghosts are scared,
Who shaking his three heads those Realms does guard
With his deep yels; snakes lick his putrid head,
About his main themselves soul vipers spread,
A Dragon at his twisted tail does hiss;
Such as his form, his fright full fierceness is.
Sibylla laying him with all his Hydra's asleep by casting to him this sop, did
with Aeneas proceed without any further interruption from this vigilant and
terrible guard. Cerberus signifies the Earth, or the Grave, which devoureth
all flesh, and from thence (as we have said. 49.) receives his denomination: He
was said by Hesiod. in Theogon. to flatter all comers, and to fawn upon them,
but to assayl with horrible yels all such as endeavored to return: thereby
insinuating, that as the grave is the receptacle of all flesh, so that there is
no return from thence. But to moralize more parti^rularly upon this place, by
Cerberus here we may undestand Obloquie, the oblatration, barking, or snarling
of a detracting tongue, to which even Aeneas himself, that is, the most
deserving is (through mistakes) many times liable: but the way to break the
fury of immerited clamours, is not violently to oppose, that does more
irritate; but to cast a sop to Cerberus, to use seasonable lenitives and
discreet Perswasives; for malice is never more disappointed, never more out of
countenance, then when we either silently neglect it, or by well-doing convince
it.

Virgil distributes Hell into nine several quarters or regions; the first is
of Infants; The Regions of Hell.
the second of the unjustly condemned; the third of self-murderers; the fourth
of Lovers; the fifth of Warriors; the sixth of Criminals; the seventh of
Purgatory; the eighth of those who were to return again into life; the ninth of
the Elysium. And that of Infants is very aptly placed in the entrance of Hell,
as who were in the very entrance of their lives snatched away.

Virgil alludes to the manner of proceeding used in his age in causes
criminal, it will not be impertinent to enlarge a little upon this subject;
you must therefore know that those who were stituted Judges in criminal or
public causes, were by the Romans styled Quaesitores, and by the figure
Syncope Quaestore^, from the verb quaerere, to seek or inquire, because they
did examine and punish all capital crimes; they were also called Praetores
Quaesitores, and Judices Quaestionis: They did not pass sentence by word of
mouth, but when they absolved the party accused, they wrote upon certain small
pieces of wood or table^s, called in Latin tesserellae, toleolae, tabellae, or
calculi, the letter A. i. e. Absolvimus: If they judged him guilty, then he
wrote C. i. e. Condemnamus: if they found the cause difficult and doubtful,
then they inscribed N. L. Non liquet: Not unlike our Ignoramus given in by the
grand Inquest, whereby the party accused is delivered from all further
prosecution: See Cowels Interpret. And then the Cause was put off, and left
undecided for a second hearing, which was termed by the Civilians Ampliatio, or
Comperendinatio; see Calv. lex Jurid. and Turnebus advers. l. 1. c. 3. The
tables thus written upon were put into a vessel which they called Vrna, and
there being shaken together, were drawn forth: Hence Virgil says, Quaesitor
Minos urnam movet. -- These sentences, because written in tables, were termed
sententiae tabulariae, and sorts, because drawn out of the Urn, as lots were
out of a Lottery. This does not only give light to this place of the Poet, but
to that where he says at the beginning, stat ductis sortibus urna: But whereas
Minos is made here by the Poet to be chief of Hells grand Inquest, is consonant
to the received opinion of those fabulous times: Minos was son of Jupiter by
Europa, and King of Crete, who from his exact and severe administration of
Justice whilst he lived, was feigned to have been made by Pluto one of the
infernal Judges, with whom Rhadamanthus and Aeacus were joined in Commission;
of whom more anon.

Greeks call (...), Against Selfmurder.
who out of a irksomness of living, laid violent hands on themselves. This
Suicide, or self-murder (though colored over and defended from the practice
and example of some few otherwise gallant men, as Themistocles, Cato,
Vticensis, Brutus, and others, and allowed of by Seneca, and those of the
Stoicall School) was by the wiser sort of Heathens not only not thought a
virtue, or act of fortitude, but its contrary, direct Cowardice; as Aristotle
concludes, Ethic. l. 6. c. 7. his words are worthy the inserting: (...), etc.
To kill a man's self to avoid want, or for love, or other affliction and cross,
is not the part of a valiant man, but rather of a Coward; and proceeds rather
from an effeminate and soft nature then otherwise: Nor only so, but it was by
Plato, and the Sect of the Acadmicks forbidden as a thing unlawful, and an
high offense against the Gods; and concluded so to be by Tully in Somn.
Scipion. Nisi cum Deus, cujus hoc templum omne quod conspicis, is it is te
corporis custodiis liberaverit, huc tibi aditus patere non potest: Unless God,
whose Temple this All is which we behold, free thee from these bonds of the
Body, can thou hasten thy journey to the other world: for to that this
particle ( Huc) relates: See Macrob. in Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 13. And therefore
Plato (as Servius observes) makes their souls to be grievously punished in
Hell, whose late possessors had before the expiration of Natures Lease
over-hastily turned them out of doors. But why Styx is said here novies
interfusa, nine times encompassed, Interpreters vary: some say that the Poet
alludes here to those sacra novendialia, the Ceremonies and Rites observed
about the dead, whose body was kept eight days, and interred the ninth: others
to the nine Regions of Hell above mentioned; but De la Cerda and Meyenus
conclude with Cael. Rhodigin. l. 22. c. 8. that the number of 9. as being a
most perfect and absolute number, is taken here indefinitely for any number or
multitude, so that novies here is eqvivalent with multoties.

Of Lovers.
First, that this place has the name of the fields of Mourning, from that
grief and melancholy which is the individual companion of impatient Lovers.
Secondly, that they spend their time in secret, close, and retired walks, as
such who being ashamed of their forepassed commissions, shun the light and all
conversation, as Ovid speaks of Nyctimene, -- quae conscia culpae
Conspectum lucemque fugit, tenebrisque pudorem
Celat. -- Ovid Met. l. 2. f. 9.
-- she full of guilt the sight
And day did shun, and masked her shame in night.
Or because Lovers (for the Poet speaks principally of the unchaste) out of the
nature of this vice commit that sin in secret. Thirdly, that they converse in
myrtle Groves, as the Slaves and Satellites of Venus, to whom that tree is
sacred. Fourthly, that, though dead, they retain their former love and
affection; for this vice (we still speak of unlawful love, that is, lust)
sticks most pertinaciously, is never, or with much difficulty eradicated;
natural inclination seconded with evil habits, rendering the unchaste an
irredeemable vassal to his own filthy desires. The examples the Poet presents
us with here are all of women, as the sex the most impatient of love, and the
most unbridled in their appetite. Of these the first is Phaedra, Daughter to
King Minos, and Wife of Theseus King of Athens, who by Antiopa the Amazon, a
former Wife, had a Son called Hippolitus. He, as well in his vow and love of
Chastity, as in that of hunting, showed himself to be a true Votary of Diana,
the Goddess of both. Phaedra.
Phaedra falling in love with her Son in Law, courted him to her bed; but the
more virtuous Youth, refusing to stain his Fathers sheets, disappointed his
lustful Mother; who impatient of the affront, as also fearing to be her self
betrayed, and accused by Hippolytus, took the advantage of anticipation, and
told Theseus that his Son would have forced her. The over-credulous Father
vowing revenge, pursues him with curses, whom (because fled) he could no
otherwise pursue. The Gods (who oftentimes yield to unjust Petitions, for a
punishment to the Petitioner) heard his rash vows, and provided a sad and
sudden destruction for the Son, whom the Father had so undeservedly cursed,
for as Hippolytus took his flight by the seaside, certain sea monsters called
Phocae (which lay basking themselves on the shore) affrighted at the noise of
his chariot, and the trampling of his horses, thre^ themselves with great
violence into the sea; the horses in like manner affrighted thereat, ran away,
and overturning the Chariot, tore the entangled Youth limb from limb; which
when the conscious Phaedra knew, after confession of her own wickedness and
false accusation, she expiated her crime by becoming her own executioner: See
Sen in Hipp^l. and Ovid. in epist.

Procris, Procris.
whose story (related at large by Ovid. Met. l. 7.) we shall contract in this
manner; Precris was the Daughter of Erectheus, King of Athens, and Wife of
Cephalus, who (though a true lover of his Wife, and a great admirer of her
virtues) upon I know not what suspicion, incident to lovers, coming to her in a
disguise, attempted her chastity; she having made a resistance sufficient to
testify her loyalty, at last by his over-acted importunity, and all-conquering
presents, yields; when he discovering himself, upbra^ds her with her
infidelity: Whereupon Procris convinced and ashamed, forsakes her Husband, and
hides her self in woods and desert places: but at last peace being made betwixt
them, she gave him (who delighted much in hunting) an inevitable dart, and a
dog exceedingly swift, called Lelaps: Thus provided, Cephalus was much abroad
in the woods, and rising before day from his Wife, went often a hunting:
wherefore Pr^cris searing that under pretense of going a hunting he quitted her
embraces, for those of some beloved Nymph, followed him privately into the
woods, and there as a spy hid her self amongst the bushes. Cephalus being
tired with heat and toil, happened to retire himself into the shade near the
place where Procris lay, and there (according to his custom) called upon Aura,
i. e. the Air, to refresh him; she thinking that by that name he called upon
his expected Mistress; that she might make the better discovery, raised her
self, and by stirring the bushes gave him a suspicion that some wild beast lay
there obscured; wherefore casting his never-missing dart (his unhappy Consorts
fatal present) he unwittingly slew his dearest Wife. A story invented to
deter from jealouse, the bane of all conjugall content, and from imaginary
and groundless suspicions, which are oftentimes the cause of real and fatal
tragedies.

Eriphyle was (according to Eustathius) Daughter of Talaus, E^ip^yle.
wife of Amphiaraus and Adrastus his Sister, who corrupted by Polynices with a
chain of gold, betrayed her Husband, who absented himself that he might not
accompany Adrastus in the Theban expedi^ion, where he knew he should certainly
perish. But Amphiaraus resenting very highly the perfidiousness of his Wife,
left it as his last legacies with his Son Alcmaeon, that as soon as he should
receive the certain news of his death he should slay his Mother, which he (
facto pius and sceleratus ^odem) in revenge of his Father performed; therefore
the Poet says of her here,

-- moestamque Eriphylen
Crudelis nati monstrantem vulnera cer^it.
The nex was Evadne, Evadne.
the Daughter of Mars by Thebe, the Wife of Asopus; she was Wife to Capaneus,
one of those Captains who accompanied Adrastus in the Theban Wars; who loved
her Husband so passionately, that when his exequies were solem^ized, she cast
her self into the same flames which consumed her beloved Consort.

As for the story of Pasiphae, La^damia.
we have already enlarged upon it. 4. we shall therefore proceed to Laodamia,
the most affectionate Consort of the undaunted Protesilaus, who notwithstanding
that it was foretold him by the Oracle, that whosoever of the Greeks should
land first upon Phrygian ground, should for his forwardness pay the price of
his life, first lept on the shore, where encountering Hector, he was by him
slain. His Wife receiving the sad news of her Husbands death, conceived such
invicible grief thereat, that she resolved not to survive him; yet desired,
that before her death she might see his Ghost, which seen she immediately
expired.

That last of this Catalogue was Caenis, Caenis.
once a beautiful Virgin, who obtained of Neptune, that for her surrendered
Virginity she might be changed into a man, and become invulnerable: this was
granted her by the grateful God, and so from Caenis, a woman, she became
Caeneus, a man, changing her name with her sex: but at last in the fight
between the Centaurs and the Lapithae, when he could be wounded by no weapon,
he was overwhelmed with an heap of wood, and so dyed: he (as Virgil testifies
here) after his death was turned into his primary sex, and therefore is here
ranged amongst the women.

Amongst these the Poet very appositely introduces the lately deceased Dido,
describing with all circumstances, apt to raise passion, the interview betwixt
her and Aeneas; we shall not insist at all upon her story, but recommending the
Reader to the fourth of the Aeneis (where it is inimitably expressed by our
divine Author) proceed to the next region or partition of Hell.

Where we are presented with a survey or general muster of some of the most
eminent Warriors and Chieftairs of their times; whereof the first he mentions
are such as died in the Theban Wars: The Region of Warrior.
Of these none was more renowned then the valiant Tydeus, Tydeus.
the Son of Oeneus, King of the Aetolians, and Father of Diomedes, a person
as high in courage as he was low in statute; of whom Statius thus, Celsior ille
gradu procera in membra, simulque
Integer annorum, sed non and viribus infra
Tydea fert animus, totosque infusa per artus
Major in exiguo regnabat corpore virtus.
Which Mr. Stephens renders thus;

The Theban was the taller, and had told
More suns then he; but Tydeus was as bold
And equaled him in courage; give him's merit,
In a less room there reigned a greater spirit.
He having unhappily killed his Brother Menalippus, fled from his incensed
Father to Adrastus, King of the Argives, where meeting Polyneces, a fugitive
also, after sharp conflict between them, they were reconciled, and became
Brothers, Tydeus marrying Deiphile, and Polynices Argia, Adrastus his two
Daughters. He having his native Aetolians under his command, was one of the
seven Princes of Greece, who followed Adrastus to the Wars of Thebes, where
having given great and frequent proofs of his valor, he was at last slain by
one Menalippus a Theban.

Parthenopaeus was one of those seven Princes also, Parthenop^eus.
Son of Atalanta and Meleager, and King of Arcadia; he went very young to those
Wars, whence returning with ill success, he did after accompany the Grecian
Princes to the Wars of Troy, where having showed himself as bold in fight as
he was skillfull in conduct, was slain. He was noted as well for his beauty and
swiftness of foot, as for his valor: Of him Statius thus lib 4.

Pulchrior haud ulli triste ad discrimen ituro
Vultus, and egregiae tanta indulgentia formae;
Nec desunt animi, veniat modo fortior aetas.
None of those who did venture to the place
Of danger, had so sweet a beauteous face;
Nor is true courage wanting, if his age
Did lend him strength and power to engage.
The third was Adrastus King of the Argives, Ad^aqstus.
and chief of the league against the Thebans: He after the loss of all his
great officers but Parthenopaeus returned home, where he died ingloriously.
Before we proceed, you may observe by the by, that there were three most noted
Epoch's or computations of time amongst the Ancients, higher then which
profane Story gives us no light. The first was from the expedition of the
Argonautes to Colchis for the golden Fleece, which (according to our learned
Countryman, and most diligent Chronologer, Dr. Simpson) happened in the
fifteenth year of Gideon, of the world 2743. and before our Savior 1260. The
second was from the Theban war, which (as the same Author testifies) fell out
in the fifteenth year of Thola, Judge of Israel, in the year of the world 2785.
forty two years after the former, and before our Savior 1218. Lastly, from the
Trojan War, which was undertaken by the Greeks in the 19. of Judge Jair, of the
world 2812. before Christ 1191. These three memorable expeditions administered
matter to the Heroic Muses of diverse famous wits; the gests of the Argonauts
were celebrated by the Greek Muse of Apollonius Rhodius, and by the Latin of
Valerius Flaccus, two Authors esteemed by the learned, though not usually
conversed with in our common Schools: The Theban War was sung by the sublime
Papinius Statius. Lastly, the Trojan was the Theme of the great Homer, and the
greater Virgil, the two glorious Luminaries of heroic poesy, and
inexhaustible treasuries of all Phiolosophy and humane literature. But pardon
this digression, and we shall return. From the Grecian Worthies the Poet makes
a transition to the Trojan, where he makes the interview betwixt them and
Aeneas to be with more then ordinary passion. He sighs to behold his
Countrymen and acquaintance, whilst they express very great content in seeing
a person so deserving, and for his deserts so worthily renowned. The Trojans'
which Virgil names here were Glaucus, sone of Antenor, slain by Agamemnon: who
Medon was it is uncertain: Thensilocus was killed by Achilles, Il. 21. who the
Antenoridae were it is not decided by Interpreters, as likewise who Polybaetes
was; but for Idaeus he was Priam's Charioter; whence the Poet makes mention
here of his Chariot and Arms. Aeneas passes from his Trojan friends to the
Greeks, his enemies, where our Author (whose design it was to magnify his
Aeneas, and to undervalue the Greeks) makes them for fear to fly from him in
the lower world, whom they so much dreaded in the upper: See, and learn hereby
to observe that decorum which is required in writing.

The Poet, with much delight to the Reader, Deipho^us.
does amplify in the story of Deiphobus, one of Priams Sons, who after Paris
his death, married his relict, the fair, but to her Husbands the ever-fatal
Helena. Virgils narrative of the cruel massacring and dismembring of Deiphobus,
agrees with that which Dictys Cretensis the Historian gives of it in his fist
book: There is nothing of difficulty in this whole relation, we shall therefore
pass it over with a brief note or two. Aeneas hearing of the death of
Deiphobus, raised (according to the custom of those times) a Cenotaphium, or
empty Monument for him; which was not only to express the duty of a friend, but
because such ceremonies were thought efficacious as to the prevention of the
hundred years wandering about the banks of Cocytus, as we have already hinted.
46. of which the chief and most material was to call on the dead thrice, which
was done by repeating the word vale three times; which were the verba
novissima, of which we also have already spoken. The next was to write the name
of the Dead, with some brief Epitaph, upon the stone, and there to carve his
arms as a monument of his profession: all which are expressed here by Virgil;
Tunc egomet tumulum Rhaetaeo in littore inanem
Constitui, and magna manes ter voce vocavi
Nomen, and arma locum servant. --
The next thing we note is the interpreting of these verses of Virgil, Hac vice
sermonum roseis Aurora quadrigis
Jam medium aethereo cursu trajecerat axem.
Whilst thus they talk, morn with her rosy wain
Had more then measured the Meridian.
This place has much perplexed Interpreters; we shall pass by others, and
adhere herein to the exposition of our Countryman, the learned Mr. Farnaby; you
must therefore know, that these magical Rites were necessarily to be finished
within the space of 24 hours: the sacrifices were begun in the nighttime, about
sunrising they begun their journey, the forenoon was spent in passing the
River Styx, in surveying the Regions of Hell, and in discoursing with Dido and
Deiphobus; and now it was supposed to be past noon: How then Virgil should make
mention of Aurora, or the morning, which determines at the appearing of the
sun, or say that the morning had passed the Meridian, there is that nodus and
crux interpretum, which is thus untied; by Aurora here we are to understand the
Sun, because Virgil puts four horses in her Chariot, whereas both Aurora and
Luna, the Morning and the Noon, are by the Poets allowed no more then two;
which indeed is Donat's interpretation, Aurora cum quadrigis solemn significat;
so that the meaning of Sibylla's speech is this: The Sun has passed the
Meridian, and is now declining toward the West, the night draws on; let us
therefore hasten that we may employ our remaining hours with Anchises, the
chief end of our present undertaking. Thus Mr. Farnaby: See Servius, De la
Cerda, Meyenus upon this place, who every one expound it variously.

Discedam, explebo numerum, reddarque tenebris.
I Will go in darkness my set time to spend.
Some go along with Macrob. l. 1. in Somn. Scip. c. 13. who in my judgment
seems to expound this place more subtilely then soundly: we shall follow Mr.
Farnaby in this also, who says, that Virgil means by number that set time
which is allotted for the purgation of souls (of which anon) before they can
return into this world, and reassume new bodies. The Purgatory torments
(according to Plato's doctrine) were completed after the expiration of 10, an
100, or a 1000 years, according as the soul to be purged was more or less
stained; so that the sense of Deiphobus his words is this, Be not angry, I will
depart to finish in darkness, or those places of darkness, that number of years
which is set or appointed for my purgatory or expiation.

Aeneas having passed that Region where the Warriors resided, came to a
certain Bivium, or place which divided it self into two paths; that on the
right led to the Elysium and Pluto's Palace, that on the left to Hell, the
place of torments; and this is that which the Ancients call Tartarus, with
which our English word, Tortu^e, although not really from thence derived, for
it comes from Torqueo, bears some proportion in the sound. This is depainted by
Virgil so much to the life, that the very reading strikes a terror and
aprrehension in any one who does diligently and in all circumstances consider
the same; all things here are so plain and obvious, that we need not vex the
Reader with glosses and interpretations where there is no knot. That
description which Claudian l. 2. in Rufin. gives of Pluto's Palace, may serve
to illustrate this place:

Est locus infaustis quo conciliantur in unum
Cocytus Phlegetonque vadis, inamaenus uterque
Alveus; hic volvit lacrymas, hic igne redundat.
Turris per geminos flammis vicinior amnes
Porrigitur, solidoque rigens adamante sinistrum
Proluit igne latus; dextra Cocytia fundit
Aequora, triste gemens, and fletu concita plangit:
Huc post emeritam mortalia secula v^tam
Deveniunt, ubi nulla manent discrimina fati,
Nullus honor, vanoque exutum nomine Regem
Proturbat Plebeius egens. --
With direful Phlegeton Cocytus here
Its waters joins, both streams unpleasant are;
With tears this swells, that does overflow with fire,
A towr environed with both these (more near
The flames) does stand; the left side Phleg'ton laves,
Made strong with Adamant; Cocytus waves
Do dash against the right; this wailing glides,
And drives laments down its tear-swollen tides:
Here Mortals (when life's glass is run) descend,
Where no distinctions do the great attend,
No honor: here the poorest Commoner
The unking'd King does justle. --
Sibylla here makes a relation of a punishments which the Damned sustain in
Hell, where (following the Poets method) we shall observe this order; first,
who were the infernal Judges; secondly, who the Executioners; thirdly, what
persons and crimes were here punished; fourthly, what the infernal punishments
were. There were therefore three Judges of Hell, The Judges of Hell.
viz. Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Aeacus; Of Minos we have already spoken. 53:
Rhadamanthus was a Cretan born, therefore entitled here Gnossius, from
Gnossus, the capital City of Crete; he was a person of a very austere life, and
very rigid in distributing justice; wherefore he was by Minos (who was also a
very severe and just Prince) constituted supreme Judge of the Nation; and for
this reason after their deaths they were both said to have been ordained Judges
of Hell. This Rhadamanthus was Author of the Law which the Greeks call (...),
(...), or lex talionis:
the Latins lex talionis, conceived (as Aristotle witnesses Eth. l. 5. c. 5.)
in these words; (...):
It Is just that one should suffer as h' has done.
Which therefore the Philosopher styles (...); and happily from him it was
translated into the Laws of the 12. Tables, as you may read in A. Gellius lib.
20. c. 1. where he introduces Favorinus the Philosopher, and Sex* Caecilius
the great Lawyer, discoursing concerning the reason and equity of this Law.
Aeacus was the Son of Jupiter and Aegina, King of Oenopia, an Island of the
Aegaean sea; which he afterward called from his Mother Aegina, Met. l. 7. f.
25. he also for his justice was feigned to be one of this infernal Triumvirate:
Of these thus Sen^in Herc. furent.

Non unus alta sede Quaesitor sedens
Judicia trepidis sera sortitur reis;
Auditur illo Gnossius Minos foro;
Rhadamanthus illo; Aeacus, Father of Peleus, who married Thetis, and on her be
got Achilles, who from his Grandsire Aeacus was called Aea^^des; so that by
Thetidis socer Thetis her Father in law Aeacus is understood.
Thetidis hoc audit socer,
Quod quisque fecit patitur; authorem scelus
Repetit; suoque premitur exemplo noncens.
Not one Judge from his lofty throne does pass
Upon the trembling Nocent death; alas!
In that Court Gnossian Minos does preside;
Here Rhadamanthus; in a third the are tried
By Aeacus; all suffer, as the have done
Their pains bear with their crimes proportion.
Furies, The Futies.
the hellish Executioners, to be tormented; which, as the Judges were, so were
they in number, three, Tisiphone, Alecto, and Megaera, three Sisters, the
Daughters of Erebus and the Night, or of Pluto and Proserpine, the Devil and
his Dam; known to the Latins by the names of Furiae, because of the terrors
and distractions wherewith they afflicted the Guilty; and Dirae, quasi Dei
irae, because such distractions arise from the just anger of God upon
offenders, or because they are Executioners of Gods wrath: To the Greeks by
those of Erynnyes, quasi (...): for the same reason the Latins call them
Furiae; and Eumenides, per antiphrasin, or by the contrary, for Dysmenides,
quasi minime mites, from their hostile and implacable severity: Servius and
Eustath. (...) in the Greek signifies benevolent and gentle, (...) the
contrary. They were said to be lean, tall, to have hollow and blood-shotten
eyes, tresses of Serpents instead of hair, and a girdle of the same
incompassing their wastes; a torch in one hand, and a whip in the other, as you
may read in the Poets, to pursue whose descriptions of this kind would be
infinite: but the end and drift of them all, was to depaint and set forth
horror and ugliness in its genuine colors in the person of the Furies, thereby
to deter men from committing such crimes as should render them obnoxious to
the evil treatment of such merciless and dreadful tormentors. But what indeed
are these Furies, what their torches, snakes and whips, but the girds and
prickings of an evil conscience, but the inward accusations of a guilty mind,
and those throws and pangs which accompany evil commissions? -- nec vulnera
membris
Vlla ferunt, men's est quae diros sentiat ictus.
Now would upon their bodies could be found;
It was the mind that felt the direful wound:
Ovid. Met. l. 4. speaking of Athamas.
And why are they said to be three, but to signify those three praedominant
affections, viz. anger, lust, and covetousness, which precipitate men, and
carry them on to such unlawful undertakings as do certainly beget the
persecutions and torments of a bad conscience? Tres furiae significant tres
animi adfectus, qui homines in omnia facinora praecipites agunt; quarum ira
ultionem, cupiditas opes, libido voluptates desiderat: Cicer. They are said to
be Virgins, because no ways to be corrupted from taking due revenge upon the
malefactor: an evil conscience can by no artifice be so quieted and allayed,
but that it will still rise up against and check the evil-doer; it will still
confront him, accuse him, and condemn him. But to proceed; after these Furies
had terrified with their snakes, and torn the bodies of the Damned with their
whips, then they were (as you may gather out of our Author here) tumbled
headlong into the abyss of Hell, called Tartarus, where they were for ever
vexed with most exquisite torments. Thus Rhadamanthus (Claudian in Rufin. l.
2.) passes this terrible sentence upon that monster of men, Rufinus; which
though a Fiction, I cannot read without an inward dread and apprehension.

Tollite de mediis animarum dedecus umbris,
Adspexisse sat est; oculis jam parcite nostris,
Et Ditis purgate domos; agitate flagellis
Trans Styga, trans Erebum; vacuo mandate Barathro:
Infra Titanum tenebras, infraque recessus
Tartareos; nostrumque Chaos, quo Ditis opaci
Fundamenta jacent; praeceps ubi mersus anhelet
Dum rotat astra Polus, feriant dum litora venti.
From 'midst the Ghost remove of souls that slain,
One sight's enough, our eyes no more profane:
Purge Dis his house, with whips drive him away,
Beyond Styx, beyond Erebus; convey
Him to the unfathomed Gulf, which lies beneath
The Titans dungeon, and the dreadful depth
Of Tart'rus and our Chaos, where are laid
Black Hels foundations; be he there conveyed
Where headlong tumbled, he may panting lie
Whilst winds strike shores, and stars adorn the sky.
The Titans.
The first of these were the Titans, the sons of Titan and the Earth, the
common Parent of all monstrous and obscure productions, and therefore such are
called (...), earth-born: these were said to have warred against Jupiter,
pretending right from their Father Titan (elder Brother to Saturn, Jupiters
Father) to the celestial Kingdom; but failing in their rebellious attempt,
they were cast into the bottomless pit of Hell, there to suffer never-ending
torments.

Aloides, The Aloides.
Othus and Ephialte, twins, the putative sons of Aloeus and Iphimedia, but
indeed of her and Neptune, who were said to grow every month nine inches; so
that in nine years they became nine else long, and nine cubits broad: these
relying on their vast proportions, casting the Mountain Ossa upon Olympus, and
then Pelion upon them both, endeavored to scale the heavens, and to force
Jupiter out of his native Kingdom; but being slain by Apollo, they were
precipitated into this place also. Both these are emblems of rebellion which
(being hatched by wiser heads) is set on foot by the Titans, the sons of the
earth, that is, the common rout, and which, like the Aloides, increasing to a
great strength in a short time, if not suppressed, heaps Pelion upon Ossa, that
is, subverts the fundamentals of government; which though moddel'd, and put
together with the greatest policy and prudence that may be, and as firmly
rooted as a moutain, is oftentimes shaken, removed, and overthrown by the
convulsions and earthquakes of popular sedition: But mark its reward, it
seldom is successful, but carries its punishment with it, not only in this
world, where it usually expires upon a gibbet, but as the blackest of
transgressions is punished (as by these examples is clear) in the other, with
the worst of punishments, viz. eternal damnation. These Fables were invented to
keep Subjects in their due obedience.

The third was Salmoneus, Salmoneus.
son of Aeolus (according to Servius) and King of Elis, who not content with
regal Majesty and honor, impiously aspired to divine; and that he might
imitate Jupiter, he caused a brazen bridge to be built, over which he drove his
Chariot, to counterfeit thunder, and darted firebrarnds and torches in
imitation of lightning, causing those to be killed at whom he flung his
imaginary thunderbolt: but himself was at last slain by Jupiter (as you see)
and thrust into Hell: as in the former examples rebellious Subjects are
reproved, so in this ambitious, proud and tyrannical Princes are reprehended.

The fourth was Tityus, Tityus.
the son of Jupiter by Elata, Daughter of Orchomerus, or (as Virgil says) of
the Omni-parent Earth, so large that when extended, he was said to cover nine
acres of ground: He for attempting Latona's chastity, Mother of Apollo, was by
him for his insolence killed, and being thrust into Hell, suffered that cruel
and endless torture which you see here expressed. Here you see how lust, and
all inordinate desires are rewarded. The truth is, that by Tityus we are to
understand filthy Concupiscence, which (according to the opinion of Physicians)
resideth in the liver, as laughter in the spleen, anger in the gall; whence his
liver is said to reincrease and grow as it is devoured, because beastly desires
are no sooner satisfied, but that they return again; and for this reason also
he was said to cover nine acres, because lust does late patere, is very
extensive, unbridled and ranging. But most worthily is Tityus punished in his
liver, as the seat of lust. The divine justice is oftentimes so precise and
notorious as to afflict the very partts which have offended. Thus the very hand
which Jeroboam stretched out against the man of God, and no other part, shrunk
up and withered.

The fifth was Pirithous, Pirithous.
who was therefore damned because he attempted Proserpine, as we have already
said: The sixth was Ixion, Ixion.
Father of Pirithous, and King of the Lapithae, who for the attempt upon June
was punished in the same manner. The story of Ixion in short is this: Ixion
(King of the Lapithae, a barbarous people of Thessalie, and son of Phlegyas)
having treacherously slain his Wifes Father Deioneus, and for that fact, and
other misdemeanors dethroned, and expelled his Kingdom by his own Subjects,
was by Jupiter (pitying his disconsolate and sad condition) received into
heaven, and made a Privado to the King of the Gods. But (as Favorites often
do) abusing his Princes friendship, he endeavored to stain Jupiters bed, and
to that end made great Court to Juno, who (as naturally honest, as she was a
cursed Shrew and ugly) discovered it to her Husband: he (hardly crediting that a
person so obliged could prove so ungrateful) would not at first entertain any
prejudicial opinion against his friend, unless he had some more evincing
evidence: wherefore transforming a cloud into the shape of Juno (now by compact
consenting) he by this experiment found out the falsehood of the designing
Adulterer, who for his desired Mistress embraced a cloud: and indeed that
contentation and satisfaction which the unchaste promise themselves in their
illicit and beastly enjoyments, proves but a cloud, a mere nothing; neither
answering the pleasure expected, or countervailing the sin committed; turpis
est and brevis in coitu voluptas. For this fact Ixion was cast out of heaven,
who not ceasing to boast of the affront he had put upon Jupiter, was for this
second piece of insolence thrust into Hell, where he was said to be tied to an
ever-turning wheel; though Maro has invented another kind of punishment. But
the History which gave rise to this tale is this; Ixion (banished by his own
Subjects) fled to a certain neighboring King (for every King was anciently by
his Parasites styled Jupiter) where he was courteously entertained by that
Prince: but endeavoring to corrupt the Queen, was by her discovered to her
Husband, who purposely put a trick upon him, by deceiving him with a servant
called Nephele, which signifies a cloud; after which being expelled the Court,
he was said to wander up and down as unquiet and restless in mind as one who is
turned on a wheel is in body. This Fable is invented against the ungrateful
and treacherous, who repay kindness and desert with injury and falsehood, with
which no punishment but that of Hell can bear proportion. As for the Lapithae,
The Lapith^.
they were a bloody, barbarous, and inhospitable people, as were their
Conterraneans the Centaurs, and might therefore as well as they deserve to be
confined to those infernal Mansions. But whereas the Poet mentions here the
hanging stone, etc. it is to set before us the life of a Tyrant, which though
in show glorious and splendid, yet in reality is very miserable and sad, being
as obnoxious to inquietudes and disturbances of mind, as it is to personal
hazards and dangers; as is manifested by the Story of Democles, Democles.
Dionysius his Parasite, who admiring and magnifying the happiness of that
exquisite Tyrant, was by him clothed in royal robes, and set at a magnificent
and richly-furnished Table; but a naked sword hanging over his head by a
slender thread took away his appetite, and made him desire to be disrobed, and
divested of that honor and state which was accompanied with so much peril and
anxiety: See Val. Maxim. and Tully l. 5. Tusc. quaest: and to this particular
Story the Poet may happily allude.

The Poet having alleged diverse particulars, lest he should cloy the Reader
with too many instances of the same kind, does as it were sum up his discourse
in these following generals, placing such as are found guilty of these or the
like crimes in Hell; whereof the first are such as hate their own Brethren,
whom by the Law of Nature they are tied to prosecute with all kindnesses and
good offices; therefore if hatred be thus severely punished, and hereby
forbidden, whatsoever is greater, as fratricide, is much more detestable.
Secondly, those who have lifted up their hands against, or struck their
Parents, whom by the same Law of Nature they are bound to reverence, honor and
obey: The Law was, that whosoever struck his Father, should lose that hand
which had been guilty of that intolerable offense: Si quis patrem pulsaverit,
manus ei praecidatur: Senec. Controvers. l. 4. If this be forbidden, and so
severely punished, much more is Parricide or Patricide; for which the Ancients
(imagining that no man could be so prostitutely wicked as to be guilty of so
enormous a crime) appointed no punishment: the aftertimes (less innocent)
punished the Parricide in this manner; they sowed him up in a Sack with a Dog,
a Cock, a Viper and an Ape, and so cast him into the sea. Pompey was Author of
this law, which was therefore called lex Pompeia de parricidiis: Inst. tit de
publicis Judiciis. 5. one L. Ostius (as Mynsinger observes upon that place) was
the first who was found guilty of, and suffered for this abominable crime. The
third were such Patrons as had cheated, abused, or deserted their Clients. It
was a Custom amongst the Romans for the poorer sort, which were called Plebei,
to make choice of some one of the richer, which were termed Patricii, to be
their protectors in their lives and fortunes, to defend and rescue them from
the unjust oppressions and persecutions of their more powerful adversaries;
and these were called Patroni; for which protection or patronage the others
(called Clientes) were bound to return all observance and respect, to credit
them with their attendance in public Assemblies, to disburse out of their own
purses toward the bestowing of their Daughters, the paying of public Mulcts,
the giving of Largesses in suing for Offices, etc. Neither was it lawful for
either of them, to inform, depose, to give their voices, or to side with
adversaries one against another without the guilt of treason, for which they
were Diis inferis devoti, cursed to Hell, and the Law gave liberty for any man
to kill them: so sacred and inviolable a thing was faith amongst the Ancients;
nay, so great was the reciprocal bond and tie of the Patron toward the
Client, that (as A. Gellius testifies l. 20. c. 1.) they preferred their Client
to the nearest of their relations, and did defend them though it were against
their own Brother. The fourth were the Covetous, who preferring their filthy,
sordid, and illegal gain to all other respects whatsoever, were so far from
making others sharers with them in their great wealth and riches, that they
denied that support and assistance (which by all Laws both natural and civil
they were obliged unto) to their nearest and dearest relations. The fifth were
adulterous persons, such (says he) as have been slain in that filthy and
unlawful act; for by the Law the Husband might kill the Adulterer and his
Wife, if he took them together. Lastly, he puts all Rebels in this damned List,
who take up arms against their natural Prince, their politic Father, and tear
out the bowels of their native soil, their dearest Mother: such arms the Poet
there full justly calls impia, and as justly damns them who take them up, to
Tartarus, or the nethermost Hell. But whereas the Poet says of Theseus, sedet,
aeternumque sedebit, that he sits, and shall for ever sit in Hell, has given
much trouble to Interpreters to reconcile; and is excepted against by Jul.
Higinus, A. Gell. lib. 10. c. 16. for he is reckoned by our Author a little
above amongst those who both descended to, and returned from Hell; and
therefore how can it be said that he sat here for ever? The learned De la Cerda
salves it thus: Virgil speaks here of Theseus, not when he descended alive into
Hell to ravish Proserpine, but of Theseus, who after his death was said to sit
for ever upon a hot burning stone: Cael. Rhodig. l. 4. c. 8. Although I see no
reason why Theseus should be condemned to so cruel a torment, who for his
heroic deeds deserved so well of mankind, that after his death he was thought
worthy of divine honors, of altars and Sacrifices, as you may read in his life
written by Plutarch; wherefore some read it Thereus, as Meyenus observes. But
for Phlegyas, he was said to be the son of Mars, King of the Lapithae, Father
of Ixion, and the Nymph Coronis, who being ravished by Apollo, he in revenge
fired that Gods Temple at Delphi, for which impiety he was slain by Apollo, and
thrust into Hell. He was certainly a very wicked Tyrant, and therefore worthily
damned: his own guilt he openly professes, whilst he bids others by his
example beware of committing the like offenses of injustice against men, and
impiety against the Gods:

Dicite justitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos.
Learn justice, nor when warned the Gods despise.


After these two particulars (see how artificially the Poet, to avoid
nauseating his Reader, interweaves his discourse with variety) he subjoyns a
few generals, viz. of those who for gold had betrayed their Country's liberty
to an usurping oppressor. Interpreters say, that either Lasthenes, who sold
Olynthus to Philip of Macedon, or Curio, who sold Rome to Jul. Caesar, is here
glanced at: of the latter thus Lucan. l. 4. Momentumque fuit mutatus Curio
rerum,
Gallorum captus spoliis, and Caesaris auro.
Changed Curio to that side much weight did add,
By Caesar's gold and spoils a Traitor made.
Secondly, of those who having the legislative power, have both made and
abrogated Laws for money: in the Latin the Poet alludes to the Roman Custom,
who when they had enacted a Law, used to engrave the same in brazen Tables, and
then to affixe them to a pillar in some public place, there to be exposed to
the general view; and then when they did null the same to take them down from
that Pillar; whence legem figere and refigere, is to make or null a Law.
Thirdly and lastly, of those who had been guilty of incest, a filthiness which
nature abhors. Donatus (whom Servius for this reprehends) says that the Poet
obliquely touches Cicero; which unhandsome censure of his he grounds upon that
defamatory declamation against Tully, which goes vulgarly under Salustius his
name, whose words are these, Filia, matris pellex, tibi jucundior atque
observantior quam parenti par est: Thine own Daughter (says that uncivil
Declaimour) received into her Mothers bed, was more delightful to, and
observant of thee, then became either her o^ thee. And now the Poet having
enlarged upon the description of Hell, of the Damned, and of the torments they
sustain, shuts up his excellent discourse with this imitation of Homer, Il. 2.
(...),
(...).
We have here in the translation ta^^ in Homers (...), not only as necessary to
the filling up of the English Rythm, but as an addition and complement to the
sense. Thus you see Hell most naturally depainted by the excellent pencill of
our great Artist, with all imaginable circumstances of Horror; invented on
purpose, to the end that those-whom humane Laws, and temporary punishments
could not bridle and restrain from evil doing, might (for fear of those more
severe and lasting torments of the other world) abstain from those enormous
sins for which they are sure to be called to a very strict account hereafter.

And now Sibylla, the person speaking, having satisfied Aeneas his curiosity
concerning Hell, bids him proceed; for they made a halt during this discourse,
parts ubi se via findit in ambas, as you may read a little above: and now
leaving Tartarus, or Hell, on the left hand, they take to the right, which led
to Pluto's Palace, and the Elysian fields: we have therefore translated this of
Virgil, Corripiunt spatium medium, as you see, not as Virgils late translatour
has done, they take the middle way; for Pluto's Palace stood not in the midst
betwixt Hell and the Elysium, but on the right hand. Hence corripiunt spatium
medium is (according to Turnebus l. 9. c. 27.) expounded carptim faciunt, cito
peragunt spatium intermedium, vel positum inter illos and Plutonis regiam:
Corripere Gradum, Viam, Spatium, are phrases frequently used by this Poet, and
signify the same.


The Elysium.
now comes to the description of the Elysium, where the souls of good men were
entertained with all pleasures imaginable, as green Medows, shady Groves,
delightful odours, clear and gentle streams, pleasant fruits, harmonious
Music, dancing, feasting, mirth, peace and security; a rare Heaven for
Epicures. But hereby the Ancients propounded rewards for virtue, which
(although sensual, and such as bear no proportion with those more spiritual
delights and contentations which the faithful expect hereafter) yet were such
as they thought would best suit with vulgar capacities, and be most prevalent
with them to excite them to well-doing. And here the Poet proceeding after the
same method he used in his discourse concerning Hell; (for, contraria juxta se
posita magis elucescunt) presents us with a list of some particular persons who
were Inhabitants of these blessed Mansions, and those for the honor of Aeneas
and his family he makes to be Trojans, as Teucer and Dardanus, the first
founders of the Trojan Nation; whence the Trojans were called Teucri and
Dardanidae: Dardanus begot Ericthonius, Ericthonius Tros, and Tros Ilus and
Assaracus, in whom the royal family was branched into two Houses: From the
eldest of these sprung Laomedon, Father of Priam, with whose life the Kingdom
of Troy expired; nor although he begot many sons, did any of them survive the
fate of their native soil: From the younger, viz. Assaracus, were lineally
descended Capys, Anchises and Aeneas, from whence the Julian Family derive
themselves: See Messala Corvinus de Augusti progeny. On the contrary, in Hell
you find the Titans, Aloides, Salmoneus, Tityus, etc. here you see such as have
hazarded their own lives for their Countries safety; the Chaste, the Pious,
Inventers of useful Arts and Sciences, and such as have deserved well of other
men, in opposition to those who have betrayed their Country, the Adulterours,
Despisers of the Gods, Disobedient to Parents, subtle Circumventers, and those
who impart nothing of their affluence and abundance to others. Note the
different reward of the Good and the Bad, and learn hence, that virtue is to be
embraced, which leads to bliss, and vice to be eschewed, whose end is
everlasting torments. And this in brief is the Moral, and design of the Poet in
the two precedent discourses.

Elysium, it (according to Servius) has its denomination (...), from the
dissolution of the soul from the body: it was placed by some in the fortunate
Islands, now called the Canaries, as you may read in Plutarch in the life of
Sertorius, who (upon the description which certain Mariners returned from
thence gave of their unparalled pleasantness, fertility and security)
designed to retire himself thither, there to spend the remainder of his life
(which had been always turmoyled in war) in a more desirable and pleasing
repose: but whereas Plutarch says that they were but two in number, he erres;
for Pliny l. 6. c. 32. makes them six; the moderns add two or three more: See
them at large described by Plutarch, ib. and more largely by Not. Comes l. 3.
c. 19. and you will easily confess that the Ancients had reason to place the
Elysium there. Others will have it in Hispania Baetica, which is now comprised
in the Kingdom of Granado, and the fertile Province of Andalusia, the most
happy and blessed tract of all Spain, if not of any part of the habitable
world: others about the circle of the Moon: others for the honor of our
climate place it in the Western part of our Britannia, betwixt that and Thule;
the Ancients in the Center of Hell; and those of the Middle age (pleased
neither with its Western situation in the Fortunate Islands, its Northern in
our Britannia, its exaltation in the Moon, or depression in Hell) confine it to
the East Indies. But the truth is, that as the precise site and position of
Paradise from whence the Ancients borrowed their fancy of the Elysium) is
variously disputed by the learned, so is the topographie of this latter as
differently set down and designed by the Ancients.

Virgil gives the epithet of purpureum to Lumen, purple light; but in this
signification purple can no way agree with light; for in purple there is a
great mixture of opacity, then which nothing is more contrary to light;
therefore purpureum is not to be rendered here according to the common
acceptance of the word, but is (according to Interpreters) consignificant with
the Greek (...), which is beautiful, white, shining, in the same sense that
Ovid says nix purpurea, and Horace, Olores purpurei: we have translated it
Cheerful: Mr. Ogilby retains the common English of it in his translation.

Elysium, as you may read in Plato's Phaedon, out of which it is probable, that
Virgil here, a close Sectator of Plato, and Claudian l. 2^. de rapt. Proserp.
borrowed their assertion. Claudian, in the person of Pluto speaks thus:

Amissum ne creed diem, sunt altera nobis
Sydera; sunt orbs alii, lumenque videbis
Purius. --
Think not day lost; for we have other stars
With other orbs, and purer light appears.
septem discrimina vocum, he alludes to the Lyre, which was a seven-stringed
Instrument, according to the number of the 7 Planets, invented by Mercury: some
ascribe the invention of it to Amphion, others to Linus, and some to Orpheus:
See Pliny l. 7. c. 56. but I should rather conclude, that Virgil (who was
skilled in all the liberal Sciences) was exactly read in Music, and did here
design the Gamut, the foundation of all Music, both vocal and instrumental;
which consists of seven Cliffs, Claves, or Keys distinguished by Guid^ Aretinus
(the composer of the Gamut) by seven letters, as g. a. b. c. d. e. f. and these
do rise and fall in Septenaries, even to the utmost extent of instrument or
voice: to be short, Nature it self (so excellent and perfect is the number of
seven: See A. Gellius l. 3. c. 10. and Cael. Rhodigin. l. 22. c. 12.) directed
the first Inventors of Music to this number, which has continued unalterable,
and so will do so long as Music lasts. So that the sense of the Poet here is
this; Orpheus (who was a Thracian born, son of Apollo and Calliope, a famed
Musician, Poet and Divine) did sweetly warble forth all the seven notes of
Music; so that it appears more probable that Virgils Septem relates to
Numeris, and they are these 7. Notes, wherein Music has its foundation,
whilst his Discrimina vocum may be taken for those various Descants and endless
changes of Concords, and agreeable sounds that arise from the repetition of the
first Septenarie. But whereas Virgil says that he did nunc digitis, nunc
pectine pulsare, is that which Musicians call intus and foris canere, with the
left hand to observe the stops, and with the right to strike or touch the
strings, as those do who play upon a Cittern, or the like Instrument. In fine,
we are to understand, that Orpheus did both sing and play at the same time: See
Turneb. upon this place l. 28. c. 46.

Turneb. de hastis praepilatis l. 13. c. 16. withal note the fond opinion of
the Ancients, who held that those desires and affections which were in the
soul, when joined with the body, remained the same in it, when it was disjoined
and separated from the same: See Cael. Rhodigin. l. 10. c. 9. and Macrob. in
Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 9. against both the nature of the soul, which (being in it
self spiritual) is not (when disembodied) either capable of, or affected with
corporeal or pains or pleasures; and against the nature of the other life,
where the delights of the blessed are more refined, elevated, and transcendent
then what this life in its greatest flatteries and indulgencies could ever
afford, as where (when we have truly balanced our accounts) we shall conclude
with Solomon, that there is nothing now under the Sun, but that all is vanity
and vexation of spirit.

^o (so called by the Moderns, Eridanus by the Greeks, and Padus by the Latins)
is a famous River of Italy, and the largest of all Europe, excepting the
Danubius: it rises out of the Mountain Vesulus in the Province of the
Ligurians or Genoeses, and receiving 30 large rivers (those on the left hand
descending from the Alps, and those on the right from the Apennine) besides
diverse great Lakes into its channel, it bears them with its self into the
Adriatic or Venetian Gulf, where at seven out-lets or mouths, called the
septem maria, it gives up its tributary waters to that general receiver of all
streams, the Sea: See Plin. l. 3. c. 16. It is seigned by the Poet to be an
Elysian River, because (as Dela Cerda and our Farnaby affirm out of Gerop.
Origin l. 9.) a great part of this River is swallowed up in the earth, and
never breaks forth again; though herein that Author agrees not with Pliny, who
says indeed that it does hide it self in a passage under ground, but rises
again in a place not far distant, viz. in agro Forovibienst: others make this
an infernal River, in regard of the course it runs; for rising out of Vesulus,
which is near the Ligustick Sea, called Mare inferum, it directs its course to
the Adriatic, which was known by the name of Mare superum. Servius seems to be
of opinion that Eridanus is put here pro quolibet fluvio, a proper name for an
appellative, which is frequent amongst the Poets; as pocula Achelcia, pro
fluvialia, and Adria for any sea. Though for my part I am apt to believe, that
it is for no other reason mentioned here by Virgil, but for that he had a mind
to celebrate a River not only in it self so famous, and hence by himself
elsewhere styled Fluviorum rex Eridanus: but also because it was not far
distant from his native Town of Mantua. But happily we obtund; we will therefore
conclude our discourse concerning the pleasure of the Elysium, with those
verses of the gentle and terse Tibullus l. 1. where he sweetly and briefly
describes the same. Sed me, quod facilis tenero sum semper amori,
Ipsa Venus campos ducet in Elysios:
Hic choreae, cantusque vigent, passimque vagantes
Dulce sonant tenui gutture carmen aves:
Fert Casiam non culta seges, totosque per agros
Floret odoratis terra benigna rosis;
Ac juvenum series teneris immixta puellis
Ludit, and assidue praelia miscet Amor.
But Venus me (because to sove inclined)
Shall lead into Elysium, where refined
Music, and Balls please, where the winged Quire
Of chirping birds do entertain the ear.
Where Casia springs unsown, C^asia is by Gerard taken to be the same with
Laven^ula or Lavender, as it is by Dela Cerda: Ecclog. ^.
where the kind earth
Does to sweet roses give an unforced birth;
Where Youths with Virgins sporting mingled are,
And Love does always wage an harmless war.


Musaeus (according to our most exact observer of time, Dr. Simpson) was the
Son of Antiophemus, born at Eleusine a Town of Attica, and bred up at Athens,
Disciple of Orpheus, as he was of Linus. Mus^^us.
He flourished in the age before the Trojan war, about the 22 of Gideon, in
the year of the world, 2750. before our Savior 1253. He was above 200 years
elder then Homer, who flourished in Solomon's time, after the subversion of Troy
188 years: See Herodot. de vita Homeri, and A. Gellius l. 17. c. 21. He was a
Prophet, and a most excellent Poet, as appears by that most polite and trim
remain of his, touching the loves of Hero and Leander; though I am not ignorant
that some deny that Poem to be Musaeus's, as being too corrected a piece for
the style of so remote and illiterate an age, ascribing it to some other of
that name, who wrote in a more refined and learned Centurie. Yet since the
great Scaliger Poet. l. 5. c. 2 gives it to Musaeus, we shall concur with him,
and excuse Virgil from that aspersion of envy and partiality which some object
to him for his pretermission of Homer, to whose writings he was so much
beholding, affirming that what he did herein, was out of a well-weighing and
rightly-distinguishing judgment; Musaeus being the far more acute and
judicious Writer, and in that more worthy to be made President of the Elysian
Hierarchy: See Scaliger ibid.

Aeneas his inquiry concerning the River Lethe, and the great confluence of
souls about the same, gives us matter for these following discourses; whereof
the first shall be concerning the Transmigration of souls; the second of the
Creation of things; the third of the nature of the soul; the fourth of
Purgatory: all which are in order to the chief design of this present Poem,
viz. the celebrating of Augustus and his Family, together with the names of
some of the more noble and illustrious Romans: of these briefly in their order.

Virgil in the person of Anchises tells us, The transmigration of Souls.
that those souls which Aeneas saw flocking about the banks of the River Lethe,
having drunk thereof, should then reascend into this world, and enter into
other bodies; and this is that which the Greeks call (...), the Latins
Transanimatio, or the passing of one soul out of one body into another; nay,
out of one species into another. Pythagoras of Samos (a man deeply learned in
the Aegyptia^ and Chaldaean Philosophy) was the first Author of this opinion;
he flourished about 535 years before our Savior, and was Contemporary with,
and Scholar of Thales Milesian. He was herein followed by Socrates and Plato,
as you may read in his Phaed. and Philaebus; from whence our Platonic Poet
has borrowed the same. A fond and ridiculous opinion, and rejected not only by
the following pro^essors of Christianism, but exploded, as absurd, by the
sounder sort of Ethnic Philosophers themselves; as you may read in Aristot. l.
1. de Anima, c. 3. who terms the transmigration of souls (...), a Pythagorean
Fable. Pythagoras flying the tyranny of Polycrates, the invader of his
Countries liberty, came to Crotona in Italy, Tarquinius Superbus lording it
then at Rome: A. Gell. l. 17. c. 21. where setting open his School, he
published, and by this device (as Meyenus takes it from Hermippus) got credit
to his new doctrine. Pythagoras (says he) at his first arrival in Italy made
himself an habitation under ground, where hiding himself he charged his Mother
to record carefully all memorable passages during his absence: she (observant
of her sons injunction) compiled a perfect diurnal of all things; in the mean
time, he (having lived thus a whole year) at last came forth out of his
subterranean mansion, lean, pale, squalid, and ghastly, as if he had risen from
the dead; then assembling the multitude, he told them that he returned from
Hell, and (that he might the better persuade what he intended to instill) he
repeated to them all what had hapened in that part of Italy during his absence
so punctually, that the people (thinking that there was more than an ordinary
spirit in the man) without further dispute or examination embraced his
doctrine; which in Pythagoras his own person is thus delivered by Ovid. Met. l.
15. f. 3. O genus attonitum gelidae formidine mortis,
Quid Styga, quid tenebras, and nomina vana timetis,
Materiem Vatum, falsique pericula Mundi?
Corpora, sive rogus flamma, seu tabe vetustas
Abstulerit, mala posse pati non ulla putetis;
Morte carent animae, semperque priore relicta
Sede, novis domibus vivunt, habitantque receptae:
Ipse ego (nam nemini) Trojani tempore belli
Panthoides Euphorbus eram, cui pectore quondam
Haesit in adverso gravis hasta minoris Atridae;
Cognovi clypeum laevae gestamina nostrae
Nuper Abanteis templo Junonis in Argis.
Omnia mutantur, nihil interit; errat, and illinc
Huc venit, hinc illuc, and quoslibet occupat artus
Spiritus; eque feris humana in corpora transit,
Inque feras noster, nec tempore deperit ullo;
Vtque novis facilis signatur cera figuris,
Nec manet ut fuerat, nec formam servat eandem,
Sed tamen ipsa eadem est; animam sic semper eandem
Esse, sed in varias doceo migrare figuras.
We will not so far injure the Poet, as to express him otherwise then what
his ingenuous Mr. Sandys.
Translatour has done, who renders him thus; O you whom horrors of cold death
affright,
Why fear you Styx, vain names, and endless night,
The dreams of Poets, and feigned miseries
Of forged hell? whether last flames surprise,
Or age devour your bodies, they nor grieve
Or suffer pains: Our souls for ever live,
Yet evermore their ancient houses leave
To live in new, which them, as Guests receive.
In Trojan wars I (I remember well)
Euphorbus was, Panthous son, and fell
By Menalaus lance: my shield again
At Argos late I saw in Juno's Fane.
All alter, nothing finally decays:
Hither and thither still the spirit strayes,
Guest to all bodies; out of beasts it flies
To men, from men to beasts, and never dies:
As pliant wax each new impression takes,
Fixed to no form, but still the old forsakes,
Yet it the same; so souls the same abide,
Though various figures their reception hide.
This doctrine being easily imbibed by his Auditors, so far dispersed it
self, that even the Gauls, a people far sequestered from those parts of Italy,
were taught the same by their Druides, as you may read in Lucan: -- Druidibus.
vobis Authoribus umbrae
Non tacitas Erebi seeds, noctisque profundae
Pallida regna petunt; regit idem spiritus artus
Orb alio; longae (canitis si cognita) vitae
Mors media est. Certe, populi quos despicet Arctos
Faelices errore suo, quos ille timorum
Maximus, haud urget lethi metus; inde ruendi
In ferrum men's prona viris; animaeque capaces
Mortis, and ignavum est periturae parcere vitae.
Dislodged souls (if you conceive aright)
To hell descend not, and those realms of night;
The body in another world is by
The same spir't ruld; in your Philosophy,
Death to another life the way does show.
In your mistake, O happiest of those, who
Are to the North-starre subject, whom the fear
Of death (of fears the greatest) does not skare.
Hence on drawn steel you rush; your great souls hence
Disdain to stick at your vile blood's expense.
Herod, it seems, was a Pythagorean in this also, whilst he said that the soul
of St. John the Baptist (by him wickedly murdered) was entered into the body of
our blessed Savior. Josephus l. 2. c. 7. de bell. Judaic. affirms, that the
Pharisees were tainted with the same erroneous belief, who held that the souls
of good men did pass into other bodies, but that those of the wicked were for
ever tormented in hell. But happily we wade too far in these speculations, we
shall therefore proceed to the next head, which is concerning the creation of
things.

The Poets sense and meaning here is briefly this, that there is a certain
spirit or soul which does inform, The Creation of things.
actuate, complete, cherish, and sustain all Beings, whether elementary, viz.
the Fire, Air (comprehended in the word Coelum, or the heaven) Earth and Water
(periphrastically expressed in the words Campos liquentes, the liquid or watrie
plains) or celestial, exemplified in the Sun and Moon, as the two most
glorious, operative and powerful Planets in generation. Astra Titania, put
here by an Enallage, for Astrum Titanium, signifies the Sun, from Titan, who
was so skillful an Astrologue, that he was feigned to be Brother to the Sun; as
Cael. Rhodig. observes out of Pausan. in Corinthiacis, lect. antiq. l. 24. c.
17. and Titan is often taken for the Sun it self: hence Astrum Titanium is only
a circumlocution of Titan or the Sun. But to proceed; from the operation of
this soul or spirit, not only simple bodies, as the Elements and Heavens, took
their being, and are by the propitious influx thereof preserved therein; but
mixed bodies also, as he instances in men, beasts, birds and fishes. The sum of
all is this, viz. that there is a certain spirit or soul, to whose operations
and powerful insinuations the world and all therein contained owes both its
existence and subsistence. If we by the spirit or soul here mentioned
understand God himself, or his omnipotent Spirit, and the powerful emanations
thereof, nothing is more consonant, not only to reason, but also to the
analogy of the holy Scriptures, then the assertion of our Poet: For God is
truly that Spirit, which being present every where, is without extension of it
self diffused through all things, and does intus alere, cherish and sustain all
things. This is that soul which actuates the vast Machine of this world, which
upholds, preserves, and governs the great fabric of the Universe, which
otherwise would fall into disorder, confusion, and into that primitive Chaos
out of which it was at first educed, for (...); In him we live, move, and have
our being. If we give tbis interpretation to the Poet, these few verses seem to
be an epitome, or brief comprehension of the first chapter of Genesis touching
the Creation; for as Moses says there; In principio Deus creavit coelum and
terram; so Virgil here, Principio coelum and terras, etc. Spiritus intus alit:
and whereas Moses says, that Spiritus Dei movebat, vel incubabat supra faciem
aquarum, that the Spirit of God did move or brood upon the face of the waters;
so Virgil here tells us of a Spiritus, or Men's, which magno se corpore miscet:
as mention is made there of the Creation of those two great Luminaries, the Sun
and the Moon; the like is here also. Lastly, as the Creation of Beasts, Birds,
Fish, and then of Man, is there specified, so Virgil says here, Inde (i. e. a
Deo operante) hominum pecudumque genus, vitaeque volantum;
Et quae marmoreo fert monstra sub aequore pontus.
But others (and with them I am apt to concur) are of opinion, that Virgil
here speaks according to the mind and sense of his Master Plato (who followed
Trismegistus and Pythagoras herein, the first founders and fautors of the
Academick Philosophy) as he did in his opinion concerning the transmigration of
souls. Plato in his Timaeus, and elsewhere (as Wendilinus cites him, Phys.
contempl. sect. 2. c. 6.) endeavors to prove, that this World or Universe is
informed by a soul distinct from the World it self, which doing the office
which other souls do in the particular beings they inform, does preserve, move
and govern this All, and all its parts, making the world hereby an Animal,
ruled and governed by its own peculiar soul: nor is God meant hereby, but some
other entity, different from that ens entium, and by them styled Anima, vel
Spiritus Mundi. But this is thoroughly winnowed and refuted by the learned
Wendilinus in the place above mentioned, and the arguments of its assertors
fully answered; to whom for more ample satisfaction herein, as also to the
subtle Scaliger, Exerc. 6. sect. 2. we shall refer the Reader, and proceed.

Anchises pointing to those souls before him, which stood upon the brink of the
river Lethe (for the Antecedent to illis, Of the nature of the soul.
which the Ancients used for illis, is Animae) says that they are of a fiery
nature, and that their principles (which he here calls semina) are of heavenly
extraction or composition; which is not to be understood only of those souls
there, but of the humane soul in general; for (according to the Theology of
some Gentiles) the soul was not judged, as it really is, a simple and spiritual
essence, but an elementary compound of Fire and Air; the two more pure,
desecated, and active elements; as the body was thought to be of Water and
Earth, the two more gross, material, and inactive principles. We shall easily
elucidate this dark place, if we reduce the Authors sense into this single
Theoreme, viz. the humane soul is a most excellent being, as consisting of the
two more excellent principles, viz. Fire and Air: From the first there is in it
igneus vigor; from the second it is coelestis originis; for coelum is taken
here (as often it is) pro aere, or the air. Hence it is plain what the Poet
means by Igneus est ollis vigor, and coelestis origo
Seminibus. --
Thus paraphrased, But those souls there of fiery vigor share;
The principles of them celestial are.
That the soul consists of fire, was the opinion of Hipparchus; that of air, of
Anaximenes; that of both, of Boethos, and our Virgil here. Epicurus added to
these two a third ingredient, whilst he held that it was a speceies igne, aere
and spiritu mixta, as you may read in Macrob. l. 1. c. 14. in Somn. Scip. who
there delivers the various opinions of the Ancients concerning the nature of
the Soul: Hence, according to Homers doctrine (who held with Hipparchus, that
the soul was originated from fire,) the Heroes abhorred nothing more then
drowning, as most contrary to the fiery nature of the Soul, which they thought
would thereby be extinguished. See how apprehensive Virgil makes Aeneas of
drowning, l. 1. Aen. Extemplo Aeneae solvuntur frigore membra,
Ingemit, and duplices tendens ad sidera palmas,
Talia voce refert, etc. --
A cold sweat does Aeneas limbs surprise;
He sighs, and his hands stretching to the skies,
He thus begins, etc. --
Whereas otherwise he makes him a person of a most undaunted and unshaken
constancy; (...) l. 6. -- Non ulla laborum,
O virgo, nova mi facies inopinave surgit.
-- no dangers unto me
Are strange, or, Virgin, shake my constancy.
Doubtless Virgil herein concurred with Homer in his opinion: And from hence
the Stoics opin'd, that the soul as soon as freed from the body, presently
took its flight to the Concave of the Moon, the place or region of the element
of fire. But of these dreams more then enough: let us now return to our Author.
Virgil from these premises inferres, that the Soul is of an active, piercing,
and subtle nature, as are the principles whereof it consists, that it is of it
self free from all passions and perturbations, -- quantum non noxia corpora
tardant. Unless by the commixtion and conjunction with the body it abate of its
natural vigor, and become, as that is, heavy and drossie. All souls are
equally intelligent, and alike impassionate; But, according to the variety of
complexions, the abundance of humors, the pureness of the spirits, the
disposition of the organs, especially of the brain, they are more intense or
remiss.

Hence the Poet says, that as to the intellectual part thereof it becomes
heavy, dull and inapprehensive, so to the appetitive or will, it becomes
subject to sundry irregularities and passions; which he specifies here in four,
whereof two have for their object an Evil, and two a Good: The first is Fear,
which is a passion of the soul touching a future evil, as Grief. The second is
touching an evil present, and now upon us. The third is Desire, or
Concupiscence, which is a passion of the soul about a good absent, as Joy. The
fourth is about a good present, and in fruition, or the acquiescence of the
Soul in the possession of its desired object. Three of these, viz. Desire, Joy
and Grief, are placed in the Concupiscible Appetite, and one, viz. Fear, in the
irascible. He inferres further, that the soul is not only subject to error and
passion, whilst united to the body, but that it does absolutely for^^ its own
nature, nor is at all sensible of its original, which is of fire and air;
which he means here whilst he says -- nec auras recipient; the body is
therefore called by him animae carcer, the prison of the soul; reflecting happily
upon that of Plato, (...), the body is the souls grave or sepulcher: For as
those who are shut up in a dark prison have all objects intercepted from their
eyes, so the soul incarcerated in the body is utterly blinded, nor can auras
respicere, have the free prospect of the air whereof it is compounded.

The Poet here occurres to a tacit objection: the soul (it is true) loses of
its original purity by conjunction with the body, but when freed from thence it
may recover its pristine state of purity and perfection: O^ Purgatory.
no, it retains still after its separation much of that pollution which it
contracted whilst it was immersed in the body. And hence he lays the
foundation of his imaginary Purgatory, which as necessarily previous to that
Transmigration, we have already discoursed of, he makes of three sorts, either
by ventilation, by air, purgation by fire, or rinsing by water; all according
to the doctrine of Plato; purging, as Physicians do, by contraries; for fire,
which is hot and dry; air, which is hot and moist; water, which is cold and
moist, are the most proper purgatives for earthy contagions, i. e. for those
stains the soul has contracted from the commerce with the body, which is
earthy; Earth being both the coldest of the 4. elements, and in that most
contrary to Fire, which is the hottest and the driest, and in that most
opposite to Water, which is the moistest; in both to Air, which is both hot and
moist: this is St. Austins conceit, l. 21. de Civit. Dei. c. 13. we will not
say that the Roman Cath^lick has no better authority for his Purgatory then
that of a Roman Poet. This we may safely affirm, that it was an opinion
received amongst the Heathens many centuries before it was introduced into the
Church of Rome, with this only difference; they held that after death the souls
went into Purgatory, and from thence ascended not into eternal bliss, but into
this world, where they were reinvested with new bodies; these, that after their
purgatory they ascended into hea^^n: they both allow of a Purgatory, and a
subsequent resurrection, and differ only in the terminus adquem, the place to
which that resurrection tends.

sound of words then soundness of sense; for what can you understand by leaving
the etherial sense pure, and a fire of simple breath or air? for so it runs, if
verbally translated: We have therefore paraphrased upon this place, as we have
done elsewhere, where the sense required it; therefore by sensus aethereus we
are to understand the Soul, a heavenly or ethereal Being; and therefore said
by Virgil a little above to be coelestis originis, as here to be aethereus
sensus, and to be ignis and aer simplex; for he says here aurai, i. e. aurae
simplicis ignem, for auram simplicem and ignem, according to the opinion of
those who held the soul to be compounded of air and fire; therefore the sense
of Igneus est ollis vigor and coelestis orgio
Seminibus. --
is here expressed in other words, whilst he says; -- purumque reliquit
Aetherum sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem.
which I think according to the sense both of the Author and the Context, may
not unaptly be paraphrased in these words: Leaving of spots that heavenly Being
clear,
Of Fire a compound, and unmixed Air.
But to sum up our precedent discourse, and to show the connection thereof,
you must know that there is a certain soul or spirit which actuateth and
presideth over this Universe, and from whence all things derive their birth and
original; amongst the rest, men, whose souls (we have, and do still speak
according to the principles of Virgil, and the Gentiles) are compounded of fire
and air, as their bodies are of water and earth; whence they (resembling their
principles) are active and pure, these drossie and dull: they from the long
commerce with the body contract stains from thence, which adhere to them even
after their separation: Hence they are to be purged in the other world, after
which, when purified, they are brought by Mercury to the River Lethe, the River
of Forgetfulness, and having drunk thereof, they then return into this world,
and are received into other bodies. We have insisted much upon the exposition
of the Author in these precedent Paragraphs; Interpreters have labored much
herein, as upon a place knotty and obscure, though full of much learning and
abstruse speculations: if we have either in our Translation or notes conferred
any thing to the explication of the Author, and the Readers satisfaction, we
shall think our pains in the one, and our collections in the other, not
altogether misemployed.

primarie scope and design of the Poet, and which indeed, as the end is, was
primus in intention, though ultimus in executione. Virgil composed this Poem
on purpose to celebrate the Family of Augustus, and to consecrate the names of
some of the most deserving and illustrious Houses of Rome to following Ages.
And to this only tends Aeneas his descent into Hell, with all the precedent
descriptions. We shall here exhibit a Summary of the Roman History, from the
Alban Kings to Augustus his time, following the series and method of our
Author, who presents them not according to the order of time wherein they were
born or lived, but as he fancies them to stand before Anchises, the person here
speaking.

A Summarie of the Roman History from Aeneas his death, and the Alban Kings, to
Augustus his time, being about 1100 years.
and was to ascend, was Sylvius, Aeneas his Son by Lavinia, Latinus his
Daughter, and half-Brother to Ascanius, surnamed Iulus, Aeneas his Son by
Creusa; he is here called an Alban name (...), by way of excellence, because
from him all the Alban Kings were denominated Sylvii; Aeneas his posthume
son, because born after his Fathers death; and Sylvius, because born in the
Woods. The Story is briefly this; Lavinia being left with child by Aeneas, fled
for fear of her son in law Ascanius, to Tyrrhus the Master of her Father
Latinus his flocks; but was delivered by the way of a son in the woods, whom
from thence she called Sylvius, i. e. Du Bois, or Wood; and from him the
succeeding Alban Kings were styled Sylvii: but being freed from her
ill-grounded jealousy, she was at last brought back to Ascanius, who looking
upon her as the dear Relict of his honored Father, did not only receive her
with all demonstrations of love, but leaving Lavinium (built by Aeneas, and so
called from Lavinia, his beloved Consort) to her, he founded Alba, or the white
City, so called from the white Aenead. lib. 7.
Sow the Trojans found at their first landing; and Longa, from its figure, it
being extended in length: See Aur. Victor. de orig. gent. Romans And this became
the royal residence of the Alban Kings, who reigned here, according to Virgil,
300 years; but according to a more exact computation, we may add one Centurie
more; for from the foundation of Alba by Ascanius, to the foundation of Rome by
Romulus (during which time Alba was the capital City of Latium) were full 400
years wanting one. The first, viz. Alba, being built An. Mund. 2852. and the
latter, viz. Rome, 3251. as Dr. Simpson proves Chron. Cathol. part. The Alban
Lings.
2. and 3. The succession of the Alban Kings is thus delivered by Livie, 1.
Ascanius, 2. Sylvius Posthumus, elected by the people to the Kingdom (who
preferred the son of Aeneas to the grandson) before Iulus, son to Ascanius;
3. Sylv. Aeneas, 4. Latinus, 5. Alba, 6. Atis, 7. Capys, 8. Capetus, 9.
Tiberinus, who passing the River Tiber, and in his passage drowned, gave it its
name of Tiberis, whereas it was originally called Albula; 10. Agrippa, 11.
Romulus or Aremulus, 12. Aventinus, from whom the Aventine Hill took its name;
13. Procas, 14. Numitor, deposed by his younger Brother Amulius, but restored
to his hereditary rights by his Grandsons Romulus and Remus, born of Rhaea
Sylvia his Daughter. The male line of the Sylvii expired in Numitor, and Rome,
founded by Romulus, soon eclipsed the State of Alba, which from that time was
governed by certain Magistrates styled Dictators; and being finally subdued and
razed by Tul. Hostilius, the third from Romulus, as an emulous and dangerous
neighbor, was displanted, and incorporated into the City of Rome. But to
return to our Author, who more like a Poet then an Historian, does but
cursorily run over the Alban Kings, reciting but some few of them, and those
not in their due order of succession, but as they there appeared before
Anchises; for Procas was not the next to Posthumus, but the twelfth from him,
Capys the sixth, Numitor the thirteenth; but Syl. Aeneas was the second, who by
the fraud of his Tutor was for a long time kept from the Crown; which at last
recovering, he reigned 30 years. There is very little registered of the Alban
Kings save only their names.

The Roman Generals (as you may read in A. Gell. l. 5. c. 6. and in Salmuth
upon Pancirol. Military Crowns.
rer. deperd. tit. 55.) for the encouragement and reward of the good service
and valor of their Soldiers amongst other gifts bestowed upon them several
sorts of Crowns, which were these, i. e. muralis corona, made of gold, and
bestowed on them who first scaled the walls, and entered the City or Castle of
the enemy. Secondly, Castrensis or Vallaris, of gold also, and given to him who
made the first impression into the enemies Camp. Thirdly, Navalis, or Rostrata,
which was his right who in a naval or sea fight first boarded the enemy's ship.
Fourthly and lastly, Civica, (for which word Virgil uses Civilis) which
although not so valuable in regard of its materials, for it was only a Wreath
made of an oaken bough, yet was esteemed more honorable then the rest; and was
bestowed on him, who, rescuing a Roman Citizen from his prevailing enemy, had
saved his life, and slain the invader. This was therefore made of oak, because
anciently, before the use of corn, acorns, the fruit of that tree, was the
sustenance and preserver of the life of man; or because the Oak was sacred to
Jupiter, under whose peculiar protection Cities were said to be; and therefore
it was proper that he who had saved a Citizen, should be crowned with a bough
of that tree which was dedicated to the tutelar Deity of all Cities. And to
this Custom the Poet alludes here, whilst he says that the Founders and
Builders of Cities were crowned with an oakenbough: for those who build and
fortify Cities, seem as it were to save the lives of the Citizens, whilst by
that means they save them from the incursions and surprisals of a watchful
enemy. The Cities here particularized, were most of them belonging to the
Prisci Latini, as they styled themselves, and planted by the Alban Kings.
Nomentum was an inland Town belonging to the Latins and not far distant from
Rome; now called Lamentana. Gabii was a Town of the Volsci, a very opulent and
wealthy City, about an hundred furlongs, which is some twelve miles, distant
from Rome toward the East in the way to Praeneste; it was made tributary to
the Romans by the fraud of Sext. Tarquinius, son to Superbus; you may read
the story at large in Livie l. 1. Fidenae was a Town of the Sabines, five miles
from Rome; now called Castle Jubeleo: Collatia, a Town of the Sabines also, at
four miles distance from the City in the Tiburtine way, famed for the rape and
death of the chaste Lucretia: Pometii, called also Suessa Pometia, now Sessa,
was a Town of the Volsci, beyond the River Liris; it was taken and plundered by
Superbus, who made of the spoils (as Livie testifies) forty talents, which
according to our modern computation amounts to twenty one thousand and sixty
French crowns, an immense sum for those days. Castrum Inui, the Castle or
Town of Inuus, i. e. Pan; for whom the Gree^s called Pan the Latins termed
Inuus, ab ineundo passim cum omnibus animalibus: Servius; which is the same
with the Greek Ephialtes, and the Latin Incubus: this was a Town of the
Volsci, and is now called Cornetto. Bola, a Town of the Aequi, bordering upon
the Latins, long since demolished. Cora, a Town of the Volsci, yet in being,
and retaining its original name. But concerning these Towns, if you desire
more ample satifaction, you may consult with Cluverius, a most diligent
surveyor of ancient Italy, l. 3. c. 8.

Anchises having passed over the Alban Kings, comes now to Romulus, Romulus.
the Founder of the Roman both City and Empire, the son of Rhaea Sylvia, or
Ilia, daughter to Numitor, and made (as it was given out) impregnate by Mars:
and hence the Poet gives him the epithete of Mavortius, or Martius. He having
reigned some time with his Grandsire Numitor in Alba Longa, thinking that
Dominion too straight for them both, resigned the whole to him; and building
Rome (the future Emperess of the world) reigned there. The story of Romulus his
actions military and civil, his death, apotheosis, or dei^ying, together with
all the particulars here instanced in by the Poet to the magnifying of Rome,
are so easily parable out of Livie, Dionyfius, Plutarch in vit. Romans that we
shall rather choose to refer the Reader to them, then to insist too long upon
things so obvious; we shall only note the aptness of the comparison here used
by the Poet, assimilating Rome, the Mother and Nurse of so many brave Heroes,
to Cybele, or Cybelle (periphras'd here by Matter Berecynthia) the Mother of the
Gods. This similitude Mr. Denham speaking of Windsore Castle, has borrowed of
Virgil, and as handsomely applied: we shall for his credit, though known to us
only by a well-deserved fame, subjoyn the verses: A Crown of such Majestic
towrs does grace
The Gods great Mother, when her heavenly race
Do homage to her; yet she cannot boast
Amongst that numerous and celest'al host
More Heroes then can Windsore; nor does Fames
Immortal book record more noble names.
But to return, Cybele Cybele.
is so called from the hill Cybella in Phrygia, where (when an Infant) she was
exposed, and (being there found by a Shepherds wife) taken and bred up by her,
as her own child, and called after the name of the place where she was first
found; or, according to Servius, (...), from shaking the head, a gesticulation
peculiar to her Priests. She was (if we consult with fabulous story) said to be
the Daughter of heaven and earth, and Wife of Saturn, known by these following
names of Ops, Rhea, Vesta, Magna Matter, Dindymene; and lastly Berecynthia; as
here, from Berecynthus, a Town of Phrygia, near the River Sangarius, where she
was most religiously worshipped. Her Priests (called Corybantes) were enjoined
to be gelt: should the Romish Church, as it forbids marriage, enjoin Castration
to their Clergy, I doubt that the Cloisters and religious Houses would not be
so well furnished, as now they are. She was said to be Turrita, crowned with
towers; and so indeed she is always painted, either because (according to
Arnobius l. 5.) when the City of Midas was shut up, she undermined and razed
the tower-bearing walls with her head, and so entered; or, as Ovid will have it,
Quod primis turres urbibus illa dedit. She was the first who taught to fortify
Towns with Towers and Castles: or lastly, because (as Servius is of opinion) by
her is meant the earth, the proper basis and support of all edifices.

Romulus, he comes per saltum to Augustus, both as the second founder of Rome,
Augustus Caesar.
and the principal scope of the whole Poem; whom he magnifies here with most
exquisite Elogies; and he truly was (as Messala Corvinus styles him) sui seculi
perenne and immortale decus, the lasting and immortal ornameut of his age;
deserving no less then a Virgil to give him his just and suitable Character. We
shall briefly examine the particulars: First he says that he was Divum genus,
sprung from the Gods, both in regard of Jul. Caesar his adoptive Father, who
was (after his death) made a Divus, or sainted, as for that he was descended
from Aeneas, the Son of Venus, the Daughter of Jupiter. Secondly, that he
should again restore the golden age, as it was in Saturns time; For having
overcome all his enemies both domestic and foreign, there was such peace and
tranquillity during his reign, that it was deservedly called the golden age.
The Temple of Janus Quirinus, (which from the foundation of Rome had been but
twice shut, the first time in Numa's reign; the second Ann, V. C. 518. Tit.
Manlius Torquatus, and C. Atilius Bulbus being Consuls, after the first Punick
war) was in his time thrice locked up, which was never done but when the
tumults and tempests of war, were laid asleep by the welcome security of a
general peace: at other times they stood open. And to this purpose our Poet
speaks of Augustus lib. 1. Aspera tum positis mitescent saecula bellis,
Cana Fides, and Vesta, Remo cum fratre Quirinus
Jura dabunt; dirae ferro and compagibus arctis
Claudentur Belli portae: Furor impius intus
Saeva sedens super arma, and centum vinctus ahenis
Post tergum nodis, fremet horridus ore cruento.
Ensuing times shall sacred peace install:
Faith; Vesta, Romulus with Remus, shall
Just laws enact: The doors of horrid War
Huge links of brass, and iron bolts shall bar:
Dire Fury, breathing blood, within shall sit
On heaps of arms, his hands behind him knit.
Wherefore in his pacifique reign Christ our Savior, the Prince of peace,
vouchsafed to take our nature upon him, to show that nothing is more acceptable
to him then peace, that bond of love and perfect character of his sincere
disciples; which (although through the ambition and emulation of Princes it
has been for many years banished Christendom) is now like to return again by
the happy and long-desired redintegration of amity betwixt those two great
Luminaries of this our Western world, Spain and France: I cannot but add my
prayers for the speedy consummation of so wished for a Good. None can pray
otherwise, but such as having agrandiz'd themselves by war, fear to lose
their unjust acquests by a to-them-unwelcome pacification, and to be made to
regorge by law what they have swallowed down by rapine. I could not but add
this, writing at this time.

Roman Empire beyond the Garamantes, a People in the heart of Africa,
Southward; and the Indians, a Nation in the extremity of Asia, Eastward, The
truth is, that these were never conquered by the Romans, for Euphrates was the
bound to their Empire on the East; but the Garamantes, with other African
Nations, were subdued by Cornelius Balbus: Meyenus. Further he says that he
should subdue a Country which lies beyond the Stars, and the course of the
Sun, that is, beyond the Zodiac, or the Stars, and constellations thereunto
belonging. In brief, the Poet speaks hypothetically, that if there were any
Country habitable beyond the Zodiac and the Tropic of Capricorn (of which the
Ancients doubted) it should be added to the Dominions of Augustus. But how
mount Atlas, which lies on this side the Equator, should be said to be, ultra
anni solisque vias; on the other side the Zodiac, and Tropic of Capricorn I
cannot understand. We must pardon hyperboles in a Poet. Virgil thought he might
lawfully extend Nature, and exceed the usual Boundaries of Geography, whilst he
strove to extol the greatness of his munificent Patron Augustus.

Fourthly, he says that all the ^racles of the world, viz. from the Caspian
sea, or Asia, to the East; from the Lake of Maeotis, or Europe, to the North;
and from Nile, or Africa, to the South, should foretell the birth of the great
Augustus. Sueton. in his life, c. 94. says, that a few months before his
birth it was prophesied that Nature should bring forth a King to the Roman
People, whereupon it was decreed by the Senate, that no male born that year
should be suffered to live; but those (whose Wives were with child) hoping that
the Prophecy might be fulfilled in their Family, hindered the execution of the
Senates Decree. The like wicked policy was not only in deliberation, but
effected by Herod upon the innocent Infants of Bethleem. At the same time all
Oracles forecold that there should be a great Prince born, who should subdue
the world; which was truly and really meant of the incarnation of our blessed
Savior, but erroneously and impudently by his Parasites applied to Augustus.

Fifthly and lastly, he compares the expeditions and conquests of Augustus, to
those of Alcides or Hercules, and Bacchus, two noted Land-lopers; for the first
traveled all over the world seeking adventures; and the second made an
impression into, and subdued the farre-remote parts of India: Nay, he preferres
the victories of Augustus to those either of Hercules or Bacchus. The 12.
labors of the first are so well known, that we need not insist long upon these
which are here mentioned. The Hind, called Cerenitis; feigned to be brazen
hoof'd, was slain by him near to the Town of Parrhasia; he also took a terrible
Boar, called the Boar of Erymanthus, a Mountain of Arcadia, alive, and brought
it to Eurystheus, who, by Juno's command, was his Tax-master, and imposed all
those hazardous labors upon that invincible Hero. Of the Beast of Lerna, i.
e. the Hydra, we have descoursed at large Paragraph 39.

From Augustus, after a desultorious manner, he returns to the successors of
Romulus, in whom the royal line of Aeneas did determine. Numa Pompilius.
The first of these was aged and hoary-headed Numa, whom Anchises seems not to
know, because a stranger, and none of his posterity, born at ^^ures, a small
Dorp or Village of the Sabines, on the very day the foundation of Rome was
laid. The character the Poet gives him, and the rest, is agreeable to the
testimony of History: For Numa Pompilius, a person famed for his justice and
religion, was by the general vote of the people (though a stranger) chosen
King; who (when placed in the regal Throne) having made peace with all his
neighbors, applied himself solely to the reforming of the Laws, Manners and
Discipline both Civil and Religious, introducing all Rites and Ceremonies into
their Church; whence he is here said to be, ramis insignis Olivae, and sacra
ferens; the first denoting his studious love of peace, of which the Olive is an
emblem; the second his great care of Religion, and the worship of the Gods;
whereby, as Florus observes, populum ferocem eo redegit, ut quod vi, and
injuria occupaverat imperium, religione, and justitia gubernaret: He taught
them to govern by religion and justice that Empire which they had achieved by
injury and force. Hence the very names of these two precedent Kings seem to
speak their natures, and to have designed them (as it were) for this different
manner of proceeding in the management of affairs; for Romulus comes from the
Greek (...), i. e. strength, and hardiness; and Numa (...), from his inventing
and ordaining of laws; for (...), a Law, is written (...) by the Doors; from
whence Numa comes: and hence his character is truly given us by Livie: Numa
regno potitus, urbem novam, conditam vi and armis (a Romulo scilicet) jure eam;
legibusque ac moribus de integro condere parat: Numa founded that City by
wholesome laws, which Romulus had founded by force and arms. He reigned 43 years.

Tullus Hostilius, the third from Romulus, succeeded to Numa, Tullus Hostilius
Grandson to Hostus Hostilius, who died fighting against the Sabines under the
Tower of Rome. He was chosen for his great valor and known conduct: He subdued
the Albans, razed their City, and transplanted the Inhabitants to Rome. In the
direption, and sack of this forlorn Town, this is chiefly to be noted, that
when they had equalled all the edifices, whether private or public, with the
ground, the triumphing enemy (out of an awe and reverence to religion) spared
the Temples of the Gods: Templis tamen Deum (ita enim edictum ab rege fuit)
temperatum est: Livie: a reproach to the impious and intemperate zeal of this
worst of ages, wherein the Temples of the true God have born the greatest marks
of the irreligious fury, not of foreign enemies (as here) but of the
once-children of the same Mother, and professors of the same faith. This King
was the restorer of their military discipline, as here characterised, and
inlarger of the City, by taking in the Mount Caelius: He reigned, according to
Livies Compute 32. years.

Ancus Martius, Grandson to Numa Pompilius by his Daughter, Ancus Martius.
the fourth from Romulus, was elected after Tullus: He is described here as
haughty and popular, because born of royal blood. He was of a disposition and
temper much like to that of his Grandsire Numa, as to his justice, regard of
religion, and government in peace, though in time of war he equalled any of
his Predecessors; whence Livie says of him, Medium erat in Anco ingenium, and
Numae and Romuli memor. In Ancus there was a mixture of Numa and Romulus; the
one appeared in his reviving the laws of Numa, concerning religious Rites and
Ceremonies; in walling the City, in building a bridge over Tiber, in planting a
Colony at Ostia, a Town situated upon the mouth of Tiber, which became a famous
Mart in after ages: The other in his wars with the Latins, Fidenates,
Vejentes, Sabines, and Volscians: He sat upon the Throne 24 years.

Romulus was Lucius Tarquinius, surnamed Priscus, Lucius Tarquinius Priscus.
or the elder, in regard of L. Tarquinius Superbus, his son, or (as Florus
writes him) his Grandson. He though not only not a Roman, but also not so much
as an Italian, was named King, propter industriam and elegantiam, for his
industry and handsome deportment. He (as Livie tells the story) was the son
of Damaratus, a rich Merchant of Corinth, who forced out of his own Country,
came with his family into Italy, and planted himself at Tarquinii, a Town of
Etruria, or Tuscanie. He had two sons, Aruns and Lucumo: Lucumo after the
death both of his Father and Brother came to Rome, where for his wealth and
prudence he was elected into the Senatorian order by Ancus Martius, and instead
of Lucumo called Lucius, and Tarquinius, from Tarquinii, the Town of his birth:
And after Ancus his death (notwithstanding the left two sons) was thought
worthy to be his Successor. He conquering the rebelling Sabines; Latins, and
the twelve Tuscan Nations, was the first who triumphed in Rome. From these last
he borrowed, and introduced all the ornaments and ensigns of Sovereignty, with
all the habits and fashions which were afterward used by the Roman people. He
reigned thirty eight years, and was treacherously murdered by two Villains,
suborned by the two Sons of Ancus Martius. As you may read the story at large
in Livie l. 1. he left two sons, Aruns and Lucius, called afterward Superbus.
But neither of these succeeded immediately to their Father; Servius Tullius
but Servius Tullius, a Slave by birth, as born of Ocrisia, a Lady taken in the
Corniculan war. Ocrisia, as being of the best quality of the Captiv^s, was
presented to Tanaquil, Wife to Tarquinius; and being left with child by her
Husband, was delivered of a boy, which from the servile condition of his Mother
was called Servius, and from his Father, Tullius. He from a hopeful and
towardly child, became a deserving and gallant man, insomuch, that K. Tarquin
thought him worthy of his Daughter, and the people of Rome of the Crown: For he
married the one, and after the death of the murdered Tarquin was elected to the
other, his predecessors issue being pretermitted. He held the reins of
government 44. years, and was as deserving a Prince as any, although omitted
here by our Author, who treats of things not Historically, but Poetically, and
after a grosser manner.

Tarquinius Superbus, Tarquinius Superbus.
Son to Tarquinius Priscus, and Sonne-in-law to Servius Tullius, who bestowed
his Daughter Tullia on him: A woman of a violent, unquiet, and ambitious
spirit; who incited her Husband, L. Tarquinius, a man of the like temper with
her self, to murder the King her own Father, and by force to invest himself in
the regal power; which he as boldly as wickedly effected: but administering that
government as impotently, as he had obtained it wickedly; as also for the rape
of Lucretia by his Son Sextus; He, with his whole family was expelled Rome,
which from that time, of a Monarchy, became a free State. Tarquin tyrannized
25. years: so that Rome from Romulus to him was governed by Kings 244. years,
as Livie computes it. And this was the infancy of the Roman State under the
regal power; and indeed, as an Infant, it (being no more then able to crawl)
had made but a small advance in order to that greatness which it afterward
achieved: For that people (which in process of time, when it arrived to its
virile estate or manhood, did bound its Empire with the rising and setting Sun,
and carried its victorious Eagles from the Northern to the Southern world) had
not in 250. years gained above fifteen miles in circuit from their Cities
walls, nor after so many battles, conquests, and triumphs extended their
Territories further then a nimble Footman could run in two hours. As if it were
in States as it is in nature, wherein we see that those things which are
designed for strength and duration, do soberly, and by degrees arrive to
perfection; but that those which are soon in their wane and decadence, do
suddenly, and as it were per saltum attain to their increment and consistence.
How often have we seen the power of a State terminate in one man, and the glory
of a Nation breath out its last, when he expired? so circumscribed a thing is
greatness, and so transitory is that gaudy pomp which the world admires: but to
return.

Lucius Junius, the son of Marcus Junius and Tarquinia, Brutus and Tarquin.
Sister to Superbus, was the first who brought the surname of Brutus into the
Junian Family: For he (seeing by the sad examples of his own Father and
Brother, lately murdered by the jealous Tyrant, that to deserve highly was the
highest treason, and that virtue was the most compendious way to ruin and
destruction) counter^eited himself a fool, wherein he acted his part so to the
life, that he purchased to himself and his Descendants the contemptible, but
secure, nickname of Brutus, or the Brute: And in all appearance he continued
such, till a fair opportunity encouraged him to lay aside the fool coat, and to
appear in the more becoming dress of a man of wisdom and courage: For he was
the first, who having rescued the oppressed people from the impotent rule of
the Tarquins, changed the form of government from a Monarchy to a State, from
Regal to Consular; and was the first, who (together with his Colleague
Collatinus) was invested in this new Magistracy; which was annual, and to be
administered by two, on purpose to defeat and disappoint those advantages, which
a single and continued power might take upon the people who instrusted them.
They were called Consules, a consulendo Reipublicae, from the care they took of
the common good; (as Cicero will have it) or (as Varro) quod consulere populum,
and Senatum deberent, because they ought to advise with the Senate and the
People in all affairs and designs. This office (as annual, and in the person of
two) differed only from the Kingly government: otherwise they had the same
ensigns and marks of sovereignty which the Kings had; for they had their twelve
Lictors carrying the Fasces, or bundle of rods before them, with the Secures,
or Axes, as before the late Kings: wherefore Virgil calls them here, fasces
receptos, viz. a regibus, the Fasces or sovereign power wrested out of the
hands of the Kings. But to proceed; and I hope that the Reader will not think
that I do impertinently seek matter of discourse, if I enlarge something upon
this Story; he shall find many particulars coincident with passages of our own
times, and agreeing with the sinister policies of our modern Innovators.
Brutus, therefore (the principal vindicator of the peoples liberty) knowing
that there was as much virtue required in maintaining what he had got, as in
the primarie acquisition, endeavors by all means possible to confirm and knit
the as-yet-feeble joints of his infant Republic: and to this end in the first
place he causes the people to engage themselves by oath against the government
of a single person; jure-jurando populum adegit, neminem Romae passuros
regnare: Livie. Secondly, he was very industrious in ruining and dis^abling the
royal party, which indeed (by reason of Tarquins demerits) were but few, and
those either green-headed Courtiers, or such of the Nobility, qu^rum in regno
libido solutior fuerat, whose looseness under a Kingly government were less
remarkable; all the friends (I say) of the ejected King were suddenly
suppressed, amongst the rest Collatinus, the Husband of the ravished Lucretia,
and Brutus his Coadjutor in the regifuge, and now Companion with him in office,
was by his means (because of Tarquins Family) both turned out of his place, and
banished his Country: nay, to strike the greater terror into others, who
should attempt the restitution of the Tarquins, he did not only pronounce
sentence upon his own sons, Titus and Tiberius, with others of the Nobility
nearly allied to him, who were convinced to have held correspondence with the
Common enemy, but appeared an unmoved and irrelenting overseer and exactor of
their punishment; and qui spectator erat amovendus, eum ipsum exactorem
supplicii fortuna dedit: Livie. Thirdly, he caused all the estate, both real
and personal of the ejected Family, to be dissipated and divided amongst the
people; knowing full well, that those who had swallowed such fair morsels,
would be very hardly persuaded to regorge them. Bona regia diripienda plebi
sunt data, ut contacta regia praeda, spem in perpetuum cum his pacis amitteret.
On the other side the Tarquins were not idle; but finding by the disappointment
of the late plot, that it was in vain to hope to compass any thing by the
assistance of disarmed, suppressed, and discouraged friends at home, they (as
in their case any would do) implore forain aid, and fly first to the Veientes
and Tarquinienses, a people of Etruria, and implacable enemies to the Roman
name. These arm in the quarrel of the exiled Princes; and in this battle fell
their great Brutus; but most remarkably; Aruns the son of Tarquin, who
commanded the enemies horse, espying Brutus at the head of the Roman horse,
which he also commanded, crying, Dii regum ultores adeste, ye Gods, avengers of
Kings, be present and assist me, set spurs to his horse and ran furiously upon
Brutus, who as gallantly received his charge; to be short, they pierced one the
other with their sances, and fell down dead together. But after a long contest
between the two Armies, and the loss of 13000. men on each side, the Romans
remained superiors. Tarquin failing here, addresseth himself to Porsena K. of
Clusium, a potent Prince in those days. Methinks Livie makes Tarquin recommend
his case very pathetically, and to the purpose, to his brother King: it is a
passage that I have often taken notice of, nor unworthy the transcribing. He
hints to Porsena thus; Ne orientem morem pellendi reges inultum sineret; satis
libertatem ipsam habere dulcedinis, nisi quanta vi civitates eam expetant,
tanta regna reges defendant. Aequa^i summa infimis, nihil excelsum, nihil quod
supra caetera emineat; in civitatibus fore. Adesse finem regnis, rei inter Deos
hominesque; pulcherrimae. A discourse most pregnant and proper in this case,
and which we may thus english. He advises Porsena as a King not to permit this
new fashion of deposing and expelling Kings to go unpunished; for that liberty
in it self was so sweet and inviting, that unless Kings did defend their
crowns as vigorously as the people sought their freedom, all things being
reduced to an equality, there would be no distinction of degrees remaining in
Cities or Commonwealths: and that in conclusion there would be an end of
Monarchy, a government the most approved both by Gods and men. These
arguments, and the consideration of his own case, engaged Porsena in Tarquins
quarrel; but after a vigorous attempt, and almost a victory, there was a sudden
pacification made between the Romans and Porsena, and Tarquins interest quite
left out in the agreement, who (as restless as he was unfortunate) makes new
applications to other friends; and by the intervention of Mamilius Tusculanus
(a person of chief note amongst the Latins; and to whom Tarquin in his
prosperity had married his Daughter) stirs up all the people of Latinum
against the Romans, whose greatness began to be suspected and dreaded by all
their neighbors; but after a long, doubtful, and bloody fight, the victory
remained still with the Romans; wherefore Tarquinius (having lost both his sons
in the wars, now grown old, and destitute of friends) gave over all further
hopes of recovering his right, and retired himself to Cumae, to Aristodemus the
then Tyrant of that City, where the fourteenth year after his expulsion he by
death put a period, as well to the fears and jealousies of his late Subjects,
as to his own miserable, harrased, and unpleasant life. All Historians do
highly celebrate this action of Brutus; and it was once my fortune to be in
company where I heard it very ^agerly defended, and propounded as a commendable
president, and fair copy for Subjects to draw by. I shall not make a formal
dispute upon the case, but only propound these following Quaeries.

Tarquin was so insupportable a Tyrant as Histories deliver him to be, or
whether those who rebelled against him, rendered him not such in story the
better to palliate their own unjustifiable proceedings.

2. Whether, if he were such, Brutus were to be justified, and his example to
be followed.

3. Whether Brutus did what he did purely for the public good, and not rather
to avenge the injuries done to his private family.

4. Whether Brutus did what he did purely for the public good, and not rather
to get into the seat of him whom he had dismounted.

5. If it were not so, why did he not, after the work was done, continue a
private man?

6. Whether it be not probable, that he who could dissemble so well, that he
deceived the crafty Tarquin himself, and passed for a fool, till he got an
opportunity to oppress him and his Family, might not as well dissemble with the
people, and pretend to be a great assertor of their liberties, till such time
as he could securely fool them out of them.

7. Whether the character Livie gives of him, viz. that he was, juvenis long
alius ingenio, quam cujus simulationem induerat, a man of a far different
disposition and temper then what he seemed to be, do not render him as a great
cheat and dissembler, and to be suspected as to this our last Quaere.

8. Whether his deposing Collatinus, and his putting his sons to death, were
not for the better color of his designs, and to beget a greater belief of his
integrity, that he might be trusted with the greater power.

9. Whether Liberty be a just pretense.

10. Whether all innovating Rebels must not of necessity, if they invade the
regal power, destroy the liberty they pretended to assert.

11. Whether experience does not tell us, that this saying of Tacitus is an
irrefragable truth; ut imperium evertant, libertatem praeferunt, quam si
everterint, ipsam aggredientur ur libertatem: those who design a change of
government, inveagle the people with a pretense of liberty, which if they
effect, themselves, invade that liberty, they lately seemed to patronize.

12. Whether this saying of Tacitus has not been verified in the flagitious
proceedings of the Fanatics of our age, etc.

Of the Family of the Decii there were three, viz. The 3. Dec^i.
the Father, Son, and Grandsonne, who for their lives lost in their Countries
service were deservedly famous: the Father (who was Consul with T. Manlius
Torquatus, an. urbis conditae 415.) did in the war against the Latins devove
himself, i. e. with strange imprecations and invocations bequeath and vow
himself to death. For when it was revealed in a dream to both the Consuls, that
that side should be victorious whose General should die in the fight; and when
it was agreed, that of the two Consuls, he whose wing did first give place,
should devove himself. Decius seeing the wing which he commanded ready to fly,
having pronounced after Valerius the high Priest the solemn words or form of
the Devotion, mounted his horse, and with his sword drawn, made an impression
into the thickest of the almost-victorious enemies; wheresoever he came a
sudden fear invaded them: quacunque equo invectus est, ibi haud secus, quam
pestifero sidere icti pavebant: Livie: at last he fell, and by his death
procured victory to his neer-conquered party. See this story in Livie. l. 8. as
also in Val. Max. l. 5. c. 6. and Florus l. 1. c. 18. Decius the Son was four
times Consul; Decius the Son.
in all which so often repeated honors he discharged and acquitted himself
much to his own praise, and his Countries advantage. In his fourth Consulate
with Q. Fabius Maximus Rullianus, an. urb. 458, in that war against the
confederated armies of the Gauls, Samnites, Vmbri and Tuscans, following his
Fathers example, he devov'd himself also; and charging into the thickest of the
now-prevailing enemy, restored the lost victory to his own party: See Livie l.
10. The form and manner of a military Devotion, as we may collect out of Livie
was this: The General of the wavering and declining Army, plucking off his
Paludamentum, or Soldiers Coat, put on his Praetexta, or purple-guarded Robe,
such as he used to wear in the City; then covering his head, and holding his
erected hands (which were hidden under his Robe) out at his chin, and standing
upon his lance, he repeated these solemn words after the Pontifex or
High Priest: A military Devotion.
Janus, Jupiter, Father Mars, Quirinus, Bellona; ye Lares, Novensiles, and
Indigetes; ye Gods who praeside over us and the enemy; ye Gods infernal, I pray
ye, I worship ye, I ask and require ye to give success to the Roman forces and
army, and to pursue the enemies of the Roman people with terror, fear, and
death. As I have solemnly pronounced these words, so I devove, bequeath, and
give my self with the legions and auxiliaries of the enemy to the infernal Gods
and Mother Tellus, for the State, Army, Legions; and Auxiliares of the people
of Rome. These words pronounced, he girded his Robe with a Cinctus Gabinus,
such a girdle as the Gabii used, and mounting his horse with his sword drawn,
rushed into the thickest of the enemy. By this means (by the Devils imposture
succeeding, and made effectual) they imagined that they bore away with them
all the evil fortune which was like to betide their own party into the enemies
army, and translated that disanimation and fear which was ready to invade
themselves unto the conquering side; and that they being by the repeating these
solemn words, devoted or accursed (for devotus and execratus are the same)
carried a curse along with them wheresoever they either went, or fell. But this
was not often put in practice; these two only occur in the Roman History. In
the Greek we read of Codrus King of Athens, who did the same. Decius the
Grandson.
But to proceed; Decius the Grandson did not (as some affirm) devove himself,
as his predecessors did, but being Consul with P. Sulpicius Savenius, ann. urb.
474. was slain fighting for his Country in the war against King Pyrrhus: of
these three thus, Cic. l. 1. quaest. Tusc. Si Mors timeretur, non cum Latinis
pater Decius decertans; cum Etruscis filius, cum Pyrrho Nepos, sese hostium
telis objecissent: were death a thing to be feared, Decius the Father fighting
with the Latins; the Son with the Tuscans, and the Grandson with Pyrrhus, had
not run upon the enemies weapons. But the glory of this illustrious Family
lasted not long, but expired with these three; after whom we read not of any of
the Decii, famous either in peace or war, or who bore any office of note in
the Commonwealth: they were but a plebeian Family, and preferred to those
honors and dignities for their virtue and valor. We will add those verses of
Juvenal concerning these Decii, as an Epitaph to be inscribed on their Tomb,
who in his eighth Satyr gives them this luculent Elogie:

Plebeiae Deciorum animae, plebeia fuerunt
Nomina; pro totis legionibus hi tamen, and pro
Omnibus auxiliis, atque omni pube Latina
Sufficient Diis infernis, Terraeque parenti:
Pluris enim Decii quam qui servantur ab illis.
To the infernal Gods and Mother Earth
The Decii (though of a plebeian birth)
For all our Legions, our Auxiliaries,
And youth, were deemed a worthy sacrifice:
For the Heroic Decii then whatever
By them was saved of greater value were.
Drusus was a cognomen of the Family of the Livii, The Drusi.
which (according to Ant. Augustinus de fam. Rom.) were distinguished into the
Dentri, Salinatores, Libones, Aemiliani, Claudiani, and Drusi. The first of the
Drusi was C. Livius Drusus, who (according to Suetonius in vit. Tiber.) took
the surname of Drusus, from Drausus, a General of the enemy by him slain;
transmitting the same to his posterity. His great Grandson, M. Livius Drusus,
being Tribune of the people with C. Gracchus, discharged himself so wisely and
faithfully in the Senates-behalf, that he got himself the honorable title of
Patronus Senatus: Sueton. in Tib. and Plutarch in Gracch. Tiberius Caesar was
by the Mothers side ingrafted into this Family; for Livia Drusilla was Daughter
to Livius Drusus, who took part with Brutus and Cassius; and after their defeat
(following them in their example, as well as in their Cause) slew himself. Him
Patereulus calls virum fortissimum and nobilissimum, a right noble and valiant
person. Lastly, of this branch of the Livii was that hopeful young Prince
Drusus Nero, younger Brother to Tiberius, and Father to the excellent
Germanicus, for whose sake (as being Son to Livia Drusilla Augusta, and so
entirely beloved by his Father-in-law Augustus) it is credible that the Poet
(who took all occasions to honor that Family) has inserted the name of the
Drusi in this illustrious Catalogue. I do much wonder that Servius, with the
rest of Virgils Interpreters, should imagine, that under the name of Drusus,
the Poet understands here that Claudius Nero, who being Consul with M. Livius
Salinator, an. urb. 546. defeated Asdrubal, the brother of Annibal: when the
Nero's were not of the Livian Family (as were the Drusi) but of the Claudian;
nor till Tib. Nero (Father to the Emperor Tiberius) did (by marrying Livia)
match into that Family, did any of the Nero's assume the name of Drusus;
whereof Drusus the Father of Germanicus was the first.

Manlian Family, Tit. Manlius.
not only as a patrician, but as a sourse and seminary of deserving Patriots,
was one of the most eminent of Rome, and which from the expulsion of the Kings
flourished in high repute till Caesar and Pompey's time. These were branched
into the Vulsones, Capitolini, the Imperiossi, and the Torquati: Ant. August.
The first of the Torquati (then whom no one of that Family was more famous) was
Titus Manlius, the Son of Lucius, surnamed Imperiossus; so called from his
haughty and imperious nature; which appearing in all his proceedings, was yet
more eminent in the unnatural usage of this Titus, his Son, whom for no other
reason, then for that he appeared to him to be less vigorous than what became
the Manlian name, he in a manner cast off, and bred up in the Country amongst
his Hinds and Plow-men: For which his unbeseeming deportment M. Pomponius,
Tribune of the people, had prepared a public Indictment and Accusation before
the people against him. The young Manlius understanding the intention of the
Tribune, goes privily, armed only with a knife, to the City, finds out
Pomponius, takes him aside, and there draws his knife, threatening immediately
to dispatch him, unless he would swear to let fall his accusation against his
Father; which for fear he swore to do. This undeserved piety of the Son
procured an absolute remission of the intended prosecution to the Father, and
immortal honor to himself; insomuch that at the next election of Officers for
the supply of the Legions, he (though friendless, obscure, and unknown) was
made a Legionary Colonel. This action of his speaking in him no common soul,
was but a prologue to more worthy performances. For when the Romans had drawn
out their Army against the Gauls, now within three miles of the City, and
divided from them only by the River A^^en, a certain Gaul of a vast stature,
terrible aspect, and Giant-like proportion, came forth upon the bridge, and in
proud and scornful words challenged any one of the enemy to fight with him
hand to hand; but when a general silence testified as general a fear, and
every one seemed to prefer his own perfonal safety to the honor of the
public, Titus Manlius coming forth, addressed himself (as Livie makes him
speak) in this manner to the General: Sir, as a Soldier (says he) I think it
my duty not to fight, were the advantage never so inviting, without my Generals
command: If you please to permit, I will make that insolent Barbarian know that
I am descended from that Viz. from Manlius Capitolinus.
Family which forced the invading Troops of the Gauls from the Capitol. The
General embracing him, encouraged him to the Combat; wherefore his companions
having put on his arms, he takes a Foot-mans shield, and a Spanish sword in his
hand (in those days short ones were in use amongst those of that Nation) as a
more proper weapon for that close fight which he intended. Thus armed, he
advances toward the Gaul, foolishly insulting, and (out of scorn) often
lolling out his tongue. They were very unequally matched, as to the outward
appearance; the one had a personage remarkable for its bulk, glittering in
richly-gilt arms, and dressed up in changeable-coloured silks; the other was
of a middle, but Souldier-like stature, not at all regardable either in his
habit or presence. He marched on ^oberly, without any noise, exultation, or
flourishing his arms, but (scorning all such vain expressions of courage,
reserved himself for the trial of the approaching fight. And now they draw
near, when the Gaul like a huge Mountain of flesh over-topping the other,
opposed his shield with his left arm to the sword of the invading enemy, and
with his right, let fall a weighty blow with a great noise upon him. The Roman
bearing the point of his sword upward, engaged the lower part of the Gauls
shield with his own, and there insinuating and working himself in within the
body and the arms of the other, sheltered his whole body from the danger of
all blows; and lying like a small vessel under a high carved ship, wounded him
with often repeated thrusts in the bottom of his belly, till at last he fell
dead at his feet. Nor did he offer any violence to the prostrate body, but
only taking off the gold chain, which he wore about his neck, put it (all
bloody as it was) about his own: whence from Torques, by which the Latins
understand a chain, He, and his posterity after him, were called Torquati. Thus
Livie describes this signal Duel. Q. Claudius Quadrigarius (a far more ancient
Author) differs in many particulars from this narrative, as you may read him
cited by a A. Gellius l. 9. c. 13. The event of this fight was so considerable,
that the Gaulick Army, utterly dismayed at the worsting of their Champion,
dislodged the next night; and making a sudden and disorderly retreat, left
their Camp, with much spoil and booty behind them. There is a third particular
recorded in History touching this Manlius, and such an one as never in my
reading occurred in any profane Story. Twenty two years after this exploit,
viz. an urb. 415. Torquatus was chosen Consul with P. Decius Mus. Both the
Consuls were in the field with a very powerful Army ready to engage the
Latins, an enemy very considerable in regard of their numbers, force, arms,
and discipline, in all which they equalled the Romans themselves; insomuch that
it was thought requisite to revive the ancient discipline of war; to which
end diverse orders were issued forth; amongst the rest it was proclaimed, that
no person whatsoever should, upon pain of death, fight the enemy without
special command from the Generals. It happened that T. Manlius, Son to the
Consul, being sent abroad with a small party to view in what posture the enemy
lay, came near that quarter where the Tusculan horse lay encamped, under the
command of Geminius Metius, a person of high repute for his valor and skill in
horsemanship. He espying, and knowing the Consuls Son, called out to him, and
in reproachful terms challenged him to the Combat: young Manlius as readily
accepts the invitation; and both setting spurs to their horse, ran furiously
at each other; but in the encounter the Roman slew the Latin, and gathering up
the spoils of the slain, returned with his Troop in a triumphant manner to the
Tent of his Father, the Consul, where entering, he salutes him in this manner;
That all may know, Sir, that I am the Son of so worthy a Father, I present
you with these spoils, which when challenged I took from the slain enemy. Which
when the Father heard, he presently turned away from his Son (who expected a
more cheerful reception) and commanded a Council of war by sound of trumpet
forthwith to be assembled. The Council being met, he thus began; the words are
Livies: Since thou, T. Manlius, regarding neither the Consuls Command, nor the
respect due to thy Parent, have (against our express order) engaged with the
enemy, and as much as in thee lay overthrown that military discipline upon
which the Roman State has to this day stood and flourished, and have reduced
me to that sad necessity, that I must either forget the interest of the
Commonwealth, or my self, and mine own relations; I will rather suffer in thy
punishment, then that the Commonwealth should be in the least prejudiced by
thy misdemeanor: we shall both of us be a sad, but a wholesome president to the
ages to come. Truly both that ingenite affection which I have for thee as my
child, together with this specimen of worth and gallantry which thou have now
given, move me not a little: But since the Consular authority is either to be
established by thy death, or by thy impunity to be for ever abolished, I think
that even thou thy self (if thou have any of my blood running in thy veins)
wilt not refuse to restore by thy punition that military discipline which by
thy default thou have destroyed. Go Lictor, do thy office. The sentence was no
sooner pronounced then it was put in execution, and a gallant, but unfortunate
son, by a severe, but wise, Fathers command, brought to an untimely end,
being to the great terror and grief of the beholders publicly beheaded. This
action might administer copious matter for a declamation: much might be said
for, much against it; however it argued a greatness of soul in the Father not
to be expressed: the effect of it was the establishing of the Roman discipline,
not only for the present, but for the future. Manlius his example living fresh
in the memory of all military men, so long as the Roman name ^urvived. Thus you
see the reason why Virgil says

-- saevumque securi
Aspice Torquatum. --
Furian Family, Furius Camillus
a Patrician, was divided into the Fusci, Medullini, Pacili, Purpureones, and
the Camilli: of these there were many men of great note and trust in the
Commonwealth; but so great was the merit of M. Furius Camillus, so many and
signal his good services done for the State, so high and often-repeated his
commands and dignities, that he did not only eclipse those (otherwise deserving
men) of his own Family, but even all those of the whole age wherein he lived.
He was a person (doubtless) endued with all moral and political virtue, the
best Man, and the best Citizen Rome ever bred. We will make good this our
character in some few of his most eminent atchievments; when he was a private
Soldier under the Dictator Postumius Tubertus, in the war against the Aequi
and the Volsci, he was the first who advancing before the Army, gave the charge
upon the enemy; wherein being hurt in the thigh with a lance, he did not
withdraw out of the fight, but plucking out the truncheon, with the spear,
which was broke in the wound, charged courageously on, and by his example so
animated his own party, and disheartened the enemy, that the victory was chiefly
due to his undaunted valor and forwardness. And this was the original of his
advancement, and that first step by which he climbed that high scale of his
following preferments. For he was five times chosen Dictator, six times
Military Tribune: He triumphed four times; was made Censor once, and thrice
Interrex. By the way we may observe these following mutations in the form of
the Roman government under a State; first, from the Consular government to that
of the Decemviri, an. urb, 302. But this lasted not above two years, the
Consular rule being re-established; which was again laid aside, and the
administration of affairs put into the hands of a certain number of Military
Tribunes, with the full power of the abrogated Coisuls, an urb. 328. they were
called Tribuni militum Consulari potestate, to distinguish them from the
Tribuni militum, which were only Colonels of the Army. And this form of policy
was interrupted by the incroachment of the Tribunes of the people, who for five
years held the reins of government without any Curule Magistrate. A Curule
Magistrate was such who had the right of riding in a Curule Chair, as Consuls,
Praetors, Censors, etc. as we shall show more largely anon. This power
determining, the Military Tribunes were again restored, who continued five
years in their Magistracy; and then the Consuls, after so many revolutions,
were empowered again; so that the Consulate was laid aside for the space of 45.
years, as Sextus Rufus computes it. And this is the reason why Camillus (who
had been preferred to all dignities in the Commonwealth) never came to be
Consul, because during his time the Consular power was quite exauctorated. In
his first Dictatorship he won the City of Veii, which had held out most
obstinately against the besieging Romans for the space of ten years; the most
memorable siege, excepting that of Troy and Numantia, that profane Story
presents us with; for which he triumphed.

But his behavior to the treacherous Schoolmaster is very remarkable, and
speaks him to have been a person of high honor. Camillus being Military
Tribune and General, entered the Country of the Falisci, and laid siege to their
principal Town, Faleria. There was in the City a certain Schoolmaster, the
general and only Educator of the Youth; he assembling all his Pupils, with
diverse of the children of the most wealthy and eminent Citizens, under pretense
of taking the air, trains them all out of the City, and leads them into the
enemies Camp, where he offers to betray them all to Camillus; who so far
disdained the disingenuous dealing of the false Pedant, that after his Lictors
(by his command) had stripped him stark naked, and bound his hands behind him, he
caused the Scholars, with whips and rods, to drive their treacherous Master
before them to the City, adding, That it became not a person of honor to seek
victory by base and indirect means, but to conquer by open valor, and discreet
conduct. But mark the success: The Falerians (whom all the battering rams of
the Romans could not make to submit) were subdued by the handsome deportment of
the truly-honorable Camillus; to whom they forthwith sent Commissioners to
treat, and conclude a peace, with the rendition of themselves and their City to
the free dispose and mercy of that enemy whom they did but now detest and
defy. Yet could not this deserving Patriot avoid the envy and malice of his
ill-requiting Citizens, who for diverse trivivial piques, and insignificant
exceptions against him, never ceased, till they had forced him to forsake his
native soil, and to withdraw himself, as an Exile, to the City of Ardea: yet
could not this unworthy usage make Camillus to be less then himself; nor though
his native soil had showed her self a Stepmother to him, would he prove an
unkind Son to her; but in the greatest extremity that ever Rome was in, he
appeared a seasonable deliverer, whilst he (being in his absence nominated
Dictator by that poor remain of the Roman Commonwealth, which was then, and had
been for seven months besieged in the Capitol) rescued the City from Brennus
and his Gauls, now triumphing in those ugly ruins they had barbarously made;
and by force expelling them, did soon turn their triumphs into a tragedy, and
deprive them of all their late taken spoils and trophies; whence he is rightly
said here, Signa refer, to recover (as he did) the lost ensigns of the
conquered Romans. Rome was sacked and burnt by the Gauls, an. urb. 365. a sad
and memorable Era. Nor did Rome owe its being to the valor and arms of
Camillus more then to his counsel and eloquence; for when the people were
generally bent to quit the desolated and ruined City, and to transplant
themselves to Veii, their late conquest, he dissuaded them from their intent,
and advised them to rebuild their native City; wherein he at last prevailing,
Rome (being in one year reedified) Phaenix-like sprung up more beautiful out
of its own ashes. And now Camillus having in his third Dictatorship overthrown
the Latins and the Volsces combined together; in his fourth done his utmost
endeavor to suppress the sedition of the Commons, who urged to have one of the
Consuls to be a plebeian; in his fifth once more vanquished the Gauls, who came
with a powerful army to revenge that total rout they had received some years
past; having (I say) to his last been with constant good success employed in
the service of his Country, he (to the great grief of all good men) died of the
plague: Vir vere unicus in omni fortuna, princeps pace belloque etc. as Livie
says of him; A man truly the same in all fortune, and who in peace and war
had still the preeminence.

Romes foundation, Caesar and Pompey.
wherein partly under Kings, partly under Consuls, Dictators, military
Tribunes, and Praetors, it had made the best part of the habitable world stoop
to its victorious Eagles; so that it was now above all fear or danger of a
foreign force; nor could any thing hurt Rome but it self. To be short, the
Roman Empire was now arrived to that fatal greatness, which is always
antecedent either to a declension, or a change: -- laetis hunc numina rebus
Crescendi posuere modum. -- Lucan.
Thus to luxuriant fortune we do see
That heaven has set a fatal boundarie.
Such (I say) was the face of things in the Roman State, when these two
Grandees, viz. Caesar and Pompey (the souls now appearing before Anchises)
pushed on by ambition and emulation, involved their native soil in most bloody
wars. Caesar could brook no superior, Pompey no equal: Caesar pretended a
righting himself against the Senate, and a party there who opposed his (as he
thought) but reasonable request, in suing for the Consulship; Pompey pretended
the Senates and Commonwealths cause, which indeed carried more plausibleness
with it, though it is more then probable that the Public was the least thing
intended by either of the Captains; and that whosoever had been victorious,
that had fared alike. Pompey having in design (had he succeeded) to have done
what Caesar did: But whatsoever their secret aims were, the cause of both
parties arming themselves was certainly this; Caesar (having done most eminent
service for the State in France, Britanny, and Germany) required, that (though
absent) he might at the next election of Consuls be chosen; a request
(considering his merit) not in the least unreasonable: this was once assented
to, Pompey himself appearing for it: but afterward (upon some suspicions and
jealousies) revoked, and Caesar commanded to quit his Army, and as a private
man to come in person, and to prefer his Suit; which if he refused to do, he
was forthwith to be proclaimed an enemy to the State, and to be proceeded
against as a Traitor. Their drift being only to divest him of his power, and
then to call him to an account for many things they had to allege against him.
But Caesar perceiving the design of his enemies (amongst which Pompey now
openly declared himself) did not only not quit his Army, but advancing toward
Rome, filled all places where he came with terror and consternation; insomuch
that the Consuls with the Senators, and Pompey their General, leaving the City
to Caesar's mercy, fled into the furthest part of Italy, where thinking
themselves as insecure, they from Brundisium passed into Epirus: Caesar by this
means remaining absolute Master of all Italy. Then returning to Rome, He, with
P. Servilius Isauricus, was the second time made Consul, an. urb. 706. Having
ordered things to his mind in the City, and enriched himself by the direption
of the public treasury, he went into Spain, where having subdued Pompeys
Lieutenants there, and secured that Province, he returned to Rome, from whence
he marched with his Army to Brundisium, and thence about the Nones of January
this very year 706. he transported his Legions to Oricum, the most convenient
Port of Epirus; and about the twentieth of July following fought with, and
utterly routed Pompey, near the City of Pharsalus, seated upon the River
Enipeus, in Thessalie; whence the plains adjoining (where this fatal quarrel
was disputed) were called the Pharsalian fields. The effect of this victory,
with the following successes in Egypt, Africa and Spain, was the change of the
government from a State to a Monarchy, begun in J. Caesar, confirmed and
established in Augustus, under the name and title of Imperator; which word
(although originally it signified a General of an Army only, (...), and that
more strictly, such a General as having obtained some notable victory over the
enemy, was by his Soldiers saluted by the name of Imperator) became afterward
equivalent with Princeps, and was the title of the Roman Emperor, with this
distinction (as Lipsius observes upon Tacitus Annal. l. 3. numero 173.) when by
Imperator we understand a General, then it is subjoyned, as an agnomen, or
additional name and title, as P. Cornelius Scipio Imperator, or General: but
when it signifies the sacred Majesty of the Roman Prince, then it is prefixed
as a Praenomen preceding, as our Christian name does to the Surname; as
Imperator Caesar Augustus, the Emperor, etc. and thus you shall find it used in
ancient Coins, Medals and Inscriptions; in which sense the Greeks render it
(...). This is a note not to be omitted.

L. Mummius Nepos, L. Mumm^us.
who being Consul with Cn. Cornelius Lentulus, an. urb. 608. subdued the
Achaeans, took and razed Corinthus, the capital City of that Province, for
which he triumphed, and purchased the agnomination of Achaicus. But to give you
a brief survey of the Achaean war, with the character of L. Mummius, you must
know that the Achaeans (then the most potent people of Peloponesus, and Lords
of the better part of that Island) picking a quarrel with the Lacedaemonians,
with design to subdue them, made incursions into their Country: whereupon the
injured Spartans make their applications to the Senate and people of Rome,
under whose protection they were: a welcome message to the Romans, who desired
but a fair pretense to make war upon the Achaeans, now the only powerful and
unsubdued people of all Greece: wherefore they forthwith dispatch their
Ambassadors, with commission to take cognizance of, and to decide the
difference betwixt these two States. But the Achaeans did not only not give ear
to any thing tending to a pacification, but offered new injuries to the
Lacedaemonians, and (against the Law of Nations) many indignities to the
Commissioners themselves, even to the throwing their ordure upon them as they
passed the streets: For which affronts war is denounced against them, and an
Army under the Command of L. Mummius appears at the very entrance of the
Isthmus; where a battle was fought betwixt them and the Romans, who obtaining a
signal victory, marched directly to Corinth (not far distant from the place
of battle) which they easily took, razed, and burnt, and (having put all the
men to the sword) sold the women and children for slaves. Corinth was razed by
Mummius the same year that Carthage was by Scipio Aemilianus 952. years after
its foundation by Ales, the son of Hyppotes (as Paterculus computes it.) Of
the Achaean war see Florus l. 2. c. 16. Justin. l. 34. Live. epit. l. 52. The
Citizens of Corinth were very wealthy in Coin, Plate, Jewels, Statues of Gold,
silver and Brass: from the confusion of all which Metals in the conflagration
of the City, proceeded that precious compound which from thence was called Aes
Corinthium, Corinthian Brass: Vessels made of this mixture were most highly
prized by the Ancients. This is now reckoned by Pancirollus amongst those
things which are lost: rer. deperd. tit. 34. The whole Peloponesus following
the fate of Corinth, because subject to the Romans; amongst the rest the Cities
of Argos, the Metropolis of the Province of Argolis, from whence the Greeks
were called Argi, Argivi, and Argolici, and Mycaenae, the seat of Agamemnon,
the Greeks General against the Trojans: Both these had furnished forth supplies
in that war: see Homer Il. 2. And therefore the Poet in the person of Anchises
does very properly foretell their subversion; which Prophecy was fulfilled in
the person of this L. Mummius, who herein did avenge his Gransires of Troy (for
the Romans were of Trojan extraction) upon the Greeks, their enemies, for all
the injuries by them done, and particularly for the violation of Minerva's
Temple, by the taking the Palladium out of it, and by devirginating Cassandra
in it: Aeneid. l. 2. Vltus avos Trojae, temerataque templa Minervae. But I
cannot but admit of the just exception of Jul. Heginus against Virgil in this
place: See A. Gell. l. 10. c. 16. for confounding the war against K. Pyrrhus
(who derived himself from Achilles, whose known Patronymick was Aeacides, from
his Grandfather Aeacus, from whom all his descendants took the name of
Aeacides, as Virgil makes Pyrrhus here) with the Achaean; a gross parochronism
doubtless, both in regard of the time of the war, as also of the persons who
managed it: for the war against King Pyrrhus (which was also called the
Tarentine war) was begun an. urb. 472. and lasted six years; and was managed
by diverse Generals, of whom the most famous were C. Fabricius, and Manius
Curious: of the first we shall speak anon; the latter was he who ended this
war, and drove Pyrrhus out of Italy. But the Achaean war was 136 years after
this, viz. an. urb. 608. L. Mummius being General; so that this verse, Ipsumque
Aeaciden, genus armipotentis Achillei is by some left out; as it is thought
Virgil would have done upon a more serious review: See A. Gell. ibid. Nor can I
in the least assent to the learned Jesuit De la Cerda upon this place, whom our
Farnaby also follows: Both these interpret these three last verses, viz. Eruit
ille Argos, Agamemnoniasque Mycaenas, etc. of Aemilius Paulus, to whom they say
this ( ille) referres; and Aeacides of Perseus, whom Aemilius conquering, with
him broke and overthrew the Macedonian Monarchy, and made that with Greece a
Province to the Roman Empire: the reasons of De la Cerda (who labors earnestly
to make good his assertion in justification of Virgil against the calumny of
Heginus, as he terms it) are but at the best but conjectures; there is nothing
positively proved out of good Authors. But I desire him to show me where he
finds, first that Aemilius had any thing to do with Peleponesus, or that after
his victory over Perseus he made war upon the Peloponesians. Plutarch (who
writes his life, and with whom all those who speak of those times agree) makes
no mention of any such thing; which had been a particular not to be omitted,
had it been so. But after the Macedonian victory, and the settlement of affairs
there, brings him home through Epirus into Italy. Beside, the Macedonian war
and the Achaean were different, both in respect of time (that being an. urb.
586. and this 608. twenty two years after) and of the Generals, Aemilius
commanding in that, and Mummius in this. Secondly, to derive Perseus from
Achilles, is an assertion as little supported by History as the former. It is
probable, that had it been so either really, or had he had the vanity to have
assumed it to himself, Historians would not have omitted it, especially the
Roman, whose honor (they being victorious) would have been the greater, the
more illustrious the person had been whom they subdued. By the Mother-side
(which is the surer) I am certain that he was far enough from touching
Achilles in blood: For (as Pl^^ testifies in Aemil.) his Mother was but a
Tailors Wife of Argos, called Gnathaenia, on whom King Philip's Father begot
him. As for his alliance by the Fathers side, the first of this race was
Antigonus, one of Alexanders Captains, in whose time there is little or nothing
said of him; who had he been of that illustrious extraction, would doubtless
therefore have been more notable, since he was a person otherwise very
deserving, and a great Soldier, as in the following wars after Alexanders
death he made appear. But, what is most evincing, is, that Plutarch (a most
diligent writer) who wrote the life of Demetrius, this man's Son, makes no
mention of his descent from Achilles, but only that he was the Son of
Antigonus, and no more; so that it is true that Perseus was born of a royal
stem, but the original of his Family was but a private person, viz. Antigonus,
who with his Son Demetrius called himself King, after the defeat of Ptolemy
in the naval fight at Salamina, some seventeen years after Alexanders death.
Demetrius was the first of this line, who was King of Macedon: Second,
Antigonus Gonatas his Son: Third, Demetrius the second: The fourth, Antigonus
Doson, who was indeed but Protector to Philip the Son of Demetrius the
second, and his Fathers Cosen: The fifth, Philip, Son of Demetrius the
second: The sixth, Perseus, of whom we now speak: in which Pedigree we find not
where Perseus can be termed Aeacides, as descended from Achilles: if we
therefore dissent herein from the learned Jesuit, and rather stick to our
above-given interpretation of this place. I hope we shall not be thought to
have done it without reason: nor let the Reader conclude that we insist too
much upon these minutiae, little inconsiderable niceties, whilst we spend so
much time and paper in this or the like speculations; they may happily appear to
be such to a vulgar intellect, those that are of a more refined and critical
complexion will not (I hope) look upon these or the like excursions, as
altogether impertinent.

L. Mummius, who was not indeed of ancient extraction, or to be reckoned
amongst those names which have been in frequent and high employments, but of
those whom the Romans called Novi Homines, New men, or Vpstarts; under which
notion is understood such an one as was the first of his name or family who
came to be advanced to the Consular dignity, or any Curule Magistracy. By the
way we may observe, that amongst other distinctions of degrees, the Romans were
divided into Nobiles, or Nobles, who were such as had the Images of their
Ancestors; into Novos, or Newmen, who had their own Images only; and Ignobiles,
or Mechanics, who had neither Images of themselves, or of their Predecessors.
Now none could have the right of Images (which is equivalent with that of
bearing Arms with us) but those to whom the right of riding in a Curule Chair
belonged, which was an Ivory Chair, and called Sella Curulis, or Currulis, from
Currus, or the Chariot wherein it was carried for the Magistrate to sit upon:
Honoris enim gratia Senatores, qui Magistratum majorem ceperant, curru in
Curiam vehi solebant, in quo sella eburnea esset cui insiderent: Stadius in
Flor. l. 1. c. 5. A. Gell. l. 3. c. 18. Thus Magistratus major and Curulis is
all one, for none were privileged to ride in these Curule Chairs but such as
had born Magistratum majorem, been one of the great Magistrates, as Consul,
Praetor, Dictator, Interrex, Decemvir, Military Tribune, etc. Hence we more
particularly may gather, that by Novus Homo is meant the first of a Family who
had been dignified with any of the greater Magistracies, who only had the right
of riding in a Curule Chair, and by consequence of Images. Hence Paterculus
says of Mummius, that he was ex novis hominibus prior qui cognomen virtute
partum vindicavit; the first of the New-men who from a conquest obtained had an
agnomination or title (viz. Achaicus) given him: and as he was the first of his
name, so was he the last who ever came to any eminence or preferment in the
Commonwealth: we read nothing of himself, or of any of his Family, after the
Achaean war, and his Censorship with Scipio Aemilianus: He was a plain
downright honest man, but withal very ignorant and illiterate, unread in any
art but in that of a Soldier; insomuch that when he sent to Rome some rare
Pictures and Statues, the choicest of the Corinthian spoils, and such as could
not be imitated but by the hand of the original Artist, he charged those who
conveyed them to have a care that they were not lost or defaced, adding, that
if they were, themselves should make them good again; as if they had been
ordinary Merchandise, and to be had every where: with this, he did as little
admire riches as he understood Pictures; for although he were the first who
made Rome acquainted with that so highly-priz'd mixture, called Corinthian
brass, yet there was not found any vessel of it in his house: Livie epit. l.
52. and Aur. Victor. de vir ^ll^st. nay, he died so poor, that having but one
Daughter (in whom happily his name expired) he had not wherewithal to give her
portion: Pliny l. 34. c. 7. Poverty did not in those days render a man
contemptible, as in our more corrupt and vicious age, but was both commendable,
and a mark of high virtue, which consists in nothing more then in contempt of
those empty enjoyments which some so highly prize.

The Porcian Family (from whence Cato sprung) was a plebeian; and himself not
only of those whom they styled Novi Homines, M. Cato.
or New-men, the first of his name who ever bore any honorable office in the
Commonwealth, but of those whom they called Municipes, i. e. such as were not
Natives of Rome, but of some other City, which living according to their own
Laws, and governed by their own Magistrates, had yet the title of Roman
Citizens: Such were the Fundani, Formiani, Cumani, Tusculani, our Cato's
Countrymen; and the Arpinates, Tullies, and Marius, their Compatriots. They
were called Municipes, a munere capiendo, because they had the privilege of
that which the Romans call Munus honorarium, i. e the honor to serve as
Citizens in the Roman Legions, and not as the Socii or Allies in the
Auxiliaries: See Stad. ad Flor. l. 3. c. 18. and A. Gel. l. 16. c. 13. and
those Towns to which these privileges were indulged were called Municipia. In
process of time the Romans enlarged the Charters of some of these Municipal
Towns, and for some great service done, gave them the full privilege of Roman
Citizens, making them capable of giving their voices in the election of
Magistrates, and of being themselves chosen into office. But then (according to
Stadius ibid.) they were totally divested of their own Laws, and became
subject to the Roman Constitutions. In conclusion, all Italy (after the Marsick
or Social War, which happened an. urb. 663. L. Martius Philippus, and Sex. J.
Caesar being Consuls) became free alike; which freedom was extorted from the
Romans by the general insurrection of all Italy. But to our purpose; M. Porcius
Cato was a Native of Tusculum, a Municipal Town of Latium, some fifteen miles
distant from Rome, once a place of note, but for nothing more then for Cicero's
Manor there, from whence that piece of his, called his Tusculan Questions,
took its name: it is now a small inconsiderable Village known by the name of
Frescata. He was the Son of M. Porcius; and surnamed Cato, from his wisdom,
sagacity and experience; from the Latin word Catus, which the Greeks call
(...), i. e. sagax, callidus, wise and subtle; whereas his original
agnomination was Priscus, M. Portius Priscus. He was brought first to Rome by
Val. Flaccus, who discerning more then ordinary endowments in him, judged that
he might in time become a fitting instrument to serve his Country. He made
himself first known by his eloquence in pleading Causes; and doubtless he was
the ablest Orator of his time. But thinking this kind of life too lazy and
inactive, he cast off his Gown, and girt on his Sword, and leaving the City for
the Camp, served first as a Tribune or Colonel; then when Scipio went upon his
African expedition, he went along with him as Quaestor, or Treasurer to the
Army: Afterward, being Praetor, he reduced Sardinia, and Consul, Celtiberia in
Spain; for which he triumphed. After this, desiring to serve his Country in any
condition, he accompanied M. Acilius Glabrio, as private Colonel in the War
against Antiochus, where he did eminent service. He was at last chosen Censor
with his friend Val. Flaccus, who had been also his Colleague in his Consulship;
and (although much opposed by diverse great ones, who stood in competition with
him) yet he carried it in the election. He behaved himself so remarkably stout,
and incorruptibly honest in his Office, that by way of eminence he got himself
the name of the Censor. And these are the public employments which he run
through: In general, he was a very severe man in his life and conversation, an
enemy to excess and luxury; very just and upright; a great lover of the Public
weal, to the advancement whereof he bent his whole studies and endeavors. He
was noted indeed to be a person of too free and biting a tongue, of too sour
and severe a complexion, some say litigious and quarrelsome; little suitable to
the corrupt age wherein he lived: all which was yet thought to proceed from the
consciousness of his own innocence, and from a mind altogether untainted with
those imputations which he reprehended in others: as for his intellectuals, he
was a man of very able parts, quick, witty, apprehensive, eloquent, fitted for
any either public or private employment! See the ample character Livie gives
of him l. 39. In hoc viro tanta vis animi, etc. He wrote much, and upon various
subjects, especially in Oratory, though by the injury of time we are deprived
of those his Monuments. He had two Wives, his first was of a noble Family, by
whom he had M. Cato, who married Tertia, Paulus Aemilius his Daughter, a right
Gallant, and deserving person: He died when he was chosen Praetor, before he
was invested in his office: He begot M. Cato, who was Consul with Q. Martius
Rex. an. urb. 637. and C. Cato, Consul with M. Acilius Balbus, an. urb. 640.
Marcus, the elder of these, left another Marcus, who being Praetor died in
France: and this is what we can gather concerning Cato's posterity by his first
Wife: See A. Gell. l. 13. c. 18. He took for his second choice the Daughter of
Salonius, his Client, a woman of mean birth, on whom he begot when he was 80.
years of age Cato Salonianus; who left two Sons, M. and L. Cato: the first died
whilst he sued to be Praetor, the second was Consul with Cn. Pompeius Strabo,
Father to Pompey the Great. This A. Gellius makes Marcus, the other Brother, to
be Father to Cato uticen. l. 13. c. 18.
Lucius Cato was (according to Plutarch) Father to M. Cato, surnamed the
Philosopher, from his wisdom and virtue; and Vticensis, because he slew
himself at Vtica in Africa, rather than to receive his life from the hands of
Caesar, his enemy. His life is written at large by Plutarch, and his character
thus briefly delivered by Vell. Paterculus l. 2. Marcus Cato, genitus proavo,
M. Catone, principe illo familiae Porciae, homo virtuti simillimus, and per
omnia ingenio Diis quam hominibus propior, qui nunquam recte fecit ut facere
videretur, sed quia aliter facere non potuit, cuique id solum visum est
rationem habere quod haberet justitiam; omnibus humanis vitiis immunis, semper
fortunam in sua potestate habuit. Marcus Cato, born of M. Cato, his
Great-grand-father, the chief and first of the Poreian Family, was the very
image of virtue; a person in all things more resembling the Gods then men; who
never did any handsome thing that it might be said he did it, but because he
could not do otherwise; as who thought that only reasonable which was just,
and being free from all vice had fortune still in his power. He left a son of
his own name, who (although noted for intemperate and loose) expiated that
stain, by dying valiantly on Brutus his side against Augustus, as heir to his
Fathers cause as well as name. He had a daughter also called Porcia, the most
loving Wife of M. Brutus, and true Inheritrix of her Fathers soul; who hearing
of the death of her beloved Consort, when she could no other way put an end to
her loathed life, Haustus sane calidus, sed gloriae plenus, and plusquam
faemineus:
swallowed down hot-burning coals, and so expired; which the ingenious Martial
has thus expressed: Conjugis audisset fatum cum Porcia Bruti, Val. Max.

Et subtracta sibi quaereret arma dolor;
Nondum scitis, ait, mortem non posse negari?
Credideram satis hoc vos docuisse Patrem:
Dixit, and ardentes avido bibit ore favillas,
I nunc, and ferrum, turba molesta, nega.
When Porcia heard of her dear Brutus fate,
And sought wherewith her own to accelerate;
Know you not death cannot be denied? I thought
My Father this sufficiently had taught.
This said, she greedily drank glowing coals,
Now swords deny, unreasonable fools.
And this is what we could collect concerning Cato, and the Porcian Family: See
Plut. in Cat. Major. and Minor. Live. l. 39. and epit. l. 114. etc.

Cossi were Patricians, of the illustrious and numerous Family of the Cornelii,
Cornel^^^ Cossus
which (according to Anton. Augustinus) were branched into the Cossi, which
were subdivided into the Maluginenses and the Arvinae. Secondly, into the
Scipiones, who were distinguished by the sirnames of the Asinae, Calvi,
Nasicae, and Africani. Thirdly, into the Lentuli, who were differenced by the
houses of the Gaudini, Lupi, Surae, Spintheri, and Marcellini. we may add to
these the Syllae, Rufini, Dolabellae, Merulae, and the Cethegi. Of the
Corn^lio-Cossian Family there were very many who bore the greatest offices in
the Commonwealth, i. e. Pontificate, or high Priesthood; once the honor of
winning the Spolia opima, or Royal Spoils, three Dictaetorships, two
Censorships, three Triumphs, two Decemvirates, ten Consulates, twenty two
Tribunates with Consular power, and four Masterships of the horse rested in
this Family, and were with great honor to themselves, and advantage to the
State, administered by them* But the glory and honor of the name, and the person
more particular to be understood here, is Aulus Cornelius Cossus; who (when the
Fid^enates, a Colony of the Romans, assisted by the Falisci* and Vejentes,
rebelled) won the Spolia opima, or Royal Spoils (of which more largely anon)
by killing with his own hand Lars Tolumnius, King of the Vejentes: See the
manner of it in Livie l. 4. by whom it is left very doubtful, both in what
Command, whether Consul, Consular Tribune, or Master of the horse, Cossus
performed this. His character Livie gives in short thus, viz. That he was a
most goodly and beautiful personage, of extraordinary strength of body, and
courage of mind, and very ambitious to increase the honor of his Family; which
(being of it self very illustrious) he by this exploit rendered much more
conspicuous. He was the second after Romulus who consecrated the Spolia opima
to Jupiter Feretrius: and this is what we find recorded concerning Cossus;
wherefore

Quis te, Magne Cato, tacitum, aut^ te Cosse relinquet?
Who Cato would omit, or Cossus, thee?
Antonius Augustinus, The Gracchi.
who wrote purposely of the most illustrious and noble Families of Rome, should
omit that of the Sempronii, a Family not of the latest extraction, or meanest
credit in its time. We (according to our slender and ofteninterrupted reading
having traced the Roman Story) find four streams issuing from the same fountain
of the Sempronii, viz. that of the Blaesi, that of the Tuditani, that of the
Longi, and that of the Gracchi: to these Fulvius Vrsinus adds the Atratini, and
the Petitiones; names he finds stamped upon some ancient coins. C. Sempronius
Blaesus was twice Consul; first with C. Servilius Caepio, an. urb. 500. about
the middle of the first Punick war: He was Consul nine years after with Aul.
Manlius Torquatus Atticus: M. Semproniu^ Tudit anus was Consul with C. Claudius
Cento, an. urb. 517. Pub. Sempronius Tuditanus, his Son, was Consul with M.
Cornelius Cethegus, an. urb. 549. the fifteenth year of the second Punick
war, when he fought prosperously against Hannibal. M. Sempronius Tuditanus
his Son was Consul with App. Claudius Pulcher, an. urb. 568. about the time
that the Romans warred against Philip King of Macedon. Tib. Sempronius Longus
was Consul with Pub. Cornelius Scipio, Father to Scipio the Great, an. urb.
535. at the first breaking out of the second Punick war: he lost, and was
slain at, the fatal battle of Trebia. The two Sons of these, viz. Tib.
Sempronius Longus, and Pub. Cornelius Scipio Africanus, were Colleagues
together, an. urb. 559. As for the Gracchi (to which Family we must principally
confine our discourse) the first we meet with of that name who was of Consular
dig^ity, was Tib. Sempron. Gracchus, who was Consul with Publ. Valerius Falco,
an. urb. 515. The next was Tib. Sempronius Gracchus, happily his Son who was
twice Consul, first with Quint. Fabius Maximus Verrucossus, in the fourth year
of the second Punick war: secondly with Quint* Fabius Maximus, the Son of
V^rrucossus; two years after Tib. Sempronius Gracchus, this man's Son, was
Consul with C. Claudius Pulcher, an. urb. 376. Sardinia fell by lot to be his
Province, wherein he did great service: his Consulship expired, he remained
there as Proconsul, in which command he quite reduced that Province to its due
obedience: See Livie l. 41. He was the second time Consul with M. Juventius
Thalva, an. urb. 590. He triumphed twice, and was honored with the Censorship,
together with C. Claudius Pulcher, his Colleague in his first Consulship. He was
indeed (as Paterculus says of him) vir eminentissimus and clarissimus, a right
eminent and famous person. But he did by nothing more ennoble the Sempronian
name, then by ingrafting it upon a fair stock of the Cornelian Family: for he
married Cornelia, the Daughter of Pub. Scipio, that Scipio who subdued Annibal,
a Lady of most transcendent worth, by whom he had a numerous progeny, viz.
twelve children; but three of them only survived, Tiberius and Caius, his
sons (who made their names as famous by their misdeeds as misfortunes, as
their Predecessors had done by their noble achievements and successful
undertakings) and Sempronia their Sister, who married Scipio Aemilianus, the
Grandson by adoption to Scipio Africanus, and by consequence her own Cosen
german, the best accomplished Gentleman Rome ever bred; of whom more anon: Of
this Family also was Madam Sempronia, who was so deeply concerned in Catilines
conspiracy: See her character in Salust. Tiberius the elder Brother was a man
of great parts, of an undaunted courage, a fluent tongue, and a comely
personage; qualifications of a dangerous consequence, if the person so
qualified happen to deviate from what is right. He was first Quaestor or
Treasurer to C. Mancinus in the Numantine War, and after his return to Rome was
made Tribune of the people; in which office, whether out of an innate hatred to
the Nobility, or out of a turbulent and seditious spirit of his own, I cannot
say* he caused a dangerous sedition, and made such a schism or rent betwixt the
Patricians and the Plebeians, as could not without a Civil Warte have been
pieced and cemented again, had not a sudden and violent death intercepted him.
And here we may observe with Florus l. 3. c. 13. how that the Tribunician power
(which was at first intended for the Commons bulwark against the encroachments
of the Nobility) did its self by degrees degenerate into the greatest
exorbitancie and tyranny that could be, whilst under that specious and
plausible pretense of asserting the peoples liberty, those popular Magistrates
did drive on their own sinister and ambitious designs; and filling all things
with faction and sedition, disappoint the end for which they were at the first
ordained, that is, did destroy the peoples liberty, which they over-eagerly
pretended to patronize, and slacken the very nerves and sinews of all civil
polity, by their contentious bandings against the Senate. But to proceed: Tib.
Gracchus (partly to despite the Nobility, but principally to shake the frame,
and to subvert the fundamentals of the present power, that he might upon the
ruins thereof raise the superstructure of his own greatness) made it his
business to cajole and flatter the people, which (by virtue of his office) he
did either by reviving old antiquated Laws, or enacting new; all which tended
to the diminution and weakening of the Patricians, either in their private
fortunes, or in their power and public employments; which pleased the Common
people, who naturally hate their Betters, and fooled them into a belief that
every one of them should come to share the estates and dignities of the ruined
Nobility, little imagining that they were to be used but as brute instruments,
and necessary tools, which were to be cast aside when the work was done:
Wherefore resolved to prosecute the Nobility, and happily secretly intending, if
things happened right, to change the form of government, he first preferred the
Laws called Agrariae, by which he deprived them of their estates; and those
called Judiciariae, by which he clipped the wings of their power. By the first
it was formerly enacted, That all lands belonging to the Commonwealth (which
were called the public lands, and were the accessions of some new Conquest)
should at easy rates be rented out to the poorer sort: these, as Lives were
lapsed, or as Leases determined, the Patricians got into their hands, the
Commons being by degrees utterly divested of their ancient posse^^ions. This
caused great discontents; and many offers were made in vain by some Tribunes to
reform this abuse, and to reduce things to their original wont and manner; but
none proceeded so far herein as Tib. Gracchus, who caused the Law to pass:
and so it was enacted by the Commons, That the public Lands should be taken
from the wealthier, and reinvested* as formerly, in the poor Plebeians. And
this had the face and show of equity, but it was but a face and show; for
Gracchus did it not so much to do right to the people, as to spite the
Nobility, and to prepare the way for some further and more dangerous design.
After this had passed, he preferred his Judiciary Laws, whereby he took the
power of Judicature from the Senate, to whom it only belonged, and transferred
it to the Equites or Gentlemen, the intermediate degree betwixt the Patricians
and the Plebeians: therein s^ill flattering the people, who looked upon
themselves as honored, and much strengthened herein, the power of Judicature
being (by falling a degree lower) come a step nearer to themselves. But whilst
Graechus was triumphing in his successes in the Capitol (where he held his
popular conventions) the Senators (who were reduced to that extremity, that
they must suffer the seditious Tribune either to ruin them, and with them the
Commonwealth, or make a vigorous attempt to reskue both from imiment danger)
led by Scipio Nasica (Grandson to that Nasica who was called vir optimus, the
best of men) and seconded by a good strong party of friends, repairing to the
Capitol, set upon Gracchus, and dissipating his party, slew him; and by his
death put a stop to those desperate innovations which he under colorable
pretenses had in design. But they did but put a stop to them; for his Brother
Caius, who was chosen Tribune ten years after, did not only insist in his
Brothers footsteps, reviving those Laws which he had preferred, but, as
Paterculus affirms, long majora and atrociora repetens, nihil immotum, nihil
tranquillum, nihil quietum in eodem statu relinquebat; attempting greater and
more horrible things, left nothing resting in the same state and condition it
was, and ought to be. But as he did pursue the same pernicious projects, so did
the same fate in the same place pursue him; for being forced out of the
Capitol, where he had fortified himself, and hotly pursued by his enemies, he
commanded his Servant (by some called Philocrates, by others Euporus) to kill
him; which he did, and afterward slaying himself, fell down dead upon his
Masters body; a notable example of the love and fidelity of a servant: Val.
Max. l. 6. c. 8. Hunc Tib. Gracchi liberi, P. Scipionis Africani nepotes, viva
adhuc matre Cornelia, Africani filia, viri optimis ingeniis male usi, vit^^
habuere exitum, etc. Thus did the Sons of Tib. Gracchus, and Grandson of P.
Cornelius Scipio Africanus, their Mother Cornelia, Scipio's Daughter, yet
living, persons who made ill use of good parts, end their days; who, if they
could have contained themselves within the bounds of moderation, might have
quietly and plausibly attained those honors which indirectly and illegally
they aspired to: As Patercules handsomely concludes. The bodies of the slain
Brethren (so heinous had their demerits been in the esteem of their implacable
enemies) were denied the last honor of sepulture, and thrown into the River
Tiber. We must not here omit a particular instanced by all Authors, to show the
unworthy return of a false friend, and the prevalent temptation of gold. L.
Opimius the Consul made a Proclamation, That whosoever should bring the head of
C. Gracchus, should have the weight of it in gold: Septimuleius, his intimate
familiar, and much indeared friend, became the ready Executioner of the Consuls
command, and brought Gracchus his head in a triumphing manner fixed upon a
spear; which by the deceit of this covetous wretch (who had taken out his
brains, and poured molten lead into his skull) weighed seventeen pounds and an
half. Let the examples of these two unfortunate Brethren serve as a document to
the mutinous and seditious, who strive by innovation, and all indirect means to
aggrandize themselves: Let them know, that at the best, if they do succeed,
they embroil their native Country, which they ought by all means to preserve
and cherish; and if they miscarry, which generally is their fate, they with
their wicked designs expire, as they deserve, upon a gibbet, leaving an
infamous and hated memorial of themselves to all posterity;

-- Dabit Deus his quoque funem.
Scipio's were (as we have said. 92.) the fairest branch of the Cornelian stem.
Scipio in Latin signifies a staff, The Sc^pio's.
and became a familiar name from one of that house; who serving his decrepit
and ^lind Father as his guide, was from thence surnamed Scipio, or his Fathers
Staff: Macrob. Sat. l. 1. c. 6. Nor did that Scipio from his filial piety
deserve more the title of the Staff of his aged Father, then some of his
Descendants (from their worth and gallantry showed in the service of the
public) that of their distressed Mother, the Commonwealth. The first of the
Scipio's whom History takes notice of as a public Minister, was P. Cornelius
Scipio, who was made Master of the horse to Furius Camillus, that year that the
City of Veii was taken, which happened an. urb. 357. He was the next year
chosen military Tribune, and two years after Interrex. To be short, there were
eleven of the Scipio's, who were men of eminent note and merit, before the
great Scipio, surnamed Africanus, hy his heroic atchievments adorned and
illustrated the Cornelian name. There was one of this branch, viz. Cn.
Cornelius Scipio (the seventh in descent from that first) who was Consul with
C. Duillius, the fifth year of the first Punick War, which fell out an. V. C.
493 on whom (though a person of indubitable worth) this ^idiculous nickname of
Asina, or the she-Asse, was (upon this occasion) imposed, and from him
transmitted to his posterity. Macrob. tells the Story, Saturn. l. 1. c. 6. This
Scipio (says he) the head of the Cornelian Family, having contracted for some
land, was (according to the custom of those times) commanded by the Judge to
give responsible security for the future payment of his money; whereupon be bad
his servant lead in the she-Asse, which stood tied, and laden at the door; and
this being brought into the open Court he offered to the Judge for security:
which done, he paused a while, to the great admiration of the Judge and the
Assistants, who all looked upon this action as an high affront to the Court,
and a bold contempt of authority; having stood silent a while, he commanded his
Servant to unlade the Ass, and tell out the money, which, as it appeared, was
put up in a sack and so brought upon the Ass; hereat the people smiled; but
none que^ionless had more reason so to do, then he who received the money:
from this time he was distinguished from the rest of his name by the
agnomination of Asina. Pub. Asina, his Son, was Consul with Minutius Rufus,
an. V. C. 532. he conquered and triumphed over the Istrians. But to come to the
persons more particularly designed by the Poet, as to whom we must limit our
dis^ourse; you must know that these two Scipio's (which Virgil celebrates here
under the titles of duo fulmina belli, and clades Libyae, the two thunderbolts
of war, and the subverters of the Carthaginian State) were Scipio Africanus,
whom for distinction sake they styled Major, the Grandfather, and Scipio
Africanus Minor, the Grandson: In whose Story. If we enlarge our selves more
then ordinary, the copiousness of matter, which their glorious actions
administered to the Writers of those times, must plead our excuse: you must
therefore understand that L. Scipio* (younger Brother to the first Scipio
Asina, and Consul the next year after him with C. Aquilius Florus, an. urb. C.
495. a gallant man, as who overthrew Hanno, the Carthaginian General, in the
Island of Sardinia, in the first Punick war: Livie epit. 17. Val. Max. l. 5.
c. 1.) had two Sons, Cnaeus and Publius; the eldest of these was Consul with
Claudius Marcellus, an. V. C. 532. the younger, viz. Publius, with Tib.
Sempronius Longus, the first year of the second Punick war, which happened
an. V. C. 536. He fought and lost the battle of Ticinus against Hannibal, the
earnest and pledge of the Carthaginians future good success in Italy. After
this he and his Brother Cnaeus (having done great service in Spain against
Asdrubal the Brother of Hannibal) died both in the bed of honor, and were
slain in fight: they were both of them very valiant men, and experienced
Soldiers. From Cnaeus the elder, those Scipio's who bear the name of Nasica
derive themselves: Of whom in the conclusion of this. from Publius the younger
came Pub. Scipio Africanus, and L. Scipio Asiaticus, with their Descendants. Of
these two we shall note what was most remarkable in their lives: Publius served
his tyrocinium, or was first entered in the wars under his Father at the
battle of Ticinus: three years after he commanded a Regiment of Foot at the
battle of Cannae: after this, at the age of 24. he was sent as Proconsul to
manage the wars of Spain, which in few years he totally reduced. Some years
after his return to Rome he was chosen Consul with P. Licinius Crassus, the
fifteenth year of the second Punick war. When his Consulate was expired the
African war was committed to him as Proconsul, which he ended the seventeenth
year of that war, by giving an irrecuperable overthrow to Annibal at the
fatal battle of Nadagara: For this victory he obtained a most glorious triumph*
and the title of Africanus. He was a second time Consul with Tib. Smpronius
Longus, an. V. C. 560. He was twice Censor, and three times Prince, or L.
President of the Senate. In fine, he (as he well deserved) arrived to the
greatest honors, and that with the greatest applause that Rome could confer
upon him* But to take the true prospect of the largeness of the soul of this
most excellent person, let us consider him in some particular actions and
passages of his life, which do more perfectly pourtraict him then generals can
possibly do. At the battle of Ticinus, being but seventeen years old, he
rescued his Father, dangerously wounded, from his prevailing enemy, giving him
life by protection from whom by generation he had received the same, Live. l.
21. Val. Max. c. 4. l. 5. After the overthrow received by the Romans at the
fatal battle of Cannae, four thousand, who had escaped the fate of that day,
made their retreat to Cannusium, under the conduct of young Scipio, by general
consent chosen General; where, whilst they were consulting about what was to be
done, word was brought to Scipio by P. Furiu^s Philus* that all was lost; for
that some young Noblemen (whereof L. Caecilius Metellus was chief ^esolved to
provide for their own safety, by deserting Italy, and to that end were now
ready to take shipping. Scipio forthwith (commanding the rest to follow him)
left the Council, and with his drawn sword rushing in amongst the intended
fugitives, made them swear that they would not forsake their Country. See this
Story in Livie. l. 22. with the form of the oath: Thus (as Val. Max. l. 5. c.
5. handsomely concludes) Pietatem non solum ipse plenissimam patriae exhibuit,
sed ex pectoribus aliorum abeuntem revocavit: He did not only himself give a
most ample testimony of his love to his Country, but arrested it when it was
flying out of the breasts of others. L. Scipio and C. Laelius being chosen
Consuls, an. V. C. 564. there fell out a great contention betwixt them about
the choice of their Provinces, both desiring Greece and Asia, with the
management of the war against K. Antiochus; insomuch that the business was
referred to the Senate; whom when Pub. Scipio perceived to be more propense to
favor Laelius then his Brother, he stood up and declared, that he would go in
person as his Brothers Lieutenant General, provided that the Senate would
declare in favor of him; which was forthwith done; and the war against
Antiochus (for the respect the Fathers bore to Publius) committed to Lucius:
The effect of it was the memorable field sought and won at Magnesia, the
accession of new dominions to the Roman Empire, together with a new title to
the Cornelian Name; for from the Conquest of all Asia Minor on this side the
Mountain Taurus, L. Scipio was styled Asiaticus. In these three instances
behold the piety of a Son, the loyalty of a Subject, and the tenderness of a
Brother. We must not here omit two notable particulars of this great man, which
this precedent story leads us to; omitting other Roman Writers, we shall adhere
to the Authority of A. Gellius l. 4. c. 18. Scipio was accused by M. Naevius,
one of the Tribunes, as having received a great sum of money from Antiochus,
to conclude a peace upon favorable and easy terms; with other crimes very
much beneath so worthy a person. Scipio coming to speak for himself, and having
briefly touched upon some of his former glorious action without any regard to
the impeachment of the Tribune, spoke thus; Memoria, Quirites, repeto diem esse
hodiernum quo Annibalem Poenum imperio nostro inimicissimum magno praelio vici,
in terra Africa, pacemq, and victoriam vobis peperi insperabilem: Non igitur
simus adversus Deos ingrati, and censeo relinquamus nebulonem hunc eamusque
nunc protinus Jovi Opt. Max. gratulatum. I have transcribed the words, because
they are the very same which (as our Author affirms) Scipio used: and indeed
the plaineness of the style pleads Antiquity, and speaks an age or two above
Tully: In English they run thus; I remember, Romans, that this is the very day
wherein, in a signal battle, I overcame Annibal the Carthaginian, a sworn enemy
to our Empire, in the land of Africa, and obtained for you an unhoped-for both
peace and victory: Let us not therefore be ungrateful to the Gods, but rather
leave this Knave here, and go and give thanks to the great and good Jupiter:
Whereupon the whole Assembly leaving the Tribune with his Clerk, and a few
Attendants, followed Scipio to the Capit^l, and from thence accompanied him
with great joy and acclamations to his own house. In like manner, when by the
instigation of Cato (his bitter enemy) he was required in open Senate by one
Paetilius, a Tribune, to give an account of the treasure taken in the late
war against Antiochus: Scipio s^anding up, and drawing the book of Accounts
out of his pocket, tore it in pieces in the face of the full Senate, adding,
that he who by his Conquests had both enlarged and enriched the Roman Empire,
scorned to be compelled to give any farther account then what himself thought
fit. These two examples are alleged by Authors, as testimonies of the
greatness and exsuperancie of his spirit, which scorned to answer petty cavils
otherwise then by slighting them. The same A. Gellius. l. 7. c. 1. as also Val.
Max. l. 3. c. 7. tell another Story, which speaks the great confidence he had
of himself, and assurance of success in his designs; both which proceeded out
of a consciousness of his own worth, and the great experience he had above
other men in military affairs. He had laid siege to a strong Town in Spain,
called Badia, and so well furnished with all warlike provision, that there was
but small hopes of reducing it; yet when he sat in judgment, as the custom
was, and when, at the breaking up of the Court, the Crier asked him when and
where he would hold another Court, he answered, three days hence I will keep
Court in the Castle of Badia; which he (having taken the Town within the time,
beyond all expectation) performed. The like confidence of himself he showed,
when having taken some Spies or Scouts of Annibals, a little before the fatal
battle of Nadagara, he did not truss them up (as they both deserved, and
expected) but commanded an Officer to carry them through the whole Camp, and to
show them whatsoever could be seen; which done, he sent them away with rewards,
and bid them tell their General in what posture the Romans lay encamped. This
his bravery and confidence did so abate the spirits of Annibal, that he
endeavored by a personal conference to procure peace; but in vain: See Live. l.
30. Val. Max. l. 3. c. 7. This great Captain left two wholesome cautions to
military men; the one was, that no General ought to say, Non putaram, I thought
not of it, because in war (where an error once committed can no way be
rectified) all things ought to be well weighed and considered of before hand:
The second was, that the enemy ought not to be engaged, unless a visible
advantage invite, or an invincible necessity compel us thereunto; for to let
slip a fair opportunity is madness, and not to fight when there is no other
way to escape, is a dangerous piece of cowardice: Val. Max. l. 7. c. 2. yet,
notwithstanding the unquestionable merit of this worthy Patriot, his own
Country (of which he had deserved so highly) proved ungrateful to him, the
usual practice of sordid Commonwealths, and (through the uncessant vexations
of the Tribunes) forced him to go into voluntary exile, and to retire to a
Country House of his near Linternum, a poor sea-Town in Campania, betwixt Baiae
and Cumae, called now (according to Leander) Torre de la Patria; where free
from all public employment he spent his time in harmless Country-sports and
Husbandry, himself (according to the custom of the Ancients) often tilling the
ground. The words he used when he left Rome are recorded by Seneca, epist. 86.
Nihil (inquit) volo derogare legibus, nihil institutis; aequum inter omnes
cives jus sit, etc. I will derogate nothing from the Laws and Customs of my
Country. Let there be amongst fellow-Citizens equal privileges. Thou may, my
native soil, make use without me of what I have done for thee. As I was cause
of thy liberty, so I will be an argument. I retire, if I am grown greater then
is consistent with thine interest. At Linternum he died the 54. of his age
(according to Plutarch) where also a monument was raised for him, on which he
by his last will had commanded this Inscription to be engraven; Ingrata patria
ne ossa mea quidem habebis: Thou shall not, my ungrateful Country, have so
much as my bones. Near Cajeta there was found a marble Sepulcher, and in it a
brass Urn; around which was written these verses, which are supposed by
Plutarch to be Scipio's Epitaph, and this the place of his sepulture: Devicto
Annibale, and capta Carthagine, and aucto
Imperio, hoc cineres marmore, lector, habes:
Cui non Europa, non obstitit Africa quondam,
Respiceres hominem quam brevis urna premit.
By Annibals, and Carthage conquest, he
Who Rome enlarged, under this stone does lie;
Whom Africa nor Europe could oppose,
A little urn lo does the man enclose!
He took to wife Aemilia, Daughter to L. Paulus Aemilius, who was Consul with
C. Terentius Varro, and was slain valiantly fighting at the battle of Cannae:
She was Sister to that Aemilius who overthrew K. Perseus, and in him subverted
the Macedonian Monarchy: He had two Daughters, the one married to Scipio
Nasica, his Brothers Son, the other to Tib. Gracchus: He had also two Sons,
but one of them only survived him, viz. P. Scipio, heir to nothing of his
Fathers but his estate and name, Val. Max. l. 3. c. 5. The only thing
commendable he ever did, was (when he was childless himself) the adopting of a
worthy person to his son, viz. L. Aemilius Paulus. his Mothers Nephew; who
quitting the Name and Family of his Father, was after his adoption (according
to the custom of those times, and the laws of adoption) called after the name
of his adoptive Father, P. Cornelius Scipio, and Aemilianus, to show the Family
of his natural Father from whence he came. And this is the other thunderbolt of
war here celebrated by Virgil. He was the natural Son of L. Aemilius
Paulus, a person of very great eminency in his time, and of an ancient
Patrician Family. He gave first proof of his valor, when he served under his
Father at the battle wherein K. Perseus was defeated; where he, with some other
young Noblemen, followed the chase so long, that he returned not till
midnight into the Camp to his sorrowing Father, who gave him for lost; but
received with great joy, when he saw him honorably defiled with dust and blood.
After this he served in Spain as a Colonel under Lucullus, the Grandfather of
him who subdued Mithridates, where in a single combat he slew a Barbarian of a
vast and Gigantick proportion, who defied the Roman Army. There is a mistake in
Florus l. 2. c. 17. who says that Scipio won then the Spolia opima: but this
could not be, because they, and no other, are called Spolia opima, which the
General of one Army takes from the slain General of the other. At the siege of
Intercatia he was the first who scaled the walls, for which he was rewarded
with a mural Crown: To be short, he behaved himself upon all occasions so
valiantly, that no person gained so much honor as himself in these wars;
which being pretty well over, he passed into Africa, with M. Manilius, under
whom he served as a Colonel, where his deportment was also so gallant, that
Cato the Censor (a man by nature a detractor) said in open Senate, relics qui
in Africa militarent umbras militare, Scipionem vigere; that the other
Commanders who served in Africa went to work like shadows, but that Scipio was
the only vigorous man amongst them; insomuch that when he sued to be made
Aedile (the first step to public employment) he was created Consul, and that
before he could legally be admitted to that charge, by reason of his minority;
for he was then but 36 years old, whereas none by law could be chosen Consul
before the age of 43. His Colleague was C. Livius Drusus. Africa was by the
general consent of the people conferred upon Scipio, a fatal name to Carthage,
which he took and razed (according to Cornelius Nepos) in six months; and from
thence was surnamed Africanus Minor, or Inferior, to difference him from his
Grand^re Africanus Major, or Superior. Dr. Simpson in his Chronology lays the
first foundation of Carthage, an. Mund. 2772. fifty years before the
destruction of Troy; Zorus and Carched^n, two Tyrians, being the first builders
and planters of this City: A second part was added to it, called in the Tyrian
tongue Carthada, or the new City, an. Mund. 2966. The third and last part, and
complement of the whole, was raised by Queen Dido, an. Mund. 3132. after
Solomon's Temple 144. years, Joas being in his thirteenth years reign over
Israel, and Jehu in his nineteenth over Judah. Dido built that part of the City
which in the Tyrian tongue they called Bosra, and the Greeks by corruption
Byrsa, which signifies a strongly fortified place; and this stood in the middle
of the City. From this year to the subversion of Carthage are counted 727
years; Paterculus reckons 667: From the first Punick war (which begun an. V.
C. 490. Appius Claudius Caudex, and M. Fulvius Flaccus being Consuls, till the
utter excision of Carthage, which happened an. V. C. 608. Cn. Cornelius Lentulus,
and L. Mummius Nepos being Consuls) are reckoned by Patereulus 115 years, by
more accurate accountants 118. This City was said to be 24. miles in circuit.
Florus measures the vastness thereof by the duration of the flames which
consumed it; for the conflagration thereof, notwithstanding all endeavors used
to extinguish the same, lasted seventeen whole days and nights: hunc finem
habuit Romani imperii Carthago aemula: Paterc. for this good service Scipio had
granted him a most magnificent triumph: He was four years after chosen Censor
with L. Mummius, a man of a dull and phlegmatic complexion, which made him in
the open Senate to say, Vtinam mihi collegam dedissetis, vel non dedissetis;
Would you had given me a Colleague, or not given me one, i. e. one more active,
or none at all: Val. Max. l. 6. c. 4. After this he was chosen Consul the
second time with C. Fulvius Flaccus, an. V. C. 620. wherein the war against
Numantia was committed to him. Numantia was a City of Spain, situated upon the
River Durius: This had holden war with the Romans fourteen years, and (being
furnished but with a Garrison of 4000) destroyed six Consuls with their Armies,
when Scipio set down before it, neither could he; notwithstanding his great
conduct and extraordinary valor, reduce it in less then 15. months; and then
indeed he did rather starve them out, then by force subdue them. History
mentions not a more memorable siege then this of Numantia; for (according to
Florus) it having neither wall nor bulwark, and being but only situated upon a
little rising hill by the River Durius, with no more then four thousand
Geltiberians, it sustained fourteen years siege against an Army of forty
thousand; but being at last totally razed, it gave Scipio both the honor of a
second triumph, and the addition of the surname of Numantinus to that of
Africanus. Four years after all these glorious exploits, in the fifty sixth
year of his age, this incomparable man was found dead in his bed; neither was
it certainly known how he came to his end. He was a great opposer of the
proceedings of the Gracchi: hence some suppose that his Wife Sempronia (who was
their Sister) in favor of them gave him poison, Live. epit. 56. but how he came
to his end it is as uncertain, as it is certain that there was no revenge taken
against his Murderers, or inquiry made into the fact: Val. Max. l. 3. c. 5.
Plut. in Gracch. Paterc. l. 2. Thus died Scipio ingloriously, and unrevenged by
his own people, who had lived so gloriously, and so often avenged his own
people upon their enemies. He was doubtless the best accomplished Gentleman of
his time: nor was he only a lover of Soldiers and the wars, but also of
learned men and the Muses; for Polybius the Historian, and Panaetius the
Philosopher were much honored by him, and his constant Associates. Most
luculent is that Elogie which Paterculus gives of him l. 2. which for its
elegancy we will here subjoyn: P. Scipio Africanus, vir avitis P. Africani,
paternisque L. pauli virtutibus simillimus, etc. P. Scipio Africanus, a person
equalling the virtues both of his Grandfather P. Africanus, and his Father L.
Paullus, was the most eminent of his time for all indowments Military or Civil,
and for his parts, as well acquired as natural; one who in his whole life
neither did, spoke, or thought any thing but what was commendable. This is that
Scipio of whom Tully wrote his Somnium Scipionis, or Scipio's Dream, on which
Macrobius (an Author by us often cited) has written a learned Comment. In him
ended the Line of P. Scipio, Father to Africanus. From Cnaeus the other Brother
those Scipio's who were surnamed Nasicae, deduce themselves; whereof the first
was Scipio Nasica who was styled by the Senate Vir optimus, Consul an. V. C.
563. the second Scipio Nasica, vulgarly called Corculum, Consul an. V. C. 592.
and 599. the third, Scipio Nasica Serapion, Consul an. V. C. 616. This was he
who (when a private man) led the people to oppose Tib. Gracchus: His son,
Scipio Nasica, was Consul the first year of the war against Jugurtha. The
last of this race was this man's Son, who being adopted into the Family of the
Metelli by Metellus Pius, was called Quintus Caecilius Metellus Scipio. Pompey
married his Daughter. This was he who slew himself in Africa when Pompey's
Cause declined; and the last of the Scipio's mentioned in History. And thus
much concerning the noble Family of the Scipio's.

Caius Fabricius, surnamed Luscinus, was the first and last of his name, Caius
Fabricius Luscinus.
who made the Fabrician Family notable, or lent matter to history. He was
Consul the first time with Q. Aemilius Papus, an. V. C. 472. and then triumphed
over the Tuscans and Gauls. After this he was sent as chief of an Embassy from
Rome to King Pyrrhus (who had lately won a great battle against the Romans)
concerning the exchange of Prisoners: Pyrrhus understanding the great worth of
Fabricius, and in what esteem he was with his own Countrymen, but withal how
narrow and straightened in fortune (for he was a very poor man) offered him a
great sum of money to become his friend; but Fabricius looking upon this
offer as a bribe to pervert his loyalty to his Country, would not accept of it
in the least: And to this Claudian alludes, l. 1. in Ruf. -- contentus honesto
Fabricius parvo spernebat munera Regum.
With a small, but well-rais'd estate content,
Fabricius slights what Kings to him present.
And hence our Poet says of him, that he was parvo potens: See Plut. in Pyrrh.
Live. epit. 13. nay Val. Max. l. 4. c. 4. de paupertate laudata, says that he
had no silver vessel in his house, save a Chalice only, to offer in to the
Gods, and one Salt-cellar. Whilst he was Ambassador with Pyrrhus (as Plutarch
relates) the King thinking to make trial of his courage, as he had done of his
abstinence, caused his men to bring one of his biggest and fiercest Elephants,
and to place it behind a hanging, which (at a sign given) he was to draw, and
unawares to show the Monster to Fabricius, as he and the King were in serious
discourse; which being done accordingly, the Elephant (which was just at
Fabricius his back) said his trunk over his shoulder, and roared terribly: but
the undaunted Roman softly stepping aside, and smiling, told the King that his
Elephant affrighted him as little that day as his Gold had temp^ed him the day
before. A. Gellius l. 1. c. 14. related a very memorable Story concerning this
worthy Roman, an argument of the greatness of his soul in despising riches and
wealth, which in most men's breasts bears so absolute an Empire, and holds the
reins of the affections even of the most sober. Certain Ambassadors (says he)
came from the Samnites to Fabricius the Roman General, and (having thanked him
for that good will and kindness he had expressed to their Nation, which after
the late pacification he had taken into his protection) presented him with a
great sum of money, desiring him to accept and make use of it; and that the
rather, because they perceived him to be disfurnished of many things necessary
for his house, and befitting the quality and place of so great a personage:
Fabricius drawing his hands from his ears to his eyes, and from thence downward
to his nose, his mouth, and his throat, and so to the very bottom of his belly,
answered, that so long as he could govern and keep under those parts he had
touched, viz. the organs of the five senses, i. e. so long as his reason could
restrain and tame the exorbitance of his affections, nothing could ever be
wanting to him; and that therefore he would not receive money (whereof he had
no use) from them whom he knew to stand in need of the same. You may read this
Story also in Val. Max. l. 4. c. 3. He was Consul the second time with the same
Aemilius Papus, an. V. C. 476. in the very heat of the war against Pyrrhus
where whilst their Camps lay near together, the Physician of Pyrrbus (by some
writers called Timochares, by others Nicias) came privily over to Fabricius the
Roman Consul, promi^^ng for a sum of money to poison the King. But Fabricius
abominating the Traitor, sent him back fast bound, and by letter discovered to
him the treachery of his Physician, whereat Pyrrhus, full of admiration, was
said to ^^claim, Hic est ille Fabricius, qui di^^icilius ab honestate quam sol
a cursu averti potest: This is that Fabricius, who more hardly can be withdrawn
from his honesty then the Sun from his course. Thus Eutropius lib. 2. Others
(as Val. Max. l. 6. c. 5. and A. Gell. l. 3. c. 8.) say, that he did not
discover the person of the Traitor, but bad Pyrrhus beware of those who were
nearest about him. I shall here subjoyn the original letter (because an antique
piece, and savouring of the true Roman spirit) which the Consuls wrote to
Pyrrhus concerning this business; Gellius ibid. borrowes it of Claudius
Quadrigarius, an ancient writer.

Romani salutem dicunt Pyrrho Regi. Nos pro tuis injuriis continue animo
strenuo commoti inimiciter tecum bellare studemus; sed communis exempli, and
fidei ergo, visum est uti te salvum velimus, ut esset quem armis vincere
possimus. Ad nos venit Nicias familiaris tuus, qui sibi pretium a nobis
peteret, si teclam interfecisset. Id nos negavimus velle, neve ob eam rem
quicquam commodi expectaret: simul visum est ut te certicrem faceremus, ne,
quid ejusmodi si accidisset, nostro consilio Civitates putarent factum; and
quod nobis non placet pretio, aut praemio, aut dolis pugnare. Tu, nisi caveas,
jacebis.

The Roman Consuls to K. Pyrrhus Greeting. We being by thy continued injuries
heartily provoked, resolve to prosecute thee with all hostility; but that we
may be examples to others in testifying our own sincerity, as also for that
there may be one in being whom we may overcome, we thought fit to provide for
thy safety. Thy familiar friend Nicias came to us, who set a price upon thy
head; but we utterly rejected the motion; and (that he might not advantage
himself by such unworthy means, or the world upon any such unhandsome accident
imagine us to be of his Counsel, who scorn to fight with thee by bribes,
rewards, or deceit) we thought fit to acquaint thee with the whole procedure.
Unless thou look to thy self thou art a dead man. Pyrrhus ( a generous
Prince) returned the Consuls thanks, and sent all the Roman prisoners (whom he
had in custody) home without ransom; yet notwithstanding these mutual
Complements, the two Armies suddenly came to join battle, where the Epirot, by
the assistance of his Elephants, got the victory. Fabricius bricius some years
after the determination of his Consulship was chosen Censor: In his Censorship
he turned P. Cornelius Rufinus (who had been twice Consul, and once Dictator)
out of the Senate, because he found ten pound weight of silver plate in his
house; which in those severe times was by moderate men thought a high piece of
luxury and excess. This Rufinus was indeed an excellent Soldier, and a right
valiant man, but very covetous and rapacious, and for this much hated by the
more just and abstinent Fabricius: yet to show that all personal respects are
to be laid aside when the Public is concerned, he caused him (because the
Commonwealth stood in need at that time of a valiant and discreet General,
Pyrrhus then prevailing in Italy) to be chosen Consul, which was the year
following his own Consulship. For this unexpected kindness Rufinus complemented
him highly, and gave him great thanks; but his return was in these biting
words, Non est quod mihi gratias agas, si malui compilari quam vaenire; Thou
have no reason ( says he) to thank me if I had rather be a little pillaged
then sold quite out; meaning that it were better for the Public to suffer a
little by the rapacity of Rufinus, then to be totally ruined by the
insufficiency of some other General: A. Gel. l. 4. c. 8.

We now come to Serranus, who was of the Family of the Atilii, Serranus.
which was divided (according to Anton. Augustinus) into the Longi, who were
Patricians; and the Reguli, Serrani, Calatini, and Bulbi, who were Plebeians:
but no one set such a luster upon the Atilian name as did M. Atilius Regulus,
and C. Atilius Serranns. The first is noted for his valor, constancy, his
love to his Counrry, and strict observing of his word; of all which this one
example is a sufficient evidence: For having done great service against the
Carthaginians in Africa, in the time of the first Punick war, his Army was at
last defeated, and himself taken prisoner by the enemy; with whom having for
some years remained a miserable captive, he was at last sent to Rome, either to
procure a peace betwixt the two Nations, or the freedom of all the
Carthaginian Prisoners; for all which he alone was offered in exchange; and in
case that neither could be effected, he was bound by oath to render himself a
prisoner again: as for the peace, it was utterly rejected; but when they came
to the debate concerning the rendition of the Captives, and Atilius his opinion
was the first asked in the Senate, he openly declared that it was unreasonable
that so many stout young men should be exchanged for one poor old man, who by
reason of his years was now no longer able to serve his Country; and
accordingly it passed in the negative, that the prisoners should not be
exchanged; and Regulus (notwithstanding the entreaties and prayers of his
friends to the contrary) returned according to his promise to an enemy from
whom he expected all barbarous treatment imaginable, as indeed he found: for
some say that they put him naked into a barrel stuck thick with sharp-pointed
nails, and so rolled him about til he died: Others, that he was cast into a
dark dungeon, and (having been kept there for some time) brought forth, and
forced to stare in the sun till he became blind; and that he might not wink
with his eyes, they plucked his eyelids asunder, and with a needle and thread
stitched them up: after this they kept him from sleep and food, till at last
for want of both, he (having suffered with much constancy the utmost of his
enemies cruelty) ended his life and misery together. This Story you may read in
Livie l. 18. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1. A. Gell. l. 6. c. 4. Flor. l. 2. c. 2. Aur.
de vir. illust. Serranus.
Eutrop. l. 2. This happened an. V. C. 503. As for Serranus, he is supposed by
some to have been the son of the former. He was Consul with Cn. Cornelius
Blasio, an. V. C. 497. He beat the Carthaginians at sea, subdued the Islands of
Lipara, and Melita, or Malta; for all which he triumphed. This man was of that
worth and esteem amongst the Romans, that they chose him Consul in his absence,
and sending for him, found him tilling his own ground; hence (according to
Pliny l. 18. c. 3.) from the Latin word serere, which signifies to sow, or
till the ground, he was called Seranus; which I take to be the orthography, or
true spelling of the word; not Serranus, as here used by the Poet, who, herein
more careful of his Meter then orthography, interposed an r, for his verses
sake. The Elogie of this Seranus you may read in Val. Max. l. 4. c. 4. de
paupertate laudata; and in Claudia^^ lib. de quarto Cons. Honorii, who sings
thus;

Sordida Serranus flexit Dictator aratra,
Lustratae Lictore casae, facesque salignes
Postibus affixi; collectae Consule messes,
Et sulcata diu trabeato rura Colono.
Serranus to the plough did set his hand,
Thatched roofs were by the Lictor entered, and
The Fasces hung on Willow posts; the Corn
Inn'd by a Consul; and he who had worn
The Trabea, tilled the ground. --
Fabian Family was one of the most numerous, most ancient, The Fabii.
and most honorable of all Rome: they were branched into six several Houses,
whereof three were more noted, and occur more frequently in History, viz. the
Vibulani, the Ambusti, and the Maximi; the other three, viz. the Dorsones,
Pictores, and Buteones, were not of that fame and celebrity with the former.
That may be said of this one Name and Family which I never read of any, that
there were 307 of them living at the same time, and that not in a large tract,
or spacious continent, but within the Walls and Precincts of one and the same
City. I shall briefly give you the history and fate of these worthy Kinsmen.
The people of Veii were incessant rather tezers then enemies of the people of
Rome, making rather predatory incursions into their territories, then waging a
just war against them. This one Family of the Fabii undertook (upon their own
charge) this war: One of the Consuls, viz. Caeso Fabius, being of that
Family, commanded this small, but gallant army: they were 306. all Patricians
or noble men, all of a blood, and (according to Livy) quorum neminem ducem
sporneret egregius quibuslibet temporibus Senatus: Such as the wisest Council
would not refuse the worst of them in never so dangerous times for a General.
They fortified themselves upon the River Cremera, where issuing out of their
Garrison, they often worsted the enemy; who (seeing they could not by open
force prevail) had recourse to art, and drawing them into a place convenient
for an ambuscade, environed them, and with numbers so over-powred them, that
(after a sharp conflict, and extraordinary valor showed on the Roman side)
they were all to one man slain. This Story you may read in Livie l. 2. Eutrop.
l. 1. auct. de vir. illust. Flor. l. 1. c. 12. etc. This happened An. V. C.
275. in the Consulships of Caeso Fabius and T. Virginius. Thus had this noble
Family been quite extinct, had not one (who by reason of his tender years was
unfit for the wars) remained at home: and this man propagated the Fabian name
down to this Fabius Maximus, who by his wise delays blunted the edge, and
broke the very point of Annibals impetuous fury: and this is the man whom
Virgil celebrates here. The first of the Fabii, who had the agnomination of
Maximus given him, was Q. Fabius Rullianus, a person of very great repute and
worth, as who had been five times Consul, twice Dictator, triumphed thrice,
once Censor; and although he deserved the name of Maximus from his Martial
atchievments, as having been the ablest and most fortunate Chieftain of his
time, yet this honorable surname was bestowed upon him, for that he in his
Censorship united the City, which was divided into two factions, into that of
the plebs, or meaner sort, and into that of the more able and sober of the
Citizens. Hence arose a great confusion and disturbance in their Comitia or
elections, the rabble carrying it by reason of their numbers against the
better; and so, many times choosing men of inferior condition into offices and
commands, contrary to the good liking of the other, and much to the diminution
of the Majesty and Grandeur of the Roman State. This Fabius remedied, by
reducing the Common People (which till then were undistinguished) into four
Tribes or Classes, which he called Tribus urbanae; as you may read in Livie l.
91. This is that Fabius whom (being Master of the horse to the Dictator
Papyrius Curson) Papyrius would have put to death for fighting the enemy in his
absence, and against his express order, although he obtained a signal victory;
but that the people interposing procured his pardon. Livie in his ninth book
gives an ample relation of this Story. His son was Fabius Maximus Gurges, who
having been thrice Consul, triumphed twice, Censor, and four times chosen L.
President of the Senate, seemed by his often-repeated honors not to come at
all short of his Fathers virtues: And this was (according to Livie) Father to
our present Fabius Maximus; from his deliberate and wary way of proceeding,
termed by his Detractors Cunctator, or the Delayer; and Verrucossus, from a
wart (which the Latins call verruca) growing upon his lip. He was also called
Ovicula, the little Sheep, or Lamb, from the gentleness of his nature. He was
twice Consul, triumphed twice, Dictator twice, as often President of the
Senate, Pontifex and Augur: and what is more then all, the Conservator of the
Roman people in the second Punick war, which he chiefly effected by his wise
delays, and constant patience; proceeding herein contrary to the manner of all
former Generals, who by their precipitancie had often hazarded the safety of
the Commonwealth, and lost both themselves and many great Armies; of whom
Ennius thus, whence Virgil borrows the first verse: Vnus homo nobis Cunctando
restituit rem,
Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem;
Ergo postque magisque viri nunc gloria claret.
This man preserved us by his wise delay;
For rumors he before the safest way
Did not prefer; wherefore his glorious name
Shall be recorded in the book of fame.
But forasmuch as both Plutarch in his life, and Livie in his relation of the
second Punick war, do particularly set down the behavior of Fabius therein,
I shall rather refer the Reader to those Authors, then enlarge upon a Story
so well known; we shall only add some few particulars concerning this right
worthy person not to be pretermitted, which speak the wisdom, prudence,
valor, justice and goodness of this noble Roman: Being Dictator he chose L.
Minutius to be Master of his horse, a rash and violent man, and of a temper
quite different from that of Fabius. He being by a Decree of the people (a
thing never before practiced) made equal in authority to the Dictator (now in
disgrace with the vulgar for his dilatory manner of proceeding) presently
thought to do something by engaging Annibal as soon as he could; which the
crafty enemy perceiving, he soon presented him with an opportunity, but withal
drew him into an ambuscade, where he and his Army had perished had not Fabius
assisted him, and rescued both from the present danger. This Minutius was
Fabius his bitter enemy, and (by his suggestions and criminations against him,
as a slow and timorous man on the one side, and by magnifying and extolling
himself, and boasting what great feats he would do on the other) had wound
himself into the opinion of the undiscerning people, and lessened the credit
and reputation of a far better man then himself. Notwithstanding this Fabius
would not take his private revenge of his adversary, when the public thereby
would have been the greatest sufferer. But Fabius by this means did not only
conquer Annibal, the common Foe, but subdue Minutius his secret enemy, who from
thenceforth acknowledging his fault, saluted Fabius by the name of Father: Live.
l. 22. and Plut. in Fab. Fabius had a Soldier in his Camp, a Marsian born, a
right valiant and gallant man; he (upon discontent, because not rewarded, as he
thought, according to his merit) practiced with some others to run over to
Annibal, where they expected to be looked upon with greater respect. This being
discovered to Fabius, he sent for the Marsian, who expected nothing but death,
which according to the Laws of War he indeed deserved; but the Consul
receiving him courteously, did not in the least take notice to him of what he
had heard, but commending him for his former good services, told him, that if
he were not rewarded according to his merit it was his own fault, who applying
himself to inferior Captains, never had made his addresses to himself, his
General; and with that gave him a good horse, and other rewards: This did so
encourage the Marsian, that for the future he became very faithful and
serviceable to the Romans. He had another Soldier who was accused for going
often out of the Camp, and quitting his colors without leave; which he
persisted to do, although often reprehended by his Officer. Fabius asked the
Captain, who accused him, what manner of man he was, and whether he had any
thing of worth in him; he told him that he was a very stout man, and had done
very great service; wherefore Fabius making inquiry into the business, found
that the Soldier had a Mistress, for whose sake he had so often transgressed:
Her Fabius caused to be fetched, and privily hidden in his Tent; then sending
for the Soldier, he told him what he had heard of him, how he had offended
against the Laws of Arms, and against the Roman Military discipline, and for
that deserved to be severely punished; but withal how he understood that he
was a valiant man, and had done good service; and therefore, although he would
not at present proceed against him according to the extremity and rigor of the
Law, yet he would commit him to the custody of one who should be accountable
for him. The Soldier hereupon being not a little abashed, Fabius called forth
the Maid whom the Soldier loved, and gave him into her hands, telling him,
that now he should know whether love, or some other ill design, caused him so
often to go out of the Camp. The Soldier never offended more after this, but
became very orderly and diligent. These two Stories you may read in Plutarch in
his life. To show that he was a strict observer of his word, he agreed with
Annibal about the redemption of Prisoners, and sent to the Senate for a certain
sum of money to pay their ransom: the Senate looking upon the agreement as
dishonorable and disadvantagious, as also for that they were altogether
dissatisfied with his proceedings, refused to ratify the articles, or to
furnish him with the sum required: wherefore Fabius (that he might make good
his promise, and give a testimony of his tenderness and affection to his
Countrymen, now miserable Captives) raised the sum by selling part of his own
lands. His Son Quintus was chosen Consul with Tib. Sempronius Gracchus, the
sixth year of the second Punick war. Fabius (who served under him as his
Lieutenant) came to him to the Camp at Suessula, where his Son went with his
Lictors before him to meet him: The Lictors out of respect to the Consuls
Father, did not (according to the custom) command him to alight, but let him
pass on on horseback, till he came to the very last of those officers, whom
young Fabius commanding to do his duty, he forthwith commanded the old man to
alight from his horse, which he very readily did, saying, experiri volui, fili,
satin scires te consulem esse; I intended, my son, to try whether you knew
that you were Consul: Live. l. 24. Plut. in Fab. in which words he embraced him,
telling him that those private relations of Father and Son must give place to
that respect which is due to the person of a public Minister. And such was
Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucossus: But this Quintus died before his Father,
who adopted into the place of his deceased Son the eldest Son of Aemilius
Paulus, and Brother to Scipio Aemilianus, who from thence was called Q. Fabius
Maximus Aemilianus: He was Consul with L. Hostilius Mancinus, An. V. C. 608.
His Son was Q. Fabius Maximus, Consul with L. Opimius Nepos, An. V. C. 632. he
was surnamed Allobrogicus, from the conquest of the Allobroges, a people of
France, supposed to have been the same with those whom the Moderns call the
Savoyards. To be short, this Family of the Fabii continued in high repute from
the foundation of Rome till Augustus his time, where we find Q. Fabius Paulus
Consul with Q. Aelius Tubero, An. V. C. 742.

Marcelli, in the brief recital of whose story we shall wind up our historical
speculations, The Ma^celli.
and in them these our annotations upon the sixth book of Virgils Aeneis; which
if they seem to be drawn too much out in length, it must not be ascribed to any
natural affectation of prolixity, or industrious inserting of such discourses
as might have been better omitted then insisted upon, but to the great variety
of learning of all sorts wherewith this Poem is richly adorned; which
sufficiently testifies the vast reading and knowledge of the Author, and which
has necessarily led us to consult with diverse good writers, and (whilst we
have endeavored to illustrate this excellent piece) discovered to us the whole
body of humane literature, whereof these annotations may serve as a Summarie or
general view; and will, I hope (according to the latitude and extent of this
kind of learning) both prodesse and delectare, be both delightful and
profitable to the Reader. But to proceed; the Claudian Family, descended
originally from the Sabines, was of two sorts; the one was of the Patricians,
the other of the Plebeians: The first were distinguished into the Regillenses,
the Pulchri, the Centhones, and the Nerones. The Marcelli (so called from their
Martial inclinations, Marcellus being a diminutive derived from Mars) were
indeed Plebeians, but men of great worth and esteem in their time. There were
nine of this name who arrived to the highest preferments Rome could advance any
Citizen to. The first of this Family who was honored with the Consular dignity,
was M. Marcellus, who was Consul with C. Valerius Flaccus, An. V. C. 422. The
third from him was this famous Marcellus, who was the first who overthrew
Annibal after the battle of Cannae: he from his incessant desire of fighting,
and engaging the enemy, was called the sword of Rome, as Fabius Maximus (with
whom he was Contemporary) from the defensive posture whereon he still used to
lie, the Shield or Buckler: He was five times Consul; first before the second
Punick war, with Cn. Scipio Calvus, An. V. C. 532. when the Galli Insubres,
those Gauls (which inhabited about Millan in Lumbardie, assisted by the
Gessatae, which were Gauls also, but living about the River Rhodanus, on the
other side the Alps) made war upon the Romans, and had then laid siege to
Clastidium, a Garrison belonging to the Romans. Marcellus leaving his Colleague
with the greatest part of the Army before Asserrae* a Town of the Gauls,
marched with an inconsiderable party to raise the siege before Clastidium;
which the Gauls having intelligence of, drew off with 1000 horse and foot to
meet the Consul; and being certified of the paucity of his forces, in their
thoughts anticipated an easy victory. Marcellus marched in the head of his
men, and Bridomarus, or Virdomarus, the Gaulick General, in the head of his
also; whom the Roman espying, and by his richly-gilt armor conceiving to be
Commander in chief, setting spurs to his horse, furiously charged, and piercing
with his spear, slew in the view of the two armies; and so disarming him, was
the third after Romulus who won the Spolia opima, which we have rendered royal
spoils: they were called opima, either ab. opibus, from the richness of them,
as Varro conjectures; or ab opere, because it was a work or deed extraordinary
to win them, according to Plutarch; or for that Opimum was all one with
Amplum: Livie defines them to be spolia quae Dux Duci detraxit, Live. l. 4.
those spoils or arms which one General has taken from another, whom he has
slain with his own hand. The Roman history makes mention but of three who ever
wan these spoils, viz. Romulus, who slew Acron King of the Caeninenses: Live. l.
1. Plut. in Romul. Flor. l. 1. c. 1. and Aul. Cornelius Cossus (of whom. 91.)
who slew Lars Tolumnius; and lastly, this Marcellus, who also slew Britomarus
King of the Gauls; for that is a manifest error in Florus l. 2. c. 17. as we
have noted. 93. where he makes Scipio Aemilianus to win the spolia opima, by
killing a Spaniard who challenged him; for neither of these Duellists were
Commanders in chief: Scipio was then but a Colonel of foot under Lucullus; and
what the Barbarian was it is not concluded, either by Livie, Val. Max. or Aur.
Victor. who all make mention of this duel; only Florus (who is singular herein)
says that he was a King. Val. Maximus c. de Fortitudine, more consonantly to
truth, reckons not Scipio amongst those three who won the spolia opima, but
amongst those famous Romans, who being challenged slew the challenger; and
these were T. Manlius Torquatus (of whom. 86.) M. Valerius Corvinus, and this
Scipio Aemilianus. The spoils thus won were carried in triumph by the Victor
(the manner you may read in Livie l. 1. and in Plut. in the life of Marcellus)
and dedicated to Jupiter Feretrius, so called from the Greek word (...), i. e.
to carry, or a feriendo host, from smiting of the enemy; or rather from
feretrum, by which they signify the Bier or engine upon which they carried the
spoils: these as a perpetual monument they hung up in Jupiter Feretrius his
Temple, built by Romulus, repaired and beautified by Augustus: Live. l. 4. Numa
to this Law of Romulus (who ordained that the spolia opima should be
consecrated to Jupiter) added, that in case any one won them thrice (which
was never known) that then the first should be offered to Jupiter, the second
to Mars, and the third to Romulus. Hence we may easily gather the sense of this
verse, which has so much puzzled Interpreters; Tertiaque arma patri suspendet
capta Quirino. Mr. Ogylby renders it thus. Shall thrice to Romulus dedicate
their arms: i. e. the spolia opima, against both the Law of Romulus, who
ordained that the spoils should be dedicated to Jupiter only; and against the
testimony of history, for Marcellus himself did dedicate the spoils to Jupiter,
and not to Romulus, as you may read in his life. Neither is this the only
mistake in Mr. Ogylby; for he says that Marcellus shall not only dedicate
these arms to Romulus, but that he shall dedicate them thrice, i. e. shall
thrice win the Spolia opima: But where does he read that Marcellus won them
thrice? they were never won during all the victories and triumphs of the
long-lived Roman Empire, but thrice, and that by three several persons, after
the long interposition of a long interval of time: therefore these words of the
Poet are to be thus expounded; suspendet, he shall hang up, not dedicate,
tertia arma capta, the third spoils taken from the enemy, patri Quirino, to
Romulus, i. e. near the arms of Romulus, in the same Temple where Romulus hung
up his. We have therefore here, as we have done elsewhere in case of the like
obscurity, paraphrastically rendered this verse, choosing rather by multiplying
of words to give the true sense of the Author, then by being to precise and
thrifty therein, to lose a jot of his meaning, or to deviate from the Customs,
Laws, or History of those times; with all which we agree, whilst we make
Virgil speak thus: Father Quirinus, he also to thine
The third spoils taken from the Foe shall join.
But to return to Marcellus, who having done great services for his Country
against the Carthaginians, as well in Sicilia as in Italy, was in his fifth
Consulship together with his Colleague Q. Crispinus unhappily slain by Annibal
in an ambuscade. The last of this honorable Catalogue is one of the same name
and Family also, viz. M. Marcellus the son of Caius (who was the son of M.
Marcellus, the sixth of this name, and Consul with L. Cornelius Lentulus Crus,
An. V. C. 704.) by his wife Octavia, Augustus his Sister, the fifth in descent
from the great Marcellus above mentioned; and the ninth from the first of that
name, who was Consul with Valerius Flaccus, An. V. C. 422. a Prince of high
hopes and great virtues, and well deserving those honorable Elogies given him
here by our Author; with whom you may compare the character which Seneca in his
book de Consolatione ad Marciam, c. 2. and Vel. Paterc. l. 2. give of him, by
all which he appears to have been a most accomplished person. Augustus
designing him for his Successor, married him to his Daughter Julia by his first
Wife Scribonia; but alas! he was taken away by an untimely fate, dying about
the 18. year of his age, not without the suspicion of poison administered to him
by Livia, Augustus his Wife, to make way for her sons to the Empire: But his
Mother Octavia conceived such insuperable grief for his death, that she never
ceased to mourn for him so long as she lived. It is recorded by Donatus in the
life of Virgil, that Octavia (who was present at the recitation of this book by
the Author) fell into a trance when he came to these words, Tu Marcellus eris.
-- and that for every verse she gave him ten Sesterces, which (according to
Budaeus his computation l. 3. de Ass, speaking there of the sum given to
Virgil by Octavia) came to about 5000. French Crowns. The great Gassendus in
his Treatise de Abaco Sestertiorum, pretends to a more exact reduction of the
Roman

account to the French, reckoning 10 Sesterces for 21 verses, viz. from Quis
pater ille virum, etc. -- to Heu miserande puer, etc. -- to amounr to 19541
Livres, 13 Solz, and 4. Deniers, which, allowing every Livre valuable at 00 --
01s. -- 08 d. of our money, comes to about 1627 l. -- 16. s. -- 01d. -- 0b. --
q. sterling. Budaeus his compute falls somewhat short of this; for 5000 French
Crowns, at 00 -- 06s. -- 00 per Crown, amounts to just 1500.l sterling. The
greatest of these was not too great a gratuity for such excellent verses. I
covet not Virgils reward, but his happiness in writing, that the English Reader
might judge whether Octavia was more munificent, or the Poet deserving.

Since these last sheets were sent to the Press, it has pleased the
al-governing Providence to make a sad Interlude amidst our pomps and triumphs,
by taking away that as highly-meriting as highly-born Prince, the illustrious
Duke of Gloucester. The precedent discourse leading us so naturally to it, we
could not but subjoyn these f^llowing verses, and cast in our Mice, not of
sorrow, (for in that we share as deeply as any) but of expressing the same,
wherein we shall easily give place even to the meanest. If we imitate not
Virgil in the elegancy of his numbers, we will do it in the number of his
verses.

That now I could a Pythagorean be!
Now were thy soul transfused into me,
Thy great soul, Maro! all its faculti's
Mine by a happy Metempsychosis!
5 That in such numbers as thou did of yore
Thy dead Marcellus (best of Bards) deplore,
I our brave Gloucester might bewail, and teach
Our English Muse Virgilian pitch to reach.
We have a Theme as high, an argument
10 As full as thine, and can we not lament
As learnedly as thou did? cannot our Muse
As well-accented Threnodies infuse
As thine? and in words as refined tell
Both Rome and thee, that we can parallel.
15 Your Prince and l^sse? that in our Gloucester we
In all things dare with your Marcellus vie?
No; we, nor yet thy self ('it is boldly said)
Thy native wit, though all Parnassus aid,
To such a height our words or sense can raise
As can our loss express, or his due praise:
21 Our Gloc'ster's dead, which all our joys allayes. The two gates of Hell.

Virgil borrows the conceit of the two gates or out-lets of Dreams, out of
Homer, Odyss. 19. There are two gates of sleep (says he) the one of Horn, from
whence real dreams (such as are made good, and seconded in the event) do
proceed; the other of Ivory, out of which issue such as are false, and never
come to pass; and out of this gate Aeneas was let by Anchises; obscurely
hinting hereby, that this whole discourse of Aeneas his descent into Hell, with
this ample description thereof, are even as true as those dreams which proceed
out of the ivory gate: See Macr^b. in Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 3. The reason of
which conceit is thus given by Interpreters: The Horn gate represents the eye,
or organ of sight, in relation to that tunicle they call Cornea, and by a
Synechdoche is taken for the whole eye; the Ivory the teeth, one of the nine
instruments of speech, which in regard of their whiteness are like to Ivory,
and are by the same figure taken for the speech in general; therefore, as what
the sight really presents to us is always true, and as what we receive from
hearsay and report is oftentimes false; so those dreams which issue out of
the Horn gate prove true, and those which come out of the Ivory one deceitful;
and by consequence this whole discourse is to be looked upon as a mere fiction,
deception, and a fallacious dream.

Finis Annotationum in sextum Aeneidos librum.
Jucundi acti labores.
Certain Pieces Relating to the PUBLIC, Penned by the AVTHOR.
Iliaci Cineres, and flamma extrema meorum
Testor in occasu vestro me tela, nec ullas
Vitavisse vices Danaum, and si fata fuissent
Vt caderem, meruisse manu --
Virg. Aen. 2.
I Do not, Reader, publish these following Pieces for their quaintness, or
elegancy, but for that they relate to the Public, and are monuments of loyalty
rather then wit: I was always Master of a better heart then head, and ever
gloried more in sincere and honest thoughts, then in trim and adorned
expressions. Farewell.

The DECLARATION of the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry and Commonalty of the County
of KENT; together with the City and County of Canterbury, the City of
Rochester, and the Ports within the said County: Penned and presented by the
Author to the Mayor at the Town Hall of Canterbury, Jan. 24. 1659.
HAving with sadness weighed the multiplied calamities wherein we are at
present involved, how friendless we are Abroad, and how divided at Home; the
importunate and loud cries of the poorer, and the disa^ility of the better sort
to relieve them; the total decay and subversion of Trade, together with the
forfeiture and loss of the honor and reputation of the Nation, and (what is
more dear to us then all these) the apparent hazard of the Gospel, through the
prodigious growth of Blasphemies, Heresies and Schism; all which owe their
birth to the instability of our Governors, and the unsettlement of Government:
Lastly, how in all these an universal ruin threateneth us, and will (if not
timely prevented) doubtless overwhelm us; We thought it our bounden duties,
both to our Religion as Christians, to our Country as Englishmen, and to our
selves and relations as friends, to represent and publish to the world our just
griefs for, and our lively resentments of, this our deplorable condition, and
to seek all lawful and probable means to remedy and redress the same.

Wherefore having the leading Examples of the renowned Cities of London and
Exeter, together with the Counties of the West, before our eyes, and the
clamours and outcries of the People always in our ears, (whereof the one
encourages, and the other enforces us to this our Declaration) we thought
that we would not be silent at such a time, when our silence would speak us to
be either Assenters to our own ruin, or Abettors of such proceedings as have
neither Law nor Equity to support them.

We therefore, the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry and Commonalty of the County of
Kent, together with the City and County of Canterbury, the City of Rochester,
and the Ports within the said County, do by these Presents unanimously Declare,
That our desires are for a Full and Free PARLIAMENT, as the only probable means
under God to lead us out of that Maze and Labyrinth of confusions wherein we
are at present engaged; that is, that the old secluded Members, so many of them
as are surviving, may be readmitted into the House, and that there may be a
free Election of others to supply the places of those who are dead, without any
Oath, or Engagement previous to their Entrance: This clause, according to the
then state of things was inserted, out of a strong presumption, that by their
means a legal Parliament, the Peoples true Representative, would in convenient
time be assembled.
These we shall own as the true Representatives of the People; these we shall
with our Lives and Fortunes, to the uttermost of our power, assist, and with
all cheerfulness submit to, and acquiesce in whatsoever they shall Enact or
Ordain, as being clearly assured that salus populi will then indeed be suprema
lex, the welfare of the Public will be the thing then chiefly designed;
whereas now salus paucorum, the establishment of the power in the hands of some
few, is the thing really contended for.

Thus concluding, that all publick-spirited men, and good Patriots, will with
all readiness join and concur with us in a matter of so extensive a concern;
and that we shall find Opposition from none but such as prefer their own
private interests, and temporal respects, to their Religion, Country and Laws
of the Land, we shall as boldly subscribe our Names, as we do heartily declare
our Desires.

The VINDICATION of the Kentish Declaration, or a NARRATIVE of the meeting of
some Gentlement, Ministers and Citizens at the Town Hall in Canterbury, Jan.
24. Penned by the Author, when he was forced to retire himself, and by him
caused to be printed.
UNderstanding that the late procedure of some of the principal Gentlemen and
Citizens, Inhabitants of the City of Canterbury has been represented above as
a malignant design tending to tumult and sedition, we thought fit to publish to
the World a brief Narrative of the same, together with the Declaration it self;
that both the one and the other being cleared from the malicious aspersions and
calumnies of our Adversaries, the whole world may judge betwixt them and us, and
so give sentence according to the merit of the Cause: wherefore some peaceable
and wel-minded Gentlemen, together with some discreet and sober Ministers,
perceiving the people generally bent for a Free Parliament (as in the precedent
Declaration is expressed) and hearing that the Cities of London and Exeter had
lately declared for the same, thought it neither unmeet to follow so leading
presidents, nor unseasonable to join their votes with the general desires of
the whole Nation: to which end it was resolved to present this foregoing
Draught to the common Burghmoot, and to desire their concurrence therein. Thus
in an orderly manner, without tumult or noise, without arms in their hands or
thoughts, and without threats or anger in their looks, diverse Gentlemen,
Ministers and Citizens went to the Town Hall on Jan. 24. 1659. the Mayor,
Aldermen and Common Counsel then sitting, and presented the Declaration by the
hands of Mr. John Boys at the door; desiring that after a serious perusal
thereof, they would be pleased to join with them in a business which they
judged agreeable not only to the sense of that Court, but also to that of the
whole County and Nation. But when it was moved that it should be put to the
vote whether the Paper should be read or not, some of the Bench protested
against it, although they knew nothing of its contents: and in conclusion
(having a long time rather wrangled then debated) the Dissenters (being but
seven of twenty four) quitted the Court, not leaving enough to make a Burghmoot
Quorum: whereupon the Gentlemen (who, though rudely treated, had quietly
attended) withdrew Re infecta, and returned home with as little tumult as at
first they came. Thus was there nothing done to disturb or surprise the Court,
nothing to raise a tumult, nothing to cause a second Kentish insurrection, as
our Adversaries give it out: No, the design was not Arms, but Peace; not
tumult, but settlement; not to surprise and disturb the Court, but to desire an
amicable and friendly correspondence with the same, to the end that the
intended Declaration might be made the more authentic by the formal
intervention and assent in open Court, of the Magistracy of so considerable a
Corporation; and that the Declarers themselves might not be thought to tread in
any oblique paths, or to proceed after a clandestine manner. But being
disappointed (as you see) herein, it was thought fit to strengthen and confirm
our Declaration, and to make good the title it bears, by private subscriptions,
as well through the whole County as this City; wherein we had in few days
proceeded so far, that some thousands of hands were then collected, when
diverse Gentlemen (from the sly insinuations, and false representations of our
Adversaries) were secured in several Prisons, The Author, though diligently
searchd for, made his escape.
to the discouragement of a wel-begun, and a wel-meant undertaking. Neither can
the Gentlemen understand wherein they have offended, or how they should merit
imprisonment, since there was no order or prohibition to the contrary. Although
they conceive, that, had they proceeded therein notwithstanding, they had not
transgressed any known Laws of the Land, it being the Subjects undoubted
birthright modestly to represent their grievances by way of Petition; and, as
the case now stands, not unlawful to do the same by way of Remonstrance or
Declaration. Wherefore lest (through our silence, and the present suppression
of our Declaration) the Aspersions of our Adversaries might be thought
deservedly cast upon us, we thought fit to publish the same, together with this
Narrative; deeming, that as we have done nothing herein worthy the present
severity, so the impartial Reader will in his private judgment absolve us from
all guilt or demerit. Neither shall we answer our Adversaries by way of
recrimination; nor (although we can by undoubted testimonies sufficiently prove
it) say, that the same men, who now appear so zealous Assertors of the
Purliaments interest and proceedings, did as eagerly join with the Army, crying
them up as much (as with whom they would live and die) as they decryed this
present Power, in its late interruption, as inconsistent with the interest and
Genius of this Nation: No, though this might serve to invalidate their
testimony, we shall enlarge no further, but refer to the Declaration it self.

A Letter of Thanks to his EXCELLENCY the L. General MONK; penned by the
Author, according to the order and advice of the Gentlemen of East-Kent, who
were concerned in the Declaration, and presented by Sir John Boys and himself
at White Hall, some few days after the sitting of the Secluded Members.
MY LORD,
AMongst that numerous List of your Excellencies Debtors (which are no less
then the People of three Nations, rescued from imminent ruin and desolation)
we of the County of Kent, who have declared for a full and free Parliament, do
here profess our particular acknowledgements, as in part enjoying the effects
of what we declared for, by the restitution of the secluded Members; a great
and glorious work, and which both themselves, our selves, and the whole Nation
must solely ascribe to your prudent Conduct. We cannot, My Lord, but as with
wonder, so with delight contemplate and comment upon your Lordships
proceedings. We wonder when we see our selves from the very Margin and brink of
Despair restored to life and safety, and as poor weather-beaten and
ship-wracked people set on shore; and now, as we hope, upon the firm ground of
a desired settlement, which nothing could effect but a miracle, neither could
any one do that miracle but your self. We are delighted when we take the
prospect and survey of your wise management, and handsome contrivance of
things, which have (to the greater heightning of this our delight) held us in
suspense, till the very close of the last Act, wherein all things are wound up
to the exquisite content and satisfaction of us your Spectators: And (to say
truth) what has hitherto been brought upon this our Theater, has (through
your Lordships prudence) proved a Scene purely Comical, and (as we hope) will
(through the influence of the same wisdom) both continue and end such; that
as our calamities were ushered in, and carried on with blood, wounds and
desolation, so they may be composed, and have their Exit with love, caresses,
and mutual embracements. May your Lordship therefore be so happy, that as you
have raised the expectation of these Nations to this height, so you may
complete and perfect the remainder of your work, and as a good Pilot guide us
at last into that Port, which, through various storms and tempests of State,
we have a long time labored to attain; that all sober people may receive the
benefit, your self the praise, and the eternal God the glory of all your
undertakings. We shall here conclude, and in the name of our fellow-Declarers
in general, but more particularly in that of our fellow-fufferers for our
Declaration, subscribe our selves,

MY LORD, Your Excellencies most obedient Servants and faithful Friends,
Canterbury, John Boys of Bonington. John Boys of Hode-Court.

Feb. 28. 1659.
A SPEECH penned by the Author, and intended to have been pronounced by him to
the Sacred Majesty of our gracious Sovereign King CHARLES the Second, on that
auspicious day of his Landing at Dover, being the 25. of May 1660. a day worthy
to be enrolled amongst our most solemn Festivals: but forasmuch as he was
prevented therein by reason his Majesty made no stay at all in that Town, he
does here with all humility cast himself and these plain, but honest, lines at
his royal feet.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign.
WHether we dream or wake we cannot easily define; we have lived so long in
darkness, and in the shadow of Death, that at the first glimps and dawning of
the all-quickning rays of MAJESTY, we dare hardly give credit to the report of
our sense, or over-hastily affirm that we see what indeed we behold.

We arise, methinks, some of us, out of our wonted Dungeons and obscurities, as
the Cadmaean Brethren were said to do out of the earth; here one thrusts forth
a head, there another an arm; here a third a half-body, and there a fourth a
whole: But be it not to the same end, viz. to destroy one the other, as they
did, that (to our smart) has been acted, and over-acted; but to destroy the
Kings foreign enemies; domestic now we hope he has none: and to this let all
the people say AMEN.

Oh! how has the miserable vessel of the Commonwealth been weather-beaten and
shipwrack'd, during the long and irksome absence of your Sacred MAJESTY our
proper and natural Pilot? and had not the divine Providence in time placed you
at the helm, it had either been swallowed up in the bottomless quicksands of
our own domestic confusions, or else dashed against, and split upon the
dangerous rocks of foreign Machinations.

Wherefore thrice welcome, most illustrious Prince; in peace take possession of
your paternal Throne; in a good and happy hour invest those royal robes, put on
that Imperial Crown, and take in hand that Princely Scepter; all which regal
Ornaments are yours, not more from your hereditary right, then they are from
your hereditary virtues, as the undoubted heir as well to the transcendencies
as regalities of your unparalled Royal Father, of Princes, as of men the
best; and (to say truth) the common Parent of us all, as in whose death three
Nations became Orphans, as well as the Royal Family, and for whose untimely
fate three mighty people put on inward sables, as well as those of his own
domestic relations.

But we shall not dwell upon these sad remembrances; our wound, though deep, is
now perfectly healed; and our tears, although once overflowing, are now quite
dried up at the grateful presence of your Gracious MAJESTY. We shall say no
more, but conclude with our prayers to Almighty God, that your MAJESTY may live
long, and reign over us in honor and glory; that from your Princely loins may
issue an uninterrupted race of Kings, to sit upon the Throne of your self and
your royal Predecessors: and lastly, that when we can enjoy you here no
longer, you may for this temporary and earthly Diadem receive an immarcescible
Crown of glory in the world to come; where you shall (doubtess) sit down by,
and reign with your Royal Father, that gracious Prince, that holy Martyr, and
now eternally blessed Saint in never-ending Beatitudes.

AD SERENISSIMAM MAJESTATEM CAROLI SECUNDI, JOANNIS DE BOSCO, VIRGILIANI
INTERPRETIS EPIGRAMMA.
Si dives, Rex magne, esset mihi vena Maronis,
Si foelix vatum principis ingenium,
Ipse fores meus Aeneas, titulisque superbis
Te ornarem, Heroi quos dedit ille suo.
Had I, Great Monarch, Maro's divine spirit,
Or did the Prince of Poets wit inherit,
You should be my Aeneas, and what He
His Hero gave, to you ascribed should be.
MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, by Your most humble and obscure, but withal most
faithful and obedient Vassal John Boys.

ERIPE ME POPULIS, ET HABENTI NUBILA TERRAE
SANCTE PATER. --
Val. Flacc. Argon. l. 1.
To his worthily esteemed Friend, and learned Antiquary, Mr. William Somner,
upon his Treasury of the Saxon tongue, entitled Dictionarium
Saxonico-Latino-Anglicum.
A SATYR.
WHat mean thou, Man? think thou thy learned Page,
And worthy pains will relish with this age?
Think that thy Treasury of Saxon words
Will be deemed such amid'st unlettered swords?
Boots it to know how our forefathers spoke
E're Danish, Norman, or this present yoke
Did gall our patient necks? or matters it
What Hengist uttered, or how Horsa writ?
Last, think that we (who have destroyed whatever
Our Grandsires did) will with their language bear?
That we (who have all famous monuments
Razed, and defeated thus all good intents
Of former Piety) will honor give
To antique characters? shall Paper live,
And Ink; when Brass and Marble cannot withstand
This Iron Ages violating hand?
Or that this title, Dictionarium
Saxonico-Latino-Anglicum,
Will sell thy book? think that the Readers itch
Of knowing much the Author will enrich?
Thy barbarous Saxon, with the Heathen Greek,
And profane Latin, buyers may go seek;
Together with the Hebrew, and the rest
Which are the language of that Romish beast;
Our Mother Tongue well-nos'd, with a wry face,
And eyes inverted, now has chiefest grace.
It Is strange, but true; our modern Rhetoric
Both heals a Brother, and makes other sick.
So that thy trade is out of fashion, friend,
Lo! against Antiquities we now contend:
Our quarrel is against the former age;
Against our dead Fathers we dire wars do wage.
Had thou some Bible-dictionary made,
A Concordance, or dealt in such like trade;
Had thou some Gospel Truths; some Commonplace
Presented to this fighting-preaching race;
Or to our Sword-Divines assistance lent
By paraphrase, expounding, or comment,
The Brethren would have been thy Readers; now
The Saints will not thy learned pains allow.
Yet, be not thou discouraged, worthy friend,
Thy oil and pains in vain thou do not spend:
All are not Fighters, nor all Preachers are;
All are not Saints, nor for the Cause declare;
All are not Godly, nor Reformers all;
Nor build up Christ by letting Churches fall:
There yet are left some pious, sober, wise,
Learned, discreet, who will thy Labors prize:
Some Martyrs yet of truth, some who adore
The Ages past, and present do deplore;
Some who dare honest be, who learning love;
Fear not; such will thine industry approve.
O happy thou! who do thy self enjoy,
Sequestered from the world, free from the annoy
Of blustering times; thou do securely sit,
Enriching both thine own and others wit:
The ambition of the Great ones, nor their fears
Disturb thine honest quiet; nothing scares
Thee' midst thy learned guard of books, where thou
Happier then Princes may thy self avow;
Whose fates thou may with unconcerned thoughts read,
And so compare the Living with the Dead,
Proceed, brave Soul, nor (since the wicked rage
Of profane hands, and a destroying age
Threatens to ruin what Antiquity
To us has left) let thy pen idle be:
It Is true, we of thy learned diligence
Have had a The Antiquities of Canterbury, etc.
taste, which only waked our sense;
We do a fuller meal expect from thee:
Thou must not only whet, but satisfy
Our craving Appetites. Do thy self right,
Do us, the future times, more largely write,
Nor to one Town confine thy straiter care;
Thy hand more ample ruins must repair:
Lo! the whole Kingdom calls thee; in time save
Its falling monuments; them from the grave
Rescue, that thy worth with the Ages crimes
May be compared by the succeeding times.
In eund. Distichon.
Te Somno, Somnere, premi cui dicere fas est?
Testatur doctus te vigilare liber.
Canter. Sept. 30. 1656.
FINIS.

