THE VINDICATION AND CLEARING OF Sir JAMES RAMSEY From those base aspersions
cast upon him through misinformation, etc. Concerning his Carriage in the
Fight at Kyneton, 23 October 1642.
Colonel Midleton, Major Baylie, and Major Melvill, being severally examined
by those whom his Excellence the Earl of Essex, Lord General of our Army had
appointed to examine the business of Sir James Ramsey his carriage and
behavior the 23. of October, at the fight in Kineton field, do all
unanimously agree and depose that the said Sir James, having the command of the
left Wing of our Horse, did so place and order the several Squadrons of Horse
of the Wing at best advantage for fight, and did place several Ranks of
Musketeers betwixt the Squadrons of Horse, and interlarded them so well for
offending of the enemy, and for defending of themselves, as could be desired,
and did also lay upon the left hand of the Horse, in a hedge two or three
hundred Musketeers, for to Flank the Front of our Horse, and give fire to the
Enemies at their charging of our Horse, and all those three abovenamed
Gentlemen affirm that the said Sir James did before the Combat exhort and
entreat all the Troops that stood thus imbattailed to stand firm, and do
for the honor of their Country and their own Reputation, representing to them
they were to fight for Gods Cause, for Religion, and for liberty of Laws of
the Kingdom, and safety of what was dearest unto them; withal telling them
that they were to fight against Gods Enemies, men of no Religion, for the most
part; Who sought their own ends only, by the overthrow of the purity of
Religion, and liberties and welfare of the Kingdom: yet notwithstanding all
this, they affirm that at the approach of the Enemy our Troops did discharge
their long pieces afar of, and without distance, and immediately thereafter
wheeled all about, and ran disorderly, leaving the Musqueteeres to be cut in
pieces by the Enemy, so did their Officers show them the way, and their
Lieutenants; whose Captain were absent, running away, told that their place
was to bring up the Reere. And Sir James himself being engaged among the
Squadrons of the Enemies Horse, was carried violently out of the Field. The
verity of which premises these three Gentlemen do offer, and are ready to give
their oath upon whenever they shall be required.

Sir James Ramsey his Declaration.
AFter I had Orders from his Excellency the Lord General of our Army, and
others my Superiors, for ordering and commanding the left Wing of the
Cavallery, I did accordingly put them in Posture Defensive, and Offensive,
interlining the Squadrons with a convenient number of Musqueteeres, and
likewise did place three hundred Musketeers on a Hedge on the left hand of the
left Wing; which did Flank the whole Front of the left Wing; Thereafter on the
head of every Squadron exhorting them to magnanimity and resolution, showing
them the worth of their Ancestors, desiring them to show themselves worthy such
Noble Progenitors, and putting before them the justness of the cause, that it
was the purity of Religion, the Liberty of the Subject, and the King and
Parliaments Honor, that drew them into the Field, and no man's private
Quarrel; and the more to encourage them, I did lay before them the
unworthiness of the adverse party, that they were Papists, Atheists, and
Irreligious persons for the most part; and after desiring, and heartily
exhorting them to give the enemy a brave meeting, who were advancing to charge
us, and commanding ours to receive them resolutely; (contrary to my
expectation, and to my perpetual regrate) ours discharged their Carbines at a
long distance, and thereafter basely run away, and that in mighty confusion,
so that I was engaged in middle of the enemies Squadrons, and violently borne
away out of the field, and so was carried along, two miles at least; being thus
among the Enemy in an enclosure, by leaping over a ditch, none of the enemies
being able to follow me, I escaped, and then assuring my self we had lost the
day, in respect the left wing of ours was altogether routed, and a great many
of the Infantry on the right wing, with flying colors; I resolved to go
toward London, fearing the Parliament should be misinformed of me, in respect
that part of the Army I commanded, first gave ground to the enemy; Likewise
knowing my hard condition if I should have been Prisoner, in respect I came
not only my self to do my best service to the King and Parliament, (though
at this time things have fallen out far contrary to my expectation) but
likewise did incite and encourage a great many others, brave Commanders, for
the same service: And this upon my Conscience I declare.

J. RAMSEY.

The Report made by the Committee to his Excellency, of the examination of
Witnesses.
ACcording to your Excellencies command, we have called before us Sir James
Ramsey, who has made a relation to us, not only of the form of Battle he
had placed the Horse into on the left wing which was under his command, the 23.
of October, at Kineton Field; but likewise has told us what exhortation and
entreaty he had made on the head of every Squadron of Horse, that they might
carry themselves bravely against their Enemy. The which Declaration he has set
down in writing under his own hand, which is also fortifyed by the testimony
of three worthy Gentlemen then present with him, that were witnesses of his
actions and speeches. In consideration whereof we are of opinion, that the
misfortune that befell him, did not proceed from any defect on his part, he
having done all that became a gallant man to do, both in ordering the
Battalions for fight, and in exhorting them to acquit themselves courageously
as brave Soldiers. As for his going to London, his Reasons being expressed in
his own Declaration, we remit them and the premises to your Honorable
considerations.

Cur. Milit. tent. in St. Albans, quinto die November. 1642.
Present. Sir John Meyrick President of the Council. Earl of Peterborough
General of the Ordnance. Sir William Balfoore Lieutenant General of the
Horse. Colonel Ballard. Sir John Meldrum. Lord Willoughby of Parham. Sir
Philip Stapleton. Lord of Rochford. Colonel Middleton. Sir William Fayrfax.


Whereas this day in the said Council of War was questioned Sir James
Ramsey, who commanded the left wing of the Cavallery, in Kineton field, the 23.
of October last past, concerning his going up to London, after the routing and
flying away of the said left Wing; the Council taking into serious
confideration, the reasons alleged by the said Sir James Ramsey, which moved
him to make his speedy repair up to London after the said dysaster: Besides
the said Council resting sufficiently satisfied of the fidelity and care, and
vigilance of the said Sir James Ramsey, on the said day in Kineton field: has
clearly acquitted and discharged; and by these presents, does acquit and
discharge the said Sir James Ramsey, of all manner of imputation, which any way
may tend to the impeachment of his Reputation and Honor.

Jo. Meyrick. Isaac Dorislaus, Advocate of the Army. To. Chambers, Secretary to
the Army.

November 6. 1642.
I Have perused the annexed Declaration of the Council of War concerning Sir
James Ramsey Knight, and have given allowance for the Printing thereof, and of
the Declaration made by himself, and allowed of by the said Council.

ESSEX.

Printed at London for John Bellamy, and Ralph Smith. 1642.


