Die Mercurij, 30 November: 1642.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Commons now Assembled in Parliament, that M.
Vines shall be desired from this House, to print the Sermon he preached before
this House at St. Margarets Westminster this Day at the public Fast; And it is
further Ordered, that he shall have the usual privledges as others formerly
have had, that none shall Print or reprint his Sermon, but those whom he shall
appoint.

Hen: Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint Abel Roper to Print this Sermon.

Richard Vines.

CALEBS INTEGRITY In following the LORD fully, IN A Sermon Preached at St.
Margarets Westminster, Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at their late
solemn and public Fast, November: 30th. 1642.

By RICHARD VINES, Mr. of Arts of Magd. College in Camb: and Minister of the
Gospel at WEDDINGTON in the County of WAR*

Et facere, and pati fortia, Christianum est. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Abel
Roper, at the Sign of of the Sun against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleete-streete. M. DC. XLII.

HONOR ATISSIMO, GRAVISSIMOQVE SENATVI PARL. DOM. COM. HANC SUAM QUALEMCUNQUE
CONCIONEM HABITAM APVD EVNDEM,

IN ECCLESIA SANCTAE MARGARETAE, APVD WESTMONASTERIVM, SOLENNI, MENSTRUORUM
JEJUNIORUM, DIE, NOVEMBER. ULTIMO, ANNO 1642. EX OMNIBVS, QUI SACRIS OPERANTUR,
IN AGRO WARWICENSI, MINIMUS.

D. D. D.

RICHARDVS VINES.

CALEBS INTEGRITY In following the LORD fully. OR The Pattern of a godly Man,
going upon a dangerous service, or at a desperate point.
NUMBERS XIV-XXIV. But my servant Caleb because he had another Spirit with him,
(or in him) and has followed me fully, ( Hebr. has fulfilled after me) him
will I bring into the Land whereinto he went, and his seed shall possess it.
THE History whereof this Text Verse. 2. and 9. and 11. and ^^.
is part; is a narrative of one of the murmurings of the Israelites, which
famous sin of theirs is expressed in some variety of style, being elsewhere
called Temptation of God, or (...) provocation, or imbittering of God, and
sometime rebellion, which is a sin incident to a people that are under
promife, or in expectation of good from God, and yet withal, so incountred
with temptations and obstructions of their hopes, wave after wave, that they
cannot unto themselves by faith reconcile the promise, or tenderness of God
with his present providence and dispensation toward them, his footsteps being
cloudy, and his hand heavy: whereupon their spirits are even by his
probationary scourges imbittered against him, as if he neither regarded his own
truth, nor their sufferings. And God again is imbittered against them for
their unbelief in him, their jealousy of him, their discontents, thought or
vented against him; for God would not have the people of his Covenant, because
they are in straits, to question his respect to them; no, though they be
between Pharaoh and the Sea, at point of perishing: But if his present hand
make them cry, Alas for the day is great, It is even the time of Jacobs trouble
I^r. 30. 7.
(and who will not shrink at the first putting his feet into cold water) yet
to over-beleeve sense, and add withal, but he shall be saved out of it. This
murmuring was the Tenth, the greatest, and of the heaviest consequence.

The Tenth, so God himself numbers it, who, as he keeps a Book of every man's
particular sins (as the phrase of blotting out imports) and whereof every man's
conscience is a counter part, so it appears hence that he keeps an exact
account of our National rebellions and provocations, Ver. 22. They have
tempted me now these ten times.

The greatest, for besides that it is after nine, and the repetition of a sin
makes the latter eo nomine the greater, ( Ezra 9. 14. Should we again break
thy Commandments) I say, absque ho^, their other murmurings arose upon their
want of flesh, bread, water, or some dislikes of some particular occonomy of
God over them: This strikes at the root, at Chap. 12* 16. Deuteronomy. 1. 20.
the throat of all, for now being in Paran, or at the Mountain of the
Amorites, in the very borders of the Land of their rest, ready to put in their
sickle to reap the promise made to Abraham so many hundred years before. They
so undervalue and dishonor Gods rest made over by deed of promise unto them
long agone, and now ready to be given by livery and seisin into their hand,
that they prefer a slavish life, nay a grave in Egypt, before such an
adventure, would God that we had died in Egypt, Ver. 2. Or would God we had
dyed in the wilderness, any grave would serve their indignation, rather then
they would put on for this inheritance; and happily they thought (as we sometimes
do in like case) that this Land being in promise, it should have dropped into
their mouths, even without their opening them, and not have been a Land of
conquest as well as promise; for so we fancy, that promises must fulfill
themselves, even though we be not in capacity of them, or contribute not to
serve Gods command or providence in the way of reaping them.

And what was the consequence? God was provoked, and in his wrath swore an oath
exclusive of this people, led them off the borders of the Land a 40. years
march in the wilderness, until all the mutineers (all above twenty years old
at their going forth of Egypt) fell therein. Upon which account, not a man of
that great people (except Caleb and Ioshuah) of much above 60. years of age
came into Canaan.

Now if these things be our ensamples, (...), 1 Cor. 10. 6.
then it is but laying the scene among our selves, and the result of it will be
this; That if after all our other National provocations of God, for which we
have long deserved, that the hand should write upon the wall, that God has
numbered our Kingdom and finished it. We should be brought to the borders of
that long prayed for rest from our yoakes and burdens in Church and State, and
then prove, as I may so say, run-awayes from Edge Hill, and stumble at the
threshold, despising the offer, cancelling our former prayers, scandalizing our
selves, saying, The time is not come, the time the Lords house should Hag. 1. 2.
be built, and so wish for Captains that we may return into Egypt, as this
people, Verse. 4. Might we not fear such another oath of God against us, and
such another pilgrimage of our selves in the wilderness of our own misery,
until our carcasses were all fallen as theirs.

The occasion of this mutiny was, Twelve Princes or heads of the Tribes, were
sent out to discover the Land, they went, returned, and reported, but these
Twelve were not all agreed of their verdict, they were ten to two; The ten
spoke their carnal fears, nothing but walled Towns, warlike people, sons of
Anak. the Land indeed is good, but like the garden of the Hesperides, Dragons
keep it; not a word or syllable of Gods covenant, promise, or presence, to
counter-ballance or make rebatement. The people are drawn after them and
imbittered, they cry out that God has betrayed their lives, Wives, Children to
manifest ruin, and to Egypt they will back again.

The two, Caleb and Joshua, countervoted the ten, Number. 30. 30, 31.
and protested. We are not able say the ten, we are well able says Caleb; they
are stronger then we say the ten, they are bread for us say the two; we are
Cum Cap. 30, 31, 32, 33. Cum. Cap. 14, 8, 9.
Pismires and Grasshoppers to them say the ten; the Lord is with us, fear them
not say the two; they are fenced in with walls, and giants say the ten; their
shadow is departed from them say the two; This was the contestation, but the No's carried it, and though Caleb and his fellow plied the people with Gods
presence, power and promise, and with the experience they had had of him, yet
they got no heat into them, but the heat of insolency and rage, All the
Congregation bad stone them with stones, Verse. 10. Spiritual arguments to a
carnal heart, are but warm clothes to a dead man; when men have once a
prejudice against God, as if he would be false to them, and think their faith
in his promises will be but a snare to engage them into ways destructive of
themselves, then it is no oyling of a wheel so skotcht: for it is a sure rule,
he that has no faith to make use of God, would by no means have need of him.
When this people saw the great work which God had done upon Egypt, then they
believe; the Exo. 4 31.
faith of a carnal heart is laid up in present sense or evidence of Gods hand;
but while the Anakims are alive, God is no body to them; a hard heart will not
bring up former experiments of God, to charge new dangers in the face, for
though says Moses, you have seen so much of God already, yet in this thing
ye did not believe the Lord your God. On the Deuteronomy. 1. 31, 32.
contrary, Caleb values God alone against all that can be said, and makes the
Giants but Pismires to his faith, by setting God by them, of such down-weight
is God, to a spirit of faith, in that very thing wherein to an unbeleever he
does not so much as stir, much less turn the beam.

So much for the survey of the Suburbs of the Text, whereby you already do
perceive, that here is something that is proper to the Meridian of our own
case.

And now I am at the words, which are an exception of Caleb out of the number
of them, whom God by oath peremptorily excluded the Land of promise for their
Rebellion, and therein we have,

1. Gods testimony of him. 2. Gods promise to him.
1. Gods testimony of him. 1. He has fulfilled after me. 2. He had another
spirit with him.

2. Gods promise to him. Him will bring, etc. and therein, 1. The assignement
of Calebs plot, the Land he searched, or that part of it into which he went.
2. The ground of that promise; because he had another spirit, and has etc. 3.
The entaile of the promise, or the inheritance upon his seed. His seed shall
possess it.
I begin with Gods testimony of this servant of his, He has fulfilled after
me, which after this time you may observe to be set as a mark of honor upon
Deuteronomy. 1. 36 Ios. 14 and 6. and alibi.
this man: insomuch as when his name is named, this character sirnames him, He
that followed me fully; in like manner, as that brand sticks upon the name of
Jeroboam, He that made Israel to sin.

I list not to vex the words. The Hebrew being (...), he has fullfilled after
me, answered with (...); in the new Testament, (...), 2 Cor. 10. 6. when your
obedience is fulfilled: but I will not stand to tub that ear, which will yield
me no more corn then the Translation has beaten out. He has followed me
fally; as if the Lord had said, he has stuck close to me, and improved the
business under his hand, howsoever succeslesly as to the people, yet
dangerously as to himself for my sake, and managed it to the best advantage of
my honor, by valuing me, my promise, presence, power, against all Objections
made by humane wisdom; or Obstructions laid by humane power.

Let us now see what the Text holds forth unto us, and that honey is best,
which runs freely from the comb; we must not commit rape or extortion upon
the word of God, a sin too frequent in our times, by such as are most zealous
for their party, for how many do (...), cauponari verbum Dei, as the Apostle
speaks, dashing and mixing as Hucksters do their wares, adulterating the pure
word with their own crude fancies, and so uttering and venting it abroad into
the world, to the great scandal of Scripture it self, godliness, learning and
ingenuity.

The Observations that offer themselves willingly are these.

1. That God makes great reckoning of, and gives special testimony unto such
his servants who fulfill after him. My servant Caleb has fullfilled after me.
2. To fulfill after the Lord, proceeds from another spirit than the unbeleeving
Israelites are acted withal. He had another spirit with him. 3. Such shall not
loose by the hand, who out of a right spirit doc follow the Lordfully. Because
he had, etc. him will I bring into the Land, etc.
For the first, it is not Calebs commendation only, but every man's duty also,
who bears this style, My Servant. You hear that Solomon who out of compliance
with his wives, took in also, as I may say, Concubines to Gods Temple, is
therefore charged, 1 King. 11. 6. Not to have fulfilled after the Lord; and
Iehu who out of compliance with that policy which proved fatal to that
Kingdom, not casting out that Ieroboamiticall Idolatry in being, is likewise
charged, 2 King. 10. 31. Not to have observed to walk in the Law of the Lord
with all h^^ heart: both of them are taken as defective in this duty, he that
took in more, and he that cast out less then might answer the level of Gods
order of worship, and judge the same in other cases. For it is plain by our
Savior his frequent and instant importunity, that his people must deny, loose,
sell, forsake, hate all, not only all sin, but all dearest things of this
life, which are lawful, necessary, and (out of the case of impediment of our
following of Christ, and their competition with him) worthy to be sought or
enjoyed, which can import no less then this duty of fulfilling after the Lord.

Nor are these merely Evangelicall counsels to some perfect men, but obligatory
of all Christians, otherwise that weight could not be laid on, which is,
Whosoever does not this cannot be my Disciple, And indeed, as the Philosopher
says of privation, that it is one of the principles of natural generation; so
is self-denial and the whole sale of all for Christ, it is the first lesson,
howsoever it be last that is well learned, being the only removens prohibens,
that which removes all impediments of our fulfilling after Christ. And as the
times of Christ, opposite to the institution of the Gospel did require the
inculcation of this Point, so ours, opposite to the restitution of Gods worship
to it is native simplicity, do bespeake the same, being such, In quibus animum
firmare oportet constantibus exemplis, as he in Tacitus.

For the opening of this Point, we shall consider,

1. What groundwork is requisite to be laid in a man, that he may fulfill
after the Lord. 2. What it is to fulfill after him. 3. Why we should fulfill
after him.
For the first of the three, I shall acquit it in four things, of which the
second will rise out of the first, the third out of the second, the fourth out
of the third.

1. The first and indeed the root of all the rest, is this, that there be in a
man a principle of saving faith, closing with Christ to secure the present and
final estate of the soul, or the groundwork of sound Regeneration and
conversion to God; there may be many workings or gifts of the Spirit of God in
and unto men, in whom there is not a spirit uniting to Christ, and there is a
dogmaticall faith of holding the truth in opinion and assent which is not
justifying of the person by reception of Christ; now there must be such a
spirit, and such a faith as may carry the soul out of it self for
subsistence, and above it self in operation and working, so that God may be
(...), from whom and unto whom the soul does act, and then it will follow,
that he that has cast his soul on Christ by faith, securing the maine estate
thereof, shall the more easily cast away his life, estate, etc. in a particular
cause for him. He that through all the pangs and struglings of the new birth,
discouragements at the weight and height of his sins, oppositions of
reasonings, delusions and flatteries of self-righteousnesse, violence of hell
it self, has shot the maine gulf and has landed in Christ, shall with more
facility lay aside his lesser, his outward interests for him: for it is a
terrible thing for the stoutest heart alive to look such a danger in the face,
as for ought he knows may at one blow kill him and damn him, or in a moment,
send him both to his grave and hell, it makes a man follow the Lord fully, when
he obeyes the Commandment by the same faith, whereby he receives the saving
promise, and offers up Isaac by the same faith, whereby he got him; that is,
to obey and suffer by a justifying faith, as they, Heb. 11. whose acts there
expressed, were not most of them justifying acts, yet done by a saving and
justifying faith, for so it is the same hand which shuts and closes upon the
gift and opens it self to work. And yet I must needs preoccupate an Objection,
and grant that Abraham who believed the maine promise without staggering,
showed some trepidation, when he conceived himself in danger of his life, They
will kill me, says he; but that is Gone. 12. 12.
but the encountering of sense with faith, which sense fights sore against
faith, when it is upon it is own dunghill, I mean in a sensible danger,
natures retraction of itself from a visible fear may causethe pulse of a
Christian which beats truly and strongly in the maine point, the state of the
soul, to intermit and faulter at such a time; but the needle will return to
the true point again upon self-recollection, That godliness has the Promises
that belong to this life and the life to come: as for such men whose hearts are
not ballast with grace; no marvel if they ride uncertainly and are up and
down in rough water, for though in fair and easy weather they may keep tune
and time, yet it will be no wonder if they ring their bells backward whenthings
begin to be on fire, Religio religat, Godliness binds fast.

2. The second is, That a man affect God himself, and account him his great
reward, and this is the immediate effect of saving grace and faith, to bring
the soul into the esteem and acceptance of God himself for our (...), or
chiefest good; it is true those Promises, I will call for the corn and
increase it, and will multiply the fruit of the Tree and of the Field, are
blessings and benefits of his Covenant, Ezekiel. 36. 29. And blessed are the
people that are in such a case, Psalm. 144. 15. but the maine Promise of the
Covenant is, I will be their God and they shall be my people; and then says
the Psalmist, Ibid. Yea blessed are the people whose God is the Lord: That
which we call amor amicitie or conjugalis closes with the person, and not only
with benefits. The first Commandment shows that this is the most natural
order; first, to have God for our God, and then and thence to perform other
duties. Servility when one is awed from sin, or driven to duties by the whip,
and mercenarines when one is drawn by mere benefit or reward, are the bane of
following the Lord fully: He that parts with sin as a slave, parts with it
and loves it, and will in the calm gather up again that which he cast
overboard in the storm; and he will perform duties and hate them: He that
follows God as a mercenary will no longer uti Deo, then he can frui mund^ He
will use him while he can serve himself of him. Duties and sufferings are
irksome things without that suave condimentum, the love of God himself. I
know the opinion of merit with God or men, sweetens sharp duties and
sufferings to some palats, but that is but dulce venenum, a sweet poison to all
we do, it frustrates our very Fasts, Did ye at all Fast Zach. 7. 5
unto me, even unto me? Was it not an argument of an excellent spirit in Moses,
when God offered him the benefit without himself or his presence, Exodus 33. 2.
I will send an Angel before thee, and I will drive out the Canaanites, etc.
but I will not go up in the midst of thee; and this was the reason, I shall
but consume thee if I do; what a fair offer was this, and what a reason of Gods
denial of his own presence was that, and yet Moses could not be content with
it; For if thy presence go not with Exodus 33. 25.
me, then carry us not up hence. Let us be here in the Wilderness under thy
Cloud, rather then possess a Canaan without thee.

3. The third is, To value Gods interests in any business under our hand, more
then our own, his Gospel, his cause, his glory; and this rises out of the
former; for he that loves God himself, above himself, will value Gods interest
above his own. It is the property of a sincere heart to observe, what share
God may have in any action or duty to which he is called, and to distinguish
and abstract it from his own. We have a famous instance in Moses, who was
offered a private fortune, even by God himself, I Will make of thee a great
Nation, greater Numb. 14 12.
and mightier then they; no (says he) Lord, thou will be a looser by it, and
shall run the hazard of thy honor; and surely as God was displeased with
Balaam for going, though he bad him go, so the Lord would not have taken it
so kindly of Moses, if he had taken him upon the offer he made in a time of his
heat against his people; nothing makes a man eccentricke in his motions so much
as private respects; he that has an habituate bie-end, has as it were a nail
in his foot, and though he may go well enough in soft ground, yet he will
halt when he comes in hard way: If ever in any great business God did intwist
his own interest with ours, it is now in our case, and if there be any that
could be content to sit down in the settlement of their liberty and property,
without further care of Religion, and to dwell in seiled houses, while the
house of God Hag. 1. 4.
lies waste: let me put them in mind of Reuben and Gad, who being seated in
their plot, would yet march on to see the rest of the Tribes settled, as well as
themselves, before they would sit down; and says Moses, if you will not do so,
ye have sinned against the Number. 32. 18, etc.
Lord, and be sure your sin will find you out.

4. The fourth is, To be able to perish for God, and this rises out of the
former, for he only can lay himself out for God, that can lay up himself in
him: And it is a point of great ability, I know how to be abased, how to
hunger, I can do all things, Phil. 4. 12. Let no man say, Paul thou must
hunger and be abased, it is a matter of necessity, nay but ye see he makes it
a point of ability in him, that he can be in a necessitous condition; a man
shall never be quiet nor at point, till he can loose himself to save himself,
as Christ speaks, and perish to live, for he shall be daunted at every alarm
of ill tidings, fearful of the shadow of the Cross; every danger in a duty
awes him; every frown of a great man dastards him, until he can perish in
his reputation, and be vile, more vile, yet more vile for God, or Heb. 11. 35.
can come to that, They would not be delivered. It was the greatest
heartbreaking to Paul when his friends in affection to him, would have
besought him out of his own danger, Act. 21. 13, 14. And this groundwork
being well laid, you may easily see how possible and probable it is, that such
a man should follow the Lord fully, especially in the matters of God and of
Religion, wherein many excellent Romans to their Country and true Patriots,
prove very truants and heavy slugs.

I come to the second thing, viz. what it is to fulfill after the Lord, or who
may be said to do it? And this I shall briefly run through.

1. More generally. 2. More particularly.
1. For the more general explication of this point, To fulfill after the
Lord. 1. Excludes partiality in the Law of God and takes in integrity.
Partiality is either in the negative part of the Law, and that is when a man
casts off some sins, and has some other, one at least, in delicijs; or in
the affirmative part, when he plowes here, and makes a bawke there, this cannot
be following fully, for that consists in integrity of aversion from sin, and
of conversion to God, quoad assensum and conatum. 2. It excludes sinisterity of
ends, and takes in sincerity; for the Scripture brands it for an emptiness of
fruit, when a man brings forth fruit to himself, Hosea 10. 1. Israel is an
empty vine, he brings sorth fruit to himself. 3. It excludes lukewarmenesse
and takes in zeal, not that preternaturall heat, miscalled zeal; for that is
a disease rather then a grace; zeal should eat us up, but not eat up our
wisdom, nor should pride eat up our zeal. 4. It excludes the mere form of
godliness, and takes in power; for form wants the chief dimension of
holiness, which is depth and substance; therefore those follow not sully, that
run before the commandment in outward form, but walk not after it it in
moral piety. 5. It excludes withdrawing and takes in constancy, for (...) and
(...), to follow fully, and go on to the end, are much at one; he that walks
fully after the Lord, walks finally after him. But this fulfilling after the
Lord, does not necessarily require legal perfection, as to exclude all sin
out of the person, or his ways, for we hear of none besides the two Adams, in
whom it might be said (...), there is no sin; though it was said of one, and
may be of other true Israelites, (...), there is no guile, or predominant
hypocrisy; Neither does this fulfilling after the Lord, exclude inequality,
and take in the same measure as necessary in all, for the fulness of two
vessels, does not infer the equality of them; God has differently tallented
men with grace, parts, means, opportunities, and he does not require him that
has but one tallent, to put forth five.

2. For the more particular explication of the point, and first, who fulfils
after the Lord in duties of obedience, and that is when a man walks,

1, Universally in compliance of heart and endeavor to the whole rule,
clipping off industriously no part of that service which bears Gods
superscription upon it, though it may be to him harsh and unpleasant, yet the
command of God shall both awe and draw the heart unto it, for that word, I am
the Lord thy God, makes every Thou shall of his, and every Thou shall not,
acceptable to a godly man, and this is to walk (...), fully.

2. Freely, though no rod be holden over us, the Laws curse is the impressed
shilling to force a servile spirit, but the love of God is the byas of a
voluntiere. Grace is that whereby God is free in giving to us, and grace is
that which makes our hearts free in obedience to him, and this freeness of
spirit will be most seen, when there are most rubs in the way; for then he
that moves by outward poyses will stick and be dull: as when a bowl runs up
hill every rub sluggs it, but when it goes down hill a rub quickens it; a free
spirit is enkindled by that which quenches another man.

3. Satisfied in part with duty, and with the conscience of sincerity and
exercise of his graces therein, though success answer not; what a joyful man
was David when he and his people had offered so willingly the materials of a
Temple, though he might not build it, 1 Chronicles. 29. What pleasure took Paul in
infirmities and reproaches for Christ, when the strength of Christ was
perfected in his weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 10. And this is that satisfaction
wherein a good conscience finds some rest, when a man can pray, can believe,
wait and speak for God, though the success and event answer not his duties
or desires, a good heart is laden with the very burden of duty, and finds ease
when it is sincerely discharged, let the issue be as it will.

4. Independent upon, and unrespective unto the eye and account of men, and
that, 1. Though equals interessed as well as he do desert him, as the ten did
Caleb and Joshua. 2. Though the people misconstrue him, as these did them; he
that walks by men's countenance or eye, steeres by a Planet, and not the
Pole Star.

2. To fulfill after the Lord when impediments lie in our way, and cross winds
carry us from the Port, is,

1. To reckon upon God with us, against all mountains of opposition, so Caleb,
The Lord is with us, fear them not. Thus the Prophet animated his man being in
fear, and Hezekiah his Subjects, There be more with us then with him, yet had
he none but 2 King 6. 16. 2. Chro. 32. 7.
God to reckon on, and the Assyrian had a hundred fourscore and five thousand
at least; such is this God of ours, who says, Shall I bring to the birth, and
not cause to bring forth, Isa. 66. 9. who promises Jacob the worm, that he
shall be his instrument to thrash mountains to dust, Isa 41. 14, 15. and what
comparison between a worm and a mountain; what other reason is given of the
breaking in pieces of all confederacies and associations against the Church,
but only this, For Immanuel, Isa 8. 10. and it might teach all the world, to
say when they set against God, si collidimus frangimur, as the earthen pot
against the iron rod breaks not the iron, but is it self broken.

2. To stand firm, by setting one foot upon the experiences we have had of
God, and the other upon his promises yet in expectation; for our experience of
him, we may argue from his opening of the red Sea, to his opening of Jordan. He
that opened the Sea to bring us into this wilderness, will surely open a River
to let us out. And for his promises to his people, they will eat their way
over all Alps of opposition, God will be the midwife of them to deliver them
of their womb, as it is said, He has fulfilled with his hands, that which he
spoke with his mouth. 2 Chr. 6. 4.


3. To fulfill after the Lord, being in encumbrances inward, outward, is,

1. When a man prefers not a quiet Egypt, before a troublesome and hazardous
adventure upon the Land promised; He will never repent of his choice of God,
nor of his engagements to his cause, though he suffer for it, and lose by it,
he will never say, would God I had died in Egypt, nor sound for a parley with
the world and sin, nor sound a retreat to his heart, to march away from the
cause or work of the Lord.

2. When we misconster not Gods intention and meaning toward us, nor put a
false gloss upon his hand that goes forth against us, like these
rotten-hearted Israelites, that cried God would betray them; it is hard when
his covenant, truth and love, cannot vindicate him from all possibility of
falsehood toward us, or forgetfullnesse of us. Keep up good thoughts of God;
that if he bring us not into Canaan at the fore-doore, yet after he has led us
about to humble our pride, he will bring us in at the posterne, as he did this
people; and if he save not Jonah by the Mariners, he may save him by the Whale
that swallows him.

3. The third thing is, why his people should fulfill after the Lord; in which
I will be brief, for Eliah his reason is enough, If the Lord be God follow 1
King. 18. 21.
him, for all attractives are in him, all remuneratives, all restoratives, and
he expects it of his people, commends it in them, and rewards it to them: He
expects it, I know Abraham says God, that he will do so and so: He commends
it, as here he does Caleb, he followed me fully: He rewards it, as here he
promises, and afterward performed to Caleb, and generally they that follow the
Lord home.

1. Shall see more of him. 2. Receive more from him.
1. They shall see and taste more of him, for then shall we know the Lord, if
we follow on to know him, Hose. 6. 3. we shall see him in oftener experiments,
and observe the curiosity of his contrivements and workmanship in his ways,
and that is one reason why he crumbles his mercies to his people, and why they
have his blessings by retaile, that communion and trading between his people
and himself may be maintained, and he more sweetly enjoyed: so the cloud
empries not it self at a sudden burst, but distills and dissolves upon the
earth drop after drop.

2. They shall receive more from him; he measures liberally back to them that
meet liberally unto him: They that will have their fill of God, must hold on
to the loose of a duty or suffering, for usually he reserves the best and
fullest cup to the last; we know what Saul lost by not holding out one moment
longer, his men melted from him, the enemy was strong and near, and himself
had stayed almost to the end, yet for want of a minute, he lost by it, 1 Samuel
13. 13. Thou have done foolishly, for now would the Lord have established thy
Kingdom for ever; we know not what we lose by making haste, and not holding
up our hands as Moses did, to the going down of the Sun.

For the Use or Application of this Point,

Israelites, who, whether out of neutrality or malignity, fulfill not after the
Lord, being either purely privative in respect of this duty, or positively
disaffected, of these we have infinite, and of diverse principles, It Is strange,
that men should be no more sensible of the sin of lukewarmenesse, but that
our Savior gives a double reason of it. 1. That they are not stone cold, that
is, not so vicious or profane as others, for there are not so many degrees of
cold in the lukewarm as in the cold water; but they should consider that the
lukewarm are more offensive to Christ's stomach, and can less be borne by it.
2. That lukewarmenesse is attended with self-conceit and security, thou say
I am rich and have need of nothing, but this Rev. 3. 17.
security arises out of selfe-ignorance, by which key whosoever is locked up,
they lie fast. I shall not so much discuss the sin, as the principles whence
such indifferency toward, or malignity against God and his ways does flow. As,

1. Some are indisposed merely out of a stupid carelessness, lying asleep in
the side of our tossed Ship in this great storm, foulded fast up in blindness
and security, as blankes in a Lottery, and they are but white paper, having
nothing written on them; such as these, like Samaritans are a kin to the Jews
when the Jews prosper, and disclaim kindred when they go down, being ready
to contribute their eare-rings neither to golden Calfe nor Tabernacle; or happily
indifferently to both, I mean Popery and purity are to them alike; And such is
the case for most part of such poor souls among whom there has been no
vision, their Idol shepherds having made their people Idols like themselves;
not seeing, not hearing, not having any spiritual sense; nor are they much the
better who have had some rare Sermons, most what about Orders and Ceremonies,
and such extrinsecalls, which have proved as a thrum left in the loomes, to
which our crafts masters might more easily tie in their new piece, and if in no
other, yet in this respect, deserve castigation; because they have so taken up
Pulpits, Pens and Tongues, as to commit wast of precious time, of affections
between brother and brother, and even of the substance of practick godliness,
which has suffered by such diversion; nor yet are they more awakend, whose
Preachers have been but Ethick Lecturers reading morality, whose Ministry has
not been first a fiery Serpent to sting the conscience (for Gods witnesses are
called tormentors of the inhabitants of the earth) and then a pole to hold up
Rev. 11. 10.
the brazen Serpent to the wounded.

2. Some are indisposed to this duty of fulfilling after the Lord, out of
policy, and that is either policy of safety or of temperament.

1. Of safety, as a reed in the stream, which stands because it yields to the
tide and ebb, and bends the same way as the stream runs; the wisdom of these
men (as they call it) makes them stand as spectators upon the shore, while the
Ship is tossed at Sea, applauding themselves alone to have hit the right blot,
and censuring all others that endanger themselves for the Truth; If there be
deliverance they shall have part in the benefit without their care, cost or
trouble, and have share in the winnings though they have nothing at stake: but
put case a man is not agreed in hac hypothesi, that such or such a cause is
Gods, and therefore cannot lay out himself in it, or suffer for it. I answer,
when men are indisposed toward a duty they can easily plead in Bar, every
lesser scruple, or haesitancy of mind, which if they might forbid the action,
notwithstanding more preponderating arguments, melancholy and Satan would have
us at such a pass, as we should do little or nothing; as it is a sinful
thing to ravish the judgment, to go without, or against the dictate of it; so
it is dangerous to enslave it to base fears, interests, lusts; the heart is
not more fraudulent than in seeking conviction, being like a Clyent instructing
his Council, and laying open all that favors him, concealing the strength of
what may be said against him, and when a rotten heart is pitched upon a verdict
like a partial and engaged ^ury, it will hold to it, let the evidence be what
it will, resolving to elude the evidence and not see it. And if inconviction of
judgment, was but enough to free a man from the finne of not doing a duty, a
man might the better rest in it; but since it is not, let every man labor to
avoid that perplexity of sinning, if he perform, and of sinning, if he
perform not, and to that purpose, not only search the Word of God, but purge
his heart from the false byas; nor only praying, but praying for practicke
ends, He that will do shall know: and let not the common sense and concurrent
judgment of those that truliest Ioh. 7. 17.
fear God be utterly slighted as inconsiderable, for though that be no rule
determining my act, yet it is a strong motive of my more diligent inquiry. I
conclude with that of our Savior, He that will save his life shall loose it.
It is a man's perdition to be safe, when he ought to perish for God.

2. Of temperament, I mean sinful, such as are they that cry, Divide the
living child, or can be content to make a mixture, like the transplanted
Nations, 2 King. 17. (...) Who feared the Lord and served their graven Images.
If there be any that can go so low as to give toleration to Popery (though now
the Papists put themselves into such a posture as they seem to threaten to
give, rather then take) let him consider that we have been too liberal in
connivence that way already, and is it not therefore that war is in our
gates; The setting up of Reubens altar had presently stirred up war against
them, if the misprision had not been cleared, that no Religion was therein
intruded; and what say the messengers Judge. 5. 8.
of the Tribes, sent upon the embassy, Rebel not against the Lord nor against
us, Josh. 22. 19. We shall smart for it if you do it. Let their Popery and
our Popishnesse go forth at once for ever: and so I would close this point,
but that having named the word Temperament, I would not be mistaken, as if I
meant to blow the fire which needs no bellows, flaming already out at the
housetop, to which every good man should bring water and not oil. For love
peace, says the Scripture, yea seek it when it is wanting to you, yea and
follow it when it is flying from you; but yet withal the same Scripture
couples peace and truth: peace and holiness in our loving, seeking and
following, for we shall have a dear bargain of it, if we sell truth to buy it,
and therefore we must not play booty with one another, to rise winners, and God
who has greatest interest to be the looser. We should be happy in such
Treaeies, as might not prove a Trojan-horse unto us; and which might heal us
to the bottom, and not skin us over. And for him that delights in blood, let
satiate sanguine be his burden.

3. Some are indisposed to this duty out of fear, as

1. Fear to be engaged, standing with one foot within, and another without the
threshold, looking back-ward and forward, afraid of every new step, saying as
Caesar at Rubicon, yet we may go back, and of such men there can be no
certainty; for as it is said of those that followed Saul, they trembled after
him, 1 Samuel 13. 7. and the next news of them is that they were scattered from
him, verse. 11. So is it here.

2. Fear of loss by the Reformation, and such is every Demetrius, whose Trade
goes down by it; and therefore no wonder if all the Crafts-men cry up their
Diana; there is but little more reason for ingrossers of dignities and livings
in the Church, then for Monopolists in the State, yet let not that Ox his
mouth be muzzled that treads out the corn: If our Churches be made golden
Candlesticks, let not candle-rushes be set up in them: If our Ministers be
Angels, they must have wings, and their feathers not so pluckt-off, as to
prevent their flying; there is no color of fear of this from a Senate of such
learning, Religion, and already declared resolution, for starve the Nurse, and
she must needs starve the Child; the bird that is to keep the nest and sit
upon the eggs, must have her meat brought in to her, and not fly abroad to
purvey for herself; nor makes this any thing against that freeness of
preaching the Gospel, which some in simplicity or worse do urge as
inconsistent with liberal maintenance; for even the Volunteer follows not the
war at his own charges. I say no more but this, that poor pittances and
mere benevolences, are but too like a prisoners maintenance, whose small
allowance, and almes-basket to boot, keep him still hungry.

3. Fear or hatred of the purity of Ordinances and power of Religion, of which
thousands will say, as they of Christ, Mal. 3. 2. But who may abide the day of
his coming, and who shall stand when he appears, for he is like a Refiners
fire and Fullers soap. This root bears gall and wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. unto
such the burning and shining light of the Ministry is terrible; and the more,
when they shall not be able at pleasure to hamper it in the old snare of
Ceremonies, or bring upon it the old extinguishers with that facility as was
wont; it is a mark of a Philistine, if the Ark of God smite him with Emerods
and afflicts him, it serves not the Israelites so.

4. A scrupulous fear of sinning against authority, and in truth the
tenderness of the conscience in that point is to be approved; for God has so
hedged in Magistracy, whether the supreme or subordinate, that 1 Pet. 2, 13,
14.
whosoever breaks through that hedge, shall feel the thorns in his sides,
and therefore conscience must acquit it self of it is warrant and sincerity,
that it seeks nothing but the saving of the Ship and Master from the violence
of the storm; and in that case that once speaking Ass said reason, who having
saved her self, yea and saved her Master from the Sword, against his own
will, did thus plead against his anger, What have I done unto thee, that thou
Number. 22. 28, 30.
have smitten me, was I ever wont to do so before time.

Let this point help forward our Humiliation this Ezekiel. 14 21.
may yet doubtless be cast out by Prayer and Fasting: nor shall I now at this
time set in order before you our former National sins, for which God has
been a Moth unto us, and is now become a Lion; for from so small a thing as a
Moth, does he threaten to be a Lion unto Ephraim, Hos. 5. 12. etc. Let us
rather apply our selves to take notice of such marks of Gods displeasure as
are now upon us, since we came to the borders of our happiness, and observe
the reason why we are wafted from the shore so far into the maine back
again. When was the venom spirits of men so discovered as now of latter
times, When I would have healed Israel, the sin of Ephraim was discovered,
Hos. 7. 1. Healing times are discovering times; and have we not cause to look
for that in Joshua 24. 20. namely that the Lord should turn to do us hurt,
and consume us after he has done us good; or for that in Numb. 14. 34. Ye
shall know my breach of promise; Our Arc is like Noah's floating upon the
waters. We have many that are weeping for Tammuz, thirsting Ezekiel. 8. 14.
for the return of their Adonis, we have bitter murmurings and eructations of
gall against God and his Truth, we fear our remedies; we are full of
divisions, sinful, paenall in Church and State. We abound in jealousies, a
just punishment of our provoking God to jealousy of us by our former
dalliances with superstition. We arc discouraged because of the way, and
speak against God and Moses, Numb. 21. 4, 5. and therefore has the Lord sent
fiery Serpents amongst us, that bite us and even devour us, Religion is torn
into divisions and fragments, the swarm is up and settles in so many places, as
without great mercy, they will never be got into one hive; such symptoms do
we put forth now that God is healing of us, and are come to such a crisis as
makes our hearts to bleed, what is there in Ireland? what in England, but pila
minantia pilis? quis talia fando? What monster of cruelty can endure to see his
Mothers bowels so tipped up. Where are our public spirits remote from mixture
of private ends? What Soldier is willing to forget his a^ream messem, or
golden harvest, and rather be bankrupt by peace, then make the State bankerupt
by war? What Delinquent rather offers up himself to Trial, and Iona. 1. 12
says, Take me up and cast me forth into the Sea, so shall the Sea be calm
unto you? Surely God will ferch our pride out of us by strong hand, if we take
not off the head of it, and cast it over the wall, to prevent his indignation;
and yet we have mavelous mercies too, if we had eyes to see them. God has
evidently shown that he is in our burning-bush, we had otherwise been in ashes
by this time, and so we are like the flint between the hard hammer and the
sost pillow, and have cause of the best kind of humiliation, which is to love
and weep, as that woman did: if we be not battered into the mould, why are we
not melted, that we may run into it? and let these humiliations be continued
in their vigor, that frequency beget not formality; for the valley of Ach^^
Hos. 2 15. Use 3.
is given to us for a door of hope.

Let it set an edge upon you to fulfill after the Lord.

1. When he goes before you, that is, (...). 2. When he flies from you, that
is, (...).
1. When the Lord goes before you and invites you yet after him, by making the
tracke of his feet evident; we must not sit still, when his Cloud arises to
move forward, it is safe to march after it: and surely if God be to be seen. 1.
In nickes of time, Tanquam a machina. 2. In working or creating good out of
evil, hope out of despair, furtherances out of oppositions, etc. 3. In
seasonable discoveries of Clouds, while they were but like a man's hand. 4. In
ministering or suggesting timely antidotes or preventions. 5. In entangling the
Spiders in their own webb, or bringing down enemies by their own hands. 6.
In drawing hopeful blessings on, upon their way above our first thoughts or
aim, as he drew on Luther, whetted by importunity of Adversaries; then is God
gone out before us, we may see his foot-stepps in all these ways, therefore
follow him.

2. When he flies from you, yet then follow him fully: Does he hide his face,
delay to hear, lengthen our danger, are things in worse state with us since
Moses came? are Treaties abortive, Fasts imprevalent? etc. let us not turn
back and say, This evil is from the Lord, why should we wait upon him any
longer? There is reason that God should be sharp, we have inveterate stains
to be washed out, which will hardly be got out, until the cloth be almost rubbed
to pieces: Christ came with a shaking of the Heavens and Earth, and all the
Nations, Hag. 6. 7. after such concussions, The desire of all Nations shall
come; nor did Christ rise out of his grave without an Earthquake, cum
duplicantur lateres venit Moses; for how could mercies be wonders, if straits
were not wondrous; though obstructions be obstinate, yet Christ will come in to
his people, even when the doors are shut: presently after Marahs bitter
waters, God brought Israel to Elim, where they had twelve wels of water, and
threescore and ten Palme-trees, Exodus 15. 27. God hides himself to be sought,
delayeth to be importuned, flies from us to be followed.

I will add but a word or two of encouragement.

1. To all. 2. To you our Honorable Senators.
1. That which I shall say to all is this, that if we fulfill after the Lord,
we shall cut shorter our travailes and troubles: so had this people done if
they had followed the Lord fully at this time, we lengthen our miseries by
shortening of our duties, and the Lord keeps aloof from us, because we lie
aloof from him: God is disabled from doing great works among us by out
distrust, He could do no great works among them, because of their unbelief,
says the Text: Or admit we be long holden off our happiness, as Caleh was
kept out of his promises fill our laps at the last; the longer day God takes to
make payment, the more he gives us at the last. If he come not to heal Lazarus
while he is alive, we shall lose nothing by it, for he will come to raise him
when he is dead; therefore let us follow him fully, both by prayer, and all
possible contributions to his work, and cause, and Gospel; what if we have
not an eare-ring left, so that the Tabernacle have it: water we see puts it
self to extremities, and contrary to particular nature, rises upward ad
prohibendum vacuum, to prevent a fraction in the universe; who is likely to
save his own cabin, when the Ship founders; but it may be the work sticks,
and it may be at thee, why is not thy shoulder at the wheel, when the Cart is
stalled; though Israel stick at first in Egypt, yet they went out at length
with the Egyptians leave, and not a dog (as Exo. 11. 7
the Text says) moved his tongue against them.

2. To you of Senatorian order, be you encouraged to follow the Lord fully, and
let not the Luminaries of the highest Orb be slowest of motion, you have need
of encouragements, that you may scatter the obloquies, the scandalls,
suspicions, jealousies had of you, and endure the contradiction of such as are
afraid to be healed: In the Universities they complain their muses lie a
dying, O let it never be by or under your hand, but only teach them as of old
they were feigned, so now really to frequent and be mistresses of purer
fountains: Some cry out that Religion will be changed, and that there will be
an alteration thereof; If this Objection arise from this, that the ceremonies
and usages hitherto offensive and burdensome, are likely to be abolisht, what
can be said more against them; for is it not time to cast them out, the rather,
because they are accounted such immoveables, that to remove them, is to commit
waste upon the very freehold it self. It Is time to break the brazen Serpent,
and to call it Nehushtan, a piece of brass, when it is idolized; or if rather
the quarrel arise from that pure administration of Ordinances of worship which
is desired, is it not as void of reason; for shall perfective alterations be
accounted destructive, does the changing of the Tabernacle into a Temple,
wherein are ten Candlesticks for one and more setlednesse and beauty, imply any
change of Religion? Others find out as many Religions as we have Articles of
Doctrine, nine and thirty, and upbraide us with Sects and Schisms, etc. which
truly are our misery, and fill us with scandalls, shame and sorrow; yet this I
may say, that if every several or new opinion, makes a new Religion, then we
have more then so many: If not, then doubtless we have fewer; but whatsoever
it be, it is but a fond thing to say there will be no building, because the
timber, stone, materials lie yet in confused heaps. I beseech you to set on
work hewers in the Mountains, and stone-squarers, to prepare 1 Kin. 5. 15, 18.
timber and stones to build the Temple, that our Jerusalem may at length be a
City compact together, and at unity in it self. And as for all aspersions and
reflections upon you, follow the Lord fully; and as the ecclipsed Moon by
keeping her motion, wades out of the shadow, and recovers her splendour, so
shall you, For every tongue that shall rise in judgment Isa 54. 17
against thee thou shall condemn, and this is the heritage of the servants of
the Lord.

For the confirming of you in following after the Lord, I might put you in
mind, what Gods people have done for God in pressing extremities. namely,

1. Doing that which saving the pressing case, it might be questioned whether
they ought; an instance whereof we have in Phinehas, Numb. 25. 13. who by an
act of zeal, turned away the near approaching wrath from Israel, and made an
atonement for them, by such a sacrifice as it is doubted by what warrant he
offered it up, I mean the execution of Delinquents, and yet is justified and
highly extolled by God for it. And so Esther, in a time of extremity, put
herself to do that* which was not according Esth. 4. 16
to the Law, to draw forth her people out of destined destruction; nor do I
know how she could have answered it to God, if her particular observation of
that humane Law, had forbidden her therescue and preservation of a whole Nation
of Gods people, and yet the Law she broke was capital, as she says, Ver.
11th. and therefore she goes on with this resolution, If I perish I perish;
whereby it appears, she could in this case have comfortably perished in the
breach of that known Law.

2. Standing to it, so as it might be questioned whether it was needful, and
it is the case of Daniel, Cap. 6. 10. whose keeping his thrice a day devotions,
and opening his windows toward Jerusalem, not abating of the number of his
prayers, nor performing them in a more concealed manner, to have avoided the
malice of his accusers for one Months time (for no longer was the Interdict to
last) may seem more then needs; yet he did not budge a ^ot, nor abate a
circumstance, because he saw his Religion was stricken at, and his sincerity
put to the trial, which he was resolved to maintain with (as I may so speak)
a holy obstinacy, whatsoever came on it. I do not urge these examples, to
precipitate any man unto rashness, especially in cases not thus
circumstanciated, but to show how fully they went after the Lord, in that
wherein carnal wisdom might and would have found sundry specious elusions to
have evaded the duty.

I shall resume the exhortation in a few words, as touching your advancing and
settling Gods interest, and then he will settle yours; He took out of all the
Cities (says the Text) the high places and Images, 2 Chro. 14 5.
and the Kingdom was quiet before him: If you will build God a house, he will
make you an house; as it was said to David, labor ye therefore to set up the
evangelicall worship and regiment of Christ, so as there may not be one
howbeit, if possible, as there was in that of Asa, Howbeit the high places were
not 2 Chro. 20 3^.
taken away; which work we shall bring to best perfection, if we adhere to the
word of God, and print after such an original as went before all editions of
error: not that I would tie any man to such examples, customs, constitutions
of the word, as were merely occasional in their both rise and use, and
respective to times then being, for what would that differ from a superstitious
valuing of the brazen Serpent, after the use of it was out, because it once had
institution of God; but of this point no more now: My business is, to excite
you to follow the Cloud, and the Rock shall follow you; let seedsmen be sent
forth into all our fields, that the people may be taken by the conscience, and
not only conformed by Law, for the strength and continuance of a reformation,
lies not all in the Magistrate, but in this, that the people receive the truth
into them and among them, who otherwise will be but as Hens in a coope, always
boaking to get out: which was the reason that they were so up and down in
Judah, according as they had remiss or religious Princes; and by this means
also shall Popery be profligate, and Papists converted a little better, then
merely by oath of supremacy and allegiance, which breed such a generation as
is contrary to rule of Philosophy, which is, Generatio unius est corruption
alterius, whereas these new Protestants are Papists still.

Finally, If there be some cross springs in the lock, some prophecy may lie
against our present hopes, for God has his arcana Imperij; or if necessity of
times, unripenesse of the people, shall retard the work, so as it shall be
said, so many years was this Temple in building, yet I say to you as the Lord
to David, 2 Chro. 6. 8. Thou did well that it was in thine heart: and let but
a right spirit (namely a spirit of adherence unto, and acquiessence in God)
carry you on to fulfill after him, and then, though Caleb through the peoples
rebellion, wander in the wilderness forty years, and be kept off his promised
reward; yet he shall come into possession thereof at last, and his seed shall
inherit it, and so I should come to that which remains in the words, as
namely, That

To follow the Lord fully proceeds from another spirit, than the unbeleeving
Israelites are acted withal: and this spirit of Caleb was clearly that which
the Apostle calls a spirit of Faith, in closing with, and cleaving unto God
alone. I cannot particularly handle this point, only be bold to cast in a word
or two toward the setting of the byas right way, else a man may run and never
obaine. If we would have the hand of the dyall to point and go right without,
the wheels and poyses must be right within, and we must not only look at
the work we have to do, but also to the principle within us, that it be a
right spirit, for there is no question but that a man of no filial disposition
toward God, may be Gods tool or instrument, or (if ye will) Gods servant, to
perform such or such a service right in Gods sight, I shall not need to show
how far a man may go, and what adventure he may make in a good cause upon
other reasons, principles and motives than proceed from a Gospel spirit; Cyrus
proclaims liberty to the Church, 2 Chro. 36. ^2. yet was he a man that knew
not the Lord. I doubt not but a Protestant upon a dogmaticall Faith or belief
of his tenets and principles, might among Papists dye upon them, and yet come
far short of salvation; how far would the name of Abraham or Moses have
carried a Jew, even a Jew in letter? Martyrdom is no merit.

Let every man therefore take heed to his spirit that Mal. 2. 16.
he deal not treacherously, for howsoever your good service perishes not to
the Church or Commonwealth, yet it perishes to you, if you be not carried with
hearts full of God. Many a man is a Carpenter to build Noah an Arc, wherein
himself is not saved. There are many rest in their mere opposition to, and
hate of Popery, as if that should seal up their salvation; and many again
will reason thus, The cause wherein I am is good, it will swim out it is gods,
and that is their plea. Alas this is not all, for be the Protestant truth never
so clear to thee, and be the cause thou art in never so good, yet thou may
be lost in it, as the Egyptians were lost while they went in the same path,
wherein the Israelites were saved; therefore pray and seek for such a spirit
of choosing and following the Lord thy God, as may ensoule thy actions or
outward works; and then beside the acceptance and testimony thy ways shall
find with God, thou shall be able to go through, and fulfill after the Lord,
which a man upon natural parts, and strength of moral principles or virtues,
shall never do, for youths shall faint and be weary, and young m^n shall
utterly fall, Isa. 40. 30. that is, men of most able selfe-sufficiencies, who
though their motion was swift before, yet when they come to the center of their
own ends, they rest and proceed no farther; such a spirit therefore as Caleb
had, do you restlesly seek of God the giver of it to them that ask him, that
being sincerely carried, (which* in great and glorious actions is the more
hard) you may reap the Euge of your own conscience, which is better then the
Hic est of all the world; and not only so, but there will be more hope of the
work when it is carried on by such hearts; as God said of David, he was a man
after his own heart, and what follows, He shall fulfill all my will, Act. 13.
22. And of Hezekiah it is said, that in every work that he began in the
service of the house of God, and in the Law, and in the Commandments, to seek
his God, he did it with 2 Chronicles, 31. 21.
all his heart, and prospered; such hearts, such success we pray to them that
are now engaged in this great work, that so promises with the entayle of them
upon Posterity may follow such Calebs for ever.

FINIS.

