A COMPEND OF CHRONOGRAPHY: Containing Four thousand thirty years complet, from
Adams Creation to Christ's Birth. As an Harbinger to two larger Tomes, in pawn
of the Authors promiss: which he intends to perform, if God shall permit.

Tempus edax Rerum: quae Tempus edit mala Res est.
Time al things does devour or spil:
The thing which time mispends is il.
By ROB. VILVAIN of Excester.

Price at Press 3 d.

LONDON, Printed by R. Hodgkinsonne (for the Author) and are to be sold at his
House in Thames street, near Baynards Castle An. Dom. 1654.

A Prefatiuncle.
CHronography is a new term, and the exact examen of Times from the beginning
to Christ's birth an unusual thing: but both very proper or pertinent to imply
the Authors intentions. Which having succinctly signified, shall suffice to giv
a little glimps of light, in the dark crooked corners of this intricat
Labyrinth: enough to lead the wandering steps of Novice Chronologers in a right
course. Adieu.

CHRONOGRAPHY.
CHRONOLOGY is a collation or Definitions.
coordination of things done in time, or applied thereto: of which kind are many
learned works every where extant. Chronography a discussion or disquisition of
Times themselfs: which are severaly stated by some in certain peecemeal parcels,
but by none entirely together.

Times (to omit Philosophers Physical partition into past, Preamble.
present, future) are diversely divided: 1. With Astronomers into years (Solar
and Lunar) months (of Peragration in 27. dais 8. hours, wherein the Moon runs
her race through the Zodiac; constitution in 28. dais or 4. weeks, ordained for
Men's affairs, and Consecution in 29. dais, 12. hours 44. minutes, wherein the
Moon at Conjuction overtakes the Sun) weeks (Diarian of 7. natural dais, and
Annarian of 7. Solar years) dais (natural of 24. equal hours, and Artificial of
12. unequal from Sunrising to setting) hours (Equinoctial of 60. minutes, and
unequal according to the dimensions of Artificial dais) minutes 60. in an hour,
and secunds or sections 60. in a minut: which is not so pertinent to this
purpose. 2. With the Apostles into times of old (reaching from the Creation to
Christ's coming) and the last dais extending to the Worlds end: which large
exception suits not with this intention. 3. With Rabbi Elias into 3.
Dischiliads; that as the World was made in 6. dais, so it shall dure 6000.
years; Because one 2 Pet. 3. 8. Ps 90. 4.
day with the Lord is as 1000. years: viz. 2000. before the Law of Circumcision
commenced in Abraham, caled void because few Kingdoms were erected, and the
Earth thinly Peopled: 2000. under it, which Christ fulfilled in the flesh and
finished: 2000. under the Messiah or Gospel, which none can prescribe or
prefine: but this distribution is too gross and untru. 4. With learned Varro
into Classic spaces: viz. from the Worlds origin to Ogyges Flood, which he calls
Adyla, uncertain, or dubious: from thence to the Olympiads styled mythica, or
fabulous: and the rest downward to al ages, caled historical, fiducious, or
veracious: but this rather respects the quality then quantity of time. 5. With
the Fathers and Divines into several Ages grounded on set periods in sacred
Scripture; with some sort into six, some into seven sections according to the
dais of Creation, suting best with my occasion: but this design from the
Creation to Christ's birth shall be branched into ten such Stages or Stations:
trahit sua quemque voluntas. For every Man abounds in his own sens, and
proponeth a method most complacently consonant to his own phansy or project.

The first Stage from Adams creation to the Floods inchoation 1 Stage includs
1656. Genesis chapter 7. and 8.
contains 1656 Solar years (as appeers in the continuance thereof so many months
and dais, as make up an entire year) not Lunar, of 30 dais only, as some
sensl^sly suppose; for no Nation ever used such sav the old Egyptians, nor they
in Civil matters (as Censorinus avers) but their Priests in sacred mysticals,
to amplify a belief of their antiquity among credulous People. This period is
proved by the Protopatriarchs generation of Sons: For Adam lived 130. full out
(so it is meant of Gen* 5 per totum.
all the rest) and begot Seth: he at 105. Enos: he at 90. Cainan: he at 70.
Mahalaleel: he at 65. Jared: he at 162. Enoch: he at 65. Michuselah: he at 187.
Lamech: he at 182. Noah: he at 600. entered the Arc: in all 1656. The 72. Elders
styled septuagints (or happily their Scribes) exceed the said sum 706. years
after the Greec Translation, or 586. in the Latin; which palpably prevaricats
from Moses Hebrew Prototype: yet most Ancients follow them as reverend holy Men;
but the Man of God must be preferred to a million of Godly Men.

He that will be Truths Champion in Chronical compute, tho a despicable Dwarf;
may not yield an inch to the greatest Giant: no not in a difference of one
years dimension. Joseph Scaliger was singularly skild in most Sciences, but
self weening (as best wits are) and subject to errors. In points of
Chronography, he is rather a troubler then amender of accounts, as Salianus
styles him: who to seem curious or censorious in mites, contests about one year
(as Henry Hotspur with Owen Glendower about Trents torted turnings, in their
imaginary sortition or sharing of England) that the Flood began A 1657.
current, because it is said, Noah was 600 complet, Gen 7 6.
when the waters were on the Earth: yet the very words plainly purport the
being, not beginning of that Deluge: yea it is after cleared, that in the 600.
current of his life, the fountains Ibid v. 11.
of the great Deep broke up: So the places are easily reconciled, tho one
mistaken. Indeed the Fathers are said to live, so many years (meaning complet)
and beget Children, which Chronologers interpret of their Births: and happily the
fractions which they lived longer, may somewhat exced the said sum. For the holy
Ghost is not scrupulous in such scantlings; which being uncertain, we must
reckon no more nor less then is expressed in the Genealogy. Some stiffly striv
that al were born just at the years end; which is most improbable, that al
should be born on the 6. day as Adam was created: and so let it pass for an
inconsiderable trifle scarsly to be conceived or credited. For the od overplus
of months or dais, may more safely be omitted or excluded, and the precise sum
of 1656. years indubitably received.

The secund from Noah's Flood to Abrams Birth includs 2 Stage 353.
353. years, asserted by the Postpatriarchs begetting of Sons: For the Deluge
dured one year, and Sem begot Arphaxad two Gen 8. 13. Genesis 11. 10.
years after it ended: he Salah at 35.: he Eber at 30. he Peleg at 34.: he Reu
at 30.: he Sarug at 32.: he Nahor at 36.: he Terah at 29.: he Abram at 130.: in all 353. The seventy translators or their transcribers, not only ad 700. years
to 7. of those Patriarchs: but insert one Cainan Arphaxads supposed Son (happily
misprised or misplaced for Enos Son. Grandson to Adam) giving him 130. years
yer he begot Salah: but Moses mentions no such Man, nor do the Chronicles name
1 Chr. 1. 18. Luke 3. 36.
him. St. Luke (whose transcribers follow the septuagints) cites him, yet happily
not the Original: for neither Philo, nor Josephus, nor St. Jerome or any of the
Ancients writing on his Genealogy, take notice of Cainan in the seventy or
Evangelist: therefore it is probable that both are vitiated since their times.
Yea Beza says Cainan is cashired in an old Manuscript of his: yet did il to
omit him in his translation, being generaly received in all Copies. Howbeit since
Moses and the Chronicles exclude him, he may not be included in sacred
Chronology. For if Moses lost him, where did the 70. find him, who had al their
light from him, being but his Torch-bearers or Translators?

Salianus says Moses suppressed him to make the Patriarchs two Decads (before
and after the Flood) equal: as St. Matthew omits three Kings of Juda, to keep
his Tessera Decad of fourten Generations entire. See the Man's wit: Matthew and
Luke intended Genealogy, wherein it matters little to cut off some links of the
Chain, so the succession be kept sound: but Moses Chronology, which would be
utterly uncertain, if any one generation be conceled. St. Matthew names the
number of Mat. 1. 17.
fourten; but Moses calls them not Patriarchs, nor casts them into Decads, as he
does the divine Decalog: nay he that looks aright, shall see eleven in the first
Age (inroling Sem the first born) and but 9 in the last: nor can any reason be
rendered to transpose Sem into the later Decad, sav that it so pleased the
Painter.

A greater rub results, at what age Terah begot Abram: because it is said, He
lived seventy years, and begot Abram, Nahor, Genesis 11. 26.
and Haran, viz. the eldest of them; which many misdeem to be Abram, because
first named. So is Sem in Noah's Offspring: Genesis 5. 32.
but both for their personal dignity being Stock-fathers to Christ, and series
of the History intended by Moses: yet Japhet and Haran indubitatly eldest
though last named. For Haran came of Terahs first wife, who was father to Loc,
Sarai, and Genesis 20 12.
Milcah; as appeers by Abrams answer to Abimelech, That Sarai was his Sister or
Niece, being Daughter (i. Grandaughter) of his Father, but not of his Mother:
For he and Nahor married their half Brothers daughters. This is the stone whereat
Chronologers stumble, cutting off (Atropos like) 60 years of the Worlds age:
but a short Enthymem shall soon remov it.

Terah died at 205, when Abram was but 75: Ergo he was 130 at Abrams birth; for
75 and 130 make 205: Quid brevius, vel quid certius esse potest? The proof is
irrefragable and indeniable; but the shifts devised to delud or disguise it
sottish and senseless: for if Abram was begot at Terahs age of 70, then Gen 11.
31. Genesis 12. 4. What briefer proof can be Or surer to agree?
was he 135 at his death: if so, then was he in Canaan and Egypt, overcam the
four Kings, had Ismael and Isaac his Sons, with many mo acts mentioned from
Genesis 11 to 22; wherein Moses should be most preposterous to set Terahs death 60
years before it befell, and record such gests after it as were done in his life
time. To elude or evade this evidence, Scaliger and his Sectators fain two
Journies into Canaan; one of Abram at 75, in Terahs time; another of Abraham
(when his name was changed) at 135, after his death. This is vented or invented
gratis without grounds, and flatly repugns St. Stephans saying: he came out of
Chaldea to dwell at Charan, and when his Father Acts 7. 4.
was dead (never before) went into Canaan. How, or when did he return with a
numerous Family (beside al Cattle, Cariages, Genesis 22. 20.
and Lots company) into Charan? or why did one tell him as news, that Nahor had
a large ^ssu (Vz, Buz, and others) if he had bin so latly among them? Scaliger
brands and blames Annius as first brocher of this novity (which is a known
Verity) that Terah begot Abram at 130: who though a forger of some Fables,
speaks truth in this point; nor is he the Inventer of a novity, for Tertullian,
St. Austin and other Ancients held it.

Ob. He objects. That Abram admired how he should beget Gen 17. v 17.
a Son at 100 (which some do even in our dais) Ergo it is not credible, that
Terah begot him at 130 years.

Sol. His doubt rose from Sarais age of 90, because it ceased to Genesis 18 11.
be with her after the manner of Women; not from his own decrepit disability:
for he had sundry Sons by Keturah, after 140.

Ob. If Abram was not born at Terahs age of 70, there is no certainty of the
time for connection of sacred Chronology.

Sol. Yes, his age 75 at Terans death, who was 205, provs Genesis 11. 10.
him to be born at his Fathers age of 130: as Sems age is notified by his Son
Arphaxads birth; both obliquely, yer infallibly: that Sem was 100 years old 2
years after the Flood. Here al Note.
personal Calculation of Times by particular Patriarchs ages ceased, and other
guids or marks are set to comput by: as the Promised, Exodus, Temple, Reigns of
Kings, Captivity of Babylon, and profane Aera's or Epoches (the Olympiads and
Rome) which must be the future Chronical Cynosure, whereby to steer our Ship in
this surging Sea.

The third from Abrams birth to the Promised, is 75 years 3 Stage 75.
Genesis 12. 4. a plain pregnant place beyond al cavillation or contradiction: yet
St. Stephan says. God appeered to him in Acts 7. 2, 3, 4.
Chaldea, before he dwelt in Charan, bidding him go eat of his Country, and com
into the Land which he should show him. So the apparition and invitation or
injunction, was at Vr in Chaldea before he came to Charan: but the Promiss not
promulged til his age 75. when he began his peregrination into Canaan.

The fourth from the Promiss to the Exodus and Promulgation 4 Stage 430.
of the Law 430. Exodus 12. 40 Gal. 3. 17. particularized thus. Abram out lived
the Promiss 100. dying at 175. from his Gen 27 7. Gen 35. 28. Genesis 25. 26. Gen
47. 28 Gen 41. 46. Gen 45 6. Gen 47 28. Gen 50 26. Acts 7 23. 30
death to Isaacs 105. who was 75. when Abraham died, and lived 180. which 75.
and 105. make 180. from his death to Jacobs 27. for Isaac was 60. at Jacobs
birth, and dying at 180. his Son was 120. who lived 27. more, dying aged 147.
from Jacobs death to Joseph's 54. who was 39. when Jacob came into Egypt (viz.
30. when Pharaoh dreamed of the Kine, 7. years of plenty, and 2. of famine: and
Jacob lived there 17. So Joseph was 56. at his death, and lived after him 54. in all 110. from his death to Moses birth 64. which are not precisely pointed out
as the former; but must be shared between his Grandfather Coath and Father
Amram. From his birth to the Law 80. for he was 40. when he fled to Madian, and
40. more at the Exodus Exodus 7. v. 7. Gen 15. 13.
in all 80. which said sums (100. 105. 27. 54. 64. 80.) make 430. whereof 215.
before Jacobs journey into Egypt, and 25. after. One seeming scruple occurs,
that God said to Abram, Acts 7 6.
thy seed shall sojourn in a strange Land, and shall be il entreated 400. years:
which St. Stephan recites: Ergo not 430. some suppose it spoken of the total
peregrination from the Promiss to the Exodus complet 430. years: but the od 30.
omitted in Genesis and the Acts. This is a remedy wors then the malady, nor can
it conciliat the Texts: for God names the affliction and persecution of Abrams
Seed in a strange Land 400 years: which many begin at Isaacs birth, being heir
of the Promiss: but from it to the Law are 405. The most orthodox hold, That
Isaac being weaned at 5 years old, was mocked or il entreated Genesis 21. 8, 9.
by Ismael, which St. Paul calls Persecution, and there the Gal. 4 29.
400 commence: but however or whenever the Persecution of 400 is to begin,
which is a distinct account by it self; we must reckon the peregrination with
Moses and St. Paul from the Promiss to the Law full 430, which is infallible.

The fifth from the Exodus to founding the Temple, involvs 5 Stage 480.
480 specificated thus: Moses ruled in the Desert 40, dying at 120: Josua 17:
Othniel 40: Ehud 80: Debora 40: Gideon 40: 1 Kings 6. 1.
Abimilech 3: Tola 23: Jair 22: Jephte 6: Ibzan 7: Elon 10: Abdon 8: Samson 20:
Eli 40: Samuel and Saul complicat 40: Acts 7 36.
David 40: Solamon 4 current, when he began to build: in all 480. Al sav Josua
are literaly Texted: but his reign not expressed, yet evidently enough implied
by leaving him 17 of the 480, since the rest take 463. Josephus and Jo: Lucidus
giv him 25; Massius 26; Eusebius and St. Austin 27; Melancthon 32; Cajetan only
10: but he died at 110 as Joseph did, being 27 Jos. 24. 29.
years younger then Moses, ruling 17 complet (or 18 current) after him.

Diverse doubts emerge most difficil to assoil: for the Israelits Doubts.
suffered sundry servituds under several Oppressors: as under Cusan Richathaim
King of Armenia 8 years: Eglon King of Moab 18: Jabin King of Canaan 20: the
Medianits 7: the Philistines and Ammorits 18: again the Philistines 40: in all
111: which must be included in the Judges Regency, or else will so far exced the
said sum. After Samsons death diverse acts are recorded, and it is twice
ingeminated, in those dais there was no King in Israel: implying some inter-reign
or vacancy, to be reckoned in the Rule of Eli succeding, or else will exced the
Account. Nay though we swalow both those Gudgins in the gulf of Time under the
Judges years: yet one scruple pincheth sore. St. Paul says, God suffered their
manners in the Wilderness 40: afterward he Acts 13 18 etc.
gav them Judges about 450 to the time of Samuel the Prophet: then they desired
a King, and he gav them Saul (involving Samuel) 40 years: and at last raised up
David, etc. who reigned 40: which sums 40, 450, 40, 40, and Salomons 4.) make
574; being 94 abov the said 480: to which ad Josua's 17 not cited by S. Paul,
and it amounts to 111 beyond the other: which is the just sum of al those
servituds, seriously to be observed. To reconcile these pugnan^ places, is
impossible: but most Interpreters Imagine the prime Amanuenses or Transcribers
mistook 100 years, setting tetracosiois for triacosiois, 450 for 350; because
the Holy Ghost is not curious in Genealogy or Chronology: but some slips in such
trifles are tolerated, as St. Matthew for Euphony of thrice 14 Generations,
omits 3 Kings after Ahazaria (Joas, Ahazia, Vzzia) beside Queen Athalia: and
St. Luke superads Cainan not found in Moses Canon.

Such answers are aspersions on holy Writ: for if misprisions Censure.
may pass for plea, why may not it be presumed, that the sum 480 is 100 too
short? for if the 111 servile years be substituted to the Judges; yet Josua
might preside more then 17, and the Tribe of Juda and Simeon waged war with
Adonibezek, took Jerusalem and Hebron, with other exploits extant in the two
first Chapters of Judges; before God stirred up Othnie^. Yea Josephus records
the story of the ravished Levits Wife, as done in those dais, though transposed
per hysteron proteron as a by-busines; beside some Anarchies intimated after
Samsons death. How much time these things took, is not defined; but must be
shared among the Judges: else the sum will swel beyond bounds, which can allow but
40 to Samul and Saul jointly: yet St. Paul says, God gav them Saul 40: nor can
it seem much less; since he had sundry Sons valiant Warriers. So little is left
for Samuels sole Rule who came a Child to Eli, being dedicated to God before his
birth by his Mother, and ruled long, dying very aged. Indeed it appeers not,
how long Eli lived, yer Samuel succeeded, or how long he Judged yer Saul was
anointed: but the series of Story shows it to be no short space.

Laying aside these difficulties, the truth is, That the precited times of
Judges are 339: but St. Paul casting in the 111 of Servitud (as the Jews used,
whose account he folows) says 450: so his computation including those years, and
others excluding them materialy agree. This is a fairer justification of St.
Paul, then to correct him under color of Transcribers errors: for his sole
scope is to show, how God released his People from Bondage, ruling them by
Moses and Judges til Saul's time: and raised up our Lord Jesus out of David's
seed, to settle the Scepters succession: but intended no exact calculation of
Times, sav what was current among his Countrymen; whose Traditions he observes
often when he speaks to win them. However we must hold the 480 in the Book of
Kings (where it is purposly prescribed, and the month Zif cited) excluding those
111 of oppression, and not stick at every opposition.

The sixth from the Temples foundation to the Captivity of 6 Stage 431.
Babylon, complet 431 demonstrated thus: Solomon reigned after the building
began 36: Roboam 17: Abiam 3: Asa 41: Jehosaphat 25: Jehoram alone 4: Ahazia 1:
Athaliah 7: Joas 40: Amazia 29: Inter-reign 11: Azaria or Vzzia the Leper 52:
Jotham 16: Ezekiah 29: Manasses 55: Amon 2: Josias 31: Jehoaz 3 months:
Jehoiachim 11: Jehoiachin or Jeconiah 3 months: Zedechiah 11: in all 436, and 6
months: but Chronologers comput only 431. For Nativities are reckoned complet,
as one is said to be a year old at end thereof; but Reigns current, as Kings at
first day of inchoation call it the first year: So King James reigned 22 years
and 3 dais, which is caled 23 current. Now the whole time from Salomons fourth
year A. M. 2994 to Zedekiahs captivity A. M. 3425. is just 431, and no more.
The frequent fractions of Co-reigns, Inter-reigns, and Anarchies are handled by
Sir Walter Raleigh. Four Babylonish L. 2 C 22 11
Captivities are cited: 1 of Manasses by Merodach: 2 of Jehoichim and Daniel;
but neither of these controverted: 3 Of 2 Chr. 33. 11. 2 Chr 36 6^ 2 Kings 25. 8.
Jeconiah and Ezekiel: 4 Of Zedekiah and all the People; al three last by
Nebuchadonosor; but Zedekiahs the grand one Catexochen, where the 70 years
foretold by Jeremy commence in the ninetenth of Nebuchadnezar, when both City
and Temple were demolished. Many maintain (specialy Scaliger) That those years
begin at Ezekiels captivity, because he says, in the twenty fifth of our
Captivity, fourten years after the City was smiten: which infers that it began
11 before Jerusalems destruction. Indeed his did, but Jeremies 70 years
commenced at the final desolation, not 11 years before. St. Matthew says, Mat
1. 11. 12.
They were carried to Babylon in Jeconiahs time: this only provs it to be a
Captivity, but not that of 70 years. For Jeremy is most exact herin, deciding
the debate beyond al dispute. Behold, I will send all the families of the North
(says the Lord) and Jer. 25 9. etc.
Nebuchadnezer King of Babel: and will bring them against al Inhabitants of this
Land, and the Nations round about, and will destroy them, and make them an
astonishment or hissing, and a continual desolation. I will take from them the
voice of mirth and gladness, the voice of Bridegroom and Bride; the nois of
Milstones, and light of the Candle: and these Nations shall serve the King of
Babel 70 years; but after these 70 I will visit the King of Babel. So the 70
years begin not when this Prophecy was uttered, nor when Jehoiachim then
reigning was captived, nor in Jeremiahs time: but with the utter deluge or
devastation of City and Country. This is evidently evinced by the event, where
it is said: They burnt the house 2 Chr. 36. 19. etc.
of God and broke down the Wall of Jerusalem: and those left he carried Captiv to
Babel; who were servants to him and his Sons til the Persians had Rule; to
fulfill the Lords word spoken by Jeremy, til the Land had her fill of Sabbaths.
For all the days she lay desolat, she kept Sabbaths to fulfill 70 years: but in
the first of Cyrus, when Jeremies word was accomplished, God stirred up Cyrus
spirit, etc. Both places plainly prove, that they began at Zedekiahs grand
Captivity: Yea Daniel declares, That God would accomplish Dan 9. 2.
70 years in Jerusalems desolation: So though his own Captivity be reckoned
with Jehoiachims, and Ezekiels with Jeconiahs (the People accounting their own
severaly) yet the last Uuniversal of 70 years, began with the general
desolation of that Nation: therefore the Scaligerians (seem they never so acut
Lynces) begin it 11 years too soon, and abridg the Worlds age so much; as they
do 60 mo at Abrams birth.

The seventh from the Captivities commencement or inchoation 7 Stage 70.
to its accomplishment or solution, compriseth 70. years, warranted by Jeremies
prophecy: but to light a Candle in the Sun, it may be proved by the reigns of
3. Babylonish Kings, as Jeremy foretold, That al Nations shall serve him, his
Son, and Jer. 27. 7.
Sons Son, til the time of his Land com also, and then they shall serve themselfs
of him. Now tho it skils little, how the 70. years be sorted or shared among
them: yet most probably thus. Nabuchodonosor sacking Jerusalem in his 19.
reigned 25. more, in all 44. Evilmerodach 26. Balthazar 17. Darius Medus almost
2. which make 70. Then Cyrus in his first over al Asia (having reigned 23. in
Persia before) released the Jews to rebuild the Temple. Many advers Opinions
occur, chiefly Josephus and his numerous Sectists, who reckon 5. lineal
descents, Nabuchodonosor, Evilmerodach, Niglisar, Labosardach, Balthazar: but
others make the 3. last Brothers and Evilmerodachs Sons; which sounds nearer to
Jeremies words, yet untru. For Balthazar was his only Son and next successor.
Some make Evilmerodach and Balthazar Brethren, because Daniel calls Balthazar
Nebuchadnezers Son for Grandson, which is Dan 5 2.
usual in Scripture and al Eastern languages. As to Niglisar, he seems to be
Husband of Nicotris (another Semiramis) Nabuchodonosors Daughter, who ruled as
Regent part of his 7. years madness, when he ran wild among Beasts: and
Labosardoch their Son a short space of 9. months, but Evilmerodach as true Heir
enjoied the Crown after his death, and Balthazar succeeded. This is the naked
truth: but how the 70. years are divided between them, is not much material; but
the gross sum from the grand Captivity to Cyrus certain. Scaliger led by Annius
(whom he rejected before about Abrams birth in a truth, and now folows him in
error) alots to Evilmerodach but 2. years, which is far short of verity: for
Jeremy Jer. 52. 33.
shows how highly he favored Jeconiah, who eat bread before him al dais of his
life: which implies no short space; for Evilmerodach outlived him being 55.
when he was released, and begot Salathiel Father to Pedaiah Zerobabels Father
afterward: so his reign must needs be much more. Scaliger (to justify his
opinion, that the 70. years began 11 before Jerusalems ruin) allows Balthazar
(caling him Labosaroach Nicotris Son) but 5. years; making his Father
Niriglisoroar Protector for 4. which near agrees with the 9. months assigned by
Annius to Niglisars Son by Nicotris: but both Father and Son ruled some part of
Nabuchodonosors wildnes or woodnes, not soly and singly after him: therefore he
merely mistakes the matter being no infallible Oracle. His last King (supposed
to be Balthazar) is one Nabonidus whom he calls Darius Medus: but differs from
his Author Annius, whose Nabonidus was a Babylonian like Balthazar. That which
deceived him to deem the Berosian Nabonidus the same with Darius is, because
Daniel says Darius took the Kingdom, not won it by force: but it is meant that
his Son in Law Cyrus got it in his absence, who entered quietly and enjoied it
during life. So tho he magisterialy condemns the whole Nation of Chronologers
for holding Darius to be Partner (who was Principal) in the Conquest; yet are
they in the right, and he in evident error. For the Medes were Cheiftains,
Persians only assistants; Darius defraier of the charges, and Cyrus manager of
the wars. So the Acquest belonged to Cyaxares (Daniels Darius Medus) for 3.
reasons: 1. Because he was Dan 5. 31.
elder and Father in Law to Cyrus: 2. Because he began the quarrel, and bore all the costs: 3. Because the Medes then were more famous then the Persians. Yet the
glory is given to Cyrus for three other causes: 1. Because the Persians
magnified their own Monarch, and from them the Greecs have it: 2. Because he was
present and President: 3. Because Darius dying within two years, he was seated
in the Throne, yer remot Nations heard of it: therefore Darius cannot be the
Berosian or Babylonian Nabonidus, but he must be Balthazar. It is worth
observing obiter, that Nabuchodonosor conqueror Note well.
of the first Monarchy, had only two successors of his own loins, Evilmerodach
and Balthazar: Cyrus next but one, Cambyses: Alexander third scars one: for
Aridaeus was his base Brother, and his Son Alexander by Roxane (unborn at his
death) barely proclaimed by his Grandmother Olympias (as our Edward 5.) but
slain by Cassander, and never Crowned: Caesar the fourth none, but adopted his
Sisters daughters Son surnamed Augustus, and he his Wifes Son Tiberius: to whom
a Nephew Caligula succeeded, and to him an Uncle Claudius: who adopted his Wifes
Son Nero the last of Caesar's lineage, as well Adoptitial as Natural. Sic transit
gloria mundi. Thus al four Monarchies soon transmigred from the Purchasers
progeny or posterity to Aliens or Allies: Man disquiets himself Ps. 39 7.
in vain, heaping up riches, and knows not who shall gather them. Here ends
Canonical Chronography, wherein we had the clear Sunshine of sacred Scripture
to guide our steps; though sometimes shadowed with thick clouds, which have bin
dispelled: but must henceforth walk by Moon light in the paths of Human
Histories; having two blazing Torches of the Olympic Era and Rome to direct us.

Most Men make Daniels Vision of 70 weeks (Annarian, each Digression of Daniels
Vision or Vaticiniation.
containing a Sabbath of 7 years, in all 490) the golden Chain of Chronology
from the Captivity to Christ; but agree like Samsons tail-tied Foxes drawing
diverse wais, both about the initiation and termination: for they are at Daggers
point in diverse Points: 1. What commandment is meant, whether that of Cyrus to
reedify the Temple, which Cambyses hindered? or of Darius Hystaspis to finish
it? or of Artaxerxes long hand, one in his seventh year when he married Esther
to offer in the Ezra 1. 2 etc. Ezr. 6. 1. etc. Ez 7. v. 8 etc. Neh. 2. 1. etc.
Temple; another in his twentieth, when Nehemiah repaired the Walls and City? 2.
Whether the 7 weeks and 62 (483 years) from going forth of the Decree to
Messiah the Prince, determine at his birth, baptism, or death? 3. How the last
week (wherein he shall confirm the covenant with many, and in the midst cause the
Sacrifice to ceas) can be continuat? But leaving contention, let us survey the
Vision so much as concerns this intention by a short Paraphrase to the present
purpose.

Daniel in the first of Darius Conquest, finding the 70 years Dan. 9. per totu^.
foretold by Jeremy near finished, prayed and confessed his sins: At which time
the Angel Gabriel informed, That at beginning of Verse. 22. 23.
his Supplications the Commandment came forth (not actualy; for all four were
promulged afterward; but by divine Decree which is Yea and Amen) that 70 weeks
(490 years) are determined on Verse. 24.
his People (the Jews) and holy City (Jerusalem) to finish transgression, seal
up sins, reconcile iniquity, bring in everlasting righteousness, Verse. 25.
seal up Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy; al applied to Christ
by most Orthodox-Divines. Then he divides these weeks: Know that from going
forth of the Commandment to bring again the People (this seems to imply that of
Cyrus) and to build Jerusalem (this rather intends another of Ataxerxes) to
Messiah the Prince, shall be 7 weeks, and 62: the Verse 26.
street shall be built and the wall in troublous times (this Nehemiah performed)
and after 62 Messiah shall be cut off, but not for himself (which seems to imply
his death) and the People of the Prince that shall com (the Romans) shall destroy
City and Sanctuary, and the end shall be with a Flood: and to the Wars end
desolations are determined: This befell 38 years after Christ's crucifixion. And
he shall confirm the Covenant with many for one week Verse. 27.
(the last) and in the midst of it shall cause the Sacrifice to ceas (happily at
Christ's Passion, 3 years and half after his Baptism) and for the overspreading
of abominations he shall make it desolat, til the consummation determined be
poured on the desolat. This denots the Cities fatal destruction, and Temples
final demolition in the other half week (for from Vespasians entry to repress
the Rebellion; til Titus took Jerusalem were 3 years and half) caled by our
Savior the abomination of desolation, spoken by Mat. 24 15.
Daniel the Prophet.

Lo here the literal Eloquy of this Enigmatical Prophecy, the Rack of learned
wits; wherein these points are clear: 1. That Messiah shall expiat sins, bring in
everlasting Righteousness or Salvation, and fulfill al Prophecy. 2. That he shall
com within those 70 weeks, and in the last be slain. 3. That the Jewish Law and
Sacrifice shall ceas. 4. That both City and Temple shall be destroyed. 5. That
this desolation shall be perpetual, til the consummation of al Things and Times.
This confuts Chiliasts, who say Christ shall in Person reign at Jerusalem 1000
years: but much more the Jews who gape for a Messiah: For let them begin the 70
weeks where they will; it must needs be that al these things are already
accomplished, and the Messiah com long ago, who has abolished al Lawish
Ceremonies.

For the limits of these weeks, some begin and end too soon: Opinions.
as Origin (who reckons 70 yeets for 7 to a week, viz 4900) extends them from
the Creation to Christ's Birth. Some begin and end too late: as Scaliger and
Junius from Josephus, who comput from Darius Hystaspis Decree to Jerusalems
downfall. Some begin too soon and end too late: as Hippolitus, who takes rise 50
years before Cyrus til Doomsday; and R. Solomon who reaches from the first
Temples demolition to the secunds destruction. Some begin too late and end too
soon: as Melancthon, who sets his But at the twentieth of Longimanus, and Basis
at Christ's Baptism. Some begin right and end too soon: Some begin well and end too
late: Some end right but begin too soon. Some end well, but begin too late, as
particular instances prove. Most probably by Commandment is meant Cyrus first
Commission or Proclamation, which Zerubabel executed: for so soon as the 70
years of Captivity expired, the 70 weeks of liberty (which exced sevnfold)
commenced, and both says Calvin are certainly conjoined. It Is no less
credible, that by abomination of desolation at end of this Vision, Jerusalems
ruin by the Romans is understood: but from one to the other intervened 606
years (116 abov 70 weeks) which is cause that none could ever make their
accounts agree, though they racked the Text on tainters, wors then Procustes
tortured his Prisoners. For in truth the premises infer this result, That it is
no Result.
connection of Times past and to come; as the interrupted intervals of 7 weeks,
62, one and half one apertly indicat: but rather a linking together of things
treated therein, with reference to Times among themselfs: as Cyrus Command to
build the Temple, Darius Decree to prosecut it, Artaxerxes permission to offer
therein, with his Charter to repair the Walls and City: the coming of Messiah,
his cutting off, not for himself; the Covenants consummation, cessation of
Sacrifice and Oblation; with the destruction of City and Sanctuary: al which
were not done in 70 successiv or continuat Annal weeks, as every ey may see.
Various are Commentators conceptions, but more erroneous Chronologers
computations; which to reconcile is impossible, to refel unprofitable; since
they unprofitably labor in impossibles. It shall suffice to show that it can be
no exact or evident rule of Chronology, which only concerns things past
Historicaly, not times to com Propheticaly: nor is the medius terminus from the
Captivity to Christ right, whether it ends at his Birth, Baptism, Death, or
Jerusalems demolition; each of which have their potent Patrons.

To conclud, it is a Chronical Coordination of Things in it Conclusion.
self, with relation to Times: but no continuat concatination of Times to
Christ or farther; nor ever so intended by the Holy Ghost.

Si Chronicam seriem e Daniele excerpere quaeras;
Oceanum exoneras, Aethiopemque lavas.
If Chronicism from Daniel ye seek to draw;
You drain the Sea, and wash a Blackmore raw.
Tu nihil invita dices faciesve Minerva.
Naught shall thou say or do,
If Nature b'advers thereto.
To wrest a connezion of sacred Chronology from Daniels Vaticiny, is to swim
against the stream or cast dust against the wind, which will fly in thy face.
It Is impossible to make Chiverel of a Sows ear, or frame a concatenation of
Times contrary to the Holy Ghosts intention: therefore beat not thy brains to
beget or bring forth a new Minerva, which al old Midwifes have faild to effect;
not for lack of skill, but it is lost labor to sow seed in a barren soil. Since
then no Chonological concordance appeers, and it is no part of this Task to
explane the Text; we must make necessity a Virtu, and apply to most approved
Authors: using the scale of those two chief Aeras, being the best Touch-stones
to try the Truth in dubious points, by way of exact Chronography. Here this
Stage had ended, but that Mr. Livly (sometime Hebrew Lecturer at Cambridg) has
some strange In his Chronol. of the Persian Monarchy
strains: whose too tedious mysterious exposition, shall put a period to this
prolix disquisition.

His Translation and Interpretation is this: Seventy weeks (Sevenets or
Sabbaths of years) are determined (decreed) on Dan. 9 24.
thy People and holy City, to finish transgression and end sin (by Christ's
death) to make reconciliation for iniquity (by appeasing Gods wrath) to bring
everlasting righteousness (by purchasing eternal Salvation or Redemption) to
seal up Vision and Prophecy (by conforming or fulfilling them) and to anoint
the Holy of Christus, Messiah, unctus Synonyma.
Holies (Christ Jesus) yet Princes, Priests, and Prophets were anointed
singly, but Christ al three in one Person, being Messia Catexochen. For they
were inunct with material Oil only, he with spiritual the holy Ghost; they
being but Types of his Inunction. So far he runs with the common current of
Divines, but the rest are novities. Know then that from going forth of the
Verse. 25.
Word (Decree, Edict, Commandment) to build again Jerusalem, unto Messiah the
Governor (by name Nehemiah, not Christ) shall be 7 weeks (here he makes a Colon
to dis-join them from the 62) and 62 weeks it shall be builded again (continu
builded so long before it be desolated) both street and wall in a troublous
time. And after 62 weeks Messiah shall be cut off (by Verse. 26.
death, deprivation, exile, or expulsion) and shall have no being (as Governor;
but expeld as King Agrippa was) and the City and Sanctuary shall the People of
the com Governor (the Roman Ruler that shall com) destroy: and the end thereof
shall be with a Flood (it shall overwhelm the Land as a Deluge) and to the Wars
end Verse 27.
shall be a precise judgment of desolations (partly by foreign Forces, partly by
intestin seditions in City and Country) and he shall make a sure Covenant to
many one week (by confirming the things foregoing of Messiah to be cut off and
desolation; which were fulfild in the last week) and half that week, shall cause
the Sacrifice and Offering to ceas (in the Temple) and for the overspreading of
abominations (by all abominable sins) shall be desolation, which to utter precise
destruction (to dure for ever past al restoration) shall be poured on the
desolat. This is the effect of his nice new Paraphrase on the Text according to
the Hebrew tongue: but for the inchoation and expiration of these weeks, he walks
single and singular: for de draws the line lower down, making Darius Nothus
(not Hystaspis) and Artaxerxes Mnemon (not Longband) Authors of the said
Commissions or Commandments cited by Ezra and Nehemia. Scaliger indeed (who is
L 6 de Emend. temp. C 2.
still unhappy to follow the worst part) imputs the revived Decree of building
the Temple to Nothus secund year, because from it to finishing the Wall and
streets were 7 weeks or 49 years, when Nehemiah returned into Persia in the
32th of Mnemon: but he rather respects Chronical concinnity then Historical
verity. For just so many years interceded, but Nehemiah served his loving Lord
Longimanus, and returned in his two and thirtieth; which was 60 before Mnemons
two and thirtieth.

Mr. Livly proceds, That after those 7 weeks, the City was to His Comment.
continu 62 or 434 years, and then Messiah or Governor of Judea (King Agrippa)
shall be cut off or chased away with stones; and the People of the com Prince or
foreign Ruler shall destroy both City and Sanctuary. So he divides the weeks into
three parts: 1. From the renewed Decree to build the Temple, in the secund of
Nothus (in truth the secund of Hystaspis) to Nehemiahs Government 49 years. 2.
From it to the continuance of Commonwealth and Princely Rule, til its ruin
(which began in the ninth of Nero, when Albinus by covetous cruelty oppressed
the Jews) 62 weeks or 434 years. 3. One after the 62, in midst whereof Messiah
the last Ruler shall be cut off, as Agrippa was pelted out, because he persuaded
the People to obey Florus wors then Albinus: and the Jewish Government extinct
in Neros twelfth, abov 3 years before their utter desolation. Thus from the
secund of Nothus when the Decree went forth (as he opines) to Jerusalems fatal
fall, are 70 weeks, or 490 years: indeed 4 more, which is not much. In this
space the Roman Rulers (Caestius Gallus, Vespasian, Titus) made Covenants with
many Jews that fled to them, using them courteously as Josephus informs; which
sundry Rabins take to be the Covenant confirmed for one week: but he expounds
it of the new Gospel Covenant, whereby many seeing the manifold miseries of the
City and Country foretold by Christ, were converted more then any time else
before. For God warned the Saints (says Eusebius) to fly from Jerusalem (like
Lot out of Sodom to Zoar) into little Pella beyond Jordan, that he might pour
his vengeance more fiercely upon Unbeleevers. If any ask to whom the Particle
(He shall make a Covenant) can be referred sav to the Roman Ruler? He says it is
usual in Hebrew, to understand a Person or Agent though not expressed before,
when a transitiv Verb has an Impersonal notion: viz. that before it be
destroyed, a Covenant shall be made to the Faithful there by such Ministers as
God shall use. In midst of that week the Legal Sacrifices ceased: for at
Vespasians coming the Rebel-Ringleaders abolished the custom of Sacrifices,
appointing the common People and Country Clowns to be Priests (as Cobblers,
Coopers, Coachmen, and Costermongers preach in Tubs during tumults) contrary to
Law: yea they defiled the Temple, and slu the Priests at the Altar: so in fine
no Oblation was offered as Josephus tells: for ceasing of Sacrifices may apply
both to this War and Christ's death, which abolished and accomplished al lawish
oblations. The sum is, that by anointing the most Holy, Christ is understood:
but by Messiah twice mentioned, the Jews Governors (Nehemiah, Agrippa) are
meant. Whereas then it is said 70 weeks are decreed to abolish sin and make
atonement, which Christ did within those weeks: as Tertullian says, the work
of redemption was perfected under Tiberius within Daniels 70 weeks.

The Hebrews held, their Messiah should reign at Jerusalems destruction,
according to an ancient rule of R. Elias School, that the World shall last 2000
years before the Law, 2000 under it, and 2000 under Messiah: which R. Leviben
Gershom calls the Dan. 2. Dan. 7.
fifth Kingdom, being to succed the four foretold by Daniel. For the Law with all Ceremonies ended, when Titus razed the seat of divine worship, and neither
Place, Priest, nor People left to solennize Gods service, R. Hami says the Son
of David shall not com so long as any Sovereignty remains in Israel: R. Milo
from R. Eliezer, that Christ shall not com, til al Judges and Magistrates be
clean rid: R. Moses Hadarson commenteth on Jacobs Prophecy, that the Sanedrim
shall not ceas til Shilo the Messiah com: which stood in full authority with Genesis
49. 10.
the Commonwealth til the last war. For Josephus relats, that the high Priest
Ananus and seventy Judges condemned James (our Lords Brother) Bishop of
Jerusalem, when Albinus began the war: Agrippa was expeld not long after: the
Sanedrim suppressed, Priesthood made a mockery, and al authority turned to
anarchy: the City and Commonwealth becoming Acephalon without Head or Guide.
Many seek the fulfilling of Jacobs prophecy at Christ's Birth, because Herod an
Idumean alien swaied the Scepter: but are deceived: for the Jews Government by
Priests and Elders dured still, tho subject to the Romans (as before to
Babylonians, Persians, and Syrians) who substituted Herod under them. Onchelos
the Chaldee Paraphrast interprets it thus: A Magistrate of Juda shall not depart,
nor a Scribe of his posterity til Christ com to whom the Kingdom pertains, and
al power shall be subdued to him. Hence so many conterfets about the Temples
downfall, fained to be Messiah: yea diverse Rabbis (Judas, Nehorai, Nehemias)
took by tradition as tokens of Christ's coming, that much wickedness should
abound, good Men abhorred, and Divinity Schools made Brothel houses; which is
Daniels overspreading of abominations. This Josephus records to be at that
Siege, when al sins against nature were acted, Laws contemned, the Temple
desiled, Virgins deflowred, Matrons ravished, Houses rifled, and al detestable
crimes perpetrated or practiced. Thus Daniel and Josephus refer the reign of
abominations to Jerusalems destruction, which the Rabins apply to Christ's
coming. To reconcile al, Christ's coming is duple: 1. Personal in humility, as
Zechary Zech. 9 9.
said, Rejoice daughter of Sion, be glad daughter of Jerusalem: for lo thy King
comes lowly riding on an Ass and an Asses Fool. 2. Powerful in principality,
whereof he self speaks, That some Mat. 16. 28.
there should not see death, til the Son of Man came in his Kingdom; which was
verified in St. John with others, of whom he said: If I will that he tarry til I
com, what is that to thee? Who lived John 21. v. 22.
til Jerusalems desolation, when Christ came as a revenging Judge to punish his
Persecutors; which may be Meaphoricaly caled a coming: tho diverse Divines
impute it to his Resurrection, being an entrance into his Kingdom, confirmed by
sending down the Comforter; yet not so proper as the other; For Junius
expounding Daniels words (from going out of the Commandment to build Jerusalem
unto Messiah, shall be 7 weeks and 62) refers them to Christ's coming in Daniels
last week, when Jerusalems desolation began: because he showed himself a severe
Lord or Judge against the Jews, and a gracious Prince or Head of the Church by
benefit of the Gospel. When Christ told his Disciples, that not a stone should
be left on a stone: they asked Mat. 24 2. 3.
when it should be, and what sign of his coming, and of the Worlds end?
Conjoining the Temples demolition, Christ's coming, and the Worlds end: but in
St. Marc and Luke they Marc 13. 4. Luk 21. 7.
only ask what time shall be of the Temples ruin? Which argues, that the
Apostles held the old Hebrews opinion of the Temples eversion and Christ's
coming to concur; when a change shall be of the old Churches overthrow, and
coming of Christ's Kingdom: who expected a new face of things by their Messiah
reign caling it the World to com. As Rabins termed the time from Adam to Christ
the first World, and from it to the general Resurrection the last: so the
Disciples inquiring the sign of Christ's coming and the Worlds end; meant the
new secund World of the Gospel. Whence those times betwixt Christ's preaching
and Jerusalems perishing, are caled the last dais, and by St. Paul the Worlds
end. Yea Christ answering Acts 2. 17. Hebr. 1. v 2.
their Quaere, givs one token cited by R. Nehemias, that wickedness shall
multiply, and Charity wax cold. This secund coming 1 Cor. 10 v 11. Mat. 24. 12.
contains his whole reign, jurisdiction, and judgment in Heavenly Jerusalem by
the Gospel preached: even from commencement of Earthly Jerusalems confusion, to
the general Resurrection; both being expressly concluded under his secund
coming: one respecting the inchoation, another the consummation of the self
same Kingdom. Thus al circumstances cohere, where he says, This generation shall
not pass til al these things be Mat. 24. 34.
fulfilled: and some shall not taste of death, til they see the Son of Man com in
his Kingdom: which respects it beginning in Jerusalems fall, when he came as a
revenging Judge; and the rest relat to the last Judgment. For what better
concent can be, then that his spiritual reign over al Nations by the Gospel
preached should commence, when al Lawish Ceremonies ceased? Or that the
Heavenly Kingdom should begin when the Earthly ended and al Jewish Government
expired? Or the inward subjection of Gods new People the Elect among Gentiles,
and his spiritual service should com in stead of the Jews outward worship? Or
that Celestial Sion (new Jerusalem) should succed, when the old Terrestrials
have no more being? This Isaiah foretold, It shall be in the last dais, that the
Isai 2. 2. 3.
Mountain of the Lords house shall be prepared on the Mountains top, and exalted
abov the Hills, and al Nations shall flow to it: and they shall say, com let us go
to the Lords Mountain, who will teach us his wais, and we will walk in his paths:
for the Law shall go forth of Sion, and the Lords Word from Jerusalem. By the
Mountain of his House (Sion and Jerusalem) is meant Christ's Church caled the
Gospel, not any real City: which St. Paul calls, High Heavenly Gal. 4. 26. Heb.
12. 22.
(new) Jerusalem abov, Mother of us al. This began when the Jews dispeopled or
disparkled, not before. Indeed Christ preached the Gospel 40 years before, and
the Disciples continued it: but the Jews civil Government or Commonwealth, with
Ceremonial Law-worship remained still: so the preceding preaching seemed rather
a preparation to Christ's Kingdom, then a Mat 4 17. Mat. 10 7 23
perfect imitation: as he self said, Amend your life's, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand: and taught his Apostles so to do: implying that his Kingdom
was shortly to com, yer they should finish all the Cities of Israel. So the full
beginning of his spiritual reign is reckoned, when the old government and
outward service expired. For then Christ reigned alone by his Gospel (not in
any material City) without partnership of the Law, nor could both concur or
coexist. Thus Daniels words of ending sin and making atonement, may be applied
to this time tho ended before: because Christ then by a kind of excellence or
eminence sanctified his Church from sin, and reconciled sinners; when he did it
by the Gospel alone without Law purifyings: and the shadow being gone, the body
came in place of it. The bringing in of everlasting righteousness may apply to
Christ himself, as Jeremy and St. Paul call him: and sealing Jer. 23 6. 1 Cor.
1. 30.
of Vision and Prophecy to his glorious Kingdom not long after his death, being
not fully finished til that time. Lastly the anointing of most Holy, agrees
best with his absolut reign: so the Hebrews referring it to Jerusalems
desolation, complies with Scripture.

Now for Chronology: the first of Cyrus Olymp. 60. 4. His Chronology.
when he proclaimed the Edict, and secund of Vespasian Olymp. 112. 2. when
Jerusalem was spoiled (which contain 606. years) are generaly made the extrems
of this Vision: in which space some go higher, some lower for the limits:
referring the rise to Cyrus Decree when he licensed Zerubabel to rebuild the
Temple; or to the 2 of Darius Hystaspis when he ratified the former; or to the
7 of Artaxerxes Longhand, when he permitted Ezra to offer in the Temple; or to
his 20, when he sent Nehemiah to reedify walls and City: but the period to
Christ's birth, baptism, death, or Jerusalems destruction; as every fancy
fashioneth the Accounts; wresting words to their sens, yet can make no
coherence.

Mr. Livly begins at 2 of Darius Nothus, and ends at 2 of Vespasian, which he
says is 490 years, as indeed it exceds but 4 which is nearest of any for
concinnity of comput, but far from truth. For Hystaspis (not Nothus) licensed
the Jews to expedit the Temple, as Ezra evidently shows: that when Zerubabel Ez
4 1, 5, 6, 7, etc.
and the Jew began, their Adversaries hired Counsilors to hinder it al dais of
Cyrus being abroad in War, and of Cambyses, til the 2 of Hystaspis: for Nothus
did not initiat til 106 years after Cyrus, and never made any Decree for the
Jews. These Men wrote to Artashaste (so they caled al Persian Kings, but properly
Cambyses, styled before Ahasueros in Hebrew a Prince being his Fathers Viceroy)
who stopped the structure 7 years in his Fathers absence, and 7 after. His next
Ez. 5. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Successor (sav 10 months usurpation by the conterfet Magi) was Hystaspis: in
whose 2 year Zerubabel incoraged by the Prophet Haggai and Zechary (who were al
dead yer Nothus Ez. 6. v. 6. 13.
reigned) retrived the work: but Tatnai and Shetherboznai opposed, til Darius
charged them to further it, which they sadly did. So it is clear as Sunshine,
that Zerubabel began to build in the first of Cyrus, and revived it in the 2 of
Hystaspis after 15 years intermission: but he builds on a falls foundation, that
Cyrus initiated and made that Edict Olym. 55. 1. for he began then in Persia
(as best writers witness) but not over al Asia til 23 years after Olym. 60. 4.
which is his mere mistake or misprision. However if it be granted that Nothus
made a new Decree, and from it to Mnemons 32 be 7 weeks or 49 years, and 490 in all to Jerusalems devastation, neither of which is exactly true: yet this provs
not the Vision to be a continuation of sacred Chronology from the Captivity
downward: for there is a vast Chasma of 115 years from the 1 of Cyrus to the 2
of Nothus, not chalked out in those 490 years; but denoted by secular Authors
according to the Olimpic Era: nor can any clear certain Chronicism be
collected from the Vision, as is copiously proved.

Sir W. Ralegh and many mo begin those weeks at the 7 of Artaxerxes Longhand
Olym. 80. 2. and end at Christ's crucifixion Olym. 202. 4. which make 490 years;
yet can be no continued Chronology from the Captivity, since neither the
preceding time from Cyrus to Longimanus; nor the subsequent from our Saviors
suffering to Jerusalems subversion (both which belong to the Vision) is
involved therein.

Mr. Livly seeks to confirm or countenance his novities by Opinions.
Contestees: 1. Eusebius, who by Messiah twice named understands a Successor of
anointed high Priests, which Ruled Regaly (as the Machabees and others) after
their releas from Babylon: so the Hebrews take the word, and expound cutting
off by expulsion or otherwise. 2. Tertullian, who begins the 70 weeks at the
secund of Darius, naming his 4 Successors (Mnemon, Ochus, Arses, Codomon) which
must needs be Nothus, though he miscals him Medus. The end of those weeks he
sets in the secund of Vespasian saying, that the Jews by being subdued,
fulfilled Daniels 70 weeks. 3. Sulpitius Severus St. Austins Contemporar, who
says the Jews by Cyrus leav began the Temple, but were hindered about 100
years; recompting Cambyses, Darius, Xerxes, Artaxerxes (with another Xerxes and
Sogdianus) who al prohibited the progress: then Darius (Nothus) in whose sixth
year it was finished. From thence to Jerusalems downfall he reckons 69 weeks or
483 years, as Daniel prophesied. It Is true the inchoation of that desolation
Albinus made about the time specified, but the consummation befell 7 years
after. 4. Scaliger refers the beginning of those weeks to Nothus Decree, and end
to Jerusalems destruction. So Junius computs from the secund of Nothus to the
secund of Vespasian: with whom concur Clemens Alexand: Origin, Chrysostom, and
sundry Rabins: nor can those Sevenets (divided into 7, and 62, and one) be more
properly or probably interpreted. Thus he pleads bravly in a bad Cause.

How Eusebius or the Hebrews expound the word Messiah, Answer.
concerns not Chronology: but al Orthodox Divines apply it to Christ.
Tertullian contradicts himself, naming Darius Medus, and noting out Nothus: for
those Ancients were sorry Historics and wors Chronologists. Sulpitius ers in
saying the building was hindered 100 years: for Zerubabel began and ended it in
20. Scaliger was Josephus Son to Julius, both self-singular: he by Messiah to
be slain after 62 weeks, understands Christ; beginning at the 5th of Mnemon
(when he says Ezra was sent) and Ez 7. v. 7.
ending at the Passion: but this cannot cohere: for Ezra went in the 7th of
Artaxerxes Longhand, nor do the years jump; since our Savior suffered by
general suffrage of best Authors Ol. 202. 4. when Phlegon reports an
extraordinary Eclips of the Sun to happen at sixth hour or high noon, that
Stars shone as at midnight; and an Earthquake subverted sundry Houses at Nice
in Bithynia; which the Evangelists ratify touching a deep darkness Mat. 27. 45.
Marc. 15. 33.
from the sixth hour to the ninth at full Moon, when can be no Solar Eclips, but
at New. Daniel divides the weeks into 7 at building the Walls, 62 for
continuance, and one after: who then can conceiv but 62 shall immediately succed
the 7, and preced the one? if so, then they must commence in Mnemens 32, and
end 7 years before Jerusalems eversion. Again, It Is said the City should be
built (streets and Wall by Nehemiah) 62 weeks, and then Messiah be cut off and
the City confounded: how then can it be made good that Christ shall be slain
after those 62? since Jerusalem flourished after Christ's crucifixion 30 years yer
the broils began, and 37 before the desolation determined. Thus these Men tug
and toil to patch up a seeming Chain of Chronology, but fall at ods like a
viperous brood of Cadmean Brethren, til they tear each other in pieces; yet can
never effect their pretended project.

Oceanum exoneras, experto creed Roberto:
Si quaeras Chronicos^e Daniele Chores.
Beleev tried Robin, you the Ocean drain;
Who Chronicism seek from Daniel al in vain.
Now to the task.

The eghth from the Captivities solution, to the Persian Monarchies 8 Stage 207.
expiration involvs 207 years. Al Authors agree, that Cyrus initiated in Persia
Olym. 55. 11. and over Asia 23 years after Ol. 60. 4. which concurs with Romes
216: but Alexander vanquished Darius at Arbela and won the Persian Dominion Ol.
112. 3. A. U. 423, which cast 207: the personal reigns ratify it thus. Cyrus 7,
Cambyses 7, Magi 1, Darius Hystaspis 36, Xerxes 21, Artaxerxes Longhand 40,
Xerxes 2, and Sogdianus (supposed to be Esthers Sons) 1; Darius Nothus 19,
Artaxerxes Mnemon 43, Ochus 23, Arses 3, Darius Codoman 6, in all 207, as the
particulars comput. This is the best Account most approved, and suits best with
both Epoches, which we must constantly observe.

The ninth from suppression of the Persian, to subversion of 9 Stage 163.
the Macedonian Monarchy in King Perseus, are 163. For he was carried Captiv to
Rome and Macedon made a Province O^: 153. 2. A. U. 586, which jump with the
said sum, and may be ratified by the several reigns: viz. Alexander after his
Persian Conquest 7, Aridaeus 6, Cassander 19, his two Sons (Antipater and
Alexander) 4, Demetrius 6, Pyrrhus 7 months, Lysimachus 5 years, Seleucus 7
months, Ptolomaeus Ceraunus, Antipater, Meleager, Sosthenes confusedly 2,
Antigonus Gonatas 36, Demetrius 10, Antigonus Doson 12, Philip 42, Perseus 12,
in all 163. This may be confirmed by the Syrian and Egyptian reigns (the two
last Relics of Alexanders immens spoils) if need were.

The last from dissolution of the Persian Monarchy to Christ's 10 Stage 166.
Nativity, are 166; which may be deduced from the Jewish Rulers and Kings of
Egypt: but the Olympic Era and Rome shall suffice, For from Perseus Olym. 153.
2. A. U. 586 forecited, to Christ's Incarnation Olym. 194. 4. A. U. 752 (being
the Luk 3. 1. 23.
forty secund of Augustus, as Dionysius a Minorit calculats from St. Luke) are
just 166 years. For Jul. Caesar was slain in Senate Mar. 15. A. U. 710. and
Augustus reigned after him 42 when Christ was born A. U. 752. So all the said
sums pointly cohere; which shall be cast jointly together: 1656, 353, 75, 430,
480, 431, 70, (these seven from infallible divine Oracles, the three subsequent
from best helps of Human History and Chronology) 207, 163, 166 in total 4031
current, or 4030 complet: sic constant computa nostra: which shall be the
constant basis or confident groundwork of al ensuing Marginal Chronicisms.

Seek not to wrest a connection of sacred Chronology from Daniels Vaticiny,
which the holy Ghost never intended: Swim not against the stream, nor cast dust
against the wind, lest it fly in thy face. It Is impossible to make Points of a
Pigs tail, or to frame a clear concatenation of times past with those to com,
where no such matter appeers.

Let the Summary stand immutable 4030 complet. complet. Summary.


Beside such as follow the depraved Septuagints, some Corollary.
others exced this sum: as Alphonsus reckons 5984: Theophilus Antiochenus 5476:
St. Austin 5351: Isidor 5210: Eusebius and Orosius 5190: Metheodorus 5000: 4192
R. Moses Germedis 4058: but many mo (specialy Scaligerians) fall short, who
pitch mostly about 3960 some more, some less: which being numberless, shall go
nameless. These fail 60 years at Abrams birth, casting it in the seventieth of
Terahs age, and 11 at the grand Captivity, commencing it when Jehoiachim or
Jakim was captived, which are evident errors. Howbeit if the precited parcels
of 111 servil years swalowed in the Judges Regency; with the uncertain
Interreigns, vacancies, and Anarchies (beside the Elders Rule after Josua yet
Othniel Judged; omitting Samuels sole sway) be well scanned; there will be more
cause to subnect many then subtract any from the said 4030: but the 60 years and
11 wherein the Scaligerian Faction fails, being added to their sum 3960, make up
4031 current, as here foreproved.

Chronology is the darkest piece of liberal literature, and Valediction.
Chronography the difficilest point of Chronology: but this a main
Masterpiece, which has cost much industry to complet it; beside most exact
exercise of Intellect and Judgment to contriv it into this form or fabric. It Is
a little Lamp, which may giv light enough to lead vulgar Readers through the
crooked corners of this Chronical Labyrinth: wherein every one may easily apply
the year of Christ from time to time: but to busy their brains about needless
Questions, senseless Opinions, endless Dissertations, and fruitless
Disquisitions, will be lost labor too late repented: such as this Chronography
cannot satisfy, may go farther and fare wors.

The four principal Aeras set in the Margins, are that of the World, which
began the first day of Creation, when God made the Chaos: that of the Olympiads
(which take name of the City Olympia near Elis, where Jupiters Temple stood)
commenced in the fiftieth of King Vzzia A. M. 3255 when Prince Iphitus renewed
those Games, instituted by Hercules Alcmenus in Gideons Judgship 500 years
before: that of Rome beginning 25 years after in the eghth of King Ahaz A. M.
3280: A. O. 7. 1. That of Christ commencing at his birth, A. M. 4031. A. O.
194. 3. A. U. 752. The first is Charactered A. M. the next A. O. the third A.
U. the last A. C. The first and last are sacred the one taken from the old
Testament, the other from the New; the two midmost secular; one used by the
Greecs, the other by the Romans: but both irrefragable, if rightly applied or
used.

Era so often cited in Chronology, is a Plural of Aes (signifying Supplement.
small pieces of brass wherewith men cast Accounts) but used by Catechrestic
Solecism (maugre Priscians pate) in the Singular number for the Head, But, or
Beginning of any Chronical Computation; whereof sundry Nations have several
sorts. The Hebrews used three chiefly, the Creation, Abrams birth, and Egypts
Exodus: beside Flood, Promiss, Temple, Captivity of less mark. The Assyrians or
Babylonians, from King Nabonasser alias Salmonasser. The Persians from King
Cyrus and King Jezdegerd. The Greecs from Troy taken, and Olympic Games. The
Romans from their Cities foundation, and Augustus Caesar's inauguration.
Mahometans from their Pseudoprophets Hegira or flight from Mecha. Christians in
general from Christ's Nativity current Januar. 1. but the Church of England
(with Pisa and Siena in Italy) from his Conception or Incarnation March 25: we
taking it complet or consummat, when he had bin a whole year in the flesh,
though but three months old: they current or inchoat from the first day of
Conception (as Kings reckon from their initiation) so they date 9 months before
the Vulgar, and a whole year before us: which is a difference in the manner, but
al equaly true for the matter; and the very style distinguishes the form: For
our term is Ao. ab Incarnatione implying complet, theirs Annus Incarnationis
importing current. Pisa and Siena style this year Annus Incarnationis 1655: we
ab Incarnatione 1654: but al else call it Annus Nativitatis 1654, commencing at
Christ's Circumcision last past.

The true measure of a Natural Solar year, and a civil Julian or Sosigenean.
A True Year is the Suns total race or revolution Note.
through the Zodiacs 12 parts, from any one point to the same: which is
finished in 365. Natural dais, 5 Equinoctial hours, 49 minutes, and 16 secunds:
a secund being the 60 part of a minut, that the 60 of an hour, and this the 24.
of a Natural day, as is vulgarly known.

Julius Caesar Romes perpetual Dictator and Emperor, by advise of Sosigenes an
Egyptian Astronomer, reformed the Roman Calendar then variously embolized more
or less at the Priests or Augurs pleasures; reducing the year to a set period
of 365 dais and 6 hours (or a quarter of a day) complet: allowing one day
(Febr. 24) to be added every 4 year, in leiu of those od annal hours: which
exceds the Solar 10 minutes and 44 secunds every year; and we observe it
unaltered ever since. This surplusage (which Caesar compted as an Atom not
considerable) makes one entire day (lack one minut and 44 secunds) in 134
years: so that from Christ's birth have resulted or increased full 12 dais with 8
hours, which should be abated or taken back, to bring every day in the set
station or season it was then. For by this obliquity, the 12 last dais of each
month, possess the place of the nexts 12 first; which is a Turcish Solecism in
Chronicism: who from the old Egyptians observe a Lunar year of 12 New Moon
changes, containing 354 dais: which is 11 and a quarter shorter then our
Julian. So they run back in Crablike Post (as we crawl or creep forth with
Snaillike pace) and in 18 years keep Summer months at Winter or contrarily: not
heeding in what seasons they solennize their falls Festivals: but Christians
should be more careful to celebrat true in their just times, so near as can be
collected by reason or record.

Pope Gregory 13 at Trent Council, consulted Aloysius Lilius with other
Mathematicians how to rectify this difformity, and finding that at first
universal Synod of Nice, Sol entered Aries the Equinox day March 21 (which then
A. C. 325.
befell Mar. 11) he with the Tridentin Fathers subtracted or struck off 10 dais
on October. 5. 1582: but should have defalked 2 more (to reach Christ's birth) as
Lily persuaded, being two dais deficient still. Yet to keep this correction firm
and free from error for ever, they ordered or ordained to have one leap-day
omitted every 100 year, except the 400 because those 10 redundant minutes and 44
secunds, make up near about 3 whole dais in 400 years; which was a wary Proviso
or warrantabe Prevention of error for the future.

The first Reformation is clyped the Julian Sosigenean year, the last (which is
no new Account, but a necessary Note or Comment on the former) the Gregorian
Lilian: but both Roman, one Imperial, the other Papal, and both somewhat
erroneous. This last most Christian Stats (Protestants and Papists) follow being
no point of Religion, but civil computation by the notion of stilo novo: who
retract their Anniversary deviation in part (tho not plenirarily or perfectly)
and prevent future aberrations. Why then shall we stick still in the Suds, and
stand single or singular in evident error? Specialy since by uniform conformity
with them, the duple comput of stilo veteri and novo will be cancelled or
cashired, to the ineffable benefit of common commerce in this Commonwealth with
foreign Nations.

Such a sudden simultal surreption of 10 or 12 dais, will breed or beget much
confusion and contention here concerning Contracts, Covenants, Bonds, Bills,
dates of Deeds, payment of Rents, etc. but if al Bistextil dais be forbid or
forborne for 44 years (which will meet with the foreign, when by superseding a
leap-day A. C. 1700 they will be 11 dais before us) or 52 according to the Suns
station in Christ's age, which will bring us 2 dais before them: a gradual
Reformation will insensibly insu, without the least inconvenience to be
imagined. For what damage or detriment can acru ora rise to any, if al years
run equal so long? The manner may be effected by Act of Parliament in few words:
that no Leap-yeer shall be held in England for 44 years (or 52 as shall seem
best) next coming: but afterward to be kept as before, except every 134 years
for ever: or else, but afterward one leapday shall be struck off every 100 year
(except each 400) for ever: either of which Proviso's is authentic to keep it
right. For the said redundance complets one day in 134 years (lack only one
minut, 44 secunds) and 3 dais in 400, lack 26 minutes and 40 secunds: which make
one day in 24000 years being inconsiderable Al Solar seasons (the 2 Equinoxes,
2 Solstices, etc.) keep the self same set stations constantly and continualy:
but civil computations of things done on such a day certain (as Christ's Birth
December. 25 A. M. 4031 current, the Norman Conquest of England Oct. 6. A. C.
1066) run on one day too far every 134 years, as foreshewed: so Christ's birth
is 12 dais later then it should be and the Conquest 4. Thus I have done my duty
or devoir to denote and demonstrat the true dimension of a Solar year, the
Julian deviation, Gregorian aberration, motivs, means, and manner of
rectification obvious to every common capacity: al which I humbly submit to
superior censure.

Thus have I like a long wearied Pilgrim, tired my head Upshot.
to disquite the truth of Times, toiled my hands to transcribe it often, and
dulled my Pen to satisfy or gratify the censorious Surveiors; who will rather
repay scofs and scorns, then du praises or thanks: But I expect no better
reward then what common Writers attain, and have done my best indevors to
instruct or inform the Ignorant: let the Learned learn to emend it, who may
take exemple by the Premises, to polish or perfect this new devised Art by
better paterns.

Lector, habe Chronica haec; quae ducta ab origin Mundi,
Ad tua sunt filo secula nexa brevi.
Ad Christi genesin primaevi tempora Mundi,
Hocce Chronographicum singula signat Opus. Aliter.

Tempora deducit de cunis singula Mundi, Alias

Ad Christum haec natum Chronnographia brevis.
Ad Christum genitum, a prima scaturigine Mundi, Secus.

Quaeque sua hoc serie secula Monstrat Opus.
Tela Chronographica haec a Mundi front gradatim, Sive.

Ad Christi tempus, tempora resque refert.
De certo Anno Mundi, quo natus est Christus.
Mill quater Mundi a genesi lapsi atque triginta A. M. 4030.

Sunt Anni, ut Christus carne repertus erat.
Bis duo mill Anni and decies ter ab Orb creato: Alias.

Filius ante Dei quam Caro factus erat.
Reader, these Chronographs with a short thread wrought,
From the Worlds dawning to thy dais are brought.
This Chronographic Work from the Worlds prime,
Shows til Christ's Birth the true Account of Time.
From the Worlds Cradle, this brief Chronography
Draws down al Times to Christ's Nativity.
From the Worlds rise to Christ's birth Stage by Stage,
This Work in order sets forth every Age.
This Chronographic web from the Worlds Spring,
Til Christ's time shows the Times and every thing.
The true year of the World, wherein Christ was born.
From the Worlds birth, four thousand thirty years clear
Ran out; when Christ did in the flesh appeer.
From the World made four thousand years and thrice ten
Past; yer Gods sole Son was made Flesh like Men.
AN END.
THis Libel or little Book is a peculiar Brat of my sole Advise.
Brain, or proper Bird (a Lark) of my Personal Brood; who like a Spider spun
this whole Web out of mine own Bowels: which has many unvulgar mysteries never
vented or invented before: Loquendum cum Plebiis, scribendum cum Eruditis; sed
sentiendum cum Sophis seu Sapientibus. I divulge likewise two Pedetasters: viz.
an Enchiridion of Epigrams in Latin and English Meters: And also eght
Theological Theorems, with some Supplements subjoined: the price of both
together at Press being 4 s. 6 d. as shall appeer in the Title Pagin of each.
This little Book may be bound with the last of those two, if any so like, being
both of one Paper and Letter.


