MYSTERIES, AND SECRETS OF Trade and Mint-affairs:

With several REASONS against transporting Treasure; and ways set down for
preventing the same: formerly presented to the Right Honorable the Lord
Bradshaw, (at whose desire I undertook this pains,) and presented it to the
late Council of State: and now enlarged, and humbly presented to this present
Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, in Aug. 1653.

By THO. VIOLET of London, Goldsmith.

coat of arms surrounded by six cherubs

London, Printed by William Du-Gard, Anno Dom. 1653.

A List of all such Ships as the Fleet of the PARLIAMENT of England have brought
into this Commonwealth as Dutch-Prizes, (which Ships have all been discharged
by the High Court of Admiraltie, the days here-under written) besides several
other Ships discharged as Dutch-prizes brought into this Commonwealth by
diverse private men of War, the particular names and times of their discharge, I
humbly desire the Register of the High Court of Admiraltie may be ordered to
bring into the Parliament.
Also I humbly desire, that the Right Honorable Admiral Blake may be desired
to send up unto the Parliament what Ships of Hamborough, Lubeck, Danzick, or any
of the Hans-Towns, he or any of his Officers has given passes to sail to the
foresaid places, since August 12, 1652.

Ships and Goods therein restored Masters. The Parties to whom. December. 10. 1652
A Sloape called the Love and Goods, London Luther Mayeer Unto the Mr and Comp.
December. 16. 52 Fisher of Straelsondt and Goods, Dover Gaspor Viscar Unto the Mr
and owners December. 16. 52 Peter of Straelsondt and Goods, London Albert
Hubertson Unto the Mr and owners December. 16. 52 Abraham's Sacrifice and Goods
Ditto Unto Peter Scrother for the use etc: December. 16. 52 Fortune and Goods
Ditto Berent Van Dunk Unto the said Mr and owners December. 16. 52 St John
Baptist, and Goods Bartle Johnson Unto the Mr for the owners December. 18. 52 St
John Baptist, and Goods Rattey Bye Mr Unto the said Mr for etc. December. 18. 52
George of Hambrough and Goods, Falmo Martine Stehew Unto the said Mr for etc.
December. 18. 52 St John and Goods Ditto Berent Johnsonson Unto the Mr for etc.
December. 18. 52 Temperance, and Goods Frederick Witherick Unto the Mr for etc.
December. 4. 52 Peter and Goods except the Silver, Ditto Daniel Stretman Unto the
Mr for etc. October. 15. 52 St Jo. Baptist of Horn, and goods, except 1/16 part,
Ditto Inebrand Peterson Unto Laurence de Geere October. 1o 52 Goods Scedulate in
the Cock, alias Rosecrame Tenby Unto Don Antonio de Plato October. 22. 52 Young
Tobias, and Goods, Cows Wesell Gosenson Mr Unto Zachary Lappa July 30. 52 Love
Galliots, and goods, London Sveyer Johnson Unto Lewis de Geere, and compa
Septem. 29. 52 Goods Scedulate in the Cock, alas Rosecrame Tynby Unto Iacintho
Lopez, October. 12. 52 Ann of Ostend, and Goods, Plimo Daniel Cornellis Unto Joos
Fremont, and Compa December. 10. 52 Sixty eight Butts of Oil in the Griman,
London Unto Cornellis and Gerard Knife Septem. 21. 52 A Sixth part of the Ship
Hopewell, and Goods Peter Johnson Unto John Southwood, or assigns October. 8. 52
part of Ancona of Venice with freight due, Ditto Adrian Hendrickson Unto
Eustace Van Ekey December. 22. 52 Katharine of Hambrough, and goods, Ditto
Bristoll Unto the Mr for etc. December. 10. 52 A Chest and half and Barrel of
Sugar, Fortune of Flushing Unto John Hubine, or assigns October. 15. 52 part of
one two and thirtieth part of the Ship Maid of Enchusen, and part of one two
and thirtieth part of the lading, and 13 saccardave planks Wm Johnson Lawne --
London Unto Zachary Lappa, or assigns August 15. 52 15/16 parts of the King
David and lading Walter Jacobson Mr Unto Simon Clerk, and Compa Septem. 21. 52
Fortune of Hambrough, and goods, Plimo John Strother Master Unto Philip Dunker,
etc. October 1o 52 May-Flower, and goods, Portsmo Andrew Short Master Except
part of Ship and goods for salvage August 5. 52 Gift of God of Air, and goods,
Plimo Thomas Kennedy Mr Unto Thomas Jarvan, and others October. 5. 52 Fortune of
Newport, and goods, Ditto Joos de Vink Master Unto Gasper Sanson, and others
November. 17. 52 Peace of Wisemire, and goods, Dover Claes Maults Master Unto the
said Mr and Compa November. 19. 52 St Jacob, and goods, London Christian
Vonderwetter Unto the Mr for the owners November. 19. 52 Black Eagle, and goods,
Dover Harman Luders Unto Hendrick Vanaskine, and others November. 17. 52 St
Matthew of Hambrough, and goods, Ditto Henry Cruse Unto Peter Larkines, and
others November. 17. 52 Charity of Gottenbrough, Ditto Paul Pawson Boman Unto
George Van Lingard, and others November. 21. 52 Hunter, and goods, Ditto Claves
Grisel Master Unto the Mr and Compa Novem. 17. 52 Fortune of Straelsondt, and
goods, Ditto Daniel Ranges Unto the said Daniel Ranges, and others Novem. 22.
52 Icedom, and goods, Ditto Pasque Alberts Unto the Mr for the use of Hen.
Johnson Novem. 19. 52 King David, and goods, London Gillos Lites Unto Vincent
Kiningsburgh, and Compa Novem. 19. 52 Sampson of Wisemire, and goods, Dover
Severt Godtman Unto Henrick Vanderdlen, and others Novem. 17. 52 Hope of
Dantzick, and goods, Portsmo John Johnson Unto Peter Benson, and Compa Noxem.
17. 52 Land of Promise, Dover Garret Higenloe Unto Burgo* Mr Wakeman, and
others Novem. 17 52 St Ellin of Rostock, Ditto Hendrick Dureloffe Unto the said
M^ and Compa Novem. 17. 52 Fortune of Hambrough, and goods, Ditto David Beck
Unto the Mr for the use of the owners Novem. 17. 52 Fortune of Lubeck, and
goods, Portsmo Joachim Dunke Unto the Mr and Compa Novem. 17. 52 Justice of
Hambrough, London Frederick Fox Unto the Mr and Compa Novem. 19. 52 St John,
and goods, Dover Hendrick Pape Unto the Mr for etc. Novem. 17. 52 Concord of
Lubeck, and goods, Ditto John Dureloffe Unto Anthony Weffels and Compa Novem.
19. 52 Hope of Hambrough, and goods, Ditto Hendrick Elders Unto John Jennink
and Compa Novem. 19. 52 Sampson of Hambrough, and goods, London Hans Hiteman
Unto William de la Bistrus and others Novem. 17. 52 Black Ox, and goods, Ditto
Garret Hendrickson Unto Andrew Garretson and others Novem. 8. 52 Lno King David
part, and part Brazeile-wood Unto Baldwin Matthews Novem: 22. 52 St Jacob of
Hambrough, Falmo Client Marenson Unto John Lemerman and Compa October. 15. 52 Lno
Little Prince 1/^ part and of Tackle and Furniture Claes Junison Unto Ralph
Tomaines October. 12. 52 Ditto Antona of Venice part and of Taclke, etc. Peter
Johnson Unto Baltazar Vandegoes December. 1o 52 Two White Hawks, and goods, Dover
Peter Harmason Beker Unto the said Mr Novem. 19. 52 Love, and goods, London
John Hendricks Unto William Blachford and others December. 1o 52 St George, and
goods, Dover John Peterson Greipe Unto the Mr for the use of the owners Novem.
29. 52 Hope, and goods, London Hendrick Martines Unto the said Mr and Compa
Novem. 29. 52 Childrens Plea, and goods Simon Fox Unto the said Mr and Compa
December. 1o 52 St Sebastian, and goods John Geest Unto the said Mr. for the use
of the owner.

Signed, THO. VIOLET.

A TRUE NARRATIVE OF SOME Remarkable Proceedings Concerning the Ships Samson,
Salvador, and George, and several other Prize-ships depending in the High Court
of Admiraltie: most humbly presented to the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND, and to the Right Honorable the COUNCIL of STATE by Authority of
PARLIAMENT, and to the Honorable the Council of Officers, of his Excellency the
LORD GENERAL.

By THO. VIOLET of London, Goldsmiths.

Who most humbly desire's them to take the same into their due Consideration,
it being for the security and safety of the Nation.

coat of arms surrounded by six cherubs

LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard, An. Dom. 1653.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Major General HARRISON, Major General DESBOROW,
Colonel PHILIP JONES, and Colonel BENNET; All of the Right Honorable the
Council of State.
RIGHT HONORABLE!
WHen God, by his Providence, had dissolved the late Parliament and Council of
State, the 20 of April, 1653; and most of those Honorable Members of the
Council, and Parliament (to whom I made formerly my humble Addresses in the
behalf of the State, against several Prize-ships and Silver, depending the 20
December, 1652, in the Court of Admiraltie) ceasing from their public
emploiments, and reduced into the condition of private persons; It pleased God
to put it into my heart, to make my addresses to Col. Weeton, and Lieutenant
Col. Joice, whom I had observed in all their actions to be public spirited
men, and such as daily sought the honor and welfare of the Commonwealth.

When I had acquainted them with my business, and how far I had proceeded in
the Court of Admiraltie, and the present condition and posture of the
Commonwealth's Silver-prises, and other affairs in that Court: They were
pleased, when they understood my desires, freely to present the state of this
weighty affair unto your Honors, desiring your care of the business, even so
far as your Honors saw it did conduce to the profit, safety, and honor of the
Commonwealth: thereupon I made my humble addresses to your Honors; Major
General Harrison being pleased to give me thanks for my pains and care I had
taken about the staying the Prize-Silver and Ships; and Colonel Bennet and
Col. Jones sending for me, upon the Lieutenant of the Tower's information to
them about me, They desired me to give them informations for the carrying on
the business of the Silver Prizes, and that I should set down several rules for
the managing the Coining of the silver for the State's profit, and for keeping
an account of all the particular parcels, which I did, and delivered it to Col.
Jones, and Col. Bennet.

Major General Desborow procured me a new Warrant from the Council of State:
these great favors of your Honors, for giving me encouragement to proceed in
this business of the Prize-ships and Silver, I humbly conceiv, was only in
relation to the service and prosperity of the Commonwealth, and your love to
Justice, that every one should have his right.

May it pleas your Honors! The Court of Admiraltie, in time of War, is like a
private Postern to a strong Castle that is besieged; the passage is narrow, you
can com in but one by one; but if the Garrison neglect to put a Sentinel at
that door, that little Postern shall, in short time, through the vigilancie of
the Adversaries, let in so many enemies, that the Castle will be taken.

Your Court of Admiraltie is a dangerous Backdoor of the Commonwealth; if the
State watch not carefully, to see what goe's, and to have a good account of
what Prizes com in, either for the State, or for private men of War.

May it pleas your Honors! there is a great deal of difference between the
judgment of any Court of Justice in Westminster, which are between man and man,
and the Judgments and Acts of a Court of Admiraltie for maritime causes; for if
an error in judgment, or any undue practices in the proceedings of the
Chancerie, Upper-Beuch, Common Pleas, and Checquer does fall out; if it be for
the State, the Commonwealth may have a review, and try their Title again: and
the like it is between party and party, if they pleas: the Lands remain, the
people are here to give a respons to any such actions. But your Court of
Admiraltie has such a Postern door, called, the Sea, that an error in judgment
there, is a damage irreparable, in this conjuncture of time; for the Ships and
Merchandise may be, and have been, in your enemie's power, to be employed
against you in 40 hours after, as in case of several Ships discharged the Court
of Admiraltie.

This Postern of your Court of Admiraltie was made so wide, by the industry of
several Merchants: and no doubt but it was by means of money, that will cut
through the Pirenean mountains, that twelv Ships passed out of the Court of
Admiraltie at one time, the 17 of November, 1652; and seven Ships the 19 Nov.
and five the 16 Dec. 1652. and 4 Ships 18 Dec. 1652: quick judgments in such
weighty businesses; whereas the safety of the Commonwealth, and every
particular person, was concerned to have every Prize-ship strictly examined
before their Discharge; and this was don after they were brought as Prize, at a
vast charge of your Fleet and loss of blood; a sad thing to think, that the
State's business should be so managed.

May it pleas your Honors! about the 16 December, 1652, seventeen Ships were to
be discharged by the Court of Admiraltie, containing 3400 Tuns; all laden with
rich Commodities, and silver, had not I com into the Court of Admiraltie, and
protested against the Deliverie of them: as appears on Record in the said
Court; for my doing thereof I had a verbal VVarrant from the Committee of
Foreign Affairs. If you will be pleased to enquire what became of many of
these Ships so discharged, this Narrative following will acquaint you: Some of
them went to Holland, Captain Bishop's Letters from Holland will tell you the
same of many of these Ships.

May it pleas your Honors! The Court of Admiraltie was, about Christ-tide last,
ruled by three men, of different affections: One, that knew much of the Law,
and the practice of that Court, which he did daily show openly; but it was in
that way of bitterness against the State's Interest in their several Prizes,
that no Counsel at the Bar said half so much for their Clients, as he, being
a Judge, declared against the Commonwealth's Title about some of the Prizes, and
Silver. The Other just, and would have been glad to have don the
Commonwealth's business, but that he was not grounded in the Proceeding of
that Court. A Third grown suddenly rich, by the common rule that all Judges
that grow suddenly rich, must walk by.

May it pleas your Honors! When I was first commanded by the Council of State
to attend this business, about the Prize-silver, I saw so much in these persons
and their practice, and some of the Proctors of that Court, at the first
entrance into the Court about this business of my Protest, that I was startled
and troubled to consider, what a business I had undertaken to the Committee of
Foreign Affairs.

But I put on a Resolution, by God's Assistance, not to be worded out of this
business, but to wade through it; for that the safety of the whole Nation was
at the Stake, in that conjuncture of time, the Hollanders being at that time
in the Downs. And to terrify me, and to deter me from proceeding to do you
this service; when I seriously considered of the business, I had first the
Merchants ready to load me with actions, if I could not have proved my
Allegations. Secondly I had public Ministers, that would have taken away my
life as an Incendiarie, if I could not have proved, there was Silver belonging
to the Hollanders, in the Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George, which I stayed.
And thirdly, had these Prizes been cleared, I had many of the Council of State
would have sent me back to my Old Lodging in the Tower. Fourthly I had an
enraged company of Doctors and Proctors, and such things, whose Trade I
discovered, and was resolved, by God's assistance, to spoil for the time to
com; and indeed I had so many obstacles to contest with, as would have startled
a thousand men.

Against this, I set the Safety of the Nation, and restoring me to my Estate:
and that I should convince mine enemies that they had don ill in oppressing
me, when they see both what I could and would venture to do for my Countrie's
service; and the world should see, that I would not fear the face of any to
unmask these frauds: And I hope the Justice and Wisdom of Parliament, will make
strict laws and rules for the future, to prevent such abuses as have been
notoriously practiced by many in that Court; and that the State will keep good
Sentinels and watchmen for the future, both to examine all papers, Bills of
Lading, and the Registers and all the Examiners, and other proceedings in that
Court.

It is not one or two of the ablest men that can be found in this Nation can
do this business in the Admiraltie duly as it should be don: If I be
commanded, and have a moderate allowance, I will give the State a good account
for the time to com.

And at this present time the Prizes are many, and sometimes a man may light on
a Letter, a Paper, or sheet of Account, that may be worth to the State a
hundred thousand pounds: and there are secrets in the expounding of Merchant's
Letters, (that are not easily discovered) Accounts, and Bills of Lading,
Purser's Books; and will take up several knowing men's time to understand: a
strict eye will improve the State's Interest much; and if the State will have
this business well don, it must be well paid for; for small fees and pensions,
where great trusts are, make's the Devil suggest invitations to take Bribes;
and where a man must lay out two or three hundred pounds, or more, for his
intelligence, boat-hire, and messengers, (and without this your business cannot
be well don) and if your Officer shall not have much more a year from the
State for his yearly Fees in this business; this, I believ, has made some to
take up the temptation, and to make them find out ways to help themselves,
seeing the State will not pay them well for their pains, getting more in an
hour by delivering a paper, or concealing it, than the State will allow them
for seven years Salarie. If I would have driven this Trade to have betrayed my
trust, I needed not have asked the State a penny: I could have had my eleven
thousand pound, without Petitioning for it. I have good reason to believ this
is, and has been acted by some: I would wish to mend it for the future, least
this fire burst out, and consume them before they be aware of it: I have given
some notice of it, if God give them grace to prevent it for the future; for else
at one time or other it will burst out. If I have proof of it, I shall not
spare him or them, when I am employed by the State.

May it pleas your Honors! I discovered the frauds of the Merchants, and
others, in laboring to deceiv the State of their Prize-silver. But it was my
Lord Bradshaw, who, by his power, interest, and influence in the late Council
of State, and his profound experience and judgment that caused the imbargo of
the Silver to be made: and what benefit and Treasure does com into the
Commonwealth by the Silver-prizes. The Commonwealth, I humbly say, ow's the
primarie Remembrance thereof to his judgment and vigilancie in this weighty
business: For when I brought him first my Papers, those of the 8th December,
1652. And after other Papers, he presently upon his diligent reading of them,
found out the fraud, as to his particular judgment, and asked me many other
Questions then I had written; which satisfied him, and that made his Honor press
so hard in this business against those that opposed me at the Council of State
for my prosecution thereof; and to see that I should not be oppressed for
doing the State this service.

For at one time in the Council of State, it was at a standing-water, whether I
should shoot Bridge, and so go back to the Tower, where I had been formerly laid
up, by the power of malicious and subtle men, who made many of the late
Parlament-men their instruments to keep me in the Tower, upon pretense that I
was a malignant, that so I should not discover the nest of Transporters of Gold
and Silver; which I then was Ordered by the Parliament to do: and there is about
twenty Orders of Parliament and Committees, for the bringing in the Act for the
discovery of the same, and the Act twice read in the late Parliament; and an
Order for the finishing the Act against the Transporters of Gold, about 14
April last, was appointed in the Parliament.

May it pleas your Honors! my Lord Bradshaw told me; about Christ-tide last,
before Tho. Westroop Esquire, that there was some of the Council would, if they
could, hang me for staying this Silver; which doing of mine, as he conceived,
was a great and good service to the Commonwealth; but to the uttermost of his
power he would see they should not oppress me: So that the State ow's his
Lordship for that benefit they receiv by the Prize-silver, and I ow my liberty
to his justice and goodness, that would engage himself in this business, to see
I should not be oppressed for my doing this service for the Commonwealth. I
humbly wish, for the safety of the Commonwealth, we had more Statesmen of
his profound judgment, vigilancie and courage.

The God of heaven prosper your Honors in all you take in hand; that so you may
be a blessing to this Nation in general; that as God has chosen you from
thousands of your Brethren to do mighty things, and wonderful in the eyes of
this Generation, both at home and abroad; so he would out of his infinite
mercies keep your hearts upright, that no worldly prosperity make you forget
God's infinite mercies to you and yours; but that you may, all the days of
your life remember your deliverances in the days of battle, when you jeoparded
your lives for the freedom of this Nation: no doubt God heard your vows, and
exspect's your performances for the good of this Nation.

May it pleas your Honors! This Narrative I humbly present you, is the
unmasking of a cunning and dangerous plot against the Parliament, tending to the
ruin and destruction of every particular Member of this Nation.

When I was first engaged in making my discovery, I met with many Wasps that
did sting me, and venomous Adders; but by the good guidance of God, the State
has plucked out some of their teeth; others will storm to see these Truths
discovered and laid open to your Honors. I am a most humble suitor to the
Parliament and your Honors for your protection and countenance in the doing this
service to the Nation.

God bless and prosper all the counsels and undertakings of Your Honors, and
every particular Member of this present Parliament; that no force or combination
of foreign or home-born Traitors may undermine them; that they being
delivered from their enemies both at home and abroad, may never forget God's
great mercies, that they may be nursing fathers of this Nation, that they may
be tender and merciful to the poor and distressed, that they be builders up
of our breaches, and that they carefully cherish Arts and Manufactures for the
setting all the poor of this Nation a Work, that all the blessings of this life
may be bestowed on them. And as God has raised them above their brethren, so
that he would be pleased to raise them all to reign with his Son for ever; it
being that which is promised those that rule well here, shall reign with him
eternally in the heavens: and this shall be the prayer of

Your Honor's humble servant Tho. Violet.
Aug. 3. 1653.

