A VINDICATION Of certain CITIZENS That lately went to the Leaguer, then
before OXFORD, Or, their Answer unto some prevaricating passages, inserted in
an Epistle, lately published by William Dell, Minister of the Gospel.

Occasioned, by their attesting his delivering of certain Positions, in a
Sermon at the Leaguer, here set down, they being thereunto called by the House
of LORDS.

PROVE. 20.6. Most men will proclaim, every one his own goodness; but a
faithful man who can find?

MATTHEW. 5.13. Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the salt has lost his
savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but
to be cast forth, and to be trodden under foot of men.

7.15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed by Eliz. Purslow for Thomas Vere at the upper end of the
Old Bailey. 1646.

Mr. Dell having beautified the Frontespiece of his Book with these Scriptures;
namely, Matthew. 5.11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. verse.
12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. Psalm. 69.9. The reproaches
of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me. Begins his Epistle thus:

To the Reader.
HAving obtained this grace from God; to be called into some friendship and
familiarity with Jesus Christ, so, as to hear and receive from him, something
of the mind and bosom of the Father, according to his free grace, who has
mercy on whom he will: and having after many tears and temptations (not
unknown to many yet in the body) obtained this further grace, to speak the
Word of God with boldness, I have also been counted worthy to be taken into
some fellowship with Christ in his sufferings, and to ondure the contraditions
of sinners, and oft-times to encounter the rage and madness of men; yea, and
to fight with men after the manner of beasts, altogether brutish and furious.
And thus it has fared with me often, especially at two remarkable times; The
one at Lincoln, upon occasion of two Sermons preached there, upon Isai. ^.7.
The other time wherein I met with remarkable opposition, was lately at Marston,
the head Quarter at the Leaguer before Oxford, whither some coming out of the
City of London, in all probability out of some special design, (seeing the
old Malignity now acts in a new form, and is daily coming forth in a second
and more plausible, cunning, and deceiving edition) became exceeding angry and
heady against the plain and clear truth of the Gospel delivered in this
following Exposition, (wherein the whole truth and substance of what was then
delivered, is exactly set down, and nothing abated, but rather some things
farther pressed; Jer. 36.32.
adding (as Jeremiah in the second roll) many like words to the former. Now
some of these men, seeing themselves and their new design clearly discovered
by the light of the Word, and made altogether naked, suddenly they grew fierce
and furious, contradicting and blaspheming; yea, some of them speaking the
language of hell upon earth, of which there are some witnesses) as became men
of such a generation. Joh. 8.44.
These men, according to the operation of that spirit, which works mightily in
the children of disobedience, come and fill the whole City with lies and
slanders, laying to my charge things that I knew not; the falsehood and untruth
whereof, there are some hundreds, and some of them of great and eminent worth
and piety, ready to witness: Wherefore of mere necessity I was constrained to
publish this Exposition, as a witness to this present and the following
generations, of these men's resisting the Spirit, and acting against Christ
himself in the Word. And though the discourse be very plain, not savouring
of any accuratonesse of Humane Wisdom and Learning; yet they that are
themselves spiritual, will acknowledge something of the spirit in it, and for
that cause will relish and love it, though others will therefore be at the
greater enemitie against it. But for my part, I have set down my resolution in
the Lord in this Cause of Jesus Christ, not to weigh all the power of Earth or
Hell, one feather; but to put it to the utmost trial, whether the truth of the
Gospel, or the slanders and lies of men shall prevail; whether the smoke of
the bottomless pit, that comes forth out of the mouth of these and many
others, shall be able to blot out or darken, the Brightness of Christ's coming
in the Ministry of the Gospel? Yea, and whether the power and malice of the
Devil and the world, shall be stronger then the love and protection of Jesus
Christ. And I doubt not, but the more the world acts in the spirit of the
Devil, the more will Christ enable us, to act in his own Spirit, till all at
last shall be forced to acknowledge, that the spirit that is in us, is stronger
then the spirit that is in the world? And what now have all these men obtained
by all their malice and fury, but a greater and more open discovery of the
truth; and to cause that that light of the Gospel, that only shone in one
Congregation, should through the Printing of it, have its beams scattered in
many parts of the Kingdom? And where over the truth comes, the Children of the
truth will entertain it, and ask no body leave. And thus, through the
overruling power of Gods wisdom, do these men betray their own and their
follo^ Cause, and overthrow their own, and their ends; and whilst they think
to oppress the truth, propagate it the more: And thus shall truths enemies
perish, and the truth it self flourish: Yea, flourish through Slanders,
Oppositions, Contradictions, Blasphemies, and all the Vileness and Villainy in
the world. And all this considente in us, arises hence; Because Christ is not
as a dead man, but is risen and ascended, and sits at the right hand of God,
and fills all things, and does all things in Heaven and in Earth, in the world,
and in the Church, among his friends, and among his enemies, till these be made
his footstool; which is the very thing we are now in expectation of. Now one
thing more which I think fit to acquaint the world withal in this Epistle, is
this. That (...) of th^se thorny hearts durst after come to discourse with me,
or to look me in the face; but one among them, that seemed of a better temper
then the rest, upon the urging of a godly Citizen then present, did speak with
me; and the Question he asked of me, was this; Whether I thought, that all
Presbyterians were carnal Gospellers: I told him, I was far from thinking
any such thing; for I knew some of them very godly Christians, and did
acknowledge the grace of God in them; and that for mine own part, I did not
allow any such distinction of Christians, as Presbyterians and Independents,
this being only a distinction of man's making, tending to the division of the
Church; and added, That as in Christ's Kingdom, Neither circumcision avails
any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature; So, in this same Kingdom of
Christ, Neither Presbytery avails any thing, nor Independency, but a new
creature; and that the Kingdom of God stands not in Presbytery nor
Independency, but in righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; and
that, if I saw any thing of God, or Christ, or the Spirit, in any one, I
reckoned him as a Brother, not taking any such opinion into consideration; and
that the unity of Spirit, and not of opinion, is the bond of peace in Christ's
Kingdom: The man then pretended to be satisfied, and to rejoice in his
satisfaction; but since (as is related) has showed his stomach again: But,
because he seems to be a Christian, The Lord lay it not to his charge.

Thus far the Epistle relates to us, our Vindication and Answer follows.

To Master Dell.
SIR,
HAving received, and perused your Epistle, directed to your Reader, we think
our selves bound in duty, as well for the Vindication of our Innocence, as the
satisfaction of our fellow Citizens, and others, who have, or shall read you;
to let your self, and the world know, that we, the persons, against whom you
are pleased to be so invective, are such as by our fruits (our lives and
conversations) desire to be known: By Gods grace we are what we are; we
desire not, that our talkative tongues should applaud us before men, but that
our sincere souls should approve us to God. To him, the searcher of all
hearts, we appeal; 2 Chronicles. 28.9
for he knows, and his discerning Spirit testifies to, and with our spirits,
that we are every one of us free from all those your virulent expressions;
which causes our spirits to be perplexed, and our very souls to grieve; not
for our own sakes, whom you have endeavored to shoot and stab, with the
sharp Arrow, and direful dart of your siery tongue. But for your own sake;
that you, whom we esteemed to be principled from Heaven, (and so some of us
reported of you,) should discover your rotten principles, Ephesi. 4.31.
by your bitterness, wrath, ang^^, calmour, evil speaking, and malice;
whereas your speech ought to be always with grace, Col. 4.6.
seasoned with salt.

Could it be imagined, that a man of your pretense could possibly thus
miscarry? Where is that divine strength that should have conquered your peevish
passion? What! profess so much grace, and demonstrate so much unsubdued
nature? Before you did thoroughly resolve to belch out so many Bedlam blasts, why
did you not remember your own honor? Surely that, though Gods glory would
not, might have deterred you from your railing rage.

Sir, You must give us leave to trace your Tract, that so we may fully answer
every piece of your patcht Epistle that shall concern us; for one jot further
we will not step; No, we have already appealed to God: And now we will
appeal to the world, whether or no, we be such as your term us, madmen,
furious, brutish beasts; Phrases that your carnal Christian surely scorns to
breath forth.

The providence of God disposing of our thoughts to visit the Leaguer lately
before Oxford; and the rather, for that it was credibly reported in London,
that Oxford would certainly be surrendered on Saturday, the sixth of June last:
And having never been at, nor seen a Leaguer; hoping likewise that this would
be the last Leaguer, that we should have occasion to see in England; by Gods
assistance, setting forth from our dwellings in London, on Friday the fifth of
June in the afternoon, we came to the Leaguer the day following, without the
least thought of any manner of design: O censorious Sir! You saw not our
hearts, our hearts to whom the very name malignitie, much more the thing, come
it whether in your first or second edition, if under that notion of malignitie,
it is odious, it is abominable: It Is publicly known, that we have laid out our
selves, and ours, for the public.

On the Lords day, the seventh of that June, in the morning, we desiring so
much as we could, at such a distance from home, and in such a place, to spend
that day to Gods glory and our own good) hearing that there would be no Sermon
at Wheatly, where we Inn'd, we repaired to the Leaguer, and inquired at the
Headquarters, who was to Preach before his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and
where the Sermon would be, and were informed that your self were to exercise
at the meeting place at Marston; learning at length that by Meeting Place was
meant the Church; thither we repaired, where we saw and heard from you Master
Dell, a great deal of other Matter then the Press has met withal; and till
then, most of us never saw, nor heard of you: Yet were we so far from anger,
or headiness, by you charged upon us, against the plain and clear truth of
the Gospel, which you then delivered in your Exposition, that we commended you
for all that we found to be commendable in you: As we did, do, and will say,
(say you what you will) that you did deliver some very good matter. But yet,
since we are necessitated, and since (as it now appears to us) wise men are
not always so wise as they should, or might be; therefore you will have us
promulge our thoughts to the world; we must declare, we were not satisfied with
all that then you did deliver. But pray, let us tell you, you do ill to
conclude, that because we spoake not with you, therefore we durst not come to
you to discourse with you, or look you in the face; for all of us had not the
opportunity to come unto you, and indeed after our rehearing from you by a
Gentleman of our Company, who did speak with you, as you have acknowledged;
though we could have gained time, we had but little desire, the reason whereof
we hereafter give you in this our Answer.

On the Monday morning, the eighth of June, we took our journey homewards, and
by Gods blessing returned that night well and safe to our dwellings; leaving
behind us at the Leaguer, some of our Company C. F.
, which we had just cause to suspect (because you put us in mind of Designs)
went thither to carry on a Design, as appeared, by deserting of us; by
maintaining the rumor of the SCOTS coming against the Army; by
discountenancing some of our godly Preachers in London; and such other
passages. Having bin a few days at home, a rumor came to our ears, of a
seditious Sermon lately Preached in the Leaguer; and the peoples voice pitched
upon this your mentioned Exposition, to be that Leagver Sermon, which so tended
to sedition. The whole truth, and substance whereof (notwithstanding your
affirmation) to our knowledge is not exactly set down in the Printed Copy: For
as very much is abated, which you then delivered; so, something is added, of
like words indeed, but of much different sense; whereof we will not presume to
pass any manner of censure or judgment, for that is above us and now
depending. For the report hereof stayed not long within the City walls;
insomuch, that within a few days following, notice having bin taken of our
late return from the Leaguer, we were, with much wonderment on our part, and
without our foreknowledge, privity or desire, summoned to make our appearance
on Monday the nine and twentieth of the same June, in the Lords House of
Parliament. Whither being come, we were there demanded by the right Honorable
Lord, the then Speaker, Whether we were lately at the Leaguer, and whether we
heard you Preach there. We answered, we were there, and there we heard you
Expound the s^ven last verses of the 54. Chapter of Jsaiah. Then was produced
by one of the Clarks of that House, a Paper, which when he had read, we found
that it contained certain passages of your Exposition, which it seems you
have now forgotten, and therefore have either omitted or minced them. But being
demanded, whether we remembered them to pass from you or not, we must speak
the truth, and did confess, that those or the like words in effect, were then
and there by you delivered. Whereupon we were for that time dismissed, and
commanded to attend again on Thursday following, being the second of this
July; where having attended some time, we were without calling in commanded to
depart, till further summons.

What was then and there read unto us, as by you delivered in your Exposition,
if not in those very words; yet to that effect, does here follow, viz.

There are no more of the Church of God in a Kingdom, then there be such as
have the spirit of God in that Kingdom.

Neither Old nor new Testament do hold forth a whole Nation to be a Church.

Whatsoever a State, an Assembly, or Counsel shall say, ought not to bind the
Saints, further then the judgment of those Saints shall lead them.

The Saints are those that are now styled Anabaptists, Famalists, Antinomians,
Independents, Sectaries, and the like.

The power is in you the People, keep it, part not with it.

The first Party that rose against you; namely, the Profane ones of the Land,
are already fallen under you; and now there is another party, Formalists and
carnal Gospelers, rising up against you; but I am confident, they shall also
fall under you.

They are willing to become Subjects, to make the Saints slaves; nay, they are
willing to become slaves themselves, that they may tread upon the necks of the
Saints.

Now that being thus by your self occasioned, we have declared our
consciences, in setting forth the whole truth of our knowledge in these
proceedings; we do, in the presence of God, protest against the very thought,
of all or any either old or new Design, to be acted by us, notwithstanding
your so much urging the same, and harping thereupon. But if instead of our
acting, those of riper and more diving judgments then we are, can or shall,
out of your own mouth, collect a Design now in hand on your part, to them we
shall leave both it and you.

Be not ashamed Sir to charge home, descend from your mighty mouthing
Generals, your pretended fierce, furious, contradicting, blaspeming, hellish
speeches (words not beseeming so mild a mouth as a Ministers ought to be) to
plain particulars; spare neither our persons, words nor actions: you have
several times met with us, pointed at us; Oh why would you not daigne to speak
with us? We are, we hope, of such a Generation as you are, if you be, as we
hope you are (notwithstanding the transcendency of your passion) of that
generation that fears God: Suppose the worst, that we had wronged you (though
should you say it, we dare say, your conscience would check your tongue) Oh me
thinks you should not recompense to us evil for evil, Pro. 24.29. Romans 12.17.
nor thus in this vain, frothy, wording way, seek to avenge your self; Romans
12 19.
Why should you be thus transported? You know whose vengeance is, and who has
said he will repay; to him both you and we must stand and fall.

Why will you thus presumingly usurp Gods Throne? Pray remember what it is to
judge; Mat. 7.1, 2. 1 Cor. 4.5.
the Lord preserve us from any, and you from further operation of that Spirit,
in whom no truth is. John 8, 44.
The whole City filled with lies, slanders! O hyperbolicall! and you poor
simple man charged with things you knew not, or rather that you will not
remember; but there are though not hundreds, yet a competent number of credible
witnesses, and some of them of known worth and piety, that when they shall be
called to it, will, in discharge of their conscience, and according to the
Covenant which they have taken, put you in mind of something which you would be
loath to hear. Ah, Master Dell! what del-usion is it that has thus seized
upon you? What, must mere necessity constrain this, and the following
Generations to be acquainted with your juglings? Because you are afraid that
your whole exposition, if it look upon the Sun, will not endure the light
thereof; and searing least we being called thereunto, will make a clear
discovery; therefore you cry out, these men resist the Spirit, and act against
Christ himself in the Word; a strange conclusion. We hint your drift; you
think perchance by your prejudice, to cloud and eclipse us, yet your
expectation may be frustrate.

Truly Sir, for our parts, we must needs confess, that your discourse in
print, is plainer then your discourse in the Pulpit was; yet both there and
here, we, whom you esteem children borne after the flesh, and carnal
Christians (the Lord more and more spirituallize both you and us) cannot be so
blind, but we must needs, and do acknowledge something of the spirit in it,
against which we abhor to be at any enmity; and are as seriously resolved as
you are, or can be (notwithstanding your boisterous blustering and
sesquipidalian verborsity) to stand to, and maintain the Cause of Christ, and
the clearing up the brightness of his coming in the Ministry of the Gospel,
against the power and malice of the Devil and the world, according to our
Vocation so far as possibly we may or can, though with the loss of what is
most dear and precious to us, even to the laying down of our lives
themselves: and this profession, notwithstanding all the venom that you have,
or can spit against us, we do here jointly and severally (we thank you for it,
for we take it as an accidental courtesy) make and hold forth; not doubting,
but knowing assuredly that the spirit of Christ, which we trust is in us, and
hope and pray that it may be in you, is, and will be predominant over that
spirit that is in the world.

And now Sir, where or what is that Victory that your verbal vaunting boasts
of? To what purpose has your furious fury all this while run descant? Phil.
3.19.
Glory not in your shaine: Is there no other way to accomplish a greater, and
more open discovery of the truth, and to cause the beams thereof to be
scattered in the Kingdom, but by your curtaild notes? Oh! what pity is it,
that another, and not your self, did not write the forepart of this your
Epistle? Let another man praise thee, and not thy own mouth; Pro. 27.2.
a stranger, and not thy own lips. Good Master Dell, do not conceive the
children of the truth to be so dull, but that they will entertain the truth,
where, and by whomsoever it comes, without asking you any leave.

Whither are you now roving? You are gotten again into the clouds, and fall
again upon your paradoxes; and because you will not too much tautalogize you
have laid aside your before mentioned cunning and deceiving malignity, and have
found out Synonimaes for Designs; and now you tell the world, that we betray
our own and our fellows Cause, and overthrow our own and their ends: We
freely profess our ignorance herein, we understand you not, neither know we
what to make of, nor how to unfold these your ridiculous riddles: but this we
plainly from our souls pronounce and say, Cursed be that person that shall
think of oppressing the truth; let it propogate and flourish, and let all its
enemies perish; let it flourish! yea, we are confident it will flourish, and
that through slanders, oppressions, contradictions, villainies, and all other
your reckoned up rascally rabble: And this our confidence is built upon a
strong foundation; John 3.35.
The Lord of heaven and earth having given all things into the hands of his
Son, Heb. 2.8. Col. 1.18.
and having put all things in subjection under his feet; so that at length he
shall most certainly have the pre-eminence; for at the name, and by the only
power of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.10.
every knee shall bow, of things in Heaven and things in Earth, and things
under the Earth. Let your thoughts of us be as mean and low as you please,
this is that great day and thing that we look and long for.

Oh! now at length pity your soul, repent your railing; 2 Samuel 16. 2 Kin. 18.
act no longer Shimei nor Rabshakeh's part: Be astonished, and magnify the
omnipotent God, that has thus discovered the deceitfulness of your heart;
Jer. 17.9.
and let our souls bless the Lord, that he, the sole wonder-working God, has
by his power and goodness, out of this your intended evil toward us, produced
thus much unspeakable joy and comfort to our spirits, causing us, through the
riches of his mercy, to clear up our evidence for heaven, and enabling us by
the freeness of his grace, tovindicate our aspersed selves as to the world, so
we hope to your own conscience. Cease therefore, we beseech you, to calumniate
those, that from their souls desire to look and walk heavenward: We verily be
leeve, did you truly know us, you would not suffer one man's whispering to be so
prevalent with you, as thus to alienate your affection from us. Though we are
strangers to you, 1 John 3.14.
we hope the Lord loves us; Why should you injure and oppress us? Nay we are
Brethren, why should you not love us? We wish that your C. F.
Informer were so godly a Citizen as you take him to be: you will not deny that
dissembled piety is double iniquity: What think you of that godliness that is
accompanied with drunkenness? to say no more of him, though we might speak of
pride, lying, backbiting; but we are loath to brand him too much. Could we
insinuate into, and fawn upon you, as others do, then we think you would not
thus condemn us: Howsoever, 1 John 3 21. Mat. 12.7.
since our hearts condemn us not, why should you do it? And you have little
reason to count us thorny hearers, for that you find by experience, that the
Word is not choked in us. Mat. 13.22.


As for that one among us that came to you, he was not urged thereunto, as you
pretend, neither do you set down either a true or full relation of that
discourse that passed between him and you. The truth is, there was some such
discourse as you have set down concerning Presbytery and Independency, and
this was that wherein he rejoiced, as seeming to you satisfied: but you must
needs remember, that other matters were then spoken of.

Neither was he so satisfied as you would make the world believe and how could
he or any of us be satisfied? when as this your exposition tends much to
division, by extolling the Independent party, and yet in private, you will
pretend to put no difference between Presbytery and Independency, and then
evade it, by going about to make us and others believe, that your intentions
were not according to your expressions. And your Relater is much mistaken in
this Christians stomach, for his stomach has been no other, either concerning
your self or this business, then becomes a Christian to have. But of this
particular, and of this Christians more particular answer to so much of your
Epistle as concerns himself singly, you may perchance hereafter have a more
full relation.

Thus having by the assistance and direction of our prudent and good God,
discharged our consciences, and endeavored to satisfy both your self and the
world, by fully answering every particular of your charge against us, we do
heartily commend you to the grace of God, earnestly entreating you to be no
longer mistaken in us, but to be convinced in your judgment, that our study is
(for such we assure you is the bent of our souls, the Lord pardon our sins,
our imperfections) to live peaceably with you and all men, Romans 12.18. Heb.
12.14.
as much as in us lies, and to acquire holiness; without which, we are most
certain, no man shall see the Lord.

Sir, we are, according to your own denomination in the end of your Epistle,
Christian Readers.

FINIS.

