THE IMPOSTVRES OF Seducing Teachers Discovered; In a SERMON before the Right
Honorable the LORD MAJOR and Court of ALDERMEN of the City of London, at their
Anniversary meeting on Tuesday in Easter week, April 23, 1644. at
Christ-Church.

By RICHARD VINES, Minister of Gods Word at Weddington in the County of
Warwick, and a Member of the Assembly of DIVINES.

Imprimatur,

CHARLES HERLE.



2 TIMOTHY 2. 17. And their word will eat as does a gangrene. LONDON, Printed by
G. M. for Abel Roper at the sign of the Sun over against St Dunstans Church
in Fleet Street, 1644.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR AND Court of ALDERMEN, of the famous
City of LONDON.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
AN Epistle Dedicatory usually bespeaks a Patron, and then the Reader is
epistled afterward. I entreat Readers only and Patrons no further than the
Truth may challenge them suo jure. Though I should have done my self but right
in sending this Sermon forth into public, yet your Commands were the stronger
tie upon me. It was received with ill resentment by some whose Character not I
but the Apostle gives in this Text: the aspect whereof is (I believe) no more
pleasing than the Sermon; Either they should not wear such faces as are afraid
of this glass, or wash first, and then they will not be angry. I should
rejoice to offend any man for his good, and be afraid to please him for his
hurt; I intended it for a stay to the nutant and unstable; a stop to that
Gangrene which I hope is not crept so near the Head as to have taken any of
you; who in other things have been so far from being Children tossed to and
fro, with winds, stormy winds, that from you posterity shall learn to be
men. The very holding up of the Text in open view may be a quo vadis? to one or
other. If not. Yet Thou have delivered thy soul, Ezekiel. 3. 19, 21. is some
comfort to him who humbly presents this Sermon to your hands and eyes, with
some enlargements here and there, which the time denied to your ears; and
whose honor it is to be*

Your Servant for Christ, RICHARD VINES.

THE IMPOSTVRES OF Seducing Teachers Discovered.
EPHESIANS. IV. XIV, XV. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things which is
the Head, even Christ.


THE Gospel had no sooner ascended the Horizon of the Gentiles, and dispel'd
that universal shade wherein they had been benighted, but the Devil erected
his factories in those new discoveries to intercept the trade of truth,
therefore is our Apostle in many of his Epistles, so much in fortifying
believers against the impressions of seducing teachers, and the history of
Fatemur quidem novas quasdam and antea non au^itas ^ectas, Anabaptistas*
Liber^inos, Mennonios Zwenk^el^l^anos statim ad exortum Evangelij ex ^ir^sse,
Ju^l Apol. Eccle. Anglicanae. Vide Sl^idanum in commentarijs.
Luthers time does witness also that it is the lot of reformations while they
are green and recent, to be infested with such sects and doctrines as happily
were never before heard of, and therefore it concerns all to be careful what
money they take when the markets are so full of adulterate coin, and to be
armed against the scandal thence arising, as if the truth was the mother of
such monsters which are none of hers, but are laid at her door to bring her
into discredit; we must expect no less, nay happily we have hereby an argument
that the truth is at the threshold, for it is not ordinary that tares grow any
where but in the wheat field. The Text too fitly serves our own meridian,
being purposely chosen to give antidote against the infection of seducing
teachers.

Whether the word Henceforth do look back to the time past, and imply that the
Ephesians had been like children tossed to and fro, as is generally conceived
by the (...), Chrysostom. Theophilact. Oecumenius, etc.
Greek expositors and others, I shall neither enquire nor insist upon it, but
shall take it as a result from what the Apostle had said in the beginning of
the Chapter, where having in the 4, 5, 6, verses, named seven ones, one body
and one spirit, one hope of your calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all, wherein the Ephesians and all believers are
concenterated. He passes on and touches upon gifts and ministeries given to
the Church by Jesus Christ, sitting at the right hand of God; in which form of
expression he seems to allude to the As he does elsewhere, viz. Luke 2. 15.
and to the Olympic exercis^s, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25, etc. and alibi.
Romans in their tryumphs, wherein the Conqueror having the glorious Captains
at his Chariot, scattered his munificence in congiaries and donatives to the
soldiery and people, for so our Savior ascended up on high, and led captivity
captive, and gave gifts to men; and what are those gifts which might become the
magnificence of a Conqueror so triumphant? are they not ministeries? ver. 12.
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pa^^ours and Teachers, a royal donative given in the day of his triumph: but
the use and end whereunto these ministeries are subservient and isntrumental
adds value to them, as it is set forth, ver. 12, 13, 14, 15. For the
perfecting of the Saints, etc. That we henceforth be no more children.

In the Text you have A Character, and An Antidote. The character is of 2.
sorts of persons The Seduced, The Seducer.

The Seduced are called children tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine.

The Seducers are said to be sleighty, crafty, and to have their artifices,
methods, stratagems of deceiving, by the sleight of men and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

The Antidote or preservative is twofold;

1. The Ministry which Christ has given to his Church, He gave some Apostles,
etc. That henceforth we be no more children, etc. for the salt ( ye are says
Christ, the salt of the earth) serves to preserve the people from being
flye-blowne with every corrupt doctrine unto putrefaction.

2. The holding fast of the substance and vitals of practick godliness, ver
15. Following the truth in love, grow up in all things into him which is the
Head even Christ. The fortifying of the vitalls is a repercussive to all
infections from the stinking breath of a currupt teacher.

I shall open each part of the Text as I come to it, And first the character or
description of the Seduced, or of them that are unstable; for there is no doubt
but the Apostle intends to descypher instability and fluctuancy by these words,
Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine;
which is a sentence (as every eye may see) carried on in metaphors and
figurative expressions, only some critics might happily ask what decorum of
speech there is in children tossed to and fro and carried about with winds? for
had it not been more congruity to have said waves tossed to and fro, or clouds
carried about, than children? but we must not teach the Spirit of God to
speak, the* sense is obvious and proper; for the better rendering whereof we
may consider;

1. By what name unstable people are called, children.

2. How their instability is expressed, Tossed to and fro and carried about.

3. What cause there is of it, Every wind of doctrine.

1. For the first, They are children (...) are synonymi^s, 1 Cor. 14. ^0. with
Heb. 5. 13. and alibi.
, so called, not in respect of age, but of knowledge and understanding, 1 Cor.
14. 20. be not children (...) in understanding, but be men: Where (...) perfect
and ripe And so (...) in veteri Testamento. Isa. 3. 4. Prove. 19. ^5. Ec^l^s.
10. ^8. and alibi.
men of knowledge are opposed to children, that is, ungrounded and unskilful
ones, unskilful in the word of righteousness, for he is a babe, Heb. 5. 13.
Such babes the Apostle calls carnal, though they be in Christ, 1 Cor. 3* 1, 2,
3. and opposes them to spirirituall, that is perfect or ripe of knowledge and
judgment; and you may see that such men, that are shallow and unballast with
knowledge, are easily carried into envying, strife, factions, one crying up
Paul, another Apollo, ver. 4. yea they become the certain prey of Sectaries
and seducers, made prize of by them, as the (...), Col. 2. 8.
word signifies, Col, 2. 8.

2. For the second, their instability is expressed in two (...).
metaphors, tossed to and fro, and carried about; the former is drawn from a
wave of the sea (for (...) is a wave) and so it denotes an uncertain man that
fluctuates in opinion, and is explained to the full, James 1. 6. a wavering man
is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed. The latter from a
light cloud swimming in the air, carried about in a circle having no weight in
it, and may well be expounded by that of Jude ver. 12. clouds without water
carried about. Nor wave nor cloud have any consistence, but are always in
motion if any wind be stirring, you shall in vain look to find them anon where
you see them now.

3. For the third, The cause of this instability is every wind of doctrine,
there are winds of persecution that overthrow the house upon the sand, and
there are winds of doctrine that toss to and fro these children. Scripture
mentions chafe and stubble driven with wind, the reed shaken with the wind,
the wave, the cloud tossed and carried by the wind. It is because we have no
weight in our selves, nor solid principles, that the wind has power over us;
they are light things and moveable, that are at the command of every wind: when
the Apostle says wind of doctrine, he implies that there is no solidity; and
when he says every wind, he implies that there may be contrariety in those
doctrins to one another, and yet every one tosses some waves to and fro, and
carries some clouds about, nay the very same cloud that is now carried one
way, is anon carried another; and what a miserable pass is he at, whose
Religion consists in some empty opinion, and is but thereof tenant at courtesy
to the next wind that blows, being carried about with every Heinsiu^ exer^^^^.
^^u^^ doctrina ^^d^es ^^ta^ilis.
change or novelty of doctrine. There are others that are unstable, not for
want of principles and knowledge, but rather want of a good by as of sincerity
for God; being carried about too, but it is by their Interests and ends,
whereby they are off and on, up and down as the sent lies, and as the game
which they hunt does lead them, with these I have not much to do at this time.

Having thus opened the words of the first part, I shall now sum them up
together into this point.

Doct. Children (that is, ungrounded people who have no sound bottom of
knowledge) are apt to be tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind
of doctrine.

1. Children, is a word denoting relation or imperfection* relation, and so ye
are all the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 26. Imperfection,
so in that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 11. When I was a child I spoke as a
child, etc. There are many of this denomination in the Church, for as in a
School there are diverse forms, and commonly the most Scholars are in the
lower, so is it in the Church of God, there are abcedaries, babes that are to
be taught (...) their letters, Heb. 5. 13, the first elements of the oracles of
God, and to be fed with the spoone, or as the Apostle calls it, milk. He did
not think himself too high to feed with milk, 1 Cor. 3. 2. Therefore let no
Minister be he never so learned, scorn to be an Usher under Christ, to teach
his petties their a. b. c. If the people had not pleaded their rotten charters
of age and marriage against Catechism, and the Minister had not thought
himself too good to teach them their letters and first elements, we had not
seen so many children carried about with winds of doctrine: Pride (I fear)
has made both ashamed of the duty, the one to teach, the other to be taught,
and I would that both were now humble enough to acknowledge the fruit of that
neglect.

Now children are so called, by reason of the imperfection of their knowledge,
either in respect of the measure of it, or of their ungroundednesse in it, and
its lying loose in them without rooting.

1. In respect of the measure of knowledge, which is low and mean, though
themselves be steadfast in it and unshaken: It is not a swimming but an
anchoring and centering knowledge, and stakes them down from fluctuancy and
tossing, and this is, by having the savor, virtue and sweetness of that they
know: He that has a little knowledge well tried by the touchstone of the word,
and tried in his own experience to be humbling, quickening and comforting, he
loves the truth, and love will establish him in it; upon that reason which
Peter gave to Christ, Joh. 6. 68. Whither should we go? Thou have the words of
eternal life. The Apostles while under Christ's own ministry and wing were
but very raw in knowledge, (and thereby we learn that no doctrinall teaching
or ministry, though of Christ himself on earth, can make way into the heart
of man until the Spirit come,) yet so much they found in the words of Christ
that they knew not whether else to go, because eternal life was in them; and
this testimony our people cannot but give to our deserted Ministers, that the
words of eternal life is in them, and why then will they not reflect upon
themselves and say, whither shall we go? I would not tread out the least
spark except it be wildfire in the house-eaves which may set the whole Town
afire. God has his babes, to whom I would recommend for their comfort the
comparing of Heb. 5. 13. with Heb. 6. 9. where the Apostle having called them
babes that had need to be taught the first principles, does yet say, we are
persuaded of you things that accompany salvation, and makes mention of their
work and labor of love, for there may be much godliness in lesser light:
Fundamentals unto salvation are not so many or burdensome, the least Star in
the orb has as swift and regular a motion though not so much light, as the
greater; only let it be your endeavor to know your own measure, Romans 12. 3. 2
Pet. 3. ult.
and to increase in grace and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ which are
practical things, and not to 1 Timothy 6. ^. (...)
be question-sick, and leave wholesome food to long after such things as do
but add to the crudity of your stomachs, and fill you up with wind.

2. In respect of their ungroundednesse in knowledge, which lies loose in them
and does not stake them down, or anchor them from being tossed, because they
have it by rote, and can neither give a reason of that they know, nor have
found the weight of it upon judgment and conscience, and so they are variable
and unstable like children; the Philosophers definition of a moist element is
proper to them: That Quod difficulter suis, sacile alienis terminis continetur.
is (says he) it has no form or consistence of its own, but easily takes
such figure as the continent or vessel in which it is does give it, as water
takes the form of the dish or glass, etc. into which you put it, such are
these; they have no mould but what the next teacher casts them into, being
blown like glasses into this or that shape at the pleasure of his breath; to
such as these I commend this, to get the reason of that they know, as its said,
a reason of the hope that is in you, for Religion consists not in a rhapsody of
loose opinions, nor will a little knowledge gotten by rote preserve a man from
being taken captive by every novell doctrine. Its the Apostles phrase, 2 Timothy
3. 6. They take prisoners silly women. Where you may (...) Omnes haereses ex
gynecaei^ Ax^omat. Ecclesiastica, page 74.
note, that he says they prevail with women; they get an Eudoxia, Iustina,
Constantia, on their side, and so work upon Adam by Eve.

2. These children are tossed to and fro, and carried about, and that denotes;

1. That they are unstable under the command of every wind, and a prey to
every net that is spread for them, traveling and wandering through all opinions
when they have left the true line; sometimes they are in Cancer, sometimes in
Capricorn, falling even into contraries, for one error is still a bridge to
another; so we know that the Arminian went forward to Popery, and many of ours
from Antinomianisme to Anabaptisme and Brownisme, and whether then? why one
error ingendring with another begets a mule, or mixed offspring, and so Africa
it self shall not show more novelties, they will increase (says the Apostle,
2 Timothy 2. 16.) to more ungodliness. Error is a precipice, a vortex or
whirlepoole, which first turns men round and then sucks them in: be not
carried about with diverse and strange doctrines, Heb. 13. 9. for its good that
the heart be ballast or stablisht with grace, where the opposition is evident
between being carried about and being established by grace.

2. That they are unprofitably carried; for to what port is the wave tossed? to
what station is the cloud carried? is not the wave bandied back again by the
racket of the next wave, and the cloud by the next wind: Its good (says he)
that the heart be established, and to that end, that we converse in such
doctrines as d^e profit them that are exercised in them, Heb. 13. ^. (...)
still asking our selves this question, what improvement is there of my soul
heavenward by such or such doctrine? what healing of the gashes of conscience?
what further inlet or admission into communion with Christ? what cleansing from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. If this be your aim, then steer this point, intend this
scope, and let go questions and vain janglings, contending toward the end of
(...), 1 Timothy 1. 6.
the commandment, which mark (says the Apostle) many never shoot at, 1 Timothy
1. 6. in their ministry or doctrine, nor indeed do many hearers aim at any
such thing, I mean our Nomades (as I may call them) or walkers, who will not
endure to sit at the feet of a constant godly ministry (which yet is the best
way of proficiency in knowledge and godliness) but by reason of their feverish
thirst, as they distaste each one, so they desire to taste all waters; of which
sort is he that wanders away the Sabbath by peeping in at Church-dores, and
taking essay of a sentence or two, and then, if there be no scratch for his
itch, lambit and fugit, he is gone.

3. These children are tossed to and fro and carried about by doctrine, and
that implies, that they are hearers that are thus unsettled, and they are
teachers by whom they are unsettled.

1. They are hearers, and must not they be hearers? what else, condemned be the
atheism of the ear of them who turn away their ear from God, who speaks by
the hand of his messengers; let us leave to the Papists ministorum muta
officia, populi caeca obsequia, the dumb offices of the Priests, and blind
obedience of the people, when Scribes and Pharisees hold the chair, our
Savior says not, Mark. 4. 24. Luke 8. 18.
hear not, but take heed how you hear. Take heed what ye hear, beware of
their leaven.

2. They are teachers that unsettle these hearers. They have troubled you with
words subverting your souls, Acts 15. 24. It much concerns the Church, yea
and the State into what hands doctrine is committed, by reason of the
unsettlement of the people which may be occasioned thereby, I should beseech
them that are in the office of teachers, that they would take heed to
themselves and to the doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 16. and that they would teach milk
or meat, and not wind, nor lead on people first into criticismes, before they
have laid in them the plain Grammar rule of sound and wholesome words, that
they may be made proselites to Jesus Christ, not to an opinion; yea though you
may bear the name of a party as Paul might have done at Corinth, yet to cry
them down who would cry you up, and put over your disciples to Christ as John
did, telling them that say I am of Paul and I of Apollo, that they are carnal;
1 Cor. 3. 4.
and so you will weane them unto Christ whose they are; As for others that
teach indeed but yet are no teachers, (for whatsoever they do by gifts, yet
themselves are not the gifts of Christ unto men in the sense of the 11th verse
of this Chapter) I should desire to know whether every one that has a gift to
be a servant must therefore be a steward, or that has gifts enabling him to
deliver a message, must therefore be an Ambassador; If in truth you be as Amos
said of himself, Herdesmen or gatherers of Sycomore fruit, then you must
produce Amos 7. 14, 15*
your extraordinary commission as he did, saying, And the Lord took me as I
followed the flock and said, go prophecy to my people Israel, or else you
must be taken to be but Herdsmen still, and so it will be no wonder that
strange teachers should carry credulous people about with strange doctrines, as
the Apostle calls them, Heb. 13. 9.

4. The doctrine by which these children are tossed to and fro, and carried
about, is called wind, and that does not denote the pure Word of God, but some
illegitimate doctrine which the adulterers and ravishers of the truth do beget
upon it: what heresy ever came abroad without verbum Domini in the mouth of
it. The Arrian pleaded out of that text John 14. 28. The Father is greater than
I. The Anabaptist from that, Matthew. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and disciple all
nations, and when he shall be thriven to his (...) or full stature he will
undermine Magistracy by that Romans 12. 19. Avenge not your selves. The
Antinomian has for his plea that 1 Timothy 1. 9. The law is not made for a
righteous man, arguing that he who has Evangelicall grace for his principle of
obedience should not have the law for a rule thereof; as if a new principle and
an old rule might not stand together: but because I intend not a particular
confutation of these or the like errors, therefore finally, you all know that
the devil has a scriptum est ready Matthew. 3. 6. the Spider sucks poison out
of the Rose, not that I would imply that there is any such thing in the Word it
self (for ex veris nil nisi verum) but that a corrupt stomach concocts
wholesome food into disease.

And why wind of doctrine?

1. Because there is no solidity in it, but being wind it breeds but wind in
the hearer and not good blood; and here I cannot but bewail our Pulpits of
late times, filled with hay and stubble in stead of gold and silver, as namely,
invectives against Bishops, and Cavaliers, news, and novell opinions, and in
the mean time the staple commodities of Heaven, as Christ, Faith, Love, etc.
are laid aside like breathed ware which no body calls for; I would not be
thought to be a patron of any such obnoxious persons against whom the Word of
God shoots an arrow; but t^is I plead for, that people who come to look for
soul-nourishing food may not be served with scumme and froth.

2. Because of the changeableness, variety and novelty of it; for indeed such
teachers do fit their lettice to the lips of their auditory and do easily
take them by their itching ears; nothing more pleasing to an Athenian ear
than novelty, which affects the hearers while it is fresh and green, but when
they shall come to chew this wind, they find nothing in it, and so they hunt
about again until they start a new notion. Christ is the only everlasting
meat, who though he be like a great standing dish, which by reason of
Kickshawes and fine Sallets is now adays not much fed upon by many; yet a
truly humble soul is never weary of Christ, neither can sit down to a meal,
I mean, hear a Sermon without him, and this sound appetite is a sign of an
excellent temperament and healthful constitution of spirit; he that has his
mouth in taste for such doctrine, and his stomach craving such solid food, has
cause to bless God, who it may be by inward shakings and temptations calls him
to the settling of the main free-holt, and state of his soul, and so takes him
off from running himself out of breath after novelties and niceties, which
will sooner fill his head with dreams than his heart with strength or comfort.

3. Because of its prevalencie with and over unstayed men, one would wonder
that this which the Apostle calls wind of doctrine should so prevail and
spread; how suddenly is a whole country leavened with it? whereas the saving
knowledge and reception of Christ, the power of godliness, and self-denial
may be preached an age, and not so many fish be taken as are taken at one
draught by a corrupt doctrine; I will not borrow that comparison which Eusebius
made choice of to express the quick spreading (...).
of the Gospel at the first, saying, that it passed through the world like a
Sun-beame; but I shall take that of the Apostle 2 Timothy 2. 17. Their word eats
like a gangrene, which presently overruns the parts and takes the brain, as
this wind of doctrine does, and the same Apostle (than whom no man did more
counter-worke false teachers) says, Acts 20. 30. they shall speak perverse
things, to draw disciples after them, whereby it seems that the way to draw
disciples is to speak perverse things; hereunto agreeing is that of our
Savior, Ioh. 5. 43. I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye receive me not: If
another shall come in his own name, him will ye receive. Christ cannot find
entertainment but Bacchochebas is followed, and the reason is, because Truth
when it comes has nothing in us, but error has: There is no tinder to
catch a spark of truth, but there is oil for the wildfire of error. Heresies
are works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19, 20. therefore men are soon removed, Gal.
1. 6. from truth to error.

And now to draw up this point into a sum, by way of Application:

1. Consider the doctrine you hear, and tell it over again from the hand of
the teacher, a man will tell money after his father. Beware lest any man make
prize of you, Col. 2. 8. some there are to whom the reputation and worth of the
teacher is the proof of his doctrine, receiving all that is stamped with his
ipse dixit. We should not call any man our father on earth, Matthew. 23. 9. and
some also think it enough to say, This doctrine makes most against
superstition and popery, and yet we will not abide that in a Maldonat, who
shall rather pitch upon such a sense of Scripture, because it makes most
against the Calvinists, and there are who falling upon some novell opinion do
honestate it with the name of a new light, and conceive themselves the greatest
illuminates, as having two eyes and all the world besides but one, I deny it
not, but that every man in his Regeneration has a new light, which is a part
of the new creature, for the new creation begins in a fiat lux; Nor do I deny
but that in the Church there may be a clearer and further demonstration of and
insight into many things in the Scriptures, which have lien in the bottom of
the pit, and may be brought nearer day than aforetime, for the nearer to the
end the more glory and light, as its said Dan. 12. 4. Shut up the words, and
seal the book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased. But this light though new to us, yet it is not
new to the word, to the Sun light is not new, though it be to the Moon, as the
Apostle calls strange doctrines, Heb. 13. 9. not such as are new to us, but such
as are foreign to the word: so we call that strange light, rather then new,
which the word of God ownes not, as the offspring thereof, and therefore I
exhort you to consider:

1. Whether this light come from the Word, or rather do not shine from a
glo-worme in your own fancies? Is not this vision of yours extra mittendo, by
beams going out of your own eyes to the object* do you not first conceive,
and then go forth to seek a father for your child? as the Sadduces that first
deny the Resurrection, and then think that they can make their heresy good,
out of a case in Moses law, Matthew. 22. ^4.

2. Whether it do nourish those graces in you in which the Kingdom of God
consists? or whether does not this new light starve you? does not this
sunshine put out your fire? for whether it be that the intention of the mind
upon the vain theory of opinions does divert the stream, and leaves (as I may
say) practicke godliness dry; or whether God withdraw his influences from them
that lay themselves out in toys? or whatsoever the cause be, experience
shows that after this vertigo takes men in the head, many of them decay in
the vitals of Religion, and turn either Politicians to erect a party, or grow
very lean in practicke godliness, and draw loose in their geeres, if indeed
they become not loose in their lives and ways.

2. This point may give us just occasion to inquire into the reason why we are
so tossed to and fro and carried about, and crumbled into divisions, for who is
a stranger in Israel that he should not know these things. The heavens are
filled with fixed stars without number, but the Planets are no more than seven;
if the proportion was cast up amongst us our (...)), as Jude calls them ver. 13.
do hold a greater proportion to our fixed stars. Is not our Church called to
the bar to answer not so much for her purity or chastity in all
Administrations as for her very being and life? what children are these, that
will unmother her, before God her husband have divorced and unwifed her? that
will throw Babylon in her face, and then justify their secession and departure
by Flee out of Babylon: which will not serve their turn except they can find
also a Go out of Ephesus, out of Pergamus, out of Sardis, out of Laodicea, etc.

Our Sacraments are also called to the bar. The Lords Supper, under the
reason of a mixed Communion, by which (as I conceive) is not meant that
unbeleevers or unregenerate persons do partake rem sacramenti the kernel of
this ordinance; for in that respect they have no Communion with the faithful:
but that the Company of Communicants in the outward seal is mixed of regenerate
and unregenerate, Saints and hypocrites; unto which we say, that though the
door ought to be more narrow than to let in dogs and swine, yet the presence
and profession of intruders does not evacuate that Communion which the
faithful have with Christ, and among themselves: for the Master of the great
Feast (as He observed,) Matthew. 22. 12. does not say to them that had the
wedding garment; how came you in hither with such a man, but Friend, how came
thou in hither not having a wedding garment?

Our Baptism is said to be a vanity, a nullity, as being dispensed to infants,
and that because we want example for it: but so we do, for women's receiving
the Lords Supper: and if the reason and equity of the rule will carry it for
women as well as men, then also we shall join issue in that point, and make it
good upon that ground, for children of believing parents as for the parents
themselves: for are not such See a learned Treatise called The Birth privilege.
infants foederati, confederates and in the Covenant, though they cannot
actually restipulate, yea surely, as well as those which were circumcised.

The moral Law is questioned, whether it be obligatory to and directory of a
believer in Christ; for because he has another bridle of restraint of him from
sin, and another spur incentive of him unto obedience, therefore he has not
the same rule: which is but a confounding of the principle whereby, and of the
rule according to which a Christian is acted; these men are much mistaken in
that place whereupon they seem to ground their opinion, Romans 7. 6. That we
should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter.
Where they oppose these two as a rule and principle, taking away the rule,
called (say they) the oldnesse of the letter, by the principle which is the
newness of the Spirit; now there is nothing more clear, then that the
Apostle, opposes not the rule, to the principle of obedience; but duo
principia, or rather duos serviendi modos, two manners of serving, in the one
of which they were bondmen, in the other freemen.

Our Ministry is arraigned also, as the Papists, because the Ministers of many
Reformed Churches have not Imposition of the hands of a Bishop, deny their
ordination to be legitimate, so is ours denied, because we had; We are between
two milstones, what Ministers will they find in the Churches of Christ for many
hundred years if this be good against ordination? I cannot conceive but God
owned some of them for his witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, Rev. 11. 3.

And finally to the nullity of these; the Church* the Sacraments, the Moral
Law, the Ministry, is added, the Mortality of the soul, which if reason
cannot confute, let a man consult conscience, if that cannot, Scripture will;
had it not been a strange mistake in our blessed Savior to have (but in a
Parable) supposed a rich man after his death in torment and Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom; if the soul be not immortal, or at least if it survive not; for that
cannot be applied to the resurrection, when the rich man will have no brethren
on earth to send unto, neither can there be any sense in that portion of
Scripture, but upon supposall of the soul outliving the body.

I had rather draw a curtain before this face of things then paint it out unto
you. How sad a hearing is it to hear I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of
Cephas: was not this that which (as Jerome observes) did at first set up
Bishops: our divisions are their factours, but that is not all; more sad it is
to hear, here is Christ, and there is Christ, for we are so impotent in our
opinions, that every man makes his own to be the very Shibboleth of the Church;
a thing unheard of before our times, that men of diverse Trades in this famous
City, can be all of one Company, but being of diverse opinions they cannot be of
one Church, nor will be all of one School except they be all of one form,
which breaks our communion into fragments; Now what may be the cause of this
transportation of people, are they children ungrounded in knowledge? that is
too much to be feared, or are they proud and wanton, and have taken surfeit of
the great things of the Law? or are they ashamed to stand in the level of
sober practical Christians, but must be masters and set up the trade of some
new opinion for themselves, and build Babel to get a name, and to be some body
in in the eyes of a party? I know not what to say, but the Lord stop the
gangrene, and turn all our eyes to the great things of the Law, that so this
tithing of mint and cummin may be left to a second place.

3. Be not children, and oh that this word might stop the fury of your
precipitate levity, as Coesar did the sedition of his Army by one word,
Quirites; you have had the vitals of Religion, a holy and pure doctrine, and
there is not another Gospel. For Ministers that have burned and shined
themselves out in holding forth essentials and saving truths, the whole world
since the Apostles time could not overmatch you; and for Christians (the seal
of their Ministry) begotten and bred up under their shadow, in respect of the
power of godliness there has not been another England on earth, since that
time; I do not ascribe this to the government and discipline (no more then I
do ascribe the multiplying of Israel to Pharaoh) but under God to the pains
and diligence of faithful pastors, whom I would not have any man now to
undervalue and debase as brats of Antichrist: they were Heroes and Worthies,
our regeneration and faith are their monuments, let no man dig up their ashes
and degrade them in esteem, nor belch out poison against the learning,
livings, callings of their godly successors in this Church; for wise men will
interpret that they do it upon no other reason then Herod burnt the Registries
of the families and genealogies of the Jews, in consciousnesse of his own
obscurity; And as for this Church, certainly she has had a womb to bear
children, and breasts to give them suck, which two things do make a fair
proof for her against all calumnies, though alas she had also a generarion of
vipers eating through her bowels. Finally, This Kingdom owes as much to
Religion as any in the world, we have seen wonders of Gods love and miracles
of deliverance, and if God shall now bring his Arc to Jerusalem, and set it up
in greater state then before time, let us dance before it, but withal let us
not despise the house of Obed-Edom which God blessed for the Arc sake; we must
not put down the Temple because its made a den of thieves, but rather whip
them out of it: and for that we fast and pray, as also that those seven Ones in
the fourth and fifth verses may continue with us for ever, One body, and one
spirit, one hope of your calling, one Lord, one Faith, one baptism, one God
and Father of all, which should be as so many quoines to lock together all
parts of the building into one, as indeed they would if men were not so
opinion-big as to make every extravagant or at least extrinsicall opinion
fundamental, and as an Atlas to a new-Church building.

I come now to the second part of the Text, which is the haracter or
description of the impostours and seducers, that do unsettle men, whereof I
shall open the terms or words.

1. Sleight of men. The original word for slight, does properly signify
Dice-playing, and by ametaphor taken from players at Dice (which sort of men
you shall seldom read of in sober authors without some brand of infamy,) it
sets out the quality of false teachers, and in this all agree, but then in the
very point of application of this similitude there is a little difference.

1. As the cast of the Die is changeable and variable, (...)
alea nihil incertius, so are these teachers and such is their doctrine, and
therefore he calls it sleight of men, opposing this doctrine of theirs to that
of Gods pure word, which is always like it self and has no interests,
passions, crooked ends, as men have.

2. As dice-players can cogge the Die and make it answer what cast they please,
so these teachers, have an act of mixing and adulterating the word, so as to
make it answer their own profit or advantage, but whether it be so or so, or
both ways, you see what these teachers make of their hearers, mere tablemen,
which the dice-player carries hither and thither, and moves from point to point
as he pleases.

3. Cunning craftiness* The same word that is used to express the subtilty of
the serpent tempting (...).
Eve, 2 Cor. 11. 3. He beguiled Eve through his subtilty, and it signifies the
deep policy of men, 1 Cor. 3. 19. He takes the wise in their own craftiness,
and so it imports that these teachers are veterators, beaten fellows, men
exercised and skillful to deceive.

4. They lie in wait to deceive, And the word in this Text is also used, Ephesians.
6. 11. that ye may be able (...).
(says he) to stand (...); against the stratagems of the Devil; for it
signifies properly an ambushment or stratagem of war, whereby the enemy sets
upon a man ex insidijs, at unawares, denoting the specious and fair overtures
and pretenses of false teachers, spreading their net under the chafe, to catch
the silly bird, for it is plain that all their slight and craftiness is
(...), to this very end and purpose, that they may entrap and catch men within
the ambush of their impostures.

That which I collect from this part of the Text, is,

Doct. 1. What odds the Apostle makes between the seducer and the seduced,
even as much as between an old fowler and a young bird, the one he calls
children, simple, easy, credulous people, the the other is a shrewd gamester,
a man of subtilty and stratagems. I cannot therefore but upon this observation,
exhort you to take heed of playing with such, stake down nothing, especially
not your souls, come not within their ambush. I wonder that petties and
novices in knowledge will forsake the Congregations and open assemblies of Gods
people, to frequent private houses where these teachers lay their ambuscado;
would not all men condemn the folly of a young man of a great estate, that
should deal with a crafty gamester? for these seducers whose design is to
make merchandise of their hearers, 2 Pet. 2. 3. do most of all aim at them
who are good prize, they care not much for a sheep that has not a good fleece.
I beseech you be wise, you may be caught, though you mean it not, God may give
you up captive to error for your vanity in forsaking his assemblies: Happily you
resolve that you will not be caught; no more did Dinah intend to be defiled
when she went forth to see the daughters of the Land, or Peter to deny Christ
when he went to the high Priests hall; there is no man but will believe a lie
when God gives him up to delusion, one may be infected with the plague by
looking in at the window, our nature is apt to receive impressions of error.
Its observed of sheep, that they eat no grass more greedily then that which
rots them, wherefore if they shall say unto you behold he is in the desert, go
not forth, behold he is. in the secret chambers, believe it not, Matthew. 24. 26.
And what may some say, would you have us come up to an Idols Temple and
communicate in Idolatry? No, Come not ye to Gilgal, nor go up to Bethaven,
Hosea 4. 15. Woods and caves, and the I Will of Pathmos are to be preferred to
such assemblies; or should Christians abstain all private meetings, and
confine their Religion as many do to a Church and a Common Prayer book? far
be it from us: Antichrist and Popery will feel the wounds of such private
Assemblies as long as they draw any breath, the enemies of God and his Church
know what reason they have to hate conventicles (as they call them:) All that I
have to say is, that you stick fast unto and make use of your pastors and
teachers, which are the gifts of Jesus Christ unto his Church, ver. 11. and
that you come not into the secret of these who are described ver. 14. by their
slight and subtilty to deceive.

Doct. 2. Seducers are artists and craftes-masters in slight and subtilty, and
stratagems of deceit, they have artifices, and ways, and methods to take men
at unawares, and to convey their poison privily; who privily shall bring in
damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2. 1. they will not resist the truth aperto mart,
but cunningly undermine it, as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these
also resist the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 8. that is by sleight and counterfeiting to
do the same thing, so that one shall have much ado to distinguish between the
serpents of Moses and them of the Magicians, for they also did the like by
their enchantments, Exodus 7. 11. It seems these seducers are men of parts, the
Apostle describes them in the same words as the old serpent is described, by
whose subtilty we exchanged Paradise for thistles and briars; which first
example should teach us for ever to take heed of them, that are of his breed,
who was more subtle then any beast of the field; that which being sanctified
or well employed, might be called wisdom, being corrupted and abused is
called craftiness, therefore (...), though usually taken in the worser part,
for Drusius in Job cap. 5. ver. 13.
subtilty and cunning, yet sometimes it signifies wisdom and lawful policy,
there is (...), a good and honest craftiness or policy, whereby a Minister
being a fisher of men, may catch such as by indiscretion will otherwise be
hardened, scandalized and lost both to himself and God; we are in great want of
this policy of discretion in the management of our Ministry, by breaking old
bottles with new wine, and by exposing Religion to contempt of them whom we
might have either convinced or at least disarmed of occasion against the truth;
but no farther upon this point: I must remember that I am upon the subtilty and
stratagems of impostours that lie in wait to seduce, some of which I shall
point out unto you, as I find them in the Scriptures, that so you may perform
that duty which is more than once enjoined upon you in this case, that is
beware.

The common design of all false teachers, is to make merchandise of people, 2
Pet. 2. 3. they negotiate their own ends, and have an eye to the stake when
they cast the die, their credit, profit, lusts are the center to which they
draw every line, they have eyes full of adultery, and their heart is exercised
in covetousness, they follow the way of Balaam who loved the wages of
unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15. and the Apostle beseeches the brethren to
mark such which cause divisions and offenses, because they that are such serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ but their own belly, Romans 16. 18. but how does the
Apostle know this? for men's ends lie close; and how is it that he seems to
charge it upon all of them? Are they all covetous? have all of them eyes full
of adultery? do they all make their belly their God, etc? Its true, that ends
lie close, a man may deny one and seek another, Simon Magus lays by his great
repute gotten by sorcery, to seek himself in getting power by laying on of
hands to give the holy Ghost, and this he carried so cunningly as to pass with
Philip undiscovered pride may be trampled upon in pride, and books written
against vainglory only to get glory, bye ends may be preached against, even
out of bye ends; as all that bowl at the same mark do not take the same
ground, so men in seeking themselves, may drive several trades; one is for
credit, another for his palate, another for his purse, etc. but this in the
general will hold good, seducers are self seekers. For the service of this
maine design these and such like are their arts or method.

by good words and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans
16. 18. the word he uses for simple, is (...), men that are otherwise not
evil, or as we vulgarly call them, harmless, innocent men, easy to be led
aside; It should seem the Corinthian teachers, with whom Paul had such
bickerings, had a faculty of pithanology or persuasive lenociny of words,
whereby they did suadendo docere, not so much convince by evidence of truth as
persuade with woing words; It concerns very much to hold fast the form of
wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. which the Apostle opposes to questions and
logomachies or strife of words and perverse disputings, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5. as
also to profane and vain bablings, 2 Timothy 2. 16. P^erunque illa duo ^^^^r^nt
^urati^ doctri^^ and novi mod^ loque^di. Chem. loc. com.
and 1 Timothy 6. 20. that is, (...), or as some read (...), empty words, and
novell expressions: you all know that by losing the genuine and proper meaning
of the word Church and Bishop, etc. we had almost forgot the Scripture use of
them, and brought the Church within the pale of the Clergy, and the Bishop into
a throne above the Ministers of the word; The Apostle Peter speaking of false
teachers, has an expression or two to this purpose, They speak great swelling
words of vanity, 2 Pet. 2. 18. that is, they speak great bubbles of words full
of wind, strong lines, or big fancies to bear down people by that torrent;
and again in the 2 Pet. 2. 3. through covetousness shall they with fained
words make (...).
merchandise of you. What are these fained words? do not they mean the same
as that 1 Timothy 4. 2. speaking lies in hypocrisy, or should it not rather be
taken for a set and composed form of words, such as Merchants use in
commending their wares to sale; showing the goodness and properties of the
commodity they desire to put off, and even belying it into credit, for to that
the words seem to allude: I shall not dwell upon this, but certainly it is
not for nothing that seducers are found to hide their hook under words and
expressions, which they do artificially fit and compose for the purpose; a
good Title sells a sorry Book; And all times will bear witness that it has
been the property of such men as have had any monster to bring to light, to use
obscurity and cloudinesse of expression, that what is unshapen and without
form at the first may afterward be lickt into proportion; errors are bashful
at first, and coming out of the dark cannot look broad-waken upon the light,
and therefore they are by their parents or nurses always swathed up in clouts
of ambiguity, as the Oracles of old lapt up their Effata, or as he that wrote
Edvardum regem occidere nolite timere bonum est, where the comma helps him out
at which door he pleases; thus the sepia goes away in her own ink, and the
door is left half chare to make escape.

Pet. 2. 18. which is to allure as a bait does the fish. And what is that bait?
see ver. 19. they promise them liberty, there is not a more catching bait then
liberty; Is it likely that Jesus Christ or his Ministers that preach a yoke, a
daily cross, a forsaking all for him, should make such great draughts of fish,
as they that promise liberty? but what liberty, happily they may call it
Christian liberty, or liberty of conscience, so the serpent said, ye shall be
as gods, but what is it indeed; Is it not a liberty from the control or check
of superiors and their authority, for they despise dominion 2 P^t. 2. 10.
and speak evil of dignities, Jude 8. and therefore does the Apostle Paul so
much call for obedience and subjection to Magistrates, Masters, Ministers,
thereby anticipating or correcting the thoughts of Libertinisme, unto which the
name of Gospel liberty might be abused: surely our Lord Christ has not
brought in a saturnalia or exemption of Christians from the Scepter of
Government, or the rod of Discipline. Nor is liberty of Conscience (though
sacred and inviolable) a freedom to be or do what we will: for by that engine
the sword might be easily wiped out of the Magistrates, and the Keys out of
the Churches hand; and then we should find our selves returned to a Chaos
without form and void; I do not wonder that all sorts of sects and heresies
(though they be of contrary principles in particular) should meet and concur
in this (...), or liberty to live by their own laws, unaccountable to others,
and independent; Those that are commonly called Independents are far off from
making the Church to be such a Romulus his asylum, a Sanctuary for all comers;
they allow that Jerusalem shall reach forth her hand as far as Antioch;
neither (I think) do they plead the letting alone of the tares until the
harvest, Matthew. 13. 30. against the censures of the Church or the fasces and
securim of the Magistrate; but I am sure of this, that he that says, Let both
grow together until the harvest, does not give way to any man to sow them. An
enemy has done this: but enough of this at this time. There are others that
go about with liberty too, and cry, a liberty from the obligation of the
Moral Law as a rule; a liberty from poenitentiall sorrows, fastings,
humiliations to them that are regenerate; a liberty from sinning, or if not so,
yet from asking pardon for it, if they be in Christ. These are great liberties
indeed, but they are glorious liberties, reserved unto another world, if any
man promise you them here on earth, he takes upon him to antedate the time of
them. There are certain fruits and effects of Christ's Redemption of us, which
are payable only in the world to come; There is yet another liberty which some
will promise, and that is a liberty of sensual lusts, and fleshly loosnesse.
It was Balaams bait whereby he invited the Israelites to the idolatry of
Baal-Peor, and the Apostle finds these false teachers baiting their hook with
the same 2 Pet. 2. 18. they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much
wantonness: and ver. 14. Having eyes full of adulteries, or of an adulteress,
as the original carries it; and again, ver. 2. many shall follow their
lascivious ways: for some copies have (...). But you will say, Is there any
such affinity between seducing by doctrine and sensuality? How is it that the
Apostle charges these teachers with such filthy lusts? I shall answer but
little to this question, as God for idolatry, which is spiritual fornication,
gives men and women up to that which is corporal: for its said Romans 1. 25, 26.
They changed the truth of God into a lie: for this cause God gave them up to
vile affections, so will God shame and discredit the errors that are set up
against his truth by the lusts that keep company with them.

Eve before he prevail with her, and those popular preachers could not reign
at Corinth but by bringing Paul into dis-esteeme, if they could; His letters,
say they, are weighty and powerful, but his bodily presence is weak, and his
speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10. 10. Its easy for men to ingratiate themselves
with their party by espying faults in every Ordinance and Administration never
so well constituted; we see beauty enough and find no want of light in the Sun,
though they that look upon it through their Galilean glasses discover spots in
it as big as all Asia or Africa, as themselves say.

Pet. 2. 16. making it to speak upon the rack^ that which it never meant;
partiality and affection to their own opinion is an ill medium to look through:
Pull the staff out of the water, and it will not be crooked; how often do men
(...) compel the Scriptures to go two mile, when of themselves they will go
but one, we should tremble to put words into the mouth of those Oracles, which
we do by mis-inferences, and misapplications. 1. By mis-inference drawing
forth that which they will not yield, as the Sadduces proved no Resurrection,
because seven brethren had taken one woman to wife, Matthew. 22. 28. unto whom
our Savior answers, that though they cited a place of Scripture, yet they
erred not knowing the Scripture; for not he that repeats the words, but takes
up the true sense, is the man that knows the Scriptures. We must not mangle
and cut one joint from another, and expound one sentence against the whole
stream. I would men would tremble to take Gods hand which he has set to his
own Word, and set it to a lie of their own: it were odious to serve a man so.
2. By mis-application of general rules to particulars. For it has been
observed (...).
that it is a great cause of many evils not to be able to adapt common
principles and general rules to particular cases or actions; for how often is
a general rule of Scripture brought for the warrant of an unlawful action? as
if the Apostle should have eaten with scandal, upon the rule of All things are
pure to the pure; so we know, how men first imagined a decency and order in
superstitious ceremonies, and then warranted them by that, Let all things be
done decently and in order; we fear not to say, that no man can prove the
calling of our Ministers, or the Baptism of our infants, or the Moral Law to
be null, etc. but by the torture of the Scriptures.

the Spirit and of glory; Happy are they to whom God in this wilderness gives
to taste these Clusters of Canaan-Grapes; And for the effects of the word which
they find in themselves, as attestations of the truth, power, and goodness of
the word. I find the Apostle appealing to the sense of believers, to attest the
doctrine of the Gospel, Gal. 3. 2. received ye the Spirit by the preaching of
the law, or by the hearing of faith? but now what is all this to the revelation
or effects of new and strange doctrines? what impostures have not been obtruded
upon pretense of private light and revelation, the old Prophet may bring you
into the lions mouth by telling you of an angel that spoke to him, 1 Kin. 13.
18. and 24. God says that he proves his people by a Prophet, or dreamer of
dreams, to know whether they love the Lord their God, with all their heart,
and with all their soul, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. nor Prophet, nor Apostle, nor Angel is
to be heard if he preach (...) besides or other than that ye have received,
Gal. 1. 8.
and for that they say that they find themselves as it were in a new world
since they found this new way. I much question their probatum est, Is it not
some angel of darkness transformed into an Angel of light? do they not walk
in the light of their fire, and the sparks that they have kindled, Isai. 50.
11. It must needs be an easy way; when a man has cast off all trouble for sin
and all care of holy duties: but surely the way is too broad to be good. These
principles, I ought not to sorrow for sin, least I disparage the sufficiency
of Christ's satisfaction: I can pay no obedience to the law, but I must thereby
either infringe my Christian liberty, or join merit with Christ; must needs
work a strange alteration, because the doctrine is strange.

I would speak a word from this point to Ministers, and to the people.

1. To the Ministers, you see these impostours have slight and subtilty to lie
in wait for the people; and whom does it concern but you to take heed to the
flock, you cannot by silence liberare sidem aut animam; Christ has given
Pastors and Teachers to his Church to this end, that the people should not be
children, tossed to and fro, etc. convincing of gainsayers, and stopping the
mouths of soul-subverting teachers does belong to your office, Titus 1. 9, 10,
11. if there were but one Heterodox teacher start up, and neglected by the
people, you would discharge at him, with as much freedom as at Papists; what
if there be more such teachers and followed by thousands, is it ever the more
truth for the number? or is it a noli me tangere? or are we slaves to
popularity? and dare not snatch the souls of our people out of the stream for
fear of displeasing them by saving of them? or have we no hope to work a
cure, and so like Physicians, we let desperate patients eat and drink, and do
what they will without contradiction? Luther did not much consider how useful
the Sectaries of his time might have been against the Pope and his party, but
confuted them freely, knowing that they more blemished and hindered the
Reformation by their tenets, than were likely to help it with their hands; I
would not blow the trumpet or proclaim open war against lesser differences,
severity and acrimony in such cases breeds schism and heales it not; but
pernicious errors and destructive to souls (which it is cruelty to spare and
not pity) must be faced and fought against, not with invectives and railing,
that does but anger the Gangrene, and is not the way to quench wildfire, but by
solid convictions and evidence of truth: for so you shall either gain a
brother, or not lose a friend. But you may ask, when should we go out against
a doctrine as pernicious; for even that point about the law which denominates
an Antinomian, and that about Baptism which denominates an Anabaptist, seem
not to be fatal to the soul? To this I answer, that we must look how a
doctrine is attended or consequenced; the first circle in the water is the
least, those that are caused by it are bigger and bigger, an opinion may be
very ill as it is a bastard mis-begotten by mis-inferences from the Word; but
it is worse as it is a whore and begets a new offspring of errors more
pernicious, but I must remember to whom I speak. Brethren, if the sheep be
infected or worried, both God and men will ask, Where were the shepherds? or
what did they in the mean time?

2. To the people I say but this, Romans 16. 17. I beseech you brethren mark
them which cause divisions and differences contrary to the doctrine which ye
have learned, and avoid them; The avoiding of such teachers is your proper
duty; as you would avoid an ambuscado or stratagem of deceit: our present
divisions are scandalous to your selves, to your Ministers, to the truth; for
by reason of them, The way of truth is evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 2. they are
the hopes of the common enemy, and our own weakenings, and because I have named
the enemy, let no man think that the betraying of these differences among our
selves does give handle and occasion to them, to traduce us all as Anabaptists,
Brownists, Sectaries: we need not fear the calumnies of those to whom
godliness it self, as Christianity of old, was crime enough, we shall do our
selves right in their eyes by disclaiming them. The Apostles do boldly tax the
divisions among Christians notwithstanding any upbraidings of the Heathens. Let
them say that we are about (instead of purging the Temple as Christ did*) to
set up a Pantheon (as the Romans did) or an Altar to the unknown god (as they
of Athens did.) This water will not stick upon us long, they will be of another
mind when we shall shake this viper off our hand; In the mean time I beseech
you to consider whether beside the slight and cunning craftiness of seducing
teachers, there be not some other stratagems on foot, acted from behind the
door and at a greater distance, some hand of Ioab is in all this, the
politician and the Jesuit blow these coals, they would make us as Samaritans
and Jews to one another. Let us not gratify our enemies. I Will say but this,
observe the brand or character set upon the seduced, Unstable souls, 2 Pet. 2.
14. silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3. 6, etc.
and upon the seducers, merchants of men's souls, 2 Pet. 2. 3. unruly,
vainetalkers, deceivers, aiming at filthy lucre, Titus 1. 10, 11. (...),
lawless persons, 2 Pet. 3. 17. men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the
faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8, etc. but admit there be a face and presence of holiness in
the person, may we not then more securely receive their doctrine? To this I
answer, that both person and doctrine may carry a fair stamp and
superscription. We do not weigh gold to try the superscription of it, but the
weight. Gilded pills may convey poison. Satan in Peter is not easily
discovered. The better pass that error brings with it, the more dangerous it
is.

So much upon the second part of the text. The third is the preservative or
antidote against all impressions of such teachers as come with slight and
subtilty, etc. and that is twofold, 1. The Ministry which Christ has given
to his Church, for this ver. relates to the 11. He gave some Apostles, and
some, etc. that henceforth, etc. and to them does the Apostle commit the charge
of the flock, to watch over them against wolves, Acts 20. 28, 29. 2. The
holding fast and pursuance of the substance and great things of Religion, ver.
15. but being sincere in love grow up in all things into him which is the head:
Its an excellent growth, to grow up into the head, that is, into communion with
and conformity to Jesus Christ, which trivial opinions nothing at all advance;
observe the antithesis or opposition he makes between being carried about, etc.
and following the truth in love, for contraria, contrarijs, diseases are cured
by contraries; so the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. gives the same receipt
against unstedfastnesse, but grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; and to take off teachers from fables and genealogies, and
questions of no value; Paul commends to them the aiming at godly edifying which
is by faith, and to hold to that which is the end of the commandment, charity
out of a pure heart and of a good conscience and of faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.
4, 5. If both Ministers and people would but drive this trade, it would take
off that wandering and hunting after novell opinions and doctrines, and would
keep us constant in the wholesome pastures, even now that the hedge of settled
government is wanting; If you have good feeding, why should not that keep you
from wandering, until the pale be set up, wait upon God in the use of his
saving ordinances; and pray for us. If Moses stay long in the mount, must the
people be setting up golden calves, and say we know not what is become of this
Moses; Aarons rod shall swallow up all the rods of Iannes and Iambres in Exodus
7. 1^.
due time. The Apostle puts us in hope of a nil ultra to such, 2 Timothy 3. 9.
They shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifest unto all.

FINIS.

