The Victorious proceedings of the Protestants in IRELAND; from the beginning
of March to this present, being the 22. of the same month. With a Letter sent
from Master Brian Smith, Minister in his Majesty's Ship called the Banaventure,
riding before Kingsa^le, which was read in the Honorable House of Commons, on
Monday the 21. of March, 1642. Declaring how the Lord President of Munster, Sir
William St. Ledger, gave Battle to the Rebels near Durgarven, killed 2000 men,
took some of their Commanders prisoners, and slew ten with his own hands.

soldier with sword and shield, leading a group of other soldiers

Printed at London for John Wright, in the Old Bailey. 1642.

The victorious proceedings of the Protestants in Irelaud, from the beginning of
Maech to this present being the 22 of the same month.
ON the 27 of February, came all our boats and ships safely into Dublin
Harbor, that had been relieving Tredah and thus they declare their voyage,
that the two first days* they spent in firing some small towns by the
shor^-side, about the 19 and 20 day, came fo^th before the mouth of Tredath
Harbor, our vessels being all that carried provision, and more to defend them,
the enemy had chained up the H^rbour with a most strong chain, which our men
knowing the wind and tide being fair on the 20 day, manned out a shalop with
instruments to break the chain, and the ships to follow in, but the labor of
the breaking the chain, God had prevented, and by that wind and tide that
camed our men safely in, as could be thouht the same wind and tide brake the
chain before our ships, even as the shalop come, the enemy notwithstanding
with three or more pieces and many other men shot at our ships with all spit,
but our men got well with the loss only of some five or six men, but many of
the enemy lost, but to the great comfort of the City, w^o had been in great
distress, and not so much when o^r provision come as before, in that the Noble
Governor Sir Alen Tichborne had being in distress, gone out again the enemy
and taken many Cowes and sheep from them, and lost but few of his men, a great
terror is he to the enemy as Sir Charles Coot is here, that their very names
makes the enemy shake, and many times have they run at their names themselves
being not near. But our ships have unladen their provision, and coming ^o
Dubli^ the enemy labored all could be to spoil our m^n and ships by them
s^elets at land, and a ship of theirs for that purpose at Sea, but our men
burnt their ship, and to^ke took two pieces, a brass and iron one from them,
and are the day above named come home to us, having victualled Tredath for six
months, but are going again: we have some men come from England but no money,
insomuch that our City is unreasonable burdened, to the utter undoing of most
part of the City, for few houses have less then 11 12 some 30 Soldiers in
them, and they to pay them money weekly, and some not able to find their own
families with bread, but all complaint gives them no relent, which makes great
misery for the present, and will be more, in that all their goods being taken
out of these poor peoples houses by the Soldiers, they being not able to give
them money, and sold by these Soldiers, at not the seven part what they are
wo^th, so that little they have is consumed, these people left to beggary and
hear nothing but sad complaints, and this is more on the Protestants then
Papists the Protestants being more poor, what the cause of these things are,
God knows, ^ut sure none knows the misery of war but those that see it, and
sure none will desire it, if cary^d as here. But for Tredath Sir Henry
Tichburne has turned all or most of the Papists out of the City there, for as
in Dublin the enemy is sometimes, ^ay always in some six miles of us, some
times more nearer, ou^ men have not gone out since the last I writ to you, but
I think will as this night go out to a place where the enemy is very strong,
God keep them, I think we are ind^fferent without danger of their taking us by
forces, but fraud which is very much, but ^amine and sickness are like to be
our greatest enemies, in the City publicly is much threatening, they send to us
indeed the Rebels increase still daily, that not any place in Ireland, but all
are out in great bodies, especially in Munster which was last out, they are now
most strong, the heads of them being Lord Musey and Lord Roch, they have among
them our Generals Countess prisoner and all his children, which is much grief
to him so brave a man. We have report that Sir Philimon O Neale was so vexed,
that he could not so presently take Tredath, that for spite he went home and
killed all his prisoners, being not less then 4000 but we hope this is not yet
true, but certain w^ are, that the Lord Cranfield that was prisoner to him; he
has caused to be slain basely on a sudden. Here is like to be much misery
befall in this Kingdom before this war is at an end, some powder is thought
is come out of Spain^ to the Reb^ls, else could they have not so much as they
have, more then at trust. Since the third of March some shipping has gone out
from us and has relieved a place called Wicklow Castle be^ieged by the Rebels,
and is go^e to relieve another place called Duncannon, for our men i^ Dublin
we have had no great business happened, only yesterday part of our men went
out for the field 3000 foot and 500 horse, and intend to stay out some time,
we have not heard any thing from them, I believe they have an intent to burn
most part of the Country within 20 miles of Dublin, on the West and North
side* we have intelligence that those Rebels increase still, so that nothing
can be expected but a tedious war; we have intelligence, that Galloway is
revolted, but there is a Fort possessed by some of ours, that can command the
Town, but this Port is near Spain, as near as Dublin England, and relief
may be feared to come from Spain that way as some have thought, but small
corn by Wexford. But we have news, that some of your ships are come to our
coasts to keep the Seas which will be well if so, for much need is ofit: we
have intelligence but something doubtfu^l it is that with some 150^ of the
English landed in Munster the Noble President of Munster being before
distressed by the Re^els, but joining with these 1500 from England, went
against the Rebels, being a great multitude l^d by thd Lord Mountgarr^t, our
men pursued the Rebels killed no less then 2000 of them, but little loss on
our side, and some think the Lord Montgarret himself is killed, but this is
something doubtfully reported, but most say its tru^, that are of account, but
sure Iam, that all is like to be very low brought are they are better, and this
like to be a tedious war. We have news out of the North, but somewhat
uncertain, that the Scots have give a defeat to the Rebels there, and killed
no less then 1500.

We have news also from Tredath, that Sir Henry Tich^orne issued out, and beat
upon part of the enemies Can^pe, on that part where one Collonell Man Brians
Quarter was a Collonell of the enemy, but with a 1000 men, Sir Henry entered
battle, the enemy being 3000, some say 4000, but Sir Henry rooted them all,
killed four hundred, took two hundred prisoners, and the rest fled away, so
now for the present he is not so hard besieged, and he has burned 20 towns
about him.

THe second of March we arrived at Kingsaile, where we understand that in the
whole Province of Munster (which was least suspected) the Irish are all
revolted. They have swept away all the English Cattle, and stripped them of
all naked; in one we^ke they killed 55000. English sheep, and do vow they will
not leave an English man's Foot, but will quite extripate man beast. What they
do about Dublin, and in the North we hear not, Colonel Barry is made
General of their Forces in Munster; they have besieged the City of Cork
already, and the Town of Kingsaile, expected to surprised every hour, if the
Kings Ships (which keep them in awe) leave them in harbor, the Fort of
Kingsaile is made a strong place, but they want Men, Money, and Ammunion; only
the Admiral here has supplied it with victuals and arms for a 100 men for
six weeks, but the works there will require above 500. men, ^o make it good
against an Army; I conceive it is a place of the greatest consequ^nce in the
Provincce* It is lamentable to consider the want and misery and fear the poor
English live in at this time; they have betaken themselvee to some places of
refuge, as to Castlehaven, ^rook-haven, Baltmore. Bandonbridge is furn^shed
with 1000. men for six months, Cork for a longer time, Youghall is of little
strength, the Fort of Dunca^on is for the King, with a little provision for a
few day^s, but if they have not speedy relief, they must perish either by
Famine or Sword. It were endless to relate what savage and barbarous acts are
done by the Irish, especially aginst Ministers; I will but instance in one.

There 17 more* of them came to a Min^st^rs house, they stripped him and his wife
naked, bound them back to b^ck^ cut off his privy members, then one after
another did ^avish her upon her husband back, th^n cut both their throats.

The Lord Mackerly, the Lord Muscroe, the Lord Roch etc. after promise and
protestation of their fidelity to the King, and thereupon were furnished with
some Arms and powder, are all turned Rebels; there is scarce one Irish man but
is a Rebel.

The Lord President of Munster Sir William Saint Ledger went out lately against
the R^bells with so many horse and foot, that his force and Sir Charles
Vavasers Regiment joining together, made 5 or 600 horse and 3000 foot, they
gave battle to the Rebels near Dungarven, killed near 2000 men, took some of
the Commanders prisoners; after that they marched to Dungarven Castle. and
took it from the Rebels, where was good booty for his Soldiers, where he has
left a Garrison, and some Gunnes to keep it, and now is approaching Cork (if
he can) to raise that ^iege. They burn and spoil, and raze all as they go.

My Lord President is very valiant and zealous, it is said he killed ten men
with his own hands. The Irish wants Arms as yet, I pray God our best
endeavors may prevent them. We are all in good health aboard the Bonadventure.
So with my love to your self, and to one and all of my friends, in haste I rest

Your very loving brother Brian Smith.
From a board his Majesty's ship the Bonadventure riding before Kingsale March
7. 1641.
FINIS.

