A SUMMARIE, OR SHORT SURVEY OF THE Annalls and most Remarkable Records of King
CHARLES His Reign, from the first YEAR thereof to this present, 1646.
Wherein we may Plainly see how the Popish, Jesuiticall and Prelaticall
Malignant Party have indevoured the Ruin of this Church and Kingdom, but was
by Gods mercy most miraculously prevented.
CAROLVS D: G: Magnae Britt: Fra: et Hiber: Rex Fidei Defensor
Sol Orbem rediens, Sic Rex Illuminat Vrbem.

Return in Peace Great CHARLES, redress our Woes:
For-sake, at length thine, and the Kingdoms Foes.
Thy Gracious Presence will more comfort bring,
Then Phoebus splendour to a backward Spring.

1 Parliament.
1 IN the first year of King Charles his Reign, a Parliament being called at
Oxford (the very first in his Reign) two subsidies were, first granted, no
grievances removed, but the said Parliament soon dissolved.

2. The sad effects which this Parliament produced, were the loss of Rochell,
by the unhappy help of Englands Ships.

3. The diversion of a most facile and hopeful war from the West Indies, to
a most expensive and successelesse attempt on Cales.

4. The bloody and unblessed attempt on the peace concluded with Spain, without
consent of a Parliament, contrary to a promise formerly made to the Kingdom by
King James, a little before his death; whereby the Cause of the Palatinate was
altogether most shamefully deserted by us.

6. The Kingdom suddenly billetted with Soldiers, and a concomitant project
set on foot for Germane Horses to enforce men, by fear, to fall before
arbitrary and tyrannical taxations, continually to be laid upon them.

2. Parliament.
7. The dissolution of a second Parliament at Westminster, in the second year
of King Charles, after a declarative grant of no less than five Subsidies, and
the sad and bad issues that followed, yea, flowed on the Kingdom thereupon.

8. As first, the violent exacting from the people of that mighty sum of the
five Subsidies, or a sum, equal to it by a Commission for a Royall-Loan, as
it was called.

9. Many worthy Gentlemen imprisoned and vexed, that refused to pay it.

10. Great sums of money extorted from Subjects by Privy Seals and Excises.

11. The most hopeful Petition of Right, blasted in the very blossom of it.

3 Parliament.
12. A third Parliament called, and quickly broken in the fourteenth year of
the King, and therein Parliamentary privileges extremely violated by after
illusage of some of the best and worthiest Members thereof, who were clapped up
close prisoners, denied all ordinary and extraordinary comforts of life, and
preservation of health, which might have proved perpetual to them, had not a
fourth Parliament (which afterward happened) necessitated their relief and
release.

13. And this third Parliament thus dissolved, O the most miserable effects
that followed thereon also.

14. Scandalous and opprobrious Declarations published to asperse and besmear
the proceedings of this last Parliament, and some of the best Members thereof;
yea, Proclamations set out to those effects, thereby extremely to dis-hearten
the Subjects, yea, and plainly forbidding them once to name a Parliament, or to
desire them any more.

15. Whence, immediately gushed out (this damme of Parliaments thus being
broken down) the violent inundations (even to a deluge of miseries) of mighty
sums of money, got by that strange and straining project of Knighthood; yet,
(...) a fair color and (...) of Law for it, and for all the rest that
followed.

16. As, the most burthen^o^ Book of Rates; the most h^avy and unheard of (till
^^en) taxation of Ship Money; the enlargement of (...) contrary to Magnae
Charta; the injurious exaction of Coat and Conduct (...) away of the
Train'd-Bands Arms; the (...) into their hands, and keeping it first from the
(...) to be had thence, but at most excessive rates.

17. The destruction of the Forest of Dean, that most famous Magazine, and
Timber-store-house of the whole Kingdom, which was sold to Papists.

18. The monstrous Monopolies of Soap, Salt, Wine, Leather, and Seacoal; yea
almost of all things in the Kingdom of most necessary and common use.

19. Restraint of Subjects Liberties in their Trades and Habitations; for
refusal of which foresaid heavy pressures, O what great numbers of the Kings
most loyal Subjects, were vexed with long and languishing suites, some fined
and confined to prisons, to the loss of health in many, of life in some; Some
having their houses broke open, their goods seized on, their studies or closets
searched for writings, books and papers to undo them; Some interrupted also in
their Sea-Voyages, and their ships taken from them, in an hostile manner, by
Projectors, as by Pirates, or common Enemies.

20. And, O the crushing cruelties of the Star-Chamber-Court, and Council
Table, in those days, chiefly, for the fomenting and increasing of those and
suchlike most exorbitant, and extravagant taxations, pressures, and unjust
suites against the Subject.

21. These, thus far for the miseries of the Commonwealth; now also for the
Churches danger, and distress. O the wonderful and amazing miseries of the
Subjects Consciences also! by King Charles his conniving at, countenancing and
encouraging the intolerable burden of Popish Ceremonies, Romish Innovations,
and such like other outrages of the Arch-Prelate of Canterbury, and his
Prelaticall Agents and instruments, over the whole Kingdom, in matters of
religion, Divine worship, and spiritual cases of Conscience.

22. The most palpable and abominable Romish Ceremonies used at the Kings
Coronation, and insolent and impious, false and destructive additions in the
Oath administered to the King, at his said first Inauguration to the Crown, by
that most arrogant Archbishop.

23. And the manifold other impious impositions in matters of religion, divine
worship, and spiritual cases of Conscience; for refusing and opposing of
which, O how was the honest-hearted and tender-conscienced subject, grievously
oppressed by fines, imprisonments, stigmatizings, mutilations, whippings,
pillories, gagges, confinements and banishments; yea, and that, into perpetual
close imprisonments in the most desolate, remote, and (as they hoped and
intended) remorslesse parts of the Kingdom.

24. The putting down, yea, utterly ruinating of that most famous and
honorable work, that ever this Kingdom saw, in a private way, for the
advancement of Gods glory in the propagation of the Gospel, I mean, the
Feoffees for buying in of Impropriations; Noy, the (then) Atturney-Generall,
openly in Court, accusing that blessed work to be a worse plot against the
Church (he meant the Prelaticall Church sure,) than the Papists Powder plot.

25. The advancing (for the most part) none, to Ecclesiastical Dignities and
Livings, but Arminians; yea, Popish-hearted Pontificians; Suspending and
silencing with deprivations, degradations, and excommunications, almost all the
most pious, painful and Orthodox learned Pastors over the kingdom, whom they
could catch in their snares, and all this under a pretense of peace, unity and
conformity; in which foresaid cases, the High Commission (like the Spanish-
Inquisition) with its most pragmaticall pranks, was, all along, most
intolerable and abominable.

26. Printing-Presses, set open for the printing and publishing of all sorts of
Popish and Arminian tenets; but, shut up and restrained from Printing, sound
and Orthodox Doctrines.

27. Nay, not only thus lamentably molesting us at home in England; but
attempting the like on our Brethren of Scotland, indevouring to impose upon
their consciences also, a New Liturgye, and a book of Canons, upon the first
introducing whereof into their Church, they not enduring them, threw stones and
stools at the Archbishop of St Andrews head, and beat him out of the Church,
crying out, a Pape, a Pape, and so rid themselves of them.

28. Upon which refusal of theirs, O what foul calumnies and scoffs were
immediately cast upon them, and they called and counted rebels and Traitors;
yea, so proclaimed in all Churches in England.

29. An Army was also raised to oppress and suppress them, for thus resisting
those the Kings and the Arch-prelates most injurious impositions on them.

30. Our Brethren of Scotland likewise raising an Army in their own just
defense, and by force of arms, enforcing their own peace.

31. A first pacification being then made by the King, and some of his
Nobility, and ratified under hand and Seal twixt them and the Scots; yet was it
shortly after shamefully violated, and broken quite off by the Arch-prelate of
Canterbury, and the Earl of Straford.

4. Parliament.
32. A fourth Parliament was thereupon shortly after called again, by those
complotters means, but to a very ill intent, and another Parliament summoned
also at the same time by the Earl of Straford in Ireland, both of them only
to levy and procure moneys to raise another Army, and wage a new War against
the Scots,

33. The Ships and goods of our Brethren of Scotland, were, in all parts and
ports of this kingdom, and of Ireland, also surprised and seized on for the
King; their Commissioners denied audience to make their just defense to the
King, and the whole kingdom of Scotland and England too, hereupon much
distracted and distempered with leavying of moneys, and imprisoning all among
us that refused the same.

34. This Parliament also refusing to comply with the King, Cant, and Straford
in this Episcopal war against the Scots, was soon dissolved and broken up by
them and thereupon they returned to their former ways of waste and confusion,
and the very next day after the dissolution thereof some eminent members of
both Houses, had their Chambers, and studies, yea their cabinets and very
pockets of their wearing clothes (betimes in the morning before they were out
of their beds) searched for letters and writings, and some of them also
imprisoned, and a false and most scandalous declaration was published against
the House of Commons in the Kings name.

35. A forced Loan of money was attempted in the City of London, to be made a
president (if it prevailed there) for the whole kingdom, but some Aldermen
refusing, were sorely threatened and imprisoned.

36. In which interim, the Clergies Convocation continuing (notwithstanding the
dissolution of the Parliament) new conscience-oppressing Canons were forged,
and a strange Oath, with a monstrous etc. in it, was framed for the
establishing of the Bishops Hierarchy, with severe punishments on the refusers
to take it.

37. In this Convocation sore taxations were also imposed upon the whole
Clergy, even no less than six Subsidies, besides a bountiful contribution to
forward that intended war against our brethren of Scotland.

38. For the advancing of which said sums for this war, the popish
pontifician party, and their scandalous priests were most free and forward;
yea, and a solemn prayer was composed and imposed by the Bishops on their
Ministers every where to be used and read in all Churches against the Scots, as
rebels and traitors.

39. The papists also in a high measure enjoyed even almost a total
toleration; and a Popes Nuncio suffered among us to act and govern all Romish
affairs, yea a kind of a private popish-parliament kept in the kingdom, and
popish jurisdictions erected among them.

40. Commissions were also (secretly) issued out for some great and eminent
papists, for martial Commands, for levying of Soldiers, and strengthening
their party with Arms and Ammunition of all sorts, and in great plenty.

41. His Majesty's treasure was by these means so extremely exhausted and his
revenues so anticipated, that he was enforced to compel (as it were) his own
Servants, Judges, and Officers of all sorts, to lend him great sums of money,
aad prisons filled with refusers of these and the other illegal payments; yea,
many High-Sheriffes summoned into the Star Chamber, and to the
Councill-Board, and some of them imprisoned for not being quick enough in
levying Ship Money, and such like intolerable taxations.

42. In sum, the whole kingdom was now brought into a lamentable and
languishing condition of being most miserably bought and sold to any that could
give and contribute most of might and malice against us, and no hope of humane
help, but dolour^ desperation and destruction, to be the portion of all.

43. In which interim, our Brethren of Scotland being entered into our kingdom,
for their own just defense, the King had advanced his Royall-Standard at York,
where the cream of the kingdom, Nobles, and Gentry, being assembled, and a
treaty twixt the prime of both Armies had at Rippon, for a fair and peaceable
accommodation, the King was, at last, enforced to take his Nobles Counsel, and
in the first place, a cessation of Arms agreed on; and then this fifth present
Parliament, (the Parliament of Parliaments,) was necessitously resolved on to
begin, November ^. 1640.

5 Parliament, Anno 1640. November. 3.
44. But, behold, a desperate plot and design was herein also, immediately, set
on foot, to spo^le or poison it in the very Embrio and constitution of it, in
the first c^oyce of the Members thereof, by Letters from the King, Queen,
malignant and popish Earls, Lords, Knights, and Gentry, posted into all parts
of the kingdom, to make a strong party for them: But, by admirable divine
providence, this their plot was counterplotted, and wonderfully frustrated, and
the Parliament most hopefully congregated and settled.

45. Shortly after, a very formidable Spanish-Fleet, or Armado, appeared on our
English narrow Seas, in sight of Dover, and was coming in (as was, on very
strong grounds, more than probably conjectured) as a third party, to help to
destroy us; the Spaniards hoping, that by this time, we and the Scots were
together by the ears, but they were by Gods mercy, beaten off from us by our
Neighbors of Holland.

46. In the time of ours and the Scots Armies residing in the North, which was
in June 1641. the Popish and malignant Lords and Prelates, fearing the effects
of this present Parliament, complotted together to disaffect that our English
Army against the Parliament, and indevoured to bring it out of the North,
Southward, and so to London, to compel the Parliament to such limits and rules
as they thought fit.

47. For the advancing of which design, the Earl of Straford, then prisoner
in the Tower, attempted an escape, with Sir William Belfore, then Leivtenant of
the Tower, promising and assuring him twenty thousand pound, and the marriage
of his daughter to Sir Williams Son, if he would but consent unto and assist
his escape; but loyal Sir William hated such bribes of treachery, and still
kept him fast, and so the neck of all that plot was broken.

48. Then, they attempted by foul and false scandals on the Parliament, to
entice the Army of the Scots, (then, still in the North) to a newtrality, and
to sit still whiles our English army acted the farther designs hatched and
hammered still in their heads and hearts, but this plot prevailed not neither.
(All these preceding passages, were the confused effects of 15 or 16 years of
the Kings reig^.)

Anno 1641. October. 23.
49. About this time, that most horrid and inhumane bloody rebellion and
monstrous massacring of almost 200000 innocent English Protestants, men, women,
and children, brake out in Ireland, namely, about October 23. 1641. (This also
being a main branch of this most mischievous design against this Parliament, by
Gods wonderful power) and providence, so firmly fixed and settled, that they
knew not how to ruinate it) those accursed Rebels having had their principal
encouragements and Commissions to authorize them in that horrid and hideous
rebellion from the Court of England, and of purpose to have made England the
chief seat of the war, and of all the papists, prelates, and malignants
utmost wrath and rage.

50. For the still effecting, and underhand working on, of this wicked design,
the malignant party in private, much prevailing still; the design now went on,
chiefly against the City of London, for which purpose, the noble and loyal
Leivtenant of the Tower, Sir William Belfore, was (for his loyalty) displaced
by the King, from his Leivtenantship, and popish Lord Cotting^on, made
Constable of the Tower; but his dangerous designs being soon discovered, he
was as soon displaced; and Colonel Lunsford, (not long before, a Newgate-bird,
and fitter for Newgate) was made Leivtenant of the Tower; But, he also by the
Parliaments petition and importunity to the King, was displaced; and Sir John
Byron, a desperate malignant (who afterward proved the most bloody Lord Byron
in Ches^ire) was made Leivtenant of the Tower, in Lunsfords stead; but he also,
on many just jealousies being petitioned against, was at length, with much ado
removed and put out thence, and Sir John Co^yers, by the power of the
Parliament, was put in his place.

51. About which time, a most wicked fellow* sent to Mr. John Pymm (a most
pious Patriot of his Country, and then a most eminent member of the House of
Commons) a most reviling Letter, therein calling him traitor, and in the said
Letter enclosed a plague sore plaster, thinking thereby to have destroyed him,
But, God mightily preserved him from the infection of it.

52. None of all these plots, yet, prevailing against the Parliament, neither
in generals nor particulars, they yet, persist to plot and attempt against it;
and about this time found occasions, craftily and causelessly (in secret) to
foment many jealousies and jarre^, to dis-joynt both Houses of Parliament,
within themselves; thereby at least, to obstruct and retard their (then) most
weighty, and great affairs in Church and State.

53. The Bishops also themselves had a pestilent plot about this time, to
subvert and overthrow the Parliament, by endeavoring to get the King to protest
against their proceedings in it; But twelve of them were thereupon presently
imp^ached of high treason, and ten of them imprisoned in the Tower of London,
and, afterward, they were all disabled from ever sitting again in the
Parliament.

54. After this, the King himself (being guarded with about 500 armed,
russianly desperate Cavaliers or Soldiers) violently rushed into the House of
Commons, accused five of their most eminent and pious Members of trea^son,
demanded their persons to be delivered up unto him, intending to destroy all
that resisted him therein; but this plot was blessedly crossed, by the happy
absen^e of the Gentlemen; this plot was attempted, Jan. 4. 1641.

Anno 1642.
55. After this, one Binion, a Silkman of London; and the Kentish Malignants,
wherein Sir Edward Deering, had a principal hand, framed dangerous and
destructive petitions against the proceedings of the Parliament; but were both
most justly rejected, and themselves fined and imprisoned for them.

56. Immediately after this, things grew still, worse and worse among the
malignants, the King himself in unjust discontent (by the desperate and wicked
counsel of that pernicious Cataline, the young Lord Digby) forsakes the
Parliament, and getting the Prince to him, leaves London and presently posts
into the North, and there attempts to get Hull into his hands, but was happily
prevented and bravely opposed by Sir John Hotham, then, in that time of his
outward and seeming fidelity.

57. The King being at York, interdicts the Militia, then, set on foot, by the
Parliament, for their just safety and defense; endeavoring to remove the Term
from the City of London, but in both is opposed by the Parliament.

58. The Lords and Gentry of Ireland, and of Scotland too, petition the King,
to return to his Parliament, yea and the Gentry and Commons of Yorkshire do
the like, but are all rejected.

59. The King set on foot a most illegal Commission of Array, to clash against
the Parliaments Militia, which occasioned much mischief and misery over the
whole Kingdom, but the Parl. Militia prevailed in most places and parts of the
land.

60. Three letters were intercepted, discovering a most desperat^ ^lot against
the Parliament by the Royalists, Commissary Wilmot, Digbie, Jermine, Crofts,
and others, which by Gods mercy failed them and came to nothing, but we in
taking some of their ships were advantaged thereby.

61. Sir Richard Gurney, then Lord Mayor of the City of London, proving a
desperate malignant and Array man, and more apt than able to act for the King,
was crossed in his desires, and clapped up prisoner in the Tower of London, by the
power of the Parliament.

62. Proclamations and Declarations against the Parliaments proceedings were
Printed and published and commanded to be read in all the Churches and Chapels
over the whole kingdom, within the Kings power.

63. Sir John Penington, a brave Seaman, but a desperate malignant, was
constituted Admiral of the Seas, for the Kings service, but displaced and
dispossessed thereof by the Parliament; and the most noble and loyal Earl of
Warwick (notwithstanding the Kings Letter and command to interdict him therein,
and to give way to Penington) being put in by the power and authority of the
Parliament, and possessed of the Ships, most happily and honorably kept and
continued in the place and office for the Parliaments service.

64. Hull having been long besieged by that most mischeivous and atheistical
Marquess of Newcastle, for the King; and in that interim, one Beck with a
known Papist, plotting to have betrayed it, by firing it in four several
places and then assaulting it; yet Hull, by Gods mighty providence was
preserved, and the King after much loss of men and money, enforced to leave
and forsake it.

65. The most noble and right honorable Earl of Essex was ordained Lord
General over all the Parliaments Forces, for the preservation of the kingdom,
which he famously and faithfully managed and marshalled, as especially
Edgehill and Newbery, and other places can abundantly witness.

66. A plot to have blown up all the Lord Generals Magazine of powder; and
another at Beverley in Yorkshire, to have slain Sir John Hotham, both intended
by one David Alexander, and hired thereunto by the Kings party, but both, by
Gods providence timely prevented.

67. Commissions granted to popish Recusants to levy men and arms against the
Parliament; but the Parlia: published a Declaration or Protestation to the
whole world against the Kings dealings, and most unjust proceedings therein.

68. The King received the most bloody Irish rebels petition, and permitted
their persons with great favor and allowance about him; calling, and counting
them his good Catholic Subjects; but utterly rejecting the Parliaments
petition, (exhibited by the Lord General) desiring peace and reconciliation
with him.

69. A Treaty of peace was really intended by the Parliament, but merely
pretended and fraudulently for a while, transacted by the Royalists; in which
interim, that most bloody bickering at Brainford, was most treacherously
committed by the Kings party, and a most wicked piece of villainy carried on
therein, but (though with much loss on both sides, but especially on theirs)
by Gods great mercy the mischief prevented, and the City of London mightily
preserved.

70. A dangerous plot against the kingdom, in new High-Sheriffes to be listed
by the King, for his better collecting of the 400000 li. Subsidies, intended to
have been confirmed to the King in a former Parliament; but, that plot crossed by
the Parliaments providence, and an Ordinance of Parliament set on foot for the
successful Association of Counties for mutual defense one of another,
against regal injurious taxations and oppressions on them.

71. A wicked design of the Royalists at Oxford and elsewhere, to proceed
against the Parliaments prisoners, as traitors, and so to put them to death; by
which Doctor Bastwick, and Captain Lilburn, were to have been tried for their
lives; but prevented by an Ordinance of Parliament for execution of a Lex
Talionis, and so of executing the Royal prisoners among us.

Anno 1643.
72. A notable plot against the City of London, immediately upon the Cities
preferring a petition to the King, by the hands of two trusty Aldermen, and
four Commoners of the said City, in reply to which petition, the King sending
as his messenger, one Captain Hern to the City, and the whole body of the City
assembling at a Common Hall, (as they term it) in their Guild Hall, this Hern
desires Faire-play above-board of them; But the business being found to be a
notable design of the malignant-Citizens against the Parliament and the (then)
Lord Mayor of London, and the Government of their City, the honest, and far
major party, cry out in the hearing of Hern, they would live and dye with the
Parliament, and so sent Hern away with a flea in his ear.

73. Another plot immediately after, contrived by the King and his agents at
Oxford, by a Letter sent by his Majesty to all the Freemen, Journeymen and
Apprentices, of the said City to assemble at their several Halls; and there
the Masters and Wardens of all Companies to read the Kings Letter to them, and
to persuade them to yield to all the Kings commands against the Parliament and
City; but this letter was nipt and crossed also in the neck and nick of it, and
voted by the Parliament to be evil and scandalous.

74. A plot also to betray Bristol into the Royallists hands by one Yeomous and
Bowcher, and diverse other their associates; but by Gods mercy the plot being
timely discovered, and the danger avoided, those two principal conspirators
were by Martial Law condemned, and hanged, and so the plot utterly frustrated.

75. Cheapeside cross, Chaering-crosse, and all other crosses, in and about
London, utterly demolished and pulled down, and that abominable and blasphemous
book of tolerating sports and pastimes on the Lords days, voted to be burnt,
and shortly after accordingly burnt, together with many crucifixes and popish
trinckets and trumperies, in the very same place where Cheapeside-crosse stood.

76. M. Prynne sent by the Parliament to the Tower of London, to search the
Arch prelate of Canterburies chamber and Study there, where he was prisoner,
who accordingly searching his Study, and his pockets of his wearing clothes (a
just requital of his dealing with Mr. Pryn^e and others) found the original
Scotch Service Book, with the Arch Bishops own hand-writings in it, the cause
of all the Scots wars; and his Diary, Devotions, and discoveries under his
own hands of matters of high concernment.

77. The City of London to have been betrayed into the hands of the Royalists,
under a pretense of a petition for peace, plotted by Mr. Waller, a member of
the H^^se of Commons, M. Tompkins, Mr. Challenor, and others; and this wicked
plot, termed by King Charles in his letter to the Queen, one of his Fine
Designs; But God manifested them to be wicked and accursed Designs; and
Waller one of the prime complotters, was by the sentence of the Parliament
fined 10000 li. in his estate, and sent out of the kingdom into perpetual
banishment, and Tompkins and Challenor hanged in London.

78. The breaking out of Sir John Hothams rotten-heart and infidelity to the
Parliament, in his intended and attempted plot for the betraying of that mighty
strong Town of Hull into the Queens hands, which treachery was plotted and
contrived between Sir John the father, Captain Hotham his son, and Sir Edward
Roades, and began to be suspected, by Sir John Hothams deserting of the most
noble Lord Fairfax, by an intercepeed letter of the Queens to the King, and
diverse other sumptomes of it, but especially by Captain Moyers letter to Mr.
Ripley, and Mr. Ripley's faithful acquainting the Mayor of Hull therewith, and
their first seizing on the Block-houses, Castles, and Commanders of them, and
at length their apprehending of the persons of Sir John Hotham and Captain
Hotham his Son was also apprehended, and both of them beheaded at the Tower of
London.

79. A desperate plot for the betraying of the City or Town of Lincoln, by the
two Purfries, two Captains of Hull, who let in 60 Cavaliers by night in
disguised habits, and who issuing out about 12 of the clock that night, to act
their design, where a plain fellow of the Town discharging a piece of Canon
upon them, slew 10 of them at one shot, the rest slain and taken by the
sentinels and Soldiers of the town, and so by Gods mercy the City preserved.

80. The Queen wrote a dangerous letter to the King, to come with all his
forces to surprise London; but by Gods over-powring wisdom and good
providence, the King refusing that counsel resolved to take Gloucester first,
which he siercely assaulted, but was as bravely repulsed, and by Gods blessing
on Major General Massies fidelity, and magnanimity of spirit, timely aid
coming to relieve the town, it was admirably freed, and by the Lord Generals
Army, and the City of Londons Regiments, delivered.

81. A desperate rebellion raised by the Kentish malignants, but by Gods mercy
timely suppressed about Tunbridge, by the valor of Colonel Brown, and the
well-affected Gentry of the County of Kent.

82. A Ship bound from Denmark to the King, of about 300 tun, richly laden with
arms and ammunition; another Ship bound from Newcastle to Holland, laden with
Sea-coale, but in the midst thereof was found between 3 and 4000 li, hid in the
coals, sent to buy arms for the King; and a third great ship called the
Fellowship, of at least 400 tun, carrying 24 pieces of Ordnance, all these 3
ships taken by the Parlia: ships, and made prize of.

83. The coming in of our brethren of Scotl. with an army of at least 20000
horse and foot, invited thereunto by the Parl: in the bitter depth of winter,
when they marched up to the middle in snow, and were forced to bring their
Artillery over the ice of the frozen river of Tyne, and the Citizens of London
lent the Parliament a 100000 li. for the Scots first pay, to encourage their
advance to help us against the Kings forces.

84. A desperate plot of the Rovalists to starve up the City of London, by
breaking into Surrey, Sussex, Kent, and the other associated Counties, but
disappointed by the Parl: Victories at Au^ton and Alsford, fought by Sir Will:
Waller, with the help of the City of Londons regiments; and the Royalists plots
to hinder our brethren of Scotl: coming in to our help, by letters and
Ambassadors sent from France, and messengers from King Charles to inveagle them
to keep from us; but all in vain by Gods good providence and mercy to us.

85. The King granted a cessation of arms with the bloody rebels of Ireland,
and afterward justified it by a Declaration of his, printed and published at
Oxford; but it was remarkably observed, that he never prospered in any of his
great designs after it.

86. A Solemn League and Covenant taken by the Lords and Commons in Parl: and
by the City of London, and all parts of the kingdom, in the Parliaments power,
for a pure reformation of Religion and Church Government, and a mutual defense
betwixt us and our brethren of Scotland.

87. A notable plot by the Royalists to have Nottingham town and Castle,
betrayed unto them, the Officers therein being proffered above 10000 li. to
c^nsent to it; but prevented by Gods mercy in the fidelity of Colonel
Hutchinson, who was then the Governor thereof.

88. A General plot against the Protestant Religion over all Christendom, and
the Danes and Hollanders also, contribute to help King Charles therein; but
God wrought a mighty overture therein by the sudden breaking out of the Danes
plot against the Swedes, and their overrunning almost all Denmark thereupon.

89. A desperate plot against the City of London, under a pretense of
petitioning for peace, acted by Sir Basil Brook, Colonel Read, and one Mr.
Riley, and Vilet, 2 Citizens of London, and others, but by Gods providence
discovered and prevented.

1645.
90. Two desperate plots for the betraying of Ailsbury into the Royalists
hands; and another against Southampton, but all three by Gods mercy timely
discovered also and prevented.

91. One Mr. Edward Stanford, a Papist, plotted with Captain Backhouse a Capt.
of Horse, under Colonel Massy for the betraying of the City of Gloucester
into the Enemies hands, and proffered 5000 li. for a reward thereof, 200 li.
whereof was paid in hand to the said Captain, but by Gods providence the plot
frustrated, and Gloucester safely preserved.

92. Englands great wonder to Gods glory, there being (about May 30. 1644.) six
brave armies in the kingdom, on the Parliaments side, and other forces for
defense of the City of London, besides.

93. A plot to have betrayed our whole Army in Cornwall in the West, but by
Gods blessing most of the Soldiers lives were preserved, though with the loss
of our Artillery.

94. Sir Alexander Carew, Sir John Hot^am Captain Hotham, and the Arch-prelate
of Canterbury beheaded on Tower Hill for treason against the Parliament.

95. A peace only pretended by the royalists at Uxbridge, and a treacherous
petition framed by the malignants of Buckingham shire, wherein one Sir John
Lawrence of that County was a great stickler, but the mischief of both was
frustrated.

96. A desperate assault on Melcomb-Regis, to have betrayed it into the
royalists hands, wherein diverse of the malignant Townsmen had a principal
hand, and Colonel Goring, and Sir Lewis Dives, were agents therein, but by
Gods blessing the plot was frustrated, the Town and Forts recovered, and two
ships with rich prize from Rhoan in France, were seized on to make amends for
their trouble.

1645.
97. Diverse Earls and Lords disaffecting the Kings courses, forsook Oxford,
and came in and submitted themselves to the Parliament.

98. The King in great distress after our famous Victory at Nazeby, is forced
to fly up and down from Leicester, not knowing where to stay in safety.

99. A desperate plot in the West against the Parliament, by the Clubmen, but
by Gods providence turned to the Enemies greatest hurt in the issue.

100. A devilish sudden plot upon Scotland, which was almost over run, by
traitorous Montrosse; but as suddenly recovered again, by Gods blessing on
General David Lesley, and Montrosse discomfitted and beaten away into the
mountains.

1646.
101. A Discovery of gross impiety in the King and his Oxonians, the King
pretending a desired and personal treaty with the Parliament, for a
wel-grounded peace and yet at that time granted a Commission to the Earl of
Glamorgan, to the ruin of all the protestants in Ireland, and so consequently
of us in England also.

102. The King before his departure out of Oxford, sends a Commission or Letter
to the Marquis of Ormond, to make an absolute peace with those bloody rebels,
granting them full profession of their Romish religion, by his voluntary
authority, to the shame of himself, and his religion; notwithstanding which
Commission or Letter, the King sent a letter to the Parliament, and another to
the City of London, protesting in them, that nothing in the world was more
desired by him, than that in religion and peace, with all the comfortable
fruits of both, they might thenceforth live under him, in all godliness and
honesty; that foresaid Commission or Letter being discovered to the Parliament,
after the sending of those Letters, and thereby the notorious unfaithfulness
of the King manifested to us.

102. The King (after that disloyal peace with the bloody Irish) was now at
last enforced out of absolute necessity to get out of Oxford in a most
disgraceful disguise, as a Servingman to Ashburnham, and by this ignoble
escape, to put himself into the hands of our loyal brethren of Scotland for
safeguard. Yet he persists and continues at Newcastle in as much obduracy and
hardness of heart as at the first, and the Lord only knows what will become
of him, if he return not to God, his people, and Parliament, which the Lord in
mercy, work his heart unto, Amen.

104. The great Seal broken before the Lords and Commons, on Tuesday the 11,
of August, 1646.

The Speech of the Lord Louthen, Chancellor of Scotland, to the King at
Newcastle, July, 1646.
YOur Majesty was plcased on Monday last to call the Lords of Your Council and
Committee, to acquaint them with the Propositions, and told them before you
would deliver Your Answer, You would make the same known to them: The time
assigned to the Commissioners stay is so short, and the consequence of your
Majesty's Answer of so great importance, either for the perservation or ruin
of Your Crown, and Kingdoms, as we could not be answerable to God, nor to
that Trust reposed in us unless we represent to your Majesty how necessary it
is that your Majesty assent to the Propositions as the (...) of affairs now
(...) that the danger and (...) of your refusal will be remediless, and b^ing
on a sudden ruin and destruction.

I shall begin first with the last, which is the danger and shall next speak a
word of the remedy.

The differences betwixt your Majesty and your Parliament (which no man knows
better than your Majesty's self,) are grown to such a height, that after
many, bloody battles; the Parliament having your Majesty, all the Forts,
Garrisons, and strong holds in their hands, having your Majesty's Revenue,
Excise, Assessements, Sequestrations, and the Authority to raise all the men
and money in the Kingdom, and having, after many victories and great
successes, a strong Army on Foot, are now in such a p^sture for strength and
power: they are in a capacity to do what they will, both in Church and State.
And some are so afraid, and others so unwilling to submit themselves to your
Majesty's Government, that they desire not you, nor any of your Race, longer to
reign over them: But the people are so wearied of the War, and great
burdens they do groan under, are so loath to have Monarchieall Government
destroyed, that they dare not attempt to cast it totally off, till once they
send Propositions of Peace to your Majesty, least the people (without whose
concurrence they are not able to carry on their design) should fall from them;
but after so great War and trouble, that they may have a perfect security
from opposition and Arbitrary power, they have resolved upon the Propositions,
which are tendered to your Majesty, as that without which the Kingdom and your
people cannot be in safety, and that there cannot be a firm peace upon any
other terms.

Your Majesty's friends in the Houses, and the Commissioners from Scotland,
(after much wra^^ing) did consent to the sending of those Propositions, or to
be rated the hinderers of peace, or otherwise to send no Propositions at all.

And now Sir, if your Majesty (as God fo^bid) shall refuse to assent to the
Propositions, You will lose all Your friends in the Houses, lose the City, and
all the Country. And all England will join against you as one man; they will
process and depose you, and set up another Government; they will charge us to
deliver your Majesty to them, and to render their Garrisons, and remove our
Armies out of England, and upon your Majesty's refusal of the propositions,
both Kingdoms will be constrained for their mutual safety, to agree and
settle Religion and peace without You, which (to our unspeakable grief) will
ruin your Maiestyy and your posterity, and if your Majesty refuse our
faithful advice (who desire nothing on Earth more than the preservation of
your Majesty's Royal Throne.) And if your Majesty lose England by your
wilfulness, You will not be permitted to come and reign in Scotland.

Sir, we have laid our hands upon our hearts, we have asked Counsel and
direction from God, and have had our most serious thoughts upon the remedy, but
can find no other to save your Crown and Kingdoms, than your Majesty's
assenting to the propositions, and dare not say but they are higher in some
things, (if it were in our power and option to remedy) than we approved of, but
when we see no other means for curing the distempers of the Kingdoms, and
closing the breach between your Majesty and your Parliament, our most humble
and safe advise is, your Majesty will be graciously pleased to assent to them
as the only way to establish your Throne; because your Majesty shall be
thereby received again in your Parliament, with the applause and acclamations
of your people, by your Royal presence all friends will be strengthened, and
all Enemies, (who fear nothing so much as the granting the propositions) will
be weakened; your Majesty will have a fit opportunity hereafter, to offer such
propositions as You and your Parliament in wisdom shall think fit, for your
Crown and Kingdom, the Armies will be disbanded, and your people finding the
sweet fruit of a peaceable Government: you will gain their hearts and
affections, and that will be your Majesty's strength and glory, and will
recover all that you have lost in this time of tempest of trouble.

And if it please God to incline your Royal heart to this advise of your
humble, and faithful servants, who next to the honor and service of God,
esteem nothing more precious, than the safety of your person, and Crown: our
actions shall make it appear, that we esteem no hazard too great for your
Majesty's safety, and that we are willing to sacrifice our lives and fortunes
for establishing your Throne and just Right.

Collected by John Vicars.
FINIS.
Printed at London by John Dever and (...) Ibbitson, for T. Jenn^^ and are to
be sold at the Royall-Exchange. 1646.


