THE ANSWER OF The Corporation of Moniers in the Mint, at the Tower of London,
to two false and scandalous Libells printed at London, and lately come forth
without date.

THE FIRST ENTITLED, The humble Representation of Peter Blondeau, as a warning
touching several disorders happening by Money ill-favouredly coined, and the
only means to prevent them.

THE SECOND ENTITLED, A most humble Memorandum from Peter Blondeau.

Which not only intends maliciously to sandall Us the Corporation of Moniers,
of the Commonwealth of England: But also most falsely to imprint in the hearts
and minds of all People in Christendom, and more especially the good People
under the obedience of the Parliament of England; That (by Us the Corporation
of Moniers) the Moneys of this Commonwealth, both for Gold and Silver, are not
justly made, according to Our Indenture.

Set forth to undeceive all the good People that have seen or read the said
Peter Blondeau's false and scandalous Libells.

PRINTED for the Corporation of Moniers. 1653.

A Letter from Master Thomas Violet, to Master John Benfeild, Clearke of the
Corporation of Moniers in the Tower of London.
SIR,
THIS day came unto my hands a false and scandalous Libell put in print,
against the Moniers and Officers in the Mint; Truly, if you value your good
names, and to be esteemed honest men, these Pamphlets must have a Reply: I am
privy to all the transaction of this business, and know there are more lies
then lines in his Libells. I was desired by Sir James Harington and the
Committee of the Mint, to attend them in the management of the trial between
M. David Ramidg and this Blondeau, I never met with so impudent a lying fellow
in my life as this frenchman is; I told the master of the Mint, Doctor Gourdon
this day at Westminster, that it was a shame to all the officers that such a
fellow should be suffered to proceed as he did, and no legal course be taken
with him. If this business be looked into seriously, it strikes at the
reputation of greater men then any officers of the Mint (even against the
State:) For, if what the Frenchman asserts prove true, then he seems to
charge the State with neglect of Justice upon the officers of the Mint who
(without dispute) are in a Praemunire by the law of this Nation: If it prove
false; then his design is, To blast and dishonor the Common-wealth's-Mint, now
in this conjuncture of time when he sees there is likely to be great
quantities of silver coined. Truly M. John Benfeild, it has been, and is, by
my means that your Mint now goes, otherwise your Irons might still have
continued rusty: I am confident there is abundance of malice in blasting and
abusing the States Mint at this time, therefore I pray make the Provost and the
rest of your fellows acquainted with this Letter; I love you all so well, that
if you desire this Mounsieur should receive an Answer to his Libell (as I
conceive you are necessitated to it) I shall do you the best service I may;
and do at present hold fit that you make your humble addresses to the Council
of State for liberty to repair your Integrity and Honor, by the just rule of
the Common Law; for doubtless these Pamphlets, dispersed into the hands of the
ignorant multitude, must needs possess them, according to his suggestion, That
the Parliaments money coined in the Tower, is not so fine nor so weighty as
formerly in King James's and King Charles's times, they not knowing how exactly
the Mint is ruled, both for the Fineness, and just weight of the moneys: These
truths appearing to a Jury (which are most obvious to all Artists and diverse
others) doubtless they will give you ample Reparation: All this (well known to
me) I shall make as apparent to the world; as freely as formerly I have acted
any thing for you, which was ever gratis; though to my vast expense both of
money and time: And if I shall for my services done receive no satisfaction
from the State, I shall never expect any from any of you, but

Remain your loving Friend THO. VIOLET.
Jan. 25. 1652.
The Corporation of Moniers Answer.
MAster Tho. Violett, our Company of Moniers thank you for your Letter dated
the 25 of January 1652. We desire you to be pleased to give an Answer to
Blundue the Frenchmans scandalous Libells concerning the Moniers, and on their
behalf to vindicate our just Cause to the Commonwealth, against those
scandalous lying pamphlets, and in so doing you will very much obliege your
very loving friends, and servants.

Simon Corbet. Prove Michaell Garnett. John Benfeild. Henry Perin. Daniell
Benfeild. Walter Tailor. Ric. Warner. John Taverner. Abram Hunt. David Rammag.
John Warner. Nathan Marsh. Simon Corbitt. Garnett Corbit. Vall. Nicholson. Hen.
Lewis. John Butterfield. Edmond Dawson. Nic. Hares. John Shoute. William
Dawson. Robert Gascoyne. George Taverner. Richard Johnson. Stephen Holton.
Edward Heward. James Boon. Richard Sternell.
Sir, here are all our fellows that are at present in the Mint, But the rest
(being in the Country) shall give you hearty thanks and ever acknowledge
themselves bound unto you for your favor and great pains in this particular, to
our Corporation, in stating the whole proceedings in this business to the World
which we had for several days before the right honorable The Committee of
Council of State for the Mint, you attending that business by Order of the
said Committee.

John Benfeild Clearke.
Jan. 27. 1652.
The humble Representation of Peter Blondeau, as a Warning, touching several
disorders happening by Money illfavoredly Coined, and the only means to
prevent them.
THE Coin which is unequal in bigness and unhandsomly don, is easily clipped,
and not perceived to be so: Most part of that which is current now is clipped,
and will be yet more and more; and your Honors will perceiv what wrong it does
to the State and Public, when you shall go about to remedy it; Such a man
shall have a 100l. sterling. in so many pieces, who yet will find but 70 or 80
by the weight; and the longer you defer the remedy, the wors the diseas will
be, as it was seen in France, when almost half was lost upon the Coin. That
disorder is grown to such a height, that even in that Mint, as things are now
carried there, they do coin the money with such inequality in the weight, that
I can exhibit some shillings which weigh not full five pence, and others that
weigh near upon eighteen pence, and have been so coined. And that is the cause
why some men do pick out the heaviest pieces to transport out of the Land, and
do give some what per cent. to cull out the heaviest Coin from among the rest.
And I have been informed that some Officers and Workmen of the Mint have
followed that way, as some of them have even confessed before the Committee for
the Mint: and that was the cause why they made it so unequal, not only on
pretense for a quicker expedition, but also that they might reap a double
profit, to the prejudice of the Public. Likewise there be some Goldsmiths,
Refiners, Gold and Silver Wyer-drawers, and Gold-laiers, and other people, who
do pick our the heaviest coin to melt it, so that it remains only within the
State for Commerce, the counterfeited, clipped or lightest money.

The common people, specially who do spend their money little by little, when
they have some falls coin or light, they cannot put it out, but are forced to
sell them to their loss to the Goldsmiths or others, and often those that buie
them do pass them among others, in payment of greater sums, so that they return
again to the people, who bear all the loss and trouble, which is worthy of
consideration and compassion.

Some do answer, that if there be any falls coiners or clippers of money, they
ought to be hanged: but I say, first they must be known and taken; and yet
when all is don, such as have lost by the false or clipped coin, are not
reimbursed of their loss.

For avoiding these disorders, the money ought to be adjusted piece by piece,
equal in bigness and weight, so that the number requisite be also found in the
pound both of gold and silver. And for that end it is requisite that an Officer
be appointed in the Mint, whose charge be to weigh the money piece after
piece, when it is finished, and in case he finde's any unequal or unhandsomly
made, he might reject it, and give it to be melted again upon the charges of
the Undertaker of the Mint, thereby to oblige him to be so much the more
careful. And for to hinder the connivence of the Officer appointed for to weigh
the said pieces, who might happen to juggle with the Undertaker, another
Officer shall be appointed, to whom any of the people that shall find any
of the new coined pieces lighter then they should be, might repair within
convenient time, who shall change the said light pieces, but shall give a pence
more for each piece so brought to him as a reward to the bringer, all which
shall be put to account to the said Officer appointed for the weighing. But
that cannot be don except the money be coined after my way, that is, marked
on both sides, and upon the brims, else the Weigher might pretend it had been
clipped and made light since it went out of his hand. And the money being so
coined after my way, besides the removing of the aforesaid inconveniences, it
would raise or increas the Exchange by about 10 per Cent. to the advantage of
this Commonwealth.

It is also requisite to maintein the standart or goodness of the Coin, that
it be permitted to any Goldsmith, Refiner, or other whomsoever, to make essay
of the current money: and in case it be not found of the due standart or
goodness, they shall be allowed to bring back to an appointed Officer the
essaie and the rest of the piece, to be there tried again before the
Commissioners and the Trier of the Mint; and if it be found, that the said Coin
be not of the due goodness, the Discoverer shall be rewarded at the charges of
the Trier, that he may have a due care, that no Coin com out of his hands, but
such as shall be of a due value, and according to the order of the STATE.

An answer to several objections formerly made against Peter Blondeau his way
of Coining the money.
I Have affirmed in my Proposition, that my invention will prevent the
counterfeiting, moulding, clipping, or any way altering the money, which I do
yet offer to maintein and make good.

And whereas some men do object, that as soon as the way I use shall be made
public, then it may be counterfeited. To that I answer, first, That the
Invention needs not to be made public; But if it be the pleasure of the State,
the Engines wherewith the brims are marked, may be kept secret among few men,
who shall be sworn to keep it, and not to reveal it to any. Secondly, I
answer, That though they be made public, the Engines that are used therein are
so big and heavy, being between 1 and 2000 l. weight, and so difficult to be
made, and before they are perfected ought to go through so many hands, that the
great expenses requisite thereunto, will dissuade any one to undertake, the
rich not being willing, and the poor being unable to lay out so much money for
an uncertain profit; besides the hazard of being discovered by the privity of
so many men, through whose hands the Engines ought to pass before they are
serviceable. Which affords me a third answer, That the Engines employed being
so great as aforesaid, they do require a very large room, and a great number of
men to work about them, and consequently no private man can undertake the same
without being instantly discovered. Whereas the money that is Coined with the
hammer, requiring but an hammer and two stamps, which can easily be hidden and
carried in a man's pocket, it is most easy to counterfeit the same, and that
secretly, yea any man that can grave can make himself with very little cost
whatsoever is requisite to Coin with the hammer: all which is prevented, as
aforesaid, by my invention.

Some do reply to that, That the money Coined by the hammer cannot be easily
counterfeited, because of the nois that ought to be made in the stamping, which
does not happen in the press or mill. I answer, That every Gun-smith or
Lock-smith, or any other that makes use of some big Vice, can with two small
stamps Coin the money in the said Vice without any nois, by pressing the same
at several times: but if they were put to mark all the pieces at one stroke, as
in the said Blondeau's invention it ought to be, then it is impossible to do
it without strong and heavy Engines, as aforesaid.

Some do object that it can be molded: but to this I return no answer, for it
is a thing known to all understanding men in the way of moulding, that it is
absolutely prevented by my invention.

To object that it can be clipped, is no less absurd then to say, the sun is
dark, or the fire cold; and therefore I pass over that objection, because it
cannot be clipped without taking away the letters or marks that are about the
brim, which would easily be discerned.

Some do object, That it can be washed or otherwise altered: To this I answer,
That I have diligently inquired and studied with great expenses all the ways
of washing, and made several experiments of them, I can boldly say, I know as
much therein as any man, and can wash both gold and silver several ways with
an extreme dexterity, and therefore I may certainly affirm, that it is
impossible to take never so little from a piece so coined by washing, but will
take away its luster and polishing, and spoil the work, which is most neat and
delicate, so that the grossest man, and most unskilful, can easily perceiv,
that it looks as if it had been molded; besides, that the ingredients that are
requisite, and the charge necessary to bring again together the gold or
silver, will cost more, or as much at least, as the profit of washing may come
unto; Therefore I do conclude that no body will undertake it.

The money coined merely at the Mill can be made with very small Engines, but
that which is propounded by the said Blondeau, cannot be coined without a
great many big and heavy Engines.

Lastly, whereas some have objected that several persons before me have bragged
of their invention to make very handsome coin: and yet having put the State to
above 15 or 1800. l. charges, could not succeed. For removing of that scruple,
I do offer to make upon my own charge as many Engines and Instruments as will
coin weekly 1500 or 2000 l. Provided I may have also the use of such Engines as
are already made; whereby it shall appear that I can do what I offer.

I do not desire to have the Bullion in my custody or disposal, but I will
only meddle with the working of the gold and silver as it shall be delivered
unto me by the Melter, approved of by the Essayers, and put in the hands of
the workmen, who shall be such as the State might entrust them; and shall be
preferred by the Commissioners of the Mint, whom I shall teach my way of
working, and shall reasonably pay them.

Among the opposers of my way of coining are the Master of the Mint, the
Officers and the Workmen of the same, and their friends; as also some
Goldsmiths and others, who sometimes use to bring Bullion into the Mint to be
coined: Some of them having told me, that there would be no encouragement for
those that should bring their Bullion into the Mint, if it was coined exactly
equal in the weight: meaning by that encouragement the chois of the heaviest
pieces to melt them again, which does bring them a very great profit* it being
observable, that as the coining goes now, instead of 62 shelings that are to be
coined in each pound weight of silver, they coin usually 64 or 65 shillings,
which comes to the benefit of those that bring the Bullion, and turns to the
prejudice of the Publik: And as aforesaid, it is that which they call the
encouragement.

Above two years since, the honorable Council of State being desirous to
remedy all the disorders in the Mint, thought good I should repair into
England. Since that time the Officers and Workmen of the Mint have made their
utmost endeavors to find out my Invention, which they could not attain unto,
although the Master of the Mint has had in his hands my Patterns above nine
months together: Besides that the workmen of the Mint entreated the
Committee, that I should be commanded to make a new trial here, hoping they
should be able to discover my secret; Accordingly I did it, but they could not
come to their end, only they made some few pieces after the old manner, which is
not ready and expeditious, nor fit for the Mint, as themselves have confessed
before the said Committee for the Mint: And therefore a further time was
granted them to endeavor the finding out of the invention, and to make their
Proposition; But all this while they could do no other thing but to bring every
day new tales to amuse the State.

The Master and some Officers and Workmen of the Mint, and some other persons
have told me, that the State paies 14 pence for the coining of a pound weight
of silver, after the way hitherto used in the Tower, and 8 shillings for the
pound weight of gold; and paieth besides the graving of the Stamps.

But I do offer to make the money after my way; viz. marked on both sides, and
upon the edg or thickness of the brim, according unto the Patterns I have made
here lately by Order, which are in Sir James Harington's hands, for the same
price of 8 shillings for the pound weight of Gold, and for 16 pence for the
pound weight of Silver. The State affording to me and paying likewise for the
melting or casting into Plate the gold and silver, and the graving of the
Stamps. And I shall oblige my self not only to pay the Workmen, but also to
maintein at my own charges all the Engines and Instruments; to bear the charge
of the second melting and the waste of the clippings: and generally all other
expenses about the Coin.

A most Humble MEMORANDUM from Peter Blondeau.
Concerning the offers by him made to this Commonwealth for the coining of the
Money, by a new Invention, not yet practiced in any State of the World; the
which will prevent counterfeiting, casting, washing and clipping of the same.

Which Coin shall be marked on both the flat sides, and about the thickness or
the edge; of a like bigness and largness, as the ordinary coin is: and will
cost no more then the ordinary unequal Coin, which is used now.

SInce it has been the pleasure of the Parliament and of the Council of State,
to pass some Orders in relation to the preventing of the counterfeited and
clipped money, now dispersed in England, Scotland and Ireland, he mak's bold,
yet with submission, to present the following particulars, containing, besides
the said offers, First, the reason why the coin of this Commonwealth is
clipped and light, so that few pieces are to be found weighing their true
weight; As also the reason why so much falls coin is now dispersed. And
secondly, the only way to remedy the said inconveniences, and to settle a good
and constant order in the Mint.

As to the first, the reason of the said abuses is because the money coined with
the hammer is so easy to be counterfeited, and with so few Engines and so
little expenses, that thereby the false coyners are encouraged and their number
increased. And the daily experience to this day showed, that seldom or never
any falls coyners have been discovered by the nois of the hammer.

Another reason is, because the money coined with the hammer, cannot be made
exactly round, nor equal in weight and bigness, and is often grossly marked,
and has many other faults, which giv's a great facility to the false Coyners to
counterfeit and mould it; as also to the Clippers to clip it: It being very
hard to discern between a clipped piece, and one not clipped. Besides,
abundance of coin is made too light even at the Mint: The said Blondeau himself
has received some shillings (which he showed to the Committee for the Mint)
which weighed some five, some six, and some seven pence only; as to the contrary,
he received some that weighed seventeen, yea and eighteen pence, both of them
made so at the Mint: Which inequality occasions several Goldsmiths and others,
who receiv the money from the Mint, to cull or pick out the heaviest pieces to
melt them; and after them, others do again cull or pick out the heaviest of
them that are left, to transport them beyond Seas; so that only the light, the false and the clipped money remain's within the State, which turn's to the great
ruin and destruction of Commerce, and undoeth those poor people, who spend
their money little by little; for having some counterfeited or clipped pieces,
they cannot put them off, but are forced to sell them, with loss, unto the
goldsmiths and others who can spend them among other moneys, or trade therein,
and sell them again to the Cash-keepers of the Treasurers, Bankiers, Merchants
and others, who make them pass afterward among other moneys; so that they
return again into the hands of the poor.

The reason why the workmen of the Mint do make the coin thus unequal in
weight, and do not keep the true weight, is because it is sooner don. Besides,
the said workmen may coin sometimes their own silver, or may treat with those
that bring their Bullion to be coined, because they do not render the coin by
tale, but by the pound, and so still there be more pieces in number then there
should be in a pound. And the money so coined being distributed out of the
Mint, the officers themselves, and the workmen of the Mint do cull or pick out
the heaviest pieces to melt them again, as they themselves have confessed
before the said Committee for the Mint. And that is the thing which among
themselves they call the mystery or secret of the Mint, and which is the cause,
that by themselves and by their friends, they make use of all their joint power
and credit, and will lay out all their estate, and leav no stone unmooved to
hinder the changing of the way of coining the money.

As to the way of remedying those inconveniences, and settling a good and
constant order in the Mint, it cannot be done but by the way propounded by the
said Blondeau, by marking the coin, not only on both the flat sides, but also
upon the thickness or the edges.

The coin made after that way, cannot be clipped without taking away the marks
that are about the thickness, the which would be easily perceived. Besides, the
pieces will be of an equal bigness and largeness; the half-crown of the
ordinary weight and bigness, the shilling and other pieces accordingly; and so
equal among themselves, that it will be impossible to take the less thing
from any of them, but it will show less then the rest, and so will become not
current. They cannot be altered by washing or any other way, but they will lose
their bigness and glass, so that a blindman will easily feel it.

The ordinary coin marked only on both the flat sides, can be molded, as the
experience do show by the great quantity of falls coin molded, which is current
now: but when it is marked on the thickness or edges, the marks about the said
edges can no way be molded. And though they could, yet in that case they ought
to be fyled after round about, specially in the place where it has been cast,
to take away the superfluous metal; which fyling cannot be don without spoiling
and taking away the said marks about the edges, and consequently made easily
known not to be current.

The money ought to be adjusted piece after piece, equal in weight, both Gold
and Silver. And for that end, it is requisite that an Officer be appointed in
the Mint, whose charge should be to weigh the money piece after piece when it
is finished; and in case he finds any piece unequal or unhandsomly made, he
ought to reject it and give it to be melted again, upon the charges of the
undertaker of the Mint, thereby to oblige him to be so much the more careful.
And for to hinder the connivence of the Officer appointed to weigh the said
pieces, who might happen to juggle with the Undertaker; another Officer may be
appointed, to whom any of the people that shall find any of the new coined
pieces lighter then it should be, might repair within a convenient time, who
shall change the said light pieces, all which shall be put to account to the
said Officer appointed for the weighing: But that cannot be don except the
money be coined after the said Peter Blondeau's way, that is, marked on both
sides, and upon the edges; else the Weigher might pretend it had been clipped
and made light since it went out of his hand. And the money being coined after
the said way, besides the hindering or removing the aforesaid inconveniences, it
will raise or encreas the Exchange by about ten per centum, to the advantage of
this Commonwealth.

It is also requisite, to maintein the standard or goodness of the coin, that
any Goldsmith, Refiner, or other whomsoever be permitted to make essay of the
current money; and in case it be not found of the standard or goodness, they
might be allowed to bring back to an appointed Officer, the essay and the rest
of the pieces by them tried, to be there tried again before the Commissioners,
and the Trier of the Mint; and if it be found that the said coin be not of the
due goodness, the discoverer shall be rewarded at the charges of the Trier,
that he may have a due care, that no coin comes out of the Mint but such as
shall be of a due value, and according to the order of the State.

The Council of State being willing to prevent the said disorders, was desirous
to have the money of this Commonwealth well coined; and therefore having seen
the patterns of coin made after a new Invention by the said Blondeau, and
having treated by Letters about the quantity of pieces that could be coined in
a week, and what they might cost; the said Council caused the said Blondeau,
the Inventor of that way of coining, to come to London, to treat with him by
word of mouth, and to agree about the price of coining the money of this
Commonwealth after his way. He being then arrived at London the 3. of September.
1649. the said Council bestowed on him 40. l. sterling, and the late Mr. Frost,
then Secretary to the said Council, told him before witnesses, that if the
State could not agree with him about the price, and that therefore he should be
necessitated to retire himself, the State would indamnifie him for his journie,
both coming and returning, and for the time he should have lost, and would
bestow on him such a present, that he would return satisfied. A while after the
said Council of State ordered the Committee of the Council of State for the
Mint to hear the said Blondeau's Proposition, and report it to the said Council.

The Committee for the Mint accordingly took into consideration, whether the
said Blondeau should be admitted to coin the money of this Commonwealth; and
having debated it, they resolved and approoved that he should be admitted
thereunto, provided his coin and his Proposition should be advantageous to the
State.

Afterward the said Committee having seriously considered and examined all the
circumstances of the way of coining propounded by the said Blondeau, and having
heard all the objections that could be alleged against it, both by the Master,
Officers and Workmen of the Mint, or by any other of those who appeared in the
business; upon debate of the whole, the said Committee concluded and Voted,
that the said way of coining propounded by the said Blondeau, was better, more
advantageous and more honorable for the State, then that which is used now in
this Commonwealth.

The Master, the Officers and the workmen of the Mint told the Committee, it
was not likely the said Blondeau had don himself, the pieces sent by him to the
Council of State. Besides, that it was an old Invention, which they knew
themselves, and that such pieces were only made for curiosity, with very long
time and great expense, and that it was impossible, that that way might be
used about the ordinary coin, which is thin. They desired that the said
Blondeau might be commanded to make a trial of his skill by making some other
pieces, and that they would do as much as the said Blondeau. Therefore the said
Committee ordered both the said Blondeau and the said workmen to make their
patterns and propositions respectively; and that he that would make it with
most advantage to the State, should have the Employment.

At the time appointed the workmen brought to the Committee some pieces made
after the old way, which is known to them, and some big pieces of silver stuffed
within with copper; but they had drawn on Propositions.

Likewise the said Blondeau brought in about 300 pieces, some half-crowns of the
ordinary weight and bigness, some shillings, sixpences, and some Gold pieces, and
presented his Proposition, which having been reformed according to the pleasure
of the said Committee, it was received and accepted of by the whole Committee,
who ordered it to be reported to the Council of State, according to the order
of the said Council.

The said Co^mittee having then taken into consideration the big pieces of
Silver at the outside, and stuffed within with copper (made with the Engines
that are at the Tower) and well understood that the said pieces, because they
are made of several pieces at the top one of another, will give no sound, so
that a blind man can easily discern that they are falls; and having weighed the
long time and great cost required for coining of each piece; because they are
made of 4 pieces, namely one of copper and one of silver, at the top, another
underneath and one about, the which ought to be adjusted and sodered together,
besides several other fashions, which cost more then the price of the lawful
pieces; having also considered the great and heavy Engines, and great number of
tools and of men required for making of one piece, the great charges for the
Engines and tools and several other things required for making of those
counterfeited pieces, they acknowledged that it would be enough to dissuade
any one from undertaking it; the rich not being willing, and the poor being
unable, and that though they should undertake it they could not do it without
being discovered. Besides, that the money coined after the way of the said
Blondeau, was so thin, that it cannot be so counterfeited.

Whereupon it is observable, that the said workmen of the Mint, although they
made use of the great and heavy Engines, that are in the Tower, yet for making
of some Tools they had need of, and for the other charges of coining about a
dozen of pieces, they made then for a pattern, have spent 100 l. st. as he
that pretends to have laid out the money has said before witnesses.

Afterward, another Order was given by the said Committee, and some time
limited to the said workmen, to draw and present their Proposition for coining
of the money marked upon the thickness or edge, as that of the said Blondeau
is; But after the exspiration of the long time demanded by them, they brought
such a Proposition, that the said Committee having read it over and over, could
not understand it, nor the sens of it; and even those that brought it could not
explain it; whereby it was apparent to the said Committee, that they were not
able to make their Proposition good, much less to coin the money after that way;
which they avowed themselves before the said Committee. Yet they entreated the
Committee to allow them the time of some months more to find, if possible, the
new invention, and that the said Blondeau's Proposition should be communicated
unto them, upon which they might frame their own. They further demanded that
the said Blondeau and the Graver, should have order to bring in all the pieces
made by the said Blondeau for a trial, with the stamps or dices used for making
of them: All which was granted them, upon that condition, that if within the
time allowed them, they could find out the means to coin the money after the
said Blondeau's way, and that thereupon he should be sent back, he should be
indamnified, which was agreed by all. But they could never find out the said
new Invention for coining the thin and weak pieces after that way with
expedition requisite. Yet for all that, they made their Propositions, which are
in the hands of the Chairman of the Committee, as are also the said Blondeau's
Proposition and patterns, about a year and a half since, to be reported by him
to the Council of State.

The Workmen of the Mint have given to understand that they are 200 poor
families, which are maintained by the work of the Mint; which is besides truth.
For some Officers of the Mint have told before witnesses, that formerly their
Corporation was at the most of 40 Masters, and that at this time they are
hardly 30 Masters, who are all rich, have lands or houses, and other ways of
maintenance, without the work of the Mint. And that when they had much money to
coin, they were wonted to hire some journie-men, giving to some 18 pence, to some
15 to some 12 for half a days work. Besides, in case the State admits of the
said Blondeau to coin the money after his way, and the workmen be willing to
work after the said way, he will oblige himself to teach them and pay them a
reasonable price.

The said Blondeau does not intend to have the Gold nor the Silver in his
custody, but only the charge of working the same, by such persons as the
State shall be pleased to admit thereunto.

He shall not have the power to admit any one to the work of the Mint, without
the consent and approbation of the State.

Nor will not have the keeping of the dices or stamps, but they shall be
entrusted in the hands of such as the State shall admit to work.

In a word he does generally submit to whatsoever the State shall think
reasonable. Only he prays to consider, that

1. The exact equality that will be effected by this way and invention of the
said Blondeau, will hinder and avoid all the known corrupt Practices about
coining.

2. The charge of the State concerning the same, considering all circumstances,
will be less then in the old way; and the honor of this Commonwealth much the
greater, in having their moneys coined in perfection, above, or beyond any
other State now known.

3. The said Blondeau came to London about 3 years and a half since, and has
no other employment here, but to attend the pleasure of the State.

White Hall the 14. June 1651.
Mr. DAVID RAMADGE,
THese are to authorize you, to make some patterns as broad as a shilling, a
half-crown, a twenty shillings piece of gold, in a mill; and if you can do it
with letters about the edge, or other ways, according to Queen Elizabeth's
patterns of mill-money, or any other modells or pieces you are to make, That so
the Committee of the Mint may see your several pieces, and thereupon consider
what is fittest to present to the Council of State, for the more handsome
making of the moneys for the honor of this Commonwealth.

James Harington.
Tho. Chaloner.

IN obedience to this Warrant from the abovesaid Right honorable Gentlemen of
the Committee for removing the Obstructions of the Mint; David Rammage, our
fellow monier, (by order of our whole Corporation of Moniers) did make his Trial
of skill, who should best work a Pattern or Model, according to the warrant
aforesaid, whether we the Corporation of Moniers, or the said Peter Blondeau.

And whereas the said Peter Blondeau had falsely affirmed to many people, That
his several pieces of coin presented by him to the Committee for the Mint no
man in the world could make the like but himself; David Rammage, at the request
of our Corporation, did make several Pieces and Modells within the Mint of the
Tower of London more exactly with Letters about the edg, then any pieces which
Peter Blondeau presented to the Committee, which Pieces are still remaining to
be seen and judged in the hands of the right honorable Sir James Harrington
Chairman of that Committee; And whereas Blondeau the french man vapored and
stood so much upon the gloss and tincture of his Moneys, viz. halfcrowns,
shillings and sixpences, which the said Peter Blondeau did falsely and
traitorously make out of the Mint, of the just weight and motto of the
Commonwealths money, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Nation, having
fraudulently silvered over the said Plates with fine silver to abuse ignorant
people; the said cheat was discovered by the most knowing and right honorable
gentlemen Master Allen, and Master Cornelius Holland, formerly Warden of the
States Mint, and both of them now of the Council of State; and at that very
time we made it our most humble Request to the right honorable the Committee
of the Mint to take notice, That the said Pet. Blondeau had committed Treason,
in traitorously making half-crown pieces, shillings and six-pences of the coin
of the Commonwealth of England, in a private house in the Strand, contrary to
the laws and statutes of this Nation, out of the Mint, not having an Act of
Parliament or a Commission under the great seal of England to do it; for which
fact the said Peter Blondeau ought to suffer as a Traitor by being hanged drawn
and quartered: Whereupon the right honorable the Committee of the Mint
presently sent Messengers and seized on all the said Peter Blondeaus
Instruments and Tools, in the Strand, and sent them to the Tower, where they
remain at this day, in safe custody, with us in the Mint.

Now follows the several Proceedings before the honorable Committee for the
Mint, viz.

To the right Honorable Sir James Harrington, one of the Council of State,
Chairman for the Committee of the Mint.
The humble Proposition of the Provost and Moniers of the States Mint in the
Tower of London.

1. THat whereas some people desire to have the moneys made by the mill for the
future, and that your Honors did bid David Rammage, one of our fellows, to set
down the lowest rate that we could aford to make the moneys of gold and silver
of this Commonwealth, as fair and beautiful as the present Lewis and
Cardeques, and all other coins of the French Nation are at this day made.

2. Whereas we have 9. d. per pound weight Troy, for working the present money
by the hammer, We do undertake, for our selves and our Company, to make fair
mill-monie for 12. d. the pound weight Troy, and to make it as fair as any
moneys current in Christendom.

3. Whereas we have 2. s. 5. d. for the making of one pound weight Troy of
gold, and the State has 15. s. for the coynage; We will undertake for our
Company, to make fair mill-gold, as fair as the gold coins in France for 5. s.
the pound weight, if it be the States pleasure that they will have it so made.

4. That whereas we are an ancient Corporation and Company, settled by charter
for many hundred years, and in all ages faithfully discharged our trust, and
never any blot lay upon us either for embasing the coins, or for not
accompting to the State for every grain of gold and silver that ever came under
our charge; We do humbly hope to have so much Justice that we shall still be
employed in the service of the State, in regard it is the livelihood and
subsistence of above two hundred Families, when the Mint is full of work, and
in regard we undertake to do it as exactly as any Frenchman in the world, and
at a cheaper price then the French man has offered, and you may be assured
that we shall discharge all or any trust that shall be put into our hands, by
the just dealing you have in all ages received from us.

We having since this Parliament many times in our own custody two or three
hundred thousand pounds, and have accounted for it to a penny, to the State.

Sir, we value the keeping of our Reputation in this point, as much as we do
our lives; and therefore humbly hope our fidelity and sufficiency to do what
we undertake, shall not be put into the scale with a Frenchman, we being
willing and desirous to put it to the trial between David Rammage our fellow
Monier and the French man, if the State please to command us.

Simon Corbet, Michael Garnet, Tho. Brook, John Benfeild, Henry Perryn, Hen.
Row, Richard Johnson, Will. Dawson, Will. Tavernor, Tho. Young, David
Rammage, John Corbett, Walter Tailor, Nath. Marsh.
28. Febr. 1650.
THe eight of May 1651. The right Honorable the Committee for the Mint did
order us the Moniers to make our trial the States Arms as upon 20. s. piece,
the motto about the edges, Truth and Peace; the same in silver for a half
crown, the motto about the edges, Truth and Peace, and some of the same pieces
to have a graining about the edges without motto, and to present them the third
of July 1651. to the right Honorable Sir James Harrington, being Chairman for
that Committee. In obedience to this order, we the Provost and Moniers were at
about sixty pounds charge in the making the trial, for which we are humble
suitors for our satisfaction, and the said pieces remain in the custody of the
Honorable Committee of the Mint; And we humbly leave it to the judgment of the
Honorable Committee, whether the letters about the edges of gold and silver
pieces, presented for and in the behalf of us the Provost and Moniers of the
Mint, did not far exceed the Frenchmans; (the pieces are still to be seen.)
And before any determination of what the State would conclude on; Peter
Blondeau a French man has dispersed a false and scandalous Paper both at
Westminster and at the Exchange in London and beyond Seas, in dishonor of the
moneys of the Nation; and charging the Officers and Moniers of the Mint with
making money contrary to their Indenture; a charge so false and scandalous,
that has enforced us the Provost and Moniers to reprint the said Blondeau's
Paper, and to give a short answer to the untruths and absurdities in it: And we
humbly submit what we say to all Artists and knowing men in Mint business,
whether the French man has not declared in his printed Paper a great many
untruths, with a great deal of impudence and ignorance. And we most humbly
desire what we here say, to have the truth of it examined by the right
Honorable the Committee for the Mint, and that their Honors would be pleased
to give us such reparation as shall be by their great wisdoms thought fit, And
it shall oblige us ever to pray for their Honors, if they will give us leave to
vindicate our selves in such a way as is agreeable to the Common Law of this
Nation.

The Provost and Moniers Answer to the Objections of Peter Blondeau is,
THat the Moneys made by the Moniers are upon their delivery out of their
Office viewed by the Warden, Master-worker and the Controler and the
Assay-master, and both weighed, assayed for weight and fineness of all the
moneys, and examined by them, and several pieces taken out of every journey of
silver, which is 30. l. weight, and a journey of gold 15. l. weight, which
pieces are put into a Box sealed with several Seals, commonly called the
Pix-Box, and formerly once every year, and now, when the State please,
examined both in the say and fineness and in the weight, that it all be made
equal; and this is done upon the oaths of twenty four men, that are Artists;
(formerly in the Star Chamber) And if the moneys do not fall out to be good
and just, both in fineness and weight, then we and all the Officers of the
Mint are in a praemunire. And this trial has ever been held; and (under favor
of our superiors) we humbly conceive, is the strictest and exactest of any
Mint in Christendom. And we do with all humility justify and affirm the money
of gold and silver delivered out of the Tower of London, the most exact for the
weight and fineness in the world. And of the truth of this, for the honor of
sterling moneys of England, all the great Merchants both English and Strangers
of London can certify what we say to the State, in this particular, to be
true.

That it is true, much clipped English moneys are passed in payment, which has
much increased sithence these wars, which if there were a Law to have it cut in
pieces, the abuses practiced by some men would for the future be prevented.
And whereas much light moneys pass abroad, and the weightiest is melted, this
comes not through any fault of the moniers, for they are bound to make all
their moneys at sixty two shillings the pound weight, with the remedy of 6. d.
the pound weight under or over. Now when sterling sylver is as it has been at
3. l. 3. s. the pound Troy, some people we conceive have melted down the
current coins of this Nation; which ought strictly to be prevented; For if
the Market will give more for silver then the money is coined at in the Tower,
till that be prevented, and the Laws revived against it, and to set the price
of silver, as it is in other countries, as you may see in Mr. Thomas Violet's
book, the rule for all the great Mints in Christendom, not to exceed their
Mints: While this be done the moneys will be culled and weighed, and the Mint
will be obstructed; for if the State allow the Mint to give but three pounds
for sterling the pound weight Troy, and no more, and to coin it and deliver
sterling in money at three pounds two shillings the pound weight Troy, and
there shall be a market amongst several people in this Nation that will give
three pound four shillings, and three pound three shillings, and three pound
two shillings six pence sterling, the Mint will not be set on work, but also
your own current coin will be culled and melted, as we humbly conceive has
been, and so the stock of this Nation will be wasted and decayed. And this
abuse comes not by the unevenness of the coining of the money, as this most
ignorant fellow Peter Blondeau affirms, but by the unevenness of the raising
of the price of silver for particular men's gains, to the damage of public;
and this is the true reason why the Mint does not go, and is humbly presented
by us to the honorable Committee of the Mint, to rectify.

There is one great and scandalous falsehood by Peter Blondeau charged upon the
moniers of the Mint, That whereas we ought by our Indenture to coin the money
at sixty two shillings the pound, we coin it at sixty four shillings or sixty
five shillings, And this is that the Goldsmiths and other Traders into the Mint
call their encouragement, as Blondeau in his Paper does falsely allege.

Truly this shows the ignorance and impudence of Blondeau: He may have skill
in making a Jack for a Kitchen, but none in Mint business. We have served the
State from our infancy, and every year had our trials made in the strictest
manner before the Lords of the Council, and upon the oath of a Jury of twenty
four men, cleared every year in the Star Chamber; And in the compass of five
years, for this Parliament, coined this Commonwealth about six millions of
silver from 1640. to 1645. And upon our trials before several Committees of
Parliament, by a Jury of Artists, all cleared, That our money was good
according to our Indenture, both for the weight and finenesse, and we have
cleared our account to a penny for about twenty five millions to the State
within thirty years; which we humbly hope the right Honorable Committee of the
Mint will consider, and value us at such a rate, as, under favor, our just
dealing has deserved.

Whereas Blondeau says, That the Officers and Workmen of the Mint have made
their uttermost endeavors to find out this Invention, which they could not
attain unto, and every day brought new tales to amuse the State, and made some
few pieces after the old manner, and does boldly and traitorously affirm, he
the said Blondeau can wash both gold and silver several ways with great
dexterity; And that he has diligently studied, with great expenses, the ways
of washing coin.

Truly we the Provost and Moniers of the Mint wonder at his impudence that he
dares say so, knowing how penal the Law is in England, brag of such a Mystery,
that in all Countries to put it in practice is death: It may be for that reason
of his skill, in washing coins, Peter Blondeau run out of France into England.
If he confess he studied this rare Art to wash coin with extreme dexterity,
and made several experiments in England, by his own confession: Then we humbly
say, he is fitter for Newgate then to be employed in the Mint of this Nation.

We are humble suitors to the Honorable Committee of the Mint, for to take
these our humble Propositions into consideration. We have made the moneys both
gold and silver with letters about the edge; And the letters about the edges of
the pieces we made, are more fair and exacter then Blondeau's pieces. Blondeau
by his first Proposition to the Council of State did demand fourteen shillings
the pound weight for gold, and twenty pence the pound weight for silver. Our
patterns are in the right Honorable Sir James Harrington's hands. We have
delivered in several patterns of coyns with a double graining, and to be
exactly rounded; which we can afford for ten pence the pound weight silver, and
three shillings the pound weight gold by the way of the hammer; And we have
delivered in a Proposition, to bear all charges, saving for coining Irons, at
fourteen pence for silver, and four shillings for gold, by the hammer.

We are humble suitors to the right Honorable the Committee of the Mint, That
their Honors would speedily enquire out the obstructions of the Mint, provide
remedies by good Laws, and employ such in trust as have skill and will to
find out the offenders; If this be done the Mint will flourish again, and
till this be done, in all humility we say, the State will have little or no
silver or gold coined in the Mint; If men can make more of it to sell it to
transport then to make it in coin, experience shows private men will dispose
of their gold and silver at their best market, for their private profits, though
it be to the loss of the Commonwealth. All which we, with all humility,
submit to the right honorable the Committee of the Mint, to settle such rules
in the Mint as may be most advantageous for the Nation. And we shall pray,
etc. 18 November. 1651.

Simon Corbet. Prove. John Benfeild. Henry Perrin. John Warner. David Rammage.
John Corbet. Abram Hunt. Vall. Nicholson. Nathaniel Marsh. William Taverner.
Walter Tailor. William Maynard. Andrew Colman. Simon Corbet Jun. Daniel
Benfeild. John Butterfild. Edward Hawerd. Thomas Garnett. William Shanbrooke.
Richard Johnson. Michael Garnet. John Pollard. Robert Gascoyne. Joseph Sanders.
James Boon. Thomas Young. Richard Collard. George Collard. Thomas Russell.
Thomas Brook. Richard Nicholls. Hen. Lewis. Edmond Dawson. Steven Hauton. John
Weatherly. Hen. Rome. Tobias Maynard.


THIS is a true and perfect account of every days proceedings before the right
honorable the Committee of the Council of State, as will appear by our
original Papers left in the hands of the right honorable sir James Harington,
chairman for the Committee of the Mint. Since which time, that is to say,
about the month of January 1652. the before named Peter Blondeau, seeing he
escaped so long without punishment, and without our calling him to a legal
account, both for his first libell and for his counterfeiting of shillings,
sixpences and halfcrowns which the said Peter Blondeau falsely and traitorously
caused to be made at a private house in the Strand, contrary to the known Laws
and Statutes of this Nation, not having a Commission under the Great Seal of
England: For which offenses we humbly desire the State, that we may file an
Indictment against the said Peter Blondeau; or that we may have the said Peter
Blondeau to run the gauntlet once about the Mint; where if he ever could run it
twice we would give him leave to libell against us all the days of his life
after: Or that we may have leave to commence our suit at the common Law against
the said Blondeau for both his libells. This last libell of his which appeared
to the world in January 1652 being the most impudent nonsense and lies that
ever was printed in English, is almost all answered by what has been said
before; yet something must be said.

We begin with Blondeau's first reason of the abuses in the Mint. He says it
is by reason the money is coined by the hammer, that thereby the false Coyners
are encouraged and their number increased; whereas we will make infallible
proof, that if the State make their money in a mill, we will make such an
Engine that a Porter shall carry it about the streets under his arm, and coin
money as he goes along, and no body shall hear him. And we must put in
remembrance Peter Blondeau what became of the Coyner that made mill-monie in
Queen Elizabeth's time: The Queen and her Council liked very well the way of
making mill-monie within her Mint in the Tower of London: But when she knew,
and had it proved, that this Mounsieur that coined her mill-monie in the Mint,
did also at the same time counterfeit and make mill-monie out of the Mint, all
his friends in Court could not save him, though he had many, as Blondeau may
have; but according to the strict rules of the Laws of this Nation, he was
condemned to death, and did suffer execution as a false traitor, by being
hanged, drawn and quartered, and his quarters parboyled. Good mounsieur Peter
Blondeau, if you should be so served your french carcass would make more Ramish
broth then a Goat: Have a care, for you will come under the consultation of
your twelve Godfathers for what you have done already.

2. The next false and scandalous lie is, That the said Peter Blondeau himself
has received some shillings which weighed some five pence, some six pence and
some seven pence only. We say that may very well be; for those that hide can
find: He has counterfeited the current money of this Nation. And by his own
confession, That he has diligently inquired and studied, with great expenses,
all the ways of washing of coins, and made several experiences of them, he
the said Peter Blondeau can boldly say, he knows as much therein as any man,
and can wash both gold and silver several ways with an extreme dexterity.
These are Peter Blondeau's own words: A gallant character for the greatest
vilain and traitorly false Coyner in the world: He cannot take up a higher
title of being a perfect Rogue, then this Peter Blondeau has taken upon
himself in his own printed Papers: And if he will do the favor to show us any
such five penny, six penny or seven penny shillings, we will lay him in
Newgate till he discover the Coyners; for we disclaim ever making any such
money: We do not know what Peter Blondeau has done where he has
counterfeited money in the Strand: he may as lawfully make light shillings
there as weighty. And that is our answer to this false scandal.

Thirdly, We further say, If any Goldsmith furnish to transport, money, either
gold or silver, cull and adulterate the money, as no doubt but some daily do, it
is a shame that a Law for the discovery and punishing of them is not passed the
house of Parliament We are sure of it that there was a certificate some years
past to the Parliament and Council of State, under the hands of Master St.
John's warden of the Mint, Sir Robert Harlow master worker, and master Cogan
Controler, 20 December. 1652. after several days consideration, presented to the
honorable Committee of the Navy; and then our head officers could do no more,
it was not in their power to make the Law, they could but inform the Parliament
as we now do. We understand the Bill has been twice read in the House, and
is kept as yet from being made an Act; if it were passed the House, the deceits
and knaveries of some Merchants, goldsmiths and others, would come to the view
of the world, the Mint in the Tower of London would flourish, and transporting
Treasure would be stopped; and till this Act be passed, the stock of Treasure
in this Nation will be wasted, and insensibly destroyed. We could say more,
but refer you to a Letter in this book that sets forth all the abuses and
damages the Commonwealth suffers by transporting and culling gold and silver.
We humbly desire that after 13 years soliciting the Parliament, this good Act
may pass the House, the Nation has lost millions of Treasure in not passing
this Act, we know what we say to be true, and some ought to be called to an
account for hindering it so long.

The Officers of the Mint in the Tower of London, whose names are hereunder
written, in pursuance of the directions of the Honorable Committee of the
Navy, in relation to their Order dated the third of December present, do
humbly conceive, and Certify as follows.
THat to prevent great abuses practiced upon the coin and bullion of the
Nation, which is transported out of the Nation; as also to prevent the culling
and melting down the current Money of the Nation, and for the discovering of
such as have offended, to be brought to Justice, to deter others from acting
the like abuses for the future, do humbly conceive,

That according to the President of the 14 Rich. 2. cap. 12. a Commission be
granted to make inquiry through the Realm, of such as had conveied the moneys
of England out of the Nation, and to make inquiry after all such as melt and
cull out the heavy current money, contrary to the Statute of the 4 Hen. 4.
cap. 10. none to melt the current silver coyns of the Nation, upon pain of
forfeiture four times the value.

That 2 Hen. 6. cap. 12. It is ordained, that neither the Master-worker of the
Mint, nor the Changer for the time being, neither sell nor cause to be sold,
nor alien to no other use; but apply the same wholly to coin according to the
tenor of the Indenture of the Mint, made between the Kings Majesty and the
Mint, to declare by Ordinance, That what Goldsmiths or Changer shall buy gold
or silver, and convert it to any use to transport, shall forfeit the value.

To declare by Ordinance, that according to the 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 19. an Act
touching the exchange of gold and silver, That whosoever gives more for gold
and silver then it is or shall be declared, shall suffer Imprisonment by the
space of a year, and make fine at the pleasure of the State. The Mint cannot be
employed, nor the transporting treasure stopped, if some course be not speedily
taken to discover these great abuses. And already, almost all the gold is
transported out of the Nation, and the silver follows it apace, as is
prudently insisted upon in the late Petition of the Citizens of London to both
houses of Parliament.

We humbly conceiv, that the making of this discovery throughout the Nation,
of such as have, or shall transport gold and silver into parts beyond the Seas,
and of such as have or shall melt down the current gold and silver coyns of the
Nation; or have, or shall buy gold and silver at above the price of the Mint:
(the practice of which abuses, if not timely prevented, is likely to bring
speedy destruction to the Trade of this Kingdom; which is presidented anno 4
Rich. 2. c. 2. when the Nation found the same mischief as we now suffer under,
by transporting of treasure. And anno 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 19. by giving for
gold and silver above the price of the Mint.) As it will be a service of great
importance to the Public affairs, and bring great advantage to the Trade of
this Nation, so it will draw with it a very great charge. Which if Master
Watkins will undertake, he will deserve highly to be encouraged: nevertheless,
we humbly submit the premises to the Wisdoms of this Honorable Committee.

John St. John, Warden. Robert Harlow, Master. Henry Cogan, Comptr.

December 20. 1647.
Fourthly, the said Peter Blondeau has charged us that we the moniers of the
Mint may sometimes coin our own silver, or may treat with those that bring
their bullion to be coined, and so make more pieces in number then there should
be in a pound, and that the workmen of the Mint do cull and pick out the
heaviest pieces to melt again, as themselves have confessed before the said
Co^mittee of the Mint, and that is the thing which amongst themselves they call
the mystery or secret of the Mint.

To this we say, master Peter Blondeau, you will gallop so fast that in the
end we believe you will knock your head against the gallows; We do all of us
jointly and severally say, That never any of us, the corporation of moniers,
ever coined any of our own moneys either gold or silver, or ever had any treaty
with any manner of person either Merchants or Goldsmiths that ever brought in
gold or silver into the Mint, to make more pieces in number then there ought or
should be in the pound weight, according to the strict rules of our Indenture,
and we do appeal to all the Goldsmiths, and others now living, who have been
yearly of the Jury for the trial of the Pickes of the moneys both gold or
silver, in the Star Chamber, whether ever we were charged, or any of the said
Jury ever imagined upon any one or all their trials of the moneys of this
nation, that such things were ever acted or done by us the Moniers of the Mint,
or any one of us; and we are all severally ready to depose every one for
himself, that such things never entered into the heart or imagination of any of
us, to act or do, much less for any one of us, to confess before the right
Honorable the Committee of the Mint, that ever any such vilanie was ever done
or acted by any of our fellow Moniers. And we most humbly desire the right
Honorable Committee for the Mint, or any one of them, to give either all of us,
or any one of us a charge (if this which Peter Blondeau the french man says we
confessed before the Co^mittee to be true) if the said right honorable
Committee clear us; then we humbly desire, we may have liberty to commence our
suit at Common Law against this Peter Blondeau, and we make no question, but a
Jury will give us full reparation.

Fifthly, Whereas Peter Blondeau says, The money ought to be ajusted piece by
piece when it is finished: This ignorant fellow ought to know every journey of
gold and silver is examined by the sworn Officers, the Warden, the Master, the
Controler, the Assay-Master, and out of every journey of gold or silver, there
are several pieces taken and put into the pix box for a years trial; and the
money both gold and silver both for fineness and weight exactly tried to see
that it be according to our Indenture before the money either gold or silver is
paid forth to the subjects; And that this is true all people that ever traded
in the Mint know; and it is the most perfect and exactest trial of any Mint in
Christendom: And this we do justify to all the world to be a certain truth.

Sixthly, That whereas the said Peter Blondeau says, That he made some three
hundred pieces, some half crowns of the ordinary weight and bigness, some
shillings, six pences, and some gold pieces, and presented his Proposition,
which having been reformed according to the pleasure of the Committee, it was
received and accepted of by the whole Committee, who ordered it to be reported
to the Council of State:

We answer, that we never knew any such order, nor never heard any of the right
honorable Committee say so much as the said Blondeau falsely affirms; But at the
same time, upon our humble Petition of setting forth the treasonable action of
the said Peter Blondeau in presuming traitorously to coin the current moneys of
the Nation in a private house in the Strand, the said Committee ordered
presently, That all his coining tools and irons then remaning in the Strand,
should be presently secured and seized, and sent into the Mint in the Tower;
which was done accordingly, and there they remain at this day. We humbly
desire as aforesaid, to have leave to indict the said Peter Blondeau, as we
have formerly said, for his treasonable coining of money out of the Mint, he
not having an act of Parliament or Commission under the great seal of England
for the doing of the same.

Seventhly, whereas the said Blondeau has printed, That for the making of some
tools for the coining of about one dozen pieces for a pattern, they have put
the State to one hundred pound sterling charge; We answer, That we followed
the strict Letter of our Warrant from the honorable Committee of the Mint, both
for the motto and weight; and though we presented but a dozen pieces, yet with
those tools we made (if commanded) we can print many thousands, and for
truth of the premises view our Account following attested under our hands.

The Account of the Moniers of the Commonwealths Mint, upon the trial with
Peter Blondeau the Frenchman, about the making of Moneys in July, August and
September, one thousand six hundred fifty one.

Inprimis in fitting of tools and instruments for the work 50. l. o. s. o. d.
In Gold and Silver for making of the trial 11. 04. 03. Expended by the Moniers
at several times, when they waited upon the Committee of the Mint in the
trial 26. 14. 02. In all 87. 18. 05. And the honorable Committee for the Mint
promised the Moniers for their exact working of the silver money, after six
months, for the silver a penny upon the pound weight, which coms to 12. l 16.
s. 7. d. And for gold six pence upon the pound weight, which comes to 06. 09.
00. total 107. 04. 00.

Mr. THO. VIOLET,
WE do desire you on behalf of the Moniers to prefer our petition to the
right honorable the Committee for the Mint, for allowance for our trial with
the frenchman, and for an allowance for a penny in the pound weight for
silver, and six pence in the pound weight for gold, as their Honors promised us
after six months, and in so doing you will very much oblige your very loving
friends to serve you;

the 8. of December. 1652. Simon Corbet. John Benfeild. Val. Nicholson. Richard
Johnson. Walter Tailor. Henry Perrin. Robert Grave.


Eighthly, Whereas Peter Blondeau says, That the Committee having read over all
our Propositions, could not understand them or the sense of them; and even
those that brought them could not explain them; whereby it was apparent we were
not able to make our Propositions good. To answer this great untruth, we are
now necessitated to print all the Papers we humbly presented to the right
honorable Committee, and leave it to the world to judge; and we with all
humility humbly leave it to the right honorable Sir James Harrington the
Chairman of the Committee, to examine whether he had not all these Papers now
printed, delivered unto him according to the several dates put down by us the
Corporation of Moniers in the States Mint, about two years since.

Ninthly, Whereas Peter Blondeau says, That our Corporation is now but of
thirty Fellows or Masters, who are all rich and have lands or houses and other
ways of maintenance without the work of the Mint; and when the State has much
money to coin they were wont to hire some journy-men at 18. d. 15. d. and 12.
d. for half a days work. To answer to this great untruth, We can speak it
with a great deal of grief, that almost twenty of our Fellows are fallen to so
great decay, that both themselves and families are brought to great distress
and poverty for want of employment in the Mint, they all of them having been
bound Apprentices for the least seven years to this Trade, and having no other
calling or way to get their living but only upon the mystery and way of making
of moneys: many of them that are fellow Moniers having no other subsistence
then what we of the Corporation amongst our selves collect for them, to keep
them from starving: And that this is true, we can produce hundreds of
witnesses; and many of us find it to our insupportable charge, we thinking our
selves bound in conscience not to see any of our fellow Moniers perish for want
of food and clothes.

Here follows the true list of Fellows and Workmen and Laborers employed in the
Mint 27. Jan. 1652. and some times we employ four times as many Laborers, viz.

The names of the fellow-Moniers belonging to the Commonwealth of Englands
Mint, in the Tower of London, the 27. January 1652.
1 Simon Corbet Provost. 2 Tho. Robinson senior. 3 Mich. Garnet. 4 Tho. Brooks
sen. 5 Tho. Garnet. 6 John Benfeild. 7 Henry Lewis. 8 John Pollard. 9 John
Butterfeild. 10 Andrew Coleman. 11 Chr. Wilson, 12 Nic. Harris. 13 John
Shoncke. 14 Edw. Dawson. 15 Hen. Row. 16 Hen. Perrin. 17 Valen. Nicholson. 18
Stephen Hawten. 19 Wm. Dawson. 20 Gabriel Benfeild 21 Tho. Robinson jun. 22
Rich. Nichols. 23 Edw. Maynard. 24 Rich. Collard. 25 Robert Gascoign. 26 James
Clay. 27 John Weatherly. 28 John Warner. 29 Ja. Boon. 30 Wm. Taverner. 31 Wm.
Shambrooke. 32 Tho. Young. 33 Rich. Johnson. 34 Walter Tailor. 35 John Corbet.
36 Edw. Heward. 37 Geo. Taverner. 38 Garnet Corbet. 39 Nathaniel Marsh. 40 Wm.
Serby. 41 Joseph Sanders. 42 Wm. Maynard. 43 Robert Graves. 44 David Ramage. 45
Edw. Worldly. 46 Simon Corbet Jun. 47 Geo. Callard. 48 Daniel Robinson. 49
Daniel Benseild. 50 Rob. Aspe. 51 Abram Hunt. 52 Wm. Young. 53 Toby Maynard.
54 Tho. Brooks Jun. 55 Tho. Russell. 56 Tho. Anderson. 57 Rich. Warner. 58
Rich. Sternell. 59 John Taverner.
The names of the Laborers belonging to the Co^mon-wealths Mint in the Tower of
London, the 27. Jan. 1652. and at work, and all in the Moniers pay.
1 Nicholas Muriel. 2 John Mathewes. 3 Jo. Luck. 4 Wm. Smyth. 5 Jo. Prince. 6
Ja. Sparks. 7 Rob. Baldwin. 8 Ja. Bernald. 9 Tho. Fulham. 10 Jeffry Tedsell. 11
Henry Freeman. 12 Samuel Freeman. 13 Robert Watts. 14 Geo. Ellet. 15 Edw.
Thede. 16 Hen. Peacocke. 17 Joseph Rowland. 18 Edw. Aires. 19 Isaac Tailor. 20
Philip Anderkin. 21 John Field. 22 Wm. Gunn. 23 John Gable. 24 Edw. Jones. 25
Tho. Brown. 26 Jo. Langly. 27 Fran. Cave. 28 Wm. Page. 29 Tho. Emes. 30 Tho.
Blunt. 31 Wm. East. 32 John Pookey. 33 John Michell. 34 John Ramzy. 35 Wm.
Ludlow. 36 Tho. Horton. 37 Rich. Hopkins. 38 Rob. Wilkinson. 39 Wm. Price. 40
John Shelley. 41 Tho. Floyd. 42 Wm. Blaygrave. 43 Rich. Cletherwell. 44 Rob.
Cave. 45 Wm. Hazelwood. 46 Edw. Darby. 47 Fran. White. 48 Rob. Finch. 49 Tho.
Collumer. 50 Wm. Atkins. 51 Wm. Hall.

