THE VINDICATION Of a true PROTESTANT, and faithful Servant to his Church,
DANIEL WHITBY, Rector of THOYDEN-MOUNT in ESSEX.

From Articles exhibited against him in the Exchequer-Chamber at Westminster,
By a few Schismatic, tempestuous, illiterate heedlesse People: Together With
a Sermon Preached at RUMFORD the last Visitation in ESSEX, in defense of the
Liturgy of the Church of ENGLAND, which is most objected in these ARTICLES.

ESAIAS 5.3. Judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my Vineyard.

HEB. 12.3. Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself, lest you be weary and faint in your minds.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the Universitie, 1644.

THE DEDICATION: TO The most Glorious and Blessed TRINITY, The Searcher of all
Hearts, the Witness of my Thoughts, Words, and Lines, the Maker of all Things,
and Judge of all Men; DANIEL WHITBY, a poor Creature, a Worm and no Man, and
yet an Image of that Great Piece: In token of his faithfulness to his Copy,
and deliverie of this Sermon, makes bold to call upon those Divine Powers, as
Witness of the Work, and Publication.

The Vindication of a true PROTESTANT.
HAving my Living sequestered, I am now at leisure to look upon the Cause;
being eased of the Pulpit, I make bold to visit the Press. There was never any
itch or inclination in my nature to appear in Print, but that the blasphemy
of the multitude compells me. I have lived these three years in the air of
Reproaches; a Popish Priest, Malignant, false-Doctrine-Preacher, what not? but
since I have parted with my Living, the noise is greater: now they fill the
air and Country with their malicious Revels, triumphing, trampling, singing
the (...), they make the Country Echo with their acclamations. Who can blame
me, if in Justice and Chartie to my self, I present the state of the business
to the world, being not ashamed to give an account of my manner of Life
Doctrine, and Trial?

'Twice was my Peace and Innocence molested by their Articles.

The first Summons were last August, in Harvest, two weeks after my Lord
Conway's departure from London; by the opportunity you may guess at the
foundation of this attempt: as soon as he was gone, they invaded his Family,
and fetched up me; before, they thought the attempt desperate. The Articles were
equally divided for number; ten exhibited in the last Summer, ten more the
Christmas following.

The first Article.
That he is an enemy to Preaching, WITHESSES, John Field-Susan. Field. Ed.
Prudden
never Preaching but once on the Lords day, yet not suffering his Parishioners
to go to other Churches to hear Sermons, when they had none at home on the
Lords day, charging them to the contrary, saying, The People have too much
knowledge; and if it were not for some honorable respects, he would not Preach
so often as he did; and said, if his People wanted any thing, it should be
Preaching.

Which Article has four Branches; Not Preaching, Forbidding men to go,
Inveighing against Knowledge, Threatening the want.

What say you, M. WHITE. Quest. ANSWER. Six years I have been a Minister.
M. Whitby, to not Preaching? Do you Preach but once a day?

Ever since I have been a Minister, I have Preached once on the Sabbath,
besides Catechizing at opportunities: for these two last years, and upwards, I
have Preached twice on the Sabbath, besides Fasts, and other occasions: if this
be to be an enemy to Preaching, I have no more to say for my self.

Here the Parishioners were called in, and did all testify the same.

You forbad them to go to Sermons, M. WHITE.
when there was none in the afternoon.

No man ever gave more liberty to his Parishioners then my self, ANSWER.
cherishi g and commending these three Accusers often for going to Sermons; yet
seeing them grow headstrong, and run contrary to my expectation, I forbad
the men one day, to try their obedience; and because the Woman constantly and
wilfully avoided Prayers in the Morning, I charged her (for satisfaction) to
come in the afternoon, which she despised: but never were they once troubled
or Presented for going, nor twice forbidden.

You said, M. WHITE.
the People had too much knowledge, and envied them Preaching.

If I destroy the things I build, ANSWER.
I make my self a transgressor: I daily labored to advance their knowledge,
therefore cannot be thought to envy it: But this line is snatched abruptly out
of its Context and frame: I use to speak it Comparative, viz. You have too
much knowledge, unless I could see more practice; too much Preaching, unless
you show more thankfulness. That line may be envious in an abrupt view, which
is apposite in its situation. Pretty, when Ministers must be wounded with the
splinters of their Sermons, without head or tail, inference, or coherence
considered.

You threatened, if they wanted any thing, M. WHITE.
it should be Preaching.

They are bound to thank me, and not to accuse; ANSWER.
because if I threatened, I have been better then my word: they never wanted
that.

The second Article.
That he has been always a maintainer of Superstatious Innovations, Joh.
Field. Susan. Field. Ed. Prudden
threatening to Present the Officers, for not setting up the Rayles about the
Communion Table with speed, refusing to administer the Sacrament to such as
would not kneel at the Rayles; and said, That whosoever would not conform to
those Orders of the Church (as he called them) then enjoined, and by him
practiced, were no better then Witches and Devils; and publicly in the Church
desired God, not to hear the Prayers of those that would not join with him in
all his performances in the Church.

Which has five Branches.

You have been a maintainer of Superstitious Innovations. M. WHITE.
ANSWER.


I have been as utter a stranger to Superstitions and Innovations as any in
the Clergy, There was no superstitious practice laid to my charge in all my
trials: For the Rayles, I practiced no more to them, or at them, then without
them.
never transported with Episcopal Innovations, nor now affected to Popular;
but kept me close to the ancient Reformation of the Church of England, and her
established Laws, which I yet magnify.

You threatened to present the Officers, for not setting up the Rayles. M. WHITE.


We were threatened to be presented at London Office, ANSWER.
and Rumford Visitation, which I told the Officers and bade them look to
themselves: John Jeyes, Churchwarden, was called in, and denied any such
thing, witnessing he had an Order from the Archdeacon to set them up: we were
so far from forwardness, that we were the latest in that observance in the
Country.

You refused to administer the Sacrament to them that did not come up to the
Rayles; by Name, Susanna Field. M. WHITE.


I never refused to administer the Sacrament, ANSWER.
nor put back any all my time, but the Incestuous Sister of Edward Gibs, my
Accuser, whom be protected in her shame, questioned me hotly for debarring her
the Sacrament, and bore me this grudge ever since: If any missed the Sacrament
besides, let them thank themselves, and not complain of me. I did my Duty
openly in the Church according to the Rubric (If any have not Received in
either kind, or both, let them speak, or signify) there was no intimation of
any that wanted, and so I went to Thanksgiving. They must observe me, I cannot
study particular persons in the Exercise of my Function. I dare say she came
artificially to want it, and lost it, to object against me.

You said, M. WHITE.
Those that would not conform to those Orders, were no better then Witches and
Devils.

They make the Scripture look enviously upon me: ANSWER.
I said no more then Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.23. Preaching upon that Text, Obedience
is better then Sacrifice, Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, I dissuaded
my Congregation from disobedience, from that Phrase wherewith it was
stigmatized in the Text, Witchcraft, which was, Conjuring and dealing with the
Devil, and I would not have them partakers with Witches and Devils, 1 Cor.
10.20. What Chymicks be these Article-mongers, that can extract Quidlibet e
quolibet? Turn a fair Text into a foul Article?

You desired God, M. WHITE.
not to hear their Prayers, that would not join with you in all your
performances.

If any such uncharitable Wishes should proceed from my mouth, ANSWER.
I should utterly be ashamed of it, and abhor my tongue for speaking it: but
the truth is this; I often threatened the neglecters of All my Accusers are
absolute enemies to the Common-Prayer-Booke.
Divine Service, that stayed from Church all Prayers-while for purpose, that
God would not hear their Prayers that would not hear ours, which they have
molded to this strange form.

Here I appeal to all the world, Whether it be not the duty of an Auditour,
if he hear any thing fall from his Minister contrary to sound Doctrine, to
come and tell him of it personally, according to Christ's Rule, Matthew. 18.15.
Dic inter te and illum, then Dic Ecclesiae etc. In many things we offend all,
as Jacob said of the Money in his sons Sacks; Genesis 43.12.
peradventure it was an oversight: if a man offend not in tongue, he is
perfect. Many times a Minister lets fall an utterance, besides his mind: yet to
show you the constitution of these Auditors, I never heard of these Faults
before, nor ever should, but to do me a disparagement.

The third Article.
That he Preached, Susan. Field. John Field. Ed. Prudden
That it was lawful for Christians to join with any Nation in their outward
Worship; and has said, That the Roman Church is a true Church, in respect of
Fundamental Points of the Religion, although it be stained with Heresy; and
that when we are in Italy or Spain, we must do as they there, and proved it
from 1 Cor. 9.19.20.

What say you to this Article? M. WHITE.


Aristotle; A been divisis ad male con^uncta, The first and last of this
Article are one, delivered in a breath: But here is a Line riveted into the
Piece about the Roman Church, which was delivered at a vast distance of time;
to invite you to believe, that M. Whitby labored a Communication with the
Church of Rome in Worship, for so the Cobweb is spunne, to catch the hearers: I
make no question, but to satisfy the Judicious and Charitable; and I care for
no more.

I beseech God to bless me in this world, and in that to come, to, and no
otherwise, but as I have been a constant enemy to that Church, from my
education, and abhor a Communion with their Tenants, etc. My afternoons
Exercises are wholly instituted against the Rhenish Annotations.
and have daily begot the detestation of her in my Auditorie; yet I am a Foe to
none, beyond the Line of Reason: And therefore to acquaint the world with what
I once delivered, and is upon Record; I once moved that Question, Ex abundantia
and copia doctrinae, out of nicitie, for so I qualified it at that time,
Stabilire opinionem, non unitatem; an Romana Ecclesia sit Ecclesia Dei? Or
belongs to the Catholic still? And stated it affirmative out of Doctor
Append. of the fifth Book of the Church, p. 882. 883.
Field; for I measured his syllables, in deciding it: It belongs to the visible
Catholic Church, and borrowes that Title As S. Aust. The societies of
Heretics contribute to the Catholic; and Solomon, Cant. 6.8. describes the
Church replenisht with Concubines as well as Queens and Virgins.
: It is Vere Ecclesia potius quam vera, in Mornay's Criticismes: Vera is but
the Emphasis of Ecclesia, if we use that phrase, and bespeaks the truth of
being, not of Doctrine; Metaphysice, not Moraliter: As a Leper, or a maimed
man, that has but body and soul together, is styled Verus homo; be his person
never so deformed, he is called a Man still, and nothing else: so the Church of
Rome is a Church, Templum Domini, else we must not expect Antichrist from
thence; and Children baptized there, must be rebaptired: so that in respect of
the Profession of Religion, the holding of some saving Truths, as the Divinity
of the Godhead, and Trinity of Persons, wherein we agree; some Articles of
Faith, Ordinations, Baptism; she steals that Title of Ecclesia Christi, as
the same Author: how dangerous is it for a Scholar to use his Judgment and
Reading among ignorant men, in whom is more malice then discretion, their gall
above their judgment? But to answer the Article; the first and last were one
continued discourse about indifferent matters, expressly about the Postureor
the Sacrament: I told them, in France they receive it standing, or walking; in
Germany sitting, in England kneeling: all these are best at home; and did we
come to their Church, we ought to comply, as Saint Paul, loco citato, observed
the manners of the places where he traveled, Italy or Spain, etc. Understand
this of our own Religion and Profession; I did not open a Gap to Libertinisme,
to teach men to be Jews or Turks, or Papists, etc. with the Polype fish, to
change their color with the next Rock.

The fourth Article.
That he labored by all means, Susan. Field. John Field. Ed. Prudden
both by Preaching and otherwise, to disgrace our Brethren the Scots, calling
them in many of his Sermons, Rebels and Traitors, and made a Sermon purposely
against them, calling them the sons of Belial, and said, Now adays a Rogue
and Tinker, a Pedlar, any Body, was good enough to draw subjects to Rebellion
against their King.

This Article was omitted: I was not questioned here; perchance it was buried
under the Act of Oblivion: But what I spoke, I spoke under Protection of State,
the Kings Proclamation to that purpose, and a Prayer in the Church to boot.
Besides, this Article is aged, it was before the Protestation, when I had no
more engagement to a Scot, then to the Dutch or French: since the Protestation,
my Vows are upon me. But to disclose the Article; at the Scots coming in, I
preached upon that Text, 2 Samuel 20.1, 2. There happened to be there a son of
Belial, whose name was Sheba, the son of Bicri, etc. I knew not who Sheba
was, and it was no matter; a Tinker or a Pedlar, I said, was fit for such a
Project, as Jack Straw, John Cade, and Wat Tiler.

The fifth Article.
He has showed himself an enemy to Parliaments, saying, Susan. Field. John
Field. Ed. Prudden
The King may take away his subjects goods to supply his wants, without a
Parliament, or else (he said) he is no King at all; and for a King to be ruled
by the Parliament, is to give his Crown to them, and himself to become a
subject: He said also, That it is not in the power of the Parliament, to take a
part of a Ministers Benefice to maintain a Curate.

What say you to this Article? M. WHITE.


Nec via nec vestigium inveniri. All the Congregation was solemnly examined on
these Articles on a Sabbath day, before worthy Gentlemen of the County, and
disclaimed this Article absolutely; never any such thing was delivered in that
Audience: I have many and many times preached Propriety, never Tyranny, and
these Rovers could neitheir produce time nor Text of these Articles, when, on
what occasion, or Scripture delivered. But since those Texts they did produce,
did so unhappily discover them, it was wisdom to be ignorant of the most, for
dolus latet in indefinito. Two of the three witnesses are of such
inconsistencie of judgment, emptiness, incapacitie, distraction, that I dare
venture my Credit, they are not able to carry a Text twice repeated, Terminis
terminantibus; which made me admire when I saw them unanimous in their
Evidences: They were long Catechized by some good Scholar, before they could
say these lessons without book; the last Line assures me of the Sophistry,
which M. White struck out; yet I believe it was as true as the rest, having no
more occasion to talk of a Minister and his Curates allowance, then of any
other impertinency, so that be the matter of this Article true or false, I am
confident it is borrowed; and, as they say, it is familiar to choose Articles
according to the fate they bring upon men. That which will put him out, you
must put in. it is no matter what he has done, but what will undo him: this
Article is more aged then the Parliament, and therefore improbable. My devotion
and behavior to the Parliament since it had a being, I hope are more innocent
and probable arguments, then wandering jealousies before.

The sixth Article.
That he dissuaded his Parishioners from contributing to the Relief of Ireland;
Ed. Gibbs. John Field.
relling them, they were at great charges otherwise and wishing the younger
people that were ready to give, to keep their money for some Briefes he had to
gather shortly of great value, and that charity begins at home.

You were an Enemy to the Relief of Ireland. M. WHITE. ANSWER.


This Article is so contradictory to what I then said, that the Congregation
wrote Impudercie on it: had that brow that made it, any wrinckle of shame or
honesty, he would have put in something else; for I labored by all skillful,
powerful Arguments, to advance it, and invented a way to make the Parish
bountiful, extracting four Briefes which I had then in my hands, from the
children and servants of the Parish, which never gave before, nor would have
been asked to that Collection, and so left the housekeepers free, that they
might be the more liberal to Ireland; yet I am wounded with mine own plumes,
and my industry to the cause inverted against me, I was never counted an enemy
to charity before.

The seventh Article.
That he has dissuaded his Parishioners from taking the Protestation; saying,
Ed. Gibbs. John Field.
That it was enough to set the whole Kingdom together by the ears.

You dissuaded your Parishioners from taking the Protestation. M. WHITE. ANSWER.


This is an Article of the same brood, I took the Protestation my self;
preached two Sermons upon it out of Psalm. 66.13. divided it into four parts,
opened it, and commended to my Congregation every part of it: I do not
contradict that in my Pew, which I preach in my Pulpit: I am not Yea and Nay;
but I told those seditious men that brought it me unattested, contrary to the
Ordinance, they were disorderly men, and would set the world together by the
ears; which they (as handsomely as they could) transferred from their persons
to the Protestation.

The eighth Article.
That in a Sermon, at a Visitation at Rumford, Ed. Prudden Ed. Gibbs. John
Field.
1641. out of a pretended zeal for the Common Prayers, bitterly inveighed
against preaching and conceived prayers, viz. That God thinks best of forms
of prayer, and not of prayers of the Spirit, for prayer by the Spirit did
quench the Spirit, and that Gods stomach is not queazie as men's of our days;
he does not search for new devices, God is the God of the Old-Exchange as well
as of the New, and wears not such mutable ears as men do.

That set-formes of Common prayer, are the greatest glory of our English Nation.

That those that cannot endure to spend one hour in hearing Divine Service,
and yet can be content to see two glasses turned in the Pulpit, though they
hear nothing but Nonsense, their ears are better then their hearts.

What say you to the Visitation Sermon? M. WHITE. ANSWER.


I preached at the Visitation on that Text Matthew. 6.9. After this manner
therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc. in advancement of our form of Common
Prayer: The Copy I had in my hand at the Trial, laid it down on the Table
before the Committee, with these words: If there be any thing in this Sermon,
that savors of a corrupt brain or an evil spirit, I will gladly bear the
guilt of all these Articles; if not, I hope this may be a glass wherein you
may see their ignorance and malice, as well as my innocence. I told them
moreover, The Lord Says.
in whose hands there was a Copy from the first birth of it: Nay, to tell the
world my folly in this case, I have preached this Sermon thrice in three solemn
Congregations: I have given out three Copies of it; to the Lord Say, to my
father, the Minister of Buckingham, and to a neighbor Gentleman in Essex; and
now I must be forced to Print it, to Vindicate both it and me stom the brain
of the Vulgar and the Country noise; and if I do not Print it as near the
Copy and delivery as I can, let God and the world detect me for an Impostor:
But to dally a little with the Article, the Author brings me in, out of a
pretended Zeal to Common Prayer, to have said this, when all the Country
knows, my Zeal is more then pretended to Divine Service: I have preserved the
form of our Church prayers to this day, and will maintain them against any
opposer: Sure some preacher put in that Rhetoric, that has renounced the
Common Prayer, and thought I would prove a pretended Zelot like himself.

Many have spoken basely and coursely of it as the report goes; it is now to be
seen, and seares no tongue but the blasphemers, no judgment but the fool's.

Here Edward Gibs made them merry, mistaking Mutual ears in God, for Mutable:
One of the Committees asked him what Mutual ears were? He could not tell; but
said, Gods Mutual ears, if it please you: as the other witness to these
Articles, the Gentleman of Gotham called the Malignants, Relignants always,
not being able to know or distinguish words: yet these Mountebankes will be
judges of Sermons and Divinity.

Reader, I will set the Sermon after the Articles, that this stuff may go
together.

The ninth Article.
That he said, Rob. Coudge solus.
It is law full for any man to do obeisance to any thing in the remembrance of
God.

Did you say these words in your Study, M. WHITE.
as you were discoursing with Rebert Goudge?

I do not well understand them, ANSWER.
nor can I Prophecy what he means by them, I resign the Article back to his
wifedome that made it.

The tenth Article.
That he refuses to take or administer the late Covenant.

Have you took the Covenant? M. WHITE. ANSWER. M. WHITE. ANSWER.


No.

Will you take it?

I crave the privilege of a Christian to enjoy my conscience, I cannot take
it: I had a fortnights time to think better of it: I came up within the time,
and told them, I would take it as far as it concerned the good of the
Parliament, but not the Pro and Con. One of the Committee asked me, what I meant
by Pro and Con? I answered, every wise man sees this Covenant to be built upon
a Controversy betwixt King and Parliament; now the same loyal opinion I have
of the one, I have of the other, and therefore cannot swear: I believe that
the Parliament took up arms, for Religion. Laws and Privileges, to
maintain them, and I believe the King does the same, and I must not drive out
one nail with another: I believe in conscience that Joseph is an honest man,
and I think the same of John; I must not swear out my charity to John, with
my charity to Joseph: and so was bid to withdraw, and sent home for almost
half a year, having satisfied the Committee with my answers, none
contributing a syllable to my doom at that time.

To show the world now, the Constitution of my accusers, how unquenchable their
Zeal is to such enterprises, their malice was more incensed by that repulse:
They are preparing presently for a second Onset like Simeon and Levi, their
wrath was cruel: that instance may stand here, for never a trial but some
Levites were apparent, as well to contrive the Articles, as countenance the
Cause; It was not the witnesses alone, but their Oracles to boot.

At Christ-masse I was served with a second Summons on the Lords Day, as I was
coming to the Sacrament; and standing before the Lords Table, preparing the
Elements for service, John Field presented me with this piece of his Religion;
his Religion I may call it, for we could see no more: as soon as he had served
me, like Judas he went out, forsaking the Service and the Congregation.

ON the 29. of December, I appeared at the Exchequer, and had ten articles
more exhibited, but they fell short of hurting me, they were either single
witnesses, or double lies; And a noble Knight of the Committee told me, they
did not stick on me, they were Moats in comparison of the first, which appeared
as Mountains: Therefore I shall be the nimbler in dispatching them to the
Reader. These Articles come most from the Chimney-corner, or Table: what I
spoke in private at home, is Articl'd by Edward Prudden, then a servant of the
Family, and a Traitor to it; but it is no matter, since the world knows the
worst.

The first Article.
First, Ed. Prudden solus. M. WHITE. ANSWER.
That the taking off the Earl of Straffords head, caused the Rebellion in
Ireland.

What say you to this Article?

I cannot tell, where, when to whom, on what occasion, I should speak it; but
we have often discoursed of the Deputy, in reference to the miseries of
Ireland, not any affairs in England, imagining that the Rebels took
opportunity to rise from his absence and death; if he had been there, they
durst not have stirred; it was causa per Accidens: Causa sine qua non, in our
talk, not Efficiens; no physical, but a moral cause, which is the occasion
and opportunity; as my going to Church is the cause that I am robbed at home.

The second Article.
That a heathen might be saved by his Moral virtues, Ed. Prudden John Field.
without Christ, else God should be more just then merciful.

This Article would make me blush, ANSWER.
had not Gods providence discovered it for me: but sure, if this Article had
not been spurious, it would have shown its face the last time; for those were
a year and an half a hatching: and could they forget this, and leave it out?
I trow not. I desired M. White to ask, on what Text it was Preached? for I
write all my Sermons, as I told them, from the beginning of my Trial. I thank
God he named a Text, 1 Cor. 13. he knew not the Verse, but I fancied it could
be no Verse but the twelfth. I looked amongst my Copies, and there I found that
Subject which I shall faithfully transcribe out of the Copy, if the Reader
will pardon the Prolixitie. The excellency of the Subject would invite me to
Print the whole, were it not for tediousness. The words are; Now we see
through a Glass darkely, but then face to face: Insisting on our different
knowledge of God in this world, and the estate to come, employed by the Glass
and the face. Three things I observed in the word (...), Glass: first, the
darkness of our knowledge here; secondly, the several Glasses wherein we see
God; thirdly, the best use of these Glasses. On the second part, I raised this
variety; Three Glasses wherein we see God: first, the Glass of the Creation,
Romans 1.20. secondly, the Glass of Reason, Proverb. 20.27. thirdly, that of
Faith and Revelation, Jam. 1.24, 25. From the two first Glasses I raised this
Question Whether the Works of the Creation and the Light of Nature, the
visible World, Reason, and Philosophy would show God sufficiently to bring a
man to Heaven? Whether a Heathen and Philosopher might be saved through these
two Glasses? The Copy runs thus: I have no authority and disposition to
condemn any nor shut Heaven-Gates against them; Who art thou that judge
another man's servant? Romans 14.4. To judge, is Gods Prerogative; it becomes me
to show Pity, rather then Cruelty: I am not proud to send all to Hell that
knew not Christ so well as I, but rather must judge my self, and think we
that know God more then they, shall have a harder Audit; Father forgive them,
they know not what they do, Luke 22. The less knowledge, the more Preface to
Mercy: The servant that knows his Lords will, and does it not, shall have
more stripes. Those that sought after God and Heaven, and walked according to
the Law he gave them, in every Nation, Age, and Condition, some were accepted,
Act. 10.35. Even the Gentiles, that had not the Law, were a Law unto
themselves, Romans 2.15, 16. If God showed them enough to condemn them, Romans 1.
it becomes not me to make him cruel, and say, he showed them not enough to
save them, Micha 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does
the Lord require of thee? There is an Indicatum, and Requisium: I will not
conceive God so hard a Master, as the ungracious servant reproacht him, reaping
where he has not sown: Put thy knowledge to the right Bank, and as God
shows, he will require, and accept thee. I know, there is no salvation but by
Faith in Christ, other foundation can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3.11. But Faith has
been a Mystery in all Ages; the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world
a wonder which Angels desired to look into. That Glass, like the Prospective
Glass, has varieties of appearances as God divides to every man a measure of
Faith, 1 Cor. 12. We must not measure all the world by our Last: Tell me now
Adam believed in Christ, before his (...); what fancy the Jew had of Christ
before he came, that would not own him when he saw him. The Old Testament
bad one Line of our Creed expressly, Credo in Deum; but the other Persons of
the Trinity were strangers to their apprehensions. Saint Paul has some
glances in his Epistles that do illuminate my mind, and confirm my Charity:
Gal. 4.9.
We know God, or rather are known of him, etc. If I may apprehend that for
which I am apprehended, Phil. 3.12. where the hand falls short of him, he
takes hold of it Gods mercy over-reacheth man's apprehension.
; I am found of them that sought me not, speaking of the Gentiles, Es. 65.1.
He will have mercy on whom he will, Romans 9.15. The Revelation of Christ was
a hidden mystery from former ages, Ephesians. 3.4, 5. And therefore above my rule to
conclude, Quanta and qualis fides ante Christum sufficit. Those virtuous
Philosophers that lived in awe of God, and expectation of his reward, Heb.
11.6. shall be within the compass of my hopes, many of them; else how should I
hope for mercy for my self, that know God better, and live worse? Will not
Cato make Christians blush at the Judgment Day? There is not so express
distinct Faith required of them, as us: To whom much is given, of them much
shall be required. So far the Sermon, which I tendered to the Committee,
showing that Line, Other foundation can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3.11. where my
opinion was visible, I showed two Copies more, my Confession of Faith on that
Article, Credo Jesum; and that Question, An gentes quae nec Messiam
expectarunt, nec missum agnoverunt, potuerunt e lumine naturae salvari, which I
had stated negative against the Arminians long ago; and in all my Sermons they
heard that Text of Peter, Act. 4.12. There is salvation in no other Name etc. I
hope three Copies did prevail above two Cow-men, though they are as Zealous as
Doeg the Edomite, Saul's heard-man that slew the Priests, 1 Samuel 21.7. and
22.18. If any wonder at the mistake in this Article, desine mirari; the man
that made it, knows as well how to Pick a hole in a Ministers Coat, as a lock
in his Ladies house.

The third Article.
That the Voting down of Bishops, Ed. Prudden John Field.
was to destroy the Order of Aaton, and to bring Jeroboams order in.

Voting is a word I never use, ANSWER.
and this Article is above two years old, before any Voting down of Bishops;
yet I have often spoken to that purpose, laboring to advance Episcopacie in
the affection of my Auditors (which was the present Government) against all
Corruptions of it: To which end I made use of that Text 2 Chronicles. 13.9, 10, 11.
Juda's Priesthood, and Jeroboam's, as Abijah said. I always made the
Church Government suitable, according to the three Constitutions of it, under
the Law of Nature, Morality, and Grace; Paternall, Sacerdotall, Episcopal.

The fourth Article.
He would often wish, Ed. Prudden solus.
That he had great sums of money to lend the King.

I have ever the best wishes for the King; ANSWER.
and hearing of Writs going abroad to borrow money, I wished I had thousands to
lend him.

The fifth Article.
Seeing an Ordinance of Parliament, John Brown solus.
for assembling Divines for the Synod, and M. Marshall and M. Sedgewick
nominated for Essex; he said, A pox take the Puritanicall Faction, they had
made more disturbance in the Kingdom, then ever would be quenched Had they no
other to put in but those?

Here comes in a new Customer, ANSWER.
a Proselyte of the next Patish, with whom I have no more acquaintance, then
the Crow that flies by me. Penes authorem fides.

Did you not curse the Furitanicall Faction? M. WHITE.


None that ever knew me, ANSWER.
heard that Dialect come out of my mouth.

Did you not speak against M. Sedgewick and M. Marshalls Election for the
Assembly? M. WHITE.


I spoke not of M. Sedgewick at all, ANSWER.
nor of any Election to the Assembly; but seeing two Sermons of D. Burges and
M. Marshalls lying upon M. Chevelyes table, I told M. Chevelye I liked D.
Burgesses Sermon well, not M. Marshalls; I saw nothing in that answerable to so
great a Fame: that was all discourse, and occasion, that we talked of; which M.
Chevelye being called in, justified before the Committee.

The sixth Article.
Upon the Propositions for Peace, John Brown solus.
he said; Now there would be Peace upon any terms to save life; Now they
would deliver up Castles, Forts, or any thing, God knows, to save life; Now
the Roundheads Arses made Buttons.

He brings me in very Theatricall, ANSWER.
as if I were acting upon a Stage: but the last part betrays the Author, The
Roundheads Arses is a Complement, that becomes his mouth better then mine.

The seventh Article.
He thanked God he never had so little manners, Ed. Prudden solus.
as to go by a Church and not pull off his hat.

This is very likely to be mine, if he means through a Church; the inside, not
the out.

The eighth Article.
His Company which he associated himself with, are Malignants, Ed. Prudden
Ed. Gibbs. John Field.
Drunkards, Swearers, and men of very scandalous lives, as D. Wright, M.
Nicolson, M. Everington, and such like persons; and when he was absent, these
only supplied his place.

I thought I might have been excused my Companie-keeping, ANSWER.
seeing I make no more use of it, then to preserve Civilitie and Courtesy: it
does not extend to the Alehouse or Taxeme, but to the doors where I live,
where there be better witnesses to take notice of my behavior. I have been
six years in this County and scarce know six Gertlemen, to whom I owe Visits;
I am an utter stranger above two miles from home: I did not expect to be
accused of Company, that am accused of Stoicisme. For these Gentlemen expressed,
I was never witness of any such ill qualities; some of them I have not seen
since the Notion Malignant came up, and I have reason to think better of them
then these report. Those that will lie unmercifully to paint their Minister,
will stretch a little to set out the colors of a stranger. For their Preaching
in my Church, it is rare; perhaps once a year I entertain a helper, when I
visir my Father: and for their Doctrine, my Accusers have commended it: when
they preached in my Church, they preached very well.

The ninth Article.
He said, That our Townes-men were right for the Cause, John Brown botcher,
solus.
to raise War against their King; but for his part, Cursed be his heart that
lends any Money, he would not go on in those ways.

This strange man brings nothing but Cursing and Swearing, ANSWER.
and filthiness against me: but imagine that we met upon Mount Ebal, I hope
the Committee will not believe, that I was so mad as to curse my self. With
that, I laid down a Bill of Expenses for this year, which I had paid and
given the Parliament, 20 pound out of a poor Living of 80 pound; the
Constables Oath was offered, to testify the payment of so much from my Purse.

The tenth Article.
That the said M. Whitby has been privy to, Ed. Gibbs. Susan. Field.
and assistant in sending one privately with Letters to Oxon.

This is a good Article to wind up the bottom; ANSWER.
there appears nothing in it but a Lie, and the Image of Jealousy: Since
there has been a Controversy in this Land, Oxford has not been the wiser
for me by a syllable; but I sent a Letter to a Friend dwelling toward
Cambridge, and they mistook the Universitie. Robert Clark was called in, whom
they accused for carrying the Letter; and he offered to take his Oath, he
knew not where Oxford stood.

Have you took the National Covenant? M. WHITE. ANSWER. M. WHITE. ANSWER.


No.

Will you take it?

I will take it Passive, but not Active; it belongs not to my Calling to root
out Episcopacie: I take it as Elisha took his Masters departure, 2 King. 2.3.
patiently. I promised them obedience to it, but preserved my opinion of it,
because my Reading had made such impression upon my Judgment. I spoke too much
to this Question and fear it did displease: yet I hoped for pardon, it being a
sudden Answer to an unexpected Question; and I only labored to show an honest
mind.

PSALM. 82.8. Surge Domine, judica terram.

1 PET. 4.19. Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the
keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

THE VINDICATION Of the Form of COMMON PRAYERS Used in the CHURCH of ENGLAND;
In a Sermon Preached at the last Visitation at RUMFORD in ESSEX; By DANIEL
WHITBY, Master of Arts, Parson of THOYDON-MOUNT: Lately accused at the
Committee in the Exchequer Chamber for the said SERMON.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the Universitie, 1644.

An Advertisement.
Where any Limb of the Article is to be found in the Sermon, it shall be noted
by an Asteriske * in the Margent, especially that Contradiction, Prayers by the
Spirit did quench the Spirit. There is no Inventorie of it, but page 27. in an
Objection, where the Reader may gather the great Abilities of these Religious
Mountebanks, that cannot distinguish betwixt an Objection and Thesis in
Divinity, nor know when a man speaks out of his own mouth, or out of another
man's.

The Vindication of the form of COMMON PRAYERS, used in the Church of ENGLAND.
MATH. 6.9. After this manner therefore pray ye.


HEre is an Ergo in my Text (Therefore) it shows this Verse is an inference of
the former: Now less any man should say to me as Christ to the intruding
guest; Friend, How came thou in hither? Mat. 22.12.
be pleased in one word to take the Ergo, the dependence.

Our blessed Savior in this Chapter censureth two sorts of people for errors
in devotion, Hypocrites, ver. 5. Heathens, ver. 7.

The Hypocrites are challenged for two things: The Posture of Prayer. The Place
of Prayer.
first, Standing; secondly, Streets and Synagogues.

Not that either of these were evil in themselves, but in their choice and
affectation: They love to pray standing, etc. They affected them both out of
Pride and Singularity: secondly, out of an evil end, To be seen of men, and
so they have their Reward.

The Heathens are condemned for Tautologie, and idle Reperitions; that served
their Prayers as the Cook his Dinner, dressed Pork in several Sauces, and
Messes; all was but Perk: So they loaded Gods ear with multitude of words, to
no purpose.

Christ labors to preserve his Disciples from them both: The former, ver. 6.
The latter in my Text, (...), etc.

The parts of this Text are two: A Precept A Pattern A Duty A Direction The
Commission Pray ye, etc. The Copy Our Father, etc.


I will say nothing touching the latter, the Lords-Prayer, though it begins to
grow out of request; in many places you shall not hear it at all. (...). 15.20.
Now the servant is not greater then the Lord: no wonder if they despise our
Prayers, when that which cropped from Christ's mouth comes not in their lips, as
if not worth the owning. The Lord maintain his own Prayer, I shall labor to
maintain ours, in the first parts of the Text, (...), After this manner, etc.
Where, that I may not spend one grain more of my Glass in a Preface, I shall
presently acquaint you what I intend to do: Four things will absolve this
Text, and my intents.

First, The Duty and Approbation of Common Prayer, Pray ye, All. Secondly, The
Excellency of set forms of Common Prayer, After this manner. Thirdly, The
Commendation of our set form of England. Fourthly, I shall wash it from the
stain of Popery.
First, To begin at the lowest Stayre of this Division and so climb upwards:
It looks the better in my conceit for its Name and Title, that it is called
Common Prayer. For the better any thing is in Religion, and Gods Worship, the
more excellent it will be, by being public; Bonum quo communius, etc. As the
Heavenly Bodies are more useful by expansion, the Sun most serviceable when
he spreads him widest in our Hemispheare; So Gods service is most serviceable
to him and us by being common, and freely communicating it self to all the
people, thriveth both in the virtue and praise. Solitary and single Prayer is
sweet, and presents the Soul with Security, and Liberty, and Raptures, to
convey her self to God. But Common Prayer is more forcible, and fortified by
Union and agreement of Christian minds. Where so many hands and hearts are
lifted up together, they pull down God among them by force of Arms: Where two
or three are gathered, I am in the midst: Exodus 25.8. Revel, 1.13.
Mat. 18. Mark how intimate he will be to the Congregation: Christ Jesus, the
middle Person of the Trinity, loves still to be in midst. When he was borne,
he was in medidio jumentorum; at twelve years old, in medio Doctorum, in the
midst of the Doctors; all his life, in medio Discipulorum; at his death, in
medio latronum, of Thieves; in Heaven, Angelorum, in the midst of Angels; in
the Church, in medio orantium, in the midst of Orators: etc.

Do you know, what it is to have God in the midst? I fancy something more then
ordinary in the phrase; it is not only his presence, but his yielding and
condescending to their joint desires, it is to compass God in out suits, to
hemme him in, to have of him what we ask and will; (as Soldiers a Prisoner,
that he cannot escape, when they have begirt him round, in medio. So (if I may
use the Metaphor with Reverence to Almighty God) God gives joint prayers the
Day and Victory over Heaven; suffers himself to be taken; and led Captive by
the faithful Devotion of an Assembly.

We seldom read in Scripture, of God thus conquered, and led Captive in single
duties, and duells of Devotion, only twice: Genesis 32.28. Hos. 12.4. Exodus 32.10.
when Jocob got him in his arms by prayer, and would not let him go, and when
Moses bound his hands, Let me alone, God begs to be Released, these single
Israelites prevailed with God. But now every pious Congregation is sure of such
a purchase, Ego in medio; God readily resigneth himself to consenting Souls.
So that those hands which single are too weak for such a Victory, Exodus 17.12.
when Aaron and Hur help them in their Devotion, become prevalent.

Even in Private Families, this Common Prayer, day and night is powerful, much
more at Bethel, the Sanctuary and Temple, where the place it self bespeaks
its necessity: Esa. 56.7.
My house shall be called a house of prayer to all people: where two things;
The Appellation House of Prayer. The Generality of it, Common Prayer to all
people.


God gave the Church her Name, as to Adam in Paradise; and fure he did not
Nickname it, it must not stand for a Cipher. Christ defends this Name, and
Text of the Prophet Esaias, Mat. 21.13.
by his tongue, hand, Repeating, and lashing it into their apprehensions in his
Gospel. Do not they deserve the lash that would disgrace it? God chooses this
Name for the Church above all, that we should choose this work above all.
Churches had not been built but for Public Oratories: shall we rob God of his
intertions, the end to which he gave them? or prefer any thing above that,
which he chiefly commends to us? But ye have made it a den of thieves, faith
Christ. Who? Buyers and Sellers: How? By stealing into the Church, creeping
with their stalls into the House of Prayer: but still they let it be a House of
Prayer. They did not envy, but advance that; and stood there to further it.

But I will tell you of a strange fort of thieves in our days, that will
steal out of the House of Prayer in Service-time: my, will steal the Prayers
out of the Church and banish them, and wound them with hands and tongnes worse
then the traveller. Luke 10.30.


But may not I be mistaken and do them wrong? they love Common Prayers and
Church-Prayers, so they be not Printed, so they be poured instantly from the
Spirit, Memory, and Man. So it be given them in that Hour as the Scripture
speaks, Mat. 10.19. whereupon they challenge the Pulpit for a sudden Service:
they will Frequent those Churches and meetings, where the business is without
bookeresigned wholly to the Preachers present thoughts: they will take such as
God sends ex tempore, Good or bad. Let it be given them fresh, and each day
variety, and they are well: Like Ahimelecks Shewbread, 1 Samuel 21.6.
which was to be set hot upon the Table, in the remotion of the Stale: So if
the Bread of Life come hot each Sabbath from the Preachers Oven, they will
accept it; othewise they are more curious then David, and will not have the
Stale. To correct this vein of Humor in our age, I step to the second Stayre
of my Division.

The excellency of set forms of Common Prayer.
And here, Part 2.
to win more credit to the cause, I shall use this Art, having but slender
Abilities of mine own, I will take some abler Scholars by the hand, to confirm
and lead me in the entrance of my opinion: Two only shall be named, which may
suffice; In the mouth of two witnesses, etc. M. Daniel Dyke, on Psa. 124. Let
Israel now say, etc. M. Attersol, on the Book of Numbers, 6. c. 23. etc. 10.2.
last ver. Where both with one Pen proclaim this conclusion, the lawfulness and
use of set forms of Prayer, and praises in Public and Private, M. Attersol
proves it at large, and answers the objections to the contrary.

I shall commend the practice of set forms from good Arguments, as well as
men. The Arguments are of three sorts: From Scriptures. Reasons. Consent of
Reformed Churches.


We find the discovery of set forms in Old and New Testament, Jewish and
Christian Church. Those two places, Numbers 6.23. Thus shall ye bless he
children of Israel, etc. The Lord bless, etc. which was given to the Priests
for the whole Congregation, to be pronounced at all times in the Tabernacle; It
was appointed to Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting Testament.
And whereas some object thus, ad hunc modum, that is after such a manner not
the same words this is very ridiculous. Then Moses and the Prophets carrying
Gods errand, Exodus 3.13.14.15.
Thus shall thou say unto them, I am has sent me to you: or, The God of
Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, etc. might not say what he said, but must coin
something else like unto it. Moses used one set form for the marching and
ressing of the Arc, c. 10.35. though he knew how to speak a word in season
and out of season, as well as any Separatist. He that offered the Basket of
First Fruits had his set-forme of Confession, A Syrian ready to perish was my
father, etc. David's 92. Deuteronomy. 26. v. ^^.
Psalm was sung every Sabbath day as we may gather by the title, which is as
Canonical in the Hebrew Copies as the rest. Our blessed Savior in the new
Testament, sung a Hymn with his Disciples after the Sacrament, one of David's
Psa. usually practiced on such occasions. And having the fullness of the
Spirit, yet went the third time praying the same words, And gave his Disciples
this set form of Prayer, Mat. 26. v. 44.
When ye pray, say, etc. Luke 11.2. as John Baptist taught his disciples the
like which we gather from the first verse.

Where although he did not always tie them to the words and no more which was
the error of the Waldenses, yet neither did he at any time forbid them the use
of those. S. Paul had copious graces of the Spirit yet he always uses one
form of salutation, before and after his Epistles. S. John in his Revelation
sets down the forms of praises in the Tryumphant Church above; Revel. chapter 4.
11. 5. 13. 15. 3. 19. etc.
In the Song of the 24. Elders, and the Rest; The Song of Moses, and the Lamb,
verbatim; what words they sung, the Hallelujahs, and Doxologies, and will not
set forms of Prayer become the Militant Church here below? So that the
Scripture is not repugnant to set forms of Prayer, but very obvious, which
shows the Ancient practice of it, both in the Jewish and Christian Church. And
as the Synagogue had a Liturgy composed out of Moses and David and the
Prophets by their Predecessors; So the Christian Church has cast her self
into the same mould from her Infancy; as we read still of the Liturgy of the
Fathers. So much of the first Argument.

The Reasons that favor a set form of Prayers,

God the hearer or accepter Of Prayer. The Orator, or Minister the maker Of
Prayer. The people to whom it redounds.
First, Its fond to think that Almighty God loatheth prayers that come often
in the same words, or likes one that has a daily new Edition corrected or
amended, or rather corrupted by the Author: *
His stomach is not so queasie as mame's are, that affect change and variety
of dishes: Act. 17.21.
He is no Athenian Auditor, Acts 17.21. that delights daily to hear some new
thing, and spends his time in expectation of thy invention: He does not listen
after noveltie and variety of words; to hear the soul in a new tune no more
then to see the body in a new dress: If we come every day in the same clothes
to Church we are as welcome. So if we apparel our thoughts in the same
language, *
God is as well the God of the Old-Exchange as of the New: He does as little
affect the changeable suits of service as of apparel, and we treth not such
mutable ears as men. Nay, he threatened to punish those that wore strange
apparel, Zephan. 1.8. and forbad strange gods: So (for any thing I see) strange
alterations in Religion, in our approaches to him: If no other God but me, Mal.
3.6.
why we affect other approaches? I am the Lard, I change not: you may change
and be unlike him so: It betrays a vanity both in our conceit of God, and in
our own souls as (...) we were never the same men before him: I am not I as
S. Austen; we have the same sins to be sortie for, the same suits to beg of
God, the same thanksgiving to pay: And what if we pay it in the same Coin? It
is all one to him, he does not affect the new Mint and stamp of Devotion; that
Jesus Christ that as the same yesterday, Heb. 13.8.
to day, and for ever; will not dislike thy prayers if they be so.

Secondly, In respect of the Orator, whose help this is in a time of need;
every one was not so rich under the old Law, to bring God an oblation of his
own cost and charges: Sacrificium Juge.
there was therefore the continual Sacrifice, which did befriend them all: so
every man is not so well gifted in this case, to pour out a daily Sacrifice of
his own invention; therefore the continual form is a remedy for that want:
though some in the Church are plentifully stored and qualified, yet every
vessel does not runover, every bottle does not burst with new wine: many an
honest man wants utterance, knowledge remembrance language and contrivance,
which are the requisites to the work: These men must betray their weakness, or
leave their Ministry. No, God and man has provided every Pastor a staff to
sustain his infirmity, so that he that like the palsie-man, Luke 5.18.
shakes and cannot go himself to Christ, he shall be supported on others
shoulders the Liturgy of abler men. This is not spoken to excuse the Minister,
and make him dull and larie; no, he has his time and place to show his rich
abilities in the Pulpit, he has work enough to do somewhere else both to
pray and preach, enough to spend himself: I wonder at those Scholars
constitutions, that would refuse this ease and make Enclosure of Divine
Service, that would have nothing open-field for the good of the Commons, but
like greedy Impropriators, enclose all within their own hedge and ditch. The
Priest had work enough to do of his own, Ergo, God gave him Levi to help
him in his service; so our Ministers have what time they will of their own for
the Pulpit, the form of Prayers is given them like Levi for assistance, so
that he that can do all of his own abundance, should be contented with his
Pulpit, and not despise the Deske where his weak brother is gratified.

Thirdly, and chiefly, in respect of the Congregation which hang upon the
Ministers lips at Prayers; and in this case, set forms are most profitable;
and in two Respects, for their Ignorance, and Edification; those two a Minister
must consider, the constitution of their souls, and then how to benefit them.
Now in the first place, a set form suits best with the Countries Ignorance and
their vulgar capacities, for they are not all wiser then their Teachers, though
the proud despisers of our Prayers think so; yet as S. Paul apprehended his
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.2.
Many are babes in Christ, and must be fed with milk, and not strong meat
alone; and will you venture to give the child every day a new breast? It is
thought more wholesome to let it draw the old: Familiarity makes the child in
love with any thing, but Ignoti nulla cupido, no desire to that it does not
know: Prayer oftener heard is better understood, digested, and turned into
whole, some flesh and blood: It is with devotion as with diet, not so good to
taste of every dish, as to feed of one, so Philosophers and Physicians say, and
so Divines: Variety may delight and please, (as Seneca said of reading, Varia
lectio delectat, certa prodest. Sen.
so I of hearing) but constancy and acquaintance brings profit to the hearer.
Those that are skillful in the words and knowing souls, could well endure a
full rich table; but weak judgments would not get, but lose at so high an
ordinary: Therefore we must condescend to the poorest soul, and train up the
simple ones: We must respect Christ's little ones, And how can that be better
then by this familiat method of Devotion? We use to set children Copies and
ruled lines, not suffer them to wander about the Paper; so Precept upon
precept, line upon line, as Esaias teaches us to repeat the same over and over
again: Esa. 28.10.
We must go along with the flock, as Jacob, according as they be able to
drive; Genesis 33 13.14
my Lord Esau may gallop to Mount Seir, Jacob must observe the foot of his
tender children, and flocks, and follow them. The Gentiles desired the same
words might be preached the next Sabbath; Act. 13.42.
Ergo, with more reason, the same prayed; a repetition Sermon is more
unseasonable then repeated Prayers.

The last Argument is drawn from the consent of all Reformed Churches wherein
every Kingdom studieth unity and uniformitie for Gods service, to avoid
confusion, which would arise from humane pleasure, if every man might have his
will: and be their form less or more, like or unlike to ours, yet still they
have some form (as my forementioned Attersol.
Author warrants) Ergo, we are obliged to this, because it is our own, which
is my third Conclusion. But first I must remove some Rubbs out of the way. But
still the Spirit is pretended to suffer injury by set forms, to be stinted,
quenched, and quite cooled, etc. 1 Thessa. 5.19. Romans 8.26.
But is not the Spirit to be seen in Common Prayer, in lifting up the heart, *
in feeling of our wants, and desires of relieving, and laying hold on God, as
well as in ex tempore Prayer? 1 Cor 14.15.
I will pray with the Spirit and Understanding: But thanks be to God, I better
understand the Common Prayers then that I never heard before; I can better say
Amen to them, because I best conceive them. The Minister prays in an unknown
Tongue to the poor Countreyman when he vents what he never heard before.
Secondly, Answ. He prays reading which he may better do then they pray
studying (as they must do) Where is his Zeal, when he has sense to look,
and scarce knows what comes next? But it shall be given in that hour, Mat.
10.19.
for it is the Spirit that speaks in you. Mark what hour that is; of
Persecution, and not of Prayer; of Distress, and not of Peace: God will not
suffer his Church to fall, for want of Truth; that is the meaning of the Text.
By that Argument, we may as well shut out all care and study for a Sermon, as
well as Prayer; For it shall be given us, etc. Set forms do not answer our
wants many times so fitly, as conceived. I answer:

The Excellency of our set form of Prayer: 3. Conclus.
My Charity is at last arrived at home, and I am proud to do my Church that
honor she deserves: *
The greatest glory of our English Church has stood these fourscore years
and upward in her public Liturgy; wherein she has so commended her self
to all the world, that I hear of no despisers but at home. The Nations round
about us have admired our happiness herein, and paid that thanks to Heaven for
us which we did owe. If Calvin and Beza had dwelt here, we had had their
approbation, (as by some Letters into England I conceive) they would have
studied no new Discipline, where they had found this. As often as I look upon
our form of Service, to me it is a matter of thanksgiving, and not dispute.
But since there are such Owies at Athens, that study to defile their own
nests; such male-contented souls, that missing some temporal preferments in
the Church, would deface the spiritual, and be revenged on Gods honor for
loss of their own: Give me leave to do my best to beat back their tongues,
and fling their insolence into their tumultuous bosoms.

I shall advance the excellency of our Liturgy, or form of Prayer, from
three apprehensions.

1. Of the Authors and Authority. 2. Of the Form and Work it self. 3. Of
the Circumstances and Constitution thereof.
First, The Authors and Compilers are unknown to me by name, but you shall
know them by their works, (as Christ faith) and by the age and time wherein
they lived, which are undoubted Arguments. They were those holy men of God that
lived in the days of Edward the sixth, the first Fruits of the Church of
England, the Reverend Fathers of the Church, that struck fire out of darkness
in the days of Popery, and set their faces against the Church of Rome, little
dreaming their book should be requited with the name of Popery for their
pains, that were ready to kiss the Stake in Queen Marie's days, for the
maintenance of this Book and Service.

Here is the foul discovery of our not-understanding Age, that would feign
make men believe that Book is Popery, whose Authors dyed for the testimony
of Jesus, and the defense of this Book. Some of them fled for persecution,
until the days of Queen Elizabeth, and then came home and enjoyed this Book
and Service by her approbation.

There is something to be given to the Authors in such a case; for if our
singing Psalms shall pass in the Church, in reverence to Antiquity, though
Tho. Sternhold, and John Hopkins (some honest Gentlemen) made them, when King
James and Sandys lie by; shall not our Service-Booke be much more honored,
that comes from the Fathers of the Church, whose persons and endowments were
far more Illustrious? But whosoever the Authors were, the Authority is
greater: It is given to us by the highest Powers, which God has ordained in
this Realm by those four Edward the sixth. Elizabeth. K. James. K. Charles.
Princes, and all their Parliaments; so that for any Factor to blast this Work,
it is to pull down all Authority upon his head, and to receive to himself
damnation, Romans 13.

Secondly, The Work it self bespeaks its excellency more then my tongue, or
all Authority can grace it: I may commit it to the world with Salomons
huswise: Prove. the last, last v.
Let her own works praise her in the gates.

Look but upon the Liturgy in a cursorie view and from the first piece of
Divine Service to the last, you shall find it so Divine, that indeed it is all
Scripture; nothing Humane, but the structure and composing. He that has but
tasted the Bible, will soon relish the Liturgy, and say, that it is Mannah
fallen in another Country, Divinity in Humane Dress: so that none can truly
quarrel with this Book, but he that knows not, or hates Divinity; that is a
Stranger, or Enemy to God. Let us bring it to the Test. Mark every word one
Sabbath: Our Prayers begin with one Sentence of Scripture, or other:

[ At what time soever, etc.] Then the Curate moves them to make a general
Confession of sins to God: Ezra 9. to the end and chap. 10.1. Dan. 9.
Nehemiah 9. Israel made often general Confessions In the Captivity. After the
Captivity.


Neither does any quarrel with this Piece in all my intelligence.

The Absolution follows which is proncunced by the Minister alone by a legible
Commission delegated to him, Mat. 16.19. Joh. 20.23.

But here the phrases are offensive,

The Clergy has a Power.

There is Certitudo Potestatis, in the Ministers Office, and Gods Ordinance.
There is Non eventus, in the parties remission.
He knows he has a Power from Christ, but knows not when and where
personally that Power takes effect. Secondly, There needs no complaining here;
for he only appears declarative, in that form of Absolution, and bespeaks
Gods mercy to penitent sinners: as we may safely denounce Gods Judgments to
the impenitent, so pronounce his Mercy to repenters.

[He declares and pronounces to his people being penitent] It is only (...),
Es. 52.7. How beautiful were the feet that brought good Tidings? Esa. 40.9.
Now Zion does but bring good Tidings, and is scorned. Christ has lest the
comfortable Promises of Pardon in his Word, and may not we declare them?
Besides, he absolves in the third Person, not the first; in Christ's Person,
not his own: if you observe the form;

[Hee pardons and absolveth] i. e. Christ: There is He, (...), Potestative.
I, (...), Declarative.


No encroachments here on Gods right, or the errors of the Church of Rome. The
Minister absolves, but not absolutely, only Ministerially and instrumentally,
disposing the penitent to sorrow, and moving God to pity; co-operates on both
sides, applying Actives to Passives, Gods promises of Mercy to the penitent
faithful Soul: He remits not by Physical influence on the Soul, but by a
Moral persuasion; and so no Popery in that.

Then follows the Lords Prayer which is Scripture; some short Sentences, Psalm.
51.15. Open thou my lips, etc. Haste thee to deliver me; Psa. 40.13.
O Lord make haste to help me. The Glory be to the Father, etc. Psa. 40.13.17.
and Hallelujah out of Revel. 4.8. from the 4. Beasts, and 24. Elders.

O come let us sing unto the Lord, David's 95. Psalm. And to countenance that,
observe, That the Jews used to read the 92. Psalm every Sunday, as the Title
shows. Canticle that follows, We praise thee, O God, etc. Ambrose's work.
Canticle that follows, Zacharies Song, Luke 1.68. or David's 100. Psalm.
Creeds: first, the Apostles Creed, whether they made it, or no, I know not, or
made out of them, or made in respect of them, being twelve Articles to the
Twelve Apostles: It is the Pillar of out Faith, and sum of all the Scripture:
The other Creed is Athanasius against the Arrians: And the third, is the Nicene
Creed, against the Nestorians. Macedonians.
Heretics of that Age. The next that follows is the Curates Blessing, by
form of salutation, The Lord be with you; and their care and duty replied,
And with thy Spirit: An excellent form to preserve mutual Obligations each to
other; and this is Scripture, Ruth 2.4. 1 Thessalonians. 1.2. and chapter 5.25.
The three. Miserere's, or calling for of Mercy out of Psalm. 57.1. Luke 18.38.
in reference to the three Persons of the Trinity. Lords Prayer. The Responses
are taken out of Scripture: Show us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy
salvation, verbatim out of Psalm. 85.7. God save the King, 1 Samuel 10.24.
Mercifully hear us, Psalm. 4.1. Endue thy Ministers; Psa. 85.7.
and that answer, Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy
Saints sing with joyfulnesse: Save thy people, Psalm. 132.9.
and bless thine inheritance, Psalm. 28.9. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, Es.
39.8. Psalm. 122.6. The answer, Exodus 14.14. 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Liturgy, these
seem to be the most humane Pieces, (as for Fair Weather, or Rain, and
Thanksgiving for the same) and so they are, and perchance better may be made.
But no Eye, saving that of Ignorance and Envy, would disparage these: They are
innocent and good; and why should any grow wanton of wholesome Food?

The Letanie is the only thing to be suspected for its length and variety,
and suffers much in their Opinions. They say, Service, give me the Letanie; it
is so substantial and powerful, that it is able to make a man devout by
violence; it commands a zeal, and seizes upon the soul of any impartial
hearer.

The second Service (as some call it) it is all one to me, Ten Commandments
appear, Exodus 20,
which concern us as well as Israel. Certainly, there is not any Commandment
but deserves the Lord have mercy on us: A little Prayer that incloseth all;
begges mercy for what it has done against that Law, and disposition better to
keep it in time to come:

It looks Backward and Forward, Miserere and Inclina.

Next follow the Collects for the King and Day, Epistle and Gospel next
succeeding, both the good Word of God, unless it loses its virtue by being
Printed in this Book. After all, the Prayer for the whole estate of Christ's
Church militant; and, The Peace of God at that end of the Book, or S.
Chrysostomes Prayer; and, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ at this end.

Thus I have viewed it in haste, and measured every syllable of Divine Service,
and find it so absolute, that none can justly quarrel with this form but
Giants.

Lastly, Liturgy, the circumstances of this Service, both for Time, Manner,
Method of Prayers: The length is not tedious, the Ceremonies not unseemely, or
unprofitable; the Method is not barren.

First, for the length of Prayer; it is but Hora, the business of an Hour:
which space the Scripture seems to smile on, Act. 3.1. The hour of Prayer
being the ninth hour, all that hour for devotion. Matthew. 26.39. Christ came
from Prayer, and chid his Disciples, What could ye not watch with me one hour?
So long I imagine he was praying. Those that cannot pray one hour without
impatiencie and complaint, will willingly sit and see two Glasses turned, to
hear a peale out of the Pulpit, though it be Nonsense: It is a sign, their
ears are better Zelots them their hearts.

Secondly, The Ceremonies of Service in this case are physical, and do not
only provide for edification of the Soul, but ease of the Body: And whereas a
man might be weary to fit, stand or kneel, so long; the Church has so
equally tempered these Postures of Divine Service, that it will seem a
courtesy to any but a froward nature: There is twice kneeling, standing, and
sitting, and those woven within one another, so that a man needs not choose a
posture to ease himself, if he be pleased to accept one from the Church: The
Church has labored to gratify the body with the mind: For besides this
humane reason they carry a heavenly. Every posture of the body is doctrinall to
the mind; kneeling, bespeaks humiliation: standing, constancy and profession,
as at Creed, and Gospel; sitting, composed attention. The fool teaches with
his fingers, says Solomon, so the wise man with his body: Every gestate is a
Lecture, every limb a line: 1 Cor. 14.5.
There is a carriage to be observed in Devotion; S. Paul bids us, that all be
done to edification. Now, no edification to another, without the body; the body
is the Looking-glass of the Soul; no man guesses at her apprehensions but by
outward demonstrations, an observant carriage in this sense edifies both my
own soul and others.

Thirdly, and lastly, The method is not barren, it is made up Of Praying.
Reading. Thanksgiving.


As the body, (by Anatomists) is divided into three Regions, so the body of
Devotion: There is Oratorie, in Letanie, Prayers, and Collects. History, in
Chapters, Epistles, and Gospel. Praise, in the Canticles, (...).


To bring all to a perfect trial, Conclus.
and to weigh our opinions in the scales of the Sanctuary: Is there any thing
now within the compass of imagination, that may seem to excel this form of
Service? Yes, a selfe-conceited Prayer: This is all one to me, as if a man
should pull down the fair ancient Pictures in a room, to hang up his own
deformity; to throw down all the Kings in Westminster, and preserre his own
ashes above their glorious Monuments: Ask but that man himself, if he will
undertake the quarrel, every time the Bell rings to Church to conceive a
better mold and Copy of Devotion to the people: If he says, yea: take him at
his word: Let us hear his new prayer, and let the world be judge betwixt that
and ours, If no man will undertake to mend this every day, then I am not so
simple but to keep the best: Prove all things, ^ Thessalonians. 5.21.
hold fast that which is good.

And shall this Liturgy now be branded by the name of Popery? Has God shut
our eyes, and are we in the midst of Samaria, 2. King. 6.20. Lord open their
eyes that they may see: We thank God we are at home, and not misled into
strange opinious. But what do these men deserve? Deuteronomy. 22.19. That husband
that raised up an evil report of his wife, was punished by Moses Law, both
with chastisements, and amercements, verse. 18.19. The reason is given, verse.
20. Because he brought up an ill name upon a Virgin in Israel. If a Child
should do so by a Mother, it would be more ungracious; a Husband with more
authority and credit may call his Wife Whore, then a Child her that bare him:
What Children has our Mother brought forth, that bring up a fame, not only
upon a Virgin in Israel; but which is more, their Virgin Mother? That is not
backward to show to all the world the tokens of her virginity, her unspotted
service of God: What punishment these Children deserve, I leave to God and to
his Magistrates. Numb. 14.36.37. Those men that were sent to search the Land,
promised, and brought up an evil report of Canaan, dyed of the Plague: The
Plague has hung many years within our City, and in the Kingdom, and may do
still until the murmuring be gone: Those that give Gods Church a black mark
no wonder if he gives there a blew mark, and visits their sins with his
Visitation.

To touch upon the last part: (...). Part.
Our Divine Service is sarre more from Popery. Quae commu^io? etc. The best
way to prove her Innocence, will be to have recourse to them that stain it;
what makes men say its pure Popery: to take a compass of their envy and
ignorance in this kind; all the presumptions that breed this, aspersion are
reducible to three heads.

The Original of it. The Matter and Work. The Rites and Ceremonies.
Either because, 1. Its taken out of their Mass. 2. Some passage in it shakes
hands with Popery. 3. We conspire in Actions and Rites of Service with them.


All that can be imagined against it, must come within this Circle: Therefore
if in none of these it be Popery, its not at all. To observe my own method,
let us try it in the first test.

First They say, it is taken out of their Liturgic, the Roman Missalls: So these
men conceive, that cannot see afar off as S. Peter speaks: 2. Epist. 1.9.
(...), their eyes are mewed up within the shallow Precincts of time. But grant
it be taken thence, if the corruption be excluded, is it ever the worse to us?
If it be taken out of the Alcaron, Synagogue, Plate, Aristotle, if no
Mahumetisme, Iudaisme, Ethnicisme, Irreligion, out of the Mass, If no
Superstition, or Error, of our Prayers be as good as God expects, or any man
can make, what care I if they were taken out of Hell? I was never taught to
slight a Jewel, though it came from a dunghill, Gold from a dirtie Mine; but
am glad still to see a fair Sun rise from the black womb of the morning:
Prove. 25.4.
Take away the dross from the Silver, and there will come forth a vessel for
the refiner, says Solomon: Take away the Errors from the Mass, and that which
is left is thine and mine.

But these men are much mistaken by carrying their heads too low they know not
the true Pedigree of our Common Prayers, which is older by many days then
Popery it self; and was borne before that Schism came in: For this I would
have Wife men understand, we do not claim any thing in our Church from the
Church of Rome, but above them: We do not like the Israelites, borrow any
Jewels of the Egyptians, but like Laban to Jacob, we search their houses to
see what Jewels they have of ours, which were lest us by the Primitive
Fathers. And dare be bold to say as Laban, Genesis 31.43.
(with a far better title) These Ceremonies be my Ceremonies, these Prayers
my Prayers; as he of his Daughters, etc. For I will never yield that we derive
from them, that we are the Apes of Rome, or consent with them in any thing, but
what they reserve from the Primitive Churches; and that belongs to us likewise.

To conceive this aright, no man can be ignorant that does but listen how the
world went before us, that we and they, Protestants and Papists, were all one
Family of Christ, one true Church heretofore: there were no such names and
distinctions heard of, nor Schisms conceived, but lay in one bosom of a
Church, and served God with joint hearts and minds: This Union was from the
Apostles times, downwards to the Primitive Fathers. To take all along with us
now, do you think there were not Liturgies and Forms of Service then? Yes, no
phrase more common among the Ancient Writers then to talk and recite their
Liturgies: S. James, Athanasius, Basil, and Chrysostomes Liturgy, etc.

Well then, in those Forms of Prayer which the Fathers used, we were both
friends, one Family still. But afterward the Israelites fell out, strove, and
would not be parted, both sides hasted from one another.

We, Mark. 14.52.
(like the Young Man in the Gospel, that night Christ was taken) fled away
naked, and lest all our Forms and Ceremonies behind us; Exodus 2. Genesis 28.
like Moses, quitted the Court of Egypt, and went into the Land of Midian;
like Jacob from Esaus fury, fled and dwelt in Syria, by reason of the
Persecution. All this while the Liturgies of the Fathers by them was utterly
corrupted, and patched up into a Monster of Superstition: by us they were
almost lost, like the Book of the Law in Hilkiahs days, 1 King. 22. v. ^ 2
King. 7.15.
it was hid in a cornet, and all our observances touching Gods Worship, like
the Syriaks vessels, were cast away for haste, and fear of Persecution: At
last, when Religion and Reformation began to look out again, and bear a
face, we began to bethink our selves where once we were, and what the Church
had when we were both friends. And that we challenge now as a Legacy from
our fore fathers; not an imitation and courtesy from a Brother.

As if a Jew should lose his ancient Rites and Prescripts of Moses (as at this
day much is lost in many Synagogues by desolation of that people) yet coming
into the Empire of the Turk, he may epsy many of his Rites and Legal
Ceremonies, though much abused, and thence seeing his privileges, and what
once he had, may purify and compose to himself this form of worship; you
could not the Jew in this case be said to borrow his Religion from the Turk,
but Moses: So we by looking on their Liturgies, see our way the better by
their darkness to arrive at last at the primitive forms of Service. So that I
may say of our Reformers and composers of this Work, Genesis 42.15.
as Joseph's Brethren pleaded for their honesty; Thy servants are no Spies.
Hereby it shall be proved that we are true men, by Antiquity, not Noveltie;
not by Benjamin, but Jacob; we have a Father, an old man; the ancient Fathers
of the Church. And when I see our Prayers filled with Scriptures, Saint
Ambrose, Athanasius, Chrysostom, the Apostles, and Nicene Fathers, I cannot be
so dull, but believe that it is older then Popery, and lived before that
Schism, the substance and matter, if not the contrivance.

Many learned men have showed the antiquity of our Church Rites and Service;
therefore will I say no more here: But only excuse the ignorant in their
conceits, that are apt to foster strange Jealousies of that which is out of
their reach, and older then their idle brains. The Jews had a conceit, that
Melchisedech had no Parents, because they knew them not, in their time: so
people believe this Book to be a Bastard, because they were not the Gossips.
But the Face bespeaks whose Child it is, and proclaims it as like the Fathers
Liturgies, as unlike the forms of Rome.

Secondly, there is no point, nor passage in all Divine Service, that is
Popery, or favors a Tenent of the Church of Rome; I prove it by this
Argument: That form which is taken out of Scripture almost to a syllable, is
not Popery; for it the Scripture cannot defend it from Popery, I have no more
to say. But our form is so: Ergo, the Minor is true, as I have proved by an
Induction of every part: The Conclusion follows, that it is no Popery at all.
And 'though all Heretics make Scripture their Asylam, and shroud their Lies
under the wings of Truth; yet there is difference still betwixt Scripture
speaking, and Scripture made to speak. We do not go about to force a Text
to countenance our form by corrupting the Originals and Translations; but the
Bible freely and naturally offers it self to defend us in our Liturgy.

I know there have been many Objections and Exceptions raised, to make a piece
of Popery appear out of Baptism, Burtall, Letanie, etc. But they have found
a Grave by abler Champions then I: if any chance to stir hereafter, I doubt
not but there will be a * Mahanaim, Genesis 32.2.
An Host of God to meet them.

Thirdly, there seems to be too much affinity betwixt their form and ours;
in Actions, Devotion, Rites, Ceremonies, Vessels, Orders, Crossing, Kneeling,
Surplis, Table, Font, Bishops, etc. we dwell too near them; they look too
like us, or we like them. These men are sickly peevish in my conceit, that
would rather have a face like an Ass, or no body, then an enemy, one whom
they love not. But I will not quarrel about the complexions: Wherein soever
our Services conspire, Rites, Actions, Ceremonies, Vessels, Orders, etc. They
are Ancient, Innocent, Indifferent: Which is enough to quit us in the Judgment
of all Reformed Divines that write upon Ceremonies of the Church.

First, They are Ancient, Jer. 6.16. we do not go a begging for them. England
is called the Ape of Nations for the fashions of the body; but for those of
Religion, I believe she is her self, and waits on none but God and Reason.

Secondly, They are Innocent, if a man (in the Law of God) had taken a woman
Captive of the Gentiles Nation, Deuteronomy. 21. v. 12.
in the Wars of Israel, yet he might shave her head and pare her nails,
bring her home, and take her to Wife: And those Vessels that were defiled,
washing brought many into the Sanctuary. So we have washed our Churches, and
Vessels left us, we have pared their nails, their Idolatry, and Superstition,
and they are clean to us.

Thirdly. They are Indifferent, and so Authority has power to command them,
to Kneel, Sit, or Stand: The Church of her self has liberty to enjoyne the
practice and see it done; to Repeat, Answer, Sing; and if the Papists do the
same, what is that to us? shall we be opposite to Reason and duty, that we may
be unlike them?

Besides the Rites and Orders of Divine Service (I speak of Sparing, Seemly,
Regular, not Superstitious.) They have three Advancements in my breast.

They are the Peace Grace Obedience
of a People.

First, They are the peace of a Church, which lies in Uniformtie. For as the
Doctrine is the Truth, so the Discipline is the Peace; wherein shall we and our
posterities in the Church agree? but in that mold of Regularity we cast our
selves: Therefore let there be Peace and Truth in my days, good Doctrine, and
good Discipline.

Secondly, They are the outward grace and civilitie of a Congregation: they
frame a carriage at Divine Service, which we owe to God and to his house. Love
does not behave it self unseemely says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.
but observes a comeliness and Decorum in Religion. Now nothing does more
civilize the rude-vulgar in Devotion, then this Regulated observance in the
house of God, it binds them to their good behavior.

Thirdly, It is the obedience which we owe to humane ordinances, 1 Pet. 2.13.
All Churches have less or more Injunctions and are obeyed: these are ours, God
speed obedience to them, Let this be the stain of England, no Reformed Church
disobeyeth her Ceremonies but ours; although they are often opposite, yet
Uniforme at home: Walking, Standing, Sitting, Kneeling at the Sacrament, all
cannot be best, yet is all of them best at home; it is strange ours should be
worst still, here is the Reason, we are worst obeyers.

I answer, (...).
no otherwise then S. Paul charge obedience to the Magistrates for
Conscience, sake, Romans 13.5.

Ceremonies are all Indifferent in their nature. Necessary in their practice.


(...) as good have none at all, as every man have the authority to neglect
them.

They are Indifferent, Speculative, in the proposition. Necessary, Practice,
in the use and observance.


Indifferent in se, but ratione pacis, obedientiae uniformitatis to be
practiced, they might be left undone, if Authority had not set a Fiat. Now
Conscience bespeaks a necessity of practice and observance; though opinion
proclaims them indifferent.

My Conclusion is an Apostrophe to God and man: First, Arise O God, maintain
thine own cause, etc. Psalm. 74. 2 last verse. lift up thy feet, etc. ver. 3.
Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion, Psalm. 51.18.

Secondly, Return, return, O Shulamite, etc. Cant. 6.13. How long ye simple
ones will ye love simplicity? Prove. 1.22.23. Take heed of resigning Devotion,
wholly to the humor and pleasure of one man, for fear it be Desolate, or
Ridiculous, Weak, or Wilful; for fear you be guided at last, and fed with
simplicity, or singularity; a Fool or a crack'd-phansie be the bane of the
Church. Take heed of taking away the daily Sacrifice, for fear the Abomination
that makes desolate stand in the room. Do not labor to sweep the Church
clean of Public Forms, Dan. ^.
for fear of bringing in seven worse Spirits of an evil Spirits contriving;
Be not overmuch of wise, Eccle. 7.16.
wiser then God that made the Church a House of Common Prayer, and Christ that
gave it this Form; After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father.

(...).
READER, I intend only to Vindicate my Doctrine, my Copies in the Sudie, and
deliveries in the Congregation; other Articles of malignitie and offensive
language I neglect and leave to the credit of my Accusers; whose persons are so
ill-qualified, their Reputations so low and tainted, that I am sure it will be
more disgrace for any man to believe them, then for me to be accused by them.

FINIS.

