A True NARRATIVE Of some remarkable-Procedings concerning the ships Samson,
Salvadore and George, and several other Prize-ships, depending in the
Admiralty; humbly presented to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
and Council of State, and the Council of Officers of his Excellency the Lord
GENERAL.

By THO. VIOLET of London Goldsmiths. Humbly desiring them to take the same
into their Consideration, it being of very great concernment to the security of
this Nation.

And further he humbly refers himself to his Papers, Petitions and Letters,
delivered to several Members of the Council of State; wherein is discovered
many Designs of Merchants and others, upon fraudulent pretenses, to have
defeated the Commonwealth of all the Silver now coining in the Tower, being
near four hundred thousand pounds: Also an Order of the Council of State,
for removing several obstructions in the Mint; And several Petitions and
Proceedings thereupon, by order of the abovesaid Committee: All which are
humbly presented to your Honors, and to all true lovers of their Country, who
shall Read and take notice of the same.

LONDON, Printed in the year of our Lord God. 1653.

TO THE PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of THO. VIOLET
Shows,
THat your Petitioner, in December last, finding the Commonwealth daily
deceived in several Prizes that had been unduly discharged in the Court of
Admiraltie, and else where since August last, to the value of many hundred
thousand pounds, which frauds, if continued, had proved highly prejudicial to
the Commonwealth, by enabling the Dutch in their mischievous practices to
circumvent and eclipse the glory of this Nation, and all this constantly acted
by some Merchants, and others, by compliance with some persons in trust in the
Admiraltie.

For prevention thereof for the future, your Petitioner did about the eighth of
December last, deliver in writing unto the Lord Bradshawe a Paper, discovering
that at that present time, a practice and combination was set on foot and
acted against the State, by several Merchants, and others, who at that time
(combining with some public ministers of foreign Princes, did endeavor and
plot to put a blind on the Parliament and Council of State, and having the
connivance and assistance of some persons in power and trust for the
Commonwealth and Admiraltie, contrived by fraud, false pretenses and claims,
to get cleared out of the Admiraltie, several ships taken as prize, but most
espicially three rich Ships, viz. the Sampson, the George, and the Salvador, in
which ships your Petitioner had certain intelligence there was many hundred
thousand pounds of Silver, and Merchandise for the account of several people
in Amsterdam, Dort, and other places of the united-Provinces (your Petitioner
having been employed by the late King and his Council, for making known many
secret practices of the like nature unto them) your Petitioner out of his
affection to the prosperity of this Commonwealth, did undertake to the Lord
Bradshawe to unmaske these frauds.

In pursuance whereof, your Petitioner knowing how much it did concern this
Commonwealth to have these abuses discovered and made known, he delivered
several Papers unto several Members of the late Council of State, and to
Doctor Walker in December and January last, which did manifest by what ways
and practices these abuses were daily committed, which service was so
acceptable to many of the Council of State, that your Petitioner had an
assurance from many of them, in the behalf of the Commonwealth, that if your
Petitioner could entitle the State to the Silver in the aforesaid ships, and
make it out by sufficient proof; then he should have all his Estate both real
and personal restored unto him, which is under sequestration upon malicious
and untrue information, or the full value thereof, which amounted unto the some
of eleven thousand pounds, to be paid unto your Petitioner out of the Silver
which your Petitioner should gain to the Commonwealth, out of the aforesaid
prize-ships, which by your Petitioners painful endeavors, and to his great and
vast expense was then accordingly stayed, and proof made to entitle the State
to all the Silver which is now coining in the Tower.

Notwithstanding the strong combinations and designs of some in the Court of
Admiraltie, and some other, great ones in power, to defraud the Commonwealth,
as was intimated by Master James Stanieres letter, and in truth your Petitioner
has run as great hazard of being ruined both in his estate and person, for his
protesting in the behalf of the Commonwealth, against the discharge of these
ships and Silver, which had then, without your Petitioners protest in Court,
been all discharged, and at that time the Dutch had such a party, even in the
Council of State, that by some of them your petitioner was discouraged to
proceed in this business, by which means the merchants were encouraged to
claim, as is well known to many hundreds of Merchants in London, insomuch as
your petitioner was enforced, in the face of the Court to charge ten several
Merchants, who were then all in the Court of Admiraltie, for fraudulent
practices, in laboring to discharge the said Ships; and your petitioner did
then declare to the Judges in the Court of Admiraltie, that if they did
discharge the said Ships and Silver, upon any pretense of any Merchants or
other persons whomsoever, before your petitioners witnesses were examined, they
did not Judge, but give away the Commonwealths Treasure, and that your
petitioner did appeal to the Parliament against their proceedings to discharge
the Silver; which did so exasperate the Judges in the Admiraltie, that they
complained to the Council of State against your petitioner, for endeavoring to
stay the Silver and said ships, and upon full examination of the business
before the Committee of forraigne-affaires, these ships were notwithstanding
ordered to be staid, and your petitioner ordered to prosecute with all
expedition and vigilance, in the behalf of the Commonwealth,, for entitling
the State to it, which he has done accordingly. Your Petitioner therefore
humbly prays your Honors to be pleased to consider the greatness of your
petitioners service, in staying the Treasure in December last, and discovering
the frauds of some in the Admiraltie, at such time when the Hollander was
domaniering in the Downs, and how much it did weaken them and disappoint their
occasions, and what an advantage it is to the Commonwealth to have the State
accomodated with near four hundred thousand pounds of the enemies Treasure,
in this conjuncture of time, for your petitioners doing thereof he has
contracted the malice of many hundred Merchants.

In consideration of all which Services, your Petitioner humbly prays his
Sequestration may be discharged, and his estate both real and personal
restored unto him, or the true value thereof paid him, as was promised your
Petitioner upon his undertaking this business, or that your Honors would take
such Order for your Petitioners relief in the Premises as by your grave
Wisdoms shall be thought agreeable to Justice.

And, as in duty bound, your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
A Copy of a Paper presented the eighth of December 1652. to the Lord Bradshaw
and Master Allen, by Thomas Violet, who the same day delivered the said Paper
to the Council of State, and the Council upon several debates before the
Comittee of Foreign affairs Ordered, the 13. of December 1652. the said Tho.
Violet to assist, on the behalf of the Commonwealth, the prosecution in the
high Court of Admiralty against the ships Samson, Salvador and George, which
had then aboard all the silver now coining in the Tower, and that he should
repair to D. Walker, Advocate for the Comonwealth, and acquaint him from time
to time what he had to offer on behalf of the public in reference to the said
Ships.
MAy it please your Honor, having understood from some Merchants that the
Council of State have referred the Spanish Ambassadors claim to a great
quantity of Treasure, which he pretends to be his Masters, the King of
Spaines silver, and all the silver belonging to his Masters subjects (unto the
Admiralty, there to receive a Judgment according to the equity of the cause.)
In all humility I acknowledge the Justice of the Admiralty, and that I believe
they will do their utmost, both for doing the Spanish Ambassador right, and to
see the State shall have what belongs justly to them.

But withal I think it my duty to acquaint you, that the proceedings in the
Admiralty must go according to the forms of that Court, except the Judges
receive some extraordinary direction from the Parliament or the Council of
State in this weighty business; now I humbly say, the proceedings at Law will
take so much time up that the Merchants will send into Spain for new cocquets,
and new Bills of lading, and for money no doubt they will get a
post-Registring, and I am confident there are many in London can write and
counterfeit Bills of lading and Cockets and never send into Spain for them;
besides, I have good reason to believe the hearts, purses, heads and books of
accounts of many Merchants of London, will be all ready to assist the
Dutch-Merchants to cozen the State of this Treasure; and truly my humble
opinion is, that if any public ministers can by their policy get all this
silver out of the Parliaments hands, that then they will be extraordinarily
rewarded by them of Holland for salvage of this Treasure, it will be beyond
Commission, money or factoridge.

And as the conjuncture of time stands between us and the Dutch this present
month of December, some public Ministers in England will have the
profitablest employment of any Ambassador in the World, if they can christen
all Hollanders goods and Treasure with the name of Antwerpians, Ostenders and
Dunkirkers; or by his or their power can make all goods laden in Hamburgers or
Hance towns, that those goods must of necessity belong to Hamborough, when I
have certain proof to justify the contrary, and I humbly desire, before the
ships be discharged, my witnesses may be all examined, and upon the peril of
my life I will prove that in these ships there are great quantities of silver
for the Account of Hollanders, and people of the united Provinces.

I having formerly been privy to the proceedings of Merchants that have
transported gold and silver out of this Nation, and also acquainted with
several Merchants that have yearly imported silver from Spain, I thought it
my duty to acquaint you, that if the Parliament and Council of State be not
very vigilant in this business; and of the proceedings about the silver, they
will be cozened of their right, for there will be no stone left unturned both
by the Merchants beyond Seas and here, to circumvent the State of this Treasure.

This that I say, I speak not out of ill will to the Hollander, for there are
several of the Council of State did me the honor to ask me what I thought of a
Peace or War; I ever, with all humility, told those that asked me; that
there could never come a more safe nor honorable thing to the State, then to
conclude a safe and honorable Peace with Holland, yet though I loved them very
well while we had Peace, I respect them not now during the time of War,
after such a rate that they by craft should cozen the State of this great
Treasure, which is now taken, if to the uttermost of my power I could hinder
it, or ad any thing to the stop of it; and knowing what great mischiefs would
come to this Nation, if I did not make your Honors acquainted with these
practices; I think I am bound, as any Englishman, not to fear the face of
any, though I know it will get me ill will, and a shrewd turn, even with some
great ones in power; this service shall bear me record how faithfully I ever
loved and do love my Country, and convince all those that have misrepresented
me to the State, that after so long oppression I may have my Estate restored;
and this is the true reason wherefore I humbly present this Paper to your Honor,
vizt.

My Lord, when the King of Spaynes fleet returns to saint Lucar, there lies
out always beyond the bar of saint Lucar, which is out of the command of the
Castle, several ships of all Nations, and these lie there purposely to take in
silver and gold, coucheneele, and all other India commodities so stolen aboard,
which some years there has been imposed above twenty in the hundred for
Registring.

These goods being shipped, as aforesaid, then the Master of the ship that
takes them in, usually signs three Bills, beside the Register of his own
books, which in time of War are many; and every Captain, Master or Purser
must keep and carry with him one, to enter all parcels and accounts: One bill
of these three the Merchant usually sends along with the ship, with a letter of
advice to the Merchant, what he has sent him, the marks and weight, or number
of Ingots, or pieces of eight, and the marks and number of all bails, fardels,
chests or caske: Another of these bills is sent over land usually by the Post,
with letters of advice of such goods, gold and silver, and those bills a
shipboard they alter according to the course they are to steer; if it be
through the channel of one two or three enemies, they will show several bills
of lading and books of entries, but those bills that go by land are always
the true bills, the other bills in these times are usually amusements to
defraude the State, but usually those that come by the Post are the true bills,
but for those on shipboard usually the Merchants know a month sooner then the
ships coming by Sea, what gold and silver or commodities his Factor has
shipped, and in what ships, and gives order accordingly at Dover, or other
Ports in this Nation, for sending his goods to several places beyond Sea, or
to London, according as advice shall be given him, where the best market is;
the third bill is always kept in the Factors hands to sue the Master, if he
does not deliver the Goods according to his Bills of lading: And if the Master
deliver the Goods, the receipts on any one of the true Bills of Lading
discharges the other two Bills.

That the State would be pleased to desire any public Agents that lay claim,
to show the original Warrants (for sending away this silver from Spain, either
at Cales or S. Lucars, or other Ports) bills of lading or his original
Letters, such as he or they will stand upon his or their honor are the true
originalls out of Spain, taken at Saint Lucar or Cadiz, and that exact copies
may be taken by the Admiralty, and this to be done forthwith, and that they put
in all their claims they make to any Goods, gold or silver in these ships very
suddenly, upon their honor to be just and true claims without any guile or
fraud.

That the State will be pleased to take order, that the Admirallty strictly
examine all the chief Factors and Mariners of these ships, what Country men
they are? where there abode is? whether they do not go by false names? and to
give a just answer at their peril; and which of them belongs to Holland? and
whether they have made any Bills of Lading falsely at Sea, or in the Downs, or
since they came into England and antedated the same? if done, by whose advice?
and who were privy unto it? or have defaced or torn leaves out of their books
of Invoyces? or altered their Bills or Books since they came from Spain? and
who were present at the doing thereof?

That they give you an account where each of them lie, and at whose house in
Saint Katherines, or elsewhere, what Merchants in London they know, or have
communication with? and who are their Factors? and set down their names, where
each particular man dwells.

That they declare upon oath, who they know has sent beyond Seas to have the
silver and gold and commodities claimed by the State registered in Spain, since
the stay of the treasure here, and what men in London have been advizing and
assisting that way, and where they dwell, and what Notaries or others in London
have given them advice concerning the premises.

What Merchants they know have promised any public Ministers of State any
sums of money, and what agreement or satisfaction they should have, if he,
or they, could get the silver claimed by him or them, into his or their hands,
and sent beyond Seas; to name what Merchants that live in England, and what
Nation soever have had any treaty or agreement with them, or any public
ministers or others, for the purpose and intents aforesaid.

My humble suit to your Lordship is, that the Council of State would be pleased
to use all the expedition they can in the business, and to settle some strict
order in it, for if they give the Merchants time to send to Spain, the
Merchants will there have what things registered, and upon whose account they
please; and seeing that here they cannot have one penny, if that we prove the
silver and commodities belong to Holland, they are and will be constrained to
go to Spain, and there, though it be a confiscation to send away silver
before it be Registered, without the Kings License, yet the great Officers and
Statesmen to have a good share, in all probability will get the Kings pardon,
and to give what Certificats shall be desired, as they have formerly done in
Otho Georges case (provided the Dutch will pay well for it.) To prevent which,
there is nothing but expedition, before they have learned their lesson from
Spain; if these Merchants which claim this silver would speak truth, they
know almost all this Silver is for the account of Amsterdam, Dort, and
Netherland merchant. My Lord, if the State in the examination of these
particulars will command my service in this business, by Gods assistance I
shall give you a good Account, I shall with all readiness attend it faithfully,
and to the uttermost of my power do my duty; for to have this plot discovered
highly concerns the Commonwealth; I have been privy to their secret
practices of transporting of Treasure to all parts of Christendom, out of this
Nation, therefore may know the way to unravell this secret combination sooner
then others; for I am assured no man in this Nation has had the opportunity to
know these ways as I do, for I was employed in these discoveries, by the late
King and his Council many years; and my Lord, an old Deere-stealer is the
best Keeper of a Park.

It may so chance that it may be pretended that all the silver that is in these
ships, and not Registered, is the King of Spaynes, as by the law it is, if it
were seized in Flanders, or the King of Spaynes dominions; but this pretense if
set on foot, will hold no water here, as I humbly conceive, for we are not to
answer to that point: the Merchant had been liable in Spayn or at Dunkirke to
have answered the Law for transporting treasure before it be Registered in
Spain, but coming into our harbors, as a prize of Holland, and they being
enemies to this State, we are not to be accountable for what these goods or
moneys owes the state of Spain for want of Registring them, nor any person
suffered to claim more then is Registered in Spain, and the State have, clear
satisfaction of the real truth of that claim; for they, having cozened the
King of his duties, intended to bring this treasure home to each Hollander upon
their private account; and this question, I humbly desire to have your honors
put to any foreign Agent that claims, whether he or they lay claim to the
treasure as forfeit to his or their Master, for want of Registring, or that he
or they claim it as all shipped for his Masters and his subjects proper account,
upon clear and just bills of lading in Spain? my humble Petition is, that
they be desired to answer upon his or their Honors that point.

The Dutch Merchants that are concerned in this silver, are so well versed in
making false entries, double bills of lading, Certificates, Charterparties, and
all other frauds of this nature, that if they have time given them to hatch
their eggs, there shall be neither a bar of silver nor pieces of eight but
what they will bring a Certificate out of Spain for the Registring it, either
for the King of Spaynes proper account or for his Subjects or Hamburgers; they
will find any Nation to lay claim unto it, saving the right owners, which in
truth is the Merchants of Amsterdam and Netherlands, and you may rest assured
the Dutch will rather set on foot any pretended claim, either Spaniards or
Antwerpians to deceive us, rather then that the English should have it they
care not who has it, for they know we shall lay all this money out in powder
and shot for them, and they no doubt will leave no stone unroled to prevent us
in that particular, if great care be not taken in this business.

All the Premises considered, I humbly desire your Honor that the Council of
State may know of these my most humble propositions, and take such Order in it,
as the greatness of the cause requires, for the safety and benefit of the
Commonwealth, all which I humbly submit to your Honors great wisdom, and
remain

My Lord, your humble servant THO. VIOLET.
December. 8. 1652.
Monday the 13. of December 1652. At the Council of State at White Hall.
ORDERED, That Master Thomas Violet do assist in the behalf of the
Commonwealth, in the prosecution of this present Suit, in the high Court of
Admiralty, against the ships Samson, Salvador and George. And that he do
repair to Doctor Walker, Advocate for the Commonwealth, and acquaint him from
time to time, what he has to offer on the behalf of the Public in
Reference to the said Ships.

Ex. John Thurloe Cleark of the Council.

A Breviat of several Papers delivered to Doctor Walker, and several of the
Committee of Foreign affairs, since tht 13. of December 1652. to the 27. of
January 1652. according to an Order of the Council of State of the 13, of
December last, concerning several prize-ships, and the silver and merchandise
therein, with a Letter to Doctor Walker the 29. of January 1652. concerning all
the Premises.
Dr. WALKER, My service presented.
SIR, the Bullion, Money and Merchandise at present under question in the ships
Sampson, Salvador and George, depending in the Admiralty, is of so great and
considerable a value, and of so high concernment in president, and other
relation to the Commonwealth, and most of it so probable to prove lawful
prize, if timely and duly prosecuted, and the passengers in the said ships, and
other witnesses I have presented to Master Bud to be examined; it behooves the
State, as I humbly conceive, not to suffer these ships to pass, as many ships
of great value since the war with the Netherlands have done, to the
unspeakable damage of this Nation, it being no new thing for the Hollanders,
in time of war, to sail under the colors and names, and with the cockets of
Hamborough, or some other of the Hanse-townes, for they did it all the while
they had wars with Spain, nor for the ships of the Hance-townes, Ostenders
and Dunkirkers to be transporters of Dutch goods through our Seas, from and to
all parts of Christendom, especially Spain.

Nay, many times, the better to countenance, their ship or ships shall be built
in Holland, and formerly sold to some friend or correspondent in Hamborough,
Emden, Lubeck, Dunkirk, Ostend, or the like, and for the better color called
the Lion or Dove, etc. of some of the aforesaid places; when really and actually
it belongs to Holland or Zealand, and for instance whereof one of the ships now
in question, styles it self by the name of the Hamborough of Hamborough, and is
certainly known and will be proved to belong to Rotterdam, and so no question
will many more of the ships under arest prove to belong to some town of
Holland, and the united Provinces, when strictly and duly examined.

Nor is it any new practice for public Ministrs of other States to make use
of their function and Masters Roabe, to befriend the subject of their Allies,
in case of the like nature of clayming Treasure and Merchandise, wherein the
native trade (as in this) may be concerned, or were it not but for the
advantage of salvage in such cases conived at, and many times by the
instructions of their superiors allowed to public ministers, as perquisites
of their employments they many times gaining more by such avenies, then by
their constant salaries.

I have often heard sir Lewis Dives say, that when he lived in Spain with his
father in law, the earl of Bristoll, and the Lord Cottington, they did do the
same for the Dutch in Spain as is now offered for the Dutch in England.

And I believe there are some foreign Princes agents in England at this time,
that understand to make their particular profit, in this conjuncture of time,
as well, if not better, then either the earl of Bristoll, or the lord
Cottington did in Spain; and upon this ground and for this end, it is more
then probable that some public agents appear in this present question in the
Admiralty; not that either their Master or his subjects, in all likelihood, are
otherwise concerned, nor he or they warranted therein, but only for their
particular profit.

Sir, this is not a common cause, and I see you take it so by your care, you
keep your word, you bid me find proof and you will hold the ships and silver,
let some of the Judges talk what they please, you will discharge your trust.

Sir, the state of Spain is rarely known to have sent or transported any bars
of silver, or coin on their own or other ships whatsoever, to the prejudice
of their Mint, that being most absolute contrary to their laws, which makes
transporting money death, without the Kings original License; had the
Merchants one, they would have showed it before now. True, it is often stolen
away by the Dutch, which is done without the Kings warrant, bills of store, or
public allowance, and so you will find this is, and thereby the more liable
to question, and upon strict examination it will be clearly proved prize: if
the Dutch should cozen us of this money now they are ranting in the Downs, the
Commonwealth would suffer extraordinarily.

Therefore all persons that claim this silver, I humbly conceive, ought to be
pressed to declare specially and particularly, whether he or they pretend the
money, or bullion, or any part of it to be the King of Spaynes peculiar
Treasure, or his subjects? and if so, he or they ought to show some special
and authentic Warrant or Order of his or their Masters or Officers for it,
Registered in the ports of Spain, and also to prove that by authentic
witnesses, by some of his Masters subjects, at the place or Port of S. Lucar or
Cadiz, and attested here by like original bills from the officers of the
Customs in Spain, which bills of lading correspondent, and their authentic
duplicats, with letters of consignement suitable, the Pursers books of
entries, with all the particular and respective marks agreeing with the bills
of lading, bills of store and letters of consignement, and all the marks of
the bars and bags duly Registered, either for the King of Spain, or his
particular subjects. If they cannot spell and speak all this perfectly, justly
and truly, at the Port of saint Lucar or Cadiz, they may fail of their ends
for all their confident clayming, and the like might every Merchant pretender
do, or fail of his.

Nor can the Articles (of the old League) supposing it to be renewed and
confirmed by this Commonwealth, excuse the ships Sampson, Salvador and George,
under question, from a search, as is pretended they ought to be, unless they
first prove, that those ships, silver, and all the lading do really belong
unto his Master or some of his subjects (nor those of the Netherlands) which I
humbly say, he or they will never be able to do, and I have sufficient proof
to the contrary, if I can but get my witnesses examined: I have about eight
witnesses to examine; and the Merchants will pack many of them away now they
hear I have used to send some of my Intelligencers amongst them into St.
Katherines and other places.

In the mean time, if either his Master or his subjects receive damage by any
public ministers claiming silver which is none of theirs, but belongs to
Holland, the Commonwealth is excused and free, and the public minister must
bear the blame, if any, using his Master or his Subjects title to the silver,
when they had no title or interest therein, which if that design had taken
effect, all men may see the damage that would acrue to this Nation thereby,
whatsoever may be pretended to the contrary.

Sir, The law takes no notice of Words; but legal proof and evidence where a
public minister bears Parol against the interest of the Commonwealth amounts
to no more then a private man's: for when a claim is laid to all this silver by
foreign Agents, as the King of Spain and his Subjects silver, I shall prove
part of this silver belongs to some Merchants of the united Provinces, our
mortal enemies, and a small part of this silver belongs to some Merchants in
London.

Sir, If I find a man tripping for a penny, I will trace him for a pound; I
fear not to speak a truth in this particular, it is for the safety and well
being of the Nation that makes me speak so earnestly.

Sir, though in Court and matters of State, public ministers be allowed a
Credence paramount, agreeable to their letters Credentiall of foreign Princes;
yet neither those Letters nor their Function shall, I humbly conceive, allow
them any, neither the lest privilege or pre-eminence (beyond civility) in any
Court of Justice against the Commonwealths title in this business of the
aforesaid Prizes and silver.

1. The Spaniards are as rarely found to trade out of their own Territories,
all writers say (or between) upon Strangers bottoms as their King himself, and
so the goods not likely to have been theirs originally, or by original
consignment; colourably perhaps they may, that is since their seizure consigned
to some of Antwerpe to defeat the claim of this Commonwealth, they being
commonly partners with the Amsterdammers, that being usual in cases of the
like nature, especially where so much respite of time has been given, and so
much money stolen out of these ships, which shall in all likelihood be employed
to bribe out of the States hands these ships, if they can fasten on any, in
power, that will be so wicked to receive bribes, if my humble advice had been
followed, the stealing this silver had been prevented.

2. The like assuredly may be affirmed touching the money bullion and plate in
the ships in question since the natural subjects of Spain dare as ill, or
worse, transport any silver, as strangers, the crime being alike penal to
both, but the subject in a worse condition, if he adventure, being a man of
estate, because he remains in the Country, when the stranger perhaps never
returns to answer it, if discovered; after he is out of the Country, as upon
publication of this business many will not dare to return into Spain, lest
they forfeit not only their own particular, and their friends estates, but also
their lives.

But Sir, suppose it may be objected, that general negatives, from never so
many instances, of never so universal non uzans, amounts not to the face of
one particular affirmative proof in contra; yet it cannot be denied for reason,
and so I humbly conceive, ought to be granted, that some such distinct,
particular and signisicant proof in a cause of this high nature and
concernment to the profit and safety of this Commonwealth, ought first to be
made of the lading of this silver, and that from the original Port of Cadiz or
S. Lucar, under the Kings Seal, or from the Duanas there, before any credit
can be given to generals, against so known, constant and universal custom of
frauds daily practiced against this Commonwealth, as I have discovered
concerning these Prize-ships before mentioned.

Sir, I have made some of the Council of State acquainted with the several
ways, how the Merchants cozen the State about their prize-ships and goods, and
they are very apprehensive of it, and I know some of the State will call this
business to a strict account, therefore I humbly desire you therein, still to
continue your care as you have done.

Sir, truly if at the first those public Ministers that claimed had produced
original Warrants from the King of Spain, the attestation of the Ports of
Cadiz and S. Lucar from the Duanas there, by authentic witnesses, that this
silver was shipped for the King of Spain or his subjects proper account, and
that all that was claimed was really true, and made that the ground of their
exceptions against the proceedings of the judicature of the Admiralty, and
therein had appealed to the Council of State or Parliament, my humble opinion
is, that perhaps their demands might have arived at a fairer issue then now
they may have reason to expect.

And (by Gods assistance) they shall have a quick and a vigilant eye on them;
for night and day, I and my Instruments shall watch them, so that some merchants
and others may live to wish they never had meddled in this silver business, and
this I will prosecute according to my Order faithfully, though it cost me all
that ever I have in the world; I know I have ventred my life in this business,
and I will not pluck back my hand let my hazard be what it will.

Sir, whosoever travels, and will enter the confines of another Nation, though
in amity; by the Civill-law, that is the law of Nations, it behooves him to
carry with him a sufficient Pass, declaring from whence, and what he is, to
what place bound, and when demanded by any public Officer to make that known
and proved, or upon refusal, or for want of such a pass, he is at discretion
liable to be arested and imprisoned until he clear the doubt and give
satisfaction to the law, but if it be proved he has made a false Pass, or
that he be of another name or Country then he pretends, he may be hanged
for a Spy.

The like Law governs at Sea, the Sea-mans ordinary Pass for his ship, is his
Cockets, I mean true ones, not counterfeit and feigned; his true bills of
store, bills of lading, letters of consignment, Pursers and Supercargoes books
fairly and truly kept for his goods; not such bills as Otho George presents,
and if any Master of a ship be found at Sea without these, or the chief of
them at least, he shall be taken under the notion of the Law for a Pirot or
common enemy; if he have any such and will not show them when required at Sea,
or that any of them be justly to be suspected by the Commander that requires
them, such Master my be brought before the Court of Admiraltie, or a Court of
Delegates for his trial, and if there he refuse to clear himself; ship,
goods, and every part of his lading, by the respective ways of proof and
warrants, before mentioned; or that the Captain, Master or Purser have torn,
imbezeled or flung away any letters of advice, or bills of lading, or forging
false bills, or names, if proved, or any miscarriage as aforesaid, such
refusal and practices in other Countries is accounted a high contempt to the
authority of the Nation, by which such Court sits, and for a sufficient ground
to an imediat confiscation.

Sir, if this be not made a Law in England, for the future, and the like for
any Master or Purser of any strangers ship, passing the Seas of this
Commonwealth, upon summons, that shall present unto the Commander or Judge,
false bills or Cockets, and to conceal any part of their lading or faculty,
and not to discover the proper owners to whom, or from whom they are consigned,
this Nation will dearly find much of that which might help to maintain the
War will go besides, and the State will still be deluded by the Dutch, as
they have been to the value of about two Millions since August last, for it is
an usual custom with traders of all Nations, especially the Dutch and
Easterlines, in time of War, to carry to Sea, as many Cockets as Colors, and
as many several bills as they fear enemies, or question, and if they be
surprised, can at a very short warning procure and counterfeit what may serve
their turns: And this you shall find to be the true state of the ships
Sampson, Salvador and George, with all their lading and silver.

Wherefore, and for which cause chiefly, the strictness aforementioned is used
in other Nations, viz. to prevent collusion. Sir, in France, one parcel of
goods found consigned to an enemy confiscates the ship and goods. In Spain or
Holland, a barrel of butter, or a case of Pistolls, consigned but as a present
to a friend shall do the like, and I hope the same civill-lawe we receive from
them shall, by us, be put on them now these ships are in judgment before you
in England; it is for the honor and safety of this Nation I press, and I see
you do your utmost, would I could say so of the rest in trust in the Admiralty.

Sir, it is to be feared, that if this Commonwealth do not make some
necessary additions to their Sea-lawes, and give some new Rules and
Instructions to their Court of Admiralty, to prevent the many abuses put on us
by the Dutch, in the business of the States prizes, other Nations will gain
advantage by our neglect, or over easines; it appearing, that for want of such
amendment, or at the least not understanding those laws in force by our Sea
Commanders, etc. many a rich ship has escaped their hands, and safely arived
in Holland since the War (which the Dutch began) to the value of above one
million of money by that way, and no less to be suspected that the enemy by
his subtle taking advantage of the old, and too gentle practice of our Court of
Admiralty, and chiefly by their not being put to plead specially, may probably
get these that remain now under question to be freed likewise, if not timely
looked unto, and thereby the State farther abused and prevented, the enemy
encouraged and enabled, whiles our own honest Merchants sit at home and
break, or thrive not (a fatal mischief to this Commonwealth) our enemies
gayning, upon the matter, what we lose or let pass; and to break this
confederacy, the State must make sharp laws, and then see them strictly put
in execution; the means left for remedy is, securing at present the ships and
goods and silver, which lies under question, and I conceive ought carefully to
be looked after.

Sir, I find some in power and trust forward to gratify the Dutch in this
particular, to the unspeakeable damage and hazard of this Nation, to prevent
which, I humbly propound this way, viz.

1. Sir, I offer in my own name, as for the intrest of the Commonwealth, to
protest against the late acts and proceedings of the Court of Admiraltie, to
pray respit of Judgment, and to appeal to a Court of Delegates, according to
the Statute

2. A Commission being granted thereupon to some select, knowing and approved
Persons, whereof some chief to be of the Coram, and before them proving the
daily imbezelment of the silver, the unsafety of the goods, and the apparent
danger of their imbezeling, whiles they remain on shipboard, which by
affidavit, and other good testimony may easily be proved. Sir, I pray that the
goods, money especially, may be brought a shore, and secured in safe ward,
until the cause be returned, and for better information of the Delegates, that
all former proceedings of the ordinary Court of Admiraltie touching the
premises in question by name, may be returned into that Court, and my self
Ordered and empowered with a large Commission in several respects, for enabling
me to do this service.

This cause being agreeable not only with the laws of this Commonwealth, but
consonant to the customs, laws and uzance of all other Nations, in cases of
like eminency and doubt, the conveniences thereof will be.

1. It will put a stop to most of the abuses and inconveniences before
mentioned, without blemish to the former proceedings of the Court of
Admiraltie, redeem the cause from that loss it is now in danger of, and
disappoint many men's expectations, who have laid a design to cozen the State
of this treasure, and lay a foundation to Rules, and give matter for further
instruction for the government of that Court, a business of great concernment
to the safety of the Nation, in this present conjuncture of time.

2. Whiles the cause is but removed into a higher Court and depends there, in
order only until a legal trial, neither any public Agent, nor other
pretender whoever can justly complain, especially they having given so great a
cause of jealousy, by claiming more then their own, in owning other men's
treasure, and by refusing to produce special proofs for what they pretend to,
it being at worst but lex talionis, we find the same measure abroad in all
like courts of Christendom at this present; I humbly conceive the affairs of
the Commonwealth do not stand in such a posture, that they should suffer
themselves to be cozened of four hundred thousand pounds now I have discovered
the fraud to them; this money will save taxes, it will set the Mint on work,
and fill the Commonwealth with money, and for every one I displease I shall
please a hundred honest men, that are true lovers of their Country.

3. Sir, whiles the plate Bullion, or other goods remains aboard the ships,
and in the Masters custody, they pretend an Interest by possession, and taking
hold of some ill-customes and prejudicial Rules of our court of Admiralty; you
the Commonwealths Advocate are put to prove the goods in question to be our
enemies.

Sir, the goods and moneys being once brought a shore, and in the States
p^session, or under ward by order of the Justice, they which were Defendants
before, must be Complaynants, and of course prove their Interest, especially
and upon authentic testimonies out of the books of customs and Records in
Spain, whereby many an advantage will accrue in evidence for the States
avail, the money for want of sufficient Warrants to transport it, or of
special Laders to own and justify the Bills of lading to be truly and
justly entered at S. Lucar or Cadiz, will undoubtedly be most of it the
Commonwealths, and if the money be gained, certainly much of the goods will
endanger the same fortune.

4. In case any difficulties should happen in proof or scruple, upon any thing
offered in evidence on the other side, the Court may thereon take time for
better information by intelligence from abroad both in Spain and Holland and
other parts, and no question much advantage themselves by overtures of proof on
the contrary part.

5. Honored sir, suppose the Commonwealth should at present have any treaty of
friendship in hand, which they would not have willingly obstructed, or
disordered, or any enemy whom they would willingly invite by kindness, which
seldom succeeds to expectation, the Duch being a stubborn people, here are
many helps for both advantages, of both kinds, they may gratify themselves or
friends as they please, and pendente lite, take what time they please for
either.

6. And lastly, In case, in the mean time, the Commonwealth shall have any
present use of this treasure, they may take an occasion at the cost of a
complement, to draw all the Bullion and silver through their Mint, the worst of
it being only to promise restitution in case any part of it should prove
lawful prize; a convenience which no state in Christendom having like occasion
would bauke, or deny it self, in so fair an opportunity, for which there wants
no presidents in the best times of government under Monarchy, in several
presidents in Queen Elizabeth's time, from which it can be no disadvantage for
this Commonwealth, to take some examples, especially in things belonging to
foreign affairs,

THO. VIOLET.
29. January 1652.
Several of these Papers, with some alterations and additions, I also
delivered to the Committee of foreign affairs; to Doctor Clarke, Advocate
for the Commonwealth, M. Wilson, M. Oxenbridg, and M. Sparrow, Commissioners
for Duch prize goods, with a list of about fourscore witnesses, part of them
have been examined in the Court of Admiralty, and some of them told me they
could not be allowed to have put down what they said to the examiner, and three
of them, holding their hands before their eyes, said; that Spanish silver had
put out the eyes of some in the Court of Admiraltie, and if there were not some
stricter care taken about the States prizes, the Hollander would laugh in his
sleeve, to see how they daily had cozened us, and these persons were Master
Long and his two sons, all three ship Carpenters, and people that had for
about thirty years lived in Holland, and came over in obedience to the Act
that calls ship carpenters home out of foreign Countries, and they knew some
of these ships that have been discharged the Court, to be Holland ships, and
several of the mariners and masters of ships to belong to the people of the
united Provinces; I carried them down to view the ships that were under
question, and we found many shot and torn, and yet these ships have been
discharged; I seeing the combination of several of the Court of Admiralty to
neglect their duty, did sit up together many nights and days, and never slept
in that time, with the assistance of several men to write night and day; I did
by Gods assistance and my intelligence get full proof to entitle the State to
the silver, to make it all prize, as appears by my Letter to master David Bud,
the Proctor for the Commonwealth. fol. 90. 91. 92. 93. THO. VIOLET.

Doctor Walker,
SIR, you may be pleased upon perusal of these Papers to see clearly that I
look not after the coining of the silver, but will also (by Gods assistance)
prove that almost all the silver in every one of these ships remaining here is
lawful prize, the like I shall do for almost all the goods a shipboard,
notwithstanding some in the Court of Admiralties forwardness for the clearing
of them; truly Sir, I humbly tell you, the English proverb will prove true in
this particular, That soft fire makes sweet Malt, and I am sure in this
business, haste has made wastes in so high a nature, that if it had not been
timely prevented by me, the loss had been irreparable to this Commonwealth,
to have had this silver come unto the Duch, in this conjuncture of time.

Sir, for the treasure a shipboard the George, Sampson, Salvadore, the Peter,
the Michael, and several other ships that came in company all together from
Cadiz, the thirteenth of October 1652. that is a thing impossible but that the
State must have for lawful prize above nine parts of ten, of all the Treasure
aboard any of the aforesaid ships, if you pursue the order of this note I
herewith send you; Sir, it is for the safety of the State, their well being
depends thereon, that makes me so earnest in this business night and day; I
have it from knowing hands, that it is agreeable to the civill-Lawe, by prime
men that know by practice in foreign Countries these things to be true. And
therefore I do most humbly recommend them to your just care, as you have most
worthily done, for which I give you humble thanks: Moreover I humbly tell you,
I have proof the silver in these ships was stolen a shipboard by night by the
Spanish Bravos, or Boatmen, some of the ships lay four months in the Harbor
of Cadiz, only looking for the Spanish fleet, and this is known unto all
honest Merchants an ordinary course for the Hamburgers every year to do the
same, and that these ships stole in by night, for sixteen or seventeene nights
together, several parcels of silver, and that the silver so stolen a shipboard
was in returns of goods sent to the West- Indies, which were goods sent by the
Hollanders formerly, and by their own confession if the silver were taken, it
would be confiscated by the Commonwealth of England, also it will be prooved,
when the said ships came away from Spain, they all stole away without leave.

Sir, these things according to my order from the Council of State, I humbly
present unto you, for the service of the Commonwealth, and remain

Sir, Your humble servant to command, THO. VIOLET.
London, 29. Janu. 1652.
For Vincent De la bar, Esquire, at Dover.
SIR, and my most true friend, I received yours of the first of January, in
answer to mine of the 26. of December, I find that your urgent occasions call
on you to stay at home for the present. Sir, I am most tender of you, as my
respects bind me for former civilities. Sir, I conceive we have enough
witnesses at home, here at London, about that which I am required to do by the
State, for their service, if not, I shall be enforced to make a journey into
the Country to Dover. I have sat up seven nights and days within these three
weeks, about the Salvador, the Sampson, the George, which ships have about
four hundred thousand pounds of silver, and I shall prove it Duch silver;
Master Brames will intimate the business unto you how it stands; pray present
my service to your Lady, and to Master De la vall, when this business shall
come under an examination at Dover, I shall be careful to do you all just
respects, I believe I may be in few days commanded to come down unto you in
one behalf I am glad that I have an opportunity to see you, the other part is
concerning the greatest business in this Nation, in relation to the silver
ships that are brought in as prize; in short, you will find that there is a
general Imbargo, and I will by my witnesses, make all the silver in the
George, the Sampson and the Salvadore prize, when I shall see you I will tell
you more then I will write.

London, 9. Janu. 1652. Sir, your true friend Tho. Violet.
I must suddenly speak with Master Thomas De la vall, therefore I pray let him
know it; Ralfe Colline, Charles Valey senior, Charles Valey jun. Will. Dunston,
Michaell Dehuz, James Younricks, and have them all examined about these
prize-ships and silver, and the States of Hollands Commission to guard these
Hamburgers from the English-fleete, I pray you have a care what Bills you
accept, for you will find this business will break a great many Merchants in
Holland.



For Arnold Brames, Esquire, at Bridge by Canterbury.
MY most noble friend I should have waited on you on Wednesday, at Dover, but I
am commanded by my Superiors to obey them in London; Sir, the business I spoke
last unto you of, I am confident since I parted from you that I have done my
discovery, we find enough proof out of London to do that business, so for
the present I shall not have the happiness to wait on you, but within few
days I think to receive order to come down with Master Charnock unto you, I
have writ so much to master Vincent Delabar my most worthy friend, I have
diverse times prayed to God to make me in such a condition that I may really pay
my vows, that is to give you my life and fortune at any time, in requital of
your great civilities, and rest assured I do not desire any inconveniency
should come upon you, or yours, in any business I have a hand in, but if God
should so order it, I would venture as far as my life to serve you really, so
far as the States just intrest be not hindered, and I know you expect no more,
for my faith is engaged to follow this business to the uttermost. Farewell,
The Prince of Merchants.

Your most obliged friend THO. VIOLET.
Land. 8. Jan. 1653.
I sent post haste for master Edward Watkins to come from Dover to assist me
in this business, about the Silver in the prize-ships, and I thank him he
came up post presently, which has much obliged me, and though the Parliament
have taken away his place these four years past, yet he is as nimble to make
these discoveries as ever he was, and he has all his old instruments. Truly
Sir, I should have won your wager, if you had laid, about your old friend Otho
George, you will see he will not clear his Silver so easily as you think,
for I have both him and others fast in a trap, and this you will find true; I
pray have a care what Bills you accept from Amsterdam, for this business will
break a great many there, vale. THO. VIOLET.

Thomas Violet makes Oath.
THE fourteenth day of December 1652. about four of the clock in the
afternoon, he met with Sir Sackvile Crow in whitehall, he told the Deponent,
that the Spanish Ambassadors business was to lay claim to the Ships and
Silver that were stayed by the Parliament, and the said Sir Sackvile Crow
further told this Deponent, that within a few days he had some serious
communication about the business with master Pompey Calendrine, a man he knew
that was well versed in all the subtleties of Trade, for that he was brother
in law to Philip Burlamacke, and his booke-keeper for all his accounts by
exchange; since he had an employment in master Prideaux office, and managed
the Letter office for master Attorney general; Sir Sackvile Crow, after
several arguments pro and con, the result of all was, that Pompey Calendrine
said unto Sir Sackvile Crow, that upon his own knowledge the aforesaid Pompey
Calendrine knew that all the silver in the ships claimed by the spanish
Ambassador, was and is really belonging to the Hollanders, and people of the
united Provinces, and holding up his hand said, does this hand belong unto me,
so truly and really, to my knowledge, does all this silver belong to the
Hollanders, though the Spanish Ambassador claim it.

This Deponent further says, that Sir Sackvile Crow wished the Deponent that
he would take some order to get Pompey Calendrine examined of the truth of
this, for it is of great concernment to the State; This Deponent further says,
that friday the thirtith of December 1652 this Deponent waited on Sir Sackvile
Crow, and found him at his lodging in the Tower, and there this Deponent told
Sir Sackvile Crow, that according to his desire this Deponent would move and
Petition the right honorable the Committee for foreign affairs, that a
Letter should be sent unto him to attend the Committee of foreign affairs,
but I would not but first come and wai^ on him, to see if he did not find I
had taken his ^ence aright, concerning what he told me about Pompey
Calendrine; whereupon he said to me I had, and that if he were commanded he
would justify a great deal more, that to his knowledge Pompey Calendrine had
reason to say what he did, for if the Ambassador of Spain had not proceeded
according to the strict rules of the Admiraltie; Sir Sackvile Crow knew then
that there was fraud, knavery and roguery in the Merchant.

That if the Committee of Foreign affairs would be pleased to admit him to
speak his knowledge in this point, and they to appoint some of the Judges of
the Admiraltie to be by, he would make it clear unto them, and taking out the
engagement, bad me read that, and told me, since he had taken the engagement,
he would be as true to them as ever he was to the King, and whatsoever his
opinion was formerly, he had not received such obligements from the other
party to suffer upon his skore, as he had to be a sufferer for his father,
and if the Committee for Foreign affairs pleased to hear what he could say
unto the Judges of the Admiralty in this point, he made no question but it
should be to your satisfaction, and a great service unto the State, and that
he would attend the honorable Committee in this business at a days warning,
and bid me return this answer with his humble service.

THO. VIOLET.
The. 1. Jan. 1652.
THis Affidavit I delivered to Alderman Allen who communicated it to the
honorable Committee of inspection, and they carried it down to the Committee
of Foreign affairs, who presently ordered a Letter to be sent to Sir
Sackvile Crow, and also Ordered the Judges of the Admiralty to be there, with
Pompey Calendren, whereupon the Committee for Foreign affairs examined
Pompey Calendren before the Judges about the same, who at first denied the
thing, but being pressed by the Lord Bradshaw, Sir William Massam and others of
the Committee, to consider before whom he was, and to recollect himself well,
and seeing Sir Sackvile Crow affirmed it, and much more to be true, the said
Calendren confessed he received letters from Amsterdam that did acquaint him
with what he had spoken to Sir Sackvile Crow, and that he had the Letters by
him and that he acquainted master Attorney-generall formerly with the contents
of these Letters, whereupon the Committee required master Pompey Calendren to
attend Doctor Walker with the Letters the same day, which he did accordingly.
THO. VIOLET.

To the right Honorable the Committee for Forraigne-affaires, delivered to the
Lord VVhitlock and Sir William Massam.
May it please your Honors,
THE seventeenth of December, 1652. I Tho. Violet came into the Court of
Admiralty, at the request of the Commissioners for Duch prizes, to assist in
behalf of the Commonwealth, against all prize-ships depending there, and had
their Warant to authorize me therein, besides your Honors Warant to assist
concerning the silver-ships, Sampson, Salvadore and George, in the Court of
Admiralty, I produced my Warant, and delivered it in to the Judges in that
behalf.

That day there was appointed by the Court seventeene ships to be discharged,
containing three thousand four hundred tonns, being all richly laden with
silver and merchandise, worth many hundred thousand pounds; the Judges would
discharge them, and though I showed them many reasons, as appears in my book
formerly put forth, fol. 75. 76. 77. 78. yet some of the ships were discharged,
and though I told them, that in my eye, in the face of the Court, there were
about ten Merchants, who by combination with the people of the united
Provinces, did color the Duch prize-ships silver, and all sorts of
merchandise, yet some of the ships goods and merchandise were about the 17 of
December discharged.

The twentieth of December, 1652. I waited on the Committee of Foreign
affairs, and made them acquainted with what had passed in the Admiraltie,
thereupon I was commanded by the honorable Committee, that what I had to
present, I should deliver to Doctor Walker, the like Order master Thurloe
delivered me from the Council of State, and that thereupon the Judges of the
Admiraltie, and Doctor Walker should consider of my Papers, and report their
opinions to the Committee of Foreign affairs; this Order I received from the
Lord Whitlock and the Lord Bradshaw.

Thereupon, because I would take witness what these Judges did, I desired
master Edward Watkins and master Charnock to go along with me to Doctors
Commons, for that Doctor Walker and the Judges had appointed me to consider of
all my Propositions, and would take special care, as Doctor Stephens said in
the business, when we came at the day appointed which was about the twenty
fourth of December, Mr. Bacon was out of town, Doctor Exton not well or would
not be spoken with, for I perceived he did not like my coming to him about the
business of the prize ships, and Silver in them, nor my staying them.

Thereupon Doctor Stevens moved to put the reading of my Papers off till
another day, I told Doctor Walker that, for my part, I saw there was such
proceedings in the Admiraltie, and the Commonwealths business in the
prize-ships stood upon such a point that the State might be cozened of every
penny in the prize-ships upon a day or twos delay, both all the silver,
merchandise and ships, which were worth many hundred thousand pounds, I told
them though the Court had given them a discharge, yet God be thanked they weee
not gone, and that I would make it appear that a great part of those prizes
they had discharged were Duch goods, and the number in all then in England were
about forty ships, according to my intelligence, and that the ships that were
of the Hans-Townes were laden with several parcels of goods that belonged to
Holland, and that the Commissioners for Duch prize-goods, had done well, and
great service for the State, in not obeying the decree of the court till the
truth was found out, notwithstanding their Decree the ships at present were all
of them in their several Ports of this Nation, and could not get away by
reason of the States-Generall Imbargo; and before the Imbarg should be taken
off, I would make the State acquainted how the business was managed about
their prizes in the Admiraltie. I told doctor Stevens that the court of
Admiralty had never so great a business before them as the Silver and these
prize-ships, thereupon doctor Stevens went into doctor Walkers chamber, and I
took master Edward Watkins and master Charnock, to be my witnesses, and
master Charnock read over to them, all my papers, which took up more then two
hours time, I was so weak with sitting up several nights, that I was not
able to read them. When they were read, I asked doctor Stevens and doctor
Walker what they thought, and whether they were not satisfied by my papers
there read, and witnesses, of the danger, damage and mischief this
Commonwealth would suffer, if that these very ships, which the court of
Admiralty had discharged had gone into Holland; and both doctor Stevens and
doctor Walker, looking earnestly one upon another, doctor Stevens said to
doctor Walker, what shall we do in this business? I told them that I humbly
conceived it did concern the court to consider well what they did in that
business either of the silver or other prizes, and that whoever had a hand in
the discharge of the ships, I would call them to an account in Parliament, if
they let one of the prize ships, or the silver in them go, till my witnesses
were examined, and thereupon I delivered a list of my witnesses to doctor
Walker, and told him I would sit up night and day, till I had finished drawing
up Intergatories, so that they would assign me a cleark or two of the Court;
they assigned me master Bud, the States Proctor; I asked doctor Walker whether
he did not know most of my witnesses, for they were the principal Merchants in
England that trade for Spain and Holland, he said he did; thereupon I told
him that I must have the viewing of the Intergatories and liberty to add more
witnesses after the Clearke had put them into a form, and sorting them to such
and such men as I know can speak to the particular points; I told them I must
have a view of all bills of lading, and other Papers master Bud or the Register
had, that this was a business I had been for many years versed in the like
kind in the Starr-chamber against the transporters of gold; I told them of
many defects in the proceedings of the Court, and that the States not mending
the proceedings in the Admiralty, had given occasion to many duch-skippers to
cozen this Nation of millions of money for want of a strict Rule in the court
of Admiralty in that behalf.

Thereupon Doctor Walker replied, the discharge of the ships was none of his
judgment, the Judges must look to that, he had looked faithfully, to the
uttermost, as far as he could by his place; Doctor Stevens desired doctor
Walker to go along with him to the Council of state, and that there they would
desire the Council that the general Imbargo might remain, till the court of
Admiraltie had made a review, and examined the witnesses that I delivered into
the court; and that I should have a view of all Papers concerning the Prizes
that were depending in the court of Admiraltie.

But Dr. Walker replied, that those that had adjudged the discharge of the
ships were to look to the stay of them, and that he perceived that their
judgment for the discharge would be called unto account, and that therefore it
was best for Doctor Stevens who had a hand in the discharge, to go presently
to the Council of state, which he did, with master Edward Watkins, master
Charnock and my self; where Doctor Stevens desired the Council, that
afternoon, that the general Imbargoe might be continued; and Ordered my
Witnesses in the mean time to be examined; how well that Order has been
performed, rests now under examination, and Doctor Walker delivered formerly
some of my Papers to master Bud, where I pressed with much earnestness his
careful dispatch of my Papers. This discourse was in Doctor Walkers Chamber
about the twenty fourth of December 1652. in the presence of master Edward
Watkins, master Charnock and my self; and doctor Walker told doctor Stevens
he did eve^ think at one time or other the State would have a revieu, and
that made him ever careful nothing should lie at his door, for he would
clear himself.

The names of several witnesses I delivered in to doctor Walker and master Bud
to examine for the discovery of the duch prize ships, presented to him about
the 24. of December 1652.

James You^ricks Daniel Skinner Abraham Stock John Perrot Mr. Buddier Arnold
Brames. Vincent De la Bar Tho. De la Vall Tho. Waade Edward Ranger
Dover Factors for the duch Merchants of the united Provinces, to examine them
about these prize-ships depending in the Admiraltie, the sixteenth of December
1652.

Adam Laurence Abraham Dolens Pompey Calendrine Anthony Ferrence Master
Curcellis Abraham Culline Deric Host Master Beck Master Sion James Staniere Mr.
Depester Solomon Morris John Vanderberg Lucas Jacobs Master Rushiott Antony
Fernando Michaell Castle William de Fisher Giles Vandeput Peter Vandeput John
Delens Tho Curtoys Lucas Lucie Jacob Jacobs James Bove John Sasse Francis Sayon
William Vanburge.
Merchants, most of them strangers, dealing for the people of the
united-Provinces, as their Factors, living all in London, to examine them about
these prize ships.

Richard King. Nathan. Wright. Tho. Jennings. Roger Kilvert. John Bland.
Stephen and Richard Slaney. Daniell Fairvacks. Isaac le Gaye. Hugh Sowdon. Tho.
Boon. John Tivil. Mr. Pickeringe. Francis Lenthall. Thomas Butler. Moysis
Goodiar.
These are all eminent English Merchants trading for Spain, to examine them
about these ships and the customs of Spain, concerning the registring of all
silver and other particulars of these Prizes.

Ralph Colline. Charles Vale sen. Benj. Stoman. William Dunston. Mr. Culline.
Edward Ash. Alderman Dethick. Mr. Jollie. Tho. Rich. Mr. Long and his 2 sons.
Charles Vale jun. John Perine. The Surgion of the Sa^pson Rich. Scott. Bernard
Clauson. Philip Brown.
Merchants, Mariners of several places, and others aboard the Ships Sampson
and George, to examine about the silver and Prize-ships.

Tho. Viner. Alexander Hoult. Rob. Cordwell. Samuel Moore. George Day. George
Snell.
Goldsmiths in Lombard-streete, that usually buy the gold and silver of the
Merchants; to examine them about these ships, and silver they bought about
Christmas last, and of whom, and if they will tell you the truth, then it will
be found that almost all the money coined about December and January last, has
been stolen and conveyed a shore out of the prize-ships Peter, Sampson,
Salvadore, George and Michael, to the great damage of this State.

John Foster John De la Bar John Day. Gregory Wilshire John Baker.
Authorized Brokers that deal on the Exchange for moneys.

James Hoore Thomas Burch
Clearks of the Mint. Edw. Watkins, late head searcher of the Port of London
May it please your Honors,
THese witnesses I delivered unto Doctor Walker the day abovesaid, and I find
not one witness produced in Court by doctor Walker, for the stay of Otho
George his ship Sampson, Salvadore or George, and the rest of the silver-ships,
but what were my witnesses, which I delivered in to doctor Walker, and Master
Bud the Proctor, and Master Doreslaus before they were examined in Court, I
delivered to doctor Walker several Papers according to my Order from the
Council of State about the spanish-silver, and the ways used in other
Countries, which Rules and practice of Merchants I had from many eminent
traders from several parts of this Nation, and from beyond the Seas, besides my
own experience; doctor Walker all the days of his trial, made use of them to
the full, and all the duch Merchants storm at me, and some of them threaten
my life, as being the only instrument for the stay of the silver, and I am
confident doctor Walker cannot deny it, but these Papers I delivered unto him,
showed him more the present customs and usages of Merchants beyond Sea, upon
the fraudulent practices of Merchants of this age, then all his books of the
civil law, for the old books of that law discover not the hundredth part of
the present tricks and practices of Merchants in this age, especially such
cunning merchants as the duch now are, and doctor Walker did confess at
several times both before master Edward Watkins, master Charnock and my
self, that for many frauds and subtleties of the duch Merchants and skippers,
set down in my Papers, their ways they have to cozen the State of these duch
prizes, there were a great many frauds there in my paper discovered, which he
believed are daily used, which by the present Rules of the Admiralty the Court
could take no notice of, for they went by a Rule, and if the Parliament would
have those frauds prevented for the future, he thought it very necessary that I
should present the same to the State, and that an Act should be made to prevent
it, especially during this time of War; and doctor Walker did not deny but that
many duch prize-ships, till the State enlarged the Rules of the Court of
Admiralty, have and might be cleared, and after go for Holland; and that if it
pleased the Parliament to give stricter Rules for the Court of Admiralty during
this War, and make it an Act of Parliament, then no man could or should make or
press the law further for the Commonwealths advantage then he would, and that
I should see; and he did order master Bud to let me see what writings and
proceedings he had in this business of the prize-ships and silver.

But as I honor doctor Walker for his great pains and care, I do as much
blame master Bud for his carriage, for when I first entered on this business,
some friends of mine told me they had a jealous eye of master Bud, and indeed
I did several times tell doctor Walker, that I would complain of master Bud
when I saw time, for several days in the Court some times Letters not
translated, sometimes Records not to be found, and upon my complaints doctor
Walker told master Bud of it in the Court of Admiralty before the Judges, and
said that he saw the business of the silver ships might come to a review by my
prosecution, and he would not have master Buds miscarriage in the business of
the silver lie at his door, and wished master Bud to mend for the future.

And although doctor Walker appointed master Bud to advise with me about my
Papers, and to let me see what Bills of lading and Papers I would, concerning
the prize-ships, such as master Bud had in his custody, concerning the silver
prize-ships, and all other prizes depending in the Admiraltie, the sixteenth of
December 1652. yet the said master David Bud never did let me come to have a
view of any of the bills of lading or Papers in his custody, though he
appointed me many times to have a sight of them; and because I would be near
him, I took lodgings not far from his house, in Bishopsgate-streete, and
continue them to this day.

May it please your honors, if I had seen the Bills of lading and books of
Entries, and all other Papers, according to doctor Walkers direction, I had
stopped many a ship that has been discharged, but that would have hindered
some Proctors of their fees, for I am credibly informed, it is ordinary for the
Proctors to put down in their Bills, besides ordinary charges, 40. l. 50. l.
and 100. l. upon the clearing of a Prize-ship to the Merchants and owners of
the ships.

I say if it be not prevented for the future, it will bring great ruin on this
Nation.

The State should find out (I humbly conceive) by diligent enquiry, the true
reason, wherefore so many Duch Prize-ships have been let slip out of their
fingers, after they have been brought into this Commonwealth with so much loss
of blood and charge, and blown away in a breath, for the profit of particular
men.

I humbly desire Captain Bishop's Letters from beyond Seas, may be produced at
the Council of State or Parliament, and there you will see what work has been
done by some in trust in the Admiralty.

May it please your Honors to avoid that I should not be isntrumental to
spoil this trade, Master Bud the Proctor, though he has had order and himself
promised me several times, yet he would never show me any of the bills of
lading, or papers concerning any ships depending in the Admiralty the 16
December. 1652. though I have been with him, and sent my man to him several
times, to have seen how many ships there were under arrest in the Admiralty the
16 December 1652, he has promised me twenty times, but never performed.

When I went to see your Prize-ships, between London and Wollage, there went
with me to see in what condition they were in, Mr. Paul Smith, Cap. Brock, Mr.
Long and his two sonns, all three Ship-Carpenters; and we looking both on the
inside and outside of the Duch prize-ships, we found many of them rent and
torn, which by the Law, if they fought in the channel of England against the
States ships, they are prize; and for this I refer my self to Master Reylye's
Records in the Tower; and thereupon I made my appeal in Court, in the behalf of
the Commonwealth, and have a great many presidents out of the Records in the
Tower, upon the like case it has been done by others, to which Records I
humbly refer my self. And I have caused the copies to be attested under Mr.
Rylies hand; he can satisfy you what pains and charges I have been at in that
business, yet several of these ships have been discharged, and they are daily
laboring to discharge the Morning Star, a ship laden with about forty thousand
pounds in silver, which fought in your channel. And finding your Court of
Admiralty would discharge many of these prize-ships, I appealed in the behalf
of the Commonwealth, and craved respit of Judgment till my witnesses were
examined: The like I did for the silver ships Sampson, Salvador and George, and
all the thirteen ships which I was aboard on by order and entreaty of the
Commissioners for Duch Prizes the 14 December 1652. The Duch Prize
Commissioners had under their charge a great many other ships besides these,
about forty at the least. I humbly desire the whole business may come under a
strict examination before a Committee of the Council of State or Parl. I
humbly desire also, the Commisioners may be ordered to give me a particular
account what ships were in their custody the 16 December, the Masters names,
and where they now remain, and what number of these ships are discharged out of
this Nation; unto whom; and the time when: And when I see a perfect account
from them, I shall humbly acquaint your honors how your business now stands.
It is very much for the safety of this Nation, for the State to keep a strict
account of this business (...) the Admiralty, as your honors will find upon a
strict examination; for if the State had kept a strict eye on all the ships
that have passed out of their hands since August last, and examined the bottom
of this business, they would have had millions of treasure in their custody
that is now in Holland; and the people of the united Provinces would have been
necessitated to seek for peace, because they could not otherways maintain
trade, and without it they cannot subsist: there must be some strange
connivence with some of your officers in the Admiraltie, or else this mischief
had been prevented, if all men entrusted had been honest. I pray see my book
fol. 99. These things I humbly submit to your honors.

THO. VIOLET.

To the right Honorable, the Lord Bradshaw, these humbly present.
May it please your Honor,
I Have left with Colonel Harbert Morley this day my Petition to the Council
of State against Otho George: I humbly desire your honor to take notice, if the
Counsel do not take some present order in it, to consider what encouragement
my self or any man that serves the Commonwealth in the discovery of the Ships,
silver and Merchandise now brought in as Duch prize shall have when they shall
be assaulted in the streets with Stilettoes and Poniards from Captain Otho
George, for being isntrumental to do the State service: I have been advised
by several friends for this eight days, not to come to the Exchange or
Admiralty, to avoid that which Otho George, within these few days, offered to
do to another man (the Surgeon of Otho George ship) which has not been, nor
can be the hundred part so isntrumental to entitle the State to the silver and
goods in the Prize-ships as I have been. The Surgeon of Otho George's ship has
discovered the silver in the ships to be Duch-mens, and Otho George's bills of
lading counterfeit: I pray let the examinations taken about this business be
sent for to the Council, and that will inform you at large.

I humbly desire your honors just assistance for a speedy Order about this my
Petition, it being of very great concernment to the Commonwealth, to take a
speedy order in it, to punish Otho George and restrain his insolence.

Your Honors humble servant, THO. VIOLET.
25 March 1653. I have heard about June last the Surgeon is dead that accused
Otho George. there is no question but some had order to give him an Italian
figg; but before he died he was examined before the Lord Mayor, and in the
Admiralty; his confession against Otho George is upon Record, about the silver
in all the Prize-ships that came together from St. Lucars in Spain.



To the right Honorable, the Council of State, THO. VIOLET
Shows,
THAT your Petitioner having by order of this Council assisted in the Admiralty
against the ships George, Sampson, and the Salvador, and several other ships;
And that the Court of Admiralty has judged the onus probandi to be put upon
the pretenders for the said ships and lading.

And that since your Petitioner has been engaged in this service, your
Petitioner has made several discoveries of great concernment, which are so
large they cannot be contained in a Petition, and the Councels time so
precious, as your Petitioner humbly conceives that the whole Council cannot
spend with convenience so much time as will be requisite to take an exact
account of so weighty a business.

Your Petitioner humbly desires your honors to appoint a Committee to take a
particular account of your Petitioner, what he has done since the 16. Dec.
1652. in this business, and that the Committee may be empowered to enquire
concerning all the aforesaid prize-ships, and what obstructions has been or
are depending in the Court of Admiralty, and to consider of some effectual
ways for removing them.

And whereas there is no particular and true account what gold, silver or
Merchandise is remaining on shipboard the Samson, Salvador and George, and
several other ships, so that by this means there can be no account kept by the
State of what treasure is a ship board, whereby the State has received much
damage, and will daily receive more, and that the security of ^0000. l given
into the Admiralty for the silver and goods a shipboard, is of no consideration
to the treasure aboard the aforesaid ships, and as long as the silver remains
aboard the State shall never find what silver and gold shall be clandestinely
stolen and imbezeled away, and if it be proved, the State shall only have
parchment for the damage in stead of moneys, the persons bound being duch
factors, so that if the State will be secure for the future, there is no other
course but to land all the Silver, and keep it in some safe place.

And whereas there are some of the commodities a shipboard, as Tobaccoes and
other Merchandise that are perishable, that your honors would appoint a
Committee to examine that business, and to take order that no Bales or
Fardels, upon any pretense, may be discharged till they be carefully viewed in
the Custom-house, and a true and exact Inventory taken both by Commissioners
and Farmers, these Merchandise, being generally false packed in the Indies.

That whereas your Petitioner has been the first, and principal Instrument
to discover all the frauds of Otho George, in his Bills of lading, and several
other abuses and practices, concerning diverse prize-ships in the Court of
Admiraltie, whereby your Petitioner has contracted a deadly hatred against
him, by the said Otho George, your Petitioner has been enforced, for the
safety and preservation of his body, to swear the Peace against Otho George,
the twenty fourth day of March, 1652. before master Recorder of London, and is
an humble suitor to your Honors that such farther directions may be given in
that behalf, that your Petitioner may be secured from being murdered, for
making this discovery against the aforesaid ships, your Petitioner having for
several days absented himself, both from the Exchange, and Court of
Admiraltie to avoid the mischief.

And if the State will not take some special order against Otho George, for
his assaulting, and offering to stab any such Persons that have, or shall be
isntrumental in doing the State service in this particular abovesaid. Your
Petitioner leaves it to your consideration, whether it be possible to have
your business done?

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
This Petition is referred to the Comittee for Foreign affairs. 26. March,
1653.
Mr. Isaac Doreslaws,
SIR you shall find by these Papers here ^sed, the true reason wherefore I do
not come to the Exchange or the Court of Admiralty as yet, till I am secured
against the force of Otho George upon my person; you know what I told you at
the Still yard about him; I told the same things to my Lord Bradshaw 16 days
ago of Otho George.

Though I am not amongst you, I have a careful eye of the business, and by my
intelligence see when I am absent. My good friend, that is an Art will cost you
many years study before you can attain to it, and is not to be done but by
many hands and at great expense: I pray let me entreat you that you would be
very careful, that when this business concerning the Prize-ships comes under
an examination, that nothing may rest at your door that is not like your self:
you have many temptations, and I had rather lose my right hand, then you should
do any thing un worthy of your self in this business: I have good ground for
what I speak; I give you this hint out of the affection I ever bore you: Truly
I am promised, from some you know well that are in power, this business of the
Prize ships shall have a strict examination; and when it comes to account, I
know it will light heavy upon some that think they dance in a net: I am not
idle but have a strict eye on this business of the silver; you know by sad
experience what it was in your fathers neglecting and slighting the advice of
having a special care of his person; and truly I know this very Otho George
has been in irons in Spain for his mad pranks; and though I know there can be
nothing done but by Gods permision, yet I will not tempt God, when I have had
certain admonitions from my special friends to prevent the giving of an
occasion of meeting with Otho George for the present.

I have taken all lawful ways, and shall see further what the Council will
do in it. About my estate which we spoke lately of, you may rest assured I
will not neglect this opportunity of getting satisfaction for it out of this
discovery, and that I expect and desire your just assistance in it. You desired
me to send you the particulars of what has been taken from me, which I
herewith send you: I ask nothing but my own, which is eleven thousand pounds,
which has been unduly taken from me these ten years past, and I could never
get a trial. If you should ever have such a value taken from you, you would, I
believe, think as I do, that it ought not to be taken from you without a
legal trial; pray send me word where I shall meet with you, and the hour,
and I will come and speak with you; for I desire your advise about some
business, and I am confident you will give it me as freely as ever I gave you,
which was ever to the best of my skill: I pray remember my service to Doctor
Walker, and tell him the reason why I do not, as yet, come to Doctors Commons.

My Petition, which I herewith send you, is referred to the Committee of
Foreign Affairs; you being acquainted with them all, I shall desire your
friendly assistance therein.

your loving friend Tho. Violet.
25 March 1653.
These following Papers I left with my Lord Bradshaw, Sr James Harrington, and
Mr Allen, about the 6th of February 1652.
May it pleas your Lordship!
I Most humbly present unto your Lord ship these papers enclosed; that your
Lordship and the Council of State may see in what a posture your business
stand's with some of your Officer's of the Admiraltie: truly my good Lord, the
State shall find it was a strange providence that I came in to be engaged in
this business about your silver prises; for upon all the papers and witnesses,
and other transactions it will be proved clearly, I, and my Instruments have
saved the State the silver in the ships Sampson, Salvador, and George.

If your Lordship shall have the patience to read my letter to Mr Bud your
proctor for the Commonwealth dated the 24th of December last; you will see I
found him out at the first, and truly it has cost me a great deal of time to
track his actions; God be thanked I discovered it timely or else some public
Ministers of foreign Princes, and Mr Bud with Mr Roe the States Solicitor might
have served the Commonwealth, as some ^encers do in a prize, make a great deal
of nois with drums and flags about the Streets to draw company, but the
agreement was made with the fencers how they shall share the money.

It is a strange posture your whole business stand's in, in the Court of
Admiraltie; when I see a convenient time, many dark deeds shall com to light,
that some men will wonder how it is possible I should ever get Instruments to
fathom the bottom out.

A great many things which I intended to discover, must not be seen, or known,
till I see the sky clear; for I find great divisions even in your own counsels
about those prizes.

I only rely on your Lordships faithful promiss before Mr. Tho Westrope, that
you would see I should have just dealing, and full satisfaction from the State
for my service in this business concerning the silver ships; Samson, Salvador,
and George.

My heart ake's to see what water run's by your mill, and you never know it;
the truth is all will be naught, and com to a sudden mischief, if it be not
speedily prevented: there must be men of experience employed as well as zeal,
for there may be many godly men that have not experience to act in this
business; and where you employ one to keep an eye on this business, you will
find ten of the ablest men in London, will be little enough, and you would
get a hundred times more then the charge.

My Lord! you have had ships worth many a hundred thousand pounds slipped through
your Fleet, and some of them had convoy to Dunkirk and Ostend, and all the goods
carried to Amsterdam; you have had Hamburgers, and other Hance-Town ships had
convoys from your Fleet, upon pretense they were free ships; and after they
have parted, unloaded themselves in the Harbors of the people of the
United-Provinces; I pray ask Captain George Bishop what information he has
received from Holland, concerning several ships discharged by the Court of
Admiraltie.

May it pleas your Honor, there are many hoggs in the Corn at London, and ships
so strangely slipped away, that your Commissioners for Prize-goods, and many
others wonder at the passages. I say I pray God all be right. I humbly desire
your Honor to pardon me, if I speak after such a way to make an Impression,
that the State, ought to have more eyes than they employ in this business, and
to make some exemplary for miscarriage in their business; and to watch to your
Court of Admiraltie, and all their Officers.

I know this will, and has got me envy; but when I have once undertaken a
business I will be faithful to my trust; it has ever been my rule, and I will
never alter, when my word is once past, and your Honor has laid your command
on me, I shall rather die then break my faith with the State.

My most humble suit to your Lordship is, that you would do in this business, I
here present unto you, in that manner that the Commonwealth may be secured
from future damage; and such employed as may not be so intimate with foreign
Ambassador's Secretaries, as Mr Bud and Mr Roe. I most humbly leav it all at
your Honor's feet, and remain

Your Lordship's humble Servant THO. VIOLET.
February 5th 1652.
Mr Watkins!
SIr! I should be glad to see you: for I am not well, and I am afraid I have
gotten a feavor with vexing. Truly you know what great pains and vast expense I
have been at, to bring this business about to make this discovery of the
prize-ships, to entitle the State unto the Silver in the ships Samson,
Salvador, George, hoping now to have convinced all my greatest Enemies both of
my sufferings and also my zeal to serve the Commonwealth in this business, and
in any other they shall employ me in.

I have delivered to the Council of State, and to my Lord Bradshaw, and Doctor
Walker, several papers with all my witnesses, being the greatest merchants in
this Nation, and several persons aboard the ships, and by their clear
testimony, by God's assistance I will do the work, which I am as sure the
State will carry by my papers, as I am sure I now write to you, if that ^hey
pleas but to proceed effectually in the business, even by the strict rules of
the Civil Law, and not give away their right, as there are some great ones would
have them to do, and without my papers and witness they could never have don
it. I find that Bud the Proctor had not in the Court of Admiraltie Mr
Calandrin's letter translated, and so being in high Dutch Doctor Walker could
not make any use of it at that present; and about a week ago I found Bud and
Roe the proctor and solicitor of the Commonwealth a feasting together with some
foreign Agents; I have made my Lord Bradshaw acquainted with it: if Bud had don
so much in the State of Venice I know he would have lost his head, now at this
time, he having all the States writings in his hands and knowing all the
secrets of this great business. But, by God's assistance I will prevent him in
his designs, or any other that goes about to discharge the silver. There are
many great heads and hands a working to cosen the State upon crafty sly
pretenses. I find the learned Doctor Walker has served the Commonwealth in
this great business with much integrity and care and learning, and a great deal
of pains (as much as a man could possible do.) And would I could say so of some
others employed in this business: the truth is some men in power juggle and they
have a great temptation for it by the Parlaments not taking order to land the
silver in secure hands, the which is now aboard the prize ships, the Merchants
by their instruments have stolen ashore many a score of thousand pounds; a
great part is brought into the mint since Christmas: and all that will be
found out, if the Goldsmiths were strictly examined who they bought this silver
of. Truly there has lately little, or no silver bin brought into the mint, but
what has been stolen out of these prize-ships and the pretenders to this
silver and prizes having got such a vast sum of money to scatter, without the
State keep a strict eye, it will blind a great many, I see it too apparently:
and if this business have not a powerful hand over it, to prevent such abuses
as have been formerly practiced, I know in what condition the States prizes
will be in.

Sir! I delivered my Lord Bradshaw in December last my papers concerning this
great business upon his faithful promiss that I should be justly dealt withal
about my estate, and that besides I should receiv a good Reward for this
Service. I have copies of all my papers delivered unto him and the Council. I
protest before God no man in England should have had my first papers touching
the prize-silver but his Honor, and I do chiefly rely on him.

It griev's me much to see some Merchants so desperately mad against me for
discovering this business, and at White Hall some of the Council think's not of
the greatness of the service and my vast charge and hazard I run. For doing
this business I have made many of my intimate friends my deadly foes: for every
man I speak with at the Exchange tell's me I was the only cause of staying this
silver or else it had all been discharged. Truly what they say in this
particular is true; for nothing yet was ever produced in the Court of
Admiraltie about this silver but what my witnesses I gave in to Doct. Walker
have, or could have spoke unto: for from several at Dover I had notice of the
State's Letter to Dewittee his Commission to convoy all Hambergers and
Lubeckers, and to guard them from the English; because these Hambergers, were
laden with silver for the accounts of the Merchants of Amsterdam, as you will
see by my letter I formerly writ to Mr Delabar.

I protest seriously it make's me stand amazed to see what is likely to fall
on this Nation; God help poor England, it is divided and falls among their great
counselors, and many of them carry Dutch and Spanish hearts in English
bodies. I find some great ones of the House could eat me without salt, for
discovering and staying this silver, and use all their endeavors to sting a
slighting and contempt on me, with some of their fellow counselors of State,
and in the Parliament: I will tell you who they are by word of mouth, when I see
you. They shall find at long running I shall see their heels trip't up, I am
afraid some great ones love Spanish Gold and silver, though it be conveyed
unto them by a Dutch hand.

Sir! my Lord Bradshaw told me before M Tho. Westrope, that there was some
great ones would hang me if they could for staying of this silver, but it was
not in their power: for he would to his uttermost, do me right, for which
great favor I did give him humble thanks. I pray present my humble service to
my Lord Bradshaw, and tell him, next unto God, I rely on him for to do me
justice, that I may have my Estate paid me which has been taken from me, or
the value of it out of this money I shall cause to be brought in, to the State,
out of the prize-ships and silver, which I have caused to be stayed in
December last.

Your true friend THO. VIOLET.
Feb. 8. 1652.
To my good friend Edward Watkins Esquire at the Post-hous. in Ab-Church-Lane
London.
May it pleas your Honors!
I Have presumed to present you with this petition, and papers: and my humble
desire unto you is, that you would do me right and justice. I was required by
some of the Council to present my desires to your Honors about my Estate: for
they conceiv it is all the reason in the world I should have my Estate, or the
full value of it.

You will see by my particulars, I have had eleven thousand pounds taken from
me undulie, and contrary to the law: and though I have ever since my coming
out of the tower, had a petition in Parliament to have relief, I could never as
yet have right. I have by all ways and means studied night and day to present
my self to the world that I was ever in all my actions loial to the interest of
Parliament: in pursuance of that, I have don the Parliament many eminent and
faithful services, as is well known to all the Commissioners of the Council of
Trade, the Committee of the Mint, and many members of Parliament and Council of
State: and now in December last I stayed the Silver-ships and many other
prize-ships at my vast and great expense. For my doing this business for the
Commonwealth I have at once lost many friends amongst the Merchants and
others, spent great sums of money, and in hazard of my life. If this be not
sufficient testimony to restore me to my Estate, and to have a good Reward, I
shall humbly leav it to the consideration of your Lordship and all good men. I
have in print but given the world a little hint, how your businesses in the
Admiraltie have been and are managed, and so for the Mint; but if the State
knew thoroughly how things stand in their Admiraltie-Court, and how their
treasure at Gold-smith's-Hall, Worcester-Hous, their Customs, Excise, and
Mint-businesses have been managed and is to this day, they would say it were
time to look about them.

The truth of it is, had I been employed, and empowered ever since the beginning
of August 1652 to have looked after all the prize-ships and had had a moderate
allowance for my intelligence, I would have saved a great many hundred thousand
pounds, that you have let gone out of your hands, (and is at this day in
Holland) whereby this Nation has been unexpressably abused, which without
God's mercy will prove fatal.

May it pleas your Honors! Let the hazard, envy, and blame be never so great:
nay though it cost me my life and all I had in the world, I would discover
unto your Honors the design that was laid to cozen the the State of the silver
in the prize-ships.

For doing this service in staying the silver I have found just what I expected
to the full: for many of the Merchants in London, Officers of the Admiraltie,
and some others spout reviling words at me, as a whale does water, and some of
them have not scrupled to threaten my life: and they are skilful at it both by
poison, or poniard: they are people that have lived in Countries, where for a
little piece of money such things are usually don.

I most humbly confess were I not satisfied in my conscience, that there was a
necessity by God's providence which put me on to make this discovery, I
should not have don it. For I feel it, I have raised against me by doing it
many hundred enemies.

May it please your Honors! I have spoken with diverse of the Council of State;
and they wished me to put in my humble propositions, and therefore I most
humbly present them to your Honors, humbly desiring your Honors advice, and
assistance in this weighty business that I might be justly, and fairly dealt
with, about these Prize-Ships, and the silver in them.

My most humble suit to the Council of State is, that out of all these Ships
that I made a Protest against their delivery, in the Court of Admiraltie, and
out of the ships Samson, Salvador, and George, I may, in reward for my
discovery and charge of intelligence reciev all my Estate which has been
taken from me to the value of the sum of eleven thousand pounds; which is but
just my own moneys, which I have had for ten years unduly kept from me, as
appears by the particulars hereafter following.

With this my humble Petition I have made several Members of Parliament, and of
the Council acquainted; and they hold, that I deserv a far greater Reward for
doing this service: for here I do the State the greatest service that ever was
don in England by any man of my condition: I bring unto the State near four
hundred thousand pounds, at this conjuncture of time, in silver, of our Enemies
money; which, if it had not been for me, the State had been cozened of it; I
also discovered a fraud and mystery of some Merchants, which, if it had
continued, would have endangered a ruin of this Nation.

The Dutch at one time, before I discovered the frauds to the State, did get
out of the Parlament's hands Eleven hundred thousand pounds in silver, which
we had once in our custody since last August, and now it is all in Holland.
For this my service to the State I have brought on my self many Enemies; so
that now if I should not have just dealing from the State, and my Estate
restored, or the value of it, I have by this action for the Commonwealth, made
my life bitter, and uncomfortable unto me every way, and it will for ever
discourage any to serve you upon the like occasion.

My Lord! I do the State this service, and ask not one penny, but to have my
own again, which has been unduly taken from me, as aforesaid, upon falls
pretenses, and I never get a trial, as is well known unto your Honor. But some
of the Members of Parliament when I petitioned for a Trial even by Marshal Law,
replied, if I had been guilty, I should never need to have petitioned for a
Trial; I should have had one without petitioning. A fearful and sad thing, to
jest me out of my whole Estate; they not remembering the rule, do as you would
be don to.

May it pleas your Honor! For God's sake consider what I say; there is none in
England of my condition ever did England, in any age, so great a service, as I
have don, in this very particular, about the Dutch prize-ships; and shall not
my faith, and true love to my Country at such a conjuncture of time, be, by
such as you are, whom God has set at the Helm, looked on and cherished? I am
confident God will never suffer the State to commit such a sin of ingratitude.

I dare say I have convinced the greatest Enemies I have in England by
deceiving their expectations, they little thinking THO. VIOLET could or would
have don the Parliament this service, I have heard so much my self from some of
their own mouths; and, I do verily believ, in their own consciences, between
God and themselves, they are convinced, that they have oppressed me unjustly;
and if so, let some Members of the Parliament have a care when they are in
judgment, Not to pronounce a sentence against the light of their own
consciences: for the Oppressors that willingly do injustice, to pleas
themselves, or others, that are in power, when their conscience shall check
them for Oppression, may one day fall under the same affliction themselves.

For those Gentlemen, how great soever, must know, there is a righteous God,
who sees all things, and in his good time will render to every man according
to his merits; and those that judge without mercy, shall have no mercy; and
they know not how soon God will call their delay of Justice, and their
forbearing to do men right to account; truly the cries of the oppressed are
many in this Nation.

May it pleas your Honors! if I may have my Estate restored, or the value of
it, it shall oblige me to pray for Honors, and then the Council keep's their
promiss, which I faithfully had from many of them, when I first undertook to
make a stop of the silver claimed by the Spaniard; I humbly submit all to your
Honors.

THO. VIOLET.
Martii 4. 1652.
For the Lord Bradshaw.
An Account of what has been taken from me, Thomas Violet, for which I humbly
desire Reparations, and satisfaction from the Parliament, out of the Silver in
the prize-Ships, which I have stayed, March 4. 1652.
1. WHen I was sent to the Tower the 6 of Jan. 1643. my Mother had of my Goods,
Bonds and Bills in her hands, taken from her, at several times, viz. to the
value of one thousand, three hundred and odd pounds; besides many of my
papers, and Accounts of great value and consideration to me, seized, and many
of my papers were of great concernment to the Commonwealth; and yet I cannot
com to the knowledge who has them; but this I am sure of, if there had been any
thing in them that could have made against me, there had been then use made of
them.

2. My Mother had at another time, a Privie-Seal taken from her, wherein the
late King acknowledged he owed me, for my expenses in the discovery of the
Transporters of Gold and Silver, ninteen hundred, threescore and eight pounds,
which money I laid out every penie out of my own purs; and am ready to make
this discovery to the State, upon passing of the Act against Transporters of
Gold; which Act has been twice read in the last Parliament, and is in the
custody of Mr Augustine Garland.

3. The Committee of Essex put me out of my possession of the Manors of
Battles, and Paton-hall in Essex, as appears by their Warrants, which I have
to produce, of which Land I had an extent to the just value of one thousand
pound, due to me in 1643. and Phlip Cage Esquire; was in possession of the
Premises for my use.

4. The Committee of Shropshire, seized in my Sister's hands in London, three
bonds, due to me, in two thousand pounds, for the payment of me Thomas Violet
one thousand pounds by the Lady Waade, Edmond Lenthal, Esquire; Phillip Cage, Esquire;
Charles Mordent Esquire; as appears under the hand of the said Phillip Cage Esquire.

5. I had the Leases of ten several houses at the Postern in little
More-fields, and the Tenants owed me, when I was committed to the Tower, in
Arrears for Rent, about one hundred pounds; and for above these nine years I
never received rent of them; but Mr Elconhead has received the Rent ever since.

6. Some of the Silver Wier-Drawers, by their unjust clamor, caused my Office to
be sequestered from me, which was for the Surveying and Sealing of all Gold
and Silver thread; to prevent the deceit of this Nation by course and adulterated
Silver-thred, wire and spangels, which at this day is very much adulterared,
for want of the said Office; which Office for the surveying and sealing of all
Gold and Silver-thred and wire, I had from the late King for three lives, and
it has cost me near fifteen hundred pounds to my Lord Treasurer, Lord
Cottington, Sr John Cook and Sr John Banks, before I could get the grant to
pass under the great Seal of England; and that Office made me above three
hundred pounds a year, besides an house rent-free.

7. I had one quarter part of the Lady Villers Farm for importation of all
Foreign Gold and Silver thread, hatbands or lace, and Copper thread throughout
England and Wales, for fourteen years; which cost me a little before I was
sequestered seven hundred pounds, and it was worth one hundred and fifty pounds
per. an. to me.

8. I had a grant from the late King under his signet to be Master Worker of
the Mint in the Tower of London, which grant was taken away from me when I had
my house seized in Jan. 1643.

9. Besides the aforesaid summ's, I spent in my imprisonment in the Tower for
almost four years, seven hundred pounds, and could never get my cause to be
heard, though by my friends I presented many petitions, and I have attended
the late Parliament with my petition this six years, ever since I had my
liberty out of the Tower, to have Justice, and relief in the foresaid
premises; and have spent on my attendance only in following this business to
get my cause heard, above one thousand pounds; besides I have spent all my time
for above these last six years, in doing several services for the State, as is
well known to a great many of the Parliament and Council of State and Committee
for trade; upon the faithful promiss of many members that my petition should
be granted, and I have my estate restored, or the value, which by these
particulars amount's to above a eleven thousand pounds. My good services I have
don is well known to your honors, Sr James Harrington, Sr Henry Mildmay, Mr
Tho. Chalenor, Col. Herbert Morley, Mr Alderman Allen, Mr Austin Garland, and
the Committee of the Mint, and many other members of the Council of trade,
about setting the par of Exchanges and coyns, Free-ports, and several other
great services I did the Commonwealth before ever your Honors and the Council
of State engaged me about the Silver Prizes and Goods in the Admiraltie; and
this has cost me more charge, trouble and hazard for the time, then ever any
business I have don. The first thing that moved me to do this service about
the Prizes, was the good and saftie of this Nation; but had I not had your
Honor's command to do it, and many of the Council of State's promise that I
should have both my estate restored, and a good reward for my great expense,
pains and hazard; I should not have ventured on so knottie a business; for
which I go in hazard of my life daily. I humbly submit the premises to your
Honors.

Tho. Violet.
March 4. 1652.
These papers with some little additions I delivered to my Lord Bradshaw, Sr
James Harrington, and Mr Allen.

Here fallows a Copy of my Petition put into the late Parliament; which
petition has been depending these six years, and I have delivered some hundreds
at several times to the Members, and could never be heard, nor I have relief
or justice, though I attended it daily, being promised by several members to
take the first opportunity for my relief: also a Copy of the late King's
Letter which I brought to London, and my answer to the honorable Committee at
Gold-smith's-Hall, when they examined me about the same; with the Order of my
commitment to the Tower, for bringing up the said Letter for peace, which was
before any Law was made to the contrary, to prohibit any person, to bring up
a Letter of peace from the late King.

To the Supreme Authority, the PARLIAMENT of the COMMONWEALTH of England.
The humble Petition of THO. VIOLET.
Shows!
THat your Petitioner, with Theophilus Rilye, then Scout-Master of the City of
London, by order of the Honorable House of Co. the 6. of Januarie 1643. was
committed prisoner to the Tower; where your Petitioner remained almost four
years, the said Rilye being discharged out of the Tower within a year from the
time of his commitment; his Estate never sequestered, or taken away, your
Petitioner having acted nothing in that business, without the approbation of
the said Theophilus Rilye. And your Petitioner had a Pass to go to Oxford by
the Lord General Essex, and an Order from the then-Hous of Commons, and the
Committee of both England and Scotland were, by your Petitioner's appointment,
made acquainted, that your Petitioner was, within few days, to bring up a
Letter from the late King to the City, for peace: which your Petitioner
desired Sir David Watkins to acquaint the Parliament with, before ever your
Petitioner went to Oxford.

My humble suit, is, therefore that Sr David Watkins and Mr Rilye, may be
examined of the truth of this. Your Petitioner acted nothing in this business
but by Order; and what the Parliament, or some prime Members, knew of, and did
consent to the doing of it.

That during the time of your Petitioner's restraint, your Petitioners Estate
was by the Committees of Essex Salop, Middlesex, and London, sequestered, and
taken away. Your Petitioner's Estate in Essex being by Order of Parment,
granted unto certain persons (through whose informations your Petitioner was
sequestered) who since the grant and obtaining thereof, have never made good
their allegations, or informations, or any part thereof, although by several
Orders of the honorable Committee of Essex, and Salop in pursuance of an Order
of the honorable the Barons of the Exchecquer, they have been required to make
good their charge against your Petitioner, as by the said Orders may appear,
neither has your Petitioner during the time of his said imprisonment, nor
since (though to the uttermost of his power endeavored daily, and solicited at
the Hous-doors) been hitherto able to obtain a hearing of his cause, whereby all
your Petitioner's Estate has for this nine years last past, been out of your
petitioner's hands, to his utter ruin without the relief of this honorable
House.

Your Petitioner humbly prays, that the said sequestration may be taken off,
and that all Lands, Bonds, Bills, Leases, Moneys, Goods, Debts, Offices,
Extents, Writings and Evidences of what nature soever, in whose custody the
same, or any part thereof is, being, and remaining, may be restored to your
Petitioner.

And that a just account may be given Your Petitioner of the profits received
ever since the sequestration by such person or persons who have received the
same; Your Petitioner humbly prays this the rather, for that he, ever since
his enlargement out of the Tower, has don many good and faithful services for
the Commonwealth, to the best of his skill and power, as is known as well to
the honorable Council of State, as to several honorable Members of this
honorable House.

And Your Petitioner shall pray, etc. THO. VIOLET.

A Copy of the late King's Letter to the Lord Major, and Aldermen of the City
of London.
Charles Rex.

Trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well; when we remember the many Acts
of Grace and Favor We, and our Roial Predecessors have conferred upon that our
City of London, and the many examples of duty and loialtie for which that
City has been likewise famous, We are willing to believ, notwithstanding the
great defection we have found in that place, that all men are not so
degenerated from their affection to Us, and to the peace of the Kingdom, as to
desire a continuance of the misery they now feel: and therefore being
informed that there is a desire of some principal persons of that City, to
present a Petition to us, which may tend to the better procuring a good
understanding between Us and that our City, whereby the peace of the whole
Kingdom may be procured: We have thought fit to let you know, that we are
ready to receiv any such Petition, and the persons who shall be appointed to
present the same to us, shall have a safe conduct, and you shall assure all our
good subjects of that our City, whose hearts are touched with any sens of
duty to Us, or love to the Religion and Laws established, in the quiet and
peaceable fruition whereof, they and their Ancestors have enjoied so great
happiness, that we have neither passed any Act, nor made any profession or
protestation for the maintenance and defense of the true Protestant Religion,
and the Liberties of the Subject, which we will not most strictly and
religioussy observe, and for the which we will be always ready to give them
any security can be desired, and of these Our gracious Letters We exspect a
speedy answer from you, and so We bid you farewell.

By his Majesty's Command, George Digbie.
Given at our Court at Oxford on the 19th year of Our Reign, 26th December. 1653.
Upon the bringing up to London of the aforesaid Letter, I, Tho. Violet of
London, Goldsmiths, was examined before an honorable Committee of Parliament at
Gold smith's Hall, Januarie 3, 1643, where I made the Committee acquainted that
I had acted nothing but by order of Mr Theophilus Riley, Scout-master of the
City of London, who was autorized by Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament,
and by Act of the Common Council of the City of London, to hold intelligence
in any of the King's quarters, and that the said Theophilus Riley, by virtue of
his place, did procure my Pass from the House of Commons to go to Oxford the 25
December, 1643, as will appear by the Journal-books in the House of Commons, and
that my Lord General Essex did give me a Pass to go to Oxford the 27 of
December. by Sr Arthur Haslerig's and Sr David Watkin's means; both which
Warrants were procured for Me Tho. Violet by Theophilus Riley, Scout-master,
and one of the Militia of the City of London, and the parties aforesaid; and
that the said Theophilus Riley, and I, Tho. Violet, and Sr David Watkins had
made several Members of Parliament, and Committee of both Nations acquainted
with the Letter, before ever we sent it to Oxford to have the King Sign it;
and we had their approbation for doing the same; and I, Tho. Violet, did plead
justification for my doing thereof before the said Committee, having the
Warrant and approbation of the Commonwealth's Scout-master. Moreover I
declared, that there was not then at the time of my bringing up of the late
King's Letter, being the 2d of Januarie, 1643, any Order, or Ordinance to
forbid me, or any other person, to bring up a Letter of Peace from the late
King: besides, I told the Committee, that by God's Law, where there is no Law,
there can be no transgression: and my bringing the late King's Letter up to
London before a law made to show me my Rule to walk by, I being the King's
Servant, I humbly conceived could be no offense; whereupon the honorable
Committee made their report to the House of Commons; and thereupon the honorable
House made this Order, viz.

Die Sabbathi 6to Januar. 1643.
SIr Henry Vane, Mr Solicitor, and Sr Arthur Haslerig report the design of Mr
Theophilus Riley, Scoutmaster of the City, Col. Read, Sr Basil Brook, Mr
Violet, and others, concerning Letters, a Petition, and Propositions touching
Accommodation, etc. and the particular examinations of the said parties, and a
Letter from his Majesty to the Lord Major, Court of Aldermen, etc. and two
Letters from the Lord Digbie to Sir Basil Brook, of the 29 of December, and the
2 of Januarie were all read.

Resolved, etc. Theophilus Riley, Sr Basil Brook, and Thomas Violet shall be
committed close Prisoners to the Tower.

Hen. Elsing, Cler Parl. D. Com.

I shall humbly desire the Committee of Essex to observe this; here was no
conspiracy charged on any of us, by the Order of the House of Commons; but if
they will read the original, they will find it, as it is Printed here in the
Journals of Parliament, only a Committment to the Tower of London; every man
that is committed to a prison, must not therefore be guilty of a conspiracy
before he be tried, either by Marshal Law, or the Common Law of the Land.

And truly I humbly take it my punishment, being so long in prison, was beyond
my offense, for bringing a letter of peace, when I had not broken any law at
that time in being, without having my Estate under Sequestration, or giving Mr
Elconhead my Estate for his charging me unjustly, with a conspiracy against
the Parliament, before the Committee of Essex, when he nor any other, either
has or can prove it; it shall be found upon examination, I have don the
Commonwealth better service then many scores such as Mr Elconhead, either
has or could ever do; and I humbly hope, when this present Parliament does take
this business into examination, they will leav me to my remedy at law against
Edward Elconhead, for his unjust and malicious charge to defraud me of my
Estate, to enrich himself by such indirect practice; and make him account with
me for all moneys, and rents he has received of mine, with damages for my
forbearance since my Sequestration, notwithstanding any pretense, or Order
from the late Parliament, or Committee of Essex. THO. VIOLET.

These papers I left with the Lord Bradshaw, Sr James Harrington, Mr Tho.
Chalenor, Mr Alderman Allen, with the Committee of Essex at Chemsford, Mr
Augustine Garland, and several other Members of Parliament.

Upon the dissolving of the last Parliament, I made my request to the faithful
Lovers of their Country Col. Wetton, and Lievt. Col. Joice, to present my
former services, about the staying the Silver and other prizes, to the Right
Honorable the Council of Officers: which accordingly they did, and brought me
acquainted with several of those noble Gentlemen; for which great civilities I
give them humble thanks; by whose means I sent this ensuing Letter to the Right
Honorable General Monk, and presented the ensuing Papers to the present Council
of State.

For the Right honorable General Monk, Admiral of the Commonwealth of England.
May it pleas your Honor!
I Have desired Lieutenant Colonel Joyce to be pleased to send your Honor this
Letter; the occasion of my writing to your Honor now is, humbly to give you
notice of a Book, I presented to the late Parliament, concerning many abuses
about several Prize-Ships brought into this Nation, and discharged; some out of
the Court of Admiraltie, and some other ways, before they were duly examined;
as appears in my Book I herewith send unto your Honor. By reason of your great
employment as Admiral, I humbly thought it my duty to present you with my
Book. In folio (99) you shall find a particular Invoice.

Sr! the damage has been to this Commonwealth, to the value of many hundred
thousand pounds, which this Nation has been couzened of, for want of a strict
Examination of Prize-Ships. I was formerly employed the 13th of December. 1652.
by the then Council of State, to assist in the Court of Admiraltie, against the
Ships Sampson, Salvador and George; having laden in them many hundred thousand
pounds, which silver had been all let gone, had it not been for my Protest and
Solicitation in the Court of Admiraltie, as appears in my Book, fol. 75. 76.
77. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82. 83. 84. I have presumed to send you the Book, with a
Copy of my Petition to his Excellency the Lord General.

My humble suit to your Honor, is, that if you conceiv my Petition is for the
service of the Commonwealth, to have these great abuses I have humbly
presented unto the Parliament found out, and prevented for the future; that your
honor would do me that just favor, to send in writing to Lieutenant Colonel
Joyce, what you conceiv is to be don concerning my humble Petition to his
Excellency.

The Silver aboard all these aforesaid Ships, is Ordered to be landed by his
Excellency: and to be brought into the Tower; I humbly desire to be
appointed Remembrancer for all prize-Ships, which if I had been in August last
employed, the State had had a Million of money now; which has by the undue,
and careless practice of some men, been let slip out of England, for want of a
vigilant prosecution, and is how in Holland. I humbly leav the consideration of
the premises to your honor, and remain,

London, Apr: 27. 1653. Your most humble Servant. THO. VIOLET.
Lieutenant Col. Joice, lies at the leg near the Fountain Tavern in the
Strand, I humbly desire your honor to signify your pleasure to him. This
letter I sent by Mr Quatmore.



The humble desire, and Petition of Thomas Violet; presented to the Right
honorable Major General Desborrow. Col. Benet, Col Jones, all of the Council of
State, May 4. 1653.
Shows!
1 THat for want of order and a due regulation, and porsecution of the matters
of the State's Prizes, and Prizes of private men of War, depending in the Court
of Admiraltie, diverse great losses and inconveniences have ensued; which, if
not prevented for the future, will bring unexpressable mischief on this Nation,
and will not only discourage all private Men of War, for continuing those
Ships they have abroad, or sending forth of others; but deprive the
Commonwealth of much, if not most of that benefit it might and ought to make
by Prizes, which are, and have been brought in by the Parlament's Ships; which
Prizes ought to be employed toward the support of this War; by which means
this State has been much disenabled, and our enemies enabled, as by sad
experience since these Wars began, the State has found, and by your Petitioner
it has been humbly presented to your Honors to take such order that there may
be a timely redress before it be too late.

2. That for want of stricter instructions to all Commanders at Sea for this
Commonwealth, many Ships have passed unquestioned, or not fully examined; and
many more are likely to be permitted to pass, and never to have judgment in
future, and you have had Millions of Treasure suffered to pass in this manner;
which if it had been stopped, had brought the Hollanders on their knees before
this time. When your Court of Admiraltie and Officers in that Court, are not
well regulated, it is a dangerous backdoor to this Nation; and by costly
experience, this State upon examination will find it.

3. That whereas heretofore in the Court of Admiraltie, several Ships were in
question, and upon just grounds and suspicion, were brought in as prize, (but
were not put to plead specially) by which means many Ships to the value of
many hundred thousand pounds, since August last, have avoided Judgment and
after-question, for want of strict examination, (by which means particular
proof might have been in all likelihood found out) these Prize-Ships have been
discharged. It being alleged, it is contrary to the Rules of the Admiraltie;
I humbly say, No ill customs should be kept up to endanger the saftie of the
Nation; for the Owners of all such Prizes, being under question, ought, by the
Civil Law, to prove their Interest; especially, as by your Petitioner's
endeavors, and reasons given to Doctor Walker, your Petitioner made it manifest
to be the constant custom of other Nations, and that attested by the ablest
Merchants in London: and by the great care of Doctor Walker, he got a Judgment
for the Commonwealth, for the Sampson, George and Salvador, being the Ships
that have the Silver, to cast the proof on the Claimers, and to cause them to
prove specially; and I humbly hope all other Prizes shall exspect the like
hereafter, for I humbly say, it is the only, and quickest way to curb the
Hollander's greatness, to stop them of Trade, in any Vessels whatsoever, which
will never be don except the State keep a strict eye on the proceedings of the
Court of Admiraltie, during the War with Holland.

4. That the State has suffered very much, for want of diligent and special
Prosecutors or Solicitors, to take especial notice of every Prize, and for
attending as Remembrancer to the Council of State, and to the State's Counsel
at law; to have this don, is the work of many men, and to order all business,
that so no Prize should com into the Court to receiv Judgment, if there were
any difficulty, or dispute in the title, till the State's Counsel had argued
it pro, and con, privately; if this course had formerly been taken, many a
Prize-Ship, which has been discharged the Court of Admiraltie, and is now in
Holland, had been confiscated to the State,

And therefore to enable your Petitioner, to do you this service for the future.

Your Petitioner humbly desire's, that he may have a perfect list, from the
Register of the Court of Admiraltie, of all the Prizes brought into this
Commonwealth, from the first of August 1652. for the use of the State, and all
Prizes brought in by private Men of War, and what Ships were condemned, and the
days when, and to whom; and that the State's Commissioners, for Dutch
Prize-goods, may be desired to do the same, that your Petitioner may see
they agree.

And I humbly say, until this be don, that there be some employed to execute
that trust, to manage and prepare business, the Commonwealth's Counsel cannot
execute their charge as were to be wished, and exspected; and it is not an
Ordinary Solicitation to find out witnesses, and the Mysteries and frauds of
Merchants, it must be don by men that have had long experience, and great
acquaintance, to get your intelligence; and this part cannot be acted by the
State's Counsel: for it is out of their Course, they must have every thing
brought to their hands; neither is it for the Judges of the Admiraltie, to take
notice of any cause further, more than what stand's proved before them in Court.

5. That by reason of the premised wants in the course of the Admiraltie, and
most especially for want of skilful solicitation, and a due care to see every
one in trust to do his duty; there has been about eighty ships brought in as
Dutch-Prizes, and many of them shot and torn; many of them had been let gone
without judgment, had it not been for Your Petitioner's protesting and
appealing in the Court of Admiraltie, which has been followed at the sole
endeavors and great charges and expenses of Your Petitioner.

6. That for want of stricter Rules in the Admiraltie, great numbers of Prizes
brought in by private men of War have been discharged, to the great
disheartning of all Adventurers of that kind, and weakening the lesser; but
necessary sinews of this Commonwealth; I humbly say, it is highly
advantageous for the State to improve all the force of particular Adventurers
both Merchants and Seamen, and to let them have all encouragement as possible
may be given, for to offend so crafty and potent an enemy; I humbly say,
that diverse great Merchants complain, that it is in vain for them to put out
private men of War against the Dutch, as things are carried in the Admiraltie;
and from good hands I have it, that the Dutch does give against this State, all
encouragement to their private men of War.

My humble desire is, that the Register of the Admiraltie may be Ordered to
give me the particular of all private Ships discharged since the first of
August, 1652, and if I be commanded, I will assist and solicit for to see to
the State's part, that the Ships be not discharged for the future as they have
been formerly, through the negligence, if not wors, of your Proctor Mr Budd,
and some other in the Court of Admiraltie.

7. That to enable Your Petitioner to do this business, he cannot have less
then two Clerks constantly to write for him and to put your business in Order
for prosecution of the business in Order for the Court: And whereas Mr
Doreslawes has a Warrant for prosecution of the business concerning the
Prize-ships; Your Petitione^ also desire's, he may also have a Warrant with
such Instructions and Powers as your Honors, in your great Wisdoms shall
conceiv is sufficient to enable your Petitioner to do this service with Mr
Doreslawes, or other ways as your Honors shall order him; submitting himself,
and his Fee for encouragement, to your grave Wisdoms.

8. Whereas many occasions have and will arise for several sums of money, for
several meetings in Wappine, St Katharine's, Lime-hous, Eriff and Blackwall,
and several Sea ports of this Nation where ships are brought in to send Post
about Witnesses, and several otherways, has already cost your Petitioner near
four hundred pounds: He humbly desire's, that you would Order your
Commissioner for Prizes to pay and issue out such sums of money for this
business, as they, or any two of them shall conceiv is for the service of this
Commonwealth.

9. That now the Silver is unloaden by the State, which was aboard the Sampson,
Salvador, and George, your Petitioner may have such a Reward as the greatness
of this service deserv's, for staying and getting the State so vast a Treasure,
in such a conjuncture of time, or at the least your Petition^ may have so much,
by way of poundage, as the Parliament has taken away from your Petitioner, and
was promised your Petitioner when he undertook to make his discovery.

Every part of the premises, I humbly submit to your Honors, both for such
allowance for my self and Clerks; and for moneys already disbursed in your
service, and such orders and directions for the future as shall be thought, by
your Honors, fit and convenient to enable your Petitioner to do this service,
and I will cheerfully accept whatsoever your Honors pleas to order and appoint;
and shall diligently and faithfully discharge my trust, by God's assistance,
highly for the benefit and advantage of this Commonwealth, and give a stop to
many mischievous practices which has been formerly put on the State concerning
their Prizes in their Court of Admiraltie.

In the three Silver Ships, there is about four hundred thousand pounds, which
had all passed out of the State's hands, had it not been for my Protest in the
Court of Admiraltie; and daily the said Silver has been imbeziled away: If I
be commanded by the State, I shall show them how they have been abused in many
of their Prizes, and in their Silver lately a shipboard, which I humbly desire
may be prevented for the future, for the good of the Commonwealth.

All which I humbly submit, etc. THO. VIOLET.
May 11th 1653.
To the Right Honorable Col. Bennet, one of the Council of State, these humbly
present.
May it pleas your Honor!
ACcording to my order I attended this day in the Court of Admiraltie, to see
what proceeding was about the Prize-Silver which is now in the Tower; truly the
carriage and passages of some eminent men in the Court was highly prejudicial to
the State's interest about the Silver; and I humbly conceiv, your Honors of the
Council of State ought to have a particular Account.

I beseech you to acquaint the Council, it falls out concerning this Silver,
just as I formerly told the late Council of State, that, for want of a strict
care of Examining several Witnesses which I had ready to produce, many of them
have been packed away by the Merchants that claim; and there has been so many
delays in the proceedings in the Admiraltie, that they beyond Seas have had
time to lay their business, that almost all the Silver shall be claimed as
belonging to them of Flanders; which if diligent and speedy care be taken,
may yet be prevented, and I shall make them lose their design.

Doctor Walker did this day carry himself in this business with a great deal
of zeal and experience for the security of the State, and made his protest in
the behalf of the Commonwealth.

Sir! The unlading of the Silver is nothing without making out the proof, that
it is Hollanders's goods and Silver.

If that some Order be not taken to give a stop to several persons, and that
suddenly, they will be all sent away out of this Nation, as I am credibly
informed some have been; and the State lose their Witnesses; then the Silver
will be all claimed under the Spaniard's title, as now they put in their
claims; and for want of a due solicitation, by knowing men that understand the
secret combination and frauds in this kind, the State will run an hazard to
lose this great Treasure, only by the miscarriages of some in the Admiraltie.

I have been acquainted with these secrets this 30 years, and there was not a
Witness produced in the Court of Admiraltie, but such as I delivered to Doctor
Walker; it will fall so out, all our English Merchants will run a great hazard
to have their goods stayed beyond Sea, if the Silver be taken away and coined,
without proving it to belong to the Dutch, or the people of the Netherlands,
which I had many Witnesses to prove this Silver Prize; therefore great
diligence ought to have been given to examine several Passengers and Mariners
aboard the said Prize-ships, before they had been shifted away by the Merchants
that claim the Silver; which the State may thank Mr Budde the Proctor for the
Commonwealth, for his neglect, if any inconvenience com on it.

Sir! If I be commanded and empowered as I have formerly told you, I will see
a quick and vigorous prosecution shall be had in the Admiraltie for all the
former miscarriages, that these frauds shall be discovered, and the State
entitled to this Treasure in the Sampson, Salvador and George, and several
other Prizes, Merchandise and Silver.

SIR! If I had had a Warrant from the State in August last, to have assisted in
the business about the State's Prizes, the State should have had above a
Million of Money now in their custody which is now in Holland, through the
connivance of some in the Admiraltie.

It would have broke the Hollander, and brought him on his knees, if there had
been a vigilant prosecution.

This Silver had been all let slipped away, had it not been for my Protest in the
Court of Admiraltie, about the 20th December last; by which means I exposed my
self to a great deal of envy, both of the Merchants and others in the Court of
Admiraltie, as appears in my Book, folio 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83,
84. I desire to have the Warrant enclosed, signed, to autorize me to proceed
in this service, which else I cannot do, till I have Warrant from the Council,
and so I rest.

Your Honors most humble Servant, THO. VIOLET.
11 June 1653.
To the Right Honorable Col. Jones, and Col. Bennet, Members of the Council of
State, these humbly present.
May it pleas your Honors!
ON Saturdaie last you told me, that I should do a very good service to the
Nation, if I did discover any of the frauds and practices that had been put on
the State, concerning any other Prize-Ships, besides the Sampson, Salvador and
George; and that if I could, my Warrant should be enlarged in relation to that
service, for that you had read in my Book, I spoke of many other Prize-Ships,
wherein the State had been deceived, that if I did present you with any such
discovery, or propound a way for the finding it out, it would be very good
service to the Commonwealth, and you would present it to the Council of State
for a speedy and effectual prosecution.

May it pleas your Honors, I know by sad, and costly experience discoveries of
this kind, when once presented, and not powerfully prosecuted, bring's to to
the discoverer a great deal of envy, which has befallen me in staying this
Silver by my Protest in the Admiraltie, has incensed many Merchants, and some
in the Admiraltie against me, and when a joint purs shall concur together
with some persons in power and trust, to bride out a business against a
particular Prosecutor (as in many businesses in this last Parliament, I know it
has been, and in this particular of the Silver, no doubt but will be, and
has been don;) I shall find the Burden too heavy for my purs, except you
restore me my own estate, which has been taken from me.

I desire notice may be taken, that I cannot prosecute it effectually, but at
my great expense, and it has already cost me many hundreds of pounds out of
my purs, for what I have don in this business about staying the Silver Prizes,
by direction of the late Council of State, and I had several of the late
Council of State's promiss, in the behalf of the State, that my estate which
has been taken from me, should all be restored, and I receiv a good reward
for my charges and endeavors, if that I could entitle the State to the Silver
the Spanish Ambassador claimed, and my reward should be proportioned according
to the quantity of the Silver I entitled the State unto; the like promiss I
had from several Members of the late Parliament: to do leav all the premises to
your Honors, and I humbly desire you to present the same to the Council of
State, that my Petition is, that I may have some assurance from this present
Council, that when I have don this service to entitle the State to the Silver,
that my estate may be all restored, and I receiv such a reward, as may
encourage all others for the future to serve the State, and in the mean time I
may be empowred to receiv such summ's of money, out of my own estate, which
is under sequestration, as may enable me to proceed in this service. And when
this is don, I shall humbly desire an Order to the Commissioners for
Dutch-Prizegoods, to have a perfect Inventarie of what Ships were then under
their charge, the 16. of December. 1652. and at that time in their custody, and
in which ships they had Officers aboard for the use of the State, as near as I
can calculate was about fifty, worth about a Million of money, and many of
them brought into Harbor, at vast expense and blood, and therefore I humbly
conceiv, not to be discharged, but upon consideration and examination, and
this you shall find agreeable to former Presidents and Records, and I humbly
desire, Mr Ryley the Keeper of those Records, may be required to attend you
in this particular, he can acquaint you what I have caused him to do in this
business.

It is now apparent to the World, what Spirit Rule's in some persons in the
Admiraltie, to the great damage of this State; it had been well for the State
I could have been believed before now. In these particulars they had saved
many hundred thousand pounds.

May it pleas your Honors, if I could have had my witnesses examined, and a
list of all the passengers in the Ships, Salvador, George and Sampson, and
where they did remain, as I desired ever since Januarie last, you had condemned
all the Silver in the said Ships before this time; But Spanish GOLD and SILVER
work's wonders; the truth is, this business has been as slily carried to the
prejudice of the State, as ever any business has been, and that with so much
boldness, as all knowing men that were in the Admiraltie and heard it, must
needs confess, that never was the like don in any Court in the memory of any
man, in so weighty a business, when the Commonwealth's title was in question:
and in convenient time, I hope the State will have a strict account of it, let
me but be empowered by restoring me to my estate, I will find out the
bottom. And if this be not don, you will find no man for the future will
venture for the State as I have don, and it will be a warning to others, not to
believ^ Court-Holy^water.

If you will have me do you service, I desire in persuance thereof, to know
what Ships the Dutch Prize-Commissioners have discharged since the 16. of
December 1652. and the days when they were put under their charge, and to whom
delivered, and where the Merchants dwell. I do humbly desire, that the Register
and Commissioners for Dutch Prize-Goods, be Ordered to give me a particular
of what Silver, Wool, and Merchandise, is claimed in the Sampson, Salvador and
George, or any other Prize-Ships within this Nation, by any person, and what
goods they have restored out of these Ships, and to whom and by what Order, and
the days when; this I humbly desire from the Dutch Prize-Commissioners, because
their Accounts and proceedings are kept perfect, and many goods have been got
from them against their good Wills, and by the Merchants Protests and Clamors;
and from the Commissioners I shall have the truth of these particulars.

My humble suit is, that Captain Bishop, may be desired to acquaint the
Council of State with what letters and advices the late Council received from
their several Intelligencers in Holland, of the proceedings and carriages of
some people in the Court of Admiraltie, concerning the abuses and practices in
their deceiving the State of their Dutch-Prizes, and what Ships have,
immediately after they have been discharged in England, went directly for
Holland; I humbly desire that Cap. Bishop would produce the Letters concerning
these discoveries to the Council of State. There was an honorable Member of the
late Council of State lately told me, that I had given the late Council of
State, so much light in the business of the Dutch-Prizes, that if they had not
been dissolved, they would have made some in the Court of Admiraltie examples;
but now he was but a private man, and he hoped I would apply my self to them
that govern the State; in doing thereof I should do great service to the
Nation, for it was very fit to have these things looked into.

Thus according to your Honors command, I have in this particular made you an
humble tender of my faithfulness, and will, to serve my Country in these
particulars, if I be commanded, and have a full and ample Warrant to empower
me for my doing thereof, and I most humbly desire an assurance from your
Honors, for my just and due rewards, when I have don your business in the
Admiraltie, concerning the Silver and other Prizes. I humbly leav my self to
the Council of State, what they shall be pleased to do in this business; in
the mean time I desire part of my estate to be restored, and I shall
faithfully and vigilantly serve them in making these discoveries, and shall not
weigh the envy of particular men, for doing my Country this service, so it
be acceptable to the Supreme Power.

Your Honors most humble Servant, THO. VIOLET.
POSTSCRIPT.
THere has been great store of Tobaccos and Wools already delivered out of the
Salvador, Sampson and George, and other Prizes; and at this instant of time,
you are about to deliver near 900 baggs of Spanish Woolls, which amount's to
very great value; I desired particular witnesses might be examined about
these Woolls and Tobaccos in Januarie last, both passengers in the Ships and
others Merchants, but could not; and many of them by the Merchants are sent
away beyond Seas, to avoid the examination; I told Doctor Walker of it
yesterdaie, being the 12. of June; who said he believed many things had been
don about these Prizes, which ought not to have been don by some in the
Admiralties; but he would impute it to ignorance, and not maliciously don;
truly I believ it was self-seeking and covetousness had a great hand in this
business; and a general malignancie of most of the Officers in the Admiraltie,
as any man may see, if he read my letter to Mr Bud, the State's Proctor.

I humbly desire to have the marks and numbers of those Woolls and Tobaccos
before they be delivered, and what sorts they are off.

May it pleas your honor; as no man can build a house without tools; so make
these discoveries without an ample Warrant, to empower me, and to be
reinvested into my estate, as I humbly desire; and then upon the peril of my
life, I will give the Commonwealth an exact and a good account, both of their
Silver, and also merchandise in these Prizes; and if the State do this, I will
by God's assistance, discover the said abuses, and if they pleas but to punish
the Offenders, when they know who has abused them; that will do the business,
to prevent it for the future: but if they be suffered to go on, the State will
be perpetually cozened by these falls and dangerous practices.

THO. VIOLET.
June 13. 1653.


May 24, 1653. For the Right Honorable Col. Philip Jones, and Col. Bennet,
these humbly present.
May it pleas your Honors!
MR Lieutenant of the Tower did send for me, to tell me that I should com
unto you about some business you had to speak with me, about the Bullion in the
Mint; and when I spoke with your Honors, you desired me to draw up in brief
for the best management of the Coining of the Bullion in the Tower; your Honor
telling me, the Council of State had taken special notice of my great service
about the Prize-Silver.

You told me you had spoken with the Masterworker and Comtroller of the Mint,
and some other Officers; you found them very raw and ignorant in this business,
all, saving one Mr James Hoar, and Mr Burch, whom you found to be able Clerks.
Seeing your Honors, and Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, have requested me to give
you in writing, what in my experience is to be don, in carrying on this great
work of taking all the marks of the silver, and keeping a particular account of
the several parcels of Silver, Weights and Marks.

1. Your Honors must take a special care that every parcel of Silver be
distinctly weighed, and that no man, but such as you imploie, see the marks of
the Bars, or Cases, and that no Silver be weighed but before one of your
Honors, being of the Committee of the Council of State, and upon every remove
out of the Office the papers of the marks to be sealed up.

2. When you bring your Parcels, you must mark every parcel in Bars, Bags,
cases, and Cask, viz. no 1, no 2, no 3, and so forward to the last number if
there be ten thousand Parcels.

3. When this is don, you must make your assaies distinctly of all Bars, and if
there be any little one, they must be melted into one Bar, and a piece cut to
make an assay; if you find Plate and vessels of silver, all that is in one
parcel must be melted down, and the fineness, and weight, and mark of the
Bags, Cases, Barrels kept distinctly; when you melt, you must weigh your silver
exactly to the pot, and keep an account of the wast back, and that all the
ashes be saved, and at the end of all be washed, for else there may be
voluntary spillings out of the Pots, and so you may be deceived. You must
have a care whom you trust in the Melting-hous while your silver is melting;
for you may have a lay or copper put in, and that shall make it weigh your full
weight; but if you employ Mr James Hoar in the business, or Mr Burch, they are
men that are very honest and able, can, and will do it justly.

5. If you pleas, I offer to melt down the Ingots, after they are all assaied,
to deliver unto the Moniers, for the Fee of 12 grains upon every pound weight
Troy. whereas Sr John Wollaston has for this 30 years had 16 grains upon
every pound weight Troy; which Office he is now incapable of to execute, by
reason of a late Order from the Cuncil of State, for his late engagement in the
late black and serpentine Petition with some of the City.

I made a Proposition to the Committee of the Mint, about a year and an half
past, to execute the place of Master-Worker of the Mint for an hundred pounds
the year, and to melt the silver at 12 grains the pound weight; whereas the
Master-Worker allow's Sr John Wollaston 16 grains the pound weight for melting
the silver.

This Proposition was Ordered to be reported to the then Council of State by
the Committee of the Mint; and I humbly offer to do it for you now at the price
of 12 grains the pound weight, and a 100l. a year; by which offer I save the
State about fifteen hundred pounds the year, of what the Master-Worker and his
man the melter has allowed them when the Mint goes, in such quantity as
formerly.

6. Your convenient's and safest way for your moneys after it is coined, is to
bag it up in the Mint; and this may be don for about two shillings the 100l.
and let it remain in some secure place in the Mint, or the Tower, and none com
unto it, but by Order of the Council of State, by this way you will save
several Fees that will run out to several people, if by this way they be not
prevented.

You must keep some purposely to see the exact telling the money; that they keep
a perfect account upon Oath, what the Shere make's, and put it down justly to
the State; by this way you may save some thousands of pounds in Fees; and the
State ought to have a just account of the profits of the Shere, which amount's
usually to 8s and sometimes 10s the 100l. by tale.

You also keep your money in your own custody, under your own lock and keie,
to be disposed of as the State shall see good at an hour's warning.

For some other directions concerning the uncapableness of several of your
Officers in the Mint; as the Master-Worker, the Comptroller, the Clerk of the
Irons, and some others; your Honors see what ignorant men they are; they may be
ashamed to eat the State's bread, and are not capable of any business: your
Honors told me you were sorry to see the State so served in the Mint; the
like did the Lieutenant of the Tower.

May it pleas your Honors, if by God's Providence I had not stayed this silver,
there would none have been coined till the State had gotten more skilful
Officers in the Mint; and yet these men, I understand, intend to stop the
arreers of wages they pretend is due to the Master-worker, the Comptrroller,
and the Clerk of the Irons, out of the moneys and profits arising by the
coining of this silver which I caused to be stayed, and is now in the Tower;
which will be to the Master-Worker about a thousand pounds, and to other
Officers twice as much; in all, it com's to three thousand pounds, or
thereabouts; When these men have spoiled your mint, they are very confident men
to make any such demands; I humbly hope the Committee of the Revenue will look
to prevent any such business on their accounts for the future, now they know it.

Truly I have justified it before the Committee of the Mint formerly, and before
all the Officers of the Mint, about a year and a half past; That the State had
better have given forty thousand pounds for these last five years, then have
such Officers as some of the aforesaid persons in the mint; and this I have
justified before these Officer's faces, at a Committee of the late Parliament;
only Mr Hoar and Mr Burch understand the business, and are men fit for their
emploiment, in the Mint, or better places then they have.

If I had the place of Master-Worker of the Mint, as the late King appointed
me, I would know from any part of Christendom, what great quantities of silver
is stirring to be transported.

May it pleas your Honors! If I had not known by long experience this Art, your
Honors at this day had not had this Treasure in the Tower.

I most humbly offer my service to your Honors, and desire such an emploiment
in the Mint, and such allowance as your Honors, and the Council of State shall
think fitting for the service of the State, and I shall accept of it as part of
my satisfaction which I humbly petition the State for; thus with the Tender of
my humble service, I remain

Your Honors most humble Servant, THO. VIOLET.

May 24, 1653, a Brevit of the Papers I delivered to the Right Honorable Col.
Bennet and Col. Joanes, who several times since have told me, that in every
particular I told them, for the carrying on this business in the Mint for the
coining of the silver, I had given them the clearest information of any; they
found it right and true, and the best way for the service of the Commonwealth
about their Mint-business, and were pleased to engage their Honors, that they
would, by the first opportunity, present my great services to the Council of
State and Parliament, and that they had made my Lord General acquainted with it;
and that they at several times had made the Council of State acquainted with my
great services I had don, and that they would present my Petition, and speak
effectually to it at the first opportunity, to have my Estate restored.

That shortly there would be a Committee for the Tower, and then what I had
propounded concerning my being Master-worker and Melter, should be presented
to the Council of State, and some order taken to get the Mint supplied with
abler Officers; Mr Lieutenant of the Tower said the same to me.

Some others of the Council I made acquainted, that great care ought to be
taken concerning the Prize-ship, Morning Star; and that I had several times
beer: with Doctor Clerk, Advocate for the Commonwealth, about that ship, to
have a great care of the State's Interest, concerning the Silver and lading, I
made him acquainted what charge and pains I had been at in searching the
Records in the Tower for Presidents: I told him Mr Riley the keeper of the
Records would satisfy him.

I found Dr Clerk very ready to receiv any Informati-; and I did see a very
hearty and cordial expression from him several times for the State's service.
He has formerly been a Judge in the Court of Admiraltie; If your Honors could
get him to Execute that place again, his experience and gravitie, and his care
of Justice, I verily believ will prevent some former abuses which has been
daily practiced in that Court, to the great prejudice of the State and Nation.
THO. VIOLET.

Friday, June 10. 1653. At the Council of State at White Hall.
Ordered,
THat Thoms Violet be appointed (together with some other person hereafter to
be named) to be Assistant in the making of Discoveris, in relation to the
Ships Sampson, Salvador add George, and their lading, whether Silver or any
other Merchandise, and likewise of any abuses which have been in the managing
of that business since the first bringing up of the said Ships, and he is from
time to time, to acquaint the Council or such as they shall appoint with what
Discoveries he shall make in this business.

Ex. Jo. Thurloe, Secr.

20. July 1653.
For the Right Honorable Col. Jones, These humbly present.
I Humbly desire the State to take notice, that their business at present, is
managed concerning their Prize-goods, in such a way, as leav's a great
latitude to your Commssioners, that are Merchants to defraud the State: So that
their fees in the Sale of your goods, and Merchandises at 2d the pound, is as
trifal, and of no consideration, in comparison of the perquesits and profits
they may make other ways, (and it is such a BAIT profit) that few men will
refuse it, to let it com to them any way; I will not possitively affirm, that
it is daily practiced, till the business is thoroughly inspected by a Committee
of Parliament.

It is this, I am a Commissioner for sale of all the State's Prize-Goods and
Ships, and by my Interest, I have gotten my Brother to have the charge of all
Warehouses, and Sellars where these goods lay. I have all Porters, Packers,
Brookers and all other several instruments that are for the buying the State's
Goods and Merchandise, com unto my Brother to taste Wines, and Tobaccos, and to
view Corn, Sugars, Oils, Woolls, Fruit, Spice, Silks, Beads, Linnings, and all
other commodities, when I have don, I will cause some people, viz. Coopers,
Brookers, Porters or other skilful persons in Merchandise, to sort the State's
Wines, either French, or Spanish; Tobaccos, Silks, Linnens, Woolls, Oils,
Fruit, Spice and all other commodities, when this is don, I will make a sale of
part of these commodities, and reserv a quantity of the sorted and picked
Merchandise, for my self, or friend, who is a monied man, and can at a pinch
lay down twenty thousand pounds for a bargain; paradventure old Mr Rowland
Willson or some other in the City.

I beseech your Honors to suppose the Commissioners, that are no merchants
make's a sale for ten thousand pounds by the candle of the States Goods, and
Merchandise; and of some of these Merchandise, a Commissioner, that is a
Merchant, make a reserv, viz to the value of three thousand pounds of sorted
and Picked goods, and after put's these goods down without a sale by the candle
on account to the State, for the wines, tobaccos, silks, woolls, oiles, sugars,
fruit, spice and all other commodities; after the same rate his fellow
Commissioners sold the great parcel of seven thousand pounds, pretending this
small remainder is not worth calling for a new sale, or I being a
Commissioner, will either buy these goods in my own name, or get friends to buy
them in their name. These goods thus sorted, gurbled and picked from the gross
bulk, may be better in the true value then the gross quantity of
Merchandise, sold by the candle unpick'd, some times twenty, thirty, naie
forty in the hundred, and sometimes where Goods are perrishable half in half,
and above. I humbly leav it to your consideration, whether the liberty of
sorting, packing and garbeling your commodities, is not a better trade then the
bare and single 2d in the pound, upon the Reasons aforesaid.

To have some information of this business, and show the Parliament the way to
find out the bottom thereof, and to prevent it for the future; I desire your
Honors to make an Order of the House of Parliament to Mr John Day Broker, that
weekly sells the Printed Bills of the current Rate and Price in the market for
all Merchandise, which Bills pass as the current Market, both at London, and
beyond the Seas, what Rates all Merchandise bare in London; and this is the
general Rule for all Merchants to buy, and sell by, as all Merchants know; to
require Mr Day to give you all the weekly Bills he has Printed for these
twelv months, of the Prizes of all Merchandises, unto the Parliament, how
Merchandises is sold every week in London. May it pleas your Honors, many
hundreds of Merchants pay Mr John Day quarterly for these Bills, as being
the only guide to buy and sell their commodities by.

I humbly desire a Committee of Parliament to view every week your sales, and
the Printed Bills, to see what you have sold the Commonwealth's merchandise
at, under Mr John Days Printed Bills, you will find it a very considerable
business to understand, and profitably to prevent for the future the garbeling
or sorting your commodities for the private profit of your Commissioners that
are merchants; and that the Parliament see carefully for the future, that none
of your Commissioners that sell your Prize merchandise, shall trade as
merchants during the time of their Commission and employment for the sale of
the State's goods, for if you do, you may be deceived of thousands of pounds
yearly. It was so formerly in the Custom-hous, no Officer was admitted to
trade, so long as he was employed, either as a Farmer, or a waiter, and it was
don in all ages upon weighty consideration.

This very intimation, I humbly say, will save you many thousand pounds a
year, naie sometimes some thousand pounds in a week, if you pleas to examine it. I
believ you have sold your Prize goods this year under the merchants market,
near one hundred thousand pounds.

May it pleas your Honors, I had in Offices taken from me above five hundred
pounds a year, which I bought of the late King and the Lady Villers. If you
imploie me for the Commonwealth, in either the Mint, Customs, or Excise, or
your Prize-Office, or in the Court of Admiraltie, I will in some of these places
save the State a hundred times more then they will give me for a pension, if
you give me a fee of 500l. a year, I will save you fifty thousand pounds a
year, which you are daily cheated of; and this shall not be denied by any
knowing merchant, or others that know's trade that shall dispute it with me,
if they understand's the course of trade, and are not biased with a prejudice
against me, for discovering these truth's to the State, which in all
likelihood, the State would never have known without my information.

If I could be so happy to find out an old Burly, a Walsingham, a Cecil, or
a Secretary Cook, they would presently apprehend this business, as Queen
Elizabeth did old Carmarden's business, as the greate^ service that could be
offered to the State: there are at present as wise State's-men as they; but it
is my unhappiness, I have not acquaintance or friends to bring me, to make my
free addresses to them upon all occasions, for the Commonwealth's business, as
is requisite for the Commonwealth's service, in this conjuncture of time; and
as I have don formerly for many years with the late King and his Council.

If I had had for these last six years, the same free address to the late
Parliament, as I had to Sr John Cook, late Secretary of State, and many other
of the late King's Privie-Counsellors; I would have saved this State many
hundred thousand pounds they have been cozened of, in the point of their
Prizes, Customs, Excise and Mint.

May it pleas your Honors; my staying the Silver, was a miracle that I had
courage to do it; considering the many hazzards I run in staying the Silver
and the multitude of people that had an interest in it, and had a design to
have deceived the State of this Treasure and many other Prizes, and if you
examine Mr Steneer's Letter carefully, you will find no mean persons had their
hands and heads in this business. If the Parliament read Cap. Bishop's Letters
from Holland, and Mr Steneer's Letters stopped by the late Council of State,
they will find strange proceedings in the business of the Prize-Silver
howsoever, for the present it is stifled and not examined; in convenient time I
may play the Surgeon, and probe it for the service of the Commonwealth.

20. July 1653. THO. VIOLET.
Sir! I desire you to communicate this Paper to the Council of State; It being
for the service of the Nation.



IT may be objected by some that are willing to Cavil at any thing I do, that I
have not don well, to put all the Transactions of this business into Print,
many things in this action being not convenient to com to public view. To
give an answer to this objection, for I conceiv I shall meet it in my Dish by
some that carp at me;
My Answer is,

1. THis Narrative is at the present, Printed only for the information of the
Members of Parliament and Council of State, and the Council of Officers of his
Excellency the Lord General (this present Parliament and Council of State,
being the only Judges to give me relief in my just demands) the former
Parliament and Council of State for whom I did this service being now dissolved
as a Parliament and Council.

2. I most humbly conceiv that this present Parliament having now in their
possession, all the Silver I stayed in the Court of Admiraltie, and several
other Prize-Ships will be honorably pleased to see me have my due Reward,
which was promised me by the late Council of State, and that is my estate
again restored unto me, or so much as can be by the power of the Parliament,
and to make up the rest of my estate that cannot be restored either in money
or Offices; the some of eleven thousand pounds, according to my particular in
this Book fol. 63. and this was the agreement and promiss I had from the
Committee of Foreign affairs, and others of the Council of State, besides many
of the Members of Parliament told me, I deserved a greater Reward for this
business, more then to be restored to my estate, for that they were of
opinion, if once my cause of Sequestration should be heard in the House, I would
be cleared of my Sequestration. Truly I humbly say, were I in any
Commonwealth in Christendom, and had don them the like service as I have don
here, and had nothing to pretend too, but this service; I have heard some
Travelers say, I should for my discovery of so great a business, have many
thousand pounds beyond what I Petition for as my due. I should be injurious to
the Justice of the Parliament, if I should make any declaration as a question
of receiving my due.

3. I humbly conceiv, that the former Council were as Factors and Agents for
this Commonwealth, and entrusted by the former Supreme Power, and what I did
with them, I do the same thing (with humility I say it) to this present
Supreme Power, and to the present Council of State. I did them this service for
the Commonwealth and not for any particular person, or for any particular
man's profit in the Council of State, and therefore though the particular
persons be changed in the Government, the Commonwealth is not changed, the
Commonwealth has the Silver, the Commonwealth in honor is engaged to do me
right; these present Governors, are as Stewards for the Commonwealth, and if
my reward should not be punctually performed by the present Power, it would
for ever hereafter be of dangerous consequence to the State, and would
discourage any to serve the State. I have don the State in this particular, the
greatest service that ever was don in England by any man of my condition, to
save them near four hundred thousand pounds in Silver of our enemies, in this
conjuncture of time. It will save Taxes and replenish the Nation with money,
and it is easy to apprehend what advantages the State has by it.

4. If I had not given every Member of Parliament in Print, a Narrative of my
whole Transactions in this business of the Silver, and Prizes in the Court of
Admiraltie, how could I put in my Petition into the Parliament, to have a Reward
for my services, and never to show all the groundwork, or original occasions,
or Transactions, upon which in justice and equity my Petition ought to be
granted by this present Parliament, they having the benefit the former Parliament
had, having by my means sowed the seed, and this Parliament reaping the harvest;
I humbly hope they will allow me a little gleanings, it is said, Thou
shalt-not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the Corn; the State
never had had this Silver in the Barn, had I not trod and trod again for it.

5. I have found many of the late Parliament men, and some of the late Council
of State with several others, their followers and friends having relation to
them, getting my Papers into their hands, have acted their parts in several
Scenes of the State at several Committees, several Treaties in Foreign Affairs,
in several Offices, as in the Mint, and at the Council of Trade, and at and in
several emploiments in this Nation: which papers of mine I have presented them
with, by means thereof some have assumed more to themselves then was ever in them
upon a strict examination; for I have sat up many nights and days at vast
expense and study to bring the State's business about; and some others by my
papers have gotten great employments (whereas if they had been truly examined
of the worth of themselves, they would some of them been found Emptie-beaded and
long-bill'd Wood-cocks) these men having served me as the hogs does the man
that shake's them down the Alcorns, they eat them up as fast as they fall, but
never look to give thanks to the man that shook them down; being so far from
acknowledging my civil respects unto them, that for my courtesies in this kind,
to some I have met withal after I have been instrumental to bring them to good
Offices and Preferment, they have don me ill offices and disrespect; I shall
forbear naming of them, hoping for the future they will have more of
Christianity than to render me evil for good; many of my friends that have
been privy to their ingratitude, have told me both of their confidence and
impudence in Relation to me as aforesaid; and this is one reason wherefore I
Print these Papers, that these Rooks for the future may be discovered.

6. For my presenting this Narrative unto the Supreme Power, I am autorized to
do it by Order of this present Council of State 10th of June 1653. to present
all abuses that are or have been in the managing of the Silver-Prizes, and by
Order of Parliament the 12. of July 1653. an Order to examine how the Treasure
coming into the State, may be managed with the least charge and expens, and
how all persons that have received the money for the Commonwealth, may be
called to account; another Order of Parliament of the 20. of July 1653. where a
Committee is appointed to receiv such Petitions to the Parliament, as are proper
to the legislative power, or not else, were to be relievable with power to send
for Papers, Records and Witnesses, by an Order of the aforesaid Date, I am
inpowr'd to present these propositions, for the advantage of the Commonwealth,
that so for the future, some good Rules and Laws may be made for the Court of
Admiraltie; and this Narrative is one of the principallest for the saftie and
profit of this Nation, that has or shall, I humbly conceiv, be presented to
the Parliament.

1. As in relation of the Silver now a Coining in the Tower.

2. Several other Prize-Ships, and discovering several frauds, and breachs of
trust in some persons, to the great damage of the Commonwealth:

3. There is a Committee appointed for the public Treasury, and for the best
improovment, these propositions is for them, wherein by careful mannaging of
the sale of the Prize-goods, they may improve the same many thousand pounds
yearly; the carriage of that business of the sale of your Prize-goods, I humbly
desire may be called to a strict and exemplar count.

4. I humbly think that there is not one Member in the House will conceiv his
time lost to be made acquainted with the several passages of this Narrative;
if I knew any would not bestow the reading of it, I would spare my pains in
presenting them with it.

7. If I would have been taken off of the Prosecution of this business, as some
are who offered me their assistance several times about Januarie last; now
their Actions are turned, they are at present for the Merchants that claim this
Silver, and act the Merchants-business against the Commonwealth: if I would
have don the same thing, I needed not at this day have petitioned for my
damages, to the Parliament; my deserting the prosecution, had lost the State's
business, for which I could have had a eleven thousand pounds paid me with
thanks, any where in Christendom I would have had it paid me: but I never
have or will by God's assistance, leav the Commonwealth for particular profit.
Had I don as some have don, (whel'd about) the State had been cozened of every
penny of these Prizes; but those that know me truly, know I am of another
temper; I desire all men whomsoever in this Nation, to give me a charge to
this present Parliament, that directly or indirectly, I ever for my own private
use, received one penny of any man for any favor, connivance or other ways
whatsoever in the late King's time; and I freely have gotten many man his
pardon, from the late King: and now I am engaged in this business, no man shall
directly or indirectly draw me to betraie the State's interest; if any can
give me a charge, I challenge them to do it, (I know I have enemies enough, I
desire them to give me a charge, I desire no favor). Upon the result of all, I
humbly desire the Parliament to consider seriously, how many men would have
served the Parliament so faithfully as I have don, upon the single account of
acting against all Merchants and others in the World, for the Honor of the
Parliament, and saftie of my native Country. If this be not duly considered
by this Parliament, and my estate restored, all men for the future will have a
care how they serve the Public, to bring a ruin on themselves for being
honest to their Nation.

8. That whereas several Honorable Members of the former Council of State,
Members of Parliament are named in this Narrative, I do humbly appeal to their
Honors for the particular business they are named in, for the truth of what is
ascerteined, both for the matter, time and circumstance, only putting it into
a form.

9. This Narrative I put forth for the information of the present Judges of the
Court of Admiraltie, that so they may be acquainted with the several abuses,
formerly acted by some in the Court of Admiraltie, and that they carefully see,
that such remedies, by Act of this present Parliament, may be made for the due
regulating the Officers, and proceedings of that Court for the future, that all
former abuses, and deceits formerly put on the Commonwealth, may be
prevented; I humbly desire an Order of Parliament, that the Judges in the
Admiraltie be Ordered to take an exact account, what Ships have been
discharged the Prize-Office, by Order of the Admiraltie, since the first of
August, 1652. to the first of August 1653. and the days when, and what Ships
were seized for the State, and what Ships for Prizes of private men of War,
there is now depending in the Court of Admiraltie this 1. of August, 1653. and
in some other particulars which I will attend the Judges of the Admiraltie in. I
do humbly desire Sr Sackvil Crow, Doctor Walker, Doctor Clark, Advocates of the
Common wealth, Mr Lieutenant of the Tower, Liev. Colonel Joice, Colonel Wetton,
Mr Oxenbridge and Mr Sparrow, Commissioners of Dutch Prize goods; Mr Jsaac
Doreslaws, Mr William Riley, Keeper of the Records in the Tower, and all others
that are named in this Narrative to declare, whether the proceedings and things
set down, be not a true Narrative of my transactions in this business, the
putting the said business into a form being allowed me; all which pains and
charge had been saved, if the old Council of State and Parliament had continued,
many of them were privy to every one of these passages, and could have
reported it to the House, without putting me to the trouble to Print this
Narrative.

And I humbly referr my self to the judgment of all judicious men, whether
there was not a necessity to Print this Narrative aforesaid, for the due and
true information of all the Honorable Members of this present Parliament; I
humbly conceiving, every one of them having equal and Supreme Power to do me
Justice in this my humble Petition, (and I pray God in Heaven direct them)
that they may do me their humble Petitioner right in this cause: for as I am
dealt with in this business, it will remain an Record, either to encourage or
discourage any for the future, to do the State service in the like kind. In
the first place, I have had constantly in my eye, in the whole course of my
proceedings in this weighty business, the Saftie, Benefit, Advantage and Honor
of this Common wealth in this conjuncture of time, venturing in this action,
both my person, estate and life, to accomplish and do the Commonwealth this
service, against public Ministers of foreign Princes, Judges and Officers in a
Court of Admiraltie, and hundreds of Merchants both English and others, as
every Member of this present Parliament may see from the first to the last of
this my Narrative.

Secondly, I have had a careful eye, that upon doing this difficult service,
that the Parliament might (acording to the promiss of the Council of State, upon
my undertaking this business) restore me to my estate which has been unduely
taken from me, that so I might have to live of my own in a plentiful way, as
I have don formerly, and be enabled to serve the Commonwealth thereby.

And these are the true reasons, that caused me to Print this Narrative, and
no other; I would have any that are not of this opinion know, I can keep
secrets as well as another man, and many hundred secrets I know both of times
past, and present, that shall be buried in perpetual silence, except such a
necessity as this is, which is for the saftie of the Nation, and for the
saving my whole estate, enforces me to discover them. I humbly leav it to the
judgment of any just discreet or honest man; whether I could never get this my
business truly stated to this Parliament, without setting forth this, Narrative,
and I humbly leav it to any indifferent man supposing he had all his estate
unduely taken away from him, as mine is from me, whether he would spare to
speak, or leav any stone unturned, if all he had should be lost for want
thereof.

The whole business is humblly left to the Justice, Equity and Piety of this
Honorable Parliament, at whose feet I prostrate it, and shall daily pray for
their prosperity in this World and in the World to com.

THO VIOLET.
Aug. 3. 1653.
FINIS.
A List of all such Ships as the Fleet of the PARLIAMENT of England have brought
into this Commonwealth as Dutch-Prizes, (which Ships have all been discharged
by the High Court of Admiraltie, the days here-under written) besides several
other Ships discharged as Dutch-prizes brought into this Commonwealth by
diverse private men of War, the particular names and times of their discharge, I
humbly desire the Register of the High Court of Admiraltie may be ordered to
bring into the Parliament.
Also I humbly desire, that the Right Honorable Admiral Blake may be desired
to send up unto the Parliament what Ships of Hamborough, Lubeck, Danzick, or any
of the Hans-Towns, he or any of his Officers has given passes to sail to the
foresaid places, since August 12, 1652.
Ships and Goods therein restored Masters. The Parties to whom. December. 10. 1652
A Sloape called the Love and Goods, London Luther Mayeer Unto the Mr and Comp.
December. 16. 52 Fisher of Straelsondt and Goods, Dover Gaspor Viscar Unto the Mr
and owners December. 16. 52 Peter of Straelsondt and Goods, London Albert
Hubertson Unto the Mr and owners December. 16. 52 Abraham's Sacrifice and Goods
Ditto Unto Peter Scrother for the use etc. December. 16. 52 Fortune and Goods
Ditto Berent Van Dunk Unto the said Mr and owners December. 16. 52 St John
Baptist, and Goods Bartle Johnson Unto the Mr for the owners December. 18. 52 St
John Baptist, and Goods Rattey Bye Mr Unto the said Mr for etc. December. 18. 52
George of Hambrough and Goods, Falmo Martine Stehew Unto the said Mr for etc.
December. 18. 52 St John and Goods Ditto Berent Johnsonson Unto the Mr for etc.
December. 18. 52 Temperance, and Goods Frederick Witherick Unto the Mr for etc.
December. 4. 52 Peter and Goods except the Silver, Ditto Daniel Stretman Unto the
Mr for etc. October. 15. 52 St Jo. Baptist of Horn, and goods, except a part,
Ditto Inebrand Peterson Unto Laurence de Geere October. 1o. 52 Goods Scedulate in
the Cock, alias Rosecrame Tenby Unto Don Antonio de Plato October. 22. 52 Young
Tobias, and Goods, Cows Wesell Gosenson Mr Unto Zachary Lappa July 30. 52 Love
Galliots, and goods, London Sveyer Johnson Unto Lewis de Geere, and compa
Septem. 29. 52 Goods Scedulate in the Cock, alas Rosecrame Tynby Unto Iacintho
Lopez, October. 12. 52 Ann of Ostend, and Goods, Plimo Daniel Cornellis Unto Joos
Fremont, and Compa December. 10. 52 Six^ie eight Butts of Oil in the Griman,
London Unto Cornellis and Gerard Knife Septem. 21. 52 A Sixth part of the Ship
Hopewell, and Goods Peter Johnson Unto John Southwood, or assigns October. 8. 52
part of Ancona of Venice with freight due, Ditto Adrian Hendrickson Unto
Eustace Van Ekey December. 22. 52 Katharine of Hambrough, and goods, Ditto
Bristoll Unto the Mr for etc. December. 10. 52 A Chest and half and Barrel of
Sugar, Fortune of Flushing Unto John Hubine, or assigns October. 15. 52 part of
one two and thirtieth part of the Ship Maid of Enchusen, and part of one two
and thirtieth part of the lading, and 13 saccardave planks Wm Johnson Lawne
London Unto Zachary Lappa, or assigns August. 15. 52 13/16 parts of the King
David and lading Walter Jacobson Mr Unto Simon Clark, and Compa Septem. 21. 52
Fortune of Hambrough, and goods, Plimo John Strother Master Unto Philip Dunker,
etc. October. 1o. 52 May-Flower, and goods, Portsmo Andrew Short Master Except
part of Ship and goods for salvage August. 5. 52 Gift of God of Air, and
goods, Plimo Thomas Kennedy Mr Unto Thomas Jarvan, and others October. 5. 52
Fortune of Newport, and goods, Ditto Joos de Vink Master Unto Gasper Sanson,
and others November. 17. 52 Peace of Wisemire, and goods, Dover Claes Maults
Master Unto the said Mr and Compa November. 19. 52 St Jacob, and goods, London
Christian Vonderwetter Unto the Mr for the owners November. 19. 52 Black Eagle,
and goods, Dover Harman Luders Unto Hendrick Vanaskine, and others November. 17.
52 St Matthew of Hambrough, and goods, Ditto Henry Cruse Unto Peter Larkins,
and others November. 17. 52 Charity of Gottenbrough, Ditto Paul Pawson Boman
Unto George Van Lingard, and others November. 21. 52 Hunter, and goods, Ditto
Claves Grisel Master Unto the Mr and Compa Novem. 17. 52 Fortune of
Straelsondt, and goods, Ditto Daniel Ranges Unto the said Daniel Ranges, and
others Novem. 22. 52 Icedom, and goods, Ditto Pasque Alberts Unto the Mr for
the use of Hen. Johnson Novem. 19. 52 King David, and goods, London Gillos
Lites Unto Vincent Kiningsburgh, and Compa Novem. 19. 52 Sampson of Wisemire,
and goods, Dover Severt Godtman Unto Henrick Vanderdlen, and others Novem. 17.
52 Hope of Dantzick, and goods, Portsmo John Johnson Unto Peter Benson, and
Compa Novem. 17. 52 Land of Promise, Dover Garret Higenloe Unto Burgo-Mr
Wakeman, and others Novem. 17. 52 St Ellin of Rostock, Ditto Hendrick Dureloffe
Unto the said Ma and Compa Novem. 17. 52 Fortune of Hambrough, and goods, Ditto
David Beck Unto the Mr for the use of the owners Novem. 17. 52 Fortune of
Lubeck, and goods, Portsmo Joachim Dunke Unto the Mr and Compa Novem. 17. 52
Justice of Hambrough, London Frederick Fox Unto the Mr and Compa Novem. 19. 52
St John, and goods, Dover Hendrick Pape Unto the Mr for etc. Novem. 17. 52
Concord of Lubeck, and goods, Ditto John Dureloffe Unto Anthony Weffels and
Compa Novem. 19. 52 Hope of Hambrough, and goods, Ditto Hendrick Elders Unto
John Jennink and Compa Novem. 19. 52 Sampson of Hambrough, and goods, London
Hans Hiteman Unto William de la Bistrus and others Novem. 17. 52 Black Ox, and
goods, Ditto Garret Hendrickson Unto Andrew Garrretson and others Novem. 8. 52
Lno King David part Brazeile-wood Unto Baldwin Matthews Novem: 22. 52 St Jacob
of Hambrough, Falmo Client Marenson Unto John Lemerman and Compa October. 15. 52
Lno Little Prince part and of Tackle and Furniture Cleas Junison Unto Ralph
Tomaines October. 12. 52 Ditto Antona of Venice part and of Tackle, etc. Peter
Johnson Unto Baltazar Vandegoes December. 1o. 52 Two White Hawks, and goods, Dover
Peter Harmason Beker Unto the said Mr Novem. 19. 52 Love, and goods, London
John Hendricks Unto William Blachford and others December. 1o. 52 St George, and
goods, Dover John Peterson Grelpe Unto the Mr for the use of the owners Novem.
19. 52 Hope, and goods, London Hendrick Martines Unto the said Mr and Compa
Novem. 29. 52 Childrens Plea, and goods Simon Fox Unto the said Mr and Compa
December. 18. 52 St Sebastian, and goods John Geest Unto the said Mr. for the use
of the owners

Signed, THO. VIOLET.

Noble Sir!
I Have here presented you a true Narrative of some remarkable passages,
concerning the Silver Prizes, viz. the Ships, Sampson, Salvador, and George,
and several Prizes depending in the High-Court of Admiraltie, with some prime
observations of the Trade of this Nation, and for regulating the Mint in the
Tower of London.

Sir! There are some men, when they behold a house ready finished, they do not at
the first apprehend the several pins, and beams, and materials that make's and
frame's the building; there is many a nail driven, which the Spectator never
see's; the builder that paie's for it, he only keep's that particular
account, as I have don for this Book, Humbly present you.

I must confess, this is but a thatched Cottage, but it has cost me many
years pains and trouble, and great expense, to present it to you, in that ruff,
and unpollished shape it is in; I have for many years night and day, had
several helps and hands, both in England and beyond-Seas, from choice
intelligencers, and out of several manuscripts in the custody of Sr John Cook,
when he was Secretary to the late King; and since the Parliament, I have got
what I could by industry, from Merchants and others, both at home and abroad,
at my great expense, to make me serviceable to my Country, in studying the
individual prosperity of every man, that is a true lover of this Commonwealth.

Sir! He that travail's far in a Winter's day, had need to be up before
Sunrising. And such honorable Members as your self, shall and have no doubt
found the affairs of the Commonwealth, left strangely entangled, the 20. of
April 1653. The great God of Heaven direct you to set all strait in the
Commonwealth; and that you may amend what you found amiss, to the comfort of
this Nation, and to you, and your posterities, everlasting honor, whereby this
Commonwealth may bless God for you, and other worthy Members of Parliament,
and Army.

SIR! There is a Rule in the State of Venice, when their Embssadors com home,
the Senate there requires them to give an account, of the negotiations in
Foreign parts, and to declare the conditions, manners, fashions and powerful
parties and factions in those Kingdoms or Commonwealths from whence they
return.

An Ambassador of Venice returning from England, in the late King Charles's
time, was, according to custom, to give his usual account in the Senate; he,
after a long Oration of the power of the Spanish, Italian, French, Dutch, and
Scotch-interest in the Court of England, their several influences on all the
actions of the late King, and his Counsel, was required to give an account of
the power and interests the English Natives had themselves in their own
Counsels; to which the Ambassador replied, That the Natives themselves had
little or no power in the Court of England; for though the King's Privy
Council had all English bodies, yet they had Spanish, French, Dutch, and Scotch
hearts, and many of them Foreign Prince's Pensioners; and the true lovers of
their Country, the Natives of England, had little power in their own Counsels;
the late King having a resolution to cast off all Parlaments, and to rule by
his own Prerogative.

The sad effects of those Counsels, and their miscarriages, brought the late
great miseries and Wars on this Nation.

May it pleas you Sir! I would to God some men could not justly say the like,
during some time of the late Parliament: many of their Counselors and Members in
the beginning of the late Parliament speaking all perfect Scotch and Presbytery;
and afterward some of their late Counselors perfect Spanish, Dutch and French.
SIR! I say I have found this a sad truth, ten thousand pounds deep and better,
to my particular estate.

SIR! let me most humbly entreat you to be instrumental, with all the worthy
Members of this present Parliament, to remember they are English, and to act
upon true English principles, esteeming the good of the Nation above all
private respects; and their faith and word once past, is ever to be kept,
either with particular men or States.

There was many Noble Gentlemen of the last Parliament labored it, and studied
to bring it about; but they were over-powred by several parties, and divisions
even amongst themselves; if there be any that hinder this good work in your
Counsels, I pray God to discover him, and to amend and convert him or bring him
to Justice.

That which I most humbly desire, is, for every man perfectly and freely (with
due reverence I humbly say it to the Supreme Authority) to speak his Countrie's
language, perfect English in all their words and actions; to be public
spirited men; that is, to study the just peace, wealth, prosperity and
happiness of every individual member of this Nation; and that they study the
restoring of Trade, the erecting of Manufactures, the setting all the poor on
work, to the relieving the aged and impotent, even such as have been struck by
God's hand, or for their Countrie's defense.

My most earnest suit to you, is, above all earthly things, diligently to
prepare Ships, men, and materials for to defend your Dominion of the Seas of
this Commonwealth; for without this, you, nor any one member in this Nation,
can call any thing their own, longer then it shall be lent them by the
courtesies of our neighbor-Nation.

And what favor upon their prevailing can be exspected by us from them, their
former courtesies in the East Indies, and their late actions apparently declare
to every true English heart.

Upon honorable and just conditions, for the good of both Nations, God in his
good time I hope and pray for, that he will find a way to save his servant
Isaac, that is, both English and Dutch; and catch the Ram in the Bush, I mean
the Jesuits that lately kindled this fire, and to this day blow the coals
between both Nations.

Noble SIR! I have in this Narrative, showed you a Watch in pieces, and some of
the Wheels and Springs that make's the motion, or else a Carpenter's Rule, the
inches and Mathematical lines. Yet noble Sir! I humbly tell you, the showing a
man a Rule and a Watch does not enable him, without long study, tools and
materials, to make a Watch, or a Rule.

I humbly say, I had rather be a Carpenter by daily practice to know how to
build a house, then a Mathematitian by Theorick, which can talk of an hundred
things in framing an house; but give him a Mallet, Saw and Square, he know's
not how to handle one of them.

So it is not the Theorick, but the Practick part that can do this service
which I have don for the Commonwealth. Sir! I humbly say, there must be Men
read, as well as books; and many years study to do this service.

SIR! I deliver not this paper to erect Offices and Employments upon the
recommendations of friends, for any in Power, to make such use of these my
humble Proposals, as some of the late Parliament have don. viz. To put into great
places of trust, and skill, ignorant and unskilful men, or Rooks; as many of
your Treasurers and other Officers have been; that, by indirect ways, have
crammed their purses, and bought incredible vast possessions.

Their moneys and lands they now have, belong's truly to the Commonwealth, and
every particular member in this Nation, have been abused by their indirect
ways.

For in the late Parliament and late Council of State, many things were
propounded of excellent use for the Commonwealth, both by my self and others;
but seldom any thing took in any other mould, then that such, and such Members,
their brethren, kindred, or favorites, must have the management of all the
Public Treasuries, Customs and Excise, Prize good, Mint-affairs, and all other
places of profit.

And justly I conceiv they ought to have the pre-eminence, provided every one
of their attempts had been just, their allowances moderate, and their whole
transactions fairly and truly carried, without fraud.

Noble Sir, it will upon strict examination be found for these many years,
several public Officers have not duly accounted for their Receipts of money,
to the Commonwealth, by which abuses of not calling the Treasurers, or
Committee Men to a strict account yearly, or oftener, according to the former
customs in the Exchequer. The Commonwealth has in their Officers hands at
this day remaining, Millions of money; which is as due to them, as a man's
rent is due when a Tennant enjoy's his Land-Lord's lands; and had all the
accounts of the Commonwealth, been kept in a Regular way, the public debts
might have been far better paid, and the Commonwealth have kept their Lands
entire, which has been sold at an under value above a Million of money, for
Rents of Lands that yearly might have been paid this Republic, to the World's
end, had some Members and Treasurers of the late Parliament been just.

SIR! This Nation may be compared to the poor man in the Gospel, that fell
amongst a party of Theivs, who have wounded us several ways; these Theivs are
some of the late Members of Parliament, some Treasurers, Committee Men and several
other Officers of the Public; some of them has served the Commonwealth, as
many lewd people do at great fires in Cities, pretend they com to carry away
the goods that they should be kept from the fire, and for the use of the
owners, and by all outward appearance in their words, express themselves to be
very instrumental to squench the fire, when originally in their hearts and
actions they blow the coals, and com only to pelfer and proline the money,
plate, linen and goods they can lay their hands on. And the poor owners in
such times of f^ight, delivering his or their goods to any that will band them
from the fire; many a merciless Theif, instead of keeping this money, plate and
goods, safe for the distressed and afflicted owner, carrie's it directly home
to his own house, and there felenously keep's it for his private use, and so
add's affliction to affliction; when the poor and distressed man, know's he
was careful to keep his plate, his money and some goods from the fire, but has
had the ill luck to deliver it into such hands that have robbed him; who
pretended, during the fire, to be friends, but after proved Theivs.

SIR! I humbly referr it to you, should such a Theif, com before you, whether
you would not think it to little to make the Theif restore to the true owner,
the party that had a great loss by fire, his own proper goods, so unduly and
felenously detained, and if upon refusal and denial, and just and due proof by
good witness, or taking the goods in the Theivs custody, whether you ought not
in Justice to send such Theivs to a house of Correction, or try them by a Jurie
and hang them.

SIR! Let me entreat you for God's sake consider, you having the power of this
Nation now in your hands, whether you can answer it to God, your own
conscience, or this abused Nation, for whom you serve, now I have with all
humility, humbly made you acquainted with it, if you and other worthy Members
of Parliament do not do the Commonwealth right in this particular; I humbly
say, it is the prayers and exspectations of thousands to have this strictly
called to account.

Sir! I humbly present you not with one Theif, but with hundreds of Theivs, not
pilfering Theivs that steal's for necessity to fill their bellies, but mighty
Theivs, such as have swallowed of the Commonwealth's Treasure, some of them one
hundred thousand pounds a man; these Theivs, lurk not in barns, allies,
thatched houses or blind places, but in Palaces and Lord-ships, which they
have fraudently gotten; and almost every Parish in this Nation, has one of the
brood of these Caterpillars.

SIR! my most humble suite to you is, to remember the time of this Parliament is
set, the days weeks and months run quickly about, many that have cap't and
crouched to several of the late Parliament men, when they were in power; now
Sir, they slite and scorn several of them, for abusing their trust; for God's
sake avoid that Rock which destroyed several of them, which was self-seeking
and covetuousness, and feeding men's expectation with vain delares; at last the
tears of the poor and oppressed ascended to heaven, and God in his good time
will call to account, such as while they had a band of being the
Commonwealth's nursing Fathers, have almost starved the Child; Sir! when this
Commonwealth has caled for bread, some of them has given it a Stone; when
this Commonwealth has been a thirst, some of them has given it Vinigar and
Gall in stead of wine to refresh them; many of them being men of no
conscience, no faith, promiss-breakers and self-seekers.

I humbly leav this to your consideration, whether these Gripers, the
Treasurers, Committees, and others of the Commonwealth's spunges, ought not to
be made restore what they have unjustly detained, and be squeezed; to cut some
of these men in pieces and make them Hawk's-meat, they will be as acceptable a
sacrifice as Emson and Dudley was in Henry the Eighth's time.

Let but the State pay me my money out of the Silver I caused to be stayed,
which is now coining in the Tower; which the late Council of State promised
me; amounting to the sum of Eleven thousand pounds, I will find ways to
bring into this Parliament diverse hundred thousand pounds, which will be
acceptable to all the good people of this Nation, and save them taxes; and if
these Treasurers and Committee Men be angry when they see what I propound, I
shall value their anger no more then I do some Merchants, and some others that
are mad at me for staying the Dutch Prize-silver; Sir! I had not common
reason, if I did not see and know some men have and will leav no stone unturned
to do me a mischief for this my affection and faithfulness to this Nation
staying the Silver.

But if my service be duly respected by such worthy persons as your self,
who is qualified and empowered to do me right; it shall encourage me to
proceed in this service, for the benefit of this Commonwealth. Thus with the
tender of my service and due respects, I remain,

Your humble servant Thomas Violet.

FINIS.
AN INDEX, For the Narrative of the Ships Sampson, Salvador and George;
presented to the PARLIAMENT, Aug. 3. 1633.
THomas Violet's Petition to the Parliament, p. 1, 2, 3, 4. Thomas Violet's
first discovery about the Prize-Silver, 8. December. 1652. Presented to my Lord
Bradshaw and M. Allen, p. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. An Order of the Council of
State 13. of December. 1652. p. 13. Papers delivered to Doctor Walker, from p.
13. to 26. A Letter to Doctor Walker, p. 26, 27. A Letter to M. Vincent de Bar,
p. 28, 29. A Letter to M. Arnold Brames, p. 29, 30. Thomas Violet's Affidavit,
p. 31, 32, 33. Papers of the Narrative of the proceeding about the Silver and
Prizes delivered in to the Lord Whitlock and Sr William Massam, being of the
Committee of Foreign affairs, p. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43,
44, 45. My Letter to my Lord Bradshaw, and Colonel Morley, concerning Cap. Otho
George's assaulting the Commonwealth's witnesses in the Streets, and stabbing
them, p 46. My Petition to the Council of State, p. 46. Referred to the
Committee of Foreign affairs, p. 37, 38. My Letter to M. Jsaac Doreslaws, p.
49, 50. Papers I left with my Lord Bradshaw, Sir James Harrington and M. Allen,
about the 6. of Feb. 1653. p. 53. 54. A Letter to M. Ed Watkins, p. 54, 55, 56,
57, 58. A Paper to my Lord Bradshaw and others of the Council, about the
restoring me to my Estate, p. 59, 60. The Dutch at one time before I
discovered it to the Council of State, did get out of the Parlament's hands
since Aug. 1652. the sum of eleven hundred thousand pounds, and they had
cosened the State of every penny of their money now a Coining in the Tower,
being near four hundred thousand pounds, bad it not been for Tho. Violet, p.
61. as appears by this Narrative. An account of my Estate taken away from me
by the late Parliament, p. 63, 64, 65. Thomas Violet's Petition to the late
Parliament, p. 67, 68. A Copy of the late King's Letter to the Lord Major and
City of London, p. 69, 70. Several transactions that followed thereupon, p.
70, 71, 72. Upon the dissolving of the late Parliament, I made my Addresses to
Colonel Wetton and Lieutenant Colonel Joice, to present my former services to
the Honorable Council of Officers, which accordingly they did, 73. Thomas
Violet's Letter to the Right Honorable General Monk, Admiral of the
Commonwealth of England, Apr. 27. 1653 p. 73, 74, 75. Tho. Violet's humble
Desire and Petition to the Right Honorable Major General Desborrow, Colonel
Bennet and Colonel Joans, May 4. 1633. p. 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80. Tho. Violet's
Letter to the Right Honorable Colonel Bennet, humbly desiring him to acquaint
the Council of State with the contents, p. 80, 81, 82. Papers delivered to the
Right Honorable Colonel Jones and Colonel Bennet, concerning several
Prize-Ships, p. 83, 84. seting forth, it is now apparent what Spirit Rules in
some Persons in the Admiraltie, to the great damage of the State, p. 85. as
appears by Cap. Bishop's Letters, p. 86. and that Covetousness and
Self-seeking has betrayed many of the State's Priz-Ships, Silver and goods in
the Admiraltie, p. 87, 88. My Letter to the Right Honorable Colonel Jones and
Colonel Bennet, concerning the best ways for the State, both for the least
charge and keeping the particular account of every parcel of Silver taken out
of the Sampson, Salvador and George ships, p 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93. An Order
of the Council of State, June 10. 1653. to Tho. Violet, to discover to the
Council, what abuses have been acted in the managing of their Prizes, and their
lading either Silver or Merchandise, since the bringing up the State's Prizes,
p. 94. Thereupon I drew the Draught of the Paper for the Parliament, setting
forth several abuses concerning the management of the State's Prizes, and to
prevent the like for the future, and to call some that have abused them to
account, p. 94, 95, 96, 97, 98. Several reasons which did induce me to Print
this Narrative, p. 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106.
AN INDEX OF Such Papers as I presented to the PARLIAMENT the 15. February 1652.
AN Answer of the Corporation of Moniers to Peter Blondeau. Tho. Violet's
Letter to Mr John Benfield. page 1, 2. The Corporation of Monier's Letter to
Tho. Violet. p. 3. Peter Blondeau's Representation as a Warning, touching
several Disorders happening by money ill-favoredly coined, p. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10. Peter Blondeau's humble Memorandum for the prevention of many abuses
concerning Coins, and will cost no more then the ordinary unequal Coin which
is used now, p. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. An Order of the
Commitee of the Mint, 14 June 1651, for a trial of making money by the Moniers
and the Frenchman, p. 21. The humble Proposition of the Provest and Moniers of
the Mint to Sr James Harrington Chairman of the Committee of the Mint, p. 22,
23. The 8 of May 1651, the Committee ordered the Frenchman and Ramadge that
worked for the English to make their triel. p. 24. The Provest and Monier's
answer to the objections of Peter Blondeau, p. 26, 27, 28, 29. The Provest and
Moniers humbly desire a Law to be made for the discovering and punishing all
Transporters of Money, according to the Certificate of the chief Officers of
the Mint, 20 December. 1647, p. 32, 33, 34. A Letter of the Provest and Moniers
to Tho. Violet, to desire him to Petirion, in their behalf, the Committee of
the Mint for an allowance of eigbtic seven pounds 18s 5d for their trial with
the Frenchman, 37, 38. The names of the Moniers and Laborers working in the
Mint, the 27 June 1652, p. 40, 41. A Letter from Transmarine parts, setting out
the abuses acted on the Coins and Bullion of England, p. 45. In France they
have Courts of Record for the Regulating their Moneys, such a Court ought to
be set up in England, and strict Laws made, and men appointed to see them put
in execution, p. 49, 47. A greater quantity of English money counterfeited and
made forth of the Mint, then is coined in the Tower, for the last six years, p.
48, till I caused the Prizesilver to be stayed in December. 1652. The great
mischiefs that is befallen them in Ireland by light and clipped money; some
Goldsmiths and others in London and Bristow the chief autors of this mischief,
to have the bottom found out, p. 49 Against culling and melting down of English
money, p. 50. The great mischiefs several Exchanging Goldsmiths in
Lombardstreet do the State, p. 50. The mischiefs that com to England by the
late King's setting up several Mints at Bristow, Shrewsburie, York, Oxford,
Carlisle, p. 52. Against the making Gold and Silver Thread in England, being A
great consumption of the Treasure, p. 54. Several Orders of Parliament for
passing the Act against Transporters of Gold and Silver, p. 55, 56, 57, and
proceedings of the Committees about the same. The inconveniences of Rasing
money, p. 59, 60, 61. A Warrant of the Council of State to search for Silver
stolen out of the Prize-ships, p. 67. Tho. Violet's Letter to the Dutch-prize
Commissioners, p. 67, 68, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74. The Dutch Skippers will
swear any thing to deceiv the State of their Prizes, p. 75 Tho. Violet's
proceeding in the Court of Admiraltie, the first time be attended that
business, showing the Court several reasons against the discharge of the
Prize-ships, till all his Witnesses were examined, p. 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80.
The damage arising to this Commonwealth by their delaie of examining of
Witness giving their Dutch-claimers time to forge any claims, p. 81. The Dutch
Factors in London deeply engaged to get this silver and prizes out of the
State's hand, p. 81, several Expresses sent to Spain by the Merchants to get
the Spaniards to claim this silver, with the reasons to induce the Dutch to do
it, p. 82, 83. Tho. Violet, greatly fears things are not fairly carried by
some in Doctors Commons, p. 82 All the Silver abord Otho George taken in by
night in Spain, p. 82, 83. Otho George a more dangerous enemy then is easily
apprehended, p. 83, 84. In the Ship Peter so much money claimed by the
Merchants, that there is not half the silver found as is claimed. p. 86. Tho.
Violet attended the Lord chief Justice Rolls about this business, he being
then Lord President of the Council; who upon pervsal of his Papers did great ly
commend Tho. Violet for his care of the safety of this Commonwealth, and the
13 Jan. 1653, his Lordship presented the many services I had don the
Commonwealth, to the Council of State in staying the Prize-silver, p. 86. Mr
Hill and Mr Wilson, two of the Commissioners of Prize-goods, told me, they
were Merchants, and had their estates in Spain, and would appear no further,
without they could get an Act of Parliament to indemnifie them p 89, so that had
I not put in my Protest, tho Commonwealth had lost all the Prizes and Silver,
p. 89. My Letter and Postscript to Mr David Bud, 24 Dec. 1652, wherein I
earnestly press him not to betraie his Trust; and that if he did not mend for
the future, I would present him and his actions to the judgment of the
Parliament; who, if they bad not been dissolved as they were, would have made Mr
Bud, and some others in the Admiraltie, examples: this Parliament, I hope, will
call them to a strict account; for it concern's the safety of the Nation, to
watch well the actions of some in the Admiraltie, p. 90, 91. A List of the Ships
p. 99. Queen Elisabeth's quarrel with the Hans Towns, p. 99. The Jesuit's work
to set England and Holland by the Ears to destroy them both, p. 100, 101, 102,
103. Tho. Violet desire's the Commissioners for prize goods may be ordered to
deliver to the Parliament a List of all ships discharged, and the day when sent,
16 of December. 1652. p. 107. A Letter of the Prize-Commissioners to Mr Thurloe,
Secreatarie to the Council of State, declaring, that they they have found Tho.
Violet very active and knowing in making these discoveries of the Prizes, both
for the Silver and Goods; and that Tho. Violet had don the Commonwealth
several good and great services in the business of the Prizes; and desire's Mr
Thurloe to present the same to some of the Council of State, with the Tender of
their services, p. 108, 109. Tho. Violet's Petition to the Council of State,
referred to the Council of Trade, p. 156, 157. Order of the Council of State
for to consider of the ways to set the mint on work, and to take some course for
the hindering the Transporting Gold and Silver, p. 161. The Propositions of
Tho. Violet to the Committee for the Mint, and removing of abuses practiced on
the Coin and Bullion of the Nation, p. 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168.
Another Proposition of Tho. Violet for setting the Mint on work, and saving the
State fifteen hundred pounds a year, of what they have allowed the
Master-Worker of the Mint on his accounts; ordered by the Committee to be
reported to the Council of State, p. 169, to 172. Several orders of the
Committee of the Mint about a Trial with Peter Blondeau the Frenchman, p. 173,
174, 175, 176. An Order of the Committee of the Mint, to have the Transporters
of Gold or Silver, and all unlawful buying and selling Gold or Silver, or
Culling and Melting down the Current Silver, excepted out of the General
Pardon, 24 Jan. 1652, p. 173. Tho. Violet's brief observations of what has
been Acted at the late Council of Trade, from tha 20 Aug. 1650, to the last of
December 1651, viz. p. 177, 178, 179, 180.
I desire you to take notice, that I being surprised in time, for the sorting
of my Papers, and using several Printers for the Expedition, some of my Papers
have been misplaced and twice printed, through the neglect of those I entrusted
in this business; Which I hope will be no trouble to the judicious that read's
them. Also I desire, what literal faults they read may be amended by their
Pens; which shall oblige me, if God send me health, and as I see this well
taken, to present to your Honors a further addition, in this nature, for the
service of this Nation.

FINIS.

