SVBJECTION TO MAGISTRATES: BOTH Divine and Subordinate, Presented in a third
SERMON, Preached at the Election of the Lord Major of London, on Michaelmas
day, 1655.

By Richard Vines, Preacher of Gods Word at Laurence Jury London.

Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher power, for there is no
power but of God. The powers that be are ordained of God. LONDON, Printed for
Abel Roper at the Sun, over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1656.

Subjection to Magistrates both Supreme and Subordinate, The Third Sermon, at
the Election of the Lord Major of LONDON.
TITUS 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to
obey Magistrates, etc.
SUbjection to Civil Magistracy, even that, which obtained in the world at
that time pressed upon them of Christian profession with such cogent Arguments;
as are used by St. Paul, Romans 13. 1, 2, etc. and by St Peter, 1. Epist. Cap. 2.
verse. 13, 14, 15. does perspicuously intimate that which Calvin observes, what
ado the Apostles had to contain the new World of Christianity within the true
bounds of this duty, which he calls in my text (...), obedience to Magistracy.
For

1 The aspect or influence of Civil Authority at that time, Heathenish, was
very malignant to Christianity.

2 The Gospel liberty unto which the Christians were called, was by many
Pseudochristians stretched beyond the line, and mistaken, or misused unto
scandal and abuse.

3 That old ferment of the Jews, being a mutinous and seditions temper against
all Foreign and Gentile authority, in defense of their own (...), had with
either Jewish Fables, Titus 1. 14. spread into the Island, and inflamed the
natural humor thereof, which (as one observed) was always seditious, and whose
infamous character given of them by Epimenides, one of their own, even a
Prophet of their own, the Apostle verifies, Titus 1. verse. 12, 13. The Cretians
are always liars, evil beasts, idle bellies.

Whether some particular Reason at that timeindisposed Christians to subjection
unto Magistracy? or whether the universal pride of man aspiring Adam like to a
condition above himself? be the reason, that every Absalon aspires to be made
Judge, and every thistle or bramble aspires to be a King, I shall not now
enquire, but observe that not only the Apostles do inculcate this point of
subjection, but also in this text the Apostle charges the local Minister to put
the Christians, his Auditors in mind to be subject to principalities and
powers, to obey Magistrates, and so leaves the Doctrine, as by entail upon all
Ministers, and the duty upon all Christians, in all times.

In the Anatomy of this text, there will arise four considerable parts, which I
will form up into as many points of Doctrine.

1 Who the Remembrancer is, whom the Apostle does charge (...), to put them in
mind, and that is Titus, and all Colleagues with him in the Ministerial
Office, the Apostle one of the highest authority Ecclesiastical, provides for
the maintenance of the highest authority Political in the Commonwealth, and if
the people will submit to the Minister of Doctrine, it may be presumed they
will subject themselves to the Magistrate, who is the Minister of God for
government, this first part I sum up into this point.

1 That the Minister of the Word ought in his place and office to endeavor
that the Scepter of Majesty in the highest, the Sword of Magistratical
authority in the lower hand be kept in possession of their rights and dues,
which are subjection and obedience of the people.

2 Whose Remembrancer the Minister is, and they are Christians by their
profession, who come to his crib to feed, Not heathens, who neither acknowledge
any authority of God in the Minister, nor are much moved to this duty of
obedience for conscience toward God, but rather for fear, whereof (I mean the
punishment) the Magistrate himself, not the Minister, is the proper executioner
or Minister (...), says the text, put them in mind, and so the second point
is.

No Christian who is by his Christianity municeps Coeli, a freeman of
Jerusalem, has by his Christianity any privilege that may exempt him from, or
loosen the bands of that civil Authority which is over him, no, though it
remain unchristian.

3 These things wherewith Christians must be charged in relation to civil
authority are summed up under two heads, subjection, obedience, put them in
mind (...). The one of these calls for subjection to the function or office,
remember your subordination, that you are placed in a lower orb, and therefore
what the Higher powers may look for of inferior subjects, what the master
though crabbed and crooked, may expect of his servants, that is, subjection,
you must perform, Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Titus 2. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 18, etc.

The other of these calls for obedience to their Laws and Commands, and that is
(...), which though in the notion of the word it signify to obey Magistrates
or Rulers, and is so turned in our last English Translation in this place, yet
is applied to obedience to God, Acts 5. 29, 32. or unto our listenings to the
persuasions of men, though no Magistrates, Acts 27. 21. I confess, that
subjection and obedience in common intention of speech do not much differ.

When the word subject is set alone without a second, it includes obedience,
Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Titus 2. verse 5. and 9 Luke 2. 51. Jam. 4. 7.

When the word obedient is set alone without a second it comprehends
subjection, Acts 5. 29, etc. (I mean this of a voluntary and not enforced
subjection, Luke 10. 17.) But when both these words are used together in the
same place, as they are in this text, they may be more accurately distinguished.

Subjection relates to the person, that is supreme in place, function office,
and the contrary, or opposite hereunto is resistance; (...), are opposed, Romans
13. 2. that is, subjection and resistance.

Obedience properly relates to the Magistrate his Edicts, Laws, lawful and
honest commands.

And it has ordinarily been pleaded by honest disobeyers of unjust commands;
We refuse not to be subject, we resist not, we oppose not the authority;
therefore we submit our selves to the penalty of the Magistrates infliction
without resistance; but we dare not, we will not perform the command enjoined,
Dan. 3. 18. and thus its plain, there may be subjection to just authority (for
that is good and lawful) when there is not obedience unto unjust commands: the
one being ordained of God; when the command may be contrary to, and against
Gods.

The third point is the sum of that debt, which the subject owes to the civil
Magistrate, is to be subject to him in his place or office, and to be obedient
to him in his commands; I might say honest obedience, but that I look not to be
carped, no more then the Apostles did, that gave this command to servants, to
obey their masters in all things, Col. 3. 22. nor yet (though I acknowledge the
subject, or the servant to be (as he said) (...) a rational instrument) would I
open a gap for every unquiet and unsober dispute, that on purpose, to shift off
the Magistrates or the Masters commands, may think it enough to pretend they
are not honest, and so the Master shall indeed be the Master, but the servant
is the Judge, the Magistrate is the Magistrate, but the subject is the Judge,
which indeed he is of his own action, by the judgment of Discretion, but not
of the command by the judgment of Authority, for that would be an easy way to
overturn both authority and obedience, and to leave all to the best disputant.

4 Those to whom this debt is to be paid, are the principalities and powers,
they are all that are in rank of Magistracy respectively, both the Highest and
the Subordinate in this Scale; Principalities and Powers, says the text,
(...), principalities, that is (...), supereminent, or superexcellent powers,
Romans 13. 1. that are in highest orb (...) powers, those that are Presidents of
Provinces, who though not in highest orb of Supremacy, are yet in a nearer
orb to you, as being in the Sphere where you live. So the Apostle Peter, 1
Pet. 2. 14. Commands subjection, whether to them he calls (...) Kings, so the
Greek Authors call the Roman Emperors, meaning by Kings, such as was at that
time (...) in the Soverignty, and by (...) Governors, the inferior Officers
and Governors under the Supreme, and the Apostle Paul thus expresses the
several ranks of Magistrates, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Kings, and all that are in authority.

The Point of Doctrine is,

That this debt of subjection and obedience is due to all that have share in
the Civil Government respectively, whether they be in the Supremacy or in
Subordination.

The superscription that is upon a two pence, owns the same authority as that
which is upon a twelvepence, that word, Romans 13. 4, 6, the Ruler is, (...),
Gods Minister to thee for good, Gods public officer commends all Magistracy to
us. If the Supreme Officer was like the Sun, which by his motion carries his
light through his whole circuit, we should need no more, but himself, but he is
like the Sea that having all fullness in it self, sends from it self founains
and rivers to water all the Continent whither the Sea it self cannot come; And
God while he kept the chief Government over Israel (as I may say in his own
hand, whereupon Josephus calls it a Theocracy) did as we know, erect under
himself Judges or Dictators in their necessities who (as one Cunaeus de Repub.
observes) did always prosper in their achievements, being (as I may say)
Gods Lievtenants. In want of which we read, that there was no King in Israel,
not because the Sanhedrin did not sit at those times, but because there was no
Chief or Sovereign Magistrate that might exercise coercion, and work
deliverance in Gods stead. As for the dispensation of common Justice they had
the Seventy, the Viginti Triumvirate in the greater, and a Triumvirate in the
lesser Towns, and thus the public Justice was brought home to them, till there
arose some hard matter to be determined by Appeal, whose judgment was final in
the case, Deuteronomy. 17. 9, 10, 11, 12.

And therefore, if there be any (as there are) that think it necessary that the
Judicials of the Jews, and that the form and mode of Government that obtained
amongst them be re-introduced into other States and Kingdoms they may please to
consider, that even the Jewish form was variable, that the Apostle Peter
commands Christian subjection to every humane ordinance, and that Paul says,
that the powers that be (that is in the world at that time) are ordained of
God, Romans 13. 2.

These are the four points, which being thus cut out shall be made up into
further use in their order.

From the first of them, the Ministers duty to put the people in mind of their
obedience to Magistracy you may learn.

1 This duty is charged upon the Minister as the public remembrancer of the
people to whom is committed the dispensation of sound doctrine, Titus 2. 1.
serving to keep them right in the duties of their relations toward one
another, and therefore it appears that God will honor the standing Ministry
with this public service, that the flock may not stand at any man's courtesy
that will feed them (I say not poison them) but expect it from some hand of
standing duty, and it appears that our Antimagistratical men, do for the same
reason cry down the Ministry, as Demosthenes observed the sheep were required
to deliver up their Dogs that wakened them by their barking at the coming of
Wolves or Thieves.

2 A faithful Ministry is very useful to Civil Magistracy in discharge of
this office of putting the people in mind of their subjection to authority,
for commonly people are querulous and waspishly froward against authority, and
subjection to man's nature is grievous, good service does the Minister of Gods
Word do for the Magistrate, who is also called the Minister of God in bearing
of his sword, and let these two Ministers like twins supporting one the other
flourish and live together, good service does the Minister also for the people
in warning them of their duty, and of their doing it for conscience sake, for
heathen Kingdoms and Policies that want this office of remembrancers do usually
more obey for wrath then conscience. Oh! let not the Minister of the Word who
is their Remembrancer cut the girdle of this relation between Magistrate and
subject by blowing the one up into Tyranny, or laying him low into contempt or
contumely, or by pulling away the other, viz. the subject as an Ivy from the
tree that supports and sustains it, for surely you ought not to turn your host
out of doors, that gives the Gospel house-room and hospitality in his
Territories, no though he were a Heathen, vae soli, woe be to either of them
that is alone, I know and am sorry that the Pulpit which is the Watchtower
whence this Remembrancer gives warning, is sometimes so partial and so
passionate as rather to seem to blow Sheba his Trumpet, or to throw dirt in the
face of Authority, for I believe that God has put this office on the Gospel
Minister, partly to sweeten and make the Gospel acceptable to States and
Magistrates, which otherwise as a Bou^efeau would (to speak humanely) have been
hunted out of all places.

I consess, it is not our place as the Heralds to blazon titles, or
pragmatically to model forms and modes of Policy, such have produced unhappy
Empericks of the Body Politic, as unhappy as Abiathar in being factor for
Adonijah, 1 Kings 2. 26. or as Phaeton undertaking the Chariot of the Sun, but
our office is to put servants in mind to be subject (...). 1 Timothy 6. 1. to their
own masters, and wives to be subject, (...), 1 Pet. 3. 1. to their own
husbands, so the people to be subject to their own Magistrates, viz. the powers
that be in place and possession of Magistracy. And therefore according to their
partiality and fancy do cry up a Magistrate, that is of their own party or
opinion, and the same man they cry down that is otherwise minded, seem to me to
miss the true grounds of subjection to him, which Sophocles hit better upon,
saying, what then? Must we obey? Why not, says he? (...), for they are Rulers
in place of Magistracy, and the Apostle seems to hold to this rule, for he
checks his own mistake of calling Ananias the High Priest, whited wall; by
alleging that text of speaking evil of the Ruler of his people; and yet it is
probable he knew not that he came into that place by lineal succession, but
irregularly and surreptitiously, as most of them had done since the time of the
Macchabees, and our Savior told the captious Jews, that they receiving Caesar's
Coin a sign of his Soverignty must in reason give to Caesar what was his.

3 God is the countenancer and approver of Civil Magistracy, as appears in that
he will have the Minister of his Word to put the people in mind to be subject
to it, for it is the ordinance of God, Romans 13. 2. and as the Romans made the
Tribunes (...), inviolable, so has God secured Magistracy from resistance by
denouncing damnation to resisters, God will maintain his own Ministers, and
such are Magistrates though Heathen, but you must distinguish between the
function or office it self, which maintains peace and safety, a peaceable and
quiet life in godliness and honesty, and between the unlawful commands and
lusts of the Magistrate, we may not resist the office, we must not obey the
unjust commands. If Jeroboam set up his Calves, or Nebuchadnezzar his Image, We
will not serve thy gods, Dan. 3. 38. is the best answer, our disobedience is
our best obedience, God has countenanced and honored disobeyers of sinful
commands, as we see in the three Worthies, but God has not favored seditious
perturbers of the Magistrate, as we see in Absalom and Sheba, etc.

From the second point I shall commend to your further satisfaction two things.

1 Let no professed Christian imagine himself to be by his Christianity the
more free, or exempt from the civil authority, that is over him though it be
Heathenish for this you shall neither learn from the head, nor from the
Doctrine of our Christian profession. Our Lord Christ for his part acknowledged
that Pilate his power over him was given of God, and our doctrine is, that
every man whereinhe is called must therein abide with God, 1 Cor. 7. 24. not
forbidding a man thereby to better his condition (if we may) but to use it
rather, v. 21. but showing that his privileges though they be great, yet are
they spiritual, and that his outward condition and state is not changed, or
bettered by becoming Christian, the wife is not freed from her heathen
husband, the bond servant is not made free from his master, the Subject not
exempt from his tyrant, nor the prisoner from his prison, for then the Gospel
hook would catch selfe-ended persons for the bait sake, but we have a better
rule religio christiana non tollit ordinationes politicus the Christian
religion does not abrogate the wholesome ordinances of the State.

2 Neither does Christianity, prohibit a Christian to be a Magistrate, nor a
Christian subject to pay him subjection, It is true unto the unlawful commands
either of the heathen or Christian Magistrate it may be pleaded in bar, Acts
5. 29. We ought to obey God rather then men, but it was a spice of that
desperate Doctrine of those Pseudochristians the Gnostics to please their
deluded followers and themselves by promising liberty, 2 Pet. 2. 19. An egg of
the same bird was that fury (call ye it) or delusion of those Rustic
Peasants, Libertines of Germany in our ancestors days, who arose in such swarms
to take the sword out of the Magistrates hand to put it into their own
scabbard, and to level their estates, into more plainness and evenness,
pretending that the sword of civil Authority becomes not a Christian hand, nor
do we say they find it in such a hand in all the New Testament as if it might
please them to have Pilate a Judge because he judged Christ; no other must fi^
us. But shall we think? that John would not forbid the Publican his office as
if inconsistent with Christianity, and Christ has forbidden the Magistrate
his; Are the Jewish Magistrates called Gods? and do the Prophets call them
Shields for their protection, Corners for their support, Nails for their
uniting of the people. Zac. 10. 6. Isa. 22. 23. Hos. 4. 18. Does the New
Testament call them Dignities, Principalities, Powers, yea the very heathen
Magistrates, Ministers and Officers for God and for thy Good. Romans 13. Do the
Heathens Plato and Homer call them (...), Saviors and Shephearas of the
people, (for so they are by the intention of their office and place, thought
they be Nero's for blood and lust,) and shall they that are promised to be
nursing fathers, Isa 49. that are commanded to be so wise as to kiss the son,
Psalm 2. that are prophesied to tread upon the Heathen Empire, and crush the
bloody Dragon, be unfit to make a nail in the Gospel Commonwealth?

What must we turn our direction cross to the Apostle, and put Christians in
mind not to be subject to Christian Magistrates, and make them incapable of
Government of Christians that are most fit for it, and for whom we must pray
that we may live, a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, for this is
good and acceptable in the fight of God, our Savior, 1 Timothy 2. 13 Qui regna
dat coelestia, non adimit terrena, Will Christ take men's kingdoms away if they
turn Christians? Will he that is King of Kings have under his Empire no
Christian Kings? sutely the Apostle commands, 1 Timothy 6.2. Those servants that
have believing masters, the rather to do them service, and why the subject that
has a believing Magistrate should not do so too, I know not. In fine, I might
argue against this denial of Christian Magistracy by argument drawn from the
scanpall which it draws upon Religion (whereof Christ teaches every Christian
to be chary, Matthew. 17. 27.) but that I find this kind of Libertines are not
much moved with such arguments, nor are they much in date or in request with
many that most pretend to holiness, in these times.

I have used this length upon this place of Doctrine, not because the sober
part of men (as I hope) do much need it, but as the Apostle says, 2 These. 2.
2. That you be not soon shaken in mind, as that the day of Christ is at hand,
so I say to you that you be not shaken in mind, as that the Kingdom of Christ
(as some say) was at the threshold, even now in 1656. For as its said, Luke 17.
20. this Kingdom comes not with observation. Its a Jewish fancy to look for
such pomp and splendour as temporal Monarchs are furnished with; It is within and
already (says he) amongst you, for my Kingdom is not of this world. It was set
up in the days of those Kings (as Daniel says, Cap. 2. 44. and shall never be
destroyed, but certainly that such a temporal Kingdom of Christ is so near as
shall put down the temporal civil Magistracy as now it obtains, as Tapers that
are eclipsed by the Sun, or Candle-rushes put out by Torches, is more then I
can affirm and has some unpleasant reflection upon the Magistracy Christian.

From the third Point observe:

That this great debt of subjection and obedience be duly paid without
grudging, two things call for payment. 1 The command of God whose Officer the
Magistrate is. 2 Your own good by whom you sleep, you walk, you are masters
of your own, you are Masters of your lives, you hold all these at this
Rent-service, your subjection. There is a certain light in man's mind, that
tells them they cannot live together in society without this nail, the mutinous
members that rose up against the belly for eating up their labors were quieted
by this oratory, that it did but digest the meat for them, nothing more
pernicions then the inferior his refusal of obedience to the Magistrate,
especially you that are Christians have most benefit by Magistracy, for you are
exposed to more envy of wicked men by your profession, and are by your
principles more unarmed from private revenge.

Besides that, you hold your Religion, your greatest treasure in peaceable
possession by his inspection and protection, except the Magistrate shall
profess himself a Gallio that cares for no such thing, or be like Esarhaddon,
that sent into the Kingdom of subdued Israel, a mixture or gallimaufrey of
several Religions in design, ut in commune consulere non sineret religionum
diversit as, that is, That diversity of Religion might hinder common counsels.

But this Province, I confess, properly belongs to the Sovereigne, though for
the executive part to every Magistrate in his order and place, as the cause of
the false prophet pertained to the Supreme Judicature, therefore our Savior
says (as Cunaeus observes) Cunaeus de Repub.
that a Prophet could not perish out of Jerusalem. Blasphemy hurts the name,
Heresy the Truth, Idolatry the worship of God, of these the Magistrate is as
he is called the heir of restraint, Judges 18. 17. for in this the Prince as a
Prince may serve God and cannot do it as he is as a private man, I bespeak this
at the Magistrates hand, I mean restraint, for that God expects it at his hand
is plain by that, that Idolatry was set up in Micah his house, Judges 17.8.
because at that time there was no King in Israel. Those that said, Quid
Imperatoricum Ecclesia (the Donatists) are justly upbraided by Augustine, that
when the Emperor was against them, they cried that cry, When for them they
changed their note as their own partiality and interest led them, as all such
kind of spirits, will still do at this day.

The Magistrate will punish corporal adultery, will prohibit the sale of
poisonous Drugs, and there is no great reason, but that the calamity of the
Commonwealth may be prevented, which may accrue by depravation of Religion,
for thereby Respublica detrimentum capit, as History and Experience may inform;
as for the Ministers way, it is conviction, so Christ dealt with the Saducees,
and the Churches way is binding by Coercion; and the Magistrates way, is
restraint an coercion in a civil way.

The Doctrine of this Church always was, that the intermedling of the Civil
Magistrate in sacris, was not that of Uzzia, but of Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. not
to perform them, but to see them done, as Reinolds against Heart says. The
Inferences from the fourth point are these which follow.

1 To put you in mind of the Extent of this duty of subjection and obedience,
it reaches from him that is in highest, to him that is of lowest rank in
Magistracy, all that have the stamp or mark of authority upon them, though the
money differ in value, yet there is a superscription on the least piece, which
speaks the same authority, the image of Caesar was upon a penny. The lower
Officers are the Supreme, his eyes, ears, hands, and therefore in them
Magistracy may be wounded, be subject, (says the Apostle) to every ordinance
of man, whether he be Supreme, or Governors under him, 1 Pet. 2. 13. and it
must be to both for the same reason, for the Lords sake, for conscience sake,
Romans 13. The honor of a child due to his father, the subjection of a servant
to a Master, the respect of a wife toward a Husband, and so the subjection of
a subject to a Magistrate* are not paid according to the grandeur of the person
of the Superior, but according to the relation in which he stands, to thee and
me; but yet this is not so much considered as it ought to be.

2 To encourage the Magistrate what he may justly expect from the people under
him, while he acts within his sphere, and stretches not his commands beyond his
place; so though he be in lowest orb, yet he has by office a share, and some
pittance of authority wherein as Gods Minister for the conservation of the
Peace and safety of the body he may expect protection and act (boldly, though
not proudly) as not fearing the contempt of lofty spirits, but let every lower
officer, carry in his eye the law of his place, for though the zeal of Phineas
be highly commended by God in such a case as many men do not understand the
warrant, which doubtless was unquestionable, as also that of Moses in his
killing the Egyptian, yet ordinarily, the subordinate Magistrate shall do well
to observe the law of his place and verge of his power, so that he himself is
like the genus subalternum, that is, but a private man in respect of that
authority which is above, and Paramount to the place that he is in, and we know
that a two pence will go but for a two pence, though it have a lawful
superscription as a bigger piece.

3 To enform the subject that howsoever he may be a greater man in birth,
estate, riches, etc. then the Magistrate, whom he disdainfully overlooks, as
the Cedar does the shrub, yet that God does command subjection and obedience to
the Magistrate both supreme and lower, not merely for or according to the
length of his sword, but for conscience toward God, upon whom the despising of
his meanest Ministers reflects dishonor, and unto whom it is a displeasure, as
the clipping but of two pieces as to the Prince, whose honor is thereby taken to
be diminished, though they be of small value.

I shall conclude with a word to you that are the Electors of this next years
Lord Major, know that your (...), or Suffrage, is a talent that is put into
your hand, of which you must give account, it was an ancient constitution in
the Election of a Bishop, Ut non ordo, sed meritum crearet Episcopum: not
seniority or order of course, but merit should make a Bishop. I know not whom
you have in eye, let both be, if you please, and as it was said, 1 Samuel 16. 8.
Look not upon externals, the man's countenance, but look unto those seven
qualifications, (as the Hebrews number them) which God requires in a Head or
Judge, Exodus 18. 21. Deuteronomy. 1. 15. which are all required (as is observed) to be
found in him that is but one of Triumvirate, or but a Captain of Tens, how much
more in a Lord Major of London.

And you, Sir, whom the Lord will honor, pray that God would please to
inaugurate you into your Government by pouring another spirit on you, and the
Lord support and guide you to follow the pattern of their wisdom that have
broke the Ice before you in this weighty service.

FINIS.
The Books following are printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun against S. Dunstans
Church in Fleetstreet.
12 Sermons preached upon several eminent occasions by Mr. Richard Vines. Viz.

1 Calebs Integrity, A Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, on Numb. 14, 24.

2 The Imposture of Seducing Teachers, discovered in a Spittle Sermon before
the Lord Major, Aldermen, etc. On Ephesians. 4. 14, 15.

3 Magnalia Dei ab Aqu^lone, A Thanksgiving Sermon before both Houses of
Parliament, on Isai. 63. 8.

4 The posture of David's spirit in a doubtful Condition, a Fast Sermon before
the House of Commons, on 2 Samuel 15 25, 26.

5 The Happiness of Israel, A Thanksgiving Sermon before both Houses of
Parliament, and the City of London, on Deuteronomy. 33. 29.

6 The purifying unclean Hearts and Hands, A Fast Sermon before the House of
Commons, on James 4. 6.

7 The Hearse of the Renowned Robert Earl of Essex, A Sermon at his Funeral on
2 Samuel 3. 38.

8 The Authors, Nature and Danger of Heresy, a Fast Sermon before the House of
Commons, on 2 Col. 2. 1.

9, 10, 11. Subjection to Magistrates both supreme and subordinate, in three
Sermons preached at the Elections of the Lord Major of the City of London, 3
years successively, on 2 Pet 13. 14, 15, 16.

12 Corruption of Mind described, In a Sermon preached at Paul's on 2 Cor. 2.
17.

The Growth and Spreading of Heresy, a Fast Sermon before the House of Commons
by Mr. Thomas Hodges on 2 Pet. 2. 2.

The Noble Order, a Fast Sermon before the House of Lords by Mr. Daniel Evance,
on 1 Samuel 2. 30.

A Vindication of the Birth, Privilege or Covenant Holiness of Believers and
their Office in the times of the Gospel, with the right of Infants to Baptism,
by Mr. Thomas Blake in answer to Mr. Tombs.

Vindiciae Foederis, or a Treatise of the Covenant of God entered with mankind
in the several kinds and degrees of it by Mr. Thomas Blake.

The Covenant sealed, or a Treatise of the Sacraments of both Covenants,
Polemicall aod Practical, especially of the Sacraments of the Covenant of
Grace, by Mr. Thomas Blake.

Saint Augustines Confessions, translated into English, illustrated with notes,
wherein diverse Antiquities are explained by Dr. Wats.

A New A. B. C. or short Catechism composed according to the Rules and
Directions concerning suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in case
of ignorance; published for the help of ignorant people by Mr. John Buckley
Pastor of Thurlestone in Devon.


