British LIGHTNING OR Sudden tumults, in England, Scotland and Ireland; to
warn the united Provinces to understand the dangers, and the causes thereof:
to defend those amongst us, from being partakers of their plagues.

Cujus aures clausae sunt veritati, ut ab amico verum audire nequeat, hujus
salus desperanda est.

The safety of that man, is hopeless, we, may fear,
That stopps his ears against his friend, and will the truth not hear.
Mors est servitute potior.

Grim-death's fierce pangs, are rather to be sought;
Than that we should to Babels-yoke, be brought.
Written first in lowe-dutch by G. L. V. and translated for the benefit of
Britain.

Printed in the year 1643.

The Translator to all his loving Countriemen.
EXperience teaches that, a skillful physician standing by, beholding a
patient, and asking him of his pains and order of his body; finds the
nature of the disease sooner than the party himself that groaneth under the
burden of it. The same we find often times in cases Ecclesiastical and
Political: we can sooner see an others blemish than our own imperfections.
The reason is, because mankind is generally negligent in self-examination. I
must ingenuously confess, I can not say so, of the author of this dialogue;
the very cause of his publishing it witnesses the contrary; and proves him
(what soever he be by calling) a feeling member of his own body, and a good
friend to his neighbors. For though I have seen many excellent remonstrances,
resolutions of questions etc published by the High court of Parliament in
England (whom I take to be (under God) the Physician of the land) and their
well-willers, which have most exactly laid out the sickness of their body,
with the causes and cure, which must have the pre-eminence: yet so soon as I
first began to read this (considering that it is the work of a stranger, and
composed in a method and style most pleasing to some capacities) I thought it
might help to the information of my poor Countriemen in the estate, of their
body politic that knowing their disease, they might (being humbled for their
sin which is the cause) fly unto him for cure, who changes the times and
seasons, shakes the mountains, and makes the earth to tremble, and the great
ones to hide them selves when he is angry; who makes the wars to cease, and
sends peace into the habitation of the righteous. If in the publishing hereof
I shall do my Country any profitable service, I shall be bound to give God
thanks for his mercy; and the acceptance of it shall be my reward. In the
mean time whither this profit or no, my prayers shall be incessantly to the
Lord, that England may not be a seat of war; but that therein may flourish
the Gospel of peace, which brings down the lofty spirits of men making the
wolf to dwell with the lamb, and the leopard to lie down with the kid, and
the calse, and the young lion and the fatling together, and a little child; to
lead them, etc. Isa. 11, 6. yea causes them to beat their swords into
plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks, Isa. 2. 4. etc: and that he
who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, by whom Kings reign and Princes
Rev. 19, 16 Pro. 8, 15 Pro. 24, 1
decree Justice, (who has their hearts in his hand turning them as the rivers
of water which way soever it pleases him,) would be pleased to make the King a
nursing father, and the Queen a nursing mother unto Isa. 49, 23.
his Israel.

Holland this 20 of the first month according to our new computation. 1643.
The AUTHOR To the READER.
MY Lords, and you the honest Inhabitants of the united Provinces. That star
with a tail seen in the year 1618. was a warning and type of a rod that should
come over all Christendom: whereupon followed those bloody effects, those
horrible wars, lamentable wastings, barbarous destructions of countries and
cities, the ruin of so many costly buildings, of so many gentle men, so many
inhabitants men and women, young and old in Germany. And o that we could yet
see the end, the bottom of the cup of indignation! but the rodd flourishes
still, the destroyer is yet busy: the hand of God is stretched out still,
there is yet too much chafe to hang away the fan, the silver is yet too
unclean, to blow out the refyneing fire. The inhabitants and those that are
fled from Germany must (by the weight of their miseries and plagues) be brought
to a better mind, to farther reformation, to a greater feeling of, and sorrow
for their past and present sins, before there can be any hope that the rod of
Gods wrath (wherewith they are now oppressed) shall be cast into the fire.

That earthquake not long since felt in the year 1640. was a token of great
commotions, and mighty shakings of the Kingdoms of the earth: for a little
before and shortly thereupon was concluded the revolt of Cathalonia, the
falling-off of Portugale, the stirs in Scotland; the rebellion of the Ireish,
those civil (uncivil) wars, great alterations, unexpected tumults in
England: amongst which none more near, none more fearful and dangerous to us,
than the rebellion of Ireland, which had its original and rize in England,
from the great ones, from the Papists, from the enemies of our religion and
state, seconded by our deadly enemy the King of Spain, plotted by the
Jesuits, executed by the barbarous Ireish, who are already grown such
profitiens in the schole of those murdering Jesuits, that they (according to
their disposition and counsel) strive for the prize, who can invent the
cruellest manner of torments for the Protestants, cutting of their
privie-members, ears, fingers, hands, boareing out their eyes, stripping some
wives naked and that in the presence of their husbands, and bruitishly
abuseing others, ripping infants out of their mothers womb, and presently
dashing them against the stones, exerciseing many other cruelties (which are
published and dispersed far and near in print to the amasement of all men)
upon our fellow members that are of the same covenant and faith with us. Do
not then these miseries touch us which are executed on our body? and that so
near; yea, the civil wars in England are yet more dangerous for us: where
the friends, members, citizens, inhabitants, subjects, of one Kingdom,
professors of one faith, Manasse and Ephraim, strive one against an other. They
there are our confederates, brethren, friends, ancient assistants, nearest
neighbors. There wrestleth the King against his subjects, the head against the
members, the master against his servants; There the defender is become a
Spoiller, the Sheepherd a destroyer, Eden an Adamah, Cunaan a wilderness. There
a long-lasting misse-used peace, is changed into an unexpected wasting war.
There may we now see worn in the place of plush, velvet, silks, sattines,
costly apparel, chains of gold and pearl, harnasse, swords, bandaleers,
muskets. There may we bear now in stead of Luxurious wantonness, danceing,
masking, viols, fluits, harpes: ratlings of drums, sound of trumpets, neighing
of horses, the sound of an alarm, groans of the wounded, and the rumor of the
approaching furious cavaleers. There al merchandising and trading stands
still. There is expense without gain; there consume they that treasure in
^rouble and distress, which they were so long in gathering; cities and houses
are pillaged, the country ruinated and wasted. They were foretold of this
misery, but none would receave, none believe it: Now feel they the evil day,
which they had put so far from them; now they feel what they have brought
upon them selves through their unbelief; now those things press them which
for want of feeling they cast into the air. These things we see afar of,
we hear this, but with little observation, to provoke us to behold our selves
in them: that so we may avoid those rocks, whereon they have suffered
shipwreck. Their haughtines and ambition went before their fall, the pride in
apparel, and diet, the state (that sucked the money) had taken the upperhand:
and now the Kings high way-Robbers. Scrabble, spoil, steal, wast, destroy,
burn, the treasures and riches of England. Shall not we then amend these
things? and put away these sins which are grown to such an height among us,
that so they may not bring the like miseries upon us? wantonness, danceing,
drinking, swilling, masking, stage playing, fornication, adultery, hate,
envy, have borne such sway, that to was accounted the highest crime to speak
or write against them: and those that have so offended have bin (without
mercy) openly brought upon the schaffold, burn-markt, their ears cut off, and
they cast into perpetual imprisonnent. How far these have broken in upon us
experience teaches us but too too well. o that (as traitors to our state) they
were banished out of all places and hearts; that by them our peace and
happiness be not banished from us. That bad government in church and common
wealth, brought in by unfit, unexperienced, audatious, ambitious, revengefull
persons, has made the land reele like a drunken man, who have wrung wrested,
molded the laws, privileges, liberties, rights to their own ends and
passions: who dispossess, affront, terrify and compel the most ancient,
grave, honest, fit, faithful, expert, courageous governors to choose their
party, or else to forsake their places, and live in highest indignation. To what
height this also is grown amongst us, and daily more and more increases, the
stones cry; that confusion teaches which begins to be acknowledged by all men
that with clear eyes do mark the discords in religion, and suppressions of
those privileges which they have with lives and goods so long maintained,
which must be remedyed, orels they will bring forth our most certain ruin.
That I dolatrie hartening of papistrie, foisting in of papisticall
superstitions, freedom of Jesuits, and other holy (unholy) orders that with
out fear spread themselves over the whole Kingdom to the misleading of many
thousand souls, advanceing of the popelike Hierarchy, suppressing of the
truth, and true professors of the same, and that with such countenance, that
the King himself was become their patron and Spokesman, when at any time
(according to the laws of the land) they were justly condemned to any
punishment: whereas the honest, godly, prudent, politic preachers could not
have any beam of favor from his Majesty, when they were by the Bisshops
unjustly condemned to open shame and punishment (worse than death) for well
doing, for withstanding the sins of the land, and overflowing of papistrie.
At this Cod him self was grieved and waxed jelous for his truth, and faithful
servants, and would not suffer the Scepter of the wicked to rest always on the
lot of the righteous, least they should put forth their hand to wickedness:
but has taken the refyneing pot into his hand, and put the fire of dissension
under it, which has already discovered many for dross. These grievances, this
flood of Idolatry, this freedom of popish exercises, Saying of mass,
bonfires on holy days, processions, tolleration of all sorts of friars and
nuns, to the misleading of the inhabitants, weakening of our state, encouraging
of our neighboring enemy, was (not many years sithence) so increased, that
the wound was judged incureable, the poison too much, and their power too great
to be daunted, destroyed or hindered by sharp proclamations, strong
resolutions, or power of officers. Shall not this then needs make the least
danger that shall befall us remedielesse, by reason of the enemies within which
desire our ruin no less than those that are without, who will be ready
(according to the example of the papists in England and Ireland) whenever
they shall have a fair advantage to contribute thereunto? Shall not this then
awaken us before it is too late, and the time shall not permit, to drive out
these Canaanites, and take away these high places? otherwise they shall take
away both us and our religion. This is the case of England, and these be the
causes thereof. The same humor is amongst us; and shall not the same disease
follow thereupon? we are like them in sin, and shall we not be made like in
punishment? If we persuade our selves otherwise, we deceave our selves: we are
the next to be cured by the like medecin, that would not hearken to those
lively admonitions and warnings exhorting us to repentance. Every one prepare
himself for a storm, to undergo the plague that comes driving on. In the
mean time let us have compassion on our brethren in England and Ireland; let
us pray for them, that the great ones may help to reconcile the King and
Parliament, to remove the differences, that their ruin become not ours: which
will surely come to pass, if those that are on the Kings side together with
him get the upper hand. Then shall they root out the Parliament, alter the
government, suppress religion, proceed in their begun revenge against the
subjects, restore the Bishops, who as instigated persons shall rage more than
ever, to bring their miss carriage to a perfect issue; striving to make of
force their Popish Canons, and again to lord it over the consciences of the
Inhabitants. The Papists, as being now the Kings trustyest assistants, shall
then be his best beloved children: then shall the best Christians be under the
yoke. And when England, and Scotland (which shall not go free) shall be
subdued, and made slaves; then shall they enter their action against us; the
pretense of the North Sea shall be revived: restitution must be made for that
imagined damage they have suffered in the East Indies, and here at home; and
transfer their plagues upon us. What can we else exspect from the Kings
Counselors, who (now these many years) have bin friends to Spain and enemies
to our State, who shall not become better, but worse by this war. But if the
Parliament get the upper hand, then shall the King be preserved (being
delivered from the slavery of his servants) and remain as free and absolute a
King as ever, if he will but advance the good. Religion shall be maintained,
the Inhabitants defended, and brought into their former rest, the laws and
privileges established, reformation in Church and common wealth shall
powerfully proceed, to the adorning of the State. Our common weal shall be by
that means secured, and the malignants restrained. Let no man then contribute
to the suppressing of the Parliament; especially let not us Netherlanders, for
the foundation of their war and ours is all one: they have maintained us
therein with their goods, and bloods, we must not help to suppress them; else
God shall suppress us, the inhabitants would protest against us before God and
the world, and God would see, and search it. Let us not employ those soldiers,
which are in our service, to help the papists there, to suppress both them and
us. Let us not transport the arms of the land, and leave our selves naked: for
that is our Capital. Let no Inhabitant (to satisfy his covetousnes) further,
or assist them: for shall we not then put a knife into their hands, to cut our
own throats? But be well informed concerning the drift of the King and
Parliament* and then you shall quickly see whose side you must take: that you
shall find in this British Lightning which shows the unexpected and
sudden tumults of the Kingdoms with the causes thereof. Read with
consideration, and judge right.

The British Lightning, or sudden tumults in England, Scotland and Ireland:
for a warning to the United Provinces.
Englishman.

Netherlander.

N. WElcome Sir: when came you from England?


E. I came thence but just now, as you see: I have my traveling clothes yet on.


N. I am glad I have met you here, I have a long time expected your coming,
that I might once hear how all things go.


E. How should it go? bad enough: there is no Kingdom more miserable than
ours; it stands all in confusion.


N. How can that be? for 't is but a little while since that all your Kingdoms
were alone at peace, when the whole world was at wars I have also heard that
you have had the negotiation of all kingdoms and states in your havens,
whereby every one among you became rich and wealthy.


E. 'T is so; we sat (as it were) in Abraham's bosom, dwelling among our own
people, had good things under our fig tree; we ate the fat, we drank the
sweet, knew of no evil: yea, we feared no mischance, not knowing from whence
it should come upon us, seeing that we dwell in Islands that have the sea, the
sand, the rocks, our ships, and Sailors, for our defense; whereby we became a
careless people.


N. I have also always heard the same, therefore I wond'red so much when you
told me that your kingdom was the most miserable of all kingdoms, when
notwithstanding all Kingdoms in Germany, France, and elsewhere, are in
exceeding bloody wars, to the ruin of many thousand souls.


E. You are in the right, that Christendom is in a lamentable condition, where
the blood of men is spilt like water, so that many countries cities and towns
are wasted, burnt, and destroyed: yet their war is not to be compared with
this of ours.


N. How! have you wars? from whence is it come upon you? you are (always
provided) in peace with all Kingdoms: I have heard of no breach, and how can
any man come with soldiers into your land, seeing you are so mighty within, both
in men and ships? This is very strange news to me.


E. Well! but how can that be, that you have not heard of our wars, when the
flame thereof is gone up into heaven, and the sound thereof to all parts of the
earth? have you no better intelligence? yes, we are at wars, but not against
our enemies without, but within; it is a civil war that scourges us which
is the most miserable, for 't is near us, the one Kingdom against the other,
the father against the son, one citizen against the other.


N. What do I hear! mine heart trembles. Are you come into our place where
we were once, when here in our land the one city stood up against the other,
the one province against the other, each using soldiers and guards against the
other: so that our land, our church, our liberty hung on a silken thread; yea,
we should have consumed one an other, had not Gods blessing and the wise and
courageous counsel of Prince Maurice prevented it. Oh! I bemoane with weeping
eyes those that are in such a condition.


E. Yea, our flourishing Kingdom is now in the highest disunion; 't is Ephraim
against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, we hear of nothing but wars
and rumors of wars. All trading traffic and prosperity stands still,
Citizens are turned soldiers; in all places you may see the houses provided
with arms, every one standing (as it were) sentinel, not knowing from whence
they should expect their enemies, for the one brother, the one Citizen, does
not trust the other.


N. But how friend! Come you with such tidings? my heart bleeds to hear it:
who should ever have thought it? how speedily can the Lord GOD raise an adder
out of our own bosoms, that shall eat us up. Why do men then gape after
present friends, strength, rivers aliance, mighty people? for men may have all
these, and yet notwithstanding fall into the greatest calamities.


E. You say well; for but three years ago there was not the least appearance
of any unquietness. When the servants of God forewarned us of the plagues that
hung over our heads; every one asked, from whence they should come. Such
preachers as spoke of heavy tidings, of great punishments that should come
upon the Kingdom, were accounted for raylers, loggerheads, melancholy
persons, puritans, whose words the land was not able to bear.


N. Oh friend! it goes just so also amongst us. When our teachers warn us and
foretell us (as they many times do) that our quietness shall be turned into
unquietnes, our mirth into sadness, our riches into poverty, our blessing into a
curse, that there are heavy plagues hanging over our heads, that we shall not
escape the tempest of Gods wrath, but (as is to be feared) we (not taking
example by the punishments of others) shall drink out the dregs of the cup of
Gods indignation: then they make a jest of it, no man believes it and accounts
it an impossible thing as long as we have so many valiant soldiers both by sea
and land, stand in such alliance, and have such a General. But as you told us
concerning England, so may they well lay it to heart, for it was a great deal
more unlikely to come on you, than upon us: but tell me (I pray) how came you
into this war? how began it first? who, and what were the causes thereof?


E. That can not so Suddenly be related, but if you please to accompany me to
my lodging, where I may shift and refresh my self a little, I shall willingly
spend an hour with you; for I perceive you have compassion on our estate, and
therefore I will presently lay open all things unto you, that so you may the
more heartily pray unto God for us, and (if need so require) afford us all the
assistance you can, and also stir up others to do the like.


N. I will very willingly go along with you, and give you the welcome: for I
love the English nation with mine heart, and would be angry with all such
Netherlanders as should not take compassion on the heaviness of England, that
had so great compassion on us when we were wrestling against the tyranny of
Spain, when they came to help us, both with their goods and bloods and were
the principal instruments of our freedom. No true hearted Netherlander shall
forget that favor, but by all means seek to requite it. Seeing then that we
are come to a good fire, I pray you relate unto me in order, what are the
occasions of all these stirs in England, and also who be the causes thereof?


E. The causes thereof are diverse, the Jesuiticall papists, the Bishops, those
politic flatterers that are about the King at Court, and other malignant
persons besides, who have each his particular end; yet all tending to the
falsifying of religion, changing of government, suppressing of the subjects,
and ruin of church and commonwealth.


N. You tell me strange things! how could all these persons weave one web,
seeming so contrary one to another, as light and darkness, heat and cold; the
Jesuits and bishops are always so far different one from an other, as truth
and falsehood, Christ and Antichrist; the one being supporters of the popes
kingdom, the other heads of the reformed Religion; they serve diverse masters,
are of a diverse Kingdom, yea religion; the one seeks always to build up
what the other seeks to pull down. How can these two walk together, when
they are not a greed?


E. We thought so too, that the Papists and our Bishops were so far from one
another, as the east is from the west, and that they were deadly enemies the
one to the other, because in former times many of the Bishops have resisted the
Romish kingdom, even unto blood, yea many of them have been martyred by the
papists, beheaded, burnt; and in all places in the pure religion persecuted
unto death. But we have in our times of peace and wealth all too well observed,
that our Bishops have forgotten and slighted their office, their promises
before God and the congregation, the example of their predecessors, and in
stead of leaders are become misleaders, of defenders of the pure worship of God
falsifyers and corrupters of the doctrine of salvation, and extinguishers
thereof.


N. You relate unto me such things as I should never have believed. What! I
have sometime heard (as I think) propounded by our best politicians, that it
were good that we had also Bishops in our land, or at least super intendants,
that then all things would be better carried in the church for the preservation
of order, to breed reverence; whereas now every one being master alike great
confusion by that mea^s is bred in the church, trouble and an heavy burden
upon the government, for when any man will now prosecute a matter in the church
before church men* he is so retroubled, then it were no more but speaking to
the head, and he should give order to the rest; hereby also those Synods which
cost the land so much should be cut off, which seemed to me not so unreasonable
a proposition: but if the Bishops or Superintendants should make such work as
you tell me, the Lord deliver us from them.


E. O friend! call you them good? yea, your best politicians that are with
child of such a pernicious conceit; that were the right highway to turn all
things upside-down amongst you, to disturb the peace both of Church and common
weal, and to put to hazard the purity of religion, which by Gods special
blessing is established amongst you in spite of so many enemies and wicked
opposers, and crowned with many blessings from heaven; for that your free order
and Church government agreeable to Gods word, not without reason so highly
commended among us, is the hedge whereby the truly reformed religion must be
preserved and maintained; which our brethren the Scots well knowing have judged
that they could not answer it before God and their posterity if they should
suffer their old church government and order (which as I am informed differs
not much from that of yours) to be changed, and will rather loose their lives
and goods in Gods cause than suffer the purity of religion which is the
foundation of all prosperity both in church and common weal to be given over
as a prey to the enemies, and suffer a company of half papish Bishops to
dominere over their consciences. And we hope that our Lords and Burgesses of
Parliament (perceaving how far we are run out in this point of
Church Government and worship) will labor to bring our churches into the same
church order with our brethren the Scots, at least that they will utterly root
out the Episcopal government, together with all its hurtful roots and
branches. And should you have such persons amongst you that would bring in
these evil plants which God has not planted, then were you utterly undone. Let
not therefore the ancient landmarks be removed, hold that you have that no man
take your crown.


N. You open mine eyes more and more; I had not so deep an insight into these
things before, and I perceave that our Churches and the land wherein we dwell as
a free people, can not have peace if they should remove the land marks of
civil and ecclesiastical government; the whole house should by that means
totter. And now I think upon that which was written to me a while since
concerning those stirs which here and there appear in our provinces where men
under pretense of a papish right (which yet ought to be nullified and cashiered
by the power of our reformation) seek to rob the churches of that godly right
which they have received from Christ their King in the free election and choice
of their teachers; how that the pretended patrons thrust in preachers against
the wills and liking of the assembly, and if they refuse to receive them they
shut the church doors and thrust the lawful preachers out of the pulpit, so
that public worship could not be performed without danger of blood shedding,
quarrelling and unsupportable insolences; God preserve us that it break no
further, out and therefore I will pray to God that all good and godly governors
of the land may maintain the authority of Synods, and Church Assemblies for the
redress of such like evils, and that they may not be hindered in their
proceedings in those things which concern the churches; then should not the
assemblies many times last so long, but the land be unburthened of unnecessary
charges which otherwise are here very narrowly reckoned on. But I am wholly
inclined to hear the state of your church, tell me then what might be the
intention of the Bishops and Jesuits which you account one brood.


E. What intention should they have had? to bring in papistry into England, and
the Inquisition over the Inhabitants.


N. That is lightly to be believed concerning the Jesuits, who disperse
themselves like poison over the whole world, to make one child of hell twice
as bad as themselves; to which end they creep into all courts, sow jealousies
in all places, and are the cause of all the wars in the world: but that the
Bishops had such an intention that made profession of the reformed religion,
that sometimes write and preach against the papists, that is not so easy to be
believed.


E. You speak the truth therein, that the Bishops (to deceave the people, and
that the King should not entertain those complaints that come against them
concerning that point) do some times write and preach against those of the
papacy: yea the Archbishop himself preaching on a time before the King, did
wholly proceed against popish doctrine, and in the pulpit did exhort all
churchmen to teach and write against them, and that every one in his parish
should have a watchful eye over them, to make them come to Church, or else to
complain; which when some have done, then has he (by indirect means)
persecuted, imprisoned, and distressed them for the same, letting them secretly
know that it was because others should be affrighted from doing the like.


N. Then must he have bin an horrible hypocrite, and have had a seired
conscience, so shall Gods judgment certainly follow him at the heels, and his
kingdom shall not stand.


E. Such an one he was indeed, who knew how so cunningly to dissemble, that the
King thought him the holiest man in England, he was always a scoffer of the
upright, a friend of Jesuits, and a flatterer of great ones, by which means he
became so great, but now truly as little and despised, sitting where he can do
no more mischief.


N. But how! is he out of favor? is his game ended? has Cod brought his wheel
about?


E. O yea; God has verified it on him, that those that oppress his shall also
be oppressed: for with the same measure that he has measured to others it is
measured to him again. He has thrust many out of their offices, and cast them
into prison, and that is justly come upon himself: he sits fast in the tower,
and is long agone condemned as a Traitor to the land, and were it not for his
age, and that he is Godfather to one of the Kings children he had bin long
since executed, and what shall become of him yet, is uncertain.


N. Yea, I thought that the great God of heaven and earth should yet do right
upon him which had abused his right to the greatest Injustice against his
church and worship. But tell me (I pray) where hence it appears, that the
Bishops together with the Jesuits sought to alter the religion and bring in
papistrie?


E. That shines as clear as the bright noon day; you must also confess it,
and the whole world, when you hear what ways they went in.


N. I pray now explain it a little unto me, for many in our land especially
amongst the great ones believe it not, and think that they are but reproaches
and missereports of the puritanes or Brownists or some discontented great ones,
because they can not have choice of ear and share in the prey.


E. O No! they be no slanders, it appears by the particulers, for all that the
Jesuits could have bin able to do suddenly to make the people papists before
they were aware of it, that have they done and to that end they have by little
and little and by degrees set up all the outward form of papistrie in the
church of England, for the apparel which the Bishops and preachers wear in
Gods service are of the same fashion with the apparel of the Bishops and
priests under the papacy.


N. Do the Bishops and preachers amongst you wear other clothes then our
teachets, and the teachers of the reformed churches in France, Geneva,
Switserland, and Germany do wear.


E. O yes, if you did but see the Bishops or the Bishops preachers say service
in our church, you could not distinguish them from the popish Clergy, for they
have then on a Bishops-gowne, wide sleeves, a four cornered cap, the tippet,
the surplus, the Cope, the hoode the cannonical clothes, and all that a Priest
at any time puts on.


N. Is that possible? if our preachers here should begin to go so, the children
would run after them, and tear such clothes off their backs, and throw dirt at
them, and esteem them for the papists apes.


E. Yea* so do our Episcopall-clergie carry the business who have a long time
used our people to these clothes, that it should not be accounted new, when
they should appear in them not as reformed but as public servants to the seat
of Rome; yet this is but the least, the churches also a few years since were
made altogether like the papists churches.


N. What do I hear? I hope that there be no Images set up there, or thar Dagon
is placed by the Ark, there are too many excellent Authors that have written
against such high places, as that they should not be taken away.


E. O that it had bin so; but we must confess to the shame of our Nation that
the Tempels of God are become slaughter-howses, and right Innes for all the
wares of Antichrist, for the Bishops have caused to be set up in our churches
Pictures, Images, Crucifixes, Wax-candles, Altars, they sing their evening and
morning song with Beads, Organs, Music, as in the popish Mattens, they cause
the pulpit to be hanged with the Arms and mark of the Jesuits, especially in
the Cathedral churches, and in the Kings Chapel, where they set up great
Cracifixes after the manner of the papists, and have also so adorned all
corners with Images that many papists and other strangers coming thither knew
no better but that they had been papist churches and chapels.


N. That is no wonder, for according to your relation, one egg is not so like
an other, as your churches and the papists. But 't is wonder that the
governors (and specially the King) have suffered such things for that is the
right way to lead all the inhabitants blind fold to all Idolatry.


E. It was well said concerning the governors; but experience has taught us
that where the Bishops are masters the governors have not much to say: yea
they had such power that they have given out process to bring diverse officers,
Majors, Justices, prisoners to their spiritual Court, confiscated their goods
and made them so afraid, that they must fly the land, and all because they
did not dispatch to set up Altars in place of the Communion Tables: no man
durst lift up their heads against them; and concerning the King they made him
believe that the tolleration of the outward form of papistrie should bring to
pass, that seeing there was so little difference in the outward, and that the
King condescended so far unto them; that they also would then be ruled by the
Kings religion to give him content, and hereby have they blinded the eyes of
the King, and brought him so far, that he in stead of hindering this bringing
in of papistrie, has judged it convenient and maintained it by his authority,
to the grief and astonishment of all the godly, and joy of papists.


N. What! were the Bishops such lads, to deal by such false practices? then 't
is no wonder, that all the honest men in England care not for them: but tell me
yet, again, were they also papists in their form of doctrine? or was it only
in the outward ceremonies and worship?


E. You can easily imagine, whither it be possible, that any man can come so
near the popish Religion in the outward worship, with such zeal for those
Idolatrous institutions, without being one with them indoctrine also. It is
very true that the Bishops and their adherents will not go to church with such
a cloak, that they should be thought papists in doctrine, they have kept that a
longtime hid, but the oulder they grow the more their painting falls off, and
the more their Esaws coat is worn out: So that all men by little and little
begin to see what was hid under it, so that they could not always play behind
the curtain, as also was not their intention; but they have now and then begun
to appear on the stage, and made it apparent, that their mouth was reformed,
but their heart papish.


N. You say true, for he that is a true protestant, he will hate even the
garment spotted with the flesh, she that is not a whore in her heart, will not
put on a whorish attire: he that is a right Reformed one will not be burdened
with such traditions, he will not touch, taste, or handle them, as being brought
in according to the institutions and doctrines of men, much less he will
defend them himself, appoint them, be zealous for them more then for the truth
it self. But (I pray you) tell me yet, wherein have the Episcopal Clergy
manifested that they are one with the papists in Doctrine also?


E. There can plentiful proof be given of that: for they have not only caused
these foresaid things to be observed as indifferent, but they have with the
papists placed holiness therein, as by this appears, seeing they compel the
people to do reverence to those things, for when the bare name of Jesus is
uttered, then must every one bow, also no man may approach to the meanest of
those Altars which they have set up, (and named by the name of the mercy seat,
the place of Gods gif^s,) without bowing three times before it, and then fall
upon his knees. They have consecrated and hallowed their Churches, Chapels,
and pavements of the same, the pulpit, cups, church yard, and many other
places, pretending that without this consecration, the places are unholy, and
unclean, and therefore no service might be performed therein till that were
first done; yea if by any occasion they were never so little defiled then they
were pronounced unclean till they were again purified by the Bishops. Who may
not from hence clearly see that their faith concerning humane traditions is all
one with that of the Papists?


N. You are in the right, for such administrations are altogether according to
the faith of papists; so that I hold it for certain, that the Bishops and
Jesuits, understood one the other in their doctrine also; but tell me (I pray)
is there yet any thing else whereby we may Judge that they were papists in the
faith also?


E. O yes, for I scarcely know any thing exercised in papistrie which may not
be found amongst them. They administer the L: Supper upon an Altar, and they
must receive it kneeling, they administer Baptism out of a font, with a cross
on the fore head of the child, they have had that form of confirmation
whereby the Bishops must consecrate the children, they have made marriage
purely Ecclesiastical as depending on the bishops who have forbidden Marriage at
some certain times, and almost half the year, and unless their consent be
gotten either by favor or money, none must Marry, yea some Clergymen amongst
them may upon no condition Marry tho it be against the minds and allowance of
their parents and friends. They have caused the Holy days to be more precisely
observed then the Saboth, forbidding all work therein upon great penalties. They
pray over the dead. They make women after childbirth to appear in the church
with white consecrated garments, and then they are purified; and many more such
like things according to the papists institution, are very precisely enjoined
by order from the Bishops.


N. You move my heart, so that I am at the Highest pitch, to hear such things
of the government of Bishops. I have always thought England to be the most
reformed land in the world, because I have seen so many excellent books that
were penned in England against all such popish institutions and for the
advancing of the doctrine of salvation and the purity of worship; and therefore
I can not enough wonder, that so many unclean things should bear such sway
there.


E. It makes you wonder, and it has made us many times exceeding sorrowful,
and to fear (unless God speedily prevent it) that we should shortly see all
our land papists, which we may perceive by their general bent that way; for in
the universities they began openly to defend, that we must pray for the dead,
yea it was preached in London at Paul's Cross, there are books written of it,
as also that the Pope is not that Antichrist, that men may very well be saved
in the papish Religion as the Arch Bishop made it manifest to the Queen;
therefore he has forbidden to pray for her any more, that God would convert
her, and open her eyes as being a Papist. They have publicly taught, that men
may be saved by their good works, and that with the approbation of the Arch
bishop, as from hence may appear, when he perused the Lithurgie of the Scots
in the place concerning good works, it stood that they were not causa regnandi
the cause of our salvation, but via regni the way to salvation, which he
caused to be put out, and willed them to exhort the people to good works
simply, without such distinctions, where hence we might easily perceive what he
bare in his buckler, as he has also approved the foresaid books, and by all
means countenanced the pen men thereof. From all which it clearly appears,
that they were right Papists both in faith and doctrine.


N. This cuts deep, and is something more than Caeremonies: by such stalking
we often see that the catt leaps quite out of the sack, and that they were
altogether Papists, and would have made the whole land papists. They must
without doubt have had great correspondence with the papish Clergy that have
so infected them.


E. You have read right, for it has bin long observed, muttered, and in the
end come to light by a certain Jesuit Tho: Abernen a Scottish gentleman, who
being by God wonder fully converted, has discovered how that there was great
correspondence held between the Arch bishop and the Jesuits in England and
Scotland, yea betwixt him and the Pope, writeing letters to and again to each
other on this subject, what might be the best way to make England Papists. In
which business, himself was employed; so that he can speak by experience.


N. You have made me suffitiently under stand and believe, that the most
Bishops and their adherents intended to make England papists, but that would
have cost hot water, for the commonaltie of England (as I have heard) are
exceeding zealous in Gods service, and well instructed in Religion, and
therefore they could not by that means have gotten the masterie.


E. 'T is very true, that in England (by Gods mercy) there have been, and are
many Godly, honest, well disposed preachers and members, who would have stood
for the truth unto blood: but these Bishops have had divelish practizes by
little and little to falsify the doctrine, and root out godlynes; where by they
doubted not, but that they should have attained their purpose.


N. I pray let me once hear, what they were.


E. They have had diverse, besides their bringing in of the outward form of
papistrie in all places, that so all might be acquainted with it, as I have
told you before. They have also stripped all the assemblies of their
faithfullest preachers, which they have degraded, imprisoned, banished, or so
persecuted, that they were feign to forsake the land, and fly into New England
or other lands: and in stead of Godly, zealous, learned, desired preachers,
have thrust in to their places unruly, ignorant, doboisht, infected persons,
which were either Arminians or partly papists, that so they might bring the
people to ignorance, and ungodlie life, and that so they might be able to frame
them to what doctrine they listed.


N. Well, those were lamentable works, to silence lawful Preachers without
cause, that is to touch the Lords anointed, the apple of his eye, that is
openly to advance the kingdom of the devil: they must surely have had some
pretense, for I cannot imagine that they have done such things without orderly
proceeding.


E. It ought indeed so to be, but their will was a law, and they have taken
for a pretense, their dissobedience against their popish canons, because they
would not subscribe to, and observe all those fore mentioned things; therefore
they have thrust them out: In former times they made sale of subscription, and
wincked at many honest and learned preachers, but some years sithence they
would excuse noe man, and when any honest and distressed preachers, not knowing
what was best to do whither to forsake their church for the institutions, or to
condescend thereunto, that they might remain by their churches, and preserve
them from the claws of ungodly preachers, then were they not content with the
ordinary subscription to the old Caeremonies, but have so long burdened them
with new, till that they could not in conscienc yield thereunto: then have they
entered their action, and justled them out, not here and there one, butifie and
sixty, yea some hondreds in a short time, without mercy, or hope of
restauratio^ not withstanding the earnest solicitation of their assemblies, the
requests they put up the gifts they presented, as being famous, learned
preachers, that had great audience, were beloved of their congregation, and had
wrought great edification in their places, for such there was no hearing, yea
though whole shires came upon their knees, with tears in their eyes, in so
much that sometimes they have wrung tears from the King himself to hear* their
grievous lamentations for the want of their faithful servants, begging for the
glory of God, and the safety of their souls, that their preachers migt be
given them again, yet they could not prevail, the King sent them to the
Bishops, and that was to knock at a deaf man's door: and the stones should
sooner be moved, than they.


N. You make me weep for the pitiful condition of such churches; how could
God be so long suffering as not to hear such tears? O what a curse have such
Bishops pulled on their own heads? God has seen it, and will regenge it, how
could the devil, have dealt worse? but have they used this cruelty against
the Preachers only?


E. O no, for after they had destroyed the Sheepherds, then like ravening
wolves, they have also destroyed and dispersed the sheep: for they have daily
cited to their spiritual Courts the honestest, godliest men, and women,
married and unmarried, accused them that they would not follow their
Ceremonies, that they went to hear, here and there out of their Parishes, where
they knew was a good preacher, held fast days by themselves, and came together
to repeat the sermon, to read, or sing, and pray. These were causes sufficient
to imprison the people by heaps, and to let them sit there, and consume, to
seize upon their goods, to draw them to themselves, so ruinating many
households, whereby many thousands were compelled to forsake the land, and to
wander into strange countries.


N. O the miserable condition of the honest inhabitants of England! they have
been there as bad as under the Inquisition, yea worse, for this is exercised
against them by those, that say they are of the same Religion with them, and
the Curats for their souls. O what reason have we to thank God, that we dwell
in such a freeland, where no man is compelled or troubled for his conscience!
we know of no such persecution, thanks be to God, and God keep us from it; for
our nation should never endure it, but stand up, and quickly hunt such
instruments out of doors, as they did that troop of Shavelings that dealt so
with the inhabitants in the beginning of the Reformation. It was lately seen in
the Hague how the inhabitants could ill endure that any man should be over
burdened, each drew it to himself, and then appeared first the loveliness of
liberty, and the sidelity of the Netherlanders to each other, that always take
compassion on the oppressed, and venture their goods and bloods therefore.


E. It is a commendable thing to relieve the oppressed, and resist the
oppressors, so it be orderly performed; But alas? what could we do! the
Bishops were too mighty, and our nation is also exceeding slavish under those
that are mightier than they; there was great murmuring at it, the will was
good, to resist such tyrans, but they could not see where it should begin,
nevertheless, they thought that it would break out into a bad issue one time
or other.


N. Undoubtedly, God will from some place or other give a good issue, as he did
in the beginning of our persecution: God wants no means either to punish a
Nation, or to deliver them out of their distress, yea when the danger is at
the highest, and the water at the brim, then God takes most pleasure to
manifest his power. But tell me (I pray) more particulerly, what ways the
Bishops have further proceeded in, to bring the papish Religion into England?


E. Besides that spoiling the Kingdom in all places of their faithfullest
Preachers, and thrusting in others according to their own humor in their
places, or leaving the church unprovided, giving them only a reader that read
their Injunction in the church out of the service book, so that great circuites
of land of 30 or 40 miles in compass had scarce two or three sermons in a
whole year, to the unspeakable spoil of the people, who nevertheless must bear
the burden of Gods worship, and pay out of their Parrishes, two, three, or
four hundred pounds sterling per annum according to the quantity of the
Parish, unto such lasie and idle bellies that had the name to be their
preachers. Besides this wicked practice (I say) they have used many other mea^s
to bannish wholly all saving knowledge of the truth, out of the Kingdom, that so
they might the better draw the people unto popery.


N. Loving friend! what do I hear? have they so took care for sowls, as to feed
them only with humane Traditions, without the preaching of the word of God the
hey and grass, and yet were so shameless, as to take such great wages of the
people; God will revenge it. But proceed to show me, what have been their
further practices?


E. They had a thousand tricks to blow out that zeal and practice of Godliness,
which had been exceedingly inflamed by so many excellent preachers for an
example to the world; and to set up in the place thereof an Athiestical
liberty, and worldliness, to which end they have with-stood the means of
salvation, and set the contrary ready for the people: as when they brought
into contempt the sanctifying of the Sabbath by exceeding ungodly practices,
for they knew so far to abuse the power of the King, that they have stirred him
up to give out a Proclamation in the year 1633. wherein he required that all
his subjects should have liberty, servants against the will of their masters,
and children against the will of their parents, to spend the Sabbath (after
service) in all manner of recreations, and danceing, men and women going to
plays, in running, shooting, bowling, stool-ball, and all to this porpose that
they might change the repeating of sermons, and other Spiritual exercises into
such idle, wanton sports, and that by Proclamation, as if men were not
sufficiently of themselves inclined to profane the day of the Lord by such
vanities.


N. Is it possible? knew they so far to mislead the king as that he should give
out a Commandment directly contrary to the Command of God, wherein he wills
that the Sabbath should be sanctified and set a part to all such exercises
which tend to the prosperity, not only of the body but of the soul of man. You
must surely have given strange attention, when you heard such things
proclaimed, for I have always heard, that the English make great conscience of
the Sabbath, yea when they went in the streets of the City, they saw not the
least work done, or any wa^tonnesse used: but that in all houses the Sermons
were repeated, psalms sung, and profitable questions propounded: So that all
understanding men did judge, that the sanctifying of the Sabbath, was the
principal reason of Gods blessing and mercy over England. There is great
profanation of the Sabbath in our land, by working, playing, riding stool-ball,
diceing, drinking, wrestling and running but (God be thanked) they are not done
by virtue of any command of our Govervours, but contrary thereunto; so there be
many excellent Proclamations against the profanation of the Sabbath in many
Provinces come forth: o that God would grant, they might be well mainteyned.


E. Yea, so is it come to pass amongst us, and yet the Bishops are so
shameless, that whereas they ought to have stood for Gods right, and to have
informed the King better, they have caused all preachers to read the same
Proclamation out of the pulpit to all the people, and to exhort them to observe
the same against the fourth Commandment: those that have refused have been
deposed, to more then an hundred in number, not with standing that the Dean
which was sent by the Bishops to see this executed in all churches a little
without London, fell dead from his horse for a warning: yet they, could there
by be brought to no remorse, but went foreward with the business.


N. O how inst are Gods judgments; and how sottish are the hearts of men, if
God mould them not? It was never heard; that preachers were commanded to
deliver from the pulpit that which clearly and evidently opposes the command
of God: those that have refused to do it, have done like Christians. But what
more practices had they?


E. They have also forbidden to preach twice on the Sabbath, under the pretense
of Catechizing, which was then ordained, appointed, and directed, to instruct
the children, and teach them the traditions of the Pope, or Bishops. They have
to their power forbidden the printing of all good books, and contrarily
suffered to be printed all Arminianish, Papish, vain books of Amadis de Gaul,
and of Commedies, to 40 thousand in a year: They have also suffered Relics
to be sold openly, yea they have been sent from the Pope to the Archbishop
himself who knew well how to make his profit by them.


N. Well! those were great wickednesses, which God will seek, and find. How
soever it goes* also very bad amongst us in those things (for there is here in
our land also great liberty to print all unfeemlie. hurtful, heretical
books) yet the honorable Magistrates of Amsterdam have exceeding worthily
caused to be burned certain Socinian books, and have hindered the players, and
dancers on the ropes (which follow fayres and Markets) from playing; oh that it
were in all places imitated: yet 't is so, that here in our land there be some
papish booke-sellers that openly sell nothing but papish books of Breviaries,
Masses, Rosaries, Legends, and publikly hang out Idolatrous Images, Crucifixes,
Beads, Paternosters, Agnus Deis, etc. without hinderance; which is to be feared
will bring Gods judgments on us; nd although (by Gods blessing) it is not so yet
ordered amongst us, that good books are forbidden: yet there are few printed,
because there is so little vent, while all hands are full of vain, unfit,
uncivil, venomous works, that hinder the^ from reading good ones. But tell me
what are the deceipts the Bishops have used to bring in the Popish Religion?


E. As it appears from that which has been said that the Bishops and papists
understood one the other in all things well enough, so have they given them
great liberty in all places, not executing the Proclamations, and orders
against them; but have connived at their assemblings, Idolatrous exercises,
absence from sermons in all places: so that England became full of Jesuits, and
all manner of Seminaries, that have so done their endeavor to turn England from
their Religion, that they have heartened, or won many thousands to the papish
religion, to the unspeakable weakening of our state, and trouble of the
reformed, that were (where they were mighty) oppressed by them, yea must
suffer great distress, without being heard therein, when they came to complain
of it to the clergy, where the favor not withstanding was continually on the
papists side.


N. There has been then a great fall in England, for I have always heard,
that every man was compelled to come to church, and attend upon Gods service,
so that none were excused, no not the greatest; and that there were very strict
orders against the Papists made in diverse Parliaments, so that I hear well that
it has gone amongst you as it does amongst us, for (the more is the pity)
there were many times strict Proclamations read against the breaking in of
papistrie, but notwithstanding papistrie is openly set up in the midst of us,
for they have their formal churches with stools, benches, Altars, ovals,
quiers, Candelsticks, cupps in sundry cities, as also in the country, and
they say service at the sound of our bells, going openly thereunto, the Priests
are known amongst us: preaching against this government, that it is unlawful,
exhorting the people to help the King to his land: will absolve no man in
shrift, but such as hold the king for the lawful Lord of the land, go public
processions with an hundred at a time, place crucifixes in the churchyards at
the graves of the dead, come to torment the people of our religion upon their
deathbeds with their Idol and oil. Yea they have their whole church-goverment
amongst us, and have divided the whole land, amongst Bishops, Archbishops,
Deacons, Archdeacons, every one knowing his Jurisdiction: they have also given
all the civil offices unto certain persons, and when they dye, then they
confer them upon others again upon hope, that though now they be but titular,
yet that once they shall have the real possession thereof* So that if any
change through any stir or other ways should come, (which God prevent) each
should know his place and office both in Ecclesiastical and civil affairs, that
so they might at once over rule the land.


E. You wondered that it went so in England, but I wonder exceedingly that it
should go so amongst you; for while you give such liberty to the papists, you
put the souls of the inhabitants, yea the whole church and land in a scale, and
suffer your sworn enemies, that are bound by oath to the King of Spain and the
Pope, to set up a government in your government: Who (if it should go ill but in
the least, or that there were any likely hood to make the King of Spain master)
would strait fall off: so that you foster an Adder in your bosoms.


N. You are in the right, and all good Patriots understand it so; it has also
sundry times appeared to be so, when the land was in any trouble, as when the
enemy was in the valle, all papists pricked up their ears, spoke exceeding
bouldly, said openly out, now shortly it shall be our time: and the further the
enemy brake into the land, the boulder they were; as also when we lost
Schenk-Scans, and that the enemy meant thereby to come in, the countenances of
the papists were then cheerful, and yet when there comes any bad news, you
may easylie perceive with which fide they hold, although peradventure they
should be no more the better for it than we, as it appears in many places,
yet their hate is so great that they would willingly wish to perrish them
selves, so that we might but perrish with them: yea they are yet so bold in
some places, that when any godly preachers are something zealous to bridle their
insolences, they dare send word to such persons, that they should consider how
it now goes in Ireland: yet not withstanding these deadly enemies of our state
are winked at because they blind the eyes of the Officers and great ones, with
great gifts, and yearlie pensions, as they them selves do say, that they are
beholding to no man for their freedom but their money; by which means they
cannot be effectually proceeded against, notwithstanding those Remonstaunces
given against them by the church, so that the Synods were necessitated to leave
it to God, and protest before all the world, that they would be free of the
sowles by this means lost, having done according to their places what they
could, as also from that destruction which shall certainly come upon the land
thereby, if not speedily prevented. Whereunto I pray God the Lord to stir up
all Corporations and their particular members to take the redress of these
things into their hands; and not to let it hang upon the officers, or a few
persons as it is here, and thereunto the great advantage of this cause.


E. Yea, I hear then that things go ill, not only in England; but that in
this matter it stands ill enough amongst you also, although you have no Bishops
to let such mischiefs break in: but hold this for certain, that the whole heap
of papists, if they can master us? and it hit right, shall be quickly a tip
toe against you: for I have lately seen a letter out of the Netherlands, to
one of our papists, which earnestly stirs ours up, to use all means
possible, to become masters, and to advance popery, assuring them that they
with the help of England should be here strong enough to make them selves
masters both of land and Religion; therefore their breaking in, grows, and
increase of such is not to be slightlie esteemed, for they can all ways at a
start be seconded by your neighbor enemies, if they but make them selves
masters of one pass or other, so as they can not do with us, because they must
fetch all assistance from beyond Sea.


N. You say right, and I know not how our government is so besotted that they do
not better consider it, for every one knows that there cannot be a more
hurtful nor dangerous enemy, than that within, especially if it be one with a
powerful enemy without: and therefore God open all eyes to see it. You have
now told me much concerning the designs of the Bishops, and the means they used
to bring in papistry, but tell me now once, wherein the malignant Courtiers, and
other infected statesmen were the cause of the stirs in England.


E. You well remembered what I told you in the beginning, that the Bishops and
the malignant Politiks, besides the papists have occasioned all our heaviness;
for it is certain, that the Bishops have spoiled all in the church, and
together with the Politiks have turned all things up side down in the common
weal also.


N. How understand you that, together with the Politikes, I think not that the
Bishops had also the care of worldly matters.


E. How! have you not known that? O yes, the Bishops have had not only
ecclesiastical, but Civil offices also, and have been also privy-counsellers,
Treasurers, Keepers of the great Seal, and I know not what; therefore they have
been a member of the Parliament in the upper house: yea they have spent the
most part of their time in politic affairs, and had so far engrossed them,
that scarce any man without their assistance, could attain a civil office.


N. I hear you, but I thought that the preachers, much more the Bishops, had so
much to do in their own offices, that it well required the whole man, and
therefore that they had no time to trouble themselves with states matters. But
tell me, (pray) how had the Bishops and Politiks contrived it, to bring all
government into their hands, to finish their dessigne?


E. To this purpose they had conceived strange windings, and first they put it
in to the kings head, that he ought to be an absolute Sovereign, not to be
under any, according to the example of France, and that they would bring him
thereunto, by means of the Ecclesiastical persons, which they had now at hand
in all places, and sat in the ear of the people. When they had made the King
to relish this to make him confirm all their design, then they made him
presently believe that all their doing tended thereunto.


N. Was the King then no absolute King, so that he might do all that he would,
not having any man above him?


E. In no wise; for Kings are limited by laws, so that they can make no new
laws, nor lay any impositions on their subjects, nor go to war with any,
without the consent of the Parliament, else the inhabitants are not bound
thereunto; yea they are liable to punishment, if they pay any impositions or
subsidies to the king upon his particular order, or will; and those that
counsil the King thereunto, or assist him therein, are guilty of high treason.


N. What is the Parliament, under which the King stands also?


E. It is the highest assembly of the Kingdom, which consists of the King,
Dukes, Earls, Barrons, Bishops, and the Commons, which is two persons out of
every shire, and chief city, deputed with absolute power, that together they
might redress the enormities of the kingdom according to the laws, and to
ordeyne new laws and impositions to the advantage of the King or kingdom,
without any compulsion of votes; which assembly is gathered and dissolved by
the King.


N. That is a stately and powerful assembly, if they understand themselves,
and of great might, to redress the greatest abuses, and to assist the King
with great sums of money. It were to be wished, that we had sometime also such
Parliaments, as in former times the assembly of the states general used to
be, before that there was a Parliament company of states general set up;
thereby might great abuses amongst us also be reformed, under which now, 't is
to be feared, we shall sinck, But have the great ones liked this Parliament?


E. That you may easily imagine, O no; the Archbishop, and all Courtiers, and
those that were in favor with the King, have always withstood it, many
years, delayed it, or when it was assembled, and that it began to touch the
soars, and to search out the bad practices of the great ones, then knew they
how to order the King, that he from time to time has caused the Parliament to
break up: and now the last time in May 1640. not withstanding that the King and
state was in an exceeding great distraction, by reason of great stirs, that
were in all places of the kingdom.


N. I hear it well, there is much-adoe in all places; it goes so with us also,
that they that know how to make themselves masters in the Provinces, they
hinder as much as they can, that the states may not come together, or when they
are together, they set one city against the other, casting many things in
amongst the members, that so they might not understand one another; and so
depart a sunder without effecting any thing, to the highest discommodity,
burden, trouble, dishonor, and spoil of the Provinces, and unspeakable
disavantage of many that it concerns, that can procure no expedition from the
table, which in the end (if the members be not wise to understand one an other
to use their own freedom, without depending upon these or any) will bring all
into confusion, as you said it was in your three kingdoms. But tell me what
were the stirs that were in all places of the kingdoms?


E. Unmeasureable great, and dangerous; for Scotland was in arms, we had a
leager in the field on the frontiers of Scotland, the King was set on to fall
upon the Scots, and they practiced daily to set the two Kingdoms together by
the ears.


N. But tell me (pray) whence proceeded this disunion? for the two Kingdoms
have one King, one Religion, and have till this time lived in peace; what has
brought forth this disquiet?


E. This disunion has been a long time in breeding by the Bishops and Papists,
whose design was not only the changing of Religion in England, but also in
Scotland, yea to thrust in all their superstitions into Scotland first, as
being the weaker nation, and ftom thence into England; to which end they have
(by little and little) thrust in Bishops there against the mind of the
Kingdom, which they first pretended should but serve to keep good order in the
Church, without having such authority over the church, and Ecclesiastical
persons, as in England; but growing by little and little in authority, and
power, so 't was, that they endeavored always to have as great authority in
Scotland as in England, wherein they were heartened by the Bishop of
Canterbury, and (through his advice) by the King also, and in the end set on
work to thrust in the Service Book (that is the Lithurgie) of England into the
church of Scotland, augmented with many additions, some openly, and some
covertly opposing the reformed Religion, together with all those former papish
Caeremonies that were before in England which first of all began to be set on
work when the King was in Scotland to be crowned.


N. How have the Scots behaved themselves therein? for they have been always
famoused for great Protestants, and lovers of the purity of worship, full of
courage to mainteyn the liberties of the Kingdom against all opposers.


E. The Scots so soon as they were aware of these novelties, and that they were
propounded by the king himself in their Parliament, so to thrust in some
beginning thereof into Scotland, then have all the gentry and burgesses cried
it down in the presence of the King, and persisted therein, notwithstanding
that the King took it very discourteously and manifested the same by his
sudden discontented departure out of the Kingdom, commanding his Counsel to
thrust in such church orders as he had given them in charge, by authority.


N. Durst the Kings counsel attempt such a thing, against the mind of the
gentry, and Commons; for they might well fear, that they were less able to
bring such a thing to pass, and now against the resolution of the Parliament,
which the King himself could not accomplish.


E. The council was exceedingly animated by the King, and specially by the
Bishops, as well of Scotland as of England, to go forward courageously herein,
not to fear; with promise of assistance, and punishment upon all those that
should refuse; where upon the Council with the advice of the Bishops of
Scotland, and command of the Archbishop of Canterbury, did augment the
Service Book of England, and mingled it with a great deal more poison than in
England which together with the five ceremonies of England they decreed to
thrust into the church by public Proclamation, declaring those preachers to be
fallen from their obedience that should oppose it, and severely to punish all
such inhabitants, that would not subject themselves to these institutions.


N. This was a bold attempt; but what was the issue?


E. Presently thereupon it came to pass, that a great number of Comitees out
of the church and state addressed themselves to the high Counsil, and diverse
times desired, that such a resolution might not go forth, but that they would
leave the church and churchmen to their ancient customs, without thrusting in
of novelties; otherwise the whole kingdom was prepared to come into a great
uprore, which exceedingly distracted the Counsil; but being set on by the
Bishops, they went forward, to the great discontent of the Comittees, and their
chiefs; whereupon the gentry, the particular Magistrates, and the
Ecclesiastics, began to bethink themselves of some means to resist this evil;
and to this end resolved to bind themselves by oath to maintein (with their
estates and lives) that old Covenant, concerning the maintenance of Religion,
form of doctrine, and government, as it has been always maintained in
Scotland. Which Covenant was confirmed and subscribed by all the inhabitants of
Scotland, except those that were papists, or held with the Bishops faction.


N. That was a fast Bond, and exceeding fearful; for by that means the
strength of those that would stand for Religion, against the popish
institutions, did presently appear. But what way could the Counsill together
with the Bishops take to mainteyn their resolution?


E. They were exceedingly distracted hereabout; but their fury and zeal to the
popish institutions, was so great, that they would hold firmly this point
against the whole Kingdom: and to this end they persuaded the King, that his
prerogative was engaged, that he mainteyn his purpose, use all his strength
therein; yea though he should compel them thereunto by force of arms, advising
him to this end to insure all the Castles and forts of Scotland, which was in
like manner put in practice; in the mean time they in Scotland went forward to
thrust in the Service Book and the five Caeremonies deposing and punishing many
that were against it: so that there fell out great stirs and heavy oppositions,
in all places; which by little and little increased more and more, bred great
distrust against the King; and so much the more when it was found, that he
caused arms and ammunition to be secretly brought into the Castles where he had
his governors.


N. I hear well; there was a bad fire kindled, which could not so quickly be
quenched; but how went it at last? did no man put himself upon the pikes to
preve^t this threatening evil, to inform the King of the danger he should bring
his Kingdoms into, and that for a few papish Caeremonies?


E. O yes; diverse did seek to diswade the King; but in vain: for either they
could have no hearing, or else the ^^shops knew strait so to bewitch the King
that he believed no man, but accounted them all for enemies to his prerogative,
that counsilled him to the contrary: whereby the common governors of Scotland
were necessitated, for the mainteynance of their freedoms and defense of
themselves, to come into arms under General Lesly, with such a General
concourse of all the people, that every one alike willingly offered himself
thereunto, both with his person and also his money, which in great abundance was
given, for to pay the soldiers.


N. How did the King take this? for it seems much that a Kingdom should
betake themselves to arms, without consent of their King.


E. The King is herby induced, to take up men against the Scots; to beset their
havens, to ploclaim their ships prise, and to permit the Duynkerkers to take
all such as had no commission from him; so that Scotland was exceedingly
distressed, both by Sea, and Land, which made them resolve, to take in certain
forts: to free their sea coasts, to bring their leagers to the frontiers of
England: and so to begin a formal order of war, not against the King but
against his bad Counsillers.


N. So 't is often seen, that a great fire comes of small sparks. These were
sad beginnings, but how did the king behave himself in these dangers?


E. The king did also place himself in order of war through the Counsill of
the Bishops, who promised to pay his leager out of the contributions of the
Clergy, so that an English leager was pitched, which together with the king
came to the borders of Scotland* In the mean time proclaiming the Scots for
Rebels, and suppressors of the kings prerogative; so that the two kingdoms
stood in direct opposition, the one against the other, yea so far that the
king made the greatest part of the English leager approach upon the Scots, who
incompassing the English, took some prisoners and got their ordonance and
ammunition without blood shed; all which they discharged, and sent to the king,
to show that they intended not the damage of their brethren the English:
whereby the English gentry have gotten better experience of the Scots then
others had informed them, in reporting that the Scots began this war to enrich
themselves out of the revenues of the English: which then appeared to be
contrary; and was also otherwise conceived by the English.


N. You report strange things unto me; I never read in any history, of such
civiltie, in those that were together by the ears, that they should so freely
dismiss one an other; here hence it also appeared that the Scots sought not
the blood of their brethren, but their own freedom; which without doubt made
the English to entertain a good conceit of the Scots.


E. We have all in general so conceived it, and our gentry began to perceive
that it was but the work of the Bishops to adorn their chair; who knew how
wonderouslie to lead on the King, to the destruction of both his Kingdoms which
has excited the great ones to advise the king to make an agreement with
Scotland, which was also performed upon condition that both the armies should
be cashiered the Castles restored into the hands of the king, and Synod and a
Parliament assembled, absolutely to end all differences; where upon there was
great joy, and all the former conditions likewise performed on the Scots side,
but not in the least on his Majesty's behalf.


N. This was yet a happy issue: but wherein did the king hold his word?


E. He did exceeding slowly cashiere his soldiers, insured the Castles
contrary to agreement, 't is true he consented to the Synod but many ways
abridged their freedom by his Committers, which caused great jealousies. For
although the king has consented to the deposing of the Bishops called in his
proclamations against the Preachers, and approved their Covenant: yet there was
much deceit under it; for the king did in the mean time strengthen himself
against that party as well with in as without Scotland, showing all courtisies
to the Bishops, privily taking in and fortifying certain holds where at every
one began to look about him, to take up arms a new, with a purpose to come into
England to the king, by him to be mainteyned in their freedoms, which
exceedingly distracted distracted the faction in England, and also the King.


N. That Is easy to imagine, for the King who is the head of the kingdom might
easily conclude, that a kingdom divided could not stand; and therefore it must
exceedingly prick him at the heart.


E. I may be the King did well fore see the danger, but he was never himself,
but always lead by others: and therefore they made him believe what they
would, persuading him that the Bishops and their adherents alone could maintein
him against the Scots, if the King would but let them alone as he has done,
whereupon they held a kind of a bastard ynode, where all the institutions of
the Bishops were approved, to contribute out of the means of the Clergy, to
the maintenance of the war against the Scots, which came all toolate. In the
mean time the Scots seeing their leagers in the land, their havens blocked up,
their trading to fail, and their kingdom in danger of ruin, did resolve to
march into England, as also they happily did, and overcame New-Castel, where
they fortifyed themselves, yet without blood (excepta little in the conquest)
or indammaging any of the inhabitants of England, to the wonder of the whole
English nation.


N. It is also greatly to be wondered at, that the Scots durst enter upon so
populous a kingdom to come so far out of their own country; but it is much
more to be wondered at, that they knew how to keep such a strict order in their
leager, that they should do violence to no man, which is almost unheard of, but
how could this be cleared?


E Our whole nation is by this coming in of the Scots yet more confirmed that
they intended not to spoil England, as the Bishops had accused them, but that
they were led by Gods Spirit, and intended nothing but their own freedom, and
the freedom of England, and the maintenance of the purity of Religion,
whereby the eyes of our nation were also opened to take notice of their
oppression under that insupportable yoke of the Bishops.


N. Were not the English exceeding jealous of this invasion, and did they not
endeavor by all means to drive the Scots out of the Kingdom?


E. In no wise; but (on the contrary) all were glad that such a reformed leager
was in England, which gave some freedom to many that sat bowing under the
burden, then also a great number of the gentry went unto the king at York,
laying open before him the grievances of the Kingdoms, and also of England, in
diverse notorious instances, desiring that the Scots and they might have
satisfaction, and that to this end a Parliament might be called, which the king
also granted, whereupon the Bishops presently sent their agents through the
whole kingdoms to many hundreds, to procure Burgesses to their own minds, by
them to hinder all their former proceedings, and to procure means to fall upon
the Scots: which they knew how to effect by the Earl of Strafford in Ireland,
where the Parliament had granted many men and diverse subsidies against the
Scots, that so they might to purpose bring under the Scots and the purity of
Religion.


N. You report strange things. The Bishops faction did well perceive that it
should now come to the point, and therefore they took such pains to get men
after their own minds in the Parliament, but did they effect it.


E In no wise; although they made use of the king himself to desire (in many
places) that such and such might be chosen, but the inhabitants would not
suffer themselves to be so over reached; but as the election of Parliament men
is in the power of the commons, so have they chosen none, but such as with whom
they knew religion and the liberty of the land to be in highest estimation, and
went with absolute power as their Deputies, so that the Parliament being
independent in her resolutions, and having power out of her own head, to make
and alter laws, to appoint impositions as great and as many as it will,
therefore every good man was careful to send conscionable and courageous men,
that could not easily be overcome, either by deceipts or promises; but go
resolved, to suffer all things rather than to yield to any thing that shall be
to the least damage of the Inhabitants, as ordinarily diverse Parliament men at
the dissolving of the Parliament have been by the King set in the Tower,
because they durst with such liberty resist him in the Parliament, to the
advantage of he inhabitants.


N. That is a great privilege of the inhabitants of England, that all
freeborn do choose and appoint to the highest assembly, there can be no cup
prepared that can corrupt so many thousand men, the commons are ordinarily
good, all the corruption is about the head, and the great ones, who to get into
places and offices carry themselves a loft, and they are no sooner come upon
the cusheon, but presently they are Politics, though they were never so good
Patriots before; which we have also had experience of in our popular government;
Many so long as they are citizens, are lovers of Religion and Liberty: But so
soon as they come into the counsill house, then observe they presently how the
wind blows, and suffer themselves to be miss led by some great ones that
bear sway in all assemblies, and begin to be enemies to Religion, and help to
suppress the cities and provinces, making one or two masters, who then direct
all things in government for themselves, and their fat offices: yea it goes so
gross in this point, that 't is to be feared, that the Commons shall one time
or other go to pot; oh, that there might be once amongst us also, a general
Parliament assembled, for the redress of that great declining amongst us! and
that the governors themselves (though upon their Oath, and for all those
advantages which they reap by the government) would take care to maintein our
dear bought freedom, and watch to the furtherance of the prosperity and
welfare of their citizens: then should the lords have honor love and all
things from their subjects who with great affection are taken up with all those
lords which show themselves good Patriots.


E. Yea, have you also flatterers amongst you? I thought that all Netherlanders
were free born, and that the blood of their forefathers was in their veins, who
did not fear the mighty king of Spain, but adventured their lives and estates
for their liberty and would not be slaves to these or any. Whom has any man
need to fear amongst you? you have no Soverreign, the cities themselves make
the sovereignity amongst you, every Lord amongst you is a member of the
assembly, and each can have in himself great attention, and power, if they be
but wise enough to employ it.


N. You speak with understanding concerning our government; and no man needs
to be a slave, if every one were content with his own, and were not too
ambitious; but there are many who (for an office, or to remain on the Cushion)
fear not much to damme their souls, and to ruin their country, and to give
away all to some great ones, to make the cities Amen-sayers, and the provinces
slaves, that by their means they may effect that which the time all too soon
(as is to be feared) shall manifest, but we digress from our purpose, tell me
then how had the Parliament its beginning, and how all things went there.


E. The Parliament by Gods wonderful direction, against the will of all the
great ones, are come together, and after that the Scots had shown the end of
their falling into England, that it was not out of any covetous desire either
of the goods or bloods of the English nation, but only out of an upright desire
and love to their own freedom, and the freedoms of their loving and
affectionate Brethren in the Kingdom of England, then have they presently more
exactly understood one an other, and the Parliament began more narrowly to
consider the disorders of their own state.


N. So was there then presently concluded a brother hood between the English
and the Scots? O wonderful work of God! that knew how so suddenly to remove
that dispersed jealousy; and to use so small a nation; (but full of courage
and religion) to open the eyes of the mighty Kingdom of England, to affect
their own freedoms. But how did the Parliament then farther proceed?


E. That would be too much to relate but we will only point at some principal
things? They have first inquired what were the inormities of the Kingdom, and
who were the causes thereof, and they found such a mass of corruption, that in
the whole Kingdom (either in the church or common weal) there was scarce any
thing sound, and all occasioned principally by the Bishops, and some
Espaniolized English about the king, as it was manifested to the Parliament
daily by an overflood of requests, and greevances of the inhabitants, out of
all quarters of the Kingdom, with the subscriptions of many thousands of men,
exhorting them to remove the evil, and Authors thereof.


N. We may see that the boil was ripe; for the lance no sooner came near it,
but presently the matter issued out. But what were those matters which they
found out?


E. Concerning the church matters and the exorbitances thereof, I have noted
them before; there was a general cry against them, all calling for the
deposing of the Bishops, and the rooting out of their Hierarchy: whereupon
presently there arose a great ado, and opposition of the whole Episcopal
faction, especially in the Higher-house, where they about four and twenty or
more are members, and also all the Papish lords of the Vpper-house which were
also 24. or more, which constantly held with the Bishops, whence men may easily
judge what correspondence the Bishops have had with the Papists, who ought by
the form of their office to have been so far separated from them, as light and
darkness, Christ and Belial: so that whatsoever was concluded against them or
their popely institutions in the Lower House, was presently opposed in the
Vpper-house; so that there could be no proceeding, till by degrees diverse
matters were discovered, whereby now these Bishops are in the Tower, and at
last the Archbishop also for diverse heavy, accusations which the Scots,
brought in against him, by whose absence the good Lords of the Parliament
procured now one, and then another good resolution, to the hinderance of many
sorts of newly appointed institutions.


N. These are great beginnings of Reformation, it is wonder that the Bishops
have not (as it began to be thought of them) incited the king (with whom they
are at all times conversant) to dissolve the Parliament as other Nimrods have
done in the like case.


E. That was prevented, for the Parliament being desired to grant the King
certain subsidies, have granted the same upon this condition, that the King
should pass an Act, that he should not dissolve them but by consent of both
houses, which he has subscribed; beside there were many thousands of
apprentices stood up in London to defend the Parliament, desiring that the
Archbishop and other bad instruments might be punished, so that the Parliament
could not be dissolved, especially seeing the Parliament men had bound
themselves to each other by oath, not to depart till all things were redressed.


N. Therein has the King yet manifested an inclination to reformation, in that
he has granted the Parliament such an act.


E. The King perceived well in what hatred all his servants that were about him
were, by reason whereof many through an evil conscience fled to France, or the
Netherlands, so that the King without the Parliament could not have quieted the
people, and therefore he was necessitated to agree to it, hoping (through his
authority, and those persons which he had in the houses) to bring all yet to
his own mind: but the King was too great a Patron of all the malignants, which
he sought to save, that made the members more and more to strengthen themselves
against the King, to resist him therein: whereupon the King put on the foxes
skin, dissembling, and abandoning many persons; yea did pass an Act that the
Bishops should sit no more in the Higher house, which gave great content, and
had the king left all his bad servanrs, and joined himself with the Parliament,
there had never bin a more mighty king in England then this.


N. I am also of that opinion, but do we not see ordinarily, that the servants
of Kings and Princes, abuse their masters, with calumnies and lies against the
best to displace them, and then alone to abuse the ear of Princes to their own
ends, not careing whither their masters be beloved or hated, if they can but be
great with them, and by their power work but their own passions against others.
It goes always so amongst us also, that the servants that are most about our
Prince in all places where they have authority, bring in drunkards, and
novices: thrusting out the ancient, honorable, beloved, grave gentlemen, to the
great distaste, and offense of the Comunalty and that by false reports brought
to his Highness against them, who unwittingly, and without his fault is thereby
ill thought of in all places, as if he where a patron of such vile persons,
which we must notwithstanding judge to be far from his princelike disposition.
But tell me, what is there more fallen out in the Parliament?


E. Continual Requests of the inhabitants, full of complaints against the Kings
Courtiers, concerning the great oppression which they have used over the people
in Monopolies, and unjust impositions, whereby they have drawn millions from
the comunalty, part for the King, but most for themselves, whereof many that
sat in the Parliament are found guilty, which were presently put out of their
commissions, and places, as well in the Higher as the Lower house; whereby the
Parliament was more and more refined; which being disanulled, and declared to
be unlawful to the great content of the common alty, who thereby have gotten
more affection to the Parliament, and given them the more encouragement, to
proceed in the Reformation: so that they themselves have caused the Earl of
Strafford to be apprehended, made his process, and proved that he had brought
the King to many bad enterprises; made him break his covenant with the Scots,
tyrannized over the Irish, as was daily confirmed by a thousand abominable
instances out of Ireland: held the Dominion for himself, compelled the
Parliament of Ireland, to grant great sums of money and men to employ
against the Scots, and other criminal causes more, for which they have (with
an enforced consent from the king who would willingly have saved him) beheaded
him, and so made him an example, whereupon yet more that were also guilty are
fled.


N. This was a great resolution of the Parliament, and I wonder exceedingly,
how they could bring the King to consent unto that, seeing I have always
understood, that he was one of the principallest instruments, by whom the King
has brought out his designs having promised to maintein him.


E. The King has done much for him, taking all his guiltinesses upon himself,
and by practices has sought to get him, out of the Tower: but the stream was
too great against him, as well of the Parliament who manifested unto the King by
many learned lawyers, that he was worthy of death, as also of the people that
by force would have him out of the way: so that the King must (although
exceedingly constrained) consent thereunto; but he did not subscribe the
sentence himself, but caused it to be done by others.


N. There comes to my mind the Marriage of the young Prince, tell me once, how
it went about that, for he was in England, when the Deputy of Ireland was
executed: I think I have heard some say, that it was thought, that the young
Prince would have made intercession for him to the Parliament; but I understood
that he did it not, least he should thereby gain the hatred of the people,
which should be discommodious for him.


E. Concerning the Marriage of your Prince, it was first set on foot by the
Queen Mary, being in the Hague, to make her acceptable: but many judged that
she meant it not: for being in England it was opposed by her faction, as also
by the Bishops, and most of the Courtiers and great ones which are yet by the
King: but the Parliament did exceedingly press it forward to hinder, her, that
she should not go to Spain, from whence she was solicited by many Ambassadors,
one after an other; but to marry with a Reformed Lord, who presently coming
into England, was gracious and welcome to the inhabitants, so that in the end
that Marriage was solemnised, and made sure, to the great content of the good
inhabitants in England, who have judged that it would be a faster bond, to
maintain the true Religion, resist the Popish faction, and bind the king
faster to the Parliament: but I hear that many amongst you have bin much
troubled about that Match.


N. I know nothing of that; all, have accounted it also a good Marriage for our
state, thereby to make yet a nearer friendship with England which is of one
faith with us. Only some are troubled least by this Marriage, all the
corruption pride, vanity, and ungodliness of the English Court coming over
with her should break in upon us, seeing that our nation at this time is
exceedingly inclined to pomp and novelties, to the ruin of many.


E. No that is not it which I have heard: but I have understood that some were
jealous of this great Marriage, because they thought it might be an alurement
to the young Prince to affect the Sovereignty of the Provinces, whereunto his
Father in law, and his Uncle the King of France, should help him.


N. Those are but evil aspersions, like those wherewith Prince Maurice was
accused by the Arminians* for therewith our Prince should win nothing, but
loose much: for he has now more to say than any Duke of Gelderland, or Earl
of Holland, or Zeeland ever had: disposing of all places and offices in the
state and Camp, by which means every one reverenceth him, and seeks to do
him all manner of service; without having any burden of war to bear, or to
have his head troubled from whence the money should come, to manteyne the war,
he lets the States take care for that: so that it is not to be thought, that
there is one hair on the Princes head, that thinks thereupon; Besides his Prince
like Excellency has been brought up in this land, and knows the nature of
our Netherlanders, who should not be brought under any Sovereign, every one
would rather adventure his life and goods, as they have done now these sixty or
seventy years, than that they should let go their liberty, or stand under the
absolute government of one Sovereigne: Should that be ever attempted, it would
prove the ruin of the land, therefore it is not to be thought, that the King
of France, or England, would lend any assistance thereunto although the Prince
should desire it. How dangerous it is to entertain Soveraingty has bin well to
be seen in the King of Bohemia; the English nation has yet too great a feeling
thereof, than that they should attempt the like again in any of theirs, and
therefore entertein not such callumnies, let us leave this, and return again to
the English affairs. What more has since that passed there?


E. After that both the English, and Scots leager, was cashiered, the King went
into Scotland, where he disburthened the Scots, and pronounced them free from
rebellion, confirmed all the Acts of the Parliament, and the resolution of the
Synod, and declared that they were falsely accused by him whereupon there was
made a new covenant betwixt the King and them, as also with England, to the
great joy of both the Nations, who thereupon have performed solemn thanksgiving
in both the Ki^gdoms, that GOD the LORD has brought to shame the evil
counsillers about the King, who always incensed him, thereby to cause war
between the two Kingdoms, that so by the help of the papists, and the force
without (as they persuaded themselves) they might be master of the King and the
two Kingdoms, to root out the true Religion, and bring in popery; but GOD be
thanked, that has made the King to see, how shamefully they have possessed him
against Scotland, that he himself before the whold world must callin, and
nullify all his poclamations against the Scots, as having unjustly proceeded
against them.


N. So knows GOD how to bring the Counsils of the wicked to shame. GOD
preserve the King that he may no more hearken to those bad instruments, that he
come into no greater danger, which I exceedingly fear, for I have heard that
most of his bad Counsillers are yet with him, and those that are fled for their
misdeeds, do yet hold correspondence with the King, and especially with the
Queen, who is a papist, and has many Jesuits about her, who together will
never rest, but always stir to bring in the popish Religion, and to incense
the King thereunto who is kind and hearkeneth much to the Queen; what think you
thereof?


E This troubles many amongst us also exceedingly, so much the more, because
it has appeared to the Parliament, that the Queen by an Act in her name,
subscribed by the Secretary which is fled to France, has ordained a
fasting-day amongst the Papists, to pray to the Saints, that the great design,
which was in hand, for the favor of the Catholics, might prosper; from whence
may be easily gathered, that she has knowledge of all those bad designs.


N. Yea, is it so? Then shall you quickly see, though (so long as the king is
among the Scots, who open his eyes) it now goes well with him, that he shall
be soon otherwise led, when he shall return into England to the Queen and his
bad counselors; for if they knew how to make the king unfaithful, and to break
his kingly word, in that first agreement made between him and the Scots
whereupon the Scots laid down their Arms, and surrendered the Castles and Forts
in Scotland to the king; they will know how to do it yet once more (as is to be
feared.) But tell me, have I not heard, that there are now and then many
treasons discovered?


E. You must not have so bad a conceit of our king: but that there are diverse
treasons discovered, is true, both before the kings goeing into Scotland, in
the time of his being there, and also since his return thence unto London, and
especially there is discovered (by some intercepted letters written out of
Scotland to London) a treason against the principallest Lords of Scotland, by
some great ones in Scotland; as also against the eminentest gentlemen of the
English Parliament, whereupon the papists in all quarters should instantly have
stood up, mastered the Tower of London, and in all parts over run the strong
holds, and then have massacred those of the Religion, according to the example
of the murder in Parice.


N. O horrible design, if it were so! but were these not counterfeit letters,
by that means to make the communalty more enraged, and to stick closer to the
Parliament?


E. Oh, that it had been so, that they were but shadows, and flourishes! yet
many things that followed thereupon do demonstrate that it was but all too
surely intended, for there are many great ones before this apprehended in
Scotland, which had intended to have massachred some of the greatest, as was
discovered by some, who themselves should have had a hand in it, for whom the
King did intercede before his departure out of the Scots Parliament, which did
also pardon them, where of they shall in time feel the smart. In England a
french Cook has confessed, that he had undertaken to poison all the meat at
a certain feast, where all the principallest gentlemen of the English
Parliament should have been, by that means to have murdered them.


N. O wonder full work of God, that discovers such hellish designs! these
come no other wise than out of the bosoms of the Jesuits, who after the
example of their father the devil, are murderers of men; Truly out of these
instances, it sufficiently appears, that the traitors were in the knot, but
should there be any thing of that, that the papists (if this murder had
succeeded) should have betaken themselves to Arms?


E. There is nothing more sure; for so soon as the treason in Scotland was
discovered, then did the Papists of Scotland stir up the English, to proceed
nevertheles with the design, as also the Ireish did revolt at the same time;
who (as is probable) had no certain intelligence of the ill success, which
the design in England and Scotland had; and therefore went they forward with
the concluded work, as also certain of the chief in this rebellion being taken
prisoners have confessed, that there was intelligence concerning this point,
between the papists in Ireland, England, and Scotlaed, and that with the
knowledge of the Queen, whose leager they have openly professed themselves to
be; so that the effects have showed, that while the King was busy in England
and Scotland, with deep protestations, declarations, and remonstrances, to
manifest his zeal, for the reformed Religion against the Papists whom he has
caused to depart from his court, and from about London, with giving out sharp
Proclamations against them, to make all the world believe, that he meant it; In
the mean time, not withstanding that, the Queen and the Minions, and
counsillers of the king, were busy, to raise up, strengthen, and arm the
papists against the Religion, Parliament, and good inhabitants of England,
which made many to fear, that such a thing is not come to pass, without the
kings knowledge, though it be not to be believed, that a king should play so
with his fidelity, certainly God would not suffer such things unpunished.


N. A crafty country clown would judge, if that the king had no hand therein, he
would not retein such servants by him, as were found guilty of such mischiefs,
but punish them as traitors, to justify himself: but is there nothing come to
pass, whence we may well perceive, that the king is no longer in the Scottish
air, but has forgotten all his fair conclusion in Scotland?


E. There are (sure enough,) heavy things come to pass, wherinto the king has
suffered himself to be led, which give great suspicion, that the king is yet
ruled by the malignants, for the king has suffered himself to be so far
carried away by his bad counsill, that he went with armed men to the
Parliament, and that as his servants themselves have confessed to fall upon the
Parliament Lords, whereby the king did put himself in the greatest danger, to
cause a common massachre, had not GOD himself wonderfully prevented it; for
which the king has yet thanked GOD afterward: for through but one unadvised
word from the King, those bloodhounds should have fallen on, as they already
began to justle, and strike some gentlemen, coming to the Parliament.


N. This must have exceedingly distracted the Parliament Lords, and made great
alteration amongst the people, for had that come to pass, the whole Kingdom
should have been in an uproar. We may well see, that these counsillers care
not, though they bring the King in great danger of his life, and spoil his
Kingdom, so they may but effect their design. But what was the issue thereof?


E. Some of the counsillers to this work, are fled: the people began to fall
upon the soldiers, the Parliament ensured themselves with a guard, and begun
to perceive that is was coined for them, which made the members of both houses
unite themselves, with the more courage to take in hand the reformation. The
malignants have so much the more incensed the King against the Parliament and
his people, making him believe that he was not safe within London, whereby they
induced him to leave London, and go into the country with his Son, that by his
absence from the Parliament, all resolutions might be the easier hindered, and
to make farther distrusts between him and the Parliament, of which also we
daily perceive the effect, for notwithstanding that the Parliament have bin
very instant, to get his Majesty again to London by them, and to remain by the
affairs of the Kingdom, yet all was in vain. How great security they have also
promised the King? But he is yet departed farther and farther, to the wonderful
hinderance of all the affairs of the kingdom.


N. These were all bad signs of farther mischief, for if the malignants be so
powerful with the King, that they can make him to forsake his great counsill,
(who in all her actions hitherto has manifested nothing else but to be
Advocates for the Religion, prerogative of the King, and Defenders of the
privileges of the inhabitants) to be take himself wholly to their counsil, so
shall they in the end draw him wholly from his Parliament, and bring him into a
civil war But how goes it in the mean time with the Irish rebellion?


E. It goes there very pitifully the rebels are exceeding strong, almost
master of all, and deal more barbarously with the reformed, than the Spaniards
have done with the Indians, as appears by many printed papers, which makes
men's hearts to melt with grief, when they do but hear of their Tyranny, so that
those of the Religion be in the extremest distress, and relief comes but
slowly to them, so that we may fear that the rebels will go away with that
Kingdom, which God preserve.


N. What is the reason that it is not speedily handled to send succor that
way, for the King is well inclined to the furtherance of that work, as is not
to be believed, but that he has compassion on the poor people of the Religion,
who every moment are in fear of death?


E. What shall I say? Oh that it were so, that we had no reason to believe it;
the Irish brag that they are the kings leager, and have no other intention, but
to maintein him against the Parliament, for whatsoever ordinance the Parliament
passes for the hindering of the rebellion in Ireland, the king refuses to
subscribe, or delayeth it so long till the occasion to send succor is by past,
without taking this work to heart, or encouraging the inhabitants thereunto;
yea the King shows that he is quite otherwise conceited against them, than he
was against the Scots, these he proclaimed presently rebels, beset their
havens, gave their ships to the prey, when he would not but by great ado
suffer the Irish to be declared rebels by publication, whereof he would have
but forty copies printed, that this proclamation of the Kings should be the
less known, when he has declared the Scots rebels by a thousand
Proclamations, yea he has caused th^s to be read in every pulpit, and so
manifested more affection, or mildness, to the papisticall Irish; than to the
reformed Scots. Every one may from hence judge, where the King, or his counsill
is lodged.


N. I begin wholly to believe, that the Queen has made the King sure to the
papish faction: and though he be now fair of the Religion, and means not to
root it out, they should yet bring him thereunto; to the destruction of
himself, and his Kingdom. GOD open the eyes of the King, to take notice of
those Achitiphels, and sons of Belial which are about him, and to be ware of
them; O unhappy Kings that meet with papish Wives, who thrust forward their
husbands (unawares) till they be drowned in tumults! Oh that this bad
instrument were separated from the King!


E. There is great likely hood thereof, for the Queen has made it known to the
Parliament, that she with her daughter would come hither, to the Hague, by the
young Prince, her son, which the Parliament has assented to; and she is come
already, fetched in by your Prince, and welcomed in the Brill, and thereupon come
with the young Prince to the Hague, where show was some days enterteined in
the lands behalf, and welcomed by all the counsils.


N. You tell me now some news; which does not please me very well, this must
have a bad foundation, that a Queen should so come out of her Country, while
her husband with his inhabitants are in such distraction, and that she her
self so inconsideratly and unexpectedly should bring over the young Princess,
before the appointed time, GOD grant that she bring not the two divisions of
England, into our Land, or engage our Prince, or State, for the King, against
the Parliament, which should cause great stirs here in our Land.


E. This was also feared in England, that she should use all means to get in
this State, against the Parliament, for the King, whereby great disadvantages
should happen both to the good party, as also to Netherland it self: yet it is
hoped, that the Prince of Orange, and the States of the Land should keep
themselves out of this, and not meddle in this matter, but hold themselves
neutrals, seeing they know well, that the Parliament seeks but to maintain
the Religion, and their Privileges; on the contrary the Kings counsill
intends nothing, but furtherance of the popish Religion, and oppression of
the inhabitants as has been before plentifully declared.


N. It is a needless fear, our State shall in nothing resist the Parliament,
else we should condemn our own war, their cause is just as ours was in the
beginning, when the States of the Land maintained the Religion, and freedom
against the King of Spain, wherein the English Nation did help us: far be it
then, from any true hearted Netherlanders, that they should resist the
Parliament either in counsill or action, yea if it should come so far, all
should rather help the Parliament, than the King. If the King get the
upper-hand, the papish Religion shall be exalted, yea the King himself, and all
welwillers should be ruinated: if the Parliament prevail, so shall the King be
yet well preserved, and honest men shall dwell in rest.


E. Our fear is not without reason, for now of late soldiers and officers
which are, and remain in the service of the Land, and hold their gages here,
with much ammunition out of the Magazines of the land, have bin sent to the
King, at the request of the Queen, and with knowledge of those, from where the
man is now lost: What is this else, but to give the knife to cut our own throats
and yours? for which we have cause to protest before God, and the world, and
call for vengeance thereupon; This exceedingly distracted our Nation, that they
have not so much favor showed them, as the Scots, with whom they have not so
handled.


N. If it be so, you have reason to be distracted, we have also as great cause:
for in so doing we disfurnish our selves of ammunition and men, that we might be
the more easily fallen upon. To do so, is the head, and if the commons should
know it, it would not go well with them. I cannot receave it that the governors
would trouble themselves herewith, for though there were many slaves among the
Lords, yet there be many good cities, that would take it upon them.


E. You judge well, for they of Holland take it exceedingly on them, have well
received the messengers of the Parliament, at their entreaty have arrested
diverse ships with ammunition, that would go to the King, notwithstanding the
deep protestations of the Queen against it: they also will that those shall be
sought for, that have sent away the former ammunition without their knowledge,
yea they press this point so far, that they have sent a message to them of
Zealand, to be one with them in this point, and other points tending to the
maintenance of the freedom of the Land, which is there also exceedingly well
taken up, and concluded to the conten^ment of those of Holland, although it
were there stoutly strugled against: God grant that the Provinces may
understand it so likewise.


N. Sir, whence heard you all this; you must have listened with a curious ear;
you tell me here choice tidings, God must be praised for the zeal of the
honorable States of Holland, this is a token that there must be yet many good
Lords there, God make their number tenfold more and so encourage them, that
neither by promises, nor deceipts, they may be won to desist from this good
begun work; their reward shall be with God, and all good inhabitants shall carry
them upon their hands, and with them, adventure all for the freedom.


E. We doubt not of the affection of the Commons: but they know not many times,
that their safety depends upon ours, and that this doing is not for us alone,
but for them also: But the Governors see this well, and therefore we hope that
they shall be for us, as for themselves, as it is also very needful; for the
Queen does not cease to be on his Highness ear, to engage himself, and assist
her with men, and money, for the Marriage sake; yea she regards not to write
to the King, that the Prince has afforded her all help in this thing already,
which must be received with discretion, for she can write that, to animate the
King, although there be nothing of it, such practices go through the world; she
pawneth still daily the Jewels of the Kingdom, knows how to send officers
privately, with ammunition to the King, which by little and little through the
wonderful providence of GOD falls into the Parliaments hand, by which all
her designs are discovered, like as GOD from time to time has brought to
light all enterprises against the Parliament. GOD grant it may be always so.


N. All good men are with his Highness exceedingly perplexed, who by this
Marriage, is in a great streyt, on the one side he would willingly give content
to the Queen and the King, being so near bound unto them by aliance, in regard
of his son; on the other side, the best governors, and body of the inhabitants
incline to the Parliament, whose good will does most concern his Highness, for
therewith he must keep house, God give his Highness wisdom, that he sail not
against the stream to engage himself farther with them that no farther diseases
or unquietnes come upon us and England. But tell me how it goes forward with
the Kings matters.


E. I have gotten even now, a Letter from England, that the Earl of Essex with
the Leager is marched toward the King, first to desire his Majesty by request
to be pleased to join himself to his Parliament, and in case of refusal to see
if he can free his Majesty from his bad counsillers, with so little blood shed
as he can.


N. But I hear that the King has also a mighty leager, and besides that, he
gets the Papists daily to his assistance, yea, that he himself has called them
to aid him. Tell me once what there is, concerning that, for that should
manifestly oppugn all his former deep protestations, wherein he has many
times called God to witness, and thereby should before GOD and the whole world,
make himself a perjured person, justify the Parliament in their proceedings,
and let every one see, that they intend nothing but the suppression of the
freedoms of the kingdom, and the Religion.


E. That is certain, that the papists who were disarmed by order from the
Parliament, have at their request received express order from his Majesty, to
arm themselves, for his, and their own defense.


N. But we wonder, that the Parliament has so long delayed: they might long
before this time, have more easily beset the King, when he had but 2. or 300.
men with him, now it will cost much blood, and spoil England.


E. The Parliament have taken the mildest way, and always hoped by humble
messages, supplications, and high presentations to the King, to mollify him,
open his eyes, and bring him again unto them: Now they can manifest to all the
common people, and before the whole World, that they are brought, by the
greatest necessity, to the last remedy of open war against their King, and are
free from all the innocent blood.


N. The Parliament shows themselves to be right fathers of their country,
that seek to content their inhabitants so much as they can. GOD give them
wisdom, and courage, to do all things according to justice, and right, in
sincerity before GOD, for his holy truth, to the rooting out of papacy, and
then they need not fear, but GOD will further his own cause.


E. This the Parliament Lords of both Houses, have professed with high and deep
oaths, and all their actions also manifest the same. But they about the King
show, that they have sworn the destruction of the whole Kingdom, for they do
nothing but pilledge and steal, and especially from the best inhabitants, and
such as are known and commended for their godliness, whom they have upon a
roll, not to pass by their houses, before that (like a company of ungodly
persons) they have turned all things upside down, and like barbarous men, have
handled the men, and women, and children. So that 't is to be feared, if these
blood thirsty persons should once get the upper hand, and effect their design,
there would follow as bloody days, as in the time of Mary.


N. In truth, the estate of your kingdom and church is exceeding pitiful, it
is wholly a popish work, the LORD go forth with the Parliaments Leager, and
bring to shame such blood thirsty men; have you not heard, whither any thing
has passed between the two Leaguers?


E. I got even now writings, that the 2 Leaguers are on each other, that there
has bin a fierce battle, yea, with great advantage for the King, seeing that
2. Regiments of the Parliament presently took flight; but the Earl of Essex,
with some other assistance, fell on with new courage, and have after a bloody
fight, put the kings folk to a retreat, and with honor and advantage kept the
field, so that on the kings side well 3000. and amongst them many great ones,
were slain, and on the Parliaments side but about, 400. God the Lord fought
for them.


N. This was a bloody beginning, God stay this fury, heal the wound, appease
the quarrels, and change the, wa^r into peace.


E. There is little sign of it, for the King seems rather to be a king of a
pillaged people, and wasted country, than that he should study to agree with
the Parliament; to the reforming of the Kingdom, yea since this battle, his
folk, and especially Prince Robert, have to the great distaste of the English
who have bin so tender hearted of their troubles more, and more enraged,
plundered Banbury, and some other places, and used the people most shamefully,
and so they approached close toward the city of London, with their leaguer,
there to share the best boot, if they could but get it.


N. There must then needs have been great fear in London.


E. You may well think that, but there was good order held in all places within
and without the City, watch set at all passages, and ordnance planted, besides
this the Earl of Warwick is on foot with a new leager, to join with the
Earl, of Essex and then apparently to fall again upon the kings leaguer. God,
grant that we may hear good news, I must go about my business, we must
break off, till a better oppertunitie.


N. One word more, is there no more hope af an accommodation?


E. Those that now speak of an agreement in the Parliament are fearful
hearted men, and it may be also many of them not true hearted enough, the
business is goen too far; not with standing seeing many have good hope to bring
the king to a good agreement, therefore the good members of both houses, to give
unto his Majesty full measure, have again nominated certain persons to
deliver a request to his Majesty, tending to peace and agreement, and there
upon some intercessons begun, but they in the mean time fell upon the
Parliaments troops, and occasioned new blood shed, contrary to all
protestations, and so all proved fruitelesse, and now all things are made ready
in London, to adventure the utmost for the religion, and liberty. The people
are full of courage, alla like willing to pawn their lives upon it, and a new
bloody battle is spoken of: the Lord fight for his.


E. Well is the cause so exceeding pitiful? how shall we answer it before
God, that we take no more compassion upon you? God shall see and search it,
that we are now so careless, knowing nothing but of divellish masking ungodly
and wanton ballades, and daunces, superfluous meals, wherewith we daily pamper
our selves as on afeast day; and the queen of England with our greatones ca^
make themselves merry with these, in this time of sorrow, as if this misery
concerned the^ not, how can it go well with them and us? is it now your turn,
it can quickly be ours, my heart is so overwhelmed with sorrow, that I can
scarce speak any more. I thank you for your friendly communication, I shall
pray to God for England, that he will spare that glorious Kingdom, discover
the malignants, open the eyes of the King, and also of all our states men, that
we may either remain neutrall, or choose the right party. Fare well my good
friend, If you hear any more news, I pray make me partaker thereof.


FINIS.

