THE PVRIFYING OF UNCLEAN HEARTS and Hands: OPENED In a SERMON Preached before
the Honorable House of COMMONS, at their solemn Fast, January 28. 1645. in
Margarets Westminster. By RICHARD VINES, one of the Assembly of Divines.

PSALM. 24. 3, 4. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall
stand in his holy place?
He that has clean hands and a pure heart.
Published by Order of the House of COMMONS.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Abel Roper, at the sign of the Sun against St
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1646.

Die Mercurij 28o. January, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, that M. Long and M. Holland do
from this House give thanks to M. Vines for the great pains he took in the
Sermons he preached this day, at the entreaty of this House, at St Margarets
Westminster, (it being the day of Public Humiliation) and to desire him to
Print his Sermon. And it is Ordered, that none shall Print his Sermon, but who
shall be licensed under his handwriting.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint Abel Roper to print this Sermon.

Richard Vines.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
SVch Auditors who will suffer the word of exhortation, Heb. 13. 22.
as they encourage the Minister to do his, so they shall be sure to know their
duty; which is not ordinarily the happiness of great personages. This Sermon was
preach upon one of the days of your solemn approach and drawing nigh to God.
It was no season to present you with fancies dressed in cobweb lawn, or thin
notions clothed with air. The Popish fasts did but change solid meat into
sweet meats. The subject of the sermon is cleansing and purifying; which as it
was necessary by the law, before the unclean person might draw nigh to God, so
it is required of you, If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thy hands
toward him; If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away: for then shall thou
lift up thy face without spot, Job 11, 13, 14, 15. It is a liberty which
Ministers claim by virtue of their commission, to speak, exhort, and rebuke
with all authority, Tit. 2. 15. You that are the tutelar patrons and assertours
of just liberties, do like your selves, in countenancing and encouraging this
also: so shall you have the ministry of the Word always ready to help you, to
beat your corruptions black and blew, which to do, is both the duty, and
beauty of your sackcloth-dayes. 1 Cor 9 17. (...).
The Lord who has said, That the pure in heart shall see God, Math. 5. 8. And
that be that has clean hands, shall be stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. so
draw nigh to you in the light of his countenance, and strength of his arm, that
you who have defended Religion from being trampled upon, may preserve it from
being torn in pieces, and see the good of Jerusalem all the days of your
lives. So prays,

Your servant in Christ lesus, Richard Vines.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Honorable House of COMMONS, upon the day of the
Monethly-Fast, January 28. 1645.
JAMES 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: Cleanse your
hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double-minded.
MY work at this time (by agreement) is to bring up the rere of this text, See
M. C^t his Sermon upon the former part of this text.
that it may appear to you in a full body; you received (in the fore-noon) the
invitation to that, which is not only the main duty, but also the chief good of
man, To draw nigh to God: And you have (I hope) tasted of the sweetness of
that promise which God does make, or the entertainment which he gives to such;
God will draw nigh to you; so the Prodigal son arose and came to his father,
Luke 15. 20.
and his father ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. The lost son comes,
the compassionate father runs. God answers his people in a way of retaliation:
if they draw nigh to him, he will draw nigh to them: and this drawing nigh of
God to us, is like the nearer approaches of the Sun, which by his heat and
prolificall influences, gives life and beauty to those things that before lay
dead and buried, shrouded in the winding sheet of the winter snow.

That part of the Text which comes under my hand ( Cleanse your hands, ye
sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double minded) contains in it,

1. The Prohibens, or impediment prohibiting this mutual drawing nigh of you
to God, of God to you; and that is, the pollution of your hands, the
uncleanness or corruption of your hearts; for it is not possible there should
be coalition, or communion between God and wicked men; therefore it is said,
Psalm. 18. 26. with the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward
thou will show thy self froward: Plato saw this truth Plato in Phaedane.
(...) (says he) (...), the law of contrariety forbids purity and filthiness
to touch, that is, to have fellowship or communion, (...), Touch not the
unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6. 17. God is so far from drawing nigh unto, that he
will hide his eyes from unclean hands. The reason why he delights not in our
fattest Sacrifices, why our incense is an abomination to him, why he hates our
new Moons and appointed feasts, why he will not hear our multiplied prayers, is
the uncleanesse of our hands, Isa. 1. from the 11. to the end of the 15. verse;
Thou art of purereyes then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity,
says the Prophet, Hab. 1. 13. that is, See the word (...) explicated in M.
Gataker his learned Treatise, called, Gods eye on his Israel
thou can not countenance the violence and oppressions of thy people, the
grievance and vexation done unto them by wicked men, much less, draw nigh to
men of such unclean hands.

2. The removens prohibens, or the removal of that impediment, and that is,
cleansing of hands, and purifying of your hearts, for says the Prophet, Isa,
1. 16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow: (And then it follows)
Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord. Our dissimilitude and
unlikenesse to God, is a bar to this mutual acquaintance and communion, for
a man unlike to God, cannot but dislike him. As white is no more contrary to
black, then black to white: so Gods holiness is no more contrary to our
wickedness, then our wickedness is to his holiness: and therefore there can be
no drawing nigh together, unles either God recede from his holiness (which
cannot be) or we be cleansed and purified from our uncleanesse, which ^s the
only way to make this communion close, sweet and firm.

That the Text is proper and seasonable for this day of our Humiliation is
plain, not only by that which immediately follows in the 9. and 10. ver. Be
afflicted, and mourn, and weep: humble your selves in the sight of the Lord.
But by the Text it self, for what is the (...), the main business of a Fast, but
to search for the Lord with all our heart, to lament after him, to draw nigh
unto, and meet our God? and what is the (...), or main business of them that
fast, but to bring forth the wickedness that is in their hands, and the
predominant corruptions that are in their hearts, and as witnesses against
them, to cast upon them the stone of execution that they may die. A Fast is not
merely a sermon and a prayer, there is a propriety in that ordinance or duty.
The sermon should spread your sins before you, and your confessions and
prayer should spread them before the Lord. The sermon puts the ashes on your
heads, and dresses your souls in that sackcloth, which you are to wear as
mourning garments, in your prayer and humiliation. I wish our Fasts may not
lose their property, like physic, which by often taking, becomes at length a
diet, rather then a medicine.

There is in the words triplex (...), a threefold conjunction.

Sinners and double-minded cleanse and your Hands purify Hearts.

I shall first break the shell, by explication of the terms.

The word [(...)] sinners, as it signifies in general any sinner, in
opposition to a righteous man, Romans 5. 19. As by one man's disobedience, many
were made [(...)] sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made
[(...)] righteous: so in special it also signifies a wicked man, one of
flagitious life, a sinner (...), therefore its often said [(...)] Publicans and
sinners, and Luke 7. 37. a woman in that City which was [(...)] a sinner, that
is, an adulteress, or a harlot, as it is generally expounded; and if we survey
the beginning of this chapter, what brawlings, envyings, lusts, self-seeking,
did reign amongst this people, we shall see good reason to take the word
sinners, for such as did lie in more open and scandalous sins, men of unclean
hands.

The word (...), double-minded, is once before used in this Epistle, chap. 1.
8. and signifies such as have double, (or as the Syriack expresses it) divided
hearts, it answers the Hebrew expression: (...)
a heart and a heart, which the septuagint do interpret word for word, 1 Chronicles. 12. 33. Psalm. 12. 2.
(...), and Symachus (whom Chrysostom on, Psalm. 12. 2. calls (...)) renders it,
(...), we shall best understand the sense of the word, by comparing it with the
opposite thereunto, and that is (...), Ephesians. 6. 5. Col. 3. 22. Simplicity, or
singlenes of heart, it is a grace recommended to servants, In singlenes of
heart as unto Christ, not with eye-service as unto men; And again its said, In
singlenes of heart fearing God: doing whatsoever you do from your heart, as to
the Lord, and not to man; where you have singlenes of heart described, to be
the steerage of the heart, by the fear of God in a right line, to intend and
aim at him and his glory, in all you do; for those crooked, serpentine, and
subtle vvindings and turnings of heart, which are called, (...)
Psalm. 145. 4, 5. crooked ways, that are like a vvinding way, or vvinding
brook, that runs in and out; or, like a vvinding stayre case, where a man goes
but three or four stepps, and then turns to another point, are set in
opposition to uprightnes of heart; such off and on, such in and out hearts
cannot be upright, they then are double minded.

1. Whose hearts are not single and entire with God, but divided between God
and self, being biassed with carnal and vvorldly lusts, policies or ends.

Like the heart of an Adulterer, or Adulteress (so these double minded ones
are also called, verse 4.) which is divided between husband or wife, and some
other strange love.

2. Whose hearts are not fixed upon one center, but uncertain, moveable, and
inconstant with God, Cap. 1. ver. 8. A double minded man is unsettled in all his
ways. The word is, (...), which signifies that he is at no setlednesse within
himself, but off and on, by reason of lusts that mutiny within him, and carry
him away from choosing, and resting upon God alone: and this inconstancy rises
from the former, namely, the division of the heart, for it being divided in it
self by reasonings, self-interests, lusts, cannot be constant in attendance
upon God. It is but by accident that the weather cock points toward the Sun,
namely, because the wind and Sun are both in one corner. If the wind turn, it
turns away also.

2. Cleanse and purify, (...), these words are promiscuously, and
indifferently used by the Septuagint, to interpret the Hebrew words that
signify to cleanse and purify; (...)
and there is in these words an allusion to legal uncleanness, and the
purifying of them; for as in the law, before an unclean person might draw nigh
to God, he must be purified from his uncleanenesse: so those that will draw
nigh to God, or would have God draw nigh to them, must cleanse their hands, and
purify their hearts. Eo lavatum, ut sacrificem, nunc lavabo ut rem divina^
faciam. Plaut. in aulul. (...). Plutarch. in M^io.
The Heathens had their ceremonious washings, and purifyings, as preparative to
their sacrifices and prayers; and this heart-purifying, and hand-cleansing, is
that purgatory through which we must go, if we will draw nigh to God in
worship and communion; God will be served with clean creatures.

3. Hands and hearts. The heart is the womb, where lust is vvarmed and
conceived; the shop, where the forge, anvill, bellows, fire are for the
forming of lust, and making of it ready. The hands are put for the executive
and isntrumental powers, that bring it forth to light, and act it, (...), Romans
6. 13. the weapons of unrighteousness unto sin: In short, the outward and
inward man being filthy and unclean, must be purified from corruption of heart
and life. For he that has clean hands, and a pure heart; Psalm, 24. 4. 5.
shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his
salvation.

I shall now come to the matter of the Text which I will handle.

1. In the two parts of it distinctly. Cleanse your hands, purify your hearts.

2. As these two parts are in connection one with the other: cleanse your hands,
and purify your hearts.

3. As they stand both together, in reference to our drawing nigh to God, and
his drawing nigh to us. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you.
Cleanse your hands, etc.

You may easily see that here is very little speculative, or notionall matter,
but practical, and such as will fall most properly into use, and into matter
of application. We have now to deal with your hearts and hands, and not your
brain. Here will be no fine thin wafers which will melt upon your tongue, and
vanish in a little sweetness; and yet such novelties and running banquets are
all for the palate of these queasy times; o Religion! how art thou turned into
a kind of Philosophy of opinions, in danger to be a mere sceptick, or terra
incognita, an every thing, a nothing, a thing for a vvanton fancy to play
withal, a smooth tongue to talk of, made up of a brain and a mouth, without
heart and hands. How can it be otherwise when the tree of knowledge is so much
preferred before the tree of life?

From the first part, Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, I observe,

1. A corrupt and wicked life argues a man to be a stranger to God, and God to
him.

2. They that will draw nigh to God, must cleanse their hands.

A corrupt and wicked life argues a man to be a stranger to God, and God him;
Doct. 1.
for otherwise a man might draw nigh to God, and have unclean hands too, which
the Text supposes that it cannot be. That power which draws a man into
acquaintance with God, does proportionably kill sin. That power which flows
from God in acquaintance with a man, kills sin too: whether I go out to the
sun, or the sun come in to me, the darkness is expeld: sin has not
dominion over them that are under grace, Romans 6. 14. the knowledge of God sets
a man loose from his bondage to the enslaving lusts he before served, ye shall
know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, John 8. 32. draw nigh to
God, and be unclean if you can. That faith which is uniting to Christ, is a
purifying faith; rebellion against the Commandments of God, is inconsistent
with communion with God; you may fast, and pray, and ask, that you may consume
upon your lusts, ver. 4. like a cutpurse in a Church, who comes not thither to
seek God, but his prey.

They that draw nigh to God, must cleanse their hands; Doct. 2.
I will wash mine hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord,
Psalm. 26. 6. Where you may observe, that thanksgivings and praises, which the
Psalmist calls sacrifices of shouting, or loud music, Psalm. 27. 6. and wherein
they used (as one says) the agere circum altar, (...) Lori^ut ^ Psa^. 16. 6.
are to be performed with washen hands: so in your prayers, the Lord requires
that you should lift up pure hands, 1 Timothy 2. 8. and what a sweet reflection
may you make upon your deliverances which are wonderful, when you can say, I
was upright with God, and I kept my self from mine iniquity? Therefore has the
Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness
of my hands in his eyesight, Psalm. 18. 23, 24. If ye fall into straits, and be
plunged into depths of misery; If your face be foul with weeping, and on your
eye lids be the shadow of death; what a lifting up of the head will it be unto
you, to be able to say, Not for any injustice in my hands? Job. 16. 17. If the
Lord shall deliver this Island from the oppression and injustice under which it
has groaned; what a crown and comfort will it be to you, that it is delivered
by the pureness of your hands? Job. 22. 30. To conclude. If there be a
frustration of our counsels, and our endeavors bring forth nothing but wind;
You shall find the reason why God makes all void and ineffectuall, Isa. 59. 6.
Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with
their works; Their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in
their hands.

That nothing may be lost, let us pick up the particulars that are offered unto
us in this point.

N="1"1. That God invites (...), great sinners to draw nigh to him, and
promises to draw nigh to them, O ye sinners, no such strangers to God, but
they may come into favor, intimacy, and communion with him; great sinners are
oftentimes made great Saints: God engraves his image in untoward wood, that the
churlishnes of the matter may the more commend the workman; he calls them to
him, being yet overwhelmed with sin, and in their drawing nigh to him they
are cleansed; as Christ sent the Lepers to the Priests, but (...), as they were
going they were cleansed, Luke 17. 14.

2. He bids these sinners cleanse and purify, their hands and hearts? but how
can corruption cleanse it self? can unsavory salt season it self? No. God
purifieth the heart by faith, Act. 15. 9. and every man that has this hope,
purifieth himself, 1 John 3. 3. Christ is he that comes by water and blood, 1 John 5. 6. that is, by all manner of purifying, typified by legal
purifications. This is (says a learned man) one of the mysteries of this law
(of purifying) that a clean person was himself made unclean, Ainsworth in Numb.
19.
by touching the holy water, sprinkling it upon the unclean: and this is the
great mystery of the Gospel, that he whose blood cleanses us from all sin, 1
John 1. 7. and in whom being a clean person is no sin, should yet be made
sin for us, and for our cleansing. And as an unclean person is said to purify
himself, Numb. 19. 12, and 20. because that (though there was a peculiar water
for that purpose, and that also to be sprinkled on him by another) it was his
duty to come unto that purifying water, and make use of it: so are you to
purify your hearts, and cleanse your hands, by coming unto that blood of
sprinkling, Heb. 12. 22, 24. Faith will bring you to this purifying blood: one
touch of Christ by faith, draws virtue out of him, which will dry up your
running issues. Humiliation, though it do not properly cleanse your hands, yet
it plucks off the gloves, and makes them bare for washing: and godly sorrow
with its seven daughters as they are expressed, 2 Cor. 7. 11. are cleansing
things. This is the way of your cleansing and purifying, this is your duty, and
this through grace is your ability; for the regenerate being principled, does
act; being purified, does purify himself; and being kept by the power of God,
does also keep himself, as it is said, 1 John 5. 18.

3. Sinners are to cleanse their hands: but what are those sins? they are
generally those outward sins, or ways of wickedness wherein men use to
walk, and which do denominate a man (...), a sinner of deeper die; but in
special we find some more eminently called sins of the hands, as oppression
and violence, Jonah 3. 8. blood, Isa. 1. 15. bribes, Isa. 33. 15. injustice,
Job. 16. 17. as there are also eye-sinnes, ear-sinnes, tongue-sinnes, etc.

4. Why is cleansing the hands set before purifying of the heart? for the rule
is, make the tree good, and his fruit good: in vain, do we go about to
sweeten the stream, when the fountain still sends forth bitter water? To this I
answer, that though it be but a sollicitous trifling, to vex every prius and
posterius which we meet with in Scripture, and is but a curiosity to take
pains to say nothing, lest we might seem to leave any thing unsaid, yet there
may some account be given of this transposition: as 1. The Scripture sometimes
puts that first, which is visibly first, the sign before the cause, as when it
is said, Calling and Election. 2. Because conviction begins at some grosser
sin, there the conscience begins to take fire: and God who has the ordering
of sin, makes some great sin very serviceable and useful, to be, as it were,
an entering wedge to break the knotty heart all to pieces. 3. Because grace
having once got footing in the heart, presently enters the field against this
kind of sins, as having greater guilt, and by their bulk making the greatest
interception of the light of Gods countenance, and more inconsistent with a
state of salvation, then those rebelling and molesting corruptions which are
within.

For the reason of this point, Reasons.
That they who draw nigh to God, must cleanse their hands. I shall offer only
this. That these sins of our hands, do keep us at distance from God, and God at
distance from us; your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and
your sins have hid his face from you, Isa. 59. 2. This is the worst effect and
fruit of sin; that it is privative of our union with, and fruition of God:
Depart from me, is as terrible a word as everlasting fire: It is (...). Jude
13. the blackness of darkness, the lustings of corruption which are in the
regenerate, are (as I may call them) transparent sins, they obstruct not our
communion with God; like the motes which are infinite, but hinder not the suns
bright beams from us; but these hand-sins or wickedness of life, are opacous,
and put us into the shade, by their interposition between God and us, and
doubtless while we are in love with sin, God is as unpleasing to us as we are
unpleasing to him, nor would we any more draw nigh to him then he to us. Give
me leave thus to convey the notion that I have upon this point, Commerce is one
thing, Communion is another: As a man will have commerce or trade with an
enemy, a stranger, any body, to trade with him for profit, and to gain some
commodity which he has in his hands; but Communion, which is in way of love,
friendship or acquaintance, he cares not for, nor would by any means admit of;
so a man, whose hands and life are full of sin, and his heart full of enmity to
God, may yet have some commerce with God in duties or ordinances, to serve his
turn upon God, uti Deo at fruatur mundo, and to make use of him for his own
ends; as its said, ver. 4. You ask, that you may confame upon your lusts; but
communion in way of league and friendship with God, and fruition of him in way
of special love and favor, he neither can have, nor will, except he also give
a bill of divorce to his best beloved lusts.

I come now to make application of this Point to you, General Use.
and the Use is in the text, Cleanse your hands, ye sinners. It Is unacceptable
work to be set upon, for a sinner to cleanse and purify, and to cleanse his
hands too, which are full of profitable sins, Turn ye every one from your evil
way, and from the violence that is in your hands, Jonah 3. 8. It is a wonder
that the ship wherein we are, so laden with sins of all ranks and
subordinations of men, King, Princes, Judges, Lawyers, Gentry, Ministers,
people (especially in such grown seas as we have been in) should live to this
day; for you know we enterd into this wilderness, wherein we yet wander, with
our former Egypt-sins upon our backs, and we alas did not first make even
before we went upon a new score; we fast, we pray, we Covenant, and yet we are
as double minded, as foul handed as before; ungodliness, unrighteousness,
self-seekings, hypocrisy, religiousnesse for our ends abound amongst us, and
contempt of the Ministry more then ever, so that preaching of the word by the
Ministers of this Kingdom, which for soundness, spiritualnesse and success,
has not been (I was going to say) paralelled, (I may truly say) excelled in any
part of the world, is by very many now judged to have been a Monopoly, and fit
among other Monopolies to go down and to be made a common trade. Not many years
ago, when it was both danger and disgrace to hold forth the profession of the
name of Christ in truth, what appetite had Christians to the sincere doctrine
of Christ, and of regeneration and mortification of sin? How did they, in their
private meetings, lay siege to the throne of grace with united strength, and
antidote themselves against the infectious air of those times? whose eyes were
thought too dear for those faithful messengers of God at whose feet they sat?
what contending was there for the faith once delivered to the Saints? what
burning love had they each to other? what onenes of heart and mind? Now alas,
some of those good ears of come are mildewd, and many run all up into straw,
and do not eat so well; Religion vapors it self out into notions and disputes
of no value, breaks into parties, and is broken in pieces by mutual
animosities; Ammianus Marcell. lib. 21 de Constant o Grotius de veritate, lib
1. in initto.
so it is observed, that that sincere and true godliness, which flourisht and
was warm in Christians under the persecuting Emperors, post Constantinum
caepit refrigescere, after Constantine, when it was both safe and honorable,
it began to cool, and to break out into ambition, pride, contention, etc. If
you will not own your sins, we that are Ministers must cry aloud, Isa. 58. 1.
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people
their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins: and observe, I pray
you, to whom the Prophet is commanded to cry aloud, namely, to such as sought
the Lord daily, and delighted to know his ways, as a nation that did
righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God; such as did ask of
God the ordinances of justice, and took delight in approaching to God, that
fasted and afflicted their souls, ver. 2, 3. such as made religious duties the
panders to their lusts, and the covert of their injustice and oppression,
hiding their filthy sores under a velvet plaster; Sin lies fast asleep and
most secure in such men, the form of religion is a buffe-coat to their sins;
and therefore cry aloud, and cry impartially against the sins of all sorts of
men, so as not to lick the sores of great ones, and bite the sores of poor
ones, for that is rather to upbraid men with their poverty, then reprove them
for their sins. You know that Physicians, Chyrurgians (and so Ministers) are
sometimes allowed to be cruel; and the truth is, I fear we have lapt up the
pills of reproof in so much pap and sugar, that by allaying the bitterness we
have frustrated the operation. Oh that you were all of you too generous to be
flatterd, and that you would search out particularly your own personal and
bosom sins, swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, injustice, oppression: for
whiles we speak generals, no man thinks that the Cock crows to him, and so goes
not forth to weep bitterly; upon a general indictment of a man to be a felon
or thief, there can be no proceeding to sentence, except the fact in particular
be expressed; so while you say only in general, We are sinners, and do not
arraign your selves upon particulars, saying, This is my iniquity, you can
never judge and condemn your selves as you ought. So much for the general.

Now particularly to you (Honored and Worthy) Particular Use.
that are Members of the Honorable House of Commons, as you are single
persons, search your selves, consider your ways; Is there any thing in your
hands to be cleansed? You are to purge the corrupt leaven out of your own
houses, your selves, your families, your places of office and trust are the
proper sphere of your activity; you are for Ecclesiastical reformation, and
the sweeping out of corruptions out of the house of God: but are you as intent
upon personal reformation of your own ways? do your own houses lie clean?
have you real principles of godliness in your own hearts? or are you carried
merely by the Parliamentary genius or stream, by a rapt motion? In one word:
are you not afraid of holiness? These are things sadly to be considered. For can
you think that in good earnest one black-more should go about to wash another?
would you not say, Why does not he first make himself white, that the other may
thereby be persuaded he can make him so too? If any of you should lie in known
sins or lusts, can you comfortably, conscientiously, and zealously contribute
to the reformation of others? you may indeed do that which is right in the
sight of God, but where is your comfort, if it be not done with a perfect
heart? He must needs be afraid to hedge in the Sacrament, and to make it
inacessible to the scandalous and profane, or to settle a faithful and
searching ministry in the place he lives in, that knows he shall but thereby
make a rod for himself. I beseech you therefore to search your selves, that you
may not be Carpenters to build an Ark for others, and your selves be lost. It
is a great honor to be a Member of this Parliament, but it is as great a
burden too, as ever English men underwent: and I shall crave leave to tell you
further, that you may become the greatest sinners in the world by it, for now
the sins of the Kingdom: may become yours; the Heresies, blasphemies, and
crying wickednesses of oppression and injustice may become yours; they are
other men's sins by commission, they are your other men's sins by your omission
of that opportunity, and duty of your place to provide for remedies preventive
and removent of them, so far as they may come within your knowledge, and the
reach of your power. That which Scripture calls partaking in other men's sins,
adds more guilt to men of all sorts, especially Ministers and Magistrates,
then is generally thought of. Take heed of making your selves partakers of
those sins and abominations, which you hate the thought of: and the Lord keep
alive your zeal by this quickening consideration.

2. So much being spoken to any of you respectively, as single Members: Give me
leave to address my self in a word or two to you the Honorable, and for ever
to be renowned body. Is there any thing in your hands, the cleansing away
whereof may cause you to draw nigher to God, or God to draw nearer to you? you
have had a miraculous hand with you this last year; and there is with you as a
token of Gods drawing nigh to you, such a chain of successes and victories,
consisting of so many links, without any flaw or breaking off between them, as
very few people have to show in the world again; I beseech you watch the door
against the entrance of that which usually attends either great parts, or great
benefits received, and that is pride: as we easilyer take cold when we are
warm: so its natural to man to be puffed up with success. I shall offer to you
this humbling consideration; when Israel was in the act of leading two hundred
thousand of Judah in triumph, having gotten a mighty victory over them; there
was a Prophet that pressed upon the Conquerours a seasonable argument, that took
very much with them, and wrought them into a more equal temper, and it was
this, 2 Chronicles. 28. 10. but are there not with you, even with you, sins
against the Lord your God? So say I to you: are there not sins with you, even
with you? reflect upon, and examine your selves. There are very many hard cases
in the Kingdom. I am not so out of my self as to lay them at your door, as you
are a body, because indeed I cannot, (and yet if I could, I durst do it) but I
most humbly give caution to you, who are the shields, the healers. There are
many forlorn and desolate persons, that follow you with cries for the price of
their husbands and fathers lives or limbs. It is not charity, but justice to
refresh their bowels: many have given down their milk freely, and yet after all
have their breasts bitten until they bleed, by unlawful plundering, spoil and
violence: many instruments employed, are very sharp bitten and prey for
themselves. The intention of the Physician and of the Leech is not the same. He
intends to draw out the blood in due proportion, as his patient can bear: She
has no other gage of her sucking, then till she be full as she can hold. It
were justice to squeese these spunges, that have sucked themselves full, and to
leave them as dry as they were at first. Let difference be made of men's faults
in their punishments: there is no reason, that Peter who denied his Master of
infirmity, and Judas that betrayed him deliberately, should be both in one
praedicament. Let not justice be biased by partiality. A Judge ought to look
with no other eye, but the eye of the law, which looks at things, and is blind
to persons. Let justice be speeded, (...), Arist. Ethic. lib. 5. cap. 7.
that expenses and attendance eat not out the principal in question, Amos 5.
24. Let judgment run down like water, and righteousness like a mighty stream;
and above all, shake your hands from bribes: whether bribes by presents, or by
kindred, friendship, favor, one puts out the eye as well as another, and there
may be quid pro quo bribes, when a man will lend his vote to one, to have it
paid him again, in a cause when he will call for it, and opinion-bribes, (as I
may call them) when a man will endeavor to carry another through, because he is
of his opinion and judgment in other things; Oh let justice dwell in your
tents, and in your hands. And if in this ataxie, or confusion of things it be
impossible to prevent, or remedy many miscarriages, as I think it is,
(considering that many who run in to the common scathe-fire, do not intend the
quenching of it, but the seeking of an opportunity, in that confusion, to rob
them that are in misery, and to fish for themselves) then my prayer shall be
that of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19. The good Lord pardon every one that
prepares his heart to seek God, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary.

And so I pass on to the second particular in the Text, Purify your hearts,
ye double minded; whence I take up these two points.

1. Double minded men have corrupt hearts. 2. This double mindednes hinders
both our drawing nigh to God, and his drawing nigh to us.
Double minded men have corrupt hearts: Doct. 1.
for its said, purify your hearts, ye double minded. Doublemindednes is a
division of heart between God and some other preponderating lust, or
self-interest; and so where there should be no division, but singlenes and
integrity, there is division; For all the heart, all the mind, all the soul,
and all the strength, is that which God calls for. There are some that have no
heart, they have no thoughts of God, no relish of him, no byasse toward him*
it was an ill omen in sacrifices, quandocor desecisset, when there wanted a
heart; there can be no expectation of any return of heartles prayer, heartles
performance of duties; and this is the common posture of spirit of the
ignorant, and secure worldlings. There are some that have double hearts, they
pretend to have a zeal of God, and they profess the name of Christ, and hang
out the Christian colors: but through hypocrisy and partiality to their own
ends, and self-respects they halt between God and Baal, or endeavor to comply
with two masters, or they part their friendship and love between God and the
world, as ver. 4. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the
friendship of the world is enmity with God? There are some that have one heart,
and this is that which God promises to his Vovenant People, and wherein he
delights, when the heart is totum homogeneum, whole and undivided from him,
then is it a perfect heart, and of a happy temper or constitution, being of
chaste love, affection and faithfulness to God, not vitiated or deflowred by
carnal copulation with other base lusts or ends; do but observe our Savior in
that saying of his, Math. 6. 22, 23. how he opposes unto a single eye, an evil
one; If, says he, Thine eye be single, and then when you would have expected
that double should have been opposed to single, he says, But if thy eye be
evil, thereby signifying, that if it be not single, it is naught and evil; and
whereas one might think, that a double eye has more light then a single: our
Savior tells us the plain contrary, that a single eye makes the body full of
light, but a double eye fills it full of darkness; Its true, there is in a
double minded man, some eye to God, that is, so as to use his name to serve
self ends, or to color and cover his sinister aims and intentions. As a harlot
whose heart goes after unchaste loves, will yet have a husband too, (that is) to
color and hide her lewdnes; such are these which are double hearted: they have
a Sabbath for God, and six days for their lusts: they retain to God, and wear
his cloth, and sometimes wait and attend, but they are their own men for the
most part, and work for themselves; Religion unto them is but the stalking
horse, under the sides whereof they creep, to get a shoot at their own game;
how often does God in Scripture find fault with this kind of professors?
when ye fasted, says he, Zech. 7. 5. did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me?
and again, when they howled upon their beds, they have not cried unto me with
their heart, they assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel
against me, Hos. 7. 14. An Israelite that is without guile, that has but one
heart, is a rare man, and worthy of an Ecce. Behold, indeed an Israelite.

In the opening of this point, I shall follow the thread of that explication of
this word (double minded) which I gave in the beginning.

1. This double mindednes is an uncertainty of the heart with God, not fixed
upon a center, but off and on, as times, occasions, and interests do lead on,
or draw off, so far you will go with God, as your way and his do fall out
to hold together: and until you must pull down Jeroboams calves, as well as
Ahabs Baal, and then you part with him when it comes to such a pinch; so also
in adversity or affliction, we make nautarum vota, mariners vows (as they do
in a storm) and when we are on shore, and landed out of danger, we eat the
Covenant we made before, Psalm. 78. 24. etc. When he slew them, then they sought
him, and they returned and enquired early after God, and they remembered that
God was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer. Nevertheles, they did but
flatter and lie unto him, for their heart was not right with him, nor were they
steadfast in his Covenant. If the heart was right with God, it would be certain
and steadfast with him. Constancy is but the daughter of sincerity. Its a
hateful thing to set sail to every wind, and to change color so often, being
no faster tied to God in the tempest, then we can be loosened in the calm; Be
what you were in the storm: in your affliction you will abide to be spurred
withoutkicking, and are very tame under reproofs: but when you are lifted up
and are at shore, then to put you in mind of your vows and Covenants in the
day of your trouble, is as an unpleasing a thing, as to put a Mariner at shore
in mind of his vows or promises made at Sea. Its no great danger to reprove
men sharply when they are low, any coward may strike a man that is down, but
(believe it) when men are aloft and high, and may more safelyer be dealt
withal by stroaking, then by the spur, then it is somewhat to come nigh the
heels of truth, for it may happily strike out his teeth.

2. This doublemindednesse is a division of the heart from God. 1. It is
divided between the promises of God, and the difficulties opposite, when a man
lays his dead body and the dead womb of Sara in the skales, against the
promise of having Isaac, this is sense fighting against faith. 2. Between
conscience and lust, conscience dictates, lust bypasses, the inferior appetite
mutinies against the superior light, and leads it captive, video melior a
proboque, deteriora sequor. 3. Between Religion and policy: and then Religion
commonly goes by the worse, Jeroboam and the Kings of Israel, to comply with
their politic respects, set up, and continued a self-devised worship. 4.
Between God and the world, or God and our own ends, as they here in the Text:
when we make God a mere servant to our selves, and move upon a private center
of our own: the heart is cunning and subtle in squinting toward its own ends:
visibly we will be for God: under hand we seek our selves: so the planets in
their daily motion from East to West, move as the fixed stars, but they have
another motion of their own, which is creepingly by stealth, and more
unperceivable then the other.

Use.
For the use of this point, let me turn the words of the Text once more upon
you, by way of exhortation; Parify your hearts, ye double-minded, cast out
those dividing lusts, policies, ends, which draw you away from God; and pluck
off those false byasses of self-interest, and self-seeking, which cause you to
wheel off from the true mark or scope of all your desires and endeavors: you
will be found faulty if your hearts be divided, Hos. 10. 2. simplicity of heart
is of great account with God; there is asinina simplicitas, and columbina, the
simplicity of the ass, and of the dove; the former is a defect in the
understanding, the later is the grace of an honest heart; and this sure is that
which is of esteem with God. In matters of judgment and justice between man
and man, you are to have two eyes, to look both ways but as they that take aim
shut one of their eyes, lest the sight should be distracted; so in your aims
and ends, your eye is to be single, in intending God, and not self: let Christ
increase, though you decrease.

The greatest matter above-board, and which all men's expectations and mouths
are full of, is the settling of Religion and of the Church. Religion is (
rerum-publicarum quoddam quasi coagulum) that which caements Commonwealths
together, Cunaeus lib ^. cap. 15.
though now it be made the ball of contention, and the great divider of us into
parties; we divide it, and are divided, being far more then double-minded
thereabout. Oh that God was first set into possession of his right, and that
his Tabernacle was pitched, before any of the lots, for our own liberties or
interests were drawn. This was the oath that David swore in his afflictions,
Psalm. 132. 2, 3, He swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of
Jacob. Surely I will not come unto the Tabernacle of mine house, nor go up
into my bed. I will not give sleep to my eyes, or slumber to my eyelids,
until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob; and this is the first Article in our vow and Covenant. What the real
impediments are, does not fall within my way: but the self-interests are to be
searched out. Not yet, say some, and their reason is the same, with that of the
common sort of people, against enclosures in former times: If every man's own
should be enclosed, they should lose their freedom of common, and that liberty
they usurped all the field over, or (as others hope) that after we have turned
round awhile, we may happily return to the same posture we were in before, and
having lost our way in the mist, may come back again to the same place whence
we set out at first. If any, (say others) let it be a George on horseback that
stands at door with a wooden dagger, but keeps no body from going in, the thief
passes under his nose into the house, as well as the true-man. Not this, say
some of those that are toward the law, for then happily many contentions might be
quenched at the bottom of the chimney, before they flame out at the top: and
such may be the want of grist, as it may tend much to the hinderance of their
mill. Nothing that's one, say the Libertines, for we have gone loose so long,
that now we cannot go strait laced. Its irksome to wild birds to be coopt up
in a cage under discipline.

Those that have been such proficients in the school of liberty in a few years,
as to commence teachers and preachers of the Word, or have grown to be such
illuminates, as they pretend, will no more rejoice in, or accept of a
Government which may degrade them, or resolve them into the first matter or
elements of their composition, then Soldiers of fortune (as they are called)
can rejoice in a peace concluded and settled. There might be named many other
such like ends and interests, which carry stroke with men, and are the causes
of our divisions; which would in great part be quenched, if the game was played
on all hands, by conscience and singlenes of heart: let us therefore search out
those self-respects which lie close in us, that we may find the head of that
Nilus which thus overflowes the banks. That double-mindednes which keeps us at
distance from God, does also keep us at distance from one another, and
therefore that we may be (...), Phil. 2. 2. of one accord, I do for my own
part conceive it much conducing, that whatsoever touching the settlement of the
Church, shall pass your hands, may (in the main parts thereof) go forth into
the world, seconded with the reasons and grounds of it: for doubtless, the
reason which induced you to set the stamp of authority upon it, will avail much
to make it pass currently with others. You know, the Gorgons head which struck
all men dumb in former times. The Church, the Church, is not likely to have the
same operation now, in this seeing and searching age: though men will willingly
be subjects to your authority, yet also, as they are men, they will be slaves
to reason. There is in your hands already (Renowned and Honorable) something
which was printed by your appointment, for your satisfaction, in one main
proposition, which if it might see the public light, might give light to many
who are yet in a cloud or mist.

So much for this point. There is yet a second, arising from these words:
Purify your hearts, ye double-minded. And that is,

A double-minded man through the uncleannes of his heart, Doct. 2.
keeps at distance from God, and God keeps at distance from him. He that is
biased with some predominant lust, cannot close with God sincerely,
universally, neither will God impart himself to such a man; For let not that
man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord, James 1. 7. would any of
you settle an acquaintance or friendship with a known Vertumnus, that will be a
parasite at one time, and a Iud^s at another? God is choice of his friends, he
owns not such as serve their lusts, and are in heart divided from him. I have
no time left me for this point: as neither for the consideration of both parts
of this Text in connection together: clean hands, and pure hearts: nor lastly,
for the consideration of them both, with reference to our drawing nigh to God,
and his drawing nigh to us; wherein I might have shown you how communion with
God, and the power of godliness are linked together; Draw nigh to God, and he
will draw nigh to you: cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts,
ye double-minded.

FINIS.

