A Vindication of Cheapside Cross against the Roundheads.
MUst I then down? is an eternal doom
Past out against me? must I needs to Rome?
And why? it is contrary to the Laws
To judge the offender e're they hear the cause.
Why come you armed against me? what may be
The cause of difference 'twixt you and me?
Have I transgrest the Law? or did I ever
Our gracious Sovereign from his people sever?
Did I to a factious covenant subscribe,
Or turn a Jack on both sides for a bribe?
Rebels have long our wished for bliss deferred,
All rose in arms, but yet I never stirred.
When such a Prick-eare troop upon me gazed,
Crying (no Cross) good faith I stood amazed:
I was stroke dumb with wonder, and which worse,
Because I Would gold about me, feared my purse.
This zealous rabble came not to adore me,
Yet (thanks to the Butchers) some fell down before me
Others ran quite away, the rest disputed,
Misusing Scripture phrases, but confuted.
Wisdom they called Apocriphall, threw dirt on
All Fathers faces, but Saint Prin and Burton.
Was God in the middle of this congregation?
Or were they led by instinct or revelation?
Kings doft their Crowns, and Cardinals their copes,
All must be bare unto a crew of Crops.
But does Religion such a hatred bring,
To hate the very picture of a King?
Brethren what would you have? or what do you fear?
I draw no sword, nor do I wear long hair.
I Will do no wrong (though armed with pikes about)
Would you know why? It Was to keep Roundheads out,
Who have not sworn, but taken a protestation
To leave no golden Cross to bless our Nation.
They will divide my coat, my flesh, my bones,
They Will share the gold, and give their wives the stones.
They say they will pluck the Tower of Babel down,
All things go right when there is no Cross in the Town.
But who can live without them? Crosses are
The good man's blessings, and his certain share.
He that would win an everlasting Crown,
Must elevate his Cross, not throw it down.
They Will have no Common Prayer, but do abhor
All that is common, but a common W --
Will you hear reason? that is not common to ye,
Will prayers prevail? I Will pray ex tempore.
You think it is justice that your factious crew
Are cross to me' cause I am Cross to you.
You will have flesh for flesh, It Is very dear
That Peter's nose should pay for Malchus ear.
If he should snuffle now, that were a jest,
That very thing would make him full blessed:
You Will run to hear him, and cry's doctrine strong,
Though nonsense, in regard he stands so long.
Put out his eyes next time, and you may find
A second like the first, and doctrine blind.
Some call me Popish, and report they see
Diverse adore me, what is all that to me.
Because they worship me shall I fall down
Unto such calves, mechanics of the Town.
It Is Popery, let them kneel that list, I Will stand,
Before I Will bow, I Will fly to some new Land.
Be sorry Brethren, I Am pleased to think
'Twas from too little wit, or too much drink.
I Will be a Roundhead spiritually sent
To pardon your affronts, if you will repent.
I am a foe to Rome, for you shall find
When I am gone, there is the more room behind.
FINIS.
Oxford, Printed, 1643.


