COUNSEL FOR YOUTH; Delivered in two Sermons upon Psalm 119. verse 9. Preached
by H.V. Rector of Alhallows-Honie-lane.

Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the
evil days com not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them. LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, in the Year MDCL.

To my loving Parishioners, and other Friends in London, or elsewhere.
Dear Friends!
I Here present you with the Sum of two Sermons, not long since preached, and
delivered by word of mouth to you of my own charge. If any enquire what put
me upon this subject, the entrance of these Sermons will resolv you in that
particular. If any ask, what moved me to put it to the Press, take my answer
now: It Is not any by end, it is not any high thought of any thing that is my
own in this discourse: But I consider,

1. The Truths are Divine and Sound.

2. The handling of them is seasonable in these days, wherein there is so much
miscarriage of youth, and (I would I had not need to say it) so much neglect
in them that have the oversight of Youth. In these Sermons both are concerned;
Youth at the first hand, and others by necessary consequence.

3. I know that words have wings, and fly away, almost as soon as they are
uttered; but it is true, Litera scripta manet. If any forget what was spoken,
by repareing to the Book their memories will be helped.

4. I have also many Friends that heard not these Sermons preached, whose
spiritual good yet I desire also to further: and to transscribe so many
copies, it would be tedious. I thought it therefore the more compendious way
(though more costly) to put it to the Press upon mine own charge, and so to
have the whole Impression at my own dispose, by means whereof I may give copies
abroad as I shall see cause.

And so ye have the clear reason of what is don: it is intended out of love to
you, and your good my aim in it.

Concerning the Sermons themselves I will not say any thing; only,

1. If any be less acquainted with business of this naeture, I give them to
understand, that what I say to Young Men, I mean it also to Young Women and
Maidens, following therein the custom of the Scripture, which ordinarily,
(especially in things which equally concern both) comprehend's both sexes under
the Male, as I might show you in many examples, if it were needful.

2. These Sermons contein matter suitable to old and young, I desire you, each
of you to take your proper portions, and not (as it is too frequent in the
world) every man to get insight into other men's duties, while they neglect to
know their own.

To conclude, if ye will accept, read, apply, and make use of what is here
presented to you, and the God of heaven shall be pleased to make it profitable
by his blessing, I have my aim and end: And so (committing you, your souls and
bodies, and your ways to the protection and guidance of the Almighty and
only wise God) I rest ever,

Your Servant for Jesus-sake H.V.
From my Study Dec. 20. 1649.
THE YOUNG-MAN'S COUNSELOR.
PSALM. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleans his way? by taking heed
thereto according to Thy Word.


THe sad report of the miscarriage of many young men now of late, and some of my
own charge, whose case I much pity, has taken me off from my wonted course,
that, by making more particular address to young men, I might prevent the
miscarriage of others. And if it shall pleas God to give such success to my
endeavors, as that I may be an instrument for the reclameing or safe-guarding
of any, I shall be so far from repenting of my attempt, that I shall readily
confess my self bound to the God of Heaven, for that He has made my
endeavors in any degree successful in this kind. If, on the other side, I
shall have occasion to complain with the Prophet, I have labored in vain, I
have spent my strength for naught, Isai. 49.4.
and in vain (which God forbid) yet my comfort is this, that faithful
endeavors shall not want acceptance. I shall not doubt to say with the same
Prophet, Ibid.
Yet my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God: I rest upon that
encouragement, which the Apostle gives, whereby he assure's us, that God will
reward every man according to his own labor, 1 Cor. 3.8. de Isid. ad Eugen. l.
4. c. 2.
Secundum opus, non secundum proventum; according to his labor, not according
to the issue of his labor, as St Bernard observ's.

And, if any of you have passed this slipperie age, and atteined to riper
years, let it not be grievous to you, that I now bend my speech to young men,
as if the business did not concern you: young men are also a part of my charge,
and our blessed Savior give's command to St Peter, Joh. 21.16.
and in him, to us all, that are his servants in the ministry, not only to
Feed his sheep, ver. 15.
but, his Lambs also. Yea, they are a part of my charge not to be slighted:
for upon the well-doing of them, that are in the flower of their youth, depend's
the hope of future ages. And, while I speak to them, ye also may hear somewhat,
which may, by the blessing of God, prove to the advantage of your souls.

But, (to leav further prefaces, and to set upon the Text, which (to this
purpose) I have undertaken to handle) it seems the Prophet entered this
meditation, while he was yet a youth in King Readiness Court, envied of many, and
exposed to many temptations. Being therefore sensible of the temptations,
vanity, incircumspection and unstaiedness of that age, and considering withal,
that yet this was his prime, wherein God especially require's to be served,
he desire's a redresser of his life and manners. And therefore finding himself
to be puzzled thereabout, he break's out of his continued meditation into
this exclameing interrogative Apostrophe, Wherewithal shall a young man cleans
his way? whereto the answer is instantly annexed, By taking heed thereto
according to Thy Word.

Whether he make's this demand to God, and receive's the answer from God; or
whether he communicate's with himself, as St Austin does probably answer,
Interrogat se, respondet sibi, He ask's himself, and answer's himself, I hold
it not much material; for both the demand, and the answer was inspired into him
by the Spirit of God.

The kind of speech, ye see, is by way of question and answer, which is
Rhetorical and vehement.

The matter enquired with such earnestness, is the reformation of life and
manners.

The Emphasis is in the word, young man.

In the demand, we have, 1. The act, redress, or cleans. 2. The Object, way.
3. The person concerned, young man: concerning all which the question is moved,
Wherewithal shall, etc.

The answer is plain and easy, By taking heed thereto according to Thy Word.

The whole verse may be resolved into these propositions, or points of doctrine.

1. Youth is, and young men's ways are naturally corrupt.

2. The ways of godly young men are no better then they should be.

3. They had need to be reformed.

4. Godly men endeavor the reformation of their ways.

5. It Is an hard thing for young men to reform their ways.

6. Yet it is a possible thing for them to do it.

7. Man know's not of himself, how to do it, but

8. God is ready to teach us, if we consult with him.

9. The way to cleans or reform our ways, is by taking heed thereto,
according to God's Word.

Of these I shall speak in order, being more brief in some of them, while I
insist more largely upon others.

Propos. 1. Youth is, and young men's ways are, naturally corrupt. It Is plain
in the Text; for what need were there else for young men's ways to be cleansed?
nothing need's cleansing, but that which is foul or corrupt; And this God
himself, who made us, and therefore know's us, does attest, whiles he saie's
of man, Genesis 8.21.
The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Hence it was, that
Solon's Laws did not admit a young man to Magistracy, though he were
otherwise of good abilities. The Romans admitted none to the Senate, till he
was five and twenty years old. The Canons of our Church admitted none to the
order of Deacon, the first degree of Ministry, Numb. 8.24. Act. 7.23.
till he was three and twenty years of age. The law of God, concerning the
Levites, admitted none to minister, till he was five and twenty years old.
Moses was full forty years old, when he first visited his brethren. Christ
himself was full thirty years old, Luke 3.23.
when He first set upon His public Ministry: and the like is said of John
the Baptist. All these laws and examples cast a kind of imputation upon youth:
especially if ye look into the reason, Philip. 5.
which Tullie give's of the Roman law, Cum grandiorem aetatem ad Consulatum
constituebant, temeritatem adolescentiae verebantur: The Romans requiring more
ripeness of years in them, that were to be admitted to Magistracy, feared the
rashness of youth. And we hear, Eccles. 10.16.
what the wise man saie's, Woe to thee, O land, when thy King is a child. And
it is to be observed to this purpose, 2 Chronicles. 10.8.13.16.
what danger befell Rehoboam, by following the counsel of the young men, no
less then the revolt of the ten Tribes. To this purpose it is also, that
Plutarch saie's, that Youth has more need of a Governor, then childhood. And
therefore, when Nero told Seneca, that such an old doting fellow, as he,
should be set over children, the Philosopher answered wisely, Magis regenda
est fervida adolescentia: Hot youth has more need to be governed. And
therefore wisdom in the book of the Proverbs give's her counsel still to young
men, ever saying, My son, my son: And Solomon put's young men in mind of the
last judgment, in that, showing them to be vicious. Rejoice, O young man,
saie's he, in thy youth, Eccles. 11.9.
etc. but know, that for these things God will bring thee to judgment.

And, if I should make a catalogue of the corruptions of youth, happily, I should
offend the younger sort (though in what I shall say, my aim is not to shame or
dis-hearten, but by setting their danger before their eyes, to warn and arm
them against it) I am sure, it would take up a great deal of time, to do it
largely. Take it therefore briefly.

1 Timothy 2.22.
1. Hear the Apostle advising his scholar Timothy, Fly the lusts of youth:
then youth has its lusts; and, me think's Plutarch, though a Pagan, make's a
good comment upon that text, saying, Juventus variis cupiditatibus obnoxia,
etc. Youth is prone to diverse lusts, to anger, to desire of rule, to ambition,
to intemperance about meats, drinks, apparel, and bodily pleasures.

2. These lusts rage and rule in youth, nor can they so easily withstand or
curb them: and therefore the Tragoedian saie's well. Juvenile vitium est,
regere non posse impetum. It Is a vice of young men, that they cannot curb the
violence of lusts; but with an headlong proneness they run into sin, that way,
which lie's open before them, like a water-cours.

3. They are inconsult, without knowledge and counsel, they want that
experience, which old age has, and so are quickly deceived, and (which is
lamentable) pejora juvenes facile praecepta audiunt; they are more prone to
follow bad counsel, then good. And this does Solomon show, Prove. 7.7, 13, 14,
21, 22, 23.
in that young man soon carried away with the enticing speeches of the strange
woman, and following her, as an Ox to the slaughter, or as a fool to the
correction of the stocks, till a dart strike thorough his liver, as a bird
hastes to the snare, not knowing that it is for his life. And this we see too
usual in woeful experience, that many young men stop their ears against their
parents and masters, yea, and of the Ministers of God, advising and admonishing
them in love for their good, but their ears are open to the evil counsels of
those, who by flattering words endeavor to draw them to destructive courses.

4. When they know little or nothing, they are yet prone to be high-conceited
of themselves, so that they think themselves wiser then the aged, and too good to
be taught and admonished by any.

5. Mark what Solomon saie's; Prove. 22.15.
Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child: See, here is then an whole
bundle of folly.

6. Hear him again. Childhood and youth are vanity: Eccles. 11.10.
he saie's not, Vanity is in them, but the age it self is vanity, as compact
and made up of vanity.

7. And, as one note's well, the word redress or cleans, here used, is a
metaphor, signifying the clearing of glass, which, though it be clean, will
yet soon gather filth, even in the sunbeams, and of it self: which note's the
great corruption of this age; especially, if we have regard to our nativitie,
which is corrupt and unclean, as David confesse's, Psalm. 51.5.
In sin I was born.

To conclude, in a word, this age (youth, I mean) may well be compared to a
gnat, that, leaving the wine, delight's in the lees; to a maid, having the
green sickness, who delights in claie, and things of il juice, rather then in
wholesome food; to an unbroken colt for unstaiedness; to a lion for wrath; to a
shee-bear for cruelty; to an ape for imitation of every evil or newfangled
fashion; to a mad dog for indiscretion; for wantonness to a goat; and to a
swine for filthiness.

Use 1. The thought of this is profitable for young men, three ways:

1. It may bring them into a dislike of this age: It Is the thought of many,
that this age is the happiest, and these the best days, that ever they shall
see; but, upon all the foregoing grounds it is evident, that we may well judge
it the most miserable, Eccles. 12.1.
because more sinful. It Is true, that Solomon call's old age evil days, but
that is only in regard of those bodily inconveniences, which attend old age;
but the danger of youth is far greater, in regard of it is proneness to sin,
which is of far more dangerous consequence.

2. It should make young men the more circumspect and watchful over their
ways. It Is the wisdom of a city besieged, to double their guards and make
stronger defenses, where, on their own parts, they find greatest weakness, and
greatest opposition from the besiegers. Take knowledge of it, dear young men,
and believ it, there is no age more strongly assailed by Satan and corruption,
no age more weak to make resistance, then is youth. Be persuaded therefore to
look to your selves, and to stand upon your watchtower: See and observe by what
means others have been baned, and sens your selves against the same.

Jer. 5.23.
1. Consider what the Prophet saie's, Death is com up into our windows, and has
entered into our palaces: the bodily eyes are the windows of the soul, sin
enter's thereby, and take's possession of the soul: how many have been ruined
by the eye? 2 Samuel 11.
yea, how have we all been undon by it? David looked and lusted, and committed
adultery, which was attended with murder, and that of a faithful Vriah, whence
followed a world of mischief. Josh. 7.21.
Hear Achan's confession, When I saw, among the spoils, a goodly Babylonish
garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedg of gold of fifty
shekels weight, I coveted and took them: ver. 24.25.
and as he by this had troubled Israel, so for it God troubled him; it was the
ruin of himself and his family. Eve saw, and liked, and persuaded her
husband, Genesis 3.6. Romans 5.12.
and they did eat, and hence followed ruin to all mankind: Oh therefore be
advised to watch over your eyes, suffer them not to be roving about undue
objects, or not unduly: gaze not upon the beauty of women, if ye desire to
be fensed against uncleanness: in this case imitate holy Job, who made a
Covenant with his eyes, and thereupon inferred, Job 31.1.
why should I look upon a maid? if ye would be fensed against drunkenness,
follow Solomon's advice: Look not upon the wine, Prove. 23.31.
when it is red, when it give's his color in the cup, etc. yea, in all kinds,
let it be your care to pray with David, Psalm. 119.37.
Turn away my eyes from beholding vanity.

2. Many have been ruined by the ear, while they have listened to destructive
counsels of wicked counselors, to flattering words of lewd women: Genesis 3.
so was Eve ruined by hearkening to the devil in the serpent. Prove. 7.
So was that forementioned young man undon, by giving ear to the wanton
allurements of that strange woman. Be persuaded therefore, I beseech you, to
watch over your ears, to keep them shut against such wicked solicitations: It Is
Solomon's advice, My son, Prove. 1.10.
if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. Let not the fair speeches of any
seduce you, nor their pretenses of friendship: were they never so near, or
seemed they never so friendly, reject them: rather reject their friendship,
then accept of their counsel. When, our Savior having foretold his passion,
Peter said to him, Be it far from thee, Lord, Matthew. 16.21.22.23.
what hear's he from his Master? Get thee behind me, Satan, he own's him
not now, as his disciple, but take's knowledge of Satan making use of his tongue
to dishearten him from that great work, which he was to perform, tending so
much to the glory of his Father, and the Salvation of the world: So let it be
your care: Look from evil counselors, as bearing the semblance of friends, and
consider them, as instruments employed by Satan to draw you from the way of
obedience, to the way of sin, and hearken not to them, because they seem
friends, but stop your ears against their wicked counsels, because herein Satan
by them seek's the ruin of your precious souls.

3. Many have been undon by evil company: and how can it well be otherwise?
One scabbed sheep marre's an whole flock: 1 Cor. 5.6. Prove. 7.
A little leaven sowre's the whole lump: Who can touch pitch and not be
defiled? here ye shall hear provocations to evil, encouragements in evil,
discouragements from good, reviling of goodness: and who know's not, what power
such speeches have to corrupt? here ye shall see examples of evil, and ye
know, how powerful examples are to draw us away: oh then be choice of your
company; be wary to what companions ye join your selves: say, Psalm. 119.115.
as David. Away from me, ye wicked, I will keep the commandments of my God:
It Is Solomon's advice, as a fens against drunkenness and riot, Prove. 23.20.
Be not among wine-bibbers and riotous eaters of flesh: would ye not prove
profane swearers? shun the company of such; and so in all other kinds. And if
ye would fear God and walk on in the way of God's fear, imitate David, Psalm.
119.63.
whose profession it was, I am a companion of all them that fear Thee, and keep
Thy testimonies. In the company of such thou shall hear exhortations to good,
and encouragements in good, and examples of good; and these ye shall find
singularly useful.

3. By how much more corrupt youth is, by so much more be incessant in prayer,
and earnest with God to watch over thee, Psalm. 127.1.
and to fens thee against the corruptions of youth: It Is true, that the
Psalmist saie's, Except the Lord watch the city, the watchman waketh but in
vain: It hold's true in the business in hand: That it is your duty, to watch
over your selves, ye have already heard; but know that all your care will be
wholly frustrate, and to no purpose, except the watchman of Israel does watch
for you and with you: Oh then ceas not to follow God with your prayers for the
obteining of this grace: whether the Masters of the families, wherein ye live,
be careful to pray to God with you and for you, or no: do not ye forget
morning and evening to commend your selves to God by prayer, that by the
watchful eye of his gracious providence, ye may be preserved from those
miscarriages, to which ye are prone of your selves, or may be solicited by
Satan, and his instruments.

2. The consideration of this corruption of youth is singularly profitable to
them that have outlived that age, and that also three ways:

1. To teach them to look back to their youth, and to take knowledge of the sins
of it, and the vices with which their youth has been tainted: not to be
tickled with joie at the remembrance of them: It Is thus with too many, as with
men, who in their younger times have delighted in hunting, whom therefore ye
shall see, (being afterward, through age, not able to follow the game, yet)
to sit upon a style, and to look after the dogs, and cry after them. So too
many (though through age they cannot follow the vices, to which in their youth
they were addicted, yet) glory in and boast of the mad pranks of their youth:
this shows plainly, that they have not so much left their sins, as their sins
have left them: Far be it therefore from you, that it should be so with you;
rather think of the sins of your youth, to be filled with grief and horror for
the same, and to repent of them, and to follow God with that request of David,
Remember not the sins of my youth. Psalm. 25.6.


2. To teach them to be the more thankful to God, if they have been kept from
those vicious courses, which they have seen in others: Others have been
drunkards, riotous persons, neglecters of Gods Word and Ordinances, profaners
of the Lord's Day, untrustie to their Masters; has it not been so with you?
sacrifice not to your own nets and yarns, take it not to your selves, as if ye
were able of your selves to abstein from such vices; for it is no such matter:
it is God that has kept you from them: let him therefore have the prais of it,
and give thanks to his Name; for it is a great favor; and the greater, by how
much there are so many, with whom God has not dealt so mercifully.

But be thankful also for the means by which ye have been kept from such
misdemeanors: thank God for the severitie of your parents, masters, teachers;
for the severitie of the Laws, by which ye have been restreined from them:
thank God, if he has kept you in order by the fear of heltorments: but
especially, if ye can find, that God has seasoned your younger years with
his grace, and enabled you to abstein from sin out of an hatred of sin,
loathing sin as it is sin, and a violation of God's righteous law, now give
prais to God especially, as it is an incomparable favor.

3. To teach them to be the more circumspect over those young ones committed
to their charge: Parents over their children, masters over their servants,
teachers over their scholars, guardians over their pupils: be not wanting in
your care for them, remember their dangers in regard of that slipperie age in
which they are: and out of pity watch over them; remember what it is,
wherewith ye are put in trust, not more the bodies then the precious souls of
your children, servants, scholars, pupils, even the souls, for which Christ did
shed his precious blood. Know ye, that are parents, that your children are
God's Children, and ye are put in trust with them, as if some subject should
be put in trust with a King's children: and think how ye will be able to
answer it, if they shall miscarrie through your fault, or by your means: and
this is no less true in regard of any other inferiors, servants, scholars,
pupils. If it be but that they are other men's children, that are put into your
hands, think how often the life of the parents hang's upon the well-doing of their
children: and how can ye hold up your heads before them, if they shall
miscarrie by your means? think, how il ye would take it, if ye shall commit
your children to the care of other men, and by their negligence they shall
miscarrie, and be ruined; and now ye know that rule of equity, What ye
would that men should do to you, Matthew. 7.12.
do ye the same to them. Yea consider, that the welfare of the Commonwealth
for the future depend's upon the well-ordering of these young ones for the
present, what little thanks can ye exspect from your Country, if ye shall
neglect your charge? Finally, think what a sad thing it will be to behold the
miscarriage and undoing of comlie youths, of good hopes, of good abilities,
well bred, well educated. In all names I beseech you to look to your charge.

Be not wanting in the use of any means for their good, and for the preventing
of their miscarriage: It Is a true saying, Qui non prohibet, quando potest,
jubet: He, that forbid's not, when he may, command's; and we may justly be
held to do that mischief, which we may hinder, and do not: he is guilty of
the death of a child, that may hinder him from falling into the fire, if he
does not: It Is no less true in this particular: oh therefore let not your care
be wanting in this kind: pry into their carriage, observe their behavior,
and their company which they haunt, be not unnecessarily absent from them,
let your eye, as much as may be, be continually upon them: many hopeful
youths have been undon for want of this care: If ye see them given to any evil
courses or evil company, admonish them of the danger of them: If words will
not prevail, add seasonable and necessary correction: Many are wrought upon
with severitie, with whom lenity and gentleness prevail's not: yet let it be
don with moderation, not as tyrants, but as fathers: through excessive
severitie come's no small danger; alienation of hearts from their superiors,
hardness of heart against means used toward them for their good, yea, often
hereupon they grow desperate.

At least take heed of poisoning them, and perverting them: an ill business
this will prove; what is it other, then with your own hands to cast them into
hell? This ye may be in danger to do, either by putting them, by your
commands or allurements, upon any evil projects, or by your lewd and wicked
example. Take heed of both, as ye love these young ones thus committed to your
charge, and as ye love your selves. Put them not upon any evil by your
commands, or allurements: What they do upon your command or persuasion, ye
shall justly be accounted to have done. Joab at the appointment of David
place's Vriah in a place of danger, in the war against Rabbath, 2 Samuel 11.15,
17.
and cause's the rest to retire, and this occasioned the death of Vriah, and
now not Joab so much as David is charged herewith: God saie's to David by the
Prophet Nathan, Thou have slain Vriah with the sword of the children of Ammon.
2 Samuel 12.9.
Take heed of giving them evil example of drunkenness, swearing, profaning of
the Lord's day, contemt of God's Ministers: how forcible examples of superiors
are to draw inferiors to evil, we cannot be ignorant: though ye give them
never so good counsel to the contrary, they are yet more ready to regard what
ye do, then what ye say, they believ their eyes rather then their ears; they
readily think, that, if you were in good earnest in your counsels, ye would
not do the contrary: be cautious therefore what examples ye give them: youth
of it self is prone to evil, there is no need that ye should put them forward
to it either by word or example.

Hitherto ye have heard of the corruption of youth, which is the first point.
But it may be said, that that which is spoken of youth's corruption, is to be
understood of those young persons, that have not lived under the light of the
Gospel; but for us young men, we hope, there is no such thing in us. But hear
what fallows.

Propos. 2. The ways even of godly young men are no better then they should
be.

1. See the text in hand, in which (it is past peradventure) David had an eye to
himself, and spoke of his own youth, as needing redress or cleansing, and then
it fallows, that it was not right and straight, as it should be.

Psalm. 25.6.
2. Mark that request of David, which he made to God, Remember not the sins of
my youth: then it fallows, that even in his youth he had sins, which needed
forgiveness.

3. Consider that warning which St Paul gave to his scholar Timothy, 2 Timothy
2.22.
Fly the lusts of youth: but that admonition had been in vain and to no
purpose, if he had been obnoxious to no such things: and yet saie's St Bernard
well of this Timothy, Give me but one Timothy in these days, and if he
will eat gold, he shall have it: So eminent an example he was of
mortification, that St Paul was fain to take him off from the strictness of his
course, giving him that advice, 2 Timothy 5.23.
Drink no longer water, but take a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine
often infirmities. If then so holy a young man, as was Timothy, was obnoxious
to lusts, what young man can be free?

And this point is not to be wondered at,

1. Because even in God's dearest children there remain's natural corruption,
which in youth does most show it self, affection then being grounded and
strong, and reason raw.

2. Because the Devil is most studious, and has an especial affection to entrap
this age, as being that, in which God require's especially to be served.

Use. The consideration hereof serv's briefly to set a further edg upon the
foregoing exhortations.

1. Let those that have young ones committed to their trust, be thee more
careful for them, and watchful over them; Let them not say, my children, my
servants are pious and godly, they truly fear God, and therefore I may be
the more assured of them, that they will not miscarrie themselves. Ye may be
deceived in your judgment of them: Hypocrisy is spun of a fine thread, 2 Cor.
11. 2 Timothy 3.5.
the devil can turn himself into an Angle of light: They that have a form of
godliness, may deny the power of it: Whatsoever therefore their shows and
pretenses are, yet intermit not your care for them, and watchfulness over them:
yea, though they be truly pious and godly, yet they are sanctified but in
part; in the best there are remainders of corruption, whence miscarriages are
prone to issue. And the devil is busy to assail them with his temptations, and
now it is no wonder, if they be sometimes overborn by such an adversary. Though
therefore they be never so pious and godly, yet continue your care for them,
and be watchful over them: Though Timothy was so eminently pious, yet St.
Paul forbear's not to admonish him, 2 Timothy 2.22.
to fly the lusts of Youth.

2. Let young men, all young men, be exhorted to be watchful and circumspect
over themselves and their ways. Wax not secure upon this presumtion, that God
has wrought the work of grace in you in truth, as if therefore ye were
safe-guarded against all misdemeanors; for

1. Ye may be deceived in the judgment of your selves: true grace has its
counterfeit: ye may think ye have true faith, when it is but the stinking weed
of presumtion, and so for other graces: and it is a shrewd sign, that it is so,
if upon this ground ye shall neglect your watch over your ways; and if it be
so, know, that ye may, and cannot but fall away totally and finally, so that
town and country shall ring of your apostasy, and ye may become unsavorie
salt, fit for the dunghill: It was so with King Joash of Judah, who for all his
fair shows all the days of Jehoiada, fell yet afterward to idolatry at the
solicitation of his Princes, 2 Chro. 24.2.4.17.18.2. Act. 8 13.18.19.23.
and murdered Zachariah the son of Jehoiada. It was so with Simon Magus, who
believed and was baptized, and yet afterward, offered to buie the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, and was affirmed of St. Peter to be in the gall of bitterness,
and the bond of iniquity. Col. 4.14.
It was so with Demas, whom St. Paul reckoned among the Saints, and yet
afterward the same Apostle complain's, 2 Timothy 4.10.
that he had forsaken them, and embraced this present world. And so we have
seen it to be with others, whose Sun has set at noon, and their light ended
in darkness; and so it may be with you for all your fair shows, and therefore
be not secure, but look to your selves.

2. If ye find the work of grace in your selves in truth, yet it is but in
part, and there remain's corruption in you in part: in the best, there is flesh
and spirit, old and new man, grace and corruption, Genesis 25.21.23
as Jacob and Esau in the womb of Rebeccah, struggling each with other; be not
therefore secure, but maintein your watch. It Is here observable, that to them,
in whom God has wrought to will and to do, Phil. 2.12.13.
even of his own good pleasure, the Apostle yet give's advice, to work out
their salvation with fear and trembling: Romans 11.29.
and no wonder, for (be it granted that, the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance, and consequently that the work of grace being begun in
truth, ye are secured against total and final apostasy; yet, (if ye look not
the better to your selves) ye may fall foully into scandalous sins, and so may
lose grace in some degrees, and deprive your selves for a time of the comforts of
grace, and dishonor God, and shame your holy profession, as many have don;
which is no small inconvenience: Oh therefore for the avoiding of it, watch
over your selves, according to the foregoing directions: And, finding any
miscarriage, of which ye are guilty, lie not in it, but by renewed repentance
amend your ways. But that fallows.

Propos. 3. Young men must cleans or redress their ways. It Is clear in the
Text; for it is here made the subject of David's question, Wherewithal shall a
young man cleans his way? And so it is here necessarily taken for granted: And
to this purpose is Solomon's advice; Eccles. 12.1
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth: And that of our blessed
Savior, Mar. 10.
Suffer little children to com unto me: And the forementioned advice of S.
Paul to his Scholar Timothy, fly the lusts of Youth. 2 Timothy 2.22.


Solomon, in that place of Ecclesiastes, uses a reason to persuade young men
to this care. God is thy Creator, Pro. 16.4.
and therefore thou art made for his glory: for he made all things for
himself. But in a different manner, all other things immediately for man, and
mediately for himself, but he made man for himself and his service
immediately: And now what think thou? that thou may serve thy self, and
thy lusts, and the devil, and the world in the flowr of thy Youth, and with thy
strength, and put off the service of God till old age, when thou art weak and
way-ward, and have enough to do to struggle with the infirmities of age? Oh no!
He will have thee to serve him all the days of thy life, from thy cradle to
thy grave; all is due to him by the right of creation; and think how unseemlie
it is (as S. Basil uses the comparison to another purpose) excipere Regem
reliquijs mensae, to entertein a King with other men's leavings? how much more
unseemlie is it to give the divel's leavings to God? To serve the devil with the
first, and best of thy strength, and to think of serving the God that made
thee, when thou art fit for nothing?

Object. A young Saint, and an old Devil.

Ans. He was no man, but a devil incarnate, that devised that saying. It Is
true, some that have begun betimes, do not persist and persevere, but, beginning
in the Spirit, Gal. 3.
are perfected in the flesh; the more is the pity: But yet this should not
dishearten us from early beginning, but should make us more watchful over our
selves, that we may persevere and hold it out, and grace our beginings with a
comfortable and pious conclusion.

Object. Many a ragged colt make's a good horse: And many an unhappie youth
make's a good man: How many are there, that have spent the time of their youth
profanely, some Tumblers, some Players, some Poets, some swaggering Soldiers, who
yet have at last proved honest men, and good Preachers?

Ans. I grant that some wicked young men have proved good in their age: It Is
true, God's mercy is not tied to times; Luke. 23.
he can convert the thief at the gallows, as he did that thief on the cross.
But shall this animate us to spend the flowr of our youth leudely in hope of
God's mercy? This were too high and desperate presumtion; and the argument
exceeding foolish: For it is a sure rule, Aposse ad esse non valet argumentum:
God can, therefore he will, is a fond kind of arguing. I would be loath to
hazard my salvation upon so nice a point. This procrastination of repentance
and amendment, when we are stirred up thereto, is a shrewd sign, that we are
in a damnable condition, and hardly ever like to mend: Here it hold's true. Qui
non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit. He that is indisposed to the work of
repentance to day, will likely be more indisposed to morrow.

And, whereas you allege some Tumblers, some Poets, some Players, some swaggering
Soldiers, have proved honest men and good Preachers; be not too hasty,
Preachers perhaps they have proved, but not many good Preachers; and you must
com back with honest men too; for a Preacher and an honest man are not all one;
but grant this also, one swallow make's not a summer; from one or two
particulars to infer a general conclusion, is absurd, since such innumerable
companies run the contrary way. But, if any, that have spent their younger
time wickedly and leudely, have proved true converts, and good Preachers, they
wish that they had never lived so wickedly: It had been much better for
themselves and for the Church.

1. They, for the most part, smell still of the liquor, with which they were
first seasoned: Examine your converts.

2. They cannot reprove sin so strongly, and so fervently, as others, who have
not been so wicked in former times: their own former wickedness, coming to their
remembrance, stop's their mouths.

3. Nor can they so severely punish the sins of those youths, that are too
openly seen to offend in the same kinds, as they have don, rather they are
friends to them.

Use. Let this exhort young men to set themselves to the reformation of their
lives in the time of their youth, and defer it not to another time. I say to
you, young men, in the words of the Psalmist, To day if ye will hear God's
voice, Psalm. 95.78.
harden not your hearts, I beseech you to imitate David, Psalm. 119.60.
who said of himself, I made haste, and delaied not, to keep thy righteous
judgments.

1. Consider, that the service of youth is specially pleasing to God. Aaron's
rod was of an Almond tree, Number. 17.8.
which is the first that blossom's: God will have his to be branches of trees
of the first blossoms: God will have the first fruits, and the firstborn
offered unto him.

2. Consider examples, Timothy, David, Samuel, Josiah, entered God's service
young: But it is a lamentable thing to see, that, for the most part, we begin
to blossom in Autumn, when the fruit should be ripe; we are fain to send for
the Minister, to teach us knowledge, faith, and repentance upon our deathbeds,
when we are ready to go to another world. It Is true, Nunquam sera est ad
bonos mores via; sound repentance is never late, but it is as true, that late
repentance is seldom true: be ye therefore persuaded to repent and amend your
lives betimes.

3. There is nothing more odious, then fruitless old age; and how is it likely,
that the tree should bear in Autumn, that blossom's not in the Spring? That old
age should be other then fruitless, except repentance has been wrought in
youth? For youth is as the Spring; therefore be careful to amend your lives
and repent betimes.

Object. I will rejoice now, while I am young, I shall live many years.

Ans. Amend now, while ye are young, else ye will be in danger to offer
Cain's sacrifice, a sacrifice without acceptance; and happily, ye shall not
have time to repent afterward; what if God shall answer thee, as he did that
rich fool in the Gospel, This night shall thy soul be taken away? Luke 12.20.
It Is a true saying, Sperant se juvenes diu victuros, sed insipienter sperant;
Young men hope, that they shall live long, but they are fools in so hoping: Ye
may live to old age, for some do so, but ye neither are, nor can be sure of
it; for they are but few, that attein to it; look in your weeklie bills, and
see how few die of age: Many are taken away by death in the flowr of youth,
and thousands do not live so long.

4. Consider that when young men are dissolute in their lives, it is a fearful
argument of God's wrath ready to fall upon a Nation: so when the Lord by the
Prophet would threaten the destruction of Jerusalem, Isa. 9.17.
he foretel's, that he would not have joie in their young men.

Therefore let parents, on this ground, be exhorted to nurture their children,
and Masters their servants, in the fear of God. When they do amiss endeavor
their reformation, by grave admonition, and by timely and seasonable
correction, word of admonition being slighted. Hearken to the advice of
Solomon, and be led on by the argument, whereby he enforces it, Pro. 22 6.
Teach a child the trade of his way, and he shall not depart from it, when
he is old: And the very Heathen man could tell us as much.

Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem

Testa diu. --

The vessel will keep that savor long, wherewith it is seasoned at the first.

But I return to you, young men, for whose sake especially I first undertook
this task. Many of you are passed ex ephebis, ye are not now under government
in comparison; therefore take ye care of your selves, to amend your own lives,
while ye are young, (the young man (saie's the Text) must cleans his own way)
for otherwise the labor of all others is like to be frustrate.

1. Ye will afterward find the benefit of it, when ye com to man's estate,
Lam. 3.27.
or to old age. It Is true in this sens, that the Prophet saie's. It Is good for
a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. If ye have born the Lord's yoke in
your youth, custom will make it the more easy to be born afterward.

2. For the present, ye shall receiv this comfortable assurance by it, that
ye are the children of God.

For so it fallows.

THE SECOND SERMON.
PRopos. 4. The endeavor of the Reformation of ways is in all God's children,
and in them only. So it was in David here, who therefore inquire's of God,
Psalm. 119.5.
concerning this matter for himself and you. And we see his wish. Oh that my
ways were directed to keep thy Statutes! Yea, Psalm. 25.4.5. Psalm. 27.11. Psalm.
143.10. Act. 24.16.
how fervently does he desire the guidance and direction of God? Show me thy
way, O Lord, teach me thy paths; lead me in thy way and teach me. Teach
me thy way O Lord, and lead me in thy paths. Teach me to do thy will. And
so in many other places. And this was St Paul's endeavor. Herein do I
exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offens toward's God and
toward men. And so is it with all others; there is no child of God, but he
desire's, and endeavour's the reformation of his way; and it cannot otherwise
be, that he should be in the state of grace; for the first grace, which God
work's in those that are his, is to will and desire; so that he is not in the
state of grace, that has not this desire; this is to be found in all the
regenerate, for it is made a mark of him, that is born again: 1 Ioh. 5.18
He that is born of God sins not: Not that any man in this life attein's
to an estate of impeccabilitie, to be void of sin. It Is the voice of Solomon
in the old Testament, Who is he, 2 Chro. 6.36.
that live's and sins not? And of St James in the new Testament, Iam. 3.2.
In many things we offend all. We, we all, and in many things: and of St
John, If we say that we have no sin, we deceiv our selves, 1 Ioh. 1.8.
and the truth is not in us. But the meaning is, that when God's children sin,
they sin of infirmity, not wilfully, but either as they are overborn by
Satan's temptations; Romans 7.23.19.17.
or by the law of the members rebelling against the law of their mind, so that
they do the evil, which they would not, and so they do it not, but sin that
dwell's in them, for they would do well, they desire and endeavor it.

Use. See here a main difference between a wicked and a godly man; the wicked
man sin's and make's it his pastime to do wickedly, it is his exercise, his
trade, he does (...) work iniquity, he is glad of the opportunity, he is
discontented at any hinderance: Isa. 5.18. 1 King. 25.
He does draw iniquity, as with cards of vanity, and sin, as with
cart-ropes, he so sin's, as if with Ahab, he had sold himself to work
wickedness: Satan is his Lord whom he naturally serv's: Of the wicked it is
true that our Savior saie's of the Jews, Ioh. 8.44.
Ye are of your father the devil, and his lusts ye will do. Thus is it with
the wicked, but it is quite contrary with the children of God; they sin indeed,
but they are not workers of iniquity: 1 Ioh. 39.
So saie's the Apostle, he that is born of God sin's not, (...), he work's
not sin; though he sin's, yet he would not sin, he delight's not in the
opportunity of sinning, he is grieved when he has sinned, he hate's it,
and himself for it; finding that he has by sin offended God, he desire's and
endeavour's the reformation of his way. It Is true, we are all of us sinners,
but if we would be able truly to say with Job, Job. 10.7.
Lord thou know that I am not wicked, let us bear this mind, in respect of
sin, not to commit it with greediness, but rather to griev, when we have
sinned, and to desire and endeavor the reformation of our ways, let not our
will and desire be cold and idle, but earnest and industrious: As the hungry
person cast's about how he may get bread, and use's all possible means to that
end, so let us (with David in the Text) cast about how, and wherewithal we
may cleans our way, and not fail to use all possible means to effect it.

Propos. 5. It Is an hard thing, and business of great difficulty, for young
men to cleans their way, to reform their lives.

It Is manifest that David, in the Text in hand, speak's of it, as such. And (if
when a godly man does his best to reform his life, he does yet often, and many
ways offend, as the Apostle saie's, Iam. 3.2.
In many things we offend all: we all, even the best of us, and that in
many things) it is then as clear as the Sun, that it is a matter of great
difficulty, for a young man to reform his ways. And it is further evident upon
these grounds.

1. Corruption of nature is strong in young men, and evil affections settled in
them, and foolishness bound up in their hearts. Pro. 22.15.


2. Many times custom of sinning hinder's the young man from reforming his
ways, so the Prophet saie's of it. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, and the
Leopard his spots? Jer. 13.23.
Then may ye do good, that are accustomed to do evil. For it is a true saying,
Consuetudo est altera natura, Custom is another nature; and of nature it is no
less true that the Poet says.

Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurret. Drive away nature with a
pitch-fork, yet it will return. It must then be necessarily granted, that it is
an hard thing for young men to reform their ways.

3. Remember the four provocations to sin, which St Ambrose observ's in the
Prodigal, which are often in other young men.

1. His portion, which enable's him to the committing of sin: which if he has
in his possession, now he is enabled to lewd living; if he has it but in
hope, even this does embolden him to wicked courses.

2. His fathers indulgence, by means whereof that is withheld from him, by
which he should be curbed, and kept in aw, namely severitie of discipline.

3. His company, lewd young men, like himself, from whom he shall not hear
any thing, but evil counsel, and encouragement to, and in evil, and
disheartnings from the way of obedience; nor see any thing, but evil example,
which has a strong power to corrupt.

4. His youth, in which there is heedlesness, and inexperience: In all which
respects, it cannot but be a difficult matter, for young men to reform their
ways.

4. If we compare childhood and youth together, we shall find, that
childe-hood is far more easily kept in order, and restrained from sin: for

1. The age it self is weak, and less acquainted with vice.

2. It is fearful, and stand's in aw.

3. Commonly it is spent under some Aristarchus, some severe and rigid
Schoolmaster.

But now, when young men have the reins cast upon their own necks, we are far
more prone to grow wors, then better. And therefore David, considering the
difficulty of the business, cast's about, which way it may be effected.

Use. The thought of this is profitable, both for them, that have young ones
committed to their care, and for young ones themselves.

1. For them that have the care of youth committed to them, Parents, Masters,
Schoolmasters, Guardians: Let the thought of this, move them (in pity and
compassion toward the young persons, with whom they are put in trust) to be
so much the more helpful to them. Consider, I beseech you.

1. How necessary it is for young ones to reform their way: Death is an
impartial officer, not sparing any for their youth: How many young men see we
daily taken out of this world? and it is woeful to them, and of sad consequence,
if death shall make a divorce between soul and body, before a divorce be made
between them and their sins: Romans 6.21. Jam. 1.15.
The issue of sin (repentance not coming between) is death: And sin, being
perfected, bring's forth death, not only the first death, the perfection of
which is the separation of the soul from the body, but also the second death,
the perfection of which is the casting of the sinner both in soul and body
from God the fountain of happiness, and his exclusion from everlasting
happiness, then which there is no greater loss; nay, none equal to it, and the
casting of him into hell and the torments of it, which are endless, easless,
and remediless, Mar. 9. Matthew. 25.
where the worm never die's, and the fire never goe's out; even utter darkness,
where is weeping and wailing, gnashing of teeth, and wringing of hands, and all
for ever.

2. How difficult a task this Reformation of ways is for young men, how many
hindrances there are in the wale of it, and how many allurements they have to
go on in their sinful courses: And in both these respects be ye ready to
give them an helping hand; do, what lie's in you to reclaim them from their
sins, and so to prevent their everlasting undoing: ye would readily think it
your duty, to prevent any temporary mischief toward them in their bodies or
estates: Know that the soul is far more excellent then either estate or body,
and therefore (as ye would show any love unto them) be specially careful to
prevent the ruin of their souls, by helping them in this great and difficult
business, the cleansing of their ways.

2. For young men themselves, let not this difficulty of cleansing your ways
dis-hearten you from attempting this business, let it rather cause you more
diligently to set about it. It Is a true saying, (...), the things are commonly
more excellent in which there is greater difficulty: the difficulty therefore
of this work, and the opposition that Satan make's against it, argue's the
excellency and usefulness of it: I remember a passage of our learned Whitaker,
that it was an evident argument of special worth and goodness in Luther, that
the Jesuits were such bitter enemies to him: as it is an argument of good fruit
on the tree, when ye see boys throwing sticks at it; so does it argue the
Reformation of young men's ways to be specially excellent and useful, that
Satan does so much oppose it, and cast so many rubs in the way: By how much
therefore Satan seek's more to hinder you in the cleansing of your ways, by so
much more, being young, apply ye your selves to the doing of it. To do easy
things is no great matter of prais, but to effect things in which we find
difficulty and meet with opposition, this is prais-worthie, yea, hoc aliquid
est voluisse, it is something, that we would do it: Ye therefore, that are
young men, be ye persuaded, the more difficulty there is in it, so much the
more sedulously to endeavor the cleansing of your ways: Labor to see what is
amiss in them, and use your best endeavors for the amendment of them. And for
your encouragement in this kind, consider what fallows. Though it be
difficult, yet

Propos. 6. It Is possible for young men to reform and amend their ways. It Is
plain in the text.

It Is possible, I say, but not by your own abilities, nor by the strength of
your own free will; for it is a business above us; it is true, that the Apostle
saie's, 2 Cor. 3.5.
We have no sufficiency as of our selves, so much as to think a good thought,
all our sufficiency is of God. And, for this particular business in hand, we
hear what repenting Ephraim said, Turn me, and I shall be turned; Jer. 31.
Cant. 1.4.
and the Church, Draw us, and we will run after thee. But yet it is possible
by the help of God's grace, which use's not to be wanting to them, that set
themselves conscionably to the businesses, which God has enjoined unto them.

And the feasibleness of it appears in this, that it has been effected in
others, as David, Timothy, etc. what others have don, we may do, by the help
of the same grace of God, by which they have effected it.

Use 1. Let us not presume of our own strength in a business of this nature,
nor set up the Reformation of our ways, as if, of our selves, we were able to
effect it, but crave the aid of God: hear what Jehoshaphat said, when Moab,
Edom, and Ammon invaded his Kingdom, and so let us say of our sins, setting
our selves to the redress of our ways, We have no might against them, 2 Chro.
20.12.
neither do we know what to do, but our eyes are upon thee: and as David went
against Goliath, so let us set our selves against our sins in the amendment of
our ways, 1 Samuel 17.45.
In the Name of the Lord of Hosts. But yet

2. Let not the difficulty of this business dis-hearten you from attempting
it, but let the possibility of effecting it, animate you to this enterprise:
were it (as difficult, so) impossible, ye might have somewhat to say for your
selves, by which to excuse your selves in the neglect of it: for, though some men
will attempt things, in which they find difficulty, yet no wise man will
attempt impossibilities: But, since (though it be difficult, yet) it is
possible, all excuse shall be taken away from you, if ye neglect this
business, the very possibility of it shall ora obturare, bolt up your mouths,
ye shall have nothing whereby to apologize for your selves, your sin will be
out of measure sinful, and your folly unspeakable. If ye, neglecting the
study of the amendment of your ways, perish, ye may thank, or rather blame
your selves, Hos. 13.9.
not God: it will be most true, Perditio tua ex te, Thy destruction is of thy
self. As therefore ye love your selves, I beseech you, young men, yea, all, to
set your selves to the cleansing of your ways. It Is difficult, but it is
possible. It Is true,

Propos. 7. Man of himself know's not how to cleans his way. And this made
David to go to God with this inquiry, Wherewithal shall a young man cleans
his way? And it is manifest, for of our selves we are ignorant of God's ways:
and, as the Prophet said of the Jews, We are wise to do evil, but, Jer. 4.22.
to do good, we have no understanding: we know how to sin; how to repent we
know not; being like the sheep, that has skill to wander, and to go astraie,
but has no skill to return to the fold.

The ground of this is our fall in Adam, whereby it is com to pass, that we
have defaced that glorious image of God, according to which we were created,
and have contracted to our selves the contrary corruption; and, amongst the
rest, we have hereby exstinguisht that light, which God had set up in our
minds, by which we were enabled at the first, and might still have been able,
(had we not wilfully disabled our selves,) to know whatsoever conduced to our
good, and darkness of mind has com in the room of it, so that that
description of the Gentiles agree's to us, Ephesians. 4.18. 1 Cor. 2.14.
having our understandings darkened, so that we neither do, nor can perceiv
the things of the spirit of God, and, (though we have skill in affairs of the
world, and skill to ruin our selves by sin, yet) we have no skill of our
selves, in the things that concern our everlasting Salvation.

Use 1. Let us bewail our own ignorance and blindeness; Oh the heavy
complaints that we hear made by those, that lay under the burden of bodily
blindness! how much more cause have we to lament the blindeness of our minds?
as it is of far more dreadful consequence: yea, let us bewail our fall in Adam,
which has occasioned it: think what goodly gods we are become, such as have
eyes, Psalm. 115.5. Genesis 3.6.
and see not: where is the Divel's promiss, Ye shall be as gods knowing good
and evil? oh what fools were we to believ that lying spirit? we affected more
then was meet for us, and we have lost what we had; we would be gods, and
we are hardly men, but beasts in the shape of men; as brute beasts, without
understanding: desperate fools that we were! oh be we ashamed of it: And,
complaining of our natural blindness, let us repair to God, with David's
inquiry in the text, Wherewithal shall a young man cleans his way? Lord, we
have don amiss, our ways are corrupt, how shall we redress them? And, as
Saul, afterward blessed Paul, let us say to God, Lord, what will thou have
thy servant to do? Act. 9 6. Psalm. 143.10.
and ceas not to join with David in that suit, Teach me to do Thy will.

2. Let us be thankful to God for the means of Instruction, that we have, as
a written word, so men, like our selves, in any measure able and willing to show
us how to amend our ways: bless God for such parents, masters, ministers:
apply your selves to them for instruction and guidance in a business of such
moment, to your parents, to your masters, being in any measure able to direct
you: especially let this be your care in respect of the Ministers of God set
over you. Ask the Priests concerning the law, Hag. 2.11. Mal. 2.7.
saie's God. And in another place, The Priests lips should preserv knowledge,
and they should seek the law at his mouth. In a dark night we are thankful for
a light, and ready to follow it: A blind man is glad of a guide, and willing
to be guided by him: the ministers of God are lights to men, that are in the
dark, and guides to the blind: be ye thankful to God for them, be ye
ready to ask counsel of them, and no less ready to accept of their advice:
and, as Jotham advised the men of Shechem, Judge. 9.7.
Hearken to them, that God may hearken to you.

3. If ye have any knowledge of, and insight into this business of the
amendment of life, be not proud of it, as if ye had this of your selves, but
acknowledge your own natural blindeness, and let God have the prais of it: it is
true of this, that our Savior saie's, Flesh and blood has not revealed it
unto you, Matthew. 16.17.
but my father that is in heaven: and therefore say in this respect with the
Psalmist, Non nobis, Psalm. 115.1.
Domine, etc. Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thy Name give Glory.

4. Having insight into this business, let us, out of pity, be ready to
teach others, that need our help, and impart our knowledge unto them. It Is an
act of charity to show others the way, they being ignorant of it, and to
guide the blind: thus is it with men naturally, they are blind and ignorant
in this business of amendment of ways; let us therefore charitably teach and
guide them in it: This especially concern's us Ministers in regard of the
people, with whose souls we are put in trust; but it belong's also to you,
that are parents and masters, in respect of your children and servants, yea, to
us all mutually: Having received the talent, hide it not in a napkin, but
emploie it to the advantage of our Lord and Master. Matthew. 25. v. 21, 23. v.
28, 30.
Remember that Parable of the Talents; see what reward God promises and
assigne's to the faithful dispensers, and the dreadful sentence against the
unfaithful servant. Hear what the Apostle saie's, The manifestation of the
spirit is given to every one to profit withal: 1 Cor. 12.7.
we shall not have the less by imparting to others; yea, we shall have the
more: It Is a true saying, Docendo disces; by teaching thou shall learn: The
talent taken from the unfaithful servant is given to him that had ten talents:
for, Matthew. 25.28. ver. 29.
to every one that has, shall be given. In all respects then be persuaded to
impart to others, for their benefit, the knowledge which in this, or any kind
God has bestowed upon you.

But, though it be true, that of our selves we know not how to go about the
cleansing of our way, yet

Propos. 8. God is ready to teach us, if we have recours to him for advice.
This is also plain in the Text: Yea, see how readily he offer's himself in
this kind by the Psalmist, Com, my children, hearken to me, Psalm. 34.11.
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. And this we may argue, as our
Savior argue's the like, What man is there of you, Matthew. 7.9.
whom if his son ask's bread, will he give him a stone? or, if he ask's a
fish, will he give him a serpent? If then ye, being evil, 10.11.
know how to give good things to your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give good things to them that ask him? So may the point in
hand be argued: what man is there, who shall give some business in Charge to
be don by his child or servant, but he will also be ready to direct him
how to do it, if his child or servant shall crave his direction? If an
earthly father will be so ready to direct his child or servant, how much
more shall God be ready to teach us, if we seek to him for advice?

Use 1. See and admire the goodness and infinite mercy of God: as if a father,
having once set up his child in the world, and put a stock into his hand, and
the son having by il husbandry embezled it, he shall again set him up, and
give him a new stock, with which to trade; who will not admire the love of such
a father? This is the case here: God in Creation gave us a stock, consisting in
part of the knowledge of his will; but we, by our fall in Adam, have forfeited
this knowledge, and brought ignorance and blindness upon our selves; yet he is
ready to give us direction, how to amend our lives, and cleans our way, we
seeking to him for it: how great then is his mercy? Let us not fail, to give
him the glory due to his Name for such mercy.

2. Let us imitate our heavenly Father, being ready to teach others, and to
give them advice, especially, if they, being ignorant, shall desire our help.
But of this before.

3. Let this encourage us to seek to God for advice in this business of so
great importance, as is the cleansing of our way. But of this also before.

Yea, God give's his answer and resolution in this text, and set's down the
means, which if ye will conscionably use, ye shall find this great work
effected. For so it fallows.

Propos. 9. The way whereby a young man, any young man, all young men, may
cleans their way, is to take heed thereto according to God's Word, to frame
our life and conversation according to the Law of God, and just as He has
commanded. It Is plain in the text, as the answer to the foregoing question:
And it further appears:

Psalm. 119.105.
1. The Word of God is a light unto our feet, and a lamp to our paths, so that
it serv's, if we take heed thereto, to show us our way, and to keep us from
stumbling, as a Lanthorn or torch in a dark night.

2. Whereas the beginning of the cleansing of our way, the amendment of our
lives, is the sight of our sins, this Word of God is a Glass, wherein we may
see what is amiss in the course of our life, that so we may amend it; as a
Looking-glass discover's to us any spot in our faces, that we may wash it
away: So St James resemble's it, while he saie's, Jam. 1.24.
If any be an hearer of the Word, and not a doer, he is like a man looking
his face in a glass, etc. Romans 3.20.
and so St Paul tell's us plainly, that by the law is the knowledge of sin.

3. The Word of God is a Rule or Square, whereby we may level or streighten
our ways.

4. And, whereas our passage in this world is over hills and dales, God's Word
is like a beacon standing on an high hill, to give us direction in our journey;
or (if on the sea of this world) this law is our load-star, yea, our Card or
Compass to guide us in our Navigation.

5. Nay, if we be blind, and consequently subject to go astraie, to stumble
and fall, this Word of God is, not only a Staff, by the help of which to feel
out the way, but also Eie-salve to cure our blindeness, and recover our sight:
So saie's David, The Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.
Psalm. 19.8.


6. In a word, this Word of God is a perfect word, every way useful, as the
Apostle saie's excellently, The whole Scripture is profitable, for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. 2 Timothy 3.16.


1. Would thou know the will of God, and his truth? This Word will be able
to teach thee what thou should do, and believ.

2. Would thou redargue error? this Word of God will perform it to thy hand.
Verum est index sui and obliqui. Truth shewe's it self, and it is contrary.
That is true, which is consonant to the Word, therefore that which is
dissonant, is error and falsehood.

3. Is any thing amiss in thy life? God's Word will correct it, by acquainting
thee with the divine prohibition, by which it is forbidden, and the judgments of
God threatened against, and executed upon men for doing such things.

4. Would thou do righteousness? God's Word instruct's thee.

5. Yea, in this way of reforming thy life do thou meet with
discouragements? God's Word will comfort thee: so saie's the Apostle, through
the comforts of the Scripture: Romans 15.4. Isai. 66.11.
these are the breasts of consolation. There is not any thing by which thou
may be discouraged in this business of the Reformation of thy way (mocks,
slanders, frowns or threatenings of great men, loss of goods by confiscation,
imprisonment, banishment, torments or death) but from this Word ye may gather
grounds of comfort against the same, as the child by sucking draw's milk from
his mothers breasts; as by inquiry ye may see in all the particulars: against
persecution and slanders hear our Savior comforting us, Matthew. 5.10.
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake: for theirs is
the kingdom of Heaven. ver. 11.
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile and persecute you, and speak all manner
of evil against you falsely for my Names sake. ver. 12.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so
they persecuted the Prophets, which were before you. Against the loss of all
for the testimony of a good Conscience, Matthew. 19.29.
hear what he saie's by way of comfort. Every one that shall forsake houses,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands,
for my names sake, shall receiv an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting
life. Against imprisonment hear that, Rev. 2.10.
Fear none of the things which ye shall suffer, for the devil shall cast some
of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten
days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.
Against the frowns and threatenings of men hear that comfort. Matthew. 10.28.
Fear not them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul: are not
two sparrows sold for a farthing? ver. 29.
and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your father. ver. 30.
But the very hairs of your head are numbered; ver. 31.
fear not therefore, ye are of more value then many sparrows. Against the
thanklesness of the world for the service which ye do, 1 Cor. 15.58.
hear the Apostle, Knowing that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.
In a word, against all afflictions, to the suffering of which ye may be
exposed, hear that ground of comfort, 2 Cor. 4.17.
Our light afflictions, which are but for a moment, Romans 8.17.
shall work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: ver. 18.
and that, If so be that we suffer with him, that is, with Christ, we shall
be also glorified together: for I reckon, that all the afflictions of this
present life are not worthy to be compared with the glories that shall be
revealed in us. Thus is the Word of God able to animate us against all those
things, that may dishearten us from the cleansing of our way, yea, thus is it
every way useful to help us in this business.

Use 1. Let us be thankful to God, for that he has given us his Word so
singularly useful in all kinds for the dispatch of so great a business, and so
necessary, as is the reforming of our ways: A jewel it is of special price.
David, in respect of that part of it, which was then written (which was the
Pentateuch, the five books of Moses) could yet raise up himself and others to
the praising of God: He has, saie's he, showed his Word unto Jacob, Psalm.
147.19.20.
his statutes and his judgments unto Israel; He has not dealt so with any
nation, and as for his judgments, they have not known them, and thence he
infer's, Hallelu-jah, Praise ye the Lord: how much more have we cause to bless
the Name of our God, who has given us the sacred Canon perfect, not only the
books of Moses, as the Text, but the writings of the Prophets, as a Comment
thereon; nor only the books of the Old Testament, which were the New Testament
veiled, but also the books of the New Testament, which are the Old Testament
reveiled? we may much more say, Non taliter fecit Deus omni populo: God has
not dealt so with other people: how many great nations are there in the world,
to whom the Word of God has not com? they for want of it sit in darkness, and
in the region of the shadow of death, but the light has shined on us: they are
as Egypt under that plague of darkness, Exodus 10.22.23.
that might be felt: we, as the Israelites in Goshen, having light in their
dwellings. St Paul moving the question, Romans 3.1.
What is the preferment of the Jews? what is the benefit of circumcision?
presently return's answer, Verily, great every way: specially because the
Oracles of God were committed unto them: v. 2.
how great then is our preferment? What cause have we then to be thankful unto
God?

2. Let us all, and do ye, young men, make use of the Word of God for this
blessed purpose, for the cleansing of your ways: To this purpose (we see)
it is profitable: and for this end God has afforded it to us: to this purpose
then let us make use of it, that we frustrate not God's exspectation: and
therefore

1. That we may see what has been amiss in our lives, let us frequently
compare our selves with the Word of God, and look our selves in this Glass; bring
we our words, actions and thoughts to a privy search hereby. It Is the counsel
of the Prophet, Lam. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord: Repentance is
necessary, as that, without which it is impossible to be saved: Luke 13.3.
for so our Savior saie's, Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish:
would ye not perish? repent: but the searching of our ways is enjoined, as
subservient to the turning to the Lord, implying, that (as Salvation is not
atteinable without repentance, so) repentance is impossible without search of
our ways: Psalm. 119.59.
and the same is implied in that speech of the Psalmist, I considered my ways
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies: Oh then neglect not this business of
the search of your ways. Call to mind the thoughts of your heart, the words
of your mouth, the works of your hands: consider them, whether they be good or
bad: and to this end, try them by the touchstone of the Word, weigh them in
this balance of the Sanctuary, if ye find them agreeable with this Word, or
not contrary to it, ye may conclude them to be lawful and good: but if they
be contrary to it, they are sinful and damnable: this Word of God is a true
and sure Glass, that will represent things to us, as indeed they are, and will
not deceiv us: If we stand to the verdict of our own imagination, we may be
deceived; There is a way (saie's Solomon) that is right in a man's eyes, Prove.
14.12.
but the end thereof are the ways of death. If we stand to the verdict of
men, we may be deceived: there are in the world flattering sycophants, that
for a meals meat, having men's persons in admiration, will call evil good,
darkness light, bitter sweet, praising those things which will prove bitter in
the end: and there are rigid censurers, who will call good evil, and light
darkness, and sweet bitter: But if we stand to the judgment of the Word of
God, we cannot be deceived, by the consonancie of our words, thoughts, and
actions with this Word, the goodness and rectitude of them will appear to our
comfort, so that we shall not need to regard the censures of men; and their
dissonancie from it will show the pravitie and crokedness of them, and so we
shall be stirred up and excited to humble our selves before God for them, and
to depart from them. As then ye love your selves, and would be set right in
the judgment of your ways, be persuaded not to make your selves, nor other men
your judges; but bring your selves; Romans 3.20.
and your conversation to the trial of God's Word, by which come's the knowledge
of sin.

2. Do nothing rashly, speak nothing rashly, think nothing rashly, but upon
mature consideration going before. This is a branch of that watchfulness, which
the Scripture every where enjoine's. The Porters at great men's gates suffer not
every one to enter that would but they first examine them, What are you? Whence
are you? Whether tend you? otherwise they may be in danger to entertein
thieves and robbers in stead of friends. So let us be circumspect over our
whole conversation: give not entertainment to every thought, that would enter
and lodge within us; give not way to every word, to every action: unspeakable
danger may, and cannot but issue upon it: but examine them first, what are you?
good? or evil? whence are you? from God? or from Satan and corruption? whether
tend you? to heaven? or to hell? to God's honor and my own comfort? or to the
dishonor of God, and my own horror? by this means ye shall prevent a world of
mischief. Oh therefore let this be the care of us all. And to guide us in this
examination, let us not stand upon humane judgment, our own, or of others: but
bring all to the trial of God's Word, weigh all in this balance, try all by
this touchstone: and if they agree with it, we may be bold and confident to
speak such words, to do such actions, to entertein such thoughts: whatsoever
we may suffer for it in the world at the hands of men, they are good, they are
from God, they tend to Heaven, to God's honor, and our own Salvation: but if
they be contrary to the Word of God, they are wicked, they are from the devil
and corruption, they tend to hell, to God's dishonor, and your own present
discomfort, and your everlasting perdition: venture not upon them though ye
might thereby gain ten thousand worlds. And thus taking heed to your
conversation according to God's Word, ye shall cleans or redress your ways.

3. That we may thus reap the benefit of God's Word for the cleansing of our
way, let us exercise our selves constantly in it, hear it read, and preached
publicly, read it privately: how else shall ye be able to make use of it, for
search of your bypast courses, for the trial of words, actions and thoughts
for the future? Hearken we therefore to our Savior, Joh. 5.39. Col. 3 16.
Search the Scriptures, and to St Paul, Let the Word of Christ dwell
plentifully in you. This concern's not us only, that are in the Ministry,
but also all ordinary Christians: nor concern's it only old men, that are
ready to depart out of the world, but it belong's also to you, that are young
men, for even to you also belong's the care to cleans your way, to which this
Word of God is subservient, Timothy from a child knew the scriptures. 2 Timothy
3.15.
Put not off this study then either to other men, or to another time, but set
your selves to it, and even now: Consider the opportunities that ye have: the
Word of God is written, yea, it is printed, so that ye may compass it at an
easy rate: and it is translated into your mother tongue, that so ye may know
what ye read, nor is there danger in reading it, as sometimes it was to our
Predecessors in this land, and is still in those Countries that lie under the
Roman yoke. Nor are ye told, that it is unlawful for you to do it, nay, ye
are frequently taught, that it is a necessary duty, and frequently excited to
it: oh, if, after all this, ye shall neglect this duty, how shall ye answer
it to God? how can it be, but that ye should find that to be true, Job.
3.19.
which our Savior said, This is condemnation, that light is com into the
world, and men love darkness rather then light: oh therefore be ye persuaded,
both young and old, to lay hold upon the gracious opportunities, which God
put's into your hands: what a sad business will it be, if by your neglect of
this grace of God, ye shall move God, in displeasure to bring such times upon
you, as in which ye would be glad to read the Scriptures and may not? do it
therefore, while ye may; let no day pass over your head without reading some
part of it: this will be a comfortable evidence to you, that ye are in the
number of them that shall be blessed: for so saie's the Psalmist, Psalm. 1.1.2.
Blessed is he that delight's in the law of the Lord, and exercises himself
therein day and night; yea, thus shall ye be enabled to the cleansing of
your way, which ye have heard to be a duty, that so mainly concern's you.

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

FINIS.

