TO HIS REVEREND AND MUCH Respected Good Friend, Mr. JOHN GOODWJN: Be these I
pray presented.
REVEREND SIR,
HAving lately received from you, by the hands of my loving Neighbor and
Friend, Mrs. Ducker, a both undeserved and unexpected favor, one of your last
Books, entitled, Innocence and Truth triumphing together; I acknowledge it a
just engagement of obliged gratitude, and therefore, accordingly, I do here
return you deserved and most humble thanks for the same, by the same friendly
hand. And because (worthy Sir) I conceived and considered with my self, that
you sent it by way of love and desire to give me (who am, as I acknowledge, a
poor and unworthy Presbyterian) satisfaction, if it might be, touching your
Independent Church Way: I having now perused it all over, even a capite ad
calcem (and I hope with that piety and impartialitie, as my God has enabled
me, which becomes a Christian and fellow servant to the same Lord Jesus Christ
with you) I therefore hope you will, not so much pardon (which I pray not) as
accept (which I heartily desire) with Christian Candor, mine ingenuitie and
plain dealing with you, in now giving you an account, briefly, as I thought it
most fit, of what light or content and satisfaction I have received from it.
Truly Sir, I having read your Epistle to the Reader, found therein very full
and fair promise of your ingenuous aim and intention in the subsequent
discourse, viz. that you projected four things therein, Brevitie, Perspicuitie,
Moderation, and Satisfaction. But having, I say, perused your Book, truly Sir,
(if I am not mistaken, as I believe I am not) you have come extreme short of
your promised project, in every of the four branches thereof. For first, if I
found you short, I am sure I found you sharp and tart; For Perspicuitie, I
assure you I found much cloudie obscurity; Very similitudinem multam, non
ipsam veritatem; satisfaction, therefore none at all. But especially, in that
of projected moderation, and promised temperature in writing, (the great
defect, and foul fault, so cried out upon by Independents against all
Presbyterian Writers or Speakers) in stead of moderation I found abundance of
bitterness, and unsavourie jerkes and jeeres (the light issues me thought,
rather of a youthful green-head, then the solid expressions of such a grave
heart) sprinkled, almost, over all your whole discourse; which I must confess
much troubled and affected me with wonder to meet with, after such a seeming
promise of moderation: Some few of very many whereof (because I knew, Dolosus
versatur in generalibus) J have here particularized with their pages where they
are evidently and easily to be seen. As first (to omit your Via Sanguinea, with
all its most bitter and biting, yea sorely wounding expositions of that term,
in your Theomachia, etc.) page 13. you compare Mr. Prynn in his Reply, to the
two false witnesses, who falsely accused our blessed Savior. And in the same
Page you tell the Reader, Here Mr. Prynn vapors in his Reply; immediately
after, in the same page how notably do you jeer and scoff him about three
Tabernacles? And with what an elated spirit do you answer him, page 16. line 4.
together with a downright jeer about a National Church, some 12 lines after?
You also grossly tax him with errors, Page 17. Sect. 21. And Page 18. and 19.
you frequently jeer him, and amongst those jeers you tell him, that Acts 15. is
only Mr. Prynns Gospel; what a bitter and unchristian censure lay you upon
him, and all Presbyterians, Page 24. Sect. 26. toward the end of it? And O how
you jeer him with his quotations, Page 37. toward the bottom; as also Page
49. and Page 51. you slander him with want of Reason and Truth too; and Page
52. you tell him, his pen spits black reproaches in the face of Independents.
You also accuse him Page 65. of much untruth; and the same also again most
foully, Page 84. Together with a Notable jeer, exalting your self, and
vilifying Mr. Prynn, which I have noted at large in your book, page 85.
Together with very many other such like expressions, too tedious to be here
recited; And yet (strange to consider) you conclude them all (with the
conclusion of your book) page 99. in a hortatorie way to Mr. Prynn in these
words: That he would put less Vinegar and Gall into his ink and more Wool
and Cotton. And in the Apostles words, Ephesians. 4. 31. That all bitterness and
evil speaking be put away, as becomes brethren. And now any impartial person
may judge, whether you your self have followed this brotherly exhortation; Nay,
whether contrariwise, you have not with unbrotherly aspersions, indeavored to
besmear the face of that precious Gentleman, most worthy ever to be honored
both by you all and us all? Truly Sir, you Independent Gentlemen have dealt
with this most worthy servant of the Lord, just as the people of Lystra did
with the Apostle Paul, whom at first they so honored and admired, as that they
were ready to deifie him and make him a god; but shortly after, they furiously
endeavored to stone him to death: So ye, at the first, in the time of Mr.
Prynns first most elaborate and learned divine writings, yea and for his most
glorious and Saint-like sufferiugs; O then, how ye all (with us) most highly
(and that most justly too) honored him, and brought him home from bauishment,
as it were in the triumphing Chariot of your love and praises! But now, since
he has piously and faithfully written against your Independent way, and only
for this, O how have you and almost all of your way, endeavored as much as in
you is, to stone to death his illustrious reputation, by most unworthy and
unchristian reviling and vilipending of him, both in words and writings! Even
him I say, who for his piety, humility, incomparable constancy, fortitude
and magnanimity in suffering for Gospel Truths, was not inferior to any of
his most faithful fellow sufferers yea, whose soundness and sincerity, whose
profound learning and indefatigable labors in writing upon deepest points of
Divinity and controverted Gospel Truths (witness his Perpetuity of the estate
of a regenerate man; his Anti-Arminianisme, Vnbisboping of Timothy and Titus,
his Histri-Mastix; and many other his later, most learned, orthodox and
precious pieces) have made his never-dying name and fame most worthily renowned
both in England and other parts of the world, beyond the Seas. And yet this
noble Gentleman to be thus, I say, besmeared and bespattred with your unjust
accusations, only I say again, for writing the truth against Independent
novelties; O! it is most sad and bad to consider. Truly Sir, you must here give
me leave to be yet more plain with you, I profess in the sincerity of my
soul, that I do most groundedly believe, that (had Mr. Prynn been such a
Nonsense, Consciencelesse, irrational, false and frivolous writer, as you and
others of your way only have strugled (but all in vain) to make and demonstrate
him by your lavish tongues and pens) that yet, I say certainly, Mr. John
Goodwin, was the most unfit man of all I know in London, to lay those
undeserved criminations to Mr. Prynns charge. For, you know good Sir, that Qui
in alterum paratus est dicere, ipsum vitio carere opertet. For you therefore,
Reverend Sir, to take upon you to tax Mr. Pryn of errors, untruths, and such
like, as you have done, how deeply you your self, (before ever this most
unhappy and unhol^ difference of Independency with Presbitery was dreamed of)
have been ceusured both of Socinianisme; (and how justly too others have most
learnedly in public declared) and more lately also how you have been
discovered to hold a most Dangerous, yea a most Damnable opinion (as a learned
Independent Brother of yours termed it in my hearing, and who then said, he
would justify it against you) touching justifying Faith by Christ. And now
also, how fiercely you are fallen on this unhappily disturbant new way of
Independencie. I beseech you therefore, Reverend Sir, seriously to consider
these things, to muster up your saddest thoughts, and to see into what a
Labyrinth you are strangely and strongly intricated. Sir, I do not, I cannot
deny, but ingenuously confess that God has given you much learning and
eminent parts, but truly Sir, if I be not, mistaken, I greatly fear your
Independent Proselites do too much magnify, if not (almost) deifie you for
them, and as it was with Pythagoras his Shollars, an Ipse dixit is enough, I,
fear for many, if not most of your disciples, jurare in verba Magistri;
Whereby I pray God, your great parts and gifts be not (thus) a great Snare to
your soul, which I much fear, if not timely and truly seen into and prevented
by Cordial Self-denial, and Holy Humility in your self, being more kindly
affectioned with brotherly love, and in honor preferring others before your
self* Romans 12. 10. And thus, Reverend Sir, I have made humbly bold, by your own
occasion, lovingly and, I hope, fairly and friendly as a true Christian Brother
ought, (Levit. 19. 17) Liberare animam meam, and thus to manifest my
reciprocal love and gratitude unto you, praying our good God it may be
accepted with the like right handed Christian Candor, and Simplicity of Heart
with which it is sent and intended, I humbly take my leave and rest,

SIR, Yours in our great Lord and Master Christ Jesus, to be commanded. JOHN
VICARS.
Jan. this 18. 1644.
Imprimatur. Ja. Cranford.
Jan. 24. 1644.
An Answer thereunto. To his much respected Friend Mr. JOHN VICARS, These be
delivered.
(The Author of this following Letter, did not intend it for the Press, but
sent it to Mr. Vicars in a private way: But Mr. Vicars his Letter coming forth
in Print, and diverse Copies thereof being dispersed into several hands by
himself, it was thought fit that this Letter should be published also.)

SIR,
WHether it was my good or hard hap to meet with your Letter directed and
sent to Mr. John Goodwin, I cannot easily determine: for though all manner of
knowledge, either of persons or things, be in some kind or other beneficial;
it being an undoubted Maxim, that Verum and Bonum convertuntur: yet some
knowledge may be so circumstantiated, that it may prove more burdensome and
offensive to the party knowing, then commodious. I confess from the reading of
your Lines I have gained thus much, to say I know you: but this gain has
occasioned such a considerable loss in the things of my joy, that I do even
wish for my former ignorance, and could be well contented, to have met with no
other description of your frame and temper, then what the promise of your
countenance, and the report of your friends have made of you: Indeed it cannot
but deduct somewhat from the comfort of a reasonable man, to see one, whom (one
would think) gray hairs should have taught the language of soberness,
shooting with his tongue at rovers, and speaking sharp and devouring words
against persons and things, which he knows not. Sorry I am, that Mr. Vicars
should break the fair face of his reputation upon this stone, against which
this besotted world is dashing it self in pieces from day to day. I have some
hope that though your zeal to Mr. Prinns glory, did cast you into such an
ecstasy of passion, that you scarce knew what you writ; yet by this time you
have pretty well recovered your self again: and lest the sense of your
miscarriage should too much oppress you, I give you to know that you are fallen
into soft and tender hands, and have discovered your nakedness to such only,
who rather pity, then deride it. For my part, I love not to disport my self
at the weakness of any man, or to turn his folly into laughter; for what were
this, but to reflect dishonor upon the same nature, wherein he partakes with
my self. Rather, I could mourn over the vanities of your Pen, and weep to see
you so far intoxicated, as to call the most injurious dealing one shall
lightly meet with, by the name of candor and ingenuitie. The truth is, you have
so foully berayed your paper with bold and untrue assertions, imputations,
exprobations, and such like excrements, that I thought even for modesty sake
to have drawn over them the veil of silence, and to have contested with that
spirit that breathes in them no further, then by speaking to it in a secret
wish, the Lord rebuke thee. But I considered with my self, that perhaps you
might communicate in the nature of such persons who (as Solomon says, Prove.
26. 5.) are apt (being unanswered) to be wise in their own conceits: and if I
shall hereby demolish or at least weaken this conceit of yours, I presume I
shall do you herein a very charitable and Christian piece of service. Think not
I am become your enemeie, because I tell you the truth: you have injured me no
other ways then by trespassing upon your own credit, and by making thereby a
sad breach in that holy profession, wherein you stand engaged with my self.
What ever your intentions were, I conceive you have done me no more wrong in
clapping the title of an Independent Proselyte upon my back, then Pilate did to
Christ in affixing this Superscription over his head, This is the King of the
Jews. I think this name to be full as honorable, as that of a poor and
unworthy Presbyterian, wherewith you have pleased to baptize your self: and
conceive that herein only you have followed your own, or rather the Apostles
counsel, in honor to prefer others before your self. But had you been
minded to suppress your name, your very Dialect had been enough to betray you:
Me thinks you write just like such a one as you say you are. Did I not hope
for better things from the hands of more worthy Presbyterians, your unworthy
dealing had set me off ten degrees further from your way, then now I stand: But
I will not take the advantage of your, or any man's misdemeanor, though more
gross and absurd then yours to render Pesbytery odious to the world: To
cloth any opinion or practice with the garments of men's personal distempers,
thereby to fall upon them and beat them with the more applause, is a method
which I as much abhor, as the Gentleman you admire, delights in: and if this
property in him were one of those beauty-spots which ravished you into a
passionate adoration of him, you need not fear, that ever I should become your
corrivall: And yet I love and honor Mr. Prynn for what ever you can find
lovely and honorable in him: I cannot deny but that in some of his works, he
has acquitted himself upon commendable terms; but to say that in all things,
he writes after the rate of a God, when in many things he falls beneath the
line of a man, is to make him and my self obnoxious to the wrath of God, and
the scorn of man. I acknowledge that for a time he ran well, but who hindered
him? questionless He who is ever and anon Hindering the Saints in the race of
holiness. The Prince of darkness owed him a fall for his sharp contesting
with his prime agents, and now he has paid his debt; but if Mr. Prynn will
be ruled by the advice of his best friends, he may rise again to his greater
glory, and notwithstanding his fall, triumph over the envy and malice of the
Devil. Concerning Mr. John Goodwin, (over whom you shake the rod of your
reproof, as if he were one of your Scholars) I could speak as high and
excellent Encomiums, as you have spoken of your preci^us Gentleman; I could
compare him even with Mr. Prynn himself: but such a comparison as this, would
be to me most odious. I could tell you what he has done, what he has
writ, how deeply he has suffered from unreasonable men; yea, I could give you
such a lively and bright description of him, as would dazzle your eyes to look
upon, and make you blush for shame to have grapled with such a person as he is,
upon such rude and unmannerly terms as you have done. For you, who are but a
Teacher of boys, so haughtily to correct a great Master in Israel, is such an
absurdity, as cannot but rend a more patient soul then mine, into disdain and
grief. It Is a wonder to me, that, whereas at the beginning of your Letter, you
confess your self to be but a poor and unworthy Presbyterian, you should so
far forget your self before you come half way, as to take upon you, like the
Dr. of the Chair; and to censure the best of men and ways with as much
confidence, as if your pen had dropped the Votes of a General Assembly with its
ink. Had a poor and unworthy Independent done the like, you would have cast
this boldness into a Basiliske, and used it to batter down the way of his
profession, and to lay the glory of it even with the ground* But I well
perceive, though you have escaped the snare of Gifts and parts (in which you
fear Mr. Goodwin is taken) yet you are fallen into the pit, not of Divine, but
natural simplicity; and have verified the old Proverb, A rash man's bolt is
soon shot. As for that Book of Mr. Goodwins, called Innocence and Truth
triumphing together, though you are pleased to triumph over both, and to cast
it out as an Arch-Rebel to reason and morality, yet (I must tell you) it has
found joyful and bountiful entertainment in the judgments of sober and
intelligent men: But certainly, it was the unhappiness of this Treatise to
fall into your hands, when you stood upon the Mount of Mr. Prins honor, and
when the vision of his transfiguration wrought so strongly in you, that you did
not wot, what you spoke, no, nor what you did neither, for you laid about you
with such regardlesse fury that you broke the head of your friend Priscian, The
words in the written Copy of his Letter, are these, and thus spelled, qui in
alterum paratus est dicere, ipsum vicio careat oportet, as may appear from the
original in Mr. Goodwins custody. But it seems the Corrector being the better
Grammarian transformed them into good Latin in the printed Copy.]
of whose safety men of your profession, should be most tender. I thought to
have argued the case with you, whether your exceptions against this Treatise
and its Author, will hold in the Court of Reason and equity: but perhaps you
are not so well skilled in the rules of this Court; and I am loath to take the
advantage of you. I shall only propound a few Querees, peradventure the
struglings of your thoughts to give them satisfaction, may dissolve the
enchantment that is now upon you. What persons did ever most learnedly declare
Mr. Goodwin to be justly censured for Socinianisme? When, or in what public
place did they make this Declaration? How call you that Brother of his, who
will justify against him the charge of holding a most damnable opinion about
justifying faith? I suppose you must strain, not so much your memory as your
invention, in shaping your answer: You had done well to remember, that though
Fools (as Solomon speaks) believe every thing; yet wise men will question such
assertions as these: Alas (Sir) the best course you can run to gain credit
with the prudent, is to cut your allegations and your proofs, just of one and
the same length: to cloth large and broad sayings with curtaild Arguments,
reflects as much shame upon such sayings, and him that speaks them, as Hanun
did upon the servants of David^ in cutting off their Garments to their
buttocks. You cannot but know, how that many grave, sober, Godly, and learned
men have fallen into that way you call Independencie. Now, your only method, to
have brought over these to your party, and to have filled their mouths with
the cry of a confederacy against this way, had bin this; not barely to have
affirmed it to be a novell and disturbant way (as you have done) but to have
poysed the lightness of your affirmation, with the weight and substance of a
Demonstration. I assure you (Sir) (what ever you may think) I approve of this
way no further then I see the footsteps of those sweet sisters, Truth and Peace
Printed in it: I have narrowly viewed it, and I can find no drops of blood, no
strewings of the liberties, estates, names, comforts of the Saints scattered in
it, and yet some Travelers affirm, they have seen such things as these in
that way, which the ignorance of thousands lust after. But to conclude, I
beseech you (Sir) be more watchful over the extravagancies of your tongue and
pen for the future: since you are (in part) acquainted with their infirmities,
let it be your wisdom to seek their cure. I reverence you for age, piety, and
some services you have done to the Public; and I should rejoice to see such
an ancient standard in the Garden of God as you are, carrying your hoary head
with honor to the grave: which that you may do, as I have (you see) in part
endeavored, so I shall further prosecute with my prayers to him, who is able
to keep you to the end: in whom (though I am unknown to you) yet with all
sincerity I profess my self,

SIR, A cordial well-wisher to your peace and credit: D. T.
January 27. 1644.

