A VINDICATION OF THE Antapologist, AGAINST THE DEFENSE OF THE Dean of St.
Paul's APOLOGY.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Bentley in Russel Street in Covent Garden, 1695.

A VINDICATION OF THE Antapologist, AGAINST THE Defense of the Dean of St.
Paul's APOLOGY.
IT IS not my design to take the Defender's whole Book in pieces, and answer
every Clause of it; there is no occasion for that, a great deal of it signifies
nothing, and is not worth any Man's notice. But I would know with what
ingenuity, conscience, or forehead a Man can vent such base reproaches,
contemptuous fleering scoffs and misrepresentations against a Person of so much
worth? Does he think to come off by asserting [He cannot expose a Man without
mentioning his Name] when it is generally known who is intended? Def. p. 14


First, for the Ant. being a Socinian, which is the Defender's continued Charge
through the whole, he says, Def. p. 4.
[He does not pretend to know his inward intention, all he has to do with, is
his Book.] And yet there is not one Clause in it that proves this, nay there
are several passages to the contrary, as Ant. p. 45. I from my heart receive
every tittle of the Revealed Christian Religion; particularly as to those two
Magnalia, the Trinity and Incarnation, and again, Ant. p. 5. to make the sum of
my Sentiments plainer, the holy Scripture states the Trinity under the notion
of three bearing witness in Heaven, and adds, he has much more to say for that
exagitated Text, than to allow it wanting in any Copies, on any other reason
but their imperfection.

What could be said more? Now this the Def. would not see. Def. p. 8.
[This third Section he does not know well what to make of] but says [in the
first place he (the Ant.) would have none but Scripture-terms made use of in
stating this Doctrine; but this, whether it were the Invention of old
Heretics, or new ones, has been shown to be in our case foolish and
unreasonable] I wish he had told us where he has shown this, I cannot find it:
The Ant. p. 21, 22. quotes St. Athanasius, and St. Ambrose, as complaining of
unscriptural words: But the Def. [is not at leisure to turn them over. Def. p.
22.
]

A Man at this rate will never be confuted, if at one time he will not see
things, and at another will not examine them, and when they pinch him will not
know what to make of them. Methinks he can tend to pass a strange Complement on
Scripture, God left it as a Rule of Faith to the end of the World. And why
should not the terms there serve our Times? What signifies it to say,
[Hereticks may still take them in their own sense. Def. p. 23.
] So they may your Unscriptural words: No doubt but those Heretics, who can
pervert all Scripture-terms, may also those others which we do contrive. But
what made him overlook what is really in the beginning of the third Section,
and bring in something at a distance? He had no mind to see the Ant. appear no
Socinian, he was resolved to call him so. He forgot the Jus Belli in
Controversies, the obligation to Truth, Justice, and common Ingenuity there.

But farther, the Ant. being asked p. 44, 45. Whether he does believe the
Doctrine of the Trinity to be defensible or no? he answers, I do, as delivered
in Scripture, but not upon his ( viz. Dr. Sh.) Novel Definitions and Hypotheses.

So, p. 46. the Doctrine of the Trinity is a Fundamental, if duly stated, and
this he with Reverence acknowledges and believes, as Scripture states it.

And, p. 48. says, the denial of the Trinity duly stated is Heresy. And
Socinianism he calls Heresy, p. 50.

Now with what face can a Man pretend to answer this Book, overlook all this,
and brand the Author still for a Socinian, Def. p. 11.
and yet profess that he [has nothing else to judge him by but the Book?] I am
loath to say what he deserves.

The case was this, the very learned and peaceable Ant. met with a dangerous
Explication of the Trinity by Dr. Sh. and seeing the ill Consequences likely to
attend the Church in wrangling about these matters at this time a day, he
desired both parties would let this Conversie alone, till fit time and place.
p. 3. And that it might rest (for this Juncture) as 'twas above thirteen
hundred years ago determined by two General Councils.

P. 33. Def. p. 2.
He did not desire us [tamely and silently to give up a Fundamental Article of
Christian Faith. Neither dissuade from Writing only in defense of the Doctrine
of the Trinity. Nor does he beseech one to be silent, Def. p. 3.
and let the others Write, Talk, Rail, Argue, etc. Def. p. 5.
he would not for Peace give up Truth, nor would betray Christian Faith under
the pretense of Peace and Moderation. Def. p. 7.
]

This truly may be matter of Melancholy consideration to all good Men,
notwithstanding his Scoffs, that a Man should give himself so strange a liberty
of thinking and speaking. These are false imputations, and malicious
insinuations still charged, even contrary to our Author's accounts; as we find
Ant. p. 9. If the old way of speaking had been kept to, the suit for peace had
been let alone.

And what can be more disingenuous? I do wonder, even to astonishment, that our
Defender should pretend to Write Controversy, and be no more true in his
Charges; or just in his Consequences.

The business is, the Doctrine of the Trinity, as Dr. Sh. has stated it, is not
a Fundamental of the Christian Faith; his mutual consciousness will not guard
him from the inference of three Gods, since the Unity of Accord (not of Nature
and Substance) is all that will follow from thence; and this, a true enquiry
into the importance of the words without any farther trouble will make appear.

But he may not like this, because the Doctor would have the word Substance
thrown away, as the cause of all the Errors Men are apt to fall into about the
Mystery of the Trinity: And yet it is in our Articles, Athanasian and Nicene
Creeds, and in the Doxology at the Communion on Trinity-Sunday. And pray who
abuses the Church now? If the Ant. had said as much as the Apology does in
this, he must have been banged about as an enemy to the Church, that he went to
expose the Creeds, the Communion Service, and the Church of England. And truly
he had reason enough, according to his notion, to be afraid of the word
Substance; a little Logic will teach him, that three distinct Infinite Spirits
are three distinct Infinite Substances, and he may tremble at what necessary
consequence will quickly be found out. His Notion is but poorly, I may say not
at all justified by a later pretended Defense; though he spits Socinian Seconds
in the Animadverter's face. Page 32. there is a great deal of obscure stuff to
no purpose.

But the Defender advocates for the Dean, that though he [gives such an
Explication of the Trinity, Def. p. 6.
as he believes to be true, he does not lay down his Hypothesis as necessary to
be expressly believed by all] but the vain boasting in the Apology, p. 85. will
answer this, viz. that he has given such a notion of the Trinity as is
agreeable to the phrase and expression of Scripture, such as solves all the
difficulties of it.

Let the Reader judge, Def. p. 12.
Whether the Reasons of the Ant. which the Defender mentions, hold good, though
he will not allow them. They are these: If the Socinians be not the only
persons Heterodox in the Points of the Trinity, and if these are not the only
Points in which they are Heterodox, then it follows not, says Ant. that he that
desired the Controversy of the Trinity to be forborne at present, did desire
that no body would write against the Socinians, though his suit was chiefly to
the Dean and Dr. Wallis.

I cannot imagine why he takes pains to prove that [every Christian or Divine
must] write, Def. p. 13.
(for that is according to the Discourse there) [when the Catholic Faith is
assaulted, or else he must be deemed a Neuter, or not Orthodox,] then there
must be a thousand Scriblers against one Heretical Pamphlet. What if there be
no need of my Defense? I may stand by very innocently, and comfort my self in
seeing the Heretics beaten by others, when there is no occasion for me to help.

The Ant. Explication of that Text, p. 23. Def. p. 23.
does not [overthrow the Personality of the Holy Ghost] because, if this did
not, there are other Texts to prove it; and nothing is said to be in this
against it. He does not say, his is the Sense of the Text; but puts this to
prove, that different Interpretations may be put on one Text, and a general
Sense may be sometimes well enough; and still he allows this Text may not,
without Probability, be interpreted of the Essential Spirit of God. So that
'twas foolishly and wickedly spiteful to say, Def. p. 23.
as Def. does, that [this Example is not very much for his (the Ant.)
Reputation, because it can serve no other End, but to overthrow the Personality
of the Holy Ghost.] Why must every thing necessarily be a Man's Design, which
may be so, when as well it may not be so? But why more particularly must this
be his End here, when it is brought to another Purpose, and another Design is
mentioned; and nothing of that which our Adversary's malevolent Inclination
makes him fancy? And yet this Man does very solemnly tell us at first, Def. p.
4.
[He does not pretend to know his inward Intentions; and therefore, whatever he
shall say in his Reflections, let him not pretend that he does it to calumniate
him, since all he has to do with is his Book;] what shall we think when there
is plainly Protestatio contra factum?

He goes on with his False Charge, Def. p 42.
[That he (the Ant.) does plainly enough insinuate, that it was not Reason or
Scripture, but Humane Force, which carried it, and determined the Point in the
Council of Nice] when there is no such thing in the whole Book; and yet
(according to his usual Custom) talking at Rovers, I am sure without the Book
he pretends to Answer, he gives us another Cast of his Civility, that ['twas
written with a Design (which he is very good at understanding) [to expose the
Nicene Faith and Council, the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Church of
England.] And if we look back, we shall find him say, the Ant. [speaks a great
many fine things in behalf of the Council of Nice, not worth repeating. Def. p.
40.
Let Us see then what these things are. I have, says the Ant. a true and
profound Veneration for that Council, and esteem it only Second to that of the
Apostles in Act. 15. Who can think otherwise of it, that considers the number
of the Fathers therein; or otherwise, that reflects on the Quality of many of
them; the Number Three Hundred and Eighteen; their Quality, diverse of them
such, who had even at that time bid fair for Martyrdom; Confessors of the First
Rank, that bore in their Body (...), the Marks of Christ; had some of them
their Hands cut off, had been seared and tormented with Fire, and otherwise
suffered for the Faith of Jesus; some had the Apostolic Gifts of Miracles, and
one Raised the Dead. Ant. p. 36. Were not these things worth repeating? A very
remarkable thing, he means not fit for him to mention, because then the Ant.
proves himself no Socinian, and that does not serve the Def.'s turn.

But pray, What makes the Def. so averse to the Ant.'s Proposal, Def. p. 39.
of calling in [a Concurring Power] to end the Controversy? Is it for the same
Reason, that some Clients will not submit to a Reference, because they love
wrangling and going to Law? Or is he afraid of a Convocation? This he would
have [not reasonable nor practicable:] Why so? The King can, and will (I hope)
call one, if asked; when a growing Heresy infests the Church, they can come
together, and they will act in such a case; and he that thinks otherwise,
abuses the Constitution, or the Persons in it. But the Def. tells you, [This is
not a fair Proposal; Def. p. 39.
for the Heretics must be first gratified, the Forms of Worship, and the
Doctrine of the Trinity thrown out of the Liturgy] when the Ant. says no such
thing. He makes what he pleases, and fathers it on this honest absent Person:
When he cannot tell what to Answer, he then mentions something odious, and runs
a great way after his own Shadow with open Mouth: And this he does not only
here, but in many other places of his Defense. Let the Reader compare the Books.

As we may see again, he cites the Ant. p. 52. saying, [That no Practice be
imposed upon any contrary to their Consciences. Def. p. 57
The Meaning of which he takes to be, That no Expressions should be allowed in
the Liturgy, which any one professes are against his Conscience; nor any Rite
or Ceremony required, which all are not satisfied in; and so we must part with
Episcopacy, and all Order and Decency, etc.] He calls him, [Brave Protestant
Reconciler. And says, It Is admirable Arguing for a Church of England-Man, who
has read Fathers and Schoolmen.] Pray let us see how the Defender has here used
him; take all his Words: In such Mysterious Points which we cannot understand,
or clear our selves in, we shall be permitted to suspend our Judgment, and not
be required to declare any further Assent and Consent to the Churches
Determinations, than that we will not contradict or teach contrary thereto;
withal, that in the mean time no Practice be imposed upon any, contrary to
their Conscience. But I would have it noted here, that I neither in my Paper
did, nor do I now expose this Temper, as a Mean to qualify Men for
Church-Preferments, but only for Communion. Ant. p. 51, 52. God deliver us from
the Tongues and Pens of false and wicked Misrepresenters. It Is not disingenuous
to know the true Meaning, and lay open the just Consequences of any Saying; but
it is abusive to put a false Construction on Words, to mutilate a Sentence to
make it look worse than it is. I agree with the Defender, that [there are Men
of perverse Minds and weak Heads:] I am sure some are blinded with Spite, Def.
p. 36.
and infatuated by Prejudice.

As to our Authors Latitude of Faith and negative Belief, and as to the Title
of Melancholy Stander-by, which the Defender makes himself with Dullness enough
so often merry with, let him but take the Account given in the Antapology with
a Candid Mind, and a Christian Temper, and I believe they will shift well
enough for themselves; however, he may find reason to be a little more serious
in his Behavior about such matters.

We meet with a mighty Bustle made about p. 31. Def. p. 30, 31, 32, 33, etc.
of Ant. a great deal is spent upon the Words of it: And yet, upon a most
strict and impartial Examination, I profess, I do not find any Occasion given
for this Heap of ill Sayings; they are not expressly, nor by Consequence, to be
found there.

They are these:

[That the Fundamental Articles of Christian Faith are revealed in such
ambiguous Terms, Def. p. 31.
that we cannot understand the true Sense of them; or at least few can.

That God meant no Senfe,

That he charges all the Heresies and Infidelity in the World on God Almighty,
by his Latitude of Faith, etc.

That the Church must not require an open Profession of the true Faith.

That nothing will uphold his Cause, Def. p. 32.
but such an Indifferency as will not allow the Church to concern her self what
Men believe, nor her Members to defend the true Faith.

Lusts and Prejudices hinder me from discerning the clear Evidence of the
Truth, Def. p. 32.
and so long I cannot believe, and therefore I hope I shall be excused.]

Nor is there any Reason for these Questions to be put.

[Does the Church desire no Man to believe the Creeds and Doctrine of the
Trinity? Def. p. 33.


Is it to no purpose to teach Men the Truth? Or to require them to profess
their Minds sincerely?]

And to these let me add, that [whether there be not some Christian Truths,
Def. p. 27.
which ought to be expressly believed by all Christians?]

My designed Brevity will not allow me to transcribe the whole; I refer the
Reader to the Book; and I am very well satisfied, he will wonder at the
Defender's bold Strokes. It Is easy to abuse by Questions, or to make Sayings
against another; but I challenge him to prove, that these things necessarily
follow from any Words there.

When all is done, we do subscribe in a large Sense, that must be admited to
save the Charity of our Church from denouncing Damnation against the Greek
Church, for want of the Word Filiog. He is not the best Friend to the
Establishment, who takes the Sentence so strictly, as to damn every body that
believes not every Word in the Athanasian Creed: It is certainly enough to
believe the Substance of our Christian Faith, touching the Trinity and the
Incarnation of the Son of God. I take that to be believing faithfully.

Dr. Falkner owns, That the Athanasian Creed gives some Explications, which are
not so necessary to be understood and believed. Lib. Ecc. p. 146.

And Dr. Stillingfleet (now Bishop of Worcester) in his Vindication of his
Answer to the King's Papers, pleads in behalf of the Eastern Churches, p. 23.
in these Words: Is it not a very hard Case these should be excluded the
Catholic Church, and consequently from Salvation, for not rightly
understanding the Subtilties of the Distinction betwixt Nature and Person? etc.

And our Articles were never designed as Declarations of Truths, necessary to
be believed only in one Sense; but as Articles of Peace, which no Subscriber
should Oppose or Preach against.

But I find our two Authors can by no means agree in their Politics. Ant. is
for Alterations, and an Union of Protestants (if it can be compassed) by
reasonable Methods: And, doubtless, he thinks his Way most likely (rebus sic
stantibus) to preserve the Church.

The Defender has another sort of Hopes and Belief. Def. p. 63.
I confess sincerely, I am not a fit Judge of such matters; I shall therefore
leave it to God's Providence, and the Wisdom of my Superiors; praying
heartily, that God will vouchsafe to continue our Liturgy in Use, Honor, and
Veneration.

The Ant. is against Scholastic Terms in our Prayers: He names Forbesius's
Exceptions; and he would have some one answer them more satisfactorily than he
can contrive to do. Now our Defender had done well, if he had here inserted an
Answer to these; his Undertaking required it; but he did not think fit to
meddle, but only tells you fleeringly, Def. p. 21.
[He hopes there are some others in the Church, that can Answer so as he would
have it Answered.] Can he do nothing but call Names, and infer bad
Consequences? But as long as the Ant. asserts in the midst of all this, that
the things excepted against may be used without Sin, p. 21. (we know what may
be done without Sin, must be done when Authority commands) he does not give any
Allowance to an Opposite Separation.

This all together would have been construed well enough by a Man not given to
Bitterness, Wrath and Disputing. But however, make the worst of it, 'twill not
amount to the Defender's Charge, or near it, viz. [That this Writing is
directly against the received Doctrine of the Trinity and Established Worship,
Def. p. 21, 22.
that the Ant. is a perfect Adversary to the Church.]

The Def. Def. p. 62.
charges the Ant. for [giving up the Convocation, but he will [not follow him
here] he says [for good Reasons; Def. p. 18.
] I suppose the same as when he says, [He has more Wit than to follow him
through his Reading and the Schoolmen.] An ingenuous Excuse: I can assure you,
he is not a Man to be followed by every Body; as he has come very near the
Character given of the Nicene Fathers, excepting their miraculous Gifts, so (I
can say it without Vanity or Flattery) his Reading and Learning is more than
common and ordinary; though the Def. says many little things of him, which
provoked me to this. One Reason he names the Ant. Def. p. 62.
[is on the securer side.] Our Champion is like to make a brave Defender of our
Faith, and our Church's Authority, who will not scratch his Hands, when his
Adversary has got the safer Side. He gives up the Convocation no more than
'twas long before, as his History makes appear, which Def. would not touch.

It Is certain, that Ecclesiastical Laws should not be made without
Ecclesiastical Persons; this is according to the Primitive Canons, to the
Proceedings of Christian Emperors, and to the Methods of England: 'Twas one of
those (...), ancient Customs that our Nation has observed.

Farther, Queen Elizabeth since the Reformation, did prohibit the House of
Commons meddling in the ordering of Church Matters, as appears by Sir Simonds
D'Ewes, p. 213.

The Speaker declared to the House of Commons, that it was her Majesty's
Pleasure, That from henceforth no Bills concerning Religion shall be preferred
or received into this House, unless the same should be first considered and
liked by the Clergy.

And we find the Persons attempting it, were then some forbad the House, others
turned out of their Offices, others sent to the Tower; nay, there was a
Submission made for transgressing in this, Anno 23. p. 284.

This is what (I guess) our Def. would be at, but he is resolved not to burn
his Fingers, and I am persuaded the Ant. is satisfied in all this.

But whatever it was heretofore, we are to examine what the Custom has been for
a considerable time past; and here we shall find, if the King give the
Parliament leave to meddle in Ecclesiastical Matters, and they do make a Law
without a Lower House of Convocation, this will be obligatory: Whether we like
it, or not, so it is.

The next Charge against the Ant. is, that he says, Def. p. 64.
[Other Dissenters have benefit by the Act of Toleration, who do not renounce
Socinianism, contrary to the express words of the Act.] And here the Ant. very
[sense, sincerity, and modesty] are questioned; he claps his wings, and crows
as if he were insulting over his conquered adversary: Nay, he puts him in a way
to excuse himself, that he [was imposed upon by hearsay, or by a hasty
conclusion, that because it was an Act of Indulgence to Dissenters, it must
certainly indulge the innocent and true Protestant Socinians among the rest.]
Very kindly done! but not too fast, look upon the Act, Pages in it are 309 and
317.

In the former it is provided that Persons in Holy Orders, or pretending to Holy
Orders, Preachers, or Teachers in Dissenting Congregations, shall be free from
the Penalties of the Act for restraining Nonconformists from inhabiting in
Corporations, and of the Act of Uniformity; upon condition only of the taking
the Oaths, and declaring the approbation of, and subscribing to the Articles of
Religion mentioned in a Statute made, 13 Eliz. ( viz. 39 Articles) except 34,
35, 36. and some words of the 20th.

In the other Clause it is Enacted, that the benefit of the Act shall not extend
to any person that shall deny in his Preaching or Writing, the Doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity, as it is declared in the aforesaid Articles of Religion. So
that none but public Preachers, etc. are comprehended in these Restrictions;
all that are not so, may believe what they please concerning the Trinity,
without being excluded from the benefit of this Act, and so indeed may
Preachers too; only they must not teach publicly any thing contrary to those
Articles they are to Subscribe and declare their approbation (not belief) of.

I shall conclude without returning his Scoffs, or his Lashes (which word used
more than once ought to be recanted, as reflecting on a very Honorable
Profession) with an earnest and a serious desire, that he will repent of all
his Virulent and Malicious Speeches and Misrepresentations; that he will learn
to be more true in his Charges, and just in his Consequences.

FINIS.

