A Vindication of the Army under the command of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, concerning a Pamphet lately printed and published, Entitled, Heads
presented by the Army to the Kings Majesty.
WHereas we find a Pamphlet lately printed and published, bearing the title
of, Heads presented by the Army to the Kings Majesty, on Saturday June the 19.
1647. though we think it will of it self appear such a confused headless
piece, so surreptitiously crept forth, and in such a pure Pamphlet dress, as
we hope it will gain little belief to our prejudice: Yet to avoid any
jealousies or doubtful thoughts which it might possible breed in any honest
mind, we cannot but take notice of it, and for the vindication of the Army do
hereby declare, That the said printed Pamphlet is most false, scandalous, and
injurious to us and this Army: Neither has there been any such Paper
presented to his Majesty by or from this Army. And the same we profess and
declare with great detestation, concerning another written Paper, whereof we
had a Copy showed to us yesterday by the Commissioners of the City, Entitled,
Articles agreed upon between the King and the Army, the 16. of June. And we
desire all that wish well to this Army, or the King or Parliament, or peace of
this Kingdom, that they would do their best to find out and discover the
Authors and Publisher of the said Paper and Pamphlet, or any thing else of that
nature that may be divulged concerning the Army, to interrupt or prejudice the
present settling and composure of Affairs. And we hope it will not be further
needful or expected from us, that we should give particular answer to every
such scandalous Paper, which the malice of our enemies may forge against us,
but that what we have published to the world in our Representation and other
Papers avowed by us, may serve to clear our intentions, until we shall
appear to act something to the contrary.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and his Council of
War. Signed JOHN RUSHWORTH.
Wickam July 1. 1647.
Die Lunae 2. Julii 1647.
ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That this Vindication of the
Army be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 1647.


