A more Exact RELATION Of the late BATTLE Near YORK; Fought by the English and
Scotch Forces, against Prince RUPERT and the Marquess of Newcastle.

Wherein the Passages thereof are more particularly set down, presented to the
view of those who desire better satisfaction therein.

Published for the more enlargement of our hearts to Almighty God on our day of
Thanksgiving, commanded by Authority for the great Victory obtained.

Allowed to be Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for H. Overton, 1644.

A more exact Relation of the late BATTLE near York, fought by the English
and Scottish Forces, against Prince Rupert, and the Earl of New Castle.
SIR;
Be pleased to take notice of Gods wonderful and almost miraculous goodness to
us, and in us to this whole Nation, and to all the Churches of God in Europe,
upon Monday last being the second of July, upon notice that Prince Rupert was
advancing on the North-side Owse, with twentie-five thousand men, to raise our
Siege before York, we conceiving our selves unable to keep the Siege, and
fight with him also, and supposing it the safest to fight with him with our
whole strength united, we drew off all our Forces, both horse and foot and
artillery, without the loss of a man, and put our selves into Battalia upon
Owse-moore, within three miles of York. That night the Prince came into York,
with about two thousand horse, his foot and Ordinance quartering in the
Forest of Gortrey, within five miles of York; We quartered at Long Marston,
and in the Towns adjacent, with an intention the next day to march to Cawood,
and so to Selby, partly to possess the River entirely, so to hinder him for
furnishing York with provisions, out of the East Riding; As also to interpose
between him and his march Southwards, he having no other way to march, (the
Earl of Denbigh and the Lancashire Forces interposing between him and his
march West-wards, the way he came:) Accordingly early in the morning, we began
our march toward Cawood, with all our Army, leaving three thousand Horse and
Dragooneers to bring up the Rear of our Foot and Ordnance.

The Enemy thinking we dislodged, because we would avoid fighting, and being
resolved to fight with us, they drew out five thousand Horse and Dragooneers,
the Vanne of their Army, and with them took the Moore near Marston, about
nine of the clock on Tuesday, and came up close to the Rear of our Carriages.

We seeing that they were in earnest to fight, and we as much as they
desiring it, presently commanded all our foot and Ordnance to come back with
all speed, the Vanne of which was gone some five miles toward Cawood, and was
with much difficulty to be brought back. The enemy in the mean while,
drawing up with part of their foot close to our noses, so near that we had
not liberty to take the Moore, and to put our selves into Battalia, so that
we were put to draw our men into a Corne-field close to the Moore, making way
by our Pioners to get ground to extend the wings of our army to such a
distance, that we might conveniently fight; which was very difficult for us to
attain, The right wing of our army being placed just by Merston Town side, the
town on our right hand, fronting on the East, and as our foot and horse came
up, we formed our battalia and the left wing, still desiring to gain as much of
the left point as we could, so that at last we came with the utmost point of
our left wing, to Topwith; so oru army fronted to the Moore from Marston to
Topwith, being a mile and a half in length; the enemy being drawn up just under
us, the wings of their army extending a little further then ours in length, but
the hedges and our Dragooners secured the flanks. About two of the clock we had
indifferently well formed our army, as also tht enemy theirs, part of their
foot being beyond Owse, that morning, which made them as late as we in drawing
up. About two of the clock, the great Ordnance of both sides began to play, but
with small success to either: about five of the clock we had a general
silence on both sides, each expecting who should begin the charge, there being
a small dich and a banck betwixt us and the Moor, through which we must pass,
if we would charge them upon the Moore, or they pass it, if they would charge
us in the great corn-field, and closes; so that it was a great disadvantage to
him that would begin the charge, seeing the ditch must somewhat disturb their
order, and the other would be ready in good ground and order, to charge them
before they could recover it.

In this posture we stood till seven of the clock, so that it was concluded on
our sides, that there would be no engagement that night, neither of the two
Armies agreeing to begin the charge: And surely had two such Armies (drawn up
so close one to the other, being of both wings within Musket shot, departed
without fighting, I think it would have been as great a wonder as has been
seen in England. The enemy had in the Field in all, some fourteen thousand
Foot, and nine thousand Horse, and some twenty five pieces of Ordnance. The
right Wing of their Horse was commanded by Prince Rupert, who had in it some
twelve divisions of Horse, consisting of one hundred Troops, and might be five
thousand men. The left Wing of their Horse was commanded by Hurry, with all the
remainder of their Horse. The right Wing of our Horse was commanded by Sir
Thomas Fairfax, consisting of 80. Troops, being his own and the Scotch Horse.
The left Wing of our Horse was commanded by Lieutenant General Cromwell, with
all his own Horse, and the Earl of Manchesters, and some of the Scotch Horse,
being in all about 70. Troops. Our Foot being twenty eight Regiments, were
disposed into twelve Brigades. About half an hour after seven a clock at
night, we seeing the enemy would not charge us, we resolved by the help of God,
to charge them, and so the sign being given, we marched down to the charge. In
which you might have seen the bravest fight in the world; Two such disciplined
Armies marching to a charge. We came down the Hill in the bravest order, and
with the greatest resolution that was ever seen: (I mean the left Wing of our
Horse led by Cromwell, which was to charge their right Wing, led by Rupert, in
which was all their gallant men: they being resolved, if they could scatter
Cromwell, all were their own.

All the Earl of Manchesters Foot being three Brigades, began the charge with
their bodies against the Marquis of Newcastle, and Prince Ruperts bravest Foot.
In a moment we were passed the ditch into the Moore, upon equal grounds with
the enemy, our men going in a running march. Our front divisions of Horse
charged their front, Lieutenant General Cromwels division of three hundred
Horse, in which himself was in person, charged the first division of Prince
Ruperts in which himself was in person. The rest of ours charged other
divisions of theirs, but with such admirable valor, as it was to the
astonishment of all the old Soldiers of the Army. Cromwels own division had a
hard pull of it: for they were charged by Ruperts bravest men, both in Front
and Flank: they stood at the swords point a pretty while, hacking one another:
but at last (it so pleased God) he brake through them, scattering them before
him like a little dust.

At the same instant the rest of our horse of that Wing, had wholly broken all
Prince Ruperts horse on their right Wing, and were in the class of them beyond
their left Wing: our Foot on the right hand of us (being only the Earl of
Manchesters Foot) went on by our side dispersing the enemies Foot almost as
fast as they charged them, still going by our side, cutting them down that we
carried the whole Field before us, thinking the victory wholly ours, and
nothing to be done but to kill and take prisoners: not knowing that the enemies
left Wing, led by Hurry had done as much to our right (led by Sir Thomas
Fairfax, they wholly carrying the Field before them, utterly routing all our
Horse and Foot, so that there was not a man left standing before them, most of
the Horse and Foot of that wing, and our main battle recreating in have
toward Todcaster and Cawood, thinking the day lost, as the enemies right wing
did toward York. The enemy being in pursuit and chase of retreating men,
followed them to our Carriages, but had slain few of them: for indeed they ran
away before the enemy charged them. Just then came our Horse and Foot from the
chase of their right wing, and seeing the business not well in our right, came
in a very good order to a second charge with all the enemies Horse and Foot
that had disordered our right wing and main battle. And here came the
business of the day (nay almost of the Kingdom) to be disputed upon this
second charge.

The enemy seeing us to come in such a gallant posture to charge them, left all
thoughts of pursuit, and began to think that they must fight again for that
victory which they thought had been already got. They marching down the Hill
upon us, from our Carriages, so that they fought upon the same ground, and with
the same Front that our right wing had before stood to receive their charge;
and we stood in the same ground, and with the same Front which they had when
they began the charge.

Our three Brigades of Foot of the Earl of Manchesters being on our right
hand. On we went with great resolution, charging them so home, one while their
Horse, and then again their Foot, and our Foot and Horse seconding each other
with such valor, made them fly before us, that it was hard to say which did
the better our Horse or Foot. Major General Lesley seeing us thus pluck a
victory out of the enemies hands, professed Europe had no better Soldiers.

To conclude about nine of the clock we had cleared the Field of of all
enemies, recovered out Ordnance and Carriages, took all the enemies Ordnance
and Ammunition, and followed the chase of them within a mile of York, cutting
them down so that their dead bodies lay three miles in length. Diverse
prisoners of note were taken, Lord Gorings son, Colonel Tilsley, Sir Charles
Lucas, Major General Porter, and about an hundred more Officers, 1500
Soldiers. The number of the dead is uncertain; but I cannot think, but of all
dead in the field, in the woods, and mortally wounded (which would die within a
day) there are between three and four thousand Their whole Army is so broken,
that of Foot I am confident they are not able of 13000. to rally 2000. and of
eight or nine thousand Horse, not above two thousand, the rest all gone to
their own homes, except those that are slain and prisoners. The glory of this,
as it only due to God, as the prime efficient, so must it be acknowledged (as
it is by all, and that most justly) thit instrumentally it was done by none but
by the Earl of Manchesters Horse and Foot led on by Cromwell, and those Scots
which charged in with them, commanded by Major General Lesley, who carried
himself very bravely. Lieutenant General Cromwell (the great agent in this
victory) has received a slight wound in the neck. We lost not in all this
fight, above two or three hundred men. Sir Thomas Fairfax (wounded in the head
or face) carried himself as bravely as as man could do, was unhorst, lay upon
the ground, and was relieved by our horse. The enemy has lost all their Arms,
the field being full of Pikes and Muskets; This morning we gathered them up
within 2 miles of York, not an enemy daring to look upon us. Rupert is on the
North side or York with about two thousand Horse. I am

Your humble Servant Lion Watson

The Contents of another Letter sent from one in the Earl of Manchesters Army
to a friend in London.
I Thought good hereby to acquaint you with that glorious victory which the Lord
has given us over the enemies of Jesus Christ mightily he has been seen in
delivering us, and confounding his adversaries. On Monday, July 1. our siege
being raised from York, and we quartering that night in Long Merston Moor, it
was reported the next morning, that Prince Rupert had his rendezvous in
Brammamoor, whereupon we marched thitherward; when we were advanced about half
a mile, we descryed Prince Ruperts horse marching after us, in Long Merston
Moore, whom we faced at that distance, they drew up in battalia on the Moor, we
returned, and did the like in the fields. About one or two of the clock the
Cannon began, and played till four or five in the afternoon. Afterward we all
marched down to them, both horse and foot; they charged us very fiercely and
violently, but by the blessing of God, we routed their horse on the right wing,
and one Regiment or body of their foot; but the field went very dangerous in
our right wing, for there they were routed, and many ran: So likewise in our
main Body, but it pleased God to uphold the spirits of our army, and our foot
charged so violenty, that they forced the enemy to run, and our horse pursued
them, and routed them totally out of the field.

There were killed about 4000. near 2000. taken; all their foot colors, and
many of their horse colors were taken, 25. pieces of Ordance, 8000. arms, and
all their wagons and ammunition. Thus the Lord did wondrously for us, blessed
be his holy Name.

My Cousin Thomas D. is very well, but escaped narrowly, being dismounted by
the enemy.

Your ever loving Brother, Robert Grifen.

FINIS.

