A LETTER Sent from the RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT Earl of Warwick: To the Right
Honorable, The SPEAKER to the House of PEERS: CONCERNING The present state and
condition, with the manner of the Raising of the Siege, OF LYME: With a
Relation of diverse other remarkable passages concerning the Queen, the Prince,
and the Lord Hopton, with the delivering up of Weymouth to the Parliament.

Printed according to Order.

Printed for Richard Best, June 18. 1644.

A LETTER Sent from the RIGHT HONORABLE, Robert Earl of Warwick, To the Right
Honorable, The Speaker to the House of PEERS.
May it please your Lordship:
EVer since my last account of the State of Lyme, I have continued here for
encouragement thereof, and in the intervening time have observed these
occurrences; That the enemy has in these five days last past shot many
vollies of great and small shot into the Town, which the besieged have
received; and answered with equal courage as before. On the twelfth instant, I
furnished the Town with ten barrells of Powder, their store being near
exhausted. On the thirteenth they took a prisoner, who gave information that
the Lord Hopton had been in the Leaguer last Sabbath Day, and demanded five men
out of every Company, which he promised to make good by an equal number of
pressed men, but they were denied him. From thence (as I heard by one of the
Frigots that came from the West on Monday last) he went to Dartmouth, whether
he came in on Thursday night with seven horse, giving out that he was to raise
an Army of fifteen thousand men. The said thirteenth instant, upon desire from
the Counsel of War in Lyme, I resolved to sent the Boats and small Vessels
here to give an Alarm on the East part of Lyme for distracting of the enemy,
and drawing him off from the Town (notice being given of the soldiers
affrightment, with what was formerly done in the like kind) which was yesterday
put in execution accordingly; the Seamen landing and marching up into the
Country, which caused the horse and foot that came down to attend them to fly
to the Hills, and gave the Seamen opportunity to converse with many of the
Country people, who have appeared generally well affected to the Parliament, in
respect of the great pressures laid upon them by a beggarly and cruel enemy.
By some of them I received notice that the Lord Hopton had two days before
commanded all there abouts, from sixteen to sixty, to repair forthwith to
Dorchester, with such arms as they could provide; as also with victuals and
money, to withstand some forces expected there suddenly; under command of his
Excellency, or sir William Waller, and that some hundreds men had been pressed
for his service, who had near all of them made an escape. Yesterday there came
aboard me one Lieutenant Far, of the Lord Broghills Regiment, and his
Ensign, who had the night before they came into Lyme two and twenty of the
soldiers under his care. By him I received Intelligence that Prince Maurice
had some notice of some forces coming to Dorchester; That the Queen was about
ten days ago brought to bed at Exeter of a Boy. That many of the Princes Army
were ready to come into Lyme, as they could gain a convenience. This morning
about two of the clock my boat came from the Town, with advice that the enemy
was drawing off his great Guns, and raising his siege, which by letters
received this day from the Governor was confirmed. The Prince withdrawing
himself last night about five of the clock, and the Army stealing away about
two of the clock this morning. At noone I went on shore, and viewing the
works, I found the enemy to be contrived with strength and much advantage, but
the Townsmen so slight, that its near a miracle they should hold out so long
against so violent and resolved an enemy. The truth is, next to the protection
of Heaven, the courage and honesty of the Officers and Soldiers were in a
manner their sole defense, they being made isntrumental, and through Gods
blessing to the preserving of them in safety and cheerfulness.

When I came amongst the Officers, I found them all worthy of precious esteem,
and modestly submitting to the many Inconveniences, which a long and hard
Siege had contracted, and that nothing is wanting to render them specially
serviceable abroad, but money, for supply whereof they desired me to be an
humble Remembrancer, which I need not to second with any Argument besides their
own merit, whereof I know the Parliament will be very sensible, considering the
great Advantages that will depend upon their fidelity: I received lately a
desire from Plymouth, to move the Parliament for some Money for their Garrison,
they having no defect to hinder their marching forth, but of that and a
Governor. On Tuesday Sir John Bamfield, Colonel Carre, and their Officers
came into this road; and went away in the Hector the same night: And so, that I
suppose they are before this time safely landed at their intended Port: I heard
a report at Lyme this day, that Weymouth is delivered up to the Parliament, and
some Carriages were observed this day to pass from that side toward Exeter;
How far that Report may be credited, or another, that Prince Charles was lately
at Weymouth, I know not: But I have renewed my command at the Ships attending
that Road, to have a special eye on all Vessels that come from those parts.
Of these things I thought fit to give advertisement to your Lordship, that the
same may be communicable to the House of Peers, of whose commands I shall be
most faithfully observant; Resting,

My LORD, Your humble servant, Warwick.
Aboard His Majesty's ship James in Lyme road; 15. Junii, 1644.
FINIS.

