The Constant Man's Character. Intended to be sent first as a LETTER FROM A
Gentleman in the Country, to a Gentleman his esteemed Friend and Countryman, a
Member of the House of Commons.

Since enlarged into a DISCOURSE by way of humble ADVICE to keep him from
Revolting, either directly or collaterally by the side-winde of being
Presbyterially affected, through the mistaken and unhappy conceit, That those
who have taken the Covenant, cannot without breach of the same, assent and
submit unto the late proceedings of the Parliament, when as the parts of the
Covenant seem to be inconsistent within themselves, as the Author's
Observations here discoursed do manifest.

The Scope whereof is 1 Historically to set down the Occasion and Beginnings of
the War. 2 To show That the Parliament had no intention to leavy a War. 3 That
the Book called (...) is probably none of the King's. 4 To prove the fitness
and necessity (as matters now stand) of complying with, and submitting unto
this present Government. For the Powers that be are Ordained of God, Romans 13.

Together With some Animadversions incident hereunto on the same Book, and on
the two Declarations, entitled The Declarations of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament at OXFORD.

The One touching a Treaty for Peace, Printed there, 1643. Other concerning
their Endeavors for Peace.

Printed at London for Giles Calvert at the Black Spread-Eagle, near the West
End of Paul's. 1649.

Reader,
THis Letter, rather this Narration, is founded on a Discourse had betwixt two
Gentlemen; the one unto whom it was written, having the abler parts of Wit and
Speech: the other, the Writer, having the juster cause, or at least he judged
it so; the weakness of whose judgment may indeed be an Objection against the
credit of the Work, there being three means only whereby to discern and report
a Truth, Judgment, Knowledge, Conscience; the two first (Judgment, Knowledge in
State Affairs) the Author may be defective in the strength thereof;
notwithstanding, in that he is neither engaged against the one, nor obliged to
the other Party, other wise then by a common duty, his judgment may seem the
more right and clear by reason his Obligations are the less, wherefore that
which may be said in his behalf is, That the Conscience and upright Truth, by
which he has measured what he has written, is free from Faction or
Partiality. The danger whereunto a Writer in Divided and Seditious Times
exposes himself, is known unto all men; when whatsoever is received with
Applause or Liking by the one, is therefore rejected with Despite and Scorn by
the other side. The Promise and See the Protestation taken, May, 1641. where
the Protestors Vow by all good ways and means to bring to condign Punishment
all such as shall by Force, Practice, Councels, Plots and Conspiracies, or
otherwise do any thing to the contrary in this Protestation; and further that
he shall in all just ways endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace betwixt the
three Kingdoms, etc.
Protestation made to Endeavor by all just ways, out-weighs the Danger. In
this Discourse he arrogates nothing to himself, but an even and true delivery
of what he has observed and is well known, much less does he think his
strength or skill, enough to help either side to Victory: but according to his
weak and spent abilities to endeavor the restoring the three Nations to their
former Peace, their mutual Interests and Rights, unto which the only and next
way is, to deliver and uprightly to set down the truth. A more able Penman may
show it more excellently, None can show a more excellent way.

The Constant Man's Character.
SIR,
I Know not how this Discourse may relish, assure your self, sent from the hand
and heart of him who loves and honors you; howbeit wise men leaning on their
own wisdoms, and sacrificing too much peradventure to their own Net, commonly
neither need nor care for the affections of their weaker friends. What I am in
relation unto you, or in the rank of them, is known to those who know us both;
what in my self, I am conscious of wanting Experience and Learning to derive
any knowledge from antiquated Times or Histories, for the fashioning this into
an elegant and polite work, but in a downright way to fall on, familiarly and
plainly to set down the beginnings and first entrance into this present War;
which when it first broke out, that the Gentlemen of this County did declare
themselves unto what Party they would adhere, Two eminent Leaders on the
Parliaments side, Sir R. C. and your self, out-weighing, as we judged, so many
more of the opposite Party, did seem to join and go one way for the Privileges
of that Court, and the Subject's Liberties; The infringing which, added to some
late Jealousies, was the first Ascent to these Divisions; how, and by what
degrees it went higher, follows in this Discourse. In your resenting which, He
as a Member of the House, You as a Patriot of the Country, We could not think
Ye did it in a light, Factious or Seditious way, but as having seriously
weighed, and by your Readings even before and since the beginning of this War
known, That the Institution of Parliaments was had and made by an Ancient,
Necessary, and wholesome Law, That the Power, Privileges, and Authority thereof
were to be kept inviolable and entire, That as to this present Parliament, the
King Himself in See His Answer to a Declaration from both Houses in May 1642.
His Answer to a Declaration sent Him from both Houses of Lords and Commons,
does confess and allow Them a full and juridicall power to judge and determine
the most doubtful, high and weightiest Crimes and Causes, although He seems to
limit it by particular Cases, and regularly brought before them; acknowledging
withal (together with the Sea the Declaration of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament (as they called it) at Oxford, 1643. Pa. 12.
Lords and Commons assembled at Oxford) The Privilege of Parliament to be so
substantial and entire a Right, that the Invasion of the Liberties of either
House, is an Injury to the other, and to the whole Kingdom. In several His
Messages returned unto their Propositions, He repeats and confirms the same
judgment of their full and ample Power, being legally summoned, and By a Law
consented unto by Him in full Parliament, not to be dissolved, unless by their
own consent. Notwithstanding which, several attempts of force and violence were
offered, as far as His Party's Power could extend it self, to the dissolving
it, by contending to divide and scatter Them, accusing the remaining part of
the Members sitting in the House of being Rebels, so being divided, to account
no other of the Parliament at Westminster, then He does of the Parliament in
Scotland, In His Declaration concerning His Proceedings with His Subjects of
Scotland, since the Pacification in the Camp near Berwick, printed 1640. pa. 38.
The divided Members of that distracted Parliamentary Body remaining at
Edinburgh. So that as to the Parliament of England, it must be confessed, that
He meant not what He expressed in allowing that Latitude of Power, or that His
Party has since prevailed with Him to renounce that judgment which He declared
to have had of Them, That the contentions at the first sitting of the House
were, upon the point, about matters of Fact, what things were done, what
attempted to be done, how the King and His Ministers of Justice had demeaned
themselves since the beginning of His Reign, how many Oppressions of several
kinds had been offered by them, how they had offended against the Known and
Fundamental Laws in an Arbitrary way of Government; The Question then tacitly
disputed in all men's hearts, betwixt Those who would that He should go on to do
what He pleased, and Those who contended to have Him govern according to the
Laws, Whether there were any Power in being to emulate and check a King's,
except a Parliaments? That this Parliament in contending to maintain the one
against the other, was interrupted and opposed, and as the Scots aver, See the
Scots Remonstrance, 1640. cited by M. Tho. May, in his History of the
Parliament of England, written 1647.
For no other reason called, then to give the King relief and aid against their
coming into England; on which grounds they sent to the Parliament of England a
Justification of their proceedings, entreating Them to be wary in vindicating
their own Laws and Liberties, to frustrate the Designs of those Evil
Counselors, who had procured this Parliament for no other end, then to arm
the King with warlike supplies against His Scottish Subjects, and by that War
to enslave, if not to ruin both Nations. That after many violations and
dissolutions of Parliaments in England, This was not to redress Grievances, but
to be so overreached, if They were not careful and courageous, that no
possibility should be left for the future redressing any; That so dangerous
Practices might be well suspected, when at the same time a Parliament was
denied to Scotland, although promised on the word of a King, granted to England
when not expected, and obtruded upon Ireland when not desired. The Rise of all
which was from the Anger which the Scots knew the King conceived against them
for some particular acts of theirs, charged with disloyalty: as That they
refused and declared (amongst other matters) against His Messages sent them to
receive the Service Book obtruded on them; for which, as for Vindicating
themselves from the like charged Disloyalties, they were Accused by the King to
have wrote a Cited and complained of by the King in the same Declaration
against His Scottish Subjects, for inviting Foreign Powers into this Kingdom
Page 56, 57. See the Letter it self in the same Declaration, Signed by seven of
the principal of the Nobility of Scotland.
Letter to the King of France, imploring His Protection, as weary of their
Obedience to their own King. For which disloyal Letter (as it was termed) a
chief The Lord Louden. See in his Answer his prudent excuse.
Peer of theirs was imprisoned, and condemned to die; That the Pacification had
and made to take away all differences past, and which might ensue betwixt the
King, the English and the Scots, by the prudent and joint advice of a select
Committee of English and Scottish Lords, as to remove all jealousies betwixt
both Nations, was soon after it was made, scorned and slighted: The Scots then
complaining in their Informations made unto the Sea the same Book.
English their Friends and Brethren, of many injuries they had received since
the Pacification made, and contrary to that Agreement, This the Condition then
of the Scots: These the very words of their Remonstrance, That the Union and
Brotherly League entered into by both Nations, was in the King's Indignation no
otherwise construed then an Invitation in the One, and Invasion of See the
King's account of them, how in the (...) He keeps it in memory, That they were
the first that began His troubles, in the Treatise of His leaving Oxford, and
going to the Scots, and elsewhere in several places of that Book. Also in the
Declaration printed on the King's behalf at Oxford, 1643. Page 23. Suggesting
an intent in them to confound the Government, and alter the Laws of England, p.
28. The Marquess of Montrosse declares how they began His Troubles (viz.) by
dispersing their Apologeticall Pamphlets, as he terms them, through great
Britain, before the troubles began, and before their coming with an Army into
England. See a Book entitled, The History of His Majesty's Affairs under the
Conduct of the Marquess in the years 1644, 1645, 1646. Page 3.
Foreigners in the other Nation; and howsoever the Charge in the seven
Articles exhibited against the six Members of both Houses was laid to those few
only, yet probably it had reached many other of the English Nation, had not the
first assault of Violence in the King's Party miscarryed as it did. So many sad
and direful notes could not but portend a War against one, or both Nations, as
Time and Opportunity should best serve to manage the Design in hand, or else
the Parliament knowing themselves to be a free and full Convention, in all
parts a Parliament, both in the Substance and Form (Summoned by the King's Writ
to meet, etc.) as in the Circumstance of Time and Place, must submit to the
Will and Pleasure of an Amongst other motives to His anger, about the E. of
Strafford's death, which whether He would have avenged on the Party who
condemned him, may be guessed at, in that He, or an unknown Author in His name,
several times repents the injustice of that act, How Himself was forced to
yield compliance: for which sin, as He mentions it, He and His Kingdoms have
felt long, great, and heavy troubles. See the same Book, in the Treatise
concerning the E. of Strafford: and the Marq. of Montrosse his Declaration, set
forth 1649. aggravating the same, to incense the King and His Party against the
Scots, expressing in it their disloyal practices, breach of Duty, Covenants,
calling them Traitors, etc.
incensed King: So to be Dissolved or Awed at pleasure, or to have Boundaries
put upon their Acts and Counsels by such as they knew to be corrupt, and would
have removed from the King, To the end His Throne might be established: That in
this agony and doubt, whether They should Submit, Desist, or Act according to
their Trust, they thought it nearly land necessarily concerned them to provide
for the public welfare, for their own and the Kingdoms safety, some of their
Members being impeached and charged, two Kingdoms provoked and menaced, the Sea
the King's grateful acknowledgment of the affection and loyalty of His Irish
Subjects, in offering to supply Him with Preparations, etc. together with their
Persons and Estates, even to the uttermost of their ability, to reduce His
disaffected Subjects of Scotland to their obedience; desiring withal, It may
be recorded as an Ordinance of Parliament, and to be printed as a testimony of
their Loyalty to all the world, and to succeeding ages; which could not but
stir up the Scots to seek protection and assistance from their Fellow Subjects
and Friends wheresoever; whom the King called His disaffected Subjects, and
how He does secern them from the rest, is hard to judge; when as the whole and
most considerable part of that Kingdom did by their Pacts and Counsels at their
Assemblies held, withstand and resolve to withstand diverse of His Messages,
obtruding on them such matters as made against the Peace of their Church and
Kingdom. See His Declaration since the Pacification. Page 63.
third also likely to bear a part in the broyls of the other two, the King
Himself jealous and displeased to see the Parliament, then at distance with Him
in transaction of matters concerning the three Kingdoms, Petitioned and
Appealed unto (termed in an envious and scornful way by some of His Party,
Omnipotent; Others murmuringly upbraiding that it was Idolized) Himself as it
were neglected and left out, none or seldom Addresses made to Him. So the
Parliament had a narrow path to tread between their hopes to regain the King's
lost Favor, after many evidences of His Anger poured forth, and their
hazarding the ruin of those Principles which by their Duty and Covenant they
were to assert and defend: What those Principles were, follows in this
Discourse; if rightly cast up, but two in chief, The securing the Protestant
Religion, the Primu^ quaerite, The preserving the Laws and Peace, Suprema Lex,
salus Populi.
the chiefest Law, the Peoples Safety: The other Principles are subservient
only, and fall in by complication and dependency upon those two, as the means
unto the end. Lastly, Sir, That this Parliament thus acting, You strenuously
argued, as knowing well that their Cause was just, their War Defensive, when
another Mr. Denz. Hollis his Speech, June 1642.
Gentleman of the like abilities with you, had in an excellent Speech delivered
to that purpose, That there was a succession of Designs to interrupt it; as
first by awing and taking away the Freedom of it by an Army: then, actually
assaulting it, and with the Sword to cut asunder the only Nerves which
strengthens and knits together the King and People, the People amongst
themselves, and the whole frame of Government in one firm and indissoluble knot
of Peace and Unity. That the Parliaments taking up Arms was to defend only, to
repel the force and violence practiced by a few of the King's side at first,
afterward to provide against the mischief which His party heightened through
Rage against the Parliament, pretense of Loyalty toward the King, might
several ways intend. That the Parliaments resisting His and His Party's
attempts, was, as you then judged and discoursed, for no other end, then to
maintain their own just Privileges, in order to the Maintenance of the Laws
and Liberties of their fellow Subjects: That they did not intend an offensive
War, the consequences whereof, as of all Civil Discords, could not but prove
calamitous and sad, the event and period as fatal and uncertain, when as
besides the two Parties immediately engaged each against the other, a middle
and Neutrall part, although wiser in their own eyes then their Fellow Subjects,
worse (as well in the Sea the Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled at
Oxford, Printed there, page 26, 27.
King's Parties Account as in the Parliaments) would fall in, more to be
shunned then a moderate Enemy. That it being presumed the aim and councels of
the Parliament and all men else being for Peace and Justice, a War once waged
would hinder and destroy their ayms, and produce more overtures for discord,
more fresh supplies for quarrelling; in the prosecuting which, many unexpected
chances would fall out to increase the discord, as in the controversies between
man and man, he who has not been so forward and visibly active for the side
unto which he does adhere, shall be traduced and accused by him that loves him
not, for a Neutrall or an Enemy. That amidst their hopes of Conquering, there
would not be wanting discontented and seditious humors, even out of their own
Party, to traduce and calumniate their proceedings, if not consonant to their
particular humors and fantasies; That those humors would be fed and animated
by the first and common Enemy on purpose to divide and weaken the prevailing
Power: That diverse other Consequences likely to result from War, would prove
harsh and irksom to a People born and governed under Laws and Peace, as that
the Soldiery and prevailing power, knowing their own opportunity and strength,
would be apt to intermeddle with private Interests, to the perverting Justice
and trampling down the Laws, which in a time of Peace distributes to every man
his just right, so that thereby the People would not only want the blessing of
Peace, but grow subject to the oppression, charges and injuries incident to a
War. The Parliament could not but foresee that in case a War were to be waged,
their own Countrymen, the English (both Officers and Common Soldiers) must
fight it out: Foreigners, Soldiers of Fortune when they have gained, will
desist their undertakings and be gone. That the English were unaccustomed to
war, therefore not fit for the Discipline and managing thereof, through an
easy and soft way of breeding not able to endure the hardship and duties of a
War, howbeit experience has otherwise proved it. That the English Gallantry
and their courage, un-acquainted with the conditions of a Warfare and the
temper requisite to a Soldier, might make them upon every discontent as apt to
mutiny and resist, as fight; for he is not always the best Soldier who has
most courage, unless he has temper withal to yield obedience to the commands
of his Superiors. The Parliament could not but be sensible withal of the
troubled condition of their fellow Subjects, that the apprehension of Engaging
would carry with it a sad aspect, all men unwilling to, and wary how they did
Engage. That the engaging Parties on either side when they see the face of War
inevitably approaching would for their better strength and Union betake
themselves to what Policy, Pacts and Leagues they could, Defensive and
Offensive, as to bind themselves and friends by Vow and Covenant; which being
to consist of several Heads and Parts, could not be so exactly and entirely
framed, but might admit of a doubtful sense, how to be be observed, how to be
understood, in part or in the whole, so consequently divide the Covenanters
within themselves. They could not but withal know, that which side soever
should prevail, both sides would be loosers, the King and Kingdom vast See it
recited in the Declaration Printed at Oxford 1643 page 13.
sufferers in the loss; as they in an humble and dutiful Message, although
contrariwise interpreted, did in the sadness of their hearts foretell the King.
That in this War, the prevailing power would be to seek (to carry an even and
well tempered hand) how to deal with the vanquished their own Countrymen and
mistaken Fellow Subjects (for 'twas a Misunderstanding which first made the
rent, Scorn to acknowledge and retract their Error, widened and continued it)
for if they did inflict too heavy a punishment, either pecuniary by Mulct or
corporal by Imprisonment, 'twould seem unjust and harsh from the Conqueror
being of their own Nation, and keep off the hopes of reconcilement and
reunion: if too gentle and remiss, 'twould leave and allow the Conquered a
Power and means of recovering their strength again. So that the War, from
revenge on the one or from hopes on the other side, would continue till all
were lost, or the Conquered perchance become the Conquerours. That there would
not want Plots and Stratagems to interrupt and destroy their hopes of
prevailing and success, as, whilst they sat solicitous and intentive to their
Councels, there would be offered to them Foreign Tenders from abroad, private
Addresses here at home, all from the same disaffected and troubled Fountain,
in matters concerning which they happily might have neither Power nor Connuzance,
to take up their thoughts and divert their Councels, to retard and hinder their
success. That, above all, in the doubtful events of War, as it was likely to
fall out betwixt Persons offending on the one part hating to be Reformed, and a
Court of Parliament on the other Edw. 3. cap. 25.
chosen and set apart to redress Grievances in a Commonwealth, Offenders would
apply themselves for refuge to the King a Supreme power, which if He did
protect ( Mr. John Heywood on the life of Hen. 4.
making thereby the Offenders faults His own) would without dispute revert to
His Dishonor, and consequently beget a Jealousy and Difference betwixt Him
and His People; which if the Parliament should take ill His protecting them,
there would issue a Contest preparatory to a War; Thence if the King engaged
and the Parliament resist or fight, They could not hope if they were subdued,
to avoid the Charge of High Treason, nor think it an easy thing in the first
beginnings of their strength, to prove Conquerours over a King seated a long
time in an Ancient Monarchy, invested with many advantages of Power and guarded
with Courtiers, Friends of all sorts, Servants, Favorites, all of which had
their Retinue also and Train of Friends to assist, in case of needing such.
That if the Parliament, notwithstanding, should prevail, they would and must to
keep up their Power, lay Taxes and Payments on the People, who when the War did
but seem, or was near at an end, their Complaints would be, and they repiningly
murmr [The War is ended, the Taxes and Payments yet continued] not
considering, That it is of as great concernment to keep as to gain a Victory,
when as the Parliament in case of their prevailing were to weigh withal the
Doubts and Dangers attending them, the Care Jealousy and Fears, which no men
but would avoid the troubles of, and such as They must be subject to until a
Conquest fully had: the Cares against the surprisall and Treacheries of their
Enemy, the Jealousy of Friends proving false or falling off, the Fears of
loosing what they should gain, all these being passive, more pensive and
anxious, then the Hopes of the Adverse Part, Fears more deeply seizing and
disquieting the Conquerour's Spirits (especially whilst their Victory is
accompanied with study and thoughts of mercy toward the Conquered) Hopes in
the vanquished being more bold and active, raising thoughts working still how
to recover what they have lost, That Foreign Enemies as well as homebred are
to be provided against, Nor foreseeing the danger which might befall in case the
Enemy should regain a Power. That a Conqueror would be held at the best but an
usurper for the time. That all Disasters and Evils happening, whether as
Judgments from above, as Sickness, Famine and the like, whether Oppressions and
wrong doings here on earth, what Enormities and Errors committed or suffered
either in Church or State, all to be laid to the charge of the present Power,
which governs and rules no better in the Peoples account and murmurings. That
thence they reckon all the Disasters of the War to flow, not looking on the
first Occasion and Authors of the War, That when a Victory shall be gained
which Victoria natura insolen^ and superba est. Cicero.
naturally is proud and insolent, and by Pride comes Contentions, Emulations
and Variances in Actions as well as in Opinions, the Conquerour's strength
would be thereby weakened, and thence in danger to be lost. That until a
complete and total Conquest made, which could not be without much pressure and
heavy sufferings on the vanquished, without charge and payments laid on all,
Enemies, Friends (Enemies in being Fined for their Delinquency, Friends
burdened by reason of their Expense and charge in the Public Service) an
Army was to be continued and maintained to prevent Insurrections here at home,
Inroads and Invasions from abroad. That an Army was to consist of multitudes of
Soldiers, those multitudes would have their several humors and opinions
tending to Division, consequently to the destruction and ruin of the whole.
That without an extraordinaty care to please and satisfy them in their
demands, there would be Mutinying, Revolting and Inconstancy in the common
Soldiery, for want of judgment to discern for what they fought. That there
are to be Agents and Officers belonging to and providing for an Army,
Receivers, Expenditors, Treasurers, others too many to be here recited, who in
troubled Waters will bring into their private Banck what is to be raised for
the Public use, or at least the People jealous will surmise as much, and that
the War and Calamities thereof are protracted through their corruption and
privy gainings. That if the Conquerour's Power shall at any time abate, before
a full and total Conquest made, he will be to seek what course to take to
increase it again: Forcing and Impressing men to fight in a Cause so intricate
(as unto some it seemed then, and for a long time controverted as this has
been) will prove harsh and irksom, and will meet with resistance in a People
made and born free. That in the Confusions of a Civil war many Dissentions and
Emulations upon true or misapprehended grounds would fall out amongst the
Orders and Ranks of men, to disturb and overthrow the Degrees and Dependencies
each on other according to their several and respective Qualities, which the
Parliament could not but foresee, and therefore in their Prudence and for the
maintenance of the Peace and Unity, would attempt nothing to the begetting such
Strifes or Disorders in a Comonwealth. Amongst the rest, That Divisions and
Envyings would in all likelihood happen through a Misconceiving, that between
the Gentry and Nobility on the one side being in the next rank unto the King,
and therefore likely to adhere to Him, and the Commonalty on the other,
sticking fast to their native Liberties which the King had of late encroached
upon, not sparing the other's also, an Emulation might or would be kindled by
the Common Enemy to beget an universal Distraction and Division between two
great Bodies (the Gentry and Nobility on the One, and the Commonalty on the
Other side) before a deliberate and true examining the misunderstanding, which
the heat of War would scarce give leave unto, should set it aright.

These Reasons thoroughly weighted could not but induce the Parliament to
decline a war, yea deter Them from leavying one: These might withal, together
with many more which might be added hereunto, imprint in you and in all men
else, who shall impartially look into the beginnings and progress of this War,
an undoubted knowledge of the Parliaments just Actings, and these Reasons of
Foresight together with what has past, might satisfy all knowing and
discerning men, that if the Parliament did intend to levy a War against the
King's Evil Counselors, the Kingdome's K. James his Speech in Parliament,
1609.
Pests and Vipers rather Then they would be born down in their just defense,
They did not intend to leavy one against the King, who had as many Friends to
adhere unto, as the Parliament had Enemies of many sorts, Offenders, Interested
and obnoxious persons to confront and oppose them. But. I may spare the pains
of setting forth what your own Prudence has foreseen, and your Actions have
thitherto directed you.

For Sir R. C. his sake and yours, rather through the same motions of
Conscience, Judgment, many other Gentlemen of quality did take part with ye.
Before and after his untimely death you carried us on in an active constancy,
challenging about seven years since, (when the King began to make Oxford a
Garrison) some Travelers of His Party and enquiring whether they went, they
confessed to Oxford, and their errand, You roughly replied ['Twas they and such
as they that did take part with the King against His Parliament and People,]
[That they did magnify the King, etc. to beget and foment a War.] A little
before, you with many other Gentlemen of the three neighboring Counties, did
enter into an Association for a jointly defending one another. If the Enemy
shall prevail, whether it will be Treason for what is past, or made so for the
time to come, I argue not, but remember well how criminal and Traitorous the
King's Friends have reported it. About six years since, the Enemy growing
powerful in these parts, and Bristoll being gained by Him, you lived within
His Quarters, bound by strong obligation not to depart but to be limited to a
Summons. The King soon after He had taken that City, came thither to compose
the difference between Prince Rupert and the Earl of Hartford about the
Governourship of that Place, He had then amongst other things, a survey of the
Gentlemen dwelling near and their affections, casting and examining with His
Friends there who might be for, who against Him; some of His Courtiers
undertook for this, some for that Gentleman and Neighbor. A great Courtier a
Friend of yours undertook or moved His Majesty on your behalf, whereunto the
King having been belike possessed before with an ill opinion of you, replied
with harsh and disgraceful words, as I have credibly heard, against your
person; which it is presumed He could not charge you with, from any immediate or
near notice He had of you, but as you were represented unto Him by some who
loved you not. He nevertheless, whether out of His indulgence to gain you unto
His Party or to Try you after, when He had made sure His Conquest, your name
being in the Catalogue of this County Rebels, the Lent Assizes appointed to be
held at Tewksbury, April 11. 1643.
Time and Place appointed for your Trial, was content to preserve you from
being undone being then at His mercy: What use might be made of His sparing
you, you knew best. Two years after, Bristoll was got from Him, much of which
service attributed unto you, with some other Gentlemen of the Neighborhood,
leading up the Countrymen unto the Siege thereof, the Lord General then and
afterward giving you applause for that your aid. About three years since, you
caused diverse Meetings to be had in several Towns near unto us, where the
Countrymen were summoned to declare what Arms they had, whatsoever the pretense
was in looking into the Book, which the Parishioners do keep for such their
Poor as are relievable by a Statute Law, and taking care for them, examining
the estates of such as were of ability to relieve the Poor, of such as were fit
and best able to be at the charge of Arms for the repulsing Soldiers, in case
they came on the sudden to quarter below-hill or to do other violence, then to
return up hill to their friends who might assist them (such was the condition
of these and the adjacent parts, where Parties were scattered up and down, the
Parliament having friends in these enclosed and nearer Parts, the King in the
Champeign, and not far distant from us) yet you, my self, and the Countrymen,
knew we had another and more uniform aim of preventing sudden incursions, which
the King's Party (many of them being Gentlemen and well horsed) might offer
unto our Neighbors. Not long after, you were chosen to be our Knight for the
County, in the competition of which place, my self, your servant, was sedulous
and successful to take off all blemishes then thrown on you by those who
labored as much to fill the County Court with the noise of your being for the
King. Soon after that, you were challenged by a Sir J. H.
fellow-Member sitting in the House of Parliament, to be within one of the
Qualifications which renders men Delinquents; Notwithstanding which, you Sat,
Voted, and were Trusted in the House; At several meetings you enforced such
Arguments against the King's Party, and for the Parliaments, You have them yet
in your breast, and can deal at single hand with any of the opposite Party, if
affection, importunity, and often dropping strange inventions into your ears
shall not misleade you, that you satisfied the hearers, and even convinced
them, had they been convincible. Since that, upon the newly hatched, and easy
to be reconciled Difference between the Presbyterian and Independent, you
received a Letter from your abovenamed Servant, mentioning the probability of
the Armies advance in or about July was twelve month, toward London, in that
Letter setting forth, That neither of those two Tenants of Presbyterian,
Independent, had taken as yet such root, as to beget a quarrel, to the
overthrow of both upon their Conquering, which I rather think to be an event of
their good success, then from any self-wilfull-humour, many of them on either
part being sober and discerning Gentlemen, and if thoroughly weighed, what is
like to be the issue of this new subdivision? That for the dissentings sake of
three or four Gentlemen (you will not grant that there are many whom you think
to have been forward to lead on a Party) for whose known valor, whose many
continued and successful achievements in this War, bringing ye to this
plenitude of Power, you may easily dispense with them for one puny error in
Opinion, that I say the People must embroyl in a second War, about terms
merely notionall, about opinions strange and unknown to them: In the first War
they knew for whom they fought (for the King, or for the Parliament) about a
Form of Government, which has not, nor can take deep root, until the War,
which confounds and overthrows all Government, be ended. The direct and certain
Issue in the Trial of the Contention was, Whether the King having by His
Creatures actually invaded the Subject's Liberties (the other differences in
Church and State are collateral, accidentally emergent out of the grand
Difference about the first and more principal, the Subject's Liberty:) The
Court of Parliament should sit as Scepticks, to look on only, without
purposing, or endeavoring to redress the same, or to be confined in their
Councels, as their Enemies should prescribe, or, the extremest of all, so
driven to new Councels, to extraordinary high and severe proceedings, to seldom
practiced and unheard of courses, the passages and quality of the Persons with
whom they had to deal, being weighed withal, as where the Disease is
imminently dangerous, the mischief desperate, the Cure must be answerable, or
the whole Body perish for want of a timely and prudent remedy to be applied.
Your actions, Sir, if rigid and severe, as to your Enemies, if variable and
uncertain, as to your selves, may in these streights and exigencies whereunto
Ye are driven and forced for safety, be dispensed with. It seems to fare with
Ye, as with Seafaring men in a boisterous storm, who are feign to steer their
vessel which way they may best secure their Fraught and Charge, sometimes
Northerly, sometimes plain North, sometimes Northwest, sometimes Northeast,
sometimes plain South, sometimes North again, so from one cross point to
another, having still the Harbor and End of their voyage in their eye; So with
Ye, encountering with such uncertainty and variety of oppositions from your
Enemies (yet all meeting in one Center, to the subversion of your Power and
strength) such Nonconformity and Dissension, even amongst your selves and
friends, that ye cannot as yet act within a direct, certain, and constant
compass, to please all Lookers on, yet your aim and end may be one and the
same, the supreamest Law, the Peoples Nulla tam sancta Lex est, quam non
opporteat, si salus Populi postulet, urgeatque necessitas, muta^^. Bodin. lib.
4. de Repub.
Safety. Wherein, if ye shall fayl, or not able to make good your undertakings,
We know by a seven years since experience, how barbarously and cruelly your
Enemies malice did show it self against ye, as being Rebels, in case they shall
recover their Power again, how a desperate revenge added to, will second their
first and furious cruelty, and to crown their glory, as for the better exalting
their pretense, they shall impute it unto Gods justice, saying [It is the Lords
doing, it may be his suffering it through your Divisions, and it is mavelous
in our eyes that he has wrested the Sword out of our Enemies hands, and put it
into ours, for no man they will say can think that Rebellion shall for ever
pass unpunished] Then when they have regained their Power, they will not want
Arguments from their own, as from a Neutrall part siding with them upon their
conquering, to bring whom they please within the compass of Treason and
Rebellion, and to make your See your Remonstrance, 1647.
Persons and your Acts their sport and scorn, those Proclamations of the
King's, lately proscribing and accusing many of both Houses of Parliament
guilty of High Treason, with other Edicts of His, to be revived, those
Sentences and Judgments seriously denounced against Them and their Proceedings,
the Scoffs and Flouts jestingly passed on ye and your Friends, to be recounted,
and by the Wit and Power of your Adversaries made good against ye, when ye have
lost your Power.

These stout and circumspect ways of yours are most remembered, and deeplyest
lodged in their breasts who speak least of them: I am only the Remembrancer, and
cannot believe it to be a defection and falling off, as that you think the
Parliament and their strength too weak to protect their Members, therefore to
forsake it. Your Power is visible yet, your strength not shortened; the great
difficulties, the fierce conflicts which ye have wrestled with, the revolting
of your Friends, the multiformity of Opinions amongst your selves, might have
abated your success, and weakened your strength, had not an Almighty hand
supported ye amongst those difficulties. Never so many Stratagems, Policies,
and Falsehoods practiced by an Enemy to impair your strength, to advance their
own, but that the God of Truth has discomfited and dispelled them all. In
which, whether He has done it in favor to the justice of your Cause, or in
His foreknowledg of their malice, to be avenged, if they could have got the
upper hand, I leave it to the judgment of the cried up (...). p 263
Author, who has more fitly observed That Gods wise Providence often permits
what his revealed word approves not, then he has suited his resembling your
Successes to prosperous winds filling the Sayls of Pirates, to justify their
Piracy, when as the giving or denying Victory and Courage in the day of
Battle, is a more immediate and effectual work of Gods Almighty Power, acting
and taking an especial care in disposing the affairs of War.

To proceed, and show how petty a difference there is betwixt those two
Tenants, is easy for any man who shall enquire into the quality of either, of
what growth, settlement, or extent they are; The one (the Presbyterian) not
ripe enough as yet to be established, neither the times now fit to entertain a
fixed or established form of Government to bind all sorts of men: Many having
been left at liberty, whether they have or will take the Covenant, many who
have taken it, thinking themselves not obliged forthwith, and in all parts to
keep it, having for some cause discovered since their taking, set it aside: The
other (the Independent) a seeming, rather then a certain abdication, or a
total renouncing all Government, or for ever. The Lord General and his Army
(called Independents, but why, let them that call them so answer for it) have
solemnly In their Remonstrance, dated Novem. 1648. page 6
declared against such Disorder, and Non-Government. The Independent Party, as
they are called, may happily desire to shake off that heavy yoke of Government,
which grown through the corruption of Manners, and indulgency of Times into
Abuse, Exorbitancy, and Oppressings, does gall and heavily press their fellow
Subjects necks, not by an easy or ordinary course to be taken off. The
Contention, indeed, betwixt those two, Presbyterian, Independent, growing as
before observed, through the pride of conquering, or cunningly contrived by
their common enemy, on purpose by dividing to overcome them both.

The difference in dispute is not in Opinion but in Fact, as (amongst other
things) unto whose charge the deluge of Blood spilt in this war is to be laid?
Ye have declared That it is to be laid at the King His Parties doors,
particularly the bloodguilty and horrid act of hindering the relief of Ireland,
whereby thousands of his Protestant Subjects have been slain, which holds the
three heretofore united Kingdoms, in a languishing and mournful Estate, even at
this day, the one divided against the other, and the People of all three
despairing to enjoy their former Peace, ye instancing First In His sparingly
and too late proclaiming their enemies, Rebels, when the Rebellion first broke
out, by signing Commissions to the chief Actors in the Rebellion. The
Parliaments Commissioners at the Sea the Objections and Answers at large in the
relation of the passages at the meeting at Vxbridg 1644. printed then at Oxford.
Treaty of Vxbridg urging besides, His disapproving the subscriptions of the
Adventurers and Officers of the Army employed for the relief of his Protestant
Subjects there, by means whereof the course intended was then diverted, His
making a Cessation with the Rebels, which had it not been made in the time of
their greatest wants, and the Forces employed against them not drawn off, they
might in probability have been ere this subdued, and the war even finished, in
stead thereof it is protracted. That Kingdom having been by the prowess and
wisdom of His Hen. 2. Q Eliz.
Predecessors kept entire, united unto and a The Law Book cases give the reason
why the bringing counterfeit money into England out of Ireland, is but
Misprision of Treason, although the bringers know and utter it. Quia Hibernia
est membrum Angliae, Dalton, Justice of Peace in cap. de High Treason.
Member of this State of England, is by His and His Party's strength abetting
it, put into a Condition and even invited to invade and conquer This. That the
Commissioners sent by the two Houses of Parliament, for the better supply and
encouragement of the Army in that Kingdom, were discountenanced and commanded
from the Council there, where the prosecution of the war was to be managed: and
By whose Authority and Command was all this done? The House of Lords and
Commons in the debate with the King about the affairs of Ireland, sent His
Majesty word, that His message then sent to Them, wherein He charge Them with
false pretenses, and a purpose in Them to divert large sums of money
collected from the English, from the proper use to which it was intended, was
an high breach of the Privilege of Parliament, and upon that occasion They
declare many particulars of their care for the relief of Ireland, and the
King's hindering it. Those particulars there expressed are as follows, They
declare That this bloody Rebellion was first vaised by the same Counsels that
had before brought two Armies within the bowels of this Kingdom, and two
protestant Nations ready to welter in each others blood, which were both
defrayed a long time at the charge of the poor Commons of England, and quietly
at last disbanded by God's blessing on the Parliaments endeavors. That this
design failing, the same wicked Councels who had caused that impious war,
raised this barbarous Rebellion in Ireland, and recommended the suppressing
thereof (for the better color) to the Parliaments care, who out of a
fellow-feeling of the unspeakable miseries of their Protestant Brethren there
(not suspecting this horrid Plot, now too apparent) did cheerfully undertake
that great work, and do really intend and endeavor to settle the Protestant
Religion, and a permanent Peace in that Realm to the Glory of God, the honor
and profit of His Majesty, and security of His three Kingdoms. But how they
have been discouraged, retarded and diverted in and from this pious and
glorious work, by those traiterous Councels about his Majesty, will appear by
these particulars. They there mention the sending over at first of twenty
thousand pounds by the Parliament, and that good way found out to reduce
Ireland by the Adventure of private men, without charging the Subject in
general, which would probably have brought in a million of money, had the King
continued in or near London, and not by leaving His Parliament, and making war
upon it, so intimidated and discouraged the adventurers, and others who would
have adventured, that that good Bill is rendered in a manner ineffectuall. They
mention that when at the sole charge of the Adventurers, five thousand foot,
and five hundred horse were designed for the relief of Munster, under the
Command of an English Lord, and nothing was wanting but a Commission to enable
him for the service, such was the power of wicked Council, that no Commission
could be obtained from the King, by reason whereof Lymrick was wholly lost, and
the Province of Munster since in very great distress. That when well-affected
persons at their own charge by way of Adventure had prepared twelve Ships and
Pinaces, with a thousand Land Forces for the service of Ireland, desiring
nothing but a Commission from His Majesty, that Commission, after twice sending
to York for it, and the ships lying ready to set sail three weeks together, at
the charge of near three hundred pounds a day, was likewise denied, and those
Adventurers (rather then to lose their Expedition) were constrained to go by
virtue of an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament. That although the Lords
lustices of Ireland earnestly desired to have two Pieces of Battery sent over,
as necessary for that service, yet such commands were given to the Officers of
the Tower, That none of the King's Ordnance must be sent to save His Kingdom.
That a prime Engineer and Quartermaster-General of the Army in Ireland, and in
actual employment there against the Rebels, was called away from that important
service by express command from the King, That a Captain, Controller of the
Artillery, a man in pay and principally employed and trusted here by the Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, for providing and ordering the Trayn of Artillery, which
was to be sent to Dublin, and who had received great sums of money for that
purpose, was commanded from that employment and trust, to serve the King in
this unnatural war against His Parliament, and when the Parliament had provided
six hundred suits of Clothes for present relief of the poor Soldiers in
Ireland, and sent them toward Chester, the Waggoners that undertook the
carriage of them were assaulted by the King's Soldiers lying about Coventry,
who took away the Clothes. That three hundred suits of Clothes sent likewise by
the Parliament for Ireland with a Chirurgion's chest of Medicaments toward
Chester, were all taken away by the King*s Troopers under command of a Captain,
together with the Carrier's horses and Wagon, for the King's service. As
likewise that a great number of draught-horses prepared by the Parliament for
the Artillery and baggage of the Irish Army, and sent to Chester for that
purpose, being there attending a passage, were then required by the King for
His present service in England, whose Forces were so quartered about the Roads
to Ireland, that no Provision could pass thither by Land with any Safety. That
two other Captains, the Admiral and vice. Admiral, of the Ships appointed to
lie upon the Coast of Ireland to annoy the Rebels, and to prevent the bringing
Ammunition and relief from Foreign Parts, were both called away from that
Employment by the King's Command, and by reason of their departure from the
Coast of Munster, to which they were designed, the Rebels there have received
Powder, Ammunition and other relief from Foreign Parts. See these Charges
mentioned by the Houses of Parliament against the King, in Mr. May his History
lib. 2. cap. 6. page 118.
By which particulars (say they) it may seem, that those Rebels were
countenanced there, upon design, to assist the Enemies of the Parliament here,
especially considering that those confident Rebels have presumed very lately to
send a Petition to the King, intituling themselves, His Majesty's Catholic
Subjects of IRELAND, and complaining of the Puritan Parliament of England, and
defiring that since His Majesty comes not thither according to their
expectation, they may come into England to His Majesty; So the Question by way
of Argument between the King and Parliament, as between the Commissioners on
either side, is laid aside, and now to be decided by no other Umpire then the
Sword, and what the two opposite Parties on either side have a long time strove
for (the one defending their Cause in their Books and Writings by vehemence and
height of Wit, the other theirs by solid and substantial Prudence) is left to
the Conqueror to determine.

What the odds is betwixt their Writings, because controverted by either side,
which Party does declare and argue the more Prudentially the reasons of their
several undertakings in this quarrel, as which Party, (the Kings or the
Parliaments) have writ more solidly and substantially concerning the Subject of
this War, which more genuinely and sincerely without expatiating or railing
Jests have argued, let the impartial Reader judge. So because there may not
want fuel for Contention, it is debated concerning the Actions of Cruelty on
either part (the Kings, the Parliaments) which did act with more cruelty, by
putting to the Sword, spayling, by consuming with Fire, laying waste Towns,
Villages, Houses. I believe our Neighbor BERKSHIRE, and other places near us.
County, as far as you and I have observed, gives Testimony against the One in
a sad Record. As to the Writings on either side, for Instance sake take three
or four here following for the rest.

First, the Letter to the Governor and Council of War at BRISTOL (that City
being then a Garrison for the Parliament) from the Lord General of the King's
Forces See Mr. May his History of the Parliament of England, mentioning the
Demand and the Answer.
requiring the Governor and Council there to forbear the putting to death the
two Citizens, threatening withal to retaliate the like Judgment and Execution
upon some Gentlemen of the Parliaments Party, kept Prisoners by the King's,
with the Resolution, and sober Answer of the Governor and Council to such
Message. The quality of which Answer is fore-judged already, and Replied unto
in Print, To be an insolent In a Book of an unknown Author, called the States
Martyr.
Pamphlet, with other words of scorn, when other men well seen in Morals, and
the Martial affairs of War, deem it to be a stout, apposite, and well penned
Answer.

Secondly, That from the Marquess of Argyle, and Sir William Armyne,
Commissioners from both Kingdoms of England, Scotland; fully See the Message
and the Answer.
and in few words delivering their Intentions and Reasons for the Summons sent
to the Governor of Carlisle; a Garrison for the King, with his Answer unto
them, full of words, pregnancy of wit, and jealousy, rejecting their Summons:
And some of His Party derogating elsewhere from the worth of See the History of
the King's affairs in Scotland, etc. Where the Historian speaking of Montrosse,
and the Marquess of Argyle, the Generals of the two opposite Armies in the
Kingdom of Scotland, he highly extols Montrosse, and as much reviles and
derogates from Argyle, rendering him in many passages of that Book, a
poor-spirited Soldier, and a Knave, when as in other men's judgments he has
proved himself a valiant and expert Commander, a Religious and wise Gentleman.
one of the Commissioners.

See this mentioned in the Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled at
Oxford, March 1643. and Printed there.
A third, Which because it is short, You have here recited in the very words,
sent from both Houses of Parliament to the King, with His Parties descant and
scornful Comment on the same.

The Message sent from both Houses of Parliament to the King.
May it please your Majesty,
WE the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England, taking into
our Consideration a Letter sent from Your Majesty, dated the third of March
instant, and directed to the Lords and Commons of Parliament Assembled at
Westminster (Which by the Contents of a Letter from the Earl of Forth, unto the
Lord General, the Earl of Essex, we conceive was intended to our Selves) Have
resolved with the concurrent advice, and consent of the Commissioners of the
Kingdom of Scotland, to represent to your Majesty in all humility and
plainness, as follows:

That, as we have used all means for a just, and a safe Peace; so will we never
be wanting to do our utmost for the procuring thereof: But when we consider the
expressions in that Letter of Your Majesty's, We have more sad and despairing
thoughts of attaining the same, then ever; because thereby, those Persons now
Assembled at Oxford, who contrary to their duty have deserted Your Parliament,
are put into an equal Condition with it: and this Parliament, Convened
according to the known and Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom (the continuance
whereof is established by a Law consented unto by Your Majesty) is in effect
denied to be a Parliament: The Scope, and intention of that Letter being, to
make provision how all the Members (as is pretended) of both Houses, may
securely meet in a full and free Convention of Parliament; whereof no other
conclusion can be made, but that this present Parliament is not a full nor free
Convention; And that to make it a full and free Convention of Parliament, the
presence of those is Necessary, who, notwithstanding that they have deserted
that great Trust, and do Levy War against the Parliament, are pretended to be
Members of the two Houses of Parliament.

And hereupon, we think our selves bound to let Your Majesty know, That seeing
the continuance of this Parliament is settled by a Law (which as all other Laws
of Your Kingdoms, Your Majesty has sworn to maintain, as we are sworn to our
Allegiance to Your Majesty, those obligations being reciprocal) we must in
duty, and accordingly are resolved with our Lives and Fortunes, to defend and
preserve the Just Rights, and full Power of this Parliament: And do beseech
Your Majesty to be assured, That your Majesty's Royal and hearty Concurrence
with us herein, will he the most effectual, and ready means of procuring a
firm and lasting Peace in all Your Majesty's Dominions, and of begetting a
perfect understanding between Your Majesty and Your People; without which Your
Majesty's most earnest Professions, and our most real Intentions concerning
the same, must necessarily be frustrated. And in case Your Majesty's three
Kingdoms should by reason thereof, remain in this sad and bleeding Condition,
tending, by the continuance of this unnatural War, to their Ruin, Your
Majesty cannot be the least, nor the last sufferer. God in his goodness incline
Your Royal breast, out of Pity and Compassion to those deep sufferings of Your
Innocent People, to put a speedy, and happy issue to these desperate Evils, by
the joint advice of both Your Kingdoms, now happily united in this Cause, by
their late solemn League and Covenant. Which as it will prove the surest
remedy; so is it the earnest prayer of your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, the
Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England.

Gray of Wark, Speaker of the House of Peers in Parliament pro tempore. William
Lenthall Speaker of the Commons-House in Parliament.
Westminster the 9. of of March, 1643.

The Kings Parties Apprehension and Comment on the Letter, in these words:
Whosoever considers that this should be a Letter from Subjects, might well
think it very unbeseeming Language in them to call His Majesty's earnest
endeavors for Peace but Professions, and their own feigned pretenses, most
real Intentions, but much more wonder at that menacing Language, that His
Majesty cannot be the least, or last sufferer; which expressions from Subjects
in Arms to their Sovereign, what dangerous construction they may admit, We are
unwilling to mention. Thus much for the King's Parties Comment on the Letter.


One other intercourse of Messages between both Parties of a latter time. See
the King's Letter March 23. 1644. and the Answer to the Committees Summons in
April fellowing.
The Summons sent by the Committee of both Kingdoms to the Governor of Newark
for surrendering that Town and Fort. The Summons expressing persuasive and valid
reasons to surrender it, the Governor, rather his Secretaries Answer, full of
good Language, courage and strength of wit, wherein mentioning the King's
Parties Letter sent the 23. of March 1644. unto both Houses of Parliament, he
urges the King's granting gracious Conditions, and proves it, in that He would
Disband His Forces, Dismantle His Garrisons, etc. He who penned the Answer
recites not all the King's Proposals, as that He would have His Friends
Pardoned, the Sequestration taken from off their Estates, and the like; either
he saw not the King's whole Letter, being he recites one part only, or else he
smiles in his sleeve, thinking by his reserved and short Comment on His Letter
to satisfy the Committee there, and the whole Kingdom besides, of the King's
gracious inclination in that Letter, whereof the Answerer recites but one
part. The Letter was full and easy to be understood, taking it collectively
and altogether, not apart, as of Disbanding, Dismantling, etc. had not He
expected to have his Friends pardoned, and their Sequestrations wholly taken
off. Such manner of collective speaking is conditional, the one to be done on
the one side, if the rest be performed on the other. The Answerer's mentioning
so much of the Letter as may serve the turn, in reciting the King's gracious
promise, leaves out on what Condition the Promise is made, the condition
annexed to the Promise, frustrates the virtue of the Promise, for that which
the Answerer calls gracious in the King's Letter of Disbanding His Forces, if
nothing else were to be expected, are in every man's judgment, as in the
Answerer's, gracious indeed, but that the King expects to have His Friends, His
party pardoned, the Sequestrations wholly taken off from their Estates, were by
giving way to the revoking their own Judgments, to accuse themselves of
injustice-doing, to put them whom the Parliament accounted offenders and their
Enemies, into as good or better condition then their own friends: the Answerer,
if knowing the King's whole Letter, and would contract it into parts, reciting
only that which serves his turn, the Committee being presumed solid and
understanding Gentlemen, would questionless follow the Dictates of their own
Judgment, without replying to the Answerer.

For Oratory and strength of wit, which happily may delight some Readers, but
cures not the Distempers and Calamities of a Civil War, nor satisfies the
serious expectation of unbyassed Spectators or Actors in these Tragedies; it is
confessed, that the Assembly at Oxford and their Party in their Quarters there,
having the more facete and nimble wits, with the help and influence of the
Youth and Scholars there, may seem to exceed the Parliament and those whom the
Parliament imploys in their Empressions, But let the Books on either side be
examined by the Test of Reason, Prudence, the Reader will soon discern the
Difference: And these four remarkable Messages instanced in, may decide the
Contest, none other of all their Conflicts of that kind being more opposite
each to other, nor any of their Messages reciprocally sent, more disdainfully
rejected on either side (as far as I have traced their Writings) then these
four abovementioned.

But to the Reasons of your deserting your first judgment, if so you have, I
rather judge it to be a fencing and trial of wits in an Argumentative way of
discoursing only, then any settled revolting from your first Opinion: you are
well read in the good man's Character, who will not be afraid for any evil
tidings, His heart stands fast, and will not shrink, etc. The Arguments you
have lately taken up against the residing part of the Parliament and the Army,
the maintainer of your Power, and next under God the preserver of our Peace,
are none of yours, nor like to yours. The House of Parliament being grown thin;
By your, and other Gentlemen of your Eminency deserting it, is become more
thin; the more weak it is through your Defections, the more need it has of
being supported by your Return. As for the Force which you and your subdivided
party urge to be offered to ye by the Army your Servants, an high affront and
breach of Parliament Privileges, Both your parties, Presbyterian and
Independent seem to be forced alike, not in an equal degree of Strength and
Number, but in a strict and closer tie of Policy and Prudence, by and through
an extreme and inevitable Necessity to the preservation of Ye and your Friends.
Neither you nor any of your Party can devise or act a means how to settle such
a course as may prevent a total confusion, or the overthrow of those who have
already prevailed by the. Sword, nor to Still the common Enemy and Avenger: But
if He being hard-driven, shall by Treaty or other unsafe way of settling a
Peace, prevail, He is left at liberty to do His pleasure. In Treatles or like
ways of Parleance, what Security can He give or will He keep, commensurate to
the safety and welfare of many thousands engaged in this Quarrel, to the
avoidance of those Dangers and Jealousies already administered by Him? Within
these three years you instanced Hen. 3. His compliance and Signing Articles,
which when He had by that recovered His Power again, kept none of them. But to
your Arguments and your paralelling the King's offering a Force to six of the
Houses of Parliament, to the Force is offered you. He might peradventure, and
by an usurped Authority do it, to exercise a Regal Power above the Laws, from
assuming unto Himself an unlimited and strong conceit of His Sovereignty and
Transcendency of Might in nothing to be resisted, to awe and force this present
Parliament, and all future Parliaments (in case He had any purpose to convene
any more) to His beck, as it is probable. Not long after, by the like menacing
and imperious act of Proclaiming those Gentlemen Traitors, who either obeyed
not, or refused to conform to His present Will; There was no necessity but His
sole Will to force all those who complied not with Him to save and rescue His
Creatures from the hand of Justice. And whether there be not now a stronger
necessity then before the great and universal Engagement of many good and
deserving men, I appeal to you. Sir, In that you take it ill That your Servants
(so the Army style themselves) should force their Masters. They are not simply
and precisely Servants immediate, subordinate rather, many of Them your Equals,
Commanders and Officers in the Army, the common-Souldiery commanded and led by
Them; Or the Army relatively unto ye as Jurors in a trial of Assize before a
number of Judges (for so ye are, although the resemblance holds not adequately,
as to an Army, and to a Jury.) Let a Major part of Judges incline or direct
which way they please: Yet an upright Jury will find according to the Evidence
in being. The Evidence in this case is the certainty of knowing and
re-collecting things past, the foresight of things to come, which induces them
to bring in such Verdict as may render all things Just and Safe: for when it
shall happen to be debated which ought to be preferred, the Privilege of
Parliament, or the Safety of a Kingdom, every one can judge which ought to sway
the balance. Again, admit the Army to be your Servants (yet properly they are
Servants unto those from whom they receive their pay, that is, from the
Kingdom, neither from the Presbyterian nor Independent Party) In a mixed and
joynt-Government where more then One commands, and a mutual consent had
betwixt the Governors, that the Servants shall obey the discreeter Party, as
between a Master and a Mistress in a Family, they mutually consent that their
Family shall be directed by the wiser of the two, there it is left to the
election and discretion of the Family, which of them (Master or Mistress) to
pay obedience unto. It skils not in a Governing and Politic Body (consisting
of many Ruling, and all consenting in the main) which is the Major part, unless
that Major part will do the whole work themselves, without the help of those
whom they do employ: which of them is to be obeyed? That Part rather which Acts
and Endeavors (without respect had to the Majority) in the more prudent,
watchful and safe way. So it is no Disobedience or Affront offered by your
Army, where Obedience may be dangerous to the Obeyours, to your Party and your
adherents. For whereas some of the King's Party prefer the Presbyterian before
the Independent, some the Independent before the Presbyterian, See the (...).
p. 224.
hating both, yet giving good words unto, and complying with the more
discontented and weaker Party, until by their cunning Artifice they overcome
them also; so in this Legerdemain, and sleight of wit blow the coals of
Dissension betwixt ye both, Ye of the Presbyterian can look for no other then
Polyphemus his courtesy, to be of those last to be devoured. Besides, as to
the Major or Minor part of Members sitting in the House, or secluded, or
voluntarily absenting themselves from the House, so that the greater number are
absent, as you reckon: Take heed of that objection, lest you open an old wound
(long since salved up through God's blessing on your success) and that
Objection be made use of against ye all of both Houses, and against that
Authority whereby Ye have at any time acted since the Contention first began
betwixt the King's Parties claim to their Parliament at Oxford, and the
Parliaments Parties claim to theirs at Westminster. For if the King's Party did
rightly calculate their numbers which were in both Houses of Lords and Commons
See their Declaration Printed at Oxford March 1643. toward the end of the Book.
258. either personally sitting at Oxford, or occasionally absent upon
employment for the King, That number exceeded that of those sitting at
Westminster: so that the Argument for the major part of the number of Members
Presbyterially affected, and that way Covenanted, against which the King's
Friends have learnedly, as yet unansweredly In a Book styled [The present
Judgment of the Convocation at Oxford dated June 1647.] Which if weighed with
the Arguments in the late Letter written by the London Ministers to the Lord
Fairfax and his Council of War, dated Jan. 1648. in behalf of the Covenant and
the keeping it, the Reader will soon discern the odds.
argued, is no safe or prudent Argument at this time to be used, however
abetted and seconded by an elaborately written Letter by the London Ministers,
lest ye help your first and common Enemy to rowse an Objection which has a
long time slept, for maintaining their Parliament at Oxford. For, by the way,
had those Ministers employed their pains in answering that Book, their Letter
might have been better credited, and more universally received. They much
insist on the Protestation, taken May 1641. wherein the Protesting is For the
maintenance of the King's Honor, Person, and Estate: yet the End (at which all
matters of weight do aim) is the preservation of Religion, Laws, and Liberties.
The maintenance of the King's Honor, etc. is but a piece of the Protestation;
the sum, full sense and scope thereof, the preservation of Religion, etc. The
drift of one of the Grecian wise men's advice was [Respice finem] and the
prudential Proverb is (made good by an acute Epigram) Non refert qua, sed quo:
So the maintenance of the King's Honor, etc. are but the Means in relation and
order to the End, the preservation of Religion, Laws, etc. The well-weighing
which Protestation might have confined and settled the unresolved and doubtful
thoughts of man, in what the end and aim of the Protestation was, A promise to
fulfill, in as much as in us lies, the Commandments of the first and second
Table of the Law, directing our duty toward God and Man, the several parts in
the Protestation tending in the sum to the maintenance of God's Honor, the
King's, the Subjects Right and Liberty, no one part thereof, if rightly applied
and understood, crossing another: and therefore how it comes to pass, that the
Protestation being one and the same, the course of men's affections should be
thus divided into Factions, and Part-takings, or that some should be of
opinion, That to maintain the King's Honor, Person and Estate, is to adhere
unto Him in this present War in what He shall command. They should withal
consider the other parts of the Protestation (viz.) the Defense of the
Protestant Religion, the Power and Privileges of Parliament, the Subject's
Right and Liberty; for by the Protester's observing all, the King is best
observed and truliest, His Honor and Promises being engaged to maintain the
latter three; when as every one who took the Protestation did in his thoughts
endeavor and intend according to his Power to make Him a Sovereign Lord of a
Free and Flourishing People, the King's Protestations concurring with, and
tending to that end: So the Protestation taken altogether is best observed and
kept. To the Protestation for the defense of the Protestant Religion, every one
who takes it is not immediately and specially bound by virtue of his Vow to
discover and make known, to extirpate or remove all Papists (that is above the
Power and Liberty of every common person) neither is wishing well alone, and
sitting still a sufficient discharge of the Protester's duty of vowing to
Endeavor. Endeavoring is a progressive motion, and the Protester's supine
failing to endeavor, can be no better reckoned of, then the Livy.
Historian did of those Soldiers who dreamed of their Enemies, Votis and
sedendo debellari posse, or what the Isaiah.
Prophet does of the Egyptians, that their strength was sitting still. A
perfunctory and neutrall slackness in the Protester, satisfies not the precept
which God himself enjoins, When thou vowest a vow unto the Lord, thou shall not
be slack to pay it, and wherein many have not only deserted this their Vow,
but endeavored against the same; others contemplatively only and remiss as not
endeavoring at all, but with cautious reservations and forbearances keep off
their endeavourings. The passive and faint observing of the Vow in some, the
Acting contrary to their Vow in others, is a sin which God is justly angry for,
visiting this Land of late with long and heavy judgments; wherefore if he who
has taken this Protestation, and shall solemnly observe the same, shall
foresee, or has cause of suspicion to believe, that the Protestant Religion
is, or was when he took the same, in danger of declining, and that the Papist
is connived at and countenanced by Which is not the Author's Observation alone,
but the unanimous judgment of most part of the Kingdom observed by their
several Petitions at that time presented, especially that of the Gentry and
Trained Bands of the County of Essex, presented to their Lord Lieutenant the
Earl of Warwick. See Mr. May his History, lib. 2. cap. 6. page 105.
higher Powers (for the Question is not about the certain and actual bringing
in of Popery, but touching the pregnancy of suspicion) if the Protester
adhereth to that Party which promises to defend the Protestant, and opposes
that which countenanceth the Popish, his Protestation is then truliest kept; a
Promise or Vow, the more pursued, the more fulfilled. In like manner to the
other part of the same Protestation (viz.) The Maintenance of the Kings Honor,
every one who takes the same is not thereby bound to comply, assent unto, and
obey the King in whatsoever He may command, whether unlawful or unjust, or to
think all his attempts and actions Justifyable throughout. This were indeed, in
the highest degree to honor Him; but in a more serious and as truly a Loyal
way of His being Honored by His Subjects, is when they or those who are put in
Place and Authority over them, shall enquire into and provide against all
things incident to His Dishonor, when they shall endeavor to suppress all
Affronts which may be offered to His Dignity; This though a more remote and
less flattering, yet a more stable and certain discharge of Duty in Honoring
Him. Again, as to that part of the Covenant [That They had then no intention to
diminish His just Power and Greatness] They might intend no less, until They
saw They could not overcome Him by humble Applications and Addresses, that they
could not discern any acknowledgment of His former Errors, any placable or
propitious heart toward His Parliament and People; any condiscending to those
Propositions, as the only and necessary means for settling a safe Peace, long
since tendered to Him jointly and unanimously by ye all, Presbyterians and
Independents, as they are called (yet not all of ye concluding or providing
what was to be done in case He did refuse) But instead thereof (contrary to the Sea the Articles of the large Treaty Page 16. Demand 4. granted by the King,
Aug. 1641.
Articles of the large Treaty agreed upon (viz.) That none should be admitted
to his Counsel or Attendance but such as should be approved of by both
Kingdoms) gracing and preferring to His nearest secrecy and trust, a Person
proclaimed guilty of High Treason, charging still and banding with the
Parliament, the Supreamest and greatest Council for Weight and Number in all
EUROPE, contending to lay the Blood spilt in this War at their doors, and
theirs alone, ever seeking by His Pyoners, by a covert and restless ill will,
one way against the Sea the Book called (...), page 23. and elsewhere in that
Book, His Party's constant and continued ill will toward the City of London.
The City styled by His party, in their wonted Invectives against it, The
Nursery and Treasury of Arms and Ammunition employed against their King,
continued even to this day to be termed by them a Rebellious City upon all
occasions, Mercur. Pragmat. from Jan. 28. to Feb. 4. 1649. further continuing
his Invectives against the City in his weekly Pamphlet.
Place receiving Them, another against their See their Declaration printed at
Oxford 1643. page 14, 15. against the suggested irregular and undue proceedings
of the Common Council in London, the Representative of the whole City.
Friends assisting Them, to undermine their Power. They thought the Covenant
not like an See the Letter of the Ministers within the Province of London, and
their notice-taking of the Parliament and Army's conceit had of the Covenant,
page 8.
Almanac out of date, as the Ministers smilingly object, but like an
Obligation, where the Obligor is destitute and left remediless through the
Obligee his restless fury and oppression, disabling him from performing his
Conditions. See His Party's Opinion of the Covenant and the taking it, in the
(...) page 113, 114, 115. whither and how far it is to be kept, how little
uniformity there is in the taking or keeping it, and for what purpose in the
Author's judgment framed at first, how ambiguous and hard to to understood, how
much mistaking or dissembling in the making it at first, or misrepresenting by
those who like it not, that howbeit one part thereof is [That (...) had then no
intention to diminish the King's (...) Power and Greatness] the Author in the
King's name conceives, That it was made and (...) the King, as in many places
of the Treatise against the Covenant he complains. See also the King's
Declaration, since the Pacification, against the Scots and the Covenant, page 8.
Which Opinion of his see confirmed in the Marquess of Montrosse his Declar^
set forth 1649. as in a Book called the History of the King's affairs in
Scotland, before recited page 5.
One part of the Covenant then taken, was, That They had no thoughts or
intentions to diminish the King's just Power and Greatness, Another part was
(when They press the Covenant taking, the maintenance of the Peace and Union
between the three Kingdoms) They would bring to justice all without respect of
Persons who did or should wilfully oppose the same, or hinder such Peace and
Union. So that if the King did by Himself, by His Friends and followers by His
example awing other men from taking the Covenant, or did by any Power or
Commission, whether to defend Himself, or to offend His opposites, act or abet,
whereby the Peace became disturbed, one Kingdom engaged against another, the
Parliament could not according to their Covenant preserve His Power and
Greatness, and punish such without respect of persons as did wilfully oppose
the same, comprehending all who did adhere unto, or take part with him: So that
the Covenant, the parts whereof seem to be inconsistent and irreconciliable
within themselves, and therefore not perfectly and exactly to be kept, is
either newly to be molded, or (which is more probable) the War to continue
between the Covenanters, and the non-Covenanters: many thousands of men neither
having, nor through the King's example willing to take the same. The great
Quarrel of ignorant men against the uniform current of the Holy Scripture, of
an higher concernment then an humane Covenant, is acutely taken up by a learned
Paraus.
Writer, Distingue tempora and reconciliantur Scripturae, in answer unto those,
who cavil against the Scriptures as if the Texts thereof were dissonant and
repugnant each to other, as if God's word, certain and infallible in it self,
were contradictory to it self. Distinguish between the time of the Covenant
taking, four or five years before the time of bringing the King to Trial,
Observe the limitation in the particle of the Covenant [That They had then no
intention to diminish the King's just Power] in opposition to unlawful and
arbitrary, and you will find that the Covenant could not be so well and safely
taken, or that it is not so hainously broke as your Enemies give out. But to
your Objections against the Army, That in adhering unto them, is to trust to an
Arm of Flesh, so all sublunary and earthly Powers are but Arms of flesh.
Secondly, That Independency admits of all Irreligion, Heresies, etc. The
Proposition is not well proved, in that some particular soldiers belonging to,
or others well-wishing to the Army, do devise and publish strange and unsound
Tenants and Opinions, which is not to be imputed to the Army or the Parliament,
neither is a present Cure to be applied for redress thereof in all parts and
places where they are vented. The Army and their Party have enough to do to
prevent and provide against the Power and Policy of their Enemies, without an
overhasty endeavoring to suppress the Schisms and Errors of every one of their
Adherents. The complaint against Heresies and Schisms abounding, is just and
seasonable, and the Heresies most fit to be suppres'd. The Complaint is made
long since, and it was foretold of old, that Heresies must be, etc. The Apostle
gives the reason, That the sound and approved Truth, may be known from fond and
received Heresy. The ground and seminary of broaching them, may be, besides
the common and inbred corruption of Pride and Falsehood, which mankind is
prone unto, that so many sorts of men in many places do despise and speak
against the Scriptures, although the Rule of Christian Faith: Others
unwarranted, do undertake to teach and expound the same. In disordered and
licentious times, caused through the distractions of a Civil War, it may fall
out, as a S. Jerome.
Father of the Church complained it did in his, of Scripture-Teachers, of
Expounders of the Mysteries in Divinity, cited by a learned Divine upon the
words of the Apostle, charging the unlearned and unstable for wresting the
Scriptures to their own destruction; whose presumption (the Divine tells us) is
enough to produce any Schism or Heresy. Sola, says he, Scripturarum ars est,
quam sibi omnes passim vendicant; hanc garrula annus, hanc delirus senex, hanc
sophtsta verbosus (he might have filled up the measure of his Complaint, by
discovering many other sorts of unlearned People intruding into the holy
Mystery of Divinity) hanc universi praesumunt, lacerant, docent antequam
discunt. Every one presuming upon his parts and gifts to be a Teacher and
Interpreter of Scripture, whereas Practitioners in other Arts can contain
themselves within the bounds of their own Profession. The reason why the
unlearned are so bold, may be their want of ability to discern the strength of
the Objections which may be made against them. By the unlearned, is not meant
he who has not read a multitude of Authors, but he who taking upon him to
divide the Word of God, is raw and unexperienced, or if he has experience,
wants judgment to make use of it. The anguish that these rash Presumers bring
unto the discreeter sort of Brethren, cannot but be great, when being convinced
of their unsound opinions, for the maintaining that which with much boldness
and open falsehoods they have averred, they pretend the Authority of the Word,
and whatsoever conceit is begotten in their heads, the Spirit of God to be
presently the Author of it: when as learned and judicious men, in whom the Lord
has put wisdom and understanding, to know how to work all manner of work for
the service of the Sanctuary, like Bezaleel and Aholiab, refuse much of the
stuff which is offered them. Scripture is given to all to learn: to teach, to
interpret, only to a few. It is the voice of God confessed by all, that the
sense is Scripture, not the words; it cannot therefore be avoided but that he
that wilfully strives to fasten some sense of his own, other then the nature of
the place will bear, must needs take upon him the Person of God himself, and to
be an inditer of Scripture. No Scripture is of private Interpretation, There
can be but two certain and infallible Interpreters of it, either it Self or the
Holy Ghost the Author of it; it self does then expound it self, when the words
and circumstances do sound unto the Reader, the prime natural and principal
sense. Besides these two, all other Interpretation is private; wherefore as the
Lords of the Philistines sometimes said of the Kine which drew the Ark unto
Bethshemesh; If they go of themselves, then is this from God, but if they go
another way then it is not from God, it is but some chance that has happened
to us, So it may be said of all pretended sense of Scripture, If Scripture come
unto it of it self, then it is from God, but if it go another way, or violently
urged or goaded on, then it is but a matter of chance, of man's devising and
invention. As for those mavelous discourses of some, framed upon presumption
of the Spirit's help in private, in judging and interpreting difficult places
in Scripture, their boldness cannot be sufficiently wondered at. The Spirit is
a thing of dark and secret operation, the manner of it none can descry. As
underminers are never seen till they have wrought their purposes, so the Spirit
is never perceived but by its effects. The effects of the Spirit, as far as
they concern knowledge and instruction, are not particular information for
resolution in any doubtful case, for this were plainly Revelation, but as the
Angel which was sent to Cornclius, informs him not, but sends him to Peter to
School; so the Spirit teaches not, but stirs up in us a desire to learn, desire
to learn makes us thirst after the means, pious sedulity and carefulness makes
us watchful in the choice, and diligent in the use of the means. The promise to
the Apostles of the Spirit, which should lead them into all Truth, was made
good unto them by private and secret informing their understandings with the
knowledge of high and heavenly Mysteries, which as yet had never entered into the
conceit of any man; the same promise is made unto us, but fulfilled after
another manner. For what was written by Revelation in their hearts, for our
instruction have they written in their Books: to us for information, otherwise
then out of these Books, the Spirit speaks not. When the Spirit regenerates a
man, it infuseth no knowledge of any point of Faith, but sends him to the
Church, and to the Scriptures; when it stirs him up to newness of life, it
exhibits not unto him an Inventory of his sins, but either supposes them known
in the Law of Nature, of which no man can be ignorant, or sends him to learn
from the mouth of his Teachers. More then this in the ordinary proceeding of
the Spirit in matter of instruction, no sober man could ever yet determine. So
that to speak of the help of the Spirit in private, either in dijudicating or
interpreting of Scripture, is to speak they know not what. Which is the rather
worth the notice, because by experience we have learnt how apt men are to call
their own conceits the Spirit, which because it is an especial Error charged
by a S. Augustine.
Father of the Church on this kind of men, to be the more prone to kindle
Schism and Contention in the Church, by how much the more they seem to
themselves to be endued with a more eminent measure of Spirit then their
Brethren, deserves reproof, whilst under pretense of interpreting, they rudely
and rashly broach their own conceits. Sir, there may be much spent upon this
one effect of this Civil War, I have been too long in these digressions, the
labor of another man; but that you may be hereby satisfied how improbable it
is that well-bred, wise, and learned men, however Malice has cast this
Contumely on them, do wilfully and willingly countenance these unlearned
Sectaries, and rude Intruders into Moses Chair. They are willing for ought it
appears to the contrary, to promote the means of Learning, to give
encouragement to the increase thereof, by their favor and respect shown unto
the Schools and Nurseries, in their Acts and Ordinances exempting them from any
Charge or Tax for raising Moneys toward this War, by placing painful and
sober Governors in the several Societies of the Universities, to reduce them
to their former temper, of acquiring Learning and good Manners, that what the
fury and fierceness of a War was likely to demolish and destroy, is yet
recoverable by the care and industry of their Governors, and whereas there is
a disproportion and Antipathy between Science (a soft, mild and tender habit)
and a War (a privative and destroying judgment) there is yet by God's blessing
left a possibility and means of a Regress from a War and Garrison of Soldiers
in one of them, to an acquisition of Sciences, and Nursery of Scholars. Neither
does the Parliament, for ought we see, neglect or dis-esteem the Universities,
or other Seminaries of Learning, or take away the Endowments of Colleges, as
their Enemies give out, because of able and learned Scholars of the
Universities and elsewhere, sequestered for a time, and dispossessed of part of
their Estates, by reason of their constant prejudice and ill will against the
Parliament and their Proceedings, the Parliament knowing such to be interested,
engaged, and not long since seasoned by the Enemy Garrisoning in one of the
Universities, to contrive their overthrow. Delinquents Compounding for their
offense, or the Sequestring their estates (a Punishment inflicted by the
Parliament) is easier to be born, taking withal the justice of the Cause,
which is here examined, then the Confiscating the Parliaments Friends estates
for adhering to that side; which they could not but expect, when Spectators
only taking part on neither side, are in danger, and a Law enforced for their
See the Oxford Declaration, p. 27.
forbearing to defend the King. The unhappiness of this Disease (viz.) of
Heresies abounding, of the unlearned their broaching them, of the causes and
consequences thereof, is to be ascribed to the Authors and Occasion of the War;
before which, and Jewel in his Apolegie of the Church of England.
many years together, the Church was at Peace and Unity within it self, it had
none of this sort of Adversaries to disturb the same. But enough of this. To
your other Objection, That Independency (as it is called) denies all Order and
Government, when as they have Remonstrated and Protested for the contrary:
Whatsoever they may for a time, for reasons best known to themselves, and upon
the altering the present state of things, Ordain and Act to the laying aside
Degrees and Orders heretofore in use, They or their successors may when the
storm threatened is over, the danger of being overcome is past, reduce and bring
the Government of this Nation, the course of Parliaments and other
Constitutions into some part of their pristine and former state again. Rather
the Royalist and Presbyterian seems to give way to many practices tending to
Irreligion, etc. when as their ill will and envy are so eager against the
opposite Party (called Independents) that they will rather submit unto, and
join with the Turk or Jew, then to be mastered by that Party betwixt whom and
one of them there is a kind of difference, no true or real, only a notional
and imaginary one. The King's Parties Envy grows out of being overcome, and
does appear from the judgment and censure he has of them, in the punishment
had he prevailed he would have condemned them to. For of the moderate sort of
the Parliament and their Friends he holds them See the Declarat. of the Lords
and Commons assembled at Oxford, etc. printed there 1643 Page 24, 26, 27.
unskilful, vulgar spirited, weak and seduced men for siding with the People,
as they term it, and their multitudes, the eminent and more active sort
Traitors, Perjured All, yea the Neutrals too, for not offerring to defend the
King, etc. according to the Oath of Allegiance (The Parliament Party having a
more moderate and mild judgment of the King's, knowing many of them restless
and virulent as yet, judging others Mistaken only, some of them being led away
through Ambition and aspiring thoughts to adhere to the King upon the Proverb
of No fishing to the Sea, nor service to the Court, whereupon the Parliament
have accordingly passed by the errors and transgressions of the King's, by an
easy Mulcting them, so that if the judgment at the first had been no worse nor
no more erroneously passed against the one then it was against the other Party,
the War had soon been ended and a Peace restored) By the King's Party's large
extension of which Oath, they may bring many within the compass of Perjury. The
King being to maintain the Laws, etc. and bound as a Supreme Power to take
vengeance on evil doers, without which He bears the sword in vain, as the
Subjects are to their Allegiance; the Obligation is reciprocal, as the two
Houses of Parliament, when allowed to be, and styled by King Himself a
Parliament, with an unanimous consent observed in their See the Message printed
with the abovenamed Declaration, dat. March. 9 1643.
message sent unto Him in a few words expressed; If the King may dispense with
His Oath, and that He reckons Himself accomptable to none but God, which the
Parliament objects as a Maxim and Ground for any Tyranny, the Enacting Laws is
of no value as to the King, and how far swearing Allegiance is to the Subject,
is the question. In this only lies the odds, upon the event of which Party
shall prevail in this War, If the Parliament shall, They are notwithstanding
subject to the Reproach and Obloquy of slanderous tongues and pens, Their
Demeanor not free from being censured, Reviled and Charged with several Crimes
as their Accusers please, No such salve for them as for the King, in case He
should have prevailed by what means soever, no man should have dared to have
questioned His proceedings, or the means by which He prevailed, in case He had
Conquered. The wise man asks, who shall say that a King is false or wicked? and
the French Proverb tells us Que la Coronne unifois prinse oste toute sort de
defaults, The meaning is, when the King shall have regained His former full and
Regal Power, the Parliament and theirs then born down, His repossessing His
Crown shall as well quit all quarrels and exceptions and cancel all disputes, as
it shall clear all manner of faults and Crimes concerning the means how He
attained His Conquest. The sustance of that Oath, even now objected, is in
these words, That the Pope has no Power either of himself or by any means to
depose the King, nor Authorize any Foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him, to
bear Arms against or offer Him violence or hurt. That no Declaration, Sentence
of Excomunication or Deprivation made by the Pope, has Power to absolve any
Subject from his Allegiance, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, etc. The reason of enjoining the Oath of Supremacy, is expressed
in the Preamble of that See the Statut. 1mo. Eliz. 1. and the Preamble thereof.
Statute made for taking the same, which was therefore done in opposition to
Foreign Princes, Prelates, States and Potentates, by reason of great exacted
sums which they by their usurping took from the Subjects of this Kingdom: so
that the Oath of Supremacy concerns the Subject's duty toward the King His
Heirs and Successors in their refusing to grant or pay any Tribute of Power to
Forraigners, but to oppose and resist all such; to acknowledge the ancient
Jurisdictions, Superorities and Preheminencies due to the King or His
Successors, against and in opposition to such usurpings. The words and prime
sense of the swearer being That he will renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Superiorities and Authorities, thence That he will defend the
King His Heirs and Successor's Jurisdiction, Authority, etc. So the Competition
for Prehemmency, Power, etc. is betwixt the King His Heirs and Successors on
the one, and Foreigners only on the other part, and by reason of such
exactions practiced by such Forraigners. The Royalists to make good this charge
of supposed Perjury in breaking the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, which
they cannot, unless they gain a Power, leave no ways untried, no stone unmoved,
what Wit and Invention can bring in to promote their Industry. By all the
Artificial and feigned means they can to keep up their Party, as by sowing the
Tares of Discord and Sedition amongst the Parliament party and their friends,
hoping at last to reap themselves the fruit and harvest, cunningly and
insensibly carrying it on, under fair pretenses to the Peace and Public good,
by their Pamphleters kept, it may be thought in pay and pension, to magnify
and talk high of their Cause and their good successes, to vilify and depress
the Parliament's and Theirs, to publish and divulge their Falsehoods, in hope to
discourage them and their Friends, and knowing that the unstable and
unresolved, (as many men unto whom the Justice of this Quarrel having seemed
doubtful, have shown themselves) would fall in unto the stronger side; By
reporting of their own accord without warrant from the King, more indulgently
and favorably on His behalf, then any of his own actions have declared, which
insinuatings and reportings in favor unto Him, have peradventure powerfully
wrought on the unstable, wavering in their affections; By their subtle
practices to pursue and continue their Designs, disguising them under several
habits, that what a Lions strength cannot, the Foxes skin put on may work, each
one acting his several part to the best advantage and improvement of the
whole; some bemoaning their dejected and low condition (thereby to draw pity to
their suggested wrongful sufferings) not that they think it so, but that they
may be thereby the less perceived to exercise their Art of gaining their
strength and Power again, both by nourishing Discontents and Seditions here at
home, and having Factors and Emissaries to solicit their Cause abroad: By
traducing and depressing the esteem of the Parliament and their Actions, to
render their Persons the more odious and contemptible, thence the more weak and
easy to be subdued. By contriving and inventing Falsehoods, sometimes in the
nature of reporting Prophesies in favor to the King and His success, as to
give out how happy and victorious He or His Posterity shall be. Many the like
devised Inventions in the nature of Predictions and Divinings, some whereof
made on purpose, others as vainly reported and given out, to give hopes unto
His Party to try if the reporting such Prophecyings can bring the fruits of
their endeavors within the compass of such Prophesies fulfilled. By seditious
Pamphletings and privily dispersing such, by publishing other more weighty, no
less seditious Books, obtruding them on such Authors as they please, all to
affect the Reader: sometimes in the King*s name, always in His behalf,
particularly that Posthume one called (...), by many men given out to be His,
which if the Parliaments often Declarations, Charges and Remonstrances against
Him and His Proceedings be true, those applauded Tracts and Meditations in that
Book, are but a reinforced dissembling put upon Him, and the Greek words might
be rather translated into the Image and Pourtraicture of a Counterfeit (For the
Author counterfeiting the King, makes the Falsehoods and Impostures obtruded
upon the King to be his own) then into the Image of a Prince. Whosoever shall
read the Parliaments often Declarations and Charges against the King, set forth
since the beginning of this War, not denied or answered by any of His Party,
saving in a recriminatory and scoffing way, calling the Parliament and their
Adherents, Rebels: Or who shall read the Written by Mr. Tho. May 1647.
beginning at Page 6. unto page 46. Moreover how Corruption and Oppressions
irremediably grew through the Discontinuance and defect of Parliaments not
called, through the often Dissolving them in the time of His Reign and His
Declarations published against the Members of some of them; which the Historian
reports, the dejected People were forced to read with patience, and to allow
against their own Reason. Wherein many things are there observed, concerning
the manner of the Scots proceedings before and even at the first beginnings of
these Troubles, Their sufferings, how by their humble applying themselves unto
the King for redress, they could have none. In fine, the aversness of the
English People from a War with Scotland, page 46.
History of the Parliament of England summarily reciting the Kings aversness
from Parliaments, cannot but acknowledge that See the (...) on that Tract.
Book, whatsoever the fair and plausible flourishes in it pretend of the King's
inclining to and desiring Parliaments, to be falsely and injuriously Charged on
him: Falsely, because They cannot but know how unwillingly and seldom He called
any, how often he did dissolve or attempt to dissolve them when they were called;
whence the Answer meets the Objection, That the Parliament's Party did begin
the preparations for a War before the King's. The King's Mr. May his History.
aversness to call Parliaments, His Mr. Hollis his Speech.
awing and dissolving them at pleasure often and long before any preparations
could be thought of for a War, may satisfy the objection: when as moreover,
diverse of his Friends and Party have long before fortified and furnished their
houses in many parts of the Kingdom with Arms and Ammunition, no other notice
taken till of late then of adorning such for strength and splendour, which with
some small addition became strong Garrisons for him. The Parliaments friends had
none or not so many Holds so soon or suddenly to be fortified for their
defense. The Author to have made his own Impostures and Dissembling the King's
desires of Peace and Justice, the more complete and full, might without
blushing as well have added one Treatise more to the twenty eight, to have
rendered the King free and innocent from that great offense of the Massacres
committed in the Irish Troubles, and declared Him guiltless of so much of his
Subjects Blood as the Rebellion there has cost. A Treatise added to that Book
with such an Apology on the King's behalf, might have passed under the same
belief and credit as other well penned passages in the Book, when as the
contrary is well known, as the two Houses of Parliament have in their Charges
and Remonstrances set forth to the public view, such Transactions of the
King's betwixt Him and the Irish concerning His conniving at and favoring the
Rebels there, under color of raising friends and Assistance thence, to serve
Him in the War against the Parliament here, as to find Him guilty of the Blood
spilt in that Kingdom as in This. Injuriously charged on the King, in that the
Author and Reader also, if a Friend to Him and would have the Book to be
reputed His, do wound His honor and render the manner of His death the more
unchristian then otherwise it would be judged, when whilst the Life is mortal
they make the vices of Dissembling and uncharitableness to be surviving and
immortal motions. The reporting it to be the King's, seems besides, to blemish
the credit of those Penitential Expressions therein, derogating from the
serious, retired, and solid parts wherewith He was endowed; then doubtless free
from the affectated words, whereof the Book is full, in defense of the manifold
actions of His incident to this War. Many of them too weakly excused, to be
His, although in an handsome way of writing (to possess the belief of men)
obtruded on Him by indeed the Author of the Book: Namely, and more
particularly, That weakly objected Crime of the Author, in the King's name,
blaming the Parliaments Army for discovering the King's Letters taken at Naseby
Fight, upbraiding them with an uncivil and inhumane dealing in publishing them.
Whosoever shall praise the Book, and thence draw applause unto the King, should
for the better glory of it have expunged some improbable and extravagant
passages, and inserted others more necessary and satisfactory, one Tract at
least of the King's care and zeal for the security and maintenance of the true
Protestant Religion; what He has written or acted to clear those doubts, to
wipe away those Jealousies had of Him, no where to be found in the Book, and a
great Incentive to this Contention. Some passages there are, plausibly set down
by way of censuring and speaking against Novelties and new fashions in
Religion, about the Form and Manner how God is to be served and prayed unto,
against the extemporary and unpremeditated Prayers of some Ministers, and the
like, somewhat also by way of In the Treatise concerning the Ordinance against
Common Prayer.
defending the Common Prayer Book, about which there is no lasting and final
discord betwixt the King's Party, and the Parliaments: For, for ought we know,
it may with some alterations to be made, be hereafter received again, rather
then the Peace or Discipline of the Church shall be disturbed about the Form
and Method of the Liturgy, the Common Prayer Book if in some parts altered,
little differing from the Directory, saving in the exercise of the Ministers
abilities, and their choice of words and quantities, how much, or how little
their Prayers and Divine Service shall be. Nothing in that Book delivered
touching the Substance of Religion, whether we take it in point of Manners, or
in Faith, or Doctrine, or of His professing to defend and secure it from
Superstition and Idolatry, as part of His Desensor Fidei.
Title implies, Rather the contrary as to the matter of suspicion, by reason of
His professed indulgence to the Queen, as the Author presents Him, Bewatling Her
absence, and Her Fortunes, etc. And whatsoever His advertisements in the King's
name are to the Prince, in a skillful Dialect expressed to persuade him to
begin and end with God, with other good Instructions frequently given him, to
be well grounded in his Religion, to keep the middle way between the Pomp of
superstitious Tyranny, and the meaness of Phantast que Anarchy. The Council
delivered is good, if the season of the delivery (a weighty circumstance) be
observed as well, That the suspicion and fear of the growth of superstitious
Tyranny in the peaceful times, were no greater then that of Anarchy, easy to
be let in through the licentiousness, and confusedness of a Civil War. And
wherefore is that Council given? As if the Parliament did intend, or had
brought in Anarchy, or devised to root out all Government. No Calumny whereby
to render Them and their proceedings odious and detestable, is of extent enough
to serve and satiate their enemies appetite. The Parliament in their Prudence
and Experience might discern a reason for the changing the Monarchical into
some other Form, of as much conducement to the maintenance of Peace and
Justice. But what that Religion is which the Author enjoins the Prince unto,
whether opposite to Popery or The speedy and effectual suppressing Errors and
Schisms is charged on him. p. 138.
Schism (This like Weeds in Corn, choking and hindering it is growth, That like
Mildews, blasting and destroying it) he defining not, makes it seem doubtful
to the Reader. For presently after, he would have the Prince his judgment and
reason to seal to that sacred bond which education has written in him, in
which he has been bred. Let a computation be had of his young years, how in his
infancy incapable of discerning the differences of Religion before this War
began, where and with whom he has lived these seven or eight years since it
began, all men will not believe that to be the Reformed Protestant Religion
which is there enjoined him (take it in its purity, or as the corruption of
times has fashioned it) the Prince seems to go in a contrary Diameter to
either, as to those instructions given him by the Author, by what is reported
of his favoring and entertaining at his Court the greatest and most known
Catholics, Forraigners of all parts, setting aside his Protestant and native
English. So that either he takes not those Instructions to be truly and
genuinely the King's, or little observes them. That which should have been
expunged out of the Book to make it the more admired His, is that one passage
(strange amongst the rest) about His challenging the Parliament for discovering
the Letters taken at Naseby Fight, even how mentioned. For, who shall look upon
a War where Parties are resolutely engaged to defend their own, to consume
their Enemies Forces, as His Party did by Fire and Sword, laying waste many
Villages and Towns, not sparing their own Friends, so they might be avenged on
their Enemies, will not expect that in the heat of War any regard should be had
to the concealing or divulging Letters; when the opposition was so extreme, the
enmity so violent, that no other censure serves to fill up His Parties malice,
then to judge the Parliament and their Friends False and Rebels: From which
calumny and stain fastened on their Credit and Posterity, They will rather
fight it out to vindicate themselves and their Friends from Attainders,
Forfeitures threatened In the Declaration printed at Oxford 1643 page 27.
on Them, and sacrifice their Lives to the justice of their Cause, then undergo
the guilt of those aspersions; the dispute resting still upon the Question Who
be Rebels? To resist and oppose the Will of a Lawful King, may more resemble
the name of Rebel, and in that acception the Parliament and their Friends may
by the King and His be reputed Rebels. Those who by practice or council shall
infringe or subvert the Laws and Liberties of a freeborn People, although in a
small degree of exaction and oppression (the Laws have their Metes and Limits,
to bound out unto every man his own) are in the judgment of a Religious and
Learned K. James's Speech beforementioned, page 14.
Prince, no better then Vipers, Pests, and Traitors to a Kingdom; styled in
these latter times evil Counselors to the King.

The violating the ancient Law of Magna Charta, so industriously and
religiously preserved by our Ancestors, and above thirty several times
confirmed in Parliament (to use the very words of the Lords and Commons
assembled at Oxford, in their Declarations printed there) is objected against
the Parliament sitting at Westminster, to be a See the Oxford Declaration, p.
19.
bold and avowed transgression of the Laws and Liberties of the People, as if
the Party of those Lords and Commons were altogether free from the like
transgressions; so they may in like manner object the violating the late King's
Grant to the Petition of Right, when they and their Party are as culpable as
the Parliaments Party are. The pillaging the Earl of Stamford's house in
Leicester shire by the Kings Party commanding there, an undoubted and notorious
Felony by the Letter of the Law, all His Soldiers guilty of the same. The
storming by day and night, and breaking into the Marquess of Winchester's
House in in Hant-shire by the Parliaments Party, the highest degree of
Burglary. Many the like Hostile actions may be instanced in on either side, but
how? In the heat of War, in the pursuit of Conquest, each Party striving which
should overcome and destroy their Enemy.

One other passage of that Book as unjustly and improbably delivered (viz.) The
excuse and plausible reasons given of the King's going to the House of Commons,
attended with so many armed Gentlemen, as the (...), in the Treatise concerning
the King's going to the House of Commons to surprise the five Members.
Author says, was no unwonted thing for the Majesty of a King to be so
attended, especially in discontented times. The times were not then so
discontented as that unheard of and horrid act did afterward make them, and
might have made them at that time, had but the hand of one desperate Caitiffe
given fire to his Pistols ready cockt, the House of Commons being near full,
and equal in number to the Forces prepared against them, no man knows how
disastrous and fatal the event had been: neither could the King justly fear to
be assaulted or affronted by any in the House, as the Author intimates, None in
the House within, being armed answerable to that the King's Guard without. The
Author thinks that he has handsomely palliated that attempt, under color of
the King's standing in need of a Guard, rendering those His Attendants there
short of His ordinary Guard: but whether he means short in number, or in
forcible array, he declares not. Many other passages as improbable as these,
are the discourses of the Book, too tedious to recite, the examining and search
whereof is besides my purpose. It seems to have little of it of the King, it
has Elegancy of wit enough, and affectation of expressions to be applauded,
inconsistent with a sound and Christian wisdom whereunto His present Condition
was to be fitted: and Charity enjoynes not to think it His, when full of so
many uncharitable expressions although clothed in pious ejaculations. The
Author is too blame to father upon Him such intermixtures of Scorn and Piety,
in some parts of it Devotion and Penitencie, in other Censurings and
Detractings, compiled probably by several Authors, the offspring too unlike it
self to be truly and unviocally begot by one and the self-same Parent. The
words of Scorn are, where the Author speaking of the King's impeaching six
Members of both Houses of High Treason, terms them in a disdainful way [ (...),
page 11.
Half a dozen] which number is all one as six, but the manner of the slighting
Phrase [Half a dozen] unbecoming the grave and serious Majesty of a King,
especially He being in sorrow and affliction as the Author presents Him, Not to
be applied to Gentlemen of quality, rather to things of cheap and mean account
vendible in Tradesmens Shops. The whole Book, indeed, if thoroughly scanned, is
but a fine-dressed Invective against the one, an Apology for the other Party,
fitly penned to keep up the affections of His friends, to win and move
compassion even from His enemies: for whilst the Author presents him innocent
and injured, compassion begets affections toward the Person injured, throws
disgrace and calumny on the Persons injuring. The best, most acceptable and
likelyest to be believed Tract had been, if the Author in His Book had observed
and declared, that the King peradventure in the time of His greatest troubles,
and when the Victory stood doubtful, did intend, as He did then profess in many
excellent and winning speeches delivered at York, Shrewsbury, Nottingham and
else where, to preserve the Laws and Liberties of His People, to maintain the
Protestant Religion, the Power and Privilege of Parliament, which He could not
but foresee (take it either in the upright heart of a pious Prince intending
it) that His real and sincere intentions to maintain the same were His best
breast plate and safest guard, or (take it in the politic part of a cunning
Enemy meaning nothing less) That such Professions were His next way to Conquer
by; but when He had thereby conquered what safety or security was there to be
expected, that He should not return unto and be governed by the advice of those
evil Counselors who had at the first drawn Him away, and by degrees might have
wrought upon His affections to the curbing, if not to the suppressing those
Laws and Liberties, to the punishing those whom He had adjudged and called
Travtors, Rebels?

The High Treason charged on the Parliament by the Author in the Person of the
King, softly and mildely instilled into the Readers ears in that Book,
down-rightly and roughly by the divided Members sitting at Oxford in their
Declaration printed there; must be understood either le Crime de Majesty or le
Crime de Fausonnerie, The Crime against His Majesty, is either against His
Person or His Honor: against His Person, as to conspire or intend His death, or
to leavie War against Him: against His Honor, as to deflour the Queen His
wife, His daughter, or the wife of His Heir, to kill those His principal
Officers of State, specified within the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. comprising all
Crimes adjudged Treason. Flattery and a temporary conformity to the present and
Arbitrary will of a Prince, are but shadows only, the true substance and
highest degree of honoring Him is, when men in Place and Authority deputed
thereunto, shall endeavor (as the Parliament Protested and were credibly
believed) to have punished all Indignities, Affronts and Crimes which had or
might have been committed against the Peace, His Crown and Dignity. The other
sort of High Treason is Le Crime de Fausonnerie, two ways committed, either by
counterfeiting the Coin or the Great Seal. Now with which sort of High Treason
does the King's Party charge the Parliaments? either with the first a purpose
to destroy His Person, etc. as above recited? or the latter, the counterfeiting
the Great Seal? not against His Person, The observing this Discourse throughout
setting forth the Manner and Original of the Contention betwixt the King and His
People (the Parliament only is as it were the Judge between both) does manifest
how improbable and untrue it does appear, that the Parliament when five or six
years since accused of Treason by the divided Members sitting at Oxford, did,
then or at any time before, intend to levy and offensive War, to imagine or
conspire the Kings Death. It is one thing originally to intend, out of malice
prepensed and forethought to devise or contrive a purpose, another thing
through an inevitable necessity to act against and contrary to the intention of
the Actors. If, by the way, any exquisite or choice
Wits, of a more sublimate reach then their Fellow Subjects, did know or could
have discovered any dark or secret contrivances of such intendment or
conspiracy against His Person, deeming all others of a narrow and lower
capacity, ignorant and dull-spirited, they were too blame to conceal the Plot,
the manner and means of effecting it: They had Power, Confidence and Liberty
enough, when the divided Members being of their Party sat at Oxford, and there
accused the Parliament sitting at Westminster of many treasonable Designs
present, which (the quality of the Persons accusing being considered) they
would leave no means unattempted to enhaunce their Power, to make good their
Charge, for the Justice sake of their Proceedings. So then the Case is briefly
thus, The King's Party (together with the divided Members sitting at Oxford)
have in their Declarations Printed there, charged the Parliament of High
Treason, which Party to make good their Charge have striven and done their
utmost to enforce their own to consume the Parliaments strength, as by inviting
Foreigners and Natives to come in to their assistance, yea See the Oxford
Declaration page 26. and 27.
Neutrals too, under pain of forfeiting their Allegiance and breach of Oath.
The Parliament have on the other side, to defend themselves and friends from
such guilt, the Neutrals also from the censure of Allegiance-forfeiting, as
much contended to abate and take away the King's Parties Strength.

Whereas the Objection now is, That the Parliament having of late, and many
years together, consisted of three Estates, King, Lords and Commons, ceases now
to be a Parliament; It Is answered, it is no less a Parliament by His death, then
by His voluntary and continuated absence in person and affections; Besides, to
satisfy the Objectors arguing, That by want of a King there is no such Court
or Government, as that the want of Him does totally vacate both. There be other
sorts of Government known to all those that have read the Politiques. Howbeit
the Parliament has heretofore consisted of three Estates (one of which is
divided into two, Lords Spiritual and Temporal) Parliaments have been
heretofore held, the In the time of Edw. 1 at St Edmondsbury, Clero excluso.
Crompt. Jurisdict. fol. 19.
one excluded. If by reason of inconvenience in succeeding times they have
discovered cause for the abolishing any of the other, preserving the Power and
Government unto themselves, and therefore have changed the Monarchical into
some other Form, They have not done it merely as Conquerors, to give new Laws
unto the Conquered, but as a just Power lawfully convened, to defend and
preserve the old from being broken and trampled on. In their disposing and
constituting a Government, there are two things to be considered, the fact of
Constituting, the equity and reason of the fact; as to the one, None will deny
but it is within the compass of a Conquering Power to alter, abrogate, repeal
and constitute: as to the reason and equity of so doing, that is to be left to
the judgment and experience of those who do it. If the Court of Parliament have
or shall require obedience to their Power, they require no more then what the
Apostle enjoins; Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is
no Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of Him. And whereas They
have Enacted and Declared That all men in offices of Trust and Qualified shall
promise to be true and faithful to this Common Wealth wherein they live and
from whence they hold and enjoy their welfare, enforcing afterward a
Subscription and Engagement of Fealty unto the Commonwealth, as it is now
established without King or House of Lords, the Peoples Subscription thereunto
is no more, if small matters may hold resemblance with greater, then Tenants of
a Manor unto a Lord thereof, unto whom, without disputing the right or title,
they promise their present Fealty. If the Lord unto whom they have heretofore
done homage, be disseised by a stronger then himself, take it either of Right
or Power, the Tenants are to pay their homage to the Lord that is, or by
denying it become subject to be distrained to what they are worth: for it is
not to the Power already past or that which is to come, but to the Powers that
be, unto which Subjection is to be rendered. The Inconveniences may be many,
discovered by their Prudence, which Commonwealths in a Monarchy may be subject
to, when Princes in their absolute and monarchical estate abusing their Power
and Liberty, have become Tyrants over the Lives and Liberties of the People,
assuming moreover so much unto themselves or having been flattered by their
Creatures to believe, That they are Gods on earth, as some of the Roman
Emperors did arrogate unto themselves, That their Power is so vast, so
sovereign, that the People were ordained for their behoof, to do and pay
obedience in whatsoever they shall command, not the King for the Quanquam
Principes and Subditi sunt ex nume^o (...), tamen natura and temports ratione
prius fuerunt instituti Subditi. Principes vero (nisi qui Tyrannidem
usurpa^in^) non natura ut Patres, sed ^uff^agio Subditorum and consensu, certis
conditionibus, Subditorum g^atia constituti sunt. I^de illud Domini apud Daniel
4 32. Scias quod domineiur Altissimus in regno hominum and cu^ voluerit dabit
illud. Ex quo sequetur non Regum causa Subdetos nasci, sed R^ges commod^s
Subd^torum inservire debere. Pucan Institut. Theolog. tractat. de Magistrate.
Thomas 1 part. 1 summa Theolog. quaest. 9. Art. 3. and 4.
Peoples good, That Kings were accomptable to none but God for whatsoever they
do, as of late 'twas threatened. The case is now quite otherwise then in former
times: Heretofore have been Civil Wars, None like this, consider it either in
the manner for the beginning and continuance of it, for the opposite and cross
Engagements even between the nearest friends, between Equals in all Degrees
Relations and Faculties, where the engaging at the first might be upon a
Misunderstanding only, the prosecution rests upon contending about several
objects, rooted now in a Contention on the one side for, on the other side
against absolute Monarchy; both Parties pretending to one and the self-same
End, PEACE. The difference is as a long time it has been, about the means how
Peace has been forfeited, how lost; now how to regain and secure it when
regained. The King's Party say (the moderate sort out of an unwillingness only
to be Conquered, others of a fiercer spirit to be avenged on their adversaries)
the surest and next way to Peace, is in the Prince his enjoying what his Father
had; the Parliament judge quite contrary, for their own Safety, their Friends,
and the Commonwealths. For whilst the Prince seems to imply a threatening to
be avenged on them which have been Actors in His Father's Death, as in his See
them recited in the Diurnal, from the 15. of February, the 21, 1649.
Letters to the Marquess of Montrosse, and to the Committee of Estates in
Scotland (amongst other things) he mentions who those Actors be, his meaning
may admit a large extent, to bring within his Censure all who have Adhered to,
Fought or Acted for the Parliament, See the (...), What the late King's Parties
Opinion is of the Covenant, and wherefore at the first contrived: In the
Marginall Note in the 41. Page of this Book,
Covenanters, Non-Covenanters, with the Sea the King's Parties Censure of them,
in the Declaration printed at Oxford, 1643.
Neutrals too, for not offering to defend the King. Not to defend or Forbear to
Assist, is all one as to Offend. Whosoever shall look on in a Conflict betwixt
two opposite Parties, his Affections questionless incline (whatsoever his
Actions are) more to one Party then to the other: So Neutrals, such as have not
acted for the King, being already by His Party adjudged Guilty, are subject to
the Censure, and may be brought in within the compass of the Prince his
meaning. On which account, whosoever have not declared themselves to have been
some way for the King, will hardly avoid His Parties suspicion of having been
for the other side, the Parliament. Now, where two Parties are extremely
opposite in their Endeavourings, the one to maintain what They have got, the
other to recover what they have lost, the judgment and practices on either part
moving in a strong opposition each to other, whether the Prevailing Power need
to enjoin or not new Ties and Leagues to conform All to the Obedience of their
Power and Government? In a doubtful Conflict, where it is not agreed which
Party will prevail (for it is which we may believe, either the Diurnals
published by, and on the Parliaments behalf, or the Pamphletters on the King's,
venting much of their Success, and hopes to recover what they have lost) it is
requisite in either case that the vanquished and weaker Party should join and
unite themselves by Engagements and Leagues to strengthen and keep up the Power
they have, when a small matter of Dividing (as whether they shall Engage or
not) turns the Scale in weighing what is to be done. The cunning and wit
practiced by many, Dissuading from a Subscription to such Engagement, the manner
of their practicing of an abstruse and dark operation hardly to be perceived
but by it is effects, the maintenance of sedition, thence a pursuit of the hopes
of Conquering by keeping up Divisions, even in matters of small weight or
Difficulty.

Sir, the scruple which some make, disputing the quality, the reason of the
Engagement which the Parliament has enjoined, is [That it is strange and new
which the People are to subscribe unto.] A St. Augustine.
Father of the Church shows what is to be expected in an Innovation in a
Commonwealth, Ipsa mutatio quae utilitate adjurat, etiam novitate perturbat.
The novity and the not examining the necessity of their enjoining such
Engagement to bring all men into one and the same entire judgment and
agreement, the Enemy (divided now into several parties) his aim to keep men
from accord and unity under pretense of the Conscience ensnared, inthralled by
such Engagements, have raised these doubts to the hopes of a new distraction.

Besides the Novity of a strange and unheard of Engagement to be imposed, other
Discontents and heartburnings are cherished, as in the Nobility to be detruded
from their Privileges and Rights of sitting in the House of Parliament as
Peers, to join with the Commons in the debate and handling the weighty affairs
of the Commonwealth, as that those Lords who have been active and assistant,
both in their Estates and Countenance, to promote the good of it during these
Distractions, may think themselves neglected and ill-rewarded to be now
debarred from their Ancient and Native Liberty of Voting in the House. The
Reason of the Parliaments enjoining of the Peoples subscribing to this
Engagement, rests upon the issue of these Questions. Whether there be a
Necessity or not of entering into such League or Engagement: Whether the
Conquest be fully made, or there need no Engagement for completing it? Whether
the Kingdom of Ireland be reduced and brought into it is former relation and
commerce with this of England, that there be no danger or fears of breaking out
again, when it shall be so reduced? Whether through and by reason of the
continuance of these Distractions, which the Parliament would put a period
unto, were they not so much opposed and inveighed against, this of England be
not in danger of loosing their ancient Rights and claims, their Freedom and
Privileges of Commerce and Traffic, which heretofore they have enjoyed? See
this Question in part cleared, page 40. in the Scots parttaking with the King
concerning one remarkable Article of the large Treaty agreed upon, August 1641.
Whether that of Scotland remain in the same condition of Amity and
Brotherhood, as in their League and Covenant with England they at first united
in? Whether whilst that is in dispute, we may rest secure from an hostile
Invasion from them or Foreigners? Whether by these unnecessary Disputes and
dissentions here at home, the Commonwealth be not in danger to loose that in
the twinkling of an eye, which has cost so much Treasure, Industry and Blood
(for the Powers that be, once shaken and becoming weak, will soon fall) most
men being apt to lay hold on the Noli in caducum parictem inclinare, Lipsius
Polit.
Polititian's advice [Not to lean on a weak and tottering wall] The Judgment
and knowledge of deciding this, rests in the Prudence and Experience of the
State: who after a long time casting and consulting what was fittest to be
done, what safest course to be taken for the strengthening and support of a firm
and present Government, have Resolved upon an Universal Engagement in such
manner and form as to their Wisdoms seems most expedient, and They have
accordingly Declared and Ordained, that They knowing the justness of their
Cause, ought in relation to the security and maintenance of their Power, to the
Preservation of a firm and lasting Peace, to use all expedient and lawful
means against the violent and restless Opposition of their Enemies; None so
safe as by an Engagement and Subscription thereunto, Which if thoroughly
weighed, crosses no former Vow or Oath either of Protestation, Covenant, See
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy and why the taking it was enjoined in
this Treatise, page 51.
Oath of Allegiance or Supremacy, the Subscriber only promising to be true and
faithful to the Commonwealth as it is now established without King or House of
Lords. Not that the Nobility are thereby excluded for ever from their
Privileges, as to succeeding Parliaments, if these continued Divisions beget
not an universal ruin taking away the succession of Parliaments to be
hereafter had, nor from an Envy or Neglect had by the House of Commons to take
the Lords away, as has been of late seditiously given out (for so the Gentry
(of which the Parliament themselves consist) being in the next Rank to the
Nobility, may fear their turn is next to be thrown from their station also and
all become Levelled) but that the Persons and Estates of such of the Lords as
have assisted the Court of Parliament in the time of their extremities may
hence be preserved from ruin, as of others also of the Nobility whom the Enemy
reckons since their first engaging for the King, to be offenders now, for their
late submitting to their Compositions for Delinquency, for their complying with
the Parliaments Votes; howbeit thereby they are free from molestation for the
future, whilst the Parliament maintain and keep up their Power. Wherefore it
is resolved that an universal Engagement shall be had as a Bond and League to
bring all men into one and the same judgment, that from an Mr. Lambard's
Eirenarch. lib. 1. cap. 2. in in his Tract on K. Edw. 3. His Writ directed to
the High Sheriff of Kent for the proclaiming a Peace, where he speaks first of
uniting minds, then of restraining hands as a means to the Preservation of the
Public Peace.
Unity of minds, a Restraining of the hands may ensue, in order to the settling
of a firm and lasting Peace. Admit that these Doubts were unquestionable, these
Dangers so removed and taken away, to our best advantage and security, that
there needed no Engagement or League to bring all men into one and the self
same mind; yet the constant prejudice and ill will which the Enemy has to the
Parliament and their Proceedings, causes him, with many more of his kind and
spirit, to dislike and refuse the Engagement, because the Parliament has
enjoined it, and for no other cause, then to quarrel with and oppose their
Authority.

The other sort of High Treason, wherewith the Parliament stands charged, is,
The making a new See the Oxford Declaration, page 21.
Great-Seal, counterfeiting the Kings: Observe Sir the justness of such Charge.
The Great-Seal an instrument of State, whereby Justice is derived and
distributed to the People, as the divided Members at Oxford do confess, being
surreptitiously and vafrously taken away from the Parliament, the
Representative Body of the People, contrary to the Trust reposed in the Keeper
of the same, the making of a new one cannot be rightly judged Counterfeiting,
within the meaning of the 25 Edw: 3.
Statute. Counterfeiting is a close and covert act against the knowledge and
privity of a Superior and lawful Power, damnified by such Counterfeiting; nor
is every thing which is made to the mould by which it is made, a simply
Counterfeiting: The quality of the offense is discerned in the manner of the
offending, and the making a Law commonly relates to some preterite crime or
fraud: Now you will believe it is no where to be found upon Record, whereon to
ground a Law, That a King and Parliament have at any time made use of any
Great-Seal, to cross or thwart each others Actings: Many other Accusations of
this kind are charged on them, See the same Declaration, page 27.
as Disturbers of the Peace, Authors and Fomentors of this, they call, Rebel
on, and what else Malice and Revenge can invent divulge to render Them and
their Actions infamous. But to return and show the Royalist his next hopes of
prevailing, shadowed out even now. By attempting to bring in any Foreign
Force, how wild or barbarous soever they be, how hard to get them out again
out of this plentiful and flourishing Kingdom, yielding them all provisions,
all Habiliments of War to strengthen themselves in This, as to provide for
their next attempt elsewhere after they have destroyed and harassed This, not
knowing how to distinguish between Presbyterian, Independent and Royal Party,
and this to be driven on by him (in an hazardous and uncertain way) out of
revenge and thirst to regain unto himself his power again, long since forfeited
through his mistaken Loyalty, certainly through his disaffection to his Native
Brethren of the same Kingdom; or without considering, which wise men should,
that a small Foreign Force, unless aided by a discontented Faction here at
home, will not do the work, a great one will destroy and overrun them also,
which is easy and obvious to every vulgar capacity to foresee: for what
Forreigner can be thought of to invade this Kingdom, whilst the Natives
thereof are true unto and at unity within themselves? If it be objected, That
the Subjects of This, taking up Arms to defend themselves will prove a leading
case to the People in other States and Kingdoms to do the like. It Is answered,
The Government of This differs from all Forms of Government in other Nations,
This being no absolute but a limited and mixed Monarchy where the King is (as a
great Bracton lib 4.
Lawyer takes his Dimension) Vniversis minor, habet Superiores, Deum, Legem per
quam factus est Rex, Curiam scilicet Comites, Barons, etc. The Laws Customs
and Constitutions of This are distinct and different from all other Nations in
the Christian world, others being Free-States simply and absolutely Monarchies,
or Powers enforcing and conforming all under them to slavery and vassaladge. So
that if a Forreigner shall attempt to invade This, it cannot be deemed he does
it from a sense of a like suffering with the King or to asist Him, rather to
enrich himself, to prey upon the wealth and opulencie of a fruitful and
flourishing Kingdom. Your last Objection, That the Army's most noted Mr. H. P.
Preacher is (as you have heard) a disguised Jesuit; Other the like Falsehoods
put upon him, of late reported, which few men besides the reporters do believe
and scarsly they. If these Objections prove untrue or easily answered, the
disgrace will recoyle and injure them who lay them on. Sir if a man has a
mind to quarrel it is easy to find a staff. Your Eminency and Credit in
your Country let in two Inconveniences, A danger to be tempted by the opposite
Party to comply and fall in with them, when mean and weak men are let alone,
The other that it will fare with you in your Defection as spots and soiles in
fine cloth; the finer the cloth the easilier the soiling is discerned, in
ordinary and course Cloths it is not so. No question there are those in several
parts of our Neighboring Counties who may instill into your Ears a likelihood
of the King's Party's prevailing, upon their prevailing the Dangers whereunto
you and the rest of His Enemies are subject, also the weakness, the often
failings, the inique or unfit Proceedings of the Parliament, in prefering for
the present Persons of a lower Degree then ordinary to Places and Offices of
Trust; when as They were forced thereunto in that men of an higher rank
discontented that their side cannot prevail refuse to bear such Offices: In
their Fining and Punishing the King's Party for Delinquency, although not in so
high and severe a way as the King's Party would have Punished Them in case they
had prevailed; In continuing Taxes and Impositions upon their fellow Subjects
for the maintenance of their Power and Army, Their Enemies not weighing the
exigence and necessities which the Parliament is forced unto, but moved by
their own prejudice and spleen against the Proceedings of that Court, and
resolvedly engaged for the King to make such men as you to be of their Party,
but that we know you can out-argue them, the strength and quickness of their
and their Party's arguments resulting merely from their pretense of Loyalty, or
from that fierceness and height of spirit occasioned through the greatness of
their Estates, therefore envying and are troubled to be overborn by men of
lower fortunes. And this may give the hint of the vain surmise, That the
Parliaments Design is to make the Estates of all men equal, to introduce a
Levelling, when as men of great estates and spirits are armed with power to
oppress and side with an Enemy against their meaner Brethren.

Sir, If there be but a Defection in part, or abatement of constancy, which
every occurrent of discontent heightened by your spirit, will or may soon turn
into a total Defection in Persons so eminent as you, in other Counties as in
this, consider what a Revolution of all things must then happen, how dangerous
and fatal the effects will be, to render all men in all places engaged any way
for the Parliament interpretably against the King, all Towns and Counties not
consonant to the King's will when this War began, to be anew questioned, all
Places and Offices by Ye conferred, all Commissions and Grants by Ye made, all
Constitutions by Ye, or under Your Authority established, to be disturbed (the
Persons accepting and invested in the same, exposed to Reproach and Scorn) by a
new moulding and alteration to be had upon a Re-Conquering, in case such a
chance should befall this Nation, and in man's apprehension cannot, unless your
Divisions shall let in such Confusion and Misery, That those who have been your
Friends, shall upon Punctilioes and petty Differences become your Enemies and
Accusers, afterward a prey themselves to the first and common Enemy. Your
active and constant Industry cannot degenerate into a revolting now. This
reciting your Actions here, will assoil you from the suspicion; and leave a
deeper Impress of your meritings, then any outward commerce or compliance can
raze out. You may for ought we know deal with as reserved a subtilty to promote
your first undertakings, as the Adverse part think that you do to promote
theirs. Lastly, this you may see in the sum of all, That if the prevailing
Party in a Division shall divide according to their varying judgments, then
subdivide, after subdivide again, there will be no end of such Dividings,
until the number of your whole Army be reduced into few or none, and shattered
in pieces, as your Enemies would have it, even as dust before the wind. For
instance sake; The Kingdom did at first divide into a Party for the King,
another for the Parliament, The Parliaments Party upon their Conquest did
divide into Presbyterian, Independent; the Presbyterian if they shall prevail,
may divide into a Scottish rigid Presbyterian, and an English Presbyterian of a
milder test, and to be new molded to the Conquerours fashion: If the
Independent shall prevail, they may rend into new Sects and Divisions, and the
prevailing party in such Sects may divide again, so there will be no end of
Dividing till all be lost and scattered. Neither is it your, or your opposite
parties fault alone, but the fault of both to weaken and consume Ye both. And
what my fault is (the weakest of the Well-willers to your accord) I shall as
willingly listen and submit unto: I fear my plain dealing, which you will say
might have been spared, and my selfless blameable. Nothing less

Your faithful Friend to serve you. S. W.
February 1649.
FINIS.

