A CENTURY OF REASONS For Subscription and Obedience to the Laws and Government
of the Church of England, both ECCLESIASTICAL and CIVIL.

With Reasons against the COVENANT.

Justified by Scripture, Confirmed by the Laws of the Kingdom the Right and
Power of Kings, Ecclesiastical and Human Authorities, with an Harmony of
Confessions.

^o which is annexed the Office and Charge belonging to the Overseers of the
Poor, etc.

Rex solo Deo minor, caeteris omnibus major. Tertul.

Who can lay his hands upon the Lords Anointed and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9.

W. Wasse Schoolmaster in Little Britain near unto Christ-church.

London, Printed by W.W. for R.H. at the Bible in Heart in Little Britain, 1663.

To the most High and Mighty Monarch, CHARLES the II. By the Grace of God, of
Great Britain, France and Ireland King, Defender of the True, Catholic and
Ancient Faith, etc.
Religious, Renowned, and most Gracious King,
THis Small Work that chiefly concerns Kings, and persuades to Obedience unto
them, with all Humility and Submission, I, one of your meanest Subjects,
present unto your Sacred Majesty, in whom Courtesy and Clemency with
Authority, are transcendently Eminent; of whom, O King of Peace, I cannot but
(with the many ten-thousands of your Loyal and Royal hearted Subjects) give in
my Test, that Your Sacred Majesty is not only as David, but as Solomon, yea,
the Solomon of the world, who having Reconciled Three Kingdoms to Your self at
Home, and most Nations of the World Abroad, have also tied Peace to Your Sacred
Person: These Transcendent, All-concluding, and All-commanding Virtues fill
Your Loyal and Royal Subjects hearts with confidence that our Eyes shall see in
Your Peaceable days God's House finished, and the Temples built again that have
been destroyed: And the rather have we this confidence, since that Your Royal
Majesty has broken down the Partition Wall of Rites and Ceremonies in the
Church of England, and in the Church of Scotland, and now of Two made One: And
as it has been usual to Unite Nations, and common to call United Nations by
one Name, and in them to Establish but one Form of Government Ecclesiastical
and Civil, even so has Your Sacred Majesty done, whereby the Black Monarchy of
the Prince of Darkness is now cast down for ever.

Most Serene and Powerful Prince, the attractive Beauty of Your Government
draws the very Hearts and Souls of Your Loyal and Royal hearted Subjects, not
only to pay unto You what is due, but also by a Practicable Example to go
before others in Obedience, for want of which many years past by and gone,
through unduely untempered Zeal, multitudes of Your Subjects denied the
Magistrates of their duty, and Your Sacred Majesty the Head of all Government:
By means whereof, for some small Differences, a few Error-searching Singulars
out-faceing and opposing Ever-famous Plurals, uncharitably first set the House
of God on fire, and afterward caused a General Conflagration throughout all
Your Majesty's Dominions, which without Art-exceeding Deploration cannot be
remembered. Therefore there is great reason why Your Sacred Majesty should
beware of yielding hasty belief to the Robes of Sanctimony: By their works you
shall know them.

Most Dread Sovereign, By this dim Light of a small Candle I am come at
Noonday to give what Light I am able unto the dark corners, where the Sun, nor
the Moon, nor the Stars as yet appear, notwithstanding the Eye-dazling luster
of them in the Firmament of our Church and State, the Light of the least of
them being able to guide the Wayless Traveller in the darkest night.

Great and Mighty King, the Great God that has made You thus Great, and set
You up the Oracle of Kings, the Miracle of Ages, and made You to Your Enemies
as a Rock invincible, against which they have, and for ever shall dash
themselves in pieces, the same Great God give You the Conquest of all our
Hearts and Wills, that there may be an Harmony and Agreement of Soul and Spirit
amongst all Your Subjects from Dan to Beersheba, and that this entire Realm of
Great Britain, English, Scottish, and Welsh, now being framed into one happy
Sovereignty, it is the humble Prayer prostrate upon the knees of my heart, that
the Almighty Three in One, would bring us to be perfectly One.

Your Majesty's Most Humble, Loyal, and Obedient Subject, W. WASSE.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, By the Divine Providence, Lord
Bp of LONDON.
Reverend Father in God,
THere is but one thing in the World has moved me to this Public Addressing
my self unto Your Lordship, and it is this, The Misrepresentation of me and my
Judgment concerning the Established Government of the Church of England, by the
False Government and the No-Government Faction, and this only occasioned from
my Childish Nonconformity, through their Instructions, for which I humbly beg
pardon, for I did it ignorantly: and since Years have taught me wisdom, with
the reasons which prove our Government Holy, Just, and Good, as to the ends
thereof, being convinced, as in duty bound, and as an account of my Obedience
which I owe, I do in all Humility present unto your Lordship the Reasons of my
Conformity: Beseeching the. Merciful God and our Heavenly Father to increase
his Graces more and more upon You, to his Glory, the Churches Freedom from
Error and Heresy, and Your Everlasting Comfort.

Your Lordship's poor Beadsman to be commanded, W. WASSE.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir John Robinson, Knight and Baronet, Lieutenant of
his Majesty's Tower of London, and Lord Mayor of the Honorable City of
London; AND To the Right Worshipful Sir Richard Brown, Knight and Baronet, one
of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, and Major General of the same.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
IT is not the first nor second time I have Affected to make known the
Uprightness of my Heart toward his Sacred Majesty's Kingly Power, the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Government of the Church of England, established in
all his Majesty's Dominions; But never until this time could I Effect it, and
I hope seasonably, when the Grounds and Reasons are considered, which with all
Humility I offer in a particular manner unto Your Lordship and Worship, and the
rather unto you than to any other Citizens, in as much as ye were so eminently
Instrumental in the Restoration of his Sacred Majesty, and since in His
Preservation. From whom I have received sufficient cause, to give Public
testimony of my thankful Heart, (which the whole Kingdom also has) and to
whom I worthily Devote my Self, who next under God and His Sacred Majesty, have
preserved me with the Loyal ten-thousands from Ruin and Destruction: and unto
whom the Power and Possession of my Person belongs; and therefore none more
meet than Your Lordship and Worship, to whom I might after the retirement to my
Books, commit the Care of this small Compiled work, which asserteth the Duty of
Subjects unto Kingly Power, Ecclesiastical and Civil Government, especially the
Duty of all Subjects unto Our Dread Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, of
whom, and of whose Government I cannot Write too much, but may Err in this,
that I have Writ no more.

The Everlasting Arms of Divine Power be under Him; and the Neverdying Favors
of His All enduring Love rest upon you, upon all Loyal and Royal Hearts, and
His well-placed Subjects of Honor and Obedience, which is the daily Orison of

Right Honorable and Right Worshipful His Majesty's Most Loyal Subject and
Your Devoted Servant, W. Wasse.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IT is not possible for any Man to make a true and constant Profession and
Confession of his Faith, except he understand the Doctrine of the Church
aright, and exercise his Conscience therewith; Then such men as have not the
understanding of the Articles of the Doctrine of Christ, expressed in the 39.
Articles of the Church of England, in some good degree and measure, are nothing
else but Vain Bubbles, which suddenly swell, start up, and fall away of
themselves. And if any man will stand in doubt of them he is justly counted not
to be a Man, but the Monster of a Man, and without all Wit: it being the
property of a good and sober Wit, not to love Cavillations, knowing that two
times four makes eight, and the Excess brings nothing but Disorder and
Amazement. What these Articles be, are plainly Comprised in the Creeds of the
Apostles, of Nice, and Athanasius: and these we judge and believe, do agree
with the perpetual meaning of the Prophets and Apostles Writings: Now since,
that there is but one Truth, and more than one there cannot be, and this Truth
we Have, Hold, and Profess; Then whatsoever varyeth from that one Truth, must
needs be no Truth, for Truth agrees with Truth. Reader, art thou a Christian?
I suppose thou art; can thou say the parts of thy Catechism? I think that
there is no Christian will be so wickedly rude, as not to know so few Heads:
Now let those Heads of the Catechism be unto thee instead of a most sure
perfect Rule, to examine, to try, and to judge all Religious and all Doctrines
by: For it is certain, that the Catechism is a short Sum of all the whole
Bible, and contains all that is required of Necessity unto Faith and unto our
Salvation. But what I write, or have written, I know not how it may please, I
have made it my Study rather to please God than Man: whether I shall offend I
know not, with much doubt I have changed some Words, and fear if I take others
I may take worse: what ever the Pains be I have taken, I cannot pass the Strife
of Tongues, neither the Malice of Ungrateful and Irreligious Spirits, nor yet
Jerks of the False Government, and the No-Government Faction, who as they have,
so still will endeavor to Disturb my outward and my inward Peace, by False,
Malicious Scandals, Lying Reports and Accusations, whereby they have and still
may promise themselves Concealment of their Ill-contrived Enterprises: Like the
Artians of old, the better to bring in their damnable Error concerning the
Deity of Christ, which Athanasius withstanding, and holding fast his Judgment
in the truth of the Deity of Christ, they forged Lies and Accusations against
him of dishonesty with a woman, and cutting off a man's hand, as Eusebius
relates. Christian Reader, that these Reasons have been kept from the Press
twelve months beyond my first intentions, has been by reason of some proud and
ignorant persons, whose Lives were notoriously tainted, as the Judgments of
others are notably corrupted, who withstood me to my face.

Yet have I this hope, that they are not so long in coming forth as to hinder
thy profit and satisfaction, who yet remainest full of doubt concerning our
Governors, and sure established Government; nor yet too late for the
confirmation and strengthening of those, who doubt not of the one nor the other.
Remember we are all under one Head, and why not all of one Heart? Seek not thy
own honor, profit, or private estimation amongst men, but the Peace of the
Kingdom, with the Salvation of Souls, and the work is done without any danger
of failing from the Land of Uprightness. Read, and consider what thou read,
pray that thou may understand and believe the Truth, and the Truth will make
you free, which is the hearty prayer of

Your Christian Faithful Remembrancer of your Duty and Allegiance, W. WASSE.
March 20 1662.
TAlem nobis Hierarchiam si exhibeunt, ir qua sic emineant Episcopi, ut Christo
subesse non recusent, ut ab illo tanquam unico capite pendeant, and ad ipsum
referantur, in qua sic inter se fraternam societatem colant, ut non alio modo
quam ejus veritate sint colligati; tum vero nullo non Anathemate dignos fateor,
si qui erunt, qui non eam reverenter, summaque obedientia observent. Call. de
Neces. Reforman. Ecclesiae.

If they would bring unto us such an Hierarchy, wherein the Bishops shall so
rule, as that they refuse not to submit themselves to Christ, that they depend
upon him as their only Head, and refer all to him, and so embrace Brotherly
Society, that they are knit together by no other means than his truth; then
surely if their shall be any that shall not submit themselves to that Hierarchy
reverently, and with the greatest obedience that may be, I confess there is no
Anathema of which they are not worthy. Calvin in the Treatise of the Necessity
of Reforming the Church.

If then it has pleased Gracious Princes, for expression of the Honor which
they gave to God in the Honor given by them to our holy Function, to grace us
with eminent Titles and Rights, can any Christian man be so foolishly spightful
as to think, because we are Lord-Bishops, that we challenge to be Lords of our
Clergy: I would these Maligners should know, that with High Titles we can bear
as humble minds as those that pick that quarrel; and are so little transported
with these Puffs of Style, that we account it (according to our Savior's
prescription) our greatest glory to be Servants to the Souls of the meanest
Drudges in the Family of our God. Bishop Hall in his Episcopacy of Divine
Right. Imprimatur.

Geo. Stradling S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Episc. Land. a sac.
Domest.
Ex Aed. Sab. Feb. 26. 1662.
A CENTURY OF REASONS For Subscription, etc.
Con. Toledo Can 2.636.
THE Decree of the B B of Spain, assembled in a National Council at Toledo,
against Perjury and Treason.
Whosoever amongst us shall from this time forward violate the Oath which he
has taken for the safeguard of this Country, and the preservation of the
King's Majesty; Whosoever shall attempt the King 's Death, or Deposition;
Whosoever shall by Tyrannical presumption aspire to the Royal Throne; let him
be Accursed before the Holy Spirit, before the blessed Saints, let him be cast
out of the Catholic Church, which he has polluted by Perjury, let him have
no Communion with Christian men, nor Portion with the Just, but let him be
Condemned with the Devil and his Angels eternally, together with his Accomplices,
that they may be tied in the Bonds of Damnation which were joined in the
Society of Sedition.

Con. 4.5.6.10. Can. 74.
Whosoever of us, or of all the People through all Spain, shall go about by
any means of Conspiracy or Practice, to violate the Oath of his Fidelity which
he has taken for the preservation of his Country, or of the King 's Life; or
who shall attempt to lay violent hands upon the King, or to deprive him of his
Kingly power, or by Tyrannical presumption Usurp the Sovereignty of the
Kingdom, let him be Accursed in the sight of God the Father and of his Angels,
and let him be made and declared a Stranger from the Catholic Church, which
he has profaned with his Perjury.

The Oath of Supremacy.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the King's
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness's Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal, and that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within
this Realm; and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdiction, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities, and do promise, that from
henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Highness, his
Heirs and Lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and Authorities, granted, or
belonging to the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or United and
Annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents
of this Book.

The Oath of Allegiance.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in
my conscience, before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES is
Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty 's
Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any
Authority of the Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other means, with any other,
has any Power or Authority to Depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty 's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any Foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him, or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give License or Leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise Tumult, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty 's Royal Person, State, or Government, or to any of his Majesty 's
Subjects within his Majesty 's Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that
notwithstanding any Declaration or Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation,
made or granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope or his Succestors, or by
any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him, or his Sea, against
the said King, his Heirs or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects
from their Obedience: I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power
against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against
Him, his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any
such Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know, or hear of to be
against Him, or any of them. And I do further swear, that I do from my heart
abhor, detest, and abjure, as Impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine and
Position, That Princes, which be Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, may be
Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor
any Person what soever, has power to Absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be Lawfully
ministered unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and
swear, according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the
plain and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any
Equivocation, or mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever. And I do
make this Recognition and Acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and truly, upon
the Faith of a Christian. So help me God.

Two things in special are to be observed in this Oath.
1. That the King receives his Authority only from God, and has no Superior
to punish or chastize him but God alone. 2. That the Bond of Subjects in
Obedience to his Sacred Majesty is inviolable, and cannot be dissolved.
Bracton 20. years Chief Justice in the time of King Henry 3.
There are under the King Freemen, and Servants are Subject unto his Power, as
also whatsoever is under him, and he himself is Subject to no Man, but only
unto God, and no Man may presume Judicially to Examine his doings, much less to
Oppose them by Force and Violence. St. Ambr.
Kings are not Bound unto Law, because Kings are Free from the Bond of Crimes,
and are not called unto Punishment by any Law, being Safe by the Power of
Command. Anonymus.
The people manifest the King to be their King, but do not give unto him the
right unto his Kingdom, which is of the Lord's appointment, By me Kings Reign:
The outward Unction not enferring upon Kings their Authority, but used as a
sign of Sovereignty; So that the People making a King, is not by giving him the
Right of his Kingdom, but by putting Him into the Possession of his Kingdom
to Reign over them. Succession and Lawful Conquest are but Titles, whereby
Princes receive their Authority, they are not the Original and Immediate
fountain of their Authority. Tertull.
Inde illis est porestas unde spiritus.

Thence have Princes their Power, whence their Spirit.

Irenaeus.
Cujus jussu nascuntur homines, ejus jussu constituuntur Principes.

By God's Appointment.
By whose Appointment they are born Men, by his Appointment are they made
Princes.

God only makes them Kings, and God only can unmake them, and deject them from
their Thrones.

King James's Royal assent to Church Government.
We of our Princely inclination, and Royal care for the maintenance of the
present Estate and Government of the Church of England, by the Laws of this our
Realm now Settled and Established, having diligently, with great contentment and
comfort, read and consi^ered of all these their Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and
Constitutions agreed upon, as is before Expressed; and finding the same such,
as We are persuaded will be very profitable, not only to Our Clergy, but to the
Whole Church of this Our Kingdom, and to all the true Members of it, (if they
be well observed) Have therefore for Us, Our Heirs, and Lawful Successors, of
Our especial Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion Given, and by these
presents do Give Our Royal assent, according to the form of the said Statute or
Act of Parliament aforesaid, to all and every of the said Canons, Orders,
Ordinances, and Constitutions, and to all and every thing in them contained, as
they are before Written: And furthermore, We do not only by Our said
Prerogative Royal, and Supreme Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, Ratify,
Confirm, and Establish by these Our Letters Patents the said Canons, Orders,
Ordinances, and Constitutions aforesaid; but do likewise Propound, Publish, and
straightly Enjoin and Command by Our said Authority, and by these Our Letters
Patents, the same to be diligently Observed, Executed, and Equally kept by all
Our Loving Subjects of this Our Kingdom, both within the Province of
Canterbury and York, in all points wherein they do or may concern every or any
of them, according to this Our Will and Pleasure hereby signified and
expressed: and that likewise for the better Observation of them, Every
Minister, by what Name or Title soever he be called, shall in the Parish Church
or Chapel, where he has Charge, Read all the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances,
and Constitutions once every Year, upon some Sundays or Holidays, in the
afternoon before Divine Service, dividing the same in such Sort, as that the
one half may be Read one day, and the other another day; the Book of the said
Canons to be provided at the Charge of the Parish, betwixt this and the Feast
of the Nativity of Our Lord God next ensuing: straightly Charging and
Commanding all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other that Exercise any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this Realm, every man in his place, to see,
and procure, (so as much as in them lies) all and every of the same Canons,
Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions to be in all points duly observed, not
sparing to execute the Penalties in them severally mentioned, upon any that
shall wittingly or wilfully Break, or Neglect to observe the same, as they
Tender the Honor of God, the Peace of the Church, the Tranquillity of the
Kingdom, and their Duties and Service to Us their King and Sovereign.

In witness, etc.
By the King. A Proclamation, Declaring that the Proceedings of his Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers, are according to the Laws of the Realm.
WHereas in some of the Libellous Books and Pamphlets lately published, the
most Reverend Fathers in God, the Lord's Archbishops and Bishops of this
Realm, are said to have Usurped upon his Majesty's Prerogative Royal, and to
have Proceeded in the High Commission and other Ecclesiastical Courts, contrary
to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; it was Ordered by his Majesty's
High-Court of Star Chamber, the Twelfth day of June last, that the Opinion of
the two Lords Chief Justices, the Lord Chief Baron, and the rest of the Judges
and Barons should be had and Certified in those particulars, viz. Whether
Processes may not issue out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the Name of the
Bishops. Whether a Patent under the great Seal be necessary for the keeping of
the Ecclesiastical Courts, and enabling Citations, Suspensions,
Excommunications, and other Censures of the Church. And whether Citations ought
to be in the King's Name, and under his Seal of Arms, and the like, for
Institutions, and Inductions to Benefices, and Correction of Ecclesiastical
offenses. Whether Bishops, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Persons may
or ought to keep any Visitation at any time unless they have express Commission
or Patent under the great Seal of England to do it, and that as his Majesty's
Visitors only, and in his Name and Right alone.

Whereupon his Majesty 's said Judges, having taken the same into their
serious Considerations, did Unanimously concur and agree in Opinion, and the
first day of July past, Certified under their hands as follows; That
Processes may issue out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the Name of the
Bishops; and that a Patent under the Great Seal is not necessary for the
keeping of the said Ecclesiastical Courts, or for enabling of Citations,
Suspensions, Excommunications, and other Censures of the Church; and that it is
not necessary that Summons, Citations, or other Processes Ecclesiastical in the
said Courts, or Institutions, or Inductions to Benefices, or Correction of
Ecclesiastical offenses by Censure in those Courts, be in the King's Name, or
with the Style of the King, or under the King's Seal, or that their Seals of
Office have in them the King's Arms; and that the Stature of Primo Edwardi
Sexti, cap. 2. which Enacted the contrary, is not now in Force: And that the
Bishops, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, may keep their
Visitations as usually they have done, without Commission under the Great Seal
of England so to do; which Opinion and Resolutions being Declared under the
Hands of all his Majesty's said Judges, and so Certified into his Court of
Star Chamber, were there Recorded: and it was by that Court further ordered,
the Fourth day of the said Month of July, that the said Certificate should be
Enrolled in all other his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and in the High
Commission, and other Ecclesiastical Courts, for the satisfaction of all men,
That the proceedings in the High Commission, and other Ecclesiastical Courts,
are agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm.

And his Royal Majesty has thought fit, with advice of his Council, that a
Public Declaration of these the Opinions and Resolutions of his Reverend and
Learned Judges, being agreeable to the Judgment and Resolutions of former
times, should be made Known to all His Subjects, as well to Vindicate the Legal
proceedings of His Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers, from the unjust and
scandalous Imputation of Invading or Entrenching on His Royal Prerogative, as
to settle the Minds and stop the Mouths of all unquiet Spirits, that for the
future they presume not to Censure His Ecclesiastical Courts or Ministers in
these their Just and Warrantable proceedings: And hereof, His Majesty
admonishes all His Subjects to take Warning, as they shall answer the contrary
at their Perils.

Given at the Court at Lyndhurst the eighteenth day of August, in the
thirteenth year of His Majesty's Reign. 1637. God save the King.
Primo Julii 1637.
The Judges Certificate concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
May it please your Lordships,
ACcording to your Lordships Order made in His Majesty's Court of Star Chamber
the Twelfth of May last, we have taken consideration of the Particulars,
wherein our Opinione are required by the said Order, and we have all agreed,

That Processes may issue out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the Name of the
Bishops, and that a Patent under the Great Seal is not necessary for the
keeping of the said Ecclesiastical Courts, or for the enabling of Citations,
Suspensions, Excommunications, or other Censures of the Church. And that it is
not necessary that Summons, Citations, or other Processes Ecclesiastical in the
said Courts, or Institutions, or Inductions to Benefices, or Correction of
Ecclesiastical Offenses, by Censure in those Courts, be in the King 's Name, or
with the Style of the King, or under the King 's Seal, or that their Seals of
Office have in them the King 's Arms. And that the Statute of Primo Edwardi
Sexti, cap. 2. which Enacted the contrary, is not now in force.

We are also of Opinion, that the Bishops, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons, may keep their Visitations as usually they have done,
without Commission under the Great Seal of England so to do. John Bramstone,
John Finch, Humphrey Davenport, William Jones, John Dinham, Richard Hutton,
George Croke, Thomas Trevor, George Vernor, Robert Berkley, Francis Crawley,
Richard Weston.

The Right Reverend Father in God, George Lord Bishop of London His
Advertisment.
To all and every the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, within the City,
Suburbs, and Diocese of London.
WHereas I am daily advertised by the relations of many honest and religious
persons, of a General Misbehaviour in most Churches, in and about the City of
London, in time of Divine Service, Men and Boys sitting then covered with their
Hats on their heads, without all show of Reverence or Respect, either of that
Holy place or Action, the one being the House of Almighty God, the other a
continued Vicissitude (as it were) of Speech between God and his People. The
due consideration whereof might easily induce any well-disposed Christian to
use such Outward posture and gesture of his body, as becomes that Sacred
place, and the great Majesty of that God, to whom they come at that time,
Professedly to perform a Divine Worship. I have therefore thought it my duty,
incessantly to recommend unto you the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen,
the Reformation of this profane abuse, scandalous to our Religion, against an
express Law in that case provided, and condemned by the contrary practice of
all Christians in all Ages in their like Solemnities and Assemblies, praying
and requiring you to join together your utmost endeavors to effect the same,
for which purpose it shall be necessary for you, the Churchwardens and
Sidemen, during the time of Divine Service, diligently to look about the
Church, and where you see any covered, if Boys, or of the younger sort, those
to shame openly by pulling off their Hats, and chastize with such Discipline as
you have been laudably accustomed to inflict upon such rude and unmannerly
Fellows; If the Elder or better sort (though I well hope that none of that
condition, out of their own judgment, will hereafter offend in this kind) those
to admonish gravely of their duty, representing unto them the inconvenien^es of
this their ill example, and how directly repugnant it is to the Apostle 's Rule
of Decency in the Church, thus to celebrate Divine Service, and to perform a
Professed and Religious Worship of Almighty God. After which your Admonition,
if any shall obstinately refuse to uncover his o^ their heads in Service time,
you shall then present them to Me or my Chancellor, to the end that they, by
the severity of Censures, may be amended, by whom brotherly and gentle
persuasions have been contemned. Moreover also I am certainly informed, That
the Public Service of Almighty God in the Churches is omitted, and thereby
come to neglect, and almost scorned, forasmuch as the Ministers read not the
Divine Service, the First and Second Service, before their Sermons, according
to the order of our Church Liturgy, and the Canon in that case provided: I do
therefore hereby require all the Parsons, Vicars, and Curates in my Diocese, to
take care, that they offend not in this kind, strictly likewise requiring you
the Churchwardens and Sidemen, that according to your Oaths you present to
Me or my Chancellor those Ministers that shall be faulty in this kind, etc.

City Petition 1646
1. That some strict and speedy course may be taken for the suppressing of all
Private and Separate Congregations.

2. That all Anabaptists, Brownists, Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, and
all such Sectaries as conform not to the Public Discipline, established, or to
be established by Parliament, may be fully declared against, and some effectual
course taken for proceeding against such persons.

3. That as we are all Subjects of one Kingdom, so all may equally be required
to yield obedience unto the Government set forth, or to be set forth, by
Parliament.

4. That no Person disaffected to the Government set forth, or to be set forth,
by Parliament, may be employed in any place of Public trust.

The most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace,
to all the Lords the Bishops within his Province of Canterbury.
AFter my hearty Commendations. I have lately received Letters from His
Majesty, wherein He takes notice of the continuance and increase of some bold
Abuses and Extravagances in the Church, especially in Preachers,
notwithstanding His great Indulgence used toward them: And foreseeing the
mischief and inconveniences likely to ensue thereupon, if not timely prevented
and repressed; Has out of His Princely and tender care of the Peace of the
Church sent withal certain Directions to be strictly observed by the Bishops
in their several Diocesses, (as by the Copies thereof which I have sent here
enclosed, your Lo^dship 's will more fully understand) and for the more speedy
dispatch and ease in the Communication, has been Graciously pleased to command
so many Copies thereof to be Printed as shall be needful, a proportionable
number whereof will be forthwith sent unto your Lordship for your Diocese. Now
as we cannot but with all thankfulness acknowledge His Majesty's Affectionate
Care and Zeal in this His providing for the good and Welfare of the Church, by
all means which He finds may be conducible thereunto; So my earnest desire and
hope is, We shall not be so much wanting to our own good, as not to second
those His Majesty's Commands with the utmost of Our endeavors; But that your
Lordship, when you shall have given order for the careful dispersing and
communicating those Copies, as is required, will by your diligent inspection,
and serious Admonitions to your Clergy, as occasion shall be offered, be able
in due time to return an account of the success in the Observation, answerable
to His Majesty 's expectation, and Pious Designs in this His Injunction. And so
with my Prayers to God for a Blessing upon your Endeavors herein, I commit you
to His holy Protection, and rest,

Your Lordships very Loving Friend and Brother, W. Cant.
Lambeth 23 October. 1662.
The Right Reverend Father in God, Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, his
Injunction.
GIlbert, by the Divine Providence, Bishop of London, To our Well-beloved in
Christ in the City and Our Diocese of London, sends Greeting: Whereas we are
informed and sadly resent the great Profanation of the Lord's day; by several
Abuses and Misdemeanors in excess of Riot, by Tippling, Sporting, Idling, and
Wandering about the Streets in the time of Divine Service, and other unlawful
and unwarrantable courses, committed and continued both in your Parish and
diverse other parts of the City, and Suburbs thereof, by an Idle and Licentious
sort of People, to the great dishonor of God, and profanation of his Day, the
scandal of our Religion, and the conscientious Professors thereof, and contempt
of the Laws and Authority both Ecclesiastical and Civil: These are therefore to
require you duly and seriously to exhort and persuade those in Authority in
your Parish and Congregation carefully to look after all such offenders in any
kind whatsoever, together with all those that Abet, Receive, or Entertain them,
and either present them unto Us, that we may proceed against them, or (if the
nature of their Crime and Offense require it) return them to the Civil
Magistrate, that so by the Conjunction of Our Power and Authority, such
seasonable and timely Remedy may be used for prevention of the like disorders
for the time to come, as is fit and necessary in business of so serious and
General concernment.

Given under our Hand and Seal the Twelfth day of September, in the Year of our
Lord one thousand six hundred sixty and two. And in the second Year of our
Consecration.
Act. and Mon. fol. 1521.
There was set forth by the most Innocent King Edward the whole Church Service,
with great Deliberation, and the Advice of the best Learned men of the Realm,
and Authorized by the whole Parliament, and Received and Published gladly by
the whole Realm, which Book was never Reformed but once, and yet by that one
Reformation it was so fully perfected, according to the Rules of Christian
Religion in every behalf, that no Christian Conscience can be offended with any
thing therein contained. Dering against Haddon.
Look if any Line be blameable in our Service, take hold of your advantage, I
think Mr. Jewel will accept it for an Article. Our Service is good and godly,
every Tittle grounded upon Holy Scripture; and with what face do you call it
darkness? But men are ashamed to seem guilty, who always have been Judges, or
at least Accusers. Anonymus.
The Papists of all Places, their desires and attempts to recover England have
been always, and still are the strongest, which in their sober moods many of
them will acknowledge to have been the only Nation, that walk the Right way of
sustifiable Reformation, in comparison of others who have run headlong rather
to a Tumultuous Innovation; whereas that alteration that has been in England,
was brought in with peaceable and orderly proceedings, by General consent of
the Prince and whole Realm, Representatively Assembled in Solemn Parliament, a
great part of their own Clergy according and conforming themselves unto it.
What public discussing and long deliberation did persuade them to be faulty,
that taken away: The Succession of Bishops and Vocation of Ministers continued,
the Dignity and State of the Clergy preserved, the Honor and Solemnity of the
Word of God not abused, the more Ancient Usages not cancelled, no Humor of
affecting contrariety, but a charitable endeavor rather of Conformity with the
Church of Rome in whatsoever they thought not gainsaying to the express Law of
God, which is the only approveable way in all New Reformations. Reasons
against the Covenant.
Ursinus.
PRincipalis autem causa juramenti debet esse gloria Dei, salus proximi privata
and publica.

The chief ends of an Oath are the Glory of God, the safeguard and welfare as
well private as public of our Neighbors.

But the ends of the Covenant have not been answerable to these ends, and
therefore ought not to be kept nor observed, though sworn unto. For

1.
The Covenant, Cum verbo Dei pugnat, and fit de rebus adversis, falsis,
incertis, illicitis, non necessariis, impossibilibus, levibus, futilibus, and
irrationabilibus, absque necessitate.

The Covenant is not agreeable to the Word of God, and is made of things
preposterous, false, uncertain, unlawful, not necessary, impossible, light,
frivolous, and unseasonable, without necessity.

See Dr. Featly's League Illegal. The Anti-Covenant Printed at Oxford 1643.

Ursinus. 2.
Juramenta autem de rebus illicitis, etc. facta sive per errorem, sive per
ignorantiam, sive per infirmitatem, sive contra conscientiam, non sunt
servanda, sed retractanda, and corrigenda, poenitentiam agendo, and a malo
proposito desistendo, non autem in eo persistendo and illud exsequendo, Ps.
15.6. Nam qui servat juramentum illicitum, (as is the Covenant) bis peccat,
semel male jurando, and iterum male juratum servando: and juxtaregulam, Quod
male juratur pejus servatur. Quae enim Deus prohibet, ea nec jurata vult
servari, and quae vetat promittere vel jurare ea tanto magis facere prohibet,
quanto facere, quam promittere est gravius. Illicitum enim non servatum minime
facit Deum testem mendacii: quando quidem mali retractatio bona est, ut
retractatio juramenti Davidis, quo juraverat se Nabalem perditurum cum familia,
etc.

Ursinus. 2.
Oaths made of Unlawful things, either by an Error, or by Ignorance, or
through Infirmity, or against the Conscience, it is a sin to keep them. And
therefore such Oaths are to be Retracted and Re-called by Repenting, and
Surceasing a wicked purpose, not to be continued by Persisting and Practicing,
lest we add thereby sin unto sin. For he that keeps an Oath made of Unlawful
things, (as is the Covenant) heapeth sin upon sin, both in that he Swear amiss,
and also in that he endeavors to do that which he Swear amiss, according to
the Common rule, Ill sworn, and Worse kept. For what things God forbids, those
things he will not have Men, either Sworn or Unsworn to perform: And what he
forbids us to will, or promise, or swear; so much the more he forbids us to do
the same, how much the more grievous a thing it is to do them, than to will or
promise. For an unlawful Oath being broken makes not God witness of a Lie,
because the revoking of it is good, as appears in the revoking of that Oath
which David had made to destroy Nabal, with all his household, etc.

3. Henderson.
Although no Human Power and Authority can dispense with a Lawful Oath, Quia
juramentum pertinet ad forum Divinum, yet in some case (as in the Covenant) it
cannot be denied, but the Obligation of an Oath cease, Sublata causa tollitur
effectus, sublato relato tollitur correlatum. Or when any Oath has a special
reference to the benefit of those to whom we swear, or make the promise (as the
Covenant had first to the Church of Scotland, and pretendedly to the Church of
England) Henderson.
if we have their desire or consent, the Obligation cease; because all such
Oaths (and so the Covenant) from the nature of the thing does include a
Condition. Now the King, the Church of England, the Church of Scotland, nor the
Parliaments of either Kingdom, never gave any consent or Civil sanction to the
Covenant, but on the contrary have abolished all Laws made as illegal and
unjust whereby we were bound to the keeping of it: So that the Covenant does
not bind us nor our consciences to the observing of it, otherwise no Laws could
be altered by the Legislative Power. The Unfeigned Assent and Consent of all
Ministers.
I A.B. do here declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and every thing
contained and prescribed in, and by the Book, entitled, The Book of
Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, according to the Use of the Church of England,
together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or
said in Churches; and the form or manner of Making, Ordaining, or Consecrating
of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

By the Parliament of England, 1662.
A Declaration or Acknowledgment to be Subscribed unto.
I A. B. do declare, that it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take
Arms against the King, and that I do abhor that traitorous Position, of taking
Arms by His Authority against His Person, or against those that are
Commissionated by him, and that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England as it is now by Law established; And I do declare, that I do hold there
lies no Obligation upon me, or any other person from the Oath, commonly called
The Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of
Government either in Church or State; And that the same was in it self an
unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known
Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

By the Parliament of Scotland, 1662.
A Declaration to be subscribed unto.
I A. B. do declare, that it is unlawful for any to take up Arms against His
Majesty, or to enter in Leagues and Covenants without His Majesty; And that all
the late Acts of Committees, and the two late Oaths called the Solemn League
and Covenant, and National Covenant, are unlawful, and no ways binding on any.

By the Parliament of Scotland Edinburgh September. 5. 1662.
A Declaration.
I Declare, that I do judge it unlawful for Subjects upon pretense of
Reformation or other pretense whatsoever, to enter into Leagues and Covenants,
or to take up Arms against the King, or those Commissionated by Him: And that
all these Gatherings, Convocations, Petitions, Protestations, and erecting and
keeping Council-Tables, that were used in the beginning, and for carrying on of
the late Troubles, were Unlawful and Seditious. And particularly, that these
Oaths, whereof the one was commonly called The National Covenant, ( as it was
sworn and explained in the year one thousand six hundred and thirty eight, and
thereafter) and the other entitled, A Solemn League and Covenant, were, and
are, in themselves, Unlawful Oaths, and were taken by, and imposed upon, the
Subjects of this Kingdom, against the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the
same; And that there lies no Obligation upon me, or any of the Subjects, from
the said Oaths, or either of them, to endeavor any change or alteration of
the Government, either in Church or State, as it is now established by the Laws
of the Kingdom.

4. Incendiaries, Malignants.
Because there are such expressions in the Covenant as are not to be found in
any Oath that has been taken in the Kingdom, and for that the Laws of the Land
are left out, and not so much as once named.

5.
All Scripture-Covenanting from the Alpha unto the Omega thereof,were commanded
or chiefly acted by the Kings or the Chief Rulers, and not one of the Covenants
by the Elders of the People, against or without the consent of the King.

6.
The Covenant is against Custom, Usage,Judicial Records, and Acts of
Parliament, the King's Declarations and Proclamation, and against all the
Customs and Usages of all Nations in the world, themselves being Judges, and
therefore ought not so much as to have been intended, much less sworn unto.

Mr. Nigh.
Such an Oath, as for Matter, Persons, and other Circumstances, the like has
not been in any Age, or Oath we read of in Sacred or Human Story. Iid.
We are entering now upon a work of the greatest moment and concernment that ever
was undertaken by any of Us, or any of our Forefathers before us, or our
neighboring Nations about us. Henderson.
The Reformed Churches, the Low Countries, our Noble and Christian Progenitors
entered not into such a Solemn League and Covenant, (whence have we this
Covenant then?)

The dangers and pressures of the Kingdom of Scotland growing to greater
extremity, such as were entrusted with the Public affairs of the Kingdom were
necessitated to call a Convention of the Estates for considering of the present
affairs -- And Commissioners were sent from both Houses of Parliament (not from
the King) to consider with the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland (without the
King) what then? Their consultations did in the end bring forth this Covenant.
When the Reformed Churches shall hear of this -- (so neither the King nor the
Reformed Churches were consulted with in this matter) How then?

Salt-marsh
The Covenant is a Divine Engine the godly have found out. This is the first
time the Sun saw such a confederation; and therefore there should be as much
Art used in preserving the Spirits of people, as there was Art used in raising
them up to this Height. Coleman.
This is a new thing, and not done in our Land before; Ask your Fathers, consult
with the Aged of your times, whether ever such a thing were done in their days,
or in the days of their fathers before them? 7. 1643. 1641.
The Covenant is diametrically opposite to the Protestation taken not long
before, wherein we have sworn, That to our Power, and as far as Lawfully we
may, we will oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to
condign punishment all such as shall either by Force, Plots, Conspiracies, or
otherwise, do any thing contrary to the true Reformed Protestant Religion
established, or against His Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, or Estate, etc.
which was taken in Lawful things, besides the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, which were taken Lawfully, and in Lawful things long before, and so
made all contrary Oaths unlawful to be afterward either taken or kept. St.
Jerome.
Now lay your hands upon your hearts, consider and take the counsel of St.
Jerome unto Ruffinus. Never blush, man, to change thy opinion (of the Covenant)
for neither you, or I, or any person living, are of so great Authority, as to
be ashamed to confess they have erred. Pym.
As it is a crime odious in the nature of it to endeavor the alteration of the
Government of the State, so it is odious in the judgment of the Law. To alter
the settled frame and constitution of the Government is Treason in any State.
Cicero.
Aut undique Religionem toll, aut usquequaque conserva.

Either take away Religion clean, or preserve it in all points whole and sound.

Bracton. l. 1. c. 8.
The material Sword is put into the hands of the King by Almighty God. lib. 2.
c. 24.
By the material Sword is meant Power and Right, to look to the defense and
preservation of the Kingdom, and it is no less than Treason to enter into any
Association (or Confederacy) without the King's Consent, or against His Will.
By the KING.
His Majesty's Proclamation, forbidding the tendering or taking the late Vow or
Covenant, etc.
WHereas We have lately seen a Vow or Covenant pretended to be taken by some
Members of both Houses of Parliament, whereby, after the taking notice of a
Popish and Traitorous Plot, for the subversion of the True Reformed Religion,
and the Liberties of the Subject, and to surprise the Cities of London and
Westminster, They do promise and covenant, according to their utmost power, to
assist the Forces pretended to be raised and continued by both Houses of
Parliament, against the Forces raised by Us, and to assist all other persons
that shall take the said Oath; which Oath, as the same has been taken without
the least color or ground, the Contrivers thereof well knowing, that there is
no Popish Army within this Kingdom, that We are so far from giving countenance
to that Religion, that We have always given, and always offered Our consent to
any Act for the suppression of Popery, and the growth thereof; and that the
Army raised by Us is in truth for the necessary defense of the true Reformed
Protestant Religion established by Law, the Liberty and Property of the
Subject, and Our Own Just Rights according to Law, All which being settled and
submitted to, or such a free and peaceable Convention in Parliament being
provided for, that the same might be settled, We have offered, and are still
ready to Disband Our Armies: and as the said Oath was devised only to prevent
peace, and to pre-ingage the Votes of the Members of both Houses ( directly
contrary to the Freedom and Liberty of Parliament) and to engage them and Our
good Subjects in the maintenance of this horrid and odious Rebellion, so it is
directly contrary, as well to their natural Duty, as to the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy established by Law, which obliges them to bear to Us
Truth and Faith of life, Members, and Earthly Honor, and to defend Us to the
utmost of their powers against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which
shall be made against Our Person, Our Crown and Dignity, and to do their best
Endeavors to disclose and make known to Us all Treasons and Traitorous
Conspiracies which shall be against Us, and to their power to assist and defend
all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and Authority belonging to Us, or
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And whereas We are
informed, that some desperate seditious persons do endeavor to persuade and
seduce others of Our good Subjects to take the said Oath, thereby to engage
them and this Kingdom into a continuance of these miserable and bloody
distempers, We do therefore out of Grace and compassion to Our people, and that
they may not by any craft or violence suffer themselves to be seduced against
their Duty and Conscience, warn them of their natural Allegiance, and their
Obligations by Oaths lawfully administered to them, and with them to remember
the great Blessings of God in Peace and Plenty, which the whole Kingdom has
received, whilst that D^ty and those Oaths were carefully observed, and the
unspeakable miseries and calamities they have suffered in the breaking and
violating thereof. And we do straightly charge and command Our loving Subjects
of what degree and quality soever, upon their Allegiance, that they presume not
to take the said Seditious and Traitorous Vow or Covenant, which endeavors to
withdraw them from their Natural Allegiance which they owe unto Us, and to
which they are or ought to be sworn, and are bound by the Laws of the Land,
albeit they are not sworn, and engages them in Acts of High Treason by the
express Letter of the Statute of the twenty fifth year of King Edward the
Third. And We do likewise hereby forbid and inhibit all Our Subjects to impose,
administer, or tender the said Oath or Covenant: And if notwithstanding this
Our Gracious Proclamation any person shall presume to impose, tender, or take
the said Vow or Covenant, We shall proceed against him or them with all
severity, according to the known Laws of the Land.

Given at Our Court at Oxford the one and twentieth day of June, in the
nineteenth year of Our Reign. God save the King.
Antiqua fert animus-dicere -- Majesty's command, and because our Government
has been, and stands established by Kingly power, which power I am not to
question, but perform what is commanded: for the King rules absolutely, and
commands his people at his pleasure, as the World and all things contained
therein are tied in subjection unto the will of the Highest King.

Statutes and Acts of Parliament which banished Popery out of this Kingdom, did
establish our Church Government with the Ceremonies as Lawful: and if we
through weakness or perverseness make Lawful things to be Unlawful, Baxter.
that will not excuse us in our disobedience, our error is our sin, and one sin
will not excuse another sin.

King as God's Vicegerent is bound to maintain and advance the true Religion,
so far forth as the light of Nature can manifest it, or Divine Revelation does
make it known unto Him: yea, a Christian King is a Lawgiver above the
Ecclesiastical Lawmakers, for with Him is Wisdom, Power, Righteousness,
Meekness, Justice and Judgment. Therefore we ought to acquiesce in the
unanimous Votes of the King's Majesty, The Honorable Houses of Parliament, And
the Venerable Convocation; and all Powers and Interests ought to be fully
satisfied, whether in the decision of Controversies in Religion, making
Ecclesiastical Canons, etc. or any the like Ecclesiastical matters, because
they are the conjunct Votes of all the concerned.

General Assembly in Parliament is the Common Council of the Realm, called
together by the King for advice in matters concerning the whole Realm; of which
Assembly, Lambard.
some be Counselors by birth as the Barons, by Succession as the Bishops, by
Election as Knights and Burgesses, the King as the Head to give life: The
Barony consisting of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commonalty made up
of the Knights and Burgesses be as the Body, to deliberate, confer, and
conclude. So that forasmuch as every man from the highest to the lowest is
there, either in person or procuration, therefore of right reason every man is
said to be bound by that which does pass from such an Assembly.

J. Goodwin.
The Parliamentary Assembly in a Representative and Legal consideration, is the
whole Body of the Nation, and of all the persons in it, having the same Power
and Authority by Law, and in Conscience too, to do every whit as much in every
respect, as the whole Nation, and all the particular persons therein could
have, if they were met together. All the Kingdom besides has no such Power, as
they: and things may be done very Lawfully, and with a good Conscience, by
virtue of their Appointment and Command (with the King's Consent) which could
not be done without it, though a thousand times more men or persons than they
are should command them.

Council of the King consists only of persons thereunto especially elected
by Himself, and thereunto sworn to serve Him with their faithful advice and
counsel, and whether they be Nobles or no, it is not material, seeing that the
Calling comes not by Birth, Lambard.
but grows by Election, and be so incorporate with him, as he speaks by
them, and their Judgments are reputed to be His own.

King and Governors substituted under him, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, excel
in virtue, by equity saving from injury, and do maintain all in one
indifferency of Right and Justice, and therefore to be obeyed in what they
shall command by all good Subjects.

J. Goodwin.
A man's consent to an Unlawful Power, in an absolute and simple consideration,
is a mere Nullity, and such a a Power never the more Lawfullized thereby.

King in his own Kingdom is the only Supreme Judge, and bound by his
Coronation Oath to be the only Judge of his people, as may appear by this one
Question therein amongst others, Lambard.
Facere fieri in omnibus judiciis tuis aequam, and rectam justitiam, and
discretionem in misericordia and veritate secundum vires tuas. Judiciis tuis
and vires tuas, do more properly denote unto us his own doings, than the doings
of his subaltern Justices, albeit their judgment be after a certain manner the
Judgment of the King himself also, from whence their Authority is derived.

Camero, the Learned holds, that in things pertaining to external order in
Religion, Kings may command what they will, pro Authoritate, and forbid to seek
any other reason, besides the Majesty of their Authority; yea, when they
command, frivola, dura, and iniqua respectu nostri: our consciences are bound
not only in respect of the end, because scandal should possibly follow in case
we obey not, but also jubentis respectu, because the Apostle bids us obey the
Magistrate for conscience sake. Eleutheri^s to K. Lucius.
Rex Dei Vicarius est in Regno suo, The King is God's Vicar in his own Kingdom.

Antiquity, but of Papists themselves, in the days of Queen Elizabeth of ever
blessed memory (whose Church Government was the same with ours now in being)
Guazzo.
If (say they) there be nothing to keep her (meaning the Queen) from Heaven but
Her Religion, no doubt but She shall go thither; for I can tell you this, that
the most Learned men of the world are of this opinion, that Her Religion is the
high way to Heaven; and if a Tree be known by its Fruits, we doubt not but this
Tree is good, which brings forth such Fruits as the like are not to be found
in the whole world again: a Princess (and now a Prince) endued with such piety,
such purity, etc. that She (and now He) may be a pattern for all Princes to
practice by: Grave and Wise Counselors referring all their thoughts and doings
to God's glory, their Prince's safety, and their Country's commodity: a
well-disposed and orderly Commonalty, ruled as much by Religion as Law, obeying
as well for conscience as fear; continual peace and quietness, which is a
singular blessing of God, and an undoubted sign that God likes well of Her
(and now of His) proceedings; For as She (so He) banished Popery, keeps the
Ceremonies, and maintains the Authority of Bishops.

Authors of Combinations, to extort by tumults the alteration of any part of
the established Government Ecclesiastical or Civil, is Treason, and will lay
such men open to the lash of the Law.

St^w in vit. H. 7.
Bugnal, Scot, Heath, and Kennington being Sanctuary men, in St. Martins le
Grand, London, had judgment to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, for setting up
seditious Bills, to the scandal of the King, and some of his Council.

In vita Eliz.
Penry, Udal, Barrow, Greenwood, Studley, Billots, and Bowdler, were Condemned,
and three of them hanged for writing Treasonable and Seditious Books, by which
the Peace of the Kingdom might have been disturbed, though no Rebellion
followed.

Hollingshed. in vit. Eliz.
Copping and Thacker were Hanged at St. Edmonds-bury for publishing the
Pamphlets writ by Robert Brown against the Book of Common Prayer.

Hows Chron.
Mr. Williams, Barrister of the Middle Temple, was Executed in King James his
Reign, for writing a defamatory Book against the said King and his Posterity.

Church Government is far wide from every man's particular profession, neither
is it to be spann'd and fathomed by the length and reach of ordinary
discretion, but requires great faithfulness, gravity, meekness, and dexterity
to restore Religion into her place, and being placed, there to keep it.

Zeal without knowledge, that can justify a good action, much less an evil
action, it must be a mature knowledge that will warrant actions; upon which our
Customs are grounded, now Customs are not to give place to men's Humors, but
men must resign their Humors to Custom, nay, to Government established by Law,
for our Government has been long and often established, and if there were a
change, we should never be at peace within our selves, by reason of those
humorous affections that are amongst us.

Government of the Church, if left to themselves, would be able to cross the
King, and encourage the people to Rebellion, and thereby become unpeaceable,
proud, obstinate, disobedient, self-willed, and contradict the Powers that be
of God. For can we expect Unity and Peace from those that have been so woefully
divided amongst themselves, and yet are unanimous against the Rites and
Ceremonies?

Jesuitical Opinion to hold, that Princes must determine nothing in matters of
Religion, nor ought to encourage the Church: For Riches tend much to strengthen
the Clergy, and preserve Religion; but dissentions, and divisions, and
exasperating of the King against the Bishops, is the way to sow the seeds of
another desperate War, and by novelties and diversities make people grow weary,
and set loose to the practice of piety.

Paraeus.
Magistratus est Custos Religionis, The Magistrate is the Keeper of Religion.
Cunaeus de Rep. Heb.
Persaepe Spiritus Divinus Reges principesque Sacerdotes appellat, quia
Ceremoniarum ad eos Religionumque cura and tutela pertinet.

The Spirit of God does very often call Kings and Princes Priests, because the
cust die and care of Ceremonies and of Religion belongs to them.

Bilson.
Kings and Princes before Christ subverted Idols, Reformed Religion in their
Realms by their Princely Power and Zeal. Stat. 25. Hen. 8.
It was Enacted by Parliament, That no Canons or Constitutions should be made by
the Bishops, etc. and by them Promulgated, without the King's Command.

Records of Convocation.
The Clergy were forced to give up their Power of Executing any old Canons of
the Church, without the King's consent had before.

Heylins History.
All former Constitutions Provincial and Synodal, though hitherto in force, by
the Authority of the whole Western Church, Stat. 25. Hen. 8.
were Committed to the Arbitriment of the King, and of sixteen Lay persons, and
sixteen of the Clergy appointed by the King, to be Approved or Rejected by
them, according as they conceived them Consistent with, or Repugnant to the
King's Prerogative, as Head of the Church, or to the Laws of God, etc.

Stat. 26. Hen. 8.
Authority was allowed to the King, to Repress and Correct all such Errors,
Heresies, Abuses and Enormities whatsoever they were, which by any manner of
spiritual Jurisdiction might Lawfully be repressed, etc. any thing to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Ibid.
All manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, was by Parliament acknowledged to
belong to the King, as Head of the Church. So that no Bishop had any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but by, under, and from the King.

Stat. 37. Hen. 8. c. 17.
Supreme Power of dispensing with any Ecclesiastical Constitutions is ascribed
to the King and Parliament, as recognized Supreme Head of the Church, Stat. 25.
Hen. 8. c. 21.
and the Archbishop made the King's Delegate; so that in Case he should
refuse, two other Bishops might be named to Grant such Dispensations. And after
all, the King and His Court of Chancery are made the last Judge, what things in
such Dispensations are repugnant to Scriptures, and what not.

Stat. 37. Hen. 8.
Though the King did not Personally himself Exercise the Power of the Keys, yet
this Right He claimed, that no Clergy man being a Member of the English Church,
should Exercise it in His Dominions, in any Cause, or over any Person without
the Leave and Appointment of Him the Supreme Head. Nor any refuse to Exercise
it, whenever He should require.

Stat. 32.
It was Enacted, that whosoever should teach contrary to the Determinations
which were set forth by the King, Hen. 8. c. 26.
should be Deemed and Treated as a Heretic.

Stat. 2.5.6. E. 6.
An Act is made in which the King and Parliament Authorize Bishops, etc. by
Virtue of their Act, to take Informations concerning the not using the Form of
Common Prayer then prescribed, and to Punish the same by Excommunication, etc.

Confirmed by 1 Eliz. cap. 1. 5 Eliz. cap. 1. 23 Eliz. cap. 1.

Major part must be obeyed; Now it has been resolved by many Kings and
Princes, that our Government is not repugnant to the Word of God, from whose
Judgment there is no appeal, but only to God by Prayer.

Schism did grow out of, and arise from Presbyterian Government in the purest
time, which caused the Churches then to out it, and to establish Episcopacy, as
the best Antidote against Schism, and for the Restoration and Maintenance of
the Churches Peace, which was by Succession from the Apostles, if not of Divine
Institution. The Apostles of Christ ordained Bishops in the Church. Bullinger
5. Ser.
Now it seems a desperate course to use Presbyterian Government as a sovereign
Antidote in our time, Lloyds prim. Epis.
which had the effect of Poison upon the Churches in the Apostles time.

Contention is a deadly Enemy to Charity, and Holy-living; Now the refusing of
Subscription, and Obedience to Church Government, must needs kindle
Contentions; and why will you thus Contend? seeing that the Government by
Bishops is the Government of Christ, and what better Government can we expect
from Man? A Government most of the Godly have Conformed to.

Baxter.
Most of the Godly able Ministers of England, since the Reformation, have Judged
Episcopacy Lawful, or most Fit, and most of them did Subscribe and Conform to
Episcopal Government, as a thing not contrary to the Word of God, (but as
instituted by the Apostles, to which all or the most of the Ancient Fathers do
agree) so that it is very Evident, that it is very Consistent with a Godly Life
to Judge Episcopacy lawful and fit, or else so many hundred of Learned and
Godly men would not have been of that mind.

Ecclesiastical and Civil, which that Prince commands under whom they Live;
Division in Government makes Division in a Kingdom, and a Kingdom divided
cannot stand. Omne regnum in se divisum desolabitur.

Government of the Church of England, have ever been of Unconstant principles,
though Violently zealous in opposing Indifferent things. Which if simply
Unlawful they were sin, why then do they not contend against them as sinful?
but as formerly they did, so now they can dispense with them under their own
Cure, in the Person of another, and Subscribe themselves if they might be
Dispensed with, as to a Compliance in their own Persons, which by the Act they
are Enjoined. Nor do we find any great Opposition in the time of the Reign of
our Immortal Queen Elizabeth, until Her Majesty Commanded Her Bishops, and Her
Bishops by Her Authority Commanded due Obedience to the Government of the
Church: which does manifest it was not, nor is not Conscience, that does raise
this Opposition against them, as if Unlawful, but as not Convenient for them,
that have been and still are Braindistempered opposers of them.

Persons for the reason of inconveniency, ought to reject what Public
Authority has allowed; Since that it is apparent that the Composers of our
Divine Service Book, made choice of the best things out of the most Ancient
Liturgies of the Churches, which Flourished long before the Birth of Antichrist.

Church of England by any Irrefragable positions, that the Government of the
Church is Unlawful, or the Ceremonies thereof Impure, for which impurity the
Church should lay aside the Practice of them, being Warranted by the Word of
God, or not Dissonant from it; And that they are Unlawful, has not nor cannot
be Proved, though Disallowed by some, whose Approbation makes nor the
Government of the Church of England ever a whit the more Lawful, though
Consented unto by them.

Church of England, exercising themselves in the Holy Duties of Religion,
without any manifest known sin in the Manner of Worshipping of God, or in the
Matter, and therefore our Government ought not to be Altered, though Opposed by
some that will not Conform, because they are Commanded; and yet confess,
Robinson Justific.
we ought and must obey the Ceremonies for the ends Commanded, and as they tend
to the Edification of our Selves and Others, and that if they tend to the
Edification of the Church and good Order, they are Lawful in the Commander.

Church, (as our Archbishops, Bishops, etc.) met together to Discuss and
Consider of matters for the good of the Churches, may be called a Church by the
Judgment of the greatest Antagonist of the Church of England. Robinson.


Bishops being of Divine Institution, Ordination, or Confirmation by the
Apostles, it follows that they are not of less Excellency than the Churches,
whose Servants they are, but that the Churches are and ought to be in due
proportion Inferior unto them: The Man was not Created for the Woman, but the
Woman for the Man; and as Ministers of the revealed Will of God, they are
infinitely above and Superior unto all, (says our great Antagonist) Robinson.
and for this Embassage of God and Christ, they are absolutely and simply to be
Obeyed.

Surplice, Cope, Cornered Cap, Tippet, Rotchet, the use of the Ring in
Marriage, Signing with the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, Kneeling, Sitting, or
Standing in Divine Service, are not Ceremonies in themselves, but only when
they are so Designed, Appointed, and Observed. Dr. Burges.
A Bishop does not wear the Judges Quoif, the Counselor a Surplice, the
Attorney a Ministers Garment, a Lay man Parliament Robes, an ordinary Citizen
an Alderman's Badge, it is one thing to wear a Garment to keep one Warm, or for
some other Service, and another thing to wear it as a Distinctive cognizance of
Authority, of such and such a Degree, Office, Calling, or Profession, in which
use it is a Ceremony, otherwise not; Dr. Burges,
a Ceremony external, because internal actions of the mind being matters of
substance, cannot be duly called Ceremonies; yet the institution or
observation of an action or thing (to express this or that) to such an use as
is Ceremonious, makes it a Ceremony. See Styleman's Peace Offering.

Religion were silent, that men under Authority should obey, and heartily
forbear to intermeddle in matters of which they are not meet Judges, though as
Mint, Annise, and Cummin; but Religion should teach them much more, and put
them in mind of the weighty things of the Law of Christ, studying by all ways
to gain some. I became a Jew that I might gain the Jew, says that great Doctor
of the Gentiles; and was this by contradicting and gainsaying the Ceremonies
of the Jewish Church?

God is a God of Order and Peace, and has ordained and commanded Peace and
Unity between Ecclesiastical and Civil Power, lest the Peace and Union both of
Churches and Kingdoms be equally in danger of being broken. Now that there is
in the Church of England purity of Doctrine, Order and Unity with Peace, the
Brethren themselves confess, who do write about 1602. That in regard of the
common grounds of Religion, and of the Ministry, we are all one, we are all of
one Faith, one Baptism, one Body, one Spirit, have all one Father, one Lord;
and be all of one Heart, against all wickedness, Superstition, Idolatry,
Heresy, and that we seek with one Christian desire the advancement of the pure
Religion, Worship, and Honor of God. We are all Ministers of the Word by one
Order, we administer Prayers and Sacraments by one Form, we preach one Faith
and substance of Doctrine. And we praise God heartily that the true Faith, by
which we may be saved, and the true Doctrine of the Sacraments, and the pure
Worship of God is truly taught, and that by public Authority, and retained in
the Book of Articles.

Doctrine, the decision of Controversies, making of Canons, Orders,
Constitutions, etc. expedient and necessary to edification of the Church, are
Acts of Religion most proper to the Church; and to make Laws to establish them,
to bestow Civil Gifts and Privileges upon the Church, to ordain Civil
Punishments for Offenses committed against Christian Religion, to erect Courts
for the Cognizance of such Causes, and the execution of the Laws, is the
peculiar and proper work of Christian Kings, who are the only Judges of their
People. Lambard.
Nevertheless Christian Kings, though they may well do all these things without
the help of the Church, yet have they not done it, but have made use of the
Church for the more ample discharge of that great trust reposed in them. Ut
levior sit illis labor.

Church has power in Civil actions that draw scandal with them,
Ecclesiastically to censure, yea, the Church is to censure them
Ecclesiastically in her members, though the Magistrate pardon or pass them by,
except the Parties delinquent repent of them, for then they are to be forgiven.
And what Usurpation is here upon the Magistracy? The greatest enemy of the
Church has confessed this for a truth. Robinson.


Ceremonies are not immediate means of Worship, neither do they terminate
themselves in God, who is worshipped.

Church does not give signification and effecting supernatural events to human
Ceremonies, as the Papists do. K. James.
And no Church ought further to separate it self from the Church of Rome,
either in Doctrine or Ceremonies, than she has departed from her self when she
was in her flourishing and best estate, and from Christ her Lord and Head.

Ceremonies are ordained for those ends for which Rites may be ordained, and
are agreeable to those Rules which God's Word prescribes, to wit, Decency,
Order, and Edification.

Order and Uniformities sake. Not any one Duty in all the Scripture so often and
so earnestly recommended as Unity, which cannot be effected without some joint
care to walk Uniformly in the Public Worship of God.

Ceremonies to be used as Ceremonies, and not at all as Worship to God in
themselves, are no where condemned in the Scripture, though not commanded.

Ceremonies are of an indifferent nature, and no Religion does lie in the
opposing of them, but scandal and offense does arise thereby, causing even the
good the Opposers might do to be evil spoken of, and to become unprofitable.

Ceremonies are not against Faith, or a good life, few and easy, which Custom
has allowed; and the not conforming to the Custom of a Church or State, does
give occasion to Censures and Opinions, and thereby cause suspicion, where a
man might pass unquestioned.

Church of England never cast away all Ceremonies, nor utterly abolished them,
but cast away all that which was properly Popish and corrupt in them. And
although the Pope have corrupted the sound Doctrine, defiled the Sacraments,
and uses Ceremonies for the most part blasphemous and Superstitions; yet we
have the sound Doctrine, and wholesome use of the Sacraments, with Ceremonies
according to the rule serving unto Order, Comeliness, and Edification.

Ceremonies which hurt not Faith and Charity, we shall never have any settled
peace, and therefore men should study what will be the issue of untempered
Zeal, or rather Passion, in opposing our Government of the Church as unlawful,
and to take heed lest they raise up dust with their own feet, to blind their
own sight.

Custom is unsafe and full of hazard, and an Innovation is scarce effected
without dislike, opposition, and danger, if not ruin. Tacitus.
All changes in Government commonly do cheat them most at last, who at first
most desire them.

Homil. against Rebellion
Though not only great multitudes of the rude Commons, but sometimes also men
of Wit, Nobility, and Authority, have moved Rebellion against their lawful
Princes; though they should pretend sundry causes, as the Redress of the
Commonwealth, or Reformation of Religion, though they have made a great show
of Holy meaning, by beginning their Rebellion with a counterfeit Service of
God, and by displaying and bearing about diverse Ensigns and Banners, which are
acceptable unto the rude, ignorant, common people, (great multitudes of whom by
such false pretenses and shows they do deceive and draw unto them) yet were the
multitudes of the Rebels never so huge and great, the Captains never so noble,
politic, and witty, the pretenses feigned never so good and holy, yet the
overthrow of all Rebels, of what number, state, or condition soever they were,
or what color or cause soever they pretended, is, and ever has been such,
that God does thereby show, that he allows neither the dignity of any person,
nor the multitude of any people, nor the weight of any cause, as sufficient for
which the Subjects may move Rebellion against their Princes.

If the King proceed not in His Government according unto Law and Right, there
is no Legal Remedy to be had against Him. Bracton. i. e. A.
All that we have to do is, that we do Petition Him for Relief and Remedy.
Because no man is to call the King's acts into question, much less to go about
to annull and void them by force and violence.

Anonymus.
There is no inferior Magistrate of what sort soever, but as he is a public
person in respect of those that are beneath him; so he is a but private person,
disabled utterly to resist his Sovereign, or bear defensive Arms against him,
as well as any other of the common people. For inferior Magistrates be no
Magistrates at all, as they relate unto the King, the Genus summum in the scale
of Government, and therefore of no more Authority to resist the King, or call
the People unto Arms, than the meanest Subject.

Plutarch.
It is resolved by Plutarch, that it is contrary both to positive Laws, and the
Law of Nature, for any Subject to lift up his hand against the Person of his
Sovereign.

Call. Instit. l. 3. c. 10.
Any private person whatsoever, who shall lift up his hand against his Sovereign
(though a very Tyrant) is for the same condemned by the voice of God.

Religion is to be looked upon as causal, not as consequent to the peace and
prosperity of the Kingdom. All things require. Order, much more Government. Now
that there is order and settlement may appear from the purpose of our Church,
Rogers.
which is best known by the Doctrine which she does profess, the Doctoine by
the thirty nine Articles established by Act of Parliament, the Articles by the
words whereby they are expressed; and other purpose than the public Doctrine
does minister, and other Doctrine than in the said Articles is contained, our
Church neither has nor holds; and other sense they cannot yield, than their
words do impart; and therefore the Sense the same, the Articles the same, the
Doctrine the same, and the purpose and intention of our Church still one and
the same -- because her Doctrine and Articles, for number, words, syllables,
and Letters, and every way be the same. And why an alteration and unsetling the
foundation of our Church, built upon the Doctrine of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles?

Doctrine of the Church, the Government, the Ceremonies thereof, and spiteful
contemning our Governors, will never alter the Doctrine, remove the Ceremonies,
or unsettle our Governors, but make all the faster.

Ceremonies improperly or respectively are and may be called parts of God's
Worship, although in them the Kingdom of God stands not.

Lord Jesus Christ has left nothing absolutely to the will of his Officers,
but has determined all things necessary unto Salvation, and left ambulatory
Rites to the Church's liberty, under general rules, which being imposed by
lawful Authority, become respectively necessary.

human considerations, when they come to be applied to Sacred actions, for the
comeliness thereof in that use, are made Sacred, in respect of the ends to
which they serve.

Ecclesiastical Orders and Constitutions, serving to the external ordering of
Religious actions, although they are called Civil, as made by men, in
opposition to Divine Institutions, which properly bind the Conscience, yet
improperly or respectively they do also bind the Conscience.

Church does not hold that the Laws thereof do properly bind the Conscience, or
that Simple obedience is due unto them, as unto the immediate Worship or
Commands of God.

Ceremonies of our Church be neither imposed or observed with Superstition or
opinion of Necessity in themselves, or of Worship, as though we placed Religion
in them, much less with the Popish conceits of Merit or Efficacy.

Ceremonies become necessary, not by the particular Commandment of Man, but by
the general Commandment of God. For notwithstanding they remain Indifferent in
themselves, and before God, and so to be used with a free Conscience without
placing any Religion in them; yet am I bound to obey them as necessary, by the
General Commandment of God: Not as Necessary in themselves, but as being
Indifferent, and yet as necessary for the avoiding of Scandal or Contempt, as
well as for Concord sake.

Ceremonies are necessary in their use: Ministers are maintained, Obedience is
showed to the King, and his Laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil, Peace is in the
Church of Christ, free Preaching and Passage of the Gospel, which are of great
Necessity.

Vestments used make not any man Godly or Wicked, and although they were
Inconvenient, not being Unlawful, rather to be yielded to than refused for the
Flock sake, and Public peace of the Church.

Ceremonies, nothing is urged that can hold any thing of Type or Figure, but
what is of a Moral equity: as the Surplice Sanctity in the Minister, to mind us
of our first Estate, a mark of an Highcalling, of the Dignity of the Person.
The Cross constancy in every Christian Baptized: intimating also what the
Congregation hope, and expect afterward from the Infant. The Ring a token and
pledge of sure performing and keeping the Vow and Covenant betwixt them made:
whereby the Man may be kept from the Flattery of the Tongue of a strange Woman;
and the Woman remembered that she forsake not the guide of her Youth, neither
forget the Covenant of her God. The Act of Kneeling, Humility in all faithful
Communicants, every Communicant having a Prayer appointed for him in receiving.

Church does not deny our Ceremonies, to have such matter and form as gives
them the Essence of Religious Ceremonies, or Appurtenances to bound Worship:
but does deny them to have any such matter and form, as gives them the Essence
of Worship it self, properly so called.

Church does not teach men to think that the Lord is better pleased with these
Ceremonies even in themselves, than he is without them, or that they are as
pleasing to him, as if he had Commanded them: Howsoever Ceremonies, and a form
of Liturgy is necessary, yet not more necessary for Episcopal, than
Presbyterial Government.

God would else be offended, is as much Superstition as to hold him necessarily
pleased with that he has not forbidden.

Subscription I am required no more than to acknowledge those things Commanded
to be Lawful, as not repugnant to the Word of God, and obliged thereby, not to
resist or speak evil of those Lawful Governors and Ordinances that preserve
Peace.

Ex animo (i. e.) dare fidem dare igitur fidem magis est quam promittere.
Subscription ex animo, is but the faithful Declaration of our hearts, which
by our Subscribing we Testify to be real and sincere; and by way of
Tolleration, to accept our Hands without Hearty approbation, would but subtly
procure an outward Peace, and when occasion should serve dangerously disturb
the Church and State: Nevertheless, by whatsoever Art of words any Man
swears, yet God who is the witness of the Conscience, accepts it as he does
to whom the Oath is made.

Church can make no new Articles of Faith, nor no new Sacraments, no new Kind
of Worship to God, properly so called; yet is left at Liberty in matters of
God's Worship, to ordain Decencies for Edification of her self, and as God's
Ambassadors have Power in Ecclesiastical matters.

Judgment of all Churches in all Ages for our Government, which is much to be
Honored, and heard in all things that contradict not Scripture.

Lord Jesus Christ did not fix any certain Fashion for the receiving of the
Sacrament, but ordained that which was Necessary, and left the rest to occasion
and choice, which has made the Law even by the Largeness of it, the more
Perfect, and in respect of the Use, the more Commodious.

Church does not Bow, nor profess to Bow before, and to the Holy mysteries in
the Sacrament, for respect of their Holiness, which in that action the Church
does not look at as Creatures, but as Divine Symbols, signifying and sealing
the Covenant of Grace to us.

Cross in Baptism, is not added to the Sacrament of Baptism, but to the
Solemnity thereof; neither does the Church esteem the Cross any Essential
thing, nor hold that it alters the Institution, but as a thing Indifferent, as
a Lawful outward Ceremony, and Honorable badge of Christian Profession,
whereby the Infant is Dedicated to the Service of Jesus Christ: which Sacrament
of Baptism the Church does hold to be perfect without Confirmation, and that it
adds not any thing to the virtue and strength thereof, but receives it as an
Apostolical Institution, and as one of the particular points of the Apostles
Catechism, set down, Heb. 6.2. which is confirmed by the Judgment of Mr. Calvin
in these words. Calvin in Heb.
Hic unus locus abunde testatur hujus Ceremoniae originem fluxisse ab
Apostolis. This one place does sufficiently evidence the beginning of this
Ceremony, to have been from the Apostles.

Ceremonies as they are not against the general rule of the Word of God, so
they are not determinable by every Voice: and being settled, not likely to be
removed. For what are we, the State should be moved for us, either this or that
way, especially considering it has not imposed any thing Unlawful, or not
Necessary, but what is allowed by Fathers, Councils, etc? and St. Augustine
says, St. Aug.
That whatsoever the Universal Church has held, and does hold, and is not
found in following Councils constituted, but always retained, is most rightly
believed to be delivered by the Apostolic Authority.

Ceremonies are not Private, but Public, Sacred, not Civil; but yet Sacred by
Application, not by Divine Institution; Mutable, not Permanent, Indifferent,
not Necessary; ordained to be used necessarily in respect of Order, Peace, and
Edification.

Order, and Peace, of what is convenient, and what not, and to determine
thereof, belongs only to those, which together with the Power of doing what
they shall well like of, have the Scales of Wisdom, and Judgment, to weigh all
Circumstances, and so to make choice of the best way.

Nonconformity begets difference of Minds, diversity of Opinions, and has
brought forth Schism, yea, caused Heart Schism, and this amongst such who know
Nonconformity is Sinful, and cannot be Justified, nor ought not to be
Tolerated: whereby each Nonconforming party become worse and worse, and the
more confirmed in their mistakings.

In-conformity, the main Duties of God's Worship are neglected: and from
Confidence fixed to an error of Opinion, with the reputation of some few to be
maintained, the Bellows of strife are blown, whence arises despising of
Government, and speaking evil of Dignities.

Government, but in the end the strictest pursuerts of Reformation fall to
Vanity in their Writings, to make others Laugh, and in the mean while open a
Door to Atheism and Profaneness: The sad consequences hereof would better
become such to Study than thus to make themselves Popular, by wilful
Disobedience to Lawful Authority, not because of the Unfitness of Ceremonies,
but of their Unwillingness to Obey.

Government, we may incense Our Prince and Governor, to courses inconvenient
for us, when as nothing but Fuel is brought to the Fire still, nothing but
what does foment Strife, Bandying one against another, and against the
established Government, the Consciences of men say within them, is not
Unlawful, but ought to be Submitted unto.

Lawgivers are not restrained to any particular Act, but have Liberty to
ordain such wholesome Laws, Canons, Orders, Constitutions, etc. Ecclesiastical
and Civil, as are not repugnant to the Word of God, which are binding to the
Conscience, and ought to be observed of every Man, though not particularly
enjoined in the Scripture, or written Word of God.

Ceremonies, and yield Obedience to the Government, than occasion the Rending
of the Church, the Displeasure of our Governors, the Loss of those Talents God
has entrusted any one with, the Distress of a man's Family, the Confirming of
an error by Example, and Condemning as Untollerable, Sinful, and Unlawful,
what God will Justify as Lawful in the Great Day.

Authority of a Christian Church and Magistrate, whom I ought to obey for
Conscience sake, I Scandalize the weak, or become an occasion to them that are
weak, to Contemn the Authority of the Magistrate, and of the Church, and the
Ceremonies thereof, which are appointed, and by them thought convenient, yea
necessary, that the External Glory of the Church should be in some measure
proportionable to the Glory of the Kingdom.

Subjects we are bound in Duty and Conscience to Submit, which all may readily
do with a free Conscience, because whatsoever Laws are Imposed, are Limited by
the Word, and the Lawmakers are restrained from Commanding that which God
Forbids.

Church is one of the sweetest rellished Mercies that we hold next unto the
Graces of God's Spirit, which by In-conformity is broken. And the Punishment of
the Omission, or rather the refusal of Submission to the established
Government, is in respect of the neglect, if not contempt of Lawful Authority,
of the Churches Discipline and Peace, and not because the mere Omission is Sin.

Ceremonies and established Government of the Church were Sinful and
Unlawful, why do Ministers themselves, and not a few others, who refuse to
Conform to the Government in their own Persons, quietly suffer it in their own
Children? do they not love the Salvation of their Children? they shall be your
Judges.

Church of England receives its own Customs with difference from other
Churches, lest men should think that Religion is tied to outward Ceremonies,
which Customs our Clergy use as the Customs of the place wherein they Live.

Laws which of their own nature are changeable, be notwithstanding incapable of
change, if he which gives them, being of Authority so to do, absolutely forbid
to change them; neither may they admit alteration against the Will of such a
Lawmakers.

Magistrates must Judge all causes, and Govern the people; whom all are to
Honor, Submit unto, and Reverence, in deed, word, and gesture, as to the Lord:
Ainsworth.
For the Word of God is Committed to them, and they therefore are called Gods.
And Subjection is due unto the King, as to the Superior, unto the Governors,
as they are sent of him. And this Subjection must be both openly and secretly,
even of Conscience, and not for fear of wrath only. And there is not a cause
why either Princes should forsake their Places, Titles, Dignities; or the
People shake off their Subjection. For seeing Magistracy is God's Ordinance,
none are meeter to Execute it, to have his Word and Sword committed to them, to
carry his Titles, and to Judge the people. And seeing it is still his Ministry
for the good of his people, none can better perform this Duty, and be Nursing-
Fathers and Nursing- Mothers of the Church, than Christian Kings: in which
Ministration they both maintain and conserve the true Religion of God,
according to his Word, and reform things Amiss, and also maintain Civil peace:
So that they are not only Ornaments of Commonwealths, but their Safety and
Strength under God: and they are the Shields of the World, to whom we owe
Homage, Service, and Subjection, and should allow them Maintenance, pay them
Tributes, and other Duties in recompense of their Cares, Labors, and
Employments; that so mutual Concord may all manner of ways be Conserved.

necessary, and cannot be omitted without Disorder and Scandal; unto the
Obedience of which all have been, and are still invited and sweetly drawn, with
yielding to the Conditions, capacities and judgments of (...), so far forth as
the Stamp which God has set on those he has called to Office and Command, may
be Preserved and not Debased. And seeing that the Original occasion of
Episcopacy does very much commend it, Lloyd.
it being brought in to Heal the evil of Schism, and by preventing it for time
to come, to secure the Peace of the Church, it should be the more acceptable to
us.

Obedience, to win others to the love of the Government, and by our sweet
behavior, to attract others to Virtue, not to Disputations; while they observe
our Dispositions, Manners, Affections, Aims and Intendments are to glorify
God, and not being otherwise minded, in all Humility to yield to reason, not
presuming upon our own strength, but with patience bearing what is Commanded,
with all Long-suffering, that we may be like our Heavenly Father. Lest we seem
to make our selves wiser than He.

Governors are given unto us, and set over us, as those to whom the whole care
of the Church belongs, and by whose Authority the honor of the Church is
preserved, which remaining safe, Peace is safe, therefore let us be followers
of their Doctrine, Living in Conformity to the Customs of the present times,
Imitators of wise Christians, and such as are Patterns to be practiced by:
considering, that our Prince and Governors, who are the true Patterns and
Mirrours of God amongst us, are not ignorant of any thing whatsoever, which may
tend to the quiet Religious and civil Government of us and the Kingdom.

Princes are Lords over Laws, and enjoin them to others, of whom it is not
Lawful to invent, or speak that thing which may turn to the Disgracing of the
Laws and Government, or Reproach of our Governors, appointed by our Head and
Superior, to whom we must and ought to yield Obedience by the Command of God,
in all causes whatsoever.

Counsel of many Learned Bishops, who had the chiefest hand in Planting, in the
Restitution and Reformation of Religion in all Ages, than that all of them
should strike Sail to the fancies of a few inconsiderate Mushromes, considering
that the Power they have committed to them, has been and still is for the good
of the Church, and not for themselves, which others that want Integrity,
Morality, Charity, Mercy, and Judgment, cannot exercise nor discharge suitable
to the ends of Government.

Churches abroad confess their Preachers have a great deal of wrong and injury
offered them, in that they are blamed as though they sought to bring the
Authority of Ecclesiastical Praelates to nothing, when as they never forbad
them that worldly Government and Authority which they have given unto them by
Kings and Emperors, for the civil Government of their Goods, etc. it being
conferred upon them by Pious Princes, out of their Love to Christ and his
Ambassadors, the better to preserve them from the contempt of the wicked, and
to enable them the better to maintain the great interest which in civil things
belongs to the Ecclesiastical State, and that the great Honor of a Christian
Kingdom should not sit without giving the Ambassadors of Christ an Honorable
place, and Privilege amongst them.

Churches abroad confess, that so many as do despise Ecclesiastical Assemblies,
and separate themselves from them, they are contemners of true Religion, and
are to be compelled by the Bishops and Godly Migistrates, to surcease
stubbornly to separate and absent themselves from sacred Assemblies.

Churches abroad confess, if any Church do Religiously celebrate the memory of
the Lord's Nativity, Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension into
Heaven, and sending the Holy Ghost upon his Disciples, according to Christian
Liberty, they do very well allow of it.

Churches abroad confess, no Religion does keep every where the same
Ceremonies, although they admit and receive the self same Doctrine touching
them. For (say they) even they which have one and the self same Faith, disagree
amongst themselves about Ceremonies, the Churches having always used their
liberty in Rites, as being things indifferent.

Churches abroad confess, Ceremonies brought in by good Custom, are with an
Uniform consent to be retained in the Ecclesiastical Assemblies of Christian
People at the common Service of God, according to the Doctrine of the Holy
Apostles, Let all things be done in the Church decently and in order. For God
is not the Author of confusion but of peace; and no man by pretending a show of
Christian liberty, should withdraw himself from such constitutions as be godly,
and serve to a good use.

Churches abroad confess, although their Preachers do not keep all Rites with
other Churches, yet they do not withstand or oppose themselves to any good and
godly Constitutions, neither are they so minded, as that for the Ceremonies
sake they would raise up any dissentions, although they should think that some
of them were not very necessary.

Churches abroad confess, their meaning is not to have Rule taken from the
Bishops, but teach, that the true Pastors of the Churches may ordain Public
Rites in their Churches for good Order's sake; and if they be broken, with
offense given, there, where the Churches are well ordered, and there be not
error in Doctrine, let him that in such a place breaks them know, that he
does offend, because he disturbeth the peace of the Church well ordered, or
does withdraw others from the true Ministry.

Churches abroad do profess Ceremonies invented by Man, such as are seemly
devised for Order, may be observed without any opinion of Merit, Worship, or
Necessity; and confess, they do both observe certain Ceremonies, which are
comely, and made for good order; and also teach that they ought to be observed,
even as men cannot live without good order.

Churches abroad confess, that it is lawful for the Bishops, with the consent
of the Church, to appoint Holydays, Lessons, and Sermons, for edifying, and for
instruction in the true Faith in Christ.

Churches abroad, touching Traditions of the Fathers, or such as the Bishops
and the Churches do at this day ordain, hold it as their opinion; such as agree
with the Scripture, and were ordained for good manners, and the profit of men,
although they be not expressed in the Scripture; nevertheless in that they
proceed from the commandment of Love, which orders all things most decently,
they are worthily to be accounted rather of God than of man, which no good
Christian will refuse to obey; no not unlawful Laws, so they have no wicked
thing in them.

Churches abroad deny not the Churches Canons about Rites, which serve for the
public order and edification of the Church, but that the matter of the Canon
warranted by God's Word does bird.

Churches abroad confess, indeed they teach, that the care of Religion does
chiefly appertain to the Magistrates, and he that opposes himself against the
Magistrate, does procure the wrath of God against him, and therefore condemn
all contemners of Magistrates as Rebels, enemies of the Commonwealth,
seditious Villains, and all such as do either openly or closely refuse to
perform those duties which they ought to do; and confess all men of what
dignity, condition, or state soever they be, ought to be subject to their
lawful Magistrates, and obey them in all things which are not repugnant to the
Word of God; and condemn all those troublesome spirits, who do reject Higher
Powers and Magistrates, overthrow Laws and Judgments, that do abolish and
confound all those Orders and Degrees which God has appointed amongst men (for
Degrees and Vocations should not be confounded, nor is it lawful for every man
to start up into the Pulpit, and there show his mind, and teach others openly.)
Con. Tol.
Solus ad sacra Dei mysteria tractanda accedat quem morum innocentia and
literarum splendour reddunt illustrem.

Let such an one alone undertake to handle the Divine mysteries of God, who is
renowned both for integrity of life, and excellency of Learning; and these
Councils conclude

Council. Mediolan. Toledo, Trident. Lateran. Carthage.
Apostoli in quorum locum Episcopi successerunt satis nobis aperuerunt verbi
Dei praedicationem esse praecipuum illorum munus qui in Episcopali sede
collocantur. The Apostles, in whose room the Bishops come, have made it
sufficiently manifest unto us, that the preaching of the Word of God is the
principal function of those who are placed in Bishops Seas.

scandal not to give obedience to the Laws of the Church, when they prescribe
things necessary or expedient for eschewing of scandal, and it were contempt to
refuse obedience to them, when we are not certainly persuaded of the
unlawfulness or inexpediency of things prescribed.

indifferent, and none of them inexpedient, we ought to do that the Church
requires, though our Brethren should exhort us unto the contrary, being bound
in conscience to obey the Ordinances of the Church, except they be evidently
unlawful, and when the Authority of the Church does ordain, and the things be
lawful and expedient, we are bound by both (says an Anonymus of Scotland.)

Church of Scotland profess his Majesty shall ever find, that he has none more
loyal and true Subjects, who will more gladly employ and bestow their Lives,
Lands, Goods, Houses, Holds, Gear, Rents, Revenues, Places, Privileges, Means,
Moyeties, and all in his Highness Service, and maintenance of his Royal Crown;
and moreover have so deeply conceived a deep and strong persuasion of his
Majesty's Princely Virtues, and much renowned propension to Piety and Equity,
that they will urge their consciences to assent unto every thing which the King
enjoins, as Right and Convenient.

Assemblies, and public Worship of God, under pretense of employing their
Talents for the good of the Church in private meetings, is scandalous, and an
inductive to sin.

Churches of God do hold with the Church of England the lawfulness of
Absolution, after satisfaction enjoined by the Church, when men have defiled
themselves with Murder, Idolatry, or filthy Lusts; and that formerly they were
severed from mutual society, and afterward the Churches did not suddenly
receive such offenders again, though they did repent, that it might be known
that they did unfeignedly repent of their Murder, Idolatry, and filthy Lusts,
and ask pardon; and for example sake that it might profit others, for certain
days Absolution was deferred, 1 Cor. 5.
that they might be seen to ask pardon publicly; which public satisfaction
before the Church, although in a sort Political, yet may be referred to the
Ecclesiastical Order, and may altogether be distinguished from those
punishments which are merely Civil, and from those which are to be inflicted by
the Magistrate, which the Churches doubt not is both acceptable to God, and
commodious for the edifying of the Church.

Minister be found guilty of crimen laesae Majestatis, the King may punish,
whereupon by consequence will follow his falling from his Ecclesiastical Office
and Dignity (says an Anonymus of Scotland) And the Churches abroad with the
Church of England say, there must be public Satisfaction and Absolution after
Repentance, before he can be received again into the Church of God, because of
Scandal given to the whole Church of God, although the King do pardon him. For
as there ought to be diligent enquiry in the Synods touching the Life and
Doctrine of the Ministers, so those that offend are to be rebuked of the
Seniors, and to be brought into the way if they be not past recovery, or else
to be deposed, and as Wolves to be driven from the Lord's Flock by the true
Pastors, if they be incurable. For if once they be false Teachers, they are in
no wise to be tolerated, says the Harmony of Confessions. And in public
Discipline (says the Church of Geneva) it is to be observed, that the
Ministry pretermit nothing at any time unchastised with one kind of punishment
or other; And if Ministers shall do any thing which is Scandalous to the
Congregation, or punishable by Civil Authority, then such a Minister shall be
Suspended from his Ministry, and it shall stand in the judgment of the Classis
(with us, of the Bishops) whether he deserves not to be deposed, say the Synods
of the Lowcountries.

The sum of all to unsettled spirits is this, to get a full persuasion of the
mind concerning our established Government and Governors, because a full
persuasion of the mind (yea, even where the judgment fails) touching matters
not intrinsecally evil, gives rest to the conscience.

Especially when you have considered indeed, that the judgment of all causes,
the deciding all controversies, the censure of all men, the sentence
determining all actions, are the Kings, and in His performances rests the very
Soul of the State, and the life of a State's flourishing; whose Soul is of too
fine and quick a Metal to love doing nothing. And when the affections of the
minds of men, or any other humor, usurps an overswaying Authority, the body of
the State languisheth, and by refusing to obey men, ruin one of the two best
parts of man. For whether a Prince comes to Authority by Succession or just
Election, it is not lawful to practice against Him, because he is the Lord's
Anointed: The greatest motive to Moderation, the only stay of the reeling
steps of Man's humanity; and next unto that nothing should move us more to
continue our Moderation, than the great commiseration of our Prince toward us
that were his enemies, Arguments sufficient to make us love Him, and not to
contend with Him, his Government, or Governors, much less to study to fetch the
means of our supposed safety from false grounds, which will prove a humor
unsafe and most displeasing; by the want of which Moderation we shall serve a
wrong Master, and by our strong affections and weak experience, show what folly
governs us in resisting of His Authority. Therefore let us give Him the love of
our hearts, it will make Him happy, and us in Him; For what we desire to make
us happy and at peace, is matter of thought only without truth, which kind of
thoughts formerly has led us into strange transgressions against a Divine Law,
besides other errors; like wandering Empericks, respiting pain, and doubling the
pain and danger afterward; or else like Women with child, that like nothing
but what is hard, if not impossible to come by, and so by an uncertain
pleasure, purchase certain loss and pain. Wherefore let us hearken to the
counsel of St. Chrysostom, who observes, that the God of All has given All
but one House, the world, to be domesticos naturae, The Household of Nature,
that Father of Lights has light all but one Candle, the Sun, to be Filios
lucis, Just and unjust Children of that Light: seeing he that spreads it out
as a Curtain, has covered all but with one Canopy and roof of Heaven, to be
one Family of Love: and seeing the Feeder of every living thing, has spread
all but one Table, the Earth, at which Board we are all Companions of one
Bread, and drink all of one Cup, the Air; doubtless this community of natural
things should breed such a common Unity in nature, as should make men in this
common House to be of one mind, and sons of one light; and the family under one
roof to walk in this House of God as familiar friends, and companions at one
Table, to eat their meat together with singleness of heart. And not with the
Bramble affecting Superiority over the Cedars of Lebanon, set on fire the Trees
of the Forest; or like that Wood in the Poet, being shaken by the wind, Sponte
edidit ignem qui ipsam consumpsit, Of it self gave fire which consumed it all.
Which leads me to add a word or two unto you that will not conform; Unto you I
wish peaceable spirits, with serious consideration of the Reasons which with me
have prevailed to own and subscribe unto the established Government of the
Church of England, notwithstanding those seeming Reasons, Scriptures, and
Authorities, brought by you to persuade, that to subscribe and yield obedience
to the established Government is sinful and unlawful, and to join in Worship
with the Church of England, as it is now constituted a Church, is to commit
Idolatry: But after long search and inquiry made, I find your Scriptures,
Reasons, and Authorities to fall short of that truth I once believed to be in
them, and of no power to convince the Church of England does err either in
Doctrine or Discipline, which while I did believe, I did not conform in any
Circumstantial supposed error, but was a Nonconformist with you, upon the
Reasons, Scriptures, and Authorities by you Urged, Preached, and Printed; yet
have I not at any time knowingly risen up against the Powers that commanded and
enjoined Obedience, as they are Powers, but upon the grounds aforesaid, which
grounds I have considered upon in more ripe judgment, and find them not to be
sufficient to warrant disobedience to the Higher Powers, or to join with you in
your determined Nonconformity, having the eyes of my understanding better
enlightened by the Divine goodness, by Scriptures, Reasons, and Authorities, the
Confessions and Professions of the Churches abroad, the Laws and equitable
Constitutions of the Kingdom (of which I am an unworthy Member) besides what I
have learnt from your own Writings, of which formerly I was ignorant. From all
which Grounds, Reasons, Scriptures, Authorities, Writings, etc. I see not any
cause to make further appeal, nor know not of any higher search that can be
made for the discovery of the truth. Now that ye may the rather weigh and
consider of what I have here offered to public view, after the satisfaction
given hereby to my own conscience, know, that I am not a person under any
temptation, neither have I any Ecclesiastical Promotion to lose, nor one that
has ever sought after, or does seek after Honor, Advancement, or to be
preferred in the world, (though I might have had it, for Swearing subjection
unto an Usurping Power) no, I am a person studying to get my daily bread with
hard labor, laboring under great unthankfulness, unjust and vexatious suits,
and all-devouring scandals; not mounted upon the uncogged wheels of prosperous
fortune, no, the Plutoes of the world, sons of violence, rapine, and spoil,
have cogged every spoak in my wheels, I mean, men, who by force, and power, and
other unjust practices, have possessed themselves of all I have, and have
possessed it for more than ten years without an account or restitution; which
puts me in mind of an Historical Example, not utterly to be despised of them.
The example of injustice is reported by one Antonius de Florentia, an ancient
Doctor, who tells us of a certain man that would not make restitution of his
unjust gain, alleging if he should do so, his Children might beg, or be sent to
the Hospital. The Father dies in the same estate, his eldest Son succeeds,
and likewise will not restore. The younger Brother demands his part of those
goods, and restores after the rate of his portion, the rest that remained he
gave to the poor, and entered into the state of a solitary life. Shortly after
the elder Brother dies, whereupon was showed to the younger Brother, living in
chaste contemplation, this Vision following; He sees his Father and his Brother
in torment, one cursing the other, the Father saying the Son was the cause of
his damnation, because it was for the love of him, and enriching of him, that
he did not make restitution. The Son he cursed, and said that his Father was
the cause of his damnation, because he left him these ill-gotten goods, the
keeping whereof has wrought his perdition. Let such as have gotten ill-gotten
goods in their possessions, or are entangled with the iniquity of them, apply
this Example before it be too late, and consider of Thespesius Fable in
Plutarch, He Fableth an infernal Vision of Souls like Vipers hanging on
together, did bite and gnaw one another, Ob memoriam injuriarum in vita
actarum, Remembering old grudges and wrongs done in their life time here on
earth, keeping their hatred for ever.

Ovid.
-- nec mors mihi finiet iras. Though we be dead, our malice shall not die.

I am sure such Caitiffs are of that Family, who at the hour of death, Lavat.
remittunt culpam, non poenam. Odia and inimicitias quasi per manus liberis
suis tradunt: haeredes paterni odii. Senec.
They say, I forgive all, and in the Will and Testament bequeath their hatred
and malice by Tradition to the hands of their sons, and make them heirs of
their fathers hatred.

Et astutam vapido servant sub pectore vulpem. They appear in Sheep's
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen,
Tuta frequensque licet, sit via crimen habet.
A safe and common way it is by friendship to deceive,
But safe and common though it be, it is knavery, by your leave.
Now I return to our purpose; I find it recorded of Dionysius Hallicarnasseus,
who was never advanced to Magistracy in the Roman Re-publick, that he has
Written far more truly the History of the Romans, than those which Flourished
amongst them with Riches and Honor. So I hope you shall find from an Obscure
person, more of the truth concerning our established Government, and reasons
for the same, than you have ever heard delivered, or seen Written by most in
Honor and Esteem amongst you: Many of them being like the Franciscans of Old,
who at the beginning professed Conscientia, losing a Syllable, and Honesty with
it, fell to Scientia, and now having lost two Syllables, remain pure Entia,
Stocks and Images. Such as these may well despise and reject these Reasons as
of no worth, and disdain to read them, much more to own them, and in hatred of
my Name consider my Person, and not the Weight that is to be found in every
sentence in them, though of so great concern, as wisely improved, would put a
stay to the Reeling steps of many thousand Ignorant, Unstable, and
Allconcluding Souls. What I have Written is necessary, though by disowning of
your Principles, I seem to savor of Levity and Inconstancy, but my reward is
with me; I know, and am prepared for the Slanderous tongues of an Ungrateful
and Miskenning world, I reckon not what becomes of me or my credit in this
World, or what I have that is most dear unto me, so God may be Glorified in me
and by me: it is not what men can Speak, or may Write, will dismay me, it were
better their pains were bestowed about their own Everlasting peace, as others
had better in former times to have bestowed the Labor they took to prove and
persuade the Church of England did err, in taking care they themselves had not
erred in Doctrine, and joined Practice with it: Departing from the Truths of
God, Rejecting the Book of Common Prayer, (and Teaching others so to do) with
great Judgment purposely framed, (as I believe) out of the Grounds of Religion,
which we profess and hold for Agreement sake, and that Scandal might be avoided
in our Christian Divine Worshipping of God: By means of which in former times,
great Mischiefs were presaged, which came to pass in our days, besides Perjury,
which did accompany all our Evils to the undermining the Tribunals of Judgment,
and the Woeful disturbance of Church and State: which the proudest Non
conformist cannot Balk, but must confess it is a Truth, and that they have
walked within the Enormous confines of their own Exorbitant desires, and even
as Atheistical Nullifidians, have not regarded the Blood of a King, like
riotous Ruffians, eating and drinking and taking pleasure therein, adjoining
Critics to justle out the truth of the Lawful absoluteness of Kingly power,
practizing as the Scenical jesters do, fast and loose, without a Cordial
subjection and obedience, but being Covetous, cried, give give for a King, to
whom no Antheme was more pleasant than possession of 80000 l. Diotrephes like,
seeking for the Pre-heminence, yet pretending to have the self-denying Virtue;
but Demas like, did embrace the present now, and at the same time, while they
did profess themselves lofty Favorites, took a Pattern of Religion from
Raviliack, and cared not for a King so much as a Wildred promise, a Promise
that made a King of never Dying Virtues, and Bishops of never Dying Fame,
troublesome to their queasie Stomachs; The Devil they had rather have for their
Father and Confessor, by whom they were led to follow the bright Beams of
Corruscant Gold and Silver, that had with them Authority to make them turn
Turn-coats; yet ceased not Parasitically to profess and swear they Loved the
King with all their Saul, at that very time the Friperers of Power and
Government were telling them so much Money as made those Mercenary Pensioners
bow before they would break, though they had a King of Power in their Hands
able for ever to have made them and three Kingdoms happy: if these were not
Idiots, going in the Pride and Presumption of their Hearts, after the Gods of
Gold and Silver, let all Generations judge, whose Faith was Spun so broad, and
whose Consciences were without Measure, as the Corn in Egypt without Number:
let any who have had so great Convincing reasons, as we have had Judge, how
likely they should be the only feeling and faithful Members, that made so
great a Defection from Duty and Allegiance, or with what Confidence we should
rely upon their Pargetting Profession, whose Pandects and Plagiaries have made
their Mountainous thoughts to swell higher than any Mountain in their barren
Country, being a people more Lapped than Nichodemus, who was ignorant of the
Mysteries of the Gospel, and came by night to Jesus for Instruction; but these
who professed they knew Jesus to be Christ the King of Jews and Gentiles, came
by night to their Anointed Sovereign Lord and King, not for instruction, but
to betray him, and Judas like, sold him for Money, the root of all Evil. Now
consider, if God was so severely wrath with David a King, for the Death of
Urias the Hittite that Dyed in War, with others of his Subjects, that God did
threaten Him, that the Sword should not depart from his House; And tell me,
nay, tell the whole World, whether you think Private persons, Subjects sworn in
Allegiance to their undoubted Lawful King, if they shall treacherously Murder
their King, will go Unpunished of God? shall not his Sacred blood be upon their
Heads? upon the Heads of those that have Slain a righteous King? upon the Heads
of those that put the Sword of War by their side, at a time of tenders of
Peace? Can such be guiltless? O tempora! O Mores! it is hard to Kick against
the Pricks. By this very thing let it be known to all Generations, ye were Sons
of Belial, ye that might have prevented the Murder, and did it not, ye are
guilty: His blood be upon you and your Children, and the Innocent let them be
free. Thus far I hope I have kept a good Conscience in what I have done, and
hope so to keep it, whatsoever I suffer for this my Integrity; when I was a
Child, I did as a Child, and took the Covenant, being traitorously misled by
them that did pretend Zeal and Piety, for which transgression I humbly plead
the forgiveness of Our Dread Sovereign Lord King Charles the First.

I willingly forgive such men's taking the Covenant, who keep it within such
bounds of Piety and Loyalty, as can neither hurt either the Church, my Self, or
the Public peace: Otherwise than thus I have not kept it, and therefore with
humble boldness lay hold upon, and plead my right unto, and in the Act of
Indemnity, given and granted by Our Dread Sovereign Lord and King Charles the
Second, as my Salvo against all the false Rumors and Reports gone out against
me, unto which I humbly add the Admission under Seal from the Right Reverend
Father in God Gilbert, by the Divine Providence Lord Bishop of London, which I
doubt not but they are sufficient Indempnities for my first Oath that ever I
took, 1643.
being in Nonage and under Servitude when I took it; And when enlarged into
freedom, I took the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, 1648.
and since never took any Oath in any kind whatsoever, but in Obedience to His
Sacred Majesty. And therefore let those that would retort upon me the Covenant,
consider the time when it was taken by me, and under what Jurisdiction I then
was, and remember that one Grand objection against our Rulers, brought by all
Non-conformists as a reason to enforce the taking of it, (viz.) that they were
Wicked, (but now are Justified) which Objection brought as a reason, did much
prevail upon the Hearts of multitudes of Ignorant Men, Women and Children, and
upon my Self amongst others: But had we been able wisely to have considered,
that the wickedness of the Rulers, (if any such there were) did not make the
truths of God a Lie, and his Commandments of none Effect, it might have been a
good Premonition to us, that profess our selves the true Members of the Church,
to have taken heed we had not fallen, and carefully to have minded those that
made it their business to creep into men's affections with entising Words, and
under pretense of Religious opposing Ceremonies, and established Government,
Killed the power of Godliness. Nevertheless, as I have, so still I do
acknowledge many Godly men to be amongst those that do not Conform, and sound
Religion, yet not more sound Religion (as some formerly and now would persuade)
than is in them that Conform, although some might then, and may now seemingly
be of a more holy Conversation: Howsoever that was, and is the Error of the
Person, not of the Government or Doctrine of the Church, yet such themselves
being Judges, cannot but have Regret upon their Spirits for those desperate
falls they have had in the Opposing of the Doctrine of our Church, and our
established Government; The fall of Contempt, and Disobedience unto that Divine
Commandment, Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. The breach of four
great Commandments, the 5, 6, 9, 10. their joining Violence with that they
called truth, and Cruelty with that they called righteousness too evidently
manifest: by which things alone I might easily be Convinced of the Equity of an
established Government, and the Iniquity of them that did and do oppose it, who
knowingly so horribly did Violate God's own Laws, which here I use as an
Argument for my own lawful and just Defense, especially when I consider, that
the first Opposing of established Government was but the beginning of Evils,
which gave scope to Bloody Seditions. And therefore by this my contending for
the established Government, with Subjection and Obedience to the King, is, that
I may go the right way to meet Peace: that I may be clear from the Blood of all
men; pure, then peaceable. From whence I infer, that it is better to Contend
against you, who have preferred your own Humors and Opinions before the
Commandments of God and the King; than to be at Peace with you, You who have
occasioned dangerous Schisms, Seditions, and Bloody wars, by which you clearly
Evidence and Justify the Authority of a Law in Church and State: Under which
Law had we acquiesced, we had not been wrapped in such evil snares, but by our
Obedience removed much Evil, and prevented the shedding of much Blood, besides
the good we might have done to others, others whose Consciences by strange
Doctrine, and unparalleld Practice, have been made Bold, Erring, Presuming,
Secure, if not Seared: who under a pretense of good Meaning, attempted
Unlawful, nay Sinful, nay Damnable actions, which cannot be Justified or
Excused. For if a good meaning did or could justify or excuse evil actions,
then they who killed the Apostles might be justified and excused, because in so
doing they thought they did God good Service. How far any of ye that have been
Leaders in the Church of God, through your good meaning (if I may so say) have
been or are from Soul ruinating Scandal, (though ye might not intend any such
thing) let your own Consciences and the fearful Effects of the late War, give
in Evidence for Conviction, as it does clearly manifest the danger of yielding
to the first beginnings of Evil, as also the danger of opposing established
Government, and teaching others so to do by Doctrine or Example. Ye could not
swallow Gnats of Ceremonies, but Camells of Blood went down; O Bellua Multorum
Capitum! These, these things we should lay to Heart, and be humbled for (...)
great Provocations and Defections from our Covenant made in Baptism, our Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy (for the breach of less Oaths than these we find
the Romans branded from the time of the third Punick War) our opposing of the
established Government of the Church of England, our loss of the Practice of
Piety, and this with all our Hearts, and according to all our Powers, to
endeavor to help the wounded Church of Christ, the cause of our Religion which
suffers much at home, and much abroad, by our strange Doctrines, Opinions, and
more strange Actions, and this with the loss of our Credits, and all that is
dear unto us, endeavoring all of us in our Places and Callings for the time to
come, to keep the Commandments of God and the King, without declining unto the
right hand or the left, that so the Evils felt or feared for our former
Disobedience and Rebellion, may be removed and prevented, and our Persons find
acceptance with God, through the only Merits and Mediation of our Great High
Priest the Lord Jesus, the Mediator of the New Testament, to whom be Honor and
Glory ascribed of us and all the Churches of God now and for evermore.

Scriptures whereby the foregoing Reasons are enforced.
Genesis 13.8.
And Abraham said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and
thee, and between my Herd-men and thy Herd-men: for we be Brethren.

Genesis 47.22.
Only the Land of the Priests bought he not: for the Priests had a portion
assigned them of Pharaoh: and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them:
wherefore they sold not their Lands.

ver. 26.
And Joseph made it a Law over the Land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh
should have the Fifth part: except the Land of the Priests only, which became
not Pharaohs.

Ex. 20.13
Thou shall not kill.

Numb. 8.14.
Thus thou shall separate the Levites from among the children of Israel: and
the Levites shall be mine:

ver. 16.
For they are wholly given unto me from among the children of Israel:

ver. 18.
For I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the children of Israel:

ver. 19.
And I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons, from among
the children of Israel.

26.9.
Seems it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel has separated
you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself, to do the
service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the congregation to
minister unto them?

ver. 10.
And he has brought thee near to him, and all thy br^thren the sons of Levi
with the: and seek ye the Priesthood also?

Deuteronomy. 17.15.
Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall
choose.

ver. 18.
And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall
write him a copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the
Priests, the Levites.

23.21.
When thou shall Vow a Vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay
it; for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and it would be sin in
thee.

Josh. 1.17.
According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto
thee.

6.19.
But all the Silver, and Gold, and Vessels of Brass and Iron are consecrated
unto the Lord, they shall come into the Treasury of the Lord.

Judge. 17.26.
In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was
right in his own eyes.

1 Samuel 15.17.
And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made
the Head of all the Tribes of Israel? and the Lord anointed thee King over
Israel.

16.9.
Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by, and he said, Neither has the Lord chosen
thee.

24.6.
And he said unto his men, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my
Master the Lord's Anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he
is the Lord's Anointed.

2 Samuel 5.
And David sent messengers unto the men of Jabesh-Gilead, and said unto them,
Blessed be ye of the Lord, that ye have showed this kindness unto your Lord,
even unto Saul, and have buried him.

ver. 6.
And now the Lord show kindness and truth unto you, and I also will requite you
this kindness: because ye have done this thing.

1 King. 7.51.
So was ended all the work that King Solomon made for the House of the Lord: 2 Chronicles. 15.8, 9.
And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated: even
the Silver, and the Gold, and the Vessels, did he put among the Treasures of
the House of the Lord, 2 King. 23.5.

2 Chronicles. 19.6.
And he said to the Judges, Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but
for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment.

Ezr. 12.7.
Artaxerxes King of Kings, unto Ezra the Priest.

ver. 13.
I make a Decree.

ver. 21.
And I, even I Artaxerxes the King, do make a Decree.

ver. 26.
And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.

chapter 8.36.
And they delivered the King' s Commissions unto the King 's Lieutenants, and
to the Governors on this side the River, and they furthered the people and the
House of God.

Ps. 82.6.
I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are children of the most High.

47.9.
The Princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of the God of
Abraham: For the Shields of the earth belong unto God, he is greatly exalted.

51.4.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight.

88.20.
I have found David my servant, with my Holy Oil have I anointed him.

Prove. 8.15
By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice.

ver. 16.
By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth.

24.21.
My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change.

Eccles. 8.12.
There is a vanity which is done upon the earth, that there be just men unto
whom it happens according to the work of the wicked: again, there be wicked men
to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous: I said, that this
also is vanity.

1.1.
The words of the Preacher, the son of David, King of Jerusalem.

10.17.
Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes
eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness.

ver. 20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts, and curse not the rich in thy
bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter.

Jer. 33.20.
Thus says the Lord, If you can break my covenant of the day, and my covenant
of the night, and that there should not be day and night in their season:

ver. 21.
Then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant, that he should not
have a Son to Reign upon his Throne, and with the Levites the Priests, my
Ministers.

Dan. 2.27.
Thou, O King, (art) a King of Kings: for the God of Heaven has given thee a
Kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

Dan. 3.9.
They spoke and said to the King Nebuchadnezzar, O King, live for ever.

ver. 10.
Thou, O King, have made a Decree, etc.

6.26.
I make a Decree, that in every Dominion of my Kingdom, men tremble and fear
before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God, and steadfast for ever, and
his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his Dominion shall be even
unto the end.

Mal. 3.7.
Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine Ordinances, and
have not kept them: Return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the Lord
of Hosts; but ye said, Wherein shall we return?

ver. 8.
Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: but ye say, Wherein have we robbed
thee? in Tithes and Offerings.

ver. 9.
Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation.

ver. 10.
Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
house, and prove me now therewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open
you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be
room enough to receive it.

ver. 12.
And all Nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome Land,
says the Lord of Hosts.

Mat. 5.19.
Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men
so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: but whosoever shall
do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

26.52.
Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place: For all they
that take the sword, shall perish with the sword.

Mar. 6.27.
And immediately the King sent an Executioner, and commanded his head to be
brought, and he went and beheaded him in the prison.

15.2.
And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answering said
unto him, Thou say it.

ver. 15.
And so Pilate willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and
delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified.

23.12.
And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together, for before they
were at enmity between themselves.

Joh. 19.15
But they cried out, Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate says
unto them, Shall I crucify your King? The chief Priests answered, We have no
King but Caesar.

Io. 16.2.
They shall put you out of the Synagogues: yea, the time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service.

Acts 1.10.
And while they looked steadfastly toward Heaven, as he went up, behold, two men
stood by them in white Apparel.

ver. 20.
For it is written in the Book of Psalms, Let his Habitation be desolate, and
let no man dwell therein: And his Bishopric let another take.

3.1.
Now Peter and John went up together, into the Temple, at the hour of Prayer,
being the Ninth hour.

4. ver. 25, 26, 27, 28. 29, 30, 31, 32.
Acts 8.14. Now when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, heard that Samaria
had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John, v. 15. who
when they were come down, Prayed for them that they might receive the Holy
Ghost, v. 17. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy
Ghost.

Acts 10.9.
Peter went up upon the Housetop to pray, about the Sixth hour.

ver. 15.
What God has cleansed, that call not thou common.

15.22.
Then it pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen
men of their own company to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas.

ver. 23.
And wrote Letters by them after this manner, The Apostles, and Elders, etc.

20.30.
Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
away Disciples after them.

Romans 12.3.
For I say, through the Grace given unto me, to every man that is among you,
not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think
soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith.

ver. 16.
Be of the same mind one toward another: mind not high things, but condescend
to them of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits.

ver. 18.
If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men

ver. 21.
Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

13.1.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of
God: the powers that be, are ordained of God.

ver. 2.
Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and
they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation.

ver. 3.
For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil: will thou then
not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise
of the same.

ver. 4.
For he is the Minister of God to thee for good: but if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid: For he bears not the Sword in vain: for he is the Minister
of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

ver. 5.
Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
Conscience sake.

ver. 6.
For for this cause pay you Tribute also: for they are God 's Ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

ver. 7.
Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom tribute is due, Custom to
whom custom, Fear to whom sear, Honor to whom honor.

1 Cor. 4.8.
Now ye are Full, now ye are Rich, ye have Reigned as Kings without us, and I
would to God ye did Reign, that we also might Reign with you.

ver. 9.
For I think that God has set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed
to Death. For we are made a spectacle unto the World, and to Angels, and to Men.

ver. 10.
We are fools for Christ 's sake, but ye are wise in Christ: we are weak, but
ye are strong: ye are honorable, but we are despised.

ver. 21.
What will ye? shall I come unto you with a Rod, or in Love, and in the Spirit
of Meekness?

3.3.
For ye are yet Carnal: for where as there is among you envying, and strife,
and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?

ver. 4.
For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo; are ye not
carnal?

ver. 9.
For we are Laborers together with God, ye are God 's Husbandry, ye are God 's
Building.

ver. 11.
For other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

ver. 18.
Let no man deceive himself, if any man among you seems to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

ver. 21.
Therefore let no man glory in men, for all things are yours.

ver. 23.
And ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

9.13.
Do ye not know that they which Minister about holy things, live of the things
of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar?

ver. 14.
Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel.

ver. 20.
And unto the Jews, I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that
are under Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law:

ver. 21.
To them that are without Law, as without Law, (being not without Law to God,
but under the Law to Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law.

ver. 22.
To the weak, became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all
things to all men, that I might by all means save some.

10.32.
Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church
of God.

ver. 33.
Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the
profit of many that they may be saved.

11.2.
Now I praise you, Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
Ordinances as I delivered them to you.

13. all.


12.28.
And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets,
thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then Gifts of healing, Helps,
Governments, diversities of Tongues.

14.26.
Let all things be done to edifying.

ver. 40.
Let all things be done decently and in order.

5.4.
In the Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my
Spirit, with the Power of Our Lord Jesus Christ.

ver. 5.
To deliver such a one unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, etc.

ver. 6.
Your glorying is not good.

1.10.
Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you: but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

ver. 13.
Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye Baptized in the name
of Paul?

2 Cor. 10.7.
Do ye look on things after the outward appearance? if any man trust to
himself, that he is Christ's, let him of himself think this again, that as he is
Christ's, even so are we Christ's.

ver. 12.
For we dare not make our selves of the number, or compare our selves with some
that commend themselves: but they measuring themselves by themselves, and
comparing themselves amongst themselves, are not wise.

ver. 18.
For not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends.

13.11.
Finally, brethren, farewell; Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

Gal. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that teaches, in all
good things.

1.8.
But though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than
that we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

5.19.
Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleaness, Lasciviousness,

ver. 20.
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
ver. 21.
Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like.

ver. 22.
But the fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith,

ver. 23.
Meekness, Temperance: against such there is no Law.

Ephesians. 4.1.
I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the
Vocation wherewith ye are called,

ver. 2.
With all Lowliness and Meekness, with Long-suffering, forbearing one another
in Love.

ver. 3.
Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

ver. 4.
There is one Body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your
Calling.

ver. 5.
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,

ver. 6.
One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.

1 These. 5.12.
And we beseech you brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you:

ver. 13.
And to esteem them very highly in love for their work sake. And be at peace
among your selves.

2 These. 3.6.
Now we command you, Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves, from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the Tradition which he received of us.

1 Timothy 1.3.
As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that
thou might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine.

ver. 5.
Now the end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned:

ver. 6.
From which some having swarved, have turned aside unto vain Janglings;

ver. 7.
Desiring to be teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor
whereof they affirm.

ver. 18.
This charge I commit unto thee, Son Timothy; according to the Prophecies which
went before on thee, that thou by them might War a good warfare:

ver. 19.
Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put away, concerning
faith have made Shipwreck.

3.4.
One that rules well his own House, having his Children in subjection with all
Gravity.

ver. 6.
Not a Novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the Condemnation
of the Devil.

ver. 10.
And let these also first be proved; then let them use the office of a Deacon,
being found blameless.

ver. 14.
These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly:

ver. 15.
But if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy
self in the House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and
Ground of Truth.

5.1.
Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father, and the younger men as
Brethren:

ver. 17.
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially
they who Labor in the Word and Doctrine.

ver. 21.
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels,
that thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing
nothing by Partiality.

ver. 22.
Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins, keep thy
self pure.

2 Timothy 1.6.
Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the Gift of God which
is in thee, by the putting on of my hands.

2.14.
Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord that
they strive not about words, to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers.

ver. 15.
Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.

ver 16.
But shun Profane and Vain bablings, for they will increase unto more
ungodliness.

3.6.
For of this sort are they which creep into Houses, and lead captive silly
Women, laden with Sins, led away with diverse Lusts.

ver. 7.
Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.

ver. 13.
But evil Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, Deceiving and being
Deceived.

ver. 16.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine,
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness.

Titus 1.5.
For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed
thee.

ver. 10.
For there are many Unruly and Vain talkers, and Deceivers, especially they of
the Circumcision:

ver. 11.
Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which
they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake.

ver. 15.
Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled, and
unbelieving, is nothing pure: but even their mind and conscience is defiled.

ver. 16.
They profess that they know God: but in works they deny him, being Abominable,
and Disobedient, and unto every good work Reprobate.

3.1.
Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work.

ver. 2.
To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness
unto all men.

ver. 9.
But avoid foolish Questions, and Genealogies, and Contentions, and Strivings
about the Law; for they are unprofitable and vain.

ver. 10.
A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject:

ver. 11.
Knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and sins, being Condemned of
himself.

Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give account: that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.

ver. 24.
Salute all them that have the Rule over you, and all the Saints.

7.7.
And without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the better.

9.6.
Now when these things were thus ordained, the Priests went always into the
first Tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God.

ver. 7.
But into the second went the Highpriests alone once every year, not without
blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.

1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lord sake, whether it be
to the King as Supreme,

ver. 14.
Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of
evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.

ver. 15.
For so is the will of God, etc.

ver. 17.
Honor all men, Love the brotherhood. Fear God, Honor the King

3.17.
For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well-doing,
than for evil-doing.

5.1.
The Elders which are among you I exhort, who also am an Elder, etc.

ver. 5.
Likewise ye younger, submit your selves unto the elder: yea, all of you be
subject one to another, and be clothed with Humility, etc.

Jude v. 8.
Likewise also these filthy Dreamers defile the Flesh, despise Dominion, and
speak evil of Dignities.

ver. 10.
But these speak evil of those things, which they know not: but what they know
naturally, as brute Beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.

ver. 17.
But beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ:

ver. 18.
How that they told you, there should be mockers in the last time, who should
walk after their own ungodly lusts.

ver. 19.
These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.

Rev. 2.1.
Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write.

ver. 8.
And unto the Angel of the Church in Smyrna, write.

ver. 12.
And to the Angel of the Church in Pergamos, write.

ver. 18.
And to the Angel of the Church in Thyatira, write.

3.1.
And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write.

ver. 7.
And to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia, write.

ver. 14.
And to the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, write.

ver. 18.
I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the Fire, that thou may be rich;
and White raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with Eye Salve, that thou
may see.

Statutes.
PArl. 21. Edw. 1.1. Edw. 3. c. 2. 25. Edw. 3. c. 2. 12. Hen. 3. p. 23. 12.
Hen. 7. c. 18. 19. Hen. 7. c. 1. 12. Hen. 8. 31. Hen. 8. c. 9.13. 25. Hen. 8.
c. 20. 2. Ric. 3.11. 18. Hen. 8.1. Bracton c. 9.10. 8. Eliz. c. 1. 25. Eliz. c.
3. Jacob 3.11.

Canons 1604.
Canon. 33, 34. 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47.59. 139, 140, 141.

The End.
MAY 29. 1660.
YE Angels great in power Protect
Our Sovereign Charles, the Lord's Elect.
Let Monk be Blessed with showers of Grace,
That has Unveiled His Royal Face.
Oh welcome welcome from Exile,
Your waiting Captives cannot but Smile;
Our King by Wisdom has Release,
Our suffering Charles the Prince of Peace.
All tongues, without false hearts let Sing,
With warbling Notes, God save the King.
MAY 30th.
Have thou an Eye,
Then look on Majesty,
Three Kingdoms just Possessour;
In Seisin full,
In Re-assuming free,
Faith's fence and best Professor.
Let Heads and Tongues,
Amongst Salvage have their doom,
Their Heart Strings break with fear;
That Treason hatch,
Against our Spotless joy,
Or England ravish of her Kingly Sphere.
Instruments be Blessed,
That opened our Eyes,
To see Deliverers that Catechize.
In Proditores, September 1660.
HEnce, hence, absent, what is it your desire,
You Enginers Massacres to conspire:
Let only such as Love a Royal peace,
Such and their Fruit for evermore increase.
Cease, cease, your thoughts, contrive not Murders still,
Against a King of Peace, ye worst of ill:
What ere you think, our Duty is to Sing,
Glory to God. Honor to the King.
God save the King. W. W.

THE OFFICE and CHARGE Belonging to the OVER SEERS OF The POOR Of Hospitals,
Bridewell, and of Every Parish, in pursuance of several Acts Of PARLIAMENT.

Give to him that asks thee, etc. 35 Matthew. 42.

When I was an hungered ye gave me meat; when thirsty ye gave me drink; when a
Stranger ye took me in; when Naked ye Clothed me; when Sick ye visited me;
when in Prison ye came unto me. 35 Matthew. 35, 36.

The Poor ye shall have always with you, 12 John 8.

Let all your things be done with Charity, 1 Cor. 16.14.

By W. Wasse Schoolmaster in Little Britain near unto Christ-church.

London, Printed by W. W. for R. H. at the Bible in Heart in Little Britain,
1663.

THE OFFICE and CHARGE Belonging to the Overseers of the Poor, etc.
WHat is the word Overseer?

Overseer is a distinction of Office,a word of Antiquity not of Novelty, a word
of Excellency not of Indignity; an Office beseeming the best of men, not the
worst of men, 1 Chronicles. 23.4. Acts 20.28.

What is an Overseer of the Poor?



1. To see what is to be done. 2. To foresee how it may be done. 3. To Oversee
that it be well done.
1. To employ the Poor by Work. 2. To Relieve the Poor by Money. 3. To order by
Discretion the wants of the Poor.
What men are fit to be Overseers of the Poor?

1. Men of Honest Report. 2. Men of Wisdom. 3. Men of Wealth. 4. Men of a good
Conscience.
What men are not meet to be made Overseers of the Poor?

1. Such as complain of their being taxed too high for the Poor, which give
with grudging, and pay with delaying. 2. Such as will not be spoke with at home
when the Tax is to be gathered, nor bring money to the Church to pay it, but
rather absent themselves from Church to defraud the Poor of their right. 3.
Such as spend all upon their Pride in Diet and Apparel beyond their degree, but
part with little to the Poor. 4. Such as abuse the Overseers, and outface them
to defraud the Poor. 5. Such men as will pay no more then the Law compels them
to, alleging that there is a Law, and by the Law they must live.


What should Overseers consider of in their Office?

1. To discharge their Office as in the sight of God who searches the heart
and sees all their actions. 2. To avoid all malice, and not to Tyrannize over
the Poor. The Naturalists observe, that the Governor of the Bees is without a
sting, or uses it not though it have a sting. 3. That their Office is not held
by Patent, but that they are as Tenants at will, and as they do over-see, so
they shall be over-seen. 4. That if any perish for want of succor through
their neglect, it is their sin. 5. That what Beggars are licensed in the Parish
according to the Law, to continue them within their limits, or else to punish
them for their defaults. 6. That if they shall tax ten shillings more by the
week then is needful, and then give largely because there is enough, it will
but increase the number of the Poor, and nothing decrease the charge of the
Parish. 7. That they relieve not such as may forbear it, because it is to
nourish idleness, to rob those that want it, to wrong those that pay it, and
condemn them of oversight which dispose it. 8. That to enquire after Poor is
the way to procure Poor, and some will sue to be Recorded for Poor that are
able to contribute to the Poor, and being Recorded raise scandal upon them, if
not the Curse of the Poor.


What is the Office of an Overseer?

Overseer,is, to Tax the Contributions for the Poor, and receive the Donations,
and then discreetly to dispose thereof. Taxing all men that are Inhabitants.

1. According to Equality.

The middle sort not equal with the Rich, and when every one is rated equally
according to his Estate, to see that every one pay their rates though there be
sufficient besides for the Poor.

1. For Example sake.

Lest others be backward in paying their due.

2. For the good of the Inhabitants.

If any thing be left it will some what abate the taxation the year following:
Moreover, if the weaker sort pay, and the better able be undertaxed or forborne,
it is an injury.

2. According to their Estates.

Which is not to be judged by reports: that is the next way to make Poor
maintain Poor. For a man of 250 pounds Estate with no Children is equal to a
man of 500. pound Estate with many Children, and so proportionably.

3. According to the time.

War and Extreme times may raise the rates which in plentiful and cheap times
ought to be taken off. Contributions are not to multiply Poor, but to take off
Poverty.

Who are liable to Taxations?

1. By the Statute every Inhabitant in a Parish. 2. Every Occupyer of Land. 3.
By Proclamation Parsons and Vicars be bound to the Relief of the Poor. 4. Every
one that has Tithes appropriate, Colemines, or Land in manual Occupation, and
such as have Saleable wood.


What may be the causes of Taxations?

1. For a Stock to set the Poor on Work. 2. To relieve the Impotent. 1. Such as
through age are past Labor. 2. Infants, poor Orphans, and others left
fatherless and motherlesse, who by reason of their tender years cannot work,
or are unable to live of their work which otherwise would become the seed of
beggary. 3. Idiots, or natural fools. 4. The Blind, Lame, and Dumb. 5. The
maimed in the Kings War. 6. Men maimed in their lawful Calling. 7. Madmen. 8.
For Relief in case of Sickness, or any infectious disease. 9. For men
afflicted with the Numb Palsy. 10. For men decayed, or overcharged with many
young Children. 11. For men made Poor by Casualty of sire or water, by
suretiship, and thriftless persons, which is left at discretion, and all of
them to be considered according to the Act of the 5 E. 6. cap. 7. 7 E. 6. cap.
11. 43 Eliz. 1 King James. 13 King Charles the II.
3. To put forth Apprentices, wherein is to be considered 1. The inclination of
the Poor. Who are by Nature inclined to Ease and Idleness, and therefore are
to be put forth very timely: otherwise by reason of their Idle and base
Education they will hardly keep their service. 2. The placing of the Poor. That
you do not thrust out poor men's Children for Apprentices where the Master is
not able to receive them: this will nothing at all benefit, but increase the
charge of the Parish. 3. Regard must be had to the necessity of the Poor. If
that Parents have many Children, and there be some which by their labor are
able to keep themselves, and yield some Relief to their Parents, to take away
such is point of small Policy, rather put forth those which are a burden to
their Parents. And the more are held to work, and ought to work, the less money
you need to distribute and give away. 4. For the Redeeming of Captives. 5. For
the Succouring of Prisoners. 6. For the furthering young Married Couples. 7.
For such Poor as are ashamed to beg.



Who must be set to work?

1. All Children whose parents are not able to keep and maintain them. 2. All
persons married or unmarried that have not means nor ordinary trade of life to
get their living by. 1. The Willing-poor, that would work if they had it. 2.
The Negligent poor, who must work, and be punished if they spoil their work, or
delay the finishing of their work. 3. The Wilful poor, that will not work
though they may have work: these to compel. 4. The fraudulent poor, with whom
severe course is to be taken, if they will not refrain to Cozen and Imbezle,
who should be put to work where they cannot Defraud or Imbezle.



Bridewell is appointed for that end, as well as for Vagabonds, Strumpets, and
other lewd persons.

What Poor are to be Relieved with Money?



As 1. Defects of Nature. Old-men and Weomen that cannot live of their work. 2.
Defects of Senses. Men and Weomen blind of both their eyes. 3. Defects of
Members. Men and Weomen that want their Limbs, whereby they cannot work, or if
they labor, yet cannot live of their labor. 4. Defects of Body. Men and
Weomen no way able to work by reason of the weakness of Age.


Who must not depend upon the help of the Law?

1. None that have natural or necessary means to live. 2. None that have
Strength to work. 3. Poor Parents must not who have Children, or Grandchildren
of ability. 4. Poor Children must not that have Father, or Grandfather of
ability.


Inducements to the Rich to Give.
1. Because God is called Deus a Dando. 2. Because the Sun, Moon and Stars give
their light. 3. Because Trees, Plants, Herbs, etc. yield fruit for the use of
Man. 4. Because fire gives heat, the Earth yields Corn, Grass, etc. for Cattle
on a thousand Hills. 5. Because we have all one entrance into Life, and one
going out. 6. Because we have all one God to our Father, and one Catholic
Church to our Mother. 7. Because every Creature in his kind will compassionate
one another. 8. Because our Savior tells us, that the poor we shall have
always with us. 9. Because he that gives to the poor shall not lack. 10.
Because he that withholdeth from the poor shall have many a curse. 11. Because
Jesus Christ gave his Life for us. 12. Because it is Enacted and required by
Law, therefore do it liberally, willingly, freely, and readily.
Motives to provoke the Poor to Labor.
1. Because the Sun, Moon, and Stars are stirring. 2. Because the Glase-worms
spin silk. 3. Because the Spider weaves a web. 4. Because the Be tills the
flowers. 5. Because the Ant provideth Corn in Summer against VVinter. 6.
Because it is the Drone that lives upon the Bees. 7. Because it is the
Caterpillar that lives upon the fruit. 8. Because it is the Bouds that live
upon the malt. 9. Because he that is Idle is as a Drone, a Caterpiller, and a
Bound. Plautus.
Quasi mures semper edere alienum panem, Like Mice they eat not their own
bread. 10. Because our first Father Adam dressed a Garden. 11. Because Noah
planted a Vineyard. 12. Because King David kept Sheep. 13. Because St. Paul
labored with his own hands, and has laid down this Rule: He that will not
work let him not eat. 14. Because God is a pure Act always doing, 5 John 17.
My Father works hitherto, and I work. 15. Because the Scripture condemns
Idleness: Matthew. 25.26. Thou wicked and sloathfull servant.
Generosos animos otium corrumpit.

Want of Employment corrupts the bravest Spirits.

Non vivit qui Nemini vivit.

He that lives not to do himself good, lives not at all.

What may be the Principal causes of so many poor Families and people.

1. The cruelty of Creditors. 2. The Unwarrantable Arrests of Sergeants. 3. The
Customary forging of Actions. 4. The Malicious multiplying of unnecessary
plaints. 5. The Excessive fees of Clerks. 6. The Inhumanity of Gaolers. 7. The
Irresistible power of Rich and unconscionable men, whereby many are kept from
their right. 8. The desperate swearing of desperate persons against men in the
Justest Cause. 9. The want of Charity and Patience. 10. The ill Training up of
Youth, Especially amongst the Poorer sort. 11. The want of Employment. 12. The
Excessive number of Private and Public Ale houses, and Tap-houses.


Malus culturafit bonus, An Evil person by due ordering is made good. Statutes.
25 R. 2. c. 6.14 Eliz. c. 5.23 E. 3. c. ult. 34 E. 3. c. 1.7 R. 2. c. 5.12 R.
2. c. 7, 8.11 H. 7. c. 2.19 H. 7. c. 12.22 H. 8. c. 12.27 H. 8. c. 25.3 E. 6.
c. 6. 5 E. 6. c. 2.7 E. 6. c. 11. An. 1. M. c. 12, 13.2, 3 Ph. and M. c. 5.5
Eliz. c. 5.29 Eliz. 39 Eliz. 43 Eliz. 3.1 K. I. E. 6. Injunction 24. Eliz.
Injunction. 11.14 K. C 2.

A CATALOGUE Of all the Archbishops and Bishops in England and Wales as they
were first Established by his Majesty K. CHARLES the II.
Canterbury. DR. William Juxon Lord Archbishop Primate and Metropolitan of all
England. 1633. York. Doctor Accepted Frewen Lord ArchBishop and Metropolitan of
England. 1634. London. Dr. Gilbert Shelden Lord Bishop. 1660. Durham. Dr. John
Cossens Lord Bishop. 1660. Winchest. Dr. Brian Duppa Lord Bishop. 1638. Prelate
of the Garter. Bath and Wells. Dr. William Piers Lord Bishop. 1632. Oxford. Dr.
Robert Skinner Lord Bishop. 1636. Bangor. Dr. William Roberts Lord Bishop.
1637. Rochester Dr. John Warner Lord Bishop. 1637. Ely. Dr. Matthew VVren Lord
Bishop. 1638. Chichester. Dr. Henry King Lord Bishop. 1641. Salisbury Dr.
Humphrey Henchman Lord Bishop 1660. Worcester. Dr. George Morley Lord Bishop.
1660. Lincoln. Dr. Robert Sanderson Lord Bishop. 1660. St. Asaph. Dr. George
Grissith Lord Bishop. 1660. St. David's. Dr. William Lucey Lord Bishop. 1660.
Peterborough. Dr. Benjamin Laney Lord Bishop. 1660. Landaff. Dr. Hugh Lloyd
Lord Bishop. 1660. Carlisle. Dr. Richard Stern Lord Bishop. 1660. Chester. Dr.
Brian Walton Lord Bishop. 1660. Exeter. Dr. John Gauden Lord Bishop. 1660
Bristol. Dr. Gilbert Ironside Lord Bishop. 1660. Norwich. Dr. Edward Reynolds
Lord Bishop. 1660. Gloucester. Dr. William Nicholson Lord Bishop. 1660.
Hereford Dr. Nicholas Monck Lord Bishop. 1660. Coventry and Lichfield Dr. John
Hacket Lord Bishop.
The first five take place by Act of Parliament, the rest according to their
Consecration.

Counties under their Several Jurisdictions with the Parishes in each Diocese.
Canterbury. CAnterbury. 257 Rochester. 098 have all Kent.
York. Yorkshire. Nottinghamshire. 581. London. Essex, Middlesex, Hartfordshire
part. 623. Durham Durham, Northumberland, Man Isle. 135. Winchester. Hantshire,
Surrey, Wight Isle, Guernsey Isle, Jersey Isle. 362. Bath and Wells.
Sommersetshire. 388. Oxford. Oxfordshire. 195. Bangor. Carnarvonshire, Anglesey
Isle, Merioneth, Denbishire part. 107. Rochest. Kent part. 98. Ely.
Cambridgeshire, Ely Isle. 141. Chiche. Sussex, Hartfordshire part. 557.
Salisbury Wiltshire, Barkshire. 248. Worcester. Worcestershire, Warwickshire
part. 241. Lincoln. Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, Huntingdonshire,
Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hartfordshire part. 1255. St. Asaph. Denbyshire
part. Flintshire part. 121. St. David's. Pembrokshire, Carmarthenshire. 308.
Peterborough. Northamptonshire, Rutlandshire. 293. Landaff. Glamorganshire,
Monmouthshire, Brecknockshire, Radnorshire part. 177. Carlisle. Cumberland
part, Westmerland. 93. Chester. Cheshire, Richmondshire, Flintshire part,
Cumberland part, Lancashire. 256. Exeter. Devonshire, Exeter City, Cornwall.
623. Bristol. Bristol City, Dorsetshire. 236. Norwich Norfolk, Suffolk. 1121.
Glocest. Gloucestershire. 267. Hereford Herefordshire, Shropshire part,
Worcestershire part, Radnorshire part. 213. Coventry and Lichfield
Warwickshire part, Staffordshire, Derbyshire, Shropshire 241.
York, Durham, Carlisle, Chester, are Diocesles in the Province of York, all
the rest are in the Province of Canterbury.

MORAL SENTENCES.
MOnarchia perfectissima gubernatio, A Monarchy is a most perfect Government.
Basilica reverenter visitanda,

A Cathedral Church is Reverently to be frequented.

Vulgi genius perplexus,

The nature of the Common people is uncertain.

Seditiosi Rei-publicae ruina,

Seditious persons are the ruin of a Commonweal.

Ingenuis acerba penuria

Penury is bitter to Ingenuous men.

Ad inferospoenas parricidii luent,

They shall suffer Punishment for their Murder in Hell.

Deteriores omnes sumus licentia,

We be all the worse by having too much liberty.

Turba gravis paci,

A rabble rout grievous to peace.

Quid opus est armis habentibus Regem?

What need we fall to Civil wars, seeing we have a King already?

Sat is peccavit qui resistere non potuit,

He has offended sufficiently who cannot oppose.

Stultus fui, qui multos fecerim inimicos; Stultior, qui falsis amicis confisus
fuerim,

I was a Fool that made so many to be my Enemies, but more Foolish that trusted
false Friends.

Ei, qui semel fidem solvit, iterum habere fidem vix est tutum,

It is not safe to give credit to him the second time, who has once Violated
his faith.

Odio digna est simulatio, and simulatione capienda,

Dissembling is worthy of hatred, and to be catched with Dissembling.

De quo been Merearis, vide,

Beware of whom you deserve well.

Cave fidem habeas verbis,

Take heed how you trust words.

Invidia vero dementius est nihil,

Nothing more mad than Envy.

Falsis testimoniis opprimi quamplurimos, tum nemo nescit,

Very many men are undone by false witnesses, as every one knows.

Intellige per vulpem, pauperculos, quos calumniis premere contumeliisque
afficere, divitibus aeque studium est,

By the Fox understand poor men, whom wealthy ones study to oppress with
Calumnies and Reproaches.

Malus, si libitum fuerit, quo jure quaque injuria praecipitem dabit,

A wicked man right or wrong will undo thee.

Impotenti and sincero perpetuo est cum malis parata certatio,

There is a perpetual Enmity betwixt powerless honest, and wicked men.

Non sunt amici omnes qui blande dicunt,

They are not all Friends, who speak flatteringly.

Verum amicum res adversae and pericula designant,

Adversity and danger Evidence a true friend.

Qui plura quam decet quaerit, interdum acquirit nihil,

He that hunts after more than is sitting, sometimes gets nothing.

Potens, si libet nocere, facile capit nocendi causam,

A mighty man, if he lists to hurt, easily takes occasion.

Unumquemque suo decet esse contentum,

It becomes every man to be content with his own.

Unicum and summum praesidium complurium amicitia est.

The only and chief strength is the friendship of many.

Noli omnibus fidem habere: Multi enim, dum aliis videntur velle prodesse, sibi
interim consulunt,

Trust not all men, for many while they seem willingly to do others a pleasure,
in the mean time provide for themselves.

Quibuslibet enim rebus potior est libertas,

Liberty is better than any thing whatsoever.

FINIS.
Words explained used in this Book.
Indifferent.] Not forbiden, nor Commanded, that may or may not be done: but as
Authority shall Judge most meet. Properly bind the Conscience.] By a Divine
ordination. Simply necessary.] Of Divine ordination. Immediate worship.] An Act
of obedience to the first Table, for the honoring of God. Properly so called.]
Any action done to the honoring of God immediately in such things as God has
to that end ordained. Improperly or Respectively.] Ceremonies ordained of men
to attend upon any service: or an Act done to the honoring of God by the
orderly and comely usage of his own ordinance. Ambulatory Rites.] Ceremonies
that have not Divine Institution. Properly Sacred.] Of Divine Institution.
Symbols.] Tokens. Institution. Ordination. Appointment, disposing,
Administration. Subaltern.] Placed under another. Venerable.] Honorable.
Convocation.] An Assembling together of Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
Books written by the Author.
ADvice or Considerations for Parents and Masters; Masters and Scholars;
Scholars, Parents and Masters, Printed for the Author, and to be sold by R. H.
at the Bible in Heart in Little Britain.

The young Maidens Guide, directing the Newest, Exactest, and easiest way to
Learn to Spell, with a Catechism Lessons, Divine and Moral, Graces, Prayers.

The Praise of Women and Virgins, Directions for their Carriage, with other
Delightful matter, crept abroad full of Errors, and wanting many pages, to
the great wrong of the buyer, and greater injury to the Author, the perfect
Copy being now ready and intended for the Press.


