THE REMONSTRANCE AND DECLARATION OF HIS EXCELLENCY Robert E. of Warwick, Lord
High Admiral of ENGLAND; CONCERNING The KING, PARLIAMENT, ARMY, and KINGDOM.

AND His Protestation and Resolution, to the Citizens of London, and all other
His Majesty's liege People, touching his Engagement, for Religion, Parliament,
and Kingdom.

Subscribed, WARWICK.

ALSO, A Letter and Declaration from the Navy, to the Apprentices of the City
of London, and the Mariners and Watermen upon the River of Thames; containing
their fvll Resolution touching the Army.

WITH The Desires and Proposals of the Citizens of London, to his Excellency
the Lord Genesis Fairfax, touching the Horse and Foot who are quartered in the
City, and the Generals Answer thereunto.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN WOOLRIDGE, 1648.

THE DECLARATIGN Of the Earl of WARWICK Concerning the Parliament and Army.
WHereas both Houses of Parliament have bin pleased to entrust me with the
charge of the Fleet, for the preservation and safety of the place of my
Nativity, I shall therefore endeavor to improve that Authority committed to
me, with a faithful and inviolable respect unto my duty. And forasmuch, that
when I first undertook this great charge, I was sensible how much the Cause,
Truth, and Glory of God, the settlement of my Countries peace, and the
preventing of the bloody and desperate designs of the Enemies thereof, depended
upon the management of this expedition, and how much I was obliged in
Conscience and Honor to omit nothing that might have a tendency to those ends.
That obligation I have (according to my best reason and judgment) faithfully
discharged, and by the blessing of Heaven have received this fruit
(notwithstanding the many obstructions and difficulties that intervened) that
the honor of the Parl. by Sea is cleared, the Fleet committed to my charge
preserved in a condition of honor and safety, the affections of the Seamen
settled, the design of those wicked Revolters, that persidiously betrayed so
considerable a part of the Kingdoms Navy broken, and such as associated with
them either rendered or reduced.

And as to the aspersion and pretended resolution of my joining with the
Prince, in case an agreement be not concluded of between the King and
parliament, I do profess in the presence of God, who knows my heart and
ways, that it never entered into my thoughts, and that my soul abhors it as
inconsistent inconsistent with my Duty prejudicial to the Parliament,
destructive to the Kingdoms peace, and unworthy of a free borne English man.

And therefore, as I have hither to been faithful to the Kingdom, and to the
Parliament, where I have the honor to sit as a Peer, so I do and shall scorn
to sacrifice my conscience, and those public and dear concernments of my
Country, wherein I have a pertion.

And while I have a heart, and a hand, I shall not fail (by Gods assistance)
to have them on all occasions, lifted up, for the service of the parliament,
and common interests of England, with my uttermost integrity, and to my highest
hazard.

Subscribed, WARWICK.


December. 13. Letters further from the Navy say, That his Excellency the Lord
Admiral, upon receipt of the intelligence, that the Army had seized on diverse
members of parliament, and entered the City of London, his Lordship declared.
That he wished well to the peace of this famous Metropolis, and desired that
the principles whereon the Army have fixed their resolutions, may prove a
sovereign Cordial, to heal the diseased and corrvpted Ulcersof this bleeding
Kingdom, and that their present Engagement may conduce to the glory of God,
the liberty and freedom of the people, and the peace and tranquillity of the
Commonweal of England, throughout all future Ages and Generations.

New propositions from the City of London, to the Lord General Fairfax
A copy whereof follows, viz. 1 That the City for their security of 40000 l.
desired, may have all the arrears upon any assesments made for this army within
London, and the Liberties thereof, which did grow due to be paid before the 25.
of March last, freed from all engagements. 2 And of those arreares all that
money paid into the Treasury sinde the 30. of November. last, to be accounted
part of the 40000. pesired. And that with the money received out uf Weavers
hall, and the 5500. l. lately received of the Treasurers, the rest shall be
paid on Monday next. 3. That a Commoncouncel have undertaken to discharge the
Generals engagements concerning the money taken out of Weavers Hall, to pay the
same thither out of the said arrears. 4 That the Common council has promised
to get in the rest of their arrears, and also to make the new assesments for
the six months ending Michaelmas last, and to collect the same withal
expedition. 5 And upon this engagement they do humbly pray, that the army may
this night be withdrawn out of the City and Liberties thereof, according to the
intimation of col. Whaley, and col. Thomlinson.

His Excellencies Answer to the said Declaration and Proposals.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
I Have perused your paper, and I find the point of security has much troubled
you and us, whereby we are yet without our money, and necessities daily grow
upon us. To prevent which and to make things clear (which I do not conceive
your papers do) I desire that you will within 14. day, or sooner if you please
cause all the money charged upon the City of London for the Army until the 25.
of March next, and in arrear. This being done, I shall both repay the Money from
Weavers Hall, and withdraw all the Forces from the City, the continuance of
which in the City in the mean time, will (I conceive) facilitate your work in
collecting your said moneys.

Subscribed, T. FAIRFAX.

The Lord Generals Declaratson to the City.
My Lord,
HAving sent so often to you for the arreares due from the City, and desired
sums of money to be advanced by you, far short of the sums due from you, yet I
have been delayed and denied, to the hazard of the army, and the prejudice of
others in the Suburbs upon whom they are quartered; wherefore I thought fit to
send to seize the said Tresuries, and to send some forces into the City to
quarter there until I may be satisfied the Arrears due unto the Army: and if
this seem strange unto you, it is no less then that our forces have been
ordered to do by the Parl. in the several Counties of the Kingdom where
assesments have not bin paid, and there to continue until they have bin paid:
and here give me leave to tell you, the Counties of the kingdom have born free
quarter, and that in a great measure, for want of your paying your Arrears
equally with them; wherefore, these ways if they dislike you, yet they are
merely long of your selves, and are of as great regret to me and to the Army as
your selves, we wishing not only the good and prosperity of your City, but that
things may be so carried toward you, as may give no cause of jealousy: I
thought fit to let you know, that if you shall take a speedy course to supply
us with 40000. l. forthwith, according to my former Desire, and provide
speedily what also is in Arrear, I shall not only cause the moneys in the
Treasuries to be not made use of, but leave them to be disposed of as right
they might, and also cause my Forces to be withdrawn from being in any sort
troublesome or chargable to the City; And let the world judge whether this be
not just and equal dealing with you. I rest, My Lord,

Your affectionate servant, T. FAIRFAX.

A Declaration from his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax concerning the Excize,
and the Citizens of London.
Whereas upon the 8. of this instant month, a party of Horse and Foot came to
the Excize Office in Broadstreet, which perhaps will occasion some to think the
Army came thither with a purpose to interrupt any more levying of the Excive;
These are to declare, and assure them, that the said Forces came thither by a
mistake, and that there was not any intentions to give interruption unto the
due levying of the Excize, or to seize upon any money in Cash; and that you may
proceed as formerly, according to those Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament,
which you have received concerning the same.

Subscribed, T. FAIRFAX.
Several Proposals have been presented to the House of Commons, by Col.
Whaley, in the name of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, in order to an
impeachment against Major Genesis Brown, and diverse other Members now under
restraint: Whereupon the House ordered that a Committee should be appointed to
treat with his Excellency, concerning the said Members.

Sir, Since the coming in of the revolted ships, most of the Mariners have
entered into a new Protestation and Engagemen; which is, That they will
sacrifice all that is near and dear unto them, for preservation of the Laws,
Liberties, and Freedoms, of their Native and Fellow Commoners of this Nation;
and that they will sacrifice both lives and fortunes, with the Army, under the
Authority and Conduct of his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax, for the
accomplishing those good ends, cited in their late Remonstrance, that so much
conduces to the peace and welfare of this bleeding Nation; and that it may
take deep impression in the hearts of all men, who profess themselves lovers
of Righteousness, and Practitioners in the Art of Navigation, they unanimously
resolved to communicate the same, to all Mariners whatsoever, upon the River of
Thames, or else where; to the end, that none may appear opposite, or
dissenting, to the faciliating of so great a Work.

Aboard the St. George 11. December. 1648.


THE END.

