WORKS OF DARKNESS Brought to LIGHT, OR A Glance on the mystery of Iniquity,
carried on in these three Nations by the IESVITS, To the utter subversion of
Religion and Government, and an attempt to subject us to Popish Tyranny: With
proposals to prevent the same.

By S. W.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLIX. May 30.

WORKS OF DARKNESS Brought to Light, etc.
IT is reported, that the Athenians finding a boy picking out the eyes of
birds, caused him to be put to death, supposing this petty cruelty an
infallible omen of his proving a tyrant, when of riper years. I could wish that
this device were put in execution against Jesuits and Popish emissaries, whose
boldness attempts so high, as not only to seduce this Nation in Peccadilloes,
and suckling Heresies, but strikes even at the two eyes of religion,
Magistracy and Ministry, Government and Religion; A sad omen that their aims
and highest expectations are to enslave us to their damnable desires. To make a
recapitulation of their former essaies to subvert religion, by removing those
from places of trust by dagges, daggers, and poison, who have engaged their
power to the utmost in the defense of the reformed religion for the good of
their country, were but to light a candle to the Sun; their very Calendars
blush to see so many Traitors canonized for Saints. And it may justly be feared
that in time this plague of Popery arising from Antichristian Rome, will
spread its infection farther than ever the victorious arms of their mother
City did, even at that time when she was styled the Mistress of the world,
which to preven^ is whol^y and primarily incumbent upon you, to whom the divine
Providence has, as to Vicegerents, resigned the reigns of government. And
know, that if the power he has lent you, be not employed by you to the
reformation or confusion of the enemies of Religion, and by censequence this
enemy of God, who ha^h commanded a strict walking therein, he will make you
memorable examples of treachetie to Religion, and apostacy from piety to all
eternity. Neither can any sober man impute those calamities (of which of late
we have deeply tasted) to any other cause than the toleration of Schisms,
Heresies, and damnable errors, which of late days has been permi^ted amongst
us; and I am confid^nt that the noxious clemency of our Ancestors has
wronged the Devil of his due, by delaying or revoking those lega, proceedings,
which by the law of this Nation have, or ought to have been made against
Heretics; and especi^lly the chief of them, Emissaries, and Seminary Priests:
which like the Egyptian Frogs and Grasshoppers, do now adays swarm in England,
Scotland, and Ireland. For certainly, if any may be thought disturbers and
breaers of the public peace, none more guilty thereof than Jesuits, than
whose damnable maxims none more destructive thereto. Some few of which I shall
instance in, and by the f^o^ of Hercules you may guess the bulk of his whole
body. 1. That Kings may impose a tribute as just, according to a probable
opinion, and that the people may refuse to pay it, as being unjust, according
to another probable opinion, and by consequence the same thing may be lawful
and unlaw^^ll at the same time. 2. That subjects do not sin when they refuse
without any reason alleged to submit to a law, whereof there has been legal
Proclamation made by the Prince. 3. That Clergymen are not subject to secular
Princes, and that they are not obliged to any obedience to their laws, even
though those laws are not any ways contrary to the State Ecclesiastical. 4.
That a man outlawed by a temporal Prince may not be killed out of his
territories, but that he who is proscribed or excommunicated by the Pope may be
killed in any part of the world, because his jurisdiction extends over all. 5.
That it is lawful, as well in judgment as out of judgment, to swear with a
mental reservation, without any regard had to the intention of him who obliges
a man to swear. 6. That it is sometimes allowable, and that so as a man shall
not be guilty of any mortal sin, to kill an adverse party, or to defame him by
charging him with crimes he is no way guilty of. 7. That it is lawful for an
Ecclesiastic or Religious man of any order, to kill a detractor, who threatens
to discover notorious crimes of him or his Religion, when there is no other way
to prevent it. 8. That it is lawful for any man to kill any one of what degree
soever, that is excommunicated by the Pope.


Now what damnable consequences may be inferred from these devilish maxims,
and what horrible murders and outrages have upon these principles been
perpetrated, no age but can produce multitudes of examples; no Nation whither
these pestilential Jesuits ever came, but has sufficiently felt the lash and
smart of their inhumane butcheries. Witness the Low Countries, France, Spain,
the West Indies, and (not to be tedious in a matter so plain) even this our
native Country can produce lively, though not living monuments of their
devilish Cruelty. To free us from the slavish, attempts of these Spiritual
Egyptians, no way safer or speedier than to make a way for the reformed
Religion through the Red Sea of their blood, to that flourishing estate which
it once enjoyed under our Ancestors of happy memory. To the effecting of which,
I humbly conceive these following proposals effectually tend. 1. That all those
penal Statutes which have been made against Pope^y, Jesuits, and Papists, and
have for a long time layn do^m^nt, may be now put into speedy and severe
execution to the intent^ and purposes for which they were created. 2. That none
Popishly affected be employed in any place though of the smallest trust. 3. To
appoint in every County according to the largeness thereof, a certain number
o^ pious and well-affected men, and them to authorize to make strict inquiry
and search after such persons, inhabitants, as are popishly affected, and to
that end do commonly harbor and conceal in their houses Jesuits, and Seminary
Priests, and them to summon before the Judges of the Assizes in their several
circuits, to answer such things as shall be objected against them. 4. That such
persons as cannot give a lawful account of their absence from Church, may be
dealt with according to the Statute in that case provided, the money so raised
being employed to set the poor of the County on work. 5. That no meetings may
be made or assembled on week ^aies or Sabbath days, but in such places as are
or have been lawfully consecrated, appointed, and set apart for the worship of
God, as being unwarrantable by the Scriptures, or Laws of this Nation. 6. That
none be suffered to rrade or work as apprentices, journey-men, or otherwise
within England, or the dominions thereunto belonging, but such as are natives
thereof, and lawfully bound to their respective Master, or have served the full
time of their apprentiships here in England or the dominions thereunto
belonging, unless the servants of Merchants, who are employed as Factours
here. Because there are many Jesuits that do exercise manual occupations in
this land under the habit and notion of Laymen, more subtly and safely
seducing others. 7. That in the respective ports, havens, harbors, and bays
of this Commonwealth, and the dominions thereunto belonging, an account may be
taken by the supreme officer and officers of the said place, of such persons,
who as passingers are imported or exported, and the occasion either of the
ingresse or egresse of the said persons into or out of this Common wealth, or
the dominions thereunto belonging, and that (...) search and inquiry may be
made into the commodities they import, to prevent the bringing in of popish
books. 8. That a set number of able Divines be authorized to read over and
license such books brought into this Nation as they shall judge not destructive
to the peace thereof, whether the said books be originally written in English,
or translated into English, and to read over, and according as they think fit
to allow or disallow all such books as shall be written in England, or the
dominions thereunto belonging, in the aforesaid Language, or translated
thereunto, to be printed, and a penalty inflicted on the offenders in the cases
aforesaid.


FINIS.

