THE DECLARATION AND SPEECH OF The Lord Admiral VANTRUMP, And his setting up
the great Standard of Broom for the States of Holland, for the clearing of the
Narrow seas of all Englishmen; With the States Remonstrance to all Christian
Princes; and their proceedings concerning the King of Scots.

London, Printed for G. Horton, 1653.

New Broom sweepes clean: OR, THE DECLARATION AND SPEECH Of Vantrump, Admiral
for the States of Holland, concerning the setting up of their Standard, for the
clearing of the Narrow seas of all the English.
Honored Sir,
IT is a notable saying, though Machiavel's; Not he that places a virtuous
Government in his own Hands or Family, but he that establishes a free and
lasting Form, for the peoples constant security is most to be commended.
Whosoever has this opportunity, may improve his actions to a greater height of
Glory, then ever followed the fame of any ambitious Idol that could aspire to
the Pinnacle of Anarchy; although Vantrump is now pleased to declare against
those, who has purchased themselves Fame, in defense of their Liberties: as
evidently appears, by his setting forth a flag (or standard) of Broom; and
being demanded what he meant by it, replied, That he was once more going to
sweep the Narrow seas of all English men. Indeed all possible means are used
for re-inforcing of their fleet; and great is their talk, of Prince Rup. sir G.
Carteret, and the French; so that as soon as the Monsieur has put off his
courting face, and set himself in a semblance of action, they may look as
formidable as a fleet of one hundred sail; but the service which may be
expected, can be nothing more then querks of Pyracie, the frolicks of a
skipping guilt; for an ill cause carries evermore with it such a sting of
condemnation in the bosom, that though their instrumental means seem
considerable, yet there is an inward injunction sits upon their conscious
souls, that valor in such persons is capable of no other or better term then
a desperate Gallantry.

If number and success prove Causes good,
And Titles never look eleer, till died in blood,
The Turk out strips us all, for in his sky
No Star so low as Christianity
But when we search the intricate resolve
Of Heaven to bruise a Nation, then re-salve
His wounded People, there is no such thing
As the surviving Crown of suffering;
But still observe the method of a God,
Though Nile drown Jordan, yet he burns the rod.
The States, we hear, have put forth a Declaration to all Christian Princes,
imploring aid and assistance; and are very vigorous in prosecuting their Design.

Again, The States proceed on vigorously in setting forth a new Armado; no less
then eighty sail is voted for, in case they receive not an Act invincible, or a
a Repeal from England: some Frigates are already off from the Stocks, and
Dewitte is the only man whom they now pin their faith upon; but that which
renders them indifferent willing, is, their strange Fancies and new Gingles of
infusing an incredible belief into the hearts of the people, viz. That your
General Cromwell is confined to the Tower of London: but upon what grounds, they
know not,

That the Ciry is extremely divided; and that the Levellers begin to grow both
high and potent, and threaten a sudden change; with many other falacious
Devises, of the Lord Grey's drawing his Sword in the Parliament house against
his Excellency, the creating of colonel Harrison General of the soldiery, and
diverse other circumstances of the like coin, which will prove too light for
these Artists of the Flemish Mint. Nay, further, they retain such unparalled
achievements of their Victors at sea, that all is like to be their own in
England, forsooth; and nothing but Death and Imprisonment shall be the Reward
and Portion of the Members of Parliament, without either Bail or Mainprize.
Again, they please themselves very much with thoughts of strange mutinies among
our men, both by Land and Sea, and divisions amongst your Governors, and
Commanders, whereupon they expect a sudden change; and it is for certain
reported, that Hull, Yarmouth, and the Devil and all, are revolted to the Royal
party. And yet all this will not get in the Interest of Monarchy, though that
party do pretend mountains of golden advantages thereby for the taming of the
English: All that they do for him as yet, is to give him free Port for such
ships as shall by his commission fail. But now bat the Zealand Lords are
arrived here, somewhat more will be attempted, not only for him, but also in
the behalf of the Orange Family.

But that which does not a little amuse them, is, the great Armado setting
forth by your provident States, a List whereof is here presented to public
view throughout the Netherlands; but the Printers and Publishers are most
unjustly detained, and confined to close imprisonment.

The genuine sense of their Charge runs thus: For holding correspondency with
the enemies of this State; For endeavoring to set up the Spirit of Division,
and perfidiously to withdraw the hearts of the people from their due obedience,
and indeated affection toward this State, etc. Erected and set up by the
Providence of Heaven.

All which, is grounded upon these following particulars, viz.

1 That the English consist of 100 sail, Men of War, 2 That there is a Design
to land an Army in Flanders. 3 That the Royal Sovereign (alias the
Commonwealth) is putting forth with 700 men, and 102 Guns. 4 That the
Resolution, the James, and diverse others, are also putting forth from
Portsmouth,
Heaven crown the truth with Victory, if it
Be right to wish such bliss, we slighting it.
Great Neptune, thou that rul'st the foaming waves,
Give Malefactors their deserved graves.
And if we must survive, let malice cease,
And wed our Land to surer bonds of peace.
FINIS.

