Warwickshire PETITION TO THE PARLIAMENT Delivered Aug. 17. 1648. With the
ANSWER.

LONDON: Printed for Tho: Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of many Gentlemen, Ministers and others well affected in
the County of Warwick, and the City and County of Coventrey.
Shows:
THat we being sensible of the Restless endeavors every where of the
Cavileers and Malignants to raise a new War against the Parliament
(notwithstanding the favor and gentleness that has been used toward them)
and the great danger of the Kingdom by it) if the Army were not on foot to
prevent it; As also the happy successes that God has vouchsafed against them
by means thereof in all places, and at all times, It extremely affects us to
see You and the Kingdom so much hazarded by several Petitions that have been
framed for the untimely disbanding it: which should it take effect, whether
before or after agreement with the King (The Treaty whereof we pray may be upon
safe conditions) and before things be in a visible effectual juncture of
safety and settlement, would lay the Parliament and all others that have
appeared for them, and the Cause they owned, open to apparent ruin and
desolation.

Our humble Petition is, That the Kingdom may not be endangered through either
the Designs of Importunities of such. Petitioners, but that the finger of God
may be taken notice of in the extraordinary mercies vouchsafed by the Army. And
that they may receive encouragement worthy their good and faithful services,
And that an Amicable Unity be endeavored betwixt the City and them, which we
conceive will much conduce to the settling of the Peace of the Kingdom, so much
interrupted (and confusion occasioned) by Jealousies and prejudices dividing
men into parties, which our prayers are, God would reconcile and unite, and
make you the happy Instruments of it, Resolving and endeavoring a firm
adhering to those first and just principles, upon which you have engaged all
the honest and well affected in the Three Kingdoms to serve You, According to
our Protestation, Solemn League and Covenant. To which service we hold our
selves still engaged with our Lives and Estates against all Opposition
whatsoever.

And we shall pray, etc.
Delivered this 17th. of Aug. 1648.
And after it was read, the Petitioners were called in, and had this Answer
returned by Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen:
THe House has heard your Petition, and do take notice of your good affections
to this House, and Kingdom: and how that you were with the first that appeared
in their behalf, and that you have continued constant to your first principles,
which they acknowledge with affectionate acceptance: And will take the Contents
of your Petition into Consideration, And have commanded me to give you hearty
thanks.

FINIS:

