A DISCOURSE AND DEFENSE OF ARMS and ARMORY, SHOWING The Nature and Rises of
Arms and Honor in ENGLAND, from the CAMP, the COURT, the CITY: UNDER The two
later of which, are contained Universities and Inns of Court. By EDWARD
WATERHOUSE Esquire

Doctores bonos secutus est, qui sola bona quae honesta, mala tantum quae
turpia, potentiam, Nobilitatem, caeteraque extra animum neque bonis neque malis
annumerant. Tacitus Hist. l. 4. de Helvidio Prisco. (...). Menander. LONDON,
Printed by T. R. for Samuel Mearne in Little Britain, 1660.

TO The honest Ingenious, AND Generous READER.
IF this Discourse be of a dull and discolored complexion, thorough the
noncirculation of ingenious blood in its veyns and arteries, I do really
request thee to impute it to that grief and sickness which immediately
succeeding my never to be forgotten wound (by the death of the best of friends
and relations that ever I on earth had, or ever I on earth hereafter expect to
have) has by a malignity of operation on me ever since, indisposed me, to such
expressions of quickness and variety, as perhaps my health would have to thy
greater content afforded thee; But since it is the good pleasure of God, to
charg the Fields of our worldly serenity with Crosses latent and patent, which,
when sanctified, are (by Heavenly Heralds, who can best blazon the intendments
of divine providence) accounted good bearings, it becomes us to accept his
chastisement with submission, and improve his Instruction with Christian
prudence.

For this tract it is small, and so I intended it, and if it were sweet, and
its lines to wise eyes, as the notes of a good composure melodious to musical
ears, It would not displease me to be short, for that is true of writing,
which Agellius writes of speaking Nunquam tacet quem morbus Lib. 1. c. 51. 15.
tenet loquendi. But such as it is, I hope thou will accept, and hereafter, if
God spare my life, and recruit my broken regiment of health, if thy candor
interpret this and me aright, (for in earnest, I have no cold zeal to Religion,
Order, Learning, Honor, to whose Joseph's sheaf I would, if I could, make every
sheaf do obeisance,) I shall employ my remaining forces of ^en. 37. 7.
strength, to dissipate that rebel sadness, which by heading a dissolute crew
of ill humors, has bin imbodied to my annoyance, and as God shall assist me
with success against that turbulent Enemy, present thee with further
expressions of my service to thee; yet ever remembering that of Apulejus, Et cum
dicto opus est impigre dicere, and cum tacito opus est libenter ^acere.

E. WATERHOUS.
London, 1. of March, 1659/60.
A Discourse and Defense OF ARMS AND ARMORIE.
THERE is no Art so unbefriended, no skill so despicable, but finds some tongue
to own, some Pen to plead for it, even the Craftsmens Diana is mentioned, Acts
19. to have more Stentorian voices for her among the Ephesians then the
Doctrine of Christ in the Apostolic mouths of S. Paul and his Companions had:
And no wonder, for the world of men are more led by opinion then reason,
sensuality then judgment, as that old Poet said, (...), Few there are that
understand, to those many that admire; and few admire what is indeed truly
admirable. There is a principle of policy so ingrafted into our new Creed,
Fortunam magis and providentiam quam amicitiam and justitiam sequi, That no man
(almost) thinks any man or thing estimable, but what is successful, and in the
Scripture phrase, Laden with thick clay, as if there were no foundation for
happiness, no merit of honor like that of worldlings gain and worldly
prosperity. This makes Arts sink with their encouragements, and artists
tonguety'd at their injuries, least vindications should be mistaken for plots,
and apologies for treasons. Indeed were Artists of Catalines spirit, Pravissimi
ingenii ad delendam patriam conjuravit, as Eutropius writes of him; there were
great cause to eye their addresses with jealousy, and answer their offers with
silence; but when they are sober, learned, and useful, to let them be Mossed
over with the scurfe of neglect, and to suffer the Canker of contempt to
dislustre their transparencies, and not clear it off with the Oil and Whiting
of Candor, argues us of this age to be no good Samaritanes. On all subjects
some have written in these times of trouble, and on this of Arms which
ordinarily we call Heraldry; but fewer (God wot) then have been provoked to it
by the indignity cast upon the Art, and the professors of it, while men of name
and fortune have patronized things that have no direct aspect on peace, order,
and National civility. There has scarce been any have owned this Lady which is
the Image of Order, and (as it were) the Magna Charta of Oeconomique
regulation, and thence of politic distinction: Contemnunt nostri Martes haec
talia, and naenias, and ludos ea habeant puerorum, as Lipsius his words are:
Yea, there are yet those further, who not through rustic hardiness, but of
pure zeal (as they think) though I think deludedly, make the author of Order,
God himself, no respecter of persons, that is, no favourer of distinctions of
men: or of any degrees of inferiority and superiority, the chief end of the
practice of Arms and procedure of honor amongst men: and that which is the
right eye in the body of Heraldry. I am no Champion to defy these Goliahs
which come forth in this quarrel to revile, not only past ages and renouned
Nations, who admired and practiced order in the method they discredit it, but
also this Nation of England, when it was, as Livy once said of Rome, Maximi
secundum deorum opes Imperii; Yet so far as their confidence to deform the
beauty of Order, makes them treacherous to the well-being of this Nation, I
dare avow my self their Antagonist.

The Romans were (in their time) the most renowned people for prowess, their
professed enemy Taxiles acknowledged, (...), yet Historians Plutarch. in
Lucullo.
make their seven hundred years prosperity, in which they almost had a
triumphall victory for every year, debtor to their discipline, Ideo
praevaluerunt adversus multitudinem Gallorum proceritates Germanorum, vires
Hispanorum and dolos Policrat. lib. 6. c. 1. Cass. Cat. g. mundi p. 331. Trog.
l. 11.
Afrorum ob retentam disciplinam, says Sarisburiensis: And the same does also
Trogus Pompeius write of Alexander: The symmetry and exact order of which well
advised dispensation continuing, brought Nations of as great power as themselves
into subjection, and expatiated the glory of their valor almost thorowout the
Continent.

And therefore as those fiery spirits amongst them who introduced their civil
Wars in which the first instituted Government by Patritians; (men of the Upper
house and Lords of the Rule according to the fundamental sanction) was
suppressed, as to its splendour, and allayed by admitting a Plebeian
coordinateness, which in time exauctorated the Senate, and erazed in a great
measure the old Nobility and Gentry, so did it give animation to revolts
abroad, and reduced their vast Dominion into narrow bounds, till at last all
their former grandeur was obliterated, and they esteemed as spurious to those
great and magnified Ancestors Curious, Fabricius Coruncanus, Metellus, Fabius,
Marcellus, Scipio, Lepidus, and such like; yea they became so rude and ruinous
by their homebred heats, and the direful consequences of them, that Sigonius
says, Vix Reipublicae Romanae forma qualis fuerit posse exponi, quae modo
unius, modo paucorum In praefat. lib. de fastis and Triumph. Rom p. 6. Edit.
Sulburgii.
nunc multorum nunc aequo omnium Imperio administrata fuerit, atque pro
humanarum rerum vicissitudine iterum atque iterum commutata. So he.

It is then my design, by Gods assistance, to write somewhat of Arms; not as
they are Instruments of War and violence, but Ensigns of peace and distinction,
not as they are handled by men of the field, but as in times of peace, and by
the standard of reason and politic prudence, with the great consent of Nations
by the pens, mouths, and practices of their learned sages, they are asserted,
allowed, and accordingly honored.

To methodize which intent of mine, I propose to consider the Nature of Arms,
the Antiquity and descent of Arms, the Use and behoof of Arms, in which Ternary
what I shall (at present) write will be conveniently couched: In the discourse
on which heads, I shall use a description of the eminently learned Sir Henry
Spelman in his late Printed Aspilogia, for which we are highly to thank Master
Bish, who has nobly published it, with his learned Notes on it and Upton. The
character there by the learned Knight, given arms, is this (which I shall
comment upon as a proper Text) Sunt Insignia decora symbola ad Aspilog. p. 2.
notitiam and honorem latoris a legitimo Judice militibus ascripta. This
description consists of sundry parts. 1. The subjects Insignia. 2. The nature,
symbola, and decora. 3. Their end, ad notitiam, ad honorem latoris. 4. Their
fountain or rise, a Judice legitimo. 5. The objects whom Arms principal, are
directed to, Militibus. 6. The manner how they become appropriate to those
persons they are intended for, ascripta. This is with in the compass of the
Knights Survey, and to touch these particulars shortly shall be my task.

The first part of this definition is the subject matter which he calls
Insignia, Catachrestically called Bella movet Clypeus, deque armis arma
feruntur. Ovid.
Arms, because by Arms in War the knowledge, use, and nature of them was
introduced, therefore Isidore derives In verbo.
them, (...), from Mars the God of War; though he also allow arma eo quod armos
tegunt, men were ever careful to keep their skins whole, for when they had no
defenses of Metal, Diodorus tells Lib. 1.
us, Hercules, and others of renown, did wear the skins of Beasts, which
defended them from those primitive weapons of the Fist, Teeth, and Feet, to
which Lucretius alludes, Arma antiqua manus, ungues dentesque fuerunt;

and when they were improved to Polyd. lib. 2. c. 11. de Inventione.
Stones, Clubs, and other Instruments of contest, yet were their coverings of
proof. But victory begot ambition, and success stole into conquering minds
affectation of some habiliments more heroique: Hence came Targets, Bucklers,
and engravements and depictions on Targets, Bucklers and Shields; On
Coat-armours and other portable Cass. Catal. gl. Mundi p. 45.
utensills which we call Insignia, as being the Trophies and devices of
Worthies who charged their shields, Banners, and Garments with such
portraitures of dread and terror as most resembled their own natures, and most
surprised with astonishment their beholders, as Agamemnon is brought in, whose
Buckler had this Inscription, (...).

Terror est hic hominum, qui hunc gerit est Agamemnon.

As then men grew proficients in contests and masteries, so did their
ingenuities devise Weapons both offensive and defensive, Swords and Shields
were inseparable companions, accounted portable Castles, covering their whole
bodies or the most part of it, which made them account them the tutelar Deities
of their lives, and adorn them with emblems of gold and glory, Insignia a signo
derivatur, quasi aliquo signo ab aliis discretus and separatus, says Festus.
Hence is it that we read of every more then ordinary thing either good or evil
expressed by Insigne. Virgil tells us of Superbum 8 Aeneid.
insigne belli, and Tacitus of Insignire annum cladibus, and Tully of Insigne
flagitium, and Insigniter improbus, Lib. 6.
and Livy of dies insignis duplici clade, and Quintilian of prodigiosa corpora
and monstris insignia: Yea, Tacitus tells us, That men of merit had of old,
Ensigns of Magistracy decreed them. So Claudius Caesar decreed to Narcissus,
Questoria insignia. Those then that merited Insignia, placed them in their
Shields and Bucklers, which the Greeks called by several names, according to
their figure and proportion: A Target or Shield they called (...) of orbicular
form, for which cause Virgil compares the great eye of the Cyclops to those
Clipei argolici he saw in use, which Dionysius calls (...) Lib. 24.
(...), as does Homer and other Authors.

They also had other Muniments and Shields which they called (...), in fashion
Oblong and of greater dimension then Bucklers. (...) scutigenus quoddam a
Magnitudine, that this Shield was in use among the Romans no man can question,
since every Author mentions it, Polybius especially, who describing the Romans
Armature, writes thus, (...), which his noble Annotator Lipsius has notably
illustrated, lib. 3. de Militia Romans Dialog. 2. p. 106. So Turneb. Advers. l.
9. c. 17. And how it came in use Livy tells us, Romanos antea Clypeis usos,
deinde postquam facti sunt stipendiarii scuta pro Clypeis fecisse, l. 8. So
that, by what Lege Lazium Reip. Romans Commentar. l. 9. c. 17. p. 793.
appears, Insignia which we call Escocheons of Arms, were originally the
charges and garnishings of Shields, corporal defenses, and representations of
the Bearers nature and worth, figured in the charges thereon, which time and
use has transferred to the accommodation and glory of their Issue, though not
of similar prowess, yet of as significant merit, since there are Virtutis
lauds, and Eruditionis insignia, as well as Fortitudinis, and Men ought to be
honored as well for council as courage. Yea so far have late times overborn
the first institution, that whereas these Arms were the embroyderies of
Shields and upper Garments, on which ground they were called in our Nation
Coat-armeurs or Coat-armours? now they are wholly left off to those uses, and
become the figures on Seals, Rings, Walls, Monuments, and such other
concomitants of civil society and order; and so I proceed to the second part
of the Description, which is the praedicate, what Arms are, mentioned in those
words Symbola decora. 2. Part.


Symbola, that's the Cipher that sets out the nature of Arms: For the Arms or
device on the Shield is but a representation of somewhat more excellent which
is concealed, and to which that is but the fescue and finger; therefore Mr.
Fern quotes a definition of Blazonry somewhat Gl. Generos. p. 164.
pat to my allegation; Blazonia est recitatio vel commemoratio alicujus
virtutis, and quempiam sub quibusdam signis, abunde and vere laudare aut
decorum dicere. Suidas terms Symbola by (...) In verbo.
(...), making the sepiment of skyn which man is bounded with a Symbol of his
Mortality. The Ancients also called their (...) or civil Concords between City
and City, (...) which Demosthenes speaks of, 7. Philip. Hence I suppose grew
that custom to give Rings as Earnests to the Concord which Terence alludes to
when he says, ut de Symbolis essemus dati annuli, and amongst us in the most
durable contract of our lives, Marriage; the legal custom was and yet is, to
bind it by a Ring as well as by other ceremonies of significancy; These Symbols
were anciently the only way of expressing the Nature and Meaning Lib. de Symb.
Pythagorae and partis secunda p. 460. cass. Catal. gl. Mund. p. 58.
of things, the Egyptians, Caldees, Greeks, Latins, all used them, as Lilius
Giraldus out of Jamblicus, Plutarch and other Authors, has largely observed.
For the World was a great while without Letters and Writing, only by
Hieroglyphics, and such like Mysterious resemblances were the minds of men
understood, when they themselves were out of place. Therefore what Plautus and
Pliny express by Tessera and Syngrapha; elder times did by Symbola, which are
the same in resemblance that parables are in Speech. So that by Symbola as
applied to Arms we understand such an Idaea of the bearers mind as charges him
to endeavor merit of that he in his Shields depiction appropriates to himself,
for Bartholus well notes, Art ought to imitate Nature, unde ista insignia
debent esse secundum Tract. de Insiguiis and armis p. 11. Edit. Biss.
Naturam rei quam figurant. And hence I suppose is that affix of modification
which the Knight here adds, Decora, a word of restriction, telling us that Arms
ought to have analogy and proportion to the bearer, and in a great Measure to
decorticate his nature, station, and course of life, or somewhat conducing
thereto, Quae gestantium Notis in Vptonem, p. 51.
nominibus alludunt antiqua sunt si non omnium antiquissima insignia, is
learned Master Bish his note, and not without many learned men's concurrence
with him. For since names given for distinction were conformed to the nature of
creatures, and the Emergency of Accidents as is evident in holy and profane
Bochartus Geograph. Sacra, p. 56. 57, 58. de Roman. Nominibus. c. 1. p. 341.
Stories, and as is clearly made out by Sigonius amongst the Romans, and is in
all Nations owned, yea, as in our own Land and the Stories of it appears; Then
ought and ever was the same rule observed in Arms and bearings of honor, for
it is a maxim, a nominibus ad arma sequuntur Zuinger. Theat vitae a p 3085. ad
3092. Fern. p. 225.
argumenta.

Here then is a fit place to instance some few noted names with the occasions
of them and the suitable bearings they have assumed, which our own knowledge
may in a great measure assure to us, they being English men and Families,
Prince Arthur was a valiant spark, and Camb. Brittan, p. 229.
from his Infancy perceived cruel, therefore he had the name Arthur, which
signifies a horrible Bear or Iron Mall; Briewre the favorite of H. 2. so called
because born in a Heath as the Norman word imports. Henry Percy called Hotspur;
Propter suam probitatem, eoquod aliis spori deditis ipse super hosts Knighton
de Eventihns Angl. p 2728. Cambd. Brit. p. 604.
invigilare consueverat, Gravesnour so called from his great skill in, and
addition to, Hunting. Latimer signifies a Truchman or Interpreter possibly from
the skill in Languages which their Ancestor had; so also some have been named
from bodily remarks, as Blunt from their yellow hair, Fairfax from their fair
bush of hair, some from Towns they dwell in, and are Lords of, as Draycot,
Wilesley, Bishopsheir, Malpas, and such like others, Cambd. Brit. 587. 603. to
609.
some from waters, as the Lord Stoveton from the River Stowre, Wallop from
Welhope, others from p. 262.
corporal defects, as Crerequer quasi decrepido cord, of which Master Cambden
every where in his Britannia makes mention. Yea, there is one that makes the
famous Family of Plantagenest which stored the Fern. Glor Generos. p. 226.
Crown of England (to use his words) well nigh the space of four hundred years;
from whence have issued one Emperor, fifteen Kings, and ten Queens, twelve
Princes, twenty four Dukes, and sixty Earls, to have taken its name of a Plant;
thus for a taste of, ordinary things, and Accidents that gave occasion to Names
of worth: there are also Families whose bearings are referential to their
names, and have a kind of consanguinity with them; Master Fern has saved me
some pains herein, therefore he shall have the honor of my acknowledgment, he
mentions the bearings of Breiwer Earl of Devonshire, p. 231.
Lucy, Will. Earlae Aquilis son to King Stephen, Sheffeild, Wingfeild,
Sommershall, Quater main, Tremayne, Hanchet, Bulloine, Calverley, and sundry
others. To which I may add thousands more of the like nature, but that I would
not clog the discourse with impertinent allegations; it being indeed hard to
find any name of family which has not participated of this prerogative of time,
to be and bear what the unavoidable vicissitudes of life, and the pregnant womb
of fate has produced them, as some beauteous Helens have had the mole of envy
to their never to be repaired blemish, so have many Zipporahs been coveted as
the minions of ages, and floated on the smooth streams of affluence to
admiration, it is the will of God it should be so, and it is best it should be
what he wills, whose will is the rule of rectitude, that which is to my
purpose, is to show that in the adaption of Names and Arms to places and
accidents, there is a good decorum observed, which is what the description
requires in the Symbol of a scutary depiction, for it says, Insignia sunt
Symbola Decora. And so did Virgil before my Author. Clypeique insigne decorum;
2. Aeneid.

This word Decora is of a great comprehension, our own Language when it
expresses any thing gracefully done, says, Its done with a good decorum, or a
good decorum observed, Decorum says a gloss, quod ita Naturae consentanea ut
in eo moderatio and temperantia appareat, cum specie quadam Liberali. The
Greeks called Decorum (...), and both Valla and Tully by it understand Valla
lib Cic. 1. Offic. 136.
tam ipsum honestum quam quod hominibus and communi opinioni honestum videtur
and pulchrum and probabile. For besides the dignity of Decorum's birth, being
derived from december the magnified number of Pythagoras, and called by him (...),
and the number which gives Malchus in vita Pythagorae.
denomination to things of remark; hence, ova decumana and fluctus decumani;
There have been in all Authors notable words joined in consort with it, Tully
has decorum and elegans; and Justa omnia decora sunt, Lib. 1. Divin. Lib. 1.
Oflit. Lib. 2. de Leg. Lib. 1. de Orat. Horat. 1. Car
and Color albus praecipue deo Decorus est, and speaking of an Orator he says,
ad rerum dignitatem apt and quasi Decore Loqui; And all grateful things have
been expressed by it. Nigro Crine Decorus, so Plebs decora 1. Syl. 6.
cultu, so Statius; Aedes decorae, decorus sermo and decorum silentium,
frequent in Horace, to which add Lacrymae Decorae and Os decorum in Terence,
together with Decora Caesaries in Virgil, all which notes that 1. Aeneid.
by Decora there is intended such a temper amentum ad pondus, as is justifiable
before the severest Tribunal of Justice, as in Consorts notes answer each other
to a Symphony, so in Armory there must be regularity; No man at the Feast of
honor must be his own Carver, standing dishes of altess, and dresses of
majestique composition are not to be touched, the officer of Arms appointed to
weigh out doles of reward is sworn to deal uprightly: and in Master Fern's
words, give p. 83. Lacies Nob.
to every man according to merit, and that with the most aptness to the
setting forth and signifying of the virtuous desert whereby the first bearer
was advanced to the bearing of Arms: so he. And if it were otherwise Arms would
beget, not prevent confusion, for every man's ambition would feed on the
daynties of regality, and contemn those proportions that are more becoming
them. It is favor enough that they have the Wall of the Plebs, too much that
they scorn an equal, and abide no superior. For as the Laws of Nations, so
the particular Law of gentility in England, denies Arms to be borne by any but
those that either have them by descent or grant, or purchase in the Field from
the body or badg of any prisoner they in open and lawful war take, and this it
does to obviate that tympanous humor that swells up lawless, and light minds
into a rude and arrogant usurpation of the rights of Nobility and Gentry, of
which tribe they are not naturalized: Therefore H. 5. by Proclamation did
inhibit, Quod nullus cujuscunque status, gradus An: 5. Regni Memb. 15. dorso in
Archivis Turris.
seu conditionis fuerit, hujumodi arma sive Tunicas armorum in se sumat, nisi
ipse Jure antecessorio vel ex donatione alicujus ad hoc sufficientem potestatem
habentis ea possident aut possidere debent, and quod ipse arma sive Tunicas
illas ex cujus dono optinet demonstrationis suae personis ad hoc per nos
assignatis seu assignandis manifest demonstret, exceptis illis qui nobiscum
apud Bellum de Again Court arma portabant, etc. And herein the Law of Arms in
England is but in affirmance of the Law of Nations, and avowes that order which
is practiced in the civilized world. For as God in the creation and
preservation of things, is the great exemplar of order, giving in the
compagination of Heaven and Earth, and the dominion and subjection in them, a
document to mortal manageries, which are then only vehiculated to their central
point, when conform to the protoplast in the direct line of regularity. So have
all ages and people by a plenarty of consent, coincided, to promote
distinctions and differences between man and man; that there be as Saint Paul's
phrase is, no Scisme in the body of Government, which without could not be
avoided; The frame of this great world cannot subsist without a God, the light
not be, if the Sun were superseded, the Firmament, the Earth not be fertile, if
not irrigated, Man not live, if not cooled by air, and strengthened by food, no
more could communityes continue their neighborhood without Government the
first born of order: And this however paradoxall to levelling Anarchists, yet
has been accounted Canon, not only by those Elder Asiatique Nations, whose
polity had all the dimensions of order in it, but also by the puissant people
of Rome, whose practice may be thought most swasive with this high courag'd and
military Age. For as they entrusted not the poorer sort, which they called
Proletarii and Capitecenses, with Arms of war, nisi in tumultu maximo, but kept
their Militia in I'Lipsius p. 19. de Milit. Romans ex Polybio Dionyseo and
Agellio.
the hands of men of blood and fortune, as Nabis the Spartan in Livy (who
opposing the Romans Custom to the Spartans, says, Vos a censu equitem a censu
peditem legitis.) So did they not indulge mean persons Arms of honor; No, nor
accommodations much below them, it was denied servants to have their head
covered, for when once the pileus was put on their head, it betokened
Emancipation according to that of Perseus, Haec mera libertas, haec nobis Pilea
donant, hence when those that were shaven became freemen, they are said by
Livy, Seneca, and others, vocari ad pileum, in Lib. 6. Ep. 47.
which regard when Brutus was the best Trump in the Roman State, he caused money
to be stamped in memorial of his parricide, cum pilio Salmuth. i^ Panciroll.
Tit. de Fibula 44. p. 178. L. Girald. Synt. 1 hist. de^^um.
duobus pugionibus imposito. Nor was any man eligible to be Tribune if one of
the Equestrian order, till he had served in the wars ten years, as Pedestrians
were to serve twenty years. They indeed allowed to merits Lipsius l. 1. milit.
Romans p. 15.
rewards and admissions to honor by grand paw's and deliberate steps of
ascent, yea, to one like Sicinius Dentatus who served his Country one hundred
and twenty battayles, and brought from them woundy Testimonies of valor; they
thought no honor too great, though the person on whom it was bestowed, ab
ortu, was but a Terrae filius, or a sese ortus, or a man of the first head as
we say, that is of a nuper exorta nobilitas, which Pliny calls subita Imago,
and after whom Budaeus. Salmuth. tit. de Cellis 2. 25. p. 63. Lib. 1. Ep. 9. in
Pandect. prioris, p. 176. edit. Basileae, A^. 1534.
But in other cases the Patricians and Senators were so jealous of their glory
and perfulgency, that they allowed none participants with them on ordinary and
nummary accounts. They, they were the men who took pleasure in the adorning the
portraytures of their Ancestors, and erecting such Statues and Emblems of their
honor as in a kind gave them a temporal immortality, with these were their
Porches and Medalls adorned, and with these were their Rooms of Lib. 6. c. 51.
State made venerable, yea, Polybius tells us, To these Statues did they
annually devote a solemnity. Which Tully perstringed in that tart passage to
Piso, Obrepsisti ad honores, errore hominum, commendatione fermosarum Imaginum
quarum simile nihil habes praeter colorem. So he: but this (with his leave) I
take rather written ad hominum, then chargeable on the Roman Grandees, for as
most of them had great personal worth, so did they preserve this memory of
their Ancestors, to excite them to a patrization, and to a generous conformity
to, if not a transcendency above them, for though it be true that it was one
end of theirs to live in the fame of generous Sirs, who had been men of honor
and office in the state, yet had they this also in their design, ut vitae
seriem Budaeus in pandectas priores p. 174.
servantes and juxta imagines cujusque propriam haberent virtutem quos
imitarentur, as Photius his words are out of Diod. Sicul. lib. 32.

I do not aver the Romans had all those things for their Insignia, which for a
long time have been in use amongstus, for time has enfranchis*d us as ages by
longer service for experience may be thought greater proficients in the variety
and employment of fancy; They had no knowledge of the use of Mettalls and
Colors, posterioris aevi inventum est, says Alteserra, Lib. de Col. and metal.
They knew not what blazoning was, that is modern, about Pharamond the first
King of the Gauls, Anno 420. Or Prince Arthurs age Summar^e armorial Imprim. a
paris l. 138 p. 3. and 5.
Anno 480, it grew in use. As their Language, habit, nature, and manner of
warfare, in time differed from what it was; so without all doubt did they vary
in their rewards and punishments, and as they differed from themselves, so were
they different from other Nations; The world is now a hotchpotch wherein all
mankind is blended together, and no Nation is so entirely what it is called as
at first it was. The Romans made many Conquests abroad, and to them was great
concourse of people, who were Roma Donati, which made Rome linsie woolsey, not
of a warp and woof alike, though therefore they might not have Arms and devices
of emblem which were of personal and genealogick right, by which cognizance is
taken of what House Gentlemen are, from what branch of that House, whether
loyal or spurious, what matches they made, and from whom their Issue are
descendants, though they might have no action in their Law of the twelve
Tables, against any that should give their Emblem in Seal or Shield, as by
latter Laws they had, and as by the Laws in use with us was allowed, though
peradventure they had not all these in the formality of latter ages. Yet had
they things analogical to them, and of identique import and significancy with
them.

They had their (...), their Ordo Campestris, Senatorius, Equestris and In
priores Pandect p. 376. Lipsius de milet. Romans Dialog. 5. p. 126. Et in
Analectis. p. 24. ad Dialo. 51.
plebeius suis quemque Insignibus distinctos, says Budaeus out of Pliny; yea
Lipsius out of Strabo, Herodotus, Pliny, Polienus, Livie, Plutarch, Virgil, and
others, tell us, their chrystae and galeae quae scutis imponuntur, familiarum
antiqua digmata, originem habent a multis chrystis, in use amongst them; yea
they had much more instances of approximation to us, Lazius com. Reip. Romans l.
9. c. 17. mentions out of Pliny, that amongst the Romans, scutis qualibus apud
Trojam pugnatum est continebantur imagines. They had their Statues and Bucklers
of gold, which in honor were hung up in public places, as that of Claudius
was hung by the Senates allowance, (...). In the Court or Senate, and his own
State was allowed to be (...) in the Lib. 9. p. 122.
Capitol, as I have it from Eutropius. They had their Arcus Triumphales, in
which stately Marble repository, were monumented the Victories of those to
whose memory those piles of fame were erected. Panciroll tells Memorab. tit. 28
us of 36 of them which were in Rome, and one without it; of which number six
only yet remain. They had their Columnae, of which two are most famous. That
to Trajan, Salmuth p. 96. E Palladio.
and the other to Antoninus Pius, a pair of Darling Emperors, amor and
deliciae humani generis. They had their Crowns, Chayns, Rings like our
attendants of Knighthood, and such like Budaeus. p. 225.
other marks of merit and reward, speaking as effectually what they were, and
whom they came from, as our Arms of Families at this day do, which I have from
learned Budaeus, who (speaking of our Insignia Gentilitia, as relating to the
same end with those elder Ceremonies) writes thus, Pro iis (ut opinor)
posteriora Tempora Insignia Gentilitia habuerunt In Paudectus priore. sp. 117.
quae arma vulgo vocantur, Quae ipsa quoque primum ac simile est very virtutis
praemia fuerunt ac rerum praeclare gestarum decora. So he.

And because it is very proper to show when arms in a distinguishing and
Gentilitiall acceptance came in use, before I write of the use and end of
them, which comes in with the next part of the description. Therefore shall I
discourse of that as pertinent to satisfy the enquiries of those that are
soberly curious.

Concerning the rise of Arms, I would speak modestly as becomes, and as my
Great Masters have presidented me, because as in Antiquity and the story of it,
decocted through so many vicissitudes, and varnished over with fucatious
semblances of truth instead of very truth; there is much doubt begot in sober
minds, to the solution of which there ought to be stanch reason and authority
produced: so because there is an impossibility of renewing those Characters
which Time and Tyranny has deleted, and wholly absorp'd, it is very convenient
to use a soft Pen, and to offer probable truth with no dictator-like
confidence. Time has a Beesom of change, that sweeps away whatever is written
in mortal dust; And it is one of the miseries of this visible Globe that deluges
of force and age carry all Monuments of antiquity before them into the abyss of
forgetfulness, what Gods mercy preserves the memory of, we only can know, and
with that are to be satisfied; And so much of that as I have learned, and judge
convenient to publish of this matter, follows.

It is probable that in the first Ages of the world, when the paucity of men
made their contests small and seldom, there was no use of Emblems and
Characters of discrimination; but not long after, people multiplied, and men
prog'd up and down for livelihoods and courses of maintenance, then they came
in as Sea-marks to keep them from splitting on the Rocks of confusion. For
Diodorus says, that the Egyptians, who make themselves Omnium mortalium
antiquissimi, Or as Lilius Giraldus; se deorum genus primum apud Syntag. 1
hist. Deor^m p. 6.
se extitisse volunt: These I say are accounted to have them ab initio
Religionis, that is from Osyris and Isis, more then 400 years before the
Israelites going out of Egypt, and Diodorus adds how they came to use
Bibliothe. l. 1. fol. 77.
them, (...), etc. When the old Egyptians for want of order in their confused
bands of men were overcome by their Neighbors, they settled their forces in
such divisions as were known by their Ensigns, every part of them having his
peculiar sign. But it pleases me rather to deduce the antiquity of their use
from the Jews, Jacobs Posterity, who growing numerous used them, and that by
some thing like a Prophetique direction of their Genitor, who is said to
prevail with God, Et nunc quasi supra Coelos evectus non in hominis persona sed
ex ore Dei qualis in longum usque tempora futura sit eorum conditio pronunciat,
says Reverend Calvin. In Cap. Genesis 49. v. 1.


There is nothing I confess in the Text that precisely directs the Character
Jacob gives of his Sons and the descendants from them (for them also it
reaches) to be used as a mark of distinguishment, or a Tribuall difference:
neither for ought I see is there any thing to forbid it. In that therefore the
Description of them is fully made, and the number of their Tribes and allyances
grown great, why then may not their Characters be thought to be used by them,
as we now do Coats of Arms in Shields and Banners? Vpton. lib 3 de Color albo.
p. 103.
Some of the Jewish Doctors say peremptorily, that the Israelites had four
Vexilla or Magnalian* Banners: And that under every of those, In cap. Number. 2.
there were three Tribes, Et erant in illis vexillis picturae notificantes
Tribus quae erant sub illis vexillis, and so Tostatus. Others conclude their
S^gna to be as in Genesis c. 49. Jacob describes them, but R. Abraham, Aben Ezra,
though he will have their Banners charged with Insignitions of distinction, yet
forsooth, the figures on them must needs be those four in 1 Ezec. 10. An Eagle,
a Lion, a Bull, and a Man; but that conceit Tostatus rejects, and adds a good
reason, revelatio illa de quatuor animalibus nondum fuit facta, fuit enim
facta, postea per multa tempora cum propheta esset apud fluvium, Chebar.

Though therefore the certain rise of familistique distinctions be not
infallibly concludable out of the Text; yet there is much conducing to, not
only its probability, but its full proof, especially when thereto we add that
the Israelites were of noble Parentage. Of a free stock, whose Parents were not
in bondage, which Tully, Boethius and Budaeus, make necessary to Gentility,
(Gentiles sunt qui eodem inter se nomine sunt, Budaeus p. 151.
qui ab ingenuis oriundi sunt, Quorum majorum nemo servitute servivit, Qui
capite non sunt diminuti.) Of great numbers, warlike Nature, and aptitude to
Generation they were, And in these regards needed distinctions which these
Characters served for: Therefore without any violence to truth, they may (with
submission to better judgments) be accounted users of them, and commendable
Ancestors to the use of Arms in after ages of the world.

Yea the Text of Numbers says, Number. 2. v. 1. 2.
That the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, saying, Every man of the Children of
Israel shall pitch by their own Standard with the Ensign of their Fathers
House, etc. by which our learned Translators intend, no doubt, that as the
Tribe had a general devise or Standard, so every House or Family in that Tribe
had a particular distinction, and of this Opinion is Lorimus. And because I
take this place for a clear proof of In locum.
the use of Insignited banners amongst the Jews, therefore shall I be bold to
consider the Original and learned Versions of it.

Every one (...) super vex illum, so the Hebrew, or juxta as the Biblia
Polyglotta Waltoniana.
Called. in nota sua sub vexillo, so the Arabic Version, the word (...)
signifies such a Standard Bearer, cui subsint december millia It Is a military
Ensign, quod magnum, as the learned take it, and the word is so used as a note
of prelation, Cant. 5. 10. My Vexillarii nominati sunt qui sub uno vexillo in
Centuria necebant. Lazius Com. l. 7. c. 5.
Beloved is fair and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand, the word Here, a
Standard Bearer. So Cant. 6. v. 3. where Christ applauds his Spouse He calls
her terrible, (...) the word Here, as an Army with Banners. That is as a
Standard attended with sundry Banners in defense of it: For Vexilla properly
signifies the Standers of Kings and Chiefs, whose Subjects hold Estates and
Offices to attend and defend their Sovereigns Standard, Labari aurei
dignitatem, lege apud Laz. Com. l. 7. c. 5. therefore are they not such as
Livy, lib. 8. called Vexilla, used by the Roman Equestrians, Vexilla se suorum
parmasque cernere equitum, but large, square, and of noble capacity, to which
proprius accedunt Vexilla Templorum quae in lustratione and processibus
anteferuntur, says Lipsius. And Lib. de milit. Romans p. 170.
if both Vegetius and Brecman, denominate these aright a velis navium, we must
conclude they are no snips or scantlings of display, but as of rich composure,
so of ample dimension. Cedrenus tells us both what, and of what they were,
(...), which Lipsius thus translates, Vexilla panni seu vela ex purpura and
auro in Quadratam p. 176.
formam effecta. Et in signis, (...) that is according to his Character, or
notable mark of evidence, so the word is used Genesis 4. 15. God set a mark upon
Cayn (...) the word here, Genesis 9. 17. This is the sign of my Covenant, so is
the word in the plural number taken, Exodus 4. 9. Deuteronomy. 34. etc. 26. v. 8. etc.
11. v. 3. and in sundry other places. In all which, there is employed as evident
discrimination as can be made by Language. In Grammat. (...) est litera quasi
signum externum vocis proferendae character Pagninus in verbo.
and nota, for it comes from (...) as if in the note and decyphering there were
something coming toward us, which we are to entertain and take notice of:
therefore though the 70. read it by (...), yet some Copies read it by (...),
which being (...), as Suidas observes; makes the sign as full of evidence, as
the sound of the Trumpet is an instance of the Horsemans preparation to march
or to Battle.

These Signa then being their familique Banners, or Ensigns, were highly valued
by them, as after they were by the other Nations, especially the Romans, as
Halycarnass witnesses, (...) Hist. lib. 6. 1 Annal.
(...), l. 1. Annal. so Tacit, conversus ad signa and bellorum Deos. So he.

(...) Castrametabuntur, a Military word, yet has also a signification of quiet
repose. God would have his Saints skilful in Martial order, lawful defense he
allows, and advantageous methods he prescribes, but all his Isreal's Militia
must tend to peace with men, and with one another. So that the conclusion hence
will be this, That if God commanded the Jews to pitch their Tents in a
Military figure, casting as it were, the Tribes into four Brigades, and in
every of them the several Families into lesser models, distinct, according to
their Standards and Ensigns: and this the Jews did, as appears Numb. 2. v.
last; Then undoubtedly the Jews are good instances of the Military use of Arms
in National Standards, and familical Ensigns or Banners. And can we think they
used not that for civil distinction, which they found so available in Military
multitudes? though the holy Text be silent in it, on that account, yet it being
punctual in pedigree, and delivering much of that in diverse places, not only of
the old but new Testament, to clear the descents and rights of eminent persons,
of which the Jews in their Families were very careful. The eldest of every
Family being the Prince, and having the archivae of his stock in his Custody,
And In primogeni^^ tanquam in Capite stat et remanet splendour geniturae. Baldus.
the Nation in general having a great zeal to propagate the honor of their
Ancestors, as appears by their expressions of having Abraham to their Father,
and being freemen and not in bondage. John c. 8. v. 33. Though I say there be
no distinct proof for Ensigns personal and gentilicial among them, yet there is
much conducing to it, and nothing against it, nay it is probable that the
Barbarous Nations conversing with the Jews, (being in their ascent to glory,
which they arrived at more and more, and to the view and admiration of which,
strangers came from far to them) learned from them, with many other parts of
useful prudence and invention, This way of Military and Civil distinction,
which has been, yet is, and I hope ever will be in the regular world. This for
what I have to write concerning the use of Arms amongst the Jews.

After the Jews, Stories tell us of Greeks, Romans, Spaniards, Germans, and all
great Nations and Personages that used them in their Shields and Trophies of
honor; Sir Henry Spelman has collected many instances p 30. Aspilog.
of them which I shall not here recapitulate, but add some other examples of
Nations and Persons, who of old time gave these Insignia in their Shields: Of
Nations, it is written the Egyptians bare an Ox, the Scythians Lightning, the
Phrygians a Sow, the Romans an Eagle, Mars by the Thracians, and a Bow and
Arrows by the Persians: the Syrians a Dove, the Indians a Dragon, the
Athenians an Owl, the Thebans Sphynx his head, the Rhegini a Hare, and the
Corynthians a flying Horse; and so many Nations more, Cat. gl. Mund. p. 20. 58.
mentioned by Cassanaeus; and for particular persons; Mr. Leigh has given us
the bearings of many, as of Joshua, David, Hector, Alexander, Ac^i^ence Armory.
p. 23. p. 112, 113.
Judas Macabaeus, Julius Caesar, King Arthur, Charlemaine, Sir Guy of Warwick,
etc. Le Mair tells us of ^emiramis In Illustrat. Galliae lib. 5,
bearing a Dove, Aeneas a golden branch in a green Field, with two silver
Doves; so Idomeneus the Pausan. lib. 5.
Nephew of Minos is alleged to bear for his Arms on his Buckler, a Cock of
the Game. ^lemannus Herculus the 11th German King, bore a Lion: Wittikind D. of
Saxony a black and after a white Horse, and La science Heroique chap. premier.
a cloud of others Monsieur Columbiere has collected; yea, the Germans to
Tacitus his time, did observe the use of Arms in Shields, so did the Romans in
their Cohort and Legionary L^zius Comment. Reip. Lib. Romans c. 17.
Insignia, long before Nero's time, as is collectable not only from their
Coins, on which those Emblems and Imageries are impressed, but also from
Juvenal Satyr. 2. Ac nudam Effigiem Clypeo fulgentis and hasta,
Prudentisque Dei perituro ostenderet hosti.


So Horace speaking of the Scythians conflicts with the Argonauts, says Cuncta
Phalanx Insigne Jovis caelataque gestat, 6 Argon.

Tegmina. --


After the use of these grew more common, and were called (...), of which
Vegetius writes thus, Sed ne milites aliquando in tumultu prae. Lib. 2 c. 8.
Scutis qualibus apud Trojam pugnatum est continebantur. Imagines, Plin. l. 35
Lazius in Com.] c. 17.
lii a suis contubernalibus aberrarent, diversis cohortibus diversain scutis
signa pingebant, ut ipsi nominant (...), si cut etiam nunc moris est fieri. And
it is observable that these Signa were no trite devices and vulgar pomps of
fancy. But first the Images of their Gods, then of those Heroes and Military
Deities that preceded their Emperors, as Mars and Romulus, after of their
Emperors, as Lipsius out of Tacitus, Suetonius, and other Authors has
instanced; which superstition De Milit. Romans p. 168, 169.
of theirs, gave occasion to Tertullian to cry out, Religio Romanorum tota
Castrensis Signa veneratur, Apolog. c. 16.
Signa Jurat, Signa omnibus Diis praeponit, yea, because the Romans grew so
doting on their fortunate warring, that in Signis militaribus Sir H Sp. Aspil.
p. 136.
ardorem and religionem omnem suam posuere; therefore did they descend to the
fatuity of bringing wild Beasts into their Gods and Emperors places, for such
at last they stained their Insignia with, as Tacitus and Pliny both testify.
By all which it Tacit. l. 14. Plin. l. 10. c 3.
appears, that Escocheons of Arms were introduced as a help to the right use
of Arms; for if the end of War be to oppose enemies, and defend Nations and
Neighbors in amity, who without differences of knowing, may fall foul each of
other, and not do the duty of right to those they owe it to, then what is a
remedy to prevent and to hinder the contrary, is of much use, and this does
Arms in Standards, Ensigns and Shields.

And therefore though it be true, that these Insignia were at first Military,
used only by those in action, and upon the prealledged grounds, yet have they
been for many hundreds of years, not only the rights Clypeus quemadmodum in
praeliis munimen militum erat, Ita pace parta suspensus atque obtrectatoribus
objectus, ormamenti quoque militaris locum accepit in quo and quae cuique
imagines, exprimebantur, ut hodieque fit, Lazius com. Reip. Romans l. 9. c. 17.
of Soldiers, but also of their Posterities, who are dignified for their
prowess, and hold Estates of their Princes upon Tenures of service of War
either in their persons or purses, or in council, which is of equivalent
acceptance and consequence. So that which way soever we cast our eye, though
as to the determinate time of the Origination of Arms, there be more mist then
clear Sky, the probable dawnings of tradition, rather then the noon-light of
History, some ascribing the first use of them to the Jews, others to Hercules,
others to the Caryans and Argonauts, who accompanied Jason to the Conquest of
the Golden Fleece, about Anno Mund. 39 21. and brought back with them charges
on their Shields, in token of their Victory; of which Opinion Hyeron Bara is,
as others are that it commenced in the Trojan ages, in Alexanders time, under
Julian, in his conflict with the Moors, The Goths and Vandalls irruption into
Europe, the times of Theodosian, Charles the great, Barbarossa and others. Yea,
and as well the Germans as any; though I say in this doubtful and not to be
determined case, every one being restive in his opinion, there can nothing
infallibly, as to the time, be concluded. Yet this is without doubt, that when,
or by whomsoever Arms on Shields, or Coats or Banners were brought in use, it
was upon grounds of inconvenience found without them; for confusions are often
parents of Order, and men's sufferings lesson them to Methods of regularity,
which till they have smarted, they cannot so readily learn. God in the Creation
rescued light from darkness, and garbled Order from the confused Chaos, and
Nations are ever most ingenious to prevent those evils they have most bin
injured by. Therefore though in the breaking in of Saracens and rude Barbarians
into Christendom, great havoc was made of sacred edifices, antic Utensils,
and Monuments of honor; yet at that Port (probably) came in the more general
use of Arms and Banners Military and gentilicial, because against them were the
great confluences of Christians united, and in the expedition against them
randevouzed.

And hence also it is probable, that Arms grew appropriate to Families, for
either those that were in Command in the Holy Wars, and used Arms in their
Banners, Shields, or outward Garments, upon their return from that service,
took those devices or Arms as their due, (for then it was permitted to every
man to take what Arms he Bartholus de Insigniis and armis. p. 1. Vpton de
officio Milit. l. 1. c. 18. p. 59.
would so none bore it in his own Nation, and he adds his reason, nam sicut
(...) sunt inventa ad recognoscendum homines, ita arma and Insignia,) or else
had indulgence from their Sovereigns or his Chieftains to bear them; which time
and use has improved into a customary legal and rightful appropriation to
their Issues and their Descendents, Mills Catal. Honor. milit. and Civil p. 157.
and to no other in that Nation, without the deserved censure of usurpation,
for which an action of injury lies, and trial by Battle was Baldus 1. c. 1.
Circa Princ. 5. de pace tenenda in usi^us seudorum.
allowed and performed, and was frequently practiced in this Nation, and other
Countries yet allow it.

It remains now, that somewhat be mentioned of the Origination of Arms,
Gentilicial and familicall in our own Country, England, which I doubt will
prove of a latter date then many of our gay boasters say they have born them in
their Families, there are some that with those Romans Plutarch speaks of, call
themselves (...), that is, elder then the Moon. No pedigree pleases them, but
that which is ab Evandro and Arcadibus. I am a great admirer of antiquity, and
honorable Auncestry, but reason and History shall sway me beyond any passion
or opinion; for if consideration be had, that for some hundred years, this
Nation was under the harrass of War, and in the storm of forraigners
assaults, and after troubled with the Cholique of civil uncivil War; there
will be little reason to be over confident in matters of Pedigree and Arms,
much beyond 400 years. I have it In Gloss. ad verb. Arma.
from the learned Knight, who adds too, Neseio an ea prorsus antiquitate. Yet
when ever (as about that time I conceive its rise) the first users of Arms, and
the first that had original right to them, were such of the British Nobility
and Saxon line as kept their honors, fortunes and seats, or some of them in
the changes of Government; They being fortunate, and not frowned upon by the
Conqueror and his Sons, kept their stations, though his Normans had the place
and power in Court and Camp, and as these grew more and more habituated to his
Government, and he abated of the rigor of a Victor, and made by peaceable
Government more calm, so these showed themselves more openly, owning their
rights with greater freedom. From these, and from the Lords of the new Model,
sprang twigs of honor, which after became tall of growth in the springs of
honor, most of the Families of our now ancient Gentry being Issues from them,
dependants on them, or preferred by them, yea dignified with badges of trust
and honor, nearly allied to those great men's bearings: so true is that of
Giraldus Cambrensis, where speaking of the great men, He says, In Itiner.
Cambr. c. 10. p. 851.
Clientes hos suis quasi armis instructos armigeros suos forte vocant, and
Militum foeda cum armis suis, suis armigeris dedisse; Thus as the Romans of old
called their best and most noted Servants Gentiles, as we read of Budaeus in
relig. Pandect. p. 304. lib. 33.
Bruti Cassii Ciceronisque gentiles, as Tully himself calls servius Tullius,
(after King of the Romans) Gentilem suum, which I take to be as much as Pliny
meant by Marcipores and Lucipores, which were the Servants of Marcus and
Lucius; It being the honest and just custom of Antiquity, not only amongst us
and the Romans, but even in the primitive Jewish times, to account faithful and
worthy Servants next to Children, and accordingly to reward them, as appears
in that passage of the Patriarch Abraham, where Eleazar of Damascus his Steward
is Genesis 15. 2.
by him declared his Heir, he being childless, nor must it seem strange; for
who merit so great respect, next to those a man begets, as faithful Servants
that attend them and theirs with love and trust? Mr. Cambden tells us of Ja. L.
Audley, who attending In Staffordshir^. p. 584.
the black Prince at the Battle of Poictiers, was there sorely wounded, the
Prince rewarded him with a gift of 400 marks of yearly rent, who presently gave
the Princes gift to his four Esquires, saying dutifully to the Prince, Sir, It
is meet that I do well for them who deserved best of me, These my Esquires
saved my life amongst my Enemies, and God be thanked, my Ancestors have left me
sufficient Revenues to maintain me in your service.

And if it be usual in story, to read of brave Spirits remunerating valor,
even in Enemies, as Edward the third did Sir Eustace Ribamont, a French Knight,
who personally encountered the King, and held him tack a long while, till the
King twice beat him on his knees: at last the King took him prisoner, with
these words, Sir, You are the Knight in the world that I have seen most
valiant, either in assault of Enemies, or defense of himself, whereupon he gave
him the Chaplet of Pearl he had from his Head: for which cause, the said Sir
Eustace gave 3 Chaplets garnished with Pearl. If Friends have been rewarded (as
was R. Steward, D. de Aubigny Marshal of France, by Lewis the 11th who had
given him the royal Arms of France with Britannie. In Scotland. p. 26.
Buckles, Or, in a bordure Gules, as Cambden instructs me; and as Albeney was
by H. 1. to whom he gave 140 Knights fees in England, and 120 in Normandy;) Why
is not the merit of Servants and Dependants, who spend their youth in faithful
drudgery, and own no parts or worth but what is at their Lords devotion, to be
amply repayd them, where Masters have opportunity and power?

Truly I see no reason, but it so should be, and so accordingly did our
Honorable An ceors now with God, do, and by this grateful bounty of theirs,
have the Families of the lesser Nobility in a great measure been increased. No
man acquainted with Story, but knows that of old most of the great Estates and
Commands in England, were in the hands of such favorites of the Conqueror and
his Issue as they granted them to, who by tenure, in their persons and with
their Tenants, Servants and dependants were to attend their Sovereigns in their
Wars: these Great Men granted parts of their Tenures to persons, either
related to them by match, service, or affection, upon such terms as they
themselves either were obliged to the first grantor of them, or else on other
conditions of advantage to them, giving them also Coat Armor; either parts of
their own, or some other as to them seemed meet. Thus did many of the great
Fern. Glo. Gener. p. 304.
Houses of Cheshire grow from the Earls of Chester, who had power to erect
Baronies and other Titles within their limits, which they did, and granted them
over to hold as freely of them as they themselves held of the Crown: thus also
grew from the Houses of Albany, Vere, Strange, Vfford, many Noble Spel. in
Aspilog.
Families in Norfolk; and so others in other parts of the Nation. Hence
probably came in the Titles of Knight, Esquire; Yeomen, which were at first badges
of personal service and domestique relation; for though miles which we render
Knight, be understood generally to import a choice person, quasi ex millibus
Electus, One of a thousand as we say, A brave person picked out of a multitude,
and furnished with a noble Horse chosen out of many, clad in Armor and
Cooperizons, tricked and adorned with Gold, which some think is the reason they
are termed Equites aurati, as others conclude them so named from their guilt
Sword and Spurs; Though I say Miles be acknowledged as a Noble Dignity, And the
great Orders of Majesty in the World be those of Knighthood, yet anciently it
was a name of service, not only in order to Tenure, the greatest Estates of
England being in Knights service, to which I suppose Upton has an eye in those
words, Miles est quasi servus Reipublicae, but Lib. 1. c. 2. p. 7.
also in regard of attendance on the body of some Lord, Peer, or great Person
on Horseback, who from being his A^mour-bearer was styled Knight, or in Saxon
Cnicht, of this fort were Knights Bannerets, who are by mistake written
Barronets, but they were not inheritable, but of personal Office, of these
there are many Parliament Records, cited by Sir Edw. Cook, 2 Instit. p. 667. on
the Statute of Additions, which is as much as, a lusty young man, a Servitor
and Minister, not accounting himself adorned with rich Clothes, precious
Jewels, and Carpet toys, sed in scuto divulso, fracta galea, gladio hebete,
facie vulnerata, as Vigetius his words are. These Knights are called by
Bracton, Radcnichts, Gallants bound by Tenure and service to attend their Lords
on Horseback, as Esquires did on foot. Hence the phrase Esquires of the body,
an Office well known in the Court, ut pote qui antiquitus militem a latere
insequend^ arma ejus ut Lib. de Nobil. p. 147.
commilito fedissimus tulerit, says Mr. Mills.

Therefore Gentlemen or Esquires, (which differ little in antiquity, (are both
called Scutiferi and Armigeri, and till Edward the fourths time, Lords (if not
Knights) were but 2 Inst t. p. 665.
styled Armigeri, bearers of the Arms of their Chiefs, in which regard a King
is called (Jovis Armiger) by Cerda, and by them dignified to In Virgil. lib 5.
p. 527.
bear Arms in their own right, it being usual in elder times for great men both
of the Clergy and Laity, to give honor, not only that of Arms bearing, but
also Knighthood, as is noted by the learned Seldom, though of late it be only
Titles honor. p. 667 771. Vpton. lib 1 c. 2. de off, milit. p 7.
restrained by Law to Sovereigns and their Deputies or to Supremes in their
respective Dominions.

After as this Nation grew more settled, men of virtuous ambitions, sought to
deliver themselves from dependencies and service, addicting themselves to such
studies, employments and courses of life, as they judged most conducing to
their speedy emancipation, and peace, proving no shambles of youth, the
increase of their number necessitated a more then ordinary Industry; And the
brave Spirits which were monopoliz'd by Great men, and which breathed out their
lusty blood in Wars, became diffused into all quarters and conditions, the
Court, the City, the Law, the Schools, as well as the Wars, and the Houses of
great men, shared them amongst them, and by these grew thrift requested, and
the effects of it reached great Honors and Purchases: So that as great men of
fortune and favor rose by Industry and Gods blessing upon it, as either were
of the Original British, Or of the dignified Norman race, Yea and in few
years, the Lands, Arms, Honors and fortunes of the Normans severe Lords of the
Nation, came with their Children in Marriage, to those* honest English Gentlemen
who were once their unfortunate vassals, Or to their Issue, whom time and
national change had made freemen. Thus (besides many others) I read of the
ancient Family of Fitzhugh (Lords of the Castle of Ravenswich, before the
Conquest) that they continued still their Splendour to the time of H. 7. per
connubia cum haeredibus Biss. in Upon. p. 46.
duarum familiarum Normannicarum Forneaux and Marmion.

The consideration of the advantage industry accomodates the Nation with, and
the justice of returning laborious Ingenuity a just reward, as it has made the
common Law of England disfavour perpetuities of Lands in infinitum on Families
as tending to the Eclipse of Industry, since if Lands may be entailed on all of
a Line, then those Families that have Land, must necessarily always have it,
and no others ever after purchase it, which seems contrary to the pleasure of
God, who appoints worldly revolutions, giving and taking away at his pleasure;
so also does not the Law of Arms in England, favor engrossing Arms to the
Gentry of one Age and not of another, but still leaves a latitude of admission
to all men of merit, whom the supreme Power either immediately, or mediately
shall think fit to dignifie with Arms, Provided such Emblems and Badges of
Honor be not injurious to those that bear the bearings, (through mistake given
them) with greater right, For Princes as well as meaner men, may err by
misinformation, and justly recall their grants as a punishment to the insolent
falsehood of their deluders.) And in other men's cases the rule of Law is
determined by Baldus, si quis assumit arma seu Insignia alterius qui eis longo
tempore usus fuerat In Lib. 2. Cod quaeres* vendi: non possunt.
tenetur poena falsi. And this the Officers of Arms who are ever privy to the
transactions of these things, are well to look to; For though no man of Honor
ought to have an evil eye because Gods is good, but give suffrage to, and
approbation of rewards of virtue, even to persons of mean and base Origin, like
the Flavia Gens, of whom Suetonius writes, obscura illa quidem In vespas.
ac sine majorum imaginibus, sed tamen Reipub. nequaquam paenitenda; for as
much as the virtues men express are the gifts of God, who often exalts men of
low degree, as Saul, David, Praemislaus, Tamberlayn, Tullus, Hostilius,
Theodosius, Servius, Archelaus, Marius, Valentinian, Telephantes, Bonosus,
Chongius, and multitudes of such like in all Ages and Countries, who being
above the vulgar, nay above their own Births and Parentage; Ought to have, and
have had a great share in the honor and esteem of men and Nations, though I
say no man (of wit and worth) denies these their right to Arms, yet men of
blood and honor, who have not attainted their stocks by disloyalty, will be
ever impatient to have their rights given to others, while they have right and
possession of their Arms and Badges of Gentility: and battle was allowed for
trial of right in this Case between Harding and Saint Low, An. 1312. by leave
of Robert the Scotch King, for the rule is, id quod nostrum (si enim prius est
nostrum) Regula Juris.
sine facto nostro, a nobis auferri non potest, and another rule there is, nemo
potest arma amittere nisi propter infamiam; As deservedly did Andrew Harkley,
created Earl of Carlisle by E. 2. loose by his infamous disloyalty, not only
his Arms but his Knight hood, for he was degraded, and all his Military
Trophies taken from him, and at last drawn upon a hurdle to the place of
Execution, and there hanged, beheaded and quartered. In this case when as Arms
and Honors are forfeited by Treason* Or return into the Supremes hand by act
of death, a Family being eraced, and the title to the Arms dying with the last
of the bearers, Then the Supreme not only as ultimus haeres, but as fons
honoris, may grant those Arms and Honors Clypei in funeribus and
parentaco^ibus pompae praeferuntur, quod denique extincta prosapia Clypei ex
suggesto dejiciuntur haec Romanorum Cuncta vestigia esse. Lazius in praefat. ad
Com. Reip. Romans
to any it pleases, without injury to any Subject, Or, to its own Honor. So
that the result of what precedes upon this Head, amounts to this, That Arms as
honourary dignities, and generous distinctions between family and family, and
person and person, have bin undoubtedly born from the time of Hen. 3. since
which there is sufficient proof of them; and though long before that, many
Families might be rich, potent and noble, yet some of them either had no Arms,
as many yet in Ireland have not, though (in Sir Henry Spelmans words) Nobiles e
primariis familiis, and as in the contest between Hastings and Ruthen, which
endured from Richard the seconds time, to Hen. the sixth, one of the Deponents
in that Cause, who was Estirpe nobili, said, Nihil sibi insignium accidisse,
quia nec ipse nec majores sui in bello unquam descendissent; Or else kept no
constant Coat, but gave now this, anon that, sometimes their Paternal,
otherwhile their Maternal or adopted Coats: which variation causing much
obfuscation in History, it is not easy to fix (upon true warrantable grounds)
the constant lineal bearing of Coats in a line of unchanged descent above Henry
the thirds time; since which Civil Wars and riotous Commotions, Jack Straw,
Will Waw, and their Companions in Richard the seconds time, Cade and Gate in
Henry the sixths time, the Bastard Fawconbridge in Edward the fourths time,
Perkin Warbeck, and the Blacksmith, in Henry the 7ths time, all these (says
Accidence Armory. p. 78.
Leigh) with their accomplices, have defaced Law and Arms, And I doubt our late
troubles have repaired neither, for as that grave Civilian Bocerus has notably
observed, De bello and d^ell^. Lib. 1. c. 29* p. 219.
Bona quae bellum aufert sunt liber Christianae religionis usus, Reipub.
tranquillitas, studia literarum, possessiones agri, vineae, praedia, domus,
agricultura, Mercatorum Navigatio, pecora, aurum, argentum, Milites etenim
Castra sequuntur saepe, non ut bonam and justam causam Defendant, sed ut
spoliato and exuto omnibus fortunis adversario, Ditiores domum redeant, pileis
inter se nummos distribuant, holosericum non ulnis sed hastis metiantur. So he,
and so I have done with the nature of the Subjects Symbola, and the
modification Decora.

The third is the end, for which Arms and Devices honorary are given, that the
Description terms double, ad notitiam ad honorem latoris, By this then it
seems, that these apposite Symbols are not toys and insignificant nothings,
but Emblems of real, though tacit Language, and the conjunction of them here
lessons us to observe: first, the Order and Locality, second, the Import and
Nature of them both in the common and select interpretation. As to the Order
and gradation the description has been very regular, for Notitia is the first
step to honor, men must know before they can venerate, God sets up light in
the Soul as the inlet of Faith, Love, Adhaesion, In which sense the Scripture
says, They that know thy Name will put their trust in thee, for Knowledge is
the Sentinel that examines all approaches to the Main guard of the affections,
and it is seldom seen that a true esteem is fixed in the heart when the
understanding is not convinced of the Nobility of the Object.

It is true, there is no demonstrative reason to be given of Love and respect,
that is, there is not always such a concurrence of praeliminaries and
worthiness in the objects of Love, as justifies our love to be placed with
judgment and choice, approving it self to the rationality of humane nature,
for what reason is there, that men love and hate things that they have no
experience of the good or evil of them; yet is there an ictus or impulse
occasioned by view, Narrative, Or some other accident, which has cogency and
force of Conquest on the apprehension, which by gaining that advantage,
proceeds to prevail on the affections, and thence on the outward man, from
which it obtains that which is called respect and honor; so that as in all
natural operations, there is Cause and effect, which in order of time precede
each other, so in knowledge and honor is there an order to be observed. Since
the honor we give to any thing or person, is but commensurate to the Knowledge
we have of that thing or person, and issuant from it as the tribute we give to
that excellency of worth we apprehend.

Secondly, The Imports of Notitiae and Honor both in their common, and in
their select acceptance is notable. For there are many things that are
Notitiae, as well as Arms, which yet are not of such personal and familical
honorable intendment as Arms are. In all Ages, and Nations, there are Notices
of distinction, both for persons and things. And some are allowed what others
are not, because they are of more conspicuity then others are, and therefore
sacrated and separate from vulgar familiarities. Suetonius tells us, of
Severus, nunquam libertinos in Equestrem ordinem redigisse ne Equestris Ordo
commacularetur, The names of Heroes were not Alex ab Alex. lib. 3 c. 20.
to be given to mean persons. The Athenians had the name Hermodius and
Aristagiton in such reverence, that they made a Law Ne illa servis indere
liceret. And Domitian punished Metius Pomposianus, for giving the names of
Magon and Hannibal to his Servants, Tanquam clarissimorum virorum nomina
servili contagio polluisset. The Agrarian Law began thus, Et in hoc more
positum (Quirites) institutoque majorum, ut hi qui beneficio vestro Imagines
familiae consequuti sunt eamprimum habeant concionem, qua gratiam beneficii
vestri cum su^rum laud conjungant, There is a casual difference which results
from the instability of mortality, which makes Time, through the versatility of
men that live in it, of a various nature. That which is fashionable, religious,
legal, loyal in one age of the World, is exploded as singular, profane,
irregular, foedifragous in another, One Arian Emperor makes the World Arian,
and a Constantine recalls it again Christian. In Maximinus his time, Soldiers
were so moderate, that a Soldier after the Persian War, finding a Parthian
bagg full of precious Jewels and orient Pearls; threw them all away, least they
should corrupt his mind, Solo pellis p. 164.
nitore contentus, says Salmuth.

And Polystratus, a Macedonian Commander, prosecuting Darius, and being
athirst, called not for Silver Curtius. lib. 5.
or Gold to drink in, but drank out of his Helmet; but in. Julian the Apostates
time, these Hectors were more dainty and braving, (Miles quasi mollis per
antiphrasin) Armato saxum non erat cubite sed pluma, and flexibiles lecti, et
graviora gladiis pocula, testa bibere pudebat, Domus ac aedes marmoreas
requirebant, they are the words. of Ammianus Marcellinus, a Lib. 22.
Soldier and an Historian, These and such like accidental notices there were
between man and man, age and age. But the Notitia's of most remark, are those
which are designed by polities, and canonized by Laws and National usages. The
Romans had their Annulos Tacit lib. 18. A^nal.
Aureos to distinguish equites a plebeis, who wore Iron Rings, They had their
Notitiae, and other things which they called Senatoria Ornamenta, Vlpian in L.
Specios. c. 100. De verborum signif.
Or after Ulpian, Magistratus Insignia, because the proper endowments of the
Senators, who were accounted Speciosae and clarissimae personae. To these
Magistratique attendancies, Lampridius i^ Alex. Scuet.
Prudentius alludes in his enumeration,

-- Nonne cursim transeunt Lege Cassiod. l. 6. Epistol.

Fasces, secures, sella praetexta Toga
Lictor, Tribunal, and Trecenta i signia,
Quibus tumetis --
They had besides these their Latisclavius, Suetonius In Augusto. c. 38.
Or loose Purple studded garment, for which cause they are called Laticlavii
Senatores, Their Calcei Lunares, or half Moon'd slippers, to teach them, that
though they were Patritii, yet Lunares, men of place in the Moon, the Mistress
Plutarch. in qu* Romans p. 282. Edit. Paris.
of inconstancy, they had their Perones, which they wore as no other Citizens
did; for theirs were lapillis quibusdam gemmisque praecicosis Variar. l. 1. p.
8.
exornatos, according to Raevardus, which Tertullian mentions Latent in
(singulis smaragdi, and cylindros vaginae suae Solus gladius sub sinu novit and
in peronibus uniones emergere de luto Lib. de Habit. Virg.
cupiunt, These and such like marks and notices had the Romans, and at this day
have all Nations* and all Orders of men in them. The Clergymans Canonique
habit, the Peer, Knight, Gentleman, Burger, Artsman, are all, (in orderly
times,) distinguishable by their Habits and attendants, which were their
Notitiae or Credentials, where their better authentiques to esteem, were not
necessary to be produced. And where as common Burgers and Arts men were not
allowed Arms, either in Shield or Seal, yet the Law justified their use of
marks, by which they distinguished their property; and who ever used their
marks other then by their privity and warrant, was accountable to them for it.
And Bartholus instancing in Smiths, or makers of Paper, who to distinguish that
they own from other men's making, set their marks on them, adds this reason why
it is not lawful for one man to use another mark, Quia ex hoc Tract. de
Insigniis and armis, p. 8.
populus laederetur, acciperetur enim opus umius pro opere alterius.

As then there are other things in Notitiam, as well as Arms, so are Arms in
Notitiam, as well as other things; for Notitia being a forinsique word, and
coming from Nosco, thence Notio, and Notitia as much as cognitio, reaches
whatever intimates more then it expresses in the outside Character. Arms in
Seals or Coats, Walls, and Windows are notices, that the bearers of them of
generous extract, were owners and Masters of that their Arms are fixed on, or
to, and that either by right, as of foundation, Inheritance, or Purchase. Or
else of Custom and Possession: and he that removes an Arms, and usurps a Seal
of any Gentleman's, giving it as his own, is to answer the injury at the Law;
For the Laws of Nations give every Gentleman as true and distinct a Title to
his Arms, as to his blood, and as in case of Lands, the evidences of them are
as rightfully the Heirs or Purchasers, as the Lands themselves. So in Causes
of honor the Law judges Arms the Gentleman's right, as truly as his blood in
his veins; Hence is it, that Gentlemen bearing Arms, for some are asymboli, not
only those heretofore mentioned, but those also which some Civilians call
Nobiles asserti, concerning which Cass. cites much out of Lucas de Penna, and
Bonus de Catal. gl. Mundi. p. 312, 313.
Custilli, with others, (and such are Gentlemen by Courtesy amongst us) ought
not to debase themselves in giving marks; for that is if not laesio
Nobilitatis, yet diminutio, a kind of temporary degradation of themselves, and
a vilipending of their dirth-right, and of the fair and flourishing Character
of it. A Gentleman is a Brother in Arms to a Prince, and is not to part with
any punctilio of generosity, to comply with petty degenerous conveniences,
unless it be in the pressures of life, and under the straitness of fortune,
where to blazon ones birth, is to heighten ones misery; for as the Lawyers say,
Omnes descendentes Vpton lib. 1. c. 19. p. 61. Edit. Biss.
admittuntur and habeantur pro Nobilibus, donec perveniunt ad paupertatem, vel
art viles, and tunc incipiunt esse non nobiles, to which the Philosopher
assents, Nobiles sunt 5 Polit.
quibus assistunt progenitorum virtutes and divitiae. If then the supports of
honor fail, better admit silence to the claims of honor, during the Eclipse
and absence of riches, which should honorably support it, then own it to its
contempt. Among the Romans there was a value set of the Estate that a man must
have, that would be Equestris Ordinis; and if any man had not that Estate in
value, he was not eligible to that dignity; and if after he was in it, he spent
his Estate una desinebat equestris Dignitas, His Dignity determined; for as the
Judgment in the Case of Mountacute Marquess of Winchester, degraded for want
of Estate, mentions, Baro non potest dici Baro nisi sit potens ad arma
tenendum. As then Arms have a Conjunct import with other Notices, so have they
a select one, being given not only to distinguish, but to adorn and beautify
the bearers, as meritful instances of Virtue, Or Constat jucundum esse rerum
bonarum saporem and utilem ambitum laudis qui appetit^r per augmenta virtutis.
Hoc nos studium proinde liberalitatis infundimus ut major sit cultus morum dum
crescunt desideria praemior^m. Cassidor lib. 7. Variarum.
descendents from such as deserved the honor of generous Trophyes, to their
posterities coruscation and ennoblement.

Undoubtedly it is a brave thing to be well born, the Greeks couple (...) with
(...) and (...) making virtue and worth the best indications of noble Birth,
which Nicostratus had an eye to, when he told Archidamus who boasted of his
descent from Hercules, and yet tempted him to betray Cromnus, promising him a
great sum of money, and Lucaena the beautiful, to wife, O Archidamus, I
perceive by these juggles and degenerous actions, you are no descendent from
Hercules, for he went about Plutarch lib. de vi^ioso pudore. p. 535. edit Paris.
the World to root out bad men, (...), but you are industrious to make good men
bad. Let therefore spightful high shows, and Sots of yesterday declaym against
Nobility and Gentility, yet all sober men and times have made it a great step
to trusts and commands, the Roman Salii (or Priests to Mars) were men of
greatest authority, and of most leading note (such as Appius, Claudius, Scipio,
Africanus, L. Bibaculus, Antoninus) and sundry others of the grandest renown)
yet these were to be ex patriciis, Alexand. ab Alex. l. 1. c. 26. zuing.
Theatr. vitae ^uma. p. 2872.
Liberi, Cives and qui neutro Parente Orbati essent. And when to this advantage
of blood, they joined that other of personal virtue, making that a conspicuous
Plume in the Cap of generosity, (...). Such an one deserves praise Plutare^u^
lib. de Laud sui, p. 546.
for his advantagiousness to mankind, The Poet tells us that virtue is the
merit of fame. Non census, non opes nec clarum nomen avorum
Sed probitas Magnum ingeniumque facit. Ovid de Ponto lib. 1. Epist. ten^l.



And Tully vindicates himself against Salust thus, Sanctius est me meis gestis
florere, quam Majorum auctoritatibus inniti, and ita vivere, ut sine posteris
meis Nobilitas initium and virtutis exemplum, yea, when envy and ill will has
spit out her poison, worth will have compurgators from the breasts of Enemies.
Photius Leostenes, when his detractors spitefully Apud Plutarch.
asked him what good had betided the commonwealth in his Pretorship, replied,
(...), ye have (replied he) saved your breath and spent none of it in sad
Orations bewayling men's unfortunate deaths, but every man has been buried,
(...), with their Fathers, not forced to abandon their houses, and live and dye
strangers to their own Land, but preserved in peace and justice to a sober and
sacred Serenity of life, which is the Crown of Government, and the commendation
of the Governors.

No doubt then, but there are virtues suitable to particular Persons and
Callings, as Piety to a Divine, Fortitude to a Soldier, Industry to a
Tradesman, Learning to a Philosopher, Memory to an Orator, Justice to a
Magistrate; but to a Gentleman well born and well bred, all, or most of these,
are in some degree or other requisite. And the Law of honor in all Nations, as
it qualifies a Gentleman for any conferrable honor; (the greatest title of
honor being but an Improvement of Gentility) so it requires the choice of men
to fill up that roll, out of which the select Jewels of Nobility are extracted,
Nihil aliud est vera Nobilitas quam vita humana clara virtutibus per Electionem
et habitum animae Lib. 1. c. ult. p. 64. Edit. Biss.
intellectualis exterius operantis, says Vpton, Therefore all Supremes in
their Patents and grants of Dignity, have these or suchlike passages: regalis
nostrae dignitatis fastidium non solum ornari sed and augeri etiam prospicimus
dum viris virtutibus claris et in rebus gerendis strenuis honorum titulos
dispensaremus, Or after the mention of the justness to reward Virtue,
praesertim quos parentum praeteritorum nobilitavit memoria and propriarum
virtutum merita clara obedientia condecorant ut praemiata virtus roboretur
intrinsecus, and multos alliciat ad virtuosos actus, to show to the World, that
they hold none meet subjects of honor, who have not virtuous In Prior. pan^
dect. p. 200.
minds as well as great Estates: therefore Budaeus out of Aristotle, calls
(...) and proposes three contenders laying claim to it, Liberty, Riches,
Virtue, some will have them in other terms, Riches, Lineage, Virtue, Science,
so Mr. Accidence Arm^rie. p. 13.
Leigh. I shall consider honor in England as having this threefold rise, The
Camp, the Court, the City, these with their Appurtenances have been the
Trojan-Horse, out of which have appeared the great Actors on the Stage of
Nobility; For unto eminent persons arising from these is Honor due, and to
such there will honor be ever given. -- For God forbid either the mean
Originalls of brave men should betray them to a stupid neglect of concurring
with that providence, which may open the Prospect to their future felicity.
Tullus Hostiliur wore out his swaddling clouts in a poor cottage, and spent his
youth in tending cattle, Et validior aetas Romanum rexit Imperium, Or the
heroique spirits of men, well born, and nobly set out to display their merit,
should not have encouragements (...), to make them contemn danger; which
Polybius says, wrought so mightily with the Roman Youth, Lipsius de milit,
Romans p 328. and 330.
that they expressed more joy to hear their General recite at the head of the
Army their valiant acts, and be themselves beheld as deservers of their
Coronae, Hastae, Armillae, Torques, Phalera; Spolia, and the rest of their
manly renumerations, then fear of danger or death, in those achievements they
undertook.

Honor there is no doubt, is the reward of virtue, and virtue the stimulation
to valor: Learned men have spent long treatises in the definition and praise
of honor, as that Golden Fleece which attended by Dragons will be assaulted by
magnanimous Jasons, It Is the great minds Dalilah, and Sampsons of courage will
buy it at the price, not only of many other men's, but of their own lives.
Sabellicus makes Fame the tinder which kindles sparks of mettle into flames of
action. This roused up those early Knights, Romulus and Numa, to show
themselves, ambo sperarunt diversum a mortalitate, yea, and of Hercules he
writes, Haec illi vel noverca Sabellec. l. 5. c. 5.
infestior quae nunquam passa esteum quiescere, haec durior quam ille
imperiosus Eurysteus per quem tam vary exercitatus est Alcmenae filius,
deinque fuisset ille nunquam tantus, si spem de immortalitate famae* nunquam
animo concupisset; O honor, thou art the wind in the sails of Industry, which
brings it to its Port; Thou art the Music of the Spheres, the sweet notes
whereof, those early queristors only hear who are by the praises of Myltiades,
kept always waking, Thou art the mortal moveable Heaven for which men contend
to, and comfort themselves in death, Collige^te Hieronime Tulgosus. lib. 8. c.
15. de Olgiato.
stabit vetus memoria facti, mors acerba, fama perpetua, was spoke like a
Roman. In a word, Honor branched out into Divine, Moral, Politic, is a large
field, and Histories abound in Instances of it coming in upon the spring tides
of opinion, and carried aloft upon the wing of Providence, the arbiter of this
Universe: some we read courting honor as their chief good, and bayting all the
hooks they ^^ve to catch advantages, when they are but nibling and smile upon
them only with a half face; Valor, beauty, learning, fidelity, temperance,
justice, and all sorts of excellencies have been exchanged for fame; yea, some
Artizans have been so transported with the thoughts of renown, that they have
coveted no better pay then perpetuity for a Masterpiece, in which they have
expended the flower of their lives, Egnatius tells us, that the Venetians being
to build Lib. 6. c. 5.
that famous Church to St. Mark, invited with great promise of reward, a famous
Artizan of Constantinople, a Greek born, to be their Architect, He promised to
do it, for no other reward then this, That he might have his Effigies in
Marble, set up in oculatissima Templi part ad aetern^^ sui memoriam, which he
had, yea Eudoxus was contented to be burned in the body of the Sun, if he
might be permitted to come so near it, as but to take the Scheme of it to leave
to after-ages.

No wonder then the Philosopher calls it externorum bonorum maximium, and that
Lawyer, Cunctis rebus Baldus. lib. 1. Polybius. lib. 2.
praeferendus, nummario precio non aestimandus, no wonder though Scipio find it
so speedy a Scalado to Spains Carthage, when it is the Circaean Cup that
enchanteth all men, and leads them upon attempts of gaining it, though never so
desperate and improbable.

To these ancient marks of honor, the visible Emblem are Arms, which is
chiefly due to the Soldier, as being the first born Coronas a privatis
gestatas fuisse in Romans Republica quibus vel ob merita Imperatores illam
concessissent veb qui in bello ob praeclara facinora eam fuissent adepti.
Lazius. Com. Reip. Romans l 9. c. 18. edit. Basil.
of merit. Honor sprang originally from the Field, for it being the effect of
Power, and Power creating right of Empire, Honor must be concluded to be
purchased by venture and a high mettled Courage, like that of Nimrod, who is
called a mighty Hunter before the Lord. It being usual in Scripture, as to call
men of savage and tyrannous Natures, Men of the field, as is Esaw, from whom
those many Dukes mentioned in Genesis 36. are said to be descended, so to describe
their recreation and employment of life to be hunting of beasts with Bow and
Arrow rather then with snare and catch, that thereby they might be the more
active, and better trained to the domination and overcoming of men, and the
greatest Conquests and first Empires of power, were those Asian ones, the
weapons of which for a long time were, and yet in some degree are, according to
the use of Hunters, Bow, Arrow, short sword, Dart, and in those times, as to
the most valiant the right of power fell, so to such as had any degree of
eminency above the vulgar, were rewards apportioned. All could not be Kings,
(...), all could not be Captains of the Host, all could not be Princes
Standard-bearers, all could not attain Scylla's honor, to have a statue of
gold in public inscribed Cornelio Scyllae Imperatori fortunato, but all that
merited might have rays of dignation, even in Israel there was a Kings
Daughter in marriage, 1 Samuel c. 17. v. 25.
and making an obscure house splendid and free, offered by Saul to him that
durst encounter Goliath, which David, by Gods spirit, entertained, and for which
He had with the Kings Daughter, her Fathers Kingdom; so amongst the Greeks in
their Certamina Olympica, and their athletary agonies, there were vast A^ri
Agoni^^^^
and various rewards. The Romans (...) de mi^^ Rom p ^7.
also had their encoragements to worth; for though they admitted no mean man to
Magistracy, till he were Emeritus, and had attained 50 years of age, when they
were permitted, (till they were rewarded with Commands or Pensions to be sub
indulgentiori militia, and sub vexillo, as Budaeus his words are) though in
Lib. 5 de Ass.
ordinary Cases they gave no testimonies of acceptance, but upon great
experience; yet did they with all freedom venerate the Senatorian eminence, in
their Issue, whom after their deaths, they called Patricians Descendants from
the first Senators who were called Dii majorum gentium, as those that were from
Tarquins time chosen into place, Budaeus in prior pandect p. 214.
were Dii minorum gentium. They had their Equestris Ordo, which consisted of
chosen men of singular fidelity and fortune, illi vetustissimi and proprie and
Soli equites Olim dicti, says Pliny, lib. 33. c 1. Nobiles qui vadunt in
equis, so Upton, Or as Varro, Lib. 1. c. 3. de ^fficio militari.
miles quasi millessimus quisque, so Commentar Juris Civilis. l. 9. c. 5. number.
1.
Connanus. Such were these, that not only the fourteen Orders of the Theater
was under their correction, as was the Orchestra within the Budaeus. p. 219.
Senates Charge, but they had their Rings and chains of Gold (as before has
bin remembered at large) to be their vouchers where ever they came; In place
whereof, Our Eques auratus at this day is, which is our Knight Bachilor,
possibly the same which Olimpiodorus mentions in Honorius his time, to be
called (...) Bucellarii, men of merit, Photius in exc^rps ex Olympiod. p. 853.
Edit. Si^b.
not only Romans but other Soldiers of stoutness and activity in amity with
them; for though our common Law use Miles rather then Eques auratus, yet
because Knighthood is properly a Horse dignity and duty, and miles tam
gregarium calligatumque peditem significat quum equo militantem and honoratum,
many judge Eques auratus more proper to signify a Knight; for as the great
Estates of England were held in Escuage and Knights service, so that service is
most performed on horseback; and those that found Horses of War, were to be
men of Gentility and value, Our English Papinian Sir Edw. Cook tells us, Lex
angliae nullum sentagium aut servitium 2 Instit. p. 595.
militare de Socmanis aut Burgensibus expetit: therefore the better to enable
the Gentry to perform the service of their Tenure, Lands in Knights service
were never in Gavelkind or socage, nor could they be chargable with what should
disable the Tenurer to do his service, because those Lands by Original
designation were not in servitium Socae sed belli, till by the 31 H. 8. c. 3.
some alteration was made, nor till near H. the fifths time, were Gentlemen
distinguished by any title or addition, but by their forinsecum servitium,
which was Knights service.

To omit then the account of that military honor called Knighthood, which
foreign Nations have, and what Cassanaeus, Bocerus, Patricius, Vegetius. l. 2.
c. 5.
Bartholus, Bara, Lazius, Vpton, and the rest say of them, together with the
annumeration of their privileges and qualities which Mr. Fern out of them
mentions at large, I shall only touch upon the dignity of it, as in our
Nation, and by Our Law and Custom it is acknowledged, for that is the best rule
of every place, illud quod in observantia Jasius. J. C.
and moribus utentium observatur, est tantae efficaciae quod tollit statutum in
contrarium, says Jasius. The prementioned Oracle of our Law, Sir Edw. Cook
agrees Knighthood to be a name of dignity, and Fern a 2 Instit. p* 594. Glor.
Gener. p. 102. cap. 2. to 49.
dignity of regality, a reverend order and an honorable, Milites and Principes
in elder times, were accounted almost Synonomous, in King Stephens reign, when
David King of Scots came into the Northern parts, Brompton tells us, Milites
and Principes Angliae Boreales animo si cum insigni Comite de Albemar
lviriliter restiterunt. Britton also terms a Knight. noble, and in the Record of
Edit. Land. p. 1026.
9 Ed. 1. Sir J. Acton has the addition of Nobilis, and nobiles sunt qui arma
gentiliciae antecessorum suorum proferre possunt, therefore though the Order or
Statute of 1 Ed. 2. did call every man that had 20 l. a year in fee, or for
term of life to Knighthood, which was ad arma militaria suscipienda, yet by
that authority, the Yeoman or Handicrafts Tradesman could be compelled, because
he ought to be a man of blood, and to have a fortune able to support the charge
that dignity would contract. Ne dignitas hujus ordinis vilesceret: therefore by
the Law, he should have a Knights fee, which is about five Hydes, and in
measure is 480 Acres, reckoning 96 Acres to the Hyde; and if men were not thus
estated, they were incapable of this dignity, as were they also of being
Coroners, Or to serve for Parliament, Or to enjoy other Fern. Stor. Genesis p.
118. 2 Instit. p. 597.
freedoms which Knighthood had, which was instituted ad arma militaria
suscipienda and pro bono publico, says Sir Ed. Cook.

After as the Nation grew more numerous, and honors appeared in request, (that
every back might bear its own burden) and one man of a name not be injuriously
molested for another, this Statute The like does 8 H. 6. c. 10. 6 H. 8. c. 4. 5
Ed. 6. c. 26. 31 Eliz. c. 3. and 9.
of 1 of Hen. the 5th, enjoynes that all Gentlemen and other persons, should
express their additions, thence came the Addition Armiger and Generosus to be
in use as Gentilicial affixes, for they were primarily Military, and have
become distinctions civil, only by the adoption of Custom, and the prevalence
of peace, whereby the Gown has brought the helmet to the Bar; and trains of
artillery Vox laudantium prima Senatus erat, deinde equitum, postremo^
exercitus. Lazius com. lib. 3. c. 18.
have veiled bonnet to the Trayn of Council, and owned the Senatorian Robe as
the fountain of that legal being they had, and the security of that pay they
could expect. 'Twas so amongst the Romans, till their Soldiers grew lawless,
and lost the honor of their promises* And when Carthage so much doted on
Military designs, sacrosanctarum legum, Justitiae, politicarum rerum cultum aut
abjecerat aut neglexerit, which Lib. de mirand. Antiq. operib.
Servilius mentions as the cause of her ruin, and conclusive downfall. And
therefore well it becomes the Civil Magistrate to be head. For in him are
lodged the Nations brain, its vital and animal spirits, in him is the life
blood which assists to all Heroique and important affairs, and carries
Government afloat from the rocky shoares, and fatal Catastrophe's of Anarchy
and Tyranny. The Holy Oracle tells us, council and strength are for the War,
First Council, then strength, Council to design, and strength to execute,
Council to command, and strength to promote obedience. For in that the Orator
is brought forth, as saying, Ego meis Majoribus virtute mea praeluxi, and si
prius noti non fuerint a me accipiant initium memoriae suae. I am thoroughly
confirmed in the conviction that Nobility, and Honor of Gentility and Arms
bearing, is as worthily merited by Learning as by courage.

Far be it from me to curtail that honorable esteem which our Ancestors gave
Soldiers, and Equestrian spirits, that were an ingratitude to those lines from
whence mine own Ancestors came, and a baston of allay to that Gentleman who
should extenuate the merit of military Grandees; Our land, laws, liberties,
were of old, effects of that virtue, courage and constancy, the noble Gallants
of England expressed in the field against the enemies of their Governors and
Government; and peace being the consectary of Gods blessing on that laudable
resolution which gives being to the life and luster of arts and professions of
civil conversation, ill expresses her self to her genitor, If she do not bless
the womb that bare her, and the paps that gave her suck. If the world rang of
English Prowess, when our Ancestors engaged in the Holy Land, and made
Conquests and gainings nearer home, 'Twould be a shame for an Englishman to
declame against a Soldier, or to account Furs and Emblems of Council better
armory then habiliments of Wars, such as are Sword Shield, Lance. It Is Jovius
in vita ejus.
written of Johannes Galleacius, that he so loved valiant men, that he would
purchase them to his party at any rate, profiteri enim erat solitus nihil esse
ea mercatura nobilius qua viri insignes pararentur. For without question, while
Soldiers are choice men, who with the Gospel Centarion, love Gods Nation, and
raise and uphold Synagogues to his worship; they are worthy to give the Lion of
the tribe of Judah in their banner, and such Crucesignati may expect the King
of Saints their Protector; while they are for him the defender of the faith;
they will not dare to do violence to what ever has his Image and Superscription
on it, nor need they fear to suffer infamy or loss of life, or member. There
is an act of Indemnity secures them, He that honors me I will honor, 1 Samuel
2. v 30.
while they are promoters of order, and a refuge to Gods exiles, as were by
Institution most military Orders, They ought to be Companions in Government
with the Gownmen, and they have thriven the better for such Companions and
Counselors in their conduct. Alexander was no puisne in the worlds Militia,
when by the 27 year of his age, he had subdued the most noted part of the
world, and wept that he had not another World to conquer, yet he regulated his
Motions by the Council of Learned men, and thought Achilles who had Homer the
Trumpet of his glory, more fortunate then himself whose memory could not be
kept but in the Urnes of their wits, and the repertories of their writings. It Is
true, Soldiers have the start of Scholars in their Eagled strength by the
confidence of which they soar high, making, as they think, their nest above
Control, but their Eggs may be sucked by industrious Ants, and their
Enterprises become addle thorough the diligent and accute vigilancies of those
pen and inkhorn men, which some Pseudomilites and reputed Martialists do
vilify. Indeed there have been Soldiers, oppressors of Religion and Learning,
and their professors, who have come in with Attila's Motto, Ira dei ego sum and
Orbis vastitas, and have sacked Countries, rifled Academies, and disbanded
Convents of Devotionaries, no exception of Rome, or his holiness in her, to
whom the Castle of St. Angelo became no refuge, nor was any reverence expressed
to his Pontificial Robes: neither has the world wanted examples of the danger
of armed men, who with John of Leyden, force their pretended setting up of
Christ to be believed, while they intend his suppression in those two great
offices of Magistracy and Ministry, which he has appointed, and they would
annihilate: these Milites do therefore not deserve the renown of Warriors, quia
non habent virtutes necessarias ad Cass. Catal. gl. mundi. p. 331.
militiam. For a true Soldier (and no Romulus, Caesar, or Alexander, is too
big for this name) is a man of liberal and insordid principles, true of his
word, f^difragous to none, of a Justice, like that of Marshall Bauciquaut under
Charles the sixth of France, who being Governor of Genoa, expressed so signal
Justice, that it was usual for men to say to those that had injured them, If
you will not right me, my Lord Marshall will, and so abundant in pity this
brave Soldier was, that he instituted the order of the white Lady, for defense
of afflicted Ladies. A true Soldier must be pious, he dare best look death in
the face, who dies daily to sin, and for whom that King of terrors is
disarmed by Christ his Savior: 'twas no mean honor to the memory of Bernard,
Count of Longevil, Constable of France, when it is recorded of him, that he
would undertake no Warlike action, before he had offered his soul, body, and
arms at the altar at a solemn Mass; A severe walking up to the rule of his
Religion, doubled the fame of renowned Tilly.

The holy Story tells us of famous Soldiers eminent for piety, Joshua, David,
Ezechias, since them of Charlemain, St. Lewis, Godfrey of Bulloigne, Wencelaus
and Amideus, besides them of Christian Soldiers, who have been devout, even to
Martyrdom, Fusebius, Nicephorus, Theodoret, Sozomen; and Baronius, mention,
Mauritius, Exuperantius, Sebastian, Marius Constantine and others; yea, if the
design of Loyola, the founder of the Jesuits Order, were, (as it is said to
be) propogative of the faith of Jesus, and purely for his honor, it was an
instance of a Military man's devotion, matchless; A true Soldier should be
generous and free, a despiser of money, and of living by rapine and plunder,
such an one was Terrail, called Chevalier Bayard whom Causinus mentions to have
p. 121, 122.
lived under Francis the first, who after 32 years service of 3 Kings, and in
places of great Command, yet died almost as poor as he was born, not but that
he had great advantages, but because he despised to be rich with other men's
ruins; Or be bought out of his Grandeur of mind, by a bribe. And such
Soldiers England has of old had.

But Soldiers like other men, vary with their Interests, and when they break
out in defiance of Discipline, prove troublesome; Gaguine in the life of Charles
the 7th; reports that the French Army grew so afflictive Lib. 10. p. 215.
to the Nation, ut dissoluta militari disciplina, milites Petro mariscallo non
audiebant, pertulce illiberaliterque viventes, praedas non mitius a Francis
quam ab host facientes, mulieribus injurii, monasteriorum violatores and
contemptores religionis. As for these Vermin of the Camp, they are no guests at
Prince Arthurs round Table, Arms were never appointed for their Trophies, who
abuse themselves by such sordid debaucheries. My prayer shall be, that there
may be such an unanimity between Arts and Arms, that both may sing Glory be to
God on high, in Earth peace, good will to men. And when Soldiers, are humble,
harmless, and loyal, as they are great encouragements to men of art, who in
profiting by study, hope to be accepted, protected and preferred by them; so
have they the grateful returns of learned pens to their publication and
perpetuity. No Author mentions an Heroique candor and friendliness to men of
learning and gravity, without some Emphasis which has a Top and Top gallant
display in it, Cuspinian notes of Alexander Severus, that valiant Emperor,
That he would ever have Learned men present at his Councels, adding the reason,
plurimum timens ne quid de se asperum scriberent, the like did Constantinus
Ducas, but upon another ground more ingenious, solebat dicere malle se
literarum gloria quam imperio illustrem esse. And Certes, these two compounded,
make the reason why learned men have been minions and bosom friends of
Soldiers.

Thus Philip of Macedon, favored Aristotle Theophrastus and Plato, Alexander
Histor. Aelim. lib. 4.
Anaxarchus, the Gymnosohists and multitudes of others, Demetrius Poliorcetes
Stilpo. Lucullus Plutarch in Alex.
not one or some, but all the knowing race, ut domus ejus Grecorum Sabel. l. 2.
En. 4. Plut. in Lucullo.
Roman venientium Prytanneum diceretur, Cato major Zeno's statue, Cato minor
Athenodorus, Pompey the great Possi^onius, Augustus Caesar, Strabo. lib. 11.
Plin. l. 7. c. 30.
Varro, Cicero, Livy (innumerosque alios doctos uno tempore) and ^arolus Zenas
Strabo. lib. 14.
Vergerius and Thomasius, to name no Egnatius. l. 8. c. 13.
more, and if the learned have been favored by the greatest Hectors, there is
reason they should requite them with memorials of perennity. And that they do
by proclaiming, not only their personal worth, but the Nobility of their
profession; And so we conclude the Camp the first rise of arms and honor.

Next to this is the Court, which I give the second place to, as it is in the
Order of honor; for as in old time, the greatest honors were those of the
field; so the residences of Princes were in tents and agrestique Pavilions,
till Cities were built, and Palaces receptive of Majesty erected, No Court
Paradoe. Or munificence was read of; Not that I restrain the Court I write of
to the Courts of Princes and great men, which anciently were ^ampus Martius's,
as well as Bacilicae Civiles. For then as great men's servants were chosen for
their proceritie of person, strength of limbs, activity of manliness, so were
their Halls, courts and stables, randevouzes of men at arms, who there did
exercise feats of Chivalry, and were breathed to Encounters of sturdiness.
These Grandees of noble part had, by the appointment of the Lord Marshal an
economy of Symmetry with that of Majesty. To these notwithstanding, I restrain
not the Court, I make a rise of honor. Nor do I exclude these from the Court I
intend, (but as I take them in, so with them Courts of Law, as in the head of
Cities, I intend Schools of learning, usually kept up, and flourishing in
Cities and Corporations) The service of Princes in their Courts no man can
doubt to be less then a kind of Nobilitation, so the rule of honor is,
adhaerentes lateri Principis and eidem in officio quocunque minimo ministrantes
Nobilitantur. Sovereigns are in their Dominions Fountains of honor, and where
such a constellation of Nobility is, there must some sparklings be diffused
which will take kindling in the tinder of minds, pursuing glory with a
Jehu-like fierceness. All men love to draw the curtayn of obscurity from before
their Ancestors, and by degrees of Enlargement to make the prospect of their
persons more pervious. No field so fair and probable for this as the Court,
which had a weight for every action, and a calculat of the Meridian of every
actor. There was a Market for all staple rarities of body and mind, and no
price was thought too great for a darling introduced by virtue, and there kept
up by the steady practice and unchangeable motions of virtue. The Favor of a
Prince is such a Sun of influence, as makes a shrub placed in his Court, and
under his royal eye and observation, quickly of a Cedars growth. It Is such a
benign umbrage as expatiates little spires of grass into the magnitude of
Laurels, and to speak before a Prince, gives an Orator (who has a noble and a
notable confidence, and whose fontenel sends forth matter with words) such an
occasion of ingratiation, as life meets not with in sublunary professions: This
made the graduate Divine from a Chaplin in ordinary, become a prefermentary
extraordinary, Arch Bishop, Bishop, Counselor, yea sometimes all, a
favorite. This made the wellbook'd Lawyer, who had a ready tongue to serve
every Clyent that would fee him, made a Sergeant, Attorney, Solicitor, Justices
of the Benches, sometimes Lord Chancellor, President, Treasuror, all advances
to honor and gain; such an One was Henry Audley in Hen. 3. time, who had vast
Lands given him by the King, Lacy Earl of Ulster, and sundry others, and of
whom Mr. Cambden says, He was In Staffordshire. p. 584.
doubtless, either a man of rare virtue, Or a gracious favorite, or a great
Lawyer, Or all jointly. This (the Court) gave rise to many younger Children,
who born of noble Families, and of good beauty, and grace of beheaviour, were
here trained, and by the favor of the two great Luminaries in that Tyssued
Firmament, bestowed in marriage to persons of honor, endowed with ample
presents, and promises of favor, promoted to great offices of profit and
income, dignified with honors of familical as well as personal splendour. In a
word, no man has come to, and continued in the Court a worthy man and servant,
but he had preferment in a Courtly order, and as corresponded with the Opinion
of desert there had of him, unless he were one so transparent, Omnibus
inducturus caliginem, that Jewels in his presence abated to Chrystalls, And
Gold became nothing above a sediment of faeculency. In this case Envy may
retard the speed to advance, and infect Princely ears with prejudices, which
are often ruinous, before revealed, and the fucus and falsity of them detected,
but otherwise the Court of a Prince was a visible step to Glory, and a
Tyring-Roome out of which have come into the Theater of view royally clad in
the Robes of favor, not only the Minions, Parasites and favorites of Princes
as high in their Masters love as Merit or Flattery could make them. Such as
Lupus Earl of Chester with the Conqueror, Brewier Baron of Odcomb to R. 1.
Hubert de Burg. to H. 3. Peirs Gaveston to E. 2. Delapool Earl of Suffolk to H.
4. Brandon and Cromwell to H. 8. and many since. But also infinite others, who
there have grown noble, rich, and happy in the ordinary account of felicity, so
that its felicity caused the Lillies and Dazies to outglitter (as it were)
Solomon in all his royalty. If soft raiment, and cloths of state had bin badges
of regality, they might have been judged almost as many Kings as men; For
therefore does the Law of Nations fix rule in the Sun, the noblest
representation of the light and luster of Sovereignty, Quia in curia sua sunt
and esse debent Cass. p. 272. Epror nico. Co stit.
praenotabiliores homines mundi in quacunque facultate.

And as the Court of the Supreme, so the Inns of Court with their
appurtenances, have been generous Academies of noble and brave spirits, for
though therein have been admitted of late years, many men of the first head,
who either have had fortunate Fathers or friends, or have been bred Clerks, and
transplanted themselves from the Inns of Chancery thither, (which I mention not
as their reproach or diminution, having my self known very brave ingenious
persons, and noble Students of this mould, who profiting to good purpose, have
by that Limbique from the simples of their Origin, extracted many Cordials to
dying glory, and given such doses of Aquavitae, as has fetched their dead
Ancestry to a new and better life;) yet anciently, no man was capable of an
entry there, but a Gentleman of Arms and Blood, and Mr. Fern says, he has seen
an Glo. Genesis p. 24.
Alphabet about the end of Henry the fifths time, in which were the Names and
Arms of the House and Family of all those who were members of an Inn of Court,
who exceeded not the number of 60 all Gentlemen of perfect descents; and
Fortescue tells us, that in H. 6sht time, c. 49.
the Inns of Court had in them 200 or near; and because the expenses of living
there was at least to every man 20 marks a year, ipsi nobilium filii tantum in
hospitiis illis leges addiscunt. A notable means both to preserve a royal race
of wits, and a generous emanation of them in stout and resolute profession of
the Law, to the defense of Justice and right; for there is the Athens of Law,
in it Reverend Judges and Grave Sergeants, sage Apprentices, learned
Barristers, ingenious and florid Students, viri omnium horarum, who though they
come thither to study, and with presumptions of the aiming at further and
future advantage by the Law, which they are thought to read in order to
practice, yet are not tethered or limited, but give themselves a latitude of
following that which is most congenial to them, and has the directest line to
accomplishment and generous politure. As all faces are not alike, but all have
figurations of the Creators power and wisdom, visible in them; so are not souls
and addictions of one and the same piece, Nor is there a uniformity in the
expressions, delights and sameness of the Objects. In some there is more
ballast then sail, in others more fire then earth, and accordingly are the
objects of their complacency. These Inns of Court are fitted for all, Here the
plod and studious Cato may read Littleton, till he be in Little tune for ought
but musing, and the more facetious and planetary spark meet with quick tasted
and more delicious choice and well Cooked learning to busy him; and if to any
other art, or to all other arts, Gentlemen of an equilibrious soul are
addicted, they may here have opportunity to buy Authors that treat of all
subjects, and converse with proficients in all Sciences. For London is near,
and that being Situatur autem studium illud inter locum curiarum illarum, and
Civitatem London quae de omnibus necessariis oppulentissima est omnium
Civitatum, and oppidorum regni illius, Fortesc de laudib. legum Angl. c. 48. ad
finem.
the Metropolis of the Nation, has a daily flux, and reflux of persons and
things to and from it; which is the reason why I suppose these Inns of Chancery
and Court are if not in, yet very near London, as the cause of the building of
London is said by Dunthorn Book to be, The River of Thames; for as the River
gives advantage to Trade, so does London to study, practice, and all other
Gentile Embehshment. Hence is it, that these Inns of Court have been the
Schools of Civility and Chivalry, as well as Law. For the Country Gallant is
here first principled to his after improvement; Here by reading both Books and
Men, Here by knowing wisdom and folly, He after becomes a Luminary in the
Country Firmament. An Oracle of the Justice Bench; a worthy representative to
Parliament; and here his Juvenility acquires him such a weapon-skill and
confidence, as ever after renders him, though retired to a Country privacy,
disdain a baffle, or be deservedly censured for estrangement to a noble bodily
beheaviour* and deportment. And therefore it was wont ever to be a commendable
addition to any man, to call him an Inns of Court man; for such were never
accounted less then honorably accomplished, their Revels, Masks, and
Solemnities of Gallantry and Entertainment were ample Orators of their count
breedings. It is true indeed, these Societies were instituted for Nurseries of
Law and Hosteleys of the Students and professors of it, who there lodged and
read the Municipe Laws of this Land, and had Mootes and public Disputes and
reading, by which, and by conferences each with other, upon perlection of
Authors, and perusal of Records and Entries, the Students became worthy
degrees of pleading, and after in their due place of further procedure and
honor; yea it was wont that some great Masters of knowledge in the Laws, did
institute the younger frye in the methods of study and intelligence, as by name
did learned Fortescue, chief Justice and Chancellor to H. 6, a man of rare
parts, as appears by his polite treatise of the Laws on which by Gods blessing
I shall write more in my intended, and in some degree formed Commentary on that
subject. He I say was learned in both the Laws, a great Antiquary, and devoted
his parts to Students who frequented him. But that way of institution is
Londini igitur jus tum civil tum municipale public docuit habuitque auditores
nobilis simos juvenes quam plurim^s Pits. in vita ejus. p. 649.
obsolete, And now Students are left to their own methods, and to such helps of
conduct, as arise from conversation one with another; And I believe that
professors of the Law of this last 100 years, are not less famons for their
Authority and Grave Judgments, then former ages; Nay the names of Plowden,
Dyer, Fitzherbert, and Cook, do deserve to be in a line of parallel with
Bracton, Fleta, Glantill, Littleton. Yea there have risen out of these
Societies of late, three such Behemoths of learning, Sir Thomas Moor; Sir
Francis Bacon, and Mr. Seldom, all Lawyers by profession, as this Nation in
their several times and perfections, could not exceed, I quote not their
eminencies for Law, but for all kinds of excellent learning; and more I could
nominate of vast reading, and great curiosity in Arts, whose names, because I
would not either displease them, or their enviers, I forbear now to mention,
only I must not have that of a great Master, be unmentioned. All these, (says
He Cook Reip.
speaking of the Inns of Court and Chancery) altogether do make the most famous
UNIVERSITY, only for profession of Law, or of any one humane science that is
in the world, and advances it Cook Preface to the 3d Report.
self above all others, quantum inter viburna Cupressus. So that there can be
no wonder at the Nations civility to the Members of these Societies; for in
that the Students admitted, are counted ipso facto Gentlemen, though they are
not natively so: the Baristers of all standings Esquires, and the Sergeants of
the Coyf a State and Dignity, as is that Mills de nob. polit. et civilii. p.
148.
of Knighthood, and have Robes and Solemnities somewhat ad instar sacrodotis,
as Fortescues words are, c. 5. Yea inasmuch, as the via Lactea of the Nation is
ermind with hundreds of Families of great Estate and blood, whose either
founders or amplifiers were Lawyers, ex judicum sobole plures de proceribus and
magnatibus regni huc usque prodierunt quam de aliquo alio statu hominum regni
qui se prudentia and industria propria, opulentos, inclytos nobilesque
fecerunt, and Fortescut. c. 51.
whose Ancestors (to use Sir Edward Cooks words) have obtained a greater
blessing and Ornament to their Preface to 2 Rep.
Families then any other professions; yea since the Lawyers, though men pliable
enough to all Powers, and not often Martyrs for the Laws; yet have ever been
zealous for their habits, and the external decencies of their professions, and
have managed their Interests with men in place, to the advantage of their
calling, as appears by their compliance with all changes, and by what the
Chancel: Fortescue councels the Prince concerning them, qualem habitum te plus
ornare optarem, cum potestas tibi fuerit ad decorem status c. 51.
legis and honorem regni sui. It is just and right to allow, the Inns of Courts
and their appurtenances, rises of honor, and seminaries of Gentility.

Now the 3d parent of men of honor and Gentility, are Cities and Corporations
with their relations, And because Academies and Schools of learning are not now
in places of retirement, but in and near Cities and Towns, most opportune to
hospitat resorters to them; and those to accomodate with all sorts of
necessaries. Therefore do I treat of them under the head of Corporation; And
forasmuch also as they are to Corporations, as the soul to its body, the more
noble part, therefore shall I marshall them first, and crave leave of
Corporations, to give precedence of treaty to the Schools; and this I the
rather do, to obviate and confront the ages malignity against them, who every
year contribute more to the Nations Order, piety and augmentation, then in a
myriad of ages their enviers and detractors will do; whose work it is to bring
a mist of ignorance on men's mind, and by that obcaecation, to lead them captive
to Barbarism and superstition, and to rifle the charities of deceased Patrons,
to feather their own deformed and voracious nests.

To the Schools then be ever reserved their due honor, they are the Mines of
learned Oar, refined into massy bullion, current Coin in England. They are
the Colonies of polite literature, the foments of subtle wits, The
inextinguishable Virgin Lamps in the Temple of virtue, through which is the
march to that other of honor. It Is true, the hand of the Lord is not shortened,
nor his wisdom limited more now then of old, He can call Prophets and Apostles,
yea Princes, Judges and Priests, from mean callings, and instantly qualifies
them with parts and principles suitable to his call, and their designation. But
in that he now works mediately, and gives men helps of gradual accomplishment,
by Languages, study, and learned conversation. It becomes us to value these
mercies, and not contemn this Mannah, because of its plenty and our easy
procurement of it; Had we not Schools of our own, we should be constrained as
of old, to wallow in ethnique barbarism, Or else take tedious journeys to
kindle our vestal fires at foreign altars. Did that evil tread on our heels,
how nimble Asahels should we be, to out run the darkness that pursued us? what
a value should we put on Schools?

In them are taught Languages, Arts, Sciences, by the Key of Language, brave
wits open the Cabinet of art, and there view the contexture of nature, and the
Harmony of her dependence, in the glass of her Ornature they view the
complexion of arts, and in her crucible assay the loyalty of her maxims, and
after a long search into, and disquisition of Authors, they become in mind, so
deep an Ocean of speculation, as deserves almost the name of that infinity of
apprehension, which we call knowledge and wisdom, the abundance of which, made
three Princes, stored above their fellows, more famous then the vastness of
their Empire, to which it also was auxiliary, Solomon, Marcus Antoninus, and
our late King James, a triplicity of unparalleld Majesty's, and glorious
Ornaments to Schools.

From these Schools of Ours, have proceeded those renowned names of Bid the
venerable, Halensis the accurate exact Aquinas his Master, Scotus the subtle,
Bradwardine the profound, ^ckham the invincible, Hooker the judioious; From
these have issued forth those Gentlemen Priests, Evangelique Heroes, Noble
Martyrs, and venerable Bishops. Cranmer, Ridley, Lat^mer, Philpot, Ferrars, and
their successors, in Order, learning and sincerity, Arch Bishops, Bishops,
Doctors, and other Graduates of Divinity, men of rare parts, and of signal
generosity. Stupor Mundi Clerus Anglieanus, many of whom have not only
contemned their lives for their Countries service in Embassies, Treaties, and
studies of an indefatigable nature, but also their posterities and worldly
remembrances, to make the Religion of the Nation their executors, and the poor
their heirs, And others of them, so free of their pains to preach, write, and
entertain their auditors, neighbors or strangers, that they seemed to keep an
all the years open house of civil charity; yea (the foundations of Kings
excepted) none have been more august then the charities, and institutions of
Ecclesiastiques.

And because the old civility of the Nation, allowed the Praelacy of England
the estimation and dignity of Peerage, giving them place and vote in their
supreme Council, And for some hundred years, taking as it were the Laws from
their mouths, (they being Judges of most Courts of Justice) and being great
Masters of the knowledge of the common, civil, and equitable Laws of England,
till of late years they have bin superseded, and suffered an Eclipse next door
to annihilation, therefore shall I originate the honor of men of the Schools
from that which is the proper Culmen of the Schools dignation, The degree of
Doctor, which is by all the Insignia of it, Magistratique and honorable. They
are invested into that degree after solemn act kept, and many inferior degrees
gone through; which Scarlet Ring, Cap, and other Ceremonies of respect, yea our
Civilians, a race of brave parted men wholly (the more's the pity) neglected in
this teechy and versatil age, have had names as famous as Papinian, Ulpian,
Bartholus, Jasius, Lazius, Budaeus, Grotius, who enjoyed privileges to be
Counts fellows, called Illustres, and other immunities, to the number of 130,
if Lud. Bologninus do not mislead me. These with Doctors of Divinity and
Physic, reputed highly of in the eyes of Nations wise and worthy, are the
superexcellent and graceful darlings of Universities.

In short, from these the learned Diodorus.
Nobility and Gentry, who here are first tutored and nourished, and from this
their Mothers milk, grow to be succulent Philosophers, great Historians, Acurat
Orators, exact Penmen, to whom, as well as to others, the Nation and World
will be ever debtor for their great proficiencies in arts, and their free and
noble communications of their labors to these and succeeding ages. These many
in number, and of very great worth, being sprigs from the Academique stock,
must argue her a noble Plant, and deservedly accounted a worthy Parent of
honor.

As therefore all Students in the Inns of Court are accounted Gentlemen, and
the graduats Esquires as before is expressed, so is the like civility applied
to the Students in Universities. A Student there is a Gentleman in Title,
though he be not so born; but if he have taken Degrees of perfection in the
arts his Degree is his addition, and upon his demand, Heralds cannot deny him a
Coat (...) p. 33. and 44.
of Arms, if none he has* For advancements in Arts, argue a meriting of that
Ensign of honor, arms bearing. And it has bin a common tradition and a
received rule, Nulli docto, nulli in scientiis liberalibus excellenti Hono is
Insignia sunt deneganda juxta illud virtutis alimentum honos.

If therefore the Schools do so (...) accomplish many generous wits, who
thither come for entrance into learning, and there stay till either they be
transplanted to the Inns of Court, or else called abroad to travel; yea if many
thousands are to them brought meanly accomodated, only sharp set on study (as
the Mint and Mart of their after fortunes; and there have behaved themselves so
worthily, that no scholastic preferment has bin thought too much, rather not
enough for them: But their Prince, privy to their merit, commanding them
thence, has delegated to them trusts of a more Courtly nature, and a more
eminent conspicuity. Do not these (though meanly born, and poorly friended)
deserve a name in the display of Armories? As their persons had, and have great
respect, so ought their Issues to be sutably regarded; For a brave man of parts
and Council, is fellow to any Master of Courage and Conduct, Non viribus non
velocitate corporis res magnae geruntur sed consilio, authoritate and scientia,
says Tully; and Trogus, says of Alexander, Lib. 1. de Senect.
victoriam obtinuit qui consilio gubernabat exercitum, For true courage has no
allay from learning, but rather a clearer prospective by it, to those
advantages which unite the means with the end, and crown the valor of men with
all desirable Encomiums which are of proof against envy, as were those pair of
perfect Gentlemen, Sir Philip Sydney, and Sir Walter Rawleigh, Tam mart quam
mercurio nobiles, Noble personages, civilly learned, and militarily valiant, of
whom it is hard to say, whether their Characters are more illustrious for valor,
or for learning; but this I am confident of, both of them have left greater
Donaries of learning, to this and after ages, then ever they communicated of
Martial Discipline to any race of men, that should endeavor to cause a high
silence of their renowned achievements, as the opportunity of their own access
to credit and popular fame, which is seldom a fixed Star over the Families
and memories of us planetary mortals, but a wandering and wanton Comet which
blazes for a while, and then sets (as to this world) in a deep dismal
tenebrious cloud of forgetfulness.

Next to the Schools, come Corporations to be considered as a step to honor;
And here should I call to mind, the fruitfulness of Cities and Buroughs; in
production of men of all ages, merits and professions, who have honored this
their Nation both in affairs of war and peace, in manadgery of
Ecclesiastical, Civil, Naval, and Land Trusts. I should exceed my intendment,
and appear troublesome to the facetious Reader, whose skill in History,
furnishes him with the view of many flowers of luster and odor, which have
grown out of every Corporation and City in England: Great Soldiers by Sea and
Land, grand Clerks, Theologues and Historians, Orators, Physicians, learned men
in both Laws, industrious Antiquaries, men of all excellencies, have no less
risen in Cities, Towns, and aggregate bodies of men, then in Counties and
places of solitude and retirement: I shall therefore as a confirmation, of
Cities and Corporations to be rises of Honor, treat only of London, the
Metropolis of this Nation, as that which has been very succesful in
impregnating, not only it self, but even every County and Condition of
England, with men of fotune, and all other generous qualifications. And here I
crave leave of the sober gallantry of this Nation, to write somewhat of this
noble City, the place of my birth, which though she is the Object of many men's
contempt and censure, yet has such constellations of beauty, order, and
importance in her, as render her a considerable poy^e and an interest of
influence on all the Nation. I have not so perfrict a forehead to justify
London in all her demeanors; nor am I so deluded by love, that I cannot see her
division, and the fatal Issues that are menaced by it, let the world have their
freedoms to judge her distempers, far be it from me to take offense at their
just exceptions, nor can knowing men justify her, where where she has acted
unjustifiably; But let not London be rashly judged and condemned as guilty,
before her charge be duly and legally proved, let not the gravity of her
Citizens be blasted for the intemperance of violent parties in her, who use her
name as their credentials to renown, and term their actions by the name of
Londons actions, when as they are in no sober sense Londons, nor are what those
Phaetons of fury do, to be charged on London, but with regard to the deluge of
necessity, which prevailing, carries all before it, and has had a similarity of
Empire on all the Nation, and hurried every part into a paroxism, next door to
Anarchy and dissolution. Allow her then but some proportions of candor, and she
will appear not unworthy their value, and my veneration, which I would here
testify by some short notes upon Her, as the Epitome of this our English
Government, in the legal and most acceptable representation of it.

London is the England of England, a City famous for her antiquity, prius
condita quam illa a Remo and Romulo, according to Stephanides, called nova
Troja, because modelled instar modum veteris Trojae. So Jeffry Monmouth.
Historia. Brit. l. 1, c, 10.
Ab. Westmo computes it about the 2855 year of the world, De eventibus Angl. p.
2484. edit. Twisd.
Knighton about the time of Ely and Samuel: famous it has been for its Trade,
and frequentation of forraigners to her; which Tacitus hints Annal. lib. 14.
when he says, Copia negotiatorum and commeatu maxim celebre. Bid terms
Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 3.
it, multorum populorum emporium terra marique venientium. This London having
all those three privileges, which Thucydides requires to a free (...)
Thucydid. lib. 5.
City that it be (...), use its own Laws, its own Judgments, its own
Magistrates: and having Citizens in her like those of Tire, (...) the honorable
of the earth, as the phrase is, Isa. c. 23. v. 8. has ever been highly
accounted of as a pregnant rise to growing Honor and Nobility. For it has of
old bin acknowledged Camera Regis, and the Citizens (freemen of the same)
termed lib. Ramesy.
by Hen. 1. Barons, which term, signifies viri fortes, or according to
Bracton, robur belli, and M. Paris, adds they were so called, propter virtutis
p. 863.
dignitatem, and civium antiquam libertatem, thus H. 3. styles them all his
time, as appears not only in his Charter Anno 9. but in M. Paris, p. 749, 863,
974, etc. The like is storyed in Malmsbury, Londinenses sunt quasi Optimates
pro magnitudine Civitatis in Anglia; and a little after, in Novell. l. 2. p.
206.
Non decere ut Londinenses qui praecipui habebantur in Anglia sicut Proceres,
etc. And if any honor result from the place of birth and residence, to the
person born or resident as all the Doctors agree, Nobilitas causatur ex loco
quoniam civis ex urbe splendida oriundus nobilis est, as the rule is, and as
Cassanaeus alleges Catal. gl. Mundi. p. 314.
many instances; and if that Custom of allowing those quasi nobiles, and
entitling them Barons, qui hahent (...). Hegesius i^ Strabone.
jurisdictionem in suis oppidis and castellis, as the Neapolitans hold it, be
good Authority, The Citizens of London, qua such; ought not to be depraeciated,
or suffer degradation from that esteem and regard, which upon the premises
considered, is thought to be due to them.

Let no man envy London, its old deserved Honor: it obtained it when, and kept
it, while it had it, upon as brave terms as any place before it. It valiantly
resisted the brutish Dane, when of old he assaulted it. Hunting. lib. 6. p. 208.
And after in King Etheldreds reign, a second time besieged by them, sed a
Civibus probe defensa, and when Malmesb. lib. 2. p. 35.
Swayn had mastered all, and made the then King fly, Soli Londinenses Regem
legitimum intra maenia tutantes portas occuserunt. To these add their Houlden.
p. 38. p. 418.
loyalties to H. 1, to Rich. 2d in disclosing Ferrars Treason, their
discomfiting Wat Tyler, resisting the Bastard Fawconbridge in Edward the
fourths time, and Cade in Henry the sixths time, yea by the Statute of 6 R. 2
c. 12. which admitted all to Rast^lls. Statutes at large of Anno. 1618. 1 Vol.
pardon, who adhered to the Kentish and Essex, or other commotion, except
certain persons, of which there were three Citizens of London, the reason of
whose punishment, in being excepted, is there rendered* For that one of them did
first and principally let William Walworth, late Mayor of London, and certain
other the Kings faithful people, to shut the Gates of the said City, against
the Commonalty of Kent and Essex, then traitorously in the said Insurrection
assembled, that they should have none entry into the sa^d City, and to defend
the same City from all Traitors. And the other two were arraigned of that that
they should have bin the first and chief Councillors of the said Traitors,
that they should come and enter the said City, and leaders of the same Traitors
within the said City: By which words of the Statute, it appeared, that the
Parliament then accounted the City their Jewel, which was not to be touched,
but by the soft and gentle hands of good men and true.

And as the City in general, have performed acceptable service to its Supremes,
so have those their great and magnificent Masters, dignified the Officers of
it, with signal expresses of honor, making the (...) and digni^^^ sunt in
^ione ejus qui potest (...) digni^t^^^^^ and nobili^ Vpton. l. 1. c. 18. p. 60.
Mayor (who is a Freeman, though the head and noblest part of it) a kind of
Viceroy, allowing triumphal Solemnities, and resemblances of, and allusions
to, those of a Coronation, at his inauguration, furnishing him with Ensigns of
supreme (...) preterea (...) ceteraque o^nia supremae dignitatis in^^^^^^
Herodiar. l. 3. de Plauti^^^ Prafecto.
power within his limits, as Sword, Mace Cap of maintenance, (all which boren
before him, remember me of Cassiodorus his words to the Senate, Sum mag^sterii
infulas in Epist. ad se^^^^^^ urbis. l. 3
dignitatis, usurus omnibus privilegiis quae tuos habuisse constiterit
decessores) with a great Council, grand privileges, and accepting him not
only as their Deputy in Government, but as a noble Tenurer to whom a chief
Office of Honor belongs of right at Coronations, For in the Register of the
Officers of the Coronation in Rich. the seconds time thus it is written, Major
Londini clamabit officium Pincernae and debite executus est, habens cyphum
aureum in manu dextra; These with other such like favors, argue the Lord Mayor
to be highly accounted of, and when consideration is had, that not only in one
time, but in the various successions of ages, high account has bin made of this
Officer, his dignity will thence receive some addition. In King John's reign,
when things were much out of order, an agreement was, that certain great
persons should be entrusted to inspect the actions of that King, and secure the
peace of the Nation, The Major M. Paris. p. 260. rot. 2. R. 2.
of London was one: in Rich. the seconds time, when Persons of all ranks were
to be rated according to their degree. The Lord Mayor was put at 4 l. the rate
of an Earl, and every Alderman at 40 s. the rate of a Baron; and when Rich. the
first in Captivity, was to be ransomed, the Lord Mayor was one of Hoveden.
part poster. p. 414.
the five Trustees for dispose of the moneys levied to redeem him. Yea, and
when the death of Qu. Elizabeth and King James his absence here, had made a
kind of Interstitium in Government, and it was thought fit by the great men of
the Realm, who being Officers by Commission, abated by the death of their
appointer, to make a publication of their fidelity to King James, and to
notify to the Nation whom they should expect, and ought to pray for as their
Lord and Master, To this publication solemnly proclaimed, the first subscriber
was To. Lee Mayor, and after him John Cantuar, Tho. Egerton, C. Sigill, Tho.
Book Proclam. Jacobi 1. proclam.
Buckhurst Treasurer, and so in order the rest of the great men; as (no doubt)
conceiving the Lord Mayor the most fixed and conspicuous Magistrate in
revolutions and changes.

And as the Mayor has been thus honored with high esteem, and had for a long
time the reward of Knighthood, (if not a Knight before) at the expiration of
his yearly office; so have also the Sherifs and Aldermen, (his Peers as it
were.) For the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen are by the Stat. of 11 Ed. 3. c.
10. said to have the Government of the City) bin reckoned non inter milites
gaudentes and milites histriones, Indict. H. 1. c. de dignit.
as Bartholus terms some, Qui non sunt nobiles, but deservers of Knighthood
upon that account that Salust gives of Pompey, who did cum alacribus saltu, cum
velocibus cursu, cum validis valide certare, Thus did 1^. Survey p. 570.
Holingshed. p. 536.
of them obtain Knighthood from E. 4. William Walworth and five more from R.
2. Eastfield and others from H. 6. Horn ^ate Astrey from H. 7. and others of
them have bin made counselors to their Princes, so was Feilding to H. 6. and
Ed. 4. William Fitzwilliams, and Sir John Allen to H. 8. Yea, and the
Grandfather of that Virgin Lady and the mirror of her Sex, Queen Elizabeth,
(the once glorious Mistress of these Islands) Sir Jeffry Bullen descended from
the famous House of Norfolk, was in Anno 1457. Lord Mayor of London; And then
is said to have to wife, one of the Daughters and Heirs of Thomas Baron of
Hoo, and Hastings, Knight of the Preparation to the Annalls. Qu. Eliz.
honorable Order of the Garter.

Further as to the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs of London all Citizens, these
largesses of bounty have been expressed; so has time and common approbation
admitted other Members of the City into title of Gentility, as well as Grandees
in Law or Schools; For as to those that either have held the place, or fined
for Aldermen, the title Esquire is given; So to all Citizens of London, though
in the City the addition of their mystery is most usual, yet the title
Gentleman, where natively they are not such (for there are many of both base
and noble Origin) is by the national courtesy given to such of them as are of
creditable professions and fortunes: which civility and grateful goodness of
the royal Government of this Nation, has been repayed by the City in all ages.
No part of the Land affording more brave, free and well advised spirits, then
here have bin born, bred, and provided for, To spring from a thriving younger
Brother, who has an elder Brothers fortune, when he has prodigally wasted it,
Or to be the first of a Stock, whose rise is not by blood and baseness; is no
less honorable, then to descend from Hercules, and want the noble qualities
of his Issue. And yet London always had, and yet has more defiances from the
Issue of her Citizens, the more is the pity, and their shame, then from all
persons of high blood and honorable Ancestry. Yea, though she has had many
profitable Offices to give, by which many have lived plentifully, and raised
great Estates, and had good Opportunities of requiting her, by publication of
her luster and renown: yet none of them that I know of, have publicly done
it, Bale and Pits indeed mention p. 654.
one Robert Bale, or Balaeus Senior, a Citizen born, who did omnem suam operam,
omne studium eo dirigere, ut ejus splendorem magis magisque illustraret. But
the works that he is said to write for Londons honor, are lost. Nor does
London encourage any of her own to appear this way in public for her, many
Monuments of antique honor and order, undoubtedly she has, which neither any
abroad, nor she her self knows of, That Sword of 1 Samuel c. 21. v. 9.
Goliath is wrapped up in a repertory of secrecy, lying by the walls, as a meet
companion for dust and Cobwebs.

O London! Thou have ever been the glory, but the envy, the Ox that has been
muzled, yet ever have trod out the Corn of profit to the Nations advantage.
Thou have bin the Candle that have lightened others out of the dark of
obscurity, into the morning brightness; and yet have bin condemned as
dulsighted to the perception of thine own interest, and the glory that attends
the due and devout improvement of it. Men say thy purse predominates thy
Council, and when they look upon thy wit, they wonder at thy wealth. This is
thy censure from thy detractors; but for all these speeches of anger and
mordacity, London has bin, and I hope yet will be London and flowrish with that
crowning mercy of orderly and peaceable Government, when her enemies shall be
clothed with shame. Gods blessing and the River of Thames, are such demesnes
about this Capital City, as will supply her, maugre the ill will of all her
Opponents. Thy name, O beloved City, has bin too much acclamated, thy
officiousness to general good, too much anciently owned, to suffer a final and
total infamy for some demeritings. Let thine accusers first prove themselves
innocent, before they cast the stones of punishment on thee; And while thou
have the merit of thy predecessors valor, of thy Magistrates bounty, of thy
Citizens riches, and of their posterities flourishing in all parts of the
Nation (who are not less fortuned, and bred in points of honor, then becomes
the Condition of Gentry) keep thy spirits about thee, to recriminate thy
reproaches; and if thou could keep thy purse, and match within thy self,
those that revile thee, would soon be deeply in debt, and hopeless how to rid
themselves from danger. For it is the honey drops of thy Wealth which
enlightneth the eyes of many well descended Jonathans, whose Lands would not
long own them for their Lords, did not thy Widows 1 Samuel c. 14. v. 29.
and Daughters portions, pay off their encumbrances, and clear up those mists
which hinder their view of them as their own, till they be removed. Show me O
ye contemners of Cities and Corporations, wherein ye exceed Citizens, and the
Issues and products of them. Is there any part of the World or this Nation,
more hospitable then London, whose Families? whose poor are better provided for
then Londons? where are there any subjects in England, that in plenty and
variety of entertainments, exceed the Majors and Sheriffs Tables; to which all
comers that are of fashion and worth, though unknown, are welcome, was not that
Table (think ye) well furnished, which in one day entertained Edward King of
England, the Kings of France, Scotland, Cyprus, Edward Prince of Wales, with a
grand Train of Nobles; and was not he a brave subject, who then also kept his
Hall for welcome of all comers? This did Henry Piccard, Mayor of London, in the
year 1363. And to make the solemnity more ample, his Lady did at the same time,
maintain a treatment apart for all female Honors of noble degree? Are there
any charities in England (surviving that furious deluge of Hen. the 8th) which
are more extensive and liberal then those of Londons Fraternities and
Hospitalls, both in London and other parts of the Nation, all which either were
founded or augmented by Citizens, some few there have bin erected by other
persons of great honor, charity and worthiness, whose devotion therein, I
doubt not but God has accepted. But though I dare not presume to write that the
Gleanings of Londons Ephraims, are beyond the vintage of those Abiezers, yet I
may modestly and truly aver, that London, both in the number and exact care and
Government of them, according to the Statutes of their foundation, is more
exact and remarkable, then others are; and those that trust them shall upon
search, find them the best executors of trusts; mistake me not, I am no
conjured Creature of Londons, wherein truth and Justice, Religion and Order,
defy her, I must not justify her, Magna est veritas and praevalebit, If the
faithful City become a harlot, if its silver become dross, and its wine be
turned to water, as once God by his Prophet complained of Jerusalem, Isa. 1.
21. v. 22.
far be it from me to endeavor her defense. But if she, when most disfigured,
and in her least commendable dress, has witnesses of Gubernative Honor, and
Pristine fidelity, though she has Apoplectique fits, and is under the rigor of
storms, which role her up and down from Coast to Coast, till her Pilots seem to
forsake their Compass, and her commoners their Sails and Tackle. God forbid any
Christian, any Englishman should wish or hope to see her in ashes, God forbid
any one that is written man, should so indulge the Gourd of his passion and
transitory greatness, which perhaps came up in a night, and may perish in a
night, as the phrase is, Jonah, c. 4. v 10. As to repine at Gods merciful
sparing of that great City, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons
that cannot discern between their right and their left hand, and also much
Cattle, v. 10. O London, I wish peace may be within thy Walls, and prosperity
within thy palaces, that Religion, Order, Trade, Charity, may never suffer a
final Eclipse in thee, That the riches of thy Citizens, which Popes have
termed, puteus inexhaustus, may rather be the delight of Scholars eyes, who
with Pope Innocent, shall desire to see divitias Londini and delicias
Westmonasterii, then of a Ruffians fists, who would desire to plunder thee.

And blessed be God for thy riches, and the good provision thy Citizens thrift
has made, for not only their Children, but for the ample maintenance of the
churches and Churchmen in thee; for as thou art abundant in sacred edifices,
(so that the great Cambden, thy learned Son says, Templis undique and
aedibus sacris ita fulget ut religio and pietas sibi delubrum hic collocasse
videatur,) and those so nobly Britan. edit. lat. rond. p. 274.
kept and adorned, as little more can be desired to their Ornament, unless St.
Paul's, thy viduated Mother Church, might be repaired, which in these sad
changes by being unchaptred and revenueless, is now in a great measure, ready
to be a colluvies of ruins) excepting only this Venust Monument of Antique
Christianities devotion. This St. Paul's at London, once not inferior to that
St. Peter's at Rome, though now likely to have no long duration, but in that
paper Monument which a skilful, painful, and well accomplished Antiquary has
erected to her perpetuity) Mr. Dugdale.
all the Parish Churches are in a comely dress, worthy that orderly Religion
the Citizens profess. And the Ministers in them, (maugre all the malice of
fanatiques and antiministerial dissenters) are better provided for, then in
most parts of the Nation besides; For though some curse the patrimonium
Crucifixi, and would dip their morsels in potions like that of the Jews to our
Lord: yet others, more in number, weight, and worth, with holy Moses, bless
their basket and their store, and let their bounties run most fluently to those
secondary Apostles, as the precious remains of Christ the Churches High Priest,
which he has left to negotiate the conversion of souls, and to propatage his
Gospel, till the number of his Elect be accomplished, and till he deliver up
the Kingdom to God the Father. But I return to London, which I find of great
consequence to her Supremes; for when the Lords and great men had her to back,
the Lord Marshall*s words to Walter Alb^net, are, Been scitis quam magnum
comm^^um est vobis M. Paris. p. 265.
and nobis servare civitatem Londoniarum quae est receptaculum nostrum. And
when King Richard the second, favored her in so unusual a way ^o indulgence,
as Sir Edw. Cook notes, confirming her liberties, 4 Instit. p. 250.
licet usi non fuerint vel abusi fuerunt, it concludes, that she has ever been
esteemed the darling of her Royal Governor, and the Nonsuch of England, in
supply of accommodations for peace and Rot. Parl. 7. R. 2. Nu. 37.
war. So that London so ancient, and so magnificent a City, so abounding in
rich, stout, grave, and well moderated Citizens, so dignified with freedoms and
franchises of exemption from vassallage, so prosperous and contributive to the
structure of English Honor, being the parental air of Princes, Prelates,
Peers, Knights, Gentlemen, and others, who in regard of high desert, are not
unworthy their company, must not be omitted in the roll of Honor, as she is
none of the lowest steps to it. For in the Saxons time, Estate in Land or
money, made men pares cum Thayno dignitate, Mills Nobil. ^olit and Civil. p.
132. E. Lambardo.
And Estates have ever been gainable in London, if any where; And that not
only by ungentle practices, such as Mr. Fern terms, Doubleness of Tongue,
violation of faith, with the rest of their trumperies Glory Generos. p. 7.
and deceits, for which, (says he) they must be contented to stand included
under the base and unnoble state of people. No nor by betraying trusts, as did
Cneius Flavius, who by discovering the Patricians secrets in the dies fasti and
infasti, was by the popular par^y preferred, Cum ingenti Nobilitatis
indignatione, ita ut plaerique Nobiles annulos aureos and phaleras deponerent,
as both Livy and Agellius testify; But by Gods blessing upon their Lib. 6. c.
91. Mercatura nihil aliud est nisi actus quidam emendi vendenque merces. Plin.
l. 7.
careful and provident industry, which by commutation of one thing for another,
and transferring the property from person to person, works out a benefit to all
conditions of men. For Merchandise, which is the common title of all Trade,
whether in gross or retail, is no tri^ling mechanique and indign employment, to
which only abject and mercenary spirits are condemned; nor is it carried on by
fortuneless and needy persons, such are rather a refined sort of Pedlars then
Merchandizers; but as Diodorus ascribes its first discovery to Lib. 6.
Mercury, and its first use to the Phaenicians, whom Tully and Polydore Lib. 3.
de Republ.
make importers of the foreign extravagancies into Greece, and we may allow
occasioners of learnings discovery to us, whom the Phaenicians (almost the
earlyest artists of the world and such as had Colonies in every Nation, and
were called (...) by Lucian, because In Toxari.
they, by their general traffic were Ubiquitaries,) visited, by coming to our
Islands for Tyn and other Metals, as Bochartus has to my hand observed, Partis
2d. l. 1. c 2. and 39. p. 719.
and with variety of learning illustrated. So may its increase and propagation
be attributed, next to Gods blessing, to those persons of renown and luster,
who either by natural inclination, or impulse of necessity, have engaged in it,
and by their succesful dexterity, prove great advancers of National profit, as
well as their own and Posterities fortunes; For as in Solons time, the Plutarch
in Solone.
Greeks accounted Trade, as that quae commoda ex regionibus barbaris
ascisseret, amicitias cum regibus conciliaret; and multarum rerum conferret
peritiam, so in this Nation, the Wittenagemote and great Council of our wisdom,
in the preamble to the Statute of 43 Eliz. c. 1^. acknowledges it to have been
the policy of this Realm, by all good means to comfort and encourage the
Merchant, thereby to increase and advance the general wealth of the Realm, her
Majesty's Customs, and the strength of Shipping, so are the words of that
Statute.

And therefore though in Trade as in other courses of life and professions of
ingenuity, there are some debauched and sordid persons, who by sinister and
undue means, dishonorable to God, and of evil report amongst men, acquire
estates, and in Solomon's words, making have to be rich, cannot be innocent, but
live the shame of their professions, and depart the stage of life, as bad
actors hissed at, and declaimed against by all that knew them: yet are there of
Traders as current, generous, stanch, simple hearted, and liberal living men,
most of whom are descended out of the best Families of Englands Gentrey, as the
Land affords; such as support their Families and relations, as splendidly, and
leave them as fair foundations of Grandeur, as merit can wish to work upon: yea
of all Orders of men in England, absit scripto invidia, none do more bless
their Wives, Widows and Children, with the fruits of Gods blessing on their
thrift and augmentation, then Citizens do, who as joyfully spend their Estates
on their Wives, Widows and Children, or for want of these, on charities both
living and dying, as ever they carefully accumulated them; and therefore there
rising from these, men of great Estates and good breedings, their children,
whom though they make not Princes in all Lands, yet they render conspicuous in
all Counties where they reside, and they being descended from, and entermarried
with, Daughters of generous Families; and having also the younger Sons of
Gentile Families, not less Gentlemen then their elder Brother, to their
Apprentices, who in time, prove great and grave Citizens, not only fellows in
fortune to their elder Brothers, but purchasors of their wasted Estates, and
second founders to their antiquated families and fortunes, which in them have a
new, and perhaps better resurrection. It is but meet the City which deserves as
well as Rome, to be called urbs aeterna, in which these budds and blowings of
Nobility and Gentry are nourished to their after increase and procerity, should
be accounted a Copartner in the rise of Honor, to which I hope, London and
other Corporations, will be ever contributors. If either the storms of Anarchy
do not kill their sap, or the fire of dissension burn their hives. And so I
have done with the third part of the description, the end why Arms and Ensigns
of Honor, were instituted, which is said to be in notitiam and honorem latoris.

The fourth thing considerable in our Knights definition, is the fountain or
rise of Arms in those words A Judice Legitimo. And this is well added to
exclude the presumption of self-creation, or of acceptance from any hand but
that of the right owners. There, there only is Honor lodged where Empire is,
and if par in parem non habet imperium, then Honor cannot come from the plebs;
but springs from the womb of the morning Sun, the Orient Giant of Majesty, who
fixed in his Orb, runs a constant race of motion, diffusing beams of luster and
vivification amongst all the subjects under his aspect, Honorem distributio
Principum est, and hinc uti Spelm. in Aspil. p. 4.
ab ipso font aut per rivos, Hoc est per ministros deducenda alioquin spuria
and inanis, says my learned Textmaster, yet not without good company, for all
the Doctors agree the same a principe tanquam a capite in omnes inferiores
honorum and potestatum munera diffunduntur, so Cassanaeus Catal. gl. Mund. p.
251.
quotes it out of them.

This Judex legitimus then, is purposely added as a rampire, and mound to
Magistracy, apt to be invaded by arrogance and levity: therefore the learned
oppose legitimus to what ever is new, unconstituted, and of a spurious birth.
Thus is Legitima cogitatio opposed to spuria; Budaeus in prior pandec. p. 206.
legitimius senatus, to indictus senatus; legitima judicia to judicia malis
artibus parta; dies juridici, which our Lawyers call temps covenables, to Cook.
1 Instit. p. 135:
dies non juridici; so careful were wise Lawmakers, that they left nothing
unsettled, that might make any flaw, or seem ununiform in the fabrique of
National polity; and because the Senate was in the Roman Commonwealth, the
Center of Majesty, the Senators to prevent all suspicion of themselves, and to
beget a reverence of their transactions in peoples minds, Ordered, That lawful
Senates should be kept upon Sueton: in Augusto.
appointed days, and those were but twice in a month; and Agellius adds, that
no lawful Senate should be nisi in loco per Augures Constituto quod templum
appellaretur, that Budaeus. p. 13^. in pand.
is but by a lawful appointment, and in a place appointed, which was their
Temple.

So that Judex Legitimus, here excludes Uptons libertine, who takes what Arms
he pleases, since Arms are not in nudam notitiam, but in honorem also. And
therefore it must come from the Fountain of Honor, who is called Animata Lex,
and Terrestris Deus, being as the Soul in the Commonwealths body, the right
eye in the Polyphemiz'd Statue of popularities, which sweetens their visage,
and renders them of deformed Monsters, amiable Objects. This is the primum
Mobile, which carries about all Orderly motions. For this cause the Apostle
commands by the spirit of God, and his Apostolic Authority, that Prayers
and Supplications, and giving of Thanks be made for all men, for Kings ^ Tim.
c. 2, v. 1. and 2.
and all that are in Authority under them, that under them we may live
peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty, And when Holy David, Sau's
successor to the Kingdom, not by inheritance, for so Jonathan would have been,
1 Samuel c. 14. v. 49.
nor by Usurpation, for so he himself durst not have been, For if his
conscience smote him for cutting off the lap of Saul's Garment, and He 1 Samuel
24. v. 5.
in a holy passion cried out, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto
my Master the Lords anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he
is the anointed of the Lord, as it is v. 6. what would have become of him. If
he had pulled by sacrilegious hands, the Crown from off his Masters head, and
put him to death to consolidate his title to his Throne.) But Holy David,
though a man of valor and victory, was a man of Justice and Honor, his right
to be Readiness successor, was of divine donation and especial appointment of
God, whose all power is, and who stated the Government in him, as appears 2 Samuel chap. 12. verse. ^. and 8. And yet though God had determined his pleasure
both as to Saul's life and Kingdom, yet this blessed King who had entrance by
his Oustre, calls upon the most tender and pensive Instruments of passionate
sadness to weep, Weep (says he) ye Daughters of Israel over Saul, who clothed
you in Scarlet with other delights, 2 Samuel 1 c. v. 24.
who put Ornaments of Gold upon your Apparel. For surely he must be a very bad
King, who is not worthy peoples prayers, when he is alive, and their tears
when he is dead. The supreme power was then firstly and chiefly one, as in the
elder Governments, and as in the polity of God over the World; For though he
has in the upper House of Glory Archangels and Angels, who infinitely
transcend us men in intellect, power, and dignity, yet are they no participants
in rule, but ministering spirits to his Elect, the members of this moveable
House of Commons here on Earth; or in the largest concession, they are but
tutelary of us Gloworms of ostentation, and puffs of nullity; the paramount
power is Gods, who terms himself a great King, and who exercises his regality,
in ruling over the Kingdoms of men, and giving them to whomsoever he will, as
the voice from Heaven declared, Dan. c. 4. v. 30. But though the supreme Power
be one, yet not only one, for there have been plures, who like many figures in
conjunction, have made Numeralls of great duration and augustness. Amongst the
Graecians, when of Aristocratique Constitution, they gave honors, and
therefore were held lawful Judges of merits, Nobilibus Athletis qui Olympia,
Pythia, Isthmia, Nemaea vicissent Graecorum majores ita Magnos instituerunt
honores uti non modo in conventu stantes cum palma and Corona ferunt lauds sed
etiam cum revertantur in suas civitates, cum victoria Triumphantes quadrigis in
maenia and in patrias invehebantur, says Budaeus; so Lazius ^^ ^^^dect. (...)
4. (...). 9 com. c. 1.
reports the Romans to do, and so above this 1200 years have the Venetians, and
for a long time other later Governments. But such Almanacks of Honor are not
calculated for every Meridian. There are Nations that will be dull Scholars to
learn any lesson Antimonarchique; for resolution, like the Rock, yields not to
any stroke but the rod of Omnipotence, and when God utters no voice from
Heaven, against National Laws, (not diametrall to the revealed will) his
word. There is a Maxim of the Law, swayes much with many, Neminem opportet
esse legibus sapientiorem. As then the Legitimus Judex in our case of honor is
the Supreme, so next to these Originals, are the illustrious Copies drawn by
their fair and magnified hands, such as are Vice-royes, Generals, Marshalls,
their civil and Military Representatives; For there can be no doubt, but that
military rewards and honors, as Arms and Knighthood, are included in their
intended powers; For there is no Argument more prevalent to elicit Soldiers
valor, then this of remuneration. Thus I read in the fourth of Richard the
second, the Duke of Buckingham made many Knights when he entered France, and
again after battles well fought, rewarded deserving gallants with Knighthood.
So the L. Admiral Howard, in his voyage into Britany, 4 H. 8. Anno 1512. and
upon his winning Morleis 14 H. 8. Anno 1522. So the Duke of Suffolk, 15 H. 8.
when he gained Roy, and the Earl of Hertford, 36 H. 8. at Leith, after the
burning of Edinburgh. The like 1 Ed. 6. was done by the Duke of Somerset,
protector of the young Kings person, who Anno 1547 made above 50 Knights when
he went for Scotland; so did the Earl of Sussex, 12 Eliz. and of Essex in Cadiz
voyage, And there is good reason for it; for take away the power to give a
badge of honor to a son of honor, and the best rounds in the scalado of
great attempts, are removed, si non pro fama pro nihilo est demicandum; Good
pay indeed, and great plunder, works most an end with the vulgar and ordinary
stipendiary, who having bruital ayms, is satisfied with low and mean
compensations, but a spirit of elixerated mettle, purely extracted from the
Oar of avarice, and quintessentially fixed upon the attainment of fame, and
the enamouring companions of Heroique virtue, acquiesses in nothing but in the
indubitate badges and testimonies of emeriting, which his principal gives him;
For the courage which vehiculates his attempts, and occasions his glory, is
Gods royal donative: therefore the bravery of such a martial soul, is of an
immortal Origin, and has no less Nobility then a Divine participation, not
essential, but communicative. The acceptance of the performance, and the
attestation of the gallantry of the subject acting it, being made known by the
notices and badges of conferred honor, which are personal and Gentilicial. For
where actions performed by men do benefit posterity, it is fit the posterity of
such actors should be dignified by their predecessors merit. So St. Leo, ad
humanam pertinet Sen. 6. Nativ.
laudem ut patrum decus in prole resplendeat. So St. Ambrose writes of one,
Caepta patris dignitas in filio nobilitatur, and Plyny for them all Ep. 6. lib.
6.
tells sons, Magnum in Gloria patris Ornamentum. Yea he is no man of honor,
who if worthies die issuless, as often they do, denies them a Monument, in the
minds of their most conspicuous coaevals, and a perpetuation in the intemerat
sheets of Historique veracity, by which have bin preserved the memories of
worthies in all ages, who yet are extant in the traditional lineaments of their
virtues, visible to the Learneds eye, who view them with delight and study to
publish them with additions.

And now I come to the last Judex Legitimus, in common understanding amongst
us, to wit, the Heralds, who though disrespected in these times, and in truth
not so regarded (as they ought) in any time in England, which caused a man well
versed in that art, to write deploringly, nunc adeo Heraldicae arti detractum
est ut neglecti plane and Mills de Nobil. Civili and polity. p. 153.
paene prostrati ubivis vivunt.) Yet are of ancient, honorable and useful
institution, yea and have been Judges of the great debates of Nations. And
though I would not hyperbolize with Mr. Leigh, who Accid. Armory. p. 41.
compares them to Angels, and to Aaron: yet I must acknowledge them publicae
fidei intermunii, a kind of propitiators between Nation and Nation. The Greeks
called them (...), and (...), and Eustathius gives the reason, (...), they were
accounted priestly, and had p. 112. and 726.
to do about the Sacrifices of the Gods; And the regard that was given to them,
made them the Instruments of publishing whatever was of a public and
extraordinary nature, and associates to persons of the greatest remarque, yea
in Homer the Scepter is said to be given to Menelaus, (...), Ilyad.
nor had the Latins less account of them; for they called them by diverse
names, alluding to their Office and use. Priscian terms them, Praecones a
Praecinendo, quasi praecanes quod ante canant and anuncient quod est faciendum,
which Plautus alludes to, when he defines them to be such as qui jussu
Magistratus public aliquid Paenul. 2. 11.
ore denunciant, qui auctionem faciebant and qui audientiam in theatris
indicebant, and Tully, exurge praeco fac populo Cicero 3 ver.
audientiam. The Romans very much set by them, Numa constituted Polyd. Virgil.
lib. 4. deInvent.
Faeciales Sacerdotes; and both Festus and Nonius derive Feciales a faciendo,
quod belli pacisque faciendae apud eos De vita pop. Romans l. 2. Livius l. 1.
dec. 1.
jus erat. Varro and Livy, call these Faeciales legatos, and there were 20. of
this Order, who judged of war and peace: some of which, were ever sent to any
Nation from whom the Romans apprehended they had received injury, with this
Message, Ego sum nuncius Populi Rocerus lib. de bello and duel^o. p 49.
Romani just pieque legatus venio. Hence the Civilians called them, Patres
Patratos, or Nuncios Legatos, and the Law of Nations gave them privilege to
pass and repass as common Intelligencers, Negotiators of accord, and Judges of
debates. For then they were of those Milites emeriti, who by long service in
war, knew the Laws of war and peace, and were well read in the Laws of
Nations, which determine right and wrong.

In later times, they have not only been used as wontedly, but also as
instruments to convey civil honor from Supremes to subjects; and that they
might not be senseless of honor, but have quick touches of it in their
breasts, as well as faculties of bestowing it in their offices, and badges of
it on their Coats, the Custom of Nations, was to appoint men to such place, who
were generously born, as well as so addicted, and handsomely accomplished by
breeding, to execute aright this honorable trust. A rare caution against
ignorant, sordid and ridiculous Heralds, who are distinguishable from the
faeculent plebs, rather by their gay Coats, then any skill, ingenuity, or
grandeur of mind they express in their actions.

But I intend no enlargement on Heralds, because a better Pen has Byss. in
Vpion. p. 28.
long since promised it, only I could wish, (if God and the Powers concurred)
that a brave Marshal like to the Duke of Norfolk, Or the old Earl of Arundel,
were revived, and such Order, in matters of Arms and Honor, constituted, as
may reduce eccentriques to their fixation. And that such men may be Officers of
Arms, as are of learned Language, count morature, Oratorique utterance, skilled
in the Laws of Nations, ready in the descents of Families, sincere in
maintenance of right, and that these (if owned Judges of Honor) may be men of
blood, family and fortune; and that such Pensions may be annexed to their
Offices, as will support them creditably. For there is nothing that prompts men
to profligate and degenerous courses, more then need and indulgence of fortune,
which often warps brave minds from their natural evenness, and distorts them
into a sordid compliance with any offer of accommodation and advantage, Though
it be as vain as that mistake of Quintus Fabius was, who not content to be
nobly born, became a painter de claro genere faciens Valor. Tit. 8. de Cupid.
gloriae.
se sordidum, ut nomen suum in publico pingens faceret aeternum, Or that
royster Pau^^nias, who would kill Philip of Macedon, ut tali parricidio
immortalitatem sibi compararet, Or as Herostra^us and others, of whom
Cassanaeus has given instance, who Catal. gl. Mundi partis primae consid. 58.
have done supersuperlative wickednesses, to bring about their heady and ill
humored purposes. And therefore I account it a well advised Petition to God,
that Agur made, Give me neither poverty nor riches, Feed me with food
convenient for me, least I Prove. 30. v. 8. and 9.
be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? Or least I be poor and steal,
and take the name of my God in vain. For those two evils, a high mind, and a
low estate, are not often reconciled in a spotless integrity of life; and
therefore to have food and raiment, and a mind contented therewith, is no mean
mercy, especially now, when unde habet quaerit nemo sed opportet habere, is
rather owned for Canon, then Budaeus his paradoxall truth, Praestat egregiis p.
600. Edit. Basil.
viris in secessu latere, aut in vita privata consenescere quam turpiter and
obnoxie in pertexta innotescere.

And when in this Iron Age, Religion has no veneration, Law no esteem, Justice
no Patron, Property no Protector, Heraldry no rule, but every man does that
which Judges 17. 6.
is right in his own eyes, as once was Isreal's calamity. All estates of men
have no other refuge but that Judex Legitimus in Heaven. For though times and
men Epist. 9. ad ^erson.
may be like what Clemanges describes, Quis locus remediis (says he) aut quae
spes salutis ubi nec de salute loqui nec de remedio concessum ubi qui cladem
and plagas inferunt probi insignes egregiique viri, omni laud and praemio
digni judicantur, and qui talia avertere nituntur scelerati, perfidiosi,
nefarii dicuntur, what, I say, though God let us live to see further changes
and declensions, to those many stupendous ones, we have with grief and
amazement beheld, yet so long as Jehovah keeps his Throne, our faith ought not
flag; For when Gods time is come, he will arise and plead his own cause, and
from him as the only Judex legitimus, there will be no appeal. And so the
fifth part of the description comes next, to hand the objects to whom Arms are
principally directed, Militibus to Soldiers. But of Soldiers, I have written
somewhat in the preceding sheets, that which remains, is only two limitations.
1. Though Arms and Honor be the proper reward of Soldiers, yet not only of
Soldiers. 2. Though they be the rewards of Soldiers, yet not of all Soldiers.

First, Though of Soldiers, yet not of all Soldiers, For if as great designs
of Conquest, and conservation of dominion, has been effected by Counsel, as by
force, then are the remunerations Military to be divided between the Co-heires
of merit, Courage and Council.

The Soldiers (indeed) as the elder is to make first choice of the divident,
but the Gown man is to have his allowance as equal as Justice can apportion it.
When Nimrod first forged his Engine of oppression, by which he became as
terrible to men, as the hunter is to the pursued beast, then was there no rival
with, no counterpoyse to power; but after when Council made snares, and fixed
harping Irons in Leviathans of rule, then was Council owned, as a conservator
of the peace of Nations. Then Princes appeared in Robes and vests of calmness,
distributing their favors under representations of peace, the Daughter of
Counsel and Prudence, rather then in tokens of war and ferocity, deriving
Dominion from the Laws of learned Justice, and not from the form of armed
strength. It Is fit indeed, fortitude should be encouraged, all ages and Nations
have need of it, and are made happy by it, therefore ought to reward it, and so
have done, and so (for example sake) will do; but other virtues of equal merit,
must not be exhaeredated, or become spurious, to advance its legitimation. It
was a brave spirit of Numa Popilius, to promise Mamurius Dyonisius. lib. 2.
Sabellic. l. 3. Enn. 2.
(that famous Artist, who made brazen Shields like that which fell from Heaven,
on which was inscribed the Roman fate) that he would give him whatever he could
wish, or would desire of him, and 'twas as bravely requited by a modest and
candid request, ut a Saliis sacerdotibus martis, cum jam saltantes canerent in
fine Carminis Mamurii artificis nomen etiam pronunciarent. Some men's virtues
vigorously confront the ghast looks of Death, and judge no bed of Honor, no
manner of Sepult^ra regum consulum and imperatorum erat in Campo Martio.
Sueton. in Augusto.
dispatch like that of a cannon shot, or an Instrument of steel. Others
resolving to adorn their lives, with actions contributive of good to men, study
not only their own, but other men's preservations, inclining actions to peace,
the Halcyon days of art, and the spring of Learnings verdure and slourishing.
Both these are good Stewards of their ^alents, and deserve Euge's from, and
shares in, the joys of their Lords. If then the scale of favor, and the
evidence of approbation, incline to any one where it ought to be equilibrious
and impartial, there would be too much ground of outcry on injustice. Let then
the Soldier be rewarded, let him have the Trophies proper to him: The Gownman
only claims such a share in this worlds luster, as is commensurate to the
officiousness he (to public good) expresses. And if he, upon the Crabstocks
of emnity grafts the Cyons of concord, and serve a Gospel reformation, by
accomplishing (as much as rests on man's part to endeavor) that promise which
points out civil as well as Religious prosperity. They shall beat their Swords
Isiah 4 4. M^cah 4. 3. Joel. 3. 1^.
into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, Nation shall not lift
up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more, etc. And if
this be done by Gownmen without blood, force, violence, the unavoidable methods
of War and the pleasure of Camps, as great a portion, and as notable a fee of
Arms and honor is to be imparted to the Scholar, as Sword-man; For incruent
Victories are least offensive to God and man, since they are rather well
studied and thoroughly improved providence, then acts of vehemence, or
compulsions of a bruital and irrational contexture, And were not encouragements
to sober diligence, and virtuous industry suitable to those of Centaurean
fierceness, Men of great spirits and noble minds, would either become the prey
and spoil of salvages, or die under the discontent to be overdripp'd by such as
are first Tigres and Lions in their natures, and then act as such, against all,
whom God and nature have polished to a more pleasing compliance with humanity
and civil conversation, the only soder of friendship, and the contentful
harmony of life. Though therefore Arms and Honor be primarily the right of
Soldiers, yet not only and exclusively their right, others are fellow
Commoners, and of the Messes of Honor with them.

No nor secondly, are all Soldiers included in this beneficence of the
Fountain of Honor, which the learned Knight calls Judex Legitimus, for there
are some that creep into the wedding feast, who having not the wedding Garment,
ought to be asked how they came in thither, such Soldiers as Marcellinus and
Vo^iscus calls milites ordinarios quos excitabant inopia and feritas, are
Lazius Com. Reip. Romans lib. 4. c. 14. Basil.
not within the care of our Judex Legitimus, for he respects only those that
are Milites Legitimos, because engaged in militia legitima (the lawful
expression of merit, which is to be rewarded by (the lawful Judge, being only
in a lawful war) St. Bernard giving encouragement to the Christians
undertaking against the Infidels, writes thus, Cum occidit c. 3 de Nov^ Militia.
malefactorem non homicida, sed ut ita dixerim, malicida, and plane Christi
vindix in his qui male agunt and defensor Christianorum reputatur. And
therefore though there be much daringness expressed by men that rush into
action, like the Horse into the battle, not caring what side they take arms
for: yet advised and pious souls, consider the cause, and resolve to stand by
the Crown of glory though it be fixed to a rotten post, all the ignominies that
this wretched world entails to the good fight of faith, Christ's faithful
Soldier and servant contemns. The forecited Father has this passage to the
Knights Templers si bonafuerit causa pugnantis pugnae exitus malus esse non
Sermon. 1. ad Milit. Templ. c. 1.
poterit, sicut nec bonus judicabitur sinis, ubi causa non bona and intentio
non recta praecesserit, si in voluntate alterum occidendi potius occidi
contigerit morieris homicida, quod si praevales, and voluntate superandi vel
vindicandi forte occidis hominem, vivis Homicida, so that Father, a notable
quel to the rash engager, who neither a victor or a looser is guiltless; The
Soldiers then that fight for honor, must fight according to the Laws, and
for the well-being of Honor, And then they will deserve primum locum in acie
Lazius lib 4. c. 14.
occupare and ante signa cum Principibus stare. As did the Roman Antesignani,
yea and be accounted meet vessels of Honor, for Baldus is positive, Super
Rube. p. 10.
Creandus in militem non sit servilis conditionis, yet most an end it is seen,
that in unwarrantable fewdes, and civil disturbances, the great Instruments of
Alarm, and Masters of misrule, are men of trite note, mean birth, despicable
breeding, who with the vultures, are in publico malo faelices; but because
these are not within the purliew of the text, I will pursue them no further but
proceed to the last part of the definition, to wit, the manner of Arms and
Honors appropriation to those persons for whom they are intended in the word
Ascripta.

Ascripta, a word of more significant capacity, then a bare title and claim;
for though in our usual Mother speech we by ascribe, mean no more then give or
render, as ascribe the praise or doing of such a thing to such a man, is no
more then to mention him as the deserver of the praise of such a work; yet
ascribe, as it comes from ad scribo, and thence for euphony ascribo, whence
ascripta the word here, has a sense of complication, suitable to its verbal
conjunction, and I take the Emphasis to arise from the composition of the
praeposition with the Verb, and to imply a more explicit notice then is in the
bare Verb; and this I humbly conceive (yet always with submission to the
learned) to be clearly the sense, not only of our Knight, but also of other
Authors, who make ascripta to surpass data and concessa, as that which
contains them, and some other testimonial beyond them, as much as a record and
indubitate authentic warranting the claim to, and assumption of them:
therefore the Greeks read this by (...), which may be well rendered, as (...)
ought to be, 2 Luke 1. 2. and 4. v. by listing and enrolling, rather then
taxing; and in this sense of listing or enrolling, I understand (but I crave
pardon if I mistake) the Orator in his phrase, ascribe^e in Orat. pro Cecin.
Legibus and in legem, so adscribi in civitatem, or in civitate for recipi in
civem, which Pliny much as adjungere vel addere quovis modo. Men when they are
entered freemen in the Chamberlains Office, having had an addition to their
native right, or a publication of their acquired privilege, are said to be
ascripti cives, to have jus in re, as well as ad rem, to be freemen and
Citizens, complete and past all question; so Tully expresses himself in that
passage, Qui Thucydidem laudant ascribat suae nostram sententiam, and Pliny in
making ascribi to amount to Canonizari, De Opt. gener. Orat. lib. 2. c. 7.
or annumerari, attributes to our Texts meaning, as much as can be wished, that
is a record or testimonial of the grantors pleasure and end in the grant of
them, which is ever upon some virtues in the claimers, for which they were thus
rewarded. Indeed of old, when Arms were not hereditary and fixed, there needed
no justification beyond that of the devisors genius, who gratified himself with
such Trophies, as lacquied most to the pomp of his fantasy, which commonly
rigged and trimmed this Perewig of hawtesse, with much of her ingenious variety.
And when Sovereigns gave Donaries from their persons, as Jewels, Swords,
Spears, Sprigs, Helmets; Armours, usually worn by them, and by them delivered
as gifts to persons, with indulgence of them to be born by their Issues, and
did this before great appearances of men, and at the head of Armies: there
needed no further testimonials of the bearers right. For time being by these
(dispersed in all corners of the Nation) informed of the occasion and
intendment of it, lodges the bruit of it in men's minds, till by usage time out
of mind, it becomes Law, and prescribes against any thing to the contrary. But
in as much as Arms and Honor do give dignity and precedence which will not
easily be assented to by those who hold themselves agrieved, and are loath to
cooperate to their own degradation. The rights of Arms and Honors gentilicial,
ought in reason to appear upon record, and the Grant or certificate rest with
the person dignified. The Law of Nations suffragating to the unquestionable
right of Supremes to grant, within the limits of their power, rewards to
merits, and Arms to such as are worthy to be distinguished from men of
meanness. And though in cases of long use and possession of many descents, as
in title of Lands, so of Arms bearing, not evidences or productions of the
commencing right is required, because subsequent acts have ratified and Laws
of latter ages barred disturbances, and made possession a fair advance to
right, and quae ab antiquis sunt temporibus praesumuntur Reg. Jur.
solemniter esse acta, yet in case of Honor and Arms of late date and
donation, the evidence of their right is to be produced, if not known, before
the privilege that comes by it, will be willingly assented to. And therefore I
conceive our learned Knight, here treating of Arms, as in their regular Aspect
they are diffused, as tokens of the acceptance of the actions and persons
performing them; and the Supremes bounty toward them for so doing, concludes
them to be a Legitimo Judice militibus ascripta: And so I have shortly treated
of the parts of the definition in these words, Insignia sunt decora symbola in
notitiam and honorem latoris a Legitimo Judice militibus ascripta.

The Epilogus, or conclusion of the Author, is to beseech Almighty God, to
take the cause of honor into his own hands, His own Honor I mean, which is
now much entrenched upon by formal Hypocrites, profane Athiests, and covetous
Mammonists, of whom that just complaint of Gods against Israel, is most true,
This people draw Isaiah 29. v. 13.
near with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but with their hearts
are far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men,
For Tantum inter Stoicos and caeteros sapientiam professos interesse quantum
inter faeminas and ^ares non immerito dixerim Senec. de Constant. Sapient. c. 1.
there was never any age wherein the name of God was more used, and the fear of
God less practiced then now; But such as men sow, that also shall they reap,
there is a spirit in man, which he himself knows not of, till it brings him to
shame and sorrow; for God often punishes man's prevarication with him, by a
disgrace and denudation, which he occasions to himself. Charles the bold, was
never happy but when he had Armies about him, and had begun Wars upon his
Neighbors, at last being overthrown in a battle, and endeavoring escape, he
was slain, and the Epitaph on him was Te pacis piguit, te taeduit atque quietis
Huraeus in vita ejus. p. 448.

Carole, sicque jaces, jamque quiesce tibi.


Ranzovius with his Catalonians, were entertained Auxilaries to the Greek
Emperor, but the Emperor Turkish History. p. 150.
being in the wayne, Ranzovius and his men did more harm to him and his friends
Countries, then the enemy did, against whom, he and his men were brought into
the field; The pretense was, that the Soldiers wanted pay; and Ranzovius their
General was necessitated, as he declared, to bear with them more then he ought,
or otherwise would; but it was thought He had a divident in the plunder of
those merciless inquisitors, and his fate was to be a sacrifice to their
insolence.

It Is an ill chosen thrift, to meditate that an Opportunity of our own glory
which God intrusts us with, to inaugurate his, if men promoted by God, to
purposes of universal good, degenerate and interpret his providence to be
Prefaces to their own advantage, God either meets with such by his ^errors in
their Conscience, or by countermining their Council, and making their device of
none effect. Ferdinand King of Arragon, was a wise and politic Prince, making
havoc of his Conscience and Honor, to make his Son the greatest Monarch in
the World. But vain Prince, He lived to see his darling Son die before him,
and that in the flower of his age, and his Wife great with child, die together
with her untimely birth, and both buried together. Gods Ulysses's must stop
their ears against this worlds Siren notes, for if once they lean to an
earthly requiem, and look upon the forbidden fruit with delight to, and desire
of it, then farewell God, Religion, Honor, Conscience, all these are Physicians
of no value to him that is thus distempered in his brains, and so dementated,
that he may be ruined, and that unlamented; Cossi was a brave Commander in
Turkish History. p. 144.
Ottoman the first his Army, having for a time large rewards, and quiet
abidance given him; but Ottoman knowing he was by profession a Christian
(though God knows a loose one and in no sort valiant for the truth) sent for
him to come to the Court, pretending he had some service for him, but with
intent, when he had him there, to make him turn Turk, Or have him murdered.
Cossi understanding the Emperors drift, to keep in his favor, and preserve
his own life, turned Turk. Men must have not so much Saul's Armor, as David's
faith, that would overcome Goliath like temptations. No Coat of Mail like to
confidence in God, no Weapons of Offense like to those little smooth stones we
gather out of the brook of self-distrust. He that fears himself, annihilates
Satan's plot, and gives a call of faith, which brings in comfortable aid; for
the Lord is nigh unto them that call upon him. And therefore Interest in God is
the best Sanctuary, in dubious and deceitful times, it is the noblest subterfuge
that we can fly to, and the safest harbor we can anchor in, when the World as
it were, is on fire about our ears, and we are burning in it, and when storms
and commotions menace overthrow, and dissolution of all. There is a famous
story of a Sorceress Bishop Spotswoods Hist. Scotland. p. 382.
in Scotland, called the wise Wife of Keith, who in Anno 1591. being
apprehended as a Sorceress, upon examination, confessed that Bothwel, a notable
Traitor, had moved her to enquire, what should become of the then King, how
long he should-raign, and what should happen after his death, and that the evil
spirit with whom she confederated, having undertook to make away the King,
after failer of performance, being challenged by her for so failing, said, it
was not in his power, speaking words which she apprehended to be Il est homme
de Dieu, He is a man of God; for though God has given the Prince of the air a
large Territory, yet has he kept the Paramount sovereignty to himself, that is,
the security we have from him, that is our enemy, whose enmity is ^ersans circa
totum genus humanum, that God says to his proud rage, hitherto shall thou
come, and no further, Et in tuto haereditas ponitur, quae Deo Sanctus Cyprian.
ad Martyrs.
custode servatur. And therefore if God have any delight in us, he will draw
our hearts off from worldly objects, and intend them on his glory; concerned
highly in the welfare of Religion, I say Religion, such as St. James calls,
pure Re^igion, and undefiled before God and the Father Jam. 1. 27.
is this, to visit the fatherless and the Widows in their affliction, and to
^eep himself unspotted of the world. For Religion thus qualited is a beauty,
meriting the best Jewels this world can purchase her, it is the Pearl worth all
Merchants wealth, the prize worth all combatants hazard, a blessing
compensating all devotion, Though it be giving ones body to be burned. 'Twas
Royal Divinity that a Noble mouth once in this Nation uttered, That soul is not
worthy of the Heavens Joys, whose body cannot endure one blow of the Hangman.

Next to Gods preservation of his own honor, the Author is an humble Orator
to God for his merciful defense of this Nations honor, which is in a great
measure decayed, and of ill report, abroad. it was once said of England, Regnum
Angliae Regnum Dei. But how, O thou Lucifer of our honor, art thou fallen from
Heaven, and have exchanged thy morning clarity for night-shades, and dresses of
dismal aspect, jam non Lucifer sed noctiferet mortifer, once O beloved
Country, thou wast like Capernaum, the envy and glory of Nations, now thy
widow-hood and old age deformity make thee unacceptable, Thou wast once as a
City united within it self; but now thy differences have begotten hostilities,
which spur and switch to ruin, ecce in regione nostra Hipponensi quoniam eam
Barbari non attigerunt, clericorum Donatistarum and Circumcellionum latrocinia
sic vastavit Ecclesias ut Barbarorum Jortasse facta mitiora sunt, was St.
Augustines Epist. 122.
complaint to Victorian, and I pray God England has not cause to say, that what
foreign enemies could not bring about to her ruin, homebred enmity is like to
do, Discord is the Port at which in vasion and conquest enters, the Goths came
into Spain and Narbon, ruina Lazius Com. Reip. Romans lib. 1. c. 10. p. 113.
videlicet Romani status and frequenti mutatione Principum animati; and if
England would escape those harasses she has formerly suffered by, she must
avoid division, and adhere to wise, worthy and legal settlements, while the
Egyptians kept to the constitutions of the Gods and their Heroes, (to speak
after Diodorus) Diod. Sicul. p. 85. Edit. Rodomanni Impress Hanoviae.
they did well, and were oracular to the world; but (...), when Macedonians
were their Lords, (...), then what was thought well settled became null, and
Egypt grew base and contemptible; My prayer is, that England may live in Gods
sight, that is, in Job his words, that it was with us chapter 29. v. 3.
as in times past, in the days when God preserved us, when his Candle shined
upon our heads, and when by his light we walked through darkness, but I have no
hope to see this till Religion be more our practice then prattle, till
meekness and moderation one of the most beauteous fruits of reformation, be
ingratiated with us. O did men know the high notes of supernal Music, and
superspherical harmony that are in the souls of peace makers, they would never
leave off prayers and tears, till they had the testimony of their consciences
that such they were, our Lord Jesus pronounces a blessing to, the Meek, Blessed
are the Meek, for they Mat. 5. 5.
shall inherit the Earth, and a second to the Peace makers, v 9. Blessed are
the peace makers for they shall be called the children of God, And if any
passionate and furious Christian thinks to merit mercy by his heat; vowing to
be revenged of his enemies (and perhaps such he thinks so, as wish his soul
fortune and family secure and prosperous in Gods and a just way) though with
Philip the second of Spain, he sell his Altar plate, Or what is as sacred and
dear as that was, to succeed it. Let Saint Basyl charm him to a more Jesu-like
calmnesse. Who treating of Heaven and of the Graces that lead to it (amongst
Sanctus Basili^s. In Psalm. 33.
which he mentions meekness and moderation) says, (...), The Heavenly
Jerusalem (says he) is not the spoil of Warrious, not the reward of Hotspurs
but the hoped for inheritance of patient Martyrs and long suffering Saints. If
this sway with us. Our peace may be prolonged, and we of this Age, who have
long been in the wilderness, may hope to see an Earthly Canaan in England, but
if God, for our sins, make our wound incurable, and let us loose to ruffle and
civil broils, I look for times like his of whom Suetonius writes, Vetera
familiarum insignia nobilissimo cuique ademit Torquato Torquem, Concinnato In
Caligula.
crinem Cne: Pompeio stirpis antiquae Magni cognomen, to prevent which, it
becomes all true English men to pray devoutly in the Church of Englands word;
That all they who In the Communion Service, in the prayer for the whole Estate
of Christ's Church militant here on earth.
profess Gods holy name, may agree in the truth of his holy word, and live in
unity and Godly love. E Q S Amen, so be it.

FINIS.
Errata.
Fo. 9. l. 8. for Jud^^ r. Judice, f. 13. l. 17. for Scutigenus r. Scutigenus,
f. 23. l. 13. for consentanea, consentan^um, l 16. for (...), f. 27. l. 3. for
demonstrationis r* die monstrationis, f. 28. l. 9. no. (,) at supers^de but
after firmament, f. 31. l. 4. for perfulgency r. pr^fulgency, l. 8. for che r.
the, l. 21. for fermosarum r. fumosarum, f. 32. l, 2. r. for hominum hominem,
36. l. 2. state r. statue. f. 44. l. 22. and 23. r. (...) f. 45. Brecman. r.
Becman, 47. l. 15. r. (...), 47. l. 18. r. (...), f. 88. l. ^2. Custilir.
Curtili, f. 89. l. 19. art r. aries, fo. 93. l. 5. Nobilitas r. Nobilitatis,
108. l. 16. gen^iliti^ r. gentilic^a. 109. l. 1. (not) must be added before be
compelled, 119. l. 13. a most r. almost, 129. l. 8. felicity r. fertility, 135.
l. 8. Hostelyes r. Hostelries, 137. quotation, Cook preface to the 3 Rep. 147.
l. 0. Philosophers r. Philologers, 177. l. 17. for to read of, 186. l. 17.
legetimus for legitimus, 202. l. 4. indulgence r. indigence. l. 81. for
Notitiae and Honor, r. Notitia and Honor. fol. 95. l. 20. for (...) r. (...).


