A LETTER FROM The Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of WARWICK Lord High Admiral
OF ENGLAND, Fully relating the condition of the Affairs at Sea.

With a List of the number of the Parliaments Ships, and the names of the
several Commanders in them, now riding in the DOWNS.

Read in the House of Peers upon Friday the 8 of September, 1648. And
commanded to be printed and published.

Sept ye 9th LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old
Bayley. 1648.

To the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers pro tempore.
My Lord:
THe proceedings of the Fleet since our weighing from Lee Road, I did on
Saturday last represent by Letter from Albrough Road, to the Committee at
Derby-House, with my desire that the same might be communicated to both Houses
of Parliament; Since that it has pleased God to bring the whole Fleet safely
into the Downs; And now I shall make bold to give the trouble of this addition.

It pleased God notwithstanding all the Counter workings of the Kingdoms
Enemies, and the great discouragements that occurred in this expedition to
enable us, after some time to get the Ships (lately in the River of Thames)
conveniently manned; his power and goodness to the Nation was further
manifested in giving to the companies of those several Ships Spirits
unanimously to engage their resolutions against the common Enemies of the
Kingdom at Sea, that had so wickedly departed from their trust and duty
(whereof we had a most glorious and seasonable experiment, at that time when
the Enemy drew near us with a Fleet above the proportion of that strength we
then had) to the defeating and disappointment of that confidence of some who
floolishly boasted of the greatest share and interest in their affection. That
mercy the same power was pleased to second, with causing those Enemies to turn
their Back even when his arrows were but making ready upon the string against
the face of them, and yet God rested not there, but the next day after the
Enemies retirement he was pleased to bring into a happy conjunction with us,
the Portsmouth Ships, whose companies had likewise testified the same Spirit
of courage and unaminity for the Parliament Service, and now we are here
together with a Fleet, which for number and quality of Ships and temper of
Seamen is fitted I hope through the strength of God effectually to execute and
accomplish what ever may rationally be expected from it for the public
Service: a List of the Ships I have here enclosed, and truly I may not omit to
represent the fidelity, constancy, and courage of the Captains, having had no
occasion fince my coming forth to take notice of the lest backwardness in any
of them to pursue their duty with the utmost diligence.

I shall stay here a little time to supply water, Ballace, and a few other
necessaries which being completed, I shall God willing improve time and
opportunity with all possible advantage for action; not doubting but as God
has hitherto helped us, so he will still accompany us with his presence,
counsel and blessing, and make bear his glorious Arm at Sea as he has done
one Shore, and so make it good that he is the strength and confidence both of
the ends of the Earth, and of them that are a far off upon the Sea.

I shall add, that being now upon the place I have considered the great
importance of getting the Castles at the Downs into a condition of Service,
the protection of the Fleet and of Trade having such a Dependence thereupon; of
their great ruins I am now an eye witness. If therefore a course may be
thought upon for their putting into repair, and settling of an establshment for
their future pay, it would be worthy of the Parliaments care to direct it,
which in discharge of my duty, I do earnestly recommend unto them accordingly,
and so defiring God to direct and prosper all your Counsels to his glory and
the Kingdoms setlement, I rest

Deal the 5. of September. 1648. Your Lorships Humble Servant, Warwick.

A List of the Parliaments Fleet now at the Downs and thereabouts, with the
names of the Commanders.
5 September. 1648.
ST. George RObert Earl of Warwick Captain Robert Moulton
Unicorne Captain Richard Haddocke Lion Sir George Aiscough Rere Admiral
Phoenix. Capt. John Bowen Non-such Capt. Rich. Willoughby Adventure Capt.
Andrew Ball Tigre Capt. James Peacock Mary Rose Capt. Tho. Harrison Providence
Capt. John Mildmay Fellowship Capt. Francis Penrose Hector Capt. Robert Nixon
Warwick Capt. John Edwin Recovery Capt. Owen Cox Greyhound Capt. John Coppin
Teuth Whelpe Capt. William Brandley Nichodemas Capt. Tho. Pacy Weymouth Pinck
Capt. John Perce Lilly Capt. John Lambert Heart Capt. John Bouden Robert Capt.
William Jenins Dove Jacob Reynolds Three Ketches

Besides, Hunter Dogger-Boate Richard Newberry Dolphin William Warren Yet about
Colchester.

FINIS.

