Vox Coeli TO ENGLAND, OR, Englands fore-warning from HEAVEN.

Being a Relation of true, strange, and wonderful Visions, and Prophetical
Revelations, concerning these tragical sinful times; and with what care and
diligence Reconciliation ought to be labored for, between the King and
Parliament, having never been heretofore published.

Now thought fit to be published to all that love Christ, and his Kingdom in
sincerity.

By Theophilus Philalethes Toxander.

Prove. 19.29. Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of
fools.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for E.W. 1646.

To the Christian Reader.
The Publisher wishes love to Christ, and to his Kingdom; and the spirit of a
sound mind.
BEloved Brother, whosoever thou art, in whose breast the zeal of Gods House
finds place (for we need not look for many whom, Psalm. 69 9. Ioh. 2.17.
with David, it eats up) thou needst not doubt of the truth of this Relation,
nor foredeem it as a forgerie; since there be many worthy Christians, to whose
hands I doubt not but it will come as well in Print, as it did before in writ,
who (if they shall think it expedient) can well satisfy any man of the truth
of it: and some (if it were fitting so to do without their consent) I could
name. Only lay aside prejudice, and read it over but with unbyassed
affections, and candid judgment, and thou may find matter enough in it self
to vindicate it from such aspersion, if thou will be curious to put it so far
to the trial. Two eminent persons are named to thee in it, the Marquis of
Hambleton, and the Princes Tutor; times and places particularly set down, and
beside His Majesty and the two aforesaid, diverse Members of Parliament hinted
at, who all know to be true, what is therein set down concerning them. The
visions were showed, some of them, six or seven years since, at least, if not
more; and the latest here mentioned, but about the time of the Kings departure
from the Parliament. The party to whom they were showed, having missed of the
principalaime of them, which was to have shown them to His Majesty, and which
was endeavored with great travel and expense, but not obtained, His Majesty
utterly denying to vouchsafe His audience; the party, I say, was at last
induced by diverse persons of eminent quality and parts to relate in writ, and
represent the truth therein to some select, zealous, and religious Christians:
which was done, and the Copy dated Apr. 1644. And now by some of these it is
thought expedient to publish it for the common good: the juncture of times
being much other, nor then it was; and requiring other procedors almost in all
affairs. If then thou read this with a right disposition, for whose good I have
published it, thou can have nothing but edification from it, and comfort in
these disconsolate times: if otherwise, we know the Scripture it self is not
privileged (to our great grief) in this Kingdom from being blasphemed and
abused. But leaving others to their own humors, and judge, (...) thou, gracious
Christian, who having kept thy self ^^ee from the spirit of giddiness and
delusion, that is a ^oaving through this Land, desire to walk humbly with
(...) God, and not making haste, but believing and waiting upon him, art
neither ashamed, nor afraid to show thy self sad in public with Nehemiah,
because the wall of Jerusalem lies yet broken down, and the gates thereof burnt
with fire, findst any good thereby, I have my intent: and if I find it
acceptable to thee, ere it be long, thou may have by Gods assistance more
and better of this kind.

THE FORE-SPEECH OF the first Copy.
TO all Gods Saints and faithful servants, which diligently observe his
ordinances in keeping his Commandments, and walk mournfully before the Lord of
hoasts in these black and dreadful times of the fiery trial and bloody agony
of his Church.

1 Pet. 4.12. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which
is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you. 13 But rejoice,
in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings. 14 For the Spirit of
glory, and of God rests upon you. 15 But let none of you suffer as a
murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other men's
matters. 16 But, if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God on this behalf. 17 For the time is, that judgment must begin at
the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what shall be the end of them
that obey not the Gospel of God? 18 And if the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

Matthew. 7.15. Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves. 16 Ye shall know them by their fruits.
19 Every tree that brings not forth good fruits, is hewn down, and cast into
the fire.

1 Timothy 6.3. If any man consent not to wholesome words, even that doctrine that
is according to godliness, 4 He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions, and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings, 5 Perverse disputings of men that are corrupted in their
judgments, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness:
(behold here the fruits of false prophecy, and not only of heresy, but
heterodoxie, or rather heterodidascaly; which is truly false prophecy) from
such withdraw thy self. 2 Timothy ^.16. Shun profane and vain janglings, for they
will increase unto more ^^godlinesse. 17 And their word will eat as does a
canker. Behold here again the kindly fruits of false prophets: for they are
inwardly ravening wolves, says our Savior; no question, for the devouring
nature of their doctrine: And here again Paul likeneth their doctrine to a
canker or gangreen for the same cause of its eating, or devouring: for which
cause also there is one sort of canker, that is called a woolf.

Gal. 5.19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, adultery, fornication,
idolatry, witchcraft, seditious, heresies, murders, drunkenness, etc. and
such like, of which I tell you, before ye do them, that they whcih do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Why! how now Paul? are the works
of the flesh manifest? and is heresy one of those? and as manifest as
adultery, fornication, idolatry, witchcraft, murder, drunkenness, etc. and
shall it as well exclude from the kingdom of heaven, as these? Now I see of a
truth that you have not been of our Sectaries and Independents mind.

In this general assault and fiery trial of the Church of Christ, by the
machinations of that red Dragon in the Revel. Cap. 12.3, 7, 9.
, even that old serpent called the devil and Satan, that transforms his own
apostles and angels into the Apostles of Christ, and himself into an Angel of
light 2 Cor. 11.13, 14.
, and deceives the whole world, wherein all the principalities and powers,
rulers of darkness and spiritual wickedness in high places Ephesians. 6.12.
, are with all their power and policy, wiles and devices, stratagems and
treacheries, designs and depths of Satan, full charged, and furiously engaged
to root it out of Christendom; Revel. 2.24.
it concerns all that have any sense of God, or of godliness, not to be idle
spectators, or hollow neutrals; but (since the public is ever to be preferred
before private, spiritual before secular, and Gods glory before all) now or
never by their utmost power, and endeavors, and liberal contributions of what
they can bring conducefull to the cause, to help the Lord against the mighty,
lest that dreadful curse of Meroz deservedly befall them Judge. 5.23.
. Whilst others therefore of greater wealth and worth contributed their means
and endeavors largely to this just war, in the eyse of it, against our Romish
Philistines, and Antichristian Sectaries and Factionists; and as just may it
prove, I pray heaven in the close of it; I trust it will not be unacceptable to
any of Gods Saints and faithful people, to present to their view this plain,
yet pertinent relation (though somewhat late, as some may think) for as much as
though some Scenes be past, yet the Play is not done, but another Act like to
begin, and perhaps more, that may bring a sadder catastrophe, then most are
aware of: Scribes and Pharisees, Erastians and Independents; Lawyers and
Civilian-policy-mongers, with Sectaries and Libertine-conscience-mongers,
having now got the place of Straffordians and Canterburians; and as busily
compassing Sea and Land, as ever the others were, and leaving nothing unessay'd
to make Proselytes of their own kind, though when they were made, they became
twofold more the children of hell, then before Matthew. 23.15.
. If it be but like the widows mite in the Gospel; yet, (which makes the mite
a million) with a free heart, and a fervent zeal to the good of Gods people,
and Church of Christ in England, she casts it up into the treasury.

The Narration.
GRace Carry sometime wife to Mr. Walter Carry of Bristoll, in her widowhood at
Vske in Monmouthshire, betook her self wholly to private prayer, and constant
reading of the holy Scriptures (besides her public frequenting of the House of
God) for three years together: which task she imposed on her self the better to
inform her judgment in the ways of God; there being even then so many
by-ways in the world, of Popery, and other nyce and crazie Sects, and her self
having been strongly tempted to Popish superstition; from which temptation it
pleased God to deliver her. For having with humble confidence implored the
favor of God, and direction of his holy Spirit, and wrestling one day by
prayers and tears to overcome that temptation, she had before day in a Sunday
morning a most heavenly rapture or trance before she was full awake, much about
that hour that she daily used to water her couch with tears, and to seek the
Lord early in the morning. The manner of the trance was this. She was for a
time in a sweet celestial ecstasy of joy (whether in the body, or out of the
body, she knows not) being for the time in Paradise, as she thought; where
there were represented unto her, as it were, the appearance of the three most
sacred Persons of the Trinity, which seemed to invite her to approach with
boldness to the throne of grace. Being awake, she felt in her self a great
delectation and enlargement of heart by spiritual joy and inward consolation,
which produced great melting of heart, and tears in abundance, accompanied with
deep humiliation and thankful recognition of Gods wonderful mercy to her
poor deluded soul; she having been formerly seduced to invocate Saints and
Angels, and to say the Ave-mary for a prayer, as Papists fondly use in their
blind devotion: for thus far had she gone. But being now strongly confirmed in
the Evangelicall truth, she had a strong desire to walk worthy so rare and high
a favor of so indulgent and gracious a God, resolving ever after to walk in
the practice of all divine duties, and serve God with pure worship. In
pursuance of which pious exercises, it pleased God in a short time after (which
was in the year of the Lord 1639.) to show her a further favor, though
intermixed with a great affliction of spirit. For both in her private devotion,
and in the public ministration at Church, she was in an extraordinary way made
sensible of these combustions and disasters which then were to befall, and now
for some years have befallen this sinful Nation and Kingdom: the manner
whereof was, as follows. She heard hideous shreeks and outcries of the people
oppressed, and captivated by enemies: also a sound of waters, as it were,
beyond Sea, accompanied with loud and terrible roaring of waves; A voice also
day and night cried, and called to her, even to the interruption of her rest
and sleep, saying, Treason and death; Treason, Treason, death, death. There was
presented likewise to her sight an apparition and show of blood; and to her
hearing, vollies of shot, as if many Pistols and Muskets had been all at once
discharged, which terribly affrighted her, and pierced her to the very heart,
as if an arrow, or dart of death had remained in her breast. A representation
also of a pen, as if it had been writing upon chalk, appeared unto her, as she
conceived, to the end that what she saw, felt, and heard, she should commit to
writing. And that she might be assured, this was a divine and heavenly vision,
certain rays of glory descending from the heavens appeared to her in the day
time, and whilst she was awake, which seemed to irradiate her from heaven,
even whilst she was reading the book of God, and earnestly in her private
duties praying against all satanicall illusions: the luster of which glorious
rays being visible to her eye seemed to exceed not only the strrres, but the
Sun in his greatest splendor. Furthermore that her faith might be the more
confirmed, and her soul the better prepared for whatsoever should ensue, she
was strongly moved, and directed to betake her self to fasting and prayer three
weeks together: intimating to her thereby, that the terror of the times
ensuing (whereof lively representations had been made unto her in the foregoing
apparitions) called hard for such duties: at the end of which several weeks
respectively she received an extraordinary sign of Gods presence and
assistance expressed in the appearance of glorious shining lights, accompanied
with vehement rushing wind, descending upon her, and the sound thereof entering
into her ears three several times. And to make her yet more sensible of the
things forementioned, and troubles to come on this Land, while she was at the
Church serving God publicly with the Congregation, in Sermon-time on the Lords
day, there appeared plainly and evidently to her view the perfect shape of a
Kings head and face without a body, which looked very pale and wan: it had a
Crown upon it, and the Crown was all bloody in the circle round about.

This bloody crowned head appeared to her view once only, as aforesaid, and
continued so in her sight about half an hour. With this apparition she
sensibly heard loud and lamentable cries of Gods people persecuted, as she
thought, both beyond Seas, and on this side: she heard very sensibly, as it
were, a lashing, and whipping of them, to drive them from the true Church, and
their holy duties and profession, accompanied with strange languages of foreign
Nations, and that in a confused manner, as at the celebration of an idolatrous
Mass, to which many seemed to call them. And the confused clamor was such, as
the Popish Capuchins made at their solemn superstitious Service in
Somerset House, whither (about three or four years since now) she purposely
repaired for her better information in that point, and that she might the more
sensibly apprehend, and he cleared in the premises, and have more full notice
perhaps, she thought, of the chief actors in our tragical miseries.

She heard another time a voice or sound of much gold and treasure, and of all
sorts of Jewels, with a voice whispering, as it were, and saying these words,
Earl, Bishop, and Queen: at which time, she calls God to witness, she knew not
any Earl or Bishop so guilty, as appeared afterward.

Lastly, she heard the grievous cries of Gods persecuted people in her ears,
pressing her to point out, as the enemy of God, the greatest Bishop in the
Church of England, and with him Earl and cruel Queen; having set down with her
pen; Earl, Bishop, and Cruel Queen, as was required, the doleful cry ceased.
Soon after she was earnestly commanded, by a celestial voice, to notify all
these things to His Majesty. But fearing to undertake so great a task, as
conscious of her own unfitness, as she thought, for the performance of so
eminent a service, she made only a sparing discovery to certain godly Divines
at Bristoll, and elsewhere, desiring their spiritual prayers and advice. But
finding that neither their prayers, nor her own could prevail with the Lord to
spare her from this service, she manifestly saw that she must obey of
necessity that heavenly voice (which did not cease to call her thereto) though
her brethren, and kindred, and her own inclination and desire strongly
dissuaded her. And whilst she prayed and wept to the Lord, saying with Moses;
Lord, if thy presence go not with me, send me not hence. Exodus 33.15. She saw,
as it were, a light from heaven comforting her, and a star of glory directing
her in her way she should travel.

Being arrived at London, she was strongly pushed on within her self to
address her self to the Court, which was then at Whitehall: whither being
come, she earnestly pressed in a Petitionary way, to present to His Majesty the
effect of what she had heard and seen; but soon found her self neglected, and
her Petition slighted. Notwithstanding, she had still a strong call from God
both inwardly, and outwardly, to follow the King, whithersoever he went, saying
to her, The King, the King; The King, and Kingdom is in danger of utter ruin
and desolation. Not long after, by her importunity she was admitted at Richmond
to His Majesty's presence; who graciously received her Petition; the Contents
being, That He would be pleased to hear her at large declare her errand by word
of mouth. The means of her admittance was by the Lord Marquis Hambleton, who
was nobly pleased to call her, and to bring her to the King; who taking her by
the one hand, and the Marquis by the other, the King asked her for her writing;
Which she having presented, and His Majesty slightly viewed over, he demanded
if it were her own hand: and she confessing, that it was, he then viewed it
better. But His Majesty being then to take horse, rendered her the said
Petition, saying, He thought, she meant well, and was a good woman. Here, the
Princes Tutor, in election to be Bishop of Chichester, coming to her, asked
her, if she wanted means. She replied, No; telling him, that she came to London
on her own charges, and had wherewith to serve her occasions; her coming to
Court, having had no other end, but the public good of King, Church and State;
and being bound in spirit, she was continually pressed, by Gods hand upon her, to
follow His Majesty from Court to Court, to her great trouble and charge, hiring
one to attend her by water and land. His Majesty being at York, there appeared
a dark black cloud over the place, where His Majesty stood (the Scots had then
taken in Newcastle) and there she enforced her former suit, humbly petitioning
him to hear her speak, but without success; and finding no rest in her spirit
for all this, but being still urged to solicit His Majesty: at last by Gods
providence she found another opportunity, and falling on her knees before him
in the Presence Chamber, most humbly besought him to hear her relation; which
he then utterly refused. And thereupon it pleased God immediately to discharge
her from all further attendance on His Majesty, which she took as a great
favor from God; and thereupon returned to London.

During her abode at York, many pious Christians being defirous to know the
truth of these things, she declared it to them, and moreover discovered to
them, that it was revealed to her particularly, that great troubles would light
upon these parts. In London having found grace and favor with many Noble
Barons, Knights, and other worthy Christians, both before her going to York,
and after her return (which she esteems as a rare mercy from God, knowing her
self less then least of any of his favors) she may not omit amongst others,
that she was sent for by a worthy Divine of an eminent place, and at that time
of singular estimation; who, when he perceived how God had dealt with her, he
told her in brief, that he could not, but approve of her desires, and
intendments, as good, and durst say nothing to discourage or dissuade her from
the way. So, thenceforth, as when Eliah had cast his mantle upon Elisha, Elias
his spirit was pressed upon Elisha, not much unlike, though the Lord had spoken
to her before, and used strong impulses on her spirit; yet now the hand of the
Lord was stronger and stronger upon her, and even almost in the bitterness of
her spirit was she carried (as the Prophet speaks of himself, Ezekiel. 3.14. and
elsewhere) and so powerful were the impressions made on her, that
notwithstanding her great struglings and defires against that long and tedious
journey to York, which she would fain have been freed of, that at last being
fully overcome, she could not but follow His Majesty even to York also, the
love of Christ, and of his Church, now constraining her. And though she reaped
not the fruit of her labor, she desired; yet as on is reported to have fetched
water every day two mile to water dry ground in hope of fruit, which he did a
whole year together; and was content so to do, because he was commanded,
thinking it reason enough to do things in some other respects unreasonable, in
mere obedience to superiors: so, much more reason was it, that she should show
her obedience to her God in a duty of so high an importance and concernment, as
the general good of Church, King, and Kingdom; which therefore with all her
might she sought to advance, saying in her heart with the woman of Tekoa, 2 Samuel 14.15. I will now speak to the King, it may be the King will perform the
request of his handmaid.

Now because it has been questioned by sundry well-affected, what she would
have expressed to His Majesty, if he had been pleased to give her audience; You
shall be pleased to know, that the substance of her speech, she had to
express, would have been as follows, or to the like purpose.

First, that His Majesty would be pleased with all his might and power to apply
himself to the finding out of the great plots and treacheries of Papists and
their confederates, Prelates and Idol-shepherds, and Innovators in Religion;
wicked and evil Counselors, State-idolizers, or rather self-seekers and
novators in the Commonwealth; and with an high hand to suppress both, with all
idolatry, superstition and prophanity, and whatsoever was against found
doctrine, the power of godliness, and the well and liberty of His Subjects.

Secondly, that Gods faithful Ministers and servants suffering for the cause
and truth of Christ under the tyranny and usurpation of Prelates, commonly
called Anticonformists, Non-conformists, and Puritanes, and sometimes also
Sectaries, and Schismatics, might have their freedom and liberty; and those,
who were the truly so called Sectaries and Schismatics, the Prelates,
Anabaptists, Antinomians, A^^mits, Familists, and especially Papists, and
Arminian Innovators, all secretly winked at, and fomented by the Bishops, might
be found out, and tried, that so the glorious Gospel of Christ might flourish,
and have free passage in plenty and in purity through the land.

Thirdly, that His Majesty would be pleased with all his might to set himself
to use all good means that might be endeavored for the Queens conversion, that
by Gods blessing thereupon she might be gained to the truth, to her self, and
to him, and for a comfort to the whole Kingdom; without which, she was given to
understand of the great hazard and trouble, yea, and utter ruin both to King
and Kingdom: great hazard and trouble, though all the rest should be effected,
and that left undone; but utter ruin, if neither that, nor the rest were done.
And thus much for the substance of what she would have said, if His Majesty had
given her audience.

But further, since she was discharged of attendance upon the King, and shortly
after His Majesty with the Queen departed from London, and deserted the
Parliament, whereas she had been in good quiet and repose till then, she fell
again into the like agonies of spirit, and has expressed, that her affliction
in the same has been very great, being pressed in like sort to attend the
Parliament, as before she had done the King; so that after the Kings leaving of
the Parliament, she has had very little rest longer, then she was either by
expressions and solicitations to Members of the House of Parliament,
endeavoring a reconciliation between His Majesty and the Parliament, or in her
private and public duties and exercises of Religion pouring out her soul to
God for effectuating thereof: so that the sad sense of her walking in these
times of trouble and distress, even to the present date of this relation given
by her in writ, which was April 1644. has been so yet that it can not be
expressed. Yet has she not been pleased to make so full and particular
relation of all passages between the Parliament and her, as in the other, but
has thought this sufficient for the present.

Now, as she has not held her life dear to confirm this truth of God of this
divine work wrought in her; and to manifest it to be a divine vision and
heavenly call, would not tempt God therein by too much refusal and
disobedience, but by faith in God, having her warrant from him, with Daniel in
the Lions den, or the three Children in the fiery furnace, she submitted
herself, and does, under the mighty hand of God: so now having with that widow
in the Gospel cast these her spiritual mites into the Churches treasury, in
hope that this her freewill-offering will be (as such oblations ever were)
accepted of God and all good men; she humbly submits her hearty, and
well-meaning, though weak endeavors to the charitable censure of the godly,
wise, impartial and unprejudicate Christians: beseeching the Almighty God of
heaven, if it may stand with his glory and good pleasure, to unite the heart of
the King and Parliament unanimously, as the heart of one man, to consent to
that reformation both of Church and State, that the Lord does require, that
idolatry, superstition, profanity, faction, godless State Policy ( Jeroboams
sin) heresy, schism, and all interest that is not agreeable to Gods interest,
and his eternal Son the Lord Jesus his, the only King and Lord of his Church,
being swept away, and suppressed, the glorious Gospel of Christ may reflourish in
its full luster, and the Scepter of his Government (sufficiently declared in
his Word to such as with humble sincerity, and love to the truth to obey it,
seek the same diligently) may be universally obeyed, and submitted to by
Prince, Parliament, and people: and happy shall that people be; that in
sincerity and constantly endeavor this; whereas contrarily, oppose it who
will, they shall not prosper to the end; but in his own time, he that sits
in the heavens will laugh; the Lord will have them in derision, saying, yet
(for all your falsehood, fraud, and force to the contrary) Yet have I set my
King upon mine holy hill of Sim, and that with your envy, Psalm. 2.4, 5, 6,
9.10. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings; Revel. 2.9. Cap. 3 7, 8, 9, 10.11.
be instructed ye Judges of the earth. Leave off ye Sectaries to blaspheme, and
say, that ye are the only Jews, the only visible Saints, the preciousest men
upon earth; whereas ye are not, but are rather the synagogue of Satan; and
submit your selves to the loving, lovely, and beloved Philadelphia, where
Christ mystical, or his Church in his practicals has holiness, in her
doctrinals truth, in her government and administrations the key of David, and
she only, how ever weak she may appear in the eye of the world, and has in
truth but a little worldly strength; yet such an open door set before her,
that no man shall ever be able to shut; submit your selves to her, and be
content to worship God before her feet, as her daughters and scholars, and to
acknowledge that Christ has loved her. For she only of all the Churches on
the earth shall be delivered out of that fearful hour of temptation, which
now is begun, and shall run through, and pass upon all the Nations of the
world, before it have done, to try all them that dwell upon the earth; and none
shall have any further security in a Church, or in a National way, and warrant
of delivery, then they flee in to her, and submit themselves to worship before
her feet. And she alone shall continue that pillar in the Temple of God that
shall go no more out, on whom shall be written the Name of the City of her God,
the new Jerusalem, Jehovah-shammah, Ezekiel. 48.35. or, The Lord is there; she
alone both a Church, and the Church, when all other Churches are gone to ruin,
even that Church upon which shall be built the Church of the called Jews, and
rich fullness of the Gentiles, and ingrafted into her as their stock, and hung
upon her as glorious lights upon their immovable pillar of truth: she alone
shall be that wall on which shall be built this palace of silver; and she
alone, that door, that shall be enclosed with these boards of Cedar. Cant.
8.9. The which things that ye may all do respectively in your places and
conditions, to whom this exhortation has been addressed, this mournful widow
with this her myte, adds yet further to pray with the blessed Apostle, Col.
1.9, 10, 11. That all Gods Saints and professors may be fulfilled in all
knowledge of his will, in all wisdom, that they may walk worthy of the Lord,
unto all pleasing, being fruitful in all good works, strengthened with all his
glorious power to all patience, that the Lord may rejoice over you, to do you
good, and plant you in this land, and take pleasure in you with his whole heart
and soul. Amen. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity. Ier. 32.41. Ephesians. 6.24.
Amen.

Psalm. 22.24. For he has not despised, nor abhorred the affliction of the
afflicted; neither has he hid his face from him, but when he cried unto him,
he has heard.

Revel. 2.2. I know thy work, and thy labor, and thy patience; and how thou
can not bear them that are evil; and how thou have tried them, which say,
they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them liars.

Revel. 2.3. And have born, and have patience, and for my Names sake have
labored, and have not fainted.

He that has an car, let him hear, what the Word says unto England.

FINIS.

