THE BEATITUDES: OR A DISCOURSE Upon part of CHRIST'S Famous Sermon ON THE MOUNT.

Whereunto is added Christ's various fullness. The preciousnesse of the Soul.
The Souls Malady and Cure. The Beauty of Grace. The Spiritual Watch. The
Heavenly Race. The Sacred Anchor. The Trees of Righteousness. The Perfume of
Love. The good Practitioner.


By THOMAS WATSON, Minister of the Word at Stephens Walbrook in the City of
London.

(...). Menand. LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhill, near
the Royal Exchange. 1660.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN EARL of CLARE, And his Virtuous and Pious
Consort, ELIZABETH Countess of CLARE.
Right Honorable,
THE many civilities and favors, received from your Honors, have laid no small
obligations upon me; and I knew not wherein I might better testify my
gratitude to you both, than by presenting you with something of this kind, as
a specimen of that solemn respect and service which I owe to you. My Lord, the
soul being a blossom of eternity, what should so preponderate, and bear sway
with us as those things which help to raise the soul to its full (...) of
happiness, and set it off in its orient splendour! Blood may enoble, learning
may adorn, but Religion puts the Garland of salvation upon a man. In this
consists true Wisdom. (...) -- My Lord, the study of this subject which I here
offer to your view, will with the blessing of God much expedite and help
forward the true progress of Religion. For the Author of this Sermon on the
Mount, behold, a greater than Solomon is here; Christ himself is the Preacher;
as his lips did ever drop like an honeycomb, so most eminently, in these Divine
Aphorisms. The duties here enjoined are weighty; the rewards annexed,
glorious. Here we may see a Christian clothed in his white linen of purity,
and scarlet-robe of Blessedness. Here we may see grace and glory meeting
together, and kissing each other. Let no man ever think to get heaven, who does
not ascend this Jacobs ladder. Gratia divina necessario requiritur ad
beatitudinem consequendam, Aquin.
Would he be rich, he must be poor in spirit; would he enjoy happiness, he
must espouse holiness; My Lord, I could not be so exact as I desired in
discussing this subject, having much other work lying on my hands; but I know,
such is your noble candor, that you will rather cover than censure what you
see amiss. I will not farther Preface it, but craving your Lordships
patrociny, and favorable acceptance of these impolite labors of mine, I shall
continue an earnest Orator at the throne of grace, for the distillation of all
heavenly benedictions upon you, and your nobly descended family, and remain

Your Lordships humble Servant in Christ, THOMAS WATSON.
From my Study at Steph. Walbrook. July 6. 1660.
Mr. Watson's Beatitudes

TO THE Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Here present thee with a Subject full of Sweet Variety: This Sermon of
Christ on the Mount, is a piece of Spiritual Needle Work, wrought about with
diverse Colors; here is both Utile, and Dulce. In this portion of Holy
Scripture, thou have a Breviary of Religion; the Bible Epitomized. Here is a
Garden of Delight, set with Curious Knots, where thou may pluck those
Flowers which will deck the Hidden man of thy heart. Here is the Golden Key
which will open the gate of Paradise: Here is the conduit of the Gospel,
running Wine to cheer such as are Poor in spirit, and Pure in heart: Here is
the Rich Cabinet, wherein the Pearl of Blessedness is locked up: Here is the
Golden Pot, in which is that Manna which will feed and refocillate the Soul
unto Everlasting life. In a word, here is away Chawlked out to the Holy of
Holyes. Reader, how happy were it if while others take up their time and
thoughts about Secular things, which Perish in the using, thou could mind
Eternity, and be guided by this Scripture-clue, which leads thee to the
Beatifical vision Hoc patens unum miseris asylum. Boethius de Consol.
. If after God has set life before thee, thou shall indulge thy sensual
appetite, and still Court thy lusts, how inexcusable will be thy neglect, and
how unexpressible thy misery? The Lord grant that while thou have an
opportunity, and the wind serves thee, thou may not lie idle at anchor, and
when it is too late, begin to hoyse up Sails for Heaven. Ob now Christian, let
thy Loins be girt, and thy Lamps burning, that when the Lord Jesus, thy
blessed Bridegroom shall Knock, thou may be ready to go in with him to the
Marriage-supper, which shall be the Prayer of him who is

Thine in all true affection, and devotion, Tho. Watson.

ERRATA.
Reader, be pleased diligently to Correct these mistakes in the Printing, else
the sense cannot be clear.

Page 76. margent. for plungenda, read plangenda. p. 84. line 30. for donatus
r. Novatus. p. 100. l. 17. for that he may be saved, r. that thinks he may be
saved. p. 116. marg. for Naturam agens r. naturam agentis. p. 127. l. 18. for
deny r. envy. p. 132. l. 3. for in r. it. p. 148. l. 5. for judicial r.
juridical. p. 215. l. 2. for bemercified r. bemercied. p. 223. l. 33. for soil
r. soul. p. 285. marg. for (...) r. (...). p. 238. l. 24. for strain r.
stream. p. 331. l. 13. for world r. word. p. 384. l. 10. for least r. last. p.
435. l. 17. for obnoxious r. obvious. p. 454. l. 1. for rig r. ring. p. 495. l.
9. for (...) r. (...). p. 513. l. 24. for of another r. to another. p. 553. l.
13. for Hannibal r. Cannibal. p. 570. l. 25. for must be saved r. may be saved.
580. l. 7. for transforms him r. transforms us. p. 584. l. 10. for purifying r.
purifieth. p. 617. for (...) r. (...). p. 615. l. 11. for scriptural r.
spiritual. p. 625. l. 9. for zeal of the spirit r. seal of the spirit. p. 619.
marg. for charitatum r. charitatem. p. 623. l. 26. for should r. would. p. 639.
l. 11. for laid r. lead.

THE BEATITVDES, Or a Discourse upon Christ's Sermon ON THE MOUNT.
MATTHEW. 5.1, 2. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when
he was set, his disciples came unto him.

And he opened his mouth, and taught them.


CHAP. I.
The Introduction into the ensuing Discourse.

THE blessed Evangelist Saint Matthew, the Penman of this Sacred History was at
first by profession a Publican or gatherer of Toll Publicani aut vectigaliarii.
Cael. Rhod. Antiq.
; and Christ having called him from the Custom-house, made him a gatherer of
souls. This holy man in the first Chapter sets down Christ's birth and
Genealogy; in the second his dignity; a Star ushers in the Wisemen to him,
and as a King he is presented with Gold and Frankincense and Myrrh, ver. 9,
11. In the third Chapter the Evangelist records his Baptism; in the fourth his
tentations; in the fifth his preaching; which Chapter is like a rich mine,
every vein has some gold in it. There are four things in this Chapter which
offer themselves to our view.

1. The Preacher. 2. The Pulpit. 3. The Occasion. 4. The Sermon.
1. The Preacher.
1. The Preacher. Jesus Christ. The best of Preachers.

He went up.] He, in whom there was a combination of virtues, a constellation
of beauties; He whose lips were not only sweet as the honeycomb, but did drop
as the honeycomb; his words an Oracle, his works a Miracle, his life a Pattern,
his death a Sacrifice, He went up into a mountain and taught. Jesus Christ was
every way enobled and qualified for the work of the Ministry.

1. Christ was an intelligent Preacher. He had the Spirit without measure, John
3.34. and knew how to speak a word in due season, when to humble, when to
comfort. We cannot know all the faces of our hearers, Christ knew the hearts of
his hearers, He understood what Doctrine would best suit with them; as the
husbandman can tell what sort of grain is proper for such a soil.

2. Christ was a powerful Preacher, He spoke with authority, Matthew. 7.29. He
could set men's sins before them, and show them their very hearts, John 4.29.
Come see a man which told me all things which ever I did. That is the best
Glass not which is most richly set with Pearl, but which shows the truest
face; Christ was a Preacher to the conscience, He breathed as much zeal as
eloquence; he often touched upon the heart strings. What is said of Luther, is
more truly applicable to Christ, He spoke as if he had been within a man. He
could drive the wedge of his Doctrine in the most knotty piece; He was able
with his two-edged sword to pierce an heart of stone. Never man spoke like this
man, John 7.46.

3. Christ was a successeful Preacher; He had the Art of converting souls. John
10.40. Many believed on him; yea, persons of rank and quality, John 12.42.
Among the chief Rulers many believed. He who had Grace poured into his lips,
Psalm 45.2. could pour grace into his hearers hearts; He had the Key of David
in his hand, and when he pleased did open the hearts of men, and make way both
for himself and his Doctrine to enter. If he did blow the Trumpet his very
enemies would come under his Banner, upon his Summons none durst but surrender.

4. Christ was a lawful Preacher; as He had his Unction from his Father, so his
Mission, John 8.18. The Father that sent me bears witness of me. Christ (in
whom were all perfections concentred, yet,) would be solemnly sealed, and
inaugurated into his Ministerial as well as Mediatory Office; if Jesus Christ
would not enter upon the work of the Ministry without a Commission, how
absurdly impudent are they who without any warrant dare invade this holy
Fuction! There must be a lawful admission of men into the Ministry Nemo in
Ecclesia debet public concionari nisi rite vocatus. Austin.
. Heb. 5.4. No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God,
as was Aaron. Our Lord Christ as he gave Apostles and Prophets which were
extraordinary Ministers, so Pastors and Teachers which were initiated and made
in an ordinary way, Ephesians. 4.11. and He will have a Ministry perpetuated,
Matthew. 28.20. Lo I am with you always even unto the end of the world. Sure,
there is as much need of Ordination now, as in Christ's time, and the time of
the Apostles, there being then extraordinary gifts in the Church which are now
ceased.

Object. 1. But why should not the Ministry lie in common? Has the Lord spoken
only by Moses? Number. 12.2. Why should not one preach as well as another?

Answ. Because God (who is the God of order) has made the work of the Ministry
a select distinct Office from any other. As in the body natural the members
have a distinct office, the eye is to see, the hand to work; you may as well
say, why should not the hand see as well as the eye? because God has made the
distinction, He has put the visive faculty into the one, and not the other. So
here, God has made a distinction between the work of the Ministry and other
work.

Quest. Where is this distinction?

Answ. 1. We find in Scripture a distinction between Pastor and People, 1.
Pet. 5.2. The Elders (or Ministers) I exhort, Feed the flock of God which is
among you. If any one may preach, by the same rule all may, and then what will
become of the Apostles distinction? Where will the flock of God be if all be
Pastors?

2. God has cut out the Minister his work which is proper for him, and does
not belong to any other. 1 Timothy 4.13. Give attendance to reading, to
exhortation, to doctrine, give thy self wholly to them; or as it is in the
Greek, (...), be thou wholly in them. This charge is peculiar to the Minister,
and does not concern any other. It is not spoken to the Tradesman that he
should give himself wholly to Doctrine and Exhortation, no, let him look to his
shop; it is not spoken to the plough-man that he should give himself wholly to
preaching, no, let him give himself to his plough. It is the Ministers charge;
the Apostle speaks to Timothy, and in him, to the rest who had the hands of the
Presbytery laid on them; and 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self approved, a
workman that needs not to be ashamed, (...), rightly dividing the word of
truth. This is spoken peculiarly to the Minister. Every one that can read the
Word aright, cannot divide the Word aright. So that the work of the Ministry
does not lie in common, it is a select, peculiar work. As none might touch the
Arc but the Priests; none may touch this Temple-office but such as are called
to it.

Object. 2. But if a man has gifts, is not this sufficient? I answer, no; as
grace is not sufficient to make a Minister, so neither gifts. The Scripture
puts a difference between gifting and sending, Romans 10.15. How shall they
preach unless they be sent? If gifts were enough to constitute a Minister, the
Apostle should have said, How shall they preach unless they be gifted? but he
says Unless they be sent; As in other callings gifts do not make a
Magistrate; The Attorney that pleads at Bar may have as good gifts as the Judge
that sits upon the Bench, but he must have a Commission before he sit as Judge.
If it be thus in matters Civil, much more Ecclesiastical and Sacred; which are
as Bucer says, Maximi mementi, things of the highest importance. Those
therefore that do usurp the Ministerial work without any special designation
and appointment, do discover more pride than zeal. They act out of their
sphere; and are guilty of Thievery; they steal upon a people: And as they come
without a Call, so they stay without a Blessing. Jer. 23.32. I sent them not,
(...) therefore they shall not profit this people at all. And so much for the
first, the Preacher.

The Pulpit.
2. The Pulpit where Christ preached: (...), He went up into a Mountain.

The Law was at first given on the Mount; and here Christ expounds it on the
Mount. This Mount as is supposed by Hierom and others of the Learned, was Mount
Tabor. It was a convenient place to speak in, being seated above the people,
and in regard of the great confluence of hearers.

3. The occasion.
3. The occasion of Christ's ascending the Mount; (...), seeing the multitude.

The people thronged to hear Christ, and he would not dismiss the Congregation
without a Sermon, but seeing the multitude he went up. Jesus Christ came from
heaven as a Factor for souls, he lay legend here a while, preaching was his
business; the people could not be so desirous to hear, as he was to preach; he
who did compassionate faint bodies; Matthew. 15.32. did much more pity dead
souls; it was his meat and drink to do his Fathers will, John 4.34. And seeing
the multitude, he goes up into the Mount and preaches. This he did not only
for the consolation of his hearers, but the imitation of his Ministers.

Doctr. That Christ's Ministers according to Christ's pattern must embrace every
opportunity of doing good to souls; praying and preaching, and studying must be
our work 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the Word, be instant in season, (...); ut omnem
scil. arripiant concionandi occasionem.
out of season*. Peter seeing the multitude, lets down the Net, and at one
Draught catches three thousand fouls: Acts 2.41. How zealously industrious
have Gods Champions been in former Ages, in fulfilling the work of their
Ministry; as we read of Chrysostom, Austin, Basil the great, Calvin, Bucer, and
others, who for the work of Christ were nigh unto death. The Reasons why the
Ministers of Christ (according to his pattern) should be ambitiously desirous
of all opportunities for soul-service, are

1. Their Commission: God has entrusted them as Ambassadors: 2 Cor. 5.20. Now
you know an Ambassador waits for a day of Audience, and as soon as a day is
granted, he does faithfully and impartially deliver the mind of his Prince:
Thus Christ's Ministers having a Commission delegated to them to negotiate for
souls, should be glad when there is a day of Audience, that they may impart the
mind and will of Christ to his people.

2. Their Titles. 1. Ministers are called Gods Seeds-men, 1 Cor. 9.11.
therefore they must upon all occasions be scattering the blessed seed of the
Word: The Sower must go forth and sow; yea, though the seed fall upon stones
(as usually it does) yet we must disseminate, and scatter the seed of the Word
upon stony hearts, because even of these stones God is able to raise up
children to himself. 2. Ministers are called Stars; therefore they must shine
by Word and Doctrine in the Firmament of the Church. Thus our Lord Christ has
set them a pattern in the Text: Seeing the multitude, he went up into the
Mountain; here was a light set upon an hill; the bright Morning Star shining to
all that were round about. Christ calls his Ministers, Lux Mundi, the light of
the World, Matthew. 5.14. therefore they must be always giving forth their
luster; their light must not go out till it be in the socket, or till violent
death as an extinguisher put it out.

3. Christ's Ministers must ansam arripere, catch at all occasions of doing good
to others, in regard of the work which they are about, and that is saving of
souls; what a precious thing is a soul (...). Macar.
? Christ takes as it were a pair of scales in his hands, and he puts the world
in one scale, and the soul in the other, and the soul out-weighs: Matthew. 16.26.
The soul is of a noble original, of a quick operation; it is a flower of
eternity; here in the bud; in heaven, fully ripe and blown. The soul is one of
the richest pieces of Embroidery that ever God made; the understanding
bespangled with light; the will invested with liberty; the affections like
Musical Instruments tuned with the finger of the Holy Ghost. The soul is
Christ's Partner, the Angels Familiar; now if the souls of men are of so noble
an extract, and made capable of glory, oh how zealously industrious should
Christ's Ministers be to save these souls! if Christ did spend his blood for
souls, well may we spend our sweat: It was Austins prayer that Christ might
find him at his coming, aut Precantem, aut Praedicantem; either Praying, or
Preaching: What a sad sight is it to see precious souls as so many Pearls and
Diamonds cast into the dead Sea of Hell?

4. The Ministers of Christ seeing the multitude, must ascend the Mount,
because there are so many Emissaries of Satan who lie at the catch to subvert
souls: How does the Old Serpent cast out of his mouth floods of water after the
woman to drown her? Revel. 12.15. What floods of Heresy have been poured out
in City and Country, which have over-flown the banks, not only of Religion, but
Civility. Ignatius calls Error, the invention of the Devil; and Bernard calls
it, dulce venenum, a sweet poison: Men's ears like Spunges have sucked in this
poison: Never were the Devils Commodities more vendible in England than now; a
fine tongue can put off bad wares; the Jesuit can silver over his lies, and
dress error in truths Coat; a weak brain is soon intoxicated; when flattery and
subtilty meet with the simple, they easily become a prey: The Romish Whore
enticeth many to drink down the poison of her Idolatry and filthiness, because
it is given in a golden Cup, Revel. 17.4. If all who have the plague of the
head should dye, it would much increase the Bill of Mortality; Now if there be
so many Emissaries of Satan abroad, who labor to make Proselytes to the Church
of Rome, how does it concern them whom God has put into the work of the
Ministry, to bestir themselves, and lay hold on all opportunities, that by
their spiritual antidotes they may convert sinners from the error of their way
and save their souls from death! Jam. 5. ult. Ministers must not only be
Pastores, but Praeliatores; in one hand they must hold the bread of life, and
feed the Flock of God; in the other hand, they must hold the Sword of the
Spirit, and fight against those errors which carry damnation in their front.

5. The Ministers of Christ should wait for all opportunities of soul-service,
because the Preaching of the Word has so many Remora's that hinder the
progress and success of it; never did Pilot meet with so many Euroclydons and
cross winds in a Voyage, as the spiritual Pilots of Gods Church do when they
are transporting souls to heaven.

1. Some hearers have bad memories, Jam. 1.25. Their memories are like leaking
Vessels; all the precious wine of holy Doctrine that is poured in, runs out
presently: Ministers cannot by study find a truth so fast as others can lose
it; if the meat does not stay in the stomach, it can never breed good blood; if
a truth delivered does not stay in the memory, we can never be as the Apostle
says, Nourished up in the words of faith, 1 Timothy 4.6. How often does the
Devil, that Foul of the Air, pick up the good seed that is sown Verbum Dei,
suffurante Diabolo memoria excidit.
! If Thieves steal away peoples money, they tell every one, and make their
complaint they have been Robbed; but there is a worse Thief they are not aware
of! How many Sermons has the Devil stolen from them! how many truths have
they been robbed of, which might have been so many deathbed cordials! now if
the Word preached slides so fast out of the memory, Ministers had need the
oftener go up the preaching Mount, that at last some truth may abide, and be as
a nail fastened by the Masters of Assemblies.

2. The Ears of many of our hearers are stopped with earth; I mean, the cares of
the world, that the Word preached will not enter; according to that in the
Parable, Hearing they hear not, Matthew. 13.13. We read of Saul, his eyes were
open, yet he saw no man, Acts 9.8. A strange Paradox! and is it not as strange
that men's ears should be open, yet in hearing hear not Fanus pecuniae funus
anima.
? They mind not what is said: Ezekiel. 33.31. They sit before thee as my people
sits, but their heart goes after their covetousness. Many sit and stare the
Minister in the face, yet scarce know a word he says; they are thinking of
their wares and drugs, and are often casting up accounts in the Church. If a
man be in a Mill, though you speak never so loud to him, he does not hear you
for the noise of the Mill. We preach to men about matters of salvation, but the
Mill of worldly business makes such a noise, that they cannot hear; in hearing
they hear not. It being thus, Ministers who are called sons of thunder, had
need often ascend the Mount, and lift up their voice like a Trumpet (...). 58.1.
; that the deaf ear may be seringed and unstopped, and may hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches, Revel. 2.7.

3. Others, as they have earth in their ears, so they have a stone in their
hearts. Zach. 7.12. They made their hearts as an Adamant stone, lest they
should hear the Law. The Ministers of Christ therefore must be frequently
brandishing the Sword of the Spirit, and striking at men's sins, that if
possible, they may at last pierce the heart of stone. When the earth is
scorched with the Sun, it is so hard, and crusted together, that a shower of
rain will not soften it; there must be shower after shower before it will be
either moist or fertile; such an hardened piece is the heart of man naturally; it
is so stiffned with the scorchings of lust, that there must be Precept upon
precept, Isa. 28.10. Our Doctrine must distill as the dew, as the small rain on
the tender herb, and the showers upon the grass, Deuteronomy. 32.2.

6. Christ's Ministers according to the example of their Lord and Master, should
take all occasions of doing good, not only in regard of Gods Glory, but their
own Comfort. What triumph is it, and cause of gladness, when a Minister can say
on his deathbed, Lord, I have done the work which thou gave me to do, I have
been trading for souls! When a Minister comes to the Mount of glory, the
heavenly Mount, it will be a great comfort to him that he has been so often
upon the preaching Mount. Certainly if the Angels in heaven rejoice at the
conversion of a sinner, Luke 15. how shall that Minister rejoice in heaven over
every soul that he has been instrumental to convert? every convert gained, as
it shall add a member to Christ's body, so a jewel to a Ministers Crown, Dan.
12.3. They that are wise, or as the Original carries it, (...) They that are
Teachers shall shine (not as Lamps or Tapers, but) as Stars; fulgebunt sicut
Stellae; not as Planets, but fixed Stars in the firmament of glory for ever.

And though Israel be not gathered, yet shall Gods Ministers be glorious in the
eyes of the Lord, Isa. 49.5. God will reward them, not according to their
success, but their diligence (...). Chrysostom.
. When they are a savor of death to men, yet they are a sweet savor to God.
In an Orchard, the Labourer that Fells a Tree, is rewarded as well as he that
Plants a Tree; the Chyrurgions Bill is paid though the Patient dye.

SECT. 1.
First,
LET me crave liberty to speak a word to the Elisha's, my Reverend and Honored
Brethren in the Ministry. You are engaged in a glorious service, God has put
great Renown upon you; he has entrusted you with two the most precious jewels,
his TRUTHS, and the SOULS of his people; never was this honor conferred upon
any Angel to convert souls; What Princely Dignity can parallel this? The Pulpit
is higher than the Throne; for a truly constituted Minister represents no less
than God himself. 2 Cor. 5.20. As though God did beseech you by us, we pray you
in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Give me leave to say as the Apostle,
Romans 11.13. I magnify my Office. Whatever our Persons are, the Office is
Sacred: The Ministry is the most honorable employment in the World; Jesus
Christ has graced this calling by his entering into it; other men work in their
Trade, Ministers work with God. 1 Cor. 3.9. (...) We are laborers together
with God. O high honor! God and his Ministers have one and the same work, they
both negotiate about souls: Let the sons of the Prophets wear this as their
Crown and Diadem; but while I tell you of your Dignity, do not forget your
Duty: Imitate this blessed pattern in the Text, the Lord Jesus, who seeing be
multitudes, he went up and taught. He took all occasions of preaching;
sometimes he taught in the Temple, Mark 14.49. sometimes in a Ship, Mark 4.1.
and here upon the Mount; his lips were a Tree of life that fed many: How often
did he neglect his food, that he might feast others with his Doctrine! Let all
the Ministers of Christ tread in his steps; make Christ not only your Savior,
but your Samplar; suffer no opportunities to slip wherein you may be helpful to
the souls of others; be not content to go to heaven your selves, but be as the
Primum Mobile, which draws other orbs along with it; be such shining Lamps,
that you may light others to heaven with you: I will conclude with that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my Beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

SECT. 2.
Secondly,
LET me turn my self to the Flock of God, than thousands of gold and silver,
Psalm. 119.72. In the Word preached heaven and salvation is offered to you; in
this Field the Pearl of price is hid: How should you flock like Doves to the
windows of the Sanctuary! Isa. 60.8. We read, the gate of the Temple was called
beautiful, Acts 3.2. The gate of Gods house is the beautiful gate; lie at these
posts of wisdoms doors, Prove. 8.34.

maintaining of them. Though I hope all who have Gods Urim and Thummim written
upon them, can say as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.14. I seek not yours, but you; yet
that Scripture is still Canonical, 1 Cor. 9.14. So has the Lord ordained, that
they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. Are not laborers in a
Vineyard maintained by their labors? says Peter Martyr; And the Apostle puts
the question, Who plants a Vineyard and eats not the fruit of it? 1 Cor. 9.7.
Hypocrites love a cheap Religion; they like a Gospel that will put them to no
charges; they are content so they may have golden bags, to have wooden
priests. How many by saving their purses have lost their souls! Julian the
Apostate robbed the Ministers, pretending conscience; I need not tell you how
vengeance pursued him. Is it not pity the fire on Gods Altar should go out for
want of pouring on a little golden oil? David would not offer that to God
which cost him nothing, 2 Samuel 24.24.

2. Encourage Gods Ministers by your fruitfulness under their labors; when
Ministers are upon the Mount, let them not be upon the Rocks. What cost has
God laid out upon this City! never I believe since the Apostles times was there
a more learned, orthodox, powerful Ministry than now; Gods Ministers are called
Stars, Rev. 1.20. In this City every morning a Star appears, besides the bright
constellation on the Lords day; Oh you that feed in the green pastures of
Ordinances, be fat and fertile; you that are planted in the Courts of God,
flourish in the Courts of God, Psalm 92.13. How sad will it be with a people
that shall go laden to Hell with Gospel-blessings! The best way to encourage
your Ministers, is, to let them see the travel of their souls in your new
birth. It is a great comfort when a Minister does not only woe souls, but win
souls, Prove. 11.30. He that wins souls is wise. This is a Ministers glory, 1
These. 2.19. For what is our joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye? A
successeful Preacher wears two crowns, a Crown of righteousness in heaven, and
a Crown of rejoicing here upon earth; Are not ye our Crown?

3. Encourage your Ministers by praying for them. Opus Angelicis humeris
formidaudum. Erasm.
than men. (...)? Who is sufficient for these things? 1 Cor. 2.16. Oh pray for
them. Christ indeed when he ascended the Mount, and was to preach, needed none
of the peoples prayers for him; He had a sufficient stock by him, the Divine
nature to supply him; but all his underofficers in the Ministry need prayer.
If Saint Paul who abounded in the graces of the Spirit, and supernatural
revelations, did beg prayer, 1 These. 5.25. then surely other Ministers need
prayer who pretend not to any such revelations. And pray for your Ministers,

1. That God will direct them what to preach, that he will cut out their work
for them, Jonah 3.2. Go preach the preaching that I bid thee. It is a great
matter to preach suitable truths; these are acceptable words, Eccles. 12.10.

2. Pray that God will go forth with their labors; for else they toil and
catch nothing. Gods Spirit must fill the sails of our ministry Cathedram habet
in caelo qui corda docet in terra. Austin.
. It is not the hand that scatters the seed which makes it spring up, but the
dewes and influences of heaven: So it is not our preaching, but the Divine
influence of the Spirit that makes grace grow in men's hearts: We are but Pipes
and Organs, it is Gods Spirit blowing in us that makes the Preaching of the
Word by a Divine Enchantment allure souls to Christ. Ministers are but Stars to
light you to Christ, the Spirit is the lodestone to draw you. All the good
done by our Ministry, is per virtutem and efficaciam Domini Bucer.
. Oh then pray for us, that God will make his work prosper in our hands; this
may be one Reason why the Word preached does profit no more, because people
pray no more; perhaps you complain the Tool is dull, the Minister is dead and
cold; you should have whetted and sharpened him by your prayer; if you would
have the door of a blessing opened to you through our Ministry, you must unlock
it by the key of prayer.

CHAP. II.
Showing, that there is a Blessedness in Reversion.

Matthew. 5.3. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit.
4. The Sermon.
HAving done with the occasion, I come now Fourthly to the Sermon it self;
Blessed are the Poor in Spirit. Christ does not begin his Sermon on the Mount,
as the Law was delivered on the Mount, Mandatis and Minis, with commands and
threatenings; the Trumpet sounding, the Fire flaming, the Earth quaking, and the
hearts of the Israelites too for fear; but our Savior (whose lips dropped as
the honeycomb) begins Promissis and Illectamentis, with Promises and
Blessings: So sweet and ravishing was the Doctrine of this heavenly Orpheus,
that like Music, it was able to charm the most savage natures, yea, to draw
hearts of stone to him. To begin then with this first word, Blessed.

If there be any blessedness in knowledge, it must needs be in the knowledge of
blessedness. For the Illustration of this, I shall lay down two Aphorisms or
Conclusions.

1. That there is a blessedness in Reversion.

2. That the godly are in some sense already blessed:

1. That there is a blessedness in Reversion: The people of God meet with many
knotty difficulties, and sinking discouragements in the way of Religion; their
march is not only tedious, but dangerous, and their hearts are ready to
despond: It will not be amiss therefore to set the Crown of blessedness before
them, to animate their courage, and to inflame their zeal. How many Scriptures
bring this Olive Branch in their mouth, the tidings of blessedness to
believers! Matthew. 24.46. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes
shall find so doing. Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father. Blessedness is
the perfection of a rational creature; it is the whet-stone of a Christians
industry; the height of his ambition; the flower of his joy; blessedness is
the desire of all men. Aquinas calls it the ultimus finis; this is the White
every man aims to hit; to this Center all the lines are drawn.

Quest. Wherein does blessedness consist?

Answ. Millions of men mistake both the nature of blessedness, and the way
thither: Some of the Learned have set down two hundred eighty eight several
opinions about blessedness Austin.
, and all have shot wide of the mark. I shall show wherein it does not consist,
and then wherein it does consist.

SECT. 1.
1. WHerein blessedness does not consist: It does not lie in the acquisition of
worldly things; happiness cannot by any Art of Chemistry be extracted here:
Christ does not say, Blessed are the Rich, or blessed are the Noble; yet too
many Idolize these things: Man by the fall has not only lost his Crown, but
his Headpiece. How ready is he to terminate his happiness in extrinsecals?
which makes me call to mind that definition which some of the Heathen
Philosophers gave of blessedness (...).
; that it was to have a sufficiency of subsistence, and to thrive well in the
World: And are there not many who go for Christians, that seem to be of this
Philosophical opinion? if they have but worldly accommodations, they are ready
to sing a requiem to their souls, and say with that brutish fool in the Gospel,
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thy ease, Luke 12.19.
Quid turpius quam bonum rationalis animi ex irrationalibus nectere Seneca.
? Alas, the Tree of blessedness does not grow in an earthly Paradise. Has not
God cursed the ground for sin? Genesis 3.17. yet many are digging for felicity
here, as if they would fetch a blessing out of a curse; a man may as well think
to extract oil out of a flint, or fire out of water, as blessedness out of
these terrestial things.

King Solomon arrived at more than any man; he was the most magnificent Prince
that ever held the Scepter. 1. For his Parentage; he sprang from the Royal
Line; not only that Line of which many Kings came, but of which Christ himself
came. Jesus Christ was of Solomon's Line and Race; so that for Heraldry and
Nobility none could show a fairer Coat of Arms. 2. For the situation of his
Palace; it was in Jerusalem, the Princess and Paragon of the earth. Jerusalem
for its Renown, was called the City of God; it was the most famous Metropolis
in the World, Whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, Psalm. 122.4. 3.
For Wealth; his Crown was hung full of Jewels; he had treasures of gold and
pearl, and gave silver as stones, 1 Kings 10.27. 4. For worldly joy, he had
the flower and quintessence of all delights; sumptuous Fare, stately Edifices,
Vineyards, Fish Ponds, all sorts of Music to inchant and ravish the senses
with joy; if there were any Rarity, it was a Present for King Solomon's Court;
thus did he bath himself in the perfumed waters of pleasure. 5. For Wisdom, he
was the Oracle of his time; when the Queen of Sheba came to pose him with hard
questions, he gave a solution to all her doubts: 1 Kings 10.3. He had a key of
knowledge to unlock Natures dark Cabinet; so that if wisdom had been lost, it
might have been found here, and the whole world might have lighted their
understanding at Solomon's Lamp. He was an earthly Angel; so that a carnal eye
surveying his glory, would have been ready to imagine that Solomon had entered
into that Paradise out of which Adam was once driven, or that he had found
another as good; never did the World cast a more smiling aspect upon any man;
yet when he comes to give in his impartial verdict, he tells us that the World
has vanity written upon its Frontispiece; and all those golden delights he
enjoyed, were but a painted felicity, a glorious misery. Eccles. 2.8. And
behold all was vanity. Blessedness is too noble and delicate a Plant to dwell
in Natures soil.

That blessedness does not lie in Externals, I shall prove by these five
Demonstrations.

1. Those things which are not commensurate to the desires of the soul, can
never make a man blessed; but transitory things are not commensurate to the
desires of the soul; therefore they cannot render him blessed; nothing on earth
can satisfy. Eccles. 5.10. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with
silver; Riches are unsatisfying.

1. Because they are not real; the world is called a fashion, 1 Cor. 7.31. The
word (...), signifies a Mathematical Figure, sometimes a show or apparition.
Riches are but tin'd over Bracteata faelicitas, Sen.
; they are like Alchymy, which glisters a little in our eyes, but at death all
this Alchymy will be worn off. Riches are but sugared lies, pleasant impostures;
like a gilded Cover, which has not one leaf of true comfort bound up in it.

2. Because they are not suitable: The soul is a spiritual thing, riches are of
an earthly extract Effodiuntur opes.
, and how can these fill a spiritual substance? a man may as well fill his
Chest with grace, as his heart with gold; if a man were crowned with all the
delights of the world, nay, if God should build him an house among the Stars,
yet the restless eye of his unsatisfied mind would be looking still higher, he
would be prying beyond the heavens for some hidden rarities which he thinks he
has not yet attained to; so unquenchable is the thirst of the soul, till it
come to bath in the River of life, and to center upon true blessedness.

2. That which cannot quiet the heart in a storm, cannot entitle a man to
blessedness; but earthly things accumulated, cannot rock the troubled heart
quiet, therefore they cannot make one blessed. If the Spirit be wounded, can
the creature pour in wine and oil into these wounds? if God sets on
conscience, and it flies in a man's face, can worldly comforts take off this
angry fury? Is there any Harp to drive away the evil Spirit? outward things can
no more cure the agony of conscience, than a silken stockin can cure a gouty
leg. When Saul was sore distressed, 1 Samuel 28.15. could all the Jewels of his
Crown comfort him? if God be angry, whose fury is poured out like fire, and the
Rocks are thrown down by him, Nahum 1.6. can a wedge of gold be a Screen to
keep off this fire? Ezekiel. 7.19. They shall cast their silver in the streets;
their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the
wrath of the Lord. King Belshazzar was Carousing and Ranting it; he drank wine
in the golden Vessels of the Temple, Dan. 5.3. but when the fingers of a man's
hand appeared, his countenance was changed, ver. 6. his wine grew sour, his
feast was spoiled with that Dish which was served in upon the Wall. The things
of the world will no more keep out trouble of spirit, than a paper sconce will
keep out a bullet.

3. That which is but for a season, cannot make one blessed; but all things
under the Sun are but (...) for a season, therefore they cannot enrich with
blessedness: Sublunary delights are like those meats which we say are a while
in season, and then presently grow stale, and are out of request: The world
passes away, 1 John 2.17. Worldly delights are winged; they may be compared to
a flock of Birds in the Garden, that stay a little while, but when you come
near to them, they take their flight and are gone. So Riches make themselves
wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward heaven, Prove. 23.5. They are like a
Meteor that blazeth, but spends and annihilates; they are like a Castle made of
snow, lying under the torrid beams of the Sun: Austin says of himself, Si quid
arrisisset prosperum, etc. When any preferment smiled upon him, he was afraid
to accept of it, lest it should on a sudden give him the slip. Outward comforts
are as Plato says, like Tennis-balls, which are bandied up and down from one
to another Dei ludibria, quae sursum ac deorsam suo coelo feruntur. Plat.
; had we the longest lease of worldly comforts, it would soon be run out:
Riches and Honor are still in fuga, they pass away like a swift stream, or
like a Ship that is going full fail. While they are with us, they are going
away from us; they are like a posie of flowers, which withers while you are
smelling to it; like Ice, which melts away while it is in your hand. The world
(says Bernard) cries out, I will leave you, and be gone Caro clamat, ego
inficiam; mandus clamat, ego decipiam. Bern.
; it takes its salute and farewell together.

4. Those things which do more vex than comfort, cannot make a man blessed; but
such are all things under the Sun, therefore they cannot have blessedness
affixed to them: As riches are compared to wind, Hosea 12.1. to show their
vanity; so to thorns, Matthew. 13.17. to show their vexation: Thorns are not more
apt to tear our garments, than Riches are to tear our hearts; they are thorns
in the gathering, they prick with care; and as they pierce the head with care
of getting, so they wound the heart with fear of losing; God will have our
sweetest wine run dregs, yea, and taste of a musty Cask too, that we may not
think this is the wine of Paradise.

5. Those things which (if we have nothing else) will make us cursed, cannot
make us blessed; but the sole enjoyment of worldly things will make us cursed;
therefore it is far from making us bessed: Riches are kept for the hurt of the
owner, Eccles. 5.13. Riches to the wicked, are fuel for pride: Ezekiel. 28.5. Thy
heart is lifted up because of thy riches; and fuel for lust: Jer. 5.7. When I
had fed them to the full, they then committed Adultery. Riches are a snare: 1 Timothy 6.9. But they that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition. How many
have pulled down their souls to build up an estate! a ship may be so laden
with gold that it sinks; many a man's gold has sunk him to hell. The rich
sinner seals up money in his bag, and God seals up a curse with it. Hab. 2.6.
Woe to him that ladeth himself with thick clay. Austin says, that Judas for
money sold his salvation, and the Pharisees bought their damnation; so that
happiness is not to be fetched out of the earth; they who go to the creature
for blessedness, go to the wrong box.

SECT. 2.
IF blessedness does not consist in Externals, then let us Mary concerning
Christ, He is not here, he is risen, Mat. 28.6. So I may say of blessedness, it
is not here, it is risen, it is in an higher Region: How do men thirst after
the World, as if the pearl of blessedness did hang upon an earthly Crown? O
says one, if I had but such an Estate, then I should be happy! had I but such
a comfort, then I should sit down satisfied? Well, God gives him that comfort,
and lets him suck out the very juice and spirits of it; but alas, it falls
short of his expectation, it cannot fill the hiatus, and longing of his soul,
which still cries Give, give, Prove. 30.15. Just like a sick man, if says he, I
had but such a meat, I could eat it; and when he has it, his stomach is bad,
and he can hardly endure to taste it; God has put not only an emptiness, but
bitterness into the creature, and it is good for us that there is no perfection
here, that we may raise our thoughts higher, to more noble and generous
delights. Could we distill, and draw out the quintessence of the creature, we
should say as once the Emperor Severus, who grew from a mean estate to be head
of the greatest Empire in the World, Omnia fui and nihil expedit; I have says
he, run through all conditions, yet could never find full contentment.

SECT. 3.
cup does not overflow, but their tears; Be not too much troubled; remember
these outward comforts cannot make you blessed; you might live rich, and dye
cursed; you might treasure up an Estate, and God might treasure up Wrath: Be
not perplexed about those things, the want whereof cannot make you miserable,
nor the enjoyment make you blessed.

SECT. 4.
HAving shown wherein blessedness does not consist, I shall next show wherein
it does consist. Blessedness does stand in the fruition of the chief good. 1.
It consists in fruition; there must not be only possession, but fruition. A man
may possess an Estate, yet not enjoy it; he may have the dominion of it, but
not the comfort; as when he is in a Lethargy, or under the predominancy of
melancholy; but in true blessedness there must be a sensible enjoyment of that
which the soul does possess. 2. Blessedness lies in the fruition of the chief
good; it is not every good makes a man blessed, but it must be the supreme
good, and that is God. Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that people whose God is the
Lord. God is quies animae, here the soul does rest: Psalm. 116.7. Now that only
in which the soul does acquiesce and rest, can make it blessed. The Globe or
Circle, as is observed in Mathematics, is of all others the most perfect
figure, because the last point of the figure ends in that first point where it
began: So when the soul meets in God, whence it sprang as its first original,
then it is completely blessed. That which makes a man blessed, must have six
Qualifications or Ingredients in it, and these are found no where, but in God
the chief good.

1. In true blessedness there must be Meliority; that which fills with
blessedness, must be such a good as is better than a man's self. If you would
ennoble a piece of silver, it must be by putting something to it which is
better than silver, as by putting gold or pearl to it: So that which does
ennoble the soul, and enrich it with blessedness, must be by adding something
to it which is more excellent than the soul, and that is God; the World is
below the soul; it is but the souls footstool; therefore cannot crown it with
happiness.

2. Another Ingredient is Delectability; that which brings blessedness, must
have a delicious taste in it, such as the soul is infinitely ravished with;
there must be in it spirits of delight, and quintessence of joy; and where can
the soul suck those pure comforts which do amaze it with wonder, and crown it
with delight, but in God? In Deo quadam dulcedine delectatur anima, immo
rapitur Ang.
: The love of God is an honeycomb, which drops such infinite sweetness, and
satisfaction into the soul, as is unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. A
kiss from Gods mouth puts the soul into a Divine Ecstasy, so that now it cries
out, It is good to be here.

3. The third Ingredient into blessedness, is Plenty; that which makes a man
blessed, must not be too scanty; it is a full draught which quenches the souls
thirst; and where shall we find Plenty but in Deity? Psalm. 36.8. Thou shall
make him drink of the River of thy pleasures, not Drops but Rivers. The soul
baths it self, and is laid as it were a steeping in the water of life; the
River of Paradise over-flows, and empties its silver streams into the souls of
the blessed.

4. In true blessedness there must be Variety: Plenty without variety is apt to
nauseate; in God there is (...) all fullness, Col. 1.19. What can the soul want,
but it may be had in the chief good? God is bonum in quo omnia bona; he is a
Sun, a Shield, a Portion, a Fountain, a Rock of Strength, an Horn of Salvation;
In God there is a complication of all excellencies; there are every moment
fresh beauties and delights springing from God.

5. To make up blessedness there must be perfection Beatitudo est status omnium
honorum aggregatione perfectus. Boethius. Cicero.
; the joy must be perfect, the glory perfect. Hebr. 12.23. Spirits of just men
made perfect. Bonum constat ex integro; if there be the least defect, it
destroys the nature of blessedness; as the least symptom of a disease takes
away the (...), and right temperature of the body.

6. True blessedness must have Eternity stamped upon it. Blessedness is a fixed
thing, it admits of no change or alteration. God says of every child of his, I
have blessed him, and he shall be blessed: As the Sunshine of blessedness is
without clouds, so it never sets. Joh. 10 28. I give unto them eternal life. 1
These. 4.17. And so shall we ever be with the Lord. Eternity is the highest link
of the Chain of blessedness: Thus we have seen that this Diamond of blessedness
is only to be found in the Rock of Ages. Blessed are the people whose God is
the Lord.

SECT. V.
Professors they are turned Epicures; they have drunk in so much of the poison
of Error, that they are quite intoxicated, and fallen asleep, and begin to
dream there is no such thing as a state of blessedness after this life; and
this opinion is to them above the Bible. When men have the spiritual staggers,
it sadly presageth they will dye. Oh it is a dangerous thing to hesitate and
waver about fundamentals; like Pythagoras, who doubted whether there was a God
or no! so, whether there be a blessedness or no. Doubting of principles, is the
next way to the denying of principles. Let it be a Maxim with every good
Christian, There is a blessedness in Reversion, there remains a rest for the
people of God, Hebr. 4.9.

Use 2. Revolve this truth often in your mind; there Chew the Cud: Let a
Christian think seriously with himself, There is a blessedness feasible, and I
am capable of enjoying it, if I do not lay bars in the way, and block up my own
happiness. Though within I see nothing but guilt, without nothing but curses;
yet there is a blessedness to be had, and to be had for me too in the use of
means.

The serious meditation of this will be a forcible Argument to make the sinner
break off his sins by Repentance, and sweat hard till he find the golden Mine
of blessedness; I say, it would be the break-neck of sin; how would a man offer
violence to himself by Mortification, and to heaven by supplication, that at
last he may arrive at a state of blessedness. What, is there a Crown of
blessedness to be set upon my head? a Crown hung with the Jewels of honor,
delight, magnificence; a Crown reached out by God himself; and shall I by sin
hazard this? can the pleasure of sin countervail the loss of blessedness? what
more powerful Motive to Repentance than this. Sin will deceive me of the
blessing! If a man knew certainly that a King would settle all his
Crown-Revenues on him after such a Term of years, would he offend that Regal
Majesty, and cause him to reverse and alter his Will? There is a blessedness
promised to all that live godly. 1 John 2.25. This is the promise that he has
promised us, even eternal life. We are not excluded, but may come in for a
child's part; now shall we by living in sin provoke God, and forfeit this
blessedness? O what madness is this! Well may the Apostle call them foolish and
hurtful lusts, 1 Timothy 6.9. because every lust does what in it lies to cut off
the entail of mercy, and block up the way to happiness; every sin may be
compared to the flaming Sword, which keeps the heavenly Paradise that the
sinner cannot enter.

Use 3. Let us so deport our selves, that we may express This God is our God
for ever and ever, Psalm. 48.11. Most men think because God has blessed them
with an Estate, therefore they are blessed; alas, God often gives these things
in anger: Id concedit Deus tratus quod non vult pacatus: He loads his enemies
with gold and silver; as Plutarch reports of Tarpeia a Vestal Nun, who
bargained with the enemy to betray the Capitol of Rome to them, in case she
might have the golden Bracelets on their left hands, which they promised; and
being entered into the Capitol, they threw not only their golden bracelets, but
their bucklers too upon her, through the weight whereof she was pressed to
death. God often lets men have the golden bracelets, the weight whereof sinks
them into hell: Oh let us superna anhelare, get our eyes fixed, and our hearts
united to God the supreme good; this is to pursue blessedness as in a Chase.

2. Let us proclaim to the World that we do believe a blessedness to come, by
living blessed lives; walk as becomes the heirs of blessedness; A blessed
crown, and a cursed life will never agree. Many tell us they are bound for
heaven, but they steer their course a quite contrary way; the Devil is their
Pilot, and they sail hell-ward; as if a man should say he were going a Voyage
to the East, but sails quite Westward. The Drunkard will tell you he hopes for
blessedness, but he sails another way; thou must go weeping to heaven, not
reeling. The unclean person talks of blessedness, but he is fallen into that
deep ditch, Prove. 23.27. where he is like sooner to find hell, than heaven. A
Beast may as well be made an Angel, as an unclean person in his Leprosy enter
into the Paradise of God. The covetous person (of whom it may be said, He is a
worm, and no man, Psalm. 22.6. he is ever creeping in the earth, yet) he would
lay a claim to blessedness; but can earth ascend? Shall a lump of clay be made
a bright Star in the Firmament of glory? be assured they shall never be
blessed, who bless themselves in their sins; if says God, Deuteronomy. 29.19. the
sinner bless himself, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; the Lord will not
spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke
against that man, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven. A man
can no more extract blessedness out of sin, than he can suck health out of
poison. O let us lead blessed lives, and so declare plainly that we seek a
country, Heb. 11, 14.

Use 4. To you that have any good hope through grace that you have a title to
blessedness, let me say as the Levites did to the people, Nehem. 9.5. Stand up
and bless the Lord your God for ever and ever. What infinite cause have you to
be thankful that the lot of free grace is fallen upon you! Though you had
forfeited all, yet God has provided a haven of happiness, and he is carrying
you thither upon the Sea of Christ's blood, the gale of his Spirit blowing your
sails; you are in a better condition through Christ, than when you had the
robes of innocence upon you; God has raised you a step higher by your fall.
How many has God passed by, and looked upon you? millions there are who shall
lie for ever under the bitter vials of Gods curses, whereas he will bring you
into his banqueting house, and pour out the flagons of wine, and feast you
eternally with the delicacies of heaven. O adore free grace, triumph in this
love of God; spend and be spent for the Lord; dedicate your selves to him in a
way of resignation, and lay out your selves for him in a way of gratulation;
never think you can do enough for that God who will shortly set you ashore on
the land of promise.

CHAP. III.
Showing that the godly are in some sense already blessed.

I Proceed now to the second Aphorism, or Conclusion, that the godly are in
some sense already blessed. Blessed are -- ] the Saints are blessed not only
when they are Comprehensores, but while they are Viatores. They are blessed
before they are crowned. This seems a Paradox to flesh and blood; what
reproached, and maligned, yet blessed! A man that looks upon the children of
God with a carnal eye, and sees how they are afflicted, and like the ship in
the Gospel, which was covered with waves, Matthew. 8.24. would think they were
far from blessedness. Saint Paul brings a Catalogue of his sufferings, 2 Cor.
11.24, 25, 26. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I
suffered shipwreck, etc. And those Christians of the first magnitude, of whom
the world was not worthy, had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings; they were
sawn asunder, they were slain with the sword, Heb. 11.36, 37. What? and were
all these during the time of their sufferings blessed? A carnal man would
think, If this be to be blessed, God deliver him from it.

But, however sense and reason would give their Vote, our Savior Christ
pronounces the godly man blessed, though a Mourner, though a Martyr, yet
blessed, Job on the dunghill was blessed Job. The Saints are blessed, when they
are cursed. Shimei did curse David, 2 Samuel 16.5. He came forth and cursed him;
yet when he was cursed David, he was blessed David. The Saints though they are
bruised, yet they are blessed. Not only they shall be blessed, but they are so,
Psalm. 119.1. blessed are the undefiled. Psalm. 3.8. Thy blessing is upon thy
people.

Quest. How are the Saints already blessed?

Ans. 1. In that they are enriched with heavenly blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. They
are (...), partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. not by an incorporation
into the Divine essence, but by a transformation into the Divine likeness.
This is beatitudo inchoata, blessedness begun; as the newborn babe is said
to have life in it as well as he who is fully grown: So the Saints who are
partakers of the Divine nature, have an inchoative blessedness, though they
have not arrived yet at perfection. Believers have Semen manens, The seed of
God in them, 1 John 3.9. And this is a seed of blessedness. The Flower of
glory grows out of the seed of grace; grace and glory differ, not in kind, but
degree, the one is the root, the other the fruit; grace is glory in the
dawning; and glory grace in the meridian; and in this sense that assertion of
Austin is true, Beati sumus fide, and spe; grace is the first link of the
chain of blessedness; now he that has the first link of the chain in his
hand, has the whole chain. The Saints have the Spirit of God in them, 2 Timothy
1.14. The Holy Ghost which dwells in us. How can the blessed Spirit be in a
man and he not blessed? a godly man's heart is a Paradise, planted with the
choicest fruit, and God himself walks in the midst of this Paradise, and must
he not needs be blessed?

2. The Saints are already blessed, because their sins are not imputed to them.
Psalm. 32.2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. Gods not
imputing iniquity, signifies Gods making of sin not to be; it is as if the man
had never sinned; the debt-book is canceled in Christ's blood; and if the debtor
owe never so much, yet if the creditor cross the book, it is as if he had never
owed any thing. Gods not imputing sin, is, that God will never call for the
debt; or if it should be called for, it shall be hid out of sight. Jer. 50.20.
In those days the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found. Now such a man who
has not sin imputed to him, is blessed; and the reason is, because if sin be
not imputed to a man, then the curse is taken away; and if the curse be taken
away, then he must needs be blessed.

3. The Saints are already blessed, because they are in Covenant with God. This
is clear, by comparing two Scriptures; Jer. 31.33. I will be their God. and
Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that people whose God is the Lord: This is the crowning
blessing, to have the Lord for our God; impossible it is to imagine that God
should be our God, and we not blessed. This sweet word, I will be your God,
implies,

1. Propriety, that all that is in God shall be ours; his love ours, his Spirit
ours, his mercy ours.

2. It implies all Relations. 1. Of a Father: 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father
unto you. The sons of a Prince are happy; how blessed are the Saints who are of
the true blood Royal? 2. It implies the relation of an Husband, Isa. 54.5. Thy
Maker is thy husband. The Spouse being contracted to her husband, is happy, by
having an interest in all he has. The Saints being contracted by faith are
blessed, though the solemnity of the Marriage be kept for heaven. 3. It implies
terms of friendship. They who are in Covenant with God, are Favorites of
heaven. Abraham my friend, Isa. 41.8. It Is counted a Subjects happiness to be
in favor with his Prince, though he may live a while from Court; how happy
must he needs be who is Gods Favorite?

4. The Saints are already blessed, because they have a Reversion of heaven; as
on the contrary, he who has hell in Reversion, is said to be already
condemned. John 3.18. He that believes not is condemned already. He is as sure
to be condemned, as if he were condemned already. So he who has heaven in
Reversion, may be said to be already blessed; a man that has the Reversion of
an house, after a short Lease is run out, he looks upon it as his already; this
house (says he) is mine: So a believer has a Reversion of heaven after the
Lease of life is run out, and he can say at present, Christ is mine, and glory
is mine; he has jus ad rem, a title to heaven, and he is a blessed man that
has a title to show; nay, faith turns the Reversion into a Possession.

5. The Saints are already blessed, because they have Primitias, the first
fruits of blessedness here: We read of the earnest of the Spirit, and the seal,
2 Cor. 1.22. and the first fruits, Romans 8.23. Heaven is already begun in a
believer. Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.
This Kingdom is in a believers heart: Luke 17.21. The people of God have a
prelibation, and taste of blessedness here. As Israel tasted a bunch of grapes
before they were actually possessed of Canaan: So the children of God have
those secret incomes of the Spirit, those smiles of Christ's face, those kisses
of his lips, those love tokens that are as bunches of grapes, and they think
themselves sometimes in heaven. Paul was let down in a basket, Acts 9.25.
Oftentimes the Comforter is let down to the soul in an Ordinance, and now the
soul is in the Suburbs of Jerusalem above; a Christian sees heaven by faith,
and tastes it by joy, and what is this but blessedness?

6. The Saints may be said in this life to be blessed, because all things tend
to make them blessed. Romans 8.28. All things work for good to them that love
God: We say to him that has every thing falling out for the best, You are an
happy man; the Saints are very happy, for all things have a tendency to their
good; prosperity does them good, adversity does them good; nay, sin turns to
their good; every trip makes them more watchful; their maladies are their
medicines; are not they happy persons, that have every wind blowing them to the
right Port?

7. A Saint may be said to be blessed, because part of him is already blessed;
he is blessed in his head; Christ his head is in glory; Christ and believers
make one body mystical, their head is gotten into heaven.

Use 1. Inform. Branch 1. See the difference between Inform.
let a wicked man have never so many comforts, still he is cursed; let a godly
man have candle of God shining on him, Job 29.3. let his way be so smooth that
he meets with no rubs; let him have success, yet still there is a curse
entailed upon him; you may read the sinners Inventory: Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, 18. He
is not more full of sin than he is of a curse; though perhaps he blesses
himself in his wickedness, yet he is heir to Gods curse; all the curses of the
Bible are his portion, and at the day of death this portion is sure to be paid;
but a godly man in the midst of all his miseries is blessed; he may be under
the cross, but not under a curse.

Branch 2. It shows the privilege of a believer; he Psalm. 115.15. You are
blessed of the Lord: Let the condition of the Righteous be never so sad, yet it
is blessed; he is blessed in affliction: Psalm. 94. Blessed is he whom thou
chastenest: Blessed in poverty: James 2.5. Poor in the world, rich in faith.
Blessed in disgrace: 1 Pet. 4.14. The Spirit of God, and of glory rests upon
you. This may be a cordial to the fainting Christian! he is blessed in life and
death, Satan cannot supplant him of the blessing.

Branch 3. How may this take away murmuring and melancholy from a child of God?
Will thou repine and be sad when thou art blessed? Esau wept because he wanted
the blessing. Genesis 27.38. Bless me, even me also O my Father, and Esau lift up
his voice and wept. But shall a child of God be immoderately cast down, when he
has the blessing? Adam sinned in the midst of Paradise; how evil is it to be
blessed, and yet murmr?

Branch 4. What an encouragement is this to godliness? we are all ambitious of
a blessing, then let us espouse Religion. Psalm. 112.1. Blessed is the man that
fears the Lord. But you will say, this way is everywhere spoken against; it is
no matter, seeing this is the way to get a blessing: Suppose a Rich man should
adopt another for his heir, and others should reproach him, he cares not, as
long as he is heir to the Estate: So, what though others may reproach thee for
thy Religion, as long as it entails a blessing upon thee; the same day thou
becomest godly, thou becomest blessed.

CHAP. IV.
MATTHEW. 5.^. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit.


HAving spoken of the general notion of blessedness, I come next to consider
the Subjects of this blessedness, and these our Savior has decyphered to be
the Poor in Spirit, the mourners, etc. But before I touch upon these, I shall a
little Preface or Paraphrase upon this Sermon of the Beatitudes.

1. Observe the Divinity in this Sermon, which goes beyond all Philosophy; The
Philosophers use to say contrarium contrarium expellit, one contrary expels
another; but here one contrary begets another; poverty uses to expel riches;
but here poverty begets riches; for how rich are they that have a Kingdom?
mourning uses to expel joy; but behold here mourning begets joy. They shall be
comforted. Water uses to quench the flame, but the water of tears kindles the
flame of joy. Persecution uses to expel happiness, but here it makes happy.
Blessed are they that are persecuted. These are the sacred Paradoxes in our
Saviors Sermon Evangelicam Philosophiam a Parado^is inchoavit Dominus. and.
Cl^^.
.

2. Observe how Christ's Doctrine and the opinion of carnal men differ. They
think, beati divites, blessed are the rich; The world would count him blessed
who could have Midas wish, that all he touched might be turned into gold. But
Christ says, Beati pauperes, blessed are the poor in spirit. The world thinks,
Blessed are they on the Pinnacle; but Christ pronounces them blessed who are in
the Valley; Christ's reckonings and the worlds do not agree.

3. Observe the nature of true Religion; Poverty leads the Van, and Persecution
brings up the Rear. Christianus quasi Crucianus. Every true Saint (says
Luther) is heir to the Cross! Some there are who would be thought religious,
displaying Christ's Colors by a glorious profession; but to be poor in spirit,
and persecuted, durus hic sermo! they cannot take down this bitter pill; they
would wear Christ's Jewels, but wave his Cross; these are strangers to
Religion.

4. Observe the certain connection between grace and its reward; they who are
poor in spirit, shall have the kingdom of God; They are as sure to go to
heaven, as if they were in heaven already. Our Savior would encourage men to
Religion, by sweetning Commands with Promises; he ties duty and reward
together. As in the body, the veins carry the blood, and the arteries the
spirits; so one part of these Verses carries Duty, and the other part carries
reward. As that Scholar of Apelles painted Helena richly drawn in costly and
glorious apparel, hung all over with orient pearl, and precious stones. So our
Lord Christ having set down several qualifications of a Christian, poor in
spirit, pure in heart, etc. draws these heavenly virtues in their fair colors
of blessedness, and sets the magnificent crown of reward upon them, that by
this oriency, he might the more set forth their unparalled beauty, and entice
holy love.

5. Observe hence the concatenation of the graces, poor in spirit, meek,
merciful, etc. where there is one grace, there is all. As they say of the
Cardinal virtues, virtutes sunt inter se connexae, the virtues are chained
together; so we may say of the graces of the Spirit, they are linked and
chained together; he that has poverty of Spirit, is a mourner; he that is a
mourner, is meek; he that is meek, is merciful, etc. The Spirit of God plants
in the heart an habit of all the graces; the new creature has all the parts
and lineaments; as in the body there is a composition of all the Elements, and
a mixture of all the humors. The graces of the Spirit are like a Row of pearl,
which hang together upon the string of Religion, and serve to adorn Christ's
Bride: This I note, to show you a difference between an hypocrite, and a true
child of God: The hypocrite flatters himself with a pretense of grace; but in
the mean time he has not an habit of all the graces; he has not poverty of
spirit, nor purity of heart; whereas a child of God has all the graces in his
heart, at least radically, though not gradually. These things being premised, I
come in particular to those heavenly dispositions of soul to which Christ has
affixed blessedness: And the first is, POVERTY of SPIRIT.

Blessed are the Poor in Spirit. Chrysostom and Theophylact are of opinion that
this was the first Sermon that ever Christ made, therefore it may challenge our
best attention. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit. Our Lord Christ being to raise
an high and stately Fabric of blessedness, lays the foundation of it low, in
poverty of Spirit; but all poverty is not blessed Non omnis paupertas beata.
B^ugensis.
. I shall use a fourfold distinction.

1. I distinguish between Poor in Estate, and Poor in Spirit; there are the
Devils poor, poor and wicked; whose clothes are not more torn than their
conscience. There are some whose poverty is their sin; who through Improvidence
or Excess, have brought themselves to want; these may be poor in Estate, but
not poor in Spirit.

2. I distinguish between spiritually Poor, and Poor in spirit; he who is
without grace, is spiritually poor; but he is not poor in Spirit; he knows not
his own beggary. Rev. 3.17. Thou know not that thou art Poor: He is in the
worst sense poor, who has no sense of his poverty.

3. I distinguish between Poor-spirited, and Poor in spirit. They are said to
be poor-spirited, who have mean, base spirits, who act below themselves. 1. As
they are men; such are those Misers, which having great Estates, yet can hardly
afford themselves bread; who live sneakingly, and are ready to wish their own
throats cut, because they are forced to spend something in satisfying Natures
demands: This Solomon calls an evil under the Sun. Eccles. 6.2. There is an
evil which I have seen under the Sun, a man to whom God has given Riches, so
that he wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him
not power to eat thereof. Religion makes no man a Niggard; though it teaches
prudence, yet not sordidness. 2. Who act below themselves as they are
Christians, while they sinfully comply and prostitute themselves to the humors
of others; a base kind of mettle that will take any stamp; they will for a
piece of silver part with the jewel of a good conscience, they will be of the
State-Religion; they will dance to the Devils Pipe, if their Superior commands
them; These are Poor-spirited, but not Poor in Spirit.

4. I distinguish between Poor in an Evangelical sense, and in a Popish sense;
the Papists give a wrong gloss upon the Text; by Poor in spirit, they
understand those who renouncing their Estates, vow a voluntary poverty, living
retiredly in their Monasteries Monasteriis, and Caenobii^ Pauperes. Bellarm.
; but Christ never meant these; he does not pronounce them blessed who make
themselves poor, leaving their Estates, and their Callings, but such as are
Evangelically poor.

Well then, what are we to understand by Poor in spirit? the Greek word for
Poor, (...), is not only taken in a strict sense for those who live upon Alms
Ad extremam inopiam reducti. Beza.
; quibus nihil superest; but in a more large sense, for those who are destitute
as well of inward as outward comfort: Poor in spirit then signifies those who
are brought to the sense of their sins, and seeing no goodness in themselves,
despair in themselves, and sue wholly to the mercy of God in Christ Qui serio
cordis affectu pauperiem suam agnoscunt, spem and fiduciam in una miserecordia
Dei propter Christum repositam habent. Paraeus.
. Poverty of spirit is a kind of self-annihilation; such an expression I find
in Calvin; The poor in spirit (says he) are they who see nothing in
themselves, but fly to mercy for Sanctuary; such an one was the Publican, Luke
18.13. God be merciful to me a sinner. of this temper was Saint Paul, Phil.
3.9. That I may he found in Christ, not having mine own righteousness; these
are the poor which are invited as Guests to Wisdoms Banquet: Prove. 7.3, 4. Here
several Questions may be propounded.

1. Why does Christ here begin with poverty of spirit? Totius a ^ificii
fundamen. Avendanus.
: You may as well expect fruit to grow without a root, as the other graces
without this; till a man be Poor in spirit, he cannot mourn: Poverty of spirit
is like the fire under the Still, which makes the water drop from the eyes;
when a man sees his own defects and deformities, and looks upon himself as
undone, then he mourns after Christ; the springs run in the valleys, Psalm.
104.10. When the heart becomes a valley, and lies low by poverty of spirit, now
the springs of holy mourning run there. Till a man be Poor in spirit, he cannot
hunger and thirst after righteousness; he must first be sensible of want,
before he can hunger; therefore Christ begins with poverty of spirit, because
this ushers in all the rest.

Answ. These are so like, that they have been taken one for the other.
Chrysostom by poverty of spirit, understands humility (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
; yet I think there is some difference; they differ as the cause and the
effect. Tertullian says, none are poor in spirit, but the humble Nulli,
pauperes spiritu nisi hamiles. Tert.
; he seems to make humility the cause of poverty of spirit; I rather think
poverty of spirit is the cause of humility; for when a man sees his want of
Christ, and how he lives on the Alms of free grace, this makes him humble; he
that is sensible of his own vacuity and indigence, with the Violet, hangs down
his head in humility; humility is the sweet spice that grows from poverty of
spirit.

Poor in spirit is an absolute self-denier; he renounceth all opinion of
himself; he acknowledges his dependence on Christ and free grace; but in some
things they differ; the self-denier parts with the world for Christ, the poor
in spirit parts with himself for Christ; i. e. his own righteousness; the poor
in spirit sees himself nothing without Christ, the self-denier will leave
himself nothing for Christ: And thus I have showed what poverty of spirit is.
The words thus opened, present us with this truth.

Doctr. That Christians must be poor in spirit; or thus, light; so when a man
sees himself nothing, out of this nothing God makes a most beautiful creature;
it is Gods usual method to make a man poor in spirit, and then fill him with
the graces of the Spirit; as we deal with a Watch, we take it first in pieces,
and then set all the wheels and pins in order: So the Lord does first take a
man all in pieces, shows him his undone condition, and then sets him in frame.

The Reasons are:

1. Till we are poor in spirit, we are not capable of receiving intus existens
prohibet extraneum; if the hand be full of pebbles, it cannot receive gold; the
glass is first emptied before you pour in wine; God does first empty a man of
himself, before he poures in the precious wine of his grace; none but the poor
in spirit are within Christ's Commission. Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God
is upon me; he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted; that is, such as are
broken in the sense of their unworthiness.

2. Till we are poor in spirit, Christ is never precious; sal and condimentum,
the sauce which makes Christ relish sweet to the soul; mercy is most welcome to
the poor in spirit; he who sees himself clad in filthy rags, Zach. 3.4, 5. what
will he give for change of raiment, the righteousness of Christ? what will he
give to have the fair Mitre of salvation set upon his head? when a man sees
himself almost wounded to death, how precious will the balm of Christ's blood be
to him? when he sees himself deep in Arrears with God, and is so far from
paying the debt, that he cannot sum up the debt, how glad would he be of a
surety? the Pearl of price is only precious to the poor in spirit; he that
wants bread, and is ready to starve, will have it whatever it cost; he will lay
his garment to pledge; bread he must have, or he is undone: So to him that is
Poor in spirit, that sees his want of Christ, how precious is a Savior! Christ
is Christ, and grace is grace to him; he will do any thing for the bread of
life; therefore will God have the soul thus qualified, to raise the price of
his Market, to inhance the value and estimate of the Lord Jesus.

Poor in spirit, we cannot go to heaven: Theirs is the Kingdom of heaven; this
does tune and prepare us for heaven: By nature a man is big with
self-confidence, and the gate of heaven is so strait that he cannot enter; now
poverty of spirit does minorare animam, it does lessen the soul, it pares off
its superfluity, and now he is fit to enter in at the strait gate. The great
Cable cannot go through the eye of the Needle; but let it be untwisted, and
made into small threads, and then it may: Poverty of spirit untwists the great
Cable, it makes a man little in his own eyes, and now an entrance shall be made
unto him, (...), Richly into the Everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. Through this
Temple of Poverty we must go into the Temple of Glory.

SECT. 1.
This poverty entitles them to a Kingdom. How poor are they that think
themselves rich! how rich are they that see themselves poor! I call it the
Jewel of poverty. There are some Paradoxes in Religion that the world cannot
understand; for a man to become a fool that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. to
save his life by losing it, Matthew. 16.25. and by being poor, to be rich; Reason
laughs at it; but, blessed are the poor, for theirs is the Kingdom; Then this
poverty is to be striven for more than all riches; under these rags is hid
cloth of gold; out of this carcass comes honey.

SECT. 2.
Prove. 16.5. There is a generation of men who do commit idolatry with
themselves; (no such idol as self.) They admire their own parts, moralities,
self-righteousnesse; and upon this stock graft the hope of their salvation.
There are many are too good to go to heaven; they have commodities enough of
their own growth, and they scorn to live upon the borrow, or be beholding to
Christ. These bladders the Devil has blown up with pride, and they are swelled
in their own conceit; but it is like the swelling of a dropsie-man whose
bigness is his disease; thus it was with that proud Justiciary, Luke 18.11.
The Pharisee stood and prayed, God I thank thee that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican; I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes, etc. Here was a man setting up the top-sail of pride; but
the Publican who was poor in spirit, he stood a far off, and would not lift up
so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smot upon his breast saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner; This man carried away the Garland; I tell you (says
Christ) this man went down to his house justified rather than the other; Saint
Paul before his conversion thought himself in a very good condition, Touching
the Law blameless, Phil. 3.6. He thought to have built a Tower of his own
righteousness, the top whereof should have reached to heaven; but at last God
showed him there was a crack in the foundation, and then he gets into the Rock
of ages; Phil. 3.9. That I may be found in him; There is not a more dangerous
praecipice than self-righteousnesse; this was Laodicea's temper, Rev. 3.17.
because thou say I am rich, and have need of nothing, and know not that
thou art wretched and miserable, etc. She thought she wanted nothing, when
indeed she had nothing. How many does this damn! we see some ships that have
escaped the rocks, yet are cast away upon the sands: so some who have escaped the
rocks of gross sins, yet are cast away upon the sands of self-righteousnesse;
and how hard is it to convince such men of their danger! they will not believe
but they may be helped out of the Dungeon with these rotten rags; they cannot
be persuaded their case is so bad as others would make it. Christ tells them
they are blind, but they are like Seneca's maid who was born blind, but she
would not believe it; Ait domum esse coecam. The house says she is dark, but I
am not blind. Christ tells them they are naked, and offers his white robes to
cover them, but they are of a different persuasion; and because they are blind,
they cannot see themselves naked; how many have perished by being their own
saviors! O that this might drive the proud sinner out of himself; a man never
comes to himself till he comes out of himself; and no man can come out, till
first Christ come in.

SECT. 3.
Trial.
How shall I Answ. By the blessed effects of this Poverty: which are;

1. He that is poor in spirit is weaned from himself, Psalm 131.2. My soul is
even as a weaned child; it is hard for a man to be weaned from himself. The Vine
catches hold of every thing that is near, to stay it self upon. There is some
bough or other a man would be catching hold of to rest upon; how hard is it to
be brought quite off himself! The poor in spirit are divorced from themselves;
they see they must to hell without Christ; My soul is even as a weaned child.

2. He that is poor in spirit, is a Christ-admirer; he the tree of life, which
is both for food and medicine! The poor in spirit sees all his riches lie in
Christ, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, etc. In every exigence he
flies to this magazine and storehouse; he adores the all-fulnesse in Christ.
They say of the oil in Rhemes, though they are continually almost spending it,
yet it never wastes. And such is Christ's blood; it can never be emptied; he that
is poor in spirit has recourse still to this fountain; he sets an high value
and appre^iation upon Christ; he hides himself in Christ's wounds In vulacribus
Christi dormio securus and requiesco intrepidus. Aug.
; he bathes himself in his blood, he wraps himself in his Robe; he sees a
spiritual dearth and famine at home, but he makes out to Christ; Show me the
Lord (says he) and it suffices.

Poor in spirit; he is ever complaining of his wants; I want a broken heart, a
thankful heart; he makes himself the most indigent creature; though he dares
not deny the work of grace (which were a bearing false witness against the
Spirit) yet he mourns he has no more grace: This is the difference between an
hypocrite and a child of God; the hypocrite is ever telling what he has; a
child of God complains of what he wants; the one is glad he is so good; the
other grieves he is so bad; the poor in spirit goes from Ordinance to Ordinance
for a supply of his wants, he would fain have his stock increased. Try by this
if you are poor in spirit; while others complain they want children, they want
Estates, do you complain you want Grace? this is a good sign; there is that
makes himself Poor, yet has great Riches, Prove. 13.7. Some beggars have died
rich; the poor in spirit, who have lain all their lives at the gate of mercy,
and have lived upon the Alms of free grace, have dyed rich in faith, heirs to a
Kingdom.

Poor in spirit, is lowly in heart: Rich men are commonly proud and scornful,
but the poor are submissive; the poor in spirit roll themselves in the dust,
in the sense of their unworthiness: I abhor my self in dust, Job 42.6. He who
is poor in spirit, looks at another excellencies, and his own infirmities; he
denies not only his sins, but his duties; the more grace he has, the more
humble he is, because he now sees himself a greater debtor to God; if he can do
any duty, he acknowledges it is Christ's strength more than his own: Phil.
4.13. as the Ship gets to the Haven more by the benefit of the wind, than the
sail: So when a Christian makes any swift progress, it is more by the wind of
Gods Spirit, than the sail of his own endeavor; the poor in spirit, when he
acts most like a Saint, he confesses himself the chief of sinners; he blusheth
more at the defect of his graces, than others do at the excess of their sins;
he dares not say he has prayed or wept; he lives, yet not he, but Christ lives
in him: Gal. 2.20. He labors, yet not he, but the grace of God, 1 Cor. 15.10.

5. He who is poor in spirit, is much in prayer; he sees Poor in spirit, he is
ever begging for a spiritual Alms; he knocks at heaven-gate; he sends up
sighs; he poures out tears; he will not away from the gate, till he have his
dole; God loves a modest boldness in prayer, such shall not be nonsuited.

6. The poor in spirit is content to take Christ upon Prince as well as a
Savior. Phil. 3.8. Jesus my Lord. A Castle that has been long besieged, and
is ready to be taken, will deliver up on any terms to save their lives; he
whose heart has been a Garrison for the Devil, and has held out long in
opposition against Christ, when once God has brought him to poverty of spirit,
and he sees himself damned without Christ, let God propound what Articles he
will, he will readily subscribe to them* Acts 9.6. Lord, what will thou have me
do? He that is poor in spirit, will do any thing that he may have Christ; he
will behead his beloved sin; he will with Peter, cast himself upon the water to
come to Christ.

Paul had tasted mercy, how thankfully does he adore free grace! 1 Timothy 1.14.
The grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant; (...), it was super-exuberant; he
sets the crown of his salvation upon the head of free grace; as a man that is
condemned, and has a pardon sent him, how does he proclaim the goodness and
clemency of his Prince! so Saint Paul displays free grace in its orient
colors; he interlines all his Epistles with free grace; as a Vessel that has
been perfumed, makes the wine taste of it: so Paul, who was a Vessel perfumed
with mercy, makes all his Epistles to taste of this perfume of free grace; they
who are poor in spirit, bless God for the least crumb that falls from the Table
of free grace.

SECT. 4.
Exhort.
and we must begin here if ever we be saved; poverty of spirit is the
foundation stone on which God lays the superstructure of glory. There are four
things may persuade Christians to be poor in spirit. 1. This poverty is your
riches; you may have the worlds riches, and yet be poor; you cannot have this
poverty, but you must be rich; poverty of spirit intitles you to all Christ's
riches. 2. This poverty is your Nobility Nobilis in^pia mentis humilitas.
Austin.
; God looks upon you as persons of honor; he that is vile in his own eyes, is
precious in Gods eyes Tanto eris apud Deum, reciosior, qua^to fueris in oculis
tuis despectior. Isiod.
; the way to rise, is to fall; God esteems the Valley highest. 3. Poverty of
spirit does sweetly quiet the soul; when a man is brought off himself to rest
on Christ, what a blessed calm is in the heart! I am poor, but my God shall
supply all my need, Phil. 4.19. I am unworthy, but Christ is worthy. I am
indigent, Christ is infinite. Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I, Psalm.
61.2. A man is safe upon a Rock; when the soul goes out of it self, and centers
upon the Rock Christ, now it is firmly settled upon its Basis; this is the way
to comfort; thou will be wounded in spirit, till thou come to be poor in
spirit. 4. Poverty of spirit paves a Cawsey for blessedness. Blessed are the
poor in spirit. Are you poor in spirit? you are blessed persons, happy for you
that ever you were born! If you ask, Wherein does this blessedness appear? Read
the next words, Theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

CHAP. V.
Showing that the poor in spirit are enriched with a Kingdom.

Matthew. 5.3. Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
A (...). Here is high preferment for the Saints, they shall be advanced to a
Kingdom; there are some who aspiring after earthly greatness talk of a
temporal reign here, but then Gods Church on earth should not be Militant, but
Triumphant; but sure it is, the Saints shall reign in a glorious manner, Theirs
is the Kingdom of heaven; a Kingdom is held the (...), and top of all worldly
felicity; and this honor have all the Saints; so says our Savior, Theirs is
the Kingdom of heaven. All Christ's subjects are Kings; By the Kingdom of
heaven, is meant that state of glory which the Saints shall enjoy when they
shall reign with God, and the Angels for ever; sin, hell, and death, being
fully subdued. For the illustration of this I shall show first, wherein the
Saints in heaven are like Kings.

SECT. 1,
Wherein the Saints glorified may be compared to Kings.

KIngs have their insignia or regalia, their ensigns of Royalty and Majesty.

1. Kings have their Crowns; so the Saints after death Rev. 2.10. Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. Believers are not
only pardoned, but crowned; Corona insignem habet praeceteris ornamentis
dignitatem. Bern.
the Crown is an ensign of honor. A Crown is not for every one, it will not
fit every head; it is only for Kings and persons of renown to wear, Psalm. 21.3.
The Crown which the poor in spirit shall wear in heaven, is an honorable
Crown; God himself installs them into their honor, and sets the Crown-royal
upon their head. And this Crown the Saints shall wear, which is divinely orient
and illustrious, exceeds all other.

1. It Is more pure. Other Crowns, though they may be made of pure gold, yet
they are mixed metal, they have their troubles. A Crown of gold cannot be made
without thorns Non ita corona circundat caput, sicut animam sollicitudo.
; it has so many vexations belonging to it, that it is apt to make the
headache. Which made Cyrus say, did men but know what cares he sustained under
the Imperial Crown, ne humi diadema tollerent, he thought they would not stoop
to take it up. But the Saints Crown is made without crosses; it is not mingled
with care of keeping, or fear of losing. What Solomon speaks in another sense,
I may say of the Crown of glory, it adds no sorrow with it Prove. 10.22.
. This Crown like David's Harp, drives away the evil spirit of sorrow and
disquiet; there can be no more grief in heaven, than there is joy in hell.

2. This Crown of glory does not draw envy to it. David's own son envied him,
and sought to take his Crown from his head. A Princely Crown is oftentimes the
mark for envy and ambition to shoot at; but the Crown the Saints shall wear, is
free from envy; one Saint shall not envy another, because all are crowned; and
though one Crown may be larger than another, yet (...), every one shall have as
big a Crown as he is able to carry.

3. This is a never-fading Crown. Corona haec non fit ex rosis aut gemmis
Tertul.
, etc. Other Crowns quickly wear away, and tumble into the dust, Prove. 27.4.
Does the Crown endure to all generations? Henry the sixth was honored with the
Crowns of two Kingdoms, France and England; the first was lost through the
faction of his Nobles; the other was twice plucked from his head. The Crown
has many heirs and successors. The Crown is a withering thing; death is a worm
that feeds in it; but the Crown of glory is immarcessible, it fades not away,
1 Pet. 5.4. It Is not like the Rose that loses its gloss and vernancy; this
Crown cannot be made to wither, but like the flower we call Semper vivens, it
keeps always fresh and splendent. Eternity is a Jewel of the Saints Crown.

2. Kings have their Robes. The Robe is a garment wherewith Kings are arrayed.
The King of Israel and the King of Judah sat clothed in their robes, 2 Chronicles.
18.19. The Robe was of scarlet, or velvet lind with Ermyn, sometimes of a
purple color, whence it was called Purpura; sometimes of an azure brightness.
Thus the Saints shall have their Robes. Rev. 7.9. I beheld a great multitude
which no man could number of all Nations and kindreds, clothed in white Robes.
The Saints Robes signify their glory and splendour; and white Robes, that is to
denote their sanctity; they have no sin to taint or defile their Robes; in
these Robes they shall shine as the Angels.

3. Kings have their Scepters in token of Rule and Greatness: King Ahashuerus
held out to Esther the golden Scepter, Esth. 5.2. and the Saints in glory have
their Scepter, and Palms in their hand, Rev. 7. It was a custom of great
Conquerors to have Palm-branches in their hand in token of victory: So the
Saints, those Kings have Palms, an Emblem of victory and triumph; they are
Victors over sin and hell. Rev. 12.11. They overcame by the blood of the Lamb.

4. Kings have their Thrones: When Caesar returned from conquering his enemies,
there were granted to him four Triumphs in token of honor, and there was set
for him a Chair of Ivory in the Senate, and a Throne in the Theater: Thus the
Saints in heaven returning from their victories over sin, shall have a Chair of
State set them more rich than Ivory or Pearl, and a Throne of glory: Revel.
3.21. This shall be, 1. An high Throne; it is seated above all the Kings and
Princes of the earth; nay, it is far above all heavens, Ephesians. 4. There is, 1.
the Aerie heaven, which is that space from the earth, usque ad spheram lunae, to
the sphere of the Moon. 2. The Starry heaven; the place where are the Stars,
and those superiores Planetae, (as the Philosophers call them) Planets of the
higher elevation, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc. 3. The Empyraean heaven, which
is called the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. In this glorious sublime place shall
the Throne of the Saints be erected. 2. It is a safe Throne: Other Thrones are
unsafe, they stand tottering; Psalm. 73.18. Thou have set them in slippery
places; but the Saints Throne is sure: Rev. 3.21. He that overcomes, shall sit
with me upon my Throne: The Saints shall fit with Christ; he keeps them safe,
that no hand of violence can pull them from their Throne. O ye people of God
think of this; though now you may be called to the Bar, yet shortly you shall
sit upon the Throne.

SECT. 2.
Showing wherein the Kingdom of heaven excels other Kingdoms.

2. HAving shown wherein the Saints in glory are like Kings, let us next see
wherein the Kingdom of heaven exceeds other Kingdoms.

Founder and Maker; other Kingdoms have men for their builders, but this
Kingdom has God for its builder: Hebr. 11.10. Heaven is said to be made
without hands, 2 Cor. 5.1. to show the excellency of it; neither Man or Angel
could ever lay stone in this building; God does erect this Kingdom; its Builder
and Maker is God.

Riches of it; gold does no so much surpass iron, as this Kingdom does all
other riches; the gates are of pearl, Rev. 21.21. And the foundations of it are
garnished with all precious stones, Ver. 19. It Is enough for Cabinets to have
pearl; but were gates of pearl ever heard of before? it is said Kings shall
throw down their Crowns and Scepters before it, Rev. 4.10. as counting all
their glory and riches but dust in comparison of it; this Kingdom has Deity it
self to enrich it, and these riches are such as cannot be weighed in the
balance; neither the heart of man can conceive, nor the tongue of Angel

3. This Kingdom exceeds in the Perfection of it; other Kingdoms are defective;
they have not all provisions within themselves, nor have they all commodities
of their own growth; but are forced to traffic abroad, to supply their wants
at home. King Solomon did send for gold to Ophir, 2 Chronicles. 8.18. but there is
no defect in the Kingdom of heaven, here are all delights and rarities to be
had. Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things. Here is beauty,
wisdom, glory and magnificence; here is the Tree of life in the midst of this
Paradise; all things are to be found here but sin and sorrow, the absence
whereof adds to the fullness of this Kingdom.

4. It excels in security; other Kingdoms fear either Solomon's Kingdom was
peaceable awhile, but at last he had an Alarm given him by the enemy, 1 Kings
11.4. But the Kingdom of heaven is so impregnable, that it fears no hostile
assaults or inrodes Nullus ibi hostium m^tus, nullae infidiae daemonum. Bern.
. The Devils are said to be locked up in chains, Jude 6. The Saints in heaven
shall no more need fear them, than a man fears that Thiefs robbing, who is
hanged up in chains. The gates of this ce^^^^l Kingdom are not shut at all by
day, Rev. 21.25. We shut the gates of the City in a time of danger; but the
gates of that Kingdom always stand open, to show that there is no fear of the
approach of an enemy; the Kingdom has gates for the magnificence of it; but
the gates are not shut, because of the secureness of it.

5. This Kingdom excels in its stability; other Kingdoms vanity written upon
them, they cease, and are changed; though they may have an head of gold, yet
feet of clay. Hosea 1.4. I will cause the Kingdom to cease. Kingdoms have their
climacterical year: Where is the glory of Athens? the pomp of Troy Jam seges
est ubi Troja fuit?
? What is become of the Assyrian, Grecian, Persian Monarchy? those Kingdoms
are demolished, and laid in the dust; but the Kingdom of heaven has Eternity
written upon it, it is an everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. other Kingdoms may
be lasting, but not everlasting; the Apostle calls it (...), a Kingdom that
cannot be shaken, Hebr. 12.28. It is fastened upon a strong Basis, the
Omnipotency of God, it runs parallel with Eternity: Revel. 22.5. They shall
reign for ever and ever.

SECT. 3.
Showing, that this Kingdom shall be certainly and infallibly entailed upon the
Saints.

3. I shall next clear the truth of this Proposition, that the Saints shall be
possessed of this Kingdom.

1. In regard of Gods (...), or free grace. Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers good
pleasure to give you a Kingdom. It Is not any desert in us, but free-gra^^ in
God: The Papists say we ^e^t the Kingdom ex condigno; but we disclaim the title
of merit; heaven is a donative.

2. There is a price paid; Jesus Christ has shed his blood for it; all the
Saints come to the Kingdom through blood; Christ's hanging upon the Cross, was
to bring us to the Crown; as the Kingdom of heaven is a gift in regard of the
Father, so it is a Purchase in regard of the Son.

SECT. 4.
The several Corollaries and Inferences drawn from the Point.

USE 1. Information. 1. Branch. It shows us that Non tantum exemplis sed
proemiis ad Christum allicimur. Bern.
. When we hear of the Doctrine of Repentance, steeping our souls in brinish
tears for sin; the Doctrine of Mortification pulling out the right eye,
beheading the King-sin; we are ready to think it is hard to take down this
bitter pill; but here is that in the Text may sweeten it; there is a Kingdom
behind, and that will make amends for all; this glorious recompense does as far
exceed our thoughts, as it does surpass our deserts; no man can say without
wrong to God that he is a hard Master. God gives double pay, he bestows a
Kingdom upon those that fear him; Satan may disparage the ways of God, like
those spies that raised an ill report of the good Land; Number. 13.32. But will
Satan mend your wages if you serve him? he gives damnable pay; instead of a
Kingdom, chains of darkness, Jude 6.

2. See here the mercy and bounty of God, that has vermiculi, worms, and no
men Psalm. 22.6.
, should be suffered to live; but that worms should be made Kings, this is
Divine bounty; it is mercy to pardon us, but it is rich mercy to crown us:
Behold, what manner of love is this! Earthly Princes may bestow great gifts and
donatives on their Subjects, but they keep the Kingdom to themselves; though
Pharaoh advanced Joseph to honor, and gave him a Ring from his finger, yet he
kept the Kingdom to himself. Genesis 41.40. Only in the Throne I will be greater
than thou; but God gives a Kingdom to his people, he sets them upon the Throne.
How does David admire the goodness of God in bestowing upon him a temporal
Kingdom! 2 Samuel 7.18. Then went King David in, and sat before the Lord, and
said, Who am I O Lord God! and what is my house, that thou have brought me
hitherto! he wondered that God should take him from the sheepfold, and set him
on the Throne! that God should turn his shepherds staff into a Scepter! O
then how may the Saints admire the riches of grace, that God should give them a
Kingdom, above all the Princes of the earth; nay, far above all heavens! God
thinks nothing too good for his children. We many times think much of a tear, a
prayer, or to sacrifice a sin for him; but he does not think much to bestow a
Kingdom upon us: How will the Saints read over the Lectures of free grace in
heaven, and Trumpet forth the praises of that God who has crowned them with
loving kindness!

Prove. 13.5. Romans 6.21. What fruit had ye in those things whereof you are now
ashamed? but Religion brings to honor: Prove. 4.8. it brings a man to a Throne,
a Crown, it ends in glory; it is the sinners folly to reproach a Saint; it is
just as if Shimei had reproached David, when he was going to be made King; it
is a Saints wisdom to contemn a reproach; say as David, when he danced before
the Ark, I will yet be more vile, 2 Samuel 6.22. If to pray and hear, and serve
my God be to be vile, I will yet be more vile: This is my excellency, my glory;
I am doing now that which will bring me to a Kingdom: O think it no disgrace to
be a Christian. I speak it chiefly to you who are entering upon the ways of
God; perhaps you may meet with such as will reproach and censure you; bind
their reproaches as a Crown about your head, despise their censure as much as
their praise; remember, there is a Kingdom entailed upon godliness. Sin draws
hell after it, grace draws a Crown after it.

4. See here that which may make the people of God Kingdom, but a Prison; hell
is the iayle where they must lie rotting for ever with the Devil and his
Angels. To every Christlesse person death is the King of terror; but the godly
may long for death, it will prefer them to a Kingdom. When Scipio's father had
told him of that glory the soul should be invested with in a state of
immortality; why then says Scipio, do I tarry thus long upon the earth? why do
I not hasten to die Tully in Somn. Scip.
? Believers are not perfectly happy till death. When Croesus asked Solon who he
thought happy? he told him one Tellus, a man that was dead; a Christian at
death shall be completely installed into his honor; the anointing oil shall
be poured on him, and the Crown-royal set upon his head. The Thracians in their
funerals used music. The Heathens (as Theocritus observes) had their (...), or
Funeral banquet, because of that felicity which they supposed the parties
deceased were entered into; The Saints are now heirs of the Kingdom, James 2.5.
Does not the heir desire to be crowned?

Truly, there is enough to weane us, and make us willing to be gone from hence.
The Saints eat ashes like bread, they are here in a suffering condition. Psalm
141.7. Our bones are scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth and
cleaves wood upon the earth. When a man hewes, and cuts a tree, the chips fly
up and down, here and there a chip: so here a Saint wounded, there a Saint
massacred; our bones fly like chips up and down; for thy sake are we killed
all the day long, Romans 8.36. But there is a Kingdom a coming, when the body is
buried, the soul is crowned. Who would not be willing to sail in a storm if he
were sure to be crowned as soon as he came at shore? How is it that the godly
look so ghastly at the thoughts of death, as if they were rather going to their
execution, than their Coronation? though we should be willing to stay here
awhile to do service; yet we should with Saint Paul, desire to be dissolved and
be with Christ. The day of a believers dissolution is the day of his
inauguration.

SECT. 5.
Containing a scrutiny, and trial whether we belong to this Kingdom.

Trial.
1. If God have set up his Kingdom within us. Luke 17.21. The Kingdom of God is
within you; by the Kingdom of God there is meant the Kingdom of Grace in the
heart. Grace may be compared to a Kingdom, it swayes the Scepter, it gives out
Laws, there is the Law of love; Grace beats down the Devils garrisons, it
brings the heart into a sweet subjection to Christ; Now is this Kingdom of
Grace set up in thy heart? Do thou rule over thy sins? Can thou bind
those Kings in chains Psalm. 149.8.
? Art thou a King over thy pride; passion, unbelief? Is the Kingdom of God
within you? While others aspire after earthly greatness, and labor for a
Kingdom without them, do thou labor for a Kingdom within thee? Certainly if
the Kingdom of Grace be in thy heart, thou shall have the Kingdom of glory. If
Gods Kingdom enter into thee, thou shall enter into his Kingdom. But let not
that man ever think to reign in glory, who lives a slave to his lusts.

2. If thou art a believer, thou shall go to this blessed Kingdom. James 2.5.
Rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom. Faith is an heroical act of the soul; it
makes an holy adventure on God, by a promise; this is the crowning grace; Faith
puts us into Christ, and our title to the Crown comes in by Christ. By Faith we
are borne of God, and so we become children of the blood royal. By Faith our
hearts are purified, Acts 15.9. and so we are made fit for a Kingdom; rich in
faith, heirs of the Kingdom. Faith paves a Causey to heaven, believers die
heirs to the Crown.

3. He that has a noble, Kingly spirit, shall go to the heavenly Kingdom; set
your affection on things above, Col. 3.2. Do thou live in mundo supra mundum,
in the world, above the world? The Eagle does not catch flies, she soars aloft
in the air; do thou superna anhelare, pant after glory and immortality? Have
thou a brave majestic spirit, an heavenly ambition? do thou mind the favor
of God, the peace of Sion, the salvation of thy soul? Do thou abhor that
which is sordid and below thee? Alexander would not exercise at the
Olympick-games. Can thou trample upon all sublunary things? Is heaven in thy
eye, and Christ in thy heart, and the world under thy feet? He who has such a
Kingly spirit, that looks no lower than a Crown, he shall dwell on high, and
have his throne mounted far above all heavens.

SECT. 6.
A serious exhortation to Christians.

Exhortation. And it has a double aspect; it looks, Exhort.
1. toward the wicked. Is there a Kingdom to be had, a Kingdom so enameled
and bespangled with glory? Oh then do not by your folly make your selves
incapable of this preferment; do not for the satisfying a base lust forfeit a
Kingdom; do not drink away a Kingdom, do not for the lap of pleasure lose the
Crown of life; if men before they did commit a sin, would but sit down and
rationally consider whether the present gain and sweetness in sin would
countervail the loss of a Kingdom, I believe it would put them into a cold
sweat, and give some check to their unbridled affections. Jacob took Esau by
the heel. Look not upon the smiling face of sin, but take it by the heel,
look at the end of it; it will deprive you of a Kingdom; and can any thing make
amends for that loss (...). Ephesians. 5.11.
? O is it not madness for the unfruitful works of darkness, to lose a
Kingdom? How will the Devil at the last day reproach and laugh at men that they
should be so stupidly sottish, as for a rattle to forgo a Crown! Like those
Indians, who for pictures and glasse-beads will part with their gold. Surely it
will much contribute to the vexation of the damned to think how foolishly they
missed of a Kingdom.

2. The Exhortation looks toward the godly; and it exhorts to two things. 1.
Is there a Kingdom in reversion? then let this be a motive to duty; do all the
service you can for God while you live; spend and be spent. The reward is
honorable; the thoughts of a Kingdom should add wings to prayer, and fire to
zeal; what honor and dignity has been done to Mordecai? says King
Ahashuerus, Esther 6.3. Inquire what has been done for God? What love have
thou showed to his Name? what zeal for his glory? where is the head of that
Goliath lust thou have slain for his sake? Methinks we should sometimes go aside
into our Closets and weep, to consider how little work we have done for God:
What a vast disproportion is there between our service, and our reward? what is
all our weeping and fasting compared to a Kingdom? oh improve all your interest
for God; make seasons of grace, opportunities for service.

And that you may act more vigorously for God, know, and be assured, the more
work you do, the more glory you shall have: Every Saint shall have a Kingdom;
but the more service any man does for God, the greater will be his Kingdom;
there are degrees of glory Sicut vary Deus sua dona sanctis in hoc mundo
distribuens, eos inaequaliter irradiat; ita in caelis patet non fore aequalem
gloriae modum. Calv. l. 3. Instit.
; which I prove thus:

1. Because there are degrees of torments in hell; Luke 20. ult. They shall
receive greater damnation: (...). They who do make Religion a cloak for their
sin, shall have an hotter place in hell: Now if there be degrees of torment in
hell, then by the rule of contraries there are degrees of glory in the Kingdom
of heaven.

2. Seeing God in his free grace rewards men according to their works,
therefore the more service they do, the greater shall their reward be. Rev.
22.12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his works shall be. He that has done more, shall receive more; he
whose pound gained ten, was made Ruler over ten Cities, Luke 19.16. This may
very much excite to eminency in Religion; the more the lamp of your grace
shines, the more you shall shine in the heavenly orb; Would you have your Crown
brighter, your Kingdom larger, your Palm-branches more flourishing? be
Christians of degrees; do much work in a little time; while you are laying out,
God is laying up; the more glory you bring to God, the more glory you shall
have from God.

2. Walk worthy of this Kingdom. 1 These. 2.12. That ye would walk (...), worthy
of God who has called you to his Kingdom. Live as Kings, let the Majesty of
holiness appear in your faces; those who looked on Stephen, saw his face as it
had been the face of an Angel, Acts 6.15. A kind of Angelical brightness was
seen in his Visage; when we shine in zeal, humility, gravity, this does
beautify and honor us in the eyes of others, and make us look as those who
are heirs apparent to a Crown.

SECT. 7.
Consol.
God has provided them a Kingdom. Theirs is the Kingdom of heaven: A child of
God is often so low in the world, that he has not a foot of land to inherit; he
is poor in purse, as well as poor in spirit; but here is a fountain of
consolation opened; the poorest Saint who has lost all his golden Fleece, is
heir to a Kingdom; a Kingdom which excels all the Kingdoms and Principalities
of the world, more than Pearl or Diamond does excel brass; it is pearless and
endless. The hope of a Kingdom, says Basil, should carry a Christian with
courage and cheerfulness through all his afflictions; and it is a saying of
Luther, The sea of Gods mercy overflowing in spiritual blessings, should drown
all the sufferings of this life. What though thou go now in rags? thou shall
have thy white robes; What though thou art fed as Daniel with pulse, and have
courser fare? thou shall feast it when thou come into the Kingdom; here thou
drinkest the water of tears, but shortly thou shall drink the wine of Paradise;
be comforted with the thoughts of a Kingdom.

CHAP. VI.
MATTHEW. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn.


M (...). Here are eight steps leading to true blessedness; they may be
compared to Jacobs Ladder, the top whereof reached to heaven; we have already
gone over one step, and now let us proceed to the second. Beati Lugentes,
Blessed are they that Mourn. We must go through the valley of tears to
Paradise. Mourning were a sad and unpleasant subject to treat on, were it not
that it has blessedness going before, and comfort coming after: Mourning is
put here for Repentance; it implies both sorrow, which is the Cloud; and tears,
which are the Rain distilling in this golden shower, God comes down to us. The
words fall into two parts. 1. An Assertion, that Mourners are blessed persons.
2. A Reason, because they shall be comforted. I begin with the first, the
Assertion, Mourners are blessed persons. Luke 6.21. Blessed are ye that weep
now. Though the Saints tears are bitter tears, yet they are blessed tears.

Quest. But will all mourning entitle a man to blessedness?

Answ. No; there is a twofold mourning which is far from making one blessed.

There is a Carnal Mourning. Diabolical Mourning.


1. There is a Carnal Mourning, when we lament outward losses. Matthew. 2.18. In
Rama there was a voice heard, lamentation and weeping, and great Mourning;
Rachel weeping for her children, etc. There are abundance of these tears shed;
we have many can mourn over a Dead Child, that cannot mourn over a Crucified
Savior: Worldly sorrow hastens our Funerals. 2 Cor. 7.10. The sorrow of the
world works death.

2. There is a Diabolical Mourning, and that is twofold.

1. When a man mourns that he cannot satisfy his impure lust; this is like the
Devil, whose greatest torture is, that he can be no more wicked: Thus Amnon
Mourned, and was sick, till he had defiled his sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.2. Thus
Ahab Mourned for Naboths Vineyard, 1 Kings 21.4. He laid him down upon his bed,
and turned away his face, and would eat no bread; this was a Divellish Mourning.

2. When men are sorry for the good which they have done: Pharaoh grieved that
he had let the children of Israel go, Exodus 14.5. Many are so Divellish, that
they are troubled they have prayed so much, and have heard so many Sermons;
they repent of their Repentance; but if we repent of the good which is past,
God will not repent of the evil which is to come.

SECT. 1.
Showing the Object of holy Mourning.

TO illustrate this Point of holy Mourning, I shall show you what is the
Adequate object of it. There are two objects of spiritual mourning, sin and
misery.

1. Sin, and that twofold; 1. Our own sin. 2. The sin of others.


1. Our own sin; sin must have tears: Nihil est fletu dignum nisi peccatum
Paul. de Palatio.
: While we carry the fire of sin about us, we must carry the water of tears to
quench it: Ezekiel. 7.16. They are not blessed (says Chrysostom) who mourn for
the dead, but who mourn for sin (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
; and indeed good reason we mourn for sin, if we consider, 1. The guilt of sin,
which binds over to wrath: Will not a guilty person weep, who is to be bound
over to the Sessions? every sinner is to be tried for his life, and is sure to
be cast, if mercy does not become an Advocate for him. 2. The pollution of sin;
sin is a plague-spot, and will thou not labor to wash away this spot with thy
tears? sin makes a man worse than a toad or serpent; the serpent has nothing
but what God has put into it, poison is medicinable; but the sinner has that
which the Devil has put into him. Acts 5.3. Why has Satan filled thy heart to
lie to the Holy Ghost? What a strange Metamorphosis has sin made! the soul
which was once of an azure brightness, sin has made of a sable color; we have
in our hearts the seed of the unpardonable sin; we have the seeds of all those
sins for which the damned are now tormented; and shall we not mourn? he that
mourns not, sure has lost the use of his Reason; but every Mourning for sin,
is not sufficient to entitle a man to Blessedness; I shall show:

1. What is not the right Gospel-Mourning for sin. 2. What is the right
Gospel-Mourning for sin.
SECT. 2.
1 WHAT is not the right Gospel-Mourning for sin; there is a five-fold Mourning
which is false and spurious.

1. A despairing kind of Mourning; such was Judas his Mourning; he saw his sin,
he was sorry, he made confession, he justifies Christ, he makes Restitution:
Mat. 27. Judas who is in hell, did more than many now adays; he confessed his
sin; he did not plead necessity, or good intentions; but he makes an open
acknowledgement of his sin, I have sinned; Judas made Restitution; his
conscience told him he came wickedly by the money; it was the price of blood,
and he brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the High Priests, Matthew.
27.3. But how many are there who invade the rights and possessions of others,
but not a word of Restitution! Judas was honester than they are; well, wherein
was Judas his sorrow blameworthy? it was a Mourning joined with despair; he
thought his wound broader than the plaster; he drowned himself in tears; his
was not a Repentance unto life Acts 11.8.
, but rather unto death.

2. An hypocritical Mourning; the heart is very deceitful, it can betray as
well by a tear, as by a kiss: Saul looks like a mourner, and as he was
sometimes among the Prophets, 1 Samuel 10.12. so he seemed to be among the
Penitents, 1 Samuel 15.25. And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned, for I have
transgressed the the commandment of the Lord. Saul did play the hypocrite in
his mourning; for 1. He did not take shame to himself, but he did rather take
honor to himself, verse 30. honor me before the Elders of the people. 2. He
did pare and mince his sin that it might appear lesser; he laid his sin
upon the people, ver. 24. because I feared the people; they would have me fly
upon the spoil, and I durst do no other; a true mourner labors to draw out
sin in its bloody colors, and accent it with all its killing aggravations,
that he may be deeply humbled before the Lord, Ezra 9.6. Our iniquities are
increased over our head, and our trespasses are grown up unto heaven. The true
penitent labors to make the worst of his sin; Saul labors to make the best
of sin; like a patient that makes the best of his disease, lest the Physician
should prescribe him too sharp physic. How easy is it for a man to put a
chea^ upon his own soul, and by hypocrisy to weep himself into hell!

3. A forced mourning; when tears are pumped out by Gods judgments; these are
like the tears of a man that has the stone, or that lies upon the wrack. Such
was Cains mourning, Genesis 4.13. My punishment is greater than I can bear; his
punishment troubled him more than his sin; to mourn only for fear of hell, is
like a thief that weeps for the penalty, rather than the offense; the tears of
the wicked are forced by the fire of affliction.

4. An extrinsecal mourning; when sorrow lies only in superficie, in the
outside, (...), they disfigure their faces, Matthew. 6.16. The eye is tender, but
the heart hard. Such was Ahabs mourning, 1 Kings 21. 27. He rent his clothes,
and put sackcloth on his flesh, and went softly. His clothes were rent, but his
heart was not rent; he had sackcloth, but no sorrow: he did hang down his head
like a bull-rush, but his heart was like an Adamant. There are many may be
compared to weeping Marbles, they are both watery and flinty.

5. A vain fruitless mourning; some will shed a few tears, but are as bad as
ever; they will cozen, and be unclean; such a kind of mourning there is in
hell; the damned weep, but they blaspheme.

SECT. 3.


Answ. That mourning which will entitle a man to blessedness, has these
qualifications.

1. It is spontaneous and free; it must come as water out of a spring, not as
fire out of a flint. Tears for sin must be like the myrrh which drops from
the tree freely without cutting or forcing. Mary Magdalens repentance was
voluntary, she stood weeping, Luke 7. She came to Christ with ointment in her
hand, with love in her heart, with tears in her eyes; God is for a
freewil-offering, he loves not to be put to distrain.

2. Gospel-mourning is spiritual; that is, when we mourn for sin more than
suffering. Pharaoh says, Take away the plague, he never thought of the plague
of his heart. A sinner mourns because judgment follows at the heels of sin;
but David cries out, my sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51. God had threatened
that the sword should ride in circuit in his family; but David does not say,
the sword is ever before me, but my sin is ever before me; The offense
against God troubled him; he grieved more for the treason than the bloody axe;
thus the Penitent Prodigal, Luke 15.21. I have sinned against heaven, (...),
and before thee; he does not say, I am almost starved among the husks, but I
have offended my father. In particular, our mourning for sin, if it be
spiritual, must be under this threefold notion.

1. We must mourn for sin as it is an act of hostility and enmity. Sin does
not only make us unlike God, but contrary to God, Levit. 26.40. and that they
have walked contrary unto me. Sin does affront and resist the Holy Ghost,
Acts 7.51. Sin is contrary to Gods nature; God is holy; sin is an impure
thing; sin is contrary to his will; if God be of one mind, sin is of
another; sin does all it can to spite God. The Hebrew word for sin (...)
signifies rebellion; a sinner does (...); now when we mourn for sin as it is
a walking Antipodes to heaven, this is a Gospel-mourning; nature will not bear
contraries.

2. We must mourn for sin as it is a piece of the highest ingratitude; it is a
kicking against the breasts of mercy. God sends his Son to redeem us, his
Spirit to comfort us; we sin against the blood of Christ, the grace of the
Spirit, and shall we not mourn? We complain of the unkindnesse of others, and
shall we not lay to heart our own unkindnesse against God? Caesar took it
unkindly that his son Brutus should stab him, (...), and thou my son? may not
the Lord say to us, these wounds I have received in the house of my friends
Zach. 13.6.
! (...) Theocr.
Israel took their jewels and earrings and made a golden Calfe of them; the
sinner takes the jewels of Gods mercies, and makes use of them to sin;
ingratitude dies a sin in grain, hence they are called crimson sins, Isa.
1.18. sins against Gospel-love are worse in some sense than the sins of the
Devils, for they never had an offer of Grace tendered to them, Diabolus peccavit
in innocentia constitutus, ego vero restitutus: ille perstitit in malitia, Deo
reprobante, ego vero Deo revocante; ille obduratur ad punientem, ego vero ad
blandientem; and sic uterque contra Deum, ille contra non requirentem se, ego
vero contra morientem pro me; ecce cujus imaginem horrebam, in multis aspicio
me horribiliorem. Anselm. de Casu Diab. Now when we mourn for sin as it has
its accent of ingratitude upon it, this is an Evangelical mourning,

3. We must mourn for sin as it is a Privation; it keeps good things from us;
it hinders our communion with God. Mary wept for Christ's absence, John 20.13.
they have taken away my Lord. So, our sins have taken away our Lord; they
have deprived us of his sweet presence. Will not he grieve who has lost a rich
jewel? When we mourn for sin under this notion, as it makes the Sun of
righteousness withdraw from our Horizon; when we mourn not so much that peace
is gone, and trading is gone, but God is gone; Cant. 5.6. My beloved had
withdrawn himself; this is an holy mourning; the mourning for the loss of Gods
favor, is the best way to regaine his favor. If thou have lost a friend, all
thy weeping will not fetch him again: but if thou have lost Gods presence, thy
mourning will bring thy God again.

3. Gospel-mourning cogit ad Deum, it sends the soul to God. When the Prodigal
son repented, he went to his father, Luke 15.18. I will arise and go unto my
father. Jacob wept and prayed, Hos. 12.3. The people of Israel wept and offered
sacrifice, Judge. 2.5. Gospel-mourning puts a man upon duty; the reason is,
because in true sorrow there is a mixture of hope, and hope puts the soul upon
the use or means; That mourning which like the flaming sword, keeps the soul
from approaching to God, and beats it off from duty, is a sinful mourning; it is
a sorrow hatched in hell; such was Saul's grief, which drove him to the Witch of
Endor, 1 Samuel 28.7. Evangelical Mourning is a spur to prayer; the child who
weeps for offending his father, goes into his presence, and will not leave till
his father be reconciled to him. Absalom could not be quiet till he had seen
the Kings face, 2 Samuel 14.32, 33.

4. Gospel-Mourning is for sin in particular: Dolosus versatur in generalibus:
It is with a true penitent as it is with a wounded man; he comes to the
Chyrurgion, and shows him all his wounds; here I was cut with the Sword, here I
was shot with a Bullet; So a true penitent bewails all his particular sins:
Judge. 10.10. We have served Baalim; they mourned for their Idolatry: And David
lays his finger upon the sore, and points to that very sin that troubled him:
Psalm. 51.4. I have done this evil; he means his blood-guiltiness; a wicked man
will say he is a sinner; but a child of God says, I have done this evil. Peter
wept for that particular sin of denying Christ; Clemens Alexandrinus says, he
never heard a Cock crow, but he fell a weeping; there must be a particular
Repentance, before we have a general pardon.

5. Gospel-tears must drop from the eye of faith, Mark 9.24. The father of the
child cried out with tears, Lord, I believe; our disease must make us mourn;
but when we look up to our Physician, who has made a plaster of his own
blood, we must not mourn without hope; believing tears are precious; when the
clouds of sorrow have overcast the soul, some Sunshine of faith must break
forth; the soul will be swallowed up of sorrow, it will be drowned in tears, if
faith be not the bladder to keep it up from sinking; though our tears drop to
the earth, our faith must reach heaven; after the greatest rain, faith must
appear as the Rainbow in the cloud; the tears of faith are botled as precious
wine Psalm. 56.8.

6. Gospel-Mourning is joined with self-loathing; the sinner does admire
himself, the penitent does loath himself. Ezekiel. 20.42. Ye shall loath your
selves in your own sight for all your evils. A true penitentiary is troubled
not only for the shameful consequence of sin, but the loathsome nature of sin;
not only the sting of sin, but the deformed face; How did the Leper loath
himself? Lev. 13.45. The Hebrew Doctors say, the Leper pronounced unclean, was
to put a covering on his upper lip, both as a Mourner, and in token of shame
Maimony. cap. 10.
, The true Mourner cries out, O these impure eyes, this heart which is a
conclave of wickedness! he not only leaves sin, but loathes fin; he that is
fallen in the dirt, loathes himself Hos. 14.1.
.

7. Gospel-Mourning must be purifying; our tears must make us more holy; we
must so weep for sin, as to weep out sin; our tears must drown our sins; we
must not only mourn, but turn. Joel 2.12. Turn to me with weeping: What is it
to have a watery eye, and a whorish heart? it is foolish to say it is day, when
the Air is full of darkness: So to say thou repentest, when thou drawest dark
shadows in thy life. It is an excellent saying of St. Austin, He does truly
bewail the sins he has committed, who never commits the sins he has bewailed
Ille vere plaugit comm^ssaqui non commutit plungenda. Aug.
. True Mourning is like the water of jealousy Number. 5.12.
, it makes the Thigh of sin to rot. Psalm. 74.14. Thou break^st the heads of the
Dragons in the waters. The heads of our sins, these Dragons are broken in the
waters of true Repentance; true tears are cleansing; they are like a Flood,
that carries away all the rubbish of our sins with it; the waters of holy
Mourning, are like the River Jordan, wherein Naaman washed, and was cleansed of
his Lep^osie. It Is reported there is a River in Sicilia, where if the blackest
s^eep are bathed, they become white; so, though our sins be as scarlet, yet by
washing in this River of Repentance, they become white as snow: Naturalists say
of the serpent, before it goes to drink, it vomits out its poison; in this be
wise as serpents; before thou think to drink down the sweet cordials of the
promises, cast up the poison that lies at your heart; do not only mourn for
sin, but break from sin.

8. Gospel-Mourning must be joined with hatred of sin. 2 Cor. 7.11. What
indignation? We must not only abstain from sin, but abhor sin; the Dove hates
the least feather of the Hawk Aldrovand.
; a true Mourner hates the least motion to sin; a true Mourner is a sin hater:
Amnen hated Tamar more than ever he loved her, 2 Samuel 13.5. To be a sin-hater,
implies two things. 1. To look upon sin as the most deadly evil, a complicated
evil; it looks more ghastly than death or hell. 2. To be implacably incensed
against it; a sin-hater will never admit of any terms of peace; the War between
him and sin, is like the War between Rehoboam and Jeroboam: 1 Kings 14.30.
There was War between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days: Anger may be
reconciled, hatred cannot; true Mourning begins in the love of God, and ends in
the hatred of sin

9. Gospel-Mou^ning in some cases is joined with Restitution; it is as well a
sin to violate the name, as the chastity of another; if we have eclipsed the
good name of others, we are bound to ask them forgiveness Fama pari passu
ambulat cum vita.
; if we have wronged them in their Estate by unjust, fraudulent dealing, we
must make them some compensation. Thus Zacheus, Luke 19.8. If I have taken any
thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold, according to
that Law, Exodus 22.1. Saint James bids us not only look to the heart, but the
hand. James 4.8. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts; if
thou have wronged another, cleanse thy hands by Restitution; be assured,
without Restitution, no Remission Non remittitur peccatura nisi restituatur
ablatum. Aug.
.

10. Gospel-Mourning must be a speedy Mourning: We must take heed of adjourning
our Repentance, and putting it off till death; as David said, I will pay my
vows now, Psalm. 116.18. so should a Christian say, I will mourn for sin now.
Luke 6.21. Blessed are ye that weep now; as Popilus the Roman Legate, when he
was sent to Antiochus the King, made a Circle round about the King, and bade
him make his answer before he went out of that Circle; so God has incircled us
in the compass of a little time, and charge us presently to bewail our sins.
Acts 17.30. Now God calls everywhere to repent; we know not whether we may
have another day granted us. Oh let us not put off our Mourning for sin till
the making of our will: Do not think holy Mourning is only a deathbed duty;
you may seek the blessing with tears, as Isaac, when it is too late, Quamdiu
cras? says Austin, How long shall I say I will repent to morrow? why not at
this instant? -- Mora trahit periculum: Caesar's deferring to read his letter
before he went to the Senate house, cost him his life. The true Mourner makes
haste to meet an angry God, as Jacob did his brother; and the Present he sends
before, is the sacrifice of tears.

11. Gospel-Mourning for sin is constant; there are some who at a Sermon will
shed a few tears, but this landflood is soon dried up; the hypocrites sorrow is
like a vein opened, and presently stopped; the Hebrew word for Eye, (...)
signifies also a Fountain, to show that the eye must run like a Fountain for
sin, and not cease; but it must not be like the Lybian Fountain of the Sun,
which the Ancients speak of; in the Morning the water is hot, at Midday cold;
the waters of Repentance must not overflow with more heat in the Morning, at
the first hearing of the Gospel; and at Midday, in the midst of health and
prosperity grow cold, and be ready to freeze; no, it must be quotidianus
planctus, a daily weeping, as Paul said, 1 Cor. 16.31. I dye daily; so should a
Christian say, I mourn daily: Therefore keep open an issue of godly sorrow, and
be sure it be not stopped till death. Lam. 2.18. Let not the apple of thine eye
cease. It is reported of holy Mr. Bradford, scarce a day passed him wherein he
did not shed some tears for sin; daily mourning is a good antidote against
backsliding. I have read of one that had an Epilepsie, or falling sickness,
and being dipped in Seawater, was cured; the washing of our souls daily in the
brinish waters of Repentance, is the best way both to prevent and cure the
falling into Relapses.

Even Gods own children must mourn after pardon; for God in pardoning, does not
pardon at one instant sins past and furure; but as repentance is renewed, so
pardon is renewed; should God by one act pardon sins future as well as past;
this would make void part of Christ's Office; What need were there of his
intercession, if sin should be pardoned before it be committed? there are
sins in the godly of daily incursion, which must be mourned for; though sin
be pardoned, still it rebels; though it be covered, it is not cured: Romans 7.23.
There is that in the best Christian, which is contrary to God; there is that in
him which deserves hell, and shall he not mourn? A ship that is always leaking,
must have the water continually pumped out; while the soul leaks by sin, we
must be still pumping at the leak by Repentance. Think not O Christian that thy
sins are washed away only by Christ's blood, but by water and blood. The brazen
Laver, Exodus 30.18. that the people of Israel were to wash in, might be a fit
emblem of this spiritual Laver, tears and blood; and when holy Mourning is thus
qualified, this is (...) 2 Cor. 7.11. that sorrowing after a godly sort, which
makes a Christian eternally blessed.

SECT. 4.
Showing, That we must mourn for the sins of others.

2. AS we must mourn for our own sins, so we must lay to heart the sins of
others (...). Chrysostom.
. The Poets feign that Biblis was turned into a Fountain; thus we should wish
with Jeremy, that our eyes were a Fountain of tears, that we might weep day and
night for the iniquity of the times; our blessed Savior mourned for the sins
of the Jews, Mark 3.5. Being grieved, super callo, for the hardness, or
brawniness of their hearts; and holy David looking upon the sins of the wicked,
his heart was turned into a spring, and his eyes into Rivers. Psalm. 119.136.
Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law. Lots
Righteous soul was vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet.
2.7. Lot took the sins of Sodom, and made spears of them to pierce his own
soul: Cyprian says that in the Primitive times, when a Virgin who vowed her
self to Religion, had defiled her chastity, shame and grief filled the whole
face of the Congregation Totum Ecclesiae caetum demittere vultus, atque
crubescere. Cyprian.
.

Have not we cause to mourn for the sins of others? the whole Axle-tree of the
Nation is ready to break under the weight of sin; what an inundation of
wickedness is there amongst us? Mourn for the hypocrisy of the times. Jehu
says, Come see my zeal for the Lord; but it was zeal for the Throne. This is
the hypocrisy of some, they entitle God to whatever they do, they make bold
with God to use his Name to their wickedness; as if a Thief should pretend the
Kings Warrant for his Robbery. Micah 3.11. They build up Sion with blood, the
heads thereof judge for reward; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is
not the Lord among us? Many with a religious kiss smite the Gospel under the
fifth rib Plurimi sub nomine Ecclesiae contra Ecclesiam Militant. Calv.
: Could not Ahab be content to kill and take possession, but must he usher it
in with Religion, and make fasting a Preface to his murder? 1 Kings 21.12. The
white Devil is worst; a burning Torch in the hand of a Ghost is most
affrighting; to hear the Name of God in the mouths of scandalous hypocrites, is
enough to affright others from the profession of Religion.

Mourn for the Errors and Blasphemies of the Nation; there is now a free Trade
of Error; toleration gives men a Patent to sin: What cursed opinion that has
been long ago buried in the Church, but is now dig'd out of the grave, and by
some worshipped! England is grown as wanton in her Religion, as she is antic
in her Fashions: The Jesuits Exchange is open, and every one almost is for an
opinion of the newest Cut: Did men's faces alter as fast as their judgments, we
should not know them.

Mourn for Covenant-violation, this sin is a flying Roll against England;
breach of Covenant is spiritual harlotry; and for this God may name us Loammi,
and give us a bill of Divorce.

Mourn for the Pride of the Nation ^our condition is low, but our hearts are
high. Mourn for the profaness of the Land; England is like that man in the
Gospel, Luke 4.33. who had a spirit of an unclean Devil. Mourn for the removing
of Landmarks Deuteronomy. 27.17.
: Mourn for the contempt offered to Magistracy, the spitting in the face of
Authority: Mourn that there are so few Mourners; surely if we mourn not for the
sins of others, it is to be feared we are not sensible of our own sins: God
looks upon us as guilty of those sins in others which we do not lament; our
tears may help to quench Gods wrath.

SECT. 5.
That we must mourn for the miseries of the Church.

THE Saints are Members of the body Mystical as well as Political, therefore
must be sensible of the injuries of Gods Church. Psalm. 137.1. We wept when we
remembered Sion. The people of Israel being debarred from the place of public
worship, sat by the Rivers weeping; they laid aside all their Musical
Instruments. Ver. 2. We hanged our Harps upon the Willows. We were as far from
joy, as those Willows were from fruit. Ver. 4. How shall we sing the Lords song
in a strange land? we were fitter to weep, than to sing.

-- Non est conveniens luctibus iste sonus. When we consider the miseries of
many Christians in Germany, the Dukedom of Savoy, and other Foreign parts,
who have been driven from their habitations, because they would not desert the
Protestant, and espouse the Popish Religion; when instead of a Bible, a
Crucifix; instead of Prayers, Mass; instead of going to Church, they should go
on Pilgrimage to some Saint or Relick: When we consider these things, our eyes
should run down: Mourn to see Gods Church a bleeding Vine: Mourn to see Christ's
Spouse with garments rolled in blood.

Methinks I hear Englands Passing bell go, let us shed some tears over dying
England; let us bewail our intestine divisions. Englands divisions have been
fatal; they brought in the Saxons, Danes, Normans; if a Kingdom divided cannot
stand, how do we stand, but by a miracle of free grace? Truth is fallen, and
peace is fled. Englands fine coat of peace is torn, and like Joseph's coat,
dipped in blood. Peace is the glory of a Nation. Some observe, if the top of
the Beech Tree be taken off, the whole Tree withers, Peace is the Apex; and top
of all earthly blessings; this top being cut off, we may truly say the body of
the whole Nation begins to wither apace.

Mourn for the oppressions of England; the people of this Land have laid out
their money only to buy Mourning.

SECT. 6.
Showing the seasons of holy Mourning.

THough we must always keep open the issue of godly sorrow, yet there are some
seasons wherein our tears should overflow, as the water sometimes rises
higher; there are three special seasons of extraordinary Mourning, when it
should be as it were high water in the soul.

1. When there are indicia irae, tokens of Gods England has been under Gods
black Rod these many years; the Lord has drawn the Sword, and it is not yet
put up; O that our tears may blunt the edge of this Sword; when it is a time of
treading down, now is a time of breaking up the fallow ground of our hearts.
Isa. 22.4, 5. Therefore said I, look away from me, I will weep bitterly, for it
is a time of treading down. Joel 2.2, 13. A day of darkness and of gloominess,
a day of cloud, etc. therefore turn ye even to me with weeping and with
mourning. Rain follows thunder: When God thunders in a Nation by his
judgments, now the showers of tears must distill: When God smites upon our
back, we must smite upon our thigh, Jer. 31.19. When God seems to stand upon
the Threshold of the Temple, as if he were ready to take his wings and fly
Ezekiel. 10.4.
, then is a time to lie weeping between the Porch and the Altar. If the Lord
seems to be packing up and carrying away his Gospel, it is now high time to
mourn, that by our tears possibly his Repentings may be kindled.

seek him sorrowing, Luke 2.48. Would thou have the smiles of Gods face, the
kisses of his lips? set open all the springs of Mourning, and then God will
draw nigh to thee in an Ordinance, and say, Here I am, Isa. 58.9. When Jacob
wept, then he found God in Bethel, Hos. 12.4. He named the name of the place
Peniel, for (says he) I have seen God face to face, Genesis 32.30. Give Christ
the Wine of thy tears to drink, and in the Sacrament he will give thee the Wine
of his blood to drink.

Donatus, there is no mercy for sins of recidivation or relapse, yet I say
there is no mercy without bitter Mourning. Scandalous sins reflect dishonor
upon Religion: 2 Samuel, 12.14. Therefore now our Cheeks should be covered with
blushing, and our eyes bedewed with tears. Peter after his denying Christ, wept
bitterly: Christian, has God given thee over to any enormous sin, as a just
reward of thy pride and security, go into the weeping Bath. Sins of infirmity
injure the soul, but scandalous sins wound the Gospel. Lesser sins grieve the
Spirit, but greater sins vex the Spirit: Isa. 63.9. And if that blessed Dove
weeps, shall not we weep? When the Air is dark, then the dew falls; when we
have by scandalous sin darkened the luster of the Gospel, now is the time for
the dew of holy tears to fall from our eyes.

SECT. 7.
Setting forth the Degrees of Mourning.

NEXT to the seasons of Mourning, let us consider the degree of it; the
Mourning for sin must be a very great Mourning; the Greek word (...), imports a
great sorrow, such as is seen at the Funeral of a dear friend Gravissima
pe^cata, gravissimis lamentis indigent. Aug.
. Zach. 12.10. They shall look on me whom they have pierced, and they shall
mourn for him, as one that mourns for his only son. The sorrow for an only
child is very great; such must be the sorrow for sin. Ver. 11. In that day
there shall be great Mourning, as the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddon. In that Valley Josiah, that famous and pious Prince was cut off by an
untimely death, at whose Funeral there was bitter lamentation; thus bitterly
must we bewail, not the death, but the life of our sins. Now then to set forth
the graduation of sorrow:

1. Our Mourning for sin must be so great, as to exceed all other grief. Elies
Mourning for the Ark was such, that it swallowed up the loss of his two
children; spiritual grief must preponderate all other: We should mourn more for
sin, than the loss of friends or estate.

2. We should endeavor to have our sorrow rise up to the same height and
proportion as our sin does. Manasseh was a great sinner, and a great Mourner: 2 Chronicles. 33.12. He humbled himself greatly. Manasseh made the streets run with
blood, and he made the prison in Babylon run with tears. Ut scilicet peccatum
lachrymis lavaret. Ambr.
Peter wept bitterly ^. A true Mourne^ labors that his Repentance may be as
eminent as his sin is transcendent.

SECT. 8.
Showing the Opposite to holy Mourning.

HAving shown the nature of Mourning, I shall next show what is the Opposite to
holy Mourning. The Opposite to Mourning, is hardness of heart, which in
Scripture is called Cor lapideum, an heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. An heart of
stone is far from Mourning and Relenting; this heart of stone is known by two
symptoms.

1. Insensibility: A stone is not sensible of any thing; lay weight upon it,
grind it to powder, it does not feel; so it is with an hard heart, it is
insensible of sin or wrath; the stone in the Kidneys is felt, but not the stone
in the heart. Ephesians. 4.19. Who being past feeling: (...).

2. An heart of stone is known by its inflexibility: A stone will not bend;
durum est quod non cedit tactui; so it is with an hard heart, it will not
comply with Gods Command, it will not stoop to Christ's Scepter; an heart of
stone will sooner break by death, than bend by Repentance; it is so far from
yielding to God, that with the Anvil it beats back the Hammer; it resists the
Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51.

Oh Christians, if you would be spiritual Mourners, take heed of this stone of
the heart. Hebr. 3.7. Harden not your hearts. A stony heart is the worst heart;
if it were brazen, it might be melted in the furnace; if Iron, it might be
bowed with the Hammer; but a stony heart is such, that only the Arm of God can
break, and the blood of God can soften. Oh the misery of an hard heart! 1. An
hard heart is void of all grace; while the Wax is hard, it will not take the
impression of the seal; the heart while it is hard, will not take the stamp of
grace; it must first be made tender and melting; the Plow of the Word will not
go upon an hard heart. 2. An hard heart is good for nothing but to make fuel
for hellfire. Romans 5.2. After thy hardness of heart thou treasurest up wrath.
Hell is full of hard hearts, there is not one soft heart there; there is
weeping there, but no softness: We read of Vessels fitted for destruction, Romans
9.22. Impenitency fits these Vessels for hell, and makes them like sere Wood,
which is fit to burn. 3. Hardness of heart makes a man's condition worse than
all his other sins besides; if one be guilty of great sins, yet if he can
mourn, there is hope: Repentance unravels sin, and makes sin not to be; but
hardness of heart binds guilt fast upon the soul, it seals a man under wrath;
it is not the hainousness of sin, but hardness of heart that damns; this makes
the sin against the Holy Ghost incapable of mercy, because the sinner that has
committed it, is incapable of Repentance.

CHAP. VII.
Containing a sharp Reprehension.



Luther calls Mourning Bara herba, a rare herb. Men have tears to shed for
other things, but have none to spare for their sins; there are many Murmurers,
but few Mourners; most are like the stony ground, which wanted moisture, Matthew.
13. We have many cry out of hard times, but are not sensible of hard hearts;
hot and dry is the worst temper of the body; sure I am to be hot in sin, and to
be so dry, as to have no tears, is the worst temper of the soul: How many are
like Gideons dry Fleece, and like the Mountains of Gilboa, there is no dew upon
them. Did Christ bleed for sin, and can not thou weep? if Gods bottle be not
filled with tears, his Vial will be filled with wrath. We have many sinners in
Sion, but few mourners in Sion. It is with most people, as with a man on the
top of a Mast, the Winds blow, and the Waves beat, and the ship is in danger of
shipwreck, and he is fast asleep; so when the Waves of sin have even covered
men, and the stormy wind of Gods Wrath blows, and is ready to blow them into
hell, yet they are asleep in security.

2. It reproves them who instead of weeping for sin, Mourners, we have Ranters;
they take the Timbrel and Harp, they spend their days in wealth, Job 21.13.
Vitam agunt Sybariticam Luther.
; they do not lugere animo, but indulgere genio; they live Epicures, and dye
Atheists: St. James bids us turn our laughter to Mourning, Jam. 4.9. But they
turn their Mourning to laughter. Sampson was brought forth to make the
Philistines sport, Judge. 16.26. The jovial sinner does make the Devil sport; it
is a saying of Theophylact, It is one of the worst sights to see a sinner go
laughing to hell: How unseasonable is it to take the Harp and Viol when God is
taking the Sword! Ezekiel. 21.9, 10. A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also
furbished, should we then make mirth? this is a sin that enrageth God. Isa.
22.12, 13. In that day did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping and to mourning,
and behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and
drinking wine; and it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, Surely
this iniquity shall not be purged from you till you dye, says the Lord God of
Hosts. That is, this your sin shall not be done away by any expiatory
sacrifice, but vengeance shall pursue you for ever.

3. It reproves those who instead of mourning for sin, Prove. 2.14. 2 Thessalonians.
2.12. (...), Who take pleasure in iniquity: Wicked men are worse in this sense
than the damned in hell; for I dare say they take little pleasure in their
sins; there are some so impudently profane, that they will make themselves and
others merry with their sins; sin is a soul-sickness: Luke 5.31. Will a man
make merry with his disease? ah wretch, did Christ bleed for sin, and do thou
laugh at sin? is that thy mirthwhich grieves the Spirit Tantis in malis
laetari, diesque jocis and choreis consumere, nonne est eos imitari qui
phrenesi laborant, qui dum carnes proprias laccrant, ridem? Isid. Clar.
? is it a time for a man to break jests when he is upon the Scaffold, and his
head is to be stricken off* thou that laughest at sin now, the time is coming
when God will laugh at thy calamity, Prove. 1.26.

Philistines who stopped the Wells, Genesis 26.15. These would stop the Wells of
godly sorrow: Antimonians say this is a legal Doctrine; but Christ here
preaches it, Blessed are they that mourn; and the Apostles preached it, Mark
6.11. And they went out and preached that men should repent. Holy ingenuity
will put us upon mourning for sin; he that has the heart of a child, cannot
but weep for his unkindness against God. Mourning for sin is the very fruit and
product of the Spirit of grace: Zach. 12.10. Such as cry down Repentance, cry
down the Spirit of grace; mourning for sin is the only way to keep off wrath
from us; such as with Sampson would break this Pillar, go about to pull down
the vengeance of God upon the Land. To all such, I say as Peter to Simon Magus,
Acts 8.22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God if perhaps the
thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee O sinner. Repent that thou have cried
down Repentance.

CHAP. VIII.
Motives to holy mourning.

2. LET me exhort Christians to holy Mourning: Exhort.
I now persuade such a Mourning as will prepare the soul for blessedness. Oh
that our hearts were spiritual limbicks, distilling the water of holy tears!
Christ's Doves weep. Ezekiel. 7.16. They that escape shall be like Doves of the
Valleys, all of them mourning, every one for his iniquity. There are several
Divine Motives to holy Mourning.

1. Tears cannot be put to a better use; if you weep Blessed are they that
mourn. These poison our corruptions; salt water kills the worms; the brinish
water of repenting tears will help to kill that worm of sin which would gnaw
the conscience.

2. Gospel-Mourning is an evidence of grace. Zach. I will pour upon the house
of David and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace, and they shall
mourn, etc. The Holy Ghost descended on Christ like a Dove, Matthew. 3. The Dove
is a weeping creature; where there is a Dove-like weeping, it is a good sign
the Spirit of God has descended there; weeping for sin is a sign of the new
birth; as soon as the child is born, it weeps. Exodus 2.3. And behold the babe
wept. To weep kindly for sin, is a good sign we are born of God. Mourning shows
an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. A stone will not melt; when the heart is in a
melting frame, it is a sign the heart of stone is taken away.

Mary stood at Christ's feet weeping, Luke 7.38. Her tears were more fragrant
and odoriferous than her ointment; the incense when it is broken, smells
sweetest; when the heart is broken for sin, now our services give forth their
sweetest perfume. There is joy in heaven over a sinner that repents, Luke
15.7. Whereupon St. Bernard calls tears Vinum Angelorum, the wine of Angels;
and sure God delights much in tears; else he would not keep a bottle for them,
Psalm. 56.8. One calls tears Holocaustum pingue, a fat sacrifice, which under
the Law was most acceptable, Lev. 3.3. St. Hierom calls Mourning a plank after
shipwreck: Chrysostom calls tears a sponge to wipe off sin; tears are powerful
Orators for mercy. Eusebius says there was an Altar at Athens, on which they
poured no other sacrifice but tears; as if the Heathens thought there was no
better way to pacify their angry gods, than by weeping: Jacob wept, and had
power over the Angel, Hosea 12.4. Tears melt the heart of God. When a
Malefactor comes weeping to the Bar, this melts the Judges heart toward him:
When a man comes weeping in prayer, and smites on his breast, saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner, this does melt Gods heart toward him. Prayer (says
Hierom) inclines God to show mercy, tears compel him; God seals his pardons
upon melting hearts; tears, though they are silent, yet have a voice, Psalm.
6.8. Tears wash away sin; rain melts and washes away a ball of snow;
repenting tears wash away sin. That sin says Ambrose Quod defendi non
potest, ablui potest. Ambr.
, which cannot be defended by argument, may be washed away by tears.

4. The sweetness of tears; mourning is the way to (...). Chrysostom.
; the soul is never more enlarged, than when it can weep. Closet tears are
better than Court-musick. When the heart is sad, weeping eases it by giving
vent: the soul of a Christian is most eased, when it can vent it self by holy
mourning; Chrysostom observes, David who was the great mourner in Israel, was
the sweet singer in Israel, Psalm. 43.3. my tears were my meat; on which place
Ambrose gives this gloss; No meat so sweet as tears; the tears of the
penitent says Bernard, are sweeter than all worldly joy; a Christian thinks
himself sometimes in the suburbs of heaven when he can weep; when Hannah had
wept, she went away and was no more sad; sugar when it melts is sweetest; when
a Christian melts in tears, now he has the sweetest joy; when the daughter of
Pharaoh descended into the river, she found a babe there among the flags; so
when we descend into the river of repenting tears, we find the babe Jesus
there, who shall wipe away all tears from our eyes. Well therefore might
Chrysostom solemnly bless God for giving to us this Lavor of tears to wash in.

5. A mourner for sin does not only good to himself, Abraham was going to
strike the blow, the Angel staid his hand, Genesis 22.12. so when God is going to
destroy a Nation, the mourner stays his hand; tears in the child's eye
sometimes move the angry father to spare the child; penitential tears melt
Gods heart, and bind his hand: Jeremy who was a weeping Prophet, was a great
intercessor; God says to him, pray not for this people, Jer. 7.16. as if the
Lord had said, Jeremy, so powerful are thy prayers and tears, that if thou
prayest I cannot deny thee; Si quid opus est impera, as he said in Plautus;
tears have a mighty influence upon God: sure God has some mourners in the
Land, or he had destroyed us before now.

locus ejulatus, a place of weeping, Matthew. 8.12. the damned mingle their drink
with weeping. God is said to hold his bottle for our tears, Psalm. 56.8. They
who will not shed a bottle full of tears, shall hereafter shed rivers of
tears, Luke 6.25. Woe to you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn. You have
sometimes seen sugar lying in a damp place dissolve to water; all the sugared
joys of the wicked dissolve at last to the water of tears; now tears will do
us good, now it is seasonable weeping, it is like a shower in the spring; if we
do not weep now, it will be too late: did we hear the language of the damned,
they are now cursing themselves that they did not weep soon enough. O is it not
better to have our hell here, than hereafter? is it not better to shed
repenting tears than despairing tears? he that weeps here is a blessed mourner;
he that weeps in hell is a cursed mourner. The Physician by letting the Patient
blood, prevents death: by the opening a vein of godly sorrow, we prevent the
death of our souls.

blessed are they that mourn; This is the road that leads to the new Jerusalem.
There may be several ways leading to a City, some go one way, some another;
but there is but one way to heaven, and that is by Bethlehem the house of
weeping, Acts 26.20. Perhaps a man may think thus, If I cannot mourn for sin,
I will get to heaven some other way; I will go to Church, I will give Alms, I
will lead a civil life; Nay, but I tell you there is but one way to
blessedness, and that is through the valley of tears; if you go not this way
you will miss of Paradise. Luke 14.3. I tell you nay, except you repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. There are many lines leading to the Center; but the
heavenly Center has but one line leading to it, and that is, a tear dropping
from the eye of faith; a man may have a disease in his body, that twenty
medicines will heal; sin is a disease of the soul, which makes it sick unto
death; now there is but one medicine will heal, and that is the medicine of
repentance.

8. Consider what need every Christian has to be conversant weeping bath!
Think what a sinner thou have been; thou have filled Gods book with thy debts,
and what need have thou to fill his bottle with thy tears! Thou that have lived
in secret sin, God enjoins thee this penance, mourn for sin: but perhaps
some may say, I have no need of mourning, for I have lived a very civil life;
go home and mourn because thou art but civil; many a man's civility being rested
upon, has damned him. It Is sad for men to be without repentance, but it is
worse to need no repentance, Luke 15.7.

9. Tears are but finite; it is but awhile that we shall Rev. 7. ult. God shall
wipe away all tears; when sin shall cease, tears shall cease. Psalm. 30.5.
Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning; in the morning
of the Ascension, then shall all tears be wiped away.



1. Mourning does make the soul fruitful in grace: When a shower falls, the
herbs and plants grow. Isaiah 16.9. I will water thee with my tears O Heshbon.
I may allude to it; tears water our graces, and make them flourish. Psalm. 104
10. he sends his springs into the valleys; that is the reason the valleys
flourish with corn, because the springs run there; where the springs of sorrow
run, there the heart bears a fruitful crop: Leah was tender-eyed, she had a
watery eye, and was fruitful; the tender-eyed Christian usually brings more of
the fruits of the Spirit; a weeping eye is the water-pot to water our graces.

2. Mourning does fence us against the Devils Tentations: Tentations are called
(...), fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16. because indeed they set the soul on fire;
Tentations enrage anger, inflame lust; now the waters of holy Mourning quench
these fiery darts; wet powder will not soon take the fire; when the heart is
wetted and moistened with sorrow, it will not so easily take the fire of
Tentation; tears are the best Engines and Waterworks to quench the Devils
fire; Faciem nostram debemus magis lachrymis rigare quaem lavacris.
and if there be so much profit and benefit in Gospel-sorrow, then let every
Christian wash his face every Morning in the Lavor of tears.

11. And lastly, to have a melting frame of spirit, is Bernard, By this you may
know whether you have met with God in a duty, when you find your selves in a
melting and mourning frame; we are apr to measure all by comfort; we think we
never have Gods presence in an Ordinance, unless we have joy; herein we are
like Thomas; unless (says he) I shall see in his hands the print of the nails,
I will not believe, John 20.25. So are we apt to say, Unless we have incomes of
comfort, we will not believe that we have found God in a duty; but if our
hearts can melt kindly in tears of love, this is a real sign that God has been
with us; as Jacob said, Genesis 28.16. Surely the Lord is in this place, and I
knew it not. So Christian, when thy heart breaks for sin, and dissolves into
holy tears, God is in this duty, though thou know it not.

Methinks all that has been said, should make us spiritual Mourners; perhaps
we have tried to mourn, and cannot; but therefore as a man that has dug so
many fathoms deep for water, and can find none, at last he digs till he finds a
spring; so though we have been digging for the water of tears, and can find
none, yet let us weigh all that has been said, and set our hearts again to
work, and perhaps at last we may say as Isaacs servants, Genesis 26.32. We have
found water: When the herbs are pressed, the watery juice comes out; these
eleven serious Motives may press out tears from the eye.

Quest. But may some say, My constitution is such that I cannot weep; I may as
well go to squeeze a Rock, as think to get a tear.

Answ. But if thou can not weep for sin, can thou grieve? Intellectual
mourning is best; there may be sorrow where there are no tears Curae loves
loquuntur, ingentes stupent.
; the Vessel may be full, though it wants vent; it is not so much the weeping
eye God respects, as the broken heart; yet I would be loath to stop their tears
who can weep; God stood looking on Hezekiahs tears, Isa. 38.5. I have seen thy
tears. David's tears made Music in Gods ears, Psalm. 6.8. The Lord has heard
the voice of my weeping. It Is a sight fit for Angels to behold, tears as pearls
dropping from a penitent eye.

CHAP. IX.
Showing the hindrances of mourning.



Answ. Do two things. 1. Take heed of those things which will stop these
Channels of mourning.

2. Put your selves upon the use of all means that will help forward holy
mourning.



The love of sin; the love of sin is like a stone in the pipe, which hinders
the current of water; the love of sin makes sin taste sweet, and this sweetness
in sin-bewitcheth the heart: Saint Hierom says, it is worse to love sin, than
to commit it: A man may be overtaken with sin, Gal. 6.1. And he that has
stumbled upon sin unawares, will weep; but the love of sin hardens the heart,
keeps the Devil in possession; in true mourning there must be a grieving for
sin; but how can a man grieve for that sin which his heart is in love with? oh
take heed of this sweet poison; the love of sin freezeth the soul in
impenitency.

Despair; despair affronts God, undervalues Christ's blood, damns the soul.
Jerem. 8.12. They said there is no hope, but we will walk after our own
devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart: This is
the language of despair, there is no hope, I had as good follow my sins still,
and be damned for something; despair presents God to the soul, as a Judge clad
in the garments of vengeance, Isa. 59.17. Judas his despair was in some sense
worse than his Treason. Despair destroys Repentance; for the proper ground of
Repentance, is mercy. Romans 2.4. The goodness of God leads thee to Repentance.
But despair hides mercy out of sight, as the cloud covered the Ark, Exodus 39.
Oh take heed of this; Despair is an irrational sin, there is no ground for it;
the Lord shows mercy to thousands, why may not thou be one of a thousand?
the wings of Gods mercy, like the wings of the Cherubims, are stretched out to
every humble penitent; though thou have been a great sinner, yet if thou art a
weeping sinner, there is a golden Scepter of mercy held forth, Psalm. 103.11.
Despair locks up the soul in impenitency.

3. A conceit that this mourning will make us melancholy: Isa. 1.6. David had
his broken bones, Psalm. 51. Is there any comfort in having the bones out of
joint? does not sin breed a palpitation and trembling of heart? Deutr. 28.66.
Is it any joy for a man to be a Magor-missabib, a terror to himself? Surely of
the sinners laughter it may be said, it is mad, Eccles. 2.2. Whereas holy
mourning is the breeder of joy, it does not eclipse, but refine our joy, and
make it better Homine ad Deum converso, mutatur ga^dium, non tollitur, Aug
; the Prodigal dated his joy from the time of his Repentance, Luke 15.24. Then
they began to be merry.

4. Checking the motions of the Spirit; the Spirit sets us a mourning, it
causes all our spring-tides, Psalm. 87.7. all my springs are in thee. Often we
meet with gracious motions to prayer, and repentance; now when we stifle these
motions, which is called a quenching the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. then we do, as
it were, hinder the tide from coming in. When the dew falls, then the ground is
wet; when the Spirit of God falls as dew in its influences upon the soul, then
it is moistened with sorrow; but if the Spirit withdraw, the soul is like
Gideons dry fleece; a ship can as well sail without the wind, a bird can as
well fly without wings, as we can mourn without the Spirit. Take heed of
grieving the Spirit; do not drive away this sweet Dove from the arc of thy
soul. The Spirit is res tenera and delicata; if it be grieved, it may say, I
will come no more; and if it once withdraw we cannot mourn.

5. Presumption of mercy; Who will take pains with goodness of God, which
should lead to repentance, Romans 4.2. leads to presumption; O sinner do not hope
thy self into hell; take heed of being damned upon a mistake. Thou say God
is merciful, therefore go on securely in sin. But who is mercy for? the
presuming sinner, or the mourning sinner? Isa 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his
way, and return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; no mercy without
forsaking sin; and no forsaking sin without mourning. If a King should say
to a company of Rebels, Whosoever comes in and submits, shall have mercy; such
as stood out in rebellion, could not claim the benefit of the Pardon. God
makes a Proclamation of mercy to the mourner; but such as are not mourners,
have nothing to do with mercy. The mercy of God is like the Arc, which none
but the Priests were to meddle with; none may touch this golden Arc of mercy
but such as are Priests unto God Rev 1.6.
, and have offered up the sacrifice of tears.

6. A conceit of the smalnesse of sin, Genesis 19.20. Is the Devil holds the
small end of the Perspective-glasse to sinners. To fancy sin less than it
is, is very dangerous: an opinion of the littleness of sin keeps us from the
use of means. Who will be earnest for a Physician that thinks it is but a
trivial disease? and who will seek to God with a penitent heart for mercy, that
thinks sin is but a slight thing? But to take off this wrong conceit about
sin, and that we may look upon it with watery eyes: consider,

1. Sin cannot be little, because it is against the Majesty of heaven; there
is no treason small, it being against the Kings person.

2. Every sin is sinful, therefore damnable: a Penknife or Stilletto makes
but a little wound, but either of them may kill as well as a greater weapon:
there is death and hell in every sin, Romans 6.23. What was it for Adam to pluck
an Apple? but that lost him his crown. It Is not with sin as it is with
diseases, some are mortal, some not mortal; the least sin without repentance,
will be a lock and bolt to shut men out of heaven.

3. View sin in the red glass of Christ's sufferings; the least sin cost
the price of blood. Would you take a a true prospect of sin, go to Golgotha.
Jesus Christ was fain to vail his glory, and lose his joy, and pour out his
soul an offering for the least sin; read the greatness of thy sin in the
deepnesse of Christ's wounds. Let not Satan cast such a mist before your eyes,
that you cannot see sin in its right colors. Remember, not only great rivers
fall into the Sea, but little brooks; not only great sins carry men to hell,
but lesser.

Procrastination; or an opinion it is too soon yet to tune the penitential
string. When the Lamp is almost out, the strength exhausted, and old age comes
on, then mourning for sin will be in season, but it is too soon yet. That I
may show how pernicious this opinion is, and that I may roll away this stone
from the mouth of the Well, that so the waters of repentance may be drawn
forth, let me propose these four serious and weighty considerations.

1. Do thou know what it is to be in the state of nature, and will thou say
it is too soon to get out of it? Thou art under the wrath of God, John 3.36.
and is it too soon to get from under the dropping of this Vial? Thou art under
the power of Satan, Acts 26.18. and is it too soon to get out of the enemies
quarters?

2. Men do not argue thus in other cases; they do not say, It is too soon to be
rich; they will not put off getting the world till old age; no, here they take
the first opportunity: Is it not too soon to be rich, and is it too soon to be
good? is not repentance a matter of the greatest consequence? Is it not more
needful for men to lament their sin, than augment their estate?

3. Gods call to mourning looks for present entertainment, Heb. 3.7, 8. To day
if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. A General besieging a
garrison, summons it to surrender upon such a day, or he will storm it. Such
are Gods summons to repentance, To day if ye will heart his voice; sinners,
when Satan has tempted you to any wickedness, you have not said, It is too
soon Satan, but have presently embraced his tentation; have you not put the
Devil off, and will you put God off?

4. It is a foolish thing to adjourn, and put off mourning for sin; for 1. The
longer you put off holy mourning, the harder you will find the work when you
come to it. A bone that is out of joint, is easier set at first than if you let
it go longer. A disease taken in time is sooner cured than if it be let alone
till it comes to a Paroxysme Sero medicina paretur, cum mala per longas
invaluere moras
. You may easily wade over the waters when they are low, if you stay till they
are risen, they will be beyond your depth. O sinner, the more treasons thou
committest, the more do thou incense heaven against thee, and the harder it
will be to get thy pardon; the longer thou spinnest out the time of thy
sinning, the more work thou make for repentance. 2. To adjourn, and put off
mourning for sin, is folly, in respect of the uncertainty of life; how does the
procrastinating sinner know that he shall live to be old? What is your life? it
is but a vapor, James 4.14. how soon may sickness arrest thee, and death
strike off thy head? may not thy sun set at noone? Oh then what imprudence is
it to put off mourning for sin, and to make a long work, when death is about to
make a short work? Caesar deferring to read the Letter sent him, was stabbed in
the Senate House. 3. It Is folly to put off all till last in respect of the
improbability of finding mercy; though God give thee space to repent, he may
deny thee grace to repent. When God calls for mourning and thou art deaf, when
thou call for mercy God may be dumb, Prove. 1.24, 28. Think of it seriously,
God may take the latter time to judge thee in, because thou did not take the
former time to repent in. 4. To respit our solemn turning to God till old age,
or sickness, is high imprudence, because these late acts of devotion are for
the most part dissembled and spurious. Though true mourning for sin be never
too late, Sera poenitentia raro vera.
yet late mourning is seldom true. That repentance is seldom true-hearted,
which is gray headed; It Is disputable whether these Autumn-tears are not shed
more out of fear of hell, than love to God. The Mariner in a storm throws his
goods overboard, not but that he loves them, but he is afraid they will sink
the ship; when men fall to weeping-work late, and would cast their sins
overboard, it is for the most part only for fear lest they should sink the
ship and drown in hell; It Is a great question whether the sick bed penitent
does not mourn because he can keep his sins no longer. All which considered,
may make men take heed of running their souls upon such a desperate hazard as
to put all their work for heaven upon the last hour.

Delay of the execution of justice. Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil. God forbears punishing, therefore men forbear
repenting. He does not smite upon their back by correction, therefore they do
not smite upon their thigh by humiliation, Jer. 31.19. The sinner thinks thus,
God has spared me all this while, he has eeked out patience into
long-suffering; sure he will not punish, Psalm. 10.11. He has said in his
heart, God has forgotten. God sometimes in infinite patience adjourns his
judgments, and puts off the Sessions awhile longer; he is not willing to
punish, 2 Pet. 3.9. The Be naturally gives honey, but stings only when it is
angered. The Lord would have men make their peace with him, Isa. 27.5. God is
not like an hasty creditor, that requires the debt, and will give no time for
the payment; he is not only gracious, but waits to be gracious Poenitentiam
expectat tuam, dum patientiam exercet suam.
. Isa. 30.18. but God by his patience would bribe sinners to repentance; but
alas how is this patience abused; Gods long-suffering hardens; because God
stops the Vial of his wrath, sinners stop the Conduit of tears. That the
patience of God may not (through our corruption) obstruct holy mourning, let
sinners remember: 1. Gods patience has bounds set to it, Genesis 6.3. Though men
will not set bounds to their sin, yet God sets bounds to his patience; there is
a time when the Sun of Gods patience will set; and being once set, it never
returns any degrees backward; the Lease of patience will soon be run out: There
is a time when God says, My Spirit shall no longer strive. The Angel cried,
the hour of his judgment is come, Rev. 14.7. Perhaps the next sin thou
committest, God may say, Thy hour is now come. 2. To be hardened under
patience, makes our condition far worse; incensed justice will revenge abused
patience; God was patient toward Sodom, but not repenting, he made the fire
and brimstone flame about their ears. Sodom that was once the wonder of Gods
patience, is now a standing Monument of Gods severity; all the plants and
fruits are destroyed; and as Tertullian says, that place still smells of fire
and brimstone Olet adhuc incendio terra.
. Long forbearance is no forgiveness; God may keep off the stroke a while, but
justice is not dead, but sleeps. God has leaden feet, but iron hands; the
longer God is taking his blow, the sorer it will be when it comes; the longer a
stone is falling, the heavier it will be at last; the longer God is whetting
his Sword, the sharper it cuts; sins against patience are of a deeper dye;
these are worse than the sins of the Devils: The lapsed Angels never sinned
against Gods patience; how dreadful will their condition be, who therefore sin,
because God is patient; for every crumb of patience, God puts a drop of wrath
into his Viol; the longer God forbears a sinner, the more interest he is sure
to pay in hell.

Mirth and Music: Amos 6.5. That chant to the sound of the Viol, and drink
wine in Bowls; instead of the Dirge, the Antheam, many sing away sorrow, and
drown their tears in wine; the sweet waters of pleasure destroy the bitter
waters of mourning. How many go dancing to hell, like those fish which swim
down pleasantly into the dead Sea! Let us take heed of all these hindrances of
holy tears: Let our Harp be turned into mourning, and our Organ into the voice
of them that weep, Job 30.31.

CHAP. X.
Showing some helps to mourning.

HAving removed the obstructions, let me in the last place propound some helps
to holy mourning.

1. Set David's prospect continually before you. Psalm. 51.4. My sin is ever
before me. David, that he might be a mourner, kept his eye still upon sin; See
what sin is, and then tell me if there be not enough in it to draw forth tears.
I know not what name to give it bad enough; one calls it the Devils excrement;
sin is malorum colluvies, it is a complication of all evil; it is the spirits
of mischief distilled. 1. Sin dishonours God; it denies Gods Omnisciency, it
derides his Patience, it distrusts his Faithfulness; sin tramples upon Gods
Law, slights his Love, grieves his Spirit. 2. Sin wrongs us. 1. Sin shames us:
Prove. 14.34. Sin is a reproach to any people; sin has made us naked, it has
plucked off our Robe, and taken our Crown from us; it has spoiled us of our
glory; nay, it has not only made us naked, but impure. Ezekiel. 16.6. I saw thee
polluted in thy blood. Sin has not only taken off our cloth of gold, but it
has put upon us filthy garments, Zach. 3.3. God made us after his likeness,
Genesis 1.26. but sin has made us like the Beasts that perish, Psalm. 49. ult. We
are all become brutish in our affections; nor has sin made us only like the
Beasts, but like the Devil, John 8.44. Sin has drawn the Devils picture upon
man's heart. 2. Sin stabs us; the sinner like the Jailer, draws a Sword to kill
himself Acts 16.27.
; he is bereaved of his judgment, and like the man in the Gospel, possessed
with the Devil, he cuts himself with stones Mark 5 5.
; though he has such a stone in his heart that he feels it not. Every sin is a
stroke at the soul; tot vitia, tot vulnera; so many sins, so many wounds; every
blow given to the Tree, helps forward the Felling of the Tree: Every sin is an
hewing and chopping down the soul for hellfire; if then there be all this evil
in sin; if this forbidden fruit has such a bitter Core, it may make us mourn;
our hearts should be the Spring, and our eyes the Rivers.

2. If we would be Mourners, let us be Orators: Beg a spirit of contrition Da
Domine Deus cordi me poenitentiam, oculis lachrymarum fontem. Austin.
; pray to God that he will put us in mourning, that he will give us a melting
frame of heart; let us beg Achsahs blessing, Josh. 15. Springs of water, Josh.
15.19. Let us pray that our hearts may be spiritual limbecks, dropping tears
into Gods bottle. Let us pray that we who have the poison of the Serpent, may
have the tears of the Dove; the Spirit of God is a Spirit of mourning; let us
pray that God would pour that Spirit of grace on us, whereby we may look on
him whom we have pierced, and mourn for him, Zach. 12.10. God must inspirare,
before we can suspirare; he must breath in his Spirit Velle bonum nisi gratiae
adminiculo non possumus. Aug. de great. and lib. arbit.
, before we can breath out our sorrows; the Spirit of God is like the fire in a
Still, that sends up the dews of grace in the heart, and causes them to drop
from the eyes. It Is this blessed Spirit whose gentle breath causes our spices
to smell, and our waters to flow; and if the spring of mourning be once set
open in the heart, there can want no joy; as tears flow out, comfort flows in;
which leads to the second part of the Text, they shall be comforted.

CHAP. XI.
Showing the comforts belonging to Mourners.

Matthew. 5.4. They shall be comforted.
HAving already presented to your view the dark side of the Text, I shall now
show you the light side, they shall be comforted.

Where observe, 1. Mourning goes before comfort; as the launcing of a wound
precedes the cure; the Antinomian talks of comfort, but cries down mourning for
sin; he is like a foolish Patient, who having a Pill prescribed him, licks the
sugar, but throws away the Pill. The Libertine is all for joy and comfort, he
licks the sugar, but throws away the bitter Pill of Repentance; if ever we have
true comfort, we must have it in Gods way and method; sorrow for sin ushers in
joy. Isa. 57. I will restore comfort to him, and to his Mourners. That is the
true Sunshine of joy which comes after a shower of tears; we may as well
expect a crop without seed, as comfort without Gospel-mourning.

2. Observe that God keeps his best wine till last; first, he prescribes
mourning for sin, and then sets abroach the wine of consolation; the Devil does
quite contrary; he shows the best first, and keeps the worst till last: First
he shows the wine sparkling in the glass, then comes the biting of the serpent,
Prove. 23.32. Satan sets his dainty dishes before men; he presents sin to them
colored with beauty, sweetened with pleasure, silvered with profit, and then
afterward the sad reckoning is brought in. He showed Judas first the silver
bait, and then struck him with the hook: This is the reason why sin has so
many followers, because it shows the best first; first the golden Crowns, and
then come the Lions teeth, Rev. 9.7, 8.

But God shows the worst first; first he prescribes a bitter potion, and then
brings a cordial, they shall be comforted.

3. Observe, Gospel-tears are not lost, they are seeds of comfort; while the
penitent does pour out tears, God poures in joy; if thou would be cheerful,
(says Chrysostom) be sad (...). Chrysostom.
: Psalm. 126.5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. It was the end of
Christ's anointing and coming into the world, that he might comfort them that
mourn: Isa. 61.3. Christ had the oil of gladness poured on him, (as Chrysostom
says) that he might pour it upon the Mourner; well then may the Apostle call
it a repentance not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. A man's drunkenness is to be
repented of, his uncleanness is to be repented of; but his repentance is never
to be repented of, because it is the inlet to joy: Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted. Here is sweet fruit from a bitter stock: Christ
caused the earthen Vessels to be filled with water, and then turned the water
into wine, John 2.9. So when the eye, that earthen Vessel has been filled with
water brim full, then Christ will turn the water of tears into the wine of joy.
Holy mourning says Saint Basil (...). Basil.
, is the seed out of which the flower of eternal joy does grow.

The Reason why the Mourner shall be comforted, is:

1. Because Mourning is made on purpose for this end; Mourning is not
prescribed for it self, but in ordine ad aliud, that it may lay a train for
comfort therefore we sow in tears, that we may reap in joy. Holy mourning is a
spiritual medicine; now a medicine is not prescribed for it self, but for
health-sake; so Gospel-mourning is appointed for this very end, to bring forth
joy.

2. The spiritual Mourner is the fittest person for comfort: When the heart is
broken for sin, now it is fittest for joy; God poures the golden oil of
comfort into broken Vessels; the Mourners heart is emptied of pride, and God
fills the empty with his blessing; the Mourners tears have helped to purge out
corruption; and after purging physic, God gives a Julip. The Mourner is ready
to faint away under the burden of sin, and then the bottle of strong water
comes seasonably. The Lord would have the incestuous person (upon his deep
humiliation) to be comforted, lest he should be swallowed up with over much
sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7.

This is the Mourners privilege, he shall be comforted; the Valley of tears
brings the soul into a Paradise of joy; a sinners joy brings forth sorrow; the
mourners sorrow brings forth joy. John 16.22. Your sorrow shall be turned into
joy. The Saints have a wet seed-time, but a joyful Harvest. (...), They shall
be comforted.

SECT. I.
Showing the mourners comforts here.

NOw to illustrate this, I shall show you what the comforts are the mourners
shall have. These comforts are of a divine infusion, and they are twofold;
either Here or Hereafter (...). Chrysostom. 1. Comforts here.
.

1. COMFORTS HERE.] They are called the consolations of God, Job 15.11. That
is, Great comforts, such as none but God can Give; they exceed all other
comforts as far as heaven does earth. The root on which these comforts grow,
is, The blessed Spirit; he is called (...), the Comforter, John 14.26. and
comfort is said to be a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Christ did purchase
peace, the Spirit speaks peace. Quest. How does the Spirit comfort? Answ.
Either Mediately. or Immediately.


1. Mediately; By helping us to apply the Promises to Wells of salvation; we
lie as dead children at the breast, till the Spirit helps us to suck the breast
of a Promise; and when the Spirit has taught Faith this Art, now comfort flows
in. O how sweet is the breast-milk of a Promise!

2. The Spirit comforts immediately; The Spirit by a more direct act presents
God to the soul as reconciled; it sheds his love abroad in the heart, from
whence flows infinite joy, Romans 5.5. The Spirit secretly whispers Pardon for
sin, and the sight of a Pardon dilates the heart with joy, Matthew. 9.2. Be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.

That I may speak more fully to this point, I shall show you the qualifications
and excellencies of these comforts which God gives his mourners. 1. These
comforts are real comforts; the Spirit of God cannot witness to that which is
untrue. There are many in this age do pretend to comfort, but their comforts
are mere impostures; the body may as well swell with wind, as with flesh: a
man may as well be swelled with false, as true comforts Distinguendum est inter
Gaudia Veritatis and Vanitatis. Aug.
; The comforts of the Saints are certain, they have the seal of the Spirit set
to them. Ephesians. 1.13. 2 Cor. 1.22. A seal is for confirmation; when a Deed is
sealed, it is firm, and unquestionable. When a Christian has the seal of the
Spirit stamped upon his heart, now he is confirmed in the love of God.

Quest. Wherein do these comforts of the Spirit which are unquestionably sure,
differ from those which are false and pretended.

Answ. Three ways. 1. The comforts of Gods Spirit are laid in deep conviction,
John 16.7, 8, and when he (that is, the Comforter, verse 7.) is come, he shall
reprove, (or as the Greek word is, (...), he shall convince) the world of sin.

Quest. Why does conviction go before consolation?

Answ Conviction fits for comfort; by conviction the Spirit does sweetly
dispose the heart to these two things. 1. To seek after Christ. When once the
soul is convinced of sin, and the hell that follows it, now a Savior is
precious. When the Spirit has shot in the arrow of conviction, now says a
poor soul, where may I meet with Christ? In what Ordinance may I come to enjoy
Christ? saw ye him whom my soul loves? All the world for one glimpse of my
Savior. 2. The Spirit by conviction makes the heart willing to receive Christ
upon his own terms: man, by nature, would article and indent with Christ; he
would take half Christ; he would take him for a Savior, not a Prince; he would
accept of Christ as he has an head of gold, Cant. 5.11. but not as he has the
government upon his shoulders, Isa. 9.6. But when God lets loose the spirit of
bondage, and convinces a sinner of his lost, undone condition, now he is
content to have Christ upon any terms. When Paul was struck down to the ground
by a spirit of conviction, he cries out, Lord, what will thou have me to do?
Acts 9.6. Let God propound what Articles he will, the soul will subscribe to
them. Now when a man is brought to Christ's terms, to believe and obey, then he
is fit for mercy; when the Spirit of God has been a Spirit of conviction, then
it becomes a spirit of consolation; when the plough of the Law has gone upon
the heart, and broken up the fallow ground, now God sows the seed of comfort.

Those who brag of comfort, but were never yet convinced, nor broken for sin,
have cause to suspect their comfort to be a delusion of Satan. It is like a mad
man's joy, who fancies himself to be King, but it may be said of his laughter,
it is mad, Eccles. 2.2. The seed which wanted depth of earth, withered, Matthew.
13. that comfort which wants depth of earth, deep humiliation and conviction,
will soon wither and come to nothing.

2. The Spirit of God is a sanctifying, before a comforting Spirit; as Gods
Spirit is called the Comforter, so he is called a spirit of grace, Zach. 12.10.
Grace is the work of the Spirit, Comfort is the seal of the Spirit; the work of
the Spirit goes before the seal; the graces of the spirit are compared to
water, Isa. 44.3. and the comforts of the spirit are compared to oil, Isa.
61.1. First, God pours in the water of the spirit, and then comes the oil of
gladness. The oil (in this sense) runs above the water; Hereby we shall know
whether our comforts are true and genuine. Some talk of the comforting spirit,
who never had the sanctifying Spirit; they boast of assurance, but never had
grace; these are spurious joys, these comforts will leave men at death, they
will end in horror and despair: Gods Spirit will never set seal to a Blank.
First, the heart must be an Epistle written with the finger of the Holy Ghost,
and then it is sealed with the Spirit of Promise.

3. The comforts of the Spirit are humbling: Lord says the soul, What am I
that I should have a smile from heaven, and that thou should give me a privy
seal of thy love? The more water is poured into a Bucket, the lower it
descends; the fuller the ship is laden with sweet spices, the lower it sails;
the more a Christian is filled with the sweet comforts of the Spirit, the lower
he fails in humility; the fuller a Tree is of fruit, the lower the bough hangs;
the more full we are of the fruits of the Spirit, joy and peace, Gal. 5.22. the
more we bend down in humility. St. Paul a chosen Vessel Acts 9.15.
, filled with the wine of the Spirit 2 Cor. 5.1.
, did not more abound in joy, than in lowliness of mind. Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who
am less than the least of all Saints, is this grace given, etc. He who was the
chief of the Apostles, calls himself the least of Saints.

Those who say they have comfort, but are proud, they have learned to despise
others, and are climbed above Ordinances, their comforts are delusions; the
Devil is able not only to transform himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor.
11.4. but he can transform himself into the Comforter. It Is easy to
counterfeit money, to silver over brass, and put the Kings image upon it; the
Devil can silver over false comforts, and make them look as if they had the
stamp of the King of heaven upon them; the comforts of God are humbling; though
they lift the heart up in thankfulness, yet they do not puff it up in pride.

2. The comforts God gives his Mourners, are unmixed; they are not tempered
with any bitter ingredients; worldly comforts are like wine that runs dregs;
there is that guilt within checks and corrodes; in midst of laughter the heart
is sad, Prove: 14.13. Queen Mary once said, if she were opened, they would find
Callis lying at her heart; if the breast of a sinner were anatomized and
opened, you would find a worm gnawing at his heart; guilt is a Wolf which feeds
in the breast of his comfort; a sinner may have a smiling countenance, but a
chiding conscience; his mirth is like the mirth of a man in debt, who is every
hour in fear of arresting; the comforts of wicked men are spiced with
bitterness, they are wormwood wine.

Hi sunt qui trepidant, and ad omnia fulgura pallent, Hor.

Cum tonat exanimes, primo quoque murmr coelum --
But spiritual comforts are pure, they are not muddied with guilt, nor mixed
with fear, they are the pure wine of the Spirit; what the Mourner feels is joy,
and nothing but joy.

3. These comforts God gives his Mourners, are sweet. Eccles. 12.7. Truly the
light is sweet; so is the light of Gods countenance: How sweet are those
comforts which bring the Comforter along with them? John 14.16. Therefore the
love of God shed into the heart, is said to be better than wine, Cant. 1.2.
Wine pleases the palate, but the love of God chears the conscience; the lips
of Christ drop sweet smelling myrrh, Cant. 5.13. The comforts God gives are a
Christians Music, they are the golden Pot and the Manna; the Nectar and
Ambrosia of a Christian; they are the Saints Festival, their banqueting
stuff; so sweet are these Divine comforts, that the Church had her (...),
fainting fits for want of them, Cant. 2.5. stay me with flagons] Metonymia
Subjecti pro adjuncto, the flagons are put for the wine; by these flagons are
meant the comforts of the Spirit; the Hebrew word (...) signifies all variety
of delights; to show the abundance of delectability and sweetness in these
comforts of the Spirit.) Comfort me with Apples.] Apples are sweet in taste,
fragrant in smell; so sweet and delicious are those Apples which grow upon the
tree in Paradise.) These comforts from above are so sweet, that they make all
other comforts sweet; health, estate, relations; they are like sauce which
makes all our earthly possessions and enjoyments come off with a better relish.
So sweet are these comforts of the Spirit, that they do much abate and moderate
our joy in worldly things; he who has been drinking spirits of wine, or
Alkermes, will not much thirst after water: and that man who has once tasted
how sweet the Lord is, Psalm. 34.8. and has drunk the cordials of the Spirit,
will not thirst immoderately after secular delights. Those who play with dogs
and birds, it is a sign they have no children; such as are inordinate in their
desire and love of the creature, declare plainly that they never had better
comforts.

4. These comforts which God gives his mourners are holy comforts; they are
called the comforts of the holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. Every thing propagates in its
own kind Omne agens operatur secundum naturam agens.
; the holy Ghost can no more produce impure joys in the soul, than the Sun can
prduce darkness; he who has the comforts of the Spirit, looks upon himself as
a person engaged to do God more service; Has the Lord looked upon me with a
smiling face? I can never pray enough, I can never love God enough. The
comforts of the Spirit raise in the heart an holy antipathy against sin; the
Dove hates every feather that has grown upon the Hawke: so there is an hatred
of every motion, and temptation to evil; he who has a principle of life in
him, opposes every thing that would destroy life, he hates poison; so he that
has the comforts of the Spirit living in him, sets himself against those sins
which would murder his comforts; divine comforts give the soul more
acquaintance with God, 1 John 1.4. Our fellowship is with the Father and his
Son Jesus.

5. The comforts reserved for the mourners, are filling comforts, Romans 15.13.
The God of hope fill you with joy, John 16.24. Ask that your joy may be full.
When God pours in the joys of heaven, they fill the heart, and make it run
over, 2 Cor. 7.4. I am exceeding joyful, the Greek word is (...), I overflow
with joy, as a Cup that is filled with wine till it runs over. Outward comforts
can no more fill the heart than a Triangle can fill a Circle. Spiritual joys
are satisfying, Psalm. 63.5. My heart shall be satisfied as with marrow, and I
will praise thee with joyful lips. David's heart was full, and the joy did break
out at his lips. Psalm. 4.7. Thou have put gladness in my heart; worldly joys
do put gladness into the face, 2 Cor. 5.12. they rejoice (...), in the face;
but the Spirit of God puts gladness into the heart; divine joys are
heart-joyes, Zach. 10.7. John 16.22. Your heart shall rejoice; a believer does
(...), Luke 1.47. My spirit rejoices in God. And to show how filling these
comforts are which are of an heavenly extraction, the Psalmist says they
create greater joy than when wine and cyle increase, Psalm. 4. Wine and Oil may
delight, but not satisfy; they have their vacuity and indigence; we may say,
as Zach. 10.2. they comfort in vain; outward comforts do sooner cloy than
cheer, and sooner weary than fill. Xerxes offered great rewards to him that
could find out a new pleasure; but the comforts of the Spirit are
satisfactory, they recruit the heart, Psalm. 94.19. Thy comforts delight my
soul. There is as much difference between heavenly comforts and earthly, as
between a banquet that is eaten, and one that is painted on the wall.

6. The comforts God gives his Mourners in this life, are glorious comforts. 1
Pet. 1.8. Joy full of glory. 1. They are glorious, because they are a
prelibation and fore-taste of that joy which we shall have in a glorified
estate (...). Chrysostom.
. These comforts are an handsel and earnest of glory, they put us in heaven
before our time. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Ye were sealed with that holy Spirit, which
is an earnest of the inheritance; the earnest is part of the sum behind; so the
comforts of the Spirit are the earnest; the cluster of grapes at Eshcol Number.
13.23.
, the first fruits of the heavenly Canaan. 2. The joys of the Spirit are
glorious, (...), in opposition to other joys, which compared with these, are
inglorious and vile. A carnal man's joy, as it is aerie and flashy, so it is
sordid, he sucks nothing but dregs. Amos 6.13. Ye rejoice in a thing of naught.
A carnal spirit rejoices, because he can say this house is his, this estate is
his; but a gracious spirit rejoices because he can say this God is his. Psalm.
48.14. For this God is our God for ever and ever. The ground of a Christians
joy is glorious, he rejoices in that he is an heir of the promise; the joy of
a godly man is made up of that which is the Angels joy, he triumphs in the
light of Gods countenance; his joy is that which is Christ's own joy; he
rejoices in the mystical union which is begun here, and consummate in heaven:
Thus the joy of the Saints is a joy full of glory.

7. The comforts which God gives his Mourners, are infinitely transporting and
ravishing; so delightful are they and amazing, that they cause a jubilation;
which as some of the Learned speak, is so great, that it cannot be expressed
Jubiliatio dicitur cum cordis laetitia oris efficacia non expletur.
; of all things joy is the most hard to be deciphered; it is called laetitia
inenarrabilis, joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8. You may sooner taste honey, then
tell how sweet it is; the most pathetical words can no more set forth the
comforts of the Spirit, then the most curious Pensil can draw the life and
breath of a man; the Angels cannot express the joys they feel; some have been
so overwhelmed with the sweet raptures of joy, that they have not been able to
contain, but as Moses, have dyed Plurimis mortem attulit gaudium ingens. Gell.
with a kiss from Gods mouth. Thus have we seen the glass often breaking with the
strength of the liquor put into it.

8. These comforts of the Spirit are powerful, they are strong cordials, so the
Apostle phraseth it, Hebr. 6.18. (...), strong consolation. Divine comfort, 1.
Strengthens for duty. Nehem. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is your strength. Joy
whets and sharpens industry; a man that is steeled and animated with the
comforts of Gods Spirit, goes with vigor and alacrity through the exercises of
Religion; he believes firmly, he loves fervently, he is carried full sail in
duty; the joy of the Lord is his strength. 2. Divine comfort supports under
affliction. 1 These. 1.6. Having received the Word in much affliction; (...),
with joy. The wine of the Spirit can sweeten the waters of Marah Amaritudines
mundi dulces reddit. Aug.
: They who are possessed of these heavenly comforts, can gather grapes of
thorns, and fetch honey out of the Lions carcass: They are strong consolations
indeed, that can stand it out against the fiery trial, and turn the flame into
a bed of Roses. How powerful is that comfort, which can make a Christian glory
in tribulation? Romans 5.3. A believer is never so sad, but he can rejoice; the
Bird of Paradise can sing in Winter. 2 Cor. 6.10. As sorrowing, yet always
rejoicing. Let sickness come, the sense of pardon takes away the sense of pain.
The Inhabitant shall not say I am sick, Isa. 33.24. Let death come, a Christian
is above it; O death where is thy sting? 1 Cor. 15.55. At the end of the Rod a
Christian tastes honey; these are strong consolations.

9. The comforts Gods Mourners have, are heart-quieting comforts; they cause a
sweet acquiescence and rest in the soul (...). Arist. Each.
. The heart of a Christian is in a kind of ataxy and discomposure, like the
Needle in the Compass, it shakes and trembles till the Comforter comes. Some
creatures cannot live but in the Sun; a Christian is even dead in the Nest,
unless he may have the Sun-light of Gods countenance. Psalm. 143.7. Hide not thy
face from me, lest I be like them that go down into the pit: Nothing but the
breast will quiet the child; it is only the breast of consolation quiets the
believer.

10. The comforts of the Spirit are abiding comforts; as they abound in us, so
they abide with us. John 14.16. He shall give you another Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever. Worldly comforts are still upon the wing, ready to
fly; they are like a land-flood, or a flash of lightning.

Mart.
-- Saepe fluunt imo sic quoque lapsa sinu. -- All things here are (...); but
the comforts with which God feeds his Mourners, are immortal: 2 These. 2.16. Who
has loved us, and has given us (...), everlasting consolation. Though a
Christian has not always a full beam of comfort, yet he has a dawning of it
in his soul; he has still a ground of hope, and a root of joy; there is that
within him which bears up his heart, and which he would not on any terms part
with.

Use. Behold the Mourners privilege, he shall be comforted. David who was the
great Mourner of Israel, was the sweet singer of Israel. The weeping Dove shall
be covered with the golden feathers of comfort; O how rare and superlative are
these comforts!

Quest. But may not Gods Mourners want these comforts?

Answ. Spiritual Mourners have a title to these comforts, yet they may
sometimes want them. God is a free Agent, he will have the timing of our
comforts; he has (...), a self-freedom, to do what he will. The holy one of
Israel will not be limited, he will reserve his Prerogative to give or suspend
comfort, pro libitu; and if we are awhile without comfort, we must not quarrel
with his dispensations; for as the Mariner is not to wrangle with Providence,
because the wind blows out of the East, when he desires it to blow out of the
West; nor is the Husbandman to murmr, when God stops the bottles of heaven in
time of drought; so neither is any man to dispute or quarrel with God, when he
stops the sweet influence of comfort, but ought rather to acquiesce in his
sacred will.

But though the Lord might by virtue of his Sovereignty withold comfort from
the Mourner, yet there may be many pregnant causes assigned why Mourners want
comfort. 1. In regard of God. 2. In regard of themselves.


1. In regard of God: He sees it fit to withold comfort, 1. That he may raise
the value of grace: We are apt to esteem comfort above grace; therefore God
locks up our comforts for a time, that he may inhance the price of grace; when
farthings go better than gold, the King will call in farthings, that the price
of gold may be the more raised. 2. God would have his people learn to serve him
for himself, and not for comfort only; it is amor Meretricius, an Harlot love,
to love the husbands money and tokens, more than his person; such as serve God
only for comfort, do not so much serve God, as serve themselves of him.

2. That Gods Mourners want comfort, it is most frequently in regard of
themselves.

1. Through mistake, which is twofold. 1. They go not to the right spring for
comfort; they go to their tears, when they should go to Christ's blood; it is a
kind of Idolatry to make our tears the ground of comfort; Mourning is not
meritorious; it is the way to joy, not the cause. Jacob got the blessing in the
garments of his elder brother; true comfort flows out of Christ's sides; our
tears are stained, till they are washed in the blood of Christ. John 16. ult.
In me peace. 2. Mistake is, that Mourners are privileged persons, and may take
more liberty; they may slacken the strings of duty, and let loose the reins to
sin: Christ has indeed purchased a liberty for his people, but an holy
liberty; not a liberty for sin, but from sin; 1 Pet. 2.16. Ye are a Royal
Priesthood, a peculiar people; ye are not in a state of slavery, but Royalty:
What follows? do not make Christian liberty a cloak for sin. Ver. 16. As free,
and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness. If we quench the
sanctifying Spirit, God will quench the comforting Spirit; sin is compared to a
cloud, Isa. 44.22. This cloud intercepts the light of Gods countenance.

2. Gods Mourners sometimes want comfort through discontent and peevishness.
David makes his disquiet the cause of his sadness. Psalm. 43.5. Why art thou
cast down O my soul? why art thou disquieted within me? A disquieted heart like
a rough Sea, is not easily calmed; it is hard to make a troubled spirit receive
comfort; this disquiet arises from various causes; sometimes from outward
sorrow and melancholy; sometimes from a kind of envy; Gods people are troubled
to see others have comfort, and they want it; and now in a pet they refuse
comfort, and like a froward child, put away the breast. Psalm. 77.2. My soul
refused to be comforted. Indeed a disquieted spirit is no more fit for comfort,
than a distracted man is fit for counsel; and whence is the Mourners
discontent, but pride? as if God had not dealt well with him in stopping the
influences of comfort; O Christian, thy spirit must be more humbled and broken
before God empty out his golden oil of joy.

3. The Mourner is without comfort, for want of applying the promises; he looks
at that sin which may humble him, but not at that Word which may comfort him.
The Mourners eyes are so full of tears that he cannot see the promise; the
virtue and comfort of a medicine is in the applying; when the promises are
applied by faith, they bring comfort: Hosea 2.19. Isa. 49.15, 16. Faith milks
the breast of a promise. That Satan may hinder us of comfort it is his policy,
either to keep the promise from us, that we may not know it, or to keep us from
the promise that we may not apply it. Never a promise in the Bible, but belongs
to the Mourner, had he but the skill and dexterity of faith to lay hold on it.

4. The Mourner may want comfort, through too much earthly-mindedness; by
feeding immoderately on earthly comforts, we miss of heavenly comforts. Isa.
57.17. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and I hid me. The
earth puts out the fire; earthliness extinguisheth the flame of divine joy in
the soul; an Eclipse is per interpositionem corporis Lunaris, when the Moon,
which is a dense body, comes between; the Moon is an Emblem of the world: Rev.
12.1. when this comes between, then there is an Eclipse in the light of Gods
face; Such as dig in Mines, say there is such a damp comes from the earth as
puts out the light of a candle; earthly comforts send forth such a damp as puts
out the light of spiritual joy.

5. Perhaps the Mourner has had comfort, and lost it: Adams Rib was taken from
him when he was asleep, Genesis 2.21. Our comforts are taken away when we fall
asleep in security; the Spouse lost her beloved when she lay upon the bed of
sloth, Cant. 5.2, 6.

For these Reasons Gods Mourners may want comfort; but that the spiritual
Mourner may not be too much dejected, I shall reach forth the cup of
consolation, Jer. 16.7. and speak a few words that may comfort the Mourner in
the want of comfort. 1. Jesus Christ was without comfort, therefore no wonder
if we are; our comforts are not better than his; he who was the Son of Gods
love, was without the sense of Gods love. 2. The Mourner has a seed of
comfort; (...) Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the righteous. Light is a
Metaphor put for comfort, and it is sown: Though a child of God has not
comfort always in the flower, yet he has in the seed; though he does not feel
comfort from God, yet he takes comfort in God. 3. A Christian may be high in
grace, and low in comfort; the high Mountains are without flowers; the Mines of
gold have little or no corn growing on them; a Christians heart may be a rich
Mine of grace, though it be barren of comfort. 4. The Mourner is heir to
comfort; and though for a small moment God may forsake his people, Isa. 54.7.
yet there is a time shortly coming, when the Mourner shall have all tears wiped
away, and shall be brimfull of comfort; this joy is reserved for heaven, and
this brings me to the second particular.

SECT. 2.
Showing the mourners comforts hereafter.

2. COMFORTS HEREAFTER. 2. Comforts hereafter.
They shall be comforted. Though in this life some interviews and love tokens
pass between God and the mourner, yet the great comforts are kept in
reversion; in Gods presence is fulness of joy; There is a time coming (the
day star is ready to appear) when the Saints shall bathe themselves in the
river of life, when they shall never see a wrinkle on Gods brow more; but his
face shall shine, his lips drop honey, his arms sweetly embrace them. The Saints
shall have a springtyde of joy, and it shall never be low water; the Saints
shall at that day put off their mourning, and exchange their sables for white
robes: Then shall the winter be past, the rain of tears be over and gone Cant.
2.11, 12.
; the flowers of joy shall appear; and after the weeping of the Dove, the time
of the singing of birds shall come. This is the great consolation, the Jubily
of the blessed which shall never expire; in this life the people of God taste
of joy, but in heaven the full vessels shall be broached; There is a river in
the midst of the heavenly Paradise, which has a fountain to feed it, Psalm.
36.8 9.

The times we are cast into, being for the present sad and cloudy, it will not
be amiss for the reviving the hearts of Gods people, to speak a little of
these comforts which God reserves in heaven for his mourners. They shall be
comforted.] The greatness of these celestial comforts is most fitly in
Scripture expressed by the joy of a feast; mourning shall be turned into
feasting; and it shall be a marriage feast, which is usually kept with the
greatest solemnity, Rev. 19.9. Blessed are they which are called into the
marriage-supper of the Lamb. Bullinger and Gregory the great, do understand
this Supper of the Lamb, to be meant of the Saints supping with Christ in
heaven Ibi gratia sine merito, charitas fine modo. Bernard. Rev. 14.13.
; men after hard labor go to supper: So when the Saints shall rest from their
labors Ibi gratia sine merito, charitas fine modo. Bernard. Rev. 14.13.
, they shall sup with Christ in glory: Now to speak something of the last great
Supper;

It will be a great Supper, 1. In regard of the Founder of this Feast, God; it
is the Supper of a King, therefore sumptuous and magnificent, Psalm 95.3. The
Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods. Where should there be
state and magnificence but in a Kings Court? 2. It will be a great Supper in
regard of the cheer and provision; this exceeds all Hyperbolies. What blessed
fruit does the tree of life in Paradise yield! Rev. 2.7. Christ will lead his
Spouse into the banqueting house, and feast her with those rare Viands, and
cause her to drink that spiced wine, that heavenly Nectar and Ambrosia
wherewith the Angelical powers are infinitely refreshed.

First, Every dish served in at this heavenly Supper shall be sweet to our
palate; there is no dish here we do not love; Christ will make such savory meat
as he is sure his Spouse loves.

Secondly, There shall be no want here, there is no want at a Feast; the
various fullness in Christ will prevent a scarcity; and it will be a fullness
without surfeit, because a fresh course will continually be served in.

Thirdly, they who eat of this Supper shall never hunger more; hunger is a
sharp sauce; the Lambs Supper shall not only satisfy hunger, but prevent it,
Rev. 7.16. They shall hunger no more!

3. It will be a great Supper in regard of the company invited. Company adds to
a Feast, and is of it self sauce to sharpen and provoke the appetite. Saints,
Angels, Archangels will be at this Supper; nay, Christ himself will be both
Founder and Guest; the Scripture calls it an innumerable company Cedit in
solatium beatoram, qui eo sane laetiores quo plures sunt.
etc. Heb. 12. and that which makes the society sweeter, is, that there shall
be perfect love at this Feast. The Motto shall be, cor unum, and via una, one
heart, and one way, all the guests shall be linked together with the golden
chain of charity.

4. It will be a great supper in regard of the holy mirth, Eccles. 10.19. a
feast is made for mirth; at this supper there shall be joy, and nothing but
joy, Psalm 16. ult. There is no weeping at a feast. O what triumph and
acclamations will there be? There are two things at this Supper of the Lamb
will create joy and mirth. 1. When the Saints shall think with themselves that
they are kept from a worse supper. The Devils have a supper (such an one as it
is) a black banquet; there are two dishes served in, weeping, and gnashing of
teeth; every bit they eat makes their hearts ache; who would deny them their
dinner here, who must have such a supper? 2. It will be matter of joy at the
Supper of the Lamb, that the Master of the Feast bids all his guests welcome;
the Saints shall have the smiles of Gods face, the kisses of his lips; he will
lead them into the wine-cellar, and display the Banner of love over them. The
Saints shall be as full of solace, as sanctity. What is a Feast without mirth?
worldly mirth is flashy and empty, this shall be infinitely delightful and
ravishing.

5. It will be a great supper for the music. This will be a marriage-supper,
and what better music than the Bridegroomes voice? saying, my Spouse, my
undefiled, Take thy fill of love; there will be the Angels Anthems Ibi
Angelorum Chori concinnut. Aug.
, The Saints triumphs; the Angels those trumpeters of heaven shall sound forth
the excellencies of Jehovah; and the Saints those noble Queristers shall take
down their harps from the willows, and join in consort with the Angels,
praising and blessing God. Rev. 15.2, 3. I saw them that had gotten the victory
over the Beast, having the Harps of God, and they sing the song of Moses, and
the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints, etc. O the sweet
harmony at this Feast, it shall be Music without discord.

6. This Supper is great, in regard of the place where it shall be celebrated,
in the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. It is a stately Palace; stately, 1. For its
situation; it is in excelsis, of a very great height, Rev. 21.8. For its
prospect: all sparkling beauties are there concentred; and the delight of the
prospect, is propriety; that is the best prospect, where a man can see furthest
on his own ground. 3. For its amplitude; this Royal Feast shall be kept in a
most spacious Room, a Room infinitely greater than the whole firmament, one
Star whereof (if we may believe Astronomers) is bigger than the whole earth;
though there be such a multitude as no man can number, of all Nations,
Kindreds, People, and Tongues, Revel. 7.9. yet the Table is long enough, and
the Room spacious enough for all the Guests. Aulus Gellius in his 13th. Book,
makes this to be one of those four things which are requisite to a Feast, locus
electus, a fit place. The Empyrean heaven bespangled with light, arrayed with
rich hangings, embroydered with glory, seated above all the visible orbs, is
the place of the Marriage-supper; this does infinitely transcend the most
profound search; I am no more able to express it, than I can span the
firmament, or weigh the earth in a pair of balances.

7. It will be a great Supper in regard of the continuance, it has no end.
Epicures have a short Feast, and a long reckoning; but those who shall sit down
at the heavenly Banquet, shall not rise from the Table; the cloth shall never
be taken away, but they shall be always feeding upon those dulcia fercula,
those sweet junkets and delicacies which are set before them: We read King
Ahashuerus made a Feast for his Princes that lasted an hundred and fourscore
days, Esther 1.4. But this blessed Feast reserved for the Saints, is for ever.
Psalm. 16.11. At thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Use. Consolation. Consol.
How may this be as Bezar stone to keep the hearts of Gods people from
fainting! they shall be comforted; they shall sit with Christ upon the Throne,
Merces tua Domine magna nimis, neque enim magnus et tu, and parva merces tuas.
Austin.
Rev. 3.21. and sit down with him at the Table. Who would not mourn for sin,
that are sure to meet with such rewards! They shall be comforted. The
Marriage-supper will make amends for the valley of tears: O thou Saint of God,
who art now watring thy plants, and weeping bitterly for sin, at this last and
great Feast thy water shall be turned into wine; thou who now mortifiest thy
corruptions, and beatest down thy body by prayer and fasting, shall shortly sup
with Christ and Angels; thou who did refuse to touch the forbidden Tree,
shall feed upon the Tree of life in the Paradise of God. Thou impoverished
Saint, who have scarce a bit of bread to eat, remember for thy comfort, in thy
fathers house there is bread enough; and he is making ready a Feast for thee,
where all the dainties of heaven are served in; O feed with delight upon the
thoughts of this Marriage-supper; after thy Funeral begins thy Festival; long
for supper-time.

Longa mora est nobis quae gaudia mellea differt. Christ has paid for this
Supper upon the cross, and there is no fear of a reckoning to be brought in;
wherefore comfore one another with these words.

MATTHEW. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.


CHAP. XII.
Concerning Christian meekness.

WE are now got to the third step leading in the way to blessedness, Christian
meekness. (...), Blessed are the meek. See how the Spirit of God adorns the
hidden man of the heart with multiplicity of graces The workmanship of the Holy
Ghost is not only curious, but various; it makes the heart meek, pure,
peaceable, etc. The graces therefore are compared to Needle Work, which is
different and various in its flowers and colors Psalm. 45.14.
. In the words there is a duty, meekness; and that Duty like the Dove, brings
an Olive-leaf in the mouth of it, They shall inherit the earth.

meek persons are blessed persons. For the right understanding of this, we must
know there is a twofold meekness.

1. Meekness toward God. 2. Meekness toward man.
1. Meekness toward God, which implies two things.

1. Submission to his Will. 2. Flexibleness to his Word.
1. Submission to Gods Will; when we carry our selves calmly without swelling
or murmuring under the dispensations of Providence. 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good. The meek-spirited Christian says thus,
Let God do what he will with me, let him carve out what condition he please, I
will submit; God sees what is best for me, whether a fertile soil or a barren;
let him chequer his work as he please, it suffices God has done it; it was an
unmeek spirit in the Prophet to struggle with God, Jonah 4.9. I do well to be
angry to the death.

2. Flexibleness to Gods Word: When we are willing to let the Word bear sway in
our souls, and become pliable to all its Laws and Maxims; he is spiritually
meek who conforms himself to the mind of God, and does not quarrel with the
instructions of the Word, but the corruptions of his heart. Cornelius his
speech to Peter did savor of a meek spirit. Acts 10.33. Now therefore we are
all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.
How happy is it when the Word which comes with Majesty, is received with
meekness James 1.21.
!

2. Meekness toward man; this Basil the great calls the indelible Character of
a gracious soul; Beati Mites, Blessed are the meek. To illustrate this, I shall
show what this (...), or meekness is. Meekness is a grace whereby we are
enabled by the Spirit of God to moderate our passion. 1. In is a grace.] The
Philosopher calls it a virtue Mititia est virtus quae mediocritatem servat
circa iram. Piccolom.
; but the Apostle calls it a grace, therefore reckons it among the fruits of
the Spirit, Gal. 5.23. it is of a Divine Extract and Original. 2. By it we are
enabled to moderate ou^ passion.] By nature the heart is like a troubled Sea,
casting forth the foam of anger and wrath; now meekness does calm the passions;
it sits as Moderator in the soul, quieting and giving check to its distempered
motions; it is (...). as the Moon does serve to temper and allay the heat of the
Sun; so Christian meekness does allay the heat of passion; meekness of Spirit
does not only fit us for communion with God, but civil converse with men; and
thus prae omnibus virtutibus principatum tenet Piccolom.
. Meekness has a divine beauty and sweetness in it; it credits Religion, it
wins upon all; this meekness consists in three things.

1. Bearing of injuries. 2. Forgiving of injuries. 3. Recompencing good for
evil.
1. Meekness consists in bearing of injuries; I may say of this grace, it is
not easily provoked; a meek spirit like wet Tinder, will not easily take fire.
Psalm. 38.12, 13. They that seek my hurt, spoke mischievous things, but I as a
deaf man heard not. Meekness is fraenum irae, the bridle of anger; the passions
are fiery and headstrong, meekness gives check to them; meekness bridles the
mouth, it ties the tongue to its good behavior; meekness observes that Motto,
(...), bear and forbear Epictetus.
. There are four things opposite to meekness.

1. Meekness is opposed to hastiness of spirit, Eccles. 7.9. Be not hasty in
thy spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the bosom of fools. When the heart
boyls in passion, and anger (as Seneca says) sparkles forth in the eye, this
is far from meekness; anger rests in the bosom of fools. Anger may be in a
wise man, but it rests in a fool. The angry man is like flax, or Gunpowder, no
sooner do you touch him but he is all on fire. Saint Basil calls anger
drunkenness; and Hierom says there are more drunken with passion, than with
wine. Seneca calls anger brevis insania, a short fit of madness; sometimes it
suspends the use of reason; in the best things we are cool enough; in Religion
we are all ice, in contention all fire. How unbeseeming is rash anger, how does
it disguise and disfigure! Homer says of Agamemnon, that when he did moderate
his passion, he resembled the gods, he was like Jupiter in feature, like Pallas
in wisdom; but when he was in his fury, he was a very Tiger, nothing of Jupiter
did appear in him; as Plato counseled the great Revellers and drinkers of his
time, that they should view themselves in a glass when they were in their
drunken humor, and they would appear loathsome to themselves: So let a man
disguised with passion view himself in the glass, and sure he would ever after
be out of love with himself. Ora tument ira, nigrescunt sanguine venae. Ephesians.
4.26, 27. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the
Devil; Oh says one, he has wronged me, and I will never give place to him:
but, better give place to him than to the Devil: an hasty spirit is not a meek
spirit. Caution. Caution.
Not but that we may in some cases be angry. There is an holy anger; that anger
is without sin, which is against sin; meekness and zeal may stand together; in
matters of Religion a Christian must be clothed with the spirit of Eliah, and
be full of the fury of the Lord, Jer. 6.11. Christ was meek, Mat. 11.29. yet
zealous, John 2.14, 15. The zeal of Gods house did eat him up.

malice; malice is the Devils picture: John 8.44. Malice is mental murder: 1
John 3.15. it unfits for duty. How can such a man pray? I have read of two men
that lived in malice, who being asked how they could say the Lords prayer? one
answered, he thanked God there were many good prayers besides: The other
answered, when he said the Lords prayer, he did leave out those words, As we
forgive them that trespass against us: But Saint Austin brings in God replying,
Because thou do not say my prayer, therefore I will not hear thine Quia tu
non dicis meam, ego non audiam tuam.
. Were it not a sad judgment, if all that a man did eat should turn to poison!
to a malicious man all the holy Ordinances of God turn to poison; the table of
the Lord is a snare, he eats and drinks his own damnation; a malicious spirit
is not a meek spirit.

revenge; malice is the scum of anger, and revenge is malice boiling over;
malice is a vermin, lives on blood; revenge is Satan's Nectar and Ambrosia Nihil
Diabolo gratius. Luth.
; this is the savoury meat which the malicious man dresseth for the Devil; the
Scripture forbids revenge. Romans 12.19. Dearly Beloved, avenge not your selves;
this is to take Gods office out of his hand, who is called the God of
recompenses, Jer. 51.56. and the God of vengeance, Psalm. 94.1. This I urge
against those who challenge one another to Duels; indeed spiritual Duels are
lawful; it is good to fight with the Devil. James 4.7. Resist the Devil: It Is
good to Duel with a man's self, the regenerate part against the carnal: Blessed
is he that seeks a revenge upon his lusts. 2 Cor. 7.11. Yea, what revenge? --
but other Duels are unlawful; Avenge not your selves. The Turks, though a
barbarous people, did in Ancient times burn such as went to Duel in their sides
with hot coals of fire; they who were in heat of revenge were punished sutably
with fire.

Object. But if I am thus meek and tame, in bearing of injuries and
incivilities, I shall lose my credit, it will be a stain to my reputation?

Answ. 1. To pass by an injury without revenge, is no Eclipse to a man's credit.
Solomon tells us it is the glory of a man to pass over a transgression, Prove.
12.11. It Is more honor to bury an injury, than revenge it; and to slight it,
than to write it down. Melius est injurias ignoscere quam vindicare.
The weakest creatures soonest turn head, and sting upon every touch; the Lion
a more Majestic creature, is not easily provoked; the Bramble tears, the Oak
and Cedar are more peaceable; passion imports weakness; a noble spirit
over-looks an injury.

Answ. 2. Suppose a man's credit should suffer an impair with those whose
censure is not to be valued; yet think, which is worse, shame or sin? Will thou
sin against God to save thy credit? surely it is little wisdom for a man to
adventure his blood, that he may fetch back his Reputation, and to run into
hell to be counted valorous.

1. Not but that a man may stand up in defense of himself self-defence is
consistent with Christian meekness; the Law of Nature and Religion justify it;
that God who bids us put up our sword, Matthew. 26.51. yet will allow us a
buckler in our own defense; and he that will have us innocent as Doves, not to
offend others, will have us wise as serpents in preserving our selves.

revenge in him, but doing justice: The Magistrate is Gods Lieutenant on earth;
God has put the sword in his hand, and he is not to bear the sword in vain; he
must be in terrorem, for the punishment of evil doers, 1 Pet. 2.14. Though a
private person must not render to any man evil for evil, Romans 12.17. yet a
Magistrate may; the evil of punishment for the evil of offense; this rendering
of evil is good. Private men must put their sword into the sheath; but the
Magistrate sins if he does not draw it out: As his sword must not surfeit
through cruelty, so neither must it rust through partiality: Too much lenity in
a Magistrate, is not meekness, but injustice; for him to indulge offenses, and
say with a gentle reproof as Eli, 1 Samuel 2.23, 24. Why do you such things? nay,
my sons, for it is no good report that I hear. This is but to shave the head
that deserves to be cut off; such a Magistrate makes himself guilty.

evil-speaking. Ephesians. 4.31. Let all evil-speaking be put away. Our words should
be mild, like the waters of Siloah, which run softly; it is too usual for
passionate spirits to break out into opprobrious language; the tongues of many
are fiered, and it is the Devil lights the match; therefore they are said in
Scripture to be set on fire of hell, James 3.6. Men have learned of the old
Serpent, to spit their venom one at another in disgraceful revilings. Matthew.
5.22. Whosoever shall say thou fool, shall be in danger of hellfire. Under
that word fool, all vilifying terms are by our Savior forbidden; let us take
heed of this, it is hateful to God, God is not in this fire, but in the still
small voice 1 Kings 19.12.
.

Object. Paul call the Galatians fools? Gal. 3.1.

Answ. Paul had an infallible spirit, which we have not; besides, when Paul
uttered those words, it was not by way of reproach, but reproof; it was not to
defame the Galatians, but reclaim them; not to vilify them, but to humble
them. Saint Paul was grieved to see them so soon fall into a relapse; well
might he say foolish Galatians in an holy zeal, because they had suffered so
much in the cause of Religion, and now made a defection and fell off, ver. 4.
Have ye suffered so many things in vain? but though Saint Paul guided by the
Spirit of God, did give this Epithet to the Galatians, it is no warrant for us
when any have wronged us to use disgraceful terms. Meekness does not vent it
self in scurrility; it does not retaliate by railing, Jude 9. Yet Michael the
Archangel when contending with the Devil, he disputed about the body of Moses,
durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said The Lord rebuke
thee. Some understand by Michael Christ; but more truly, it is meant of one of
the chief of the Angels. The contest or dispute between the Archangel and the
Devil, was about the body of Moses. Some Divines say, that when God did dispose
of Moses his body, he employed the Archangel to inter him so secretly, that
his burying place might not be known. It Is likely if his dead body had been
found, the Israelites might have been ready in a preposterous zeal to have
adored it. The Devil opposes the Archangel, and contends about the dead body;
but the Archangel durst, not (...), some read it, he could not endure to bring
a railing accusation; it seems the Devil provoked him with evil language, and
would fain have extorted passion from him, but the Archangel was mild, and
said only, The Lord rebuke thee; the Angel would not so much as rail against
the Devil: we may learn meekness of the Archangel, 1 Pet. 3.9. Not rendering
railing for railing.

Caution.
Not but that a Christian ought prudentially to clear himself from slanders.
When the Apostle Paul was charged to be mad, he vindicates himself, Acts 26.25.
I am not mad most noble Festus. Though a Christians retorts must not be
vulnerating, they may be vindicating. Though he may not scandalize another, yet
he may apologize for himself. There must be Christian prudence, as well as
Christian meekness; it is not mildness, but weakness to part with our
integrity, Job 27.6. To be silent when we are slanderously traduced, is to make
our selves appear guilty. We must so affect meekness, as not to lose the
honor of innocence; it is lawful to be our own congratulators, the fault lies
only in this, when we retort injuries with reproachful terms, which is to pay
a man back in the Devils coin.

The second Branch of meekness is in forgiving of injuries, Mark 11.25. and
when ye stand praying, forgive; as if Christ had said, It is to little purpose
to pray, unless you forgive; a meek spirit is a forgiving spirit; This is an
Herculean work; nothing does more cross the stream of corrupt nature; men
forget kindnesses, but remember injuries Scribit in marmore laesus.
. I once heard of a woman that lived in malice, and being requested by some of
her neighbors when she lay on her deathbed, to forgive; she answered, I
cannot forgive though I go to hell; this is cutting against the grain; some
can rather sacrifice their lives than their lusts; but forgive we must, and
forgive as God forgives.

Really, God does not make a show of forgiveness, and keeps our sins by him,
he blots out our debts, Isa. 43.25. God passes an act of oblivion, Jer. 31.34.
he forgives, and forgets. So the meek spirt does not only make a show of
forgiving his neighbor, but he does it from the heart, Mat. 18.35.

2. Fully. God forgives all our sins; he does not for fourscore write down
fifty, but he gives a general release, Psalm. 103.3. who forgiveth all thy
iniquities. Thus a meek-spirited Christian forgives all injuries; false hearts
pass by some offenses, but retain others, this is but half-forgiving; Is this
meekness? Would thou have God deal so with thee? Would thou have him
forgive thee thy trespasses, as thou forgivest others?

3. God forgives often; we are often peccant, we run every day afresh upon the
score, but God often forgives; (...)
therefore he is said to multiply to pardon, Isa. 55.7. So a meek spirit does
reiterate, and send one pardon after another; Peter asks the question, Matthew.
18.21. Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till
seven times? Christ answers him, verse 22. I say not unthee until seven times,
but until seventy times seven.

1. Such an affront has been offered, that flesh and

Flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Cor. 15.50. Christians
must walk Antipodes to themselves, and with the sword of the Spirit fight
against the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.24.

2. But if I forgive one injury, I shall invite more.

1. It argues a divellish nature to be worse for kindness; Col. 3.13. Shall we
cease from doing good, because others will not cease from being evil?

2. I answer, If the more thou forgivest injuries, the more injuries thou
meetest with, this will make thy grace shine the more; another vice will be a
greater demonstration of thy virtue; often forgiving will add the more to the
weight of his sin, and the weight of thy glory. If any shall say to me, I
strive to excel in other graces; but as for this grace of meekness, bearing,
and forgiving of injuries, I cannot arrive at it, I desire in this to be
excused; What do thou talk of other graces? where there is one grace, there
is all Virtutes sunt inter se connexae.
; if meekness be wanting, it is but a counterfeit chain of grace; thy faith
is a fable, thy repentance is a lie, thy humility is hypocrisy.

And whereas thou say thou can not forgive, think of, 1. Thy sin; thy
neighbor is not so bad in offending thee, as thou art in not forgiving him;
thy neighbor in offending thee, does but trespass against a man; but thou
refusing to forgive him, do trespass against God. 2. Thy danger; thou who
art implacable, and though thou may smother the fire of thy rage, yet wilt
not extinguish it, know, that if thou dyest this night, thou dyest in an
unpardoned condition; if you will not believe me, believe Christ, Mark 11.26.
If you do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive your
trespasses. He who lives without meekness, dies without mercy.

Branch of meekness is in recompencing good for evil; this is an higher degree
than the other, Matthew. 5.44. Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you,
pray for them which despightfully use you, Romans 12.20. If thine enemy hunger,
feed him, 1 Pet. 3.9. not rendering evil for evil, but contrariwise blessing.
This threefold cord of Scripture should not easily be broken. To render evil
for evil, is brutish; to render evil for good, is divellish; to render good
for evil is Christian. The Heathens had this maxim, Nemini laedere nisi
lacessitus injuria; they thought it lawful to wrong none unless first provoked
with an injury; but the Sun-light of Scripture shines brighter than the lamp of
reason. Love your enemies; when grace comes into the heart, it works a strange
alteration; when a sciens is ingrafted into the stock, it partakes of the
nature and sap of the Tree, and brings forth the same fruit; take a crab,
ingraft it into a Pepyn, it brings forth the same fruit as the Pepyn; so he who
was once of a sour, crabby disposition, given to revenge; when he once
partakes of the sap of the heavenly olive; he bears generous fruit, he is full
of love to his enemies: Grace allays the passion, and melts the heart into
compassion; as the Sun draws up many thick noxious vapors from the Earth and
Sea, and returns them in sweet showers; so a gracious heart returns all the
unkindnesses and discurtesies of his enemies with the sweet influences and
distillations of love; thus David, Psalm. 35.13. They rewarded me evil for good;
but as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth, I humbled my
soul with fasting, etc. Some would have rejoiced, he wept; some would have put
on scarlet, David put on sackcloth; this is the rarity, or rather miracle of
meekness, it retorts good for evil; thus we have seen the nature of meekness.

SECT. 1.
Showing the Character of a true Saint.

IT shows us the badge of a true Saint; he is of a meek, he is not easily
provoked; he takes every thing in the best sense, and conquers malice with
mildness. I would to God all who profess themselves Saints, were bespangled
with this grace. We are known to belong to Christ, when we wear his Livery; he
is a Saint, whose spirit is so meekned, that he can smother prejudices, and
bury unkindnesses; a passion of tears does better become a Christian, than a
passion of anger; every Saint is Christ's Spouse, Cant. 4.8. It becomes Christ's
Spouse to be meek; if any injury be offered to the Spouse, she leaves it to her
husband to revenge; it is unseemly for Christ's Spouse to strike.

SECT. 2.
Containing a Swasive to meekness.

Exhort.
Zeph. 2.3. Seek meekness: Seeking, implies we have lost it; therefore we must
make an hue and cry after it to find it: Col. 3.12. Put on therefore as the
Elect of God meekness; (...), Put it on as a garment, never to be left off.
Meekness is a necessary ingredient into every thing. 1. It is necessary in
instruction. 2 Timothy 2.25. In meekness instructing, etc. Meekness conquers the
opposers of truth; meekness melts the heart; soft words are softning. 2.
Meekness is necessary in hearing the Word. Jam. 1.21. Receive with meekness the
ingrafted Word; he who comes to the Word either with passion or prejudice, gets
no good, but hurt; he turns wine into poison, and stabs himself with the sword
of the Spirit. 3. Meekness is needful in reproofs. Gal. 6.1. If a man be
overtaken with a fault, restore such an one with the spirit of meekness. The
Greek word is (...), put him in joint again; if a bone be out of joint, the
Chyrurgion must not use a rough hand, that may chance break another bone; but
he must come gently to work, and afterward bind it up softly; so if a brother
be through inanimadvertency overtaken, we must not come to him in a fury of
passion, but with a spirit of meekness labor to restore him. I shall lay down
several Motives or Arguments to meeken the spirits of men.

1. Let me propound examples of meekness.

1. The example of Jesus Christ. Matthew. 21.5. Thy King comes unto thee meek.
Christ was the samplar and pattern of meekness. 1 Pet. 2.23. When he was
reviled, he reviled not again. His enemies words were more bitter than the gall
they gave him; but Christ's words were smoother than oil; he prayed, and wept
for his enemies; he calls to us to learn of him; Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, for
I am meek. Christ does not bid us (says Austin) learn of him to work miracles;
to open the eyes of the blind, to raise the dead, but he would have us learn of
him to be meek; if we do not imitate his life, we cannot be saved by his death.

2. Let us set before our eyes the examples of some of the Saints who have
shined in this grace. Moses was a man of unparalled meekness. Numb. 12.3. Now
the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the
earth. How many injuries did he put up? when the people of Israel murmured
against him, instead of falling into a rage, he falls to prayer for them. Exodus
15.24, 25. The Text says, they murmured at the waters of Marah; sure the
waters were not so bitter as the spirits of the people; but they could not
provoke him to passion, but petition. Another time when they wanted water, they
fell a chiding with Moses, Exodus 17.3. Wherefore is this that thou have brought
us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children with thirst? As if they had
said, if we dye, we will lay our death to thy charge; Would not this
exasperate? sure it would have required the meekness of an Angel to bear this;
but behold Moses his meekness, he did not give them an unbecoming word! though
they were in a storm, he was in a calm; they chide, but he prays. Oh that as
the spirit of Elijah did rest upon Elisha, so that some of the spirit of Moses,
this meek man, (or rather earthly Angel) may rest upon us! Another eminent
pattern of meekness was David; when Shimei cursed David, and Abishai one of
David's lifeguard would have beheaded Shimei; No, says King David, Let him
alone, and let him curse, 2 Samuel 16.11. And when Saul had wronged and abused
David, and it was in his power to have taken Saul napping, and have killed him,
1 Samuel 26.7, 12. yet he would not touch Saul, but called God to be Umpire, Ver.
23. Here was a mirror of meekness.

3. The examples of Heathens; though their meekness could not properly be
called grace, because it grew not upon the right stock of faith, yet it was
beautiful in its kind. Pericles when one did revile him, and followed him home
to his gate at night, railing upon him, he answered not a word, but commanded
one of his servants to light a Torch, and bring the Raylor home to his own
house. Frederick Duke of Saxony, when he was angry, would shut up himself in
his Closet, and let none come near him till he had mastered his passion.
Plutarch reports of the Pythagoreans, if they had chanced to fall out in the
day, they would embrace and be friends ere Sunset. Cicero in one of his
Orations reports of Pompey the great, he was a man of a meek disposition, he
admitted all to come to him so freely, and heard the complaints of them that
were wronged, so mildly, that he excelled all the Princes before him; he was of
that sweet temper, that it was hard to say whether his enemies did more fear
his valor, or his subjects love his meekness. Julius Caesar not only forgave
Brutus and Cassius his enemies, but advanced them; he thought himself most
honored by acts of clemency and meekness. Did the springhead of nature rise
so high, and shall not grace rise higher? shall we debase faith below reason?
let us write after these fair Copies.

2. Meekness is a great Ornament to a Christian. 1 Pet. The ornament of a meek
spirit. How amiable is a Saint in Gods eye when adorned with this jewel? what
the Psalmist says of praise Psalm. 33.1.
, the same may I say of meekness, it is comely for the righteous; no garment
more becoming a Christian than meekness; therefore we are bid to put on this
garment. Col. 3.12. Put on therefore as the Elect of God meekness. A meek
spirit credits Religion, silenceth malice; it is the varnish that puts a luster
upon holiness, and sets off the Gospel with a better gloss.

3. This is the way to be like God; God is meek toward Cum crebris exacerbatur
offensis, iram suam temperat. Cypr.
; how many black mouths are opened daily against the Majesty of heaven? how do
men tear his Name? vex his Spirit? crucify his Son afresh? they walk up and
down the earth as so many Devils covered with flesh, yet the Lord is meek, not
willing that any should perish, 2 Pet. 3. How easily could God crush sinners,
and kick them into hell! but he moderates his anger; though he be full of
Majesty, yet full of meekness; in him is mixed Princely greatness, and Fatherly
mildness; as he has his Scepter of Royalty, so his Throne of grace. Oh how
should this make us fall in love with meekness! hereby we bear a kind of
likeness to God; it is not profession makes us like God, but imitation; where
meekness is wanting, we are not like men; where it is, we are like God.

4. Meekness argues a noble and excellent spirit; a Immensae virtutis est, non
sentire te esse percussum.
. Passion arises from imbecility and weakness; therefore we may observe old
men and children are more choleric than others; strength of passion argues
weakness of judgment, but the meek man who is able to conquer his fury, is the
most puissant and victorious. Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to anger, is better
than the mighty; and he that rules his spirit, then he that takes a City. To
yield to ones passion is easy; it is swimming along with the Tide of corrupt
nature; but to turn head against nature, to resist passion, to overcome evil
with good, this is like a Christian; this is that spiritual Chivalry and
Fortitude of mind as deserves the Trophies of victory, and the garland of
praise.

Saul lay at David's mercy, and he only cut off the skirt of his Robe, how was
Saul's heart affected with David's meekness! 1 Samuel 24.16, 17. Is this thy voice
my son David? and Saul lift up his voice, and wept; and he said to David, Thou
art more righteous than I; for thou have rewarded me good, forasmuch as when
the Lord had delivered me into thy hand, thou killedst me not; wherefore the
Lord reward thee good, etc. This heaping of coals melts and thaws the heart of
others; it is the greatest victory to overcome an enemy without striking a
blow; the fire will go where the wedge cannot; mildness prevails more than
fierceness; passion makes an enemy of a friend; meekness makes a friend of an
enemy; the meek Christian shall have letters testimonial, even from his
Adversary. It is reported of Philip King of Macedon, that when it was told him
Nicanor did openly rail against his Majesty, the King instead of putting him to
death (as his Council advised) sent Nicanor a rich Present, which did so
overcome the man's heart, that he went up and down to recant what he had said
against the King, and did highly extol the Kings clemency. Roughness hardens
men's hearts, meekness causes them to relent: 2 Kings 6.22. When the King of
Israel feasted the Captives he had taken in War, they were more conquered by
his meekness, than by his sword. 2 Kings 6.23. The bands of Syria came no more
into the Land of Israel.

6. Consider the great promise in the Text, The meek (...) this Argument
perhaps will prevail with those who desire to have earthly possessions (...).
Chrysostom.
. Some may object, If I forbear and forgive, I shall lose my right at last, and
be turned out of all? No, God has here entered into Bond, the meek shall
inherit the Earth. The unmeek man is in a sad condition, there is no place
remains for him but hell; for he has no promise made to him either of Earth or
Heaven; it is the meek shall inherit the earth.

Object. How do the meek inherit the Earth, when they are strangers in the
earth? Hebr. 11.37.

Answ. The meek are said to inherit the Earth, not that the Earth is their
chief inheritance, or that they have always the greatest share here; but

1. They are the inheriters of the Earth, because though inherit says Ambrose,
notes the Saints title to the Earth Fruuntur mites terra tanquam possessione
haeriditaria. Ambr.
. The Saints title is best, being members of Christ, who is Lord of all: Adam
did not only lose his Title to Heaven when he fell, but to the Earth too; and
till we are incorporated into Christ, we do not fully recover our Title; I deny
not but the wicked have a civil right to the Earth which the Laws of the Land
give them, but not a sacred right. Only the meek Christian has a
Scripture-title to his Land; we count that the best title which is held in
capite; the Saints hold their right to the Earth in capite, in their head
Christ, who is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. In this sense,
he who has but a foot of Land, inherits more than he who has a thousand
Acres, because he has a better and more judicial right to it.

the blessing of the Earth; the wicked man has the Earth, but not as a fruit
of Gods favor; he has it as a Dog has poisoned bread, it does him more hurt
than good; a wicked man lives in the Earth as one that lives in an infectious
Air, he is infected by his mercies; the fat of the Earth will but make him fry
and blaze the more in hell; so that a wicked man may be said not to have what
he has, because he has not the blessing; but the meek Saint enjoys the Earth
as a pledge of Gods love; the curse and poison is taken out of the Earth. Psalm.
37.11. The meek shall inherit the Earth, and shall delight themselves in the
abundance of peace; on which words Austin gives this gloss; Wicked men (says
he) may delight themselves in the abundance of Cattle and Riches, but the meek
man delights himself in the abundance of peace; what he has, he does possess
with inward serenity and quietness.

Caution.
Caution. When it is said the meek shall inherit the Earth, not that they shall
inherit no more than the Earth; they shall inherit Heaven too; if they should
only inherit the Earth, then (says Chrysostom) how could it be said, Blessed
are the meek? the meek have the Earth only for their sojourning-house; they
have Heaven for their mansion house. Psalm. 149.4. He will beautify the meek
with salvation. The meek beautify Religion, and God will beautify them with
salvation; salvation is the Port we all desire to sail to; it is the Harvest and
Vintage of souls; the meek are they which shall reap this Harvest; the meek
shall wear the embroidered robe of salvation. The meek are Lords of the Earth,
and heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14.

7. The mischief of an unmeek spirit: 1. There is nothing Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Let
not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the Devil; when men
let forth passion, they let in Satan; the wrathful man has the Devil for his
bedfellow. 2. Passion does hinder peace; the meek Christian has sweet quiet
and harmony in his soul; but Passion puts the soul into a disorder; it not only
clouds reason, but disturbs conscience; he does not possess himself, whom
Passion possesses; it is no wonder if they have no peace of conscience, who
make so little conscience of peace; wrathfulnesse grieves the Spirit of God,
Ephesians. 4.30, 31. and if the Spirit be grieved, he will be gone; we care not to
stay in smoaky houses: the Spirit of God loves not to be in that heart which is
so full of the vapors and fumes of distempered Passion.

8. Another argument to cool the intemperate heat David looked beyond Shimei's
rage, 2 Samuel 16.11. Let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him; What wisdom
were it for Christians to see the hand of God in all the barbarismes and
incivilities of men! Job eyed God in his affliction, and that meekned his
spirit, The Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1.21. He
does not say the Caldeans have taken away, but the Lord has taken away; what
made Christ so meek in his sufferings! he did not look at Judas or Pilate, but
at his father, John 18.11. The Cup which my Father has given me; when wicked
men do revile, and injure us, they are but Gods Executioners; who is angry with
the executioner?

And as God has an hand in all the affronts and discurtesies we receive from
men (for they do but hand them over to us) so God will do us good by all if we
belong to him; 1 Samuel, 16.12. it may be (says David) that the Lord will look
upon mine affliction, and will requite me good for his cursing; usually when
the Lord intends us some signal mercy, he fits us for it by some eminent trial;
as Moses his hand was first leprous before it wrought salvation, Exodus 4, 6. so
God may let his people be belepered with the cursings and revilings of men
before he shower down some blessing upon them; It may be the Lord will requite
me good for his cursing this day.

Mark 4.39. Peace, be still. So where there is grace in the heart, it stills
the raging of passion, and makes a calm. He who is in a perpetual frenzy,
letting loose the reins to wrath and malice, never yet felt the sweet efficacy
of grace, ^t is one of the sins of the Heathen, Implacable, Romans 1.31. a
revengeful, cankred heart, is not only heathenish, but divellish, Jam. 3. 14,
15. If ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, this wisdom descends
not from above, but is devilish. The old Serpent spits forth the poison of
malice and revenge.

this bedlam-humour of wrath and anger; let me tell you, you are the persons
whom God speaks of, who hate to be reformed; you are rebels against the Word;
read and tremble, Isa. 30.8.9. Now go write it before them in a table, and note
it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever, that this
is a rebellious people, children that will not hear the Law of the Lord. If
nothing yet will charm down the wrathful Devil, let me tell you, God has
charged every man not to meddle, or have any league of friendship with you,
Prove. 22.24. Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou
shall not go; What a monster is he among men, that every one is warned to
beware of, and not come near, as one who is unfit for humane society; make no
league says God with THAT MAN; if thou take him into thy society, thou
take a Snake into thy bosom; with a furious man thou shall not go. Will thou
walk with the Devil? the furious man is possessed with a wrathful Devil.

Oh that all this might help to meeken, and sweeten Christians spirits.

Object. But it is my nature to be passionate?

Answ. 1. This is sinful arguing; it is secretly to lay our sin upon God; we
learned this from Adam, Genesis 3.12. The woman whom thou gave to be with me,
she gave me of the tree, and I did eat; rather than Adam would confess his
sin, he would father it upon God; the woman thou gave me; as if he had said,
it thou had not given this woman to me, I had not eat. So says one, it is my
nature, this is the froward, peevish nature God has given me; oh no, thou
chargest God falsely; God gave thee no such nature; he made man upright, Eccles.
7.25. God made thee straight, thou made thy self crooked; all thy affections
at first, thy joy, love, anger, were set in order as the Stars in their right
orb, but thou did misplace them, and make them move Excentrick; at first the
affections like several Musick-instruments well-tuned, did make a sweet
consort, but sin was the jarring string that brought all out of tune; vain man,
plead not it is thy nature to be angry, thank thy self for it; natures spring
was pure, till sin poisoned the spring.

Answ. 2. Is it thy nature to be fierce and angry? this is so far from being an
excuse, that it makes it so much the worse; it is the nature of a Toad to
poison, that makes it the more hateful; if a man were indicted for stealing, and
he should say to the Judge, Spare me, it is my nature to steal, were this any
excuse? the Judge would say, Thou deservest the rather to dye; Sinner, get a
new nature, flesh and blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

SECT. 3.
How to attain this grace of meekness.



Answ. 1. Often look upon the meekness of Christ; the Scholar that would write
well, has his eye often upon the Copy.

2. Pray earnestly that God will meeken thy spirit; God is called (...), the
God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. He has all the graces in his gift, Sue to him
for this grace of meekness; if one were Patron of all the Livings in the Land,
men would sue to him for a Living: God is Patron of all the graces, let us sue
to him; mercy comes in at the door of prayer. Ezekiel. 36.26, 37. I will yet for
this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them: Meekness is the
commodity we want, let us send prayer as our Factor over to heaven to procure
it for us; and pray in faith; when faith sets prayer on work, prayer sets God
on work; all divine blessings come streaming to us through this golden channel
of prayer.

MATTHEW. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after Righteousness.


CHAP. XIII.
Describing the Nature of spiritual hunger.

WE are now come to the fourth step of blessedness, Blessed are they that
hunger. The words fall into two parts.

1. A Duty implied. 2. A Promise annexed.
1. A Duty implied, Blessed are they that hunger. 1. The Duty implied.
Spiritual hunger is a blessed hunger.

Quest. 1. What is meant by hunger?

Answ. Hunger is put for desire, Isa. 26.9. Spiritual hunger is the rational
appetite whereby the soul pants after that which it apprehends most suitable and
proportionable to it self.

Quest. 2. Whence is this hunger?

Answ. Hunger is from a sense of want; he who spiritually hungers, has a real
sense of his own indigence, he wants righteousness.

Quest. 3. What is meant by righteousness?

Answ. There is a twofold righteousness.

1. Of Imputation. 2. Of Implantation.
1. Justitia imputativa.
1. A righteousness of Imputation; viz. Christ's righteousness. Jer. 23.6. He
shall be called the Lord our righteousness. This is as truly ours to justify,
as it is Christ's to bestow; by virtue of this righteousness God looks upon us
as if we had never sinned, Number. 23.21. this is a perfect righteousness: Col.
2.10. Ye are complete in him; this does not only cover, but adorn; he who has
this righteousness, is equal to the most illustrious Saints; the weakest
believer is justified as much as the strongest; this is a Christians triumph;
when he is defiled in himself, he is undefiled in his head; in this blessed
righteousness we shine brighter than the Angels; this righteousness is worth
hungring after.

2 Justitia implantativa.
2. A righteousness of Implantation; that is, inherent righteousness; viz. the
graces of the Spirit; holiness of heart and life, which Cajetan calls universal
righteousness; this a pious soul hungers after.

This is a blessed hunger; bodily hunger cannot make a man so miserable, as
spiritual hunger makes him blessed; this evidenceth life; a dead man cannot
hunger; hunger proceeds from life; the first thing the child does when it is
born, is to hunger after the breast; spiritual hunger follows upon the new
birth: 1 Pet. 2.2. Saint Bernard in one of his Soliloquies comforts himself
with this, that sure he had the truth of grace in him, because he had in his
heart a strong desire after God Certus sum per gratiam, defiderium ^ui habere
me in toto cord. Bern. Solil.
; it is happy, when though we have not what we should, we desire what we have
not; the appetite is as well from God as the food.

SECT. I.
The Inferences drawn from the Proposition.

1. SEE here at what a low price God sets heavenly hungring and thirsting.
Inform.
Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, buy We are not
bid to bring any merits as the Papists would do; nor to bring a sum of money to
purchase righteousness; Rich men would be loath to do that; all that is required
is to bring an appetite. Christ has fulfilled all righteousness, we are only
to hunger and thirst after righteousness; this is equal and reasonable; God
requires not Rivers of oil, but sighs and tears; the invitation of the Gospel
is free; if a friend invite Ghuests to his Table, he does not expect they
should bring money to pay for their Dinner, only come with an appetite; so
says God, It Is not penance, pilgrimage, self-righteousness I require; only
bring a stomach, hunger and thirst after righteousness. God might have set
Christ and salvation at an higher price; but he has much beaten down the
price: Now as this shows the sweetness of Gods Nature, he is not an hard
Master; so it shows us the inexcusableness of them who perish under the Gospel;
What Apology can any man make at the day of judgment, when God shall ask that
question, Friend, why did thou not embrace Christ? I set Christ and grace at
a low rate; if thou had but hungered after righteousness, thou might have
had it, but thou did slight Christ; thou had such low thoughts of
righteousness, that thou would not hunger after it; how do thou think to
escape who have neglected so great salvation? The easier the terms of the
Gospel are, the sorer punishment shall they be thought worthy of who unworthily
refuse such an offer.

Isa. 26.9. Psalm. 73.25. A true Saint is carried upon the wing of desire; it is
the very temper and constitution of a gracious soul to thirst after God; Psalm.
42.2. In the word preached, now he is big with desire; these are some of the
pantings of his soul, Lord, Thou have led me into thy Courts, O that I may have
thy sweet presence, that thy glory may fill the Temple! This is thy Limning
house; will thou draw some sacred Lineaments of grace upon my soul, that I may
be more assimilated and changed into the likeness of my dear Savior. In
prayer, how is the soul filled with passionate longings after Christ! prayer is
expressed by groans unutterable, Romans 8.26. The heart sends up whole Vollies of
sighs to heaven; Lord, one beam of thy love, one drop of thy blood!

SECT. 2.
Containing a Reprehension of such as do not hunger after Righteousness.

Choler: So those who are soul-sick, and in the gall of bitterness, find no
sweetness in God or Religion; (...), sin tastes sweeter to them, they have no
spiritual hunger. That men have not this hunger after righteousness, appears by
these seven Demonstrations.

1. They never felt any emptiness, they are full of own righteousness. Romans
10.3. Now the full stomach loathes the honeycomb; this was Laodicea's disease,
she was full, and had no stomach either to Christ's gold or eye salve, Rev.
3.17. When men are filled with pride, this flatuous distemper hinders holy
longings; as when the stomach is full of wind, it spoils the appetite; none so
empty of grace, as he that thinks he is full; he has most need of
righteousness, that does least want it.

2. That men do not hunger after righteousness, appears, oil in the Cruse, the
world coming in, they are well content; grace is a commodity that is least
missed; you shall hear men complain they want health, they want Trading, but
never complain they want Righteousness; if men lose a meal or two, they think
themselves half undone; but they can stay away from Ordinances, which are the
Conduits of grace: Do they hunger after righteousness, who are satisfied
without it? nay, who desire to be excused from feeding upon the Gospel-banquet
Luke 14.18.
; sure he has no appetite, who entreats to be excused from eating.

3. It is a sign they have none of this spiritual hunger, sleep than food; they
are more drowsy than hungry; some there are who come to the Word, that they
may get a nap, to whom I may say as Christ did to Peter, Mark 14.37. Could
thou not watch one hour? it is strange to see a man asleep at his meat; others
there are who have a deep sleep fallen upon them, they are asleep in security,
and they hate a soul-awakening Ministry; while they sleep, their damnation
slumbereth not, 1 Pet. 2.3.

offered, nay pressed upon them, but they put away salvation from them, as the
froward child puts away the breast, Psalm. 81.11. Acts 13.46. Such are your
Phanaticks and Enthusiasts, who put away the blessed Ordinances, and pretend
Revelations, That is a strange Revelation, that tells a man he may live without
food; these prefer Husks before Manna; they live upon Aerie Notions, being fed
by the Prince of the Air.

Tim. 6.3, 4. If any man consent not to wholesome words, he is proud, knowing
nothing, etc. The plainest truth has its beauty; they have no spiritual
hunger, that desire only to feast their fancy; of such the Prophet speaks,
Ezekiel. 33.32. Thou art to them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can play well on an Instrument. If a man were invited to a Feast,
and there being Music at the Feast, he should so listen to the Music, that he
did not mind his meat, you would say, Sure he is not hungry; so when men are
for gingling words, and like rather gallantry of speech, than spirituality of
matter, it is a sign they have surfeited stomachs, and itching ears.

viz. their profits and recreations; If a boy, when he should be at dinner, is
playing in the street, it is a sign he has no appetite to his meat; were he
hungry, he would not prefer his play before his food: So when men prefer vain
things which cannot profit, before the blood of Christ, and the grace of the
Spirit, it is a sign they have no palate or stomach to heavenly things.

7. It is a sign men have no spiritual hunger, when they Disputes in Religion,
than Practicks. Robertus Gallus thought he saw in his dream a great Feast, and
some were biting on hard stones; when men feed only on hard questions and
controversies 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.
, (like some of the Schoolmens utrums and distinctions) as whether one may
partake with him that has not the work of grace in his heart? whether one
ought not to separate from a Church in case of maladministration? what is to
be thought of Paedobaptism? etc. when these Niceties and Criticisms in Religion
take up men's heads, neglecting faith and holiness, these do pick bones, and not
feed on the meat. Scepticks in Religion have hot brains, but cold hearts; did
men hunger and thirst after righteousness, they would propound to themselves
such questions as these, How shall we do to be saved? How shall we make our
Calling and Election sure? How shall we mortify our corruptions? but such as
Ravel out their time in frothy and litigious disputes, I call Heaven to witness
they are strangers to this Text, they do not hunger and thirst after
righteousness.

SECT. 3.
Containing a Reproof of them that do hunger, but not after Righteousness.

Riches: This is the thirst of covetous men, they desire Mammon, not Manna:
Auri sacra fam^s. Hor.
Amos 2.7. That pant after the dust of the Earth. This is the disease most are
sick of, an immoderate appetite after the world; but these things will no more
satiate, than drink will quench a dropsy man's thirst; covetousness is
Idolatry, Col. 3.5. Too many Protestants set up the Idol of gold in the Temple
of their hearts; this sin of covetousness is the most hardly rooted out;
commonly when other sins leave men, this sin abides; wantonness is the sin of
youth, worldliness the sin of old Age.



1. It reproves such as thirst after others men's Lands and Possessions; this
the Scripture calls a mighty sin, Amos 5.12. Thus Ahab thirsted after Naboths
Vineyard; this is an hungry Age wherein we live; we have a great deal of this
hungring and thirsting, which has made so many State-Thieves; Men have fleeced
others to feather themselves. What a brave challenge did Samuel make? 2 Samuel
12.3. Behold here I am, witness against me before the Lord, and before his
Anointed, Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I
defrauded? of whose hand have I received any bribe? etc. Few that have been in
Power can say thus, Whose Ox have we taken? whose house have we plundered?
whose estate have we sequestered? Nay, whose Ox have they not taken? Goods
unjustly gotten, seldom go to the third heir. De male quaesitis vix gaudet
tertius haeres. Read the Plunderers curse: Isa. 33.1. Woe to thee that
spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall
be spoiled. Ahab paid dear for the Vineyard, when the Devil carried away his
soul, and the Dogs licked his blood, 1 Kings 21.19. He that lives on Rapine,
dies a fool. Jer. 17.11. He that gets riches, and not by right, at his end
shall be a fool.

2. It reproves such as hunger and thirst after revenge; this is a Divellish
thirst; though it were more Christian and safe to smother an injury, yet our
nature is prone to this disease of revenge; we have the sting of the Be, not
the honey; malice having broken the Bars of Reason, grows savage, and carries
its remedy in the Scabbard: Heathens will rise up against Christians, who have
stopped the vein of revengeful passion, when it has begun to vent: I have read
of Phocion, who being wrongfully condemned to dye, desired that his son might
not remember the injuries which the Athenians had done to him, nor revenge his
blood.

3. It reproves such as hunger and thirst to satisfy their impure lusts;
sinners are said to sin (...), with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. So Amnon was sick
till he had defiled Tamars chastity; never does an hungry man come with more
eagerness to his food, than a wicked man does to his sin; and when Satan sees
men have such an appetite, commonly he will provide a Dish they love; he will
set the forbidden Tree before them; they that thirst to commit sin, shall
thirst as Dives did in hell, and not have a drop of water to cool their tongue.

SECT. 4.
Showing the signs of spiritual hunger.

Trial.
I shall give you five signs by which you may judge of this hunger.

painful thing. Esau, when he was returned from Hunting, was almost dead with
hunger: Genesis 25.32. and Psalm. 107.5. Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in
them: So a man that hungers after righteousness, is in anguish of soul, and
ready to faint away for it; he finds a want of Christ and grace, he is
distressed and in pain till he has his spiritual hunger stilled and allayed.

Shall I dye for thirst? says Sampson, Judge. 15.18. So a man that hungers and
thirsts after righteousness, says, Give me Christ, or I dye; Lord, What will thou give me seeing I go Christless? what though I have parts, wealth, honor
and esteem in the world? all is nothing without Christ; Show me the Lord, and
it suffices. Let me have Christ to cloth me, Christ to feed me, Christ to
intercede for me; while the soul is Christless, it is restless; nothing but the
water-springs of Christ's blood can quench its thirst.

walls: Genesis 42.1, 2. The soul that spiritually hungers, is resolved, Christ it
must have, grace it must have; and to use Basils Expression, the hungry soul is
almost distracted till it enjoyes the thing it hungers after (...). Basil.
.

4. An hungry man falls to his meat with an appetite; you need not make an
Oration to an hungry man, and persuade Jer. 15.16. Thy words were found, and I
did eat them; in the Sacrament he feeds with appetite upon the body and blood
of the Lord; God loves to see us feed hungrily on the bread of life.

5. An hungry man tastes sweetness in his meat; so he Pet. 2.3. If so be ye
have tasted that the Lord is gracious: He that spiritually hungers, tastes the
promises sweet, nay, tastes a reproof sweet. To the hungry every bitter thing
is sweet, Prove. 27.7. A bitter reproof is sweet; he can feed upon the myrrh of
the Gospel as well as the honey; by these notes of trial we may judge of our
selves whether we hunger and thirst after righteousness.

SECT. 5.
Comfort to such as do hunger, wherein is shown the differences of hunger.

IT may serve to comfort the hearts of those who do Consol.
I doubt not but ^t is the grief of many a good heart, that he cannot be more
holy, that he cannot serve God better. Blessed are they that hunger. Though
thou have not so much righteousness as thou would, yet thou art blessed,
because thou hungerest after it; desire is the best discovery of a Christian;
actions may be counterfeit; a man may do a good action for a bad end; so did
Jehu. Actions may be compulsory; a man may be forced to do that which is good,
but not to will that which is good; therefore we are to cherish good desires,
and to bless God for them; oftentimes a child of God has nothing to show for
himself but desires: Nehem. 1.11. Thy servants who desire to fear thy Name.
These hungrings after righteousness proceed from love; a man does not desire
that which he does not love; if thou did not love Christ, thou could not
hunger after him.

Object. 1. If my hunger were right, then I could take comfort in it; but I
fear it is counterfeit; hypocrites have their desires.

Answ. That I may the better settle a doubting Christian, I shall show the
difference between true and false desires, spiritual hunger and carnal.

tanquam medium, as a bridge to lead him over to heaven; he does not so much
thirst after grace, as glory; he does not so much desire the way of
righteousness, as the Crown of righteousness; his desire is not to be made like
Christ, but to reign with Christ; this was Balaams desire: Number. 23.10. Let me
dye the death of the righteous: Such desires as these are found among the
damned, this is the hypocrites hunger; but a child of God desires grace for it
self, and Christ for himself; to a believer, not only heaven is precious, but
Christ is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7.

heaven and his sins to; heaven and his pride, heaven and his covetousness: The
young man in the Gospel would have had heaven, provided he might keep his
earthly possessions; many a man would have Christ, but there is some sin he
must not be uncivil to, but gratify; this is the hypocrites hunger; but true
desire is absolute. Give me says the soul, Christ on any terms; let God
propound what Articles he will, I will subscribe to them. Would he have me deny
my self? would he have me mortify sin? I am content to do any thing, so I may
have Christ; hypocrites would have Christ, but they are loath to part with a
lust for him; they are like a man that would have a Lease, but is loath to pay
down the Fine.

3. Hypocrites desires are but desires, they are lazy Lipsius to the study of
virtue, says he, My mind is to it. Prove. 21.25. The desire of the slothful
kills him, for his hands refuse to labor. Many stand as the Carman in the
Fable, crying, Help Hercules, when his Wain stuck in the Mud, when he should
rather have put his shoulder to the Wheel. Men would be saved, but they will
take no pains. Does he desire water that will not let down the Bucket into the
Well? but true desire is quickened into endeavor. Isa. 26.9. With my soul have
I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early; they are the violent take heaven by force, Matthew. 12.11. The lovesick
Spouse, though she was wounded, and her vail taken away, yet she follows after
Christ, Cant. 5.7. Desire is the weight of the soul, which sets it a going; as
the Eagle which desires her prey, makes haste to it. Job 39. ult. Where the
stain are, there is she; the Eagle has sharpness of sight to discover her
prey, and swiftness of wing to fly to it: So the soul that hungers after
righteousness, is carried swiftly to it in the use of all holy Ordinances.

David would not offer burnt-offerings without cost, 1 Chronicles. 21.24. An hungry
man will give any thing for food; as it fell out in the siege of Samaria, 2
Kings 6.25. That man did never hunger after Christ, who thinks much of parting
with a little silver for the Pearl of price.

5. Hypocrites desires are flashy and transient; they blessed are they that are
hungring; though they have righteousness, yet they are still hungring after
more. Hypocrites desire is like the motion of a Watch which is quickly down.
The desire of a godly man is like the beating of the Pulse, which lasts as long
as life, Psalm. 119.20. My soul breaks for the longing that it has to thy
judgments. And that we might not think this pang of desire would soon be
over, he adds (...) at all times. David's desire after God was not an high
color in a fit, but the constant complexion of his soul. In the Temple the
fire was not to go out by night, Levit. 6.13. The fire shall ever be burning
upon the Altar. There was says Cyril, a mystery in it, to show that we must be
ever burning in holy affections and desires.

6. Hypocrites desires are unseasonable, they are not timed; they put off their
hungring after righteousness till it be too late; they are like the foolish
virgins that came knocking when the door was shut, Matthew. 25.10. In time of
health and prosperity the stream of the affections did run another way; it was
sin the Hypocrite desired, not righteousness; when he is to dye, and can keep
his sins no longer, now he would have grace as a Passe-port to carry him to
heaven Luke 13.25.
. This is the Hypocrites fault, his faith is too early, and his desires are too
late; his faith began to bud in the morning of his infancy, he believed ever
since he could remember, but his desires after Christ begin not to put forth
till the evening of old age; he sends forth his desires when his last breath is
going forth; as if a man should desire a pardon after the sentence is passed;
these bedridden desires are suspicious; but true desires are timely and
seasonable: a gracious heart seeks first the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 6.33.
David's thirst after God was early, Psalm. 63.1. The wise Virgins got their oil
betimes before the Bridegroom came. Thus we see the difference between a true
and false hunger; they who can find this true hunger, are blessed, and may
take comfort in it.

Object. 2. But my hunger after righteousness is so

Answ. 1. Though the pulse beats but weak, it shows Matthew. 12.20. a bruised
reed he will not break; a reed is a weak thing, but especially when it is
bruised; yet this bruised reed shall not be broken, but like Aarons dry rod,
bud and blossom. In case of weakness, look to Christ thy High Priest; he is
merciful, therefore will bear with thy infirmities; he is mighty, therefore
will help them.

Answ. 2. If thy desires after righteousness seem to be weak and languid, yet
a Christian may sometimes take a measure of his spiritual estate as well by the
judgment, as by the affections. What is that thou esteemest most in thy
judgment? Is it Christ and Grace? This is a good evidence for heaven; it was a
sign Saint Paul did bear entire love to Christ, because he esteemed this
Pearl above all; he counted other things (...), but dung, that he might win
Christ, Phil. 3.8.

Object. 3. But says a child of God, That which much eclipseth my comfort, is,
I have not that hunger which once I had. Time was I did hunger after a Sabbath,
because then the Manna fell; I called the Sabbath a delight; I remember the
time when I did hunger after the body and blood of the Lord; I came to a
Sacrament as an hungry man to a Feast; but now it is otherwise with me, I have
not those hungrings as formerly.

Answ. It Is indeed an ill sign for a man to lose his stomach; but, though it
be a sign of the decay of grace to lose the spiritual appetite, yet it is a
sign of the truth of grace to bewail the loss; it is sad to lose our first
love, but it is happy when we mourn for the loss of our first love.



SECT. 6.
Containing a persuasion to spiritual hunger.

Exhort.
Parum est justitiam velle, sed esurire, quod ingens desiderium prae se fert.
Novarinus. Hunger less after the world, and more after righteousness; say
concerning spiritual things, Lord, evermore give me this bread; Feed me with
this Angels food. That Manna is most to be hungered after which will not only
preserve life, but prevent death, John 6.50. that is most desirable, which is
most durable. Riches are not for ever, Prove. 28.24. but righteousness is for
ever, Prove. 8.18. The beauty of holiness Psalm. 110.3.
never fades; the robe of righteousness Isa. 61.10.
never waxes old! Oh hunger after that righteousness which delivers from
death, Prove. 10.2. This is the righteousness which God himself is in love
with, Prove. 15.9. he loves him that follows after righteousness. All men
are ambitious of the Kings favor; alas what is a Princes smile but a transient
Beatitude? This sunshine of his royal countenance soon masks it self with a
cloud of displeasure; But thou who art endued with righteousness art Gods
Favorite, and how sweet is his smile! Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving-kindnesse is
better than life.

SECT. 7.
Containing an excitation to spiritual hunger.

TO persuade men to hunger after this righteousness, consider two things.

1. Unless we hunger after righteousness, we cannot but if we refuse to come
up to these terms, there is no righteousness to be had for us. God will stop
the current of his mercy, and set open the sluice of his indignation.

here, we shall thirst when it is too late; if we do not thirst as David did,
Psalm. 42.2. my soul thirsts for God; we shall thirst as Dives did for a drop
of water, Luke 16.24. They who thirst not for righteousness, shall be in
perpetual hunger and thirst; they shall thirst for mercy, but no mercy to be
had. Heat increases thirst; when men shall burn in hell, and be scorched with
the flames of Gods wrath, this heat will increase their thirst for mercy, but
there will be nothing to allay their thirst. O is it not better to thirst for
righteousness while it is to be had, than to thirst for mercy when there is
none to be had? Sinners, the time is shortly coming when the drawbridge of
mercy will be quite pulled up.

I shall next briefly prescribe some helps to spiritual hunger.

Windy things. When the stomach is full of wind, a man has little appetite to
his food; so when one is filled with a windy opinion of his own righteousness,
he will not hunger after Christ's righteousness; he who being puffed up with
pride, thinks he has grace enough already, will not hunger after more; These
windy vapors spoil the stomach. 2. Sweet things destroy the appetite: so by
feeding immoderately upon the sweet, luscious delights of the world, we lose
our appetite to Christ and Grace. You never knew a man surfeit himself upon the
world, and sick of love to Christ; while Israel fed with delight upon Garlic
and Onions, they never hungered after Manna; the soul cannot be carried to two
extremes at once; as the eye cannot look intent on heaven and earth at once
Oculus non potest and caelum and terram simul inspicere. Cyprian.
, so a man cannot at the same instant hunger excessively after the world, and
righteousness! the earth puts out the fire; the love of earthly things will
quench the desire of spiriritual, 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, the sin is
not in the having, but in the loving.

2. Do all that may provoke spiritual appetite. There Exercise; a man by
walking and stirring gets a stomach to his meat: So by the exercise of holy
duties the spiritual appetite is increased, 1 Timothy 4.7. Exercise thy self to
godliness. Many have left off Closet-prayer; they hear the Word but seldom,
and for want of exercise they have lost their stomach to Religion.

2. Sauce; Sauce whets and sharpens the appetite; there is a twofold sauce
provokes holy appetite. 1. The bitter herbs of repentance; he that tastes the
gall and vinegar in sin, hungers after the body and blood of the Lord. 2.
Affliction. God often gives us this sauce to sharpen our hunger after Grace;
Reuben found Mandrakes in the field, Genesis 30.14. The Mandrakes are an Herb of a
very strong savor Herba magni odoris, and stomacho labora^tibus tribuit
medelam.
, and among other virtues they have, they are chiefly medicinable for those who
have weak, and bad stomachs. Afflictions may be compared to these Mandrakes
which do sharpen men's desires after that spiritual food which in time of
prosperity they began to loath and nauseate; penury is the sauce which cures
the surfeit of plenty. In sickness people hunger more after righteousness than
in health; The full stomach loathes the honeycomb; Christians when ful-fed,
despise the rich cordials of the Gospel. I wish we do not slight those truths
now, which would taste sweet in a prison; how precious was a leaf of the Bible
in Queen Mary's days! The wise God sees it good sometimes to give us the sharp
sauce of affliction, to make us feed more hungrily upon the bread of life. And
so much for the first part of the text, Blessed are they that hunger.

MATTHEW. 5.6. For they shall be filled.


CHAP. XV.
Showing that the spiritual hunger shall be satisfied.

2. The Promise annexed.
I Proceed now to the second part of the text, a Promise annexed, (...), they
shall be filled. A Christians fighting with sin is not like one that beats the
air, 1 Cor. 9.26. and his hungring after righteousness is not like one that
sucks in only air, Blessed are they that hunger, for they shall be filled.

Doctr. Those that hunger after righteousness shall be filled; God never bids
us seek him in vain Isa. 45.19.
, here is an honeycomb dropping into the mouths of the hungry, they shall be
filled. Luke 1.53. He has filled the hungry with good things. Psalm. 109.7. He
satisfies the longing soul, God will not let us lose our longing; here is the
excellency of righteousness above all things; a man may hunger after the
world, and not be filled; the world is fading, not filling; Cast three Worlds
into the heart, yet the heart is not full; but righteousness is a filling
thing, nay, it so fills, as it satisfies; a man may be filled, and not
satisfied; a sinner may take his fill of sin, but that is a sad filling, it is
far from satisfaction. Prove. 14 14. The back-slider in heart shall be filled
with his own ways; he shall have his belly full of sin, he shall have enough
of it; but this is not a filling to satisfaction, this is such a filling as the
damned in hell have, they shall be full of the fury of the Lord: But he that
hungers after righteousness, shall be satisfyingly filled. Jerem. 31.14. My
people shall be satisfied with goodness. Psalm. 63.3. My soul shall be satisfied
as with marrow. Joseph first opened the mouth of the Sacks, and then filled
them with corn, and put money in them, Genesis 42.25. So God first opens the mouth
of the soul with desire, and then fills it with good things, Psalm. 81.10. --
For the illustration of this, consider these three things.

1. That God can fill the hungry soul. 2. Why he fills the hungry soul. 3. How
he fills the hungry soul.
1. That God can fill the hungry soul; he is called a Psalm. 36.9. With thee is
the fountain of life: The Cistern may be empty, and cannot fill us: Creatures
are often broken Cisterns, Jer. 2.13. But the fountain is filling; God is a
Fountain; if we bring the Vessels of our desires to this Fountain, he is able
to fill them; the fullness in God is, 1. An infinite fullness; though he fill us,
and the Angels which have larger capacities to receive, yet he has never the
less himself; as the Sun, though it shines, has never the less light. Luke
8.46. I perceive that virtue is gone out of me. Though God lets virtue go out
of him, yet he has never the less; the fullness of the creature is limited; it
arises just to such a degree and proportion, but Gods fullness is infinite; as
it has its Resplendency, so its Redundancy, it knows neither bounds nor bottom.

2. It is a constant fullness: The fullness of the creature is a mutable fullness,
it ebbs and changes. I could (says one) have helped you, but now my Estate is
low; the blossoms of the Fig Tree are soon blown off; creatures cannot do that
for us which once they could; but God is a constant fullness. Psalm. 102.27. Thou
art the same: God can never be exhausted, his fullness is overflowing and
ever-flowing then surely it is good to draw nigh to God, Psalm. 73.28. it is
good bringing our Vessels to this springhead, it is a never-failing goodness.



the Spirit would fail before him, and the soul which he has made, Isa. 57.16.
If the hungry man be not satisfied with food, he dies; God has more bowels
than to suffer an hungry soul to be famished; when the Multitude had nothing to
eat, Christ was moved with compassion, and he wrought a miracle for their
supply: Matthew. 15.32. Much more will he compassionate such as hunger and thirst
after righteousness: When a poor sinner sees himself almost starved in his
sins, (as the Prodigal among his husks) and begins to hunger after Christ,
saying, There is bread enough in my Fathers house; God will then out of his
infinite compassions bring forth the fatted Calf, and refresh this soul with
the delicacies and provisions of the Gospel; oh the melting of Gods bowels to
an hungry sinner! Hosea 11.8. My heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled. We cannot see a poor creature at the door ready to perish with hunger,
but our bowels begin to relent, and we afford them some relief; and will the
Father of mercies let a poor soul that hungers after the blessings of the
Gospel go away without an Alms of free grace? no, he will not, he cannot; let
the hungry sinner think thus, Though I am full of wants, yet my God is full of
bowels.

2. God will fill the hungry that he may fulfill his Psalm. 107.9. Jer. 41.14.
Luke 6.21. Blessed are ye that hunger now, for ye shall be filled. Isa. 44.3. I
will pour water upon him that is thirsty, I will pour my Spirit upon thy
seed, etc. Has the Lord spoken, and shall it not come to pass? promises are
obligatory; if God has passed a promise, he cannot go back: Thou that
hungerest after righteousness, have God engaged for thee; he has (to speak
with Reverence) pawned his truth for thee. As his compassions fail not, Lam.
3.22. so he will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, Psalm. 89.33. If the
hungry soul should not be filled, the promise should not be fulfilled.

3. God will fill the hungry soul, because he himself has excited and stirred
up this hunger; he plants holy desires prayer, when God prepares the heart to
pray, he prepares his ear to hear, Psalm. 17.10. So in case of spiritual hunger,
when God prepares the heart to hunger, he will prepare his hand to fill; it is
not rational to imagine that God should deny to satisfy that hunger which he
himself has caused: Nature does nothing in vain: Should the Lord inflame the
desire after righteousness, and not fill it, he might seem to do something in
vain.

4. God will fill the hungry, from those sweet Relations he stands unto them,
they are his children; we cannot deny our children when they are hungry, we
will rather spare it from our selves: Luke 11.13. When he that is born of God,
shall come and say, Father, I hunger, give me Christ; Father, I thirst, refresh
me with the living streams of thy Spirit, can God deny? Does God hear the Raven
when it cries, and will he not hear the righteous when they cry? when the Earth
opens its mouth and thirsts, God does satisfy it: Psalm. 65.9, 10. Does the
Lord satisfy the thirsty Earth with showers, and will he not satisfy the
thirsty soul with grace?

Psalm. 50.23. Who so offers praise, glorifies me.



Answ. There is a three fold filling.

1. With Grace. 2. With Peace. 3. With Bliss.
1. God fills the hungry soul with Grace: Grace is filling, because suitable to
the soul. Stephen full of the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.55. This fullness of Grace is
in respect of parts, not of degrees. There is something of every Grace, though
not perfection in any Grace.

2. God fills the hungry soul with peace. Romans 15.13. The God of hope fill you
with joy and peace; this flows from Christ. Israel had honey out of the Rock;
this honey of peace comes out of the Rock Christ. John 16. ult. that in me ye
might have peace. So filling is this peace, that it sets the soul a longing
after heaven; this Cluster of Grapes quickens the appetite and pursuit after
the full Crop.

3. God fills the hungry soul with bliss: Glory is a filling thing. Psalm. 17.
ult. When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy image. When a Christian awakes
out of the sleep of death, then he shall be satisfied, having the glorious
beams of Gods image shining upon him; then shall the soul be filled brim-full;
the glory of heaven is so sweet, that the soul shall still thirst; yet so
infinite, that it shall be filled.

Qui te Christ bibent, dulci torrente refecti
Non sitient ultra, sed tamen and sitient. --
Use. What an Encouragement is this to hunger after righteousness! such shall
be filled: us to fill the hungry, Isa. 58.10. He blames those who do not fill
the hungry, Isa. 32.6. And do we think he will be slack in that which he blames
us for not doing? Oh come with hungrings after Christ, and be assured of
satisfaction. God keeps open house for hungry sinners; he invites his Guests,
and bids them come without money, Isa. 55.1, 2. Gods Nature inclines him, and
his Promise obliges him to fill the hungry. Consider, Why did Christ receive
the Spirit without measure? John 3.34. It was not for himself; he was
infinitely full before; but he was filled with the holy unction for this end,
that he might distill his grace upon the hungry soul. Art thou ignorant? Christ
was filled with wisdom that he might teach thee. Art thou polluted? Christ was
filled with grace that he might cleanse thee: Shall not the soul then come to
Christ, who was filled on purpose to fill the hungry? we love to knock at a
rich man's door; in our Fathers house there is bread enough; come with desire,
and you shall go away with comfort; you shall have the virtues of Christ's
blood, the influences of his Spirit, the communications of his love.

Here are two Objections made against this.

The carnal man's Objection: I have (says he) hungered after righteousness, yet
am not filled.

Answ. 1. Thou say thou hungerest, and art not satisfied; perhaps God is not
satisfied with thy hunger; thou have opened thy mouth wide Psalm. 81.10.
, but have not opened thine ear Psalm. 40.9.
: When God has called thee to Family Prayer, and mortification of sin, thou
have like the deaf Adder, stopped thine ear against God, Zach. 7.11. No wonder
then thou have not that comfortable filling as thou desire; though thou have
opened thy mouth, yet thou have stopped thine ear; the child that will not hear
his parent, is made to do penance by fasting.

2. Perhaps thou thirstest as much after a tentation as after righteousness: At
a Sacrament thou seem to be inflamed with desire after Christ; but the next
tentation that comes, either to drunkenness or lasciviousness, thou fallest in,
and closest with the tentation. Satan does but becken to thee, and thou come;
thou openest faster to the Tempter than to Christ; and do thou wonder thou
art not filled with the fat things of Gods house?

3. Perhaps thou hungerest more after the world than after righteousness: The
young man in the Gospel would have Christ, but the world lay nearer his heart
than Christ: hypocrites pant more after the dust of the Earth Amos 2.7.
than the water of life. Israel had no Manna while their Dough lasted; such as
feed immoderately upon the Dough of earthly things, must not think to be filled
with Manna from heaven; if your money be your god, never look to receive
another God in the Sacrament.

2. The godly man's Objection; I have had unfeigned

Answ. 1. Thou may have a filling of grace, comfort; if God does not fill
thee with gladness, yet with goodness, Psalm. 107.11. Look into thy heart, and
see the distillations of the Spirit; the dew may fall, though the honeycomb
does not drop.

2. Wait a while, and thou shall be filled; the Gospel is a spiritual Banquet,
it feasts the soul with grace and comfort; none eat of this Banquet but such as
wait at the Table. Isa. 25.6, 9. In this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make
unto all people a Feast of fat things, a Feast of wines on the Lees well
refined; and it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God, we have waited
for him; we will be glad, and rejoice in his salvation. Spiritual mercies are
not only worth desiring, but waiting for.

3. If God should not fill his people to satisfaction here, yet they shall be
filled in heaven; the Vessels of their desires shall be filled, as those
water-pots, Joh. 2. up to the brim.

MATTHEW. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.


CHAP. XV.
Containing a Discourse of mercifulness.

THese Verses like the stairs of Solomon's Temple, cause our Ascent to the Holy
of holies. We are now mounting up a step higher, (...), Blessed are the
merciful, etc. There was never more need to preach of mercifulness than in
these unmerciful times wherein we live. It is reported in the life of
Chrysostom, that he did much preach on this subject of mercifulness, and for
his much pressing Christians to mercy, he was called of many (...), the
Almes-preacher, or the Preacher for mercy; our times need many Chrysostoms.

Blessed are the merciful. Mercy stands both in the Van and Rear of the Text;
in the beginning of the Text it stands as a Duty; in the end of the Text it
stands as a Reward. The Hebrew word for godly, (...) signifies merciful; the
more godly, the more merciful; the Doctrine I shall gather out of the words,
which will comprehend and draw in the whole, is this;

That the merciful man is a blessed man; Psalm. 109.6, 7, 8, 9, etc. Let Satan
stand at his right hand; when he shall be judged, let him be condemned, and let
his prayer become sin; let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow;
let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg; let the Extortioner catch
all that he has, and let the stranger spoil his labor; let there be none to
extend mercy to him; let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation
following let their name be blotted out; let the iniquity of his fathers be
remembered with the Lord, and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out. Why,
what is this crime? Ver. 16. Because he remembered not to show mercy, etc. See
what a long Vial full of the plagues of God is poured out upon the unmerciful
man! So by the Rule of contraries, the blessings of the Almighty do crown and
encompass the merciful man. 2 Samuel 22.26. Psalm. 37.26. Psalm. 41.1. The merciful
man is a blessed man. For the illustrating this, I shall show, 1. What is meant
by mercifulness. 2. The several kinds of mercy.


1. What is meant by mercifulness? I answer, 1. Quid misericordia.
it is a melting disposition, whereby we lay to heart the miseries of others,
and are ready on all occasions to be instrumental for their good.

Quest. 1. How do mercy and love differ?

Answ. In some things they agree, in some things they differ; like waters that
may have two different spring-heads, but meet in the stream. Love and mercy
differ thus; Love is more extensive; the Diocese that Love walks and visits in,
is larger: Mercy properly respects them that are miserable; Love is of a larger
consideration; Love is like a friend that visits them that are well; Mercy is
like a Physician that visits only them that are sick. Again, Love acts more out
of affection; Mercy acts out of a principle of conscience; Mercy lends its help
to another, Love gives its heart to another: Thus they differ; but Love and
Mercy agree in this, they are both ready to do good Offices; both of them have
soundings of bowels, and healing under their wings.

Quest. 2. Whence does mercy spring?

Answ. Its springhead rises higher than nature; Mercy taken in its full
latitude, proceeds from a work of grace in the heart; naturally we are far
enough from mercy; the sinner is a bramble, not a Fig Tree yielding sweet
fruit: It Is the Character and (...) of a natural man, unmerciful, Romans 1.31. A
wicked man like Jehoram, has his bowels fallen out 2 Chr 21.19.
. Therefore he is compared to an Adamant, Zach. 7.11. because his heart melts
not in mercy. Before conversion the sinner is compared to a Wolf for his
savageness, to a Lion for his fierceness Isa. 11.6.
, to a Be for his sting, Psalm. 118.12. to an Adder for his poison, Psalm.
140.3. By nature we do not send forth oil, but poison; not the oil of
mercifulness, but the poison of maliciousness.

Besides that inbred unmercifulness which is in us, there is something infused
too by Satan; the Prince of the air works in men, Ephesians. 2.2. He is a fierce
Spirit, therefore called the red Dragon, Revel. 12.3. And if he possesses men,
no wonder if they are implacable, and without mercy; what mercy can be expected
from hell? so that if the heart be tuned into mercifulness, it is from the
change that grace has made: Col. 3.12.
When the Sun shines, then the ice melts; when the Sun of righteousness once
shines with beams of grace upon the soul, now it melts in mercy and tenderness;
thou must first be a new man, before a merciful man; thou can not help a
member of Christ, till first thou thy self art a member.

2. The several kinds of mercy, 2. Quotuplex misericordia.
or how many ways a man may be said to be merciful. Mercy is a Fountain that
runs in five streams; we must be merciful to the 1. Souls of others. 2. Names
of others. 3. Estates of others. 4. Offenses of others. 5. Wants of others.


SECT. I.
Showing that mercy is to be extended to the souls of others.

1. WE must be merciful to the souls of others; this is Spiritualis Eleemosyna,
a spiritual Alms. Indeed soul-mercy is the chief; the soul is the most
precious thing; it is a vessel of honor, it is a bud of eternity, it is a
sparkle lighted by the breath of God, it is a rich Diamond set in a Ring of
clay; the soul has the blood of God to redeem it, the image of God to
beautify it; it being therefore of so high a descent, sprung from the Ancient
of days, that mercy which is shown to the soul, must needs be the greatest.
This soul-mercy to others stands in four things.

1. In pitying them. If I weep, says Austin, for that body from which the soul
is departed, how should I weep for that soul from which God is departed? Had we
seen that man in the Gospel cutting himself with stones, and fetching blood of
himself, it would have moved our pity. Mark 5.5. To see a sinner stabbing
himself, and having his hands imbrued in his own blood, should cause relentings
in our bowels; our eye should affect our heart: God was angry with Edom,
because, he did cast off all pity, Amos 1.11.

2. Soul-mercy is in advising and exhorting sinners: Tell them in what a sad
condition they are, in the gall of bitterness. Show them their danger, they
tread upon the banks of the bottomless pit; if death gives them a jog, they
tumble in; and we must dip our words in honey, use all the mildness we can. 2 Timothy 2.25. In meekness instructing, etc. Fire melts, ointment mollifies; words
of love may melt hard hearts into Repentance; this is soul-mercy: God made a
Law, Exodus 23.5. that whosoever did see his enemies Ass lying under a burden,
he should help him. On which words says Chrysostom, We will help a Beast that
is fallen under a burden; and shall we not extend relief to those who are
fallen under a worse burden of sin?

3. Soul-mercy is in reproving refractory sinners; there is a cruel mercy, when
we see men go on in sin, and we let them alone; and there is a merciful
cruelty, when we are sharp against men's sins, and will not let them go to hell
quietly. Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shall
in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Fond pity is no
better than cruelty: Titus 1.13. Rebuke them sharply; (...), cuttingly; the
Chyrurgion cuts and lanceth the flesh, but it is in order to a cure, they are
healing wounds; so by a cutting reproof, when we lance men's consciences, and
let out the blood of sin, we exercise spiritual Chyrurgery, this is showing
mercy. Jude 23. Others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire. If a man
were in the fire, though you did hurt him a little in pulling him out, he would
be thankful, and take it as a kindness. Some men when we tell them of sin,
say, O this is bitterness; no, it is showing mercy. If a man's house were on
fire, and another should see it, and not tell him of it for fear of waking him,
were not this cruelty? when we see others sleeping the sleep of death, and the
fire of Gods wrath ready to burn about their ears, and we are silent, is not
this to be accessory to their death?

4. Soul-mercy is in praying for others. This is like physic used in a
desperate case, and often it recovers the sick patient, James 5.16. The effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much; as it cures the sick body, so
the sin-sick soul. There is a story of one who gave his soul to the Devil, who
was given in to the prayers of Luther. When Eutychus fell down from an high
loft, and was taken up dead, Paul fell on him Affectus vehementia. Beza
, that is, he did effectually pray over him, and he prayed him alive, Acts
20.9, 11. By sin the soul is fallen from an high loft, viz. a state of
innocence; now, fervent prayer oft-times fetches life in such a dead soul.

Use 1. See what a blessed work the work of the Ministry light with it, but
eye salve, anointing the eyes to see that light. It is a sin-killing, and a
soul-quickning Ordinance, it is the power of God to salvation. What enemies are
they to their own souls that oppugn the Ministry! They say, the people that
live under the line, curse the Sun, and are glad when the sun sets, because of
its burning heat. Foolish sinners curse the Sunrising of the Ministry, and are
offended at the light of it, because it comes near their sins, and scorcheth
their consciences, though in the end it saves their souls.

Use 2. It reproves them that have no mercy to souls.

1. Evil Magistrates. 2. Evil Ministers.
1. Evil Magistrates, who either take away the Key of knowledge Luke 11.52.
, or give a Toleration to wickedness, suffering men to sin by a License, The
meaning of Toleration is this, if men will to hell, none shall stop them. Is
not nature enough poisoned? Do not men sin fast enough, but must they have such
political engines as scrue them up higher in wickedness? Must they have such
favorable gales from the breath of great ones as serve to carry them full sail
to the Devil? This is far from soul-mercy Meminerit princeps non solum quantum
sibi commissum, sed quatenus permissum fit. Cicero.
. What an heavy reckoning will these Statists have in the day of the Lord!

2. Evil Ministers. 1. Such as have no bowels to the souls of their people;
They do not pity them, pray for them; they seek not them, but theirs; they
preach not for love, but lucre; their care is more for Tithes than souls. How
can they be called spiritual fathers who are without bowels? These are
mercenarii, not ministri.

2. Such as feed not the souls of their people with solid truths. When Christ
sent out his Apostles, he gave them their Text, and tells them what they must
preach, Matthew. 10.7. Preach, saying the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Upon
which place says Luther, the Ministers of Christ must preach quae ad regnum
coelorum conducant, Things that pertain to the Kingdom of God; pardon of sin,
sanctification, living by faith, ne aliter ex ecclesia faciant politiam. They
are unmerciful to souls, who instead of breaking the bread of life, fill their
peoples heads with very speculations and notions; who rather tickle the fancy,
than touch the conscience, and give precious souls rather music than food.

3. Such as darken knowledge with words, and preach so as if they were speaking
in an unknown tongue. Some Ministers love to soar aloft, like the Eagle, and
fly above their peoples capacities, endeavoring rather to be admired than
understood. They are like some crabbed Authors which cannot be read without a
Comment. Indeed God calls his Ministers Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. but they must
not be like those Outlandish Ambassadors that cannot be understood without an
Interpreter. It Is unmercifulness to souls to preach so as not to be
understood. Ministers should be Stars to give light, not clouds to obscure the
truth. Saint Paul was learned, yet plain. Clearness and perspicuity is the
grace of speech. It Is cruelty to souls when we go about to make easy things
hard; This many are guilty of in our age, who go into the Pulpit only to tie
knots; and think it their glory to amuse the people; this savours more of pride
than mercifulness.

4. Such as see others going on in sin, but do not tell them of it. When men
declare their sin as Sodom, it is the Ministers duty to lift up his voice like
a trumpet, and show the house of Jacob their sin, Isa. 58.1. Zeal in the
Ministry, is as proper as fire on the Altar; he who lets another sin, and holds
his peace, is a manslayer. That Sentinel deserves death, who sees the enemy
approaching, and gives not warning, Ezekiel. 3, 20.

5. Such as poison souls with Error; how dangerous is the leprosy of the head!
a Frenzy is worse than a Fever; what shall we say to such Ministers as give
poison to their people in a golden cup? are not these unmerciful? others there
are, (unworthy the name of Ministers) itineraries, the Devils journey men, who
ride up and down, and with Satan, compass the earth, to devour souls; it would
pity ones heart to see poor unstable creatures misled by rude and illiterate
men, who diet the people with blasphemy and nonsense, and make them fitter for
Bed-lam, than the New Jerusalem; all these are unmerciful to souls.

Let me beseech all that fear God, to show soul-mercy. Strengthen the weak,
reduce the wandering, raise up them that are fallen, James 5.20. He which
converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death.

SECT. 2.
Showing that Christians must be tender of one another names.

names of others. A good name is one of the greatest blessings upon earth; no
chain of Pearl does so adorn as this; it being so, we ought to be very tender
of names. They are to be accounted in an high degree unmerciful, who make no
conscience of taking away the good names of their brethren. Their throats are
open Sepulchers to bury the fame and renown of men, Romans 3.13. It Is a great
cruelty to murder a man in his name, Cant. 5.7. The keepers of the wall took
away my veil from me; some Expositors interpret it of her honor and fame,
which did cover her as a beautiful vail. The ground of this unmercifulness to
names is,

1. Pride. Pride is such a thing as cannot endure to be out-shined; it loves
not to see it self exceeded in parts, and eminency; therefore will behead
another in his good name that he may appear something lower: The proud man will
be pulling down of others in their reputation, and so by their Eclipse he
thinks he shall shine the brighter; the breath of a proud man causes a blast
or mildew upon fame.

2. Envy. 1 Pet. 2.1. An envious man maligns the dignity of another, therefore
seeks to mischief him in his name; Religion teaches us to rejoice in the
esteem and same of others. Romans 1.8. I thank my God for you all, that your
faith is spoken of throughout the whole world. (...), it is divulged with fame.
A good report is a credit to Religion. Heb. 11.4. If persons professing
godliness have not a good name, Religion will have no very good name; but envy,
consulting with the Devil, lays a Train, and fetches fire from hell to blow up
the good name of another.

Quest. How many ways may we be unmerciful to the names of others?

Answ. Diverse ways: 1. By misreporting them, a sin Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not
raise a false report. Eminency is commonly blasted by flander. Psalm. 64.3.
Their tongues are as arrows shot out. The tongue of a slanderer shoots out
words to wound the fame of another, and make it bleed to death: The Saints of
God in all Ages have met with unmerciful men, who have fathered things upon
them that they have not been guilty of Surius the Jesuit reported of Luther,
that he learned his Divinity of the Devil, and that he dyed drunk; but
Melancthon, who wrote his life, affirms that he dyed in a most pious, holy
manner, and made a most excellent prayer before his death: It was David's
complaint, Psalm. 35.11. They laid to my charge things which I knew not. The
Greek word for Devil, signifies slanderer, 1 Timothy 3.11. (...), not slanderers;
in the Greek it is not Devils. Some think it is no great matter to defame and
traduce another; but know, this is to act the part of a Devil. O how many
unmerciful men are there, who indeed go for Christians, but play the Devil in
venting their lies and calumnies! wicked men in Scripture are called Dogs,
Psalm. 22.16. Slanderers are not like those Dogs which licked Lazarus his soars
to heal them; but like the Dogs which are Jezebel, they rend and tear the
precious names of men. Valentinian the Emperor did decree, Capitali sententiae
subjugandum, that he who was openly convicted of this crime of slander, should
dye for it: And Pope Gregory did decree that such a person should be
excommunicate, and not have the Communion given him; I think it was a just
Decree.

receive a slander, and then report what we hear. Lev. 19.16. Thou shall not go
up and down as a Talebearer among thy people. A good man does not evil to his
Neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his Neighbor, Psalm. 15.3. We must
not only not raise a false report, but not take it up. To divulge a report
before we speak with the party, and know the truth of it, is unmercifulness,
and cannot acquit itself of sin. The same word in the Hebrew, (...) to raise a
slander, signifies to receive it: Exodus 23.1. The receiver is even as bad as
the Thief; it is well if none of us have (in this sense) received stolen
goods; when others have stolen away the good names of their Brethren, have not
we received these stolen goods? there would not be so many to broach false
rumors, but that they see this liquor pleases other men's taste.

diminish from their just worth and dignity; when we make more of their
infirmities, and less of their virtues. Jam. 4.11. Speak not evil one of
another. I have read a story of one Idor an Abbot, that he was never heard to
speak evil of any man. Saint Austin could not endure that any should eclipse
and lessen the fame of others; therefore wrote those two Verses upon his Table.
Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere famam,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.
Whosoever loves another name to blast,
This Table is not for him, let him fast.
Wicked men are still paring off the credit of their Neighbors, and they make
thick parings; they pare off all that is good; nothing is left but the Kore,
something that may tend to their disparagement. Unmerciful men know how to
boil a Quart to a Pint; they have a Divellish Art so to extenuate and lessen
the merit of others, that it is even boiled away to nothing. Some, though they
have not the power of Creation, yet they have the power of Annihilation. They
can sooner annihilate the good which is in others, than imitate it.

4. We are unmerciful to the names of others, when we know them to be
calumniated, yet do not vindicate silence as slander; he who is merciful to his
brother, is an Advocate to plead in his behalf when he is injuriously traduced;
when the Apostles, who were filled with the wine of the Spirit, were charged
with drunkenness, Peter vindicated them openly, Acts 2.15. A merciful man will
take the dead fly out of the box of ointment.

5. They are in an high degree unmerciful to the names bear false witness
against them. Psalm. 27.11. Exodus 23.1. Put not thy hand with the wicked to be a
false witness. Putting the hand, is taking an Oath falsely; as when a man puts
his hand upon the book, and swears to a lie; so Tostatus expounds it; this
(...), false witness is a two-edged sword; the party forsworn wounds another
name, and his own soul. A false witness is compared to a Maul or Hammer, Prove.
25.18. It is true in this sense, because he is hardened, 1. In impudency; he
blusheth at nothing. 2. In unmercifulness: There is no softness in a Maul or
Hammer; nor is there any relenting, or bowels to be found in a false witness.
All these ways men are unmerciful to the names of others.

Exhort.
Use. Let me persuade all Christians, as they make conscience of Religion, so
to show mercy to the names of others; be very chary and tender of men's good
name^ Consider,

1. What a sin it is to defame any man: Tit. 3.2. 1 Pet. 2.1. Laying aside all
envies and evil speakings; Envy and evil speaking are put together; laying
aside.

(...), Putting away, as a man would put away a thing from him with
indignation; as Paul shook off the Viper, Acts 28.5.

2. The injuriousness of it; thou that take away the good name of another,
woundest him in that which is most dear to him; better take away a man's life
than his name; by eclipsing his name thou buriest him alive; it is an
irreparable injury; aliquid haerebit. -- A wound in the name is like a flaw in
a Diamond, or a stain in Azure, which will never out; no Physician can heal the
wounds of the tongue.

3. God will require it at men's hands; if idle words must be accountable for,
shall not reproachful slanders? God will make inquisition one day as well for
names, as for blood. Let all this persuade to Caution and Circumspection; you
would be loath to steal the goods of others; a man's name is of more worth; and
he that takes away the good name of another, does sin more than if he had taken
the corn out of his Field, or the wares out of his Shop.

Especially, take heed of wounding the names of the godly: God has set a Crown
of honor on their head, and will you take it off? Numb. 12.8. Wherefore then
were you not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? To defame the Saints, is
no less than the defaming God himself, they having his picture drawn upon them,
and being members of Christ. Oh think how ill Christ will take this at your
hand another day! it was under the old Law a sin to defame a Virgin, and what
is it to calumniate Christ's Spouse? Are the names of the Saints written in
heaven, and will you blot them out upon earth? Be merciful to the names of
others.

SECT. 3.
Mercy in some cases to be extended to the Estates of others, and that
Christians must not take the summum jus.

3. BE merciful to the Estates of others. If a man Blessed are the merciful
Justitia sine misericordia, non est justitia, sed crudelitas.
. The wicked are compared to Beasts of prey, that live upon rapine and spoil,
they care not what mischief they do. Psalm. 10.9. He lies in wait secretly, as
a Lion in his Den, he does catch the poor when he draws him into his net.
Chrysostom says, the drawing into the Net, is, when the Rich draw the Poor
into Bonds, and in case of non-payment at the day, the Bond being forfeited,
seize upon all they have; it is not justice, but cruelty, when others lie at our
mercy, to be like that hard-hearted Creditor in the Gospel, who took his Debtor
by the throat, saying, Pay me what thou owe, Matthew. 18.28. God made a Law,
Deutr. 24.6. No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge, for
he takes a man's life to pledge: If a man had lent another money, he must not
take both his milstones for a pawn; he must show mercy, and leave the man
something to get a livelihood with; we should in this imitate God, who in midst
of anger remembers mercy. God does not take the extremity of the Law upon us;
but when we have not to pay, if we confess the debt, he freely forgives: Prove.
28.13. Matthew. 18.27.

Not but that we may justly seek what is our own; but if others be brought low,
and submit, we ought in conscience to remit something of the debt. Blessed are
the merciful.

SECT. 4.
Showing that Christians must be merciful to the offenses of others.

offenses of others, be ready to show mercy to them which have injured you.
Thus Stephen the Proto-martyr, Act. 7.60. he kneeled down and cried with a loud
voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. When he prayed for himself, he
stood; but when he came to pray for his enemies, he kneeled down Pro se orans
stat and crigitur, pro lapidantibus flectit genua. Bern.
; to show says Bernard, his earnestness in prayer, and how greatly he desired
that God would forgive them; this is a rare kind of mercy. Prove. 19.11. It is a
man's glory to pass over a transgression. Mercy in forgiving injuries, as it is
the touchstone, so the Crown of Christianity; Bishop Cranmer was of a merciful
disposition; if any who had wronged him came to desire a courtesy of him, he
would do all that lay in his power for him; insomuch that it grew to a Proverb,
Do Cranmer an injury, and he will be your friend as long as he lives. To
overcome evil with good, and answer malice with mercy, is truly heroical, and
renders Religion glorious in the eyes of all; But I wave this, and proceed.

SECT. 5.
That mercy must be extended to the supplying the wants of others.

WE must be merciful to the wants of others. This the text chiefly intends; a
good man does not like the Snake, twist within himself; his motion is direct,
not circular: he is ever merciful and lends, Psalm. 37.26. This merciful
charity to the wants of others, stands in three things.

1. A judicious consideration, Psalm. 41.1. Blessed is he that considers the
poor: and you must consider four things.

1. It might have been your own case; you your selves might have stood in need
of another charity, and then how welcome and refreshing would those streams
have been to you?

2. Consider, how sad a condition poverty is. Though Chrysostom calls poverty
the highway to heaven; yet he that keeps this road, will go weeping thither,
(...). Consider the poor, behold their tears, their sighs, their dying groans;
look upon the deep furrows made in their faces, and consider if there be not
reason why you should scatter your seed of mercy in these furrows? Pro pallio
vestem laceram, pro pulvinari lapidem -- the poor man feeds upon sorrow, he
drinks tears, Psalm. 80.50. like Jacob, in a windy night he has the clouds for
his canopy, and a stone for his pillow.

Nay farther, consider, that oftentimes poverty becomes not only a cross, but
a snare; it exposes to much evil, which made Agur pray, Give me not poverty,
Prove. 3.8 (...).
want puts men upon indirect courses. The poor will venture their souls for
money; which is like throwing Diamonds at Payrtrees; If the rich would wisely
consider this, their Alms might prevent much sin.

Consider, why the wise God has suffered an inequality in the world: it is for
this very reason, because he would have mercy exercised. If all were rich,
there were no need of Alms, nor could the merciful man have been be so well
known. If he that traveled to Jericho, had not been wounded, and left half
dead, the good Samaritan who poured oil and wine into his wounds, had not been
known.

Hectora quis nosset, foelix si Troja fuisset? Consider, how quickly the
balance of Providence may turn; we our selves may be brought to poverty, and
then it will be no small comfort to us that we relieved others, while we were
in a capacity to do it. Eccles. 11.2. Give a portion to seven, and also to
eight; for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. We cannot
promise our selves always Halcyon days; God knows how soon any of us may
change our pasture; the Cup which now runs over with wine, may be filled with
the waters of Marah, Ruth 1.21. I went out full and the Lord has brought me
home again empty. How many have we seen like Bajazet, and Bellizarius, invested
with great Lordships and possessions, who have on a sudden brought their Manor
to a morsel?

-- Irus erit subito qui modo Croesus erat. -- So that it is wisdom (in this
sense) to consider the wants of others. Remember how soon the scene may alter;
we may be put in the poors dress; and if adversity come, it will be no trouble
of mind to us to think that while we had an estate we did lay it out upon
Christ's indigent members; this is the first thing in mercifulness, a judicious
consideration.

2. A tender commiseration, Isa. 58.10. If thou draw out thy soul to the
hungry. Bounty begins in pity; the Hebrew word for Mercy (...) signifies
bowels. Christ first had compassion on the multitude, then he wrought a miracle
to feed them, Matthew. 15.32. Quis ignorant ex ^a appellatione esse misericordiam,
quod miserum c^r faciat co^dolent^s ali^no malo. Aug. Tom. 1. l. 1.
Charity which wants compassion is brutish. The bruit creatures can relieve us
many ways, but cannot pity us. It Is a kind of cruelty (says Quintilian) to
feed one in want, and not to sympathize with him. True Religion begets
tenderness; as it melts the heart in tears of contrition toward God, so in
bowels of compassion toward others (...). Gr. Naz.
Isa. 11.16. My bowels shall sound as an harp. Let me allude, when our bowels
of pity sound, then our alms make sweet music in the ears of God.

3. Mercifulness consists in a liberal contribution, Deuteronomy. 15.8. If there be a
poor man within thy gates, thou shall open thy hand wide unto him. The Hebrew
word to disperse (...) Psalm. 112.9. signifies a largness of bounty Non habet
hic locum sordida tenacitas. Muscul.
; it must be like water that over-flows the banks. Non tenuiter erogandunt
pauxillum aliquid. If God has enriched men with estates, and made his candle
(as Job says) to shine upon their tabernacle, they must not incircle, and
^ngrosse all to themselves, but be as the Moon which having received its light
from the Sun, lets it shine to the world. The Ancients, as Basil and Lorinus
observe, made oil to be the emblem of charity Olcum charitatis symbolum.
; the golden oil of mercy, must like Aarons oil, run down upon the poor,
which are the lower skirts of the garment; this liberal disbursement to the
wants and necessities of others, God commands.
Grace compels.


God commands; there is an express Statute Law, Lev. 25.35. If thy brother be
waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shall relieve him. The
Hebrew word is (...) thou shall strengthen him; put under him a silver Crutch
when he is falling. It Is worth our observation what great care God took of the
poor, besides what was given them privately; God made many Laws for the public
and visible relief of the poor. Exodus 23.11. The seventh year thou shall let
the Land rest, and lie still, that the poor of thy people may eat. Gods
intention in this Law was, that the poor should be liberally provided for; they
might freely eat of any thing which did grow of itself this seventh year
Ordinabatur ad commodum pauperum. Cornel. a lap.
; whether of Herbs, Vines or Olive Trees: If it be asked how the poor could
live only on these fruits, there being (as it is probable) no corn growing
then? for answer, Cajetan is of opinion, they lived by selling these fruits,
and so converting them into money, lived upon the price of the fruits.

There is another Law made, Lev. 19.9. And when ye reap the Harvest of your
Land, thou shall not wholly reap the corners of thy Field, neither shall thou
gather the gleanings of thy Harvest. See how God indulged the poor, some
corners of the Field were for the poors sake to be left uncut; and when the
Owners did reap, they must not go too near the Earth with their Sickle; the
Vulgar Latin reads it, non tondebis usque ad solum, thou shall not shear to
the very ground. Something like an after-crop must be left; the shorter ears of
corn, and such as did lie bending to the ground, were to be reserved for the
poor, says Tostatus.

And God made another Law in favor of the poor, Deutr. 14.28. At the end of
three years thou shall bring forth the tithe of thy increase the same year, and
thou shall lay it up in thy gates, and the Levite and the fatherless, and the
widow which are within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat, and be satisfied.
The Hebrews write that every third year, besides the first tithe given to Levi,
which was called the perpetual tithe, Number. 18.21* the Jews did set apart
another tithe of their increase for the use of the Widows and Orphans, and that
was called the tithe of the poor, Sol. Jarchi. Besides, at the Jews solemn
Festivals, the poor were to have a share, Deutr. 16.11.

And as relieving the necessitous was commanded under the Law, so it stands in
force under the Gospel. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Charge them that be rich in this
world, that they (...), do good, that they be rich in good works, etc. It Is not
only a counsel, but a charge; and the non-attendency to it runs men into a
Gospel- praemunire. Thus we have seen the mind of God in this particular of
charity; let all good Christians comment upon it in their practice; what
benefit is there of gold while it is imbowel'd and lock up in the Mine? and
what is it the better to have a great Estate, if it be so hoarded and
cloistered up, as never to see the light?

2. As God commands, so grace compels to works of mercy and beneficence. 2 Cor.
5.14. The love of Christ constrains. Grace comes with Majesty upon the heart;
it is not in sermon, but virtute; grace does not lie as a sleepy habit in the
soul, but will put forth it self in vigorous and glorious actings; grace can no
more be concealed than fire; like new wine, it will have vent; grace does not
lie in the heart as a stone in the Earth, but as seed in the Earth Si operari
renuit gratia non est.
, it will spring up into good works.

SECT. 6.
Containing a Vindication of the Church of England.

1. Inform.
IT may serve to justify the Church of England against the calumny of
malevolent men: Inform.
Julian upbraided the Christians that they were Solifidians; and the Church of
Rome lays upon us this aspe^sion, that we are against good works; indeed we
plead not for the merit of them, but we are for the use of them. Titus 3.14.
Let ours also learn to maintain good works for necessary use. We preach they
are needful both necessitate praecepti, and medii Asserunt Pontificii bona
opera (...) esse peccati, mortis terrores vincere, neque misericordia Dei, and
propitiatore Christo egere, quas in operibus opiniones ut impias damnamus.
Melanct. de Justif.

Debitorem ipse se Dominus fecit, non accipiendo sed promittendo. Austin in
Psalm. 83.


: We read the Angels had wings, and hands under their wings, Ezekiel. 1.8. It may
be emblematical of this truth, Christians must not only have the wings of faith
to fly, but hands under their wings to work the works of mercy. Tit. 3.8. This
is a faithful saying, and these things I will that you maintain constantly,
that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain good works.
The Lamp of faith must be filled with the oil of charity; faith alone
justifies, but justifying faith is not alone; you may as well separate weight
from lead, or heat from fire, as works from faith; good works, though they are
not the causes of salvation, yet they are evidences; though they are not the
foundation, yet they are the superstructure Bona opera sunt via ad regnum, non
causa regnandi. Bern.
: Faith must not be built upon works, but works must be built upon faith. Romans
7.4. Ye are married to another, that ye should bring forth fruit unto God.
Faith is the grace which marries Christ, and good works are the children which
faith bears; for the vindication of the Doctrine of our Church, and in honor
of good works, I shall lay down these four Aphorisms.

1. Works are distinct from faith; it is vain to imagine

2. Works are the touchstone of faith: Show me Jam. 2.18. Sicut se res habet
ad esse, ita ad operari. Aquin.
Works are faiths letters of credence to show; if, says Saint Bernard, thou
see a man in operibus strenuum, full of good works, then by the Rule of
charity thou art not to doubt of his faith: We judge of the health of the body
by the pulse, where the blood stirs and operates; O Christian, judge of the
health of thy faith by the pulse of mercy and charitableness; it is with faith,
as with a Deed in Law; To make a Deed valid, there are three things requisite;
the Writing, the Seal, the Witnesses; so for the trial and confirmation of
faith there must be these three things; the Writing, the Word of God; the Seal,
the Spirit of God; the Witnesses, good works. Bring your faith to this
Scripture-touch-stone; faith does justify works, works do testify faith.

3. Works do honor faith; these fruits adorn the Trees of righteousness; let
the liberality of thy hand (says Clemens Alexandrinus) be the ornament of thy
faith, and wear it as an holy bracelet about thy wrists. Job 29.15. I was eyes
to the blind, and feet was I to the lame; I put on righteousness, and it
clothed me; my judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem. While Job was the poors
Benefactor and Advocate, this was the Ensign of his honor, it clothed him as
a Robe, and crowned him as a Diadem. This is that takes off the odium and
obloquy, and makes others speak well of Religion, when they see good works as
handmaids waiting upon this Queen.



1. Because they are of a more noble diffusive nature; though faith be more
needful for our selves, yet good works are more beneficial to others; faith is
a receptive grace Fidei est accipere, charitatis distribuere. Aug.
, it is all for self-interest, it moves within its own Sphere. Works are for
the good of others; and it is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive.

2. Good works are more visible and conspicuous than faith. Faith is a more
occult grace, it may lie hid in the heart and not be seen; but when works are
joined with it, now it shines forth in its native beauty; though a Garden be
never so decked with Flowers, yet they are not seen till the light comes; so
the heart of a Christian may be enriched with faith, but it is like a Flower in
the night, it is not seen till works come; when this light shines before men,
then faith appears in its orient colors.

SECT. 7.
A check to the unmerciful.

2. IF this be the Effigies of a good man, that he is of a scales of the
Leviathan, shut up together as with a close seal, Job 41.15. They move only
within their own circle, but do not indulge the necessities of others; Job
41.15.
they have a flourishing Estate, but like him in the Gospel, they have a
withered hand, and cannot stretch it out to good uses. They have all, quoad
(...), not quoad (...), these are a Kin to the Churl Nabal. 1 Samuel 25.11. Shall
I take my bread, and my water, and give it unto men whom I know not whence they
be? It was said of the Emperor Pertinax, he had a large Empire, but a narrow
scanty heart Augustum imperium, angustum animum.
.

There was a Temple at Athens, which was called the Temple of mercy, it was
dedicated to charitable uses; and it was the greatest reproach to upbraid one
with this, that he had never been in the Temple of mercy; it is the greatest
disgrace to a Christian to be unmerciful: Covetous men while they enrich
themselves, they debase themselves, setting up a Monopoly, and committing
Idolatry with Mammon; thus making themselves lower than their angels, as God
made them lower than his Angels. In the time of Pestilence it is sad to have
your houses shut up, but it is worse to have your hearts shut up. How miserable
is it to have a Sea of sin, and not a drop of mercy? Covetous hearts like the
Leviathan, are firm as a stone, Job 41.24. One may as well extract oil out of
a flint, as the golden oil of charity out of their flinty hearts. The
Philosopher says, that the coldness of the heart is a presage of death Cord
infrigidato, moritur animal.
: When men's affections to works of mercy are frozen, this coldness at heart is
ominous, and does sadly portend that they are dead in sin. We read in the Law
that the Shellfish was accounted unclean; this might probably be one Reason,
because the meat of it was enclosed in the Shell, and it was hard to come by.
They are to be reckoned among the unclean, who enclose all their Estate within
the Shell of their own Cabinet, and will not let others be the better for it.
How many have lost their souls by being so saving!

There are some who perhaps will give the poor good words, and that is all
(...). Ignat.
; Jam. 2.15. If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of food, and one of
you say to them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled, notwithstanding you
give them not those things which are needful, what does it profit? Good words
are but a cold kind of charity Veritas fundatur in aliquo esse.
, the poor cannot live as the Camelion upon this Air; let your words be as
smooth as oil, they will not heal the wounded; let them drop as the
honeycomb, they will not feed the hungry. 1 Cor. 13.1. Though I speak with the
tongue of Angels, and have not charity, I am but as a tinkling Cymbal. It Is
better to be Charitable as a Saint, than Eloquent as an Angel. Such as are
cruel to the poor, let me tell you, you unchristian your selves; unmercifulness
is the sin of the Heathen, Romans 1.31. While you put off the bowels of Mercy,
you put off the badge of Christianity. Saint Ambrose says, that when we
relieve not one whom we see ready to perish with hunger, we are guilty of his
death Pasce fame morientem; si non paveris, occi^isti. Ambr.
. If this Rule hold true, there are more guilty of the breach of the sixth
Commandment, than we are aware of. St. James speaks a sad word, Jam. 2, 13. For
he shall have judgment without mercy, that showed no mercy. How do they think
to find mercy from Christ, who never showed mercy to Christ in his members?
Dives denied Lazarus a crumb of bread, and Dives was denied a drop of water: At
the last day behold the sinners Indictment; Matthew. 25.42. I was an hungered, and
ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink. Christ does not say
Ye took away my meat, but Ye gave me none, ye did not feed my members; then
follows the sentence, Ite maledicti, Depart from me ye cursed. When Christ's
poor come to your doors, and you bid them Depart from you, the time may come
when you shall knock at heaven gate, and Christ will say, Go from my door,
Depart from me ye cursed.

In short, Covetousness is a foolish sin; God gave the Rich man in the Gospel
that appellation, (...), Thou fool, Luke 12.20. The Covetous man does not enjoy
what he does possess; he imbitters his own life, he discruciates himself with
care, either how to get, or how to increase, or how to secure an Estate; and
what is the issue and result? often as a just reward of sordid penuriousness,
God does blast and wither him in his outward Estate: That saying of Gregory
Nazianzene (...), etc.
is to be seriously weighed, God many times lets the Thief take away, and the
Moth consume that which is injuriously and unmercifully withheld from the poor.

Before I leave this Use, I am sorry that any who go for honest men, should be
brought into the Indictment; I mean, that any Professors should be impeached as
guilty of this sin of covetousness and unmercifulness. Sure I am Gods Elect,
put on bowels, Col. 3.12. I tell you, these devout Misers are the reproach of
Christianity; they are wens and spots in the face of Religion. I remember
Aelian in his History, reports that in India there is a Griffin having four
feet and wings, his Bill like the Eagles; it is hard whether to rank him among
the Beasts, or the Foul: So I may say of penurious Votaries, they have the
wings of profession, by which they seem to fly to heaven, but the feet of
Beasts, walking on the Earth, and even licking the dust; it is hard where to
rank these, whether among the godly, or the wicked: Oh take heed, that seeing
your Religion will not destroy your Covetousness, at last your Covetousness
does not destroy your Religion. The Fabulist tells a Story of the Hedgehog,
that came to the Coney-Burroughs in stormy weather, and desired Harbor,
promising that he would be a quiet Ghuest; but when once he had gotten
entertainment, he did set up his prickles, and did never leave till he had
thrust the poor Coneys out of their Buroughs: So Covetousness, though it has
many fair pleas to insinuate, and wind it self into the heart, yet as soon as
you have let it in, this Thorn will never leave pricking till it has choked
all good beginnings, and thrust all Religion out of your hearts.

SECT. 8.
Persuading to mercifulness.

put on bowels of mercies, Exhort.
be ready to indulge the miseries and necessities of others, Saint Ambrose
calls charity the sum of Christianity; and the Apostle makes it the very
definition of Religion, James 1. ult. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God,
and the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and the widows in their
affliction. The Hebrew word for poor (...) seu, (...) signifies one that is
empty, or drawn dry Exhaustus, opibus attenuatus. Drusius.
. So the poor are exhausted of their strength, beauty, substance, like Ponds
they are dried up; therefore let them be filled again with the silver streams
of Charity. The poor are tanquam in Sepulchro, as it were in the Grave, the
comfort of their life is buried; Oh Christians, help with your merciful hands
to raise them out of the Sepulcher: God sends his springs into the valleys,
Psalm. 104.10. Let the springs of your liberality run among the valleys of
poverty; your sweetest and most benign influences should fall upon the lower
grounds: What is all your seeming devotion without bounty and mercifulness? I
have known many says Basil, pray and fast, but relieve not such as are in
distress; they are for a zeal that will put them to no charges (...). Basil.
: What are they the better (says he) for all their seeming virtue? we read the
incense was to be laid upon the fire, Lev. 16.13. The flame of Devotion must be
perfumed with the incense of Charity. Aaron was to have a Bell and a
Pomgranate; the Pomgranate, as some of the Learned observe, was a Symbol of
good works. They want the Pomgranate (says Gregory Nazianzene) who have no
good works. The wise men did not only bow the knee to Christ, but present him
with gold, myrrh, and franckincense, Matthew. 2.11. Pretenses of zeal are
insufficient; we must not only worship Christ, but bestow something upon his
members; this is to present Christ with gold and frankincense. Isaac would not
bless Jacob by the voice, but he feels and handles him, and supposing them to
be Esau's hands, he blessed him. God will not bless men by their voice, their
loud prayers, their devout discourses; but if he feel Esau's hands, if their
hands have wrought good works, then he blesses them.

Let me exhort you therefore to deeds of mercy, let your fingers drop with the
myrhe of liberality Si desit charitas, frustra habentur caetera. Aug.
; sow your golden seed; in this sense it is lawful to put out your money to
use, when you lay it out for good uses: Remember that excellent saying of Saint
Austin, Give those things to the poor which you cannot keep, Da quod non potes
retinere, ut recipias quod non potes ami^tere.
that you may receive those things which you cannot lose. There are many
occasions of exercising your mercifulness. Pauper ubique jacet. -- Hear the
Orphans cry, pity the Widows tears. Some there are who want employment, it
would do well to set their Wheel a going: Others, who are past employment; be
as eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame: Some, whole Families are sinking,
if some merciful hand does not help to shore them up. Before I press Arguments
to liberality and munificence, there are three Objections lie in the way which
I shall endeavor to remove.

Object. 1. We may give, and so in time come ourselves to want?

Answ. Let Basil answer this: Wells (says he) which have their water drawn,
spring ever more freely (...). Basil.
. Prove. 11.25. The liberal soul shall be made fat. Luther speaks of a Monastery
in Austria, which was very rich while it gave annually to the poor, but when it
left off giving, the Monastery began to decay. There is nothing lost by doing
our duty; an Estate may be imparted, yet not impaired. The flowers yield honey
to the Be, yet hurt not their own fruit: When the candle of prosperity shines
upon us, we may light our Neighbor that is in the dark, and have never the
less light our selves. Whatever is disbursed to pious uses, God does bring it
in some other way; as the Loaves in breaking multiplied, or as the Widows oil
increased by pouring out, 1 Kings 17.16.

Object. 2. I cannot do so much as others, Erect Churches, Build Hospitals,
Augment Libraries, Maintain Scholars at the University?

Answ. If you cannot do so much, something; let there be quantitas virtutis,
though there be not quantitas molis. The Widows two Mites cast into the
Treasury were accepted, Luke 21. God (as Chrysostom observes Non (...), sed
(...). Heinsius.
) looked not at the smalness of her gift, but the largeness of her heart. In
the Law, he that could not bring a Lamb for an offering, if he brought but two
Turtle-doves, it sufficed. We read, Exodus 35. the people brought gold and
silver, and Goats hair, to the building of the Tabernacle; on which place
(says Origin) I desire Lord, to bring something to the building of thy Temple;
if not gold to make the Mercy-seat on; if not silk to make the Curtains on; yet
a little Goats hair, that I may not be found in the number of those that have
brought nothing to thy Temple.

Object. 3. But I have not any thing to bestow upon

Answ. 1. Have thou to bestow upon thy lusts? have

Answ. 2. Admit this excuse to be real, that you have Isa. 40.2. Speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem. If you can give them no gold, you may speak a word in
season which may be as apples of gold in pictures of silver: Nay more, you may
be helpful to the poor, in stirring up others who have Estates to relieve them;
as it is with the wind, if a man be hungry, the wind will not fill him; but it
can blow the Sails of the Mill, and make it grind Corn for the use of man; so
though thou have not an Estate thy self, to help him who is in want, yet thou
may stir up others to help him; thou may blow the Sails of their
affections, causing them to show mercy, and so may help thy brother by a
Proxy.

Having answered these Objections, let me now pursue the Exhortation to
mercifulness: I shall lay down several Arguments, which I desire may be weighed
in the balance of reason and conscience.

Ephesians. 2.10. Created in Christ Jesus to good works. Every creature answers the
end of its Creation; the Star shines, the Bird sings, the Plant bears; the end
of life is service (...). Ignat.
. He that does not answer his end in respect of usefulness, cannot enjoy his
end in respect of happiness. Many, says Seneca, have been long in the world,
but have not lived, they have done no good. Telluris inutile pondus. -- An
unuseful person serves for nothing but to cumber the ground; and because he is
barren in figs, he shall be fruitful in curses, Hebr. 6.8.

to delight in mercy (...). Mac.
: Micah 7.18. His mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. He requites good
for evil; like the clouds, which receive ill vapors from us, but return them
to us again in sweet showers. There is not a creature lives but tastes of the
mercies of God; every Bird (says Ambrose) does in its kind sing Hymns of
praise to God for his bounty; but Men and Angels do in a more particular manner
taste the cream and quintessence of Gods mercies.

1. What temporal mercies have you received! every time you draw your breath,
you suck in mercy; every bit of bread you eat, the hand of mercy carves it to
you; you never drink but in a golden Cup of mercy.

2. What spiritual mercies has God enriched some of you with! pardoning,
adopting, saving mercy! The Picture of Gods mercy can never be drawn to the
full; you cannot take the breadth of his mercy, for it is infinite; nor the
height of it, for it reaches above the clouds; nor the length of it, for it
is from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 103.17. The works of mercy are the
glory of the Godhead: Moses prays, Lord, show me thy glory, Exodus 33.18. Says
God, I will make all my goodness to pass before thee, Ver. 19. God does account
himself most glorious in the shining Robes of his mercy; now by works of mercy
we resemble the God of mercy; we are bid to draw our Lines according to this
Copy. Luke 6.36. Be you merciful, (...), as your Father also is merciful.

3. Alms are a Sacrifice. Hebr. 13.16. To do good, and to communicate forget
not, for with such Sacrifices God is well-pleased; (...); when you are
distributing to the poor, it is as if you were praying, as if you were
worshipping God. There are two sorts of Sacrifices; Expiatory, the Sacrifice of
Christ's blood; and Gratulatory, the Sacrifice of Alms. This (says holy
Greenham) is more acceptable to God than any other Sacrifice: Acts 10.4. The
Angel said to Cornelius, thy Alms are come up for a memorial before God. The
backs of the poor are the Altar on which this Sacrifice is to be offered.

4. We our selves live upon Alms; other creatures do Psalmist says, the
Valleys are covered with corn, they shout for joy, they also sing, Psalm. 65.13.
One creature gives us wool, another oil, another silk; we are fain to go a
begging to the Creation. Shall every creature be for the good of man, and man
only be for himself? how absurd and irrational is this!

Isa. 58.7. That thou hide not thy self from thy own flesh. The poor are ex
eodem luto, they are fellow members of the same body Pars est propter totum.
: The members do by a Law of equity and sympathy contribute one to another; the
eye conveys light to the body, the heart blood, the head spirits; that is a
dead member in the body, which does not communicate to the rest. Thus it is in
the body Politic; let no man think it is too far below him to mind the wants
and necessities of others; it is pity but that hand should be cut off which
disdains to pluck a thorn out of the foot. It is spoken in the honor of that
Renowned Princess, the Emperess of Theodosius the great, that she did her self
visit the sick, and prepare relief for them with her own Imperial hands.

Lords of an Estate, but Stewards; and how soon may we hear that Word, Read
rationem, Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer
Steward! Luke 16.2. An Estate is a Talent to trade with; it is as dangerous to
hide our Talent Defosso auro incubare dicitur, qui pecuni am i^utilem detinet.
Grotius.
, as to spend it, Matthew. 25.25, 30. If the covetous man keep his gold too long,
it will begin to rust, and the ^ust of it will witness against him, Jam. 5.3.



merit than bounty. Trajan the Emperor did rend off a piece of his own Robe to
wrap his soldiers wounds. Christ did more, he rent his flesh, he made a
medicine of his body and blood to heal us, Isa. 53.5. by his stripes ye are
healed. Here was a pattern of charity without a parallel (...). Greg. Myssen.
.

2. The Jews are noted in this kind; it is a Rabbinical Philo the Jew) as if by
giving they hoped to receive some great gratuity; Now if the Jews are so
devoted to works of mercy, who live without Priest, without Temple, without
Messiah, shall not we much more who profess our faith in the blessed Messiah!

3. Let me tell you of Heathens; I have read of Titus Vespasian, he was so
inured to works of mercy, that remembering diem perdidi, I have lost a day. It Is
reported of some of the Turks, that they have servants whom they employ on
purpose to enquire what poor they have, and they send relief to them. And the
Turks have a saying in their Alcoran, that if men knew what a blessed thing it
were to distribute Alms, rather than spare, they would give some of their own
flesh to relieve the poor. And shall not a Christians Creed be better than a
Turks Alcoran?

Let all this persuade to works of mercy.

Regia creed mihi res est succurrere lapsis. -- When poor indigent creatures,
like Moses, are laid in the arc of bulrushes weeping, and ready to sink in the
waters of affliction, be as temporal Saviors to them, and draw them out of the
waters with a golden cord. Let the breasts of your mercy nurse the poor; be like
the trees of the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.12.
both for food and medicine; when distressed and even starved souls are
fainting, let your costly ingredients revive, and fetch spirits in them. Let
others see the coats, and garments which you have made for the poor, Acts 9.39.

sin of unmercifulness. 1. The unmercifull man is an unthankful man, and what
can be said worse? Thou to whom the Lord has given an estate, thy cup runs
over, but have a miserly heart, and wilt not part with any thing for good uses;
it is death to thee to relieve them that are dying; know that thou art in the
highest degree ungrateful; thou art not fit for humane society; The Scripture
has put these two together, unthankful, without natural affection, 2 Timothy 3.2,
3. God may repent that ever he gave such men estates, and may say, as Hos. 2.9.
Therefore will I return and take away my corn, and my wine in the season
thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax.

2. The unmerciful man wants love to Christ; all men would be thought to love
Christ, and would be very angry with them that should question their love; but
do they love Christ who let the members of Christ starve? No, these love their
money more than Christ, and come under that fearful Anathema, 1 Cor. 16.22.

unfruitful work (...). Theod.
. Whatsoever is disbursed to the poor, is given to Christ, Mat. 25.40. Inasmuch
as you have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it
unto me. The poor man's hand is Christ's Treasury Manus pauperis est Christi
gazophylacium. Chrysolog.
, and there is nothing lost that is put there. Quicquid in terra jacenti
porrigitis, sedenti in caelo datis. The text says the merciful shall obtain
mercy; in the Greek it is (...), they shall be bemercified. What is it we need
most? is it not mercy? pardoning, and saving mercy? What is it we desire most
on our deathbed? is it not mercy? Thou that show mercy, shall find mercy;
thou that pourest in the oil of compassion to others, God will pour in the
golden oil of salvation into thee, Matthew. 7.2. The Shunamite woman showed
mercy to the Prophet, and she received kindness from him another way, 2 Kings
4. She welcomed him to her house, and he restored her dead child to life; they
that sow mercy, shall reap in kind, they shall obtain mercy; such is the
sweetness and mercifulness of Gods nature, that he will not suffer any man to
be a loser. No kindness showed to him shall be unregarded or unrewarded. God
will be in no man's debt for a cup of cold water, he shall have a draught of
Christ's warm blood to refresh his soul, Heb. 6.10. For, God is not unrighteous
to forget your work and labor of love which you have showed toward his name,
in that you have ministered to the Saints, etc. Gods mercy is a tender mercy, a
pure mercy, a rich mercy; mercy shall follow and overtake the merciful man; he
shall be rewarded 1. In this life. 2. In the life to come.


1. The merciful man shall be rewarded in this life; he shall be blessed,

1. In his Person. Psalm. 41.1. Blessed is he that considers the poor. Let him
go whether he will, a blessing goes along with him; he is in favor with God,
God casts a smiling aspect upon him.

2. Blessed in his name. Psalm. 112.6. He shall be had in everlasting
remembrance. When the Niggards name shall rot, the name of a merciful man shall
be embalmed with honor, and give forth its scent as the wine of Lebanon.

3. Blessed in his Estate. Omni rerum copia affluet. Prove. 11.25. The liberal
soul shall be made fat. He shall have the fat of the Earth, and the dew of
Heaven. He shall not only have the Venison, but the blessing.

4. Blessed in his Posterity. Psalm. 37.26. He is ever merciful, and lends;
his seed is blessed. He shall not only leave an Estate behind, but a blessing
behind to his children; and God will see that the entail of that blessing shall
not be cut off.

5. Blessed in his Negotiations. Deutr. 15.10. For this thing the Lord thy God
shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand
unto. The merciful man shall be blessed in his building, planting, journying;
whatever he is about, a blessing shall empty it self upon him. Quicquid
calcaverit rosa fiet. -- He shall be a prosperous man; the honeycomb of a
blessing shall be still dropping upon him.

6. Blessed with long life. Psalm. 41.2. The Lord will preserve him, and keep
him alive Restituet eum Deus, qui a^ea morti vicinus fuit and longiore vita
donabit. Mollerus.
. He has helped to keep others alive, and God will keep him alive: Is there
any thing then lost by mercifulness? it spins out the silver thread of life;
many are taken away the sooner for their unmercifulness; because their hearts
are straightened, their lives are shortened.

2. The merciful man shall be rewarded in the life to come. Arist. Rhet.
Aristotle joins these two together, (...) and (...), liberality and utility.
God will reward the merciful man hereafter, though not for his works, yet
according to his works. Revel. 20.12. I saw the dead, small and great stand
before God, and the Books were opened, and the dead were judged out of those
things which were written in the books according to their works. As God has a
bottle to put our tears in, so he has a book to write our alms in; as God will
put a vail over his peoples sins, so he will in free grace set a Crown upon
their works: The way to lay up, is to lay out; other parts of our Estate is
left behind Eccl. 2.18, 19.
; but that which is given to Christ's poor, is hoarded up in heaven; that is a
blessed kind of giving, which though it makes the purse lighter, it makes the
Crown heavier.

You that are mercifully inclined, remember whatever alms you distribute,

1. You shall have good security. Eccles. 11.1. Luke 6.38. Prove. 19.17. He that
gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, and that which he has given will he pay
him again. There is Gods Counter-band to save you harmless, which is better
security than any PUBLIC FAITH; yet here is our Unbelief and Atheism, We will
not take Gods bond; we commonly put our deeds of mercy among our desperate
debts.

2. You shall be paid with overplus; for a wedge of gold which you have parted
with, you shall have a weight of glory; for a cup of cold water, you shall have
Rivers of pleasure, which run at Gods right hand for evermore. The interest
comes to infinitely more than the principal: Pliny writes of a Country in
Africa, where the people for every bushel of seed they sow, receive an
hundred and fifty fold increase. For every penny you drop into Christ's
Treasury, you shall receive above a thousand fold increase; your after-crop of
glory will be so great, that though you are still reaping, you will never be
able to Inn the whole Harvest; let all this persuade rich men to honor the
Lord with their substance.

SECT. 9.
Containing Directions in showing mercy.

BEfore I conclude this Subject, let me lay down some Rules briefly concerning
works of mercy.

free. Deutr. 15.10. Thou shall give, and thy heart shall not be grieved, etc.
that is, thou shall not be troubled at parting with thy money; he that gives
grievingly, gives grudgingly; it is not a gift, but a tax; charity must flow
like spring water Non quaeritur quantum, sed quo animo detur. Ambr.
; the heart must be the Spring, the hand the Pipe, the poor the Cistern; God
loves a cheerful giver. Be not like the Crab, which has all the ver-juyce
squeezed and pressed out. You must not give to the poor, as if you were
delivering your purse on the Highway: Charity without alacrity, is rather a
Fine than an Offering; it is rather doing of penance, than giving of alms;
charity must be like the myrrh which drops from the Tree without cutting or
forcing Beneficium est magis affectu, quam effectu. Seneca.
.

Isa. 58.7. To deal thy bread to the hungry; it must be de tuo pane. The word
for alms in the Syriack, signifies justice, to show that alms must be of that
which is justly gotten; the Scripture puts them together, Micah 6.8. To do
justice, to love mercy; we must not make ex Rapina Holocaustum, a Sacrifice of
Sacrilege Qui male part^ dispergit, injust^^ ejus manet in saecu lum. Muscul.
Isa. 61.8. For I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt-offering.
He that shall build an Almes-house or Hospital with goods ill gotten, displays
the Ensign of his pride, and sets up the Monument of his shame.

in Christ, and for Christ.

1. Do all in Christ; labor that your persons may be in Christ. -- We are
accepted in him, Ephesians. 1.6. Origin, Chrysostom, and Peter Martyr affirm, that
the best works not springing from faith are lost. The Pelagians thought to have
posed Austin with that question, Whether it was sin in the Heathen to cloth
the naked? Austin answered rightly, The doing of good is not in it self simply
evil, but proceeding of infidelity it becomes evil Non per se ipsum factum pro
peccato babetur, etc
. Titus 1.15. To them that are unbelieving is nothing pure Matthew. 7.18. Hebr.
11.6.
. That fruit is most sweet and genuine, which is brought forth in the Vine,
John 15.4. Out of Christ all our Almsdeeds are but the fruit of the wild
Olive Faciunt gentes ea quae legis sunt Ethice, non Evangelice; bona opera
agunt, sed non been. Macovii. loc. com.
; they are not good works, but dead works.

2. Do all for Christ; namely, for his sake, that you may testify your love to
him; Love mellows and ripens our Almsdeeds, it makes them a precious perfume
to God (...). Cyril.
; as Mary did out of love bring her ointments and sweet spices to anoint
Christ's dead body; so out of love to Christ, bring your ointments, and anoint
his living body, viz. Saints and Members.

4. Works of mercy are to be done in humility; away dead fly in the box of
ointment. When Moses face did shine, he put a vail over it; so while your light
shines before men, and they see your good works, cover your selves with the
vail of humility; as the silkworm, while she weaves her curious works, hides
her self within the silk, and is not seen; so we should hide our selves from
pride and vainglory.

'Twas the sin of the Pharisees, while they were distributing alms, they did
buccina canere, blow the Trumpet Nec illa perfecta est liberalitas si
jactantiae causa largiaris. Ambrose.
, Matthew. 6.2. They did not give their alms, but sell them for applause. A proud
man casts his bread upon the waters, as a Fisherman casts his Angle upon the
waters, he angles for vainglory. I have read of one Cosmus Medices, a rich
Citizen of Florence, that he confessed to a near friend of his, he built so
many magnificent Structures, and spent so much on Scholars and Libraries, not
for any love to Learning, but to raise up to himself Trophies of Fame and
Renown Burt. Melan.
. An humble soul denies himself, yea, even annihilates himself; he thinks how
little it is he can do for God; and if he could do no more, it were but a due
debt; therefore looks upon all his works as if he had done nothing (...). Macar.
. The Saints are brought in at the last day as disowning their works of
charity. Matthew. 25.37. Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? etc. A
good Christian does not only empty his hand of Alms, but empties his heart of
Pride; while he raises the poor out of the dust, he lays himself in the dust;
works of mercy must be like the Cassia, which is a sweet spice, but grows low.

prudentially; it is said of the merciful man, he orders his affairs with
discretion, Psalm. 112.5. Vox pauperum monet prudentiam in dandis Eteemosynis
adhibe dam esse. Mollerus.
There is a great deal of wisdom in distinguishing between them that have
sinned themselves into poverty, and who by the hand of God are brought into
poverty. Discretion in the distribution of Alms, consists in two things.

1. In finding out a fit Object. 2. In taking a fit Season.
1. In finding out a fit Object, and that comes under a double notion. 1. Give
to those who are in most need; raise the Hedge where it is lowest; feed the
Lamp which is going out. 2. Give to those who may probably be more serviceable;
though we bestow cost and dressing upon a weak Plant, yet not upon a dead
Plant; breed up such as may help to build the house of Israel, Ruth 4.11. that
may be Pillars in Church and State, not Cater-pillars, making your charity to
blush.

2. Discretion in giving Alms, is in taking the fit season: Give to charitable
uses in time of health and prosperity; distribute your silver and gold to the
poor, before the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, Eccles.
12.6. Qui cito dat, bis dat; make your hands your executors; not as some, who
do reserve all they give till the Term of life is ready to expire; and truly,
what is then bestowed, is not given away, but taken away by death; it is not
charity, but necessity. Oh do not so marry your selves to money, that you are
resolved nothing shall part you but death; be not like the Medlar, which is
never good till it be rotten. A covetous man may be compared to a
Christmas-box, he receives money, but parts with none, till death breaks this
box in pieces; then the silver and gold comes tumbling out: Give in time of
health; these are the Alms which God takes notice of, and (as Calvin says)
puts into his book of accounts.

6. Give thankfully: They should be more thankful Nazianzene) give (...), a
thank-offering to God that we are in the number of Givers, and not Receivers:
Bless God for a willing mind; to have not only an Estate, but an Heart, is
matter of gratulation.

MATTHEW. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.


CHAP. XVI.
Describing Heart-purity.

THE holy God who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, calls here for
heart-purity; and to such as are adorned with this jewel, he promises a
glorious and beatifical Vision of himself, they shall see God. Two things are
to be explained.

1. The nature of Purity. 2. The subject of Purity.
The nature of Purity.
1. The nature of Purity. Purity is a Sacred refined thing; it stands
diametrically opposite to immunditia, or whatsoever defiles; we must
distinguish of purity. 1. There is a Primitive Purity which is in God
Originally and Essentially as light is in the Sun. Holiness is the glory of
the Godhead Septuag.
, Exodus, 15.11. (...), Glorious in holiness; God is the Pattern and Prototype of
all holiness.

2. There is a created Purity; Thus holiness is in the Angels, and was once in
Adam; Adams heart had not the least spot or tincture of impurity. We call that
wine pure which has no sophistication; and that gold pure which has no dross
mingled with it. Such was Adams holiness, it was like the wine which comes
from the grape, having no mixture; but this is not to be found on earth, we
must go to heaven for it.

3. There is an evangelical purity; when grace is mingled with some sin; like
Gold in the Oar, like air in the twilight, like wine that has a dash in it,
like fine cloth with a course list; like Nebuchadnezzars image, part of silver
and part of clay, Dan. 2.35. This mixture God calls purity in a Gospel-sence;
as a face may be said to be fair which has some freckles in it. Where there is
a study of purity, and a loathing our selves for our impurity, this is to be
pure in heart.

Some by pure in heart, understand chastity; others sincerity, Psalm. 32.2. But
I suppose purity here is to be taken in a larger sense, for the several kinds
and degrees of holiness; they are said to be pure, who are consecrated persons,
having the oil of grace poured upon them. This Purity is much mistaken.

1. Civility is not Purity; a man may be clothed with moral virtues, justice,
prudence, temperance, yet go to hell.

2. Profession is not purity; a man may have a name to live, and yet be dead,
Rev. 3.1. He may be swept by civility, and garnished by profession, yet the
Devil may dwell in the house. The blazing Comet is no Star; The Hypocrites
tongue may be silver, yet his heart stone. Purity consists in two things. 1.
Rectitude of mind; a prizing holiness in the judgment, Psalm. 119.30. 2
Conformity of will; an embracing of holiness in the affections, Psalm. 119.97.
A pure soil is cast into the mould of holiness; holiness is a blood runs in
his veins.

The subject of Purity.
2 The subject of purity; The Heart. Pure in heart. Purity of heart does not
exclude purity of life; no more than the pureness of the fountain excludes the
pureness of the stream. But it is called Purity of heart, because this is the
main thing in Religion, and there can be no purity of life without it. A
Christians great care should be to keep the heart pure, as one would especially
preserve the spring from being poisoned. In a Duel, a man will chiefly guard
and fence his heart; so a wise Christian should above all things keep his heart
pure; take heed the love of sin does not get in there, lest it prove mortal.

Doctr. Christians should above all things breath after heart-purity, 1 Timothy
3.9. Holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience; justification causes
our happiness, sanctification evidenceth it.

Reasons for 1. Purity. 2. Heart-purity.


1. Reasons for Purity.
The Reasons for Purity are, 1. Purity is a thing called for in Scripture, 1
Pet. 1.16. Be ye holy, for I am holy. It is not only the Minister bids you be
holy, but God himself calls for it; what should the holy God do with unholy
servants? 2. Because of that filthy and cursed condition we are in before
purity be wrought in us; we are a lump of clay and sin mingled together; sin
does not only blind us, but defile us; it is called (...), filthiness, James
1.21. And to show how befilthying a thing it is, it is compared to a
plague-soar, 1 Kings 8.38. To spots, Deuteronomy. 32.5. To a vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22. To
the infants tumbling in blood, Ezekiel. 16.6. To a menstruous cloth, Isa. 30.22.
which (as Hierom says) was the most defiling thing under the Law. All the
legal washings which God appointed, were but to put men in mind of their
loathsomeness before they were washed in the blood of Christ. If all the evils
in the world were put together, and their quintescence strained out, they could
not make a thing so black and polluted as sin does; a sinner is a Devil in man's
shape. When Moses his Rod was turned into a Serpent, he fled from it; would God
open men's eyes, and show them their deformities, and damnable spots, they would
be afraid, and fly from themselves as Serpents! This shows what need we have
of Purity. When grace comes it washes off this hellish filth, of Ethiopians,
it maks us Israelites; it turns Ravens into Swans; it makes them who are as
black as hell, to become white as snow.

3. Because none but the pure in heart are interested in the Covenant of Grace;
covenanted persons have the sprinkling with clean water, Ezekiel. 36.25. Now, till
we are thus sprinkled, we have nothing to do with the new Covenant, and by
consequence, with the new Jerusalem. If a Will be made only to such persons as
are so qualified, none can come in for a part, but such as have those
qualifications. So, God has made a Will and Covenant that he will be our God,
and will settle heaven upon us by entaile, but with this clause, or proviso in
the Will, that we be purified persons, having the clean water sprinkled upon
us; Now till then, we have nothing to do with God, or mercy.

4. Purity is the end of our election, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us that we
should be holy; not for holiness, to holiness, Romans 8.29. Whom he did
foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son. God
predestinates us to Christ's image, which image consists in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. So that till thou art holy thou can not show any
sign of election upon thee, but rather the Devils brand-mark.

5. Purity is the end of our redemption; if we could have gone to heaven in our
sins, Christ needed not have died. Why did he shed his blood but to redeem us
from a vain conversation? 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and Titus 2.14. Who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people; Christ shed his blood to wash off our filth; the Cross was
both an Altar and a Lavor. Jesus Christ died not only to save us from wrath, 1
These. 1. ult. but to save us from sin, Matthew. 1.21. Out of his sides came
water, which signifies our cleansing as well as blood, which signifies our
justifying, 1 John 5.6. The truth is, it were to make the body of Christ
monstrous, if the head should be pure and not the members.

2. Reasons for heart-purity.
2. Why Purity must be chiefly in the heart. 1. Because if the heart be not
pure, we differ nothing from a Pharisaical Purity; the Pharisees holiness did
consist chiefly in externals; theirs was an outside Purity, they never minded
the inside of the heart, Matthew. 23.25. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites, for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but
within ye are full of extortion; and verse 27. Ye are like unto whited
Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead
men's bones. The Pharisees were good only in superficie, they were not Albi, but
dealbati, whited over, not white; they were like a rotten post laid in
Vermilion color; like a fair Chimny-piece gilded without, but within nothing
but Soot. O such Hypocrites Salvian complains of, who had Christ in their
mouths, but to no purpose; we must go farther, be pure in heart, like the Kings
daughter, all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. Else ours is but a pharisaical
purity; and Christ faith, Matthew. 5.20. Except your righteousness shall exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into
the kingdom of heaven.

2. The heart must especially be kept pure, because the heart is the chief
seat, or place of Gods residence. God dwells in the heart, he takes up the
heart for his own lodgings, Isa. 57.15. Ephesians. 3.17. therefore it must be pure
and holy. A Kings Palace must be kept from defilement, especially his
Presence Chamber; The heart is Gods Presence Chamber, How holy ought that to
be? If the body be the Temple of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19.
the heart is the Sanctum Sanctorum; Oh take heed of defiling the room where
God is to come, let that room be washed with holy tears.

3. The heart must especially be pure, because it is the heart sanctifies all
we do; if the heart be holy, all is holy, our affections holy, our duties holy,
The Altar sanctified the gift Mat. 23.19.
, the heart is the Altar that sanctifies the offering. The Romans kept their
springs from being poisoned; the heart is the spring of all our actions, let us
keep this spring from poison; be pure in heart.

SECT. 1.
Showing the true beauty of the soul.

1. SEE here what is the beauty that sets off a soul in viz. Purity of heart.
Inform.
Thou who art never so beautiful, art but a spiritual Leper till thou art pure
God is in love with the pure heart, for he sees his own picture drawn there;
Holiness is a beam of God, it is the Angels glory; They are pure
virgin-spirits; take away purity from an Angel, and he is no more an Angel but
a Devil; thou who art pure in heart, have the Angels glory shining in thee;
thou have the Embroydery and Workmanship of the Holy Ghost upon thee. The pure
heart is Gods Paradise where he delights to walk, it is his lesser heaven; the
Dove delights in the purest Air; the Holy Ghost, who descended in the likeness
of a Dove, delights in the purest soul. God says of the pure in heart, as of
Sihon, Psalm. 132.14. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell. God loves the
fairest complexion; the pure in heart is Christ's Bride, decked and bespangled
with the jewels of holiness. Cant. 4.9. Thou have ravished my heart with one of
thine eyes. Thine eyes, that is, thy graces, these as a Chain of Pearl have
drawn mine heart to thee; of all hearts, God loves the pure heart best. Thou
who dressest thy self by the glass of the Word, and adornest the hidden man of
thy heart 1 Pet. 3.4.
, art most precious in Gods eyes, though thou may be blear-eyed as Leah, lame
as Barzillai, yet being pure in heart, thou art the mirror of beauty, and
may say, Yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, Isa. 49.5. How may
this raise the esteem of purity! this is a beauty that never fades, and which
makes God himself fall in love with us.

SECT. 2.
That Christians must not rest in outside purity.

pure in heart, then we must not rest in outward purity; civility is not
sufficient; a Swine may be washed, yet a Swine still; civility does but wash a
man, grace changes him; civility like a Star, may shine in the eyes of the
world, but it differs as much from purity, as the Crystal from the Diamond;
civility is but strewing flowers on a dead corpse; a man may be wonderfully
Moralized, yet but a tame Devil; how many have made civility their savior!
Morality may as well damn as Vice; a Vessel may be sunk with gold, as well as
with dung.

Observe two things:

1. The civil person, though he will not commit gross sins, yet he is not
sensible of heart-sins; he discerns not the Law in his members, Romans 7.23. He
is not troubled for unbelief, hardness of heart, vanity of thoughts; he abhors
Jayle-sins, not Gospel-sins.

2. The civil person has an aching tooth at Religion; his heart rises against
holiness; the Snake is of a fine color, but has a deadly sting. The civil man
is fair to look to, but has a secret antipathy against the ways of God; he
hates grace as much as vice; zeal is as odious to him as uncleanness; so that
civility is not to be rested in: The heart must be pure; God would have Aaron
wash the inwards of the Sacrifice, Lev. 9. Civility does but wash the outside,
the inwards must be washed: Blessed are the pure in heart.

SECT. 3.
Showing the signs of an impure heart.

LET us put our selves upon the Trial, Trial.
whether we are 1. An impure heart. 2. A pure heart.


ignorant heart is an impure heart; to be ignorant of sin, Signs of an impure
heart.
or Christ, argues impurity of heart. Nahash the Ammonite would enter into
Covenant with the men of Jabesh-Gilead, so he might thrust out their right
eyes, 1 Samuel 11.2. Satan leaves men their left eye, in worldly knowledge they
are quick-sighted enough; but the right eye of spiritual knowledge is quite put
out: 2 Cor. 4.4. Ignorance is Satan's strong hold, Acts 26.18. The Devils are
bound in chains of darkness, Jude 6. So are all ignorant persons; impossible it
is that an ignorant heart should be good; it is knowledge makes the heart good.
Prove. 19.2. That the soul be without knowledge it is not good. For any to say,
though their mind be ignorant, yet their heart is good; they may as well say,
though they are blind, yet their eyes are good. In the Law, when the plague of
Leprosy was in a man's head, the Priest was to pronounce him unclean: This is
the case of an ignorant man, the Leprosy is in his head, he is unclean. That
heart cannot be very pure which is a Dungeon: Grace cannot reign where
ignorance reigns; an ignorant man can have no love to God. Ignoti nulla cupido;
he cannot love that which he does not know; he can have no faith; knowledge
must usher in faith, Psalm. 9.10. he cannot worship God aright, John 4.22.
Though he may worship the true God, yet in a wrong manner; ignorance is the
root of sin; blindness leads to lasciviousness, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. Prove. 7.23.
Ignorance is the mother of pride, Revel. 3.17. It is the cause of Error, 2 Timothy
3.6. and which is worst, an affected ignorance; aliud est nescire, aliud nolle
scire: Many are in love with ignorance Non modo ducem non quaerunt sed oblatum
respuunt. Bern.
, they hug their disease, Job 21.14. 2 Pet. 3.5. Ignorant minds are impure,
there is no going to heaven in the dark.

sees no need of purity. Revel. 3.17. I am rich, and have need of nothing. Not
to be sensible of a disease, is worse than the disease; you shall hear a sick
man say, I am well, I ayle nothing; there are some who need no Repentance, Luke
15.7. Some sinners are too well to be cured; heart-purity is as great a wonder
to a natural man, as the new birth was to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.4. It Is sad to
think how many go on confidently, and are ready to bless themselves, never
suspecting their condition till it be too late.

3. He has an impure heart, who regards iniquity Psalm. 66.18. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. In the Original it is, (...)
if I look upon sin; that is, with a lustful look; sin-regarding is inconsistent
with heart-purity.

Quest. What is it to regard iniquity? Answ. 1. When we indulge sin; when sin
not only lives in us, but we live in sin. Some will leave all their sins but
one: Jacob would let all his sons go but Benjamin; Satan can hold a man by one
sin; the Fowler holds the Bird fast enough by a Wing or Claw: Others hide their
sins, like one that shuts up his Shop-windows, but follows his Trade within
doors: Many deal with their sins, as Moses his mother dealt with him, she hid
him in the Ark of Bulrushes, as if she had left him quite; but her eye was
still upon him, and in conclusion she became his Nurse, Exodus 2.9. So many seem
to leave their sins, but they only hide them from the eye of others, their
heart still goes after them, and at last they Nurse, and give the breast to
their sins.

2. To regard iniquity, is to delight in iniquity. A child of God, though he
sins, yet he does not take a complacency in sin. Romans 7.15. What I hate, that
do I; but impure souls make a recreation of sin. 2 These. 2.12. They had
pleasure in unrighteousness. Never did one feed with more delight on a dish he
loves, than a wicked man does upon the forbidden fruit. This delight shows the
will is in the sin. Et voluntas est regula, and mensura actionis.

3. To regard iniquity, is to lay in provision for sin. Romans 13.14. Make not
provision for the flesh: Sinners are Caterers for their lusts; it is a Metaphor
taken from such as make provision for a Family, or victual a Garrison. The
Greek word there, (...), signifies a projecting and fore-casting in the mind
how to bring a thing about. This is to make provision for the flesh, when one
studies to gratify the flesh, and lay in fuel for lust. Thus Amnon made
provision for the flesh, 2 Samuel 13.5. He fains himself sick, and his sister
Tamar must be his Nurse, she must cook and dress his meat for him, by which
means he defiled the breasts of her Virginity; it is sad when men's care is not
to discharge conscience, but to satisfy lust.

4. To regard iniquity, is to give it respect and entertainment; as Lot showed
respect to the Angels; Genesis 19.2. He bowed himself with his face toward the
ground, and said, behold now my Lords, turn in I pray you, etc. When the Spirit
of God comes it is repulsed, and grieved; but when tentation comes, the sinner
bows to it, sets open the great Gates, and says, Turn in my Lord; this is to
regard iniquity.

5. He is said to regard sin, that does not regard the threatenings of God
against sin. We read of seven thunders uttering their voice, Rev. 10.3. How
many thunders in Scripture utter their voice against sin. Psalm. 68.21. God
shall wound the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his Trespasses.
Here is a thundering Scripture, but sinners fear not this thunder; let a
Minister come as a Boanerges, clothed with the spirit of Eliah, and denounce
all the curses of God against men's sins, they regard it not, they can laugh at
the shaking of a Spear Job 41.29.
; this is to regard iniquity, and does argue an impure heart.

4. An unbelieving heart is an impure heart. The an evil heart of unbelief,
Hebr. 3.12. An unbelieving heart is evil summo gradu, it is full of the poison
of hell: Unbelief is omnium peccatorum colluvies, the root and receptactle of
sin.

1. Unbelief is a God-affronting sin. 1. It puts Psa. 78.19, 20.
, mercy, truth. 1 John 5.10. He that believes not, has made God a liar. And
can a greater affront be cast upon the God of glory? 2. It makes us trust to
second causes, which is a setting the creature in the room of God. 2 Chronicles.
16.12. Asa in his disease sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians. He
relied more on the Physician, than upon God. Saul seeks to the Witch of Endor.
O high affront, to lean upon the Reed, and neglect the Rock of Ages!

2. Unbelief hardens the heart; these two sins are Mark 16.14. He upbraided
them with their unbelief and hardness of heart. Unbelief breeds the stone of
the heart; he that believes not Gods threatenings, will never fear him; he that
believes not Gods promises, will never love him. What is said of the Leviathan,
is true of the unbeliever: Job 41.24. His heart is as firm as a stone. Unbelief
first pollutes the heart, and then hardens it.

3. Unbelief breeds hypocrisy: Atheists believe not jealous God, and will call
them to account; therefore it is they put on a Mask of Religion, and are Saints
in jest, that they may play the Devil in earnest. 2 Timothy 3.4, 5. They pretend
God, but Self is the Idol they worship; like Batge-men, they look one way, and
row another. The unbeliever is the greatest hypocrite.

degeneres animos timor arguit; fear is a debasing thing, it does unman a man,
it makes him afraid to be good; the fearful man studies rather compliance than
conscience. Prove. 29.25. The fear of man brings a snare: What made Abraham
equivocate, David feign himself mad, Peter deny Christ? Was it not their fear?
And whence does fear spring, but from unbelief? therefore the Scripture joins
them together, Revel. 21.8. The fearful and unbelieving.

Hebr. 3.12. An evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God. What
is the reason those who seemed once zealous, now despise prophesying, and leave
off prayer in their Families? is it not their unbelief? they believe not that
God is, and that be is a rewarder of them that seek him, Hebr. 11.6. Infidelity
is the cause of Apostasy; (...) leads to (...). And if infidelity be the
breeder and fomenter of so much sin, then the unbelieving heart must needs be
an impure heart.

covetous heart is an impure heart; the Earth is the most impure Element; the
purity of the heart lies in the spirituality of it; and what more opposite to
spiritualness, than earthiness? Covetousness is the root of all evil, 1. Tim.
6.10. -- Quid non mortalia pectora cogit
Hor.
Auri sacra fames? --


1. Covetousness is the root of discontent: Why do any repine at their
condition, but because they think they have not enough? The Greek word for
covetousness, (...), signifies an immoderate desire of getting; covetousness is
a dry dropsy; and because the thirst is not satisfied, therefore the heart
frets through discontent and impatiency.

2. Covetousness is the root of Theft. Achans covetous humor made him steal
that wedge of gold which served to cleave asunder his soul from God, Joshuah
7.21.

3. Covetousness is the root of Treason; it made Judas betray Christ, Matthew.
26.15. What will ye give me and I will deliver him unto you! Absaloms
covetousness made him attempt to pluck the Crown from his fathers head. He that
is a Demas, will soon prove a Judas. 2 Timothy 3.2. Men shall be covetous; and it
follows in the next Verse, Traitors. Where covetousness is in the Premises,
Treason will be in the Conclusion.

4. Covetousness is the root of Murder. Why did Ahab stone Naboth to death, but
to possess the Vineyard? 1 Kings 21.13. Covetousness has made many swim to the
Crown in blood; and can the heart be pure, when the hands are full of blood?

5. Covetousness is the root of Perjury. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3. Men shall be covetous;
and it follows, (...), Truce Breakers. For love of money men will take a false
Oath, and break a just Oath. He that lives a Midas, will dye a Perjurer.

6. Covetousness is the root of Necromancy: Why do persons indent with the
Devil but for money? they study the black Art for yellow gold: Alexander the
sixth, pawned his soul to the Devil for a Popedom.

7. It is the root of Fraud and Cozenage in dealings: Such as would be
over-rich, will overreach; it is the covetous hand holds false weights Amos
8.5.
.

8. Covetousness is the root of bribery and injustice; it makes the Courts of
Judicature Magna Latrocinia, Places of Robbery, as Austin speaks; at Athens,
Causes were bought and sold for money.

9. It is the cause of uncleanness. The Scripture mentions the hire of a whore,
Deuteronomy. 23.18. For money, both conscience and chastity are set to sale.

10. Covetousness is the root of Idolatry. Col. 3.5. Covetousness, which is
Idolatry. The covetous person bows down to the image of gold. His money is his
god, for he puts his trust in it. Money is his Creator; when he has abundance
of wealth, then he thinks he is made; it is his Redeemer; if he be in any
strait or trouble, he flies to his money, and that must redeem him; it is his
Comforter; when he is sad, he tells over his money, and with this golden Harp
he drives away the evil Spirit; when you see a covetous man, you may say There
goes an Idolater.

11. Covetousness is the cause of unprofitableness under the means. In the
Parable, the Thorns choked the seed, Matthew. 13.7. This is the reason the Word
preached does no more good; the seed often falls among Thorns; thousands of
Sermons lie buried in earthly hearts.

12. Covetousness is the root of penuriousness and baseness, it hinders
hospitality Avarus nemini bonus. Sen.
; a covetous man has a withered hand, he cannot reach it out to cloth or feed
such as are in want. The covetous person is so sordid, that if his Estate may
flourish he is content to let his name lie dead and buried: What a cursed sin
is avarice? and can he be pure in heart, that has such a root of bitterness
growing in him? we may as well say the wine is pure which runs dregs, or the
body is pure which is full of plague-spots.

6. Those hearts are impure who are haters of purity, 3.2. who hate the good,
Prove. 1.29. they hated knowledge. Some things in nature have an antipathy; the
Serpent will not come near the boughs of the wild Ash. There is an antipathy in
a carnal heart against holiness; and when hatred is boiled up to malice, it is
dangerous. Thus Julian did maliciously oppose holiness, and made war against
the Persians, and receiving a mortal wound through his armor, he threw up an
handful of his blood into the air in indignation, saying, Vicisti Galilee?
Thou Galilean have thou overcome me?

7. He that derides Purity, has an impure heart, Luke Pet. 3.3. There shall
come in the last days scoffers. There are some that make a jeere of Religion;
These are (say they) your holy brethren! it is a sign of an Ishmael spirit to
scoff at holiness; are we not commanded to be perfect as God is? Matthew. 5.
ult. One would wonder that those who dare open their mouths in derision against
holiness, the earth does not open her mouth to swallow them up as it did Korah
and Dathan. These are Devils covered over with flesh; they have damnation
written on their foreheads. Lucian who in the time of the Emperor Trajan had
professed Religion, afterward became so profane as to make a mock at the
Christians, and by his jeeres and taunts went about to rend Religion, at last
he himself was rent asunder, and devoured by dogs. When the scab of the Leper
did appear, he was to be shut out of the Camp, Levit. 13.9. Those who flout at
Religion, if God give them not repentance, are sure to be shut out of the Camp
of heaven.

SECT. 4.
Showing the signs of a pure heart.

Signs of a pure heart.
I Shall next show you the signs of a pure heart.

Psalm. 32.2. In whose spirit there is no guile. There are four Characters of a
sincere-hearted Christian. 1. A sincere heart serves God with the whole heart.

First, He serves God with the heart. The Hypocrite does but make a show of
obedience, Jer. 12.2. Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins;
there may be a fair complexion, when the Lungs and Vitals are rotten. The
Hypocrite is fair to look on, he has a devout eye, but a hollow heart; but he
who is sincere, his inside is his best side. In the Law God would have the
inwards offered up, Levit. 4.11. A good Christian gives God the inwards; when
he prays his heart prays, 1 Samuel 1.13. Hannah prayed in her heart. In his
Thanksgivings the heart is the chief instrument of praise, Psalm. 111.1. Then is
the sweetest music when we make melody in our hearts to the Lord, Col. 3.16.

Secondly, The sincere Christian serves God with the whole heart, Psalm. 119.2.
Hypocrites have a double heart, Psalm. 12.2. An heart for God, and an heart for
sin, Hos. 10.2. Their heart is divided; God loves a broken heart, but not a
divided heart; an upright heart is a whole heart; the full strain and torrent
of the affections runs out after God; a sincere heart follows God fully, Number.
14.24.

2. A sincere heart is willing to come under a trial, Psalm. 139.23. Search me O
God, and try me; That metal is to be suspected which men are afraid to bring
to the Touchstone; a sound heart likes the Touchstone of the Word; he is for
a searching Ministry. Hypocrites are veritatis lucifugae Tertul.
, they fly from that light which would discover sin; they hate that Physic of
the Word which meeting with their ill humors, begins to make them sick, and
trouble their conscience. A gracious soul loves that preaching best which makes
an Heart-Anatomy.

3ly. A sincere heart dares not act in the least against his conscience; he is
the most magnanimous, yet the most pusillanimous; he is bold in suffering,
Prove. 28.1. but fearful of sin, Genesis 39.9. He dares not get an estate by sinful
shifts, or rise upon the ruins of another. Jacob got his fathers blessing by
fraud; but that is not the way to get Gods blessing.

Fourthly, a sincere heart is a suspicious heart. The Hypocrite suspects
others, and has charitable thoughts of himself; the sincere Christian has
charitable thoughts of others, and suspects himself; he calls himself often to
account, O my soul, have thou any Evidences for Heaven? are they not to seek
when they should be to show? Is there no flaw in thy Evidences? thou may
mistake common grace for saving. Weeds in the Cornfieldsd look like flowers.
The foolish Virgins Lamps looked as if they had oil in them; O my soul, is it
not so with thee? The sincere soul being ever jealous, plays the Critic upon
himself, and does so traverse things in the Court of conscience, as if he were
presently to be cited to Gods Bar. This is to be pure in heart.

2. A pure heart breaths after purity. If God should Ask, and it shall be given
thee to half the Kingdom; he would say, Lord, a pure heart; let my heart have
this inscription, Holiness to the Lord; let my heart be thy Temple, and do thou
dwell in it. Lord, what should I do in heaven with this unholy heart? what
converse could I have with God or Angels? A gracious soul is so in love with
purity, that he prizeth a pure heart above all blessings.

1. Above riches; he knows he may be clothed in purple and fine linen, and
yet go to hell Divitiae sunt in sinistra Domini. Bern.
; he is content to be poor, so he may be pure; he knows heart-purity is a
special Certificate of Gods love, the pure in heart shall see God.

2. Above gifts; gifts do not at all set us off in Gods eye; a pure heart is
the jewel. Matthew. 15.28. O woman great is thy faith! It was not her Rhetorical
language Christ was taken with, but her faith. Hypocrites have had rare gifts;
Saul had the spirit of Prophecy; Judas no doubt could make an Elegant Oration.
Hypocrites have come into Gods Church laden with Egyptian gold; videl Humane
learning: There may be Illumination without Sanctification. A small Diamond is
better than a great deal of brass: A little grace excels the most flourishing
parts. Now if the outgoings of thy soul are after holiness, thou desire
rather a pure heart, than an eloquent tongue; thou have the oil of the Spirit
poured on thee, and thou shall be crowned with a sight of God.



1. He may forbear sin; as one may hold his breath while he dives under water,
and then take breath again: And a man may forbear sin: 1. For want of occasion;
The Gunpowder makes no noise till the fire be put to it; the Clock stands
still till the Weights are put on. Let a tentation come, which is like the
hanging on of the Weights, and the heart goes as fast in sin as ever. 2. He may
forbear sin, formidine poenae, for fear. A man forbears a Dish he loves, for
fear it should bring his disease upon him of the stone or gout. There is a
conflict in a sinner between the passion of desire and fear. Desire spurs him
on to sin, but fear as a Curben-bit checks him; nor is it the crookedness of
the Serpent he fears, but the sting of the Serpent. 3. He may forbear sin out
of a design; he has a plot in hand, and his sin might spoil his plot. Some
rich heir would fly out in excess, but he carries it fair to prevent a cutting
off the Entail. How good was Joash while Jehoiada the Priest lived! Prudence as
well as Conscience may restrain from sin.

2. A man may forsake sin, yet not have a pure heart; it is a great matter I
confess to forsake sin; so dear is sin to men, that they will part with the
fruit of their body for the sin of their souls. Micah 6.7.
Sin is the Dalilah that does bewitch, and it is much to see men divorced from
it; this is some fruit of the Ministry to civilize; but there may be a
forsaking of sin, yet no heart-purity; sin may be forsaken upon wrong
principles. 1. From Morality. Moral Arguments may suppress sin: I have read of
a debauched Heathen, who hearing Socrates read an Ethick Lecture of Virtue and
Vice, (though he came with a purpose to deride Socrates, yet) he went away
changed, and did no more follow his former Exorbitancies. Cato, Seneca,
Aristides, seeing a beauty in Virtue, did lead unblameable lives. 2. From
Policy. A man may forsake sin, not out of respect to Gods glory, but his own
credit. Vice will waste his Estate, eclipse the honor of his Family, therefore
out of policy he will divorce his sin. 3. From Necessity. Perhaps he can now
follow the Trade of sin no longer; the Adulterer is grown old, the Drunkard
poor; his heart is to sin, but either his purse fails him, or his strength; as
a man that loves Hunting, but his Prison-fetters will not suffer him to follow
the sport. This man who is necessitated to put a stop to sin, does not so much
forsake sin, as sin forsakes him.

But now he is pure in Gods eye who abhors sin. Psalm. 119.104. I hate every
false way. This is excellent indeed, because now the love of sin is crucified.
A hypocrite may leave sin, yet love it; as the Serpent casts her coat, yet
keeps her sting; but when a man can say he abhors sin, now sin is killed in the
root; a pure heart abstains from sin, as a man does from a Dish that he has an
antipathy against. This is a sign of a new nature, when a man hates what once
he loved; and because he hates sin, therefore he fights against it with the
sword of the Spirit; as a man that hates a Serpent, seeks the destruction of it.

These. 5.22. Abstain, (...), from all show of evil. A pure heart avoids that
which may be interpreted evil: He that is loyal to his Prince, not only
forbears to have his hand in Treason, but he takes heed of that which has a
show of Treason. A gracious heart is shy of that which looks like sin: When
Joseph's Mistress took hold of him, and said, Lie with me, he left his garment
in her hand, and fled from her, Genesis 39.12. He avoided the appearance of evil,
he would not be seen in her company. Now a pure heart avoids whatever may have
the suspicion of sin.

1. In regard of himself, and that two ways. 1. Because the appearance of evil
is oftentimes an occasion of evil. Effeminate Daliance is an appearance of
evil, and many times occasions evil. Had Joseph been familiar with his Mistress
in a wanton, sporting manner, he might in time have been drawn to commit folly
with her. Some out of Novelty and Curiosity have gone to hear Mass, and
afterward have lent the Idol not only their ear, but their knee. In our times
are there not many who have gone with itching ears into Sectarian company, and
have come home with the plague in their head? When Dinah would be gadding, she
lost her chastity, Genesis 34.2. A pure heart foreseeing the danger, avoids the
appearance of evil: It Is dangerous to go near an Hornets Nest. The men who went
near the Furnace were burned, Dan. 3.22. 2. Because the appearance of evil may
eclipse his good name. A good name is a precious ointment, it is better than
fine gold, Prove. 22.1. It commends us to God and Angels, which riches cannot do
Opera salutis sine fama boni odoris non satis praelucent. Hierom.
. Now a godly man avoids the appearance of evil, lest he wound his good name;
what comfort can there be of life, when the name lies buried?

2. A pure heart avoids the suspicion of sin out of reverence and respect to
the holiness of God. God hates the very appearance of evil: God abhors
hypocrites, because they have no more than the appearance of good; and he is
angry with his children, because they have so much as the appearance of evil. A
gracious heart knows God is a jealous God, and cannot endure that his people
should border upon sin, therefore he keeps aloof off, and will not come near
the smell of infection.

3. A pure heart avoids the show of sin in regard of the godly. The appearance
of evil may scandalize a weak brother: A gracious heart is not only fearful
left he should defile his own conscience, but lest he should offend his
brothers conscience; were it only in a thing indifferent, yet if it be an
appearance of evil, and may grieve another, we are to forbear 1 Cor. 10.25, 28.
. For when we sin against the Brethren, and wound their weak conscience, we sin
against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.12. The weak Christian is a member of Christ,
therefore the sinning against a member, is a sinning against Christ.

4. A pure heart avoids the very appearance of evil in regard of the wicked.
The Apostle would have us walk wisely, (...), toward them that are without, 1
These. 4.12. The wicked watch for our halting; how glad would they be of any
thing to reproach Religion? Professors are placed as Stars in the highest orb
of the Church; and if there be but the appearance of any Excentrick, or
irregular motion, the wicked would presently open their mouths with a fresh cry
against Religion. Now to a godly heart the fame and honor of the Gospel is so
dear, that he had rather dye than impeach or eclipse it; by this then let us
try our selves whether we are pure in heart: Do we avoid the least apparition
of sin? alas, how many run themselves into the occasions of sin? they tempt the
Devil to tempt them; some go to Masks and Comedies, the very fuel and tentation
to lust. Others frequent Erroneous Meetings; and truly God often in just
judgment leaves them to the acts of sin, that do not avoid the appearance of
sin. Psalm. 106.35. They were mingled among the Heathen, and learned their
works. Pure hearts fly the occasion: John would not endure the company of
Cerinthus in the Bath, as Nicephorus notes. Polycarp would have no conference
with Marcion the Heretic, but called him Primogenitum Diaboli, the Devils
firstborn. Basil says that the Christians in his time avoided the Meetings of
Sectaries, (...), as the very Schools of Error. Oh avoid the appearance of
evil; the Apostle bids us to follow those things which are (...), of good
report, Phil. 4.8.

due order, consists in three things.

1. Preparing the heart before a duty: An unholy heart cares not how it rusheth
upon an Ordinance, it comes without preparation, and goes away without profit:
The pure heart is a prepared heart; it dresseth it self before it comes to a
Duty, by Examination and Ejaculation: When the Earth is prepared, then it is
fit to receive the seed; when the Instrument is prepared and tuned, it is fit
for Music.

2. Watching the heart in a Duty: An holy heart labors to be affected and
wrought upon, his heart burns within him. There was no Sacrifice without fire;
a pure Saint labors to have his heart broken in a duty. Psalm. 51.17. The
incense when it was broken, did cast the sweetest favor. Impure souls care not
in what a dead perfunctory manner they serve God. Ezekiel. 33.31. They pray more
out of fashion, than out of faith. They are no more affected with an Ordinance,
than the Tombs of the Church. God complains of offering up the blind, Mal. 1.8.
And is it not as bad to offer up the dead? O Christian, say to thy self, How
can this deadness of heart stand with pureness of heart? Do not dead things
putrify?

3. Outward reverence: Purity of heart will express it self by the reverend
gesture of the body, the lifting up of the eye and hand, the uncovering the
head, the bending the knee. Constantine the Emperor did bear great reverence
to the Word. When God gave the Law, the Mount was on fire, and trembled, Exodus
19.18. The reason was, that the people might prostrate themselves more
reverently before the Lord. The Ark wherein the Law was put, was carried upon
bars, that the Levites might not touch it: Exodus 25.11, 14. To show what
reverence God would have about holy things. Sitting in prayer (unless in case
of weakness) and having the Hat half on in prayer, is a very undecent,
irreverent practice; let such as are guilty reform it. We must not only offer
up our souls, but our bodies, Romans 12.1. The Lord takes notice what posture and
gesture we use in his worship: If a man were to deliver a Petition to the King,
would he deliver it with his Hat half on? The careless irreverence of some
would make us think they did not much regard whether God heard them or no. We
are run from one extreme to another; from superstition to unmannerliness. Let
Christians think of the dreadful Majesty of God who is present: Genesis 28.17. How
dreadful is this place? this is none other but the house of God, and this is
the gate of heaven. The blessed Angels cover their faces, crying, Holy, holy,
Isa. 6.1. An holy heart will have an holy gesture.

Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord. Where there is a good
Conscience, there will be a good Conversation. Some bless God they have good
hearts, but their lives are evil. Prove. 30.12. There is a generation that are
pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness. If the
stream be corrupt, we may suspect the springhead to be impure. Aaron was
called the Saint of the Lord, Psalm. 106.16. He had not only an holy heart, but
there was a golden plate on his forehead on which was written holiness to the
Lord. Purity must not only be woven into the heart, but engraven upon the life.
Grace is most beautiful when it shines abroad with its golden beams. The Clock
has not only its motion within, but the finger moves without upon the Dyal:
Pureness of heart shows it self upon the Dyal of the Conversation.

1. A pure soul talks of God, Psalm. 37.30. His heart is seen in his tongue; the
Latins call the Roof of the mouth Coelum, Heaven. He that is pure in heart,
his mouth is full of heaven.

2. He walks with God, Genesis 6.9. He is still doing Angels work; praising God,
serving God; he lives as Christ did upon Earth. Holy duties are the Jacobs
Ladder by which he is still ascending to heaven. Purity of heart and life are
in Scripture made Twins; Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within them: there
is purity of heart; and they shall walk in my statutes; there is purity of
life. Shall we account them pure, whose Conversation is not in heaven Phil.
3.20.
, but rather in hell? Micah 6.11. Shall I count them pure with the wicked
balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights? How justly may others reproach
Religion, when they see it kicked down with our unholy feet! a pure heart has
a golden Frontispice; grace like new wine will have vent; it can be no more
concealed than lost. The Saints are called Jewels, Mal. 3. because of that
shining luster they cast in the eyes of others.

7. A pure heart is so in love with purity, that nothing

1. Let others reproach purity, he loves it; as David, when he danced before
the Ark, and Michal scoffed; if (says he) this he to be vile, I will yet be
more vile, 2 Samuel 6.22. So says a pure heart, If to follow after holiness be
to be vile, I will yet be more vile. Let water be sprinkled upon the fire, it
burns the more: The more others deride holiness, the more does a gracious soul
burn in love and zeal to it. If a man had an inheritance befallen him, would he
be laughed out of it? what is a Christian the worse for another reproach? it is
not a blind man's disparaging a Diamond, that makes it sparkle the less.

2. Let others persecute holiness, a pure heart will pursue it. Holiness is the
Queen every gracious soul is espoused to, and he will rather dye than be
divorced. Paul would be holy, though bonds and persecutions did abide him, Acts
20.23. The way of Religion is often thorny and bloody; but a gracious heart
prefers inward purity before outward peace. I have heard of one who having a
Jewel he much prized, the King sent for his Jewel; Tell the King (says he) I
honor his Majesty, but I will rather lose my life, than part with my Jewel. He
who is enriched with the Jewel of holiness, will rather dye than part with this
Jewel: When his honor and riches will do him no good, his holiness will stand
him instead. Romans 6.22. Ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life.

SECT. 5.
Exhorting to heart-purity.

wipes her mouth, Exhort.
Prove. 30.20. But that is not enough, Wash thy heart o Jerusalem, Jerem. 4.14.
And here I shall lay down some Arguments or Motives to persuade to heart-purity.



1. In respect of our selves: Till the heart be pure, all our holy things are
polluted; they are splendida peccata: Titus 1.15. To the unclean all things are
unclean; their offering is unclean. Under the Law, if a man who was unclean by
a dead body, did carry a piece of holy flesh in his skirt, the holy flesh could
not cleanse him, but he polluted that: Hag. 2.12, 13. He who had the Leprosy,
whatever he touched was unclean; if he had touched the Altar or Sacrifice, the
Altar had not cleansed him, but he had defiled the Altar; A foul hand defiles
the purest water; an impure heart defiles Prayers, Sacraments; he drops poison
upon all. A pure stream running through muddy ground is polluted; the holiest
Ordinances are stained running through an impure heart. A sinners works are
called opera mortua, dead works, Hebr. 6.1. And those works which are dead,
cannot please God; a dead wife cannot please her husband.

2. Heart-purity is necessary in respect of God: God is holy; purity is the
chief Robe wherewith God himself is clothed. Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes
than to behold evil: And will this holy God endure to have an impure heart come
near him? will a man lay a Viper in his bosom? the holy God and the sinner
cannot dwell together. None can dwell together but friends; but there is no
friendship between God and the sinner, both of them being of a contrary
judgment and disposition. An impure heart is more odious to God than a Serpent;
God gave the Serpent its venom, but Satan fills the heart with sin. Acts 5.3.
Why has Satan filled thy heart? The Lord abhors a sinner, he will not come
near him, having his plague-soars running. Zach. 11.8. My soul loathed them.

3. Heart-purity is necessary in regard of the Angels; they are pure creatures:
The Cherubims, which typified the Angels, were made of fine gold, to denote the
purity of their Essence; no unholy thought enters into the Angels; therefore
there must be purity of heart, that there may be some resemblance between us
and them. What should unholy hearts do among those pure angelical spirits?

4. In regard of the Saints glorified. They are pure, being refined from all
lees and dregs of sin. Their title is, spirits of just men made perfect, Heb.
12.23. Now what should profane spirits do among spirits made perfect? I tell
you, if you who wallow in your sins, could come near God and Angels, and
spirits of men made perfect, and have a sight of their luster, you would soon
wish your selves out of their company; as a man that is dirty, and in his rags,
if he should stand before the King and his Nobles, and see them glistering in
their cloth of gold, and sparkling with their jewels, he would be ashamed of
himself, and wish himself out of their presence.

5. There must be heart-purity in regard of heaven; heaven is a pure place, it
is an inheritance undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4. No unclean beasts come into the
heavenly Ark; there shall not enter into it any thing that defiles, Rev.
21.27. The Lord will not put the new wine of glory into a musty, impure heart;
all which considered, shows the necessity of heart-purity.

These. 4.3. This is the will of God, your sanctification. Are you low in the
world? perhaps it is not the will of God that you should be rich; but it is the
will of God that you should be holy; This is the will of God, your
sanctification. Let God have his will by being holy, and you shall have your
will in being happy. Gods will must either be fulfilled by us, or upon us.

Psalm. 73.1. God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.
Heart-purity denominates us the Israel of God. It is not profession which makes
us the Israel of God; it makes us of Israel indeed; but, all are not Israel
which are of Israel, Romans 9.6. Purity of heart is the jewel which is hung only
upon the elect. As chastity distinguishes a virtuous woman from an Harlot; so
the true Saint is distinguished from the Hypocrite by his heart-purity. This is
like the Noblemans star, or garter, which is a peculiar ensign of honor,
differing him from the vulgar; when the bright star of purity shines in a
Christians heart, it does distinguish him from a formal professor.

4. Purity of heart makes us like God; it was Adams unhappiness I know you
not*. Chrysostom.
God delights in no heart but where he may see his own face, and likeness. You
cannot see your face in a glass when it is dusty: Gods face cannot be seen in
a dusty impure soul; a pure heart (like a clean glass) gives forth some idaea
and representation of God. There is little comfort in being like God in other
things besides purity. Are we like God in that we have a being? So have stones.
Are we like him in that we have motion? So have stars; are we like him in that
we have life? so have trees and birds; Are we like him in that we have
knowledge? so have Devils; there is no likeness to God will prove comfortable,
and blisseful, but our being like him in purity; God loves the pure in heart;
lovers founded upon likeness.

5. The excellency of the heart lies in the purity of it. Purity was the glory
of the soul in innocence; the

6. God is good to the pure in heart, Psalm. 73.1. God We all desire that God
should be good to us; it is the sick man's prayer, the Lord be good to me. God is
good to such as are of a clean heart.

Quest. But how is God good to them?

Answ. Two ways, 1. To them that are pure, all things are sanctified. Titus
1.15. To the pure all things are pure. Estate is sanctified, Relations are
sanctified; as the Temple did sanctify the gold, and the Altar did sanctify
the offering. To the unclean nothing is clean; their Table is a snare, their
Temple-devotion is sin. There is a curse entailed upon a wicked man; but
holiness removes the curse, Deuteronomy. 28.16
and cuts off the entail; to the pure all things are pure. 2. The pure-hearted
have all things work for their good; Romans 8.28. Mercies and afflictions shall
turn to their good; the most poysonful drug shall be medicinable; the most
cross Providence shall carry on the design of their salvation Ista quae putatur
poena fit medicina. Hier.
; who then would not be pure in heart? God is good to such as are of a clean
heart.

shall see God. Happiness is nothing but the quintessence of holiness; purity
of heart is heaven begun in a man; holiness is called in Scripture the
anointing of God, 1 John 2.27. Solomon was first anointed with the holy oil,
and then he was made King, 1 Kings 1.39. The people of God are first anointed
with the oil of the Spirit, and made pure in heart, and then the Crown of
glory is set upon their head (...). Macar.
: And is not purity to be highly valued? it lays a Train for glory; purity of
heart, and seeing of God, are linked together.

John 8.46. Which of you convinces me of sin? in this we are to imitate
Christ; we are not to imitate him in raising the dead Non mundos fabricare, non
mortuos susci^ere. Aug.
, or in working miracles, but in being holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. Besides, this golden
pattern of Christ, we are to write after the fair copy of those Saints who have
been of a Dove like purity. David was so pure in heart, that he was a man after
Gods heart; Abraham so purified by faith, that he was one of Gods
Cabinet-counsel Genesis 18.17.
. Moses so holy, that God spoke with him face to face; what were the rest of
the Patriarchs, but so many plants of Renown flourishing in holiness? The
fathers in the primitive Church were exemplary for purity; Gregory Nazianzene,
Basil, Augustine, they were so inlaid and adorned with purity, that envy it
self could not tax them Stabilitatem habuerunt in fide, sanctitatem in opere.
; therefore as Caesar wished he had such Soldiers as were in the time of
Alexander the great; so we may wish we had such Saints as were in the Primitive
times; so just were they in their dealings, so decent in their attire, so true
in their promises, so devout in their Religion, so unblameable in their lives,
that they were living Sermons, walking Bibles, real Pictures of Christ, and did
help to keep up the credit of godliness in the world.

9. Heart-purity is the only jewel you can carry out carry nothing out of the
world, 1 Timothy 6.7. Purity of heart is the only commodity can be with comfort
transported, this is that will stay longest with you; usually we love those
things will last longest; we prize a Diamond or piece of gold above the most
beautiful flower, because fading; heart-purity has perpetuity; it will go with
us beyond the grave.

SECT. 6.
Means for heart-purity.

BUT how shall we attain to heart-purity? 1. Often look into the Word of God.
John 15.3. Now ye are clean through the Word. Psalm. 119.140. Thy Word is very
pure: Gods Word is pure, not only for the matter of it, but the effect, because
it makes us pure: John 17.17. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is
truth. By looking into this pure Crystal we are changed into the image of it;
the Word is both a glass to show us the spots of our souls, and a lavor to wash
them away; the Word breaths nothing but purity; it irradiates the mind, it
consecrates the heart.

2. Go to the Bath: There are two Baths Christians should wash in.

1. The Bath of tears Lavacrum lachrymarum.
: Go into this Bath; Peter had sullied and defiled himself with sin, and he
washed himself with penitential tears. Mary Magdalen who was an impure sinner,
stood at Jesus feet weeping, Luke 7.38. Mary's tears did wash her heart, as
well as Christ's feet. Oh sinners, let your eyes be a fountain of tears; weep
for those sins which are so many, as have passed all Arithmetic; this water of
contrition is healing and purifying.

2. The Bath of Christ's blood Lavacrum sanguinis.
; this is that fountain opened for sin, and for uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. A soul
steeped in the brinish tears of Repentance, and bathed in the blood of Christ,
is made pure; this is that (...); all the legal washings and purifications were
but Types and Emblems, representing Christ's blood; this blood lays the soul a
whitening.

3. Get faith: It Is a soul-cleansing grace, Acts 15.9. Having purified their
hearts by faith. The woman in the Gospel, that did but touch the hem of Christ's
garment was healed; a touch of faith heals. If I believe Christ and all his
merits are mine, how can I sin against him? we do not willingly injure those
friends which we believe love us: Nothing can have a greater force and efficacy
upon the heart to make it pure, than faith; faith will remove Mountains; the
Mountains of pride, lust, envy; faith and the love of sin are inconsistent.

4. Breath after the Spirit; it is called the holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. It
purges the heart, as Lightning purges the Air: That we may see what a
purifying virtue the Spirit has, it is compared

1. To fire, Acts 2.3. Fire is of a purifying nature; it does refine and
cleanse metals; it separates the dross from the gold; the Spirit of God in the
heart does refine and sanctify it; it burns up the dross of sin (...).
Chrysostom.
.

2. The Spirit is compared to wind. Acts 2.2. There came a sound from heaven as
of a mighty rushing wind, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. The
wind does purify the Air Ventus aerem expurgat.
; when the Air by reason of foggy vapors is unwholesome, the wind is a Fan to
winnow and purify it. Thus when the vapors of sin arise in the heart, vapors
of pride and covetousness, earthly vapors, the Spirit of God arises and blows
upon the soul, and so purges away these impure vapors. The Spouse in the
Canticles prays for a Ga^e of the Spirit, that she might be made pure, Cant.
4.16.

3. The Spirit is compared to water. John 7.38, 39. He that believes on me,
out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living water, but this spoke he of the
Spirit: The Spirit is like water, not only to make the soul fruitful, (for it
causes the desert to blossom as the Rose, Isa. 32.15. Isa. 35.1. But the
Spirit is like water to purify: Whereas before the heart of a sinner was
unclean, and whatever he touched had a tincture of impurity, Number. 19.22. when
once the Spirit comes into the heart, it does with its continual showers and
lavors wash off the filthiness of it, making it pure, and fit for the God of
the spirits to dwell in.

5. Take heed of familiar converse and intercourse with the wicked. One vain
mind makes another; one hard heart makes another; the stone in the body is not
infectious, but the stone in the heart is. One profane spirit poisons another;
Beware of the society of the wicked.

Quest. But what hurt is in this? did not Jesus Christ converse with sinners?
Luke 5.29.

Answ. 1. There was a necessity for that: If Jesus Christ had not come among
sinners, how could any have been saved? He went among sinners, not to join with
them in their sins, but to heal them of their sins. He was not a Companion of
sinners, but a Physician of sinners Ut si accusetur medicus quod in domum
aegroti intraverat. Austin.
.

pure in heart, let us shun their society. He that would preserve his garment
clean, avoids the dirt; the wicked are as the mire, Isa. 57.20. The fresh
waters running among the salt, taste brackish.

6. If you would be pure, walk with them that are pure; as the communion of
Saints is in our Creed, so it should be in our company. Prove. 13.20. He that
walks with the wise shall be wise; and he that walks with the pure shall be
pure. The Saints are like a Bed of spices; by intermixing our selves with them
we shall partake of their savouriness; association begets assimilation;
sometimes God blesses good society to the conversion of others.

7. Wait at the posts of Wisdoms doors, Reverence the Word preached; the Word
of God sucked in by faith Hebr. 4.2.
, transforms the heart into the likeness of it; Romans 6.17. The Word is an holy
seed Jam. 1.18.
, which being cast into the heart, makes it partake of the Divine Nature 2 Pet.
1.4.
.

8. Pray for heart-purity. Job propounds the question, Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? Job 15.14. God can do it; out of an impure heart he
can produce grace; make that prayer of David, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean
heart, O God. Most men pray more for full purses, than pure hearts; we should
pray for heart-purity fervently; it is a matter we are most nearly concerned
in; without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Our prayer must be with sighs
and groans, Romans 8. There must not only be elocution, but affection. Jacob
wrestled in prayer, Genesis 32.24. Hannah poured out her soul, 1 Samuel 1.15. We often
pray so coldly, (our Petitions even freezing between our lips) as if we would
teach God to deny Ludit Deum, qui ore petit quod cord negligit.
: We pray, as if we cared not whether God heard us or no. Oh Christian, be
earnest with God for a pure heart; lay thy heart before the Lord, and say,
Lord, Thou who have given me an heart, give me a pure heart. My heart is good
for nothing as it is, it defiles every thing it touches. Lord, I am not fit to
live with this heart, for I cannot honor thee; nor to dye with it, for I
cannot see thee; oh purge me with Hysop; let Christ's blood be sprinkled upon
me, let the Holy Ghost descend upon me, Create in me a clean heart O God. Thou
who biddest me give thee my heart, Lord, make my heart pure, and thou shall
have it.

MATTHEW. 5.8. They shall see God.


CHAP. XVII.
The blessed privilege of seeing God explained.

THESE words are linked to the former, and they are a great incentive to
heart-purity; the pure heart shall see the pure God. There is a double-sight
which the Saints have of God.

1. In this life; that is spiritually, by the eye of faith. Faith sees Gods
glorious Attributes in the glass of his Word; faith beholds him showing forth
himself through the Lattice of his Ordinances. Thus Moses did see him who was
invisible, Hebr. 11.27. Believers see Gods glory as it were veiled over, they
behold his back-parts, Exodus 23.33.

2. In the life to come; and this glorious sight of God is meant in the Text,
(...), they shall see God: A pleasant prospect! this Divines call the
beatifical vision Inspectio sola divinitatis efficit, ut beatius nihil esse
potest. Cassiodor.
; at that day the Vail will be pulled off, and God will show himself in all his
glory to the soul; as a King on a day of Coronation shows himself in all his
Royalty and Magnificence: This sight of God will be the heaven of heaven; we
shall indeed have a sight of Angels, and that will be sweet; but the
quintessence of happiness, and the Diamond in the Ring will be this, we shall
see God. If the Sun be absent, it is night for all the Stars. The Angels are
called Stars, Job 38.7. But it would be night in heaven if the Sun of
righteousness did not shine there; it is the Kings presence makes the Court;
Absalom counted himself but half alive, unless he might see the Kings face 2 Samuel 14.32
: -- Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. -- This sight of
God in glory, is 1. Partly mental and intellectual; we shall see him with the
eyes of our mind. If there be not an intellectual sight of God, how do the
spirits of just men made perfect see him? 2. Partly corporeal; not that we can
with bodily eyes behold the bright essence of God. Indeed the Anthromorphites
and Vorstians erroneously held that God had a visible shape and figure; as man
was made Gods image, so they thought God was made in made in man's image; but
God is a spirit, John 4.24. and being a Spirit, is (...), invisible, 1 Timothy
1.17. He cannot be beheld by bodily eyes; whom no man has seen, (...), nor can
see, 1 Timothy 6.16. A sight of his glory would overwhelme us; this wine is too
strong for our weak heads.

But when I say our seeing of God in heaven, is corporeal, my meaning is, we
shall with bodily eyes behold Jesus Christ, through whom the glory of God, his
wisdom, holiness, mercy shall shine forth to the soul. Put a back of steel to
the glass, and you may see a face in it; so the humane nature of Christ is as
it were a back of steel, through which we may see the glory of God 2 Cor. 4.6.
; in this sense that Scripture is to be understood, Job 19.26. with these eyes
shall I see God.

SECT. 1.
Setting forth the excellency of the Beatifical vision.

NOW concerning this blessed sight of God, it is so sublime and sweet, that I
can but draw a dark shadow of it; we shall better understand it when we come to
heaven; only at present I shall lay down these nine Aphorisms or Maxims.

1. Our sight of God in heaven shall be a transparent sight; here we see him
per aenigma, through a glass darkly, 1 Cor. 13.12. But through Christ we shall
behold God in a very illustrious manner; God will so far unvail himself, and
show forth his glory, as the soul is capable to receive; if Adam had not
sinned, yet it is probable he should never have had such a clear sight of God
as the Saints in glory shall. 1 John 3.2. We shall see him as he is; now we see
him as he is not; he is not mutable, not mortal; there we shall see him as he
is, in a very transparent manner; then shall I know, even as also I am known, 1
Cor. 13.12. that is, clearly: Does not God know us clearly and fully? then
shall the Saints know him (according to their capacity) as they are known; as
their love to God, so their sight of God shall be perfect.

2. This sight of God will be a transcendent sight, it will surpass in glory;
such glittering beams shall sparkle forth from the Lord Jesus, as shall
infinitely amaze and delight the eyes of the beholders. Imagine what a blessed
sight it will be to see Christ wearing the Robe of our humane nature, and to
see that nature sitting in glory above the Angels. If God be so beautiful here
in his Ordinances, Word, Prayer, Sacraments; if there be such excellency in him
when we see him by the eye of faith through the prospective glass of a promise,
O what will it be when we shall see him face to face! when Christ was
transfigured on the Mount, he was full of glory, Matthew. 17.2. If his
transfiguration were so glorious, what will his inauguration be? what a
glorious time will it be, when as it was said of Mordecai, we shall see him in
the presence of his Father, arrayed in Royal apparel, and with a great Crown of
gold upon his head, Esth. 8.15. (...)
. There will be glory beyond Hyperbole; if the Sun were ten thousand times
brighter than it is, it could not so much as shadow out this glory; in the
heavenly Horizon we shall behold beauty in its first magnitude and highest
elevation; there we shall see the King in his glory Isa. 33.17.
. All lights are but Eclipses, compared with that glorious Vision; Appelles
pensil would blot, Angels tongues would but disparage it.

3. This sight of God will be a transforming sight: 1 John 3.2. We shall be
like him: The Saints shall be changed into glory; as when the light springs
into a dark Room, the Room may be said to be changed from what it was. The
Saints shall so see God, as to be changed into his image. Psalm. 17. ult. Here
Gods people are black'd and sullied with infirmities, but in heaven they shall
be as the Dove, covered with silver wings; they shall have some rays and beams
of Gods glory shining in them; as a man that rowles himself in the Snow, is of
a Snow-like whiteness; as the Crystal by having the Sun shine on it, sparkles
and looks like the Sun; so the Saints by beholding the brightness of Gods
glory, shall have a tincture of that glory upon them; not that they shall
partake of Gods very essence; for as the iron in the fire becomes fire, yet
remains iron still; so the Saints by beholding the luster of Gods Majesty shall
be glorious creatures, but yet creatures still.

4. This sight of God will be a joyful sight. Acts 2.28. Thou shall make me
glad with the light of thy countenance. After a sharp Winter, how pleasant will
it be to see the Sun of righteousness displaying himself in all his glory! Does
faith breed joy? 1 Pet. 1.8. In whom though now you see him not, yet believing
ye rejoice with joy unspeakable. If the joy of FAITH be such, what will the joy
of vision be? the sight of Christ will amaze the eye with wonder, and ravish
the heart with joy. If the face of a friend whom we entirely love does so
affect us and drive away sorrow; O how chearing will the sight of God be to the
Saints in heaven! then indeed it may be said, (...), your heart shall rejoice,
John 16.22. And there are two things which will make the Saints vision of God
in heaven joyful.

1. Through Jesus Christ the dread and terror of the Divine Essence shall be
taken away. Majesty shall appear in God to preserve reverence, but withal
Majesty clothed with beauty, and tempered with sweetness to excite joy in the
Saints. We shall see God as a friend, not as guilty Adam did, who was afraid,
and hid himself Genesis 3.10.
; but as Queen Esther looked upon King Ahashuerus, holding forth the golden
Scepter Esth. 5.2.
; surely this sight of God will not be formidable, but comfortable.

2. The Saints shall not only have vision, but fruition; they shall so see God,
as to enjoy him. Aquinas and Scotus dispute the case whether the formalis
ratio, the very formality and essence of blessedness be an act of the
understanding or the will. Aquinas says, Happiness consists in the
intellectual part, the bare seeing of God. Scotus says, Happiness is an act of
the will, the enjoying of God; but certainly true blessedness comprehends both
Illi acu rem tangunt, qui in visione and amore Dei simul consistere volunt
beatitudinem. Dr. Arrows.
; it lies partly in the understanding, by seeing the glory of God richly
displayed; and partly in the will, by a sweet delicious taste of it, and
acquiescence of the soul in it; we shall so see God as to love him (...).
, and so love him as to be filled with him; the seeing of God implies fruition.
Matthew. 25.21. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord; not only behold it, but Non
tantum aderit gloria, sed incrit. Bern.
enter into it. Psalm. 36.9. In thy light we shall see light, there is vision.
Psalm. 16. ult. At thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore, there is
fruition. So great is the joy which flows from the sight of God, as will make
the Saints break forth into triumphant Praises and Hallelujahs.

5. This sight of God will be a satisfying sight: Cast three worlds into the
heart, and they will not fill it; but the sight of God satisfies, Psalm. 17.15.
I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. Solomon says, the eye is
not satisfied with seeing, Eccles. 1.8. But there the eye will be satisfied
with seeing; God and nothing but God can satisfy. The Saints shall have their
heads so full of knowledge, and their hearts so full of joy, that they shall
find no want.

6. It will be an unweariable sight: Let a man see the ra^est sight that is, he
will soon be cloyed; when he comes into a Garden and sees delicious walks, fair
Arbours, pleasant Flowers, within a little while he grows weary; but it is not
so in heaven, there is no surfeit Ibi nec fames nec fastidium. Bern.
; we shall never be weary of seeing God; for the Divine Essence being infinite,
there shall be every moment new and fresh delights springing forth from God
into the glorified soul; the soul shall not so desire God, but it shall still
be full; nor shall it be so full, but it shall still desire; so sweet will God
be, that the more the Saints behold God, the more they will be ravished with
desire and delight.

7. It will be a beneficial sight, it will tend to the bettering and
advantaging of the soul; some colors while they delight the eyes, they hurt
them; but this intuition and vision of God shall better the soul, and tend to
its infinite happiness. Eves looking upon the Tree of knowledge did prejudice
her sight; she afterward grew blind upon it; but the Saints can receive no
detriment from the inspection of glory, this sight will be beatifical: The soul
will never be in its perfection till it comes to see God, this will be the
crowning blessing.

8. This sight of God shall be perpetuated; here we see objects awhile, and
then our eyes grow dim, and we need Spectacles; but the Saints shall always
behold God; as there shall be no cloud upon Gods face, so the Saints shall have
no Mote in their eye; their sight shall never grow dim, but they shall be to
all Eternity looking on God, that beautiful and beatifical object. O what a
soul-ravishing sight will this be! God must make us able to bear it; we can no
more endure a sight of glory, than a sight of wrath Sensibile forte destruit
sensum.
; but the Saints after this life shall have their capacities enlarged, and they
shall be qualified, and made fit to receive the penetrating beams of glory.

9. It will be a speedy sight. There are some who deny that the soul is
immediately after death admitted to the sight of God; but I shall make good
this Assertion, that the Saints shall have an immediate transition and passage
from death to glory; as soon as death has closed their eyes, they shall see
God; if the soul be not presently after death translated to the beatifical
Vision, then what becomes of the soul in that juncture of time till the
Resurrection?

1. Does the soul go into torment? That cannot be; for the soul of a believer
is a member of Christ's body mystical; and if this soul should go to hell, then
something of Christ should go to hell; a member of Christ might be for a time
damned; but that is impossible.

2. Does the soul sleep in the body as some drowsily imagine? How then shall we
make good sense of that Scripture? 2 Cor. 5.8. We are willing rather to be
absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. If the soul at death be
absent from the body, then it cannot sleep in the body.

3. Does the soul dye? so the Lucianists held that the soul was mortal, and did
dye with the body; but as Scaliger observes, it is impossible that the soul
being of a spiritual uncompounded nature should be subject to corruptibility
Luke 12.^.
. Such as say the soul dies, I would demand of them wherein the soul of a man
then differs at death from the soul of a brute? By all which it appears that
the soul of a believer after death goes immediately to God: Luke 23.43. This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. That word (...), with me, shows clearly that
the Thief on the Cross was translated to heaven, for there Christ was, Ephesians.
4.10. And the other word (...), this day, shows that the Thief on the Cross had
an immediate passage from the Cross to Paradise; so that the souls of believers
have a speedy Vision of God after death; it is but winking, and they shall see
God.

SECT. 2.
The sinners misery that he shall not see God.

the pure in heart only shall see God. Such as live in sin, whose souls are
dyed black with the filth of hell, they shall never come where God is; they
shall have an affrighting Vision of God, but not a beatifical Vision; they
shall see the flaming Sword, and the burning Lake, but not the Mercy-seat; God
in Scripture is sometimes called a consuming fire, sometimes the Father of
lights; the wicked shall feel the fire, but not see the light: Impure souls
shall be covered with shame and darkness, as with a Mantle; and shall never see
the Kings face; they who would not see God in his Ordinances, shall not see him
in his glory.

SECT. 3.
That we should labor to be rightly qualified for this Vision.

To get into Christ; We cannot come to God but by Christ; we cannot see God but
through Christ. Moses when he was in the Rock did see God, Exodus 33.32. In this
blessed Rock Christ we shall see God. 2. Be purified persons; it is only the
pure in heart who shall see God; it is only a clear eye can behold a bright
transparent object; those only who have their hearts cleansed from sin, can
have this blessed sight of God; sin is such a cloud, as if it be not removed,
will for ever hinder us from seeing the Sun of righteousness. Christian, Have
thou upon thy heart holiness to the Lord? then thou shall see God; there are
many says Saint Austin, could be content to go to heaven, but they are loath to
take the way that leads thither; they would have the glorious Vision, but
neglect the gracious Union.

There are several sorts of eyes which shall never see God; the ignorant eye,
the unchaste eye, the scornful eye, the malicious eye, the covetous eye; if you
would see God when you dye, you must be purified persons while you live. 1 John
3.2, 3. We shall see him as he is; and every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself.

SECT. 4.
A Cordial for the pure in heart.

3. LET me turn my self to the pure in heart. Moses his prayer, I beseech thee
show me thy glory, Exodus 33.18. The Saints shall behold Gods glory; the pure in
heart shall have the same blessedness that God himself has; for what is the
blessedness of God, but the contemplating his own infinite beauty.

2. Begin your sight of God here; let the eye of your faith be still upon God.
Moses by faith saw him who is invisible, Hebr. 11.27. Often look upon him with
believing eyes, whom you hope to see with glorified eyes: Psalm. 25. Mine eyes
are ever toward the Lord; while others are looking toward the Earth, as if
they would fetch all their comforts thence, let us look up to heaven; there is
the best prospect; the sight of God by faith would let in much joy to the soul.
1 Pet. 1.8. Though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable.

3. Let this be as Cordial-water to revive the pure in heart; Be comforted with
this, you shall shortly see God. The godly have many sights here that they
would not see; they see a body of death, they see the Sword unsheathed, they
see Rebellion wearing the Mask of Religion; they see the white Devil, these
sights occasion sorrow; but there is a blessed sight a coming, they shall see
God; and in him are all sparkling beauties, and ravishing joys to be found.

4. Be not discouraged at sufferings; all the hurt affliction and death can do,
is to give you a sight of God; as he said to his Fellow-Martyr, One half hour
in glory will make us forget our pain; the Sun arising, all the dark shadows of
the night fly away: When the pleasant beams of Gods countenance shall begin to
shine upon the soul in heaven, then sorrows and s^fferings shall be no more;
the dark shadows of the night shall fly away; the thoughts of this beatifical
Vision should carry a Christian full sail with joy through the waters of
affliction; this made Job so willing to embrace death, Job 19.25, 26. I know
that my Redeemer lives, and though worms devour this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God.

MATTHEW. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, etc.


CHAP. XVIII.
Concerning Peaceableness.

THIS is the seventh step of the golden Ladder which leads to blessedness,
(...). The name of peace is sweet, and the work of peace is a blessed work.
Blessed are the Peacemakers. Observe the Connection, the Scripture links these
two together, Pureness of heart, and peaceableness of spirit. Jam. 3.17. The
wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable. Hebr. 12.14. Follow peace and
holiness; and here Christ joins them together, Pure in heart, and Peacemakers;
as if there could be no purity, where there is not a study of peace; that
Religion is suspicious, which is full of Faction and Discord.

In the words there are three parts.

1. A Duty implied; viz. peaceable-mindedness. 2. A Duty expressed; to be
Peacemakers. 3. A Title of honor bestowed; (...), They shall be called the
children of God.
1. The Duty implied, peaceable-mindedness; for before men can make peace among
others, they must be of peaceable spirits themselves; before they can be
promoters of peace, they must be lovers of peace.

Doctr. 1. That Christians must be peaceable-minded; this peaceableness of
spirit is the beauty of a Saint, it is a jewel of great price. 1 Pet. 3.4. The
ornament of a quiet spirit which is in the sight of God of great price. The
Saints are Christ's sheep, John 10.27. the sheep is a peaceable creature; they
are Christ's Doves, Cant. 2.14. therefore they must be sine fell, without gall;
it becomes not Christians to be Ishmaels, but Solomon's: Though they must be
Lions for courage, yet Lambs for peaceableness; God was not in the Earthquake,
nor in the fire, but in the still, small voice, 1 Kings 19.12. God is not in
the rough, fiery spirit, but in the peaceable spirit. There is a fourfold
peace that we must study and cherish.

1. An Oeconomical peace, peace in Families; it is called vinculum pacis, the
bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. Without this all drops in pieces; peace is a girdle
that ties together members in a Family; it is a golden Clasp that knits them
together that they do not fall in pieces; we should endeavor that our houses
should be (...) houses of peace: It Is not fairness of Rooms makes an house
pleasant, but peaceableness of dispositions; there can be no comfortableness in
our dwellings, till peace be entertained as an inmate into our houses.

2. There is a Parochial peace; when there is a sweet harmony, a tuning and
chiming together of affections in a Parish. When all draw one way, and as the
Apostle says, are perfectly joined together in the same mind, 1 Cor. 1.10. One
jarring string brings all the Music out of tune; one bad Member in a Parish
endangers the whole: 1 These. 5.13. Be at peace among your selves. It Is little
comfort to have our houses joined together, if our hearts be asunder; a
Geometrical union will do little good without a Moral.

3. There is a Political peace; peace in City and Country, this is the fairest
flower of a Princes Crown; (...).
peace is the best blessing of a Nation. It is well with Bees when there is a
noise; but it is best with Christians, when (as in the building of the Temple)
there is no noise of Hammer heard. Peace brings plenty along with it; How many
Miles would some go on pilgrimage to purchase this peace! therefore the Greeks
made peace to be the Nurse of Pluto, the God of wealth. Political plants thrive
best in the Sunshine of peace. Psalm. 147.14. He makes peace in thy borders,
and fills thee with the finest of the wheat. -- Omnia pace vigent. -- The
Ancients made the Harp the Emblem of peace; How sweet would the sounding of
this Harp be after the roaring of the Canon! -- Pacem te poscimus omnes. -- All
should study to promote this Political peace; the godly man when he dies,
enters into peace, Isa. 57.2. But while he lives, peace must enter into him.

4. There is an Ecclesiastical peace, a Church-peace: When there is unity and
verity in the Church of God; never does Religion flourish more, then when her
children spread themselves as Olive-plants round about her Table: Unity in
Faith and Discipline is a mercy we cannot prize enough; this is that which God
has promised, Jer. 32.39. and which we should pursue, Zach. 8.19. Saint
Ambrose says of Theodosius the Emperor, that when he lay sick, he took more
care for the Churches peace than for his own recovery.

The Reasons why we should be (...), peaceable-minded, are two. 1. We are
called to peace, 1 Cor. 7.15. God never called any man to division; that is a
reason why we should not be given to strife, because we have no call for it;
but God has called us to peace. 2. It is the nature of grace to change the
heart, and make it peaceable: By nature we are of a fierce cruel disposition;
when God cursed the ground for man's sake, the curse was, that it should bring
forth thorns and thistles, Genesis 3.18. The heart of man naturally lies under
this curse, it brings forth nothing but the Thistles of strife and contention;
but when grace comes into the heart, it makes it peaceable, it infuseth a sweet
loving disposition, it smooths and polisheth the most knotty piece, it files
off the ruggedness in men's spirits; grace turns the Vulture into a Dove; the
Bryar into a Myrtle Tree Isa. 55.13.
; the Lyon-like fierceness into a Lamb-like gentleness. Isa. 11.7, 8. The wolf
also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid,
etc. It is spoken of the power which the Gospel shall have upon men's hearts, it
shall make such a Metamorphosis, that those who before were full of rage and
antipathy, shall now be made peaceable and gentle; The Leopard shall lie down
with the Kid.

SECT. 1.
Peaceableness a Saints Character.

Inform.
given to peace; he is the Keeper of the peace; he is filius pacis, a son of
peace.

Caution. Not but that a man may be of a peaceable spirit, yet seek to recover
that which is his due; if peace has been otherwise sought, and cannot be
attained, a man may go to Law, and yet be a peaceable man. It is with going to
Law, as it is with going to War, when the Rights of a Nation are invaded; as 2 Chronicles. 20.2, 3. and peace can be purchased by no other means than War, here it
is lawful to beat the Plough-share into a Sword; so when there is no other way
of recovering ones right, but by going to Law, a man may commence a suit in
Law, yet be of a peaceable spirit. Going to Law (in this case) is not so much
striving with another, as contending for a man's own; it is not to do another
wrong, but to do himself right; it is a desire rather of equity than victory: I
say as the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.8. The Law is good if a man use it lawfully.

Quest. Is all peace to be sought? how far is peace lawful?

Answ. Peace with men must have this double limitation.

1. The peace a godly man seeks, is not to have a league of amity with sinners;
though we are to be at peace with their persons, yet we are to have war with
their sins; we are to have peace with their persons as they are made in Gods
image; but to have war with their sins as they have made themselves in the
Devils image: David was for peace, Psalm. 120.7. but he would not sit upon the
Ale-bench with sinners, Psalm. 26.4, 5. Grace teaches good nature; we are to be
civil to the worst, but not twist into a cord of friendship; that were to be
Brethren in iniquity. Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness. Jehoshaphat (though a good man) was blamed for this, 2 Chronicles.
19.2. Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? The
fault fault was not that he entertained civil peace with Ahab; but that he had
a league of friendship, and was assistant to Ahab, when he went contrary to
God; therefore there was wrath upon Jehoshaphat from the Lord, Ver. 2. We must
not so far have peace with others, as to endanger our selves: If a man has the
plague, we will be helpful to him, and send him our best Receipts, but we are
careful not to have too much of his company, or suck in his infectious breath:
So we may be peaceable toward all, nay helpful; pray for them, council them,
relieve them; but let us take heed of too much familiarity, lest we suck in
their infection: In short, we must so make peace with men, that we do not break
our peace with conscience: Hebr. 12.14. Follow peace and holiness; we must not
purchase peace with the loss of holiness.

2. We must not so seek peace with others, as to wrong truth. Prove. 23.23. Buy
the truth, and sell it not. Peace must not be bought with the sale of truth;
truth is the ground of faith, the rule of manners; truth is the most orient gem
of the Churches Crown; truth is a depositum, or charge that God has entrusted
us with; we must God with our souls, he trusts us with his truths; we must not
let any of Gods truths fall to the ground Petius ruat coelum, quam pereat una
mica veritatis* Luth.
; the least filings of this gold are precious; we must not so seek the flower
of peace, as to lose the pearl of truth.

Some say let us unite, but we ought not to unite with Error. What communion
has light with darkness? 2 Cor. 6.14. There are many would have peace with the
destroying of truth; peace with Arminian, Socinian, Antiscripturist; this is a
peace of the Devils making. Cursed be that peace which makes War with the
Prince of peace; though we must be peaceable, yet we are bid to contend for the
faith, Jude 3. We must not be so in love with the golden Crown of peace, as to
pluck off the jewels of truth; rather let peace go than truth; the Martyrs
would rather lose their lives, than let go the truth.

SECT. 2.
Containing a Reproof of such as are unpeaceable.

IF Christians must be peaceable-minded, what shall we Exhort.
who like Flax or Gunpowder, if they be but touched, are all on fire! how far
is this from the spirit of the Gospel? it is made the note of the wicked, Isa.
57. They are like a troubled Sea; there is no rest or quietness in their
spirits, but they are continually casting forth the foam of passion and fury.
We may with Strigelius, wish even to dye, to be freed from the bitter strifes
which are among us: There are too many like the Salamander, who live in the
fire of broils and contentions. Jam. 3.14, 15. If ye have bitter envying and
strife, this wisdom descends not from above, but is Divellish; the lustful man
is Brutish, the wrathful man is Divellish. Every one is afraid to dwell in an
house which is haunted with evil spirits; yet how little afraid are men of
their own hearts, which are haunted with the evil spirit of wrath and
implacableness.

And which is much to be laid to heart, the divisions of Gods people; Gods own
Tribes go to War. In Tertullians time it was said, See how the Christians love
one another; but now it may be said, See how the Christians snarle one at
another! -- Saevis inter se convenit Ursis. -- Wicked men agree together, when
those who pretend to be led by higher principles, are full of animosities and
heart-burnings. Was it not sad to see Herod and Pilate uniting, and to see Paul
and Barnabas falling out? Acts 15.39. When the Disciples called for fire from
heaven, Ye know not (says Christ) what manner of spirit ye are of, Luke 9.56.
As if the Lord had said, This fire you call for, is not zeal, but is the
wilde-fire of your own passions; this spirit of yours does not suit with the
Master you serve, the Prince of peace; nor the work I am sending you about,
which is an Embassage of peace; it is Satan who kindles the fire of contention
in men's hearts, and then stands and warms himself at the fire. When boystrous
winds are up, we use to talk of Conjurers: Sure I am, when men's spirits begin
to bluster and storm, the Devil has conjured up these winds. Discords and
Animosities among Christians, bring their godliness much into question; for the
wisdom which is from above, is peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated,
Jam. 3.17.

SECT. 3.
Containing an Exhortation to peaceable-mindedness.

Romans 12.18. If it be possible, Exhort.
as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. The Curtains of the
Tabernacle were to be looped together, Exodus 26.3, 4. So should the hearts of
Christians be looped together in peace and unity. That I may persuade to
peaceable-mindedness, let me speak both to Reason and Conscience.

1. A peaceable spirit seems to be agreeable to the natural frame and
constitution; man by nature seems to be (...), a peaceable creature, fitter to
handle the Plough than the Sword; other creatures are naturally armed with some
kind of weapon wherewith they are able to revenge themselves: The Lion has his
Paw, the Boar his Tusk, the Be his Sting; only man has none of these weapons,
he comes naked and unarmed into the world, as if God would have him a peaceable
creature. -- Candida pax homines, trux decet ira feras. -- Man has his Reason
given him that he should live amiably and peaceably.

2. A peaceable spirit is honorable. Prove. 20.3. It is an honor for a man to
cease from strife. We think it a brave thing to give way to strife, and let
loose the reins to our passions; oh no, it is an honor to cease from strife:
Noble spirits are such lovers of peace, that they need not be bound to the
peace; it is the bramble that rends and tears whatever is near it; the Cedar and
Fig Tree, those more noble Plants, grow pleasantly and peaceably; peaceableness
is the Ensign and Ornament of a noble mind.

3. To be of a peaceable spirit, is highly prudential. Jam. 3.17. The wisdom
from above is peaceable. A wise man will not meddle with strife; it is like
putting ones finger into an Hornets Nest; or to use Solomon's similitude, Prove.
17.14. The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water. To set out the
folly of strife, it is as letting out of water in two respects.

1. When water begins to be let out, rhere is no end of it; so there is no end
of strife when once begun.

2. The letting out of water is dangerous: If a man should break down a Bank,
and let in an Arm of the Sea, the water might overflow his Fields, and drown
him in the Flood: so is he that intermeddles with strife; he may mischief
himself, and open such a Sluice as may ingulph and swallow him up. True wisdom
espouseth peace; a prudent man will keep off from the briars as much as he can.

4. To be of a peaceable spirit, brings peace along with it; a contentious
person vexes himself, and eclipseth his own comfort; he is like the Bird that
beats it self against the Cage, he troubles his own flesh, Prove. 11.17. He is
just like one that pares off the sweet of the Apple, and eats nothing but the
Kore: So a quarrelsome man pares off all the comfort of his life, and feeds
only upon the bitter Kore of disquiet, he is a self-tormentor; the wicked are
compared to a troubled sea, Isa. 57.20. And it follows, there is no peace to
the wicked, Ver. 21. The Septuagint renders it (...), there is no joy to the
wicked; froward spirits do not enjoy what they possess; but peaceableness of
spirit brings the sweet Music of peace along with it, it makes a calm and
harmony in the soul; therefore the Psalmist says, it is not only bonum, but
jucundum; not only good, but pleasant to live together in unity, Psalm. 133.1.

5. A peaceable disposition is a God-like disposition.

1. God the Father is called the God of peace, Hebr. 13.20. Mercy and peace are
about his Throne, he signs the Articles of peace, and sends the Ambassadors of
peace to publish them, 2 Cor. 5.20.

2. God the Son is called the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. His name is Emmanuel,
God with us, a name of peace; his Office is to be a Mediator of peace, 1 Timothy
2.5. He came into the world with a song of peace; the Angels did sing it, Luke
2.14. Peace on Earth; he went out of the world with a Legacy of peace: John
14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you.

3. God the Holy Ghost is a Spirit of peace, he is the Comforter; he seals up
peace, 2 Cor. 1.22. This blessed Dove brings the Olive Branch of peace in his
mouth; Now a peaceable disposition evidenceth something of God in a man,
therefore God loves to dwell there. Psalm. 76.2. In Salem is Gods Tabernacle:
Salem signifies peace, God dwells in a peaceable spirit.

6. Christ's earnest prayer was for peace; he prayed that his people might be
one, John 17.11, 21, 23. that they might be of one mind and heart: And observe
the Argument Christ uses in prayer, (it is good to use Arguments in prayer;
they are as the feathers to the Arrow, which make it fly swifter, and pierce
deeper; Affections in prayer are as the fire in the Gun; Arguments in prayer
are as the Bullet) the Argument Christ urges to his Father, is, Ver. 22. That
they may be one, even as we are one. There was never any discord between God
the Father and Christ; though God parted with Christ out of his bosom, yet not
out of his heart. There was ever dearness and oneness between them: Now Christ
prays, that as he and his Father were one, so his people might be all one in
peace and concord. Did Christ pray so earnestly for peace, and shall not we
endeavor what in us lies to fulfill Christ's prayer? how do we think Christ
will hear our prayer, if we cross his?

7. Christ not only prayed for peace, but bled for it. Col. 1.20. Having made
peace through the blood of his Cross: Pacem omnimodam; he dyed not only to make
peace between God and man, but between man and man. Christ suffered on the
Cross, that he might cement Christians together with his blood; as he prayed
for peace, so he paid for peace; Christ was himself bound to bring us into the
bond of peace.

8. Strife and contention hinder the growth of grace: Can good seed grow in a
ground where there is nothing but thorns and briars to be seen? Matthew. 13. The
thorns choked the seed. When the heart is as it were stuck with thorns, and is
ever tearing and rending, can the seed of grace ever grow there? Historians
report of the Isle of Patmos, that the natural soil of it is such, that
nothing will grow upon that Earth. A froward heart is like the Isle of Patmos,
nothing of grace will grow there, till God changes the soil, and makes it
peaceable. How can faith grow in an unpeaceable heart? for faith works by love.
Impossible it is that he should bring forth the sweet fruits of the Spirit, who
is in the gall of bitterness; if a man has received poison into his body, the
most excellent food will not nourish, till he takes some antidote to expel that
poison. Many come to the Ordinances with seeming zeal, but being poisoned with
wrath and animosity, they receive no spiritual nourishment. Christ's body
mystical edifieth it self in love, Ephesians. 4.16. There may be praying and hearing,
but no spiritual concoction, no edifying of the body of Christ without love and
peace.

9. Peaceableness among Christians is a powerful loadstone to draw the world to
receive Christ; not only gifts and miracles, and preaching may persuade men to
embrace the truth of the Gospel, but peace and unity among the Professors of
it: When as there is one God and one faith, so there is one heart among
Christians; this is as Cummin seed, which makes the Doves flock to the windows.
The Temple was adorned with goodly stones, Luke 21.5. This makes Christ's
spiritual Temple look beautiful, and the stones of it appear goodly, when they
are cemented together in peace and unity.

10. Unpeaceableness of spirit is to make Christians turn Heathens; it is the
sin of the Heathens, (...), implacable, Romans 1.31. They cannot be pacified,
their hearts are like Adamant, no oil can supple them, no fire can melt them;
it is a Heathenish thing to be so fierce and violent, as if with Romulus, men
had sucked the milk of Wolves.

11. To add yet more weight to the Exhortation, it is the mind of Christ that
we should live in peace. Mark 9.50. (...), have peace one with another. Shall
we not be at peace for Christ's sake? if we ought to lay down our life for
Christ's sake, shall we not lay down our strife for his sake?

To conclude, if we will neither be under counsels nor commands, but still feed
the peccant humor, nourishing in ourselves a spirit of dissension and
unpeaceableness, Jesus Christ will never come near us. The people of God are
said to be his house, Hebr. 3.6. Whose house are we, etc. When the hearts of
Christians are a spiritual house, adorned with the furniture of peace, then
they are fit for the Prince of peace to inhabit; but when this pleasant
furniture is wanting, and instead of it nothing but strife and debate, Christ
will not own it for his house, nor will he grace it with his presence; who will
dwell in an house which is smoaky, and all on fire?

SECT. 4.
Showing some helps to peaceableness.



1. Take heed of those things which will hinder it. There are several
impediments of peace which we must beware of; and they are either outward or
inward.

1. Outward; as whisperers, Romans 1.29. There are some who will be buzzing
things in our ears, purposely to exasperate and provoke; among these we may
rank Tale-bearers, Lev. 19.16. The Talebearer carries reports up and down, the
Devil sends his letters by this Post; the Talebearer is an Incendiary, he
blows the coals of contention. Do you hear (says he) what such an one faith of
you? Will you put up such a wrong? will you suffer your self to be so abused?
thus does he by throwing in his fireballs, foment differences, and set men
together by the ears; we are commanded indeed to provoke one another to love,
Hebr. 10.24. but nowhere to provoke to anger: We should stop our ears to such
persons as are known to come on the Devils Errand.

2. Take heed of inward lets to peace.

As 1. (...), self-love. 2 Timothy 3.2. Men shall be lovers of themselves: And it
follows, they shall be (...) fierce, Ver. 3. The setting up of this Idol of
Self has caused so many Lawsuits, Plunders, Massacres in the World. All seek
their own, Phil. 2.21. Nay, it were well if they would seek but their own.
Self-love angles away the Estates of others either by force or fraud. Self-love
sets up Monopolies and Enclosures; it is a Bird of prey, which lives upon
rapine. Self-love cuts asunder the bond of peace; lay aside Self. The Heathens
could say, Non nobis solum nati, we are not born for our selves.

2. (...), Pride. Prove. 28.25. He that is of a proud heart, stirs up strife.
Pride and Contention like Hippocrates Twins, are both born at once. A proud man
thinks himself better than others, and will contend for superiority. Joh. 3.9.
Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence: A proud man would have all
strike sail to him. Because Mordecai would not give Haman the Cap and Knee, he
gets a bloody Warrant signed for the death of all the Jews, Esther 3.9. What
made all the strife between Pompey and Caesar but pride? their spirits were too
high to yield one to another. When this wind of pride gets into a man's heart,
it causes sad Earthquakes of division. The Poets fain, that when Pandora's
box was broke open, it filled the World with diseases. When Adams pride had
broken the box of Original righteousness, it has ever since filled the World
with debates and dissentions. Let us shake off this viper of pride; humility
soders Christians together in peace.

3. (...), envy; envy stirs up strife; the Apostle has linked them
together: 1 Timothy 6.4. Envy, strife: Envy cannot endure a Superior; this made
the Plebeian faction so strong among the Romans, they envied their Superiors:
An envious man seeing another to have a fuller Crop, a better Trade, is ready
to pick a quarrel with him. Prove. 27.4. Who can stand before envy? Envy is a
vermin that lives on blood; take heed of it; peace will not dwell with this
inmate.

4. (...), Credulity. Prove. 14.15. The simple believes every word. A credulous
man is akin to a fool, he believes all that is told him, and this does often
create differences. As it is a sin to be a Talebearer, so it is a folly to be
a Tale-believer. A wise man will not take a report at the first bound, but will
sift and examine it before he gives credit to it.

2. Let us labor for those things which will maintain and cherish peace.

As, 1. Faith; faith and peace keep house together; faith believes the Word of
God; the Word says, Live in peace, 2 Cor. 13.11. And as soon as faith sees the
King of heavens Warrant, it obeyes; faith persuades the soul that God is at
peace; and it is impossible to believe this, and live in variance; nourish
faith; faith knits us to God in love, and to our Brethren in peace.

2. Christian communion: There should not be too much strangeness among
Christians; the primitive Saints had their (...), love feasts Tertul.
. The Apostle exhorting to peace, brings this as an Expedient, Be ye kind one
to another, Ephesians. 4.32.

3. Look not upon the failings of others, but their graces; there is no
perfection here. We read of the spots of Gods children, Deutr. 32.5. The most
golden Christians are some grains too light: Oh let us not so quarrel with the
infirmities of others, as to pass by their virtues. If in some things they
fail, in other things they excel. It Is the manner of the world to look more
upon the Sun in an Eclipse, than when it shines in its full luster.

4. Pray to God that he will send down the Spirit of peace into our hearts; we
should not as Vultures, prey one upon another; but pray one for another. Pray
that God will quench the fire of contention, and kindle the fire of compassion
in our hearts one to another: So much for the first thing in the Text implied,
that Christians should be peaceable-minded. I proceed to the second expressed,
That they should be (...) Peacemakers.

SECT. 5.
Pressing Christians to be Peacemakers.

peaceable themselves, but make others to be at peace; as in the body, when a
joint is out, we set it again; so it should be in the body Politic: When a
garment is rent, we sow it together again; when others are rent asunder in
their affections, we should with a spirit of meekness sow them together again:
Had we this excellent skill, we might glue and unite dissenting spirits. I
confess it is often a thankless office to go about to reconcile differences
(...). Gr. Naz.
: Acts 7.27. Handle a bryar never so gently, it will go near to scratch; he
that goes to interpose between two Fencers, many time receives the blow; but
this duty, though it may want success as from men, yet it shall not want a
blessing from God: Blessed are the peacemakers. O how happy were England if it
had more peacemakers. Abraham was a peacemaker, Genesis 13.8. Moses was a
peacemaker, Exodus 2.13. and that ever to be honored Emperor Constantine, when
he called the Bishops together at that first Council of Nice to end
Church-controversies, they having instead of that prepared bitter invectives,
and accusations one against another, Constantine took their papers and rent
them, gravely exhorting them to peace and unanimity.

Use 1. Reproof. It sharply reproves them that are so peacemakers, that they
are peace-breakers: Romans 16.17. Mark those which cause divisions and avoid
them: Have no more to do with them, than with Witches or Murderers: The Devil
was the first peace-breaker, he divided man from God; he like Phaeton, set all
on fire: There are too many make-bates in England, whose sweetest Music is in
discord; who never unite but to divide; as it was said of one of the Arian
Emperors, he procured unity to prevent peace Unitatem procurat ne pax sit.
: How many in our days may be compared to Sampsons Foxtails, which were tied
together only to set the Philistines Corn on fire! Judges 15.4, 5. Sectaries
unite to set the Churches peace on fire; these are the persons Gods soul hates.
Prove. 6.19. Sowers of discord among Brethren; these are the children of a
curse. Deutr. 27.24. Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly. That is,
who backbites, and so sets one friend against another; if there be a Devil in
man's shape, it is the Incendiary.

Use 2. It exhorts to two things.

Exhort.
1. Let us take up a bitter lamentation for the divisions of England; the wild
Beast has broken down the hedge England comfort her, but rather rake in her
bowels: Will not an ingenuous child grieve to see his mother rent and torn in
pieces? It is reported of Cato, that from the time the Civil Wars began in Rome
between Caesar and Pompey, he was never seen to laugh, or shave his beard, or
cut his hair. That our hearts may be sadly affected with these our Church and
State-divisions, let us consider the mischief of divisions.

1. They are a Prognostic of much evil to a Nation; here that Rule in
Philosophy holds true, omne divisibile est corruptibile. When the vail of the
Temple did rend in pieces, it was a sad omen and forerunner of the destruction
of the Temple; the rending the vail of the Churches peace, betokens the ruin
of it. Josephus observes that the City of Jerusalem, when it was besieged by
Titus Vespasian, had three great factions in it, which destroyed more than the
enemy, and was the occasion of the taking it: How fatal intestine divisions
have been to this Land? Cambden and other learned Writers relate, our
discerptions and mutinies have been the scaling ladder by which the Romans and
the Normans have formerly gotten into the Nation. How is the bond of peace
broken? we have so many Schisms in the body, and are run into so many
particular Churches, that God may justly unchurch us, as he did Asia.

2. It may afflict us to see the garment of the Churches peace rent, because
divisions bring an opprobrium and scandal upon Religion; these make the ways of
God evil spoken, as if Religion were the fomenter of strife and sedition.
Julian in his invectives against the Christians, said, they lived together as
Tigers, rending, and devouring one another; and shall we make good Julians
words? It Is unseemly to see Christ's Doves fighting; to see his lilly become a
bramble. Alexander Severus seeing two Christians contending, commanded them
that they should not take the name of Christians any longer upon them; for
(says he) you dishonor your Master Christ. Let men either lay down their
contentions, or lay off the coat of their profession.

3. Divisions obstruct the progress of piety; the Gospel seldom thrives where
the apple of strife grows; the building of Gods spiritual Temple is hindered by
the confusion of tongues. Division eats as a worm, and destroys the peaceable
fruits of righteousness Hebr. 12.11.
. In the Church of Corinth, when they began to divide into Parties, one was for
Paul, and another for Apollo, there were but few for Christ; confident I am,
Englands divisions have made many turn Atheists.

2. Let us labor to heal differences, and be repairers Blessed are the
peacemakers. 1. Jesus Christ was a great peacemaker, he took a long journey
from heaven to earth to make peace. 2. Peace and unity is a great means for the
corroborating and strengthening the Church of God; the Saints are compared to
living stones, built up for a spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2.5. You know the stones
in an Arch or Fabric do help to preserve and bear up one another; if the
stones be loosned, and drop out, all the Fabric falls in pieces: When the
Christians in the primitive Church were of one heart, Acts 4.32. what a
supporting was this? how did they counsel, comfort, build up one another in
their holy faith? We see while the members of the body are united, so long they
do administer help and nourishment one to another; but if they be divided and
broken off, they are no way useful, but the body languisheth; therefore let us
endeavor to be peacemakers; the Churches unity tends much to her stability.

3. Peace makes the Church of God on earth in some measure like the Church
which is in heaven; the Cherubims (representing the Angels) are set out with
their faces looking one upon another, to show their peace and unity; there are
no jarrings or discords among the heavenly spirits; one Angel is not of an
opinion differing from one another; though they have different orders, they are
not of different spirits; they are Seraphims, therefore burn, but not in heat
of contention, but love: The Angels serve God, not only with pure hearts, but
united hearts; by an harmonious peace we might resemble the Church Triumphant.

4. He that sowes peace, shall reap peace. Prove 12.20. To the Counselors of
peace is joy. The peacemaker shall have peace with God Tranquillus Deus,
tranquilli^ omnia.
; peace in his own bosom; and that is the sweetest Music which is made in a
man's own breast; he shall have peace with others; the hearts of all shall be
united to him; all shall honor him, he shall be called instaurator ruinae, the
repairer of the breach, Isa. 58.12. To conclude, the peacemaker shall dye in
peace, he shall carry a good conscience with him, and leave a good name behind
him. So I have done with the first part of the Text, Blessed are the
peacemakers. I proceed to the next.

CHAP. XIX.
MATTHEW. 5.9. They shall be called the children of God.


IN which words the glorious privilege of the Saints is set down: Those who
have made their peace with God, and labor to make peace among Brethren, Per
nomen pacifici itur ad nomen filii.
this is the great honor conferred upon them, They shall be called the
children of God.

They shall be [called;] that is, they shall be so reputed and esteemed of God;
God never miscalls any thing; he does not call them children which are no
children. Luke 1.76. Thou shall be called the Prophet of the highest, that is,
thou shall be so; they shall be called the children of God; that is, they shall
be accounted and admitted for children.

Doctr. The Proposition resulting is this, That peacemakers are the children
of the most High. God is said in Scripture to have many children.

1. By Eternal Generation; so only Christ is the natural Son of his Father.
Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

2. By Creation; so the Angels are the sons of God. Job 1.6. and Job 38.7. When
the Morning Stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy.

3. By Participation of dignity; so Kings and Rulers are said to be children of
the High God. Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are gods, and all of you are children
of the most High.

4. By Visible profession; so God has many children. Hypocrites forge a title
of sonship. Genesis 6.2. The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were
fair.

5. By Real Sanctification; so all the faithful are peculiarly and eminently
the children of God.

That I may illustrate and amplify this, and that believers may suck much
sweetness out of this Gospel-flower, I shall discuss and demonstrate these
seven particulars.

1. That naturally we are not the children of God. 2. What it is to be the
children of God. 3. How we come to be made children. 4. The signs of Gods
children. 5. The love of God in making us children. 6. The honor of Gods
children. 7. The privileges of Gods children
SECT. 1.
Showing, that by nature we are not Gods children.

1. THAT naturally we are not the children of born Gods children, but made so
Facti sumus non nascimur filii. Hierom.
. By nature we are strangers to God; Swine, not sons, 2 Pet. 2. ult. Will a man
settle his Estate upon his Swine? he will give them his Acorns, not his Jewels:
By nature we have the Devil for our father, John 8.44. Ye are of your father
the Devil. A wicked man may search the Records of hell for his Pedigree.

SECT. 2.
Showing what it is to be children.

2. WHAT it is to be the children of God. This

1. Adoption. 2. Infusion of grace.
1. Childship consists in Adoption. Gal. 4.5. That we might receive the
Adoption of sons.

Quest. Wherein does the true nature of Adoption consist?

Answ. In three things.

1. A Transition or Translation from one Family to another. He that is adopted,
is taken out of the old Family of the Devil and Hell, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. To which
he was heir apparent, and is made of the family of heaven, of a noble family,
Ephesians. 2.19. (...).
God is his Father, Christ is his Elder Brother, the Saints Coheir, the Angels
fellow servants in that Family.

2. Adoption consists in an immunity and disobligement from all the Laws of the
former Family. Psalm. 45.10. Forget also thy fathers house. He who is
spiritually adopted, has now no more to do with sin. Ephraim shall say, What
have I any more to do with Idols? Hos. 14.8. A child of God has indeed to do
with sin as with an enemy to which he gives battle; but not as with a Lord, to
which he yields obedience. He is free from sin, Romans 6.8. I do not say he is
free from duty: Was it ever heard that a child should be freed from duty to his
parents? this is such a freedom as Rebels take.

3. Adoption consists in a Legal investiture into the Rights and Royalties of
the Family into which the person is to be adopted; these are chiefly two.

1. The first Royalty is a new name. He who is divinely adopted, assumes a new
name; before a slave, now a son; of a sinner, a Saint, this is a name of honor,
better than any title of Prince or Monarch. Rev. 2.17. To him that overcomes I
will give a white stone, and in the stone a new name written. The white stone
signifies remission; the new name signifies adoption; and the new name is put
in the white stone, to show that our Adoption is grounded upon our
Justification; and this new name is written, to show that God has all the
names of his children enrolled in the book of life.

2. The second Royalty is, a giving the party adopted an interest in the
inheritance. The making one an heir, implies a relation to an inheritance. A
man does not adopt another to a title, but an Estate; so God in adopting us for
his children, gives us a glorious inheritance. Col. 1.12. The inheritance of
the Saints in light.

1. It Is pleasant, it is an inheritance in light.

2. It Is safe; God keeps the inheritance for his children. 1 Pet. 1.4. and
keeps them for the inheritance; 1 Pet. 1.5. so that they cannot be hindered
from taking possession.

3. There is no disinheriting; for the Saints are Coheirs with Christ, Romans
8.15. Nay, they are members of Christ, Col. 1.18. The members cannot be
disinherited but the head must.

4. The heirs never dye; eternity is a jewel of their Crown. Revel. 22.5. They
shall reign for ever and ever.

Before I pass to the next, here a question may arise, How Gods Adopting, and
man's Adopting differ.

1. Man adopts to supply a defect, because he has no children of his own; but
God does not adopt upon this account; he had a Son of his own, the Lord Jesus;
he was his natural Son, and the Son of his love, testified by a voice from
heaven. Matthew. 3. ult. This is my beloved Son: Never was there any Son so like
the Father, he was his exact Effigies; Hebr. 1.3. The express image of his
person; he was such a Son as was more worth than all the Angels in heaven.
Hebr. 1.4. Being made so much better than the Angels; so that God adopts, not
out of necessity, but pity.

2. When a man adopts, he adopts but one heir; but God adopts many. Hebr. 2.10.
In bringing many sons to glory. Oh may a poor trembling Christian say, Why
should I ever look for this privilege to be a child of God! it is true, if God
did do as a man, if he did only adopt one son, then thou might despair; but
he adopts millions, he brings many sons to glory; indeed this may be the reason
why a man adopts but one, because he has not Estate enough for more; if he
should adopt many, his Land would not hold out; but God has Land enough to
give to all his children. John 14.2. In my Fathers house are many Mansions.

3. Man when he adopts, does it with ease; it is but sealing a Deed, and the
thing is done; but when God adopts, it puts him to a far greater expense, it
sets his wisdom on work to find out a way to adopt us; it was no easy thing to
reconcile hell and heaven, to make the children of wrath, the children of the
promise; and when God in his infinite wisdom had found out a way, it was no
easy way, it cost God the death of his natural Son, to make us his adopted
sons. When God was about to constitute us sons and heirs, he could not seal the
Deed, but by the blood of his own Son; it did not cost God so much to make us
creatures, as to make us sons: To make us creatures cost but the speaking of a
word; to make us sons cost the effusion of blood.

4. Man when he adopts, does but settle earthly privileges upon his heir; but
God settles heavenly privileges, Justification, Glorification. Men do but
entail their Land upon the persons they adopt; God does more; he not only
entails his Land upon his children, but he entails Himself upon them. Hebr.
8.10. I will be their God; not only heaven is their portion, but God is their
portion.

2. Gods filiating or making of children, is by the infusion of grace. When God
makes any his children, he stamps his Image upon them; this is more than any
man living can do; he may adopt another, but he cannot alter his disposition;
if he be of a morose rugged nature, he cannot alter it; but God in making of
children, does disponere ad filiationem, he does prepare and sanctify them for
this privilege; he changes their disposition, he files off the ruggedness of
their nature, he makes them not only sons, but Saints; they are of another
spirit, Numb. 14.24. They become meek and humble, they are partakers of the
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

SECT. 3.
Showing how we come to be Gods children.

3. THE third thing is, How we come to be the

Answ. There is a double cause of our filiation or childship.

1. The Causa (...), or impulsive cause, is Gods (...), his free grace: We were
Rebels and Traitors, and what could move God to make sinners sons, but
free grace? Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us unto the Adoption of children,
according to the good pleasure of his will. Free Grace gave the casting voice;
Adoption is a mercy spun out of the bowels of free grace; it were much for God
to take a clod of earth, and make it a Star; but it is more for God to take a
piece of clay and sin, and instate it into the glorious privilege of sonship.
How will the Saints read over the Lectures of free grace in heaven?

2. The Organical or Instrumental cause of our sonship, is faith* Baptism does
not make us children, that is indeed a badge and livery, and gives us right to
many external privileges; but the thing which makes God take cognizance of us
for children, is faith. Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus. Before faith be wrought, we have nothing to do with God; we are
(as the Apostle speaks in another sense) bastards, and not sons, Hebr. 12.7. An
unbeliever may call God his Judge, but not his Father. Wicked men may draw near
to God in Ordinances, and hope that God will be their Father; but while they
are unbelievers, they are bastards; and God will not Father them, but will lay
them at the Devils door: Ye are the children of God by faith; faith does
legitimate us, it confers upon us the title of sonship, and gives us right to
inherit.

How then should we labor for faith! without faith we are creatures, not
children; without faith we are spiritually illegitimate; this word
illegitimate, is

1. A term of infamy; such as are illegitimate, are looked upon with disgrace,
we call them base-born; Thou who do ruffle it in thy silks and velvets, but
art in the state of nature, thou art illegitimate; God looks upon thee with an
eye of scorn and contempt; thou art a vile person, a son of the earth, of the
seed of the serpent; the Devil can show as good a Coat of Arms as thou.

2. This word illegitimate imports infelicity and misery. Persons illegitimate
cannot inherit legally; the Land goes only to such as are lawful heirs; till we
are the children of God, we have no right to heaven; and there is no way to be
children but by faith; Ye are the children of God by faith.

Here two things are to be discussed.

1. What faith is. 2. Why faith makes us children.
1. What faith is: If faith does instate us into sonship, it concerns us to
know what faith is. There is a twofold faith.

1. A more lax, general faith. When we believe the truth of all that is
revealed in the holy Scriptures, this is not the faith which does privilege us
in sonship; the Devils believe all the Articles in the Creed: It Is not the bare
knowledge of a medicine, or believing the Sovereign virtue of it, will cure one
that is ill. This general faith (so much cried up by some) will not save; this
a man may have, and yet not love God. He may believe that God will come to
judge the quick and the dead, and hate him; as the prisoner believes the
Judges coming to the Assizes, and abhors the thoughts of him. Take heed of
resting in a general faith; you may have this, and be no better than Devils.

2. There is a special faith; fides qua creditur; when we do not only believe
the report we hear of Christ, but rest upon him, embrace him, taking hold of
the horns of this Altar, resolving there to abide. In the body there are venae
sugentes, sucking veins, which draw the meat into the stomach, and concoct it
there: So faith is the sucking vein, which draws Christ into the heart, and
applies him there. This is the filiating faith; by this we are made the
children of God; and wherever this faith is, it is not like physic in a dead
man's mouth, but is exceeding operative, it obliges to duty, it works by love,
Gal. 5.6.

2. Why Faith makes us children? why not as well other graces, Repentance,
Love, etc?

Answ. 1. Because Faith is instituted of God, and honored to this work of
making us children. Gods institution gives Faith its value and validity; it is
the Kings stamp makes the Coin pass current; if he would put his stamp upon
brass or leather, it would go as current as silver. The great God has
authorized, and put the stamp of his institution upon Faith, and that makes it
pass for current, and gives it a privilege above all the graces to make us
children.

2. Faith makes us children, as it is the vital principle. Hab. 2.4. The just
shall live by faith. All Gods children are living, none of them are still-born;
now by faith we live. As the heart is the primum vivens, the fountain of life
in the body; so Faith is the fountain of life in the soul.

3. Faith makes us children, as it is the uniting grace; it knits us to Christ;
the other graces cannot do this; by faith we are one with Christ, and so we are
akin to God; being united to the Natural Son, we become adopted sons: The
Kindred comes in by Faith, God is the Father of Christ; Faith makes us Christ's
Brethren Hebr. 2.11.
, and so God comes to be our Father.

SECT. 4.
Setting forth the signs of Gods children.

4. THE fourth particular to be discussed, is, To show the signs of Gods
children; it concerns us to know whose children we are. Aut filii Dei, aut
filii Diaboli. Aug.
Austin says, All mankind are divided into two Ranks; either they are the
children of God, or the children of the Devil.

tenderness of heart. 2 Chronicles. 34.27. Because thy heart was tender. A
child-like heart is a render heart; he who before had a flinty, has now a
fleshy heart: A tender heart is like melting wax to God, he may set what seal
he will upon it; this tenderness of heart shows it self three ways.

1. A tender heart grieves for sin; a child weeps for offending his father,
Peter showed a tender heart, when Christ looked upon him, and he remembered his
sin, he wept as a child. Clemens Alexandrinus says, he never heard a Cock
crow, but he wept Da mihi Domine, in hoc exilio, lachrymarum fontem quem super
omnem d^litiarum copiam ^surio. Aug. l. de contrit. cord.
: And some learned Writers tell us, that by much weeping there seemed to be as
it were, Channels made in his blessed face. The least hair makes the eye weep;
the least sin makes the heart smite. David's heart smote him when he cut off the
Lap of King Saul's garment? What would it have done if he had cut off his head?

2. A tender heart melts under mercy: Though when God thunders by affliction,
the rain of tears does fall from a gracious eye, yet the heart is never so
kindly dissolved, as under the Sunbeams of Gods mercy; see how David's heart
was melted with Gods kindness. 2 Samuel 7.18. Who am I O Lord God, and what is my
house, that thou have brought me hitherto? there was a gracious thaw upon his
heart. So says a child of God, Lord, who am I? (a piece of dust and sin
kneaded together) that the orient beams of free grace should shine upon me! Who
am I, that thou should pity me when I lay in my blood, and spread the golden
wings of mercy over me! The soul is overcome with Gods goodness, the tears
drop, the love flames; mercy has a melting influence upon the soul.

3. A tender heart trembles under Gods threatenings, Psalm 119.120. My flesh
trembles for fear of thee, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. Because thy heart was tender, and
thou did humble thy self before God, when thou heardst his words against this
place, and did rend thy clothes, etc. If the father be angry, the child
trembles. When Ministers denounce the menaces and threats of God against sin,
tender souls sit in a trembling posture; this frame of heart God delights in,
Isa. 66.2. To this man will I look, even to him that trembles at my word; a
wicked man like the Leviathan, is made without fear, Job 41.33. He neither
believes the Promises, nor dreads the Threatenings; let judgment be denounced
against sin, he laughs at the shaking of a spear; he thinks either that God is
ignorant and does not see, or impotent and cannot punish; the mountains quake
before the Lord, the hills melt, the rocks are thrown down by him, Nahum. 1.5.
But the hearts of sinners are more obdurate than the rocks; an hardened sinner
like Nebuchadnezzar, has the heart of a beast given to him, Dan. 4.16. a
child-like heart is a tender heart; the stone is taken away.

Assimilation, Col. 3.10. Ye have put on the new man which is renewed af-the
image of him that created him. (...); the child resembles the father; Gods
children are like their heavenly Father, they bear his very image and impresse;
wicked men say they are the children of God, but there is too great a
dissimilitude and unlikenesse; the Jews bragged they were Abraham's children, but
Christ disproves them by this argument, because they were not like him, John
8.40. Ye seek to kill me, a man that have told you the truth which I have heard
of God; this did not Abraham. You Abraham's children, and go about to kill me!
Abraham would not have murdered an innocent, you are more like Satan than
Abraham, ver. 44. ye are of your father the Devil. Such as are proud, earthly,
malicious, may say, our father which art in hell; it is blasphemy to call God
our Father, and make the Devil our Pattern. Gods children resemble him in
meekness and holiness; they are his walking pictures; As the Seal stamps its
print, and likeness upon the Wax; so does God stamp the print and effigies of
his own beauty upon his children.

Spirit of God. It Is called the Spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15. ye have received
the Spirit of adoption, etc.

Quest. How shall we know that we have received the Spirit of adoption, and so
are in the state of adoption?

Answ. The Spirit of God has a threefold work in them who are made children.

1. A Regenerating work. 2. A Supplicating work. 3. A Witnessing work.
1. A Regenerating work; whomsoever the Spirit adopts, it regenerates; Gods
children are said to be born of the Spirit, John 3.5. Except a man be born of
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God; we must first
be born of the Spirit, before we are baptized with this new name of sons and
daughters; we are not Gods children by creation but renovation; not by our
first birth, but our new birth. This New Birth produced by the Word as the
material cause James 1.18.
, and by the Spirit as the efficient cause, is nothing else but a change of
nature, Romans 12.2. which though it be not a perfect change, yet is a through
change, 1 These. 5.23. This change of heart is as necessary Generatus damnatus
nisi regeneratus. Austin.
as salvation.

Quest. How shall we know that we have this regenerating work of the Spirit?

Answ. Two ways.

By the pangs. By the products.
1. By the pangs; There are spiritual pangs before the new birth; some
bruisings of soul; some groanings and cryings out, some struglings in the heart
between flesh and spirit, Acts 2.37. they were pricked at their heart; The
child has sharp throws before the birth, so it is in the new birth; I grant
the new birth does recipere magis and minus; all have not the same pangs of
humiliation; yet all have pangs; all feel the hammer of the Law upon their
heart, though some are more bruised with this hammer than others; Gods Spirit
is a Spirit of bondage, before it be a Spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15. What then
shall we say to those who are as much to seek about the new birth as Nicodemus!
John 3.4. How can a man be born when he is old, etc? The new birth is ludibrium
impiis, though it be grande mysterium piis; some thank God they never had any
trouble of spirit, they were always quiet. These bless God for the greatest
curse; it is a sign they are not Gods children; the child of grace is always
born with pangs.

2. The new birth is known by the Products, which are three.

1. Sensibility. The infant that is newborn, is sensible of the least touch;
If the Spirit has regenerated thee, thou art sensible of the ebullitions and
first risings of sin, which before thou did not perceive. Paul cries out of
the law in his members, Romans 7.23. The newborn Saint sees sin in the root.

2. Circumspection. He who is born of the Spirit is careful to preserve grace;
he plies the breast of Ordinances, 1 Pet. 1.2. he is fearful of that which may
endanger his spiritual life, 1 John 5.18. he lives by faith, yet passes the
time of his sojourning in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. This is the first work of the
Spirit in them who are made children, a regenerating work.

3. The Spirit of God has a supplicating work in the heart: The spirit of
adoption is a spirit of supplication, Romans 8.15. Ye have received the spirit of
adoption whereby we cry Abba Father. While the child is in the womb it cannot
cry: while men lie in the womb of their natural estate, they cannot pray
effectually, but when they are born of the Spirit, then they cry Abba Father.
Prayer is nothing else but the souls breathing it self into the bosom of its
Father. It Is a sweet and familiar intercourse with God; as soon us ever the
Spirit of God comes into the heart, it sets it a praying; no sooner was Paul
converted, but the next word is, behold he prays Implet Spiritus Sanctus
organum suum and tanquam filia chordarum, tangit digitus Dei corda Sanctorum*
Prosper in Epist.
, Acts 9.11. It is reported in the life of Luther, when he prayed, it was with
so much reverence as if he were praying to God, and with so much boldness, as
if he had been speaking to his friend Theodor. in vit. Luth. p. 142.
. And Eusebius reports of Constantine the Emperor, that everyday he used to
shut up himself in some secret place in his Palace, and there on bended knees
did make his devour prayers and soliloquies to God; Gods Spirit tunes the
strings of the affections, and then we make melody in prayer. For any to say in
derision, you pray by the Spirit, is a blasphemy against the Spirit: it is a
main work of the Spirit of God in the hearts of his children to help them to
pray, Gal. 4.6. Because you are sons, God has sent the spirit of his Son into
your hearts, Crying, Abba Father.

Quest. But many of the children of God have not such abilities to express
themselves in prayer; how then does the Spirit help their infirmities.

Answ. Though they have not always the gifts of the Spirit in prayer, yet they
have the groans of the Spirit, Romans 8.26. Gifts are the Ornament of prayer, but
not the life of prayer. A carcass may be hung with jewels. Though the Spirit
may deny fluency of speech, yet it gives fervency of desire, and such prayers
are most prevalent. The prayers which the Spirit indites in the hearts of Gods
children, have these threefold qualifications.

1. The prayers of Gods children are believing prayers: Prayer is the key,
Faith is the hand that turns it; Faith feathers the Arrow of prayer, and makes
it pierce the Throne of grace. Matthew. 21.22. Whatever you shall ask in prayer
believing, ye shall receive. Whereupon says Hierom Non orarem, nisi crederem.
, I would not presume to pray, unless I bring faith along with me; to pray, and
not believe, is (as one says) a kind of jeer offered to God Irrisio Dei est.
Pelican.
; as if we thought either he did not hear, or he would not grant.

That Faith may be animated in prayer, we must bring Christ in our Arms when we
appear before God. 1 Samuel 7.9. And Samuel took a sucking Lamb, and offered it
for a burnt-offering, and Samuel cried unto the Lord for Israel, and the Lord
heard him; this sucking Lamb typified Christ. When we come to God in prayer, we
must bring the Lamb Christ along with us. Themistocles carried the Kings son in
his Arms, and so pacified the King when he was angry Thucyd.
; the children of God present Christ in the Arms of their Faith.

2. The prayers of Gods children indicted by the Spirit, are ardent prayers. Ye
have received the Spirit, whereby we cry Abba, Father, Romans 8.15. Father, that
implies Faith; we cry, that implies fervency. The incense was to be laid upon
burning coals, Lev. 16.12. The incense was a type of prayer; the burning coals
of ardency in prayer: Elias prayed earnestly, Jam. 5.17. In the Greek it is
(...), Verbis addita verbalia apud Hebraeus vehementiam significant. Grot.
, IN PRAYING HE PRAYED; that is, he did it with vehemence; in prayer the heart
must boil over with heat of affection: Prayer is compared to groans
unutterable Romans 8.26.
, it alludes to a woman that is in pangs. We should be in pangs when we are
traveling for mercy; such prayer commands God himself, Isa. 45.11.

3. The prayers of Gods children are heart-cleansing prayers, they purge out
sin; many pray against sin, and sin against prayer; Gods children do not only
pray against sin, but pray down sin.

3. The Spirit of God has a witnessing work in the influence of the Spirit,
but the witness. Romans 8.16. The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit,
that we are the children of God. There is a threefold witness a child of God
has; the witness of the Word, the witness of Conscience, the witness of the
Spirit; the Word makes the major Proposition; He who is in such a manner
qualified, is a child of God. Conscience makes the minor; but Thou art so
divinely qualified; the Spirit makes the conclusion, therefore Thou art a child
of God; The Spirit joins with the witness of Conscience. Romans 8.16. The Spirit
witnesses with our spirits: The Spirit teaches Conscience to search the
Records of Scripture, and find its evidences for heaven, it helps conscience
to spell out its name in a promise; it bears witness with our spirit.

Quest.

Answ. Enthusiasts speak much of the Spirit, but they leave the Word: That
inspiration which is either without the Word, or against it, is an imposture.
The Spirit of God did indite the Word, 2 Pet. 1.21. Now if the Spirit should
witness otherwise than according to the Word, the Spirit should be divided
against it self, it should be a spirit of contradiction, witnessing one thing
for a truth in the Word, and another thing different from it in a man's
conscience.

4. The fourth sign of Gods children, is, Zeal for Day, his Truth, his Glory;
they who are born of God, are impatient of his dishonor. Moses was cool in his
own cause, but hot in Gods; when the people of Israel had wrought folly in the
golden Calf, he breaks the Tables: When Saint Paul saw the people of Athens
given to Idolatry, his spirit was stirred in him, Acts 17.16. In the Greek it
is (...), his spirit was imbittered, or as the word may signify, he was in a
Paroxysme, or burning fit of zeal. He could not contain, but with this fire of
zeal discharges against their sin. As we shall answer for idle words, so for
sinful silence; it is dangerous in this sense to be possessed with a dumb
Devil. David says, the zeal of Gods house had eaten him up, Psalm. 69.9. Many
Christians whose zeal once had almost eaten them up, now they have eaten up
their zeal; they are grown tepid and neutral; the breath of preferment blowing
upon them, has cooled their heat: I can never believe that he has the heart
of a child in him, that can be patient when Gods glory suffers. Can an
ingenuous child endure to hear his father reproached? though we should be
silent under Gods displeasure, yet not under his dishonor: When there is an
holy fire kindled in the heart, it will break forth at the lips; zeal tempered
with holiness, is the white and sanguine, which gives the foul its best
complexion.

Of all others, let Ministers be impatient when Gods glory is impeached and
eclipsed. A Minister without zeal, is like salt that has lost its savor. Zeal
will make men take injuries done to God, as done to themselves: It is reported
of Chrysostom, that he reproved any sin against God, as if he himself had
received a personal wrong (...).
. Let not Ministers be either shaken with fear, or seduced with flattery; God
never made Ministers to be as false glasses, to make bad faces look fair; for
want of this fire of zeal, they are in danger of another fire, even the burning
lake, Rev. 21.8. into which the fearful shall be cast.

God, are of a more noble and celestial spirit than men of the world; they
mind (...), things above Col. 3.2.
: 1 John 5.4. Whatsoever is born of God, (...), overcomes the world. The
children of God live in an higher Region, they are compared to Eagles, Isa.
40.31. in regard of their sublimeness and heavenly-mindedness; their souls are
fled aloft, Christ is in their heart. Col. 1.27. and the world is under their
feet, Rev. 12.1. Men of the world are ever tumbling in thick clay; they are
terrae filii; not Eagles, but Earthworms; the Saints are of another spirit,
they are born of God, and walk with God, as the child walks with the father.
Noah walked with God, Genesis 6.9. Gods children show their high Pedigree in their
heavenly Conversation, Phil. 3.21.

6. Another sign of Adoption, is love to them that born of God, then we love
the brotherhood, 1 Pet. 2.17. Idem est motus animae in imaginem and rem; he
that loves the person, loves the picture: The children of God are his walking
pictures; and if we are of God, we love those who have his Effigies and
Pourtraiture drawn upon their souls: If we are born of God, we love the Saints
notwithstanding their infirmities; Children love one another, though they have
some imperfections of nature, a squint-eye, or a crooked back. We love gold in
the Oar, though it have some drossiness in it; the best Saints have their
blemishes: We read of the spot of Gods children, Deutr. 32.5. A Saint in this
life, is like a fair face with a scar in it: If we are born of God, we love his
children though they are poor; we love to see the image and picture of our
father, though hung in never so poor a Frame; we love to see a rich Christ in a
poor man.

And if we are children of the Highest, we show our love to Gods children,

1. By prizing their persons above others: He who is born of God, honors
them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4. The Saints are the dearly beloved of Gods
soul, Jerem. 12.7. They are his jewels, Mal. 3.17. They are of the true
blood royal; and he who is divinely adopted, sets an higher estimate upon
these, than upon others.

2. We show our love to the children of God, by prizing their company above
others. Children love to associate and be together; the communion of Saints is
precious. Christ's Doves will flock together in company; pares cum paribus, etc.
Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee; though a child of
God is courteous to all 1 Pet. 3.8.
; We read that Abraham bowed himself to the children of Heth, Genesis 23.7. A
child of God has a love of civility to all, but a love of complacency only to
such as are fellow-heirs with him of the same inheritance.

By this persons may try their Adoption; it appears plainly that they are not
the children of God, who hate those that are born of God; they soil and black
the silver wings of Christ's Doves, by their aspersive reproaches; they cannot
endure the society of the Saints. As Vultures hate sweet smells, and are killed
with them; so the wicked love not to come near the godly, they cannot abide the
precious perfume of their graces; they hate these sweet smells; it is a sign
they are of the Serpents brood, who hate the seed of the woman.

the presence of their father; where the King is, there is the Court; where the
presence of God is, there is Heaven; God is in a special manner present in his
Ordinances, they are the Ark of his presence: Now if we are children, we love
to be much in holy duties; in the use of Ordinances we draw near to God, we
come into our Fathers presence; in prayer we have secret conference with God;
the soul while it is praying, is as it were parlying with God. In the Word we
hear God speaking from heaven to us; and how does every child of God delight
to hear his Fathers voice! In the Sacrament God kisseth his children with the
kisses of his lips; he gives them a smile of his face, and a privy seal of his
love; oh it is good to draw near to God, Psalm. 73.28. It is sweet being in his
presence; every true child of God says, a day in thy Courts is better than a
thousand, Psalm. 84.10. Slighters of Ordinances are none of Gods children,
because they care not to be in his presence; they love the Tavern better than
the Temple. Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 4.16. not that he
could go out of Gods sight, Psalm. 139.7. but the meaning is, Cain went from the
Church of God, where the Lord gave visible signs of his presence to his people.

8. The eighth sign, is, compliance with the will of Speak Lord, thy servant
hears, 1 Samuel 3.9. When God bids his children pray in their Closets, mortify
sin, suffer for his Name, they are ambitious to obey, they will lay down their
lives at their Fathers call. Hypocrites court God, and speak him fair, but
refuse to go on his errand; they are not children, but rebels.

Gal. 4.19. Phil^m. 10. He who is of the seed-Royal, will be ambitiously
desirous to bring others into the Kindred. Art thou divinely adopted, thou will
studiously endeavor to make thy child a child of the most High. There are
two Reasons why a godly parent will endeavor to bring his child into the
heavenly Kindred.

1. Out of conscience: A good parent sees the injury he has done his child;
he has conveyed the plague of sin to him, and in conscience he will endeavor
to make some recompense: In the old Law, he that had smitten and wounded
another, was bound to see him healed, and pay for his cure. Parents have given
their children a wound in their souls, and therefore must do what in them lies,
by admonition, prayers, tears, to see the wound healed.

2. Out of a flaming zeal to the honor of God. He who has tasted Gods love in
Adoption, looks upon himself as engaged to bring God all the glory he can; if
he has a child, or acquaintance that are strangers to God, he would gladly
promote the work of grace in their hearts; it is a glory to Christ, when
multitudes are born to him.

How far are they from being Gods children, who have no care to bring others
into the Family of God! Too blame are those Masters, who mind more their
servants work, than their souls; too blame are those parents, who are
regardless of their children; they do not drop in principles of knowledge into
them, but suffer them to have their head; they will let them lie and swear, but
not ask blessing; read Play-books, but not Scripture.

Object. 1. But say some, to chatechise and teach our children, is to take Gods
name in vain.

Answ. 1. Is the fulfilling Gods command taking Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words which
I command thee this day, thou shall teach them diligently to thy children.
Prove. 22.6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he
will not depart from it. Ephesians. 6.4. Ye fathers, provoke not your children to
wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. This
threefold cord of Scripture is not easily broken.

2. The Saints of old were continually grafting principles Genesis 18.19. I know
that Abraham will command his children, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Father,
and serve him with a perfect heart. Sure Abraham and David did not take Gods
name in vain. What need is there of instilling holy instructions to overtop
the poysonful weeds of sin that grow? as Husbandmen, when they have planted
young Trees, they set stays to them, Ut Agricolae sti^pibus pedimenta apponunt.
to keep them from bending. Children are young Plants; the heavenly precepts of
their parents are like stays set about them, to keep them from bending to
error and and profaness; when can there be a fitter season to disseminate and
infuse knowledge into children, than in their minority? Now is a time to give
them the breast, and let them suck in the sincere milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2.

2. But it is to no purpose to teach our children the

1. We read in Scripture of children, who by virtue Timothies Mother and
Grandmother taught him the Scriptures from his Cradle, 2 Timothy 3.15. And that
(...), from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures. Timothy sucked in
Religion as it were with his milk; we read of young children who cried Hosanna
to Christ, and did trumpet forth his praises, Matthew. 21.15. And sure those
children of Tire had some seeds of good wrought in them, in that they showed
their love to Paul, and would help him on his way to Sea-shoar. Acts 21.5. They
all brought us on our way, with wives and children. Saint Paul had a Convoy of
young Saints to bring him to take ship.



we have delivered our own souls. There is comfort in the discharge of
conscience, we must let alone issues and events; duty is our work, success is
Gods.

All which considered, should make parents whet holy instructions upon their
children; they who are of the Family of God, and whom he has adopted for
children, will endeavor that their children may be more Gods children than
theirs; they will travail in birth till Christ be formed in them. A true Saint
is a lodestone that will be still drawing others to God: Let this suffice to
have spoken of the signs of Adoption. I proceed.

SECT. 5.
Discovering Gods love in making us children.

THE next particular to be discussed, is the love of God in making us children.
1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that
we should be called the sons of God! God showed power in making us creatures,
but love in making us sons. Plato gave God thanks that he had made him a man,
and not a beast; but what cause have they to adore Gods love, who has made
them children? the Apostle puts an ecce to it, behold! O aeterna and vera
charitas! Aug.
That we may the better behold Gods love in making us children, consider three
things.

1. We were deformed. Ezekiel. 16.6, 8. When I passed by thee, and saw thee
polluted in thine own blood, it was the time of love. Mordecai adopted Esther
because she was fair; but we were in our blood, and then God adopted us; he did
not adopt us when we were clothed with the Robe of innocence in Paradise, when
we were hung with the jewels of holiness, and were white and ruddy; but when we
were in our blood, and had our leprous spots upon us; the time of our loathing,
was the time of Gods loving.

2. As we did not deserve to be made children, so neither did we desire it. No
landed man will force another to become his heir against his will; if a King
should go to adopt a beggar, and make him heir of the Crown; if the beggar
should refuse the Kings favor, and say, I had rather be as I am, I would be a
beggar still; the King would take it in high contempt of his favor, and would
not adopt him against his will. Thus it was with us, we had no (...), or
willingness to be made children; we would have been begging still, but God out
of his infinite mercy and indulgence, not only offers to make us children, but
makes us willing to embrace the offer Psalm. 110.3.
: Behold what manner of love is this!

3. Which is the wonder of love that God should adopt us for his children when
we were enemies. If a man would make another heir of his Land, he would adopt
one that is near akin to him, no man would adopt an enemy; but that God should
make us children when we were enemies; that he should make us heirs to the
Crown, when we were Traitors to the Crown; oh amazing, astonishing love! Behold
what manner of love is this! We were not akin to God, we had by sin lost and
forfeited our Pedigree; we had done God all the injury and spite we could,
defaced his image, violated his Law, trampled upon his mercies, and when we had
angered him, he adopted us: What stupendous love was this, such love was never
shown to the Angels! when they fell (though they were of a more noble nature,
and in probability might have done God more service than we can, yet) God never
vouchsafed this privilege of Adoption to them; he did not make them children,
but prisoners; they were heirs only to the treasures of wrath Romans 2.5.
.

Use. Let all who are thus nearly related to God, stand admiring his love; when
they were like Saul, breathing forth enmity against God; when their hearts
stood out as Garrisons against him, the Lord conquered their stubborness with
kindness, and not only pardoned, but adopted them; it is hard to say which is
greater, the mystery or the mercy; this is such amazing love, as we shall be
searching into, and adoring to all eternity; the bottom of it cannot be
fathomed by any Angel in heaven; Gods love in making us children, is,

1. A rich love; it is love in God to feed us, but it is rich love to adopt us;
it is love to give us a Crumb, but it is rich love to make us heirs to a Crown.

2. It is a distinguishing love; that when God has passed by so many millions,
he should cast a favorable aspect upon thee! most are cut out for fuel, and
are made Vessels of wrath; and that God should say to thee, Thou art my son,
here is the mirror of mercy, the meridian of love! Who, O who can tread upon
these hot coals, and his heart not burn in love to God?

SECT. 6.
Declaring the honor of Gods children.

6. THE sixth particular is, the honor and renown

1. God makes a precious account of them. 2. He looks upon them as persons of
honor.
1. God makes a precious account of them. Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast precious
in my sight, etc. A father prizeth his child above his Estate: How dearly did
Jacob prize Benjamin! his life was bound up in the life of the Lad, Genesis 44.30.
God makes a precious valuation of his children; the wicked are of no account
with God, they are vile persons, Nahum. 1.14. I will make thy grave, for thou
art vile; therefore the wicked are compared to chafe, Psalm. 1.4. to dross,
Psalm. 119.119. There is little use of a wicked man while he lives, and no loss
of him when he dies; there is only a little chafe blown away, which may well
be spared: But Gods children are precious in his sight, they are his jewels,
Mal. 3.17. The wicked are but lumber, which serves only to cumber the ground;
but Gods children are his jewels, locked up in the Cabinet of his Decree from
all eternity. Gods children are the apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8. very dear and
tender to him, and the eyelid of his special Providence does cover them; the
Lord accounts every thing of his children precious.

1. Their name is precious; the wicked do leave their name for a curse, Isa.
65.15. The names of Gods children are embalmed, Isa. 60.15. So precious are
their names, that God enters them down in the book of life, and Christ carries
them on his breast. How precious must their name needs be, who have Gods own
Name written upon them? Rev. 3.12. Him that overcomes, I will write upon him
the Name of my God.

2. Their prayers are precious. Cant. 2.14. O my Dove, in the clifts of the
Rock, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice. Every child of God is
this Dove; prayer is the voice of the Dove, and sweet is this voice: The prayer
of Gods children is as sweet to him as Music; a wicked man's prayer is as the
howling of a Dog, Hosea 7.14. The prayer of the Saints, is as the singing of
the Bird; the finger of Gods Spirit touching the Lutestrings of their hearts,
they make melody to the Lord. Isa. 56.7. Their sacrifices shall be accepted
upon mine Altar.

3. Their tears are precious, they drop as pearls from their eyes. I have seen
thy tears, Isa. 38.5. The tears of Gods children drop as precious wine into
Gods bottle: Psalm. 56.8. Put thou my tears into thy bottle. A tear from a
broken heart, is a Present for the King of heaven.

4. Their BLOOD is precious, Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of his Saints. This is the blood God will chiefly make inquisition
for: Athaliah shed the blood of the Kings children, 2 Kings 11.1. The Saints
are the children of the most High, and such as shed their blood, shall pay dear
for it. Rev. 16.6. Thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy.

2. God looks upon his children as persons of honor. Isa. 43.4. Since thou
wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, etc.

1. God esteems them honorable, he calls them a Crown, and a Royal Diadem,
Isa. 62.3. He calls them his glory, Isa. 46.13. Israel my glory.

2. God makes them honorable; as a King creates Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Barons, etc. so God installs his children into honor; he creates them noble
persons, persons of Renown. David thought it no small honor to be the Kings
son-in-law; 1 Samuel 18.18. Who am I, that I should be son-in-law to the King?
What an infinite honor is it to be the children of the High God, to be of the
blood royal of heaven? The Saints are of an Ancient Family, they are sprung
from the Ancient of days, Dan. 7.9. That is the best Pedigree which is fetched
from heaven; here the youngest child is an heir, a coheir with Christ, who is
heir of all, Hebr. 1.2. Romans 8.17.

Consider the honor of Gods children.

1. Positively. 2. Comparatively.
1. Positively.

1. They have the titles of honor, they are called Kings, Rev. 1.6. The
excellent of the Earth. Psalm. 16.2. Vessels of honor, 2 Timothy 2.21.

2. They have their Scutchion; you may see the Saints Scutchion or Coat Armor,
the Scripture has set forth their Heraldry; sometimes they give the Lion, in
regard of their courage, Prove. 1.28. Sometimes they give the Eagle, in regard
of their sublimeness; they are ever flying up to heaven upon the two wings of
faith and love. Isa. 40.31. They shall mount up with wings as Eagles; sometimes
they give the Dove, in regard of their meekness and innocence, Cant. 2.14. This
shows the children of God to be persons of Renown.

2. Consider the honor of Gods children comparatively; and this comparison is
double.

Compare the chidren of God 1. With Adam. 2. With the Angels.


1. Compare the children of God with Adam in a state of innocence. Adam was a
person of honor, he was the sole Monarch of the World; all the creatures did
vail to him as their Sovereign; he was placed in the garden of Eden, which was
a Paradise of pleasure; he was crowned with all the contentments of the Earth;
nay more, Adam was Gods lively picture, he was made in the likeness of God
himself; yet the state of the meanest of Gods children by Adoption, is far more
excellent and honorable than the state of Adam was, when he wore the Robe of
innocence; for Adams condition, though it was glorious, yet mutable, and was
soon lost; Adam was a bright star, yet a falling star; but Gods children by
Adoption, are in a state unalterable. Adam had a posse non peccare, a
possibility of standing; but believers have a non posse peccare, an
impossibility of falling; once adopted, and ever adopted; as Isaac said, when
he had given the blessing to Jacob, I have blessed him, and he shall be
blessed, Gen* 27.33. So may we say of all Gods children, they are adopted, and
they shall be adopted; so that Gods children are in a better and more glorious
condition now, than Adam was in all his Regal Honor and Majesty.

2. Let us ascend as high as heaven, and compare Gods children with the
glorious and blessed Angels; Gods children are equal to the Angels, in some
sense above them, and then sure they must needs be persons of honor.

1. Gods children are equal to the Angels; this is acknowledged by some of the
Angels themselves. Rev. 19.10. I am thy fellow servants; here is a Parallel made
between John the Divine, and the Angel; the Angel says to John, (...), I am
thy fellow servants.

2. The children of God by Adoption, are in some sense above the Angels, and
that two ways.

1. The Angels are servants to Gods children. Hebr. 1.14. Though they are
glorious spirits, yet ministering spirits. The Angels are the Saints servitors;
we have examples in Scripture of Angels attending the persons of Gods children;
we read of Angels waiting upon Abraham, Moses, Daniel, the Virgin Mary, etc.
Nor do the Angels only service to Gods children while they live, but at their
death too. Lazarus had a Convoy of Angels to carry him into the Paradise of
God; thus we see the children of God have a pre-eminence and dignity above the
Angels; the Angels are their servants both living and dying and this is the
more to be observed, because it is never said in Scripture that the children of
God are servants to the Angels.

2. Gods children are above the Angels, because Christ by taking their nature,
has ennobled and honored it above the Angelical Naturam humanam nobilitavit.
Aug.
. Hebr. 2.16. He in no wise took the nature of Angels. God by uniting us to
Christ, has made us nearer to himself than the Angels; the children of God are
members of Christ, Ephesians. 5.30. This was never said of the Angels; how can they
be the members of Christ, who are of a different nature from him? Indeed
Metaphorically and improperly Christ may be called the head of the Angels, as
they are subject to him, 1 Pet. 3.22. But that Christ is head of the Angels in
that near and sweet conjunction, as he is the head of believers, we nowhere
find in Scripture; in this respect therefore I may clearly assert the children
of God have a superiority and honor even above the Angels; though by Creation
they are a little lower than the Angels, yet by Adoption, and Mystical Union,
they are above the Angels.

Use. How may this comfort a child of God in midst either of calumny or
penury! he is a person of honor, he is above the Angels. A Gentleman that is
fallen to decay, will sometimes boast of his Parentage and Noble blood; so a
Christian who is poor in the world, yet by virtue of his Adoption, he is of the
Family of God, he has the true blood royal running in his veins, he has a
fairer Coat of Arms to show than the Angels themselves.

SECT. 7.
The high privileges of Gods children.

Childrens bread: The fruit of Paradise was to be kept with a flaming Sword; so
these sweet and heart-ravishing privileges are to be kept with a flaming
Sword, that impure sensual persons may not touch them. There are twelve rare
Privileges which belong to the children of God.

1. If we are children, then God will be full of tender Psalm. 103.13. Like as a
father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Oh the
yearning of Gods bowels to his children! Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear son? Is
he a pleasant child? my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy
upon him, says the Lord. Toward the wicked Gods wrath is kindled, Psalm. 2.12.
Toward them that are children, Gods repentings are kindled, Hosea 11.8. Mercy
and pity does as naturally flow from our heavenly Father, as light does from
the Sun.

Object. 1. But God is angry, and writes bitter how does this stand with love?

Answ. Gods love and his anger toward his children, opposita, but diversa;
they may stand together, he is angry in love. Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I
rebuke and chasten; we have as much need of afflictions as Ordinances: A bitter
Pill may be as needful for preserving health as a Julip or Cordial. God
afflicts with the same love as he adopts; God is most angry, when he is not
angry; his hand is heaviest when it is lightest Deus irascitur, cum non
irascitur. Bern.
; affliction is an argument of sonship. Heb. 12.7. If you endure chastening,
God deals with you as with sons. Oh says one, Hos. 4.14.
sure God does not love me, I am none of his child, because he does follow me
with such sore afflictions: Why, it is a sign of childship to be sometimes
under the Rod; God had one son without sin, but no son without stripes; God
puts his children to the School of the Cross, and there they learn best
Correctio est effica^ virtutis gymnasium.
. God speaks to us in the Word, Children be not proud, do not love the world,
walk circumspectly Ephesians. 5.15.
: But we are dull of hearing; nay, we stop the ear: Jer. 22.21. I spoke to thee
in thy prosperity, but thou said I will not hear. Now says God, I shall lose
my child if I do not correct him; then God in love smites, that he may save;
Aristotle speaks of a Bird that lives among Thorns, yet sings sweetly; Gods
children make the best melody in their heart, when God hedgeth their way with
thorns, Hos. 2.14. Afflictions are refining: Prove. 17.3. The fining pot is for
silver, and the furnace for gold (...). Chrysostom.
. Fiery Trials make golden Christians; afflictions are purifying. Dan. 12.10.
Many shall be tried, and made white. We think God is going to destroy us, but
he only lays us a whitening: Some Birds will not hatch but in time of thunder.
Christians are commonly best in affliction; God will make his children at last
bless him for sufferings; the eyes that sin shuts, affliction opens Oculos quos
peccatum cl^u dit, plena aperi^.
; when Manasseh was in chains, then he knew the Lord was God, 2 Chronicles. 33.13.
Afflictions fit for heaven first; the stones in Solomon's Temple were hewn and
polished, and then set up into a bu^lding. First the Saints (who are called
lively stones 1 Pet. 2.5.
) must be hewn and carved by sufferings, as the corner stone was, and so made
meet Col. 1.12.
for the celestial building; and is there not love in all Gods fatherly
castigations?

Object. 2. But sometimes Gods children are under the black clouds of
desertion; is not this far from love?

Concerning desertion, I must needs say this is the saddest condition that ^an
betide Gods children; when the Sun is gone, the Dew falls; when the Sun-light
of Gods countenance is removed, then the Dew of tears falls from the eyes of
the Saints. In desertion God rains hell out of heaven (to use Calvin's
expression;) The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof
drinks up my spirits, Job. 6.4. This is the poisoned arrow that wounds to the
heart. Desertion is a taste of the torments of the damned. God says, in a
little wrath I hid my face from thee, Isa. 54.8. I may here gloss with Saint
Bernard, Modicum illud vocas Domine? Lord do thou call that a little wrath
when thou hidest thy face? is it but a little? What can be more bitter to me
than the eclipsing of thy face? God is in Scripture called a light and a fire;
the deserted soul feels the fire, but does not see the light. But yet, thou who
art adopted may spell love in all this. They say of Hercules his club, that
it was made of the wood of Olive; the Olive is an emblem of peace; so Gods club
whereby he beats down the soul in desertion, has something of the Olive; there
is Peace and Mercy in it. I shall hold forth a spiritual Rainbow, wherein the
children of God may see the love of their Father in the midst of the clouds of
desertion. Therefore I answer,

1. In time of desertion God leaves in his children a seed of comfort, 1 John
3.9. his seed remains in him. seal of the Spirit, yet they have the Unction
of the Spirit, 1 John 2.27. Though they want the Sun, yet they have a day star
in their hearts; as the tree in winter, though it has lost its leaves and
fruit, yet there is sap in the root: So, in the winter of desertion, there is
the sap of grace in the root of the heart; as it is with the Sun masking it
self with a cloud, when it denies light to the earth, yet it gives forth its
influence: so though Gods dear adopted ones may lose the light of his
countenance, yet they have the influence of his grace.

Quest. What grace appears in the time of desertion?

Ans. 1. An high prizing of Gods ove. If God should say to the deserted soul,
what will thou, and it shall be granted to half of the Kingdom? he would reply,
Lord, that I might see thee, as I was wont in the Sanctuary; That I may have
one golden beam of thy love; the deserted soul slights all other things in
comparison; it is not gardens, or orchards, or the most delicious Objects that
can give him contentment; they are like music to a sad heart; he desires as
Absalom, to see the Kings face.

2. A lamenting after the Lord. It Is the saddest day with him when the Sun of
righteousness is eclipsed; a child of God can better bear the worlds stroke
than Gods absence; he is even melted into tears, the clouds of desertion
produce spiritual rain; and whence is this weeping but from love?

3. Willingness to suffer any thing so he may have a sight of God. A child of
God could be content with Simon of Cyrene, to carry the Cross, if he were sure
Christ were upon it; he could willingly die, if with Simeon he might die with
Christ in his arms. Behold here, the seed of God in a believer; the work of
sanctification, when he wants the wine of consolation.

Answ. 2. I answer, God has a design of mercy in hiding his face from his
adopted ones.

First, it is for the trial of grace; and there are two graces brought to trial
in time of desertion.

1. Faith. 1. When we can believe against sense and feeling; when we want an
experience, yet can trust to a ptomise; when we have not the kisses of Gods
mouth, yet can cleave to the word of his mouth; this is faith indeed; here is
the sparkling of the Diamond.

2. Love. When God smiles upon us, it is not much to love him; but when he
seems to put us away in anger Psalm 27.9.
, now to love him, and be as the Lime, the more water is thrown upon it, the
hotter it burns, this is love indeed. That love sure is strong as death Cant.
8.6.
which the waters of desertion cannot quench.

Secondly, It is for the exercise of grace: we are all for comfort; if it might
be put to our choice, we would be ever upon Mount Tabor, looking into Canaan:
we are loath to be in trials, agonies, desertions, as if God could not love us
except he had us in his arms. It Is hard to lie long in the lap of spiritual
joy, and not fall asleep. Too much Sunshine causes a drought in our graces;
oftentimes when God lets down comfort into the heart, we begin to let down
care. As it is with Musicians, before they have money they will play you many a
sweet lesson, but as soon as you throw them down money they are gone, you hear
no more of them. Before joy and assurance, O the sweet music of prayer and
repentance! but when God throws down the comforts of his Spirit, we either
leave off duty, or at least slacken the strings of our Viol, and grow remiss
in it. Thou art taken with the money, but God is taken with the music; Grace
is better than comfort. Rachel is more fair, but Leah is more fruitful. Comfort
is fair to look on, but grace has the fruitful womb; now, the only way to
exercise grace, and make it more vigorous and lively, is sometimes to walk in
darkness and have no light, Isa. 50.10. Faith is a star that shines brightest
in the night of desertion; I said I am cast out of thy sight, yet will I look
again toward thy holy Temple, Jonah 2.4. Grace usually puts forth its most
heroical acts at such a time.

3. I answer, God may forsake his children in regard Vision, but not in regard
of Union. Thus it was with Jesus Christ when he cried out, my God, my God.
There was not a separation of the Union between him and his Father, only a
suspension of the Vision Non suit divulsio unionis, sed tantum suspensio
visionis,
. Gods love through the interposition of our sins may be darkened and eclipsed,
but still he is a Father. The Sun may be hid in a cloud, but it is not out of
the firmament. The Promises in time of desertion may be as it were sequestered,
we have not that comfort from them as formerly, but still the believers title
holds good in Law.

Joseph when he spoke roughly to his brethren, and made them believe he would
take them for Spies, still his heart was toward them, and he was as full of
love as ever he could hold; he was feign to go aside and weep: So, God is full
of love to his children, even when he seems to look strange. And as Moses his
Mother when she put her child into the ark of bulrushes, and went away a little
from it, yet still her eye was toward it, the babe wept; I, and the mother wept
too; So God, when he goes aside as if he had forsaken his children, yet he is
full of sympathy and love toward them. God may change his countenance, but not
break his covenant. It is onething for God to desert, another thing to
disinherit. Hosea 8.11. How shall I give thee up O Ephraim! etc. It Is a
Metaphor taken from a father going to disinherit his son, and while he is
setting his hand to the Deed, his bowels begin to melt, and to yearn over him,
and he thinks thus within himself, Though he be a prodigal child, yet he is a
child, I will not cut off the entail; So says God, How shall I give thee up?
though Ephraim has been a rebellious son, yet he is a son, I will not
disinherit him. Gods thoughts may be full of love, when there is a vail upon
his face; the Lord may change his dispensation toward his children, but not
his disposition; he may have the look of an enemy, but the heart of a Father:
So that the beliver may say, I am adopted, and let God do what he will with me,
let him take the rod, or the staff, it is all one, he loves me.

2. The second adoptional privilege is this, if we are Mal. 3.17. I will spare
them, as a man spares his own son that serves him. We often grieve the Spirit,
abuse kindness; God will pass by much in his children, Numb. 23.21. he has
not seen iniquity in Jacob; his love does not make him blind; he sees sin in
his people, but not with an eye of revenge, but pity; He sees sin in his
children, as a Physician does a disease in his Patient; He has not seen
iniquity in Jacob so as to destroy him; God may use the rod, 2 Samuel 7.14. not
the Scorpion. O how much is God willing to pass by in his children, because
they are children! God takes notice of the good that is in his children, and
passes by the infirmity. God does quite contrary to us; we often take notice of
the evil that is in others, and overlook the good. Our eye is upon the flaw in
the Diamond, but we observe not its sparkling. But God takes notice of the good
that is in his children; God sees their faith, and winks at their failings, 1
Pet. 3.6. Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham calling him Lord; the holy Ghost
mentions not her unbelief, and laughing at the promise, but takes notice of the
good in her, viz. her obedience to her husband; she obeyed Abraham calling him
Lord. God puts his finger upon the fears and infirmities of his children; how
much did God wink at in Israel his firstborn! Israel often provoked him with
their murmurings, Deuteronomy. 1.27. but God answered their murmurings with mercies;
he spared them as a father spares his son.

3. The third privilege is this, If we are children, Cor. 8.12. oftentimes we
come with broken prayers, but if we are children, God spells out our meaning,
and will take our prayers as a grateful present; a father loves to hear his
child speak, though he does but lisp and stammar, Isa. 38.14. Like a Crane, so
did I chatter. Good Hezekiah looked upon his praying as chattering, yet that
prayer was heard, ver. 5. a Sigh and groan from an humble heart goes up as the
smoke of incense. Psalm. 38.9. My groaning is not hid from thee. When all the
glistering shows of Hypocrites evaporate, and come to nothing, a little that a
child of God does in sincerity is crowned with acceptance; a father is glad of
a letter from his son, though there are blots in the letter, though there are
false spellings and broken English; O what blottings are there in our holy
things? what broken English sometimes? yet coming from broken hearts it is
accepted; though there be weakness in duty, yet if there be willingness, the
Lord is much taken with it. Says God, it is my child, and he would do better,
Ephesians. 1.6. He has accepted us in the beloved.

Cor. 12.14. so does our heavenly Father.

1. He gives us our allowance, Genesis 48.15. The God which fed me all my life
long unto this day. Whence is our daily bread, but from his daily care? God
will not let his children starve, though our unbelief is ready sometimes to
question his goodness, and say, Can God prepare a Table? See what arguments
Christ brings to prove Gods paternal care for his children, Matthew. 6.26. Behold
the fowls of the air, they sow not, neither do they reap, yet your heavenly
Father feeds them. Does a man feed his bird, and will he not feed his child?
Luke 12.27. Consider the Lilies how they grow, they toil not, they spin not; if
then God so cloth the grass, etc? Does God cloth the Lilies, and will he not
cloth his Lambs? 1 Pet. 5.7. the Lord cares for us. As long as his heart is
full of love, so long his head will be full of care. This should be as physic
to kill the worm of unbelief.

2. As God gives his children a viaticum, or bait by the way, so he lays up a
portion for them; Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a
kingdom; our Father keeps the purse, and will give us enough to bear our
charges here, and when at death we take shipping, and shall be set upon the
shore of eternity, then will our heavenly Father bestow upon us a Kingdom
immutable, and immarcessible; lo here a portion which can never be summed up!

5. If we are children, then God will shield off dangers

1. Temporal evil. 2. Spiritual evil.
1. God screens off temporal evil. There are many casualties and contingencies
which are incident to life; God mercifully, prevents them; he keeps watch and
ward for his children, Psalm. 7.10. my defense is of God. Psalm. 121.4. he that
keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. The eye of Providence is ever
awake; God gives his Angels charge over his children, Psalm. 91.11. a believer
has a guard of Angels for his lifeguard; we read of the wings of God in
Scripture: as the breast of his mercy feeds his children, so the wings of his
power cover them; how miraculously did God preserve Israel his firstborn! he
did with his wings sometimes cover, sometimes carry them, Exodus 19.4. He bare
you as upon Eagles wings; an emblem of Gods providential care; the Eagle fears
no Bird from above to hurt her young, only the Arrow from beneath; therefore
she carries them upon her wings, that the Arrow must first hit her before it
can come at her young ones. Thus God carries his children upon the wings of
Providence; and they are such, that there is no clipping these wings, nor can
any Arrow hurt them.

2. God shields off spiritual evils from his children: Psalm. 91.10. There shall
no evil befall thee. God does not say, no afflictions shall befall us, but no
evil.

Quest. But sometimes evil in this sense befalls the godly, they spot
themselves with sin.

Answ. But that evil shall not be mortal; as quicksilver is in it self
dangerous, but by ointments it is so tempered that it is killed; so sin is in
it self deadly, but being tempered with Repentance, and mixed with the sacred
ointment of Christ's blood, the venomous damning nature of it is taken away.

Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto
babes. A father will teach his children; the child goes to his father, Father,
Teach me my Lesson; so David goes to God, Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will
for thou art my God. The Lord glories in this title, Isa. 48.17. I am the Lord
thy God, which teaches thee to profit. Gods children have that anointing which
teaches them all things necessary to salvation; they see those mysteries which
are veiled over to carnal eyes; as Elisha saw those Horses and Chariots of
fire, which his servant did not see, 2 Kings 6.17. The adopted see their own
sins, Satan's snares, Christ's beauty, which they whom the god of the world had
blinded, cannot discern; whence was it that David understood more than the
Ancients? Psalm. 119.100. He had a Father to teach him, God was his Instructor:
Psalm. 71.17. O God thou have taught me from my youth. Many a child of God
complains of ignorance and dullness; remember this, thy Father will be thy
Tutor; he has promised to give his spirit to lead thee into all truth, John
16.13. And God does not only inform the understanding, but incline the will; he
does not only teach us what we should do, but enable us to do it. Ezekiel. 36.27.
I will cause you to walk in my statutes. What a glorious privilege is this, to
have the star of the world pointing us to Christ, and the lodestone of the
Spirit drawing!

7. If we are children, this gives boldness in prayer; Luke 11.13. How much
more shall your heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask him? All
the father has, is for his child; if he comes for money, who is it for but
his child? If thou come to God for pardon, for brokenness of heart, God
cannot deny his child: Who does he keep his mercies in store for, but his
children?

And that which may give Gods children holy boldness in prayer, is this; When
they consider God not only in the relation of a Father, but as having the
disposition of a Father. Some parents are (...), of a morose, rugged nature;
but God is (...), the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. He begets all the bowels
in the world; in prayer we should look upon God under this notion, a Father of
mercy, sitting upon a Throne of grace; we should run to this heavenly Father in
all conditions.

1. In our sins; as that sick child, 2 Kings 4.19. He said unto his father, my
head, my head! as soon as he found himself not well, he ran to his father to
succor him: So in case of sin, Run to God, My heart, my heart! O this dead
heart, Father quicken it; this hard heart, Father soften it; Father, my heart,
my heart!

2. In our tentations: A child, when another strikes him, runs to his Father
and complains; so when the Devil strikes us by his temptations, let us run to
our Father; Father, Satan assaults, and hurles in his fiery darts; he would not
only wound my peace, but thy glory; Father, take off the Tempter; it is thy
child that is worried by this red Dragon; Father, wilt not thou bruise Satan
under my feet! What a sweet privilege is this, when any burden lies upon our
spirits, we may go to our Father, and unload all our cares and griefs into his
bosom!

Claudius Lysias valued his freedom of Rome at an high rate; a state of
sonship is a state of freedom; this is not to be understood in an Antinomian
sense, that the children of God are freed from therule of the Moral Law; this
is such a freedom as Rebels take: Was it ever heard that a child should be
freed from duty to his parents? But the freedom which Gods children have, is an
holy freedom; they are freed ab imperio carnis, from the Law of sin, Romans 8.2.

This is the sad misery of an unregenerate person, he is in a state of
Vassaladge, he is under the tyranny of sin Quamobrem dignitatem tuam abjicis,
teque servum peccati constituis? Bern.
. Justin Martyr used to say, It is the greatest slavery in the world for a man
to be subject to his own passions: A wicked man is as very a slave as he that
works in the Gally; look into his heart, and there are Legions of lusts ruling
him; he must do what sin will have him; a slave is at the service of an
usurping Tyrant; if he bid him dig in the Mine, hew in the Quarries, tug at the
Oar, he must do it. Thus every wicked man must do what corrupt nature inspired
by the Devil bids him; if sin bids him be drunk, be unchaste, he is at the
command of sin, as the Ass is at the command of the Driver; sin first enslaves,
and then damns.

But the children of God, though they are not freed from the in-being of sin,
yet they are freed from the Law of sin; all sins commands are like Laws
repealed, which are not in force; though sin live in a child of God, yet it
does not reign. Rom 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you: Sin has not a
coercive power over a child of God; there is a principle of grace in his heart
which gives check to corruption: This is a believers comfort, though sin be not
removed, yet it is subdued; and though he cannot keep sin out, yet he keeps sin
under; the Saints of God are said to crucify the flesh, Gal. 5.24. Crucifying
was a lingering death; first one member dyed, then another; every child of God
crucifies sin, some limb of the old man is ever and anon dropping off; though
sin does not dye perfectly, it dies daily; this is the blessed freedom of Gods
children, they are freed from the Law of sin, they are led by the Spirit of
God, Romans 8.14. This Spirit makes them free and cheerful in obedience. 2 Cor.
3.17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

9. If we are children, then we are heirs apparent to precious, 2 Pet. 2.4. The
promises are a Cabinet of jewels, they are breasts full of the milk of the
Gospel; the promises are enriched with variety, and are suited to a Christians
present condition. Does he want pardoning grace? there is a promise carries
forgiveness in it, Jer. 31.34. Does he want sanctifying grace? there is a
promise of healing, Hos. 14.4. Does he want corroborating grace? there is a
promise of strength, Isa. 41.10. And these promises are the childrens bread;
the Saints are called (...), Heirs of the promise, Hebr. 6.17. There is Christ
and heaven in a promise; and there is never a promise in the Bible, but an
adopted person may lay a Legal claim to it, and say, This is mine. The natural
man who remains still in the old Family, has nothing to do with these
promises; he may read over the promises (as one may read over another man's Will
or Inventory) but has no right to them; the promises are like a Garden of
flowers, paled in, and enclosed, which no stranger may gather, only the
children of the Family. Ishmael was the son of the bondwoman, he had no right
to the Family; Cast out the bondwoman and her son, as Sarah once said to
Abraham, Genesis 21.10. So the unbeliever is not adopted, he is none of the
household, and God will say at the day of judgment, Cast out this son of the
bondwoman into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

our Fathers blessing. Isa. 61.9. They are the seed which the Lord has
blessed. We read that Isaac blessed his son Jacob, Genesis 27.28. God give thee of
the dew of heaven; which was not only a prayer for Jacob, but a Prophecy of
that happiness and blessing which should come upon him and his posterity Luther.
. Thus every adopted child has his heavenly Fathers benediction, there is a
special blessing distilled into all that he possesses. Exodus 23.25. Psalm.
29.11. The Lord will bless his people with peace: He will not only give them
peace, but they shall have it with a blessing; the wicked have the things they
enjoy with Gods leave, but the adopted have them with Gods love; the wicked
have them by Providence, the Saints by Promise. Isaac had but one blessing to
bestow, Genesis 27.38. Have thou but one blessing my father? But God has more
blessings than one for his children; he blesses them in their souls, bodies,
names, estate, posterity; he blesses them with the upper-springs, and the
nether-springs; he multiplies to bless them, and his blessing cannot be
reversed; as Isaac said concerning Jacob, I have blessed him, yea, and he shall
be blessed, Genesis 27.33. so God blesses his children, and they shall be blessed.

11. If we are children, then all things that Romans 8.28. All things work
together for good to them that love God.

1. Good things. 2. Evil things.
1. Good things work for good to Gods children.

1. Mercies shall do them good.

1. The mercies of God shall soften them. David's heart was overcome with Gods
mercy. 2 Samuel 7.18. Who am I? and what is my house, etc? I who was of a mean
Family, I who held the Shepherds staff, that now I should hold the Royal
Scepter! Nay, Thou have spoken of thy servants house for a great while to come:
Thou have made a promise that my children shall sit upon the Throne, yea, that
the blessed Messiah shall come of my Line and Race; and is this the manner of
man O Lord God! as if he had said, Do men show such kindness undeserved? See
how this good man's heart was dissolved and softened by mercy! the flint is
soonest broken upon a soft pillow.

2. Mercies make the children of God more fruitful; the ground beats the better
crop for the cost that is laid upon it. God gives his children health, and they
spend, and are spent for Christ; he gives them Estates, and they honor the
Lord with their substance; the backs and bellies of the poor are the Field
where they sow the precious seeds of their charity; a child of God makes his
Estate a golden Clasp to bind his heart faster to God, a footstool to raise
him up higher toward heaven.

2. Ordinances shall work for good to Gods children.

1. The Word preached shall do them good; it is a savor of life, it is a Lamp to
their feet, and a Lavor to their hearts; the Word preached is Vehiculum
salutis, a Chariot of salvation; it is an ingrafting, and a transforming word;
it is verbum cum unctione, it not only brings a light with it, but eye salve,
anointing their eyes to see that light; the preaching of the Word is the
Lattice where Christ looks forth, and shows himself to his Saints; this golden
pipe of the Sanctuary conveys the water of life. To the wicked the Word
preached works for evil, even the Word of life becomes a savor of death; the
same cause may have diverse, nay, contrary effects Eadem causa varios habet
effectus.
; the Sun dissolves the ice, but hardens the clay. To the unregenerate and
profane, the Word is not humbling, but hardening. Jesus Christ the best of
Preachers, was to some a Rock of offense; the Jews sucked death from his sweet
lips; it is sad that the breast should kill any; the wicked suck poison from
that breast of Ordinances where the children of God suck milk, and are
nourished unto salvation.

2. The Sacrament works for good to the children of God; in the Word preached
the Saints hear Christ's voice, in the Sacrament they have his kiss. The Lords
Supper is to the Saints a Feast of fat things; it is an healing, and a sealing
Ordinance; in this Charger, or rather Chalice, a bleeding Savior is brought in
to revive drooping spirits. The Sacrament has glorious effects in the hearts
of Gods children; it quickens their affections, strengthens their faith,
mortifies their sin, revives their hopes, increases their joy; it gives a
prelibation and fore-taste of heaven.

2. Evil things work for good to Gods children. Psalm. 112.4. Unto the upright
arises light in darkness.

1. Poverty works for good to Gods children; it starves their lusts, it
enricheth their graces: James 2.5. Poor in the world, rich in faith. Poverty
sends to prayer; when God has clipped his childrens wings by poverty, they
fly swiftest to the Throne of Grace.

2. Sickness works for their good; it shall bring the body of death into a
consumption. 2 Cor. 4.16. Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is
renewed day by day; like those two Laurels at Rome, when the one did wither,
the other did flourish; when the body withers, the soul of a Christian does
flourish. How often have we seen a lively faith in a languishing body? Hezekiah
was better on his sick bed, than upon his Throne; when he was upon his sick bed
he humbles himself and weeps; when he was on his Throne, he grew proud, Isa.
39.2. Gods children recover by sickness; in this sense, out of weakness they
are made strong, Heb. 11.34.

3. Reproach works for good to Gods children, it increases their grace and
their glory.

1. Disgrace increases their grace; the Husbandman by dunging his ground makes
the soil more rich and fertile; God lets the wicked dung his people with
reproaches and calumnies, that their hearts may be a richer soil for grace to
grow in.

2. Reproach increases their glory; he that unjustly takes from a Saints
credit, shall add to his Crown; the Sun shines brighter after an Eclipse; the
more a child of God is eclipsed by reproaches, the brighter he shall shine in
the Kingdom of heaven.

4. Persecution to Gods children works for good; the godly may be compared to
that Plant which Greg. Naz. speaks of, It lives by dying, and grows by cutting
(...). Naz.
: The zeal and love of the Saints is blown up by sufferings, their joy
flourishes. Tertullian says, the Primitive Christians rejoiced more in their
persecutions than in their deliverance.

5. Death works for good to the children of God; it is like the whirlwind to
the Prophet Eliah, which blew off his mantle, but carried him up to heaven; so
death to a child of God is like a boisterous whirlwind, which blows off the
mantle of his flesh, (for the body is but the mantle the soul is wrapped in)
but it carries up the soul to God; this is the glorious privilege of the sons
of God; every thing that falls out shall do them good; the children of God when
they come to heaven (as Chrysostom speaks) shall bless God for all cross
Providence.

John 5.24. John 10.28. Those who are adopted, are out of the power of
damnation: Romans 8.1. (...), there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ. Will a father condemn his own son? God will never disinherit any of his
children; fathers may disinherit for some fault: Reuben for incest lost the
Prerogative of his birthright, Genesis 49.4. What is the reason Parents
disinherit their children? surely this, because they can make them no better,
they cannot make them fit for the inheritance; but when we are bad, our
heavenly Father knows how to make us better, he can make us fit to inherit.
Col. 1.12. Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us meet for the
inheritance: Therefore it being in his power to make us better, and to work in
us an idoneity, and meetness for the inheritance, certainly he will never
finally disinherit.

Because this is so sweet a privilege, and the life of a Christians comfort
lies in it, therefore I shall clear it by Arguments, that the children of God
cannot finally perish; the entail of hell and damnation is cut off; not but
that the best of Gods children have that guilt which deserves hell; but Christ
is the friend at Court which has begged their pardon; therefore the vis
damnatoria, the damning power of sin is taken away, which I prove thus.

1. The children of God cannot finally perish, because the blood of God,
justice is fully satisfied, and meddles not to condemn those for whom this
blood was shed, and to whom it is applied. Jesus Christ was a Sponsor, he stood
bound for every child of God as a Surety; he said to justice, Have patience
with them, and I will pay thee all; so that the believer cannot be liable to
wrath. God will not require the debt twice, both of the Surety and the Debtor,
Romans 3.24, 25, 26. God is not only merciful in pardoning his children, but
righteous: 1 John 1.9. He is just to forgive; it is an act of Gods equity and
justice to spare the sinner, when he has been satisfied in the Surety.

2. A damnatory sentence cannot pass upon the children Cant. 4.11. There is a
marriage-union between Christ and the Saints; every child of God is a part of
Christ, he is Christ Mystical. Now, shall a member of Christ perish? A child of
God cannot perish, but Christ must perish. Jesus Christ who is the husband, is
the Judge, and will he condemn his own Spouse?

Gal. 4.19. Will Christ suffer his own image to be destroyed? Theodosius
counted them Traitors who defaced his image; Christ will not let his image in
believers be defaced and rent; he will not endure to see his own picture take
fire; the Sea has not only stinking carrion, but jewels thrown into it; but
none of Gods jewels shall ever be thrown into the dead Sea of hell.

Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, Psalm. 32.1. But what
blessedness were there in having sin forgiven, if afterward a final and
damnatory sentence should pass upon the heirs of promise? What were a man the
better for the Kings pardon, if he were condemned after he were pardoned?

Psalm. 58.11. Doubtless there is a reward for the righteous. God sweetens his
commands with promises, he ties duty and reward together. As in the body the
veins carry the blood, and the arteries carry the spirits; so one part of the
Word carries duty in it, and another part of the Word carries reward; now if
the adopted of God should eternally miscarry, what reward were there for the
righteous? and Moses did indiscreetly in looking to the recompense of reward,
Hebr. 11.26. And so by consequence there would be a door opened to despair.

By all which it appears that the children of God cannot be disinherited or
reprobated; if they should lose happiness, Christ should lose his purchase, and
should dye in vain.

Thus we have seen the glorious privileges of the children of God. What an
encouragement is here to Religion? how may this tempt men to turn godly? Can
the world viey with a child of God? Can the world give such privileges as
these? as Saul said, 1 Samuel 22.7. Will the son of Jesse give every one of you
Field, and Vineyards, and make you all Captains of thousands? Can the world do
that for you, as God does for his children? Can it give you pardon of sin, or
eternal life; Are not the gleanings of Ephraim better than the Vintage of
Abjezer^ Is not godliness gain? What is there in sin that men should love it?
the work of sin is drudgery, and the wages death. They who see more in sin than
in the privileges of Adoption, let them go on, and have their ears boared to
the Devils service.

CHAP. XX.
Containing several Uses drawn from the Proposition.

all profane persons; these have damnation written upon their forehead.

1. Scoffers at Religion; it were blasphemy to call these the children of God;
Will a true child jeer at his fathers picture?

2. Drunkards, who drown reason, and stupifie conscience; these declare their
sin at Sodom, they are children indeed, but cursed children, 2 Pet. 1.14.

Use 2. Exhortation; which consists of two branches.

Exhort.
1. Let us prove our selves to be the children of God.

2. Let us carry our selves as the children of God.

prove our selves to be the children of God; there are many false and
unscriptural evidences.

1. Says one, the gravest Divines in the Country think me to be godly, and can
they be mistaken? Are the seers blind?

Answ. Others can but see thy outward carriage and deportment; if that be fair,
they by the rule of charity judge well of thee; but what says God and
conscience? Are these thy Compurgators? Art thou a Saint in Gods Kal^nder? it is
a poor thing to have an applauding world, and an accusing conscience.

2. Oh but says another, I hope I am a child of God, I love my heavenly
Father.

Answ. Why do thou love God? perhaps because God gives thee corn and wine;
this is a mercenary love, a love to thy self more than to God; you may lead a
sheep all the field over with a bottle of Hay in your hand; but throw away the
Hay, now the sheep will follow you no longer: So the squint-eyed hypocrite
loves God only for the Provender; when this fails, his affection fails too.

But leaving these vain and false evidences of Adoption, let us enquire for a
sound evidence; the main evidence of Adoption is Sanctification: Search (O
Christian) whether the work of Sanctification has passed upon thy soul! Is thy
understanding sanctified to discern the things which are excellent? Is thy will
sanctified to embrace heavenly objects? Do thou love where God loves, and
hate where God hates? Art thou a consecrated person? This argues the heart of
a child; God will never reject those who have his image and superscription
upon them.

2. Let us carry our selves as becomes the children of

1. In obedience; 1 Pet. 1.14. As obedient children. If a stranger bid a child
do a thing, he regards him not; but if his father command, he presently obeyes:
Obey God out of love, obey him readily, obey every command. If he bid thee part
with thy bosome-sin, leave and loath it. Jer. 35.5. I set before the sons of
the house of the Rechabites pots full of wine, and cups, and I said unto them,
Drink ye wine; but they said, We will drink no wine; for Jonadab the son of
Rechab our father, commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye,
nor your sons for ever. Thus when Satan and thy own heart would be tempting
thee to a sin, and set cups of wine before thee, refuse to drink; say, My
heavenly Father has commanded me not to drink. Hypocrites will obey God in
some things which are consistent either with their credit or profit, but in
other things they desire to be excused: Like Esau, who obeyed his Father in
bringing him Venison, because probably he liked the sport of Hunting, but
refused to obey him in a business of greater importance; namely, in the choice
of his wife.

2. Let us carry our selves as Gods children in humility: 1 Pet. 5.5. Be ye
clothed with humility, it is a becoming garment. Let a child of God look his
face every morning in the glass of Gods Word, and see his sinful spots; this
will make him walk humbly all the day after; God cannot endure to see his
children grow proud; he suffers them to fall into sin, as he did Peter, that
their Plumes may fall, and they may learn to go on lower ground.

3. Let us walk as the children of God in sobriety: 1 These. 5.8. But let us who
are of the day be sober: Gods children must not do as others, they must be
sober.

1. In their speeches; not rash, not unseemly. Col. 4.6. Let your speech be
seasoned with salt: Grace must be the salt which seasons our words, and makes
them savoury; our words must be solid and weighty, not feathery; Gods children
must speak the language of Canaan; many pretend to be Gods children, but their
speech bewrays them; their lips do not drop as an honeycomb, but are like
the sink Prove. 15.2.
, where all the filth of the house is carried out.

2. The children of God must be sober in their opinions; hold nothing but what
a sober man would hold; error, as Saint Basil says, is a spiritual
intoxication, a kind of frenzy; if Christ were upon the earth again, he might
have Patients enough; there are abundance of spiritual Lunaticks among us which
need healing.

3. The children of God must be sober in their attire. 1 Pet. 3.3. Whose
adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of
wearing of gold, etc. But let it be the hidden man of the heart. Gods children
must not be conformed to the world, Romans 12.2. it is not for Gods children to do
as others, taking up every fashion. What is a naked breast, but a glass in
which you may see a vain heart? What is spotting of faces, but learning the
black Art? God may turn these black spots into blew; walk soberly.

4. Let us carry our selves as the children of God in sedulity; we must be
diligent in our Calling. Religion does not seal Warrants to idleness; it was
Hieroms advice to his friend, to be always well employed: Six days shall thou
labor; God sets all his children to work, they must not be like the lillies
which toil not, neither do they spin; heaven indeed is a place of rest, Rev.
14.13. They rest from their labors; there the Saints shall lay aside all their
working-tools, and take the Harp and Vial; but while we are here, we must
labor in a Calling; God will bless our diligence, not our laziness.

5. Let us carry our selves as the children of God in magnanimity and
heroicalness. The Saints are highborn, they are of the true blood royal, born
of God, they must do nothing sneakingly or sordidly, they must not fear the
faces of men; as that brave-spirited Nehemiah, Shall such a man as I fly?
Nehem. 6.11. so should a child of God say, Shall I be afraid to do my duty?
Shall I unworthily comply and prostitute my self to the lusts and humors of
men? the children of the most High should do nothing to stain or dishonor
their noble birth. A Kings son scorns to do any thing which is below him.

6. Let us carry our selves as Gods children in sanctity, 1 Pet. 1.16. Holiness
is the diadem of beauty, in this let us imitate our heavenly Father; a
debauched child is a disgrace to his father; there is nothing does more cast a
reflection on our heavenly Father, than the irregular actings of such as
profess themselves his children. What will others say, Are these the children
of the most High, is God their Father? Romans 2.24. The Name of God is blasphemed
through you Gentiles. Oh let us do nothing unworthy of our heavenly Father.

7. Let us carry our selves as the children of God in cheerfulness. It was the
speech of Jonadab to Amnon, Why art thou being the Kings son lean? 2 Samuel 13.4.
Why do the children of God walk so pensively? Are they not heirs of heaven?
perhaps they may meet with hard usage in the world, but let them remember they
are the seed-royal, and are of the Family of God. Suppose a man were in a
strange Land, and should meet there with unkind usage, yet he rejoices that he
is son and heir, and has a great Estate in his own Country: So should the
children of God comfort themselves with this, though they are now in a strange
Country, yet they have a title to the Jerusalem above; and though sin does at
present hang about them (for they still have some relics of their disease) yet
shortly they shall get rid of it; at death they shall shake off this viper.

8. And lastly, Let us carry our selves as the children of God in holy longings
and expectations. Children are still longing to be at home; 2 Cor. 5.2. We
groan earnestly, etc. There is bread enough in our Fathers house, how should we
long for home! death carries a child of God to his Fathers house; Saint Paul
therefore desired to be dissolved; it is comfortable dying, when by faith we can
resign up our souls into our Fathers hands. Luke 23.46. Father, into thy hands
I commend my spirit.

MATTHEW. 5.10. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.


CHAP. XXI.
Concerning Persecution.

WE are now come to the last Beatitude, Blessed are they which are persecuted,
etc. Our Lord Christ would have us reckon the cost: Luke 14.27, 28. Which of
you intending to build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts the cost,
whether he have enough to finish it? etc. Religion will cost us the tears of
Repentance, and the blood of persecution; but we see here a great encouragement
that may keep us from fainting in the day of adversity; for the present
blessed, for the future crowned.

The words fall into two general parts.

1. The condition of the godly in this life, They are persecuted.

2. Their reward after this life, Theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

I shall speak chiefly of the first, and wind in the other in the Applicatory.

Doctr. The observation is, that true godliness is usually attended with
persecution. Acts 14.22. We must through much tribulation enter into the
Kingdom of God. Acts 13.50. The Jews stirred up the chief men of the City, and
raised persecution against Paul, etc. Luther makes it the very definition of a
Christian, Christianus quasi crucianus; though Christ dyed to take away the
Curse from us, yet not to take away the Cross from us: Those stones which are
cut out for a Building, are first under the Saw and Hammer to be hewed and
squared; the godly are called lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. And they must be hewn
and polished by the Persecutors hand, that they may be fit for the heavenly
building; the Saints have no Charter of exemption from trials; though they be
never so meek, merciful, pure in heart, their piety will not shield them from
sufferings; they must hang their harp on the willows, and take the Cross; the
way to heaven is via spinosa, and sanguinea; though it be full of Roses in
regard of the comforts of the Holy Ghost, yet it is full of thorns in regard of
persecutions. Before Israel got to Canaan, a Land flowing with milk and honey,
they must go through a Wilderness of serpents, and a red Sea: So the children
of God in their passage to the holy Land, must meet with fiery Serpents, and a
red Sea of persecution. It is a saying of Ambrose, there is no Abel but has
his Cain: Saint Paul fought with Beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15.32. Set it down
as a Maxim, if you will follow Christ, you must see the Swords and Staves; put
the Cross in your Creed. For the amplification of this, there are several
things we are to take cognizance of.

1. What is meant by persecution. 2. The several kinds of persecution. 3. Why
there must be persecution. 4. The chief persecutions are raised against the
Ministers of Christ. 5. What that persecution is which makes a man blessed.
SECT. 1.
Showing what is meant by persecution.

1. WHAT is meant by persecution? the Greek word (...), to persecute, signifies
to vex and molest, sometimes to prosecute another, to arraign him at the Bar,
and to pursue him to the death; a persecutor is a pricking bryar Ezekiel. 28.24.
, therefore the Church is described to be a Lilly among thorns, Cant. 2.2.

SECT. 2.
Setting forth the several kinds of persecution.

2. WHAT are the several kinds of persecution? There is a twofold persecution.

A persecution of the hand. A persecution of the tongue.
1. A persecution of the hand. Acts 7.52. Which of the Prophets have not your
fathers persecuted? Romans 8.36. For thy sake are we killed all the day long,
Gal. 4.29. This I call a bloody persecution, when the people of God are
prosecuted with fire and sword: So we read of the ten persecutions in the time
of Nero Domitian, Trajan, etc. And the Marian persecution; England for five
years drank a Cup of blood; and lately Piedmont, and the confines of Bohemia
have been scourged to death with the Rod of the Persecutor; Gods Church has
always like Abraham's Ram, been tied in a Bush of thorns.

2. The persecution of the tongue, which is twofold.

1. Reviling; this few think of, or lay to heart; but it is called in the Text
persecution; when men shall revile and persecute you; this is
tongue-persecution. Psalm. 55.21. His words were drawn swords. You may kill a
man as well in his name, as in his person; a good name is as precious ointment,
Eccles. 7.21. A good conscience and a good name, is like a gold Ring set with a
rich Diamond. Now to smite another in his name, is by our Savior called
persecution: Thus the Primitive Christians endured the persecution of the
tongue. Hebr. 11.36. They had trial of cruel mockings. David was the song of
the Drunkards, Psalm. 69.12. They would sit on their Ale-bench, and jeer at him;
how frequently do the wicked cast out the Squibs of reproach at Gods children,
These are the holy ones! little do they think what they do; they are now doing
Cains work and Julians, they are persecuting.

2. Slandering; so it is in the Text, When they shall persecute you, and say
all manner of evil against you falsely. Slandering is tongue-persecution; thus
Saint Paul was slandered in his Doctrine; it was reported he should preach, Men
might do evil that good might come of it, Romans 3.8. Thus Christ who did cast
out Devils, was charged to have a Devil, John 8.48. The Primitive Christians
were falsely accused for killing their children, and for incest Te^tul. Apol.
. Psalm. 35.11. They laid to my charge things that I knew not.

Let us take heed of becoming persecutors: Some think there is no persecution
but fire and sword; yes, there is the persecution of the tongue; there are many
of these persecutors now adays, who by a Divellish Chemistry can turn gold
into dung, the precious names of Gods Saints into reproach and disgrace. There
have been many punished for clipping of Coin; of how much sorer punishment
shall they be thought worthy, who clip the names of Gods people to make them
weigh lighter.

SECT. 3.
Declaring the causes of persecution.

3. WHY there must be persecution.

I answer for two Reasons.

1. In regard of God.

1. His Decree. 2. His Design.
1. Gods Decree; 1 These. 3.3. (...), We are appointed thereunto: Whoever brings
the suffering, God sends it; God did bid Shimei curse; Shimeie's tongue was the
Arrow, but it was God that did shoot it.

2. Gods Design; God has a twofold design in the persecutions of his children.

1. Trial; Dan. 12.10. Many shall be tried: Persecution is the touchstone of
sincerity; it discovers true Saints from hypocrites; unsound hearts pretend
fair in prosperity, but in a time of persecution fall away; Mat. 13.20, 21.
Hypocrites cannot sail in stormy weather; they will follow Christ to Mount
Olivet, but not to Mount Calvary; like green Timber, they shrink in the
scorching Sun of persecution; if trouble arises, hypocrites will rather make
Demas his choice, than Moses his choice; they will prefer thirty pieces of
silver before Christ; God will have persecutions in the world to make a
discovery of men; suffering times are sifting times: Job 23.10. When I am
tried, I shall come forth as gold. Job had a Furnace-faith; a Christian of the
right breed (who is born of God) whatever he loses, will hold fast his
integrity, Job 2.3. Christ's true Disciples will follow him upon the water.

2. Purity; God lets his children be in the Furnace, that they may be partakers
of his holiness, Hebr. 12.10. The Cross is physic, it purges out pride,
impatience, love of the world; God washes his people in bloody waters, to get
out their spots, and make them look white, Dan. 12.10. I am black, but comely,
Cant. 1.5. The torrid zone of persecution made the Spouses skin black, but her
soul fair; see how differently afflictions work upon the wicked and godly; they
make the one worse, the other better. Take a cloth that is rotten, if you
scowre and rub it, it frets and tears; but if you scowre a piece of Plate, it
looks brighter. When afflictions are upon the wicked, they fret against God,
and tear themselves in impatience; but when the godly are scowred by these,
they look brighter.

2. There will be persecutions in regard of the enemies of the Church; these
Vultures prey upon Gods Turtles: The Church has two sorts of enemies.

1. Open enemies; the wicked hate the godly; there is enmity between the seed
of the woman and the serpent, Genesis 3.15. As in nature there is an antypathy
between the Vine and the Bay Tree Vitis laurum non am^t neque ejus odorem; si
prope crescat, enecat.
; the Elephant and the Dragon. Vultures have an an antipathy against sweet
smells; so in the wicked there is an antipathy against the people of God, they
hate the sweet perfumes of their graces; it is true, the Saints have their
infirmities; but the wicked do not hate them for these, but for their holiness;
and from this hatred arises open violence; the Thief hates the light,
therefore would blow it out.

2. Secret enemies; who pretend friendship, but secretly raise persecutions
against the godly; such are hypocrites and heretics. Saint Paul calls them
false Brethren, 1 Cor. 11.26. The Church complains that her own sons had vexed
her, Cant. 1.6. That is, those who had been bred up in her bosom, and
pretended Religion and sympathy, these false friends vexed her; the Churches
enemies are them of her own house; such as are open pretenders, but secret
opposers of the faith, are ever worst. A wen seems to be a part of the body,
but is indeed an enemy to it, it does disfigure and endanger it; they are the
vilest and basest of men, who hang forth Christ's colors, yet fight against him.

SECT. 4.
Showing that the keenest edge of persecution is turned against the Ministers.

Blessed are ye when men shall persecute you, Ver. 11. So persecuted they the
Prophets before you, Ver. 12. Take my Brethren the Prophets for an example of
suffering affliction, Jam. 5.10. No sooner is any man a Minister, but he is a
piece of a Martyr. The Ministers of Christ are his chosen Vessels; now as the
best Vessel of gold and silver passes through the fire, so Gods chosen Vessels
pass often through the fire of persecution: All times are not like the silver
Age wherein Constantine lived; he was an honourer of the Ministry; he would not
sit down in the Council of Nice, till the Bishops who were convened there, did
come and beseech him; he would say, if he saw an infirmity in the Clergy, sua
Purpura velaret, he would cover it with his own Purple Robe. Ministers must not
always look for such shines of the Princes favor, they must expect an Alarm.
Peter a famous Preacher, who knew how to cast the Net on the right side of the
ship; at one Sermon he converted three thousand souls, yet neither the Divinity
of his Doctrine, nor the Sanctity of his life could exempt him from
persecution. John 21.18. When thou shall be old, another shall gird thee, and
carry thee whether thou would not; it alludes to hi^ suffering death for
Christ; he was (says Eusebius) bound with chains, and afterward crucified at
Jerusalem with his head downwards. Saint Paul a holy man, who is steeled with
courage, fired with zeal, as soon as he entered into the Ministry, bonds and
persecutions did abide him, Acts 9.15, 16. He was made up of sufferings, 2 Timothy
4.6. I am ready to be offered up; he alludes to the drink offerings, wherein
the wine or blood used in Sacrifice was poured out, thereby intimating by what
manner of death he should glorify God; not by being sacrificed in the fire,
but by pouring out his blood, which was when he was beheaded; and that it might
seem no strange thing for Gods Ministers to be under the heat and rage of
persecution, Stephen puts the question, Acts 7.52. Which of the Prophets have
not your fathers persecuted? Ignatius was torn with wild beasts; Cyprian,
Polycarp Martyred: Praedicare nihil aliud est quam derivare in se furorem
mundi. Luther.
Maximinus the Emperor (as Eusebius relates) gave charge to his Officers to
put none to death, but (...), the Governors and Pastors of the Church.

The Reasons why the storm of persecution has chiefly fallen upon the
Ministers, are:

1. They have their corruptions as well as others; and least they should be
lifted up through the abundance of Revelation, God lets loose some Messenger of
Satan to vex and persecute them. God sees they have need of the flaile to
thresh off their Husks; the fire God puts them into, is not to consume, but
refine them.

2. The Ministers are Christ's antesignani, his Ensigne-bearers to carry his
colors; they are the Captains of the Lords Host, therefore are most shot at.
Phil. 1.17. I am set for the defense of the Gospel. The Greek word (...),
alludes to a Soldier that is set in the forefront of the Battle, and has all
the Bullets flying about his ears. The Ministers work is to preach against men's
sins, which are as dear to them as their right eye, and they cannot endure
this. Every man's sin is his King, to which he yields love and subjection; now
as Pilot said, Shall I crucify your King? men will not endure to have their
King-sin crucified; this therefore being the work of the Ministry to divide
between men and their lusts, to part these two old friends, no wonder it meets
with so much opposition. When Paul preached against Diana, all the City was in
an uproar: We preach against men's Diana's, those sins which bring them in
pleasure and profit, this causes an uproar.

3. From the malice of Satan: The Ministers of Christ come to destroy his
Kingdom, therefore the old Serpent will spit all his venom at them; if we
tread upon the Devils head, he will bite us by the heel; the Devil sets up
several Forts and Garrisons in men's hearts, pride, ignorance, unbelief; now the
weapons of the Ministry beat down these strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4. therefore
Satan raises his Militia, all the force and power of hell against the
Ministry: The Kingdom of Satan is a Kingdom of darkness, Acts 26.18. Revel.
16.10. And Gods Ministers are called the lights of the world, Matthew. 5.14. They
come to enlighten those that fit in darkness, this enrageth Satan; therefore he
labors to eclipse the lights, to pull down the stars, that his Kingdom of
darkness may prevail; the Devil is called a Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. The souls of
people are the Lions prey, the Ministers work is to take away the prey from
this Lion; therefore how will he roar upon them, and seek to destroy them!

Use 1. It shows us what a work the Ministry is; though full of dignity, yet
full of danger; the persecution of the tongue is the most gentle persecution
can be expected; it is not possible (says Luther) to be a faithful Preacher,
and not meet with trials and oppositions.

Use 2. It shows the corruption of men's nature since they are their own
enemies, they persecute those who come to do them most good. What is the work
of the Ministry but to save men's souls? to pull them as brands out of the fire;
yet they are angry at this. We hate not the Physician who brings such physic
as makes us sick, because it is to make us well; nor the Chyrurgion, who
lanceth the flesh, because it is in order to a cure; Why then should we quarrel
with the Minister? What is our work but to bring men to heaven? 2 Cor. 5.20. We
are Ambassadors for Christ, etc. (...), We would have a peace made up between
you and God; yet this is the folly of depraved nature, to requite evil for
good. Aristoxenus did use to moisten his flowers with wine, honey, and
perfumes, that they might not only smell more fragrantly, but put forth more
vigorously: So should we do with our Ministers, give them wine and honey,
encourage them in their work, that they might act more vigorously; but instead
of this, we give them gall and vinegar to drink, we hate and persecute them.
Most deal with their Ministers, as Israel did with Moses; he prayed for them,
and wrought miracles for them, yet they were still quarrelling with him, and
sometimes ready to take away his life.

Use 3. If the fury of the world be against the Ministers, These. 3.2. Pray for
us, that the Word of the Lord may have free course, and that we may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men. People should pray for their
Ministers, that God would give them the wisdom of the Serpent, that they may
not betray themselves to danger by indiscretion; and the boldness of the Lion,
that they may not betray the truth by fear.

SECT. 5.
Showing what that persecution is which makes one blessed.





1. That suffering is not reckoned for Martyrdom, when we pull a cross upon our
selves, there is little comfort in such suffering. Austin speaks of some in his
time that were called Circumcelliones, who out of an itch (rather than zeal) of
Martyrdom, would run themselves into sufferings; these were accessory to their
own death; like Saul, who fell upon hi^ own sword; we are bound by all lawful
means to preserve our own lives. Jesus Christ did not suffer till he was called
to it; suspect that to be a tentation which bids us cast our selves down into
sufferings; when men through precipitancy and rashness run themselves into
trouble, it is a cross of their own making, and not of Gods laying upon them.

2. That is not to be accounted Martyrdom, when we suffer for our offenses, 1
Pet. 4.15. Let none of you suffer as an evil doer. Luke 23.41. We indeed suffer
justly. I am not of Cyprians mind, that the Thief on the Cross suffered as a
Martyr; no, he suffered as an evil doer; Christ indeed took pity on him, and
saved him; he dyed a Saint, but not a Martyr. When men suffer by the hand of
the Magistrate for their uncleanness, blasphemies, etc. these do not suffer
persecution, but execution; they dye not as Martyrs, but Malefactors; they
suffer evil, for being evil.

3. That suffering will not make men blessed, when they suffer out of sinister
respects, to be cried up as the head of a Party, or to keep up a Faction. The
Apostle implies that a man may give his body to be burned, yet go to hell, 1
Cor. 13.3. Ambitions men may sacrifice their lives to purchase same; these are
the Devils Martyrs.

-- Vicit amor Patriae laudisque immensa cupido. 2. What that suffering
persecution is which will make

Answ. 1. When we suffer in a good cause; so it is in the Text, Blessed are
they which suffer for righteousness sake; it is the cause that makes a Martyr
Causa non poena facit Martyrem.
: When we suffer for the truth, and espouse the quarrel of Religion, this is to
suffer for righteousness sake. Acts 28.20. For the hope of Israel I am bound
with this chain.

2. When we suffer with a good conscience: A man may have a good cause, and a
bad conscience; he may suffer for righteousness sake, yet he himself be
unrighteous. Saint Paul, as he had a just cause, so he had a pure conscience.
Acts 23.1. I have lived in all good conscience to this day. Paul kept a good
conscience to his dying day; a good conscience will make a man suffer with
comfort, it has made the Saints go as cheerfully to the stake, as if they had
been going to a Crown; look to it, that there be no flaw in conscience. A ship
that is to sail upon the waters, must be preserved from leaking; when
Christians are to sail on the waters of persecution, let them take heed there
be no leak of guilt in their conscience; he who suffers (though it be in Gods
own cause) with a bad conscience, suffers two hells; an hell of persecution,
and an hell of damnation.

3. When we have a good call. Matthew. 10.18. When ye shall be brought before
Kings, etc. There is no question but a man may so far consult for his safety,
that if God by his Providence open a door, he may fly in time of persecution,
Matthew. 10.23. But when he is brought before Kings, and the case is such, that
either he must suffer, or the truth must suffer; here is a clear call to
suffering, and this is reckoned for Martyrdom.

4. When we have good ends in our suffering; viz. that we may glorify God, set
a seal to the truth, show our love to Christ. Matthew. 10.18. When you shall be
brought before Kings for my sake. The Primitive Christians did burn more in
love than in fire; when we look at God in our sufferings, and are willing to
make his Crown flourish, though it be in our ashes, this is that suffering
which carries away the Garland of glory.

5. When we suffer as Christians. 1 Pet. 4.16. If any man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed: To suffer as a Christian, is to suffer with
such a Spirit as becomes a Christian, which is,

1. When we suffer with patience. Jam. 5.10. Take my Brethren the Prophets for
an example of suffering affliction, and of patience. A Christian must not
repine, but say, Shall I not drink the cup of Martyrdom which my Father has
given me? There should be such a spirit of meekness in a Christians suffering,
that it should be hard to say which is greater, his persecution or his
patience. When Job had lost all, he kept the breast plate of innocence, and the
shield of patience; an impatient Martyr is a Solecism.

2. To suffer as Christians, is, when we suffer with courage. Courage is a
Christians Armor of proof, it steels and animates him. The three children (or
rather the three Champions) were of brave heroic spirits; they do not say to
the King we ought not serve thy gods, but we will not: Dan. 3.18. Neither
Nebuchadnezzars Music, nor his Furnace could alter their resolution.
Tertullian was called an Adamant for his invincible courage: Holy courage makes
us (as one of the Fathers says) edomita front ad Crucis opprobrium, have such
faces of brass, that we are not ashamed of the Cross; this is to suffer as
Christians, when we are meek, yet resolute. The more the fire is blown, the
more it flames; so it is with a brave-spirited Christian; the more opposition
he meets with the more his zeal and courage flames forth: What a spirit of
gallantry was in Luther, who writing to Melancthon, If says he it be not the
cause of God, we are embarked in, let us desert it; if it be his cause, and
will bear us out, why do we not stand to it Si piam and justam causam
defendimus cur Dei promissis non confidimus?
?

3. To suffer as Christians, is to suffer with cheerfulness. Patience is a
bearing the Cross, cheerfulness is a taking up the Cross. Christ suffered for
us cheerfully, his death was a free will offering; Luke 12.50. Sanguinem suum
patri obtulet tanquam sacrificium (...).
. He thirsted to drink of that cup of blood; such must our sufferings be for
Christ; Cheerfulness perfumes Martyrdom, and makes it the sacrifice of a
sweet smelling savor to God. Thus Moses suffered cheerfully, Hebr. 11.24, 25.
Moses when he was come to years, chose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Observe,

1. When he was come to years; it was no childish act, it was not in his
nonage, but when he was of years of discretion.

2. He chose to suffer affliction; suffering was not so much his task, as his
choice; the Cross was not so much imposed, as embraced; this is to suffer as
Christians, when we are Volunteers, we take up the Cross cheerfully, nay,
joyfully; Acts 5.41. They departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name: Or as it is more
emphatical in the Original, (...), they rejoiced that they were so far graced,
as to be disgraced for the Name of Christ. Tertullian says of the Primitive
Christians, they took more comfort in their sufferings, than in their
deliverance Magis damnati quam absoluti gaudentes. Tert. Apol.
: And indeed well may a Christian be joyful in suffering 2 Cor. 4.7.
, because it is a great favor when God honors a man to be a witness to the
truth. Christ's marks in Saint Paul's body, were prints of glory (...). Chrysostom.
; the Saints have worn their sufferings as ornaments. Ignatius his chains were
his jewels; never have any Princes been so famous for their Victories, as the
Martyrs for their sufferings.

4. We suffer as Christians; when we suffer and pray. Matthew. 5.44. Pray for
them which despightfully use you and persecute you.

There are two Reasons why we should pray for our persecutors.

1. Because our prayers may be a means to convert them. Stephen prayed for his
persecutors, Acts 7.60. Lord, lay not this sin to their charge; and this prayer
was effectual to some of their conversions. Austin says, the Church of God was
beholding to Stephens prayer for all that benefit which was reaped by Paul's
Ministry.

2. We should pray for our persecutors, because they do us good, though against
their will; they shall increase our reward; every reproach shall add to our
glory; every injury shall serve to make our Crown heavier; as Gregory
Nazianzene speaks in one of his Orations, Every stone which was thrown at
Stephen, was a precious stone, which enriched him, and made him shine brighter
in the Kingdom of heaven. Thus I have shown what that suffering is which makes
us blessed, and shall wear the Crown of Martyrdom.

SECT. 6.
Inferences drawn from the Proposition.

1. IT shows us what the nature of Christianity is, viz. Inform.
a true Saint carries Christ in his heart, and the Cross on his shoulders. 2 Timothy All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. Christ
and his Cross are never parted; it is too much for a Christian to have two
heavens; one here, and another hereafter Delicatus nimis es si and hic vis
gaudere cum saeculo, and postea regnare cum Christo. Hier.
. Christ's Kingdom on earth, is Regnum Crucis: What is the meaning of the shield
of faith, the helmet of hope, the breast plate of patience? but to imply that
we must encounter with sufferings. It is one of the titles given to the Church,
Afflicted, Isa. 54.11. Persecution is the Legacy bequeathed by Christ to his
people. John 16. ult. In the world (...), ye shall have tribulation. Christ's
Spouse is a lilly among thorns. Christ's sheep must expect to lose their golden
Fleece; this the flesh does not like to hear of; therefore Christ calls
persecution the Cross, Matthew. 16.24. Because it is cross to flesh and blood; we
are all for reigning. Acts 1.7. When will thou restore the Kingdom again to
Israel? But the Apostle tells us of suffering before reigning. 2 Timothy 2.12. If
we suffer, we shall reign with him. How loath is corrupt flesh to put its neck
under Christ's yoke, or stretch it self upon the Cross! but Religion gives no
Charter of exemption from suffering; to have two heavens, is more than Christ
had. Was the head crowned with Thorns, and do we think to be crowned with
Roses? 1 Pet. 4.12. Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial. If we are
Gods gold, it is not strange to be cast into the fire. Some there are that
picture Erasmus half in heaven, and half out: Methinks it represents a
Christian in this life; in regard of his inward consolation he is half in
heaven, in regard of his outward persecution he is half in hell.

blessed are they that are persecuted: If they are blessed who dye in the Lord,
Are not they blessed who dye for the Lord? We are very apt to judge them hated
and forsaken of God, who are in a suffering condition. Matthew. 26.40. If thou be
the Son of God, come down from the Cross. The Jews made a question of it, they
could hardly believe Christ was the Son of God when he hung upon the Cross:
Would God let him be reproached and forsaken if he were the Son of God? When
the Barbarians saw the Viper on Paul's hand, they thought he was a great sinner.
Acts 28.4. No doubt this man is a Murderer: So when we see the people of God
afflicted, and the Viper of persecution fastens on them, we are apt to say,
These are greater sinners than others, and God does not love them; this is for
want of judgment: Blessed are they that are persecuted. Persecutions are
pledges of Gods love, badges of honor, Hebr. 12.7. In the sharpest trial there
is the sweetest comfort; Gods fanning his wheat is but to make it purer.

SECT. 7.
Containing a sharp reproof.

Cross: Matthew. 13.21. When persecution arises because of the Word, by and by
he is offended. There are many professors who speak Christ fair, but will
suffer nothing for him; these may be compared to the crystal which looks like
pearl, till it comes to the hammering, then it breaks; many when they see the
Palme-branches and garments spread, cry Hosanna to Christ; but if the Swords
and Staves appear, then they flink away; as King Henry the fourth, then of
Navar, told Beza, who urging him to engage himself in the Protestant Religion,
said, he would not launch out too far into the deep, but that if a storm should
arise, he might retreat back to shore: It Is to be feared there are some among
us, who if persecutions should come, would rather make Demas his choice, than
Moses his choice; and would study rather to keep their skin whole, than their
conscience pure. Erasmus highly extolled Luthers Doctrine; but when the
Emperor threatened all that should favor Luthers cause, he unworthily deserted
it. Hypocrites will sooner renounce their Baptism, than take up the Cross; if
ever we would show our selves Christians to purpose, we must with Peter, throw
our selves upon the water to come to Christ. He that refuses to suffer, let
him read over that sad Scripture, Matthew. 10.33. Whosoever shall deny me before
men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

2. It reproves them who are the opposers and persecutors Acts 7.51, 52. Ye do
always resist the Holy Ghost; which of the Prophets have not your Fathers
persecuted? Persecutors offer affront to Christ in heaven, they tread his
jewels in the dust, touch the apple of his eye, pierce his sides. Acts 9.4, 5.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? When the foot was trodden on, the head
cried out; as the sin is great, so the punishment shall be proportionable. Rev.
16.6. They have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them
blood to drink, for they are worthy. Will not Christ avenge those who dye in
his quarrel? what is the end of persecutors? Dioclesian proclaimed that the
Christian Churches and Temples should be razed down, their Bibles burned; he
would not permit any man that was a Christian to hold an office; some of the
Christians he cast alive into boiling lead, others had their hands and lips cut
off, only they had their eyes left, that they might behold the tragedy of their
own miseries, what was the end of this man? he ran mad, and poisoned himself.
Felix Captain to Emperor Charles the fifth, being at Supper at Auspurg, vowed
he would ride up to the spurs in the blood of the Lutherans; a flux of blood
came up that night into his throat, wherewith he was choked; it were easy to
tell how Gods hand has so visibly gone out against Persecutors, that they
might read their sin in their punishment.

SECT. 8.
That Christians should possess themselves before hand with thoughts of
suffering.

Exhort.
this reckoning before hand can do us no hurt, it may do us much good.

1. The fore-thoughts of suffering will make a Christian very serious; the
heart is apt to be feathery and frothy, the thoughts of suffering persecution
would consolidate it; Why am I thus light? Is this a posture fit for
persecution? Christians grow serious in the casting up their spiritual
accounts, they reckon what Religion must cost them, and may cost them; it must
cost them the blood of their sins, it may cost them the blood of their lives.

2. The fore-thoughts of persecution will be as sauce to season our delights,
that we do not surfeit upon them. How soon may there be an Alarm sounded? how
soon may the clouds drop blood? the thoughts of this would take off the heart
from the immoderate love of the creature. Our Savior at a great Feast breaks
out into mention of his death; Mark 14.3. She has prepared this against my
Burial: So the fore-thoughts of a change would be an excellent antidote against
a surfeit.

3. The fore-thoughts of sufferings would make them lighter when they come
Levius laedunt praevisa mala. Grotius.
; the suddenness of an evil adds to the sadness; this was ill news to the fool
in the Gospel, (who reckoned without his Host) Hac nocte, This night shall thy
soul be required of thee. This will be an aggravation of Babylons miseries,
Rev. 18.8. Her plagues shall come in one day; not that Antichrist shall be
destroyed in a day, but (in a day) that is, suddenly; the blow shall come
unawares, when he does not think of it; the reckoning before hand of suffering,
does alleviate and take off the edge of it when it comes; therefore Christ to
lighten the Cross, still fore-warms his Disciples of sufferings, that they
might not come unlooked for, Joh. 16.33. Acts 1.7.

4. Fore-thoughts of persecution would put us in mind of getting our Armor
ready; it is dangerous as well as imprudent, to have all to seek when the trial
comes; as if a Soldier should have his weapons to get when the enemy is in the
Field. Caesar seeing a Soldier whetting his sword when he was just going to
fight, cashiered him; he that reckons upon persecution, will be in a ready
posture for it; he will have the Shield of Faith, and the Sword of the Spirit
ready, that he may not be surprised unawares.

2. Let us prepare for persecution; a wise Pilot in a calm will prepare for a
storm. God knows how soon persecution may come, there seems to be a cloud of
blood hanging over the Nation.

SECT. 9.
Showing how we may be armed for sufferings.





1. Be persons rightly qualified for suffering. 2. Avoid those things which
will hinder suffering. 3. Promote all helps to suffering.
Be righteous persons; that man who would suffer for righteousness sake, must
himself be righteous; I mean Evangelically righteous; in particular I call him
righteous,

1. Who breaths after sanctity, Psalm. 119.5. Though sin cleaves to his heart,
yet his heart does not cleave to sin; though sin has an alliance, yet no
allowance. Romans 7.15. What I do I allow not! a good man hates that sin to which
Satan does most tempt, and his heart most incline, Psalm. 119.128.

2. A righteous person is one who makes Gods glory his Center; the glory of God
is more worth than the salvation of all men's soul. He who is divinely
qualified, is so zealously ambitious of Gods glory, that he cares not what he
loses, so God may be a gainer; he prefers the glory of God before credit,
estate, relations. It was the speech of Kiliaz that blessed Martyr, Had I all
the gold in the world to dispose of, I would give it to live with my relations,
(though in prison) yet Jesus Christ is dearer to me than all.

3. A righteous person is one who values the jewel of a good conscience at an
high rate; good conscience is a Saints Festival, his Music, his Paradise, and
he will rather hazard any thing than violate his conscience. They say of the
Irish, if they have a good Skimmeter (a warlike weapon) they had rather take a
blow on their Arm, than their Skimmeter should be hurt. To this I may compare
a good conscience; a godly man had rather sustain hurt in his body or estate,
than his conscience should be hurt; he had rather dye, than violate the
Virginity of his conscience; such a man as this, is Evangelically righteous;
and if God call him to it, he is fit to suffer.

2. Avoid those things which will hinder suffering.

1. The love of the world; God allows us the use of the world, 1 Timothy 6.7. But
take heed of the love of it; he that is in love with the world, will be out of
love with the Cross. 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this
present world; he not only forsook Paul's company, but his doctrine. The love of
the world choaks our zeal; a man wedded to the world, will for thirty pieces of
silver betray Christ and a good cause. Let the world be as a loose garment,
that you may throw off at pleasure; before a man can dye for Christ, he must be
dead to the world. Paul was crucified to the world, Gal. 6.14. It will be an
easy thing to dye, when we are dead before in our affections.

Carnal fear. There is a twofold fear.

1. A filial fear; when a man fears to displease God Incidam potius in Geheunam
quam peccatum. Anselm.
; when he fears lest he should not hold out, this is a good fear; Blessed is he
that fears always; if Peter had feared his own heart, and said, Lord Jesus, I
fear I shall forsake thee, Lord strengthen me, doubtless Christ would have kept
him from falling.

2. There is a cowardly fear; when a man fears danger more than sin; when he is
afraid to be good, this fear is an enemy to suffering. God proclaimed that
those who were fearful should not go to the Wars; Deuter. 20.8. The fearful are
unfit to fight in Christ's Wars; a man possessed with fear, does not consult
what is best, but what is safest. If he may save his Estate, he will snare his
conscience. Prove. 29.25. In the fear of man there is a snare. Fear made Peter
deny Christ; Abraham equivocate; David fain himself mad; fear will put men upon
indirect courses, making them study rather compliance, than conscience. Fear
makes sin appear little, and suffering great; the fearful man sees double, he
looks upon the cross through his perspective twice as big it is; fear argues
sordidness of spirit Degeneres animos timor arguit.
, it will put one upon things most ignoble and unworthy; a fearful man will
Vote against his conscience; fear infeebles, it is like the cutting off
Sampsons locks; fear melts away the courage. Josh, 5.1. Their hearts melt
because of you; and when a man's strength is gone, he is very unfit to carry
Christ's Cross; fear is the root of Apostasy. Spira's fear made him abjure and
recant his Religion; fear does one more hurt than the Adversary; it is not so
much an enemy without the Castle, as a Traitor within indangers it; it is not so
much sufferings without, as traiterous fear within which undoes a man; a
fearful man is versed in no posture so much as in retreating; Oh take heed of
this, be afraid of this fear. Luke 12.4. Fear not them that can kill the body.
Persecutors can but kill that body which must shortly dye; the fearful are set
in the forefront of them that shall go to hell, Rev. 21.8. Let us get the fear
of God into our hearts; as one wedge drives out another, so the fear of God
will drive out all other base fear.

3. Take heed of a facil spirit; a facil-spirited man Romans 16.18. With fair
speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple. A facil Christian is malleable
to any thing, he is like wool that will take any dye; he is a weak reed that
will be blown any way with the breath of men; one day you may persuade him to
engage in a good cause, the next day to desert it; he is not ex quercu sed ex
salice; he is made of willow, he will bend every way: Oh take heed of a facil
spirit; it is not ingenuity, but folly to suffer ones self to be abused. A good
Christian is like Mount Sion, that cannot be moved, Psalm. 125.1. He is like
Fabricius, of whom it was said, a man might as well alter the course of the
Sun, as turn him aside from doing justice. A good Christian must be firm to
his resolution; if he be not a fixed, he will be a falling star.

4. Take heed of listening to the voice of the flesh. St. Paul conferred not
with flesh and blood, Gal. 1.16. The flesh will give bad counsel; first Saul
consulted with the flesh, and afterward he consulted with the Devil, he sends
to the Witch of Endor; oh says the flesh, the Cross of Christ is heavy, there
is a nail in the yoke which will tear, and fetch blood; be as a deaf Adder,
stopping your ears to the charmings of the flesh.

3. Promote those things which will help to suffer.

Tim. 2.3. As a good Soldier of Christ endure hardship. Jacob made the stone
his pillow, Genesis 28.18. It Is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth,
Lam. 3.27. The bearing of a lighter cross will fit for bearing an heavier:
Learn to bear a reproach with patience, and then you will be fitter to bear an
iron chain Quid iste faceret in igne qui Christum rubuit in nube?
. Saint Paul did dye daily; he began with lesser sufferings, and so by degrees
learned to be a Martyr; as it is in sin, a wicked man learns to be expert in
sin by degrees Nemo repent fit turpis.
; first he commits a lesser sin, then a greater, then he arrives at custom in
sin, then he grows impudent in sin, then he glories in sin, Phil. 3.19. so it
is in suffering, first a Christian takes up the chips of the Cross, a disgrace,
a prison, and then he carries the Cross it self.

Alas how far are they from suffering, who indulge the flesh! Amos 6.4. that
lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches; a very unfit
posture for suffering. That Soldier is like to make but poor work of it, who
is stretching himself upon his bed, when he should be in the field exercising
his Arms Quid dicam de his quibus cura est ut vestes been oleant, ut crines
calamistro rorentur, ut digiti a nulis radient, and si via humi dior fiat vix
in came pedes compriment! Hier.
: What shall I say says Hierom, to those Christians who make it all their care
to persume their clothes, to crisp their hair, to sparkle their Diamonds; but
if sufferings come, and the way to heaven has any water in it, they will not
endure to set their feet upon it! Most people are too effeminate, they use
themselves too nicely and tenderly; those delicatuli, those silken Christians,
(as Tertullian calls them) that pamper the flesh, are unfit for the School of
the Cross; the naked breast and bare shoulder is too soft and tender to carry
Christ's Cross; inure your selves to hardship, do not make your pillow too easy.

can never dye for him he does not know. 2 Timothy 1.12. For which cause I suffer
these things, for I know whom I have believed. Blind men are always fearful; a
blind Christian will be fearful of the Cross; enrich your selves with
knowledge; know Christ in his Virtues, Offices, Privileges; see the
preciousness in Christ. 1 Pet. 1.7. To you that believe he is precious; his
Name is precious, it is as ointment poured forth; his Blood is precious, it is as
balm poured forth; his Love is precious, it is as wine poured forth; Jesus
Christ is made up of all sweets and delights. -- Ipse totus desideria; -- he is
light to the eye, honey to the taste, joy to the heart; get but the knowledge
of Christ, and you will part with all for him; you will embrace him, though it
be in the fire; an ignorant man can never be a Martyr; he may set up an Altar,
but he will never dye for an unknown God.

3. Prize every truth of God; the filings of gold are Prove. 23.23. Buy the
truth, and sell it not. Truth is the object of faith, 2 These. 2.13. The seed of
Regeneration, Jam. 1.18. The spring of joy, 1 Cor. 13.6. Truth crowns us with
salvation, 1 Timothy 2.4. If ever you would suffer for the truth, prize it above
all things; he that does not prize truth above life, will never lay down his
life for the truth. The blessed Martyrs sealed to the truth with their blood.
There are two things God counts most dear to him, his glory and his truth. I
will, says Bishop Jewel, deny my Bishopwrick, I will deny my name and credit,
but the truths of Christ I cannot deny.

4. Keep a good conscience; if there be any sin allowed can never carry the
Cross of Christ; if a Ship be sound, and well rigged, it will sail upon the
water; but if it be full of holes, and leaks, it will sink in the water: If
conscience be full of guilt, (which is like a leak in the Ship) it will not
fall in the bloody waters of persecution. An house will not stand in a storm,
the pillars of it being rotten; if a man's heart be rotten, he will never stand
in a storm of tribulation; how can a guilty person suffer, when for ought he
knows he is like to go from the fire at the stake to hellfire! Let conscience
be pure. 1 Timothy 3.9. Holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. A good
conscience will abide the fiery trial; this made the Martyrs flames, beds of
Roses; good conscience Murus abaeneus esto, Nil conscire sibi.
is a wall of brass; with the Leviathan, it laughs at the shaking of a Spear,
Job 41.29. Let one be in Prison, good conscience is a Bird can sing in this
Cage; Austin calls it the Paradise of a good conscience.

Psalm. 119.50. The Scripture well digested by meditation will fit for
suffering; The Scripture is a Christians Palladium, his Magazine and
Fort-royal; it may be compared to the Tower of David, on which there hang a
thousand Bucklers, Cant. 4.3. From these breasts of Scripture divine strength
flows into the soul. Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.
Hierom speaks of one who by frequent studying the Scripture made his breast
bibliothecam Christi, the Library of Christ. The blessed Scripture as it is an
honycomb for comfort, so an armory for strength; first, the Martyrs hearts did
burn within them by reading the Scripture, Luke 24.32.
and then their bodies were fit to burn. The Scripture arms a Christian both
against tentation and persecution.

1. Against Tentation. Christ himself when he was tempted by the Devil, ran to
Scripture for armor, it is written. Three times he wounds the old Serpent with
this sword. Hierom says of Saint Paul he could never have gone through so many
tentations but for his Scripture-armour. Christian, art thou tempted? go to
Scripture, gather a stone hence, to sling in the face of a Goliah-temptation;
art thou tempted to pride? read that Scripture, 1 Pet. 5.5. God resists the
proud; art thou tempted to lust? read James 1.15. when lust has conceived, it
brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth death.

2. Against persecution. When the flesh draws back, the Scripture will recruit
us, it will put armor upon us, and courage into us, Rev. 2.10. Fear none of
those things which thou shall suffer; behold the Devil shall cast some of you
into prison that ye may be tried, and you shall have tribulation ten days: be
thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. O says the
Christian I am afraid to suffer; Fear none of those things thou shall suffer.
But why should I suffer? I love God, and is not this sufficient? nay, but God
will try your love; it is that ye may be tried. Gods gold is best tried in the
Furnace. But this persecution is so long. No, it is but for ten days; it may
be lasting, but not everlasting: What are ten days put in the balance with
eternity? But what am I the better if I suffer? what comes of it? I will (says
God) give thee a Crown of life: Though thy body be Martyred, thy soul shall be
Crowned. But I shall faint when trials come. My grace shall be sufficient, 2
Cor. 12.9. The weak Christian has Omnipotency to under-prop it.

6. Get a suffering frame of heart.

Quest. What is that?

Answ. A self-denying frame: If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up the Cross. Self-denial is the foundation of godliness; and
if this be not well laid, the whole building will fall. If there be any lust in
our souls which we cannot deny, it will turn at length either to scandal or
apostasy. Self-denial is the thread which must run along through the whole
work of Religion; the self-denying Christian will be the suffering Christian;
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross.

For the further Explication of this, I shall do two things.

1. Show what is meant by this word deny.

2. What is meant by self.

1. What is meant by deny; the word (...), to deny, signifies to lay aside, to
put off, to annihilate ones self. Beza renders it abdicet seipsum, let him
renounce himself.

2. What is meant by self; Self is taken four ways.

1. Worldly self. 2. Relative self. 3. Natural self. 4. Carnal self.
1. A man must deny worldly self; that is, his estate. Matthew. 19.27. Behold we
have forsaken all, and followed thee. The gold of Ophir must be denied for the
pearl of price; Let their money perish with them (said that noble Marquess of
Vico) who esteem all the gold and silver in the world worth one hours
communion with Christ.

2. A man must deny RELATIVE SELF, his dearest Relations if God calls; if our
nearest alliance, father or mother stand in our way, and would hinder us from
doing our duty, we must either leap over them, or tread upon them. Luke 14.26.
If any man come to me, and hate not father and mother, and wife, and children,
etc. he cannot be my Disciple. Relations must not weigh heavier than Christ.

3. A man must deny natural self; he must be willing to become a sacrifice, and
make Christ's Crown flourish, though it be in his ashes. Luke 14.26. Rev. 12.11.
They loved not their lives unto the death: Jesus Christ was dearer to them than
their own heart-blood.

4. A man must deny carnal self; this I take to be the chief sense of the Text.

1. He must deny self-ease; the flesh cries out for ease, it is loath to put its
neck under Christ's yoke, or stretch it self upon the Cross; the flesh cries out
there is a Lion in the way, Prove. 22.13. We must deny our self-ease; they that
lean on the soft pillow of sloth, will hardly take up the Cross. 2 Timothy 2.3.
Thou as a good Soldier of Christ endure hardness. We must force a way to
heaven through sweat and blood. Caesar's Soldiers did fight with hunger and
cold.

2. A man must deny self-opinion; every man by nature has an high opinion of
himself, he is drunk with spiritual pride; and a proud man is unfit for
suffering, he thinks himself too good to suffer. What (says he) I that am of
such a noble descent, such high parts, such repute and credit in the world,
shall I suffer? a proud man disdains the Cross; oh deny self-opinion; how did
Christ come to suffer? He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death,
Phil. 2.8. Let the Plumes of pride fall.

3. A man must deny self-confidence; Peter's confidence undid him. Matthew. 26.33,
34. Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
offended; though I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee. How did this
man presume upon his own strength, as if he had more grace than all the
Apostles besides? his denying Christ, was for want of denying himself; oh deny
thy own strength; Sampsons strength was in his locks; a Christians strength
lies in Christ; he who trusts to himself, shall be left to himself; he who goes
out in his own strength, comes off to his own shame.

4. A man must deny self-wisdom: Renunciet proprio ingenio. Beza.
We read of the wisdom of the flesh, 2 Cor. 1.12. Self-wisdom is carnal policy;
it is wisdom (says the flesh) to keep out of suffering; it is wisdom not to
declare against sin; it is wisdom to find out subtle distinctions to avoid
the Cross; the wisdom of the flesh is to save the flesh. Indeed there is a
Christian prudence to be used; the Serpents eye must be in the Doves head;
wisdom and innocence do well, but it is dangerous to separate them; cursed be
that policy which teaches to avoid duty; this wisdom is not from above, but
is divellish, Jam. 3.17. it is learned from the old Serpent; this wisdom will
turn to folly at last; it is like a man, who to save his gold, throws himself
overboard into the water; so the Politician to save his skin, will damn his
soul.

5. A man must deny self-will; Saint Gregory calls the will the Commander in
chief of all the faculties of the soul; indeed in innocence Adam had rectitude
of mind, and conformity of will; the will was like an instrument in tune, it
was full of harmony, and did tune sweetly to Gods will; but now the will is
corrupt, and like a strong Tide carries us violently to evil; the will has not
only an indisposition to good, but an opposition, Acts 7.51. Ye have always
resisted the Holy Ghost; there is not a greater enemy than the will, it is up
in arms against God, 2 Pet. 2.10. The will loves sin, and hates the Cross. Now
if ever we suffer for God, we must cross our own will; the will must be
martyred; a Christian must say, not my will Lord, but thy will be done.

6. A man must deny self-reasonings; the fleshy part will be reasoning and
disputing against sufferings. Mark 2.8. Why reason you these things in your
hearts? such reasonings as these will begin to arise in our hearts.

1. Persecution is bitter.

Answ. Oh but it is blessed! Jam. 1.12. Blessed is he that endures tentation,
etc. The Cross is heavy, but the sharper the Cross, the brighter the Crown.

2. But it is sad to part with Estate and Relations.

Answ. But Christ is better than all, he is Manna to strengthen, he is wine to
comfort, he is salvation to crown.

3. But liberty is sweet.

Answ. This restraint makes way for enlargement. Psalm. 4.1. Thou have enlarged
me in distress; when the feet are bound with irons, the heart may be sweetly
dilated and enlarged.

Thus should we put to silence those self-reasonings which are apt to arise in
the heart against sufferings.

This self-denying frame of heart is very hard; this is to pluck out the right
eye; one says, a man has not so much to do in overcoming men and Devils, as
in overcoming himself. -- Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit
Maenia. --
Self is the Idol; and how hard is it to sacrifice this Idol, and to turn
self-seeking into self-denial? but though it be difficult, it is essentially
necessary to suffering; a Christian must first lay down self, before he can
take up the Cross.

Alas how far are they then from suffering, that cannot deny themselves in the
least things? in their diet or apparel; who instead of martyring the flesh,
pamper the flesh; instead of taking up the Cross, take up their Cups; is this
self-denial, to let loose the reins to the flesh? it is sure, they who cannot
deny themselves, if sufferings come, they will deny Christ. Oh Christians, as
ever you would be able to carry Christ's Cross, begin to deny your selves;
consider,

Matthew. 19.29. Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my Names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Here is a very
saving bargain; is it not gain enough to have ten in the hundred, nay, above an
hundred for one.

the shame, Hebr. 12.2. He denied his life, he poured out his blood as a
sacrifice upon the Alta^ of the Cross, Col. 1.20. Did Christ deny himself for
you, and will not you deny your selves for him?

thee I never slept: Do thou fast? I never eat; What do thou more than I?
Why, says the good man, I will tell thee Satan, I pray, I serve the Lord, nay
more then all, I deny my self; nay then says Satan, thou go beyond me, for
I exalt my self; and so vanished. Self-denial is the best touchstone of
sincerity; by this you go beyond hypocrites.

4. To deny your selves, is but what others have Moses was a self-denier, he
denied the honors and profits of the Court, Hebr. 11.25. Abraham denied his
own Country at Gods call, Hebr. 11.8. Marcus Arethusus who lived in the time of
Julian the Emperor, endured great torments for Religion; if he would but have
given an halfpenny toward the rebuilding of the Idols Temple, he might have
been released; but he would not do it, though the giving of an halfpenny might
have saved his life; here was a self-denying Saint.

5. There is a time shortly coming, that if you do world will deny you, but
Christ will deny you. Matthew. 10.33. Whosoever shall deny me before men, him
will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

7. Get suffering graces, these three in particular.

1. Faith. 2. Love. 3. Patience.
1. Suffering grace is faith. Ephesians. 6.16. Above all taking the shield of
faith; the pretense of faith is one thing, the use of faith another; the
hypocrite makes faith a cloak, the Martyr makes it a shield; a shield is useful
in time of danger, it defends the head, it guards the vitals; such a shield is
faith, faith is a furnace-grace. 1 Pet. 1.7. Though it be tried with fire, it
is found unto praise and honor. Faith like Hercules club, beats down all
oppositions; by faith we resist the Devil, 1 Pet. 5.9. By faith we resist unto
blood, Hebr. 11.34. Faith is a victorious grace; the Believer will make Christ's
crown flourish, though it be in his own ashes; an unbeliever is like Reuben,
unstable as water, he shall not excel, Genesis 49.4. A believer is like Joseph,
who, though the Archers shot at him, his Bow abode in strength. Cast a
believer upon the waters of affliction, he can follow Christ upon the water,
and not sink; cast him into the fire, his zeal burns hotter than the flame;
cast him into prison, he is enlarged in spirit; Paul and Silas had their
prison-songs. Psalm. 91.13. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and the Adder. A
Christian armed with faith as a coat of Male, can tread upon those persecutions
which are fierce as the Lion, and sting as the Adder; get faith.

Quest. But how comes faith to be such Armor of proof?

Answ. Six manner of ways.

1. Faith unites the soul to Christ, and that blessed head sends forth spirits
into the members. Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ, etc. Faith is
a grace lives all upon the borrow; as when we want water, we go to the Well and
fetch it; when we want gold, we go to the Mine; so faith goes to Christ, and
fetches his strength into the soul, whereby it is enabled both to do and
suffer; hence it is faith is such a wonder-working grace.

2. Faith works in the heart a contempt of the world; faith gives a true map of
the world, Eccles. 2.11. Faith shows the world in its night-dress, having all
its jewels pulled off; faith makes the world appear in an Eclipse; the believer
sees more Eclipses than the Astronomer; faith shows the soul better things than
the world; it gives a sight of Christ and glory, it gives a prospect of heaven;
as the Mariner in a dark night climbs up to the top of the Mast, and cries out,
stellam video, I see a star; so faith climbs up above sense and reason into
heaven, and sees Christ, that bright morning star; and the soul having once
viewed his superlative excellencies, becomes crucified to the world; oh says
the Christian, shall not I suffer the loss of all these things, that I may
enjoy Jesus Christ!

3. Faith gets strength from the promise; faith lives in a promise; take the
fish out of the water, and it dies; take faith out of a promise, and it cannot
live; the promises are breasts of consolation; the child by sucking the breast
gets strength; so does faith by sucking the breast of a promise. When a
Garrison is besieged, and is ready almost to yield to the enemy, Auxiliary
forces are sent in to relieve it; so when faith begins to be weak, and is ready
to faint in the day of battle, then the promises muster their forces together,
and all come in for faiths relief, and now it is able to hold out in the fiery
trial.

4. Faith gives the soul a right notion of suffering; faith draws the true
picture of sufferings; what is suffering? says faith; it is but the suffering
of the body, that body which must shortly by the course of nature drop into the
dust. Persecution can but take away my life; an Ague or Fever may do as much;
now faith giving the soul a right notion of sufferings, and taking (as it were)
a just measure of them, enables a Christian to prostrate his life at the feet
of Christ.

5. Faith reconciles providence and promises; as it was in Saint Paul's voyage,
providence did seem to be against him, there was a cross wind did arise,
called Euroclydon, Acts 27.14. but God had given him a promise that he would
save his life, and the lives of all that sailed with him in the Ship, Ver. 24.
therefore when the wind blew never so contrary, Paul believed it would at
least blow him to the Haven; so when sense says, Here is a cross providence,
sufferings come, I shall be undone; then says faith, all things shall work for
good to them that love God, Romans 8.28. This providence, though bloody, shall
fulfill the promise; affliction shall work for my good, it shall heal my
corruption, and save my soul. Thus faith making the wind and tide go together,
the wind of a providence with the tide of the promise, enables a Christian to
suffer persecution.

6. Faith picks sweetness out of the Cross; faith shows the soul God
reconciled, and sin pardoned; and then how sweet is every suffering? The Be
gathers the sweetest honey from the bitterest herb. -- Saepe tulit lassis
succus amarus opem. -- So faith from the sharpest trials gathers the sweetest
comforts, faith looks upon suffering as Gods love token* Afflictions (says
Nazianzene) are sharp arrows, but they are shot from the hand of a loving
Father; faith can taste honey at the end of the rod; faith fetches joy out of
suffering, John 16.20. Faith gets an honeycomb in the belly of the Lion, it
finds a jewel under the cross; and thus you see how faith comes to be such
Armor of proof; above all taking the shield of faith; a believer having cast
his Anchor in heaven, cannot sink in the waters of persecution.

2. Suffering grace is love; get hearts fired with love

1. Love is active, it lays a Law of constraint upon the soul. 2 Cor. 5.14.
The love of Christ constrains me; love is the wing of the soul that sets it a
flying, and the weight of the soul that sets it a going; love never thinks it
can do enough for Christ; as he who loves the world, never thinks he can take
pains enough for it; love is never weary, it is not tired, unless with its own
slowness.

2. Love is passive, it enables to suffer; a man that loves his friend, will
suffer any thing for him rather than he shall be wronged. The Curtii laid down
their lives for the Romans, because they loved them; love made our dear Lord
suffer for us; per vulnera viscera; as the Pelican out of her love to her young
ones, when they are bitten with Serpents, feeds them with her own blood to
recover them again; so when we had been bitten by the old Serpent, that Christ
might recover us, he did feed us with his own blood. Jacobs love to Rachel,
made him almost hazard his life for her. Many waters cannot quench love, Cant.
8.7. No not the waters of persecution; love is strong as death, Cant. 8.6.
Death makes it way through the greatest oppositions; so love will make its way
to Christ through the Prison and the Furnace. But all pretend love to Christ;
how shall we know that we have such a love to him as will make us suffer?

1. True love is amor amicitiae, a love of friendship, which is genuine and
ingenuous, when we love Christ for himself; there is a mercenary and
meretricious love, when we love divine objects propter aliud, for something
else: a man may love the Queen of truth for the jewel at her ear, because she
brings preferment; a man may love Christ for his head of gold Cant. 5.11.
, because he enricheth with glory; but true love is when we love Christ for his
loveliness, namely, that infinite and superlative beauty which shines in him
Jesus propter Jesum. Aug.
as a man loves sweet wine for its self.

2. True love is amor desiderii, a love of desire, when we desire to be united
to Christ as the fountain of happiness; love desires union; the soul that loves
Christ, is, ambitious of death, because this dissolution tends to union; Death
slips one knot, and ties another.

3. True love is amor benevolentiae, a love of benevolence; when so far as we
are able we endeavor to lift up Christ's name in the world; as the wise men
brought him gold and franckincense, Mat. 2.11. so we bring him our tribute of
service, and are willing that he should rise, though it be by our fall. In
short, that love which is kindled from heaven, makes us give Christ the
pre-eminence of our affection. Cant. 8.2. I would cause thee to drink of spiced
wine, and the juice of my Pomgranates. If the Spouse has a cup which is more
juycy and spiced, Christ shall drink off that; indeed we can never love Christ
too much; we may love gold in the excess, but not Christ; the Angels do not
love Christ to his worth. Now when love is boiled up to this height, it will
enable us to suffer; love is strong as death; the Martyrs

3. The third suffering grace is patience Ga^^et patientia duris. Lucan.
; patience is a grace made and cut out for suffering Sine ferro and flamma
Martyrs esse possumus, fine patientia non possumus.
; patience is a sweet submission to the will of God, whereby we are content to
bear any thing that he is pleased to lay upon us. Patience makes a Christian
invincible, it is like the Anvil that bears all strokes. We cannot be men
without patience; passion does unman a man, it puts him beside the use of
reason; we cannot be Martyrs without patience, patience makes us endure, James
5.10. We read, Rev. 13.2. of a beast like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as
the feet of a Bear, and the Dragon gave him his power, etc. This Beast is to be
understood of the Antichristian power. Antichrist may be compared to a Leopard
for subtilty and fierceness; and on his head was the name of blaspheming, ver.
1. which agrees with that description of the man of sin. 2 These. 2.4. He
sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God; and the Dragon
gave him power, Ver. 2. that is the Devil; and it was given to him to make war
with the Saints, Rev. 13.7. Well, how come the Saints to bear the heat of this
fiery trial? Ver. 10. Here is the patience of the Saints; patience overcomes by
suffering. A Christian without patience, is like a Soldier without arms; faith
keeps the heart up from sinking, patience keeps the heart down from murmuring;
patience is not provoked by injuries, it is sensible, but not peevish; patience
looks to the end of sufferings; this is the Motto; -- Deus dabit his queque
finem. As the Watchman waits for the dawning of the morning, so the patient
Christian suffers and waits, till the day of glory begins to dawn upon him;
faith says, God will come; and patience says, I will stay his leisure; these
are those suffering graces which are a Christians Armor of proof.

8. Treasure up suffering promises; the promises are honey at the end of the
Rod; hoard up promises.

1. God has made promises of direction, that he will give us a Spirit of
wisdom in that hour, teaching us what to say, Luke 21.15. I will give you a
mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, nor
resist. You shall not need study, God will put an answer into your mouth; this
many of Gods sufferers can set their seal to; the Lord has on a sudden darted
such words into their mouths, as their enemies could easier censure than
contradict.

2. God has made promises of protection. Acts 18.9. No man shall set on thee
to hurt thee. How safe was Paul, when he had Omnipotency it self to screen off
danger? and Luke 1.18. There shall not an hair of your head perish. Persecutors
are Lions, but chained Lions.

3. God has made promises of his special presence with his Saints in
suffering. Psalm. 91.15. I will be with him in trouble. If we have such a friend
to visit us in prison, we shall do well enough; though we change our place, we
shall not change our Keeper; I will be with him. God will hold our head and
heart when we are fainting! What if we have more afflictions than others, if we
have more of Gods company? Gods honor is dear to him; it would not be for his
honor to bring his children into sufferings, and leave them there; he will be
with them to animate and support them; yea, when new troubles arise. Job 5.19.
He shall be with thee in six troubles.

4. The Lord has made promises of deliverance: Psalm. 91.15. I will deliver
him, and honor him; God will open a backdoor for his people to escape out of
sufferings. 1 Cor. 10.13. (...); He will with the tentation make a way to
escape. Thus he did to Peter. Acts 12.10. Peter's prayers had opened heaven, and
Gods Angel opens the prison; God can either prevent a snare, or break it. Psalm.
68.20. To God the Lord belong the issues from death. He who can strengthen our
faith, can break our fetters; the Lord sometimes makes the enemies instruments
of breaking those snares which themselves have laid, Esther 8.8.

5. In case of Martyrdom God has made promises of consolation. John 16.22.
Your sorrow shall be turned into joy; there is the water turned into wine. Acts
23.11. Be of good cheer Paul. In time of persecution God broacheth the wine of
consolation; cordials are kept for fainting. Philip Lantgrave of Hesse,
professed se divinas Martyrum consolationes sensisse. Stephen saw the heavens
opened, Acts 7.56. Glover that blessed Martyr cried out at the stake in an holy
rapture, He is come, he is come, meaning the Comforter.

6. Promises of compensation; God will abundantly recompense all our
sufferings, in this life an hundred fold, and in the world to come life
everlasting, Matthew. 19.29. This Austin calls the best and greatest usury; our
losses for Christ are gainful. Matthew. 10.39. He that loses his life for my
sake shall find it. These suffering promises should we treasure up, and by
holy meditation suck sweetness and strength out of them.

9. Set before your eyes suffering examples, look upon Jam. 5.16. Take my
Brethren the Prophets, (...), for an example of suffering affliction. Examples
have more influence upon us than precepts; the one instruct, the other animate;
as they show Elephants the blood of Grapes and Mulberries to make them fight
the better; so the Holy Ghost shows us the blood of Saints and Martyrs to
infuse a spirit of zeal and courage into us: Micaiah was in the prison,
Jeremiah in the Dungeon, Isaiah was sawn asunder. The Primitive Christians
though their flesh was boiled, roasted, dismembered Alii flammis exusti, alii
patibulo cruciati.
, yet like the Adamant they remained invincible; such was their zeal and
patience in suffering, that their persecutors stood amazed, and were more weary
in tormenting, then they were in enduring Tertul. in Apolog.
: John Husse when he was brought to be burned, they put upon his head a tripple
crown of paper printed with red Devils, which when he saw, says he, My Lord
Jesus Christ wore a crown of thorns for me, why then shall not I wear this
crown, how ignominious soever? Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, when he came before
the Proconsul, he bade him deny Christ, and swear by the Emperor; he replied,
I have served Christ these eighty six years, and he has not once hurt me, and
shall I deny him now Octoginta sex annos illi jam inservii, etc.
? Sanders that blessed Martyr, said, Welcome the Cross of Christ; my Savior
began to me in a bitter cup, and shall not I pledge him? You Baynham, you
Papists that look for miracles, I feel no more pain in the fire, than if I were
in a bed of Down. Another of the Martyrs said, The ringing of my chain has
been sweet Music in my ears; O what a comforter (says he) is a good
conscience! Another Martyr kissing the stake, said, I shall not lose my life,
but change it for a better; instead of coals I shall have pearls! Another, when
the chain was fastening to him, said, Blessed be God for this wedding girdle!
These suffering examples we should lay up, God is still the same God; he has
as much love in his heart to pity us, and as much strength in his arm to help
us; let us think with our selves what courage the very Heathens have shown in
their sufferings: Julius Caesar was a man of an heroic spirit; when he was
foretold of a conspiracy against him in the Senate house, he answered, He had
rather dye than fear Mori se quam timere malle. Plut.
. Mutius Scevola having his hand held over the fire, till the flesh fried, and
his sinnews began to shrink, yet did bear it with an undaunted spirit. Quintus
Curtius reports of Lysimachus a brave Captain, that being adjudged to be cast
naked to a Lion, when the Lion came roaring upon him, Lysimachus wrapped his
shirt about his arm, and thrust it into the Lions mouth, and taking hold of his
tongue, killed the Lion. Did nature infuse such a spirit of courage and
gallantry into Heathens! how should grace much more into Christians? let us be
of Saint Paul's mind, Acts 20.24. Not counting my life dear, so that I might
finish my course with joy.

10. Let us lay in suffering considerations. A wise Christian

1. Consider who we suffer for; it is for Christ, and kindle a fire on Gods
Altar for naught, Mal. 1.10. then surely no man shall sacrifice himself for God
in the fire for naught.

2. It is a great honor to suffer persecution. Ambrose encomium of his sister,
said, appellabo Martyrem, I will say this of her, she was a Martyr; it is a
great honor to be singled out to bear witness to the truth. Acts 5.41. They
departed from the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for his Name; it is a title that has been given to Kings, Defenders of
the Faith; a Martyr is in a special manner, a Defender of the Faith; Kings are
defenders of the faith by their Swords, Martyrs by their blood Reges conserva^t
fidem gladio, Martyrs sanguine.
. Gregory Nazianzene calls Athanasius, (...), the Bulwark of truth; it is a
credit to appear for God. Martyrs are not only Christ's Followers, but his
Ensign-bearers: The Romans had their Camilli and Fabricii, brave Warriors which
graced the field; God calls out none but his Champions to fight his battles; we
read Abraham called forth his trained soldiers, Genesis 14.14. such as were more
expert and valiant. What an honor it is to be one of Christ's trained-band? the
Disciples dreamed of a temporal reign, Acts 1.6. Christ tells them, Ver. 8. Ye
shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem, etc. To bear witness by their
sufferings to the truth of Christ's Divinity and Passion, was a greater honor
to the Disciples, than to have had a temporal reign upon earth; a bloody Cross
is more honorable than a purple Robe; persecution is called the fiery trial, 1
Pet. 3.12. God has two fires; one where he puts his gold, and another where he
puts his dross; the fire where he puts his dross, is hell fire; the fire where
he puts his gold, is the fire of persecution; God honors his gold when he puts
it into the fire. 1 Pet. 1.7. 1 Pet. 4.14. A Spirit of glory rests upon you.
Persecution, as it is a Badge of our Order, so an Ensign of our Glory. What
greater honor can be put upon a mortal man, than to stand up in the cause of
God? and not only to dye in the Lord, but to dye for the Lord. Ignatius called
his fetters his spiritual pearls; Saint Paul gloried more in his iron chain,
than if it had been a gold chain, Acts 28.20.

Calvin says, Christ's whole life was a series of suffering: Christian, what is
thy suffering? art thou poor, so was Christ? Matthew. 8.20. Foxes have holes, and
the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his
head. Art thou surrounded with enemies? so was Christ. Acts 4.27. Against thy
holy child Jesus whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with
the Gentiles, etc. were gathered together. Do our enemies lay claim to
Religion? so did his. Matthew. 27.6. The chief Priests took the silver pieces,
and said It is not lawful to put them into the Treasury, because it is the
price of blood. Godly persecutors! Art thou reproached? so was Christ. Matthew.
27.29. They bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of
the Jews. Art thou slandered? so was Christ. Matthew. 9.34. He casts out
Devils through the Prince of the Devils. Art thou ignominiously used? so was
Christ. Mark 14.65. Some began to spit upon him. Art thou betrayed by friends?
so was Christ. Luke 22.48. Judas betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? Is
thy Estate sequestered? and do the wicked cast lots for it? so Christ was dealt
with. Matthew. 27.34. They parted his garments, casting lots. Do we suffer
unjustly? so did Christ; his very Judge did acquit him. Luke 23.4. Then said
Pilate to the chief Priests, and to the people, I find no fault in this man.
Art thou barbarously dragged and haled away to suffering? so was Christ. Matthew.
27.2. When they had bound him (though he came to loosen them) they led him
away. Do thou suffer death? so did Christ: Luke 23.33. When they were come to
Calvary, there they crucified him. They gave him gall and vinegar to drink; the
one deciphering the bitterness, the other the sharpness of his death. Christ
under-went not only the blood of the Cross, but the curse of the Cross, Gal.
3.13. He had an agony in his soul, Matthew. 26.38. (...); My soul is exceeding
sorrowful unto death. The soul of Christ was over-cast with a cloud of Gods
displeasure; the Greek Church speaking of the sufferings of Christ, calls them
(...), unknown sufferings. Did the Lord Jesus endure all this for us, and shall
not we suffer persecution for his Name? say as holy Ignatius (...). Ignat.
, I am willing to dye for Christ, for Christ my love was crucified. Our cup is
nothing to the cup which Christ drank; his cup was mixed with the wrath of God;
and if he did bear Gods wrath for us, well may we bear man's wrath for him.

Caesar that he had such Soldiers as were able to fight with hunger and cold,
and endure hardship in their marches. It is an honor to Christ that he has
such listed under him as will leave all for him; it proclaims him to be a good
Master, when his servants will wear his Livery, though it be sullied with
disgrace, and lined with blood; Paul's iron chain made the Gospel wear a golden
chain. Tertullian says of the Saints in his time, they took their sufferings
more kindly, than if they had had deliverance Magis damnati quam absoluti
gaudemus. Tert. Apolog.
. O what a glory was this to the truth, when they durst embrace it in the
flame! And as the Saints sufferings adorn the Gospel, so they propagate it.
Basil says the zeal and constancy of the Martyrs in the Primitive times, made
some of the Heathens to be Christianized.

-- Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine crevit. -- The showers of blood
have ever made the Church fruitful, Phil. 1.13. Paul's being bound made the
truth more enlarged; the Gospel has always flourished in the ashes of Martyrs.

we would be true to Christ's interest, and fight it out under his Banner to the
death; and how often have we in the blessed Supper taken the oath of allegiance
to Jesus Christ, that we would be his liege servants, and that death should not
part us! Now if when being called to it, we refuse to suffer persecution for
his Name, Christ will bring our Baptism as an indictment against us; Christ is
called the Captain of our salvation, Hebr. 2.10. We have listed our selves by
name under this Captain; now if for fear we shall fly from our colors, it is
perjury in the highest degree; and how shall we be able to look Christ in the
face another day? Summum creed nefas, etc. Juvenal. sat. 10.
That oath which is not kept inviolably, shall be punished infallibly; where
does the flying roll of curses light, but in the house of him that swears
falsely. Zach. 5.4.
.

6. Our sufferings are light. 2 Cor. 4.17. This light affliction, etc. It is
heavy to flesh and blood, but it is light to faith; affliction is light in a
threefold respect.

1. It is light in comparison of sin; he that feels sin heavy, feels suffering
light; sin made Paul cry out, O wretched man that I am! Romans 7. He does not cry
out of his iron chain, but of his sin; the greater noise drowns the lesser;
when the Sea roars, the Rivers are silent; he that is taken up about his sins,
and sees how he has provoked God, thinks the yoke of affliction light, Micah
7.9.

2. Affliction is light in comparison of hell; what is persecution to
damnation? what is the fire of Martyrdom to the fire of the damned? it is no
more than the pricking of a pin to a deaths wound. Who knows the power of
thine anger? Psalm. 90.11. Christ himself could not have born that anger, had he
not been more than a man.

3. Affliction is light in comparison of glory; the weight of glory makes
persecution light; if says Chrysostom, the torments of all the men in the
world could be laid upon one man, it were not worth one hours being in heaven;
and if persecution be light, we should in a manner set light by it; let us
neither faint through unbelief, nor fret through impatience.

Pet. 5.10. After ye have suffered awhile; or as it is in the Greek, (...), a
little; our sufferings may be lasting, not everlasting; affliction is compared
to a cup, Lam. 4.21. The wicked drink of a Sea of wrath, which has no bottom,
it will never be emptied; but it is only a cup of Martyrdom, and God will say,
Let this cup pass away. Psalm. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon
the lot of the righteous; the rod may be there, it shall not rest; Christ calls
his sufferings an hour, Luke 12.53. Can we not suffer one hour? persecution
is aspera, but brevis; though it has a sting to torment, yet it has a wing to
fly: Isa. 35.10. Sorrow shall fly away; it is but awhile when the Saints
shall have a Writ of ease granted them, they shall weep no more, suffer no
more; they shall be taken off the torturing wrack, and laid in Christ's bosom;
the people of God shall not always be in the iron Furnace, a year of Jubilee
will come; the water of persecution like a Land-flood, will soon be dried up.

Romans 8.17. If we suffer with him, etc. Jesus Christ bears part of the
suffering with us; oh says the Christian, I shall never be able to hold out;
but remember thou suffer with Christ, he helps thee to suffer. As our
blessed Savior said, John 16.32. I am not alone, the Father is with me: So a
believer may say, I am not alone, my Christ is with me, he bears the heaviest
end of the Cross. 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee. Deutr. 33.27.
Underneath are the everlasting arms; if Christ put the yoke of persecution over
us, he will put his arms under us; the Lord Jesus will not only crown us when
we conquer, but he will enable us to conquer; when the Dragon fights against
the godly, Christ is that Michael which stands up for them, and helps them to
overcome, Dan. 12.1.

9. He that refuses to suffer persecution, shall never

1. Internal sufferings; he that will not suffer for conscience, shall suffer
in conscience; thus Francis Spira, after he had for fear abjured that doctrine
which once he professed, was in great terror of mind, and became a very
Anatomy; he professed he felt the very pains of the damned in his soul; he who
was afraid of the stake, was set upon the wrack of conscience.

2. External sufferings. Pendleton who refused to suffer for Christ, not long
after, his house was on fire, and he was burned in it; he who would not burn
for Christ, was afterward made to burn for his sins.

3. Eternal sufferings: Jude 7. Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.

10. These present sufferings cannot hinder a man Blessed are they that are
persecuted, etc. We think beati divites, blessed are they that are rich, nay,
but blessed are they that are persecuted. Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that
endures temptation. 1 Pet. 3.14. If ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are
ye.

That persecution cannot hinder us from being blessed, I shall prove by four
demonstrations.

1. They are blessed, who have God for their God. Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that
people whose God is the Lord; but persecution cannot hinder us from having God
for our God. Dan. 3.17. Our God is able to deliver us; though persecuted, yet
they could say, Our God; therefore persecution cannot hinder us from being
blessed.

2. They are blessed whom God loves, but persecution cannot hinder the love of
God. Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
persecution? The Goldsmith loves his gold as well when it is in the fire, as
when it is in his bag; God loves his children as well in adversity, as in
prosperity. Rev. 3.19. As many as I love I rebuke; God visits his children in
prison. Acts 23.11. Be of good cheer, Paul. God sweetens their sufferings. 2
Cor. 1.5. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds. As the mother having given her child a bitter pill, gives it
afterward a lump of sugar; persecution is a bitter pill, but God gives the
comforts of his Spirit to sweeten it; if persecution cannot hinder Gods love,
then it cannot hinder us from being blessed.

3. They are blessed for whom Christ prays, but such as are persecuted, have
Christ praying for them. John 17.12. Keep through thy own Name those whom thou
have given me; which prayer, though made for all believers, yet especially for
his Apostles, which he foretold should be Martyrs, John 16.2. Now if
persecution cannot hinder Christ's prayer for us, then it cannot impede or
obstruct our blessedness.

4. They are blessed that have sin purged out; but persecution purges out sin,
Isa. 27.9. Hebr. 12.11. Persecution is a corrosive to eat out the proud flesh,
it is a Fan to winnow us, a fire to refine us; persecution is the physic God
applies to his children, to carry away their ill humors; that surely which
purges out sin, cannot hinder blessedness.

10. The great suffering consideration is the glorious their's is the Kingdom
of heaven; the hope of reward says Saint Basil, is very powerful and moving.
Moses had an eye at the recompense of reward, Hebr. 11.26. yea, Christ himself,
Hebr. 12.2. Many have done great things for hope of a temporal reward; Camillus
when his Country was oppressed by the Galls, ventured his life for his
Country to purchase fame and honor; if men will hazard their lives for a
little temporal honor; what should we do for the reward of glory? A Merchant,
says Chrysostom, does not mind a few storms at Sea, but he thinks of the
emolument and gain when the ship comes fraught home; so a Christian should not
be over-solicitous about his present sufferings, but think of the rich reward
when he shall arrive at the heavenly Port. Great is your reward in heaven, Ver.
12. The Cross is a golden Ladder, Noli attendere qua iturus sis, sed quo
venturus. Aug.
by which we climb up to heaven; a Christian may lose his life, but not his
reward; he may lose his head, but not his crown; if he that gives a cup of cold
water, shall not lose his reward, then much less he that gives a draught of
warm blood; the reward of glory may sweeten all the waters of Marah, it should
be a spur to Martyrdom.

Caution. Not that we can merit this reward by our sufferings. Rev. 2.10. I
will give thee a Crown of life. The reward is the Legacy which free grace
bequeaths. Alas, what proportion is there between a drop of blood, and a weight
of glory? Christ himself as he was man only (setting aside his Godhead) did not
merit by his sufferings: For 1. Christ as he was man, only was a creature; now
a creature cannot merit from the Creator. 2. Christ's sufferings as he was man
only, were finite, therefore could not merit infinite glory; indeed as he was
God, his sufferings were meritorious; but consider him purely as man, they were
not. This I urge against the Papists; if Christ's sufferings as he was man only,
(though as man, he was above the Angels) could not merit; then what man upon
Earth, what Prophet or Martyr is able to merit any thing by his sufferings?

But though we have no reward ex merito, by merit, we shall have it ex gratia,
by grace; so it is in the Text, Great is your reward in heaven. The thoughts of
this reward should animate Christians (...). Ignat.
. Look upon the Crown, and faint if you can; the reward is as far above your
thoughts, as it is beyond your deserts; a man that is to wade through a deep
water, fixes his eyes upon the firm Land before him; while Christians are
wading through the deep waters of persecution, they should fix the eyes of
their faith on the Land of promise; great is your reward in heaven. They that
bear the Cross patiently, shall wear the Crown triumphantly.

Christ's suffering Saints shall have greater degrees in glory, Matthew. 19.28.
God has his highest seats, yea, his Thrones for his Martyrs; it is true, he
that has the least degree of glory, a doorkeeper in heaven, will have enough;
but as Joseph gave to Benjamin a double mess above the rest of his brethren, so
God will give to his sufferers a double portion of glory; some orbs in heaven
are higher, some stars brighter; Gods Martyrs shall shine brighter in the
heavenly Horizon.

Oh often look upon the recompense of reward; not all the silks of Persia, the
spices of Arabia, the gold of Ophir, can be compared to this glorious reward:
How should the thoughts of this whet and steel us with courage in our
sufferings! when they threatened Basil with banishment, he comforted himself
with this, that he should be either under heaven, or in heaven Aut sub coelo,
aut in coelo.
. It was the hope of this reward which did so animate those Primitive Martyrs,
who when there was incense put into their hands, and there was no more required
of them for the saving of their lives, but to sprinkle a little of that incense
upon the Altar in honor of the Idol, they would rather dye than do it; this
glorious reward in heaven is called a reigning with Christ. 2 Timothy 2.12. If we
suffer, we shall reign with him. First Martyrs, then Kings. Julian honored all
those who were slain in his battles, so does the Lord Jesus; after the Saints
Crucifixion follows their Coronation, they shall reign. The wicked first reign,
and then suffer; the godly first suffer, and then reign. The Saints shall have
an happy reign, it shall be both peaceable and durable; who would not swim
through blood to this Crown? who would not suffer joyfully? Christ says (...),
be exceeding glad, Ver. 12. The Greek word signifies to leap for joy
G^sticulationem sonat laetantis. Erasm.
; Christians should have their spirits elevated and exhilarated, when they
contemplate the weight of glory.

11. If you would be able to suffer, pray much, beg Phil. 1.29. To you it is
given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer
for his sake. It is a gift of God to be able to suffer, (...).
pray for this gift; do not think you can be able of your selves to lay down
life and liberty for Christ; Peter was over-confident of himself. John 13.37. I
will lay down my life for thy sake; but Peter's strength undid him; Peter had
habitual grace, but he wanted auxiliary grace; Christians need fresh gales from
heaven; pray for the Spirit to animate you in your sufferings; as the fire
hardens the Potters Vessel, which is at first weak and limber; so the fire of
the Spirit hardens men against sufferings; pray that God will make you like the
Anvil, that you may bear the strokes of persecutors with invincible patience.

1 JOHN 5.3. His Commandments are not grievous.


CHAP. XXII.
Containing an Appendix to the Beatitudes.

YOU have seen what Christ calls for; Poverty of spirit, Purity of heart,
meekness, mercifulness, cheerfulness in suffering persecution, etc. Now that
none may hesitate, or be troubled at these commands of Christ, I thought good
(as a closure to the former Discourse) to take off the surmises and prejudices
in men's spirits, by this sweet mollifying Scripture, His Commandments are not
grievous.

The censuring world objects against Religion that it is difficult and irksome.
Mal. 1.13. Behold what a weariness is it! therefore the Lord that he may invite
and encourage us to obedience, draws Religion in its fair colors, and
represents it to us as beautiful and pleasant, in these words, His Commandments
are not grievous: This may well be called a sweetning ingredient into Religion,
and may serve to take off that asperity and harshness which the carnal world
would put upon the ways of God.

For the clearing of the terms, let us consider:

1. What is meant here by Commandments?

Answ. By this word (...), Commandments, I understand Gospel-precepts; faith,
repentance, self-denial; etc.

2. What is meant by not grievous.

The Greek word (...), signifies they are not tedious, or heavy to be born;
there is a Meiofis in the words, His commands are not grievous; that is, they
are easy, sweet, excellent.

Doctr. Hence observe, none of Gods commands are grievous; when he calls us to
be meek, merciful, pure in heart, these Commandments are not grievous. Matthew.
11.30. My burden is light; the Greek word there for burden, (...), signifies
properly the ballast of a ship, which glides through the waves so swiftly and
easily, as if the ship had no weight or pressure in it. Christ's Commandments
are like the ballast of a ship, useful, but not troublesome, all his precepts
are sweet and facil; therefore called pleasantness, Prove. 3.17. To illustrate
and amplify this, consider two things.

1. Why Christ lays commands upon his people. 2. That these commands are not
grievous.
1. Why Christ lays commands upon his people, there are two Reasons.

1. In regard of Christ; it is suitable to his dignity and state; he is Lord
Paramount, this name is written on his Thigh and Vesture, King of Kings, Rev.
19.16. And shall not a King appoint Laws to his subjects? it is one of the jura
regalia, the flowers of the Crown to enact Laws and Statutes; what is a King
without his Laws? And shall not Christ ( by whom Kings reign Prove. 8.15.
) put forth his Royal Edicts by which the world shall be governed?

2. In regard of the Saints; it is well for the people of God that they have
Laws to bind and check the exorbitancies of their unruly hearts; how far would
the Vine spread its luxuriant branches were it not pruned, and tied? the heart
would be ready to run wild in sin, if it had not affliction to prune it, and
the Laws of Christ to bind it; the precepts of Christ are called (...), a
yoke, Matthew. 11.30. The yoke is useful, it does keep the Oxen in from straggling
and running out; so the precepts of Christ as a yoke, do keep the godly from
straggling into sin; whether should we not run, into what damnable opinions and
practices, did not Christ's Laws lay a check and restraint upon us? Blessed be
God for precepts. That is a blessed yoke which yokes our corruptions; we should
run to hell were it not for this yoke. The Laws of Christ are a spiritual
hedge, which keeps the people of God within the pastures of Ordinances; some
that have broken this hedge, and have stragled, are now in the Devils pound.
Thus we see what need the Saints have of the Royal Law.

2. The second thing I am to demonstrate, is, That Christ's commands are not
grievous; I confess they are grievous to the unregenerate man, to mourn for
sin, to be pure in heart, to suffer persecution for righteousness sake, Durus
hic sermo, this is grievous to flesh and blood; therefore ^hrists commands are
compared to bands and cords, Psalm. 2. because carnal men look upon them so.
Gods commands restrain men from their excess, and bind them to their good
behavior, therefore they hate these bonds, and instead of breaking off sin,
say, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us, Psalm.
2.3. A carnal man is like an untamed Heifer, which will not endure the yoke,
but kicks and flings; or like a wild Bull in a net, Isa. 51.20. Thus to a
person in the state of nature Christ's commands are grievous.

Nay, to a child of God, so far as corruption prevails, (for he is but in part
regenerate) Christ's Laws seem irksome; the flesh cries out, it cannot pray or
suffer; the Law in the members rebels against Christ's Law; only the spiritual
part prevails, and makes the flesh stoop to Christ's injunctions. A regenerate
person, so far as he is regenerate, does not count Gods Commandments grievous,
they are not a burden, but a delight.

Divine commands are not grievous, if we consider them first positively, in
these eight particulars. 1. Positively.


1. A Christian consents to Gods commands, therefore Romans 7.16. I^ consent to
the Law that it is good. What is done with consent, is easy; if the Virgin
give her consent, the Match goes on cheerfully. A godly man in his judgment
approves of Christ's Laws Romans 7.12.
, and in his will consents to them, therefore they are not grievous; a wicked
man is under a force, terror of conscience hales him to duty; he is like a
slave that is chained to the Gally, he must work whether he will or no, he is
forced to pull the Rope, tug at the Oar; but a godly man is like a free
subject, that consents to his Princes Laws, and obeyes out of choice, as seeing
the equity and rationality of them. Thus a gracious heart sees that beauty and
equity in the commands of heaven, as draws forth consent, and this consent
makes them that they are not grievous.

Christ's comands, therefore not grievous. Take my yoke, Matthew. 11.29. Gospel
commands are not the Laws of a Tyrant, but a Savior. The husbands commands are
not grievous to the wife, it is her ambition to obey; this is enough to animate
and excite obedience, Christ commands. As Peter said in another sense, Matthew.
14.28. Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee upon the water. So says a
gracious soul, Lord; if it be thou that would have me mourn for sin, and
breath after heart-purity; if it be thou (dear Savior) that biddest me do
these things, I will cheerfully obey. Thy commandments are not grievous. A
soldier at the word of his General makes a brave onset.

love, and then Gods commandments are not grievous. Therefore in Scripture
serving, and loving of God are put together, Isa. 56.6. The sons of the
strangers that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the Name
of the Lord, etc. Nothing is grievous to him that loves; love lightens a
burden; it adds wings to obedience; an heart that loves God counts nothing
tedious, but its own dullness and slownesse of motion; love makes sin heavy,
and Christ's burden light.

auxilio Spiritus, by the help of the Spirit; and the Spirit makes every duty
easy, Romans 8.26. The Spirit helps our infirmities. The Spirit works in us
the (...), and (...), both to will, and to do, Phil. 2. When God enables to do
what he commands, then, his commandments are not grievous; if two carry a
burden it is easy; the Spirit of God helps us to do duties, to bear burdens,
it draws as it were in the yoke with us; If the Scrivener guides the child's
hand, and helps it to frame its letters; now, it is not hard for the child to
write. If the Loadstone draw the iron, it is not hard for the iron to move: if
the Spirit of God as a Divine Loadstone draw and move the heart, now, it is not
hard to obey. When the birds has wings given it, it can fly. Though the soul
of it self be unable to do that which is good, yet having two wings given it,
(like that woman in the Revelation) Rev. 12 24.
the wing of faith, and the wing of the Spirit, now it flies swiftly in
obedience, Ezekiel. 11.1. the Spirit did lift me up. The heart is heavenly in
prayer, when the Spirit lifts it up. The sails of a Mill cannot move of
themselves, but when the wind blows, then they turn round; when a gale of the
Spirit blows upon the soul. Now the sails of the affections move swiftly in
duty.

5. All Christ's commands are beneficial, therefore not Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. And now
O Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, to love him, to keep his Statutes which I command thee this day for thy
good. Christ's commands carries meat in the mouth of them, and then surely they
are not grievous, salvation runs along in every precept. To obey Christ's Laws,
is not so much of duty, as our privilege; all Christ's commands center in
blessedness. Physic is in it self very unpleasant, yet because it tends to
health, no man refuses it; Divine Precepts are to the fleshy part irksome,
yet, having such excellent operation as to make us both holy, and happy, they
are not to be accounted grievous; the apprentise is content to go through hard
service, because it makes way for his freedom; The Scholar willingly wrastles
with the knotty difficulties of Arts and Sciences, because they serve both to
enoble and advance him. How cheerfully does a believer obey those Laws which
reveal Christ's love! That suffering is not grievous which leads to a Crown.
This made Saint Paul say, I take pleasure in infirmities, in persecutions, 2.
Cor. 12.10.

6. It Is honorable to be under Christ's commands; therefore they are not
grievous. The precepts of Christ do not burden us, but adorn us Omnia quae
praestari jubet Christus, non onerant nos, sed ornant. Salv.
. It Is an honor to be employed in Christ's service. How cheerfully did the
rowers row the Barge that carried Caesar; the honor makes the precept easy; a
Crown of gold is in it self heavy, but the honor of the Crown makes it light,
and easy to be worn. I may say of every command of Christ, as Solomon speaks
of wisdom, Prove. 4.9. She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace; a
Crown of glory shall she deliver to thee. It Is honorable working at Court. The
honor of Christ's yoke makes it easy and eligible.

7. Christ's commands are sweetened with joy, and then they are not grievous.
Cicero questions, whether that can properly be called a burden which is carried
with joy and pleasure Utrum onus appellandum quod laetitia fertur. Cicero.
? When the wheels of a Chariot are oyled, they run swiftly; when God poures in
the oil of gladness, how fast does the soul run in the ways of his
commandments! Joy strengthens for duty. Nehem. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is
your strength; and the more strength, the less weariness; God sometimes drops
down comfort, and then a Christian can run in the yoke.

8. Gospel-commands are finite, therefore not grievous. Christ will not always
be laying his commands upon us; Christ will shortly take off the yoke from our
neck, and set a Crown upon our head. There is time coming when we shall not
only be free from our sins, but our duties too; prayer and fasting are irksome
to the flesh; in heaven there will be no need of prayer or repentance; duties
shall cease there: indeed in heaven the Saints shall love God, but love is no
burden; God will shine forth in his beauty, and to fall in love with beauty is
not grievous. In heaven the Saints shall praise God, but their praising of him
shall be so sweetened with delight, that it will not be a duty any more, but
part of their reward. It Is the Angels heaven to praise God; This then makes
Christ's commands not grievous, though they are spiritual, yet temporary, it is
but awhile, and duties shall be no more. The Saints shall not so much be under
commands as embraces; wait but a while, and you shall put off your armor, and
end your weary marches; thus we have seen that Christ's commands considered in
themselves, are not grievous.

2. Let us consider Christ's commands comparatively, 2. Comparatively.
and we shall see they are not grievous; let us make a fourfold comparison.
Compare Gospel-commands.

1. With the severity of the Moral Law. 2. With the Commands of sin. 3. With
the torments of the damned. 4. With the glory of heaven.
1. Christ's commands in the Gospel are not grievous, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law
to do them. Impossible it is, that any Christian should come up to the
strictness of this. The golden Mandates of the Gospel comparatively are easy.
For,

1. In the Gospel, if there be a desire to keep Gods Nehem. 1.11. 2 Cor. 8.12.
If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted. Though a man had had never so
good a mind to have fulfilled the Moral Law, it would not have been accepted,
he must de facto have obeyed, Gal. 3.12. but, in the Gospel, God crowns the
desire. If a Christian says in humility, Lord, I desire to obey thee, I would
be more holy; Isa. 26.8.
this desire, springing from love, passes for current.

2. In the Gospel a Surety is admitted in the Court. The Law would not admit of
a Surety, it required personal obedience; but now, God does so far indulge us,
that what we cannot of our selves do, we may do by a Proxy. Christ is called
the Surety of a better Testament, Heb. 7.22. We cannot walk so exactly; we
tread awry, and fall short in every thing; but God looks upon us in our Surety;
and Christ having fulfilled all righteousness Matthew. 3.15.
, it is all one as if we had fulfilled the Law in our own persons.

3. The Law did command and threaten, but gave no strength to perform; it did
Egyptianize, requiring the full tale of Brick, but gave no Straw. But now God
with his commands gives power; Gospel-precepts are sweetened with promises. God
commands, Ezekiel. 18.31. Make you a new heart. Lord, may the soul say, I make a
new heart? I can as well make a new world. But see Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart
also will I give you. God commands us to cleanse our selves, Isa. 1.16. Wash
you, make you clean. Lord, where should I have power to cleanse my self? Who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job. 14.4. See the Precept turned
into a Promise, Ezekiel. 36.25. From all your filthiness, and from your Idols
will I cleanse you. If when the child cannot go, the father takes it by the
hand, and leads it, now it is not hard for the child to go; when we cannot go,
God takes us by the hand, Hos. 11.3. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them
by their arms.

4. In the Gospel God winks at infirmities where the heart is right. The Law
called for perfect obedience; it was death to have shot but an hairs breadth
short of the mark; it were sad if the same rigor should continue upon us: Woe to
the holiest man that lives, (says Austin) if God comes to weigh him in the
balance of his justice. It Is with our best duties as with gold; put the gold
in the fire, and you will see dross come out; what drossinesse in our holy
things? but in the Gospel though God will not endure haltings, yet he will
pass by failings. Thus Christ's commands in the Gospel are not grievous,
compared with the severity of the Moral Law.

2. Christ's commands are not grievous, compared with the commands of sin. Sin
lays an heavy yoke upon Talent of lead, Onera unusquisque portas, sua peccata
sunt. Aug.
Zac. 5.7. to show the weightinesse of it. The commands of sin are burdensome;
let a man be under the power and rage of any lust, (whether it be covetousness
or ambition) how does he tire and excruciate himself! what hazards does he run
even to the endangering of his health, and soul, that he may satisfy his lust!
Jer. 9.5. They weary themselves to commit iniquity. And are not Christ's
precepts easy and sweet in comparison of sins austere and inexorable commands?
Therefore Chrysostom says well, That Virtue is easier than Vice (...). Chrysostom.
. Temperance is less burdensome than Drunkenness; doing justice is less
burdensome than violence. There Is more difficulty, and perplexity in the
contrivement Micah 2.1.
, and pursuit of wicked ends, than in obeying the sweet and gentle preceps of
Christ. Hence it is, that a wicked man is said to travel with iniquity, Psalm.
7.14. To show what anxious pain and trouble he has in bringing about his
wickedness. What tedious and hazardous journeys did Antiochus Epiphanes take
in persecuting the people of the Jews? Many have gone with more pain to hell
than others have to heaven.

I am tormented in this flame, Luke 16.24. Hellfire is so unconceivably
torturing, that the wicked know not either how to bear, or to avoid it. The
torment of the damned may be compared to a yoke, and it differs from other
yoaks; usually the yoke is laid but upon the neck of the beast; but the
hell-yoak is laid upon every part of the sinner; his eyes shall behold nothing
but bloody Tragedies, his ears shall hear the groans and schreeks of
blaspheming spirits. He shall suffer in every member of his body and faculty of
his soul; and this agony, though violent, yet perpetual; The yoke of the damned
shall never be taken off. -- Vestiga nulla retrorsum -- Sinners might break the
golden chain of Gods commands, but they cannot break the iron chain of his
punishments Vincula insoluta manent. Bern.
. It Is as impossible for them to file this chain, as to scale heaven.

And, are not Gospel-commands easy in comparison of hell torments? what does
Christ command? he bids you repent; is it not better to weep for sin, then
bleed for it? Christ bids you pray in your families and closets; is not praying
better than roaring? he bids you sanctify the Sabbath; is it not better to
keep an holy rest to the Lord, than to be for ever without rest? Hell is a
restless place, there is no intermission of torment for one minute of an hour.
I appeal to the consciences of men. Are not Christ's commands sweet and facil in
comparison of the unsupportable pains of reprobates? is not obeying better than
damning? are not the cords of love better than the chains of darkness?

4. Gospel-commands are not grievous, compared with The weight of glory makes
duty light.

Use 1. Behold here an encouraging argument to Religion, his commandments are
not grievous; Inform.
believers are not now under the thundering curses of the Law, no nor the
ceremonies of it, which were both numerous and burdensome; the ways of God are
equal, his statutes eligible; he bids us mourn, that we may be comforted. He
bids us be poor in spirit, that he may settle a Kingdom upon us; God is no hard
Master, his commandments are not grievous. O Christian, serve God out of choice
Psalm. 119.30.
. Think of the joy, the honor, the reward of godliness; never more grudge God
your service; whatever he does prescribe, let your hearts subscribe.

Use 2. It reproves them that refuse to obey these Psalm. 81.11. Israel would
none of me. We may cry out with Austin, the generality of men choose rather to
put their neck in the Devils yoke, than to submit to the sweet and easy yoke
of Christ Plurimi durissimum peccati jugum volunt far, and dulce jugum
Christi nolunt suis humeris imponere. Aug.
. What should be the reason that when Gods commandments are not grievous, his
ways are pleasantness, his service PERFECT FREEDOM, yet that men should not
vail to Christ's Scepter, nor stoop to his Laws? Surely the cause may be

1. That inbred hatred which is naturally in men's hearts against Christ.
Sinners are called (...), God-haters, Romans 1.30. Sin begets not only a dislike
of the ways of God, but hatred; and from disaffection flows disloyalty, Luke
19.14. His Citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, we will
not have this man to reign over us.

2. Besides this inbred hatred against Christ, the Devil labors to blow the
coals, and increase this odium and antipathy. He raises an evil report upon
Religion, as those Spies did on Canaan, Numb. 13.32. They brought up an evil
report of the Land. Satan is implacably malicious; and as he sometimes accuses
us to God, so he accuses God to us, and says, he is an hard Master, and his
commandments are grievous; it is the Devils design to do as the sons of Eli,
who made the offering of God to be abhorred, 1 Samuel 2.17. If there be an hatred
and prejudice in the heart against Religion, an enemy has done this. Matthew.
13.38.
The Devil raises in the hearts of men a twofold prejudice against Christ and
his ways.

Psalm. 119.35. whereas the way of pleasure and vanity is the road-way; many
ignorantly conclude, That must needs be the best way which most go.

Answ. 1. There are but few that are saved, and will not you be saved because
so few are saved? a man does not argue thus in other things, There are but few
rich, therefore I will not be rich; nay, therefore he the rather strives to be
rich. Why should not we argue thus wisely about our souls? There are but few
that go to heaven, therefore we will labor the more to be of the number of
that few.

Ans. 2. What a weak argument is this, There are but few that embrace Religion,
therefore you will not? Those things which are more excellent, are more rare:
there are but few Pearls and Diamonds, in Rome few Senators; the fewness of
them that embrace Religion, argues the way of Religion excellent.

-- Non cuivis contingit adire Corinthum. -- Answ. 3. We are warned not to sail
with the multitude, Exodus 23.2. Most fish goes to the Devils net.

2. The ways of Religion are rendered deformed and

Answ. I acknowledge the luster of Religion has been much eclipsed and sullied
by the scandals of men; this is an age of scandals; many have made the pretense
of Religion a Key to open the door to all ungodliness; never was Gods name
more taken in vain; this is that our Savior has foretold, Matthew. 18.7. It
must needs be that offenses come. But to take off this prejudice: Consider, 1.
Scandals are not from Religion, but for want of Religion. 2. Religion is not
the worse, though some abuse it. To dislike Religion because some of the
Professors of it are scandalous, is as if one should say, Because the servant
is dishonest, therefore he will not have a good opinion of his Master. Is
Christ the less glorious because some that wear his livery are scandalous? Is
Religion the worse because some of her followers are bad? Is wine the worse
because some are intemperate? Shall a woman dislike chastity, because some of
her neighbors are unchaste? Let us argue soberly; judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judgment, John 7.24.

3. God sometimes permits scandals to fall out in the Church out of a design.

1. As a just judgment upon Hypocrites; these squintey'd devotionists who serve
God for their own ends, the Lord in justice suffers them to fall into horrid
debauched practices that he may lay open their baseness to the world, and that
all may see they were but py-bald Christians, painted Devils. Judas, first a
sly Hypocrite, afterward a visible Traitor.

2. Scandals are for hardening of the profane; some desperate sinners who would
never give God a good word, they would not be won by Religion, they shall be
wounded by it. God lets scandals be to be a breakneck to men, and to ingulph
them more in sin. Jesus Christ (God blessed for ever) is to some a Rock of
offense, Romans 9.33. His blood which is to some balm, is to others poison; if
the beauty of Religion does not allure, the scandals of some of its followers
shall precipitate men to hell.

3. Scandals in the Church are for the caution of the godly; the Lord would
have his people walk tremblingly, Romans 11.20. Be not high-minded, but fear.
When Cedars fall, let the bruised reed tremble; the scandals of Professors are
not to discourage us, but to warn us; let us tread more warily; the scandals
of others are Sea-marks for the Saints to avoid: and let all this serve to take
off these prejudices from Religion; though Satan may endeavor by false
disguises to render the Gospel odious, yet there is a beauty and a glory in it;
Gods commandments are not grievous.

Use 3. Let me persuade all men cordially to embrace the ways of God; Exhort.
his commandments are not grievous. God never burdens us, Onerat Deus ut
exoneres.
but that he may unburden us of our sins; His commands are our privileges;
there is joy in the way of duty Psalm. 19.11.
, and heaven at the end.

Christ's various fullness.
COL. 3.11. But Christ is all in all.


THE Philosopher says, every Science takes its dignity from the object Omnis
scientia sumit dignitatem ab objecto.
; the more noble the object, the more rare the knowledge. Hence it is that
Jesus Christ being the most sublime and glorious object, that knowledge which
leads us to Christ, must needs be most excellent; it is called (...), the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.8. So sweet is this knowledge,
that Saint Paul determined to know nothing but Christ, 1 Cor. 2.2. And indeed
what needed he to know more? for Christ is (...), all in all.

In the Text there is a Negation and an Assumption; something the Apostle sets
down privatively, and something positively.

1. Privatively. Saint Paul tells the Colossians what will not avail them;
neque Circumcisio, neque Praeputium; neither Circumcision, nor uncircumcision
avails, etc. Circumcision was a great privilege, it w^^ a badge and
cognizance to distinguish the people of God from those who were exteri and
foreign; it was a Pale between the Garden enclosed, and the Common. The people
of circumcision were a people of Gods circumspection, they were under his eye,
and his wing; they were (...), his household family; and rather than they should
want, God would make the heavens a Granary, and rain down Manna upon them; he
would set the Rock abroach, and make it a living Spring; how glorious was
circumcision! Romans 9.4, 5. Who are Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption
and the glory, whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh
Christ came. What rich jewels hung upon Isreal's Crown! but in matters of
salvation, all this was nothing, neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision, etc.
From whence we may observe:

Cor. 1.26. Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble
are called. God sees not as man sees; we are taken with beauty and parts; these
things avail not with God, God lays his left hand on these, as Jacob did upon
Manasseh, Genesis 48.14. God often passes by those who cast a greater splendour
and luster in the world, and looks upon them of an inferior Alloy; the reason
is, that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.29. If God should
graft his grace only upon wisdom and parts, some would be ready to say, My
wisdom, or my eloquence, or my nobility has saved me; therefore not many wise,
not many noble are called. God will have no priding or vaunting in the creature.

Use. Rest not in outward privileges or excellencies, these are ^o stocks to
graft the hopes of salvation upon; many of Christ's kindred went to hell. Paul
is called the servant of the Lord, Romans 1.1. And James is called the brother of
the Lord, Gal. 1.19. It is better to be the servant of the Lord, than the
brother of the Lord. The Virgin Mary was saved, not as she was the mother of
Christ, but as she was the daughter of faith; it is grace, not blood gives the
precedence; an heart that has Christ formed in it, is Gods delight, and this
brings me to the next.

2. The Apostle sets down something positively; but Christ is all in all; in
which words there is,

1. The Subject, Christ; dulce Nomen Jesu, his Name is sweet, it is as ointment
poured forth, Cant. 1.3. It was Jobs wish, Oh that my words were now written,
that they were graven with an iron pen, and laid in the Rock for ever, Job
19.23. And it is my wish, O that this Name (this sweet Name) of Christ, were
now written, that it were graven with the pen of the Holy Ghost in our hearts
for ever; the name of Christ has in it, says Chrysostom, a thousand
treasuries of joy.

2. The Predicate, All in all; Christ is all fullness, all sweetness; he is all
that is imaginable, all that is desirable; he who has Christ, can have no
more, for Christ is all.

The Proposition out of the words, is, He is all.

1. Sometimes faith is said to be all, Gal. 5.6. nothing avails but faith;
faith is all, organice, as it is an instrument to lay hold on Christ, whereby
we are saved; as a man is saved by catching hold on a Bough.

2. Sometimes the new creature is said to be all, Gal. 6.15. Nothing avails
but a new creature; the new creature is all dispositive, as it qualifies and
fits us for glory; without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Hebr. 12.14. It
is a saying of Chrysostom, at the day of judgment God will ask that question
as our Savior did, Matthew. 22.20. Whose image and superscription is this? So
will God say, Whose image is this? if thou can not show him his image
consisting in holiness, he will reject thee; thus the new creature is all.

3. Here in the Text Christ is said to be all; but in what sense is Christ all?

1. Christus omnia eminenter; Christ is all by way of eminency; all good things
are eminently to be found in him; as the Sun does virtually contain in it the
light of the lesser stars.

2. Christus omnia derivative, Christ is all by way of derivation; all good
things are transmitted and conveyed to us through Christ; as your rich
commodities, jewels and spices come by Sea; so all heavenly blessings sail to
us through the red Sea of Christ's blood. Romans 11.36. Through him are all
things. Christ is that spiritual pipe through which the golden oil of mercy
empties it self into the soul.

in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, Col. 2.9. He has a
partnership with God the Father. John 16.15. All that the Father has is mine;
so that there is enough in him to scatter all our fears, to remove all our
burdens, to supply all our wants; there can be no defect in that which is
infinite.

Use 1. Information. And it has six Branches. Inform.


He is all in all. Christ is a Panoply, a Magazin and Storehouse of all
spiritual riches; you may go with the Be from flower to flower, and suck here
and there a little sweetness, but you will never have enough till you come to
Christ; for he is (...), all in all.

Now in particular, Christ is all, in six Respects.

1. Christ is all in regard of righteousness. 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made to us
righteousness. The Robe of innocence, like the vail of the Temple, is rent
asunder, ours is a ragged righteousness. Isa. 64.6. Our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags. As under rags the naked body is seen; so under the rags of our
righteousness, the body of death is seen; we can defile our duties, but they
cannot justify us; but Christ is all in regard of righteousness. Romans 10.4.
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to them that believe Domine
Jesu, ego sum peccatum tuum, and tu es justitia mea. Luth.
: That is, through Christ we are as righteous as if we had satisfied the Law in
our own persons. Jacob got the blessing in the garment of his elder brother; so
in the garment of Christ our elder brother we obtain the blessing; Christ's
righteousness is a coat woven without seam. 2 Cor. 5. ult. We are made the
righteousness of God in him.

2. Christ is all in regard of Sanctification. 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made to us
Sanctification. Sanctification is the spiritual enamel and embroydery of the
soul; it is nothing else but Gods putting upon us the jewels of holiness, the
Angels glory by it; we are made as the Kings daughter, all glorious within,
Psalm. 45.13. This does disponere ad coelum, it does tune and prepare the soul
for heaven; it turns iron into gold, it makes the hea^ which was Satan's
Picture, Christ's Epistle. The Virg^^ ^^^her 2.12. had their days of
purification; they (...) first to be perfumed and anointed, and then they were
to stand before the King; we must have the anointing of God, 1 John 2.27. and
be perfumed with the graces of the Spirit, those sweet odours, and then we
shall stand before the King of heaven; there must be first our days of
purification before our days of glorification; what a blessed work is this! a
soul beautified and adorned with grace, is like the coelum stellatum, the
firmament bespangled with glittering stars. O what a Metamorphize is there! I
may allude to that, Cant. 3.6. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness
with myrrh and frankincense, and all the powders of the Merchant? So, who is
this that comes out of the wilderness of sin, perfumed with all the graces of
the Spirit? Holiness is the signature and engraving of God upon the soul; but
whence is this? Christ is all, he is made to us Sanctification; he it is that
sends his Spirit into our hearts to be a refiners fire, to burn up our dross,
and make our graces sparkle like gold in the Furnace; Christ arises upon the
soul with healing under his wings, Mal. 4.2. He heals the understanding, and
says, Let there be light; he heals the heart by dissolving the stone in his
blood; he heals the will, by filing off its rebellion. Thus he is all in regard
of Sanctification.

3. Christ is all in regard of Divine acceptance. Ephesians. 1.6. He has made us
accepted in the Beloved; (...); he has made us Favorites; so Chrysostom and
Theophylact render it; through Christ God is propitious to us, and takes all we
do in good part.

A wicked man being out of Christ, is out of favor; as his ^oughing is sin,
Prove. 21.14. so his praying is (...) ^^ov. 15.8. God will not come near him,
his brea^^ infectious; God will hear his sins, and not his prayers; but now in
Christ God accepts us. Eccles. 9.7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and
drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy works; as Joseph did
present his Brethren before Pharaoh, and brought them into favor with the
King, Genesis 47.2. so the Lord Jesus carries the names of the Saints upon his
breast, and presents them before his Father, so bringing them into repute and
honor; through Christ God will treat and parley with us, he speaks to us, as
Isa. 62.4. Thou shall no more be termed forsaken, but thou shall be called
Hephzibah, for the Lord delights in thee. Through the red glass every thing
appears of a red color; through the blood of Christ we look of a sanguine
complexion, ruddy and beautiful in Gods eyes.

4. Christ is all in regard of Divine assistance; a Christians strength lies in
Christ: Phil. 4.13. (...), I can do all things through Christ. Whence is it a
Christian is able to do duty, to resist tentation, but through Christ's
strengthening Nunquam Caesar tanto impetu civitates oppugnavit, quanto Satan
conscientias piorum. Luther.
? Whence is it that a sparkle of grace lives in a Sea of corruption, the storms
of persecution blowing, but that Christ holds this sparkle in the hollow of his
hand? Whence is it that the roaring Lion has not devoured the Saints, but that
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah has defended them? Christ not only gives us our
Crown, but our Shield; he not only gives us our garland when we overcome, but
our strength whereby we overcome. Rev. 12.11. They overcame him (that is, the
accuser of the Brethren) by the blood of the Lamb. Christ keeps the Fort-royal
of grace that it be not blown up; Peter's shield was bruised, but Christ kept it
that was not broken. I prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, Luke 22.31.
(...), that it be not in a total Eclipse. The Crown (...) all the Saints
victories must be set upon the head of Christ. Romans 8.38. In all these things
we are more than Conquerors through Christ. Write the name of Michael upon all
your conquests.

5. Christ is all in regard of pacification; when conscience is in an agony,
and burns as hell in the sense of Gods wrath Job 6.4.
; now Christ is all, he poures the balm of his blood into these wounds; he
makes the storm a calm. Christ does not only make peace in the Court of
heaven, but peace in the Court of conscience; he not only makes peace above us,
but within us. Joh. 16. ult. That in me ye might have peace; in me tanquam in
font, says Cyprian; all our golden streams of peace flow from this fountain.
John 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Jesus Christ not
only purchased peace for us, but speaks peace to us; he is called the Prince of
peace, Isa. 9.6. Peace is a flower of his Crown, he whispers his love to the
soul, and sends his Spirit that blessed Dove, which brings an Olive Branch of
peace in its mouth, John 16.7. The peace which Christ gives, is peace in
trouble. Micah 5.5. And this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall
come into our Land, and tread in our Palaces. Kings can proclaim war in a time
of peace, but Christ proclaims peace in a time of war. Oh how sweet is this
peace! it is pax supra pacem, as Bernard says: Austin calls it serenitas
mentis, a sweet calm and sabbath in the soul; it is a foretaste of glory, it is
a bunch of grapes from the true Vine which chears the heart, it passes all
understanding, Phil. 4.7. Thus Christ is all in regard of pacification, he
makes peace for us and in us; this honey and oil flows out of the Rock Christ.

6. Christ is all in regard of remuneration; he it is that crowns us after all
our labors and sufferings; he dyed to advance us; his lying in the wine press,
was to bring us into the wine-celler; he is gone before to take possession of
heaven in the name of all believers. Hebr. 6.20. Whether the forerunner is for
us entered, even Jesus. -- Christ is gone to bespeak a place for the Saints,
John 14.2. He makes heaven ready for them, and makes them ready for heaven.
Thus Christ is all in regard of remuneration. Rev. 22.12. (...), Behold, I come
quickly, and my reward is with me.

2. If Christ be all, it shows us what a vast disproportion Christ and the
creature; there is as much difference as between ens and nihil; Christ is all
in all, and the creature is nothing at all. Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine
eyes on that which is not? The creature is a nonentity; though it has a
physical existence, yet considered theologically, it is nothing; it is but a
gilded shadow, a pleasant fancy; when Solomon had sifted out the finest flower,
and distilled the spirits of all created excellency, here is the Result, ALL WAS
VANITY, Eccles. 2.11. The Greek word (...) for Vain, signifies empty. -- O
quantum est in rebus inane? -- We read the earth in the Creation was void, Genesis
1.2. (...) so are all earthly comforts void; they are void of that which we
think is in them, they are void of satisfaction; therefore they are compared to
wind, Hos. 12.1. A man can no more fill his heart with the world, than he can
fill his belly with the air he draws in. Now the creature is said to be
nothing in a threefold sense.

1. It is nothing to a man in trouble of spirit; if the spirit be wounded,
outward things will give no more ease, than a Crown of gold will cure the
headache.

2. The creature is nothing to a man that has heaven in his eye; when Saint
Paul had seen that light shining from heaven, surpassing the glory of the Sun,
Acts 26.13. though his eyes were open, he saw no man, Acts 9.8. so he that has
the glory of heaven in his eye, is blind to the world; he sees nothing in it
to allure him, or make him willing to stay here.

3. The creature is nothing to one that is dying; a man at the hour of death
is most serious, and is able to give the truest verdict of things; now at such
a time the world is nothing, it is in an Eclipse, the sorrow of it is real, but
the joy imaginary. Oh then what a vast difference is there between Christ and
the creature! Christ is all in all, and the creature nothing at all; yet how
many damn their souls for nothing?

all in all. Do thou want grace? go to Christ. Col. 2.3. In him are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Christ is the great Lord Treasurer; go
then to Christ; say, Lord I am indigent of grace, but in thee are all my fresh
springs, fill my Cistern from thy Spring. Lord, I am blind, thou have
eye salve to anoint me; I am defiled, thou have water to cleanse me; my heart
is hard, thou have blood to soften me: Quicquid ex me mihideest, id repletur ex
vulneribus Christi. Aug.
I am empty of grace, bring thy fullness to my emptiness. In all our spiritual
wants we should repair to Christ, as Jacobs sons did to their brother Joseph;
He opened all the storehouses, Genesis 41.56. and gave to his Brethren corn and
provision for the way, Genesis 42.25. Thus the Lord has made Christ our Joseph,
our (...), Col. 2.3. In him are hid all treasures (...). Chrysostom.
, Oh then sinners, make out to Christ; he is all in all; and to encourage you
to go to him, remember there is in him not only fullness, but freeness; ho every
one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. Christ is not only full as the
honeycomb, but he drops as the honeycomb.

all, see here a Christians Inventory; how rich is he that has Christ Qui
habet habentem omnia, habet omnia.
! he has all that may make him completely happy. Plutarch reports that the
wife of Phocion being asked where her jewels were, she answered, My husband and
his triumphs are my jewels! so if a Christian be asked where are his riches, he
will say, Christ is my riches. A true Saint cannot be poor; if you look into
his house, perhaps he has scarce a bed to lie on. 1 Cor. 4.11. Even to this
present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and have no certain
dwelling place. Come to many a child of God, and bid him make his will, he
says as Peter, Acts 3.6. Silver and gold have I none; yet he can at the same
time make his triumph with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.10. As having nothing, yet
possessing all; he has Christ who is all. When a believer can call nothing
his, he can say all is his. The Tabernacle was covered with Badgers skins,
Exodus 25. yet most of it was of gold; so a Saint may have a poor covering,
ragged clothes, but he is inlaid with gold, Christ is formed in his heart, and
so he is all glorious within.

5. How should a Christian sit down satisfied with Christ is all. What though
he wants other things, is not Christ enough? if a man has Sunshine, he does
not complain he wants the light of a Candle; has not he enough, who has the
unsearchable riches of Christ? I have read of a godly man, who being blind,
his friend asked him if he was not troubled for the want of his sight? he
confessed he was; why says his friend, Are you troubled because you want that
which flies have, when you have that which Angels have? so I say to a
Christian, Why art thou troubled for wanting that which a reprobate have, when
thou have that which the glorified Saints have? Thou have Christ with all his
Perquisites and Royalties! Suppose a father should deny his son furniture for
his house, but should settle all his Land upon him, had he any cause to
complain? If God denies thee a little furniture in the world, but in the mean
time settles his Land upon thee, he gives thee the field wherein the pearl of
price is hid, have thou any cause to repine? A Christian that wants
necessaries, yet having Christ, he has the one thing needful. Col. 2.10. Ye
are complete in him; what? complete in Christ, and not content with Christ?
Luther says, the Sea of Gods mercy should swallow up our particular
afflictions; surely this Sea of Gods love in giving us Christ, should drown all
our complaints and grievances; let the Christian take the Harp and the Viol,
and bless God.

all, see the deplorable condition of a Christless person; he is poor, he is
worth nothing. Rev. 3.17. Thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, etc. The
sadness of a man that wants Christ, will appear in these seven particulars.

1. He has no justification; what a glorious thing is it when a poor sinner is
absolved from guilt, and is declared to be rectus in curia! but this privilege
flows from Christ; all pardons are sealed in his blood. Acts 13.39. (...), By
him all that believe are justified: So then he who is out of Christ, is
unjustified; the rea^ us, or guilt of sin cleaves to him; he must be
responsible to justice in his own person, and the curse stands in full force
against the sinner.

2. He that wants Christ, wants the beauty of holiness; Jesus Christ is a
living spring of grace. John 1.14. Full of grace and truth. Now a Christless
person is a graceless person, he has not one shred of holiness. The siens must
first be engrafted into the stock, before it can receive sap and influence from
the root; we must first be engrafted into Christ, before we can of his fullness
receive grace for grace, John 1.16. A man out of Christ is red with guilt, and
black with filth; he is an unhallowed person, and dying in that condition, is
rendered incapable of seeing God, Hebr. 12.14.

3. He that wants Christ, has no true Nobility; it is through Christ that we
are akin to God, of the blood royal of heaven; it is through Christ that God is
not ashamed to be called our God, Hebr. 11.16. But out of Christ we are looked
upon as ignoble persons; the Traitors blood runs in our veins; a man out of
Christ is base-born; whoever is his natural father, the Devil is his spiritual
father, John 4.48.

4. He that wants Christ, wants his freedom; nihil durius servitute. John 8.36.
If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed. A man out of Christ, is a
slave, when he sins most freely.

5. He that wants Christ, has no ability for service; he is as Sampson, when
his lock was cut; his strength is gone from him, he wants a vital principle, he
cannot walk with God, he is like a dead member in the body, that has neither
strength nor motion. John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. The Organs will
make no sound, unless you blow in them; so unless Christ by his spirit breath
in the soul, it cannot make any harmony, or put forth strength to any holy
action.

6. He that wants Christ, has no consolation; Christ is called the consolation
of Israel, Luke 2.25. A Christless soul is a comfortless soul; how can such a
(...) have comfort when he comes to dye? he is in debt, and has no surety; his
wounds bleed, and he has no Physician; he sees the fire of Gods wrath
approaching, and has no screen to keep it off; he is like a ship in a tempest;
sickness begins to make a tempest in his body, and sin to make a tempest in his
conscience, and he has nowhere to put in for harbor; oh the terror and
anguish of such a man at the hour of death! Isaiah 13.8. Their faces shall be
as flames; an elegant expression! the meaning is, such fear and horror shall
seize upon sinners in the evil day, that their countenances shall change, and
be as pale as a flame; what are all the comforts of the world to a dying
sinner? he looks upon his friends, but they cannot comfort him; bring him his
bags of gold and silver, they are as smoke to sore eyes, it grieves him to part
with them; bring him Music, what comfort is the Harp and Viol to a condemned
man? There are in Spain Tarantula's venomous spiders, and those who are stung
with them, are almost dead, and are cured with Music Tarantula icti, tibiis
aut tympanis curantur.
! but those that dye without Christ, who is the consolation of Israel, are in
such hellish pangs and agonies, that no Music is able to cure them.

7. He that wants Christ, has no salvation. Ephesians. 5.23. He is the Savior of
the body; he saves none but them who are members of his body mystical; a strong
Scripture against the doctrine of universal redemption; Christ leaped into the
Sea of his Fathers wrath, only to save his Spouse from drowning; he is the
Savior of the body, so that those who dye out of Christ are cut off from all
hopes of salvation.

magno conatu nihil agunt. -- Isa. 55.2. Wherefore do you spend money for that
which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not? If you get
all the world, you are but golden beggars without Christ. The Physician finds
out noxious diseases, but is ignorant of soul-diseases; and while he gets
Receipts to cure others, he neglects the receipt of Christ's blood to cure
himself. The Lawyer while he clears other men's titles to their Land, he himself
wants a title to Christ. The Tradesman is busied in buying and selling, but
neglects to trade for the pearl of price; like Israel, who went up and down to
gather straw; or like the lodestone, that draws iron to it, but refuses gold.
These who so mind the world, as to neglect Christ, their work is but
spider-work. Hab. 2.13. Is it not of the Lord of Hosts that the people shall
labor in the fire, and weary themselves for very vanity?

1. If Christ be all, then set an high valuation upon Pet. 2.7. Exhort.
To you that believe he is precious. If there were a jewel which contained in
it Paul counted all things (...), dung, that he might win Christ, Phil. 3.8. Oh
that I could raise the appretiation of Jesus Christ! prize Christ above your
Estates, above your Relations; that man does not deserve Christ at all, who
does not prize Christ above all. Jesus Christ is an incomprehensible blessing;
whatever God can require for satisfaction, or we can desire for salvation, is
to be found in Christ; oh then let him be the highest in our esteem; no writing
shall please me, says Saint Bernard, if I do not read the Name of Christ
there. The Name of Christ is the only music to a Christians ear, and the blood
of Christ is the only cordial to a Christians heart.

2. If Jesus Christ be all, then make sure of Christ; this bundle of myrrh lie
between your breasts, Cant. 1.13. In other things we strive for a propriety;
This house is mine, these jewels are mine, and why not this Christ is mine?
There are only two words which will satisfy the soul, Deity and Propriety:
Quid est Deus, si non est meus? says Austin. What was it the better for the
old world they had an Ark, as long as they did not get into the Ark? And that I
may persuade all to get Christ, let me show you what an enriching blessing
Christ is.

1. Christ is bonum transcendens, a supreme good; put what you will in the
balance with Christ, he does infinitely outweigh. Is life sweet? Christ is
better! he is the life of the soul, Col. 3.4. his loving kindness is better
than life, Psalm. 63.3. Are Relations sweet? Christ is better; he is the friend
sticks closer than a brother.

2. Christ is bonum sufficiens, a sufficient good; he who has Christ, needs no
more; he who has the Ocean, needs not the Cistern. If one had a Manuscript
that contained all manner of learning in it, having all the Arts and Sciences,
he need look in no other book; so he that has Christ, needs look no further.
Christ gives grace and glory, Psalm. 84.11. The one to cleanse us, the other to
crown us; as Jacob said, It is enough, Joseph is yet alive, Genesis 45.28. So he
that has Christ, may say, Luther.
it is enough, vivit Christus, Jesus is yet alive.

3. Christ is bonum adaequatum, a suitable good; in him dwells (...), all
fullness, Col. 1.19. He is bonum in quo omnia bona; he is whatever the soul can
desire; (...), etc. Christ is beauty to adorn, gold to enrich, balm to heal,
bread to strengthen, wine to comfort, salvation to crown; Christ is quicquid
appetibile; if we are in danger, he is a shield; if we are disconsolate, he is
a Sun; he has enough in his wardrobe abundantly to furnish the soul.

4. Christ is bonum sanctificans, a sanctifying good; he makes every condition
happy to us, he sweetens all our comforts, and sanctifies all our crosses.

1. Christ sweetens all our comforts; he turns them into blessings; health is
blessed, estate is blessed, relations are blessed. Christ's love is as the
pouring sweet water on flowers, which makes them cast a more fragrant perfume.
A wicked man cannot have that comfort in outward things as a godly man has; he
may possess more, but he enjoyes less; he who has Christ, may say, This mercy
is reached to me by the hand of my Savior, this is a love-token from him, an
earnest of glory.

2. Christ sanctifies all our crosses, they shall be medicinal to the soul;
they shall work sin out, and work grace in; Gods stretching the strings of his
Viol, is to tune it, and make the music better; Christ sees to it that his
people lose nothing in the Furnace but their drossie impurities Quod durum fuit
pa^i, memi nisse dulce est Sen. Trag.
.

5. Christ is bonum rarum, a rare blessing; there are but few that have him;
the best things when they grow common, begin to be slighted; when silver was in
Jerusalem as stones, 1 Kings. 10.27. it was apt to be trod upon; Christ is a
jewel that few are enriched with, which may both raise our esteem of him, and
quicken our pursuit after him; those to whom God has given both the Indies, he
has not given them Christ; they have the fat of the earth, but not the dew of
heaven; and among us Protestants, many who hear of Christ, but few that have
him. Luke 4.25. Many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the
heaven was shut up three years and six months, but unto none of them was Elias
sent save unto Sarepta, a City of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. There
are many in this City who have Christ sounded in their ears, but few who have
Christ formed in their hearts; O how should we labor to be of this few! they
who are Christless, should be restless.

6. Christ is bonum selectum, a select choice good; God shows more love in
giving us Christ, than in giving us Crowns and Kingdoms. God may give us other
things, and hate us; but in giving Christ he bestows the highest pledge of his
love; God may give the men of the world bona scabelli, as Austin says, the
blessings of the footstool; but in giving Christ to a man, he gives him bona
Throni, the blessings of the Throne; what though others have a crutch to lean
on, if thou have a Christ to lean on! Abraham sent away the sons of the
Concubines with gifts, but he gave all he had to Isaac, Genesis 25.5. God may send
away others with a little gold and silver; but if he gives thee Christ, he
gives thee all that ever he has; for Christ is all, and in all: Psalm. 145.16.
Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest every living thing; in bestowing the
world, God does but open his hand; but in bestowing Christ, he opens his heart;
Christ is a crowning blessing.

7. Christ is bonum fine quo nihil bonum; he is such a good, as without which
nothing is good; without Christ health is not good, it is fuel for lust; riches
are not good, they are golden snares; Ordinances are not good; though they are
good in themselves, yet not good to us, they profit not; they are as breasts
without milk, as bottles without wine; nay, they are not only a dead letter,
but a savor of death; without Christ they will damn us; for want of Christ
millions go loaded to hell with Ordinances.

8. Christ is bonum permanens, an enduring good; other things are like the
Lamp, which while it shines it spends; the heavens shall wax old like a
garment, Psalm. 102.26. -- But Jesus Christ is a permanent good, with him are
durable riches, Prove. 8.18. They last as long as eternity it self lasts.

9. Christ is bonum diffusum, a diffusive, communicative good; he is full, not
only as a vessel, but as a spring, he is willing to give himself to us; if
indeed Christ should say, he would have nothing to do with us, we are not in
his Commission, he is not sent to such sinners as we, then we might despair;
but he is willing that we should have him; he calls, Come unto me all ye that
are weary; he would fain have the match made up between us and him; oh that we
were but as willing as Christ is! Now then if there be all this variety of
excellency in Jesus Christ Multifaria suav^tatis dull cedo exube^at in pectore
Domini Jesu. Bern.
, it may make us ambitiously desirous of an interest in him.

Quest. But how shall I get a part in Christ?

Answ. 1. See your need of Christ, know that you are undone without him. How
obnoxious are you to Gods eye! how odious to his nature! how obnoxious to his
justice! O sinner, how near is the Sergeant to arrest thee! The Furnace of hell
is heating for thee, and what will thou do without Christ? it is only the Lord
Jesus can stand as a screen to keep off the fire of Gods wrath from burning
thee. Tell me then, is there not need of Christ? though Christ be offered to
sinners, yet he will not have his love abused, he will not throw away himself
upon such as see no need of him; see thy self wounded, and then Christ that
good Samaritan, will pour in wine and oil into thy wounds; think often of
that Scripture, John 3.18. He that believes not, (...), is condemned already.
He that dies in his sin, not laying hold on Christ by faith, is as sure to be
condemned, as if he were condemned already.

2. Be importunate after Christ Lord, give me Christ or I die. As Acsah said to
her father Caleb, Josh. 15.19. Thou have given me a South land, give me also
springs of water. So should a poor soul say, Lord, thou have given me an estate
in the world, but this South-land will not quench my thirst, give me also
springs of water. Give me those living springs which run in my Saviors blood;
Thou have said, Let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him take
the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17, 18. Lord, I thirst after Jesus Christ,
nothing but Christ will satisfy me; I am dead, I am damned without him, oh
give me this water of life. When the blind man was importunate, Jesus stood
still, Luke 18.40. and wrought a cure upon him, verse 42. Christ cannot deny a
praying soul. As the tender mother opens the breast when the child cries for
it: so when an humble, thirsty sinner cries importunately to heaven, God will
open the breast of free grace, and say, Here, take my Christ, be satiated with
him, let him be to thee all in all, both for food and medicine.

3. Be content to have Christ as Christ is offered, a Prince and a Savior,
Acts 5.31. Be sure you do not compound or indent with Christ. Some would have
Christ and their sins too. Is Christ all, and will you not part ^^th something
for this all? Christ would have you part with nothing, but what will damn you,
if you keep, namely your sins. Vomit up this poison by repentance, and Christ
will pour in the wine of his blood to cheer your heart.

There are some bid fair for Christ, they will part with some sins, but keep a
reserve. Jacob would let all his sons go but Benjamin; whereas if you leave but
one sin in your heart, it will be as an Egg for Satan to brood upon. If a man
part with many lovers, and retain the love but of one Harlot, he is an
Adulterer: so if thou partest with many sins, and do retain the love but of
one sin, thou have an adulterous heart, and Christ will not make up a match
with thee. Does that man think he shall have Christ's love that feeds sin in a
corner? O part with all for him who is all. Part with thy lusts, nay thy life
if Christ calls.

3. It exhorts us not only to get Christ, but to labor Exhort.
1 John 2.3. hereby we know that we know him. This reflex act of faith is more
than the direct act. Some Divines call it sensus fidei, the perception, or
sensible feeling of faith; now concerning this knowledge that Christ is ours,
which is the same with assurance, I shall lay down these four Corollaries or
conclusions.

1. That this knowledge is feasible, it may be had, 1 John 5.13. These things
have I written to you that believe, that ye may know ye have eternal life, and
that ye may believe on the Name of the Son of God. The meaning is, the Apostle
wrote to these believers that they might know they were believers, and might be
assured Christ was theirs. Indeed the Papists deny this certainty of knowledge;
it is inserted in one of their Canons, Anathema sit -- Let him be Anathema, who
holds assurance. But that we may arrive at it, I shall evince by these
demonstrations.

1. Why else does God bid us make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
if assurance may not be had? and to prove our selves whether we are in the
faith, 2 Cor. 13.5. if we cannot come to this knowledge that Christ is ours?
The Greek word there for proving (...), signifies to boar, or pierce through a
piece of metal to see whether it be gold within or no; a Christian may thus
pierce his heart by examination and self-reflection to see whether Christ be
formed within him or no.

2. What are all the signs which the Scripture gives of a man in Christ but so
many ciphers, if the knowledge of this interest may not be had? 1 John 3.14. We
know that we have passed from death unto life because we love the brethren; and
1 John 4.13. Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has
given us of his Spirit. Here are two (...), evident characters of a man in
Christ; now these signs are in vain if assurance may not be arrived at.

3. There are some duties enjoined in Scripture, which to perform is utterly
impossible; if the knowledge of an interest in Christ be not attainable; we are
bid to rejoice in God, Phil. 4.4. and to rejoice in tribulation, 1 Pet. 4.13.
How can he rejoice in suffering, who does not know whether Christ be his or no?

4. Why has Christ promised to send the Comforter, John 14.16. whose very work
it is to bring the heart to this assurance, if assurance that Christ is ours
may not be had? Therefore in Scripture we read of the seal of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 1.13. The earnest and first fruits, 2 Cor. 1.22. Romans 8.23. The promise
of the Comforter were in vain, the earnest and witness of the Spirit were but
phantasmes and nullities, if the assurance of union with Christ be not feasible.

5. Some of the Saints have arrived at this certainty of knowledge; therefore
it may be had. Job knew that his Redeemer lived, Job 19.25. And Saint Paul had
this assurance, 2 Timothy 1.12. Gal. 2.20. Yea, may some say, Paul was an eminent
believer, a Christian of the first magnitude, no wonder if he had this jewel of
assurance! nay, but the Apostle speaks of it as a case incident to other
believers, Romans 8.35. (...)? who shall separate us from the love of Christ? He
does not say, Who shall separate me? but us! so that by all it appears that a
believer may come to spell out his interest in Christ.

Caution 1. Not that the Saints have always the David? sometimes we hear him
say, Gods loving kindness was before his eyes, Psalm. 26.3. As it is a
Proverbial speech, I have such a thing in my eye, I see it just before me; but
at another time, Where are thy loving-kindnesses? Psalm. 89.49. A Christian has
not always the same Plerophory; Saint Paul at one time sets up the Trophies of
victory, and sings his (...), or triumphant song. Romans 8.37. We are more than
Conquerors. At another time how did the Plumes of his confidence fall? and he
was as a man in the midst of the Sea, struggling with the waves, and crying out
for help, Romans 7.24. (...), O wretched man that I am, etc. A Saint in this life
is like a ship at Anchor, which though safe, yet it may be sometimes tossed
upon the water; these doubtings and convulsions God suffers in his children
sometimes, that they may long the more for heaven, where they shall have a
constant spring-tyde of joy.

Caution 2. Not that all believers have the same assurance.

1. Assurance is rather the fruit of faith, than faith: Now as the root of the
Rose or Tulip may be alive, where the flower is not visible; so faith may live
in the heart, where the flower of assurance does not appear; yet this is sure,
there is so much wrought in the heart of every believer by Gods Spirit as he
can bottom his hope upon; as for instance, a high prizing of Christ, an
acquiescence in Christ, a rejoicing in his image, a delighting in his word; the
weakest believer has so much to show as he would not part with for a world.

2. Assurance is difficult to be obtained; it is a rare jewel, but hard to come
by; not many Christians have this jewel.

1. God sees it good sometimes to withdraw assurance from his people, that
they may walk humbly; through the corruption of our nature we are apt to abuse
the richest mercies; the Moth breeds in the finest cloth, the Worm in the
sweetest fruit; pride is apt to breed in this sweet fruit of assurance. It is
hard for Christians to want assurance, and be content; and to have it, and be
humble.

2. Satan does what he can to way-lay and obstruct our assurance; he is called
the red Dragon, Rev. 12.3. And how does he trouble the waters of a Christians
peace? If the Devil cannot keep a believer from heaven, he will do what he can
to keep him from an heaven upon earth; he will wrack him with fears and
disquiets. If he cannot blot a Christians evidence, yet sometimes he casts such
a mist before his eyes, that he cannot read his evidence; the Devil envies that
God should have any glory, or the soul any comfort.

3. That we want assurance, the fault for the most is our own; we walk
carelessly, neglect our spiritual watch, let go our hold of promises, comply
with temptations; no wonder then if we walk in darkness, and are at such a
loss, that we cannot tell whether Christ be ours or no; our uneven carriage
grieves the Spirit, whose work it is to seal up assurance; if we quench the
graces of the Spirit, no wonder if God quench the comforts of the Spirit.

3. Assurance is very sweet; this wine of Paradise chears the heart; how
comfortable is Gods smile! the Sun is more refreshing when it shines out, then
when it is hid in a cloud; for want of this knowledge Christ is ours; we often
hang our Harps upon the Willows, and sit as Israel by the Rivers weeping, Psalm.
137.1, 2. A man that has a rich Mine of gold in his Field, yet if he does not
know it is there, he cannot take the comfort of it. One that has a great
Estate befallen him beyond the Seas, yet if ignorant of it, he is as if he had
no such Estate. Hagar had a Well of water by her, but her eyes being held that
she saw not the Well, she sat weeping; it is the knowledge of an interest gives
comfort. Luke 1.47. My spirit rejoices in God my Savior; not a Savior, but
my Savior. The Rabbis say that Moses dyed with a kiss from Gods mouth; he
that knows Christ is his, has a kiss from Christ's lips, he dies triumphing;
assurance puts a man in heaven before his time.

4. Assurance is very useful, it will put us upon service for Christ.

1. It will put us upon active obedience; assurance will not (as the Papists
say) breed security in the soul, but agility; it will make us mount up with
wings, as Eagles, in holy duties; faith makes us living, assurance make us
lively; if we know that Christ is ours, we shall never think we can love him
enough, or serve him enough. 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constrains us.
Assurance is like wings to the Bird, like oil to the Lamp, like weights to the
Clock, it sets all the wheels of obedience a going; assurance is a whetstone to
the graces, it stirs up hope, love, zeal; faith makes a Christian walk, 2 Cor.
5.7. assurance makes him run: Nehem. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is your
strength. Assurance breeds such joy in the soul, as does derive and issue forth
strength for duty.

2. Assurance will put us upon passive obedience: Romans 5.3, 5. We glory in
tribulation, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts. He that has
Christ's love shed into his heart, will be willing to shed his blood for Christ;
he who knows Christ is his, will come to him with Peter upon the waters; he
comforts himself with this, though he lose all for Christ, he shall find all in
Christ. Mr. Fox speaks of a woman in Queen Mary's days, who when the
adversaries threatened to take her husband from her, she answered, Christ is my
husband; when they threatened to take away her children, she answered, Christ is
better to me than ten sons; when they threatened to take away all from her,
says she, Christ is mine, and you cannot take away him from me; that man who
is assured Christ is his, will hazard the loss of all for him; he knows though
he may be a loser for Christ, he cannot be a loser by Christ; for Christ is
all, and in all. No wonder Saint Paul was willing to be bound, and dye for
Christ, Acts 21.13. when he knew that Christ loved him, and had given himself
for him, Gal. 2.20. Though I will not say Paul was proud of his chain, yet he
was glad of it, he wore it as a chain of pearl.

Quest. But how shall I get this jewel of assurance?

Answ. 1. Make duty familiar to you; when the Spouse sought Christ diligently,
she found him joyfully, Cant. 3.4. The Ordinances are the Lattice where Christ
looks forth, and gives the soul a smiling aspect. As Christ was made known to
his Disciples in the breaking of bread, Luke 24.35. so in the use of holy
Ordinances, in the breaking of bread, Christ makes a glorious discovery of
himself to the soul. Christ's parents found him in the Temple, Luke 2.46. They
who would find Christ with comfort, and have the kisses of his lips, shall be
sure to meet with him in the Temple.

2. Preserve the virginity of conscience; when the glass is foul you will not
pour wine into it, but when it is clean; so when the soul is cleansed from the
love of every sin, now God will pour in the sweet wine of assurance (...).
Socrat.
. Hebr. 10.22. Let us draw near in full assurance of faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience. Guilt clips the wings of joy; he who is
conscious to himself of secret sin, cannot draw near to God in full assurance;
he cannot come with boldness, but blushing; he cannot call God Father, but
Judge; assurance is a flower that grows only in a pure heart; before David
prays for joy, he first prays for a pure heart. Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a
clean heart O God.

3. Be much in the actings of faith; the more active the child is in
obedience, the sooner he has his fathers smile; if faith be ready to dye, Rev.
3.2. if it be like Armor hung up, or like a sleepy habit in the soul, never
look for assurance. God will not speak peace to thee when thou art asleep; it
is the lively faith which flourishes into assurance. Abraham had a vigorous,
sparkling faith. Romans 4.18. who against hope believed in hope. That is against
the hope of sense he believed in the hope of the promise; and how sweetly does
God manifest himself to Abraham? he calls him his friend, he makes him of his
Cabinet-counsel, Genesis 18.17. Shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I do?
Would thou have Christ reveal his love to thee? k^ep faith upon the wing;
this is the Bird which soars aloft, and plucks a bunch of grapes from the true
Vine.

4. If Christ be all, then make him so to

1. Make Christ all in your understanding, be ambitious to know nothing but
Christ. 1 Cor. 2.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you save Jesus
Christ. The Greek word is (...), I judged not; I did not think any thing in my
judgment worth knowing in comparison of Christ. Austin says of Cicero, he
liked his eloquence, but he could not take so much delight in reading him, quia
Nomen Christi non erat ibi, because he could not find the Name of Christ
there; what will all other knowledge avail a man at his death, who is ignorant
of Christ? -- Si Christum nescis, nihil est si coetera noscis. -- What is it to
have knowledge in Physic? to be able with Esculapius and Galen to discourse of
the causes and symptoms of a disease, and what is proper to apply, and in the
mean time to be ignorant of the healing under Christ's wings? What is it to have
knowledge in Astronomy, to discourse of the Stars and Planets, and to be
ignorant of Christ that bright morning star which leads to heaven? what is it
to have skill in a shop, and ignorant of that commodity which does both enrich
and crown? what is it to be versed in Music, and to be ignorant of Christ,
whose blood makes atonement in heaven, and music in the conscience? what is it
to know all the stratagems of War, and to be ignorant of the Prince of peace? O
make Christ all, be willing to know nothing but Christ; though you may know
other things in their due place, yet know Christ in the first place; let the
knowledge of Jesus Christ have the pre-eminence; as the Sun among the lesser
Planets.

This is the crowning knowledge, Prove. 4.18. The prudent are crowned with
knowledge.

1. We cannot know our selves unless we know Christ; he it is who lights us
into our hearts, and shows as the spots of our souls, whereby we abhor our
selves in dust and ashes. Christ shows us our own vacuity and indigency; and
until we see our own emptiness, we are not fit to be filled with the golden
oil of mercy.

2. We cannot know God, but through Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. Out of Christ God is
terrible, he is a consuming fire; it is through Christ that we know God as a
friend; oh then treasure up the knowledge of Christ; he is the golden ladder by
which we ascend to heaven; to be ignorant of Christ, is as if a man were
poisoned, and there were an herb in the garden could cure him, but he is
ignorant of that herb.

2. Make Christ all in your affections.

1. Desire nothing but Christ, he is the accumulation of all good things. Ye
are complete in him, Col. 2.10. Christ is the Christians perfection; what
should the soul desire less? what can it desire more (...). Ignatius.
? Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire besides thee. David had his Crown and his Throne to delight in; I
but it was the presence of Christ he chiefly thirsted after; without Christ all
his other comforts were not only emptiness, but bitterness.

2. Love nothing but Christ; love is the choycest affection, it is the purest
stream of the soul, it is the richest jewel the creature has to bestow; oh if
Christ be all, love him better than all; let your Rivers still run into this
golden Sea. Every man's heart is set upon his treasure; in Christ there are
unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8. Though the Angels have lived so long in
heaven, yet to this day they know not how rich Christ is. Take the most
precious pearl or Diamond that is, and the Jeweller can set the full value of
it; he can say, This is worth so much, and no more; but the riches of Christ
are unsearchable, it cannot be said he is worth so much, and no more; neither
man or Angel are able to set the full value of the pearl of price; and shall
not Jesus Christ lie nearest our hearts? shall he not have the cream of our
love?

Consider 1. If you love other things, when they dye your love is lost; but
Christ lives for ever to requite your love.

2. You may love other things in the excess, but you cannot love Christ in the
excess. MARY LOVED MUCH, Luke 7.47. but not too much; if Christ cannot be
prized enough, he cannot be loved too much; the Angels in heaven cannot love
Christ to his worth.

3. When you love other things, you love that which is worse than your selves;
if you love a fair house, a pleasant garden, a curious picture, these things
are worse than your selves; if I would love any thing more intensly and
ardently, it should be something which is better than my self, and that is
Jesus Christ. He who is all, let him have all; give him your love who desires
it most, and deserves it best.

-- Minus te amat qui aliquid tecum amat. -- 3. Make Christ all in your
abilities, do all in his strength. Ephesians. 6.10. Be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might. When you are to resist a tentation, to mortify a
corruption, do not go out in your own strength, but in the strength of Christ:
Be strong in the Lord. Some go out to duty in the strength of parts, and go out
against sin in the strength of resolutions, and they come home foiled. Alas!
what are our resolutions, but like the green withs which did bind Sampson! a
sinful heart will soon break these; do as David when he was to go against
Goliath, says he, I come to thee in the Name of the Lord. So say to thy
Goliah-lust, I come to thee in the Name of Christ. Then we conquer, when the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah marches before us; Christ is called an horn of
salvation, Luke 1.69. The strength of a creature lies in his horn; so the
strength of a believer lies in this horn of salvation: Oh make Christ all, do
all in his strength. The Bird may as well fly without wings, as we can do any
thing prevailing without Christ. 1 Samuel 2.9. For by strength shall no man
prevail.

4. Make Christ all in your aims, do all to his glory, 1 Pet. 4.11. Let Christ
be the center to which all the lines of your actions are drawn; the hypocrite
pretends Christ, but drives on some self-interest, Hos. 10.1. He is like one
who pretends to woe for his friend, but is a suitor for himself. Simon Magus
would have given money for the gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts 8.18. but probably
the reason was, because he intended to have sold that gift to others; how many
make the Name of Christ a stirrup to get into the saddle of honor and
preferment? it is well if some have not made the Crown delinquent for its
jewels, and the Church for its Lands. The squintey'd hypocrite is the Devils
wind-fall; oh make Christ all in your aims and designs; in every action
propound this question, Will this make for the honor of Christ? will this
bring any Revenues into his Exchequer? how happy were it if it might be said of
us, as the Angel speaks to the two Mary's, Matthew. 28.5. I know that ye seek
Jesus which was crucified! If a man does not take a right aim, he can never
hit the mark; he who does not aim at Gods glory, can never hit the mark of his
own salvation.

5. Make Christ all in your affiance, trust to none but Christ for salvation;
the Papists make Christ something, but not all; they trust partly to Christ,
and partly to their own merits; they pray to Christ and Angels; to Christ as a
Mediator of Redemption, and to Angels as Mediators of Intercession; they
invocate the Virgin Mary for mercy, so mingling her milk with Christ's blood;
but what is given to others superstitiously, is taken from Christ
sacrilegiously; they have their Masses, Penance, extreme unction; they confess
ind^ed Christ's blood does wholly sati^fie for Original sin, but sins after
Baptism committed, they have fountains of their own to wash in. The Eagles
feathers will not mix with other feathers; Christ will not endure to have his
blood mixed either with the merits of Saints, or prayers of Angels. Christ will
be all in all, or nothing at all.

And is there not naturally a spice of Popery in our hearts? we would be
grafting happiness upon the stock of our own righteousness; every man (says
Luther) is born with a Pope in his heart. How ready are we to Idolize our
duties and graces, and to draw so much from the stream, as to neglect the
Spring! Oh make Christ all in regard of recumbency; let him be your City of
refuge to fly to, your Ark to trust to. It was a good speech of Luther, If I
could keep the whole Moral Law, I would not trust to this for justification, I
would vail and stoop to Christ's merits.

6. Make Christ all in your joy. Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should glory,
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Luke 1.47. My spirit rejoices in
God my Savior. The Virgin Mary did not so much rejoice that she was Christ's
Mother, as that Christ was her Savior; she did not so much rejoice that Christ
was conceived in her womb, as that he was formed in her heart; how glad was
Simeon when he had taken Christ in his arms! Luke 2.29. How cheerful may that
man be who has taken Christ in the arms of his faith? The wise men when they
saw the star, rejoiced with exceeding great joy, Matthew. 2.10. O Christian, have
thou seen the Lord Jesus? has this morning Star shined into thy heart with its
enlightening, quickening beams? then rejoice, and be exceeding glad. Shall others
rejoice in the world, and will not you rejoice in Christ? how much better is he
than all other things? God has given the men of the world a Crutch to lean on,
he has given thee a Christ to lean on; oh rejoice in Christ! Shall the
Malefactor rejoice, and shall not the Favorite rejoice? it reflects
disparagement upon Christ when his Saints are sad and drooping; is not Christ
yours, what would you have more?

Object. 1. But says one, I am low in the World,

Answ. But have thou not Christ? and is not Christ all? Psalm. 16.5, 6. The Lord
is the portion of my inheritance, and of my cup, the lines are fallen unto me
in pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly heritage. Christ is omnibus Thesauris
opulentior, an inexhaustible Treasury; Aug.
and he who by faith is united to him, has a title to all Christ's riches. A
beggar being married to a Prince, she has a right and title to all his
Revenues.

Object. 2. If indeed I knew Christ were mine, then I

Answ. 1. Is thy soul filled with anhelations and pantings after Christ? water
out of Christ's sides to cleanse thee, as blood out of his sides to save thee?
These sighs and groans are stirred up by the Spirit of God, by the beating of
this pulse judge of the life of faith in thee; a wicked man has none of these
breathings after Christ. Job 21.14. They say unto God depart from us. Christ
and grace are dead commodities, they care not for them; if the heart move
Christward, the Spirit as a divine loadstone has been drawing it.

2. Have thou given up thy self by an universal subjection to Christ? art thou
his not only by education, but dedication? this is a good sign that Christ is
thine. Psalm. 27.8. When thou said, Seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee,
Thy face Lord will I seek.

Princes of the earth, Psalm. 113.8. He has done more for you, than if he had
made you Angels; for by virtue of your marriage-union with Ghrist, you are
richer than the Angels. O be thankful for Christ; God in giving you Christ,
has done more for you, than if he had given you the whole world; he can make
more worlds, but he has but one Son; as Naomi said to her Daughters, Ruth
1.11. Are there yet any more sons in my womb? Has God any more sons to give?
in short, God cannot give a greater gift than Christ; for in giving Christ, he
gives himself to us; and all this calls aloud for thankfulness.

Use ult. Here is a breast of comfort to every man that has Christ, Consol.
Christ is all, it is good lying at this fountain head. When a Christian sees a
deficiency in himself, he may fee an all sufficiency in his Savior. Happy is
that people whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 144. ult. That servant need not want,
who has his Masters full purse at command; he need not want, who has Christ;
for Christ is all and in all. What though the Fig Tree does not flourish, if
thou have Christ the Tree of life, and all fruit growing there? In the hour of
death a believer may rejoice, when he leaves all, he is possessed of all, as
Ambrose said to his friend, I fear not death because I have a good Lord. So may
a godly man say, I fear not death because I have a Christ to go to; death will
but carry me to that torrent of divine pleasure which runs at his right hand
for ever more. I will end with that 1 These. 4.18. Wherefore comfort one another
with these words.

MATTHEW. 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world and
lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?


The preciousnesse of the Soul.
EVery man does carry a treasure about him, a DIVINE SOUL, and that this Jewel
should not be undervalued, our Savior here sets a price upon it, he lays the
soul in balance with the whole world, and being put in the scales, the soul
weighs heaviest. What is a man profited if he gain the whole world and lose his
own soul?

The world is a stately fabric, enriched with beauty and excellency, it is
like a curious piece of Arras, set about with diverse colors; it is a bright
Myrror, and Crystal in which much of the wisdom and majesty of God is
resplendent; But as glorious as this world is, every man does carry a more
glorious world about him, a precious soul. Magna res est anima. -- It would
banquer the world to give half the price of a soul; it will undo the world to
buy it, and it will undo him that shall sell it. If we can save our souls,
though we lose the world, it is a gainful loss; if we lose our souls, though
we gain the world, our very gains will undo us. For what is a man profited if
he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give
in exchange for his soul?

The words branch themselves into these five parts.

1. A supposal of a purchase, if a man shall gain. The if he shall gain, it is
not a certain purchase: It Is only supposed.

world.

whole world, the world with all its revenues and perquisits.

he shall lose his soul. not that his soul shall be annihilated (that were
happy) but he shall lose the end of his creation; he shall miss of glory, he
shall lose his soul. And the loss of the soul is amplified by two things.

his own soul, that which is nearest to him, that which is most himself;
subjectum a praestantiori, the soul is the most noble part, it is the man of
the man, he shall lose his own soul.

What shall a man give in exchange for his soul? The words are a Miosis, there
is less said, and more intended. What shall he give? as if Christ had said,
alas, he has nothing to give; or if he had something to give, yet nothing will
be taken for it; the soul cannot be exchanged, there shall be no bail, or
mainprize taken for it. What shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

5. Our Saviors Verdict upon this purchase, (...). for what is a man profited?
as if Christ had said, he will have an hard bargain of it, he will repent him
at last, it is but the fools purchase: for what is a man profited, etc?

The observation is, all souls are alike The soul of Prince and Peasant, all
are equal; Anima rationales sunt aequales.
and every soul of more value than a world. For the illustration of the
Doctrine there are two things to be demonstrated.

First, That the soul is very precious.

Secondly, That it is more precious than a world.

1. That the soul is very precious. What Job says Man knows not the price
thereof, it cannot be vallued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx,
or the Sapphire, the gold and the Crystal cannot equal it, and the exchange of
it shall not be for jewels of fine gold, Job 28.13, 16, 17. The soul is the
glory of the Creation. The inscription of it may be (...), The soul is a beam
of God; it is a sparkle of celestial brightness, as Damascen calls it; it is
(according to Plato,) a Glass of the Trinity. There is in the soul an Idaea,
and resemblance of God: an Analogy of Similitude not proportion as the
Schoolmen speak. If David did so admire the rare texture and workmanship of his
body, Psalm. 139.13, 15. I am wonderfully made, I was curiously wrought in the
lowest parts of the earth. If the Cabinet be so curiously wrought, what is the
Jewel? how richly and gloriously is the soul embroydered! it is divinely inlaid
and enameled. The body is but the sheath, Dan. 7.15. I was grieved in the midst
of my body, in the Chalde it is, in the midst of my sheath. The most beautiful
body is but like a velvet sheath, the soul is the blade of admirable metal.
The soul is a sparkling Diamond set in a rig of clay. (...), etc. The soul is a
vessel of honor Macarius.
; God himself is served in this vessel. The soul is the bird of Paradise that
soars aloft: it may be compared to the wings of the Cherubims, it has a winged
swiftness to fly to heaven. The soul is Capax beatitudinis, capable of
communion with God and Angels Bern.
. The soul is Gods house he has made to dwell in, Heb. 3.6. The Understanding,
Will, and Affections are the three stories in this house. What pity is it that
this goodly building should be let out, and the Devil become Tenant in it. The
preciousnesse of the soul is seen in two particulars.

It has 1. An intrinsecal worth. 2. An estimative worth.


1. The soul has an intrinsecal worth. Which appears in two things.

1. Spirituality. 2. Immortality.
1. Spirituality. The soul is a spiritual substance. It Is a saying among the
Ancients, our souls are tempered in the same mortar with the heavenly spirits
In eodem cratere temperatas esse animas nostras cum caelestibus.
. Now the soul is spiritual three manner of ways.

In its Essence. Object. Operation.


1. The soul is spiritual in its Essence. God breathed it in, Genesis 2.7. It is a
sparkle lighted by the breath of God. The soul may be compared to the spirits
of the wine, the body to the dregs: the spirits are more pure refined part of
the wine, such is the soul; the body is more feculent, the soul is the more
refined, sublimated part of man. Mistake me not, when I say the soul is
spiritual, and that it is a beam of God, I do not mean that it is of the same
substance with him; as Servetus, Ofiander, and others have held; for when it is
said God breathed into man the breath of life, they erroneously thought that
the soul being infused did convey into man the spirit and substance of God,
which opinion is absurd and sinful: For if the soul should be part of the
Divine Essence, then it will follow that the Essence of God should be subject
not only to change and passion, but which is worse, to sin, which were
blasphemy to assert; so that when we say the soul is spiritual, the meaning is,
God has invested it with many noble endowments, he has made it a mirror of
beauty, and printed upon it a surpassing excellency; as the Sun shining upon a
Crystal, conveys its beauty, not its being.

2. The soul is spiritual in its object, it contemplates God and heaven; God is
the orb and center where the soul does fix; if you could lift up a stone into
the highest Region, though it did break in an hundred pieces, it would fall to
its center. God is the terminus ad quem, the soul moves to him, as to its rest.
Psalm. 116.7. Return to thy rest O my soul. He is the Ark to which this Dove
flies; nothing but God can fill an heaven-born soul; if the earth were turned
into a globe of gold, it could not fill the heart, it would still cry, Give,
Give. The soul being spiritual, God only can be the adequate object of it.

3. The soul is spiritual in its operation, it being immaterial, does not
depend upon the body in its working. The senses of seeing, hearing, and the
rest of those Organs of the body, cease and dye with the body, because they are
parts of the body, and have their dependence on it; but the soul (as Aristotle
says) has a nature distinct from the body, it moves and operates of it self
though the body be dead, and has no dependence upon, or coexistence with the
body. Thales Milesius an ancient Philosopher defines the soul,(...): He calls
the soul a self-movable, it has an intrinsecal principle of life and motion,
though it be separate from the body. And thus you have seen the souls
spirituality.

2. The preciousness of the soul appears in its immortality. There are some
that say the soul is mortal; indeed it were well for those who do not live like
men, if they might dye like beasts; but as Julius Scaliger well observes, it is
impossible for any thing of a spiritual, uncompounded nature, to be subject to
death and corruption, the souls of believers are with Christ after death, Phil.
1.23 Oecolampadias said to his friend who came to visit him on his deathbed,
Good news, I shall be shortly with Christ my Lord. And the devout soul shall be
ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. ult. The Heathens had some glimmerings of the
souls immortality. Cicero says that the Swan was dedicated to Apollo, because
she sings sweetly before her death; by which Hieroglyphick they intimated the
joyfulness of virtuous men before their death, as supposing the Elizian
delights, which they should always enjoy after this life. And we read it was a
custom among the Romans, that when their great men dyed, they caused an Eagle
to fly aloft in the Air, signifying hereby that the soul was immortal, and
did not dye as the body.

The souls immortality may be proved by this Argument, That which is not
capable of killing, is not capable of dying; but the soul is not capable of
killing; our Savior Christ proves the minor proposition, that it is not
capable of killing. Luke 12.4. Fear not them that kill the body, and after that
have no more that they can do. Therefore the soul not being capable of killing,
is not in a possibility of dying; the essence of the soul is Metaphysical, it
has a beginning, but no end; it is eternal, a part post. The soul does not
wax old Anima non senescit.
, it lives for ever, which can be said of no sublunary created glory. Worldly
things are as full of mutation as motion, and like Jonah's Gourd, have a worm
eating at the root.

2. The soul has an estimative worth.

1. Jesus Christ has set an high value and estimate upon the soul; he made it,
and he bought it, therefore he best knows the price of it. He did sell himself
to buy the soul. Zach. 11.12. They weighed for my price thirty pieces of
silver. Nay, he was content not only to be sold, but to dye; this inhanceth the
price of the soul, it cost the blood of God. Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 1.19. Ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things as silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of Christ. God must dye, that the soul may live; the heir of heaven was
morgaged, and laid to pawn for the soul of man. What could Christ give more
than himself? what in himself dearer than his blood? O precious soul, that have
the image of God to beautify thee, and the blood of God to redeem thee! Christ
was the Priest, his Divine Nature the Altar, his blood the sacrifice which he
did offer up as an atonement for our souls. Now reckon what a drop of Christ's
blood is worth, and then tell me what a soul is worth.

2. Satan does value souls, he knows their worth; he says as the King of Sodom
did to Abraham, Give me the persons, and take the goods to thy self. So says
Satan, Give me the Persons. He cares not how rich you are, he does not strive
to take away your estates, but your souls. Give me the persons says he, take
you the goods; whence are all his (...), his warlike stratagems, his subtle
snares, but to catch souls? Why does this Lion so roar but for his prey? he
envies the soul its happiness; he lays the whole train of tentation to blow up
the whole Fort-royal of the soul. Why does he lay such suitable baits? he
allures the ambitious man with a Crown, the covetous man with a golden apple;
the sanguine man with beauty; why does he tempt to Dalilah's Lap, but to keep
you from Abraham's bosom? Latet anguis in herba. The Devil is angling for the
precious soul; to undo souls is his pride; he glories in the damnation of
souls; it is next to victory to dye revenged. If Sampson must dye, it is some
comfort that he shall make more dye with him; if Satan that Lion must be kept
in his hellish Den, it is all the heaven he expects, to reach forth his paw,
and pull others into the Den with him.

2. Having showed you the souls preciousness; the next thing to be
demonstrated, is, that the soul is more precious than a world: it is (...). The
world is made of a more impure lump; Rudis indigestaque moles; The world is of
a courser make, of an earthly extract; the soul is heaven-born, of a finer
spinning, of a more noble descent; the world is (...)* as Origin calls it, a
great Book o^ Volume, wherein we read the Majesty and Wisdom of him that made
it; but the soul is (...) the Image of God, Genesis 1. The soul is a studied
piece; when God made the world, it was but fiat, let it be, and it was done;
but when he made the soul, all the persons in the Trinity sat together at the
Councel-table, Genesis 1.26. Come let us make man in our own likeness. The soul is
a Glass wherein some Rays of Divine Glory shine, much of God is to be seen in
it; though this glass be cracked by the fall, yet it shall one day be perfect;
we read of spirits of just men made perfect, Hebr. 12.23. The soul since the
fall of Adam, may be compared to the Moon in its conjunction, very much
obscured by sin; but when it is sanctified by the Spirit, and translated from
hence, it shall be as the Moon in the full, it shall shine forth in its perfect
glory.

1. If the soul be so precious, see then what that Inform.
that which comes from the more noble part of the soul. To thee O Lord do I
lift up my soul. David did not only lift up his voice, but his soul; though God
will have the eye and the knee, the service of the body; yet he complains of
them that draw near with their lips, when their hearts were far from him, Isa.
29.13. Neque enim in Sacrificiis munera eorum, sed corda intueba^ur Deus. Cypr.
The soul is the jewel; David did not only put his Lute and Viol in tune, but
his soul in tune to praise God. Psalm. 103.1. Bless the Lord O my soul; his
affections joining together in worship made up the consort. The soul is both
Altar, Fire and Incense; it is the Altar on which we offer up our prayers, the
Fire which kindles our prayers, and the Incense which perfumes them. Gods eye
is chiefly upon the soul; bring an hundred dishes to Table, he will carve of
none but this; this is the savoury meat he loves He who is best, will be served
with the best; when we give him the soul in a duty, now we give him the flower
and the cream; by an holy Chemistry we still out the spirits. A soul inflamed
in service, is the cup of spiced wine, and the juice of the Pomgranate, which
the Spouse makes Christ to drink off Cant. 8.2.
; without the worship of the soul, all our Religion is but (...), bodily
exercise, 1 Timothy 4.8. which profits nothing; without the soul we give God but a
carcass. What are all the Papists Fastings, Penance, Pilgrimages, but going to
hell in more pomp and state? What are the Formalists prayers, which do even
cool between his lips, but a dead devotion? It is not sacrifice, but
sacrilege; he robs God of that which he has a right to, his soul.



1. Ordinances they are the golden ladder by which the soul climbs up to
heaven, they are conduits of the water of life. O how precious should these be
to us! they that are against Ordinances, are against being saved.

2. Of how precious account should Ministers be, whose very work is to save
souls; their feet should be beautiful.

1. Their labors should be precious; they are (...), 2 Cor. 6.1. They labor
with God, and they labor for your souls; all their sweat, their tears, their
prayers are for you; they woe for your souls, and oftentimes spend their lives
in the suit.

2. Their liberties should be precious. Constantine was a great honourer of the
Minstry; if indeed you see any of them who are of this holy and honorable
function, like that drug the Physicians speak of, which is hot in the mouth,
but cold in operation; if you see them either idle or ravenous, if they do not
(...), and (...), divide the Word rightly, and live uprightly, censure and
spare not. God forbid I should open my mouth for such. In the Law the lips of
the Leper were to be covered; that Minister who is by office an Angel, but by
his life a Leper, ought to have his lips covered, he deserves silencing. A good
Preacher, but a bad liver, is like a Physician that has the plague; though his
advice and receipts which he gives may be good, yet his plague infects the
Patient; so though Ministers may have good words, and give good receipts in the
Pulpit, yet the plague of their lives infects their people. If you find a
Hophni and Phineas among the sons of Levi, whose unholy carriage makes the
offering of God to be abhorred, you will save God a labor in ejecting them;
but be sure you distinguish between the precious and the vile; while you let
out the bad blood, have a care to preserve the heart-blood; while you purge out
the ill humors, do not destroy the spirits; while you are taking away the
snuffs, do not eclipse the lights of Gods Sanctuary; it is a work fit for a
Julian to suppress the Orthodox Ministry, and open the Temple of the Idol. The
Romans sacked the City of Corinth, and razed it down to the ground for some
incivility offered to their Ambassador. God will avenge the affronts offered to
his Ministers, Psa. 105.15. Oh take heed of this; if souls be of such infinite
value, how precious should their liberties be, whose very design and
negotiation is to save souls? 1 Timothy 4.16. Jude 23.

1. If the soul be so precious, take heed of abusing Exhort.
Socrates exhorted young men that they should look their faces in a glass, and
if they saw they Caverent ne quid ea pulchritudine indignum committerent, they
should have a care to do nothing unworthy of their beauty. Christians, God has
given you souls that sparkle with divine beauty; oh do nothing unworthy of
these souls, do not abuse them: There are four sorts of Persons that abuse
their souls.

1. They that degrade their souls.

1. That set the world above their souls; who pant after the dust of the earth,
Amos 2.7. As if a man's house were on fire, and he should take care to preserve
the lumber, but let his child be burnt in the fire.

2. That make their souls Lackies to their bodies. The body is but the brutish
part, the soul is the angelical; the soul is the Queen-regent, who is adorned
with the jewels of knowledge, and sways the Scepter of liberty; oh what pity is
it that this excellent soul should be made a vassal, and be put to grind in
the Mill, when the body in the mean time sits in a Chair of State! Solomon
complains of an evil under the Sun, Eccles. 10.7. I have seen servants upon
horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth. Is it not an evil under
the Sun to see the body riding in pomp and triumph, and the soul of man that
royal and heaven-born thing, as a Lacky walking on foot?

2. They abuse their souls, that sell their souls.

1. The covetous person sells his soul for money; as it is said of the Lawyer,
he has linguam venalem, a tongue that will be sold for a Fee; so the covetous
man has animam venalem, a soul that is to be set to sale for money. Achan did
sell his soul for a wedge of gold. Judas did sell his soul for silver; Judas
sold cheap penny-worths; for thirty pieces he did sell Christ, who was more
worth than heaven; and his own soul, which was more worth than a world! how
many have damned their souls for money? 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. It is observed that the
Eagles quills or feathers mixed with Hens feathers, will in time consume them;
such is the world to the soul; if you mix these earthly things with your souls,
and let them lie too near you, they will in time consume and undo your souls.

2. The ambitious person sells his soul for honor; as Alexander the sixth did
sell his soul to the Devil for a Popedom; and what is honor but res
imaginaria? a Torch lighted by the breath of people, with the least puff of
censure blown out! Miserum est alienae incumbere famae. How many souls have
been blown to hell with the wind of popular applause?

3. The voluptuous person sells his soul for pleasure. Heliogabalus drowned
himself in sweet water; so many drown their souls in the sweet perfumed waters
of pleasure. Plato calls pleasure the bait that catches souls: Ea capiuntur ut
pisces hamo. Pleasure is a silken halter, a flattering Devil, it kills with
embracing.

3. They abuse their souls that poison their souls; error is a sweet poison,
Ignatius calls it the invention of the Devil (...). Ignat. Epist. 2. ad.
Trallianos.
. A man may as well damn his soul by error as vice, and may as soon go to hell
for a drunken opinion, as for a drunken life.

4. They abuse their souls, that starve their souls; these are they that say
they are above Ordinances; but sure we shall not be above Ordinances, till we
are above sin. The Apostle says, that in the blessed Sacrament we are to
remember the Lords death, (...), till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. That is, until
Christ comes to judgment. How then can any omit Sacraments without a contempt
and affront offered to Christ himself? if Sant Paul and the Apostles, those
Giants in grace, needed the Lords Supper to confirm and corroborate them, much
more do we need such holy Ordinances, who have but an infant-faith; but Satan
likes these fasting days, he would have men fast from Ordinances; if the body
be kept from food, it cannot live long.



1. It is a foolish loss to lose the soul. Thou fool, this night thy soul shall
be required of thee, Luke 12.20. It is a foolish loss to lose the soul, in a
threefold respect.

1. Because there is a possibility of saving the soul; we have time to work in,
we have light to work by, we have the Spirit offering us help. The soul is like
a ship laden with jewels, the Spirit is a gale of wind to blow; if we would
but loosen anchor from sin, we might arrive at the Port of happiness.

2. It is a foolish loss, because we lose the soul for things of no value;
worldly things are infinitely below the soul, they are non entia. Prove. 23.5.
Will thou set thine eyes on that which is not? The world is but a bewitchery,
these things glister in our eyes; but at death, we shall say we have set our
eyes on that which is not: He that thinks to find happiness here, is like
Ixion, that hugged the cloud instead of Juno; and like Apollo, that embraced the
Laurel Tree instead of Daphne. Now to lose the soul for such poor
inconsiderable things, is a foolish loss; it is as if one should throw a Diamond
at a Pair-tree, he loses his Diamond.

3. It is a foolish loss; for a man to lose his soul, because he himself has
an hand in it; is it not folly to give ones self poison? a sinner has his
hands embrued in the blood of his own soul. Perditio tua ex te, thy destruction
is of thy self, Hosea 13.9. They lay wait for their own blood, Prove. 1.18. The
foolish sinner nourishes those lusts that kill his soul; the Tree breeds the
worm, and the worm eats the Tree; were it not folly for a Garrison to open to
the enemy that besieges it? the sinner opens to those lusts which war against
his soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. this is a foolish loss.

2. It is a fatal loss to lose the soul.

1. It is an unparalled loss, because in losing the soul there are so many
things lost with it; as a Merchant in losing his ship, loses many things with
it; his money, plate, jewels, spices. Thus he that loses his soul, he loses
Christ, he loses the Comforter, he loses the Society of Angels, he loses
Heaven.

2. It is an irreparable loss; other losses may be made up again; if a man lose
his health, he may recover it again; if he lose his Estate, he may get it up
again; but if he lose his soul, this loss can never be made up again. Are there
any more Saviors to dye for the soul? as Naomi said to her daughters, Are
there yet any more sons in my womb? Ruth 1.11. Has God any more sons? or will
he send his Son any more into the world? oh no, if the soul be lost, Christ's
next coming is not ^o save it, but to judge it. Christian, remember thou have
but one soul, and if that be gone, all is gone. God, says Chrysostom, has
given thee two eyes, if thou losest one, thou have another; but thou have but
one soul, and if that perish, thou art quite undone. The Merchant that ventures
all in one ship, if that ship be lost, he is quite broken.

3. The loss of the soul is an eternal loss; the soul once lost, is lost for
ever; he that loses his soul, may say as that wicked Doctor of Paris on his
deathbed, Parcite funeribus, mihi nil prodesse valebit;
Heu infaelicem eur me genuere parents?
Ah miser aeternos vado damnatus ad ignes.
The sinner and the furnace shall never be parted, Isa. 33.14. As the sinners
heart will never be emptied of sin, so Gods Vial shall never be emptied of
wrath; it is an eternal loss.

under the power of Satan, Acts 26.18. Now there are but two ways to fetch
home the pawn; and both are set down, Acts 20.21. Repentance toward God, and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Unravel all your works of sin by
repentance, honor Christ's merits by believing; Divines call it fidem
salvificam, saving faith, because upon this wing the soul flies to the Ark
Christ, and is secured from danger.

LUKE 5.31. They that are whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick.]


The Souls Malady and Cure.
THE occasion of the words is set down in the context; Levi was called from the
receipt of custom, (he was a Custom House man) but Christ called him, and
there went out power with the word, he left all, rose up, and followed him,
ver. 28. Levi did not consult with flesh and blood, he did not say, What shall
I do for the hundred Talents 2 Chronicles. 25.9.
? how shall I live and maintain my charge? I shall lose many a sweet bit at the
Custom-house; poverty is like to be my patrimony; nay, in case I follow Christ
I must espouse persecution; he does not reason thus; but having a call, he
hastens away after Christ, He rose up and followed him; and that he might give
Christ a pledge and specimen of his love, he makes him a feast, ver. 29. And
Levi made him a great feast in his own house; a better guest he could not
invite; Christ always came with his cost; Levi feasted Christ with his cheer,
and Christ feasted him with salvation. Well, Christ being at this feast, the
Pharisees begin to murmur, ver. 30. Why do ye eat and drink with publicans?
The Pharisees, 1. were offended at him that he should go in and eat with
Publicans. The Publicans were counted the worst of sinners; sinners of the
deepest dye; yet the Pharisees were not so much offended at the sins of the
Publicans, as they had a mind to pick a quarrel with Christ. He who was the
Horn of salvation to some, was a Rock of offense to these Jews; others did
feed on him, these did stumble at him. 2. They accuse Christ: for these words
carry in them a Charge and Accusation, Why do ye eat with Publicans and
sinners? The Pharisees impeached Christ for eating with sinners; malice will
never want matter of accusation. Though the Devils proclaimed Christ's
holiness, Luke 4.34. Let us alone, I know thee who thou art, the holy one of
God. Yet the Pharisees tax him for a sinner; see what malice will do, it will
make a man speak that which the Devil himself will not speak. The Devils
justify Christ, the Pharisees accuse him. And if Christ who was a Lamb without
spot, could not escape the worlds censures, no wonder if his people are loaded
with the calumnies and censures of the wicked.

But let us examine the master of the Charge they bring against Christ, and see
how groundless it was. They indite Christ for going in with sinners.

First, Christ did nothing but what was according to his Commission; the
Commission he received from his Father, was, that he should come to save
sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Secondly, Christ went in with sinners, not to join with them in their sins,
but to heal them of their sins; to accuse Christ, was (as Austin says) as if
the Physician should be accused because he goes among them that are sick of the
Plague; This groundless accusation Christ over-hears, and in the text gives
these envious Pharisees a silencing answer, They that are whole need not a
Physician, but they that are sick. As if Christ had said, you Pharisees think
your selves righteous persons, you need no Savior; but these poor Publicans
are sick, and ready to die, and I come as a Physician to cure them; therefore
be not angry at a work of mercy; though you will not be healed, yet do not
hinder me from healing others. They that are whole need not a Physician, but
they that are sick.

In the words there are two general parts.

1. The dying Patients. 2. The healing Physician.
1. The dying Patients, Them that are sick. Whence observe,

Doctr. 1. That sin is a soul-disease, Psalm. 103.8. Isa. He has born our
griefs, in the Hebrew it is (...) our sicknesses. Man at first was created in
an healthful temper, he had no sickness of soul, he ayled nothing; the soul
had its (...), its perfect beauty and glory. The eye was clear, the heart pure,
the affections tuned with the finger of God into a most sweet harmony. God made
man upright, Eccles. 7.29. but Adam by eating the Apple fell sick, and had dyed
for ever, had not God found out a way for his recovery. For the amplification
of the Doctrine, there are three things to be considered.

1. In what sense sin is resembled to sickness. 2. What the diseases of the
soul are. 3. That sin-sicknesse is the worst.
1. In what sense sin is resembled to sickness.

1. Sin may be compared to sickness for the manner of catching.

First, Sickness is caught often through carelessness; some get cold by
leaving off clothes. So when Adam grew careless of Gods command, and left off
the garment of his innocence, he caught a sickness; he could stay no longer in
the Garden, but lay bedridden; his sin has turned the world, which was a
Paradise, into an Hospital.

Secondly, Sickness is caught sometimes through superfluity and intemperance.
Excess produces sickness. When our first parents lost the golden bridle of
temperance, and did eat of the forbidden tree, they, and all their posterity
surfeited on it, and took a sickness. The Tree of Knowledge had sickness and
death under the leaves; it was fair to the eye, Genesis 3.6. but poison to the
taste; we all grew desperately sick by eating of this tree. Adams intemperance
has brought us to fasting and weeping; and besides that disease at first by
propagation, we have added to it by actual perpetration. We have increased our
sickness, therefore sinners are said to wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13.

Isa. 1.5, 6. The whole head is sick, the whole heart is faint; from the sole
of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it, but wounds, and
bruises, and putrefying sores, etc.

1. Sin does corrupt the understanding Gregory Nazianzene calls the
understanding the lamp of reason, (...)*
this lamp burns dim, Ephesians. 4.18. Having their understanding darkened; Sin has
drawn a vail over the understanding, it has cast a mist before our eyes, that
we neither know God nor our selves; naturally we are only wise to do evil, Jer.
4.21. Witty at sin, wise to damn our selves; the understanding is defiled, 1
Cor. 2.14. We can no more judge of spiritual objects till the Spirit of God
anoint our eyes, than a blind man can judge of colors; our understandings are
subject to mistakes; we call evil good, and good evil; we put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa. 5.20. A strait stick under water seems
crooked; so to a natural understanding the strait line of truth seems crooked.

2. The memory is diseased; the memory at first was like a golden cabinet in
which divine truths were locked up safe; but now it is like a Colander or
leaking vessel which lets all that is good run out. The memory is like a
Searcer, which sifts out the flower, but keeps the bran. So the memory lets
saving truths go, and holds nothing but froth and vanity. Many a man can
remember a story, when he has forgot his Creed. Thus the memory is diseased;
the memory is like a bad stomach that wants the retentive faculty, all the meat
comes up again: So the most precious truths will not stay in the memory, but
are gone again.

3. The Will is diseased; the will is the souls commander in chief, it is the
master-wheele; but how irregular and excentrick is it! The Will in the Creation
was like that golden bridle which Minerva was said to put upon Pegasus to guide
and rule him; it did answer to Gods Will; This was the language of the Will in
innocence, I delight to do thy will O God, Psalm. 40.8. but now it is
distempered, it is like an iron sinew that refuses to yield and bend to God,
Isa. 48.4. John 5.40. ye will not come to me that you may have life. Men will
rather die than come to their Physician. The Arminians talk of Free Will; the
Will is sick; what freedom has a sick man to walk? the Will is a Rebel
against God, Acts 7.51. ye do always resist the holy Ghost. The Will is
diseased.

4. The Affections are sick.

First, the Affection of desire; a sick man desires that which is hurtful for
him, he calls for wine in a Fever. So the natural man being sick, he desires
that which is prejudicial for him; he has no desire after Christ, he does not
hunger and thirst after righteousness; but he desires poison, he desires to
take his fill of sin, he loves death, Prove. 8.36.

Secondly, The Affection of grief; a man grieves for the want of an estate, but
not for the want of Gods favor: he grieves to see the Plague or Cancer in his
body, but not for the plague of his heart.

Thirdly, the Affection of joy; many can rejoice in a wedge of gold, not in the
cross of Christ. The Affections are sick and distempered.

5. The Conscience is diseased. Titus 1.15. Their mind and conscience is
defiled. Conscience is either, 1. Erroneous, binding to that which is sinful,
John 16.2. Acts 26.9. I verily thought with my self I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus. Conscience is an ignis fatuus leading out of the
right way. Or, 2. Dumb, it will not tell men of sin; it is a silenced Preacher.
Or, 3. Dead, Ephesians. 4.19. Conscience is stupefied and senseless; the custom
of sinning has taken away the sense of sinning. Thus the sickness of sin has
gone over the whole soul, like that cloud which overspread the face of the
heavens, 1 Kings 18.45.

Romans 5.6. When we were without strength Christ died. In innocence Adam was in
some sense like the Angels, he could serve God with a winged swiftness, and
filial cheerfulness; but sin brought sickness into the soul, and this
sickness has cut the lock where his strength lay; he is now disarmed of all
ability for service; and where grace is wrought, though a Christian be not so
heart-sick as before, yet he is very faint. The Saints prayers do but whisper
in Gods ears, and if Christ did not pray them over again, God could not hear
them; we sin fervently, but pray faintly; as David said, 2 Samuel 3.39. I am this
day weak, though anointed King; so Christians, though they have the oil of
grace poured upon them, and they are anointed spiritual Kings, yet they are
weak; sin has infeebled them; they take their breath short, and cannot put
forth such strong desires after God as they ought. When we find our selves
dead in duty, our holy affections languishing, think thus, This is my sickness,
sin has made me weak; as Jephtha said to his daughter, Judges 11.35. Alas my
daughter, thou have brought me very low; so may the soul say, Alas my sin, thou
have brought me very low, thou have brought me almost to the gates of death.

3. Sickness does eclipse the beauty of the body: Psalm. 39.11. When thou with
rebukes do correct man, thou make his beauty to consume away like a Moth.
The Moth consumes the beauty of the cloth; so a fit of sickness consumes the
beauty of the body. Thus sin is a soul-sickness, it has eclipsed the glory and
splendour of the soul, it has turned ruddiness into paleness; that beauty of
grace which once sparkled as gold, now it may be said, How is this gold become
dim! Lam. 4.1.
That soul which once had an orient brightness in it, it was more ruddy than
Rubies, its polishing was of Saphyr, the understanding be spangled with
knowledge, the will crowned with liberty, the affections like so many Seraphims
burning in love to God, now the glory is departed. Sin has turned beauty into
deformity; as some faces by sickness are so disfigured, and look so ghastly,
they can hardly be known: So the soul of man is by sin so sadly Metamorphiz'd,
(having lost the image of God) that it can hardly be known. Joel 2.31. The Sun
shall be turned into darkness. Sin has turned that Sun of beauty which shined
in the soul, into a Cimmerian darkness; and where grace is begun to be wrought,
yet the souls beauty is not quite recovered, but is like the Sun under a cloud.

pabulum animae, it is bread to strengthen, wine to comfort; but the sinner
tastes no sweetness in the Word. A child of God who is spiritualized by grace,
tastes a savouriness in Ordinances, the promise drops as an honeycomb, Psalm.
19.10. but a natural man is sick; and his taste is gone; since the tasting of
the forbidden Tree, he has lost his taste.



second death.

Adam by breaking the box of original righteousness, has filled the soul full
of diseases; the body is not subject to so many diseases as the soul: I cannot
reckon them all up. Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his errors Psalm. 40.12.
? Only I shall name some of the worst of these diseases. Pride is the tympany
of the soul, lust is the fever, error the gangrene, unbelief the plague of the
heart, hypocrisy the scurvy, hardness of heart the stone, anger the phrenzy,
malice the Wolf in the breast, covetousness the dropsy, spiritual sloth the
green sickness, apostasy the epilepsie; here are eleven soul-diseases, and
when they come to the (...), the full height, they are dangerous, and most
frequently prove mortal.

3. The third thing to be demonstrated, is, that Tokens, is far worse; as
appears:

1. The body may be diseased, and the conscience quiet. Isa. 33.24. The
Inhabitant of the Land shall not say I am sick. He should scarce feel his
sickness, because sin was pardoned; but when the soul is sick of any reigning
lust, the conscience is troubled. Isa. 57. ult. There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God. When Spira had abjured his former faith, he was put IN
LITTLE EASE, his conscience burned as hell, and no spiritual physic that
Divines did apply, could ever allay that inflammation.

2. A man may have bodily diseases, yet God may love him. Asa was diseased in
his feet, 2 Kings 15.23. He had the Gout, yet a Favorite with God. Gods hand
may go out against a man, yet his heart may be toward him; diseases are the
Arrows which God shoots; pestilence is called Gods Arrow, Psalm. 91.5. This
Arrow (as Gregory Nazianzene says) may be shot from the hand of an indulgent
father: But soul-diseases are symptoms of Gods anger; as he is an holy God, he
cannot but hate sin, he beholds the proud afar off, Psalm. 138.6. God hates a
sinner for his plague-sores: Zach. 11.8. My soul loathed them.

3. Sickness (at worst) does but separate from the society of friends; but this
disease of sin, if not cured, separates from the society of God and Angels. The
Leper was to be shut out of the Camp; this leprosy of sin without the
interposition of mercy, shuts men out of the Camp of heaven, Rev. 21.8. This is
the misery of them that dye in their sins, they are allowed neither friend nor
Physician to come at them, they are excluded Gods presence for ever, in whose
presence is fullness of joy.

Inform.
nay, we dye away in David's enemies said reproachfully of him, is true of every
natural man. Psalm. 41.8. An evil disease cleaves fast unto him. He has the
plague of the heart, 1 Kings 8. And even those who are regenerate, are cured
but in part, they have some grudgings of the disease, some ebullitions and
stirrings of corruption; nay, sometimes this Kings Evil breaks forth to the
scandal of Religion and from this sin-sickness arises all other diseases,
(...). Chrysostom. de poen. hom. 5.
! Plague, Gout, Stone, Fever. 1 Cor. 11.29, 30. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself; for this cause many are
weak and sickly among you.

Insipientium malus pudor ulcera celat.
! Job 31.33, 40. If I covered my transgression as Adam, by hiding my iniquity
in my bosom, let thistles grow instead of wheat, etc. The wicked take more
care to have sin covered, than cured; if they can but sin in private, and not
be suspected, they think all is well; there is a curse belongs to him who puts
sin in a secret place, Deutr. 27.15. The hiding and concealing a disease proves
mortal. Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper.

3. If sin be a soul-sickness, then what need is there Pastors and Teachers,
Ephesians. 4.11. The Ministers are a College of Physicians, their work is to find
out diseases, and apply medicines; it is dura provincia, an hard work; while
Ministers are curing others, they themselves are nigh unto death, Phil. 2.30.
They find their people sick of several diseases; some have poisoned themselves
with error, some are surfeited with the love of the creature, some have stabbed
themselves at the heart with gross sin. O how hard is it to heal all these sick
gangrened souls! many Ministers do sooner kill themselves by preaching, than
cure their Patients (...).
; but though the work of the Ministry be a laborious work, it is a needful
work; while there are sick souls, there will be need of spiritual Physicians.
How unworthy then are they who malign and persecute the Ministers of God? 1
Cor. 4.9. O unkind world, thus to use thy Physicians; Can there be a greater
injury to souls? would it not be a piece of the highest cruelty and barbarism,
if there were an Act made that all Physicians should be banished out of the
Land? And is it not worse to see multitudes of sick souls lie bleeding, and to
have their spiritual Physicians removed from them, which should under God heal
them? This is a wrath-procuring sin. 2 Chronicles. 36 16. They misused his Prophets
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no
remedy. See what is inscribed in Levies blessing, Deutr. 33.8, 11. And of Levi
he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy One; bless Lord his
substance, and accept the work of his hands; smite through the loins of them
that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again. The
Lord will wither that arm which is stretched out against his Prophets.

Exhort.
the Scripture often calls upon us for humility, 1 Pet. Be ye clothed with
humility; if any thing will humble, this consideration may; sin is a
soul-disease; if a woman had a fair face, but a cancer in her breast, it would
keep her from being proud of her beauty. So Christian, though thou art endued
with knowledge and morality, which are fair to look upon, yet remember thou art
diseased in thy soul, here is a cancer in the breast to humble thee; this
certainly is one reason why God leaves sin in his own children; (for though sin
be healed as to the guilt of it, yet not as to the stain of it) that the sight
of their sores may make their Plumes of pride fall. There are two humbling
sights; a sight of Gods glory, and a sight of our diseases. Uzziah the King had
no cause to be proud; for though he had a Crown of gold on his head, he had the
Leprosy on his forehead, 2 Chronicles. 26.19. Though the Saints have their golden
graces, yet they have their leprous spots; seeing sin has made us vile, let it
make us humble; seeing it has taken away our beauty, let it take away our
pride; if God, (says Saint Austin Si Deus superbientibus Angelis non pepercit.
) did not spare the proud Angels, will he spare thee, who art putredo and
vermis, but dust and rottenness? Oh look upon your boyles and ulcers, and be
humble. Christians are never more lovely in Gods eyes, than when they are
loathsome in their own; those sins which humble, shall never damn.

2. If sin be a soul-disease, and the most damnable second death. Thou who art
a Drunkard or a Swearer, tremble at thy soul-maladies. I wonder to see sinners
like the Leviathan, made without fear. Why do not men fear sin? why do they not
shake with this disease? surely the reason is

1. Stupidity; as they have the Fever of sin, so withal a Lethargy. 1 Timothy 4
2. Having their conscience seared with an hot iron. He that has an unbelieving
heart, and a seared conscience, you may ring out the Bell, that man's case is
desperate.

2. Presumption. Many fancy that they can lay a fig upon the boil; though they
be sick, they can make themselves well; it is but saying a few prayers, it is
but a sigh, or a tear, and they shall presently recover; but is it so easy to
be healed of sin? is it easy to make old Adam bleed to death? is it easy when
the pangs of death are on thee, in an instant to have the pangs of the new
birth? oh take heed of a spiritual lethargy; fear your disease, lest it prove
mortal and damnable. Physicians tell of a disease which makes men dye laughing;
so Satan tickles many with the pleasure of sin, and they dye laughing.

3. If sin be a soul-distemper then account them your David was glad of an
healing reproof, Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a
kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil which shall not
break my head. Ministers are charged by virtue of their office to reprove, 2 Timothy 4.2. They must as well come with Corrosives as Lenitives (...).
. Titus 1.13. Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith. The
word is (...), cuttingly; as a Chyrurgion searches a wound, and then lanceth,
and cuts out the gangrened flesh; or as a Physician uses Leeches and
Cupping-glasses, which put the Patient to pain, but it is to restore him to
health; so must the Ministers of Christ rebuke sharply, that they may help to
save their dying Patients. Who is angry with the Physician for prescribing a
bitter potion? Why should any be angry with Christ's Ministers for reproving,
when in regard of their office they are Physicians, and in regard of their
bowels they are fathers! but how few are they who will take a reproof kindly!
Amos 5.10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate. But why do not men love a
reproof?

1. Because they are in love with their sins; a strange thing that any should
love their disease, but so it is, Prove. 1.22. How long ye simple ones will ye
love simplicity? Sin is the poison of the soul, yet men love it; and he who
loves his sin, hates a reproof.

2. Sin possesses men with a lunacy. Luke 15.7. People are mad in sin,
Jeremiah 50.38. THEY ARE MAD ON THEIR IDOLS. When sickness grows so violent
that men lie raving, and are mad, they then quarrel with their Physician, and
say, he comes to kill them. So when sin is grown to an head, the disease turned
to a frenzy, then men quarrel with those that tell them of their sins, and are
ready to offer violence to their Physicians; it argues wisdom to receive a
reproof. Prove. 9.8. Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. A wise man had
rather drink a sharp potion, than dye of his disease.

4. If sin be a soul-sickness, then do not feed this provision for the flesh,
Romans 13.14. He that feeds a disease, feeds an enemy. Some diseases are starved.
Starve thy sins by fasting and humiliation. Either kill thy sin, or thy sin
will kill thee.

5. If sin be a soul-disease, and worse than any other, whole and need not the
Physician. It Is a bad Symptom to hear a sick dying man say he is well. The
Church of Laodicea was a sick Patient, but, she thought she was well. Rev.
3.17. Thou say I am rich, and have need of nothing. Come to many a man and
feel his pulse, ask him about the state of his soul, he will say, he has a
good heart, and doubts not but he shall be saved. What should be the reason
that when men are so desperately sick in their souls, and ready to drop into
hell, yet they conceit themselves in a very good condition!

1. There is a spiritual cataract upon their eye, they see not their soars.
Laodicea thought her self rich, because she was blind, Rev. 3.17. The god of
the world blinds men's eyes, that they can neither see their disease, nor their
Physician. Many bless God their estate is good, not from the knowledge of
their happiness, but from the ignorance of their danger; when Hamans face was
covered, he was near execution. Oh pray with David, Lighten mine eyes that I
sleep not the sleep of death, Psalm. 13.3.

2. Men that are sick think themselves well, from the haughtiness of their
spirits. Alexander thought himself awhile to be the son of Jupiter, and no
less than a God; what an arrogant creature is man! though he be sick unto
death, he thinks it too much a disparagement to acknowledge a disease; either
he is not sick, or he can heal himself. If he be poisoned, he runs to the herb,
(or rather weed) of his own righteousness to cure him*. Romans 10.3.


3. Men that are sick, conceit themselves well, through self-love. He that
loves another, will not credit any evil report of him. Men are (...),
self-lovers, 2 Timothy, 3.2. Every man is a Dove in his own eye, therefore does not
suspect himself of any disease; he will rather question the Scriptures verity,
than his own malady.

4. Self-deceit,and the deceit of the heart, appears in two things.

1. In hiding the disease; the heart hides sin as Rachel did her fathers
images, Genesis 31.34. Hasael did not think that he was so sick as he was; he
could not imagine that so much wickedness (like a disease) should lie lurking
in him, 2 Kings 8.13. Is thy servant a dog that he should do this great thing?
As the Viper has his teeth hid in his gums, so that if one should look into
his mouth he would think it an harmless creature. So though there be much
corruption in the heart, yet the heart hides it, and draws a vail over that it
be not seen.

2. The heart holds a false Glass before the eye, making a man appear fair,
and his estate very good. The heart can deceive with counterfeit grace; hence
it is men are insensible of their spiritual condition, and think themselves
well when they are sick unto death.

5. Men take up a reverend opinion of themselves, and fancy their spiritual
estate better than it is through mistake. And this mistake is double.

1. They enjoy glorious privileges; they were born within the sound of Aarons
bells, they were baptized with holy water, they have been fed with Manna from
heaven, therefore they hope they are in a good condition, Judge. 17.13. Then
said Micah, Now I know the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my
Priest. But alas, this is a mistake; outward privileges save not. What is any
one the better for Ordinances, unless he be better by Ordinances? A child may
die with the breast in its mouth. Many of the Jews perished, though Christ
himself were their Preacher.

2. The other mistake is set down by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.12. They measuring
themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves amongst themselves, are not
wise. Here is a double Error or mistake.

First, They measure themselves by themselves: That is, they see they are not
so bad as they were, therefore they judge their condition is good. A Dwarf may
be taller than he was, yet a dwarf still; the Patient may be less sick than he
was, yet far from well; a man may be better than he was, yet not good.

Secondly, They compare themselves amongst themselves. They see they are not so
flagitious and profane as others; therefore they think themselves well, because
they are not so sick as others: This is a mistake; one may as well die of a
Consumption as the Plague. One man may not be so far off heaven as another, yet
he may not be near heaven. One line may not be so crooked as another, yet not
strait. To the Law, to the Testimony; the Word of God is the true Standard and
measure by which we are to judge of the state and temper of our souls.

Oh let us take heed of this Rock, the phancying our condition better than it
is; let us take heed of a spiritual Apoplexy, to be sick in our souls, yet not
sensible of this sickness. What do men talk of a light within them! the light
within them by nature is not sufficient to show them the diseases of their
souls; This light tells them they are whole, and have no need of a Physician.

Oh what an infinite mercy is it for a man to be made sensible of sin, and
seeing himself sick, to cry out with David, 2 Samuel 12.13. I have sinned against
the Lord. Were it not a mercy for a person that is distracted, to be restored
to the use of his reason? so for him that is spiritually distempered, and in a
lethargy, to come to himself, and see both his wound, and his remedy! Till the
sinner be made sensible of his disease, the medicine of mercy does not belong
to him Non moris ^^t, membrum non percussum plaugere, and nondum suscepto ictu
admovere manum, fovere unguento ubi non dolet, emplastrum adhibere ubi caesura
non ost. B^rn. in Apologe^.
.

bloody issue, spent her whole estate upon the Physicians, Luke 8.43. Be more
earnest to have thy soul cured than thy body. Make David's prayer, Psalm. 41.4.
Heal my soul, for I have sinned. Have thou a consumptive body? rather pray to
God to heal the Consumption in thy soul; go to God first for the cure of thy
soul, James 5.14. Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the
Church, and let them pray over him; The Apostle does not say, Let him call for
the Physician; but the Elders, that is, the Ministers, (...) Physicians are to
be consulted in their due place, but not in the first place. Most men send
first for the Physician, and then for the Minister; which shows they are more
desirous and careful for the recovery of their bodies, than their souls; but if
soul-diseases are more dangerous and deadly, then we should prefer the
spiritual cure before the bodily; heal my soul, for I have sinned; let us
consider,

1. Till we are cured, we are not fit to do God any service. A sick man cannot
work; while the disease of sin is violent, we are not fit for any heavenly
employment; we can neither work so. God, Opera^to animi secundum virtutem.
nor work out our own salvation. The Philosopher defines happiness the
operation of the mind about virtue. To be working for God, is both the end of
our life, and the perfection. Would we be active in our Sphere? let us labor
to have our souls cured. So long as we are diseased with sin, we are lame and
bedridden, we are unfit for work. We read indeed of a sinners works, but they are
dead works, Heb. 6.1.

2. If we are not cured, we are cursed; if our disease abides on us, the wrath
of God abides on us.

Quest. But how shall we get this disease of sin cured? This brings to the
second thing in the Text -- The healing Physician; The whole need not a
Physician.]

Whence observe:

Doctr. 2. That Jesus Christ is a soul-physitian. Apostles, and in them to all
his Ministers, Lo I am with you to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.20. That is,
I am with you to assist and bless you, and to make your Ministry healing; but
though Ministe^s are Physicians, yet but under-physitians. Jesus Christ is the
(...). the Chief Physician; he it is that teaches us all our Receipts, and goes
forth with our labors, else the physic we prescribe would never work; all the
Ministers under heaven would not do any cure without the help of this Great
Physician. For the Amplification of this I shall show 1. That Christ is a
Physician. 2. Why he is a Physician. 3. That he is the only Physician. 4. How
he heals his Patients. 5. That he is the best Physician.


Exodus 15.26. I am the Lord that heals thee. He is a Physician for the body;
he anointed the blind, cleansed the Lepers, healed the sick, raised the dead,
Matthew. 8.16. He it is that puts virtue into physic, and makes it healing; and
he is a Physician for the soul. Psalm. 147.3. He heals the broken in heart. We
are all as so many impotent, diseased persons; one man has a Fever, another
has a dead Palsy, another has a bloody issue, he is under the power of some
hereditary corruption; now Christ is a soul-physitian, he heals these
diseases Medicus aegrotis Jesus. Bern.
; therefore in Scripture the Lord Jesus to set forth his healing virtue, is
resembled

1. By the Brazen Serpent, Numb. 21.9. Those who were stung, were cured by
looking on the Brazen Serpent; so when the soul is stung by the old Serpent, it
is cured by that healing under Christ's wings.

2. Christ is resembled by the good Samaritan. Luke 10.33, 34. A certain man
went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among Thieves, which stripped him
of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead; but a
certain Samaritan as he journyed, came where he was, and when he saw him, he
had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in
wine and oil, etc. We have wounded our selves by sin, and the wound had been
incurable, had not Christ that good Samaritan, poured in wine and oil.

3. Christ as a Physician, is resembled by the Trees of the Sanctuary. Ezekiel.
47.12. The fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof shall be for
medicine. Thus the Lord Jesus that Tree of life in Paradise, has a sanative
virtue; he heals our pride, unbelief, etc. As he feeds our graces, so he heals
our corruptions.

2. Why Christ is a Physician.

1. In regard of his Call; God the Father called him to practice Physic, he
anointed him to the work of healing. Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel; he has sent me to heal
the brokenhearted. Christ came into the world as into an Hospital to heal
sin-sick souls; this, though it were a glorious work, yet Christ would not
undertake it, till he was commissionated by his father. The Spirit of the Lord
is upon me, he has sent me. Christ was anointed and appointed to the work of a
Physician; this was for our imitation; we are not to meddle in any matters
without a call; that is acting out of our sphere.

2. Jesus Christ undertook this healing work, because of that need we were in
of a Physician. Christ came to be our Physician, not because we deserved him,
but because we needed him; not our merit, but our misery drew Christ from
heaven; had not he come, we must of necessity have perished, and dyed of our
wounds; our disease was not ordinary; it had seized on every part; it made us
not only sick, but dead; and such Receipts were requisite as none but Christ
could give.

3. Christ came as a Physician out of the sweetness of his Nature; he is like
the good Samaritan, who had compassion on the wounded man, Luke 10.33. A
Physician may come to the Patient only for gain; not so much to help the
Patient, as to help himself; but Christ came purely out of sympathy; there was
nothing in us to tempt Christ to heal us; for we had no desire of a Physician,
nor had we any thing to give our Physician; as sin made us sick, so it made us
poor; so that Christ came as a Physician, not out of hope to receive any thing
from us, but was prompted to it out of his own goodness. Hos. 14.4. I will heal
their backslidings, I will love them. Love set Christ awork; not only his
Fathers Commission, but his own Compassion moved him to his spiritual Physic
and Chyrurgery. King David banished the blind and lame out of the City, 2 Samuel
5.8. Christ comes to the blind and lame, and cures them; it is the sounding of
his bowels that causes the healing under his wings.

Only Physician. Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, etc.
There Is no other Physician besides. Verinus.
Non plures medici sed satis unus erit. The Papists would have other healers
besides Christ, they would make Angels their Physicians; all the Angels in
heaven cannot heal one sick soul; indeed they are described by their wings,
Isa. 6.2. but they have no healing under their wings. Papists would heal
themselves by their own merits. Adam did eat that Apple which made him and his
posterity sick; but he could not find any herb in Paradise to cure him; our
merits are rather damning than healing; to make use of other Physicians and
medicines, is as if the Israelites in contempt of that brazen Serpent which
Moses set up, had erected other brazen Serpents. O let us take heed of that
turba medicorum. Indeed in bodily sickness it is lawful to multiply Physicians;
when the Patient has advised with one Physician, he desires to have others
joined with him; but the sick soul, if it joins any other Physician with
Christ, it surely dies.

4. How Christ heals his Patients.

Answ. There are four things in Christ that are healing.

1. His Word is healing. Psalm. 107.20. He sent his Word, and healed them. His
Word in the mouth of his Ministers is healing; when the Spirit is wounded in
desertion, Christ does create the lips that speak peace, Isa. 57.19. The Word
written is a Myrothecium, or Repository in which God has laid up Sovereign
oils and balsomes to recover sick souls; and the Word preached is the pouring
out of these oils, and applying them to the sick Patient. He sent his Word,
and healed them. We look upon the Word as a weak thing, What is the breath of a
man to save a soul? but the power of the Lord is present to heal, Luke 5.17.
Christ makes use of his Word as an healing medicine; the Receipts which his
Ministers prescribe, he himself applies; he makes his Word convincing,
converting, comforting.

Caution. Not that the Word heals all; to some it is not an healing, but a
killing Word. 2 Cor. 2.16. To the one we are a savor of death unto death. Some
dye of their disease; two sorts of Patients dye.

1. Such as sin presumptuously; though they know a thing to be sin, yet they
will do it. Job. 24.13. They are of those that rebel against the light; this is
dangerous Number. 15 30.
. David prays, Psalm. 19. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins.

2. Such as sin maliciously; when the disease comes to this head, the Patient
will dye, Hebr. 10.29. But to them who belong to the election of grace, the
Word is the healing medicine Christ uses. He sent his Word, and healed them.

2. Christ's wounds are healing. Isa. 55.3. With his stripes we are healed.
Christ made a medicine of his own body and blood; the Physician dyed to cure
the Patient Ille Colaphizatus, lauceatus, spinis corenatus, in cruce suspensus,
ut per ejus mortem nobis medelam pararet. Aug. in Evang. Joh.
. The Pelican when her young ones are bitten by Serpents, feeds them with her
own blood to recover them. Thus when we were bitten by the old Serpent, then
Jesus Christ prescribes a Receipt of his own blood to heal and restore us. --
Sanguis Christi salus Christiani. Corpus Christi est aegris medicina, languorem
sanans, sanitatem servans. Bern.
-- The blood of Christ being the blood of him who was God as well as man, had
infinite merit to appease God, and infinite virtue to heal us: This, this is
the balm of Gilead, that recovers a soul which is sick even to death. Balm as
Naturalists say, is a juice which a little shrub (being cut with glass) does
weep out. This was anciently of very precious esteem, the favor of it was
odoriferous, the virtue of it Sovereign; it would cure ulcers, and the stinging
of Serpents Pliny.
. This balm may be an emblem of Christ's blood; it has a most Sovereign virtue
in it, it heals the ulcer of sin, the stinging of tentation, it merits for us
justification, Romans 5.9. O how precious is this balm of Gilead! by this blood
we enter into heaven.

3. Christ's Spirit is healing; the blood of Christ heals the guilt of sin; the
Spirit of Christ heals the pollution of sin; the Spirit is compared to oil, it
is called the anointing of the Spirit, Isa. 61. to show the healing virtue of
the Spirit; oil is healing. Christ by his Spirit heals the rebellion of the
will, the stone of the heart; though sin be not removed, it is subdued.

4. Christ's rod is healing, Isa. 27.9. Christ never wounds but to heal; the rod
of affliction is to recover the sick Patient Unguento utitur medicus, item
ferro and igue. Bern.
. David's bones were broken, that his soul might be healed. God uses affliction
as the Chyrurgion does his Lance, to let out the venom and corruption of the
soul, and make way for a cure.

Quest. But if Christ be a Physician,

Answ. 1. Because all do not know they are sick; they

2. All are not healed, because they love their sickness. Psalm. 52.3. Thou
love evil; many men hug their disease. Augustine says, before his
conversion, he prayed against sin, but his heart whispered, Non adhuc Domine;
-- Not yet Lord; he was loath to leave his sin too soon; how many love their
disease better than their Physician! while sin is loved, Christ's medicines are
loathed.

3. All are not healed, because they do not look out John 5.40. Ye will not
come unto me that ye may have life. Christ takes it as an undervaluing of him
that we will not send to him; some send for Christ when it is too late; when
other Physicians have given them over, and there is no hope of life, then they
cry to Christ to save them, but Christ refuses such Patients as make use of
him only for a shift; Thou that scornest Christ in time of health, Christ may
despise thee in the time of sickness Medicum spernens sanari nequit. Bern.
.

tears, but his blood saves.

Recipes to take, have you taken them? ask conscience. There are many hearers
of the Word, do like foolish Patients, who send to the Doctor for Physic, but
when they have it, they let the physic stand by in the glass, but do not take
it; it is probable you have not taken the Receipts which the Gospel prescribes,
because the Word has no operation on your hearts, you are as proud, as
earthly, as malicious as ever.

Believe ye that I am able to do this? Matthew. 9.28. This undoes many; oh says
the sinner, There Is no mercy for me, Christ cannot heal me. Take heed, thy
unbelief is worse than all thy other diseases. Did not Christ pray for them
that crucified him? FATHER FORGIVE THEM! Some of those were saved that had an
hand in shedding his blood Acts 2.36, 37
! Why then do thou say Christ cannot heal thee? unbelief dishonours Christ,
it hinders from a cure, it closes the Orifice of Christ's wounds, it stauncheth
his blood, Matthew. 15.58. Millions dye of their disease, because they do not
believe in their Physician.

5. The fifth and last particular is, That Christ is the best Physician. That I
may set forth the praise and honor of Jesus Christ, I shall show you wherein
he excels all other Physicians; no Physician like Christ.

1. He is the most skilful Physician, he has his Psalm. 103.3. Who heals all
thy diseases. The Pool of Bethesda might be an emblem of Christ's blood. John
5.4. Whosoever first after the troubling of the water stepped in, was made whole
of whatsoever disease he had. There are certain diseases Physicians cannot
cure; as a consumption in the lungs, some kind of obstructions and gangrenes;
Non est in medico semper relevetur ut ager. Some diseases are opprobria
medicorum, the reproaches of Physicians Rhetor non semper suadebit nec Iatros
sanabit.
; but there is no immedicabile vulnus, no disease can pose Christ's skill; he can
cure the gangrene of sin when it is come to the heart; he healed Mary Magdalen
an unchaste sinner; he healed Paul, who breathed out persecution against the
Church; insomuch that Paul stands and wonders at the cure, 1 Timothy 1.13. But I
obtained mercy; (...). I was bemercied. Christ heals head-distempers, and
heart-distempers* which may keep poor trembling souls from despair. O says the
sinner, never was any so diseased as I! but look up to thy Physician Christ,
who has healing under his wings; he can melt an heart of stone, and wash away
black sins in the crimson of his blood; there are no desperate cases with
Christ Omnipotenti nihil insanabile. Aug.
; he has those salves, oils, balsomes, which can cure the worst disease.
Indeed there is one disease which Christ does not heal; namely, the sin against
the Holy Ghost; this is called a sin unto death; if we knew any who had sinned
this sin, we were to shut them out of our prayer: There is a sin unto death, I
do not say that he shall pray for it, 1 John 5.16. There Is no healing for this
disease; not but that Christ could cure this, but the sinner will not be cured.
The King could pardon a Traitor, but if he will have no pardon, he must dye.
The sin against the Holy Ghost is unpardonable, because the sinner will have no
pardon; he scorns Christ's blood, despights his Spirit, therefore his sin has
no sacrifice, Hebr. 10.26, 29.

better part, the soul Christus medicus animarum. Aug.
; other Physicians can cure the Liver or Spleen, Christ cures the heart; they
can cure the blood when it is tainted, Christ cures the conscience when it is
defiled. Hebr. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your
conscience from dead works? Galen and Hippocrates might cure the stone in the
Kidneys, but Christ cures the stone in the heart; he is the best Physician,
which cures the more excellent part. The soul is immortal, angelical; man was
made in the Image of God, Genesis 1.27. Not in regard of his body, but his soul.
Now if the soul be (...), so divine and noble, then the cure of the soul does
far exceed the cure of the body.

feel our disease. The disease of sin though it be most damnable, yet least
discernable; many a man is sin-sick, but the Devil has given him such
stupifying physic, that he sleeps the sleep of death, and all the thunders of
the Word cannot awaken him; but the Lord Jesus this blessed Physician, awakes
the soul out of its lethargy, and then it is in an hopeful way of recovery. The
saylor was never so near a cure, as when he cried out, (...), Sirs, What must I
do to be saved? Acts 16.30.

4. Christ shows more love to his Patients than any Physician

1. In that long journey he took from heaven to earth.

2. In that he comes to his Patients without sending for. The sick send to
their Physicians, and use many entreaties; here the Physician comes unsent for.
Isa. 65.1. I am found of them that sought me not. He does prevent us with
mercy, he entreats us to be healed; if Christ had not first come to us, and
with the good Samaritan poured in wine and oil, we must have dyed of our
wounds.

3. This Physician lets himself blood to cure his Patient. Isa. 53.5. But he
was wounded for our transgressions; per vulnera viscera; -- through his wounds
we may see his bowels.

4. Our repulses and unkindnesses do not drive Christ away from us. Physicians
if provoked by their Patients, go away in a rage, and will come no more. We
abuse our Physician, thrust him away, we bolt out our Physician, yet Christ
does not forsake us, but comes again, and applies his Sovereign oils and
balsomes. Isa. 65.3. I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious
people. Christ puts up wrongs and incivilities, and is resolved to go thorough
with the cure. Oh the love of this heavenly Physician!

5. Christ himself drank that bitter cup which we should have drunk, and by his
taking the potion we are healed and saved. Thus Christ has shown more love
than ever Physician did to the Patient.

Luke 8.43. Physicians fees are chargable, but Jesus Christ gives us our
physic freely, Medicipecuniis, Christus autem precibus placatur.
he takes no fee, Isa. 55.1. Come without money and without price. He desires
us to bring nothing to him, but broken hearts; and when he has cured us he
desires us to bestow nothing upon him, but our love; and one would think that
were very reasonable.

ease than any other; other Physicians apply pills, potions, bleeding, Christ
cures with more facility, with a word; Christ made the Devil go out with a word
speaking, Mark 9.25. So when the soul is spiritual possessed, Christ can with
a word heal, nay, he can cure with a look. When Peter had fallen into a
relapse, Christ looked on Peter, and he wept. Christ's look melted Peter into
repentance; it was an healing look. If Christ does but cast a look upon the
soul, he can recover it. Therefore David prays to have a look from God, Psalm.
119.132. Look thou upon me and be merciful unto me.

tenderhearted Physician. He has ended his Passion, yet not his compassion.
How does he pity sick souls! He is not more full of skill than sympathy, Hos.
11.8. My heart is turned within me. Christ shows his compassion in that he does
proportion his physic to the strength of the Patient. Physic if it be too
sharp for the constitution, endangers the life. Christ gives such gentle
physic as shall work kindly, and savingly. Though he will bruise sinners, yet
he will not break the bruised reed. Oh the soundings of Christ's bowels to poor
souls that feel themselves heart-sick with sin! He holds their head and heart
when they are fainting; he brings the cordials of his promises to keep the sick
Patient from dying away. Christians, you perhaps may have hard thoughts of your
Physician Christ, and think he is cruel, and intends to destroy you; but, O the
workings of his bowels toward humble brokenhearted sinners! Psalm. 147.3. He
heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds. Every groan of the
Patient goes to the heart of this Physician.

8. Physicians often prescribe such physic as is prejudicial (...). Chrysostom. hom.
de ^oen.
. If the disease of the soul be pride, he humbles it with affliction. God
turned Nebuchadnezzar to grass to cure him of his Tympany. If the disease of
the soul be sloth, Christ applies some awakening Scripture, Matthew. 12.11. Luke
13.24. 1 Pet. 4, 18. If the disease be the stone of the heart, Christ uses
proper medicines; sometimes the terrors of the Law, sometimes mercies,
sometimes he dissolves the stone in his own blood. If the soul be fainting
through unbelief, Christ brings some Scripture-cordial to revive it, Matthew.
12.20. A bruised reed he will not break. Isa. 57.16. I will not contend for
ever, neither will I be always wroth; for the Spirit should fail before me, and
the souls which I have made. Thus the Lord Jesus always prescribes that
physic which is proper for the disease, and shall work effectually to the cure.

John 17.12. Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost.
Judas was not given to Christ to be healed; but never any who was given to
Christ did miscarry.

Quest. How shall I know that I am given to Christ to be cured?

Answ. If it be with thee as with a sick Patient, who sees himself dying
without a Physician. Art thou undone without Christ? do thou perceive thy
self bleeding to death without the balm of Gilead? then thou art one of Christ's
sick Patients, and thou shall never miscarry under his hands. How can any of
those be lost whom Christ undertakes to cure? as he poures in the balsome of
his blood, so he poures out the perfume of his prayers for them. John 17.11.
Holy Father, keep through thy own Name those whom thou have given me. Satan
could never upbraid Christ with this, that any of his sick Patients were lost.

dead. Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins. A
sinner has all the signs of death on him; the pulse of his affections does not
beat, he is without breath, he breaths not after holiness, he is dead; but
Christ is a Physician for the dead; of every one whom Christ cures, it may be
said, (...), He was dead, and is alive again, Luke 15.32.

11. Christ cures not only our diseases, but our deformities. whole, but fair.
Hosea 14.4. I will heal their backslidings, ver. 6. his beauty shall be as the
Olive Tree. Jesus Christ never thinks he has fully healed us, till he has
drawn his own beautiful image upon us. Cant. 2.13. Arise my fair one; fair with
justification, fair with sanctification. Christ does not only heal, but adorn;
he is called the Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. Not only because of the
healing under his wings, but because of those Rays of beauty which he puts
upon the soul, Rev. 12.1.

12. And lastly, Christ is the most bountiful Physician. cure them, but crown
them, Rev. 2.10. Christ does not only raise from the bed, but to the Throne; he
gives the sick man not only health, but heaven.

1 Good News this day, there is balm in Gilead; Indies, want the blood of the
Lamb; but the Sun of righteousness is risen in our Hemisphere, with healing in
his wings. If a man were poisoned, what a comfort would it be to him to hear
that there were an herb in the Garden could heal him! if he had a gangrene in
his body, and were given over by all his friends, how glad would he be to hear
of a Chyrurgion that could cure him! O sinner, thou art full of peccant
humors, thou have a gangrened soul; but there is a Physician that can recover
thee. There is hope in Israel concerning this; though there be an old Serpent
to sting us with his tentations, yet there is a Brazen Serpent to heal us with
his blood.

Luke 4.40. When the Sun was setting, all they that had any sick with diverse
diseases, brought them unto him, and he laid his hands on every of them, and
healed them. You that have neglected a Physician all this while, now when the
Sun of the Gospel, and the Sun of your life is even setting, bring your sick
souls to Christ to be cured. Christ complains that though men are sick even to
death, yet they will not come or send to the Physician. John 5.40. Ye will not
come to me that ye might have life. In bodily diseases the Physician is the
first that is sent to; in soul-diseases the Physician is the last that is sent
to. But here there are many sad Objections that poor souls make against
themselves, why they do not come to Christ their Physician.

Obj^ction 1. Alas, I am discouraged to go to Christ to cure me, because of my
unworthiness; just like the Centurion, who sent to Christ about his sick
servant, Luke 7.6. Lord trouble not thy self, for I am not worthy that thy thou
should enter under my roof. Christ was coming to heal his servant, but the
Centurion would have slaved off Christ from coming, (...). I am not worthy. So
says many a trembling soul, Christ is a Physician; but who am I that Christ
should come under my roof, or heal me! I am unworthy of mercy, as Mephibosheth
said to King David, 2 Samuel 9.8. What is thy servant, that thou should look
upon such a dead Dog as I am? Now to such as have their hearts broken with a
sense of their unworthiness, and are discouraged from coming to Christ to heal
them, let me say these five things by way of reply.

1. Who did Christ shed his blood for but such as are unworthy? 1 Timothy 1.15.
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Christ came into the world as
into an Hospital, among a company of lame, bedridden souls.

2. Though we are not legally worthy, we may be evangelically; it is part of
our worthiness to see our unworthiness. Isa. 41.14. Fear not thou worm Jacob.
Thou may be a worm in thy own eye, yet a Dove in Gods eye.

3. Though we are unworthy, yet Christ is worthy; we do not deserve a cure, but
Christ has merited mercy for us; he has store of blood to supply our want of
tears.

4. Who was ever yet saved, because he was worthy? What man could ever plead
this title, Lord Jesus heal me, because I am worthy. What worthiness was there
in Paul before his conversion? what worthiness was there in Mary Magdalen, out
of whom seven Devils were cast? but free grace did pity and heal them; God does
not find us worthy, but makes us worthy.

5. If we will never come to Christ to be healed till we are worthy, we must
never come; and let me tell you, this talking of worthiness savours of pride,
we would have something of our own; had we such preparations and
self-excellencies, then we think Christ would accept of us, and we might come
and be healed; this is to see our Physician; oh let not the sense of
unworthiness discourage (...).
; go to Christ to be healed: Arise, he calls thee, Mark 10.49.

Objection. But I fear I am not within Christ's Commission, I am not of the
number of those that shall be saved; and then though Christ be a Physician, I
shall not be healed.

Answ. 1. We must take heed of drawing desperate conclusions against our
selves; it is high presumption for us to make our selves wiser than the Angels.
All the Angels in heaven are not able to resolve this question, Who are
elected, and who are reprobated?

Luke 4.18. He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted. Has God touched thy
heart with remorse? do thou lay to heart thy Gospel-unkindnesses? do thou
weep more out of love to Christ, than fear of hell? then thou art a
brokenhearted sinner, and art within Christ's Commission; a bleeding Christ
will heal a broken heart.

Objection. But my sins are so many, that sure I shall never be healed, I am
sick of many diseases at once?

Answ. Thou have the more need of a Physician; one would think that was a
strange speech of Peter to Christ, Luke 5.8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful
man O Lord; rather, Lord come near to me. Is it a good Argument to say to a
Physician, I am diseased, therefore depart from me? No, therefore come and heal
me. Our sins should serve to humble us, not to beat us from Christ. I tell you,
if we had no diseases, Christ would have no work to do in the world.

Objection. But my disease is inflamed, and grown to a Paroxysme; my sin is
greatly heightened.

Answ. The plaster of Christ's blood is broader than thy sore. 1 John 1.7. The
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. The blood of the Lamb takes
away the poison of the Serpent; all diseases are alike to Christ's blood; he can
cure the greatest sin as well as the least (...). Chrysostom.
. Have thou a bloody issue of sin running? the issue of blood in Christ's
sides can heal thine.

5. Objection. But mine is an old inveterate disease,

Answ. Though thy disease be chronical, Zacheus an old sinner, a Custom House
man, he had wronged many a one in his time, but Christ cured him. Christ
sometimes grafts his grace upon an old Stock; we read Christ cured at
Sunsetting, Luke 4.40. He heals some sinners at the Sunsetting of their lives.

6. Objection. But after I have been healed, my disease

Answ. It is rare that the Lord leaves his children to these relapses, though
through the suspension of grace, Solomon's offense, that he sinned after the
Lord had appeared to him twice, 1 Kings 11.9. These sins after healing open the
mouth of conscience to accuse, and stop the mouth of Gods Spirit which should
speak peace. These sins exclude from the comfort of the promise; it is as it
were sequestered; but if the soul be deeply humbled, if the relapsing sinner be
a relenting sinner, let him not cast away the anchor of hope, but have recourse
to his soul-physitian; Jesus Christ can cure a relapse, he healed David's, and
Cranmers relapse, 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ. Christ appears in the Court as the Advocate for the
Client. As he poured out his blood upon the brazen Altar of the Cross: so he
poures out his prayers at the golden Altar in heaven, Heb. 7.25. He ever lives
to make intercession for us. Christ in the work of intercession, presents the
merit of his blood to his Father, and so obtains our pardon, and applies the
virtue of his blood to us, and so works our cure; therefore be not discouraged
from going to thy Physician; though thy disease has broken out again, yet
Christ has fresh sprinklings of his blood for thee; he can cure a relapse.

Objection. But there is no healing for me, I fear I have sinned the sin
against the holy Ghost?

Answ. 1. The fear of sinning it, is a sign thou have not sinned it.



Answ. Every grieving the Spirit of God is not that fatal sin. We grieve the
Spirit when we sin against the illumination of it; the Spirit being grieved,
may depart for a time, and carry away all its honey out of the Hive, leaving
the soul in darkness, Isa. 50.10. But every grieving the Spirit is not the sin
against the Holy Ghost. A child of God when he has sinned, his heart smites
him: and he whose heart smites him for sin, has not committed the unpardonable
sin. A child of God having grieved the Spirit, does as Noah, when the Dove did
fly out of the Ark, he opened the windows of the Ark to let it in again. A
godly man does not shut his heart against the Spirit, as a wicked man does,
Acts 7.51. The Spirit of God would come in, he keeps him out; but a gracious
soul opens his heart to let in the Spirit, as Noah opened the door of the Ark
to let in the Dove Intra sancte Spiritus, ut habeam te velut signaculum super
cor meum. Austin.
. Christian, is it not so with thee? then be of good comfort, thou have not
sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost; that sin is a malicious despighting the
Spirit Hebr. 10.29.
, which thou tremblest to think of.

Therefore laying aside these Argumentations and Disputes, whatever the
diseases of thy soul are, come to Christ for a cure, believe in his blood, and
thou may be saved; (...). You see what a skilful and able Physician Christ
is, what Sovereign oils and balsomes he has, how willing he is to cure sick
souls; oh then what remains but that you cast your selves upon his merits to
heal and save you! of all sins unbelief is the worst, because it casts
disparagement on Christ, as if he were not able to work a cure. Oh Christian,
believe in thy Physician, John 3.15. that whosoever believes in him should not
perish: Say as Queen Esther, Esther 4.16. I will go in unto the King, which is
not according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish. So say, the Lord Jesus is
a Physician to heal me I will adventure on his blood; if I perish, I perish.
Queen Esther ventured against Law, she had no promise that the King would hold
out the golden Scepter; but I have a promise which invites me to come to
Christ: He that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast him out, John 6.37. Faith
is an healing grace: We read when the Israelites were burying a man, for fear
of the Soldiers of the Moabites, they cast him for haste into the grave of
Elisha; now the man as soon he was down, and had touched the dead body of the
Prophet, revived, and stood upon his feet. 2 King. 13.21. so if a man be dead
in sin, yet let him be but cast into Christ's grave, and by faith touch Christ,
who was dead and buried, he will revive, and his soul will be healed. Remember,
there is no way for a cure but by believing; without faith, Christ himself will
not avail us. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood. Faith is the applying of Christ's merit. A plaster, though
it be never so rare and excellent, yet if it be not applied to the wound, will
do no good; though the plaster be made of Christ's own blood, yet it will not
heal, unless applied by faith. The Brazen Serpent was a Sovereign remedy for
the cure of those that were stung; but if they had not looked upon it, they
received no benefit: So though there bean healing virtue in Christ, yet unless
we look upon him by the eye of faith, we cannot be cured (...). Chrysostom.
. Above all things labor for faith; this is the all-healing grace; this hand
touching Christ, fetches virtue from him.

Not that faith has more worthiness than other graces; but only it is
influential, as it makes us one with Christ. If a man had a stone in a Ring
that could heal many diseases, we say the Ring heals, but it is not the Ring,
but the stone in the Ring that does the cure; so faith saves and heals, not by
its own virtue, but as it lays hold on Christ, and fetches down his sacred
influences into the soul.

2. If Jesus Christ be a spiritual Physician, let us labor to hasten the cure
of our souls. Consider:

1. What a little time we have to stay here, and let that hasten the cure.
Solomon says there is a time to be born, and a time to d^e, Eccles. 3.2. but
mentions no time of living, as if that were so sho^t, that it were not worth
naming; the body is called a vessel, 1 These. 4.4. This Vessel is filled with
breath; sickness broacheth it, and death draws it out. Oh hasten thy souls
cure, death is upon its swift march, and if that surprizeth you suddenly, there
is no cure to be wrought in the grave. Eccles. 9.10. There is no work, nor
device, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go.

2. Now is properly the time of healing, now is the day of grace, now Christ
poures out his balsomes, now he sends abroad his Ministers and Spirit. 2 Cor.
6.2. Now is the accepted time: There were certain healing days wherein the
King healed them that had the evil. The day of grace is an healing day; if we
neglect the day of grace, the next will be a day of wrath, Romans 2.5. Oh
therefore hasten the cure of thy soul; rather neglect thy food, than thy cure;
sin will not only kill, but damn.

To get a cure,

1. Come to the healing pool of the Sanctuary; the Spirit of God may on a
sudden stir these waters; the next Sabbath for ought thou know, may be an
healing day to thy soul.

2. Pray others to pray for you; when any disease is upon your body, you desire
the prayers of others; the prayers of the Saints are pretiosa balsama, precious
balmes and medicines to cure sick souls.

3. Is Jesus Christ a soul-physitian? then let me speak to you who are in some
measure healed of your damnable disease. I have four things to say.

1. Break forth into thankfulness; though sin be not quite cured, there are
still some grudgings of the disease, yet the reigning power of it is taken
away; you are so healed that you shall not dye, John 3.16. John 11.26. Those
that were cured by the Brazen Serpent, afterward dyed; but such as are healed
by Christ, shall never dye. Sin may molest, it shall not damn; oh then what
cause have you to admire and love your Physician! The Lord Jesus has taken out
the core of your disease, and the curse; publish your experiences. Psalm. 66.16.
I will tell you what God has done for my soul: As a man that has been cured
of an old disease, how glad and thankful is he? he will tell others of the
medicine that cured him. So say, I will tell you what God has done for my
soul: He has cured me of an old disease, an hard unbelieving heart, a disease
that has sent millions to hell. Truly we may cheerfully bear any other
sickness, if this soul-sickness be cured. Lord (says Luther) strike and wound
where thou will, if sin be pardoned. Oh let the high praises of God be in your
mouth, Psalm. 149.6. God expects thankfulness as a tribute; he wonders men bring
not their thank-offering. Luke 17.17. Were there not ten cleansed? but where
are the nine?

2. Are you healed? take heed of coming into infected company, lest you take
the infection; the wicked are Devils to tempt to sin. Lot was the worlds wonder
that lived in Sodom when it was a Pesthouse, yet did not catch the disease.

3. Take heed of relapses: Men are afraid of a relapse after they are cured;
beware of soul-relapses. Has God softened thy heart? take heed of hardening it.
Has he cured thee in some measure of deadness? do not relapse into a drowsy
security. Thou may have such an uproar and agony in thy conscience, as may
make thee go weeping to thy grave. Oh take heed of falling sick again; sin no
more, best a worse thing come unto thee, John 5.14.

4. Pity your friends that are sick unto death; show your piety in your pity.
Have thou a child that is well and lusty, but has a sick soul? pity him, pray
for him. David wept and fasted for his sick child, 2 Samuel 12.16. Thy child
has the plague of the heart, and Thou have conveyed the plague to him; weep
and fast for thy child. Have thou a wife or husband that (though they do not
keep their bed yet) the Lord knows they are sick, they are under the raging
power of sin? oh let thy bowels yearn over them; lift up a prayer for them; the
prayer of faith may save a sick soul. Prayer is the best physic can be used in
a desperate case; you that have felt the disease of sin, and the mercy of your
Physician, learn to pity others.

4. And lastly, Is Christ a soul-physitian? then let us go to Christ to cure
this sick, dying Nation. England (God knows) is a sick Patient, the whole head
is sick, the whole heart is faint. Physicians call it (...), when no part of
the body is free from distemper. The body Politic has a Kakexy, it is ill all
over. Magistracy, Ministry, Commonalty are diseased; and those who pretended to
be our Healers, are Physicians of no value. We have spent our money upon these
Physicians, but yet our sores are not healed. Jer. 14.19. Why have thou smitten
us, and there is no healing for us? Instead of healing us, those who should
have been our Physicians, have increased the Nations malady, by giving a
toleration; this is like giving strong water in a Fever, which does more
inflame the disease. Ah sick England, because sinful England, sick of error,
uncleanness, drunkenness, so sick, that we may fear our Funerals are
approaching. And (which is the worst symptom) though balm has been poured into
our wounds, the precious Ordinances of God have been applied, yet we are not
healed; a sign of bad flesh that is so ill to be cured.

This sin-sickness in the Land has brought forth many direful effects;
division, oppression, bloodshed, the very bowels and arteries of the Nation
are almost torn asunder, so that now God has fulfilled that threatening upon
us, Micah 6.13. I will make thee sick with smiting thee. We have made our
selves sick with sinning, and God had made us sick with smiting. Now what
remains, but that we should go to the great Physician of souls, (whose blood
sprinkles many Nations Isa. 52.15.
) that he would apply some healing medicines to dying England; God can with a
word heal; he can give repentance as well as deliverance; he can put us in
joint again. Let all the people of the Land lie between the Porch and the
Altar, saying, Spare thy people O Lord, Joel 3.17. Our prayers and tears may
set Christ on work to heal us. Psalm. 106.23. Therefore he said that he would
destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood in the breach to turn away his
wrath. Let us never leave imploring our heavenly Physician, till he lay a Fig
on ENGLANDS Boil, and cause it to recover.

1 PET. 1.2. Grace unto you, and Peace be multiplied.


The beauty of Grace.
THE blessed Apostle having felt the Efficacy and Sovereignty of grace, is
taken up with the thoughts of it; and so sweet is this wine of Paradise, that
he commends it to these dispersed Christians to whom he writes, wishing them
all increase.

-- Grace unto you, and Peace be multiplied. -- The words run in the form of a
Salutation, Grace unto you, and Peace. When we salute our friends, we cannot
wish them a greater blessing than Grace and Peace: Other mercies lie without
the Pale, and are dispersed in common to men; but Grace is a special Congiary
and Gift bestowed on them who are the Favorites of heaven. In the words
observe 1. The Connection. 2. The Order.


1. The Connection, Grace and Peace. 1. The Connection.
The way to have peace, is to have grace; grace is the breeder of peace; the
one is the root, the other the flower; peace is the sweet water that drops from
the limbeck of a gracious heart.

2. The Order.
2. The Order. First grace, then peace; grace has the priority: Grace and peace
are two sisters, but grace is the elder sister (...). Theoph.
; and give me leave at this time to prefer the elder before the younger. --
Grace unto you be multiplied. -- For the illustration, consider 1. What is
meant by grace. 2. The Author of it. 3. Why it is called grace. 4. The Cogency
of it.


1. What is meant by grace. This word GRACE is (...), it has various
acceptions in Scripture.

1. Grace is sometimes taken for the favor of God, Genesis 6.8. Noah found grace
in the eyes of the Lord; God did cast a gracious aspect upon him.

2. Grace is taken for beauty; as we say such a thing is graceful. Jam. 1.11.
The flower falls, and the grace of the fashion of it perishes.

3. Grace is taken figuratively, and improperly for the show of grace; as we
call that a face in the glass, which is but the idaea, and resemblance of a
face; so John 2.23. Many believed in his Name; that believing was but a show of
faith, as Austin and Theophilact note.

4. Grace is taken in a genuine and proper sense; so in the Text, Grace be
multiplied; it may admit of this description; Grace is the infusion of a new
and holy principle into the heart, whereby it is changed from what it was, and
is made after Gods own heart. Grace makes not only a civil, but sacred change;
it byasseth the soul heavenward, and stamps upon it the image and
superscription of God.

2. The Author or Efficient of grace; namely, the Spirit of God, who is
therefore called the Spirit of grace, Zach. 12.10. The Spirit is the fountain
from whence crystal streams of grace flow (...). Theodoret.
. Man, as Clemens Alexandrinus observes, is Gods Harp or Timbrel; the Harp will
not sound, unless touched with the finger; so the heart of man cannot put forth
any gracious harmony, till first it be touched with the finger of Gods Spirit;
this blessed Spirit works grace in the Subject, 1. Universally. 2.
Progressively.


1. Universally. 1 These. 5.10. The God of peace sanctify you wholly. The
Spirit of God infuseth grace into all the faculties of the soul; though grace
be wrought but in part, yet in every part; in the understanding light, in the
conscience tenderness, in the will consent, in the affections harmony;
therefore grace is compared to leaven, Matthew. 13.33. because it swells it self
into the whole soul, and makes the Conversation to swell and rise as high as
heaven.

2. The Spirit of God works grace progressively, he carries it on from one
degree of another. The Pelagians hold that gratia operans, the beginning of
grace is from God; but gratia cooperans, the progress of grace is from our
selves; so God shall be the Author of faith, and we the finishers. God shall
lay the first stone, and we the Superstructure; but alas, there needs the
continual influence of the Spirit to the carrying on the work of grace in our
hearts. Should God withdraw his Spirit from the most holy men, their grace
might fail and annihilate: Sublata causa tollitur effectus
If the Sun withdraw its light, though never so little, there follows darkness
in the Air; we need not only habitual grace, but assisting, exciting,
subsequent grace. The Ship needs not only the Sails, but the wind to carry it;
there needs not only the Sails of our Abilities and Endeavors, but the wind
of the Spirit to blow us to the heavenly Port.

3. Why the work of holiness in the heart is called grace?

Answ. 1. Because it has a super-eminency above nature Caelitus delapsa. Beza.
; it is a flower which does not grow in natures garden; it is (...), of a Divine
extraction. Jam. 3.17. By reason we live the life of men, by grace we live the
life of God.

Gratia quasi gratis data.
; every link in the golden chain of our salvation is wrought and enameled with
free grace. That one should be sanctified, and not another, this is of grace;
that God should pass by many of the Noble, Rich, Learned, and graft his
heavenly endowments upon a more wild luxuriant Stock, a crabbed nature, weaker
parts, well may it be called grace.

Quest. But why is not grace bestowed upon all?

Answ. We must hold with Zanchy, there is always a just reason of Gods will;
but in particular, I answer.

Romans 9.15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. Suppose two
Malefactors brought before the King, one he will pardon, but not the other; if
any demand the reason, he will answer it is his Prerogative: So God will give
grace to one, not to another; he will make one a vessel of mercy, the other a
vessel of wrath, this is his Prerogative. The Apostle has silenced all
disputes in this kind, Romans 9.20, 21. Who art thou that replyest against God?
has not the Potter power over the clay? If we could suppose a Plant to speak,
Why was not I made a Bird? or a Beast, Why should not I have reason? just so it
is when vain man enters into contest with God, Why should not I have grace as
well as another? Dispute not against Prerogative; let not the clay syllogize
with the Potter.

2. I answer, God may justly deny his grace to any wicked

1. Because once he had grace, and lost it; if a father give his son a stock to
trade with, and the son breaks, the father is not bound to set him up again.
God gave Adam a stock of grace to begin the world with; Adam did break, and
make all his children Banquerupts; God is not tied to give him grace again.

2. God may justly deny his grace to every wicked man, because he is a despiser
of grace, he tramples this pearl under foot, Prove. 1.7. Is God bound to give
grace to them that despise it? If a Kings pardon be rejected once, he is not
bound to tender it any more; but I shall not launch forth any further into this.

4. The cogency and necessity of grace; it is most needful, because it fits us
for communion with God. 2 Cor. 6.14. What communion has light with darkness?
God can no more converse with an ungracious soul, than a King can converse with
a Swine; it is by grace that we keep a constant intercourse with heaven.

1. Let me with the greatest zeal and earnestness persuade Exhort.
to endeavor after grace; this is the Unum Necessarium; grace will be
desirable at death; it is as useful now, and more seasonable to look after.
Prove. 4.7. With all thy getting get understanding. Alexander being presented
with a rich Cabinet of King Darius, he reserved it to put Homers works in, as
being of great value. The heart is a spiritual Cabinet into which the jewel of
grace should be put; we should desire grace above other things; above the gifts
of the Spirit; nay, above the comforts of the Spirit. Comfort is sweet, but
grace is better than comfort; bread is better than honey; we may go to heaven
without comfort, not without grace; it is grace makes us blessed in life and
death. I shall show you twelve rare Excellencies in grace: I shall set this
fair Virgin of grace before you, hoping that you will be tempted to fall in
love with it.

Hebr. 10.38. The just shall live by faith. Men void of grace are dead; they
have breath, yet want life; they are walking ghosts, Ephesians. 2.1. The life of sin
is the death of the soul (...)
: A sinner has all the signs of one that is dead; he has no pulse; the
affections are the pulse of the soul; his pulse does not beat after God, he
has no sense. Ephesians. 4.19. (...), who being past feeling. Dead things have no
beauty, there is no beauty in a dead flower; dead things are not capable of
privilege; the dead heir is not crowned; but grace is the vital artery of the
soul; it does not only irradiate, but animate; therefore it is called lumen
vitae, the light of life, John 8.12. And believers are said to have their
grave-cloaths pulled off, and to be alive from the dead, Romans 6.13. By grace
the soul is grafted into Christ the true Vine, John 15.5. and is made not only
living, but lively, 1 ^et. 1.3. Grace puts forth a Divine Energy into the soul.

2. Grace has a soul-enriching excellency. 1 Cor. 1. ye are enriched in all
knowledge. As the Sun enricheth the world with its golden beams, so does
knowledge bespangle and enrich the mind Vera divitiae non opes sunt, sed
virtutes. Bern.
. Faith is an enriching grace, Jam. 2.5. Rich in faith; plus fulget fides quam
aurum; faith brings Christ's riches into the soul, it intitles to the promises;
the promises are full of heavenly riches, Justification, Adoption, Glory: Faith
is the key that unlocks this Cabinet of the promises, and empties out their
treasure into the soul. The riches of grace excel all other riches, the
merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, Prove. 3.14.

1. These riches make a man wise; wisdom is the best possession (...). Menand.
; other riches cannot make one wise. A man may ditescere and delirare, he may
have a full purse, and an empty brain. Many a rich heir, though he lives till
he be of age, yet he never comes to years of discretion: But these riches of
grace have power to make a man wise. Psalm. 111.10. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom. The Saints are compared to wise Virgins, Matthew. 25. Grace
makes a man wise to know Satan's (...), his devices and subtilties, 2 Cor. 2.11.
It makes him wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Grace gives the Serpents eye in
the Doves head.

2. These spiritual riches sanctify other riches. Riches without grace are
hurtful; they are not divitiae, but insidiae, they are golden snares; they are
the bellows of pride, the fuel of lust, they set open hell gates for men (...).
Menand.
; they are unblest blessings; but grace sanctifies our riches, it corrects the
poison, it takes away the curse, it makes them beneficial to us; riches shall
be Certificates of Gods love, wings to lift us up to Paradise. Thus grace by a
Divine Chemistry extracts heaven out of earth, and gives us not only the
venison, but the blessing.

3. Grace satisfies; other riches cannot, Eccles. 5.10. Riches can no more fill
the heart, than a Triangle can fill a Circle; but grace fills up every chink
and hiatus of the soul; it dilates the heart, it ravisheth the affections with
joy, Romans 15.13. which joy, as Chrysostom says, is a foretaste of heaven.

Pet. 3.4, 5. Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plating the
hair, and of wearing of gold, but let it be the hidden man of the heart, even
the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
price; for after this manner in the old time, the holy women also who trusted
in God adorned themselves. If a man has Plate and Jewels, Cloth of Gold,
Hangings of Arras, these adorn the house, not the man; the glory of a man is
grace (...). Chaysost.
. Prove. 4.9. She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace. The graces are
a Chain of pearl that adorns Christ's Bride; the heart inlaid and enameled with
grace, is like the Kings daughter, all glorious within (...). Theodoret.
, Psalm. 45.13. A gracious soul is the image of God, curiously drawn with the
Pensil of the Holy Ghost; an heart beautified with grace, is the Angels joy,
Luke 15.7. and is Gods lesser heaven, Isa. 57.15. Ephesians. 3.17. Reason does not so
far exceed sense, as grace does reason; grace changes corruption into
perfection; nothing so graceth a man as grace does; grace is the purest
complexion of the soul, for it makes it like God. Grace is the flower of
delight which Christ loves to smell to; grace is to the soul, as the eye to the
body, as the Sun to the world, as the Diamond to the Ring, it does bespangle
and beautify. A soul decked with grace, is as the Dove covered with silver
wings and golden feathers.

we are defiled; sin is an impure issue, it is a be filthying thing, 2 Cor. 7.1.
A sinners heart is so black, that nothing but hell can pattern it; but grace is
lavacrum animae, a spiritual lavor; therefore it is called the washing of
regeneration, Tit. 3.5. The grace of Repentance cleanses: Mary's tears, as
they washed Christ's feet, so they washed her heart; faith has a cleansing
virtue, Acts 15.9. Having purified their hearts by faith. Grace lays the soul
a whitening, it takes out the Leopards spots, and turns the Cypriss into an
azure beauty. Grace is of a Celestial nature, though it does not wholly remove
sin, it does subdue it; though it does not keep sin out, it keeps it under;
though sin in a gracious soul does not dye perfectly, yet it dies daily. Grace
makes the heart a spiritual Temple, which has this inscription upon it,
Holiness to the Lord.

5. Grace has a soul-strengthning excellency, it enables a Arist.
. Grace teaches to mortify our sins, to love our enemies, to prefer the glory
of Christ before our own lives. Thus the three children by the power of grace
marched in the face of death; neither the sound of the Music could allure
them, nor the heat of the Furnace affright them, Dan. 3.17. They did bear up
infracto animo, and prorsus chalybeo. Grace is a Christians Armor of proof,
which does more than any other Armor can; it not only defends him, but puts
courage into him. Tertullian calls Athanasius, Adamas Ecclesiae, an invincible
Adamant (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 3.
; grace makes a Christian not only bear suffering, but glory in suffering, Romans
5.3. A soul steeled and animated with grace, can tread upon the Lion and Adder,
Psalm. 91.13. and with the Leviathan, can laugh at the shaking of a Spear, Job
41.29. Thus does grace infuse an heroic spirit, and derive strength into a
man, making him act above the Sphere of nature.

Prove. 15.24. The way of life is above to the wise: Grace raises a man above
others; he lives in the altitudes, while others creep on the earth, and are
almost buried in it; a Christian by the wing of grace flies aloft; the Saints
mount up as Eagles, Isa. 40.31. A believer is a Citizen of heaven, there he
trades by faith, grace shoots the heart above the world, Psalm. 139.17. Phil. 3.
ult. Grace gives us conformity to Christ, and communion with Christ. 1 John
1.3. Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus. A man full of
grace, has Christ in his heart, and the world under his feet; grace humbles,
yet elevates.

a sweet odor to God. Hence grace is compared to those spices which are most
odoriferous and fragrant, Myrrh, Cinnamon, Frankincense, Cant. 4.13. -- There
is a double perfume that grace sends forth.

1 It perfumes our names. Hebr. 11.2. By faith the Elders obtained a good
report: Grace was the spice which perfumed their names. How renowned was
Abraham for his faith, Moses for his meekness, Phineas for his zeal? what a
fresh perfume do their names send forth to this day! The very wicked cannot but
see a splendent Majesty in the graces of the Saints; and though with their
tongues they revile grace, yet with their hearts they reverence it. Thus grace
is aromatical, it embalms the names of men; a gracious person when he dies,
carries a good conscience with him, and leaves a good name behind him.

2. Grace perfumes our duties. Psalm. 141.2. Let my prayer be set forth before
thee as incense. Noah's sacrifice was a perfume, Genesis 8.21. The Lord smelled a
sweet savor. The sighs of a wicked man are an unsavory breath, his solemn
sacrifice is dung, Mal. 2.3. There is such a noisome stench comes from a sinners
duties, that God will not come near. Amos 5.21. I will not smell in your solemn
Assemblies. Who can endure the smell of a dead Corpse? but grace gives a
fragrancy and redolency to our holy things. Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered a
more excellent sacrifice than Cain, God testifying of his gifts. Abels
sacrifice was better sented, God smelled a sweet savor of it; for he testified
of his gifts. If it be asked what this testimony was God gave of Abels
sacrifice? Hierom says, Deus inflammavit, God set his sacrifice on fire 1
King. 18.38
; so from heaven testifying his acceptance of Abels offering; and if grace does
so perfume you, wear this flower, not in your bosoms, but your hearts.

8. Grace has a soul-ennobling excellency, it does ennoble vessels of honor
Summa apud Deum nobilitas clarum esse virtutibus. Hier.
, it sets us above Princes and Nobles. Theodosius thought it more dignity to be
Christ's servant, and wear his Livery laced with the silver graces of the
Spirit, than to be great and renowned in the world. Isa. 43.4. Since thou were
precious in my sight thou have been honorable. Sin does debase a man; Christ
tells wicked men their Pedigree, John 8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil:
They may put the cloven foot in their Scutchion; an ungracious person is a vile
person. Nahum. 1.14 I will make thy grave, for thou art vile; the Hebrew word
for vile (...) signifies to be lightly esteemed: There is nothing so vile, but
an ungracious man will do; he is ductil and facil to any thing, like wire,
which will be bent awry; he will snare his conscience, stain his credit, run as
a Lackey after the sinful injunctions of men; but grace ennobles; he who is
divinely inspired, as he is highborn, 1 John 3.1. so he acts sutably to his
birth, he hates whatever is disingenuous and sordid. The Saints are Called
Kings and Priests for their dignity, Rev. 1.6. and jewels for their value, Mal.
3.17.

Jer. 9.21.
, would you not now be safe? nothing will secure you in times of danger but
grace; grace is the best lifeguard; it sets Christians out of Gunshot, and
frees them from the power of hell and damnation. Prove. 10.2. Righteousness
delivers from death. Do not righteous men dye? yes, but righteousness delivers
from the sting of the first death, and the fear of the second. It was the
saying of one, I am not afraid to dye, but to be damned Mori nen metuo, damnari
metuo.
. But here is a believers comfort, the fire of Gods wrath can never kindle upon
him; grace is Gods own image stamped on the soul, and he will not destroy his
own image. xerxes the Persian, when he destroyed all the Temples in Greece, he
caused the Temple of Diana to be preserved for its beautiful structure; that
soul which has the beauty of holiness shining in it, shall be preserved for
the glory of the structure; God will not suffer his own Temple to be
demolished: Would you be secured in evil times? get grace, and fortify this
Garrison; a good conscience is a Christians Fort-Royal. -- Murus Aheneus esto
Nil conscire sibi. --
David's enemies lay round about him, yet says he, I laid me down and slept,
Psalm. 3.5. A good conscience can sleep in the mouth of a Cannon; grace is a
Christian Coat of Male which fears not the Arrow or Bullet. True grace may be
shot at, but can never be shot through; grace puts the soul into Christ, and
there it is safe, as the Be in the Hive, as the Dove in the Ark. Romans 8.1.
There Is no condemnation to them in Christ Jesus.

10. Grace has an heart-establishing excellency. Hebr. It is a good thing that
the heart be established with grace. Before the infusion of grace, the heart is
like a Ship without a Ballast; it wavers, and tosseth, being ready to overturn;
therefore a man void of grace, is called (...). a double-minded man, Jam. 1.8.
He acts for and against, as if he had two souls; he is unresolved, to day of
one mind, to morrow of another; to day he will hear a Preacher that is
Orthodox, to morrow one that is Heterodox; he will be as the Times are, and
change his Religion as fast as the Camelion his color. Hearts unsanctified
will be unsettled; they will face about to the rising side; they will follow not
what is best, but what is safest; they are for that Religion not which has the
Word to guide it, but the sword to back it; this Seneca calls a mind that
rolls up and down Nusquam residentis animi volutatio. Seneca.
, and settles nowhere.

But grace does consolidate and fix the heart. Psalm. 57.7. My heart is fixed, O
God. Hypocrites are like Meteors in the Air; David was a fixed star; grace
keeps the heart upright; and the more sincere, the more steadfast; grace carries
the heart to God as the center, and there it rests, Psalm. 116. Psalm. 7. A
gracious heart cleaves to God, and let whatever changes come, the soul is
settled as a Ship at Anchor.

11. Grace has a preparatory excellency in it; it prepares Hyperbole (...).
Chrysostom.
. Now grace tunes and fits the soul for glory: 2 Pet. 1.3. Who has called us
to glory and virtue. Virtue leads to glory. First you cleanse the Vessel, and
then pour in the wine. God does first cleanse us by his grace, and then pour
in the wine of glory; the silver link of grace draws the golden link of glory
after it: Indeed grace differs little from glory; grace is glory in the bud,
and glory is grace in the flower. In short, glory is nothing else but grace
commencing, and taking its degrees.

for a season, but grace has eternity stamped upon it, it is called durable
riches, Prove. 8.18. Other riches take wings and fly from us; grace takes wings
and flies with us to heaven. Some tell us of falling away from grace; I grant
seeming grace may be lost; a blazing Comet will spend and evaporate; nay,
saving grace may fail in the degree, it may suffer an eclipse, it may lose all
its sweet fruit of joy and peace; but still there is sap in the Vine, and the
seed of God remains, 1 John 3.4. Grace is a blossom of eternity Grotia
concutitur, non excutitur. Aug.
; it is called unctio manens, 1 John 2.27. The anointing that abides; colors
laid in oil are durable; those hearts which are laid in oil, and have the
anointing of God, hold their colors, and endure for ever: Grace is compared to
a river of the water of life, John 7.38. This River can never he dried up; for
the Spirit of God is the spring that seeds it: Grace is not like a Lease which
soon expires; so the Pelagians would make it; to day a believer, to morrow an
unbeliever; to day justified, to morrow unjustified; this would be like a Lease
soon run out; but God settles grace on the Saints as an inheritance, and he
will see that the entail shall never be cut off. He who has true grace, can no
more fall away than the Angels, which are fixed stars in their heavenly orbs.

The Arguments to prove the perpetuation of grace, are:

1. Gods Election; this I ground upon Romans 8.29, 30. Whom he did foreknow, he
also did predestinate. Predestination is the grand cause of the Saints
preservation; God chooses as well to salvation, as to says, 2 These. 2.13.
What shall make Gods Election void?

2. The Power of God. 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept by the power of God through faith
to salvation. I deny not but grace in it self may perish, (our grace is no
better coin than Adams) but grace in Gods keeping cannot; the Saints graces of
themselves may break as glasses, but these glasses in the hand of God shall
never break.

3. Gods Solemn Engagement; the Lord has passed it under hand and seal; he
has given bond for the Saints perseverance. Jer. 32, 40. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, and they
shall not depart from me. A believers Charter is confirmed under the broad Seal
of heaven; and if grace does not endure to eternity, it is either because God
wants power to make good what he has decreed, or truth to make good what he
has promised; either of which to assert were blasphemy.

Besides all this, Jesus Christ our blessed High Priest, who has the golden
plate on his forehead, appears in the Court; and as he poured out blood on the
Cross, so he poures forth prayers in heaven for the Saints perseverance. Hebr.
7.25. He ever lives to make intercession for them. And Christ is not only a
Priest, but a Son; therefore likely to prevail; and which puts the matter out
of doubt, what Christ prays for as he is man, he has power to give as he is
God. John 17.24. Father, I will; Father, there he prays as man; I will, there
he gives as God.

So that grace is an abiding thing; Christians, you may lose your friends, your
estates, your lives; but you shall never lose your grace. Those who hold
falling away from grace, would make a believer wear Cains mark, which was a
continual shaking and trembling in his flesh; they would spill a Christians
cordial, and break a link of the chain of salvation.

2. Let us try whether our grace be true! There is something Chrysostom says
the Devil has a counterfeit chain to all the graces, Trial.
and he would deceive us with it. Lapidaries have ways to try their precious
stones; let us try our grace by a Scripture touchstone; the painted Christian
shall have a painted Paradise.

1. The truth of grace is seen by a displacency, and antipathy against sin.
Psalm. 119.104. I hate every false way: Grace sets it self against
complexion-sins, Psalm. 18.23. and against the sins of the Times, Rev. 2.2.

2. Grace is known by the growth of it, growth evidenceth life. Dead things
grow not; a picture will not grow: An hypocrite, who is but a picture of
Religion, does not grow; a good Christian grows in love to Christ, in humility,
in good works. Psalm. 92.12. Hos. 14.5. He shall grow as the lilly, his branches
shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, and his smell as
Lebanon. When the Spirit of God distills as dew upon the soul, it makes grace
flourish, and put forth into maturity.

3. True grace will make us willing to suffer for Christ. Grace is like gold,
it will abide the fiery trial, 1 Pet. 1.7. -- And if upon a serious scrutiny
and trial we find that we have the right jewel, the grace of God in truth, Col.
1.6. this will be a deathbed cordial; we may with Simeon, depart in peace,
being assured that though we cannot resist death, yet we shall overcome it.

Direction.


1. If we would be enriched with this jewel of grace, let us take pains for it;
we are bid to make an hue and cry after knowledge, and to search for it, as a
man that searches for a vein of gold, Prove. 2.2, 3. Our salvation cost Christ
blood, it will cost us sweat.

2. Let us go to God for grace Incassum laborat qui aliunde virtutes sperat
quam a Domino virtutum.
; he is called the God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. We could lose grace of our
selves, but we cannot find it of our selves Domine errare potui, redire non
potui. Austin.
. The Sheep can wander from the Fold, but cannot return without the help of the
Shepherd: Go to the God of all grace; God is the first Planter, the Promoter,
the perfecter of grace; God is the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. He must light
up this candle of grace in the soul; grace is in his gift; it is not an
impropiriation, but a donative: Oh then go to God in prayer, lay thy heart
before him; Lord, I want grace; I want an humble, believing heart, and thou art
the God of all grace, all my springs are in thee. Oh enrich me with grace, deny
me not this before I dye: What is gold in the bag, if I have no oil in the
Lamp? Give me that anointing of God. I read in thy Word of the fruits of the
Spirit Gal. 5.22.
; Lord, my heart is a barren soil, plant some of these supernatural fruits in
me, that I may be more useful and serviceable; Lord, I cannot be put off with
other things. Who will thou give grace to, if not to such as ask, and are
resolved not to give over asking?

3. If you would have grace, engage the prayers of others in your behalf; he is
like to be rich, who has several stocks going; he is in the way of spiritual
thriving, who has several stocks of prayer going for him. If you had a child
that were sick, you would beg the prayers of others; thou have a soul that is
sick, sick of pride, lust, sick unto death; oh beg the prayers of godly
friends, that God will heal thee with his grace; a Moses and Jacob have much
power with God: Believers can prevail sometimes not only for themselves, but
for their friends, Jam. 5.16. A godly man's prayers may do you more good than if
he should bestow upon you all his lands of inheritance.

4. If you would have grace, frequent the means of grace, lie at the pool of
Bethesda, wait at the posts of wisdoms door. Inward grace is wrought by outward
means; the preaching of the Word is Gods Engine that he uses for working
grace; it is called the rod of his strength, Psalm. 110.2. and the breath of his
lips, Isa. 11.4. By this he causes breath to enter; out of this golden pipe of
the Sanctuary, God empties the golden oil of grace into the soul; the Ministry
of the Gospel is called the Ministry of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 8. because the
Spirit of God ordinarily makes use of this to work grace; this Ministry of the
Spirit is to be preferred before the Ministry of Angels.

Quest. Why is the Word preached the ordinary means to convey grace? why not
conference or reading?

Answ. The reason is, because God has appointed it to this end, and he will
grace his own Ordinances, 1 Cor. 1.21. (...), it pleased God -- What reason
could be given why the waters of Damascus should not have as sovereign virtue
to heal Naamans leprosy, as the waters of Jordan? only this, because the Lord
did appoint and sanctify one to this work, and not the other; if therefore we
would have grace, let us wait where the Manna falls, and there expect the dew
of the Spirit to fall with Manna; the power of God goes along with his Word.

How should we delight in Ordinances! Sleidan says there was a Church in
France formerly, which the Protestants called Paradise; as if they thought
themselves in Paradise while they were in the house of God; those Ordinances
should be our Paradise, which are the power of God is salvation.

PROVE. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of
life.


The spiritual watch.
THIS Book of the Proverbs is full of many Divine Aphorisms; other parts of
Scripture are like a golden chain, the Verses are linked together by Coherence;
this Book is like an heap of gold Rings; many precious sentences lie scattered
up and down in it, as so many jewels, or sparkling Diamonds. That title which
some have given to Peter Lombard, Solomon might justly challenge, to be Master
of the Sentences. Solomon was the wisest of Kings; as his Kingdom was a Map of
the worlds glory, so his Head was an epitome of the worlds wisdom. He was
endued with a Divine Spirit; while he did write, the Holy Ghost did dictate;
and surely among all his golden sentences, none is more weighty and important
than this, Keep thy heart with all keeping, for out of it are the issues of
life. -- Agitur de vita. -- The Text is about matter of life and death; the
words are mandatory; for all counsels in Scripture carry in them the force of a
command: Keep thy heart. Here is Gods solemn charge to every man, like the
Judges charge given upon the Bench. I shall first explain, then apply.

1. Keep;] the Hebrew word (...) to keep, has various significations.

1. Sometimes it signifies munire, to arm or fence; a stroke at the heart
kills; fence thy heart.

2. Sometimes it signifies c^rare, to take care of a thing that it be not lost;
as one would take care of a piece of plate, that it be not taken away.

3. Sometimes it signifies custodire, to keep in safe custody; so keep thy
heart, lock it up safe, that it may be forthcoming when God calls for it.

2. Thy heart;] (...) the heart is taken diversely in Scripture; sometimes it is
taken for the vital part, Judge. 19.5. sometimes for the soul, Deutr. 13.3.
sometimes for the mind, Prove. 10.8. sometimes for the conscience, 1 John 3.20.
sometimes for the will and affections, Psalm. 119.36. I shall take it in its
full latitude, for the whole soul with all its noble faculties and endowments;
this is the depositum, or charge every man is entrusted with, the heart.

3. With all diligence;] the original carries it (...) with all keeping; the
Hebrew word (...) signifies to keep with watch and ward; a Christian is to set
a continual guard about his heart. Some read the words, Keep thy heart, supra
omnem custodiam, above all keeping Junius.
; nothing requires such strict custody; a Christians heart must ever be in his
eye.

4. For out of it are the issues of life:] (...) as the heart is the fountain
of life; if the heart lives, the body lives; if the heart be touched, death
follows: So the soul is a spiritual fountain, out of it issues either sin or
grace; from this springhead flow the streams either of salvation or damnation.

In the words there is,

1. A duty, Keep thy heart.

2. The manner, with all diligence.

3. The reason, for out of it are the issues of life.

Doctr. eyes, Job set a watch there. Job 31.1. I made a Covenant with mine
eyes, etc. We are to keep our lips, David bridled his tongue. Psalm. 39.1. I
will keep my mouth as with a bridle; but especially we are to look to our
hearts: Keep thy heart with all keeping. The heart like Dinah, will be gadding
abroad, and it seldom returns home, but it is defiled: It was the saying of an
Heathen, I never come home with such good desires as I went out with.
Christian, thy chief work lies with thy heart, Keep thy heart. The Serpent when
any danger is near, keeps his head; and to preserve his head, will expose his
whole body to injury; so a wise Christian should especially keep his heart; he
should adventure his skin to keep a wound from his heart. To amplify this, I
shall show that the heart must be kept, 1. With all kind of keeping. 2. At all
times. 3. The Reasons enforcing.


1. The heart must be kept with all kind of keeping. 1. Keep the heart with
all kind of keeping.


1. Keep thy heart, as thou would keep a Temple; the Temple was an hallowed
place set apart for Gods worship; Augustissimum Dei Templum, Seneca.
, the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.16. This heart-temple must be kept pure and holy;
no filth 2 Chronicles. 29.16.
mus^ lie here; sweep the dust out of the Temple Mundemus ^oc Templum, quod non
fumo, nec pulvere sed mal^ cogitatio nibus sordidatur. Lactan.
; the vessels of the Temple were cleans'd, 2 Chr. 29.15. Thus the memory,
affections, conscience, these Temple-vessels must be cleansed, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, John 2. The cares of
the world will be crowding into the heart; now you must get a whip made of the
threatenings of the Law, and drive these money changers out of the Temple of
your heart; let not Gods Temple be made an Exchange; the Temple had a fire
burning on the Altar; take heed of strange fire; but keep the fire of zeal and
devotion flaming upon the Altar of thy heart; do Temple-work, offer up the
sacrifice of a broken heart. When the heart is Dei sacrarium, a consecrated
place, an Holy of holies, now God will walk there: Many a man's heart is a
Pesthouse, a Bedlam, being polluted with sin; this is to put Swine into Gods
room; this is to let the Devil come into Gods Temple; David's heart was a Temple
dedicated, Psalm. 119.38.

treasure: A man that has a great treasure of money and jewels, will keep it
with lock and bolt, that it be not stolen. Christian thou carriest a precious
treasure about thee, even all that thou art worth, an heart Particula divinae
aurae.
; the Devil and the world would rob thee of this jewel; oh keep thy heart as
thou would keep thy life; if thou art robbed, thou art ruined; few know the
value of their hearts; an husbandman can set a price upon corn, but not on
pearl; men know not the worth of that treasure they carry about them,
therefore prefer other things; keep thy heart as a treasure.

Garden Ca^. 4.1^.
, weed sin out of thy heart. Among the flowers of the Spirit weeds will be
growing; the weeds of pride, malice, covetousness; (these grow without setting)
therefore every day be weeding thy heart by prayer, examination, repentance.

1. Weeds hinder the herbs and flowers from growing; the weeds of corruption
hinder the growth of grace; where the weed of unbelief grows, it hinders the
flower of faith from growing.

2. Weeds spoil the walks; Christ will not walk in an heart overgrown with
weeds and briars. Christ was sometimes among the lillies, Cant. 6.3. never
among the thistles. Poor sinner, thou complainest thou have not communion with
God; time was when God did make himself known to thee, but now he is grown
strange, and never comes near thee; this is the reason, sin has spoiled
Christ's walks; thy heart lies like the field of the sluggard, Prove. 24.30. And
will Christ walk there? Indeed we read Christ was once in the wilderness when
he was tempted, Matthew. 4.1. But he did not go thither for delight, but that he
might duel and skirmish with Satan; it is the garden Christ delights in; oh weed
thy heart daily, let not thy heart be a Thicket for Satan.

4. Keep thy heart as thou would keep a Garrison: The Cor hominis tanquam
castellum Bern.
or Fort-royal; this Garrison is besieged, the Devil shoots his fiery darts of
tentation; now keep thy heart as a Tower or Castle.

1. Keep close sentinel in thy heart. Hab. 2.1. I will stand upon my watch, and
set me upon the Tower. Discover where Satan labors to make a breach, what
grace he most shoots at, and there set a double guard, and fortify.

2. Make use of all thy spiritual ammunition, meditation and prayer. Prayer is
the great Ordnance; discharge this Cannon, and be sure to put the bullet of
faith in, Mat. 21.22. 1 Pet. 5.9. If the Devil take the Garrison by storm, it
will be sad, How did he rend and tear that man in whom he was! Mat. 9.18. it is
easier letting Satan in, than getting him out. Turpius ejicitur quam non
admittitur hostis. If the Devil get the Garrison of thy heart, thou art his
slave, and remember he gives no quarter.

Prisoner. The heart is guilty, and is ready ever and anon to break prison; we
had need lay bolts and fetters upon it. A prisoner in the Jayle may promise
fair that he will not stir, but when he sees an opportunity, if you do not
watch him, he will file off his fetters, and be gone: So the heart promises
fair, that it will keep from such sins; but if you be not careful, it will
steal out to vanity; therefore keep thy heart as a prisoner; when thou
perceivest it breaking loose, lay chains and fetters upon it, bind it fast with
the terrors of the Law, keep it with the flaming sword of a reproof: Say to thy
heart, as John Baptist to Herod, Mark 6.18. It is not lawful for thee to have
thy brothers wife. So say to thy heart, it is not lawful for thee to meddle with
the forbidden fruit, thou may not be proud, vain, earthly; lay the commands
of God upon thy heart; a man may be too jealous of his friend, he cannot be too
jealous of his heart; let it be kept close prisoner.

Watch. The heart will be unwinding to the earth, therefore wind it up every
morning and evening by prayer; the motion of a Watch is not constant; sometimes
it goes faster, sometimes slower; so it is with the heart, sometimes it goes
faster in vanity, and slower in duty; therefore set this spiritual Watch by the
Sun-dyal of the Word.

2. Keep the heart at all times.
2. The heart must be kept at all times.

1. Keep thy heart when thou art alone; it was Satan's subtilty to set upon Eve
when she was alone, and less able to resist; he is like a cunning Suitor, that
woes the daughter when her Parents are from home; the Devil breaks over the
hedge commonly where it is weakest. I confess privacy and retirement is good;
had a Christian a fruitful heart, what sweet thoughts might he have of God when
he is alone Psalm. 139.17.
! but alas, by reason of innate corruption, how many vain, proud, impure
thoughts will be stealing into our hearts when we are most secluded from the
world! The Fowls will be coming at the Sacrifice; the Devil will be shooting
in his Balls of wilde-fire, and when we least suspect him, will be treating
with us to deliver up the Castle of our heart to him.

2. Keep thy heart when thou art in company. Vain company is the bait by which
Satan is angling for the heart. In the Law, he who touched a dead body, was
unclean, Number. 5.2. The heart is apt to be defiled by being among them who are
dead in sin; it is easy to catch a disease in company (...). Epictetus.
: Indeed in innocence the heart might be compared to those Plants of Paradise,
which Athanasius says, do impart an Aromatical sweet savor to the Trees
adjoining; but since the fall, our hearts are ready to pollute and infect one
another, being like that withered Vine the Poet speaks of, which took away the
fresh color and sap from its neighbor Vine. A good eye by looking on a watery
eye, many time falls a watring; so often a good heart by beholding and conversing
with the profane, gathers corruption. If you mingle bright and rusty metal
together, the rusty will not be made bright, but the bright will become rusty.
So an evil companion who is rusted with sin, rubbeth ever and anon some of his
unholy rust upon a man that is brightned with grace Rubiginosus comes etiam
candido suam affricuit rubiginem. Seneca.
: Nay Christians, look to your hearts in good company; those who may like
Abijah, have some good thing in them, 1 Kings 14.13. yet it is but (...), very
small; like a pearl in a heap of stones, or like filings of gold among dust;
there may be much levity of discourse among them who are good; and if no filth
or scum, yet froth may boil up; these are most dangerous, because less
suspicious. Who would suspect the plague in perfumed linen? though the lungs
be sound, the breath may not be savoury; such as we hope have sound hearts, yet
want some grains of solidity, and are not so savoury and heavenly in their
speeches as they should Col. 4.6.
. The Devil does that hurt sometimes by a good instrument, which he cannot do
by a bad; he hands over a tentation by such, he tempts Christ by an Apostle;
the Devil once crept into the Serpent, here into the Dove; but Christ spied his
cloven foot, Matthew. 16.23. Get thee behind me Satan; how watchful had we need
be in company!

3. Keep thy heart especially after good duties; when Christ had been praying
and fasting, then the Devil comes and tempts him, Mat. 4.2, 3. When we have
been most enlarged in our services, now will Satan tempt to pride and security.
Many Christians hearts like Bows stand unbent after shootings, they are apt to
grow more remiss, as if duty were a sufficient spell and antidote against
tentation; do not we know Satan always lies at the catch! he is more mad
against us after duty; those prayers which appease God, incense Satan; and if
we lay down our weapons, he will fall on and wound us. After David's victory
over the Assyrians, he grew lustful, and defiled Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11.4. After
we have gotten a victory over Satan in duty, now let us fear lest our hearts
give us the slip. When God had driven Adam out of the Garden, he placed a
flaming Sword at the East of it to keep the Tree of life, Genesis 3. ult. When we
have cast out the Devil by prayer and fasting, let us set a strong guard about
our hearts to keep them, that the enemy do not make a re-entry.

4 Keep thy heart in time of adversity; the Devil makes use of all winds to
toss the soul, and make it suffer shipwreck. Adversity has its tentations; not
more ships than souls have been cast away in a storm; in adversity the Devil
tempts to Atheism and Desperation. Job 2.9. Do thou still retain thy
integrity? Satan used Jobs wife as a Ladder, by which he would have scaled the
impregnable Tower of Jobs faith: Still retain thy integrity? a cutting kind of
speech; as if the Devil had said, God has pulled down thy hedge, he has
smitten thee in thy children, and art thou so senseless as still to serve and
worship God? what have thou got by his service? where are thy earnings? what
have thou to show but thy Boiles? Throw off Religion, Curse God, and dye!
Satan's physic always poisons. Mal. 3.14 Ye have said It is vain to serve God;
and What profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance? We have mourned and
fasted, and have almost fasted away all we have, we will fast no longer. When a
man's estate is low, and his spirit troubled, now Satan begins to throw in his
Angle; and oftentimes Satan makes use of poverty, to put a man upon indirect
courses. Agur feared his heart in poverty, Prove. 30.8, 9. Oh keep thy heart in
adversity, beware of taking the forbidden fruit.

5. Keep thy heart in time of prosperity. The Moon, the fuller it is, the more
remote it is from the Sun; and oftentimes the more full a man is of the world,
the further his heart is from God. Deutr. 32.15. Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked;
it is hard to abound in prosperity, and not abound in sin; a full cup is hardly
carried without spilling; the Trees are never more in danger of the wind, than
when they blossom; pride, idleness, luxury Multos felicitas p^ratai^, pa^
vict^s reddidi^.
, are the three daughters which are bred of plenty. Sampson fell asleep in
Dalilahs lap; millions in the lap of prosperity have slept the sleep of death.
Agur prayed, Give me not riches, Prove. 30.8. He knew his heart would be ready
to run wild; the worlds golden apple bewitcheth. When God sets an hedge of
prosperity about us, we had need set an hedge of caution and circumspection.

3. Reasons enforcing heart-custody.
3. The next thing is, why we must be so careful about keeping of our hearts?
the Reasons are:

1. Because the heart is a slippery piece, Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful
above all things; in the Hebrew it is (...) the heart is a Jacob above all
things, the heart is a supplanter; if we are not very cautious and watchful,
our hearts will put a cheat upon us. There is deceit in coin, in friends, in
books; but the heart has an art of deceiving beyond all, it is a desperate
impostor Grande profundum est homo. Aug.
; the way of the heart is like a Serpent upon a Rock. O the pleats and folds,
the subtilties and labyrinths of a self-deceiving heart! Let us a little trace
the heart in its fallacies and stratagems, and see if there be not reason to
lie sentinel continually, and set a strong guard about it. The heart will
deceive us about things sinful. lawful. religious.


1. The heart will deceive us about things sinful.

1. The heart will tell us sin is but small, and being small, it is venial.

2. The heart will apologize for sin, masking over bad transactions with golden
pretenses.

3. The heart will tell a man he may keep his sin, and keep his Religion too. 2
Kings 17.33. They feared the Lord, and served their own gods. The heart will
secretly suggest to a man thus, as long as he goes to Church, and gives alms,
he may secretly indulge corruption; as if duty gave a man a Pattent and License
to sin.

4. The heart will quote Scripture to justify sin. 1 Cor. 9.20, 22. To the
Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews, I am made all things to
all men, etc. This Text the heart will bring for sinful compliance. O subtle
heart that can find out Scripture to damn thy self! though Saint Paul in
things indifferent would conform to others, that he might save their souls, yet
he would not to gratify them violate a Law, or deny an Article of his Greed;
and if the heart is so treacherous, (being always more ready to excuse sin
than examine it) what care and circumspection should we use in keeping our
hearts, that they do not decoy us into sin before we are aware.

2. The heart will deceive us about things lawful in two cases.

1. It is lawful to endeavor to preserve our credit. A good name is a precious
ointment; but under a pretense of preserving the name, the heart is ready to
tempt a man to self-seeking, and make him do all to get a name. John 12.43. Thy
loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.

2. It is lawful to take comfort in estate and relations, Deutr. 26.11. But the
heart will be ready here to overshoot* how often is the wife and child laid in
Gods room* the full stream of the affection runs out to the creature, and
scarce a drop of love to Christ; this is the deceit of the heart, it makes us
offend most in lawful things; more are killed with wine, than poison; they are
afraid of poison, but take wine in the excess. Gross sins affright, but how
many surfeit upon lawful things, when we overdo we undo.

3. The heart will deceive us about things religious.

1. Our duties. 2. Our graces.
1. Our duties. The heart will tell us it is enough to come to Word and
Sacrament, though the affections are not at all wrought upon; this is like the
Salamander, which lives in the fire; but (as Naturalists say) it is never the
hotter; Will this be any Plea at Gods bar to tell the Lord how many Sermons you
have heard? surely it will be the bringing of Uriahs letter, it will be an
evidence against you: How subtle is the heart to plot its own death, and bring
a man to hell in the way of duty!

2. Our graces; the heart is like a flattering glass, that would make the
hypocrite look fair; the foolish Virgins thought they had oil; many strongly
conceit they have grace, but have none. The hypocrites knowledge is no better
than ignorance. 1 John 2.4. He has illumination, but not assimilation, he is
not made like Christ. The hypocrites faith is fancy; he believes, but his heart
is not purified Acts 15.9.
; he pretends to trust God in greater matters, but dares not trust him in
lesser; he will trust God with his soul, but not with his estate.

Well, if the heart be thus deceitful, what need have we with all keeping to
keep the heart! do with the heart, as with a cheater; we will trust a cheater
no further than we can see him; the heart is a grand cheater, it will supplant
and cozen; try it, but do not trust it. Prove. 28.26. He that trusts in his
own heart is a fool.

2. We must excubias agere, keep the heart with watch and ward, because it is
not only false, but fickle. God complains of Israel, that their goodness was as
the early dew, Hos. 6.4. The Sun arises, and the dew vanishes; the heart
sometimes seems to be in a good frame, but it soon alters; set the water on the
fire, it boyles; set it in the open Air, it freezeth: Those good affections
which boil in the Church, often freeze in the Shop; one day a Christian is
quick and lively in prayer, another day like the Disciples, heavy and sleeping,
Luke 22.45. At one time a Christian is like David, when he danced before the
Ark with all his might, 2 Samuel 6.14: At another time like Sampson, when his
hair was shaved, and his strength went from him, Judges 16.19. When the gold
has been made pure in the fire, it remains pure; but it is not so with the
heart; when it has been purified in an Ordinance, it does not remain pure, it
gathers new soil and dross. The heart is one day humble, next day proud; one
one day meek, the next day passionate; one day quick in its motion toward
heaven, the next day the clock is set back; it is with the heart, as with a sick
man's pulse, which alters almost every quarter of an hour. The heart being so
full of variation and inconstancy, it is needful to keep the heart with all
keeping; the heart like a Viol, will soon be out of order, therefore we must
often scrue up the strings, and keep the instrument in tune, that we may make
melody in our heart to the Lord Ephesians. 5.19.
.

3. The heart must especially be looked to and watched, because the heart is
the fountain of all our actions and purposes; the heart does either sweeten or
poison all we do; the heart is the spring which makes the current of our life
run either pure or muddy; the heart is the Throne either of sin or grace. If
the root be sour, no sweet fruit can grow upon it; so if there be a root of
bitterness springing u^n the heart Hebr. 12.15.
, it is impossible that our services should give a sweet relish: As in the
natural body the heart is the fountain of life; if the heart lives, the whole
body lives; if the heart be tainted and poisoned, the body dies: So it is in a
spiritual sense; if the inner man of the heart be holy, then the thoughts and
actions are holy; if the soul be earthly and impure, the actions receive a bad
tin^ture. In Religion the heart is all; we judge of men's heart by their
actions; God judges of men's actions by their hearts; the heart differenceth
actions. Amaziah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not
with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. But of Asa it is said, his heart was
perfect all his days, 2 Chronicles. 15.17. It is the heart gives the denomination
to a thing; now if the heart be the spring which makes our actions good or bad,
then the heart is chiefly to be watched and tended; preserve the spring pure,
keep thy heart with all diligence.

Inform.
the hypocrite looks most to externals, he keeps his actions from blotting, he
sets a watch before his lips, the godly man sets a watch before his heart; his
main work lies within doors, he sees the first ebullitions and risings of sin,
and grieves for them, he labors to set his heart right; the heart is the Altar
which sanctifies the gift.

with all keeping, then it reproves four sorts of persons.

1. Such as have no care at all about their hearts; they will have a care to
keep their land that it be not morgaged, but no care to keep their hearts.
Salvation and blessedness depend upon the keeping of the heart, yet how few
mind their hearts, they let the Devil get into their hearts. The Shepherd keeps
his Flock, the Physician keeps his Receipts, the Lawyer keeps his Evidences, the
Merchant keep his Wares, the Covetous man keeps his gold; but few that keep
their hearts.

Quest. Why do not men keep their hearts?

Answ. 1. Because they study not the preciousness of them; what a treasure is
the heart? it is divinely ennobled, it is capable of glory, but few know the
worth of this jewel.

2 Men keep not their hearts, because they are taken up Cant. 1.6. My own
vineyard have I not kept. Many a man may say I have been cumbred about the
world, I have been keeping my estate, tending my lusts, but my own heart has
been neglected, my own vineyard have I not kept. Judas was keeping the bag,
when he should have kept his heart.

3. Men keep not their hearts, because they keep themselves diligence, and few
are willing to put themselves to the trouble; but should not a Merchant keep
his books of account because he finds some trouble in it?

4. Some think their hearts are so good, that they need

2. It reproves them, who when they should be keeping their hearts, fall
asleep. Mat. 13.25. While men slept, the enemy came and sowed tares. When men
are asleep, and neglect their spiritual watch, the Devil comes and sowes
poysonful seeds in their hearts, seeds of malice, pride, lust; they say when
the Dragon is asleep, a jewel is taken out of his head; so the Devil takes away
this jewel of the heart while men sleep in security; it is death for a Soldier
to fall asleep upon his guard.

3. It reproves them, who instead of keeping their hearts, have suffered them
to be stolen away. The love of the world has stolen away men's hearts; we may
make an hue and cry after hearts. Satan catches men's hearts with a golden
bait; this, this is the reason why preaching the Word does so little good:
Ministers preach to men's ears, but the world has stolen away their hearts.

4. It reproves those who keep half of their heart, but not all; they have
affections to good things, but let out some rooms of their heart to sin. H^rod
did many things, but he let out one room of his heart to the Devil, he lived in
incest Ubi regnat peccatum, non potest regna^e Dei regnum Au^
. The true mother would not have the child divided; God will not endure to
have the heart divided, he will have the whole heart kept for him.

Exhort.
but whatever we lose, if we can keep our hearts, we shall do well enough: Keep
thy heart with all diligence. This is I confess an hard work; Eliah found it
easier to shut heaven by prayer, than to shut his heart from evil thoughts
Facilius est coelum obse^a^e quam animum.
; but this is the work every good Christian must set upon, the keeping of his
heart.

Quest. But if my heart be evil, must I keep it?

Answ. No, Cast away the evil of it, and keep that which is good; as when we
candy fruit, we pare off the skin, cut out the core and rotten, and preserve
that which is best; so do with thy heart; what is evil in it cast away; what is
good preserve; if thy heart be hard, cast away the stone, keep it soft; if
hypocritical, cut out the rotten, keep that which is sound; separate between
the precious and the vile. The sin in thy heart throw away, the grace keep and
cherish; in a word, do with thy heart, as they in the Parable did with the
Fish, Mat. 13.43. They gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away.

This is the great Exhortation, Heart-custody; sinners look to your hearts; let
not your hearts be bewitched, and stolen away with the pleasures of the world.
Hos. 4.11. Whoredom and wine take away the heart; many have drowned their
hearts in wine. Clemens Alexandrinus reports of a certain Fish that has not an
heart distinguished from the belly as other fishes, but has the heart in the
belly; an emblem of Epicures, their heart is in their belly.

Quest.

Answ. Keep thy heart awake. Cant. 5.2. My heart waketh. Psalm. 108.2. I my self
will awake early Ut te ipsum serves non expergisceris? Hor.
; though we have been sluggish, yet now it is high time to awake out of sleep,
Romans 13.11. Take heed of sleeping in ignorance, impenitency, security; the
heart is naturally asleep, sin may be compared to sleep.

1. A man that is asleep, his senses are tied up Somnus est ligatio sensuum.
; so a sinner whose heart is asleep in sin, his spiritual senses are taken
away, he is not sensible of sin or wrath, Ephesians. 4.19. He is going to hell, but
knows it not, he laughs in his sleep.

2. Though in sleep the senses are bound, yet the fancy is let loose, the man
dreams he is at a Banquet, Isa. 29.8, So when the heart of a sinner is asleep
in sin, yet his fancy is quick; he fancies that he is an heir of the promise,
that God loves him, fancy is let loose.

3. Sleep hinders from action; he that is asleep, cannot work; so a sinner
fallen asleep in sin, cannot work out his salvation.

4. A man asleep, is in danger to be robbed, his money or jewels may be taken
away; so while the sinner is asleep, he may be robbed of his soul; oh therefore
keep thy heart awake, let the judgment of God on sinners be as an alarm to
awaken thee, make that prayer of David, Psalm. 13.3. Lighten mine eyes, that I
sleep not the sleep of death.

2. Keep thy heart jealous; toward others exercise charity, toward thy self
jealousy; the better the heart is, the more suspicious: Satan has a party
within us; the heart is not true to its self, therefore it needs excubation and
caution; little did Hasael think what was in his heart, 2 Kings 8.13. Had one
come to Noah, and said, Noah, Thou will be drunk shortly, he would have been
ready to have defied him; there is all sin seminally in the heart; whether will
not the heart run, if we do not guard it? it will run to Idolatry, Atheism,
Incest: Be ever jealous; jealousy breeds vigilance, and vigilance safety; let
thy heart be ever in thy eye, keep it in with the curben-bit of mortification.

3. Keep thy heart serious; take heed of a light heart. Zeph. 3.11. His
Prophets are light. The heart of the wicked is vain, and in this sense is said
to be little worth, Prove. 10.20. If you put a feather in the scale, it weighs
nothing; so feathery is the heart of a sinner; vanity swims on the top, and
deceit lies at bottom: Christ says of the Sparrows, Are not two of them sold
for a farthing? Matthew. 10.29. Thousands of the sinners thoughts are not worth a
farthing! a light heart is like a ship without a ballast, it soon overturns; a
vain heart will be unstable; light things are blown every way; a flashy
Christian is not broken for sin, sin seldom lies heavy on a light heart; keep
the heart serious, fix it upon God. Psalm. 57.7. O God my heart is fixed. Grace
consolidates the heart, and keeps it from floting in levity; poize thy heart
with the thoughts of hell and judgment.

4. Keep thy heart humble, 1 Pet. 5.5. That is the best frame of heart, which
fits a man for Gods presence; the humble heart is the Valley where God delights
to walk; the house where he will take up his residence In spirituali deficio,
fundamen^i locus ponitur in imo. Hugo de Claustr. anim. l. 1.
, Isa. 57. The humble heart does sibi ipsi vilescere Ba^n.
, it has a low esteem of it self, and an high esteem of others, Phil. 4.3. The
more humble the heart is, the more fertile in grace; those Meadows which lie
low, are the richest grounds: Keep thy heart humble, view thy own wants, and
others perfections; the impostume of pride kills. The Eagle lifts up the
Tortoise into the Air, and then throws her down upon a rock, and breaks her
Valor. Max.
; so the Devil lifts the heart up in pride, and so destroys it.

5. Keep thy heart sublime. Col. 3.1, 2. Seek those things which are above.
Keep down thy heart with the weight of humility, yet mount it up with the wing
of heavenly-mindedness; when the heart is touched with the loadstone of the
Spirit, it ascends. Thus you have seen the holy frame and posture the heart is
to be kept in.

Quest.

1. If you would keep your heart, keep the Word in Psalm. 119.11. Thy Word have
I hid in my heart, Rules for keeping the heart.
that I might not sin against thee. The Word is a preservative and antidote to
keep the heart from spiritual infection. What are all the golden precepts in
the Word of God, but several receipts for the keeping of the heart? if a Mariner
would keep his ship, he must have his eye to the Star and the Compass; the best
way to keep our hearts, is to sail by a Scripture-compass.

2. If you would keep your heart, have a care what the communion of Saints be
thy Convoy, take heed of coming near such as are irreligious, they are
infectious, and will poison thy heart; let thy delight be in them that excel
in virtue, Psalm 16.3. The Saints carry the Lanthorn of the Word along with
them, it is good to walk with them that carry the light.

passions; the heart is ready to be destroyed by its own passion, as the Vessel
is to be overturned with the Sail; the heart does sometimes sink in sorrow,
swell with anger, and abound excessively with carnal joy. Diagoras seeing his
three sons in one day crowned Conquerors, dyed for joy. Passion transports
beyond the bounds of reason, it is a kind of frenzy that possesses. Lay the
curben-bit of restraint upon your passions, or your hearts will run wild in
sin; take heed of enflaming your spirits, as a man would avoid those wines and
strong waters that may heat his blood; cut off all occasions that may awaken
this FURY, take away the fuel that feeds this fire. When this viper of passion
begins to gather heat, pray it down: Prayer, says Luther, takes down the
swelling of the soul, and abates the heat of inordinate affections. How
dangerous are these fiery exhalations! Moses in a passion spoke unadvisedly
with his lips, Psalm. 106.33. A man in a rage is like a ship in a Tempest, that
has neither Pilot or Sails* or Oars to help it, but is exposed to the Waves
and Rocks; how many have lost their hearts in a storm!



1. Keep the eye; the eye often sets the heart on fire. Job did make a Covenant
with his eyes, Job 31.1. Voluit reducere speciem sensus externi ad tandem
speciem cum inte^o.
The Serpent sometimes creeps in through the Window or Casement into a Room;
the old Serpent the Devil, creeps through the Casement of the eye into the
heart; the eye is taster to the appetite. First Eve saw the Tree was good for
food, then she took of the fruit, Genesis 3.6. Look to the eye; some of the
Heathens have pulled out their eyes, because they would not be enticed by
impure objects. I say not pull out the eye, only keep the Portal shut; the
Romans never did let their prisoners go abroad but their Keepers went with
them; never send thine eyes abroad, but send their Keepers with them.

2. Keep the ear; much sin is conveyed to the heart through the ear; the
Apostle calls it (...), corrupt communication, Ephesians. 4.29. Because impure
discourse corrupts and poisons the heart. Keep thy ear open to God, and shut to
sin; deafen thy ears to the lies of the slanderer and heretic, let not him
have thy ear, who comes to rob thee of thy heart.

5. If you would keep your heart, get Christ into your Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ
may dwell in your heart: Nothing can hurt but sin; if Christ be in the heart,
he will purify it, his Spirit is the refiners fire, Mal. 3.2. If Christ be in
the heart, he will adorn it, he will bring in the rich furniture of his graces,
and so beautify the hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet 3.4. If Christ be in the
heart, he will defend it; the Castle of the heart can never be taken, if Christ
be in it! Let Satan dig his Mines, lay his Train of powder, shoot his Balls of
wilde-fire; if the Lord of Hosts pitch his Tent in the heart, it can never be
taken by storm.

6. If you would keep your hearts, have a care to keep Jer. 4.14. How long
shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? What though you set a watch before the
door of the lips, if you let your heart run out in vain impure thoughts? the
heart is the presence chamber which is to be kept for God; vain thoughts defile
the Room, and make it unfit for God to come into. The thoughts make way for
sin; while the mind is musing, the heart burns. David let his heart rove into
wanton thoughts, and that made way for the act of adultery, 2 Samuel 11.4.
Thoughts are Purveyers for sin; they do first start sin, and then the heart
hunts it.

Cor. 13.5. Traverse things narrowly in thy soul, see if there be no sin
countenanced; search as Israel did for Leven, keep a Diary in thy heart, see
how things go in thy soul, be not a stranger at home; for want of this p^lying
with the heart, many are kept in the dark, and understand not the true state of
their souls; they live known to others, but dye unknown to themselves.

O what wisdom is it for a Christian to be much with his own heart; he that
would keep his Estate, must keep his Account-books well. Christian, redeem time
every day to turn over the book of conscience; trade with thy own heart, it
will be stealing out to sin, call it often to account. Seneca would every night
when his candle was out, ask himself what he had done that day? often
reckonings keep God and the conscience friends.



fear of God. Prove. 23.17. Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. As
in natural fear the spirits recoil to the heart to keep it; so the fear of God
preserves the heart; fear puts an holy awe upon the soul, and keeps it from
sinful excursions; fear bolts the door of the heart against vanity. Prove. 16.6.
By the fear of the Lord men depart from evil. As a Noble-mans Porter stands at
the gate to keep out every thing that is unseemly from being brought into the
house; so the fear of God stands as an armed man at the gate of the heart, to
keep out tentations from entrings; fear lies sentinel, it stands as a Watchman
on the Tower, and looks every way to see what danger is approaching; fear will
not admit any thing into the soul which is dishonorable to God.

2. Love without fear, makes us presume; and fear Anselm say, Let me rather
fall into hell than sin; would thou keep thy heart, environ it with love,
death cannot break this fence.

3. Faith; this is called a shield, Ephesians. 6.16. The shield Helmet and
Breast Plate. The shield of faith defends the other graces* the Breast Plate of
love, the Helmet of hope, the Girdle of truth. When Satan strikes at a
Christians heart, faith beats back the blow, and wounds the head of the old
Serpent. 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist steadfast in faith; faith is the best
safeguard, faith brings in peace. Romans 15.13. Peace in believing. And peace
fortifies the heart, Phil. 4.7. The peace of God shall keep your heart.

4. A good conscience. The heart is placed in the midst the heart is kept, I
may compare a good conscience, this keeps the soul that nothing can annoy it.
-- Murus Aheneus esto, etc. -- Good conscience is a brazeen wall about the
Castle of the heart; these are the fences that keep the heart.

Psalm. 121.5. The Lord is thy Keeper Utinam ut mihi semper a dexteris fis, bone
Jesu. Bern.
; it is good to go always with such a Keeper; this is the reason none of the
Saints are lost, because the Lord is their Keeper. 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by
the power of God. Every Ward has a Guardian to keep him; choose God for thy
Guardan, they are safe whom God keeps; lock up thy heart with God, and give him
the Key.

Motives to heart-custody.
The Motives that may persuade us to look after the keeping of our hearts, are
these.

1. If we do not keep our hearts, the Devil will keep them; shall we let Satan
have them? when a rude Army gets into a Town, what work do they make? what
Rapines, Plunders, Massacres? when Satan possesses hearts, he carries them at
last violently (as he did the Swine) into the Sea, Satan is first crafty, then
cruel.

1. He is crafty; his work is to fish for hearts, and he is very subtle; he
has his (...), his policies and stratagems, 2 Cor. 2.11.

1. He observes the humors of the body, and lays suitable baits; the Devil
cannot know the heart, but he may observe the temper and constitution Novit
Diabolus cui illecebras carn^ ingerat, cui virus invi diae insundat, omnium
discurit mores. Leo.
; he tempts a sanguine man with beauty, a covetous man which gold; as the
Husbandman knows what ground is fit for Barley, what for Wheat; Satan has not
been a Tempter so long, but by this time has gained experience, having
commenced Master of his black Art.

2. Satan baits his hook with Religion, he tempts to sin under a pretext of
piety, thus transforming himself into an Angel of light. He tempts some to make
away themselves, that they may not live any longer to sin against God. Who
would suspect Satan, when he comes as a Divine, and quotes Scripture? Thus
cunningly does the Devil angle for hearts.

2. Having once gotten his prey, he is cruel; his cruelty exceeds the rage of
all Tyrants; we read of Hannibal, Antiochus, Nero, who caused the Christians to
be put in Coats, laid over with pitch and brimstone, burning all night, that
they might be a living Torch to them that passed by; this is nothing to the
unparalled barbarism and cruelty of Satan; his name is Apollyon, Devourer;
he rent and tore the man in whom he was, and threw him into the fire, Matthew.
17.15. If he was so fierce when he was chained, what will he do when he has
full power? when he had taken away all Jobs Estate, smitten his body full of
soars, and thrown the house upon his children, yet all this was in the Devils
account but a touch of the finger, Job 1.11. If the touch of his finger be so
heavy, what will the weight of his loins be? Oh then if Satan be so subtle in
fishing for hearts, and so savage when he gets men's hearts, let us have a care
to keep our hearts; if we do not keep them, Satan will keep them for us, and
then see what havoc he will make.

2. He that keeps his heart, keeps his peace; whence are our perturbations and
disquiets, but from the neglect of our spiritual watch? he that keeps his heart
all day, may lie down in peace at night, Psalm. 4.8. What a comfort will this be
to a Christian in every condition! in a low condition, when he thinks thus with
himself, Though I have lost my friends and estate, yet I have kept my heart; in
a sick condition; we shall shortly be chained to a sickbed; but when a
Christian shall keep his bed, it will be no small comfort to him that he has
kept his heart; in a dying condition; death may take away the life, but not the
heart; that jewel God lays claim to, and it is kept for him.

The heavenly race.
1 COR. 9.24 Know ye not that they which run in a race, run all, but one
receives the prize? So run, that ye may obtain.


REligion is a business of the greatest importance; the Soul, which is the more
Noble and Divine part, is concerned in it; and as we act our part here, so we
shall be for ever happy or miserable; the advice of Solomon in this case is
most seasonable; Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no work, nor device, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go,
Eccles. 9.10. The business of Religion requires our utmost zeal and intension,
Mat. 11.12.

1. Sometimes the work we are to do for heaven, is set out by striving, Luke
13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate; (...), strive as in an agony,
strive as for a matter of life and death; so Cornelius a lapide; though we must
be men of peace, yet in matters of Religion we must be men of strife; it is an
holy strife, a blessed contention; indeed the Apostle says, Let nothing be
done (...)* through strife; but though strife does not do well among
Christians, yet it does well in a Christian, he must strive with his own heart,
or he will never get to heaven.

2. Sometimes our work for heaven is compared to wrestling. Ephesians. 6.12. We
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers,
etc. Our life is a continual wrestling; as Jacob wrestled with the Angel, so we
must wrestle with our corruptions; we must not lay our sins in our bosom, but
set our feet upon their necks; if we foil our sins, and get them down, it is
not baseness or cowardice to strike them when they are down; and we must
wrestle with Satan; wrestlers get one within another; Satan labors to get
within us, and give us a fall, as he did our first Parents. What the Devil
would have done to Christ, thrown him from the pinnacle of the Temple, Mat. 4.
that he did to our first parents, he threw them down from the Pinnacle of
happiness; therefore we must wrestle with him; resist the Devil, and he will
fly from you, Jam. 4.7.

3. Sometimes the life of a Christian is compared to fighting. 1 Timothy 6.12.
Fight the g^od fight of faith; Christ is the Captain of the Saints Forces; he
is called (...), the Captain of their salvation, Hebr. 2.10. We must all be
Military persons; faith is our shield, hope is our helmet, the Word of God our
sword; we come into the world, as into a field-battel, lusts war against us, 1
Pet. 2.11. Good reason therefore that we should war against them; it is a day of
battle, and it is dangerous going abroad without our Armor.

4. Sometimes a Christians work for heaven, is compared to the running of a
race; so in the Text, Know ye not that they which run in a race, run all, but
one receives the prize? So run, that ye may obtain. In which words the Apostle
seems to allude (as learned Writers observe) either to the Olympian games,
which were kept every fifth year in honor of Jupiter, or to the Isthmian games
celebrated near Corinth in the honor of Neptune, in which games they did put
forth all their strength to win the prize. So says the Apostle, Run the race
of Christianity which is set before you with a winged swiftness, that ye may
obtain the prize of salvation.

The words fall into two general parts.

1. The race to be run, (...), so run.

2. The end of running, (...), that ye may obtain.

The Observations out of the Text are these two.

1. That Christianity is a race.

2. That wise Christians should labor so to run, as to win the prize: (...),
so run, that ye may obtain.

Hebr. 12.1. Let us run with patience the race that is set before us: We must
be Viatores* before we are Comprehensores; heaven is a place of rest. Hebr.
4.9. There remains a rest for the people of God: No more wrestling there, for
then we have overcome the enemy; the Saints in glory are set forth with Palms
in their hands, Rev. 7.9. in token of victory. No more running there; for the
prize being obtained, the Saints have Thrones to sit and rest themselves upon,
Revel. 3.21. But this life is a race, and it must be run, and so run.

For the illustration of the Doctrine there are three things to be opened.

1. Wherein a Christians life is compared to a race. 2. Wherein the Christian
race differs from other races. 3. Why this race must be run.
1. Wherein a Christians life is compared to a race; that appears in four
particulars.

1. In a race there is the way or path to run in Stadium, locut erat in quo
cursu c^rtabatur pedibus aut equis. Estius.
; so in Christianity there is the pathway in which we must run. Psalm. 119.32.
I will run the way of thy Commandments, this is a good old way, Jer. 6.16. It Is
as good as it is old. The way of sanctification and obedience, is the way the
Saints have gone in, and the way which God has been found in; this way we are
to run in, is,

1. A pleasant way, it is sweetened with comfort. Prove. 3.17. All her ways are
pleasantness. Romans 15.13. Joy in believing. The way of Religion is strowed with
Roses; oh the bunches of grapes that God cuts down, the flagons of wine that he
gives to those that turn their feet into this way!

2. The way of Gods Commandments is a clean way, it is a way paved with
holiness, Isa. 35.6. Christians may run in this way, and never wet the sole of
their feet; the way of sin is defiling; such as use themselves to this way, the
filth of hell sticks upon them; in the ways of sin there are such deep
sloughs, that men sink into perdition; but the way of the Christian race is
clean; such as run this race, cleanse themselves from all pollution of flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness, 2 Cor. 7.1.

2. A race is laborious; the running of a race is a violent exercise; men do
vires exerere, put forth all the strength of their bodies in running. Thus
Christianity is a race for labor, we must put forth all our strength in this
race. My soul follows hard after God, Psalm. 63.8. I reach forward, Phil.
2.13, 14. (...), the word signifies, I stretch my neck forward; and says the
Apostle, I press (...), toward the mark; as runners in a race gather up their
feet with all swiftness, and stretch themselves forward to lay hold on the
prize; it is not an idle wish, a dead prayer will win the garland; but a
Christian must put forward with all speed and vigor of affection, that he may
obtain what he runs for.

3. A race is short; breve curriculum, as Horace calls it; the Greek word for a
race, (...), signifies a short stage of ground; the Olympian race contained six
hundred feet, 'twas one hundred twenty paces long as Authors report. A race is
but a short space of ground, it is soon run: Thus our time being short, our
race cannot be long; and this may encourage us in the race of Religion, and
keep us from being out of breath; remember it is but a short race. 1 Pet. 5.10.
After ye have suffered awhile. So I may say, after ye have run awhile, you will
be at the end of the stage; it is but awhile (Christians) and you shall have
done wrestling, weeping, praying, and you shall reap the fruit of all your
prayers; it is but awhile, and you shall have done suffering, and be among the
spirits of just men made perfect; it is but awhile, and you shall be at the end
of your race. 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your faith, etc. How should a
child of God rejoice to think he has got over a good part of his race, and is
almost at the end; as Doctor Tailor Martyr once said, I have but two styles to
go over, and then I shall be at my Fathers house. You that have set out betimes
for heaven, and now are in your old age, comfort your selves with this, you
have but a few steps more to take, and then you are at the end of your race.

4. In a race there is a Crown or Garland given to him that gets the better
Bravium significat praemium quod datur ijs qui ex certamine victores sunt;
(...) legunt palmam. Ambr. Cypr. de Exhort. Martyr. cap. 8.
; so in Religion, those that win the race, shall wear the Crown, 2 Timothy 4.8.
Such as do not run through sloth, or will not run through pride, miss of the
reward; but such as run the heavenly race faithfully, shall have a Crown, 2 Timothy 4.8. And this reward is fitly resembled to a Crown for the splendour of it;
a Crown hung full of jewels, is bright and splendid, it gives an orient luster;
neither can pen describe, or pensil delineate, or tongue of Angel express the
glory and magnificence of this Crown; nor can it be shadowed out by all the
beauties of heaven, though every star were a Sun.

2. The second thing to be illustrated, is, to show wherein the Christian race
differs from other races.

2. In other races one only is crowned; so in the Text, but one receives the
prize; but in the spiritual race many win the prize; the Saints shall come to
heaven from all the quarters of the world, East and West, etc. Matthew. 8.11.
Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham and
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven. Rev. 7.4. There were sealed an
hundred and forty and four thousand of all the Tribes of the children of
Israel; after this I beheld, and l^ a great multitude, which no man could
number, of all Nations, of kindreds and people and tongues stood before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes and Palms in their
hands, Ver. 9. By this multitude not numerable, are to be understood those that
belong to the election, and are salvable; these as Victors are crowned, and
stand with Palms in their hands; should but one receive the prize, there might
be room left for despair.

2. In other races some stand still and look on, and usually there are but two
run; but here in the heavenly race all must run; those that are unfit to run
other races, must run this, as the lame and blind, none are excused from this
race; all have run from God by sin* and all must run to him by repentance,
either run or damn; either fly to heaven, or fall to hell.

3. In other races the feet run, but in the Christian race the heart runs.
Psalm. 119.32. I will run when thou shall enlarge my heart. In Religion the
heart is all; that which the heart does not, is not done Quicquid cor non
facit, non fit.
; it is not the lifting up of the eye or hand toward heaven that forwards the
race, it is the out-going of the heart; many a man's tongue runs in Religion,
but not his heart; Do thou believe with thy heart? Romans 10.9. Do thou love
God with thy heart? Matthew. 22.37. This is to run the race of Religion; this
rids away ground, and brings a Christian apace to the Gole; when David's heart
was enlarged, then he would run.

4. In other races, he only gets the prize, that runs fastest; but it is not so
in this heavenly race; though others may outrun us, yet if we hold on to the
end of the race, we shall receive the reward. Some Saints are like Asael, light
of foot as a Roe, 2 Samuel 2.18. They run swifter in the race of obedience, as
Ahimaaz out-ran Cushi, 2 Samuel 18.23. But this is the comfort of weak believers,
though they cannot run so fast as others, yet if they hold on to the end of the
race without tyring, they are crowned; he that came in at the eleventh hour,
had his pay as well as he that came in at the first hour, Matthew. 20.9. To show
that those who set out later, and may be outrun by other Christians, yet
persevering, they are saved.

5. In other races men run for a temporal reward; in the Christian race we run
for an eternal; others run for a corruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9.25. Sometimes the
Crown bestowed upon the Victor, was made of Olive, sometimes of Myrtle; the
Egyptians had a Crown of Cinnamon enclosed in gold, but still it was
corruptible; but the Crown the Saints run for is incorruptible, it is a
never-fading Crown, 1 Pet. 5.4. Other Crowns are like a Garland of flowers,
that soon withers, Prove. 27.4. But this Crown given to the conquering
Christian, is immarcessible Corona haec no^fi ^sit aut gemmis, flores isti ex
quibu^ ^tur semper vi^idescunt repullulant semper.
; the jewels of this Crown are never lost, the flowers of it never fade.

6. In other races the Garland is bestowed in a way of merit; but in the
Christian-race it is bestowed as a Legacy of free grace; though we shall not
obtain the prize unless we run, yet not because we run; how can we merit the
recompense of reward? Before we merit we must satisfy, but we have nothing to
satisfy: Besides, what proportion is there between the race and the
recompense? therefore the Crown bestowed is called (...), a gratuitous gift.
Romans 6.23. The gift of God is eternal life Munera sua Coronat Deus, non merita
tu^ Aug. epist. 105.
. God will so bestow his rewards, that he himself may be no loser; though the
Saints have the comfort of their Crown, God will have the glory.

7. In other races many times one hinders another; but in the race to heaven
one Christian helps another. 1 These. 5.11. Edify one another even as also you
do: One Christian helps by his prayer, advice, example, to confirm another:
What is the communion of Saints, but one Christian putting forward another in
the heavenly race?

8. One may lose other races and not be miserable; but he cannot lose this race
in Religion but he must needs be so. In other races a man does but lose his
wager; but if he falls short of this spiritual race, he loses his soul; how
seasonable therefore is that Apostolical caution, Heb. 4.1. (...), Let us fear,
lest we should come short.

The third thing to be insisted on, is, Why we must run this race of
Christianity.

There are three Reasons; 1. Because God has set us this race. Heb. 12.1. Let
us run the race that is set before us. It is not Arbitrary, it is not left to
our choice whether we will run or no, God has set us the race; Gods commands
carry power and Sovereignty in them: If a General bids his Army march, they
must march. There Is no disputing duty at the Word of God; the heavens drop down
their dew, the stars set themselves in Battalio, the earth thrusts forth a
crop, the Sea is bridled in, and dare not go a step farther: If inanimate
creatures obey the word of command, much more those who are endued with reason;
when God says Run the race, we must run.

2. There Is no other way to get to heaven but by running the race; by nature we
are far distant from the gole, and if we would have heaven we must run for it;
a man can no more get to heaven that does not run this race, than one can get
to his journeys end, that never sets a step in the way. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give
diligence to make your calling and election sure, for so an entrance shall be
ministered to you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom.

3. Our time allotted to us is short; Job compares our life to a swift Post: Job
9.25. My days are swifter than a Post. The Poets painted Time with wings; if
Time flies, we had need run; the night of death hastens, and there is no
running a race in the night.

Informat.
we must put forth all our strength and -- Herculem duri celebrant labores;
Ille Centauros domuit superbos,
Cerberum traxit triplici catena;
Ultimus coelum labor in reflexo
Sustulit collo, etc.
Claud. Religion is a race; we must run, and so run; it is an hard thing to be a
Christian; alas then what shall we say to them that stand all the day idle?
Come to many, and one would think they had no race to run; they put their hand
in their bosom, Pro. 19.24. Is that a fit posture for him that is to run a
race? They stretch themselves upon their couches, Amos 6.4. they had rather lie
soft, than run hard; many would have heaven come to them, but they are loath to
run to it; if salvation would drop as a ripe fig into the mouth of the eater,
Nahum 3.12. men could like it well, but they are loath to set upon running a
race; but never think to be saved upon such easy terms: (...). M^nand.
the life of a Christian is not like a Noblemans life; the Nobleman has his
rents brought in by his Steward whether he wake or sleep; think not that
salvation will be brought to you when you are stretching your selves on your
beds of ivory; if you would have the prize, run the race. The passenger in the
ship, whether he sit in the Cabinet, or lie on the Couch, is brought safe to
shore; but there is no getting to the heavenly port without rowing hard.
Zacheus ran before to see Jesus, Luke 19.4. If we would have a sight of God in
glory, we must run this race: we cannot have the world without labor, and
would we have heaven?

2. If the life of Christianity be a race, this is that Psalm. 119.60. I made
haste and delayed not to keeep thy Commandments. Carnal spirits say, What need
you make such haste? why are you so strict and precise? why do you run so
fast? fair and softly, a more easy pace will serve; oh but may a Christian
reply, Religion is a race, I cannot run too fast, nor hardly fast enough: If
any had asked St. Paul why he ran so fast, and pressed forward to the mark, he
would have answered, he was in a race. Here is that may justify the Saints of
God in their zeal and activity for heaven; they are Racers, and a race cannot
be run too fast: The blind world is ready to judge all zeal madness; but have
we not cause the to put on with all speed, when it is a matter of life and
death; if we do not run, and so run, we shall never obtain the prize; if a man
were to run for a wager of three or four millions, would he not run with all
celerity and swiftness? 1 Samuel 21.8. The Kings business requires haste: If any
should say to us, Whether so fast? why so much praying and weeping? we may say
as David, The Kings business requires haste. God has set me a race to run, and
I must not linger or loyter. The haste Abigail made to the King, 1 Samuel 25.34.
prevented her death, and the massacre of Nabals family; our haste in the
heavenly race will prevent damnation. This may plead for a Christian in his
eager pursuit after holiness, against all the calumnies and censures of the
wicked.

the race of iniquity. -- qui virilius peccant; Sen.
who sacrifice their lives to Bacchus; they make haste, but not to heaven* they
make haste to fulfill their lust^, Prove. 6.18. they make haste to swear, to be
drunk, they are swift to shed blood; Isa. 59.7. their feet run to evil. The
sinner in regard of the haste he makes in sin, is compared to a swift
Dromedary, Jer. 2.23. a wicked man's swiftness in sin is like Absaloms riding on
his Mule: 2 Samuel 18.9. The Mule went under the thick boughs of an Oak, and his
head caught hold of the Oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and the
earth. Sinners make haste to sin as a bird hastens to the snare; they run as
the swine possessed with the Devils, ran into the Sea and were drowned, Mark
5.13. Oh what haste do men make to hell, as if they feared the gates would be
shut e^e they could get thither! what needs this speed? why do they run so fast
to prison? the sins men commit in haste, they will repent at leisure; Achan
make haste to the wedge of gold; but now he has time enough to repent of it:
Sin is an unhappy race, a damnable race; will it not be bitterness in the end?
2 Samuel 2.26. when men come to the end of that race, instead of a Crown, behold
chains of darkness, Jude 6.

2. It reproves them who instead of running the race dance than a race. Job
21.12, 13. They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the
Organ, they spend their days in mirth; they are at their music when they
should be at their race: Amos 6.4. That chaunt to the sound of the Viol, that
drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments. It Is hard
to have two heavens; some are all for pleasure; (...): they are like those
hunting-dogs Diodorus Siculus speaks of, while they run among the sweet
flowers, they smell to the flowers, and lose sent of the Hare, and leave off
their game. So while many are among the sweet flowers, the delights and
pleasures of the world, they fall a smelling to these flowers, and leave off
their race. (...) sub dulci melle latent venena. -- These go merrily to hell; I
may say as Solomon, Prove. 14.13. The end of that mirth is heaviness.

creep, but do not run; their motion is like the motion of the eighth Sphere,
slow and dull; they should be like the Sun in the firmament which is swift,
when they are like Sun on the Dial which moves very slow; many Christians move
so heavily in the ways of God, that it is hard for standers by to judge
whether they make any progress or no; they are hasty in their passion, but slow
of heart to believe, Luke 24.25. what haste did Israel make in their march when
Pharaoh was pursuing them? what need have Christians to expedite their race,
when the Devil is behind pursuing, and ready to overtake them, and make them
lose the prize! we read in the Law that God would not have the Ass offered in
sacrifice, he hates a dull temper of soul; the Snaile was accounted unclean,
Levit. 11.30. the slow-paced Christian will be taken tardy at last, and miss
of the prize.

Ye did run well, who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth? Gal.
5.7. the Crown is set upon the head of perseverance, he that runs half the way,
and then faints, loses the Garland. It Is sad for a man to come near to heaven,
and then tire in the race; as it is to see a ship cast away in sight of the
shore.

Nay, what shall we say to them who do worse than tire in the race, they run
backward into the way of profanesse, as Julian, Gardner and others; there is no
going to heaven backward; such do cast reproaches upon the ways of God; better
never begin the race, than run back: 2 Pet. 2.21. For it had been better for
them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it
to turn from the holy Commandment. A Soldier that runs from his Colors, and
lists himself in the enemies Regiment, if he be taken, must expect Martial Law.
Heb. 10.38. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him; God
will bear with infirmity, but he will punish treachery; wrath shall smoke
against the Apostate; fury will display itself in its bloody colors; indeed in
War there is a retreating sometimes, which if it be done politickly, and to the
enemies disadvantange, it is called an honorable retreat; but in a race to
heaven there must be no retreats, these are not honorable retreats, but
damnable retreats; whosoever draws back, it is (...) to perdition, Heb. 10. ult.

3. Let all Christians be exhorted to run this heavenly Exhortat.
what Arguments shall I use to persuade? look upon other creatures winged with
activity, and then Christian shame thy self: Look into the firmament and see
the Sun as a Giant running his race, Psalm. 19.5. and do thou stand still?
look into the Air, see the birds soaring aloft, and mounting toward heaven;
look into the earth, see the Bees working in the Hive; look upon the Angels,
they are swift in obedience; look upon other Christians near thee, thou shall
find them their race, reading at praying, weeping; and have thou nothing to do?
look upon thy precious time, time runs, and do thou stand still? look upon
the wicked how quick are they in sin? and shall they run faster to hell than
thou do to heaven? nay, look upon thy self, how industrious art thou for the
world, rising early, compassing Sea and Land, and yet how stupid, and heartless
in the matters of salvation? will thou run for a feather, a bubble, and not run
for a Kingdom?

To quicken your pace in godliness; consider what the prize is we run for, it
is a Crown of glory. (...).
This incircles all blessedness within it; there will soon be an end of our
race, but there will be no end of our Crown; this blessed reward should quicken
u^ in the race; but how shall we run the race, so as to obtain?* it is sad to
run in vain, Phil. 2.16. this brings to the next.

Direction.
4. I shall prescribe some Directions about this heavenly race.

1. Take heed of those things which will hinder you in your race. As 1. Shake
off sloth* idleness is pulvinar Diaboli; the sluggish Christian will never win
the race, he is asleeping when he should be running; sloth is the rust of the
soul, it is the disease of the soul; a sick man cannot run a race. Prove. 12.27.
The slothful man roasteth not that which he took in hunting; he will rather
fast than hunt for Venison; oh shake off sloth, abandon this idle Div^l if ye
intend a race.

2. Throw off all weights. There are two sorts of weights we must throw off.

1. The weight of sin; Heb. 12.1. Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin
that does so easily beset us, and let us run the race. The Prophet David felt
this weight; Psalm. 38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over mine head as an heavy
burden, they are too heavy for me. If we do not throw off this weight by
repentance, it will sink us into hell: A man cannot run a race with a burden
upon his back; an unclean person cannot run the race of holiness; a proud man
cannot run the race of humility; a self-willed man cannot run the race of
obedience. O Christian, unburden thy soul of sin, through off this weight if
thou intendest to lay hold on the Crown.

2. The second weight the Spiritual Racer must throw off, is the world. This is
a golden weight which has hindered many, and made them lose their race. So far
as the world is a weight, throw it off; I say not lay aside the use of the
world, but the love of it. 1 John 2.15
When the golden dust of the world is blown in men's eyes, it blinds them that
they cannot see their race.

3. Discard false Opinions about this race; as

1. That the race is easy; many a man thinks he can run the race from earth to
heaven on his deathbed. O sinner, thou that say the race is easy, art a
stranger to the Christian race. Thou art dead in sin, till a supernatural
Principle of grace be infused, Ephesians. 2.1. is it easy for a dead man to run a
race? to run the way of Gods Commandments is against nature; and is it easy
for a man to act contrary to himself? is it easy for the water to run backward
in its own channel? is it easy for a man to deny himself, to crucify the
flesh, to behead his beloved sin? oh take heed of this mistake, that the
Christian race is easy. Do you know what Religion must cost you, and what
Religion may cost you?

2. The second false Opinion we must beware off, is, that the race to heaven is
impossible; there is so much work to do that sure we shall never win the race.
Cyprian confesses of himself that before his conversion he had many thoughts
tending to despair; he imagined that he should never get the mastery of some of
his corruptions; the thoughts of impossibility cut the sinews of all endeavor;
Desperaree ^ in infernum descendere. Isidor.
God has encouraged us to run not only by promising rewards when we win, but
by promising strength to enable us to run; has not he said he will put his
Spirit within us, Ezekiel. 36. and then afflante spiritu, we can run and not be
weary Isa. 40 u^t.
; how many has Satan disheartened through despair? sure says the diffident
soul, I may run, but I shall never so run as to obtain; Jer. 2.25. Thou said^st
There Is no hope. So says the despairer, I had as good go on in my sins, as
good keep the old road, there is no hope, all succors of mercy are cut off;
this is a dangerous Praecepice; despair takes a man off his legs, and then
how can he run. Despair is heluo animarum, the great devourer of souls; he that
is under the power of this sin, disputes himself into hell.

4. Take heed that company does not stay you by the way; if a man should be
running a race, and he should have a friend as he is running, come and take him
by the hand and desire to speak with him, this might make him lose the race. So
stands the case here, many will be ready to meet with us, and stop us in our
race to heaven; what need you (will they say) set out so soon? what need you
run so fast? stay and bathe your selves a while in the luscious delights of the
world; thus have many been stopped in the middle of their race, and lost the
prize; to him that would hinder us in our race, we must say with an holy
indignation, as Christ, Get thee behind me Satan, Matthew. 4.10.

2. You must use all means to help you in the heavenly Race; as

1. Run the right race, the Apostle calls it (...), the race set before us,
Hebr. 12.1. that is the race chal'kd out in the Word of God; the race of
selfdenial and sanctity. It Is not any race, but the race set before us, that we
must run; which confutes that opinion, that a man must be saved in any Religion.

2. Fit your selves for the heavenly race; as

1. Diet your selves; the Racers in Ancient times, says Ireneus, did diet
themselves, they would not eat of any gross meat, nor yet a full meal, that
they might be the more prepared for the race; thus must Christians diet
themselves by sobriety and mortification, that they may by a well ordering of
themselves be the fitter to run the race which is set before them. St. Paul did
(...), beat down his body, 1 Cor. 9.27. that he might be the fitter for his
race.

2. Strip your selves for the race; the runner in a race uses to strip himself
of all about him, and wear only a white garment that he might be light and
nimble; So should Christians do, strip themselves of all conceits of merit, and
only wear the white garment of Christ's Righteousness.

3. Begin the race betimes: Eccles. 12.1. Direction.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Young ones think they may set
upon the race too soon; can a man be good too soon? can he run the race of
repentance too soon? but suppose he might; yet it is better to repent a year
too soon, that an hour too late. Esaus tears as well as his Venison came too
late, Genesis 27.33, 34. David would seek after God early, Psalm. 36.1. Austin in
his confessions complains of himself that he knew God no sooner Sero nimis te
am^vi Domi^.
* they will hardly be able to run the heavenly race who have old age, and old
sins upon them.

4. Run the pathway, not the road-way; hell-road is full of travelers; most
go wrong; Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil; the
multitude does not consider what is best, but what is safest; our Savior has
told us, narrow is the way which leads unto life, Mat. 7.14. run in the
narrow way of self-denial, and mortification.

5. Resolve to hold on in the race notwithstanding dangers and difficulties: A
good Christian must be steeled with courage, and fired with zeal: it is probable
there will be thorns in the way of our race, and flint-stones, therefore we had
need be well shod.

1. We must be shod with the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15. he whose heart is
filled with that peace the Gospel brings, will be able to run over the hardest
piece of Religion with ease.

2. We must be shod with patience: Heb. 12.1. Let us run with patience the
race. Patience bears up the heart of a Christian, and keeps him from tyring in
the race; if this shoo be off, we shall soon halt, and give over running.

6. Christians in their race must keep their eye still upon the mark: The
Grecians had their white line drawn at the end of their race, which was called
(...), and the Racers eye was still upon it: The looking upon the prize
quickens Christians in their race. St. Paul looked (...) toward the mark,
Phil. 3.14. as Archers look at the white, Racers at the prize. And Moses, Heb.
11.26. (...), looked to the recompense of reward; he looked with one eye at
Gods glory, and with the other eye at the Garland or Prize.

7. O run with delight; Psalm. 119.47. I will delight my self in thy
Commandments. Oil supples the joints and makes them agil and nimble: The oil
of gladness makes Christians lively and fit to run the heavenly Race: The joy
of the Lord is your strength, Nehem. 8.10.

8. Run in the strength of Christ; do not think you can of your selves win the
race; the Arminians talk of Free Will, but it is not of him that wills, nor
of him that runs, Romans 9.16. by nature we are blind, and lame, therefore
unfit to run a race; we run fastest when Christ takes us by the hand.

9. If you would run so as to obtain, be often in the exercise of grace; is it
not enough to have grace in the habit, but in the exercise. Such as run the
heavenly race, must not only be living, but lively; they must have a
flourishing faith, a flaming love: What is the meaning of the Loins girt, and
the Lamps burning, Luke 12.35. but grace in its activity? without this there
can be no speed in the heavenly race.

If you would run hard, pray hard; Prayer helps us on in the race. Luther was a
man of Prayer: Pray over that Prayer, Cant. 1, 4. Draw me, we will run after
thee.

Pray that you may not mistake your way through Error, nor stumble in it
through offenses. In a word, Let us pray for the Holy Spirit, which does
animate us in the race, and carry us above our own strength. Gods Spirit
breathed in, keeps us in breath.

The sacred Anchor.
Titus 2.^3. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.


A Christians happiness is in reversion, it is yet behind; a Saint in in this
life is aeternitatis candidatus, a candidate and expectant of heaven; he has
little in hand, but much in hope; so says the Text, Looking for that blessed
hope, etc.

There is enough to make us breathe after that hope* if we look either Intra, or
Extra.

1. Intra, if we turn our eyes inward and behold ^ur sins. This made Paul
himself cry out, O wretched man that I am, Romans 7.24. A Christian has two men
within him; flesh and Spirit; this may make him look for that blessed hope,
when he shall be disintangled of his sins, and shall be as the Angels of God.

2. If we look Extra, if we cast our eyes abroad, the world is but our
sojourning-house, it is a Stage whereon vanity and vexation act their part, and
the Scene seldom alters: Depart, this is not your rest, Mich. 2.10. all which
considered, may make us look for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing
of the great God and our Savior.

In which words there is, 1. The Act, looking. 2. The Object; which is set down,

1. Emphatically, that blessed hope.

2. Specifically, the glorious appearing of the great God, etc.

I begin with the first, the Act, looking, (...). There is a threefold looking.

1. A looking with desire, as the servant looked for the year of Jubily and
release, Lev. 25.40. or as the Bride looks for the marriage day. Now it is a
time of absence from our Husband Christ; therefore we are dressed in mourning,
and hang our Harps upon the Willows; but how does the Spouse desire the
marriage day when the Nuptials shall be solemnized! at that wedding the water
shall be turned into wine: How does the pious soul cry out in an holy pang of
desire, usque quo? how long Lord! why is thy Chariot so long a coming? why
tarry the wheels of thy Chariot? it is the Vote of the whole Church; Rev.
22.17. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

2. There is a looking with joy; Romans 5.2. We rejoice in hope of the glory of
God. There is terror in a sinners looking, it is called (...), a fearful
looking for of judgment, Heb. 10.27. as a man indebt looks every hour when the
Sergeant shall arrest him, but the Saints is a joyful looking; as a man looks
for a friend, or for one that is to pay him a great sum of money. So Moses
looked with joy to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26.

3. There is a looking with patience; as a man casts his seed into the earth,
and looks with patience till the Crop spring up: Jam. 7.5. Behold the
Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience
for it; be ye also patient, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. So much
for the Act, looking.

2. The Object, that blessed hope; where we are to consider, 1. What hope is.
2. What a Christian hopes for.


1. What hope is. I answer: Hope is a Theological grace planted in the heart by
the Spirit of God, whereby a Christian is quickened to the expectation of those
things which are held forth in the promise: Romans 8.25. If we hope for that we
see not, then do we with patience wait for it. Aquinas descibes hope thus; Spes
est circa bonum arduum, futurum, and possibile.

1. Hope is circa bonum, it looks at some good, so it differs from fear; fear
looks at evil, hope at good.

2. Hope circa bonum futurum, it looks at some good to come; so it differs from
joy; joy is exercised about something present, hope about something future. So
Clemens Alexandrinus defines hope, (...).

3. Hope is circa bonum arduum, it looks at some good which is difficult to
attain. So hope differs from desire; desire is weak and transient, it is soon
over; hope is resolute and fixed, it wrastles with difficulties, and will not
give over, till it has the thing hoped for.

4. Hope is circa bonum possibile, it looks at some good which is feasible, and
which there is possibility of obtaining. So hope differs from despair; despair
looks on things with black spectacles, and gives all for lost; hope is like
Cork to the Net, which keeps the heart from sinking in despair. Thus you have
seen what hope is.

Here a Question may be moved, how hope differs from Faith?

Answer; These two graces, (...), Faith and Hope are so like, that they have
been taken one for the other; there is such a near affinity between them that
(says Luther) it is hard to find a difference: But though they are placed near
together as the two wings of the Cherubims on the Mercy-seat, yet they are not
the same. Indeed, in some things Faith and Hope do agree; both feed upon the
Promise; both help to support the soul in trouble: Faith and Hope are like two
bladdars put under a Christian, which keep him from sinking in the waters of
affliction; both of these graces like cordial-water comfort the fainting soul:
There is joy in believing, Romans 15.13. Rejoicing in hope, Romans 5.2. Faith and
Hope like those two golden Pipes, Zach. 4.12. empty their golden Oil of joy
into a Christian; but though in some things these two graces agree, and are
alike, yet in some things they differ.

Faith and Hope differ, 1. Ordine, in order and priority; Faith does precede
and go before hope, it is the Mother grace; Faith is (...): The ground if
things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. The Promises are precious; they are like the Ark
which had Manna laid up in it; but we must first believe the things contained
in the promise, before we hope for them. Therefore Hierom says well, Spes est
expectatio rerum qua^ in fide h^bemus.
Faith lights the Lamp of Hope, as the fire of the Altar lighted the Lamps of
the Sanctuary. Thus these graces differ in Priority; Hope is the Daughter of
Faith.

2. They differ Natura, in their nature, and that two ways.

1. Hope only looks forward at things to come; Faith looks backward as well as
forward; it looks at things past as well as future: Faith believes Christ's
Passion and Resurrection, as well as his coming to glory.

2. Hope looks at the excellency of the promise, Faith looks at the certainty;
Fides intuetur verbum rei, spes vero rem verbi. Alsted.
Hope reads over the writing of the promise, Faith looks at the seal of the
promise: Titus 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie has
promised. That which Hope looks at is eternal life; that which Faith looks at
is the infallibility of the promise, God which cannot lie has promised. In a
word, Faith believes, Hope waits; Faith shows a Christian the land of promise,
Hope sails thither with patience. Thus you see how Faith and Hope differ, but
these Twins must not be parted; Faith strengthens Hope, and Hope comforts
Faith; as Elm supports the Vine, and the Vine loads the Elm with its fruit:
Faith is the Cable, and Hope the Anchor, and both these help to keep the soul
steady, that it does not dash upon Shelves, or sink in the Quicksands. Thus
much for the first, what hope is.

2. What a Christian hopes for: This is set down,

1. Emphatically, (...): That blessed hope. Hope here is put by a Metonymie for
(...). The things hoped for. That blessed hope, is the hope of blessedness. A
Christians hope is not in this life, then he were in the Forlone-hope; here is
nothing to be hoped for, but viciscitudes, all the world rings changes; but,
looking for that blessed hope. This is the difference between the Seamans
Anchor, and the Believers Anchor: The Seaman casts his Anchor downwards, the
Believer casts his Anchor upwards in heaven, looking for that blessed hope. The
Believer is a rich heir, Hebr. 6.17. and he waits till the Crown-royal shall be
set upon his head. According to our Common Law, there are two sorts of
Free-holds: There is a Freehold in Deed, and a Freehold in Law; a Freehold
in Deed, is when a man has made an entrance upon Lands and Tenements, and is
actually seized of them; but a Freehold in Law, is when a man has right to
Lands, but has not yet made actual entrance upon them. Heaven is a Believers
Freehold in Law, he has a right to it, it is promised by the Father, it is
purchased by the Son, it is assured him by the Holy Ghost; but he has not the
Freehold in Deed, but waits Gods leisure, and looks for that blessed hope,
till the time comes that he shall actually enter upon possession of the
inheritance.

2. The Object of a Christian hope is set down Specifically, The glorious
appearing of the great God and our Savior Christ. Where by the way, the Deity
and Godhead of Christ is strongly proved from hence against the Arrians, as
Hierom and Chrysostom well observe: The Apostle shows who this* (...), this
great God is, it is (says he) our Savior Jesus Christ; but that only in
transitu.

To speak then of the Object of a Christians hope, set down here Specifically,
(...): The glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior. There is a
threefold Epiphany, or appearing of Christ.

1. There is an appearing of Christ to us; as when he was Incarnate: Isa. 9.6.
To us a Child is born. This was a happy appearing when this morning Star
appeared, then salvation appeared to mankind; when Christ took flesh, he did
marry our humane nature to the divine nature. The Virgins womb was the place
consecrated for the tying that knot: Great is this Mystery, God manifest in the
flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. It Is such an aenigma as the Angels adore, 1 Pet 1.12. God
said, the man is become as one of us, Genesis 3.22. but now we may say, God
himself is become as one of us; he made (...), in the likeness of men* Phil.
2.7. This was Christ's first appearing.

2. There is an appearing of Christ in us, that is, when he appears in our
hearts, which is called a forming of Christ in us, Gal. 4.19. Christ is said to
appear in us, when by the operation of his grace he transforms him into his own
image: In the Incarnation Christ made himself like to to us, by Sanctification
he makes us like to him, holy as he is holy, and this is a comfortable
appearing. What are we better for Christ's appearing in our flesh, unless he
appear in our hearts? what are we the better for a Christ without us, unless we
have a Christ within us? Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of glory.

3. There is an appearing of Christ for us; and that two ways.

1. Christ appears for us as an Advocate: Hebr. 9.24. He is entered into heaven,
there to-appear in the presence of God for us. It Is a Metaphor borrowed from
our Law-Courts, where the Attorney pleads for the Client; so Christ pleads as
an Advocate for the Saints. Satan is the accuser, but Christ is the Advocate,
he answers all bills of Indictment brought in* and he appears, says the
Apostle (...), in the presence of God for us; the High Priests under the Law
appeared before the Ark and the Mercy-seat, which was but a Type of Gods
presence; but Christ appears in the very presence of God for us, (...), in the
face of God; he spreads his merits before his Father, and in the virtue of his
bloody sufferings pleads for mercy: and if Christ appear for us in heaven,
shall not we appear for him upon earth.

2. Christ appears for the Saints as a Judge, and this appearing is meant in
the Text, looking for the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior.

Christ's first appearing in the flesh was dark and obscure, his beauty was
veiled over, Isa. 53.2. all that saw the Man, did not see the Mesiah. But his
second appearing as our Judge will be a glorious appearing, like the Sun
breaking out of a Cloud Tunc ejus s^lgor and Majestas omnibus inn^rescet. Esti.
; it will be a glorious appearing both in respect of Christ and the Saints.

1. In respect of Christ himself, and that thee manner of ways.

1. His Person will be glorious. That light which shone upon Saint Paul
surpassing the glory of the Sun, Acts 26.13. was but a part of Christ's beauty,
as a sparkle of the Sun of Righteousness; what will it be when he shall appear
in all his Spiritual embroidery?

2. His throne will be glorious, he shall sit (...), upon the throne of his
glory, Matthew. 25. he shall have his Chair of State set him more rich than Ivory
or Pearl, a Throne most sublime and magnificent.

3. His attendants shall be glorious: Matthew. 25.31. When the Son of man shall
come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him. The Angels are the
Courtiers of heaven, they are compared to lightning, Matthew. 28.3. in regard of
their sparkling luster, and these glorious sublimated spirits shall be Christi
satellitium, part of Christ's Train and Retinue, accompanying him to his Throne;
thus it will be a glorious appearing in regard of Christ.

2. It will be a glorious appearing in regard of the Saints. Christ will appear
to do three things.

1. Christ as a Judge will appear to acquit his people, and that is by
pronouncing the sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father. The debt-book shall be
crossed in the blood of the Lamb.

2. Christ as a Judge will appear to vindicate his people. The names of the
godly many times lie buried in reproach; but at that day; they shall (as
Bernard says) Fragrare unguentis optimis, Christ will give them a new name; he
will call them his friends, his Spouse, the apple of his eye, their names shall
flourish with honor, and give forth their perfume as the wine of Lebanon.

3. Christ as a Judge will appear to crown his people, when body and soul shall
be reunited and perfected in glory. Christ will take his people into his sweet
and everlasting embraces, he will lay them in his bosom he will set them upon
his Throne, he will fill them with the Inebriating wine of his love to all
eternity. And thus you see what is the Saints hope, namely the glorious
appearing of Christ, when he shall appear as a Judge to acquit, vindicate,
crown them.

Informat.
he makes the wedge of gold his hope, he casts his Anchor downwards; he can
have no hope of Christ's appearing; he fears Christ's appearing, he does not hope
for it; he is like a Prisoner that fears the Judges coming to the Bench.
Christ's appearing will be a dismal appearing to him; when Christ shall appear,
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4.18. a wicked man is
like a Mariner at Sea that has no Anchor; like a man in a storm that has no
shelter; where is his hope when he shall come to die? It is with a sinner as it
was with the old world when the flood came; the waters did arise higher and
higher by degrees. First the waters came to the Valleys, but they encouraged
themseves in the Hills; then the waters came to the Mountains; I, but there
might be some Trees upon the Hills, and they would climb up to them; then the
waters prevailed and rose to the top of the Trees, now they had nothing to
trust to; all hopes of being saved were gone. So it is with a sinner, if one
comfort be taken away, he has another left; if a Relation be gone, he has an
estate left; if one Crutch be broken, yet he has another to lean upon; I but
sickness comes, and he sees he must die, and appear before his Judge, now he
has no hope, he dies despairing, he must lie for ever in the boiling furnace
of Gods wrath In inferno nulla est redemptio; qui illic damnatuus and demersus
fuerit, ulterius non exibit. Aug. in Sermon. ad Erem.
.

-- In cava Lethaeas dolia portat aquas. -- 2. Put your selves upon the trial;
Have you this blessed hope of Christ's appearing, and of your appearing with him
in glory? come almost to any man, and you Trial.
let every soul put it self upon the trial. I shall show you four differences
between a sound Hope, and a sandy Hope.

1. True hope is quickening; it sets a man a working for heaven Addit conatum
quendam, and elevationem animi. Aquinas
; it is called a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. it puts life into a man; hope is a
Spur to duty, a Whetstone to industry. Hope of victory makes the Soldier
fight, hope of gain makes the Merchant runthrough the several Zones. Divine
hope is as Wind to the Sails, as Wheels to the Chariot, it makes a Christian
active in Religion, he runs the ways of Gods Commandments. (...). Macar.
Hope is circa arduum, it cuts away through the Rock; it wrastles with
difficulties, it despises dangers, it marches in the face of death. True hope
never gives over till it has the thing hoped for. He who has Divine hope,
will have Christ though it be in a Furnance; he will profess the truth, though
the next word Christiani ad Leones. The Romans as Tertullian observes, would
endure all kind of hardship, they would fight with cold, and hunger, and run
any hazard for hope at last to be Consul, which was (says Tertullian) unius
anni gaudium volaticum, honor but for a year. Oh then, what pains will he take
who has hopes of heaven, where he shall be Crowned with a Garland of glory for
ever; does that man say his hope is in God, who stands all the day idle? Prove.
19.24. there is a faint velleity in Hypocrites, they would be saved, but sit
still and do nothing; their hope is not a a lively hope, but a dead hope;
(...). True hope is in the soul like fire, which is an active Element, it is
ever sparkling, or flaming.

2. True hope is purifying; 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope in him, (...),
purifying himself. Hope is in the soul as lightning is in the Air, it clears
the Air; he who has hope in Christ, sets himself against all sin, both in
purpose and practice; he is a consecrated person, there is engraven upon his
heart, Holiness to the Lord; hope is a Virgin-grace, it lives in the soul
tanquam scintillatio in fomite, tanquam ramus in radice O quam multi cum
vanaspe descendunt ad inferos! Aug.
. St. Bernard compares holiness to the Root, and hope to the Branch; true hope
flourishes upon the root of holiness; now then try your hope by this Scripture
Touchstone. The hypocrite says he has hope, but is he a purified person;
what, an unclean person and hope to go to heaven? nothings enters there which
defiles, Rev. 21.27. what, a drunkard and hope to be saved? do thou think to
go reeling to heaven? what, an Apostate and yet hope to be saved? as if there
were any going to heaven backward. O quam multi cum vanaspe descendunt ad
inferos! Aug.
The wicked man is not sure of happiness, but secure.

3. A true hope is a good hope; 2 These. 2.16. (...), Who has given us good
hope through grace. A wicked man's hope is as far from being good as his heart;
the Hebrew word for hope (...) signifies both confidence and folly, it is fitly
applied to a wicked man's hope, his confidence is folly; the hope of a godly man
is compared to an Anchor, Hebr. 6.19. the hope of a wicked man to a Spiders
Web, Job 8.14. And the sinners hope is fitly resembled to a Spiders Web three
ways.

1. The Spiders Web has no foundation; such is the hope of the wicked; it is a
pleasing thing, but it has nothing to rest upon: A godly man's hope is built
upon a double Basis.

1. The Word of God: Psalm. 130.5. In his word do I hope. The Word says, Let
the sinner forsake his way; and the Lord will abundantly pardon: The Word
says, Hereby we know that Christ abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us, 1 John 3.8. Now a child of God finding these qualifications wrought
in him, he builds his hope for heaven upon them; In his Word do I hope.

2. The hope of a godly man is built upon experiences: Romans 5.4. Experience
works hope. A Believer can bring in a Catalogue of experiences; Psalm. 119.65.
Thou have dealt well with thy servant. So can a Believer say, God has dealt
well with him: In several cases he has had experiences of God; when his sins
and tentations have been strong, God has come in with Auxiliary Forces, and
his grace has been sufficient. When his heart has been sinking under fears,
God has boyed him up out of quicksands, and lifted up his head out of deep
waters: Psalm. 3.3. Thou art O Lord my glory, and the lifter up of my head. When
his heart has been dead in duty, the Spirit of God has been sweetly tuning of
his soul, and now he makes melody in his heart to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19. A
godly man has many signal experiences of Gods favor to him, and experience
breeds hope: So that a godly man's hope has a foundation, it is a well built
hope; that hope must needs stand strong, which stands with one foot upon a
promise, and with the other foot upon an experience: But a wicked man's hope is
tela aranea, a Spiders Web, he has nothing to ground his hope upon, his hope
is an imposture, a golden dream; Isa. 29.8. It is as when an hungry man
dreameth, and behold he eats, but he awaketh and his soul is empty. The hope
of a sinner is like a dying man's will, that has neither seal set to it, or
witnesses; in the will he promises to bequeath such a Manor and Lordship, so
many thousand pounds to such a one; but the will being without seal and
witnesses, it is null and void in Law; just such is the hope of a wicked man,
his hope promises him great matters, that Christ is his, and all the
privileges of heaven are his, but alas it is a mere delusion of his false
heart; when things come to be examined, he wants both seal and witnesses; he
wants the seal of the Word to confirm his Title, and the witness of the Spirit,
Plurimi spe periclitantur; Aug.
this is a sad thing for a man to go to hell with the hope of heaven; (...).

Eurip.
2. The Spider spins the web out of her own bowels; she fetches all from her
self. The Be fetches all from without; the matter of her Comb and Honey the
sucks from the flower: The Spider fetches all from within her self. A true
Christian like the Be fetches all from without, he sucks from the sweet
flower of Christ's Righteousness; Isa. 45.24. In the Lord have I righteousness
and strength: But a wicked man like the Spider fetches all his hope from
within; ^he spins the thread of his hope out of himself, his duties and
moralities; thus his hope is like the Spiders Web.

3. The Spiders Web is but weak, the least blast shakes it, the least touch
breaks it. Such is the sinners hope, the least terror of Conscience shakes it:
Job 8.14. whose hope shall be cut off: commonly before a wicked man's life is
cut off, his hope is cut off. The godly man hope is a good hope, it is solid
and scriptural, the other is a spiders Web.

4. A true hope is a Persevering hope: Heb. 3.6. Whose house are we if we hold
fast the confidence of hope firm unto the end. True hope does not faint, it is
not broken with affliction, it is an Adamantine grace, (...). Hope makes us
endure; therefore it is compared to an Anchor which holds the ship in a storm;
and to an Helmet, 1 These. 5.8. The Helmet keeps off the blow of the sword, or
arrow from entering: So hope as an helmet keeps off the stroke from a Christian
that it shall not hurt or dismay him. In time of public calamities, hope keeps
the soul from sinking; Joel 3.16. The Lord shall roar out of Sihon; the heavens
and earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his people. Though
heaven and earth be ready to come together, yet a Believers hope abides. --
Sola spes in miseriis consolatur. Cicero.
A Believer does never cast away his Anchor. The Jews were prisoners in
Babylon, yet prisoners of hope: Zach. 9.10. Turn to your strong hold, ye
prisoners of hope. When a Christan is on his deathbed, and all hope of life is
taken away, yet his hope in God is not taken away.

3. What unspeakable comfort is this to a child of Solamen vitae mortalis est
spes vitae immortalis. Austin.
when Christ shall appear, Consolation
^t will be a glorious appearing to a believer; -- Credula vitam
-- spes fovet.
A Christian is like a rich heir that has great Lands in Reversion; he has
much in hope. Alexander having given away almost all he had in Greece, and
being asked what he had left for himself, answered, Hope; his meaning was, he
had hope to conquer more Kingdoms, as afterward he did: So if a Christians
outward comforts were taken away, and one should ask him what he had left, he
might say, The Anchor of hope; he has a confident hope of those eternal
Mansions which Jesus Christ is gone to prepare for him, John 14.2. When Christ
who is his life shall appear, then shall he also appear with him in glory, Col.
3.4. Oh what comfort is this, how may this lighten, and sweeten the cross?
after the waters of Marah, comes the wine of Paradise; after a wet Spring, a
joyful Harvest.

Romans 5.2. We rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Exhort.
Timor^ contristatur animum; Spes non potest esse sine gaudio; Divine hope
(says Austin) cannot be without some mixture of joy; has a Christian hopes of
heaven, and not rejoice? Prove. 10.28. The hope of the righteous shall be
gladness.

Object. But may some say, It is long before we shall enter upon possession of
heaven, and hope deferred makes the heart sick, Prove. 13.12.

Answ. It is not long, Rev. 22.12. (...), Behold I come quickly, and my reward
is with me. This glorious reward we hope for is quickly in faiths account;
faith makes things future present; what hope says shall be, faith says it is
already: Christ's coming is at hand, the bright morning Star begins to appear;
as a Perspective glass makes those things which are a good way off, seem near
to the eye. So faith makes Christ, and heaven, and the day of recompense seem
to be near, it gives a kind of possession of them in this life; Oh then
Christians rejoice, turn your lamentations into Halelujahs, it is but a while,
and you shall be made partakers of those blessed things you hope for; think of
the certainty of Christ's appearing, Behold I come; and think of the celerity, I
come quickly.

2. Maintain your hopes against all discouragements -- (...). A Soldier that
has the higher ground, and is gotten upon an hill, he will not let the enemy
beat him off his ground, but will keep it to the last breath. Has God set you
on the higher ground? has he raised your hopes as high as heaven? be not
beaten off your ground, maintain your hopes to the last, pray to God that he
would further clear your Title to heaven, that you may be as Mount Sihon which
cannot be moved.

3. How should this make us abound in the work of -- Spes sulcis credit aratis
Semina, quae magno foenore reddet ager.
He who has a well-grounded hope of heaven, how fervent should he be in duty,
how zealous in the cause of God! the hope of glory should spirit and animate a
Christian. If there could be grief in heaven, sure it would be that we have
done God no more service; what an infinite disproportion is there between our
work and reward! Let Divine Hope be as Oil to the Lamp, as Wind to the Sails,
to excite and to blow us forward in holy activity for God; we sow in hope: Gal.
6.9. Let us not b^ weary in well-doing, for (...), in due season we shall reap
if we faint not.

hopes should have heaven in their lives; let us walk after that golden pattern
whith Christ has left us, 1 John 2.6. As we hope to have Christ's death for our
justification, we must have his life for our imitation. I will conclude with
that, Philip. 1.27. Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ.

The trees of Righteousness blossoming, and bringing forth fruit.
Phil. 1.11. Being filled with the fruits of Righteousness which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.


THE blessed Apostle in this Chapter makes a solemn Prayer to God for these
Philippians; and among the rest, he puts up two rare Petitions for them.

1. That they might be sincere. Ver. 10.

2. That they might be fruitful, in the words of the Text, Being filled with
the fruits of Righteousness, etc. Where is observable,

1. The Matter, being filled with fruits.

2. The Manner of Production, by Jesus Christ.

3. The End, which are to the glory and praise of God.

Doctrine from whence this great truth does result, That Christians should
above all things endeavor after fruithfulness. The Saints are called trees of
Righteousness, Isa. 61.3. These rational trees must not only bring forth
leaves, but fruit; Being filled with the fruits of righteousness. For the
further amplifying of this, there are two things to be enquired into.

1. How a Christian brings forth fruit. 2. What is the fruit he brings forth.
1. How a Christian brings forth fruit. I answer; he brings forth fruit in the
Vine; by nature we are barren; there is not one good blossom growing on us;
but when by faith we are engraffed into Christ, then we grow and fructify:
Joh. 15.4. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the
Vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. Jesus Christ is that blessed Root
which shoots up that sap of grace into his Branches. The Pelagians tell us we
have sufficiency of our selves to bring forth good fruit: but how improper is
this? does not the Root contribute to the Branches? is it not of Christ's
precious fullness that we receive? Joh. 1.16. Therefore it is observable Christ
calls the Spouses grace his grace: Cant. 5.1. I have gathered my Myrrh with my
Spice. Christ says not, thy myrrh, but my myrrh. Emissiones istae bone Jesu,
sunt emissiones tuae. Bern. in Cant. If the Saints bear any spiritual fruit,
they are beholding to Christ for it, it is his wine, it is his myrrh: Hose.
14.8. From me is thy fruit found.

2. What that fruit is which a good Christian brings forth. Answer; it is 1.
Inward fruit. 2. Outward fruit. 3. Kindly fruit. 4. Seasonable fruit.


1. A Christian brings forth inward fruit: Love, joy, Gal. 5.22. This fruit is
sweet, and mellows, growing under the Sun of Righteousness; this is that ripe
fruit God delights to taste of, Micah 7.1.

2. A Christian brings forth outward fruit.

1. The fruit of good discourse: Prove. 15.4. A wholesome tongue is a tree of
life. Gracious speeches fall from the lips of a godly man, as fruit from a tree.

2. The fruit of good works; Col. 1.10. God will show me thy faith by thy
works, Jam. 2.18. A true Saint does all the good he can, honoring the Lord
with his substance; he knows he is to be in the world but a while, therefore
lives much in a little time, and crowds up a great deal of work in a little
room; it was Christ's speech not long before his suffering, I have finished the
work which thou gave me to do, Joh. 17.4. How can they be said to finish
their work, that never yet began a good work?

3. A Christian brings forth kindly fruit. The godly his fruit, Psalm. 1.3.
(...). That is, he brings forth that fruit which is proper for him to bear. But
what is this kindly and proper fruit? I answer, when we are good in our
Callings and Relations: In a Magistrate, Justice is kindly fruit, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
in a Minister, Zeal, Acts 17.^6. In a Parent, Instruction, Deuteronomy. 4.10. in a
Child, Reverence, Ephesians. 6.1. in a Master, good example, Genesis 18.19. Ephesians.
6.9. in a servant, Obedience, 1 Pet. 2.18. in the Husband, Love, Ephesians. 5.25.
in the Wife, Submission, Ephesians. 5.22. in a Tradesman, diligence, Exodus 20.9. in
a Soldier, innocence, Luke 3.14. A tree of Gods planting brings forth (...)
his fruit, that which is suitable and proper. I shall never believe him to be
good, that does not bear kindly fruit; a good Christian, but a bad Master; a
good Christian, but a bad Parent, does not sound well. That Minister can no
more be good which wants zeal, than that wine is good which wants spirits; that
Magistrate can no more be good which wants Justice, than that Pillar is good
which is not upright. Remota justitia, quid sunt Regna nisi magna latrocinia?
Aug.
That Child can no more be good who does not honor his Parent, than a Traitor
can be said to be loyal. When Absalom did rise up in rebellion against his
Father, the Mule which he rode upon (as if she were weary of carrying such a
burden) resigns up her load to the great thick Oak, and there left him hanging
by the head betwixt Heaven and Earth, as neither fit to ascend the one, nor
worthy to tread upon the other.

Let Christians be persuaded to bring forth proper and genuine fruit, and shine
forth in their Relations; consider,

1. He who is not good in his Relations, goes under the just suspicion of an
Hypocrite; let a man seem to be a penitent, or Zelot, yet if he bear not fruit
proper to his station, he is no tree of righteousness, but some wild degenerate
plant. There are some will pray, hear Sermons, discourse well, this is good;
but, what means the bleating of the sheep? they are not good in their
Relations; this discovers they are foundered and unsound. A good Christian
labors to fill his Relations, and to go through all the parts of Religion, as
the Sun through all the Signs of the Zodiac. I like not those Christians who
though they seem to be traveling to heaven, yet leave the duties of their
Relations a as Terra incognita, which they never come near.

2. The excellency of a Christian is to bring forth proper fruit Perfectum est
quod propriam att^ngit virtutem.
; wherein lies the goodness of a member in the body, but to discharge its
proper office? The eye is to see, the ear to hear, etc. So the excellency of a
Christian is to bring forth that fruit which God has assigned him; what is a
thing good for which does not do its proper work? what is a Clock good for that
will not strike? what is a ship good for that will not sail? what is a Rose
good for that does not smell? what is that Professor good for that does not
send forth a sweet perfume in his Relation? the commendation of a thing is when
it puts forth its proper virtue.

3. Not to bring forth suitable fruit, spoils all the other Luke 18.22. Yet
lackest thou one thing. Thou have prayed, and fasted, and heard sermons, yet
lackest thou one thing, thou have not been good in thy Relations.

4. Relative graces do much beautify and set off a

5. A good Christian brings forth seasonable fruit, Psalm. 1.3. he that brings
forth fruit (...) in his season, Eccles. 3.1.
every thing is beautiful in his time, Eccles. 3.11. That may be good at one
time, which at another may be out of season. There is a great deal of skill in
the right timing of a thing; duties of Religion must be performed in the fit
juncture of time.

1. Christian duties that relate to our Neighbor must

1. Our reproving others must be seasonable. Reproof is a duty; when we see
others walk irregularly, like soldiers that march out of Rank and File, we
ought mildly, yet gravely, to tell them of their sin, Levit. 19.17. but let
this fruit be brought forth in its season.

1. Do it privately: Matthew. 18.15. Go and tell him his fault between thee and
him alone.

2. Do it when thou see him in the best temper, not when his passions are up;
that were pouring oil on the flame; but when his spirit is meekned and calmed;
you put the seal on the wax when it is soft and pliable; there is a time when
men's spirits are more flexible and yielding; now is the fittest season to stamp
a Reproof upon them, and it is likelyest to take impression. When Abigail
reproved Nabal, it was in the right season; not when he was in wine, but when
he was in his wits, and was fit to hear a Reproof, 1 Samuel 25.37.

3. Another season for Reproof is in the time of affliction: Affliction tames
men's spirits, and now a word of Reproof spoken prudentially may work with the
affliction; a bitter potion is not refused if in case of extremity of pain.
Affliction opens the ear to Discipline Job 36.10.
.

2. Our comforting others must be seasonable; Prove. 15.23. A word spoken in due
season, how good is it? when we see one fallen into sin, and with Peter weeping
bitterly, oh now a word of comfort will do well. The cest^ous Corinth being
deeply humbled, the Apostle calls for oil and wine to be poured into his
wounds; 2 Cor. 2.7. Ye ought rather to comfort him, and the reason is given,
lest perhaps such an one should be swallowed up of sorrow. When the soul is
wounded for sin, now bring the mollifying ointment of a promise, Jer. 3.1. hang
out free graces Colors, display the glory of Gods Attributes, his Mercy and
Truth to the sinner, when the spirit is broken; a word of comfort spoken in
season, is the putting it in joint again, Gal. 1.6. this is to bring forth
seasonable fruit, when we give wine to them that are of a heavy heart; Prove.
16.4. Pleasant words are as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul. Jobs friends
pretended to comfort him, but instead of pouring oil into the wound, they
poured in vinegar.

2. Duties of Religion that relate to God, must be performed in their season.

1. Mourning for sin is a duty; God loves a contrite heart, Psalm. 51.17. how
powerful with God is the weeping Rhetorique that a poor sinner uses? but yet
there is a time when mourning may not be so seasonable; when God has given us
some eminent, signal deliverance, and this mercy calls aloud to us to rejoice,
but we hang our Harps upon the willows, and sit weeping; this sadness is
fructus intempestivus, fruit out of season; there was a special time at the
feast of Tabernacles, when God called his people to rejoicing; Deutr. 16.15.
Seven days shall thou keep a solemn feast unto the Lord thy God, and thou
shall surely rejoice.

Now if the Israelites had sat heavy and disconsolate at that time when God
called them to rejoicing, it had been very unseasonable, like mourning at a
wedding; when we are called to thanksgiving, and we mingle our drink with
tears; is not this to be highly unthankful for mercy? God would have his people
humble, but not ungrateful. It Is the Devils policy either to keep us from duty,
or else to put us upon it when it is least in season.

2. Rejoicing is a duty; Psalm. 33.1. But when God by some special providence
calls us to weeping, now joy is unseasonable; this is that which God complains
of, Isa. 22.12. In that day did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping, and behold
joy and gladness, etc. Oecolampadius and others think it was in the time of
King Ahaz, when the signs of Gods anger like a blazing star did appear Cum jam
prae foribus esset in^^tus.
, now, to be given to mirth, was very unseasonable, ver. 14. Surely this
iniquity shall not be purged from you till you die, says the Lord of Hosts. In
the Hebrew it is (...) If this iniquity be purged; it is a concise form of an
Oath, as if God had said, I swear it shall not by any prayer or sacrifice be
expiated; the fruit of joy must be brought forth in its season.

3. Reading the Word is a duty, Joh. 5.39. but this fruit must be brought
forth in its season. To read at home, when the Word is a preaching, or the
Sacrament celebrating, is unseasonable, nay sinful; as Husha said, 2 Samuel 17.7.
The Counsel is not good at this time: so I say of reading the Word at home in
time of public administrations, it is not good at this time; one duty is to
prepare for another, but not to justle out another; fruit must put forth
seasonably. The great God who has appointed the duties of his worship, has
appointed also the time. God enjoined a set time for the Passover, when they
were to bring their offering to the Lord: Numb. 9.2, 3. Let the Children of
Israel keep the Passover at his appointed season, in the fourteenth day of
this month, etc. had the people of Israel been reading the Law at home, or
praying in the time of the Passover, it had not been in season, and God would
have punished it for a contempt; ver. 13. The man that forbeareth to keep the
Passover, even the same soul shall be cut off from among his people. If when
public Ordinances are administered, any person whether out of pride, or sloth,
shall stay at home, though he may have his private devotions, yet he brings
forth fruit out of season, and let that man know he shall bear his sin.

Let all the trees of righteousness bring forh seasonable fruit; in prosperity
be thankful, in adversity patient. To every thing there is a season, Eccles.
3.1. The Psalmist says, He appointed the Moon for his seasons. Psalm. 104.19.
If the Moon should shine at noonday, or the Sun shine at midnight, this were
not in season; so it is in Spirituals.

To excite to seasonable fruit, consider

1. The seasonableness of a thing puts a value and pretiousness upon it. There
are certain meats which we eat of when they are in season; if they be out of
season, we care not for them; we value a seasonable kindness, else it is worth
nothing. Duties of Religion performed in their season are glorious.

2. Creatures by the instinct of Nature observe their season: Jer. 8.7. Yea the
Stork in the heaven knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, etc. Pliny
says they observe the season of changing their climate; and shall not
Christians observe their seasons, when to mourn, when to rejoice? let not the
Stork, and Turtle outwit them.

3. Duties of Religion not well timed are dangerous; a strong purgation may
sometimes be good; but to give it out of season, when nature is spent, and
between fainting fits, it may kill the patient. Snow and Hail are good for the
ground, when they come in their season, but when the Corn is ripe, now a storm
of Hail would do hurt, and be like a Flail to thrash the Co^n out of the Ear.
Mourning in a time of joy, private duties in time of public, is as
unseasonable as Snow and Hail in Harvest, and will prove no less prejudicial.

1. It shows us who is a Christian in Gods Calendar, Informat.
As soon as the sap of grace is infused, it puts forth it self in Evangelical
fruit. No sooner was Paul converted, but he became a plant of renown, he did
bring forth rare fruit, humility, faith, heavenly-mindedness; he was one of the
most fruitful Trees that ever God planted in his Vineyard. The Jailer when God
had changed him from a wild tree, to a tree of Righteousness, brought forth
sweet and generous fruit. How kindly did he use the Apostles! he set meat
before them, and washed their wounds, Acts 16.33, 34. he who was before their
Jailer, becomes now their Nurse and Physician. It is impossible for a man to be
ingraffed into Christ, who is so full of juice and succulency, but he must
needs be fruitful. He who is a branch of this Tree, though before he were like
Aarons dry Rod, yet now he blossoms, and brings forth Almonds.



Hose. 10.1. Israel O how many unfruitful hearers are there, who evaporate into
nothing but froth and fume, being like those ears which run out all into straw!
they give God neither the early fruit, nor the latter. There are many
Christians like Arbors, covered only with the leaves of profession; they may be
compared to the wood of the Vine which is good for nothing, Ezekiel. 15.2. He who
has not the fruits of the Spirit Gal. 5.22.
, has not the Spirit; and he who has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of
Christ's, Romans 8.9. and if he be not Christ's, whose is he then? I fear the sin
of this Age is unfruitfulnesse. Never more laboring in Gods Vineyard, and yet
never less fruit; instead of the Figtree and Pomgranate, we have abundance of
barren willows grow among us; Ministers say they fear they spend their labor
in vain; many are perverted, few converted. Papists, and Heretics see the
fruit of their labors; millions are made Proselites to Rome; Satan never had
such an harvest in England as of late years; but how few are savingly wrought
upon? how few fruitful plants? they are as the gleanings after Vintage. This is
a lamentation and shall be for a lamentation. The silver showers of the
Sanctuary fall upon barren ground. Histories relate that in some Countries they
have no Trees at all growing. I will not be so uncharitable as to say we have
no trees of Righteousness in England; blessed be God we have some trees laden
with Gospel-fruit, Plants of renown; but few trees, in comparison of the Thorns
and Briars that grow; we have many will commend fruit, but few that bear fruit.
To the unfruitful Christian let me say four things.

1. Unfruitfulness is a shame: Barrenness of old was counted a great shame. For
a tree in winter to be fruitless, is no great wonder; but in the Spring and
Summer to be without fruit, is a reproach to the Tree: So in the winter of
ignorance and Popery to have less fruit was less culpable; but in the Spring
time of the Gospel, when the Sun of Righteousness has shined so gloriously in
our Horizon, now to be without fruit is a reproach not to be wiped away; men
think it a shame to want an eye, or a limb; but it is a greater shame to want
fruit.

2. What account can the unfruitful Christian give to God? God will come with
this question, Where is your fruit? a godly man dies full of fruit; Job 5.26.
Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of Corn, etc. The
unfruitful Christian comes to his grave not as shock of corn, but as a bundle
of straw, fit only for the fire: It Is good to bethink our selves what answer we
shall give to God for our barrenness. The Lord has planted us in a rich soil;
he may say to us as to his Vineyard, Isa. 5.1. My beloved has a Vineyard in a
very fruitful hill, and he fenced it, and planted it with the choicest Vine,
etc. and he looked that it should bring forth Grapes, and it brought forth wild
grapes, in an Hill] hilly places are judged the fittest for Vines to grow in,
Psalm. 80.10. there the Sun comes best, and is of more force for ripening the
Grapes.

In a fruitful hill] in the Hebrew it is (...) the horn of the son of oil, or,
the son of fatness, that is in a very fat, rich soil. So may God say to us, I
have planted you in an hilly place, you have been higher than the Nations round
about you, you have been even lifed up to heaven with Ordinances; the Sunbeams
of mercies, and Sihons silver drops have fallen upon you; but where is your
fruit? your enjoyments are great, but what are your improvements? whom God
finds without fruit, he leaves without excuse.

3. They that do not bring forth good fruit, shall never taste of the fruits
that grow in heaven. Heaven is the Garden of God, the Paradise of pleasure
where the most rare delicious fruits grow; there are fruits that the Angels
themselves delight to feed on; it may be said of those Celestial fruits, as
Cant. 4.13. Thy Plants are an Orchard of Pomgranates with pleasant fruits,
Camphire, and Spiknard, Saffron, Calamus, and Cinnamon, with all trees of
Frankincense, Myrrh, and Aloes, with all the chief spices, or as it is in the
Original, the head of the spices. How Aromatical and fragrant are those fruits
which grow in the heavenly Jerusalem? now if you do not bring God your fruit,
you shall never taste his fruit: you that do not bring forth the fruits of
Righteousness, shall never taste the fruits of Paradise. Oh present Christ with
your sweet spices, give him your Myrrh, Cant. 5.2. your spiced wine with the
juice of the Pomgranate. Cant. 8.2. your Myrrh, that is, repentance; this,
though it be bitter to you, it is sweet to Christ. Your spiced wine, and the
juice of the Pomgranate; that is, love mixed with obedience. Those who have no
Myrrh, or wine to give God, shall never feed upon the Tree of life which bears
several sorts of fruit, Rev. 22.2.

4. Think of the heavy doom which will be passed upon the unfruitful person;
Matthew. 25.30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness. Non tantum
de non servato, sed de non aucto munere damnabuntur impii. Prosper.
This man had not embezeld his Talent, but because he did not trade with it,
and bring forth fruit, therefore he is sentenced. God will condemn men as well
for hiding their Talents, as for spending them; as well for not bearing Figs,
as for bearing thorns; let unfruitful Christians look to it; if God should not
cut down unprofitable branches, he should be untrue in his Word; for he has
said, Every tree which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down, Mat. 3.10.

2. It reproves such as bring forth evil fruit. They Garden, but the
Wilderness; their hearts are a fruitful soil for sin, they bring forth pride,
malice, Superstition; some of their hellish and bitter fruits are mentioned,
Gal. 5.20, 21. Adultery, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations,
Seditions, Heresies, etc. These are wild grapes, Isa. 5.2. Grapes of gall,
Deuteronomy. 32.32. Fruit unto death, Romans 7.5. these are Trees of the Devils
planting; let not that man say his heart is good, who bears such fruit. One may
as well say, though the Crab bear sower fruit, it has a sweet Root; bad fruit
shows a rotten heart Luke 6.44.
. -- Fructus indicat arborem.

3. It reproves such as bring forth good fruit, but to a Hose. 10.1. Israel is
an empty Vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself: A man had as good bring
forth no fruit, as bring forth fruit to himself.

Quest. What is it for one to bring forth fruit unto himself?

Answ. When all the good he does is for the magnifying of himself, the worm of
pride gets into his fruit and spoils it. Prayer is good; but when a man prays
only to show his parts, this is to bring forth fruit to himself; some pride it
in their humbling confessions, which is as if Benhadads servants had been proud
when they came before the King with Ropes upon their heads, 1 King. 20.31.
Works of mercy are good, but when a man gives alms, not so much to feed the
poor, as to feed his pride; now he brings forth fruit to himself, and this
fruit is worm-eaten. God will say to all such self-seekers, as once he did to
the people of the Jews, Zach. 7.5. When ye fasted and mourned, did ye at all
fast unto me, even to me? Sinners did ye not bring forth fruit unto your selves?

Exhort.
were it if it might be said of us as Joseph, Genesis 49.22. Joseph is a fruitful
bough. We love to see every thing fruitful; if there be a Tree in our Orchard
though with never such fair leaves, we value it not unless there be fruit; when
you come into your Garden, you complain if you see no fruit; such a Root is
set, but it does not grow; we love to see fruitfulness everywhere, and why not
in our hearts? oh let the precious Grapes and Figs we bear, evidence that we
are trees of Gods planting; Pia anima spiritualibus redolet; sicut aromaticis
floribus bortus Bern.
we often plant Trees to be a shade to the house. God cares for no such trees
as are only for shade, he loves fruit. Arabia is called Faelix, because of the
sweet fruits which grow there, Frankincense, with other perfumes and spices.
That Christian may be entitled Faelix, happy, that has the sweet fruits of the
Spirit growing in his heart; be fruit-bearing trees. The Heathens had a custom
of dedicating their trees; they dedicated the Oak to Jupiter, the Laurel to
Apollo, the Olive Tree to Minerva; but certainly, if we would dedicate a tree
to the God of Heaven which he should accept of, let it be a tree filled with
the fruit of righteousness. Christians should be like the Pomcitron, which (as
Naturalists say) bears fruit at all times of the year; when some of its fruit
falls off, other fruit begins to mellow, and when that mellows, other of its
fruit does but begin to blossom, it is never without fruit. This is the Emblem
of a good Christian, he is never without fruit, either bloomimg in his
affections, or fructifying in his conversation.

That I may persuade Christians to fruitfulness, I desire them to weigh these
five things.

1. Fruit is that which God expects from us, we are his plantation; and Who
planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? 1 Cor. 9.7. Let us
not be as Pharaohs kine, which devoured the fat, and yet still were lean; let
us not be still devouring Sermons, yet never the fatter.

2. Fruitfulness is one of the best distinctive Characters of a Christian;
Prove. 12.12. The root of the righteous yields fruit. Fruitfulness differs a
Saint from an Hypocrite; the Hypocrite is all for show and pretense, he has
fair leaves, but the root of the righteous yields fruit; fruit can no more be
separated from faith, than moisture from the Air, it is the very definition of
a branch in Christ, it bears fruit, Joh. 15.2. As a man differs from a beast by
Reason, a beast differs from a plant by sense, a plant differs from a stone by
vegetation; so a good Christian differs from an Hypocrite by fruit.
Fruitfulness puts a difference between the sound tree and the hollow tree.

Quest. But may not Hypocrites bring forth fruit.

Answ. 1. They do not bring forth fruit in the Vine; they bring forth in the
strength of parts, not in the strength of Christ.

2. Hypocrites bring forth something like fruit, but it is not the right fruit.

1. The fruit they bear is not so sweet. The Crab may bear fruit as well as the
Pearmain, but this excells in sweetness. The Hypocrite may pray, and give alms
as well as a child of God, but there is difference in the fruit; the fruit of
the Regenerate is mellow, it is sweetened with Faith, it is ripened with love.
The Hypocrites fruit is sower and harsh, he does not bring forth Pomgranates
but Crabs, not Figs, but wild Grapes.

2. The seeming fruit of Hypocrites dies, and comes to nothing: Joh. 15.6. He
is cast forth as a branch, and is withered. The Hypocrites fruit is like the
grass upon the house tops, which withers before it grows up, Psalm. 129.6.
Matthew. 13.6.

3. Fruitfulness adorns a Christian; the Fruit adorns the Tree; a Fruit-bearing
Christian is an Ornament to Religion; the more fruitful the branch is, the more
fair to look on; Jer. 11.16. The Lord called thy name a green Olive Tree, fair,
and of goodly fruit. A dead tree as it is unserviceable, so it is uncomely. A
Christian decked with the Fruits of Righteousness, is beautiful and glorious.
The fertile Christian is compared to the Lilly for pulchritude and fairness,
Hos. 14.5. There are many strive to make themselves look fair by their dressing
and attire, their chain of Pearl and Bracelets. O would you be fair in Gods
eye? Then spread your Branches, send forth your Spices as Aromatic Trees in
Lebanon.

4. Fruitfulness is a good evidence to show for heaven; the fruits of love,
humility, good works, are (as St. Bernard says) Seeds of hope, signs of
Predestination, the happy presages of future glory. The righteousness of faith,
Rom 4.11.
is always accompanied with the fruits of Righteousness. He that can show good
fruit, goes (like a ship laden with Jewels and Spices) full sail to Heaven.

5. God delights in his fruitful trees; when his Garden flourishes he will
walk there; he who curses the barren tree, will taste of the fruitful tree;
Cant. 5.1. I am come into my Garden my sister, my Spouse, I have gathered my
Myrrh with my Spice.

2. It Exhorts them that do bear fruit, that they would Joh. 15.2. Every branch
that bears fruit, he purges it that it may bring forth more fruit. Grace is
like the morning light which increases more, and more to the full meridian of
glory. Christians should be like that ground in the Parable which brought forth
some sixty, some an hundred fold, Matthew. 13.8. He who has a little gold,
labors to increase it; and is not grace more precious than gold? some
Christians have a little fruit, and they think that is well; like Trees that
have an Apple or two growing on them to show that they are of the right kind:
Isa. 17.6. Two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough. They are
like the Church of Philadelphia which had (...), a little strength, Rev. 3.8.
so they have a little faith, a spark of love. Christ chides a little faith,
Matthew. 14.31. Christians should increase with the increase of God, Col. 2.19.
Christ compares the breasts of his Spouse to Clusters of Grapes, for
fruitfulness, Cant. 7.7. Oh labor to be Christians of degrees; the Apostle
prays for the Philippians that their love might abound (...), yet more and
more, Phil. 1.9.

Now that I may press Christians who have Fruit, to bring forth more fruits of
patience, humility, love, etc. Consider

1. This is the end why we have new cost laid out upon us that we should bring
forth more fruit. The Lord is still Manuring us; not a week; not a day, but he
is at new cost with us, he rains down golden showers; and why is God at all
this charges with us, but that we may bring forth more Fruit?

2. The more fruit we bring forth, the more glory we bring to God; Joh. 15.8.
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. Though it is a blessed
sight to see any Fruit, I would not discourage such as bear but two or three
Olive berries, it is a sign they are not dead trees; it is observable, the
ground in the Parable which brought forth more sparingly, Christ calls it good
ground, Matthew. 13.8. If the Husbandman sees a thin ear, which has but a little
Corn in it, yet he is glad to see some, and he carries it into the Barn. So
though thou art a thin ear, thou have not so much grace as others, God will not
reject thee; if there be any Fruit, God will accept it; he that gained but two
Talents, had his Euge bone serve; Matthew. 25.22. Well done thou good and
faithful servant. This I speak that I may not discourage the weak Christian;
though thou have less Fruit growing on thee, thou art too good a tree to be
made fuel on, thou shall be transplanted into Paradise. But I say, you should
not rest in small beginnings, but labor to put more Oil in the Lamp, and be
increasing your stock of grace; for, the more Fruit you bring forth, the more
glory God has; herein is my Father glorified; though the lowest degree of
grace may bring salvation to you, yet it does not bring so much glory to God.
It is observable in the Text, when the Apostle had said, Filled with the fruits
of righteousness, he adds, which are unto the glory and praise of God. It is a
praise to the Husbandman, and commends his skill and industry when the plants
in his Orchard thrive; so when the plants of Righteousness flourish, this is to
the praise of Gods glory; it is the highest end of the Creature to bring glory
to God; better lose our lives, than lose the end of our living.

3. The fuller we are of Fruit, the more we are like Christ, who was full of
grace and truth, Joh. 1.14. he received Spirit without measure, Joh. 3.34. This
Tree of life was ever bearing; and he brought forth several sorts of Fruit,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, etc. The more we are filled with the
fruits of righteousness, the more we resemble the Sun of Righteousness. We were
elected to this end, to be made like Christ, Romans 8.30. and then are we most
like this blessed Vine when we bear full clusters.

4. The more fruit a Christian brings forth, the more will Christ love him. Now
(says Leah) will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him three
sons, Genesis 29.34. When we bear much fruit, now will Christ's heart be joined to
us. If Christ builds a nest of comfort, it is in those Trees which fructify
most; though the Lord Jesus does accept of the truth of grace, yet he commends
only the degrees of grace: Matthew. 8.10. I have not found so great faith, no not
in Israel; he sets a trophy of renown upon that Faith; Christ will pardon a
weak Faith, he will honor a great Faith. It was not a sparckle of love Christ
commended in Mary Magdalen, but love flaming; Luke 7.74. (...), she loved much.
Christians, would you be as that beloved Disciple which leaned on the bosom of
Jesus? would you have much love from Christ? let him have much fruit from you.

5. Bearing much fruit will usher in abundance of comfort into the soul in
these two Exigences.

1. In the hour of tentation. Satan wiil be sure to besiege the weakest
Christian; all his darts fly that way, and a strong tentation may overcome a
weak faith; but a flourishing Faith stands like a Cedar and is not blown down
by the wind of tentation; a strong Faith can stop the mouth of the Devil that
roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.9.

2. Store of fruit will give comfort in the hour of death; a little danger will
make us above the danger of death, but degrees of grace will make us above the
fear of death; O what joy will it be on the deathbed when a Christian can
bring his sheaves full of Corn! when he can show his five Talents that he has
gained by trading! when there is not only a drop or two of Oil, but his Lamp
full of Oil! what though the Devil show God our debts, if we can show him our
fruit, O how sweet will death be! it will not be interitus, but introitus; not
a destruction, but a deliverance. (...). Chrysostom
Death like a whirlwind may blow down the tree of the body, but it cannot blast
the Fruit of our graces. The Trees of Righteousness carry their fruit with
them, Rev. 14.13. Their works follow them. The Christian who abounds in
holiness may say as Simeon, Luke 2.29. Lord, now let thou thy servant
depart in peace. He who bears but a little fruit, departs in safety; but he who
bears much fruit departs in peace.

6. Consider what need we have to be (...). putting forth still more Fruit; our
graces are yet in their nonage; indeed in heaven this Doctrine will be out of
season, we shall not need to hear it; then we shall have done growing, being
arived at our full stature; then our light shall be clear, and our love
perfect; but while we live here, there is something (...)
lacking in our faith, 1 These. 3.10. therefore we had need increase the stock
of grace, and bring forth (...), more fruit. Our grace is eclipsed with sin,
our Faith is full of unbelief; now as when the Sun is Eclipsed, it is by
degrees getting out of the Eclipse, and it shines brighter, and brighter till
it recover its perfect luster; so it must be with us, we must be getting out of
the Eclipse till we shall arrive at our perfect luster in glory.

7. He who does not increase to more fruitfulness, will soon be on the losing
hand; he that has not more faith, will quickly have less; non progredi, est
regredi; Rev. 2.4. Thou have left thy first love. It is with grace as it is
with fire; if it be not blown up and increased, it will soon decay. Such as
thrive not in their spiritual estate, we may perceive sadly to decline. Though
a Christian cannot lose the seed of grace, 1 John. 3.9. yet he may lose the
actings of grace, and the comfort; therefore bring forth more fruit; no sooner
does a Christian begin to stand still, but you may perceive him going backward.

8. The more your fruit is increased, the more your glory will be increased; he
whose pound gained ten, was made Ruler over ten Cities, Luke 19.16, 17. If you
would have your Crown hung full of jewels, let your boughs be hung full of
fruit.

4. The last use is of Direction. I shall lay down some Direction.


1. Be sensible of unfruitfulness. Many might have been fruitful in grace, if
they had not conceited themselves so; he that thinks himself fruitful enough,
is barren enough; be sensible of your wants; it is better to complain than
presume.

2. If you would be fruitful, remove those things which will hinder
fruitfulness.

1. Cherishing any secret lust in the heart; sin lived in, is like Vermin to
the tree, which destroys the fruit; grace cannot thrive in a sinful heart: In
some soil plants will not grow; the cherishing of sin is the withering of the
Fruit.

2. The love of riches: The cares of the world choked the seed, Matthew. 13. The
love of sin poisons the Fruit, the love of riches choaks it. This is like a
blast upon trees, it destroys the precious Fruits of godliness: Love not the
world, 1 John 2.15.

3. The third means to fruitfulness, is weeping for sin. Moisture helps
germination in trees; holy tears do water the trees of God and make them more
fruitful: Mary Magnalen (a weeping plant) how fruitful was she in love to
Christ? moist grounds, as your Marshes, are more fertile: the soul that is
moistened and steeped in tears, is most frugiferous: never did David's graces
flourish more, than when he watered his Couch with tears. When the Plant has
been pricked whereby it lets forth gumm, or tears, it is fuller of Fruit, and
the Fruit is sweeter. That Christian who has been pricked at heart for sin,
whereby he lets forth plenty of tears, bears the sweetest Fruits of grace:
Moisture helps fruitfulness.

4. If you would be fruitful, often apply the blood of Christ, and the Promises.

1. Apply the blood of Christ. Naturalists say, that blood applied to the Root
of some trees makes them bear better. Sure I am, the blood of Christ applied to
the heart, makes it flourish more in holiness. None so fruitful as a Believer;
I know (says St. Paul) whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12. there was the
applying blood to the Root of the tree, and how fruitful was he in zeal, love
to Christ, Heroical courage! 2 Cor. 12.15. He that believes Christ dyed for
him, never thinks he can do, or suffer enough for Christ. When we read, and
pray, now we do but water the Branches; when we believe, now we water the Root
of the Tree and make it fruitful.

2. Apply the Promises. Husbandmen have an art to comfort the spirits of the
Root to make the tree bear better: Apply the Promises; these are for comforting
the spirits of a Christian, and then he puts forth fruit more vigorously. It is
an experiment in nature, the Root of the Pine tree watered with wine, does
cause it to flourish, the Promises are as wine to water the Trees of
Righteousness whereby they spread and augment more in grace. Ever preserve the
spirits of the tree if you would have it bear; a pensive dejected soul is less
fruitful; but when through the Promises a Christians heart is cheared and
comforted, now he is enriched with pleasant fruits, Camphire, and Spiknard, and
Frankincense; he is like a Tree laden with fruit.

5. Another means to fruitfulness, is humility. The low grounds are most
fruitful: The Valleys are covered with Corn, Psalm. 65.13. The humble heart is
the fruitful heart. It is observed in some Countries, as in France, that the
best and largest Grapes which they make their wine of, grow upon the lower sort
of Vines. The largest and fairest Fruits of the Spirit grow in a lowly
Christian: 1 Pet. 5.5. God gives grace to the humble. St. Paul calls himself
the least of Saints, yet he was the chief of the Apostles. The Virgin Mary was
low in her own eyes, Luke 1.48. but this lowly Plant did bear that blessed Vine
which brought the Fruit of salvation to the world.

6. If you would be fruitful in grace, be much in good conference: Mal. 3.16.
Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another. There is an
observation some have concerning the Sympathy of Plants; some plants will bear
better near other trees, than when they grow alone, as is seen in the Myrtle
and Olive: This holds true in Divinity; the trees of righteousness when they
associate, and grow near together, thrive best in godliness. The communion of
Saints is an excellent means for fruitfulness. Christians increase one another
knowledge, strengthen one another Faith, clear one another evidences. When
the Trees planted in Gods Orchard stand at a distance, and grow strange one to
another, they are less fruitful.

7. If you would be fruit-bearing trees, be near the waters of the Sanctuary:
Jer. 17.8. He shall be like a tree planted by the waters, and that spreads
out the roots by the River; her leaf shall be green, nor shall it cease from
yiedling fruit. The Word preached will not only make us knowing Christians, but
growing Christians. Ministers are compared to Clouds, Isa. 5.6. their Doctrine
drops as the rain, and makes the trees of God fruitful. Those that sit under
these silver drops (the wind of the Spirit blowing) are like that flock of
sheep, Cant. 2.4. whereof every one bears twins, and none is barren among them.
I wonder not that they are barren trees and nigh unto cursing Heb. 6.8.
that are not under the droppings of the Sanctuary; a Christian can no more be
fruitful without Ordinances, than a tree without showers.

8. And lastly, if you would fructify apace, go to God and desire him to make
you fruitful; God is called the Husband man, John. 15.1. and he has an art
above all other Husbandmen; they can plant and prune trees, but if they be dead
they cannot make them bear. God can make the barren tree bear, he can put life
into a dead tree: Ephesians. 2.5. It is not Paul's planting, but the Spirits
watering must give the increase.

Pray to God to make you fruitful though it be by affliction; oftentimes God
makes us grow in grace this way; Hebr. 12.11. No chastening for the present
seems to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness. The bleeding Vine bears best; It is an
observation, that the pulling off some of the blossoms of a tree, makes the
fruit fairer, the reason is, because the sap has the less to nourish; some
Writers say, they have known a tree by having too many blossoms, has blossomed
it self dead. The notion holds true in a Scriptural sense; God by pulling off
some of the blossoms of our outward comforts makes us bring forth fairer fruit;
some have so blossomed in prosperity, that they have blossomed themselves into
hell: It is an ancient experiment, that the planting of some tender trees near
the West sun does them hurt, and parcheth the Fruit, the Sun being so extreme
hot: Too much prosperity, like the West sun does Christians much hurt, and
parcheth all good affection, Jer. 22.21. Oh pray to God that he would make you
fruitful though it be by bleeding. Say as Luther, Lord, wound where thou will,
prune and cut me till I bleed, so that I may have my Fruit unto holiness, and
my end everlasting life, Romans 6.22.

The perfume of Love.
1 Pet. 1.22. See that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently.


THE holy Scripture makes the love of the brethren the surest note of a man
that shall go to heaven, 1 John 3.14. and I find Christ and his Apostles
beating much upon this string of love, as if this made the sweetest music and
harmony in Religion. The consideration whereof has put me upon this subject.

All the graces have their beauty; but there are some that do more adorn and
set off a Christian in the eye of the world (like some of the Stars that shine
brighter) as humility, and Charity. These two graces like precious Diamonds
cast a sparkling luster upon Religion. I have designed to speak of the last of
these at this time; See that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently.
Love is a Grace always needful, therefore never out of season, though too much
out of use.

My Text like the River of Eden Genesis 2.10.
, parts it self into four Heads.

1. Here is a Commission or charge, (...), See that ye love.

2. The Extent of this Love, (...), One another.

3. The Manner of this Love, (...), with a pure heart.

4. The Degree of this love, (...), fervently.

1. Love purely, that is opposed to Hypocrisy: Love must be with the heart; it
must not be a complement, which is like a painted fire; dissembled love is
worse than hatred.

2. Love fervently, that is opposed to Neutrality; love must flame forth, it
must not be as the smoking flax, but as a burning Lamp; so much the Hebrew
word for love (...) imports an ardent and zealous affection Ardens and vehemens
affectio.
, no waters must quench it.

Doctr. Christians must love one another cordially, and fervently; Col. 3.14.
Above all these things put on charity. 1 Pet. 4.8. Above all things have
fervent charity among your selves: as if the Apostle had said, whatever you
neglect, do not neglect this grace: Hierom reports that when St. John was old,
he was fain to be led up into the Pulpit, and there he repeated these words,
Little children, love one another; and then came down from the Pulpit. Oh that
this grace of love were engraven as in letters of gold upon our hearts by the
finger of the Holy Ghost!

Here the question will be asked what love is?

I answer, Love is a sweet and gracious affection, whereby we wish the good of
another, and promote his welfare as our own. Love is a sacred fire kindled in
the heart by the Spirit, like that fire which came from heaven, 2 Chronicles. 7.1. I
shall endeavor to preserve this fire in Christians hearts, as the fire the
Vestal Virgins kept in Rome that it may not go out.

There are several Arguments to enforce Love upon us.

1. We must love virtute praecepti, by virtue of Command; Joh. 13.34. A new
Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another. Love is both a new
Commandment, and an old. It Is an old Commandment, because it is (...), a Law
written in the heart of man by the pen of nature, as with the point of a
Diamond: And it is old, because it is written in the ancient Statutes and
Records; Levit. 19.18. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, I am the
Lord; and yet it is a new Commandment,

1. Because newly purged from Pharisaical glosses; before it was love thy
neighbor, but now it is love thy enemy, Matthew. 5.44. here is a new Comment
upon an old Law.

2. Love is said to be a new Commandment, because of a new Edition; it came
out of the new mint of the Gospel, and was pressed by a new example; Joh.
13.34. As I have loved you; so that it is not Arbitrary, but a duty; it is a new
Commandment and an old.

The second Argument enforcing love, is the excellency of this grace, it is a
lovely grace; Color gratiae purpurcus ob scurior esset, si n^n charitate
vestiretur. Ber.
all the other graces seem to be Eclipsed, unless love shine and sparckle forth
in them. Faith itself has no beauty unless it work by love; the tears of
repentance are not pure unless they flow from the spring of love. Love is the
Jewel Christ's Bride wears, it is the Diamond in the ring of the graces; love
is (...), as Chrysostom calls it. This is the grace that seasons all our
actions and makes them savoury; love is aroma, amp; opo balsamum, it is like
musk among linen which perfumes it. So love makes all our Religious services
(...), a sweet Odor to God, Ephesians. 5.2. Prayer is compared to incense, Psalm.
141.2. Now incense if it be laid on the Altar, and have no fire put to it, does
not smell so sweet; the incense of Prayer does not cast such a fragrant smell,
unless kindled with this fire of love; love is the badge and cognizance of a
true Saint: Joh. 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if
ye love me another: not if ye work miracles, but if ye love one another; by
this livery ye are known to belong to me. St. Bernard calls love ros gratiae,
the sweet dew that distills from a Christian, and refreshes all whom it drops
upon; love is the golden clasp that knits hearts, it is opus signinum, the
cement that soders Christians together; it is (...), the bond of perfectness,
Col. 3.14. if this bond be broken, all falls to pieces. Love is radix omnium
bonorum; it is (...), the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. Omne praeceptum ad
charitatum refertur. Aug.
All the duties of the first and second Table, Piety toward God, and Equity
toward our neighbor, are comprehended in this, Thou shall love.

O how sweetly does the Apostle Paul descant and paraphrase upon this grace!
how does he extol it! he plays as well the Orator as the Divine; how does he
delineate this grace of love! how does he pensil and draw it out to the life in
all its beauty and spiritual embroidery!

That he may extol this grace,

1. First, he does it exclusive, he shows that the most glorious things are
nothing without it Aug.
. Si desit charitas, frustra habentur coetera: ^ Cor. 13.1. Though I speak with
the tongues of men] If a man could speak in so many Languages as Mithridates,
of whom it is said he understood 22. sundry Tongues; if he had the golden mouth
of Chrysostom, if he could do with his Oratory, as the Poets fain Orpheus did
with his Harp, move the very Rocks and stones, yet without love it were nothing.

Nay, says the Apostle, though I speak (...), with the tongues of Angels, and
have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or as a tinkling Cymbal] Were
it not a brave thing to have the eloquence of Angels? yet this without love
were but Cymbalum tinniens, the tinkery of the Cymbal; to love as Christians,
is better than to speak as Angels.

And though I understand all mysteries and all knowledge, ver. 2.] If a man's
head were a Library of all learning, if he could know all that is knowable, if
he could with Solomon, discourse from the Cedar in Lebanon even to the Hysop,
and has not charity, hoc aliquid nihil est, all is nothing; Knowledge without
love, makes a man no better than a Devil.

And though I have all faith, so that I could remove Mountains] Were it not
admirable to have the Faith of Miracles? to unhinge Mountains, to cast out
Devils, to take up Serpents, and drink poison, and it should not hurt us?
Matthew. 16.16. Yet, if I have no charity I am nothing: Nullius sum pretij, I am
of no account with God; the Miracles of faith without the mystery of love
profit nothing.

And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, ver. 3] Suppose I give away
all my Estate in Alms, yet without love it avails me nothing; it is like a Lamp
without Oil.

And though I give my body to be burned, and have not love, it is nothing] the
fire of Martyrdom avails not without the fire of Charity.

Let a man come to Church, pray, receive Sacraments, yet if his heart burn in
malice, it is but going to hell in a more Saint-like manner; O quam pulchra
charitas! Oh how precious a jewel) says Austin) is love, how rare a grace,
that if this be wanting, all other things (though never so glorious) are in
vain.

2. The Apostles sets forth this grace of love Positive, by deciphering its
nature and excellency.

1. Charity is kind, ver. 4. (...), Love is a munificent bountiful grace, it is
full of good works, it drops as the honeycomb.

2. Charity is not puffed up, (...), though it be bountiful, it is not proud;
love is a humble grace; like the violet, though it perfumes the Air, yet hangs
down its head; love lays aside the Trumpet, and covers it self with a vail;
love conceals its own worths and says as Paul, 2 Cor. 12.11. (...)* though I
be nothing.

3. Charity seeks not her own, ver. 5. The Apostle complains, Phil. 2.21. All
men seek their own, but love seeks not her own. This is a diffusive grace,
and wholly spends it self for the good of others, 1 Cor. 10.33. It is reported
of Pompey that when there was a great dearth in Rome, Pompey having provided
great store of corn abroad and shipped it, the Mariners being backward in
hoysing up sail by reason of a tempest, Pompey himself sets forward in the
storm, using these words, Better a few of us perish than that Rome should not
be relieved (...).
; here was public spirit! love seeks not her own; it makes a private Christian
a common good. Love is a grace that dwells not at home, it goes abroad, it
makes frequent visits, it looks into the condition of others and relieves them
Quid prodest misereri inopis, nisi alimoniam ei Largiaris! Amb.
. Love has one eye blind, to wink at the infirmities of others, and another
eye open to spy their wants.

4. Charity is not easily provoked; (...), it is not in a Paroxysme, it burns
not in anger; it is meek and calm, never taking fire unless to warm others with
its benign beams of mercy; it gives honey, but does not easily sting.

3. The Apostle sets forth the excellency of this grace of love Comparative, by
laying it in the balance with other graces, ver. 13. And now abides faith,
hope, charity; these three, but the greatest of these is charity. He compares
love with faith and hope, and then sets the ctown upon love; indeed in some
sense Faith is greater than charity.

1. Ordine causalitatis, in respect of causality; faith is the cause of
charity; therefore more noble; for as Austin says, Quicquid pulchritudinis in
arbore ex radice proficiscitur.
though the root of the tree be not seen, yet all the beauty of the branches
procee'ds from the Root: So all the beauty that sparckles in love proceeds from
the Root of Faith.

2. Faith is more excellent than charity Ratione beneficij; Faith is a more
beneficial grace to us; for by faith we are ingraffed into Christ, and partake
of the fatness of the Olive. Faith fetches in all the strength and riches of
Christ into the soul; Faith puts upon the soul the embroidered Robe of Christ's
Righteousness in which it shines brighter than the Angels; but in another sense
love is greater than faith,

1. Respectu visibilitatis, because Love is a more visible grace then Faith;
Faith lies hid in the heart; Romans 10.9. Love is more conspicuous, and shines
forth more in the life. Love discovers the soundness of Faith, as the even
beating of the pulse shows the healthful temper of the body. Faith bows the
knee to Christ and worships him, love opens its treasures and presents unto
Christ gifts, Gold, and Frankincense, etc.

2. Love is greater than Faith Respectu durationis, in regard of continuance; 1
Cor. 13.8. Charity never fails; we shall lay down our body of flesh, and see
God face to face; faith and hope shall be no more, but love shall remain: While
we live here we have need of Faith, this is our Jacobs staff to walk with; 2
Cor. 5. We walk by faith; but we shall set this staff shortly at heaven door,
and love only shall enter within the vail Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 34.
. So you have seen the sparkling of this Diamond, and thus does the Apostle no
less elegantly than divinely set forth the beauty and orient luster of this
grace.

3. The third Argument pressing Christians to love, is, this is Decus and
ornamentum Evangelij, it sets a crown of honor upon Religion, it renders the
Gospel lovely in the eyes of the world; it was an honor to Religion in
Tertullians time, when the Heathens could say, Ecce quam mutuo diligunt, see
how the Christians love one another! Psalm. 133.1. Behold how good, and how
pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity! it is like the precious
ointment upon the head, that runs down to the skirts of Religions Garments. O
what a blessed sight it is to see Christians linked together with the silver
link of charity! the Church is Christ's Temple, the Saints are living stones, 1
Pet. 2.5. how beautiful is this Temple, when the stones of it are cemented
together with love! it was said of the first Temple there was no noise of
hammer in it; and oh that there might be no noise of strife and division in
Gods Church; could we see unity and verity like the Vine and Elm mutually
embracing; could we see the children of Sion spreading themselves as Olive
plants round about their Mothers table in an amicable and peaceable manner, how
should this adorn Religion, and be as a lure to invite and draw others to be in
love with it; what is Religion but Religation? a binding and knitting together
of hearts! we are knit to God by Faith, and one to another by love.

4. The fourth Argument is the necessity of love; love is (...), a debt; now
debts must be paid; Owe nothing to any man but love, Romans 13.8. The debt of
love differs from other debts.

1. When a debt is paid, we receive an Acquittance, and are to pay it no more;
but this debt of love must be always paying; in heaven we must be paying this
debt, love to God, and the Saints; there is no discharge from this debt.

2. Other debts may be dispensed with; we forgive a debt sometimes, as that
Creditor did in the Parable, Matthew. 18.27. The Lord of that servant was moved
with compassion and forgave him the debt. But this debt of love is by no means
to be dispensed with, it must be paid; if we do not pay this debt, God will
come upon us with an arrest and throw us into hell prison.

3. In civil debts between man and man, the more they pay, the less they have;
but in this debt of love it is quite contrary; the more we pay, the more we
have; the more grace from God, the more love from others; love like the widows
oil increases by pouring out; by paying other debts we grow poor, by paying
this debt we grow richer.

5. Love makes us like God, God is love, 1 John 4.16. a golden sentence? Austin
says, the Apostle does more commend love in this one word, God is love, than
Saint Paul does in his whole Chapter; as the nature of the Sun is light, so
Gods nature is love: The three persons in the Trinity are all love.

1. God the Father is love; Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world; that God should
part with Christ out of his bosom, the Son of his love, and lay this jewel as
it were to pawn for our salvation, oh unparalleld love! never was such love
showed to the Angels.

2. God the Son is love; how did Christ love his Spouse when he died for her!
his sides dropped blood, his heart dropped love; such a vein of love was opened
in him that our sins could not stench; love was the wing on which Christ did
fly into the Virgins womb. Christ incarnate, hre was love covered over with
flesh; and Christ on the Cross, here was a book of love laid open before us to
read in. Per vulnera viscera --

3. God the Holy Ghost is love, his appearing in the likeness of a Dove showed
his nature; the Dove says Pliny, is an amicable creature, it is without gall;
what are all the motions of the Spirit but tenders of love? what is the Zeal of
the Spirit but the print of love? why does this blessed Spirit as a suitor come
a woing to sinners, but that they may know he is in love? thus all the persons
in the Trinity are love; and the more we shine in the grace of Love, the more
we resemble the God of Love.

6. Argument enforcing love, is from the sweet Relations we stand in one to
another; we are (...) fellow-Citizens, Ephesians. 2.19. we all expect one heaven;
we shall shortly live together, and shall we not love together? we are
soldiers of the same band, 2 Timothy 2.3. ours must be the fight of faith, not
the fight of contention; our strife must be who shall love most; we are
branches of the same Vine, and shall we not be united? we are stones of the
same building, and shall we not be cemented with love? nay we are brethren,
Acts 7.26. Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one to another?

Use 1. I might here take up a lamentation, and steep my funerals of this grace
among Christians; -- Terras Astraea reliquit -- the fire of brotherly love is
almost ready to go out; instead of the fire of love, the wildfire of passion. I
have read of one Vitalis who hazarded his life to succor his distressed
friend; but sure such Vitales are dead in this age. -- fratrum quoque gratia
rara est -- The Text says, See that ye love one another; but our times have
made a bad Comment upon this Text; how do Christians reproach, censure, malign
one another! the Text says, love fervently, but they hate fervently; instead
of the bond of love, behold the apple of strife; we live in the frigid zone,
the love of many waxes cold. Many live as if they had been born upon the
Mountains of Bether, the Mountains of division; and as if they had been
baptized in the waters of Meribah, the waters of strife. Do the wicked unite?
nay do the Devils unite? there was in one man a Legion, which is according to
Varro, seven thousand six hundred twenty two: shall there be more harmony among
Devils, than among Christians? For these divisions of the godly, there are
great thoughts of heart. Oh Christians, turn your hot words into salt tears!
how do the enemies of Religion insult to see not only Christ's Coat, but his
Body rent; for these things let our eyes run down.

Consider the ill consequence where love is wanting; the absence of this grace
brings forth divisions, and they are dangerous; For

1. Divisions bring an opprobrium, and scandal upon Religion, they make the
ways of God evil spoken of, as if Religion were the fomenter of envy and
sedition. Julian in his Invectives against the Christians, said, that they
lived together as Tigers, rending and tearing one another; and shall we by our
animosities, and contentions make good Julians words? this will make others
afraid to embrace the Christian Faith. There is a story in Epiphanius of
Miletius, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, both Confessors of the Orthodox
Religion, both condemned to suffer; who being together in prison, upon a small
difference sell into so great a Schism, that they drew a partition between
each other in the prison, and would not hold communion in the same worship of
Christ, for which notwithstanding they both suffered, which division grew
scandalous, and did more hurt than their persecution did good.

2. Divisions advance Satan's Kingdom. The Devil has no hope but in our
discords Nibil spei nisi per discordias. Cornel. Tac.
. St. Chrysostom observes of the City of Corinth, when many zealous converts
were brought in, Satan knew no better way to damme up the current of Religion
than by throwing in a bone of contention, and dividing them into parties; one
was for Paul, and another for Apollo, but few for Christ.

Use 2. Be Exhorted to cordial and fervent love; See that Exhort.
Oh that this sweet spice might send forth its fragrant smell among Christians!
Oh that the Gilboa which have none of this heavenly dew upon them. They say of
the stones of the Temple they were so closely cemented as if there had been but
one stone in the Temple; it were to be wished that the hearts of Christians
were so sweetly cemented in love, as if there were but one heart.

Let me commend this grace of amity and love to Christians under a double
notion.

1. As you are members of a body politic. The whole nation is (...), a
Political body; now it should be with the body Politic as it is with the
natural body; all the members of the body have a sweet sympathy, they all work
for the good of the whole, that there be no Schism in the body, 1 Cor. 12.25.
So it should be in the body politic.

2. You are membra Ecclesiae, members of the Church of God, you bear Christ's
Name, you wear his Livery, therefore you must be sodred together in affection.
It is a sad Omen and presage, when the joints of the same body shall be loosed,
and the knees shall smite one against another.

If yet men will live at variance, nourishing a Viper in their bosoms, I shall
offer two things to their serious consideration.

1. An uncharitable person is an unregenerate person; Titus 3.3. We were
sometimes disobedient, serving diverse lusts, living (...), in malice and envy;
as if he had said, Before grace came, we were filled, and ready to burst with
this poison of malice; the Apostle describing a natural condition calls it the
gall of bitterness, Acts 8. He that lives in bitter strife, is in the gall
bitterness: A malicious person is of no a kin to God, for God is love; he knows
nothing of the Gospel savingly, for it is a Gospel of peace; we read in
Scripture of the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. and the bond of iniquity, Acts
8.23. him whom the Gospel has not bound in the bond of peace, Satan has bound
in the bond of iniquity.

2. Uncharitableness is a leaven that sowres the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.8.

1. It sowres your good qualities; Naaman an honorable man, a mighty man in
valor, but he was a Leper, 2 King. 5.1. that but was like a dead fly in the
Ointment, it spoiled all the rest. So it may be said, Such a man is a man of
parts, a man of great moral endowments, he is just, affable, temperate, but he
is a leper, he will not be in charity; he pays every one their own, but there
is one debt he will not pay though he rot in hell for it, (viz.) the debt of
love; this is a (...), a brand of infamy upon him.

2. Uncharitableness sowres your good duties; you pray and come to Church, but
refuse to be tied in a knot of amity; what profit is there of all your seeming
devotion? we are bid to lift up pure hands without wrath, 1 Timothy, 2.8. The
uncharitable person does not lift up pure hands in prayer, but leprous hands,
bloody hands: 1 John 3.16. Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer. Prayer
says Chrysostom, may be compared to a fine Garland; the hands that make a
Garland had need be clean: So the heart that makes a prayer had need be clean:
wrath and anger do sully a Christians prayers, and will the Holy God touch
them? the uncharitable man poisons his own prayers, and will the Lord accept of
a poisoned sacrifice?

Oh that all this might at last persuade to cordial and fervent love; let us
turn all our censuring into praying; let us pray to God that he would quench
the fire of contention, and increase the fire of fraternal love among us: let
us pray that the Lord would heal our Schisms, repair our breaches, that he
would make us like the Cherubims with our faces looking one upon another; let
us pray that God will make good that promise, that we shall serve him with one
consent, or (...)
as in the Hebrew, with one shoulder; and that this may be the golden Motto
written upon England, Cor unum, via una, one heart, and one way Jer. 32 30.
.

2. It Exhorts us that as we would be amicable to all, of the household of
Faith, viz. the Saints and people of God, Exhort.
Psalm. 16.2. We must love as God loves; he loves them most who are like him;
he loves piety, though it be espoused to poverty: so must our love run out
especially to those who have the image and superscription of God upon them.
Joseph loved all his brethren, but Benjamin most; the people of God must have a
Benjamins portion in our love. The Saints are called Jewels, Mal. 3.17. which
we must love and prize; they are called the apple of Gods eye, Zach. to show
how tender they should be in our eye. The Saints are partakers of the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. not by an incorporation into the Divine Essence, but by a
conformity to the Divine likeness: these we must love amore complacentiae, with
a love of complacency and delight: These are near alied to Christ by faith,
they are of the blood Royal of heaven; these must be higher in our thoughts,
and deeper in our affections than others; Hierom loved Christ dwelling in
Austin.

When I say the Saints must have the largest share in our love, I mean not all
that call themselves Saints, (such as under a mask of holiness commit sin,
hypocritical Saints) Quid tibi prodest vocari quod non es? Aug.
but such as the Scripture calls Saints, such as excel in virtue, Psalm. 16.
such as walk humbly with God, Mich. 6.8. such as have aliquid Christi (as Bucer
says) something of Christ in them; these Saints must we place our entire love
upon: Indeed there is that in them which may excite and draw forth love; they
have the beauty of inherent holiness, and they have an interest in the
unspotted holiness of Christ, which may be a sufficient loadstone to draw love
to them.

But what shall we say to those, who instead of loving the people of God
because they are Saints, hate them ea ratione, because they are Saints; as
Tertullian, Confessio nominis, the very confession of the Name of a Christian
was enough to bring them into an odium, and was laid against them as a matter
of crime: It was said of Aristides that he was banished out of Athens, quia
justus, because he was just. Sanctity is the thing that is reproached and hated
in the world; wicked men Panther-like would tear the picture of God drawn in
the New man; let one have all kind of accomplishments, Learning, Morality,
Piety; though men will love him for his Learning, and Morality, they will hate
him for his Piety. Holiness is become the crime; the Serpent is known by his
hissing, they are the seed of the Old Serpent that hiss at Religion; Let me
speak my mind freely. There is generally among men a secret antipathy against
the power of godliness; they are for some shows of devotion, they keep up a
form; but such as have a spirit of zeal and sanctity shining in them, their
hearts rise against; let me tell you, there is not a greater sign of a rotten
and divellish heart, than to hate a man for that very thing for which God loves
him; namely his holiness. It Is an high affront to abuse the Kings Statue: what
vengeance (think we) shall they be counted worthy off, who malign, and do what
in them lies to tear in pieces the image of the living God. Oh take heed of
this; the hating the grace of the Spirit, comes near to the despighting of the
Spirit of grace: To conclude, let us beg the spirit of amity and unity, that we
may love one another, especially that we may be endeared in our affections to
them who are of the family of God, and whose names are enrolled in the book of
life.

The good Practitioner.
Ioh. 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.


IN this Chapter our Blessed Savior, the great Doctor af the Church, falls
upon teaching his Disciples; he taught them

1. Doctrina, by doctrine, ver. 34. A new Commandment give I unto you, that ye
love one another. Christ was now going out of the world; and as a father when
he is dying leaves a charge with his children that they love; so our Savior
leaves this solemn charge with his disciples, that they did love one another.

2. He taught them emblemate, by embleam, ver. 4. he took a Towel and girded
himself. Thus teaching them by a sacred embleam, how he did begirt himself with
with our flesh: the blessed angels stood wondering at this, how the divine
nature could be girdled with the humane.

3. He taught them exemplo, by example, ver. 5. he pours water into a Basin,
and began to wash his disciples feet: he teaches them humility by his own
example; he stoops to the meanest office: he washes his disciples feet, and
this he did for their imitation, ver. 14. ye ought also to wash one another
feet. Now our Lord Christ having thus taught his disciples, by Doctrine,
Embleam, and Example, he makes as it were the Use of all in the words of the
Text (...), If you know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

A text that deserves to be engraven in letters of gold upon our hearts; a
text, that if well observed, will help us to reap benefit by all other texts. A
Sermon is never heard a right till it be practiced: I shall therefore make this
Sermon to be by the blessing of God as a selvidg to keep the rest from
ravelling out. That were an happy Sermon which would help you to put all the
other Sermons you have heard in practice.

If you know these things, etc. by the word (...) [these things] our Savior by
a Synecdoche, comprehends all the matters of religion, though more particularly
those two things he had been immediately before speaking of, love and humility.

In the Text there is 1. a Supposition, if ye know, and do.

2. A benediction, happy are ye. if ye know these things happy are ye, and
there had made a stop, and gone no further, we should have thought knowledge had
been enough to have made one happy; but Christ stays not here, but goes
further, happy are ye if ye do them; Christ does not put happiness upon
knowing, but doing. So that the Doctrine clearly results, That it is not
knowledge but practice renders a man blessed.

This Proposition consists of two Branches, and I shall handle them distinctly.

1. That Knowledge alone in the mysteries of religion, will not make a man happy.

2. That it is the Practique part of religion makes a man happy.

1. Branch of the Doct.
1. That Knowledge alone in the mysteries of religion will not make a man happy.
Mat. 7.21. Luke 6.46. Why call ye me Lord Lord, and do not the things which I
say? It is not the (...) the speculation of the most glorious truths can bring
a man to heaven: If a man could discourse de omni scibili, if his head were
(...) a Treasury of wisdom, an Ocean of learning, as it is said Hyperbolically
of Albinus, Beringarius, Hermolaus Barbarus and others, yet this could not
entitle him to happiness: his knowledge might make him admired, but not blessed.
If a man knew all the policies of State, the mysteries of Trade, the subtilty
of Arts, the system of Divinity, all this could not crown him with happiness.

Indeed, knowledge in the Theory of Religion has a beauty in it next to the
Pearl of grace; this gold is most precious. Knowledge is the enriching of the
mind, it is a fair garland to look upon; but as Rachel though beautiful, yet
being barren, said, give me children or I dye; so if knowledge does not bring
forth the child of obedience, it will dye and come to nothing: I would by no
means disparage knowledge: knowledge is the Pilot to guide us in our obedience;
if zeal be not according to knowledge, it is (...) will worship, it is the
setting up an altar to an unknown God. Knowledge must usher in obedience; it is
as abominable to God to offer up the blind as the lame. Final ignorance
damnes, Hose. 4.6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. The Hebrew
word is (...) they are cut down, or felled like Trees, so that there is a
necessity of knowledge: knowledge is the elder sister, but obedience is better
than knowledge; here the elder must serve the younger: knowledge may put us into
the way of happiness, but it is only practice brings us thither. That knowledge
alone cannot make a man happy, I shall prove by three demonstrations.

1. Knowledge alone does not make a man better, inform, not transform: knowledge
of it self has no power upon the heart to make it more divine: it is like weak
physic that does not work; it does not warm the affections, or purge the
conscience: it does not fetch virtue from Christ to dry up the bloody issue of
sin: a man may receive the truth in the light of it, not in the love of it, 2
These. 2.10. the Apostle calls it (...) a form of knowledge. Romans 2.20. Knowledge
alone is but a dead form, having nothing to animate it: he that has knowledge
only, is a spiritual stilborn: he looks like a Christian, but has neither
appetite nor motion. Knowledge alone makes men monsters in religion; they are
all head, but no feet, they do not walk in Christ, Col. 2.6. A man may have
knowledge and be neglective of his duty, as Plutarch said of the Grecians, they
knew what was just, but did it not: A man may have knowledge, and be profane;
he may have a clear head, and a foul heart. The sun may shine when the way is
dirty: the understanding may be irradiated, when the foot of a sinner treads in
unholy paths; now then if knowledge abstracted from practice does not make a man
better, then it cannot make him happy.

2. Knowledge alone will not save, therefore it will not make a man happy: if
knowledge alone will save, then true, for then Judas should be saved, he had
knowledge enough; then the Devil should be saved; he can transform himself into
an Angel of light; he is called (...) from the great knowledge he has, a man
may have knowledge and be no better than a Devil; hell is full of learned
heads; now if knowledge alone will not save, then it will not put a man into a
state of blessedness.



1. Knowledge takes away all excuse and apology. Joh. 15.22. Now ye have no
cloak for your sin.

2. Knowledge adds to a man's torment: Woe unto thee Corazin; it shall be more
tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of judgment than for thee. It will be
better with Indians than Christians living in a contradiction to their
knowledge: Luke 12.47. That servant which knew his Lords will, and did not
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. Knowledge without
practice serves only as a Torch to light men to hell; the brighter the light,
the hotter the fire. If a King cause his Proclamation to be published, the
Subject knows it, but obeys not, this does the more incense the King against
him, he will punish it for a contempt; better be ignorant than knowingly
disobedient. Now then, if knowledge alone makes a man's case worse, then it is
far from making him happy.

Use. Get knowledge, but do not rest in it; will you rest in that which will
not make you happy? what is it to cry the Temple of the Lord? what is it to lay
knowledge up, and not lay it out? in this sense, he who increases knowledge,
increases sorrow, Eccles. 1.18. his knowledge will but serve to condemn him.
If knowledge separated from practice would make men happy, the people of
England were a happy people, they want not for knowledge; never since the time
of the Apostles did the light shine clearer; but here is the mischief, most
people know only to know; it may be said of the generality of people as Seneca
speaks, malint disputare quam vivere, they had rather dispute well than live
well; they would have knowledge to be spangle them, rather than sanctify them.
Alas, knowledge alone will never make them happy; men may build their nests
among the stars, yet make their bed in hell; they may have knowledge to crown
them, and God to damn them. O Christian, who gloriest in thy knowledge and
haste no more, wherein do thou excel an Hypocrite? wherein do thou excel
the Devil? he knows all the Articles of the Creed, he could say to Christ it is
written -- Is it not sad that a man should have no better evidences to show for
heaven than the Devil!

How unprofitable is the luxuriancy of knowledge? he who is only filled with
knowledge, is like a glass filled with froth; what a vain, foolish thing is it
to have knowledge, and make no spiritual use of it! It is as if a man had
several Fountains in his Garden, but never waters his Flowers with them; or as
if an Ass should be laden with Provender, but eats not of it. So many a man
carries a great deal of knowledge about him, but does not feed upon the
sweetness of it, nor digest his knowledge into practice. To know only to know,
is like one that knows certain Countries by the Map, and can discourse of them,
but never traveled into them, nor tasted the sweet spices of those Countries.
So the Gnostick in Religion has heard and read much of the beauty of holiness,
but never traveled into Religion, nor tasted how good the Lord is; what is it
the better to have the Bible in our heads, if not in our hearts? can Notions be
Cordials when we come to dye? To conclude this, men cannot properly be
denominated Christians from their knowledge: you do not call him an
Handicraftsman who does not work in his Trade; let a man be never so skillful,
yet you do not call him a Goldsmith who did never refine a vessel, or try gold;
though a man has skill in Surgery, yet you do not call him a Chirurgian who
did never lance a wound, or dress a sore: so it is improper to call him a
Christian who has knowledge, but no practice; he knows he should mortify sin,
but he does not, he knows he should show works of mercy, but he does not; he
never yet wrought in the trade of godliness.

2, Branch of the Doct.
2. I proceed to the second Branch of the Doctrine, That it is the practique
part of Religion makes a man happy; knowledge without practice is like a fair
Arbor without fruit; the Art of practice is the most noble Art; the llfeblood
of Religion runs through the veins of obedience; here I shall show 1. Why there
must be practice. 2. That it is only the practique part of Religion makes a man
happy.


1. Why there must be practice; the reason is, because it is only practice that
answers Gods end in giving us his Word both written and preached; Levit. 18.4.
Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine Ordinances to walk therein, Deuteronomy.
26.16. This day the Lord thy God has commanded thee to do these statutes and
judgments; thou shall therefore keep and do them. Not only thou shall know
them, but obey them, (...)* the Word of God is not only a Rule of knowledge,
but a Rule of duty. If you speak to your Children and tell them what is your
mind, it is not only that they may know your mind, but do it. God gives us his
Word not only as a Picture to look upon, but as a Copy to write after. The
Master gives his servant a Candle, not to gaze on, but to work by: The light of
Scripture is to guide our feet into the way of obedience; and so David calls
the Word of God, not a Lamp to his eyes, but a Lanthorn to his feet, Psalm. 119.
implying, that the light of the Word is rather to walk by than to see by. God
gives us his Word as his Will and Testament which he leaves in charge with us
to see it performed. If God would only have had his Laws to be known or talked
of, he might have delivered them to Parrots: If he would only have had them
kept safe, he might have graven them with an iron pen, and laid in the rock for
ever, Job 19.24. But therefore he delivers the Records of heaven to men, that
they should be obeyed. The Lord gives us his Precepts as a Physician gives the
patient his Receipts to take and apply: for this end are all Gods institutes
that we may by practice apply them for the purging out sin, and bringing the
soul into a more healthful temper: God gives us his Word, as the Mother gives
the Child the breast, not only to look upon, but to draw it; many have gone to
hell with the breast in their mouths, because they have not drawn it, and
turned the milk of the Word into sacred nourishment.

2. That it is only the practick part of Religion makes a man happy: This is
clear, if we consult either with Scripture or Reason.

1. It appears by Scripture; the Scripture knows no other way to happiness but
practice; Psalm 15. ult. He that does these things shall never be moved. (...)
It is Calvin's gloss upon the words, The Psalmist does not say He that knows
these things shall never perish, but He that does them. To be a (...), a doer
of the Word, entitles a man to blessedness: Jam. 1.25. This man shall be
blessed in the deed: not (...), for his deed; (as the Papists wrongly gloss)
but (...), in his deed; obedience is rather an evidence of blessedness than a
cause.

Search from one end of the Bible to the other, and you shall find the Crown
still set upon the head of obedience. The Saints renowned of old have ever
received their commendations and titles of honor from their obedience: Moses a
man mighty in words and deeds, Acts. 7.22. Cornelius a man fearing God, giving
much alms. When Christ pronounces the sentence of absolution, see how it runs,
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom; for I was an hungered and ye
gave me meat; thirsty, and ye gave me drink, Matthew. 25.34, 35. Christ is not
said at the last day to reward men according to their knowledge, but their
deeds: Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me to give every man
according as his works shall be, Rev. 22.12. So then, if the Scripture that
Mercurial rod points out no other way to happiness but practice, then it is in
vain to expect it any way else.

2. It appears by Reason; happiness is not attainable but in the use of means;
now the use of means implies practice. Salvation must not only be sought out by
knowledge, but wrought out by practice, Phil. 2.12. There can be no Crown
without running, no recompense without diligence. If happiness comes only in
the use of means, then it is neither imaginable, or feasible without practice.

talk of God, but do not walk with God; men are all for knowledge, because it
is counted an O^nament; they would be stuck with this gay flower, but one leaf
of the tree of life is worthy all the tree of knowledge. It Is better to practice
one truth then to know all: herein most Christians are defective; they have
with Rachel good eyes, but they are barren. Mephibosheth caught a fall and
became lame, 2 Samuel 4.4. Since Adams fall men are lame on their feet; they walk
not in the ways of obedience. Men know coveteousness is a sin: The Greek word
for coveteousness (...) signifies an immoderate desire of getting Ex vi nominis
significat studium semper plus habendi. Ger.
; like Midas who desired every thing he touched might be turned to gold; the
several species of sin grow upon this root of coveteousness. 2 Timothy 3.2. Yet
men live in this sin, and nothing can cure them of this dry dropsy, Amos 2.7.
that pant after the dust of the earth. Men know swearing is a sin; for this the
land mourns. Jer. 23.10. Sinners let their oaths fly, and God sends a flying
roll against them. Zach. 5.2, 3. Yet they will not leave this sin. They know
drunkenness to be a sin: there is death in the Cup, yet the drunkard will drink
it off. Men know uncleanness to be a sin. Exodus 20.14. it wastes their strength,
blots their name, wounds their conscience, wrongs their posterity, damnes
their souls. Rev. 22.15. yet they will follow this sin, and burn in lust though
they burn in hell. -- Transiens est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat. --

Men know they should be winged with activity in the duties of religion, but
they can be content to let these duties alone. They know they should mortify
the flesh, pray in their families, be just in their dealing, give alms to the
poor; but if there were no other Bible to teach us these things than the lives
of most, we should not know there were any such duties Commanded. For the most
part, men are no changlings; what they were twenty, thirty years ago, they are
the same still; as proud and unreformed as ever. The best Tools have been
either broke, or worn out upon their rockie hearts, yet they are as unhewn and
unpolished as ever. The Bellows are burnt, the lungs of Gods Ministers are
wasted, yet how much reprobate silver remains still in many of our
Congregations! If none are happy but doers of the word, how few will be saved?

But why do so few come up to the Practical part of religion? Surely it is 1.
for want of deep humiliation: he that has the spirit of bondage let loose upon
him, apprehends himself as it were in the Forlorne-hope, he sees the sea of his
sins before him ready to swallow him up, and the justice of God behind pursuing
and ready to overtake him; he cries out as St. Paul, Act. 9.6. Lord, what will thou have me do? Will thou have me repent, believe? I stand ready pressed to what
ever service thou Command: the humbled sinner does not dispute, but obey.
The seed that had not depth of earth, withered and came to nothing, Math. 13.5,
6. The reason men do not bring forth the fruits of obedience, is, because they
have not depth of earth: they were never yet deeply humbled for sin: A proud
man will never obey; instead of trampling his sins under his feet, he tramples
Gods Laws under his feet. Jer. 43.3, 4. He who stoops in humility, is the
likeliest to put his neck under Christ's yoke: he that sees himself within an
inch of hell, asks the Jailors question, What must I do to be saved? Act.
16.30. What will not a condemned man do for a pardon?

2. Want of Practice, is for want of faith. Isa. 53.1. Who has believed our
report? This makes Sermons to be like showers of rain falling upon a rock,
they neither mollify, nor fructify, because men are in part infidels; they
had rather dispute then believe: such as live Scepticks die Atheists. Did men
believe sin were so bitter, that wrath and hell followed it, would they take
this serpent into their bosom? Did they believe there were a beauty in
holiness; did they believe godliness were gain; that there were joy in the way,
and heaven at the end, would they not turn their feet into the way? Men have
some slight transient thoughts of these things, but their judgments are not
fully convinced, nor their conscience fully captivated into the belief of them.
This, this is Satan's masterpiece, his draw-net by which he drags millions to
hell by keeping them in infidelity; he knows if he can but keep them from the
belief of the truth, he is sure to keep them from the practice of it.

3. Men's backwardness to Practice, is from the difficulty of the practical
part of religion; it is easy to hear a truth, to give some assent, to commend
it, to make a profession of it; but to digest a truth into practice, this is
hard, and men are overgrown with sloth, they are loath to put themselves to too
much trouble; Prove. 19.15. Can men dig for gold, and not for the Pearl of
price? Can they take pains in the pursuing of their sins, and will they be at
no pains for the saving of their souls? I dare be bold to say, It costs many a
sinner more sweat and labor in toyling about his lusts, then it costs a Saint
in serving his God Impij quare strenue serviunt diabole! Cypr.
.

4. The World comes between and hinders: The thorns choke the seed of the Word.
Men practice so much in the world, that they have no time to practice better
things: the world is like a Mill, it makes such a noise in carnal hearts, that
it drowns the sound of Gods silver Trumpet. Men's affections are sometimes
kindled by the preaching of the word, and we begin to hope that the flame of
godliness will break forth in their lives, but then comes the earth and puts
out this fire; how many Sermons lie buried in earthly hearts? More die then are
put in the Bill of Mortality.

Oh that the want of Practice in this age were more laid to heart! This is a
Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation: many Professors are all ear; if we
should see a Creature made up of nothing but ear, it were a monster in nature;
how many such monsters are there in Christianity? They hear, and hear, and are
never the better; like the Salamander which lies in the fire, but as
Naturalists say, it is never the hotter.

Some satisfy themselves with the having of Ordinances. Judge. 17.13. Then said
Micah, Now know I that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my
Priest. But what is Physic if it be not applied? what is it to have the sound
of the word in our ears, unless we have the savor of it in our hearts? It will
be little comfort to men on their deathbeds, to think that Christ has been
preached in their streets, and they have been lifted up to heaven in Gospel
administrations, when their Consciences shall tell them they have been unholy
and unreformed; they have come into Gods House as the beasts did into the Ark;
they came in unclean, and went out of the Ark unclean.

Exhort.
There are three steps leading to heaven, Knowledge, Assent, Practice; it is not
the taking the two first steps, but the third step which will make you happy.
Obedience is the Grand precept both of the Law and Gospel; in this stands a
Christians duty, in this consists his felicity. 1 Samuel 15.22. To obey us better
than Sacrifice Per victimas aliena caro, per obedientiam vero propria voluntas
macta^ur.
. It Is grateful to God, it is graceful to a Christian. What is the excellency of
a thing but its practicalness and usefulness? what are the fine feathers of a
bird if it cannot sing? what is a plant though decked with leaves if it brings
not forth fruit? What is it we commend in an Horse, his eyes or his good
mettle? Cant. 5.5. My hands dropped with Myrrh. I may allude, not only a
Christians lips must drop knowledge, but his hands and his fingers must drop
Myrrh, that is, by working the works of obedience.

Let me use some Divine Motives to tempt Christians to the practique part of
godliness.

1. Gospel-obedience is an evidence of sincerity; as our Joh. 10.25. The works
which I do, bear witness of me. Though never man spoke like Christ, yet when he
comes to put himself upon a trial, he will not be judged by his words, but by
his works, they bear witness of me; so it is not a Christians golden words, but
his works which testify of him; Psalm. 119.59. I have turned my feet unto thy
statutes. David did not only turn his ears to Gods Testimonies, but he turned
his feet to them, he walked in them: we judge not of the health of a man's body
by his high color, but by the pulse of the arm where the blood chiefly
operates: so we judge not of a Christians soundness by his knowledge or high
expressions; what is this high color? Saul may be among the Prophets; but the
estimate of a Christian is to be taken by his obediential actings toward God.

2. To be practitioners in Religion will not only do

1. It will honor Religion; the Gospel may be compared to a beautiful Queen;
the fruitful lives of Professors are so many jewels that do adorn this Queen,
and make her shine forth in greater glory and magnificence; what a honor was
it to godliness when the Apostle could say, the faith of the Romans was
trumpeted abroad in every place! Romans 1.8. I thank my God that your faith is
spoken of throughout the whole world. That is, faith flourishing into
obedience; 1 These. 1.2, 3. We give thanks to God for you, remembering your work
of faith, and labor of love. Christians should be ambitious to keep up the
credit of Religion.

2. The practice of those truths we know, will much propagate Religion;
Practice is the best Syllogism and Argument we can use to prevail with others;
this will confirm them in the truth of Religion. The Emperor Jovinian said to
the Orthodox, and Arrian Bishops, I cannot judge of your Doctrine, but I can
judge of your lives; their practice would preach loudest. If others see us make
a profession, and yet live in a contradiction to what we profess; if they hear
Jacobs voice, but see Esaus hands, they will think Religion is but a devout
complement, a severe policy; why does the Father forbid his Children to swear,
when he himself swears? would you gain many Proselytes to Religion? be doers of
the Word; say as Abimilech to his fellows, Judge. 9.48. What ye have seen we do,
make have and do as I have done. Would ye be as load-stones to draw your
children and servants to heaven; set upon the practice of holiness. Basil
observes, that Julian in one of his Epistles writing to Arsatius, says that
the Christian Religion did much flourish by the sanctity and liberality of them
who professed it.

Joh. 14.21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that
loves me. We use to say, If you love me, do such a thing. This me thinks
should be a great Argument to obedience; by the love ye bear to Jesus Christ,
obey his Word. Every man would be thought to love Christ; I but try your love
by this touchstone; Are ye cast into a Gospel-mould? do you obey? It is a vain
thing for a man to say he loves Christ's person, when he slights his commands
Qui Dei praecepta contemnit, Deum non diligi^; neque enim principem veneramur
si odi^ ejus leges habemus. Isidor.
.

4. Without practice you will come short of them who have come short of heaven:
Herod did many things, Mar. 6.20. (...), he was in many things a practiser of
John's Ministry. Those who rest in the speculative part of Religion, are not so
good as Herod.

5. What unspeakable comfort will obedience yield

1. In life; is it not a comfort to a man when he has been casting up his
Accounts and finds that he has gained in his Trade? you come hither in the use
of Ordinances, Word, and Prayer, to trade for heaven; now if ye find upon a
true account that ye have gained in the Trade of godliness, and are filled with
the fruits of the Spirit, will not this be a great comfort to you? he who is
full of good works, God will gather the fruit, and bless the Tree.

2. Obedience gives comfort at death; what a joy was it to St. Paul when he
came to die, that he could make that sweet appeal, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have kept the
faith! that is, Paul had kept the Doctrine of Faith, and had lived the life of
faith. Oh with what comfort may a Christian lay his life down, when he has
laid his life out in the service of God! This was a deathbed Cordial to King
Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee how I have walked before
thee in truth. A man may repent of his fruitless knowledge, but never did any
man repent of his obedience when he came to die; never did any Christian who is
going to rest with God, repent that he had walked with God.

6. What is the end of all Gods administrations but obedience? what are all
Gods Promises but persuasions to obedience? what is the end of all Gods
threatenings which stand as the Angel with a flaming sword in their hand, but to
drive us to obedience! Deuteronomy. 11.28. A curse if ye will not obey. What is the
voice of mercy but to call us to duty? the Father gives his child money to
bribe him to ingenuity. The fire under the Still makes the Roses drop; the fire
of Gods mercies is to make the sweet water of obedience distill from us; mercy
(as Ambrose says) is a medicine which God applies to us to cure our
barrenness: what are all the examples of Gods justice upon non-proficients, but
allarums to awaken us out of the bed of sloth, and put us into a posture of
service? Gods rod upon others is a Fescue to point us to obedience; if God has
not his end in respect of duty, we cannot have our end in respect of glory.

7. Motive; consider what a sin disobedience is; that is a sad Scripture, Jer.
44.16. As for the word thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will
not do.

Disobedience is

1. A sin against Reason; are we able to stand it out in defiance against God?
1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he? it
is as if the thorns should set them selves in battle array against the fire;
will the sinner go to measure arms with the great God? what Solomon says of
laughter, Eccles. 2.2. the same may be said of Rebellion, it is mad.

2. Disobedience is a sin against Equity: we have our subsistence from God, in
him we live and move; and is it not equal that as we live upon him, we should
live to him? justitia jus suum cuique tribuit; is it not just and fitting that
as God gives us our allowance, we should give him our allegiance? If the
General give his Soldier pay, the Soldier is to march at his command, not
only by the Law of Arms, but the Law of equity.

3. Disobedience is a sin against Conscience; God by Creation is our Father, so
that Conscience binds to duty: Mal. 1.6. If then I be a Father, where is my
honor?

4. Disobedience is a sin against our Vows: We have taken the oath of
Allegiance. Thy vows are upon me O God, Psalm. 65.12. We have many vows upon us;
our Baptismal vow, our Sacramental, our National, our Sickbed vows; here are
four cords to draw us to obedience, and if we slip these Sacred Knots, and cast
these cords from us, will not God come upon us for Perjury? If oaths will not
bind us, God has chains that will.

5. Disobedience is a sin against our Prayers. We pray, Thy will be done: So
that by Non-obedience we confute our selves, and live in a contradiction to our
own prayers. That man who is self-confuted, is self-condemned.

6. Disobedience is a sin against Kindness. It Is a disingenious sin: it is a
kicking against Gods bowels, a despising the riches of his goodness, Romans 2.4.
Therefore the Apostle links these two sins together, 2 Timothy 3.2. (...)
Disobedient, Unthankful: and this dies a sin of a Crimson color. One calls
ingratitude, The Seminary of sin Pet. Crinitus l. 2. Poem.
. It is an epitomizing sin. Brutus his unkindness went deeper to Caesar's heart,
than the stab. -- Ingratus hoc unum benefacit cum perit. --.

7. Disobedience is a sin against Nature. Every creature in its kind obeys
God. 1. Animate creatures obey him. God spoke to the Fish to set Jonah ashore,
and it did it presently, Jonah 2.10. What are the Birds thankful Hymms (as
Ambrose calls them) but tributes of obedience?

2. Inanimate creatures obey God. The Stars in their course fought against
Cisera. Judge. 5. The Wind and the Sea obey him. Mar. 4.41. The very Stones if
God give them a Commission, will cry out against the sins of men. Hab. 2.11.
The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it. If men should be silent, the stones would in some manner have
testified of Christ. Luke 19.40. At Christ's Passion the Rocks did rend. Mat.
27.51. Which tearing Rhetorique was a voice to tell the world that the Messiah
was now crucified. Shall every creature obey God but man? O Christian, think
thus with thy self; if God had made me a stone, I should have obeyed him; and
now that he has made me rational, shall I refuse to obey? This is against
Nature. There are none that disobey God but Man and the Devil, and can we find
none to join with but the Devil?

8. Disobedience is a sin against Self-preservation 1 Pet. 4.17.
. Disloyalty is treason, and by treason the sinner is bound over to the wrath
of God. 2 These. 1.7, 8. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them who obey not the
Gospel. He that refuses to obey Gods will in Commanding, shall be sure to obey
his will in Punishing. The sinner while he thinks to slip the Knot of
Obedience, twists the Cord of his own Damnation. Thus ye have seen the sin of
Disobedience set out in its bloody colors: Be wise now therefore O ye Kings,
be instructed ye Judges of the earth; serve the Lord with fear; Kiss the Son
left he be angry. Kiss Christ with a kiss of love; Kiss him with a kiss of
loyalty; When his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put
their trust in him, Psalm. 2. ult.

9. The Benefit of obedience. Psalm. 19.11. In keeping his precepts there is
great reward. Obedience is Crowned with happiness; So says the Text, happy are
ye, etc. If this argument will not prevail, what will?

Quest. But what happiness?

Answ. All kind of blessings are poured upon the head of Obedience, as the
precious oil was poured on Aarons head.

1 Temporal blessings. Deuteronomy. 28.3, 4, 9. Blessed etc. If thou shall keep the
Commandments of the Lord thy God, etc. He that has a fruitful Heart, shall
have a fruitful Crop. God will make him to thrive in his Estate: And his basket
shall not only be full, but blessed. God will bless what he has. Here is not
only the Sack full of corn, but money in the mouth of the Sack.

2. Spiritual blessings. Exodus 19.5. If ye will obey my voice indeed, then ye
shall be a peculiar Treasure to me, above all people. You shall be my Portion,
my Jewels, the Apple of my eye; I will give Kingdoms for your ransom. Jer.
7.23. Obey, and I will be your God. I will make over my self to you by a deed
of gift. What a Superlative distinguishing mercy is this! Psalm. 14.4. Happy is
that people whose God is the Lord.

3. Eternal blessings. Heb. 5.9. Christ became the author of Eternal salvation,
to all them that obey him: It is a salvation that bears date to eternity: Oh
then, who would not be in love with obedience! while we please God, we pleasure
our selves. (...). Homer. II.
We are ready to say as Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.9. But what shall we do for the
hundred Talents? Ye see brethren, you are no losers by Obedience; who did ever
kindle a fire on Gods Altar for naught? Mal. 1.10.

3. I shall lay down some Rules to help Christians in Direction.
that it may be the Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God.

Obedience must have these four Ingredients in it.

It must be cordial, Deutr. 26.16. The Lord thy God has commanded thee to do
these statutes, thou shall therefore keep and do them with all thy heart. (...)
Romans 6.17. Ye have obeyed from the heart Obedienta non servili metu sed cordis
affectu servanda, non timore poenae sed amorae justitiae.
. Obedience without the heart is like fire on the Altar without Incense. The
heart is the seat of Love, and it is Love perfumes every duty. The heart makes
service a Freewill offering, else it is but a tax: Cain brought his sacrifice,
not his heart; it was rather a mulct than an Offering: Without the heart our
Religion is like the Angels assuming dead bodies; those bodies did eat, and
drink, and walk, but they had no soul to animate them. They did movere, not
vivere: how many do but assume the duties of Religion; Obedience without the
heart is hypocrisy. How can thou say I love thee, when thy heart is not with
me? Judge. 16.15.

2. Obedience must be extensive, it must reach to all Gods Commandments, 1
King. 9.4. Luke 1.6.

Quest. But who can arrive at this?

Answ. Though we cannot keep all Gods Commandments Legally, yet we may
Evangellically: A good Christian

1. Consents to the equity of the whole Law; Romans 7.12. The Law is holy, and
just, and good: he sets his seal to every Law.

2. He does make conscience of every Law: David had respect to all Gods
Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. his eye was upon all; every command has such
authority upon a Christian, that he knows not how to dispense with it; though
he fail in every duty, yet he dares not neglect any duty.

3. A child of God desires to keep every command; Psalm. 119.5. O that my ways
were directed to keep thy statutes. what a child of God wants in strength, he
makes up in will; Romans 7.18. To will is present. The regenerate Will stands
bent to all Gods Precepts.

4. The gracious soul mourns that he can do no better; when he fails, he weeps:
O wretched man that I am, Romans 7.24. O this unbelieving heart! how am I clogged
with corruption! The good I would, I do not. Thus does a Child of God lament
his failings, and judge himself for them, and this is in a Gospel sense to keep
every Law.

Unsound hearts as they are slight in their obedience, so they are partial;
some duty they will dispense with, some sin they will indulge, in this thing
the Lord pardon thy servant, 1 King. 5.18. The Hypocrite will walk in some of
Gods statutes, not in all, like a foundred Jade that will not set all his feet
upon the ground, but favors one foot: Such foundered Christians there are, who
halt, and limp, and favor themselves in some things, though it be to the
hazard of their souls; Herod could as well die as leave his Incest. True
obedience is universal as the Papists say, we owe to our Mother the Church, an
Unlimited subjection; its true here, we owe to our God Unlimited obedience.

3. The third Ingredient into obedience is Faith; Heb. 11.6. Without faith it
is impossible to please God. therefore it is called the obedience of faith,
Romans 16.26. Abel is said by faith to offer up (...), abetter sacrifice than
Cain. -- Sacra solet magnis rebus inesse fides. Faith is a vital principle,
without it all our services are dead Sicut in arbore quicquid pulchritudinis
inest, ex radice proficiscitus, ita in anima quicquid decorum, ex fide. Aug.
. Therefore the Scripture speaks of dead works, Hebr. 6.1.

But why must this silver thread of faith run through the whole work of
obedience?

I answer, because faith looks at Christ in every duty, and so both the person
and offering is accepted: Ephesians. 1.6. He has accepted us in the beloved. We
are not accepted through our duties, but through the beloved: Faith looks at
the Merit of Christ to take away the guilt; and the Spirit of Christ to take
away the filth which cleaves to the most angelical services, thus it procures
acceptance.

The High Priest under the Law looked at Christ in all; when he offered up the
Sacrifice, he laid his hand upon the head of the beast slain, which did point
at the Messiah, Exodus 29.10. So Faith lays its hand in every Gospel-sacrifice
upon the head of Christ; his Blood does cleanse, and the sweet Odours of his
Intercession do perfume our holy things. Now Faith looking up to Christ in
every Duty, finds acceptance.

Nay, Faith does not only look at Christ, but it unites to Christ, as the Siens
is graffed into the stock. Believers are part of Christ; Christ and the Saints
make one body Mystical; no wonder then if God casts a favorable aspect upon
those services which Believers present to him.

4. Obedience must be constant; Revel. 2.26 He that keeps my works unto the
end, to him will I give the morning star.

Faith must lead the Van, and Perseverance must bring up the Rear: There is a
(...), something still remaing for a Christian to do, Non currenti sed vincenti
datur corona. Aug.
and he must not leave work till the night of death comes on.

Mnason of Cyprus an old Discilple, Acts 21.16. what an honor is it for one to
be gray headed in Religion? what a credit when it shall be said of him, His
last works are better than his first! Revel. 2.19. A good Christian is like
wine full of spirits which is good to the last drawing. A Limner makes his last
work more complete and curious: blessed is that man who the nearer he is to
death, moves swifter to the heavenly Center.

FINIS.
THE TABLE Alphabetical.
A.
ABusers of their souls, page 462 Acceptance through Christ, 422 Adoption,
wherein it consists, 291 Afflictions no sign of Gods anger, 321, 322
Afflictions light, 395 Angels in some sense inferior to Saints, 319 Anger
opposite to meekness, 133 Appearance of sin to be avoided, 242 Appearing of
Christ, 579 Arguments to brotherly love, 618 Assurance to be labored after, p.
437 Assurance though feisible, yet difficult to be attained, 440 It is useful,
441 How this jewel of assurance may be had. 442

B.
BAlm of Gilead, 490 Beauty of grace, 511 Blessedness in reversion, 17 Wherein
blessedness does not consist, 18 Wherein it does consist, 24 Believe a
blessedness to come, 27 The godly in some sense blessed in this life, 31, 32
Blood of Saints precious, 317
C.
Cheerfulness, 588 Childship a state of freedom, 332 Children of God, 290, 291
They labor to make others Gods Children, 310 They have boldness in Prayer,
331 All things turn to their gaod, 335 They shall never finally perish, 338
They should endeavor to carry themselves as Children, 343
Christ the best of Preachers, 2 Christ our Righteousness, 421 Christ a most
transcendent blessing, 432 Christ a soul-Physitian, 485 Why a Physician? 486
The best Physician, 493
Christ's love to his Patients, 495 Christ can cure a relapse, 504 Christianity
no disgraceful thing, 60 The nature of Christianity, 363 Christians should
shine forth in their Relations, 594 Comforts belonging to mourners in this
life, 108, 111 In the life to come, p. 125
Commands of God not grievous, 402 Concatenation of the Graces, 38 Conversation
must be pure, 246 Covetousness a multiplying sin, 234, 235
D.
DAnger of despair, 98, 99 Dangerous to fancy sin less than it is, 101 Deceit
of the heart, 538, 539 Dead in sin, healed by Christ, 498 Debt of love
differs from other debts, 624 Degrees of fruit, 607 Deriding holiness, a fatal
sin, 237 Desertion, 323 Differences between true and false desires, 194, 195
Differences between the Christian race and other, 559 Divisions dangerous, 626
E.
EMissaries of Satan, 8 Examples of meekness, 143 Excellency of grace, 516
Excellency of the mourners comfort, 113 Exhortation ton to mutual love, p. 627
F.
FAith in our heavenly Physiitian, 505 Faith makes us Children, 952 Faith a
suffering grace, 381 How faith enables to suffer, 382
Fences about the heart, 550 Fear an enemy to suffering, 370 Fickleness of the
heart, 540 Flesh not to be listened to, 371 Forethoughts of sufferings, 366
Forgiving of injuries, 138 Forsaking of sin may have its deceits, 241
Fruitfulness, 591 Fruit in the season, 595 Exhortation to fruitfulness, 604
Fullness of Christ, 417
G.
GOod Conscience, 373 Glory proportioned to the service we do for God. 65 Godly
have cause to long for death, 61 Gospel-precepts facill compared with the
severity of the Law, 409 Grace severally taken in Scripture, 512 Grace not
bestowed on all, p. 514 Grace quickneth the soul 516 Grace enricheth, 517 Grace
adorneth, 518 Grace a Spiritual perfume, 520 Grace the ballast of the soul, 523
Grace fits for glory, 523, 524 How grace is to be obtained, 526

H.
HArdness of heart dangerous, 87 Heart-custody, 529 Heart kept with all kind of
keeping, 531 At all times, 534
Heart the Fountain of our actions, 541 Motives to heart-custody, 552
Hindrances of the success of the Word, 9, 10 Honor of Gods children, 315
Honor to suffer for Christ, 391 Hope of a Christian, 576 Hope and Faith
differenced, 577 Signs of a true hope, 583
How Christ heals, 489 Hunger of the soul described, 153 A reproof of those who
have no spiritual hunger, 156 Who hunger after unrighteousness, 160 Signs of
Spiritual hunger, 162 Helps to spiritual hunger, p. 170
Hungry shall be filled, 172, 173
I.
IMpure hearts deciphered, 229, 230 Interest in Christ to be labored after,
431 Joys of heaven resembled to a feast, 116
K.
KEeping the heart, 531 Kingdom of heaven excells other Kingdoms, 56, 57 How we
may know we belong to it, 62 Thoughts of this Kingdom sweetens poverty, 66
Knowledge alone will not make a man happy, 633, 634
L.
LIfe to be denied for Christ, 377 Loss of the soul foolish, 464. Fatal, 465
Love of God in making us his children, 313 Love to be centred on Christ, 445
Love to Gods Children, 307 Love of the world an enemy to suffering, 369 Love
among Christians, 616, 617
M.
MAlice mental murder, 134 Manner of the Spirits comforting, p. 111, 112 Manner
of our seeing God in heaven, 259 Means of a Spiritual cure, 507 Meekness what
it is, 132 Motives to meekness, 145, 146 Directions for meekness, 152
Mercifulness, 180, Mercifulness to men's souls, 183 Names, 188, Estates, 193
Offenses, 194 Wants, 195 Exhortat^^n to mercifulness, 206 Motives to
mercifulness, 210 Rules about showing mercy, 218
Ministers must take all opportunities for soul-service, 6 Ministers Seedsmen,
7 Their dignity, 12
Ministers under the torrid zone of persecution, 354 What need there is of
Ministers in the Church, 477
Misery of a Christless person, 428 Mourners are blessed, 67 Sin the object of
mourning, 69 What is not the right mourning for sin, 70 What is the right
mourning, p. 72
Mourn for the sins of others, 80 For the miseries of the Church, 82 Seasons of
mourning, 83 Degrees of mourning, 85 Motives to mourning, 91 Hindrances of
mourning, 98 Helps to mourning, 106

N.
NAmes of others not to be wronged, 188, 189 Nicities in Religion too much
minded, 159 This discovers want of appetite, ibid.

O.
OBjections of sinners answered, 501, 502 Opposites to meekness, 133 Opposite
to mourning, 86 Ordination needful for Preachers, 4, 5, 6 Outward things not
suitable to the soul, 20 Not durable, 21

P.
PAssions to be watched over, 548 Patience abused grows furious, 105 Patience a
Christians Armor of proof, p. 386 Peaceable mindedness, 269 Motives to it, 277
Peacemakers blessed, 285 People to encourage their Ministers, 14, 15
Persecution, 347 Why it must be, 351, 352 What that persecution is which will
not make a man blessed, 358 What that is will make him blessed, 359 A reproof
to such as refuse to suffer persecution, 364 To such as inflict persecution,
365 How to prepare for persecution, 368
Persecution cannot hinder blessedness, 397 Poverrty of spirit, 41 How poverty
of spirit differs from humility, 42 How from self-denial, ibid. Why Christians
must be poor in spirit, 43 Signs of poverty of Spirit, 47
Practice of Religion makes us happy, 638 What it is hinders practice, 642
Pretiousness of the soul, 451 Pride of spirit dangerous, 45 Privileges of
Gods Children, 320 Procrastination dangerous, 103 Promises made to suffering,
p. 388 Purity of heart, 222 Why we must be pure, 224 Why the heart must be, 226
Purity the souls beauty, 227 Signs of a pure heart, 238 An exhortation to
peart- purity, 248 Means for heart- purity, 254

R.
REasons why mourners want comfort, 122, 123 Reasonings of the flesh dangerous,
379 Recompencing good for evil, 140, 141 Regarding iniquity, what it is, 231
Regeneration, 301 Rejoicing in Christ, 448 Religion a Race, 554 Reproof to be
taken kindly, 479 Reverence in Gods worship, 245 Rewards for Christ's Martyrs,
399 Righteousness what it implies, 154 Righteous person who, 368
S.
SAints perseverance, 524 Saints glorified are Kings, 53 Scandals. p. 415.
Self-denial needful for suffering, 375 Scripture to be resorted to, 374 Signs
of Gods Children, 298 Signs of sincerity, 238 Sins commands grievous. 411 Sin a
deadly evil, 106 Sin a soul desease, 469 How resembled to sickness, 469, 470
Sin the worst sickness, 475 Sick souls think themselves well, 481 The reasons
of that mistake, 482
Sin spreads over the whole soul, 470, 471 Sin a spiritual sleep, 545 Soul more
precious than a world, 458 Spirit of Adoption, a Spirit of supplication, 302,
303 Sufferings of Christ, 392 Suffering-graces, 381
T.
TEaching, 330 Tears precious, 92 Tenderness of heart, 299 Thankfulness for
Christ, 450 Thoughs to be watched over, 549 Tongue-persecution 350 Torments of
the damned unexpressably grievous, 412 Trial of grace, p. 526 Truth to be
prized, 373
V.
VAnity of the Creature, 425 Vindication of the Church of England, 200 Vision
of God in heaven glorious, 260 It will be speedy, 264
Unbelief how great a sin, 233 Unfruitfulness, 600 Unmercifulness reproved, 203
Unworthiness should not keep us from Christ, p. 501
W.
WAant of love reproved, 625 Watchfulness needful in prosperity, 537 Witness of
the Spirit, 305 Word of God healing, 489 Works commendable, 201
Z.
Zeal, 305
FINIS.

