VOX CHARITATIS: CONTAINING A LOUDER CRY For Bowels of Compassion, to the
Lord's Poor Afflicted People.

With a Word of COUNSEL and COMFORT to Them; and a Concluding Word to their
OPPRESSORS.

By a true lover of His truly Sacred Majesty, and all his Faithful Subjects.

Open thy Mouth for the Dumb, in the Cause of all such as are appointed to
Destruction. Open thy Mouth, Judge Righteously, and plead the Cause of the Poor
and Needy, Prove. 31.8, 9. Turn ye unto him from whom the Children of Israel
have deeply revolted, Isa 31.6. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not
see; but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy toward thy People: yea,
the Fire of thine Enemy shall devour them, Isa 26.11. Printed in the Year, 1663.

VOX CHARITATIS: Containing a louder Cry, for Bowels of Compassion to the Lords
Poor Afflicted People.
WE are informed by the Lord, Gal. 6.7. that it will not be as we show; but as
we sow, so shall we reap: and in the second and third verse, are esteemed
nothing, if we bear not one another Burdens; that is to say, If we feel them
not, as if they were on our selves, to help to make them light and easy to him
on whom they are; by putting under our helping hand, to enable him to bear
them; not knowing how soon our selves also (who are in the Body) Heb. 13.3. may
have our own burden, Gal. 6.5. and need the helping hand of others; and as a
Conclusion, verse. 10. we are required to do good to all, especially the
Household of Faith. And indeed, Job esteemed his Friends nothing, that saw his
casting down, and were afraid, Job 6.21. or were not ashamed to make themselves
strange to him, Job 19.3. Now regard to the Poor (especially the poor of God's
People) is required, with more plenty of Promises, and upon more perils in the
neglect thereof, than any act of a Christian besides; and the Lord's distressed
Ones, are called His Poor, Psalm. 72.2. and 74.19. He styles himself (in
especial manner) The Father of the Poor, the Widow, and Fatherless, in his
Holy Habitation, Psalm. 98.5. and has espoused their cry, especially in cases
of wrong, or neglect of them, Exodus 22.22, 23. Ezekiel. 16.49. -- And indeed, the
People of the Lord especially, are in this day exposed to greatest poverty, by
ways scarce heard of; in a Land where Righteousness was pretended, but as when
there was no King in Israel, Judge. 17.6. And as in all times (for many Reasons)
they ought to have the preference in Christian Alms before any, so in this day
more than ever; for other poor as they have latitudes in their Nature, so have
opportunities now to attend at the door of the belly-gods, who now abound (as
Sodom) in their sensual Festivals; and such poor are now (many of them)
transformed into Scullions, Players, Singing-boyes, Priests, Sub-Priests,
Parators, Informers, Jaylers, Trapanners, and such like retinue: Others of them
also, having generally their liberty of getting their lively-hoods, as their
more civil Genius may incline; which latter sort (whose honest Callings may not
yet with the utmost labor obtain a livelihood) as they are also the Subjects
of Christian Charity; so they either have or can claim, and have the advantage
of those constant Parish Impositions, Public Collections and Allowances for
the Poor, throughout the Land, which the Lords Poor, are most of them (beyond
their Ability) compelled to pay to, and few of them (how poor soever) are
sharers of; besides, the other poor (in extraordinary Case) can have their
Briefs, Admissions of their Widows and Fatherless into Schools and Hospitals,
and other special Donations: But, who sees not the Lords Poor broken in pieces,
and driven from their former Callings, and comfortable Societies (wherein they
were cared for and supported) without the helps aforesaid; now under the evil
eye of almost any evil Beast in all the Land: And who is so much a stranger in
Israel, as not to see that any of the other poor crew aforesaid, or others (how
profane or inconsiderable soever) may malice his poor Neighbor (who fears
the Lord, by almost any impertinent information) into the Goal? where then his
Calling is interrupted; and what ever his poor Family suffers at home, the mind
of his hungry Jailer must be fed, with more in a week by Fees and Usury, for
his poor Diet and Lodging, than perhaps he knew how to get for his Wife and
Children in a Month before; and it may be six months there, before he may be
heard, and so doubtly robbed, both of his Calling, and the little Meal he had
in the Barrel; Yea, perhaps when heard, he appears before such cruel Judges, as
shall strengthen his Chain (though he be cleared in the Matter whereof he was
first accused) if he answer not their humor, to some Absurd, Illegal,
Extemporary Question, in the Breast, either of the unjust Judge, or by means of
any malicious Justice, or stander by, though the first false Informer against
him, (viz.) Have you taken the Oath of Obedience? What Church are you of? Are
you a fifth Monarchy-man? Will you leave Preaching, or going to Meetings, or
the like? Or if he be released, perhaps he has no sooner settled himself again
to his honest Calling, but is in like cruel manner interrupted, to the loss of
his custom, and discouragement of him to settle, if he should be delivered;
neither can he conscientiously become a Servant, or any Master so comfortably
employ or depend upon him; because perhaps at the next Meeting to Worship his
God (which is deservedly dearer to him than his Life) he is again snatched from
the Affairs depending upon him, which are then all at a stand. And for proof of
these intolerable Sufferings of the Lords poor People, London it self may be a
looking-glass into the Land; and by it, you may guess How the dark places of
the Earth, are full of the Habitations of Cruelty, Psalm. 74.20. When in the
chief City, even under the eye of the Chief, the imperious insolences of some
are such, and so boundless, that many thousand Families, its thought, have
been brought to beggary hereby. And many have deserted their Vocations, as
thinking themselves most unhappy, to have served seven years, to be free of
little in the chief City of the Land, but slavery to Subjects: Left now so
free, in absurd and boundless insolency, by which, still poverty increases,
and the cry of the poor oppressed ones, as it goes up daily before God, so it
should enter into our Souls; for God has so commanded us, and we know not how
evil the day may be, and therefore says Solomon, Eccles. 11.2. Give a Portion
to seven, and also to eight. And verse. 1. Cast thy Bread upon the Waters, for
thou shall find it after many Days. The Blessings of him that was ready to
perish, come upon me, says Job, Job 29.13. It was well for Dorcas, that the
poor Widows could show to Peter the Coats she had made for them, Acts 9.39.
Blessed is he that considers the Poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble, etc. Psalm. 41.2, 3. He that has pity to the Poor, lends to the
Lord, Prove. 19.17. And that which he has given, will he pay him again; he
shall be repaid with interest indeed: for it is a Sacrifice so acceptable, and
well-pleasing, that in return to the Philippians, who had sent twice to Paul,
even to Thessalonica, to supply his necessity, Phil. 4.16. He says, verse. 19.
My God shall supply all your need, etc. The Lord show mercy to the House of
Onisiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my Chain, 2 Timothy
1.16, 17. And whosoever (says Christ) shall give to drink unto one of these
little ones, a cup of cold Water only, in the Name of a Disciple, verily I say
unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward, Mat. 10.42. For at the great day
of Reckoning, the Lord will esteem your Meat, Drink, Lodging, Clothing, and
visits of his Hungry, Thirsty, Pilgrim, Naked, Sick, and imprisoned Ones, as
done to him, Mat. 25.35. etc. and the contrary will be cursed, verse. 41. For I
was an Hungry, and ye gave me no Meat, etc. But such as consider the Poor, are
pronounced happy, Prove. 14.21. He that gives to the poor shall not lack, Prove.
28.27. and the Righteous does consider them, Prove. 29.7. who yet perhaps, may
need an exhortation to be more enquiring after those that are at a distance
from them in this evil day; and like the Hebrews, show more labor of love
herein. Heb. 6*10* making it more your business, as the Churches of Macedonia,
2 Cor. 8.2, 3, 4. Who to their power, yea, and beyond their power (were
commended herein) as willing; and according as the merciful Man, Psalm. 112.5.
so to order your affairs with discretion, as that you may be ever merciful and
lending. Oh! how many a profuse dish of Meat, and other extravagancies, which
(in such times especially) may be sin to provide, etc. Isa. 22.13. Exodus 33.4.
Ezekiel. 21.10. Prove. 23.20. might be profitably laid aside for the poor? Oh! that
we might not be by fits in this work, seeing the Poor are with us; and lest, as
Deuteronomy. 15.11. yea, increased daily, perhaps for trial of our love unfeigned to
the Lord a little season, who will shortly rid them out of their distress; but
that in giving, there might be a true respect unto their need, Deuteronomy. 15.8. He
that has a bountiful eye, shall be blessed; for he gives of his bread to the
poor, Prove. 22.9. As the good Samaritan, Luke 10.33, 34, 35. who interrupted
his Journey, employed his Pains, Skill, Purse, and Credit too, wholly to free
the poor stranger out of his misery, when the Priest and Levite (that professed
more) neglected him: which pattern of pity to our Neighbor, the Lord
commends to us, verse. 37. as our standing example, when great Professors
fail: and himself our Pattern; who, though he was Rich, for our sakes became
Poor, 2 Cor. 8.9. Wherefore I beseech you, put on bowels as the Elect of God;
give not according to the broken fragments of money you have about you, but
learn rather obedience to that Word of the Lord, Luke 12.33. Sell that you
have, and give Alms. Oh! how far are rich Professors from following the Lord
herein, who among them has voluntarily lessened the yearly value of his Lands
(in Obedience to the Lord of all) in this? Oh! that verse. 34. may not conclude
most rich Professors Treasure, to be only earthly: For where your Treasure is,
there will your hearts be also. But, alas! How dwells the Love of God in him
who has this Worlds goods, and sees his Brother need, and shuts up his
Bowels of Compassion? Oh! tremble Rich Professors, If (in your expense upon
your selves) you are not so grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.6.
how can you face the aforesaid Word, in 1 John 3.17. with Peace, and shut up
your Bowels to your poor Perishing Brethren? Who shall trust such Stewards,
with the true Riches, Luke 16.11. who deny the Lord, the faithful employing the
unrighteous Mammon? Profess what you will, you are nothing, if you be so
unnatural as not to bear the burdens of your distressed Brethren, Gal. 6.2, 3.
Do you pass on the other side, and hide your eyes like the Priest and Levite,
from the poor Object in necessity? The compassionate Samaritan shall shame you
in the Day of (...) you at such a time ( Dives-like) fare deliciously, and
cloth your self gorgiously, and stop your ears at the cry of the poor? you
also shall cry your selves, and shall not be heard, Prove. 21.13. Yea, is it not
come to pass in part upon you already, as Zech. 7.13. (compared to verse. 9.)
for this very thing? And will not yet your danger be, as Ezekiel. 8.18? And though
they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them. Is not this
the fast that I have chosen, to loose the Bands of Wickedness; to undo the
heavy burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free? and that you break every
Yoke? Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor
that are cast out to thy house? When thou see the naked, that thou cover him,
and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh; then shall thy light
break forth, etc. Isa 58.6, 7, 8. Then shall thou call, and the Lord will
answer; thou shall cry, and he will say, Here I am, verse. 9. And if thou draw
out thy Soul to the hungry, and satisfy the Afflicted Soul, then shall thy
light rise in obsecurity, and thy darkness be as at noonday: And the Lord
shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in drought, etc. verse. 10,
11. But Oh rich Professor! Can thou not draw out thy Soul? Can thou not
sell a part of thy Land, nor spare of thy Goods? Are thy Bowels so shut to thy
poor Brother? Art thou rather ashamed of him in his Bonds? Can thou not send
to the Lord? Know then, Thou reproachest thy Maker, Prove. 14.31. He has little
credit with thee, while in this world; and thou shall be reproached by him for
ever, when he shall shut out thy cry. Oh! will thy fading Riches, whereof thou
art an unjust Steward, ( Luke 16.9, 10, 11.) stand thee in stead with thy
powerless Profession, when he shall require of thee an account of thy Talent?
and thou shall appear before him on the left hand, to hear him indict thee on
this wise, When I was an hungry, etc. Mat. 25.42, 43. But to such as through
Grace can trust the Lord, and honor him with their Substance, Prove. 3.9. I
hope I need now say no more then exhort you, to do it in simplicity, Romans 12.8.
according to your ability, 1 Pet. 4.11. cheerfully, 2 Cor. 9.7. and as you have
opportunity, Gal. 6.10. which will not be long. And whilst the Lord, who gives
Seed to the Sower, and blesses the Seed sown, give you to reap bountifully, 2
Cor. 9.6. and bless your Seed sown, to the bringing the Blessings of many that
are ready to perish upon you, and raising up in the heart of the relieved
abundant thanksgiving to God in your behalf, 2 Cor. 9.12, 13. To that end, as
you are entreated for the Lords sake, to order your Affairs with Discretion,
avoiding all lavish expenses; every other way, to lay aside to your utmost
weekly, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. and labor to engage (to this use) by your earnest in
treaty (like the Macedonians) some, as neat as you can, like Paul, 2 Cor. 8.4.
and Titus, verse. 16. and such whose praise is in the Gospel, verse. 18. and such
who have often times proved diligent in many things, but now are much more
diligent, verse. 22. whose work it may be more naturally to mind, and as equally
as may be, administer your liberality, to the necessity of the innumerable
distressed; in wisdom, that one do not abound, whilst others perish. Oh! that
God would put it into the hearts of his Remnants every where, to employ all
their might herein; with correspondency, like to the Body whereof Christ is the
Head, 1 Cor. 12.26. 2 Cor. 11.29. That our Fasts may not be flung as dung in
our Faces; but with our acceptable Alms, come before him; and that the
Primitive Example aforesaid, and the solemn choosing seven men full of the Holy
Spirit, in one Congregation, Acts 6.3, 7. might so far add to the weightiness
of this affair, that there might be at least some such set a part, on the
behalf of the thousands of Precious Ones, ready to perish in the Land; that the
fierce anger of the Lord may not yet further kindle upon us, to the cursing our
Blessings, and we be extinct as Monsters, forgetting our own flesh; that under
so famous Profession, and frequent and fervent Prayer, suffered our fellow
Members to famish, whilst we had fullness; Which the Lord in Mercy prevent. Amen.

And now a Word to the Afflicted.
IN the time of adversity consider, is the Counsel given of the Lord, Eccles.
7.14. And indeed, till adversity, we are like the Prodigal, Luke 15. who came
not to himself, until he could not fill his belly with the Husks, verse. 16.
This Voice of the Lord calls now to the City, and the Man of Wisdom will know
his Name; hear the Rod, and who has appointed it, Mich. 6.9. The Visitations
of the Lord preserved Jobs Spirit, Job 10.12. and if that be not the Fruit, to
take away the sin, Isa. 27.9. there is too much cause to fear, whether such a
Professors Case be comprised in the New Covenant, Psalm. 89.32. and then his
Poverty, and his Riches, his Prison, and his Liberty, will be much a like,
under a Curse; and he will fall into the two extreme evils which Agar prayed
(and Solomon by the Spirit gave Counsel) against, Prove. 30.8. and 3.11. But if
the Lord please, I would ( Elihu-like) speak in the uprightness of my heart,
and utter knowledge clearly herein, Job 33.3.

I am very much persuaded, That the good Figs for their good, are come first
into captivity, Jer. 2.4, 5. By captivity I mean the variety of close
affliction, which the Lord immediately, or by cruel men, or any other way, has
brought them into, or bound them with, and by which he has brought them down
wonderfully; for so Job's various distress is called a Captivity, Job 42.10.
And now, whether Poor, in Prison, or both Robbed, Spoiled, or on the Bed of
Sickness; Banished or chased from thy dwelling, with the addition too (it may
be) of inward withdrawing, etc.

First, I desire that first of all, I may be accepted in imploring thy very
serious and diligent search, and self-examination, with assurance, that, that
word, Ezekiel. 14.23. is as true in thy case as ever, That God has not done
without cause, all that he has done unto thee; and that (still finding out the
cause) there will be no disposition to returning, but to self-justifying still,
as Mal. 3.8, 13.

Secondly, Till then the Commission for outward Judgments may continue, Lev.
26.40. 1 John 1.9. Prove. 28.13.

Thirdly, Insensibleness of the Cause, exposes to filthy-fretting, Numb.
14.23, 24. Prove. 19.3. but Aaron, when the Cause was showed him, held his
peace, Lev. 10.3. and so Mich. 7.9.

Fourthly, Till then, we cannot so fitly enjoy deliverance, Ezekiel. 16.63. and
36.31, 32.

Fifthly, This is a mean to deliver, when nothing else will do, Ezekiel. 7.16.
Isa. 57.9, 10, 15. Hos. 5.15. and 6.1. Ezekiel. 18.30.

Sixthly, Hereby God will be honored again, and his Name gloriously
vindicated, when thou shall seriously thus acknowledge thy offenses, Jer. 3.13.
Josh. 7.19. And for Helps herein, I beseech you,

First, Hearken to the voice of the present Rod, expounded by the Word, Psalm.
18.25. Hos. 8.3 and 10.4. Levit. 26.25. Mich. 6.9.

Secondly, Let no special excellency cause thee to overlook the Cause, Rev.
2.4, 5. and 14.20. much less when it may be with thee, as Rev. 3.1. Eli, Moses,
Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Asa, Jonah, David, etc. troubled themselves, and some of
them Israel, though they were eminent.

Thirdly, Begin at the Root, Ezekiel. 16.2. to. 15. and verse. 27.

Fourthly, Do not clear thy self, because men may in many things falsely accuse
thee, Job 40.2. to 6. and 42.1, 2. nor because men may in every thing commend
thee, 2 Cor. 10.18. Gal. 6.4. But,

Lastly, Above all, seek at the Throne earnestly, with a true disposition to
return, Lam. 3.40, 41. Jer. 29.12, 13, 14.

Know now assuredly, that the Prison or Captivity in which thou art, is God's
School or University, wherein he would show thee thy work, and the
transgression wherein thou have exceeded, Job 36.8, 9. -- For thy work then,
sure if thou art chosen to bear his Name, it is set down briefly in this single
Scripture, Mich. 6.8. and what does the Lord (...) quire of thee? but to do
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. Whereon I will not
enlarge impertinently, to swell my speech beyond the patience of the afflicted,
which perhaps his tribulation yet has nor effected; but expound, walking
humbly with thy God, by that explanation in James 4.7. where it is called, a
submitting unto God, that is, to his Counsel, to his Will, with a reverend
respect to all his advice and pleasure therein; contented with our condition,
turning to his Will, humbly and timely under his reproof. Now poor Soul, was
there not a day wherein Professors experienced happiness, whilst they walked so
humbly with their God? contented with Food and Raiment in the Work and Way of
God? living in the comfort of the Righteousness of Christ? in rich communion
with him? innocently abiding with him, as in the Case of Adulam, for his will
and work? cleaving to such as favored his Righteous Cause in truth? and
steering thy course by the straight Rule of his Counsel; not loving thy life in
comparison of his Precious Service, Cause and Gospel? and whether it was not
then better with thee? Did not all them that devoured thee offend? Jer. 2.3.
Do thou no^ yet say, It was then better with me then now? Hos. 2.7. Do not
yet hear the Lord lamenting over thee? as Psalm. 81.11. to 15. Oh that my people
had hearkened to me, etc. Do not yet know it is befallen thee, as Ephraim?
Hos. 13.1, 9. Can thou not remember where thou did lose thy Crown? that the
way in which Ephraim got gray hairs, Hos. 7.8. to the end, stole insensibly
upon thee? and when men gathered thee? John 15.6. when the present world was
embraced? 2 Timothy 4.10. Was there not a time wherein thou followedst God, as in
a Land which was not sown? Jer. 2.2. and thoughtst thou had gain enough in
God and Godliness? 1 Timothy 6.6. and thoughtst thou had enough of the world,
and could never get enough of God? and has not a time stolen upon thee,
wherein thou could never get enough of this world, but had enough of God?
When thou turnedst thy back upon the succesful victorious way of Faith, and
tryedst the Carnal way of sense ( like the Nations, Jer. 2.31.) in Pride and
Oppression staying thereon? Isa. 30.12, 13, 14. when the Word of the Lord grew
a burden to thee? Jer. 6.10, 11. when thou grewest zealous for thy utmost
portion of earthly things, and cold and indifferent in heavenly things? Then
thou may partly see thy work, and the transgression thou have exceeded. Have
thou not in thy fullness also fallen into Sodoms snare? Ezekiel. 16.49. Pride,
fullness of bread, etc. and been proud also of the Mountain or Temple of the
Lord, Jer. 7.4. under even the Nations transgressions? Was zeal for
Righteousness, and sense of others cry in simplicity of Soul, turned into
insensibleness of others sufferings, and satisfaction taken in self,
sensuality? then may thou cry (for a season at least) and not be heard, Prove.
21.13. Was successes abused, to advance thy (...) in provoking the Lord to
jealously? Deuteronomy. 32.6. by lightness in Worship, 1 Cor. 10.22. by breaking faith
with the Enemy, 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, 3. and oppressing thy Brethren too at the same
time, thinking to build Zion with blood, Mich. 3.10, 11. (wherefore it is now
plowed as a field, etc.) and to settle on the lees, Zeph. 1.12, 13. when thou
had gotten greatness and lands, Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12. blessing those that so
steered backward, Ps. 10.3. or at least not mourning over these, and such like
departings and evils, Ezekiel. 9.4. then is our work now best to be, as Eze. 7.16.
and 21.12. Ezr. 10.6. and to come to the Valley of Achor, stoning in our selves
and others these troubling transgressions; and to be humbled deeply, if the
Lord seem to give us a divorce, as Jer. 11.15. Hos. 2.15. And if any of you
have got riches, and not by right, and now leave them in the midst of your
days; or if you withheld, and it tends to penury, lay your hand on your
mouth, Jer. 17.11. Prove. 11.24. if by any hint thou see thy sickness, and thy
wound, do not do now as Hos. 5.13. Isa. 31.1. and 57.9. but try the good old
way following, wherein never any yet failed of finding effect, who attained to
it in truth, Deuteronomy. 4.29. Hos. 6.1. and 14.2, 3. Isa. 10.20. Jer. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
and 31.18, 19, 20. Ezra 10.2. Ezekiel. 7.16. For thus says the Lord God, the Holy
One of Israel, In returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and in
confidence shall be your strength, and ye would not; but ye said, no; for we
will flee upon Horses, etc. Isa. 30.15. But you will say to me, Who is he that
lives and sins not? have not all their faults? yea, yet let me say to thee,
the spots of the Lords people are of several sorts; and though all of them have
sinned, it is not safe (like the Hypocrite or time-server) to quit scores;
therefore with their reprovers to spare the troubling sin. All Israel had sin
in them, but Achans especially troubled Israel; therefore your Generation-sin
against Gods Holy and Righteous Cause in your hands, dishonouring it, and his
Holy Name, either by Oppression, grasping after the worlds greatness, wisdom or
riches: which was so weak before you, unbelief drawing back, bringing an evil
report upon the Promises; not delighting in, but despising the good Word and
Ways of the Lord; trusting in an Arm of flesh; lightly breaking Vows, and
Faith, with God and men; walking haughtily and loftily, whilst oppression and
violence continued and increased. Yea lastly, making Covenants with Hell and
Death, Isa. 28.18. that is, Carnal interests, for fear of danger; saying, The
time is not yet, and the Lord will neither do good nor evil, Zeph. 1.12. and
the like, are in the first place to be made close inquiry after, as troublers
of Israel, and causers of confusion. Yet also have those that have erred in
vision, and staggered in judgment, Isa. 28.7. limitting the Holy One to times,
instruments and ways of working, either for his People, or against his
Adversaries, which he removes as he sees good, Ezekiel. 16.50. though they should
be wholly free (through mercy) from that dethroning sin of making league with
cursed interests, through unbelief, as Isa. 28. yet have they much cause of
mourning, as having sinned both toward God greatly, and occasioned stumbling
to many, and to their own Souls. Yea, lastly, If God has given so much
integrity to any, as to preserve them from the raging power of all the first
black classes of public corruptions (which is much to be feared) yet if thou
have been proud of thine integrity, as Job 32.9. slighty in thy reproofs, as
Eli, 1* Sam. 2.14. exalting thy self as Moses, saying, Must we fetch water,
Number. 20.10. instead of sanctifying God; Yea, in the ostentation of Hezekiah,
Is. 39.2. may not God bring thee through Jobs furnace, to bring thee into his
abasement, Job 42.6. or make thy ears tingle as Eli with rebukes, 1 Samuel 3.13.
or bury thee in silence as Moses, Number. 34.5, 6. or make all that is in thy
house be carried into captivity, as Hezekiah, Isa. 39.6. but especially, if
Cain-like, thou have been glad in uncovering the nakedness of others; or Herod,
or Jehu-like have affected praise, 2 Kin. 10.16. Acts 12.23. or to have thy
name exalted; may not God pour contempt upon thee? Oh! that we might be united
in abasement, through the pouring down of the Spirit of Grace and supplication,
as Zach. 12.10, 11, 13. Observe these, that the house of Levi, Nathan and David
(which were most eminent for faithfulness to the Lord) shall yet see cause
enough (for their shortness made known to them in the light of the Spirit) to
mourn as deeply (it may be) as Sh^mei, who at first cursed the work of God, 2 Samuel 16.5. Yea truly, the Publican-like defiled One, or who may be too justly
styled the Apostate (that said, I will not, and after repented and went, Lu.
21.19.) shall be before many that have learned to say, Apostate at every word,
and walk not humbly with their God. On therefore! that as there may be
maintained an irreconcilable enmity to, and true mourning over, yea constant,
seasonable reprehension of every of the aforesaid evils; so also we might be
more in the Spirit of the Holy Reprover of Old, and in their humility for our
share of the evil, and shortness to prevent or cure it; which besides their own
inward corruptions, shamed them always before the Lord; and though kept
(through grace) from the public gross appearances of defilements in their day,
yet involved themselves in their confessions usually with the worst of the
Transgressors, Ezra 9.7. Ne. 9.33, 34. Da. 9.5. to 10, 13, 14. Isa. 24.16. and
6.5. Oh! how humbly do the Holy Angels appear in the perfect Will of God? Isa.
6.2. The snuffers of the Sanctuary, were to be of pure gold, Exodus 37.23. What
need have brazen reprovers to blush then before the Lord? and desire rather the
power of Christ, then pride of their own Integrity might rest upon them. The
great means then that I advise toward thee, through healing of the breach
(this day upon the Lords poor Ones) is, true poverty of Spirit; each bearing
his shame, unto through abasement and repentance never to be repented of; no
man sparing his own, nor coming into the secret of any who would have his name
whole, and his sin spared; but that they may be united indeed, thus to join
together, to make one head, as Hos. 1.11. to look on their sin-wildred-state,
and sean no more to their own understanding, but upon their Beloved; (as to
trust in his Words, so to wait for and walk in his way) And then I assure you,
He that sittern upon the Throne, would soon make all things new, Rev. 21.5. A
new sharp threshing Instrument, having teeth, shall quickly be entrusted unto
them who would employ it with strength, chiefly. First, Against their own
abominations; then shall the iniquity of Israel be sought for, and there shall
be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; For I will pardon
them whom I reserve, says the Lord, Jer. 50.20. In one day the inquity of that
Land should be removed, Zech. 3.9. and the Lord their God shall save them in
that day, as the flock of his People; for, they shall be as the stones of a
Crown lifted up, as an ensign upon his Land. O turn you to the strong hold ye
Prisoners of hope, even to day do I declare, I will render double to thee,
Zech. 9.12, 16. For in this Mountain shall the Hand of the Lord rest, (that is
his contending hand, with his inheritance) and Moab shall be trodden down under
him, even as straw is trodden down for the Dunghill, Isa. 25.10. In that day
shall this Song be sung in the Land of Judah, We have a strong City, Salvation
will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks, Isa. 26.1. There will I make the horn
of David to bud. His Foundation is in the Holy Mountains; for thus has the
Lord spoken unto me, like as the Lion, and the young Lion roaring on his prey;
when a multitude of Shepherds are called forth against him, he will not be
afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them; so shall the
Lord of Hosts come down to fight for Mount Zion, and for the hill thereof. As
Birds flying, so will the Lord of Hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also, he
will deliver it, and passing over, he will preserve it, Psalm. 132.17. and 87.1.
Turn ye unto him from whom the Children of Israel have deeply revolted, Isa.
31.4, 5, 6. Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which
travaileth has brought forth; Then the remnant of his Brethren shall return
unto the Children of Israel, and he shall stand and feed in the strength of the
Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God, and they shall abide; for
now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth, Mich. 5.3, 4. Be in pain
therefore, and labor to bring forth, O Daughter of Zion, like a woman in
travel; for now thou shall go forth out of the City, and thou shall dwell in
the field, and thou shall go even to Babylon, there shall thou be delivered;
There the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies, Mich. 4.10.
The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and steps of the
needy, Isa. 26.6. For he will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not
despise their Prayer, Psalm. 102.17. This shall be written for the Generations
to come, and the people which shall be created, shall praise the Name of the
Lord; for he looked down from the height of his Sanctuary from Heaven did the
Lord behold the Earth, to hear the groaning of the Prisoner, to loose those
that are appointed to death, to declare the Name of the Lord in Zion, and his
praise in Jerusalem; when the people are gathered together, and the Kingdoms to
serve the Lord. For the Lord shall Judge his people, and repent himself for his
Servants; when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or
left, Deuteronomy. 32.36. Amen.

Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen and Amen.

But a Word to their Oppressors.
TO deliver mine own Soul, yet cautiously, for some of them are now grown such
sons of Belial, that a man cannot speak to them, 1 Samuel 25.17. and therefore I
will confine my self to some Scripture truths (not yet out of date) which it
will concern them to consider, as the Oracles of him who (if they will not hear)
shall make himself be heard, by another voice of his, that yet they have not
heard. And the Lord shall cause his glorious Voice to be heard, and shall show
the lightning down of his Arm, with the indignation of his Anger, and with the
flame of a devouring Fire: with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones; for
through the Voice of the Lord, shall the Assyrian be beaten down, which smote
with a Rod, Isa. 30.30, 31. And I will execute vengeance in anger, and fury
upon the Heathen, such as they have not heard, Mich. 5.15. The great day of the
Lord is near, it is near, and hastes greatly, even the Voice of the Day of the
Lord; the mighty man shall cry there bitterly, Zeph. 1.8. to 18. For thus says
the Lord God, My people went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there, and
the Assyrian oppressed them without cause; Now therefore, what have I here,
says the Lord, that my people is taken away? They that rule over them, make
them to howl, says the Lord, and my Name continually every day is blasphemed;
therefore my people shall know my Name, etc. Isa. 52.4, 5, 6. So that a man
shall say; Verily there is a reward for the Righteous; verily there is a God
that judges in the Earth, Psalm. 58.11.

Woe to the bloody City, it is full of lies, the prey departs not; Art thou
better than populous No, etc. All thy strong holds shall be like fig trees,
with the first ripe figs; if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the
mouth of the eater. Thy crowned men are as the Locusts, and thy Captains as the
great grass-hoppers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the Sun
arises they flee away, and their place is not known where they are. There is
no healing of thy bruise, thy wound is grievous, all that hear the bruit of
thee, shall clap their hands over thee; for upon whom has not thy wickedness
passed continually? Nahum 3.1. She is empty, and void, and waste; and the heart
melts, and the knees smite together, Nahum 1.10. Because ye were glad,
because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of my heritage. -- Jer. 50.11. For thus
says the Lord God, Because thou have clapped thy hands, and stamped with thy
feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy despite against the Land of Israel,
Ezekiel. 25.6. And have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart to destroy it, for
the old hatred, verse. 15. Behold I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto
all people round about, when they shall be in the siege both against Judah and
against Jerusalem. And in that day, I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone
for all people; all that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces.
Though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it; In that
day, says the Lord, I will smite every horse with astonishment, and his rider
with madness, and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, etc. Zech.
12.2, 3, 4. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces, out of
Heaven shall he thunder upon them; the Lord will judge the ends of the Earth,
and he shall give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn of his Anointed, 1 Samuel 2.10. Moreover, the multitude of thy stranger^, shall be like the small
dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff that passes
away; Yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly. Thou shall be visited of the
Lord of Hosts, with thunder and with earthquake, and great noise; with storm
and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire. And the multitude of all the
Nations, that fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her, and her
munition, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision, Isa.
29.5, 6, 7. I was wroth with my People, I have polluted mine inheritance, and
given them into thine hand; thou did show them no mercy: upon the Ancients
have thou very heavily laid the Yoke, Isa. 47.6, 11. And thou said, etc.
Therefore shall evil come upon thee, thou shall not know from whence it rises;
and mischief shall fall upon thee, thou shall not be able to put it off; and
desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shall not know. And verse.
3. I will take vengeance, I will not meet thee as a man; for he brings down
them that dwell on high, the lofty City he lays it low, he lays it low,
even to the ground, he brings it even to the dust: The foot shall tread it
down, even the foot of the poor, and the steps of the needy, Isa. 26.5, 6. Let
favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn Righteousness: In the
land of uprightness will he deal unjustly; and will not behold the Majesty of
the Lord. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall
see, and be ashamed for their envy at thy people; yea, the fire of thine enemy
shall devour them. And they shall pass through it hardly bested and hungry; and
it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret
themselves, and curse their King and their God, and look upward: and they shall
look to the earth, and behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish, and
they shall be driven to darkness, Isa. 8.21, 22. Behold the whirlwind of the
Lord goes forth with fury, a continual whirlwind, it shall fall with pain upon
the head of the wicked; the fierce anger of the Lord shall not return, until he
has done it, and until he has performed the intents of his heart; in the
latter days you shall consider it, Jer. 30.23, 24. For the Lord shall rise up
as in Mount Perazim; he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may
do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his Act, his strange Act: Now
therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bonds be made strong, Isa. 28.21, 22.
Beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the Prophets;
Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; for I work a work in your days, a
work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you, Acts
13.40, 41. And that profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come, when
Iniquity shall have an end; Thus says the Lord God, Remove the Diadem, and
take off the CRown, this shall not be the same; exalt him that is low, and
abase him that is high. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be
no more, until He come whose right it is, and I will give it Him, Ezekiel. 31.25,
26, 27. His enemies will I cloth with shame, but on himself shall his Crown
flourish, Psalm. 132.18. And he shall come upon Princes, as upon Mortar, and as
the Potter treads clay, Isa. 41.25. For the oppression of the poor, and
sighing of the needy; now will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him in
safety from him that puffs at him, Psalm. 12.5. The meek also shall increase
their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of
Israel: for the terrible one is brought to naught, and the scorner is consumed;
and all that watch for iniquity are cut off; that make a man an offender for a
word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate; and turn a side the
just for a thing of naught, Isa. 29.19, 20, 21. Ezekiel. 35.5. Jer. 46.17. Isa.
10.1, 4. Ezekiel. 29.7. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings; be instructed ye Judges
of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the
Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but
a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in Him, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12.

Have all the workers of Iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they
eat bread, and call not upon the Lord. There were they in great fear: for God
is in the Generation of the Righteous, Psalm. 14.4, 5.

FINIS.

