Epinicia Carolina, OR AN ESSAY Upon the Return of His SACRED MAJESTY, Charles
the Second.

By S. W. of the Inner Temple.



LONDON, Printed for Robert Gibbs, at the Golden Ball in Chancery Lane. 1660.

AN ESSAY, Upon the Happy Return of His SACRED MAJESTY, Charles the Second.
1.
He Is come! -- See there Else. -- There again.
He Is just now landed with his Train;
Just now has changed for loyal ground, the unfaithful Main.
He Is come! -- Hark how the forward Air
Resounds His Welcome to the Shore,
Redoubling all the Eccho's ore.
When the unloaded Guns can do no more,
Volleys with thunder may compare;
Volleys that thunder far excel;
For when raged Heaven in such a language speaks,
With fiery tongues, and silence through the darkness breaks.
(Clouds that are dark as night, or hell)
Showr's to allay the flame
That just now came,
And unexpected fell
Pour down, the sky with storms is dull,
Of tempests, and thick weather full;
Each clap is followed with its band of hail,
Squadrons that will prevail;
Above, engaging Arms appear,
Below the Earth does groan to hear
The shock, and quakes at some sad fate it sees not, in the Rear.
(2)
Quite different is this Peal, this Noise,
Is but the repetition of our joys.
Continued Acclamations from a louder voice,
Cannons that so well imitate,
Encourage, not amate,
Tell us a most desired calm is nigh,
And without help of following tempests clear the sky.
A calm great Prince, such as none else could say
Beside Yout Self, and never to late,
To a distracted and tumultuous State;
To a divided Land,
That never could without such help command,
Or know till now what truly 'twas to obey;
A calm Your Name brings, and a certain bay:
Nor is it less welcome, cause so long deferred,
That very Name has raised the price,
Increased the weight, and made it twice)
The thing for what before't appeared;
So Expectation almost gone,
Makes us too much esteem a certain one!
And even despairing to be free,
We can Your Self no other See,
Than one that has procured us double liberty.
3.
And as in the troubled deep in spite of hope,
When the burdened Ship with thousand billows tossed,
Is to it Self and Convoy lost:
And Mariners in the dark their Tackling grope,
Ready to be devoured by every wave
Which threatens and prepares a grave,
If there appear one glimps of day,
And a faint thought the storm may steal away,
Though at the greatest distance set,
And scarce discerned yet,
Courage returns, and check's Despair,
Be it with loss of half the Fare,
Is buried in a Nobler Care.
Y' have done all this, a greater thing,
Deliverance given, Heaven could not bring,
By any means, but such a King.
Y' have don't, and with it returned Our Light,
Almost forgotten through a twelve-years Night;
Dispel'd Our fears, to the Heaven brought
A prize inestimable, and unsought;
And beside, what was Ours before,
Returned Your Self, which makes ten thousand prizes more.
4.
Pardon, Great Name, if one so mean aspire,
And to your Sun, expose his humbler fire;
(Amongst the many flames to rise)
Not to increase Your light
(Beyond expression bright,
And never to be greater made,
By an additional and borrowed aid)
But to consume his Sacrifice.
It Is true, You need not what such things can do,
Nor can Your praise by such lo praises grow,
It being not You that want, but we that owe;
We ow't, and if that Theme wont give
To an officious duty, and return,
It Is our ambition in the common flame to burn:
Nor will we that survive,
If Salamander like in the flames we cannot live;
We are ennobled by this service done,
To our selves, and not to Thee,
Making it harder to be known,
Whether more proud or dutiful we be:
If we refuse, You Are still the same,
Great by thy birth, and greater by thy Fame,
None by the choice of Heaven and Us more freely came.
(5)
Should we refuse, 'twere but to be
Fond Heralds of our slavery,
And how unwillingly we are made free,
We should belly our interest, and give way
To others to prevent us in our joys:
And the same Acclamations pay
Before us, through a false delay,
As equally concerned in our voice.
No! No! we never will yield,
It Is too too much, 't has been deferred so long;
Nor will we make another title strong,
By entering last, or never in the Field;
Though our Engagement only can descry
Not what we would, but what we cannot deny.
Our pens shall do their duty first,
Though hitherto to silence cursed,
Or Tyranny, of Theams the worst;
Not by recanting, for thus how to sin,
Like others we never knew,
Who must their pardon sue,
Before they can with confidence again begin,
Or uninfected reach the KING.
It Is but a poor disguise to say 'twas done,
with the multitude to the rising Sun,
At least to him that went for one,
Meteors may be admired till fallen and gone.
If Persian like we superstitious are,
Thou art the Sun, the Tyrant, but a blazing star.
6.
You are alone a Sun, Your very Name
Gives a new life and birth to every thing,
Gives a new and perpetual spring,
Like that above in Qualities the same;
For as to that we all distinctions owe,
Of times and seasons, night and day,
By You that very thing we know,
And go more satisfied away.
You are the greater Sun o'th two.
For as in the objects that does show
The pleasures which they have,
To take the greedy sight,
Are from themselves, not from his light;
And don't by his addition beauteous grow:
But were before thus beautiful, and crave
Assistance from his beams to tell, not make 'um so.
You at the same time light and object bring,
What is, and how it is to be seen,
The medium, and the very thing,
Without the caution of design between:
You make the Prospect, and that done,
Are what we see it by the Sun:
So that to say you are like the Sun, will not do,
It Is mean, You are not like the Sun, the Sun's like You.
(7)
Since then so great a miracle You are,
That nothing can resemble or come near,
We other Similes shall spare,
And to Your Self alone Your Self compare:
And as the likeness of the Painters draught
Is to be judged no other way,
Then by the Pattern which before him lay,
And matter for his Pensil brought;
Then by the life, how far the Features be
The very same, where hard, and where more free
We have it all in You; one Scet'h has all,
Your Self the Copy and Original;
So like which either is that none dare say:
But as two postures by the self-same face
May have a different Air, and several Grace
From the reflection of the light and place,
When with a languishing Aspect the One,
As some sad Mourner bears down;
The Other with a livelier Eye,
Intends a Crown and Majesty:
Both are unlike to other, as the hand
Of Artist, and the passions can command.
You have a different Meene as Prince
And Exile, what You were before,
And what Y' are since;
Yet like Your Self in both so much, that nothing can be more.
8.
A perfect wonder in Your several State,
Whether we count Your Cross, or better Fate,
The adventures that have run
From the Cradle to the Throne.
If Princes have their Infancy,
And can be born, though they cannot dye;
When for twelve years The have known,
What it is to be a KING, and to be None;
When Majesty disguised did lie
In The Visord of a private one;
The safest and the best retreit
For Him that is destined to be great.
Nay in a lower Sphere Thou seem'dst to move,
As if degrading's not enough
Thy patience, and thy heart to prove,
A banishment, shall lead the way
To an unconstant and unsettled stay;
To save the life that else had been a prey:
As if 'twas equal fault to, Be
As hold the reins of Sovereignty.
Under so great an heap our fire was laid,
And part o'th common rubbish made,
Almost unminded, and quite spent,
Till by the smoke it upward sent,
We knew it lived, and on a gentle turn,
Could reassume its former flames, and burn.
9.
This we experienced when thy forward zeal,
Made Thee to us at Worcester fight appeal,
More for thy Countries good, than for thy own;
Thy Country which insensible was grown,
And by continued slavery,
Thought it a burden to be free;
We saw there, (and who could not see?)
The little price You put on Majesty,
When undistinguish't with the Rout,
Had not Your actions marked You out,
You as some under-Captain wheeled about,
Charged up, Retreited, Lead the Van,
Faced the Cromwellians like a private man;
And though in You that time there lay
Concentered Happiness and Peace,
Our future joy and present ease,
They unregarded were that day,
And as rich nothings put away:
Breaking first through the Armed Rancks,
Now on the Front, then in the Rear;
Upon the guarded, and well-bodied Flancks,
You overran all, ere You could be judged near.
10.
You were too prodigal of life and blood,
When scarce to be withstood,
You Would Public Victime for proud Rebels dye;
Would scarce prevailed with be to live,
And wait a better destiny.
"So much 'twas not to get the victory,
"To be ore-powr'd, and yet survive!
Though no less by it was thy renown,
It Is equal to deserve, and wear a Crown!
You did Your share, and more,
Than any Prince ere did before,
Only Fates would with triumph you restore:
Fates that for better times thy fortune knew,
Unwilling were that Bout thou should subdue,
And from the Conquest CHARLES withdrew;
So that 'twas they were routed, and not You:
Who by your happy 'scape away,
And Parthian like in flight, did get the day;
Making the Oaken Garland far exceed the Bay.
11.
Had You that time overcome in fight,
That very Name had spoiled the show,
'Twas more consulted in Your flight;
The Notion of a Countries overthrow,
Less pleasure, greater hurt will do.
Blood that from streams like these does spout,
Increases not the Royal Die, but rots it out;
The purple loses by the stain,
If possible to get it up again.
In civil broils the Laurel won,
Is but a pale and withered one;
Has more of Cypress in it, and Thorn,
So purchased and worn.
Caesar in triumph, when he led
Great Pompy's children, lost more praise,
Then Is Victory did Trophies raise;
His Crown did not defend, but more expose his head.
12.
But should we every Scene present,
Deliver every Act of thine,
'Twere to exhaust a Mine;
And not a scanty and consumed Mint:
Full of new wonders every hour was seen
The least, that nothing Vulgar came between;
An hour can subject to a Volume give,
A day to an whole History;
A month and year can never subsist and live,
But with their own weight pressed, must sink and dye.
And as the light that in a mean,
Renders the Object better seen:
If it exceed its wonted ray,
Takes what before it gave, away.
Y' have done too much, all words outdone,
Your Self, and the most lavish tongue;
By giving too great a Theme have given none,
Y' have done beyond all gone before;
Had you done less great Prince, we had done more.
13.
Yet though we cannot express, we may admire
Thy condescension, when thou did retire,
And in a Straiter orb confine,
Luster would else break out and shine.
Yet though envelopt in a cloud, even there,
It all enlightened that were near:
A cloud may hide, not chase the Day,
Obscure the Sun, not take it away.
The Suns the same, when it don't, as when it does appear;
'Twas ill for us when private walls did feel
Your power, when laying by the warlike steel,
You all regrets, but ours could heal;
Resolved for us, Your Exile to forgo,
And something more than Exile know
To suffer double banishment.
First, from Your Country, than the place
Where You had covert got in the Chase,
And by a Fate more grievous went:
"So great a power had Usurpation gained,
"That by less crimes it could not be maintaind;
"A little spot appears till the whole Fleece is stained.
14.
Mean while we languish't with the rotting pain
Of Foreign hatred and disdain;
'Twas death or prison to return again;
Those whom the public ruin forced to shore,
And for some shelter fly
To other Lands, and unknown lie;
If but their names were heard,
They were as an infection feared,
To be an English man was plague enough.
At home we knew no other peace,
But a continued War; no health, but a disease:
And since we could no better be
By our Physicians mystery;
Always to be so, and no worse, was all our ease.
So that if expectation gone,
And buried with thee in oblivion,
Some for the base Usurper prayed,
And in their forced Devotions strayed;
'Twas out of Dread, not Duty paid:
So much of a worse power we were afraid!
The same was for Sicilian Tyrant done,
Not out of love to him, but fear of a more cruel one.
15.
And as the Romans in their superstitious care
To several Deities did Temples rear,
Ridiculous to all but them that worshiped there:
When they made Fevers Fanes resound,
To Paleness Altars Crowned;
And Tempest that whole Fleets had drowned:
'Twas not that from their influence
They good expected, but to drive 'um thence.
If we this thing for others did, then you,
'Twas not because we reckoned it their due:
But we our selves no other thing could do,
Our worship was constrained; constraint did bring
Almost a Fate our Sovereign to deny,
Whilst every Pulpit still did ring
With this impossibility,
At once to serve God, and pray for the KING;
It Is easy now, and unperplext;
Without a Comment we can read the Text;
And the most partial man must say,
What 'ere 'twas heretofore, it is treason now not to obey.
16.
Till you returned, the thought of joy
Was banished from these sad retreits;
And the few fires we had proved but unnatural heats,
Never thoroughly warmed, but forced colder sweats,
And with their clamminess did more annoy.
Our fires were like those which from Aetna rise,
Never seen, but after some strange Prodigies,
Flames that don't lighten, but obscure the Skies.
Yours have a greater power, restore the day;
And when it is sunk, and lost in a decay,
Renew it with a brighter ray.
The Islands one continued fire,
Is terrible to all that see it round;
And those that know the reason and the ground,
Overcome with heat, already even expire:
Saylors I fear that pass by this way 'l mistake,
And a new Country in their Sea Chards make;
For as toward us they forward steer,
And with the Compass round us Veer,
They scarce know whether Pole they are near,
Like a new Terr' del fogo, we so much appear.
17.
We Are truly now the Happy Isle,
Beyond all else on which the Sun does smile:
But you are He has made us so,
This happiness could from our selves never flow;
Or any thing that we could do;
You are the gift, and giver too.
It Is true, Thou might have used some other hand,
That might have laid it as a just command;
The Spanish and the German aid,
That to such plunder willingly had come,
And with the same facility o're-come,
And made us dearly for refusal paid.
Thou might have done this, something more,
Made blood and wounds thy right restore;
But resolute to stay
Till something greater made the way;
Till the whole Land should see,
Not thou of them, (...) they would need of thee:
Thou more then any Prince have done,
Come by a double title to the Throne;
The choice thy Peoples is, the right thy own.
18.
And since the art come, may thou still find
Those pleasures such a welcome brings:
Where Loyalty and Dutie's joined
To serve and own the best of KINGS!
May with thy Reign, thy happiness increase,
And never know what it is to grow less!
Or if Ecclips it suffers with the Sun,
Let it like that before hand known,
Not be a total, or a sudden one;
But such as when it is past and gone,
May make you reassume this light,
Thy pristine beams, and be more bright:
Make the whole world thy rays adore,
Obscuring that small star, that thee obscured before.
May thou be like thy Self, none equal know,
To heaven alone thy Scepter owe!
"To be within comparison is to be low.
MONCK the mean time (while to the Sky
Thy Name is mounted by winged victory,
That does in Ambush for that honor lie)
In The Sky shall also have a Memory,
And by some brighter Constellation known,
Attend thy Grandeur, and increase his own:
So w^i^e Your Self we must to CHARLES his Wain refer,
MONCK with another title shall be called the Waggoner.
FINIS.

