THE Earl of VVarwicks SVMMONS To the KINGS Fleet at Gowry, and Prince Charles
his Answer.

With His Lordships REPLY.

And a Declaration by the Hollanders, concerning the Prince and his Lordship.

Also the taking of the Lord Jermin his ship, and another ship of the Irish
Rebels, by the Earl of WARWICK.

And a great VICTORY against the SCOTS.

depiction of a seventeenth-century warship

London Printed for R. Smithurst, near Pye-corner, 1648.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE stylized depiction of the English royal blazon
flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn, as well as the Tudor rose and
Scottish thistle
THE EARL of VVARVVICKES SUMMONS TO The KINGS Fleet at GOWRY: AND Prince
Charles His Answer.
Sir,
THe Lord Admiral with his fleet consisting of about 20 ships, has now
alarumed the revolted ships, and is laboring to reduce them, the particulars
are thus.

His Lordship called a Council of War of his Officers, (upon receite of the
Ordinance for giving Indemnity to the revolted ships, the Officers and Seamen)
And it was resolved to send them a summons, and therewith to offer them
Indemnity accordingly.

And we attended his Lordship hither for the reducing of them, And coming
within 4 leagues of them, a summons was sent to them, they being then in Gowry
and we also within those limits, offering to them that if they would come in,
and surrender themselves, they or any of them and their Vessels, they should
have Indemnity and favor, if not to expect none.

But Prince Charles, Prince of Wales being newly come, they were all commanded
to ships, and the ships to readiness, for the Prince had heard before that we
were coming hither against them.

The Prince sent us answer of a positive denial to come in, or do any thing
in order to that summons, sleighting the Indemnity offered. And declared
resolution and those with him, for the restoration of the King his father to
His Rights.

In the mean time the Seamen of the Princes ships drew off some Ordnance, out
of their ships to plant them on the shore, to play against us, but the
Hollanders declared a very great dislike of that, not thinking it fit to give
any way to them to fortify upon their land. But this dispute reached not far,
for the Prince of Orange, and his Council had so ordered it, that some were
sent thither to act more subtlely for the defense of Prince Charles and the
ships, and Officers, and Seamen under him, and a Council sat for the effecting
thereof. In the interim my Lord Admiral sent a reply to the Prince to let His
Highness know the dangerous courses he is in, and those with him, and what an
hopeful way the Kingdom of England, is now in to be settled, and all
differences composed, and very good invitation to His Highness, and those with
him to hearken to an agreement, and comply with the Parliament of England.

But there is as yet no satisfactory answer, nothing visible but a countenance
to stand out, and oppose, and addresses are made to the Prince of Orange, and
the Estates, that they may be protected by them.

Diverse Hollanders are troubled, and vexed to see it, fearing that it may not be
conducing to their Interest in their Liberties, to let such things be done. And
there were many that did stir in it, and made some demurre in the
Declaration. But at last it was thought fit by the Prince of Orange and his
Council, that the Agreement between the Nations of 1622. should be considered
of, and in that one branch, that between England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
there should be no Acts of Hostility, by, and in the others territories. And it
was instanced that it was so Acted by England, when the Hollanders, chased the
Spaniards about 10 years since, and they sailed to the Coasts of England, and
there secured, so that the Hollanders were not admitted to act any hostility
against them.

Indeed that was a strange action, and so is this: for those Spaniards by all
probability came to invade England, and had a design by conjunction with the
English Papists, who had Collections, and good store of Treasure ready for them
from all parts of the Kingdom. And had not the Hollanders met with them, and
prevented it, they had (no doubt) attempted to have made a surprizall of
England, and destroyed the Protestants. And yet for all that, when the
Hollanders had fallen upon them, and cut off, and spoiled some, and likely to
give them an utter defeat, yet the Spaniards were by authority from England
protected, and the Hollanders not suffered to do further execution upon them.

And the Spaniards lay several days recruting their provisions in the Downs,
many of them walking up and down the Country in Kent and other places to spy
out the Country.

And this for ought I know is as mad a business of the Hollanders to do any
thing by way of protection to the revolted ships, whose principles are so
positive against their interest.

Yet it is carried by the major party (who at present prevail) that no act of
hostility (according to the Articles aforesaid) be done here on either part.
And so we (at present) prevented from doing what we would by the Hollanders
means.

They Declare themselves Newters, and that they will not meddle at all, neither
on the one side nor on the other, between the King and the Parliament of
England.

And they have a fleet of ships put in (now) between our ships and the Princes,
that so no hostile act may be done on either side.

But the Officers and Seamen have differences amongst them, with the Prince,
and that very great; only at present upon a little moneys paid to them, they
are not so unruly altogether, since the Prince came, as they were before, and
yet I do not hear that Prince Charles is aboard them.

It is thought his Highness will not go aboard any of the ships, for fear
that they should have some design to carry him away.

We have just now intelligence that the Warwick Frigot has had a fight with
one of the Irish ships, and taken her, with ten piece of Ordnance, five barrels
of Gunpowder, and good store of Merchandise, diverse hundreds of Hides, and
many thousand weight of Tallow. And there is also a little vessel taken that
was (by the Lord Jermins order) going with relief to his Islands, and all the
Ammunition therein taken.

Gowry this 24 of September. 1648.
Sir,
MAy it please you, at present being arrived into Chester water, having been to
the Northward, and came on yesterday out of the Bay of Carrickfergus, where
upon Saturday was sevennight Col. Monk did surprise the Town and Castle of
Carrickfergus, and the same day did surprise Belfast: I have brought over with
me the General Major Monro Prisoner unto your Honors: Upon Thursday last
when I received him aboard, Colonel Monk did march away toward Colrane, I
pray God give him good success, he is in great want of men and money; here is
one Captain Browf come over in charge with the General Major, to whom I
refer you to further relation at his coming to you. Thus with my humble
service presented unto you, I take leave and remain.

From aboard the Swan Frigot in ChesterRiver 24 Sep. 1648. Your Honors Servant
to command, ROBERT CLARKE.

FINIS.

