Vox Infantis. OR, THE PROPHETICAL CHILD.

Being a true Relation of an Infant that was found in a Field, near Lempster,
in Herefordshire, July 16. 1649.

That did Declare and Foretell of many Strange things that Shall ensue in
England and Ireland, within the space of three years.

Concerning the Crowning of CHARLES the second King of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; His great Victories, with the Destruction of this present Parliament
and Army; and many other passages touching the Death of our late King.

This Relation is Attested to be True, as appears by the hands of several
Witnesses annexed to the Book.

Aug: 2d. 1649

LONDON, Printed in the year 1649.

STRANGE NEVVES OUT OF Hereford-shire.
THE works of the Lord are wonderful! And the Heavens declare his handy
work: Before the day of Judgment Signs shall appear in the Firmament, and
Wonders upon the face of the Earth; Nation shall rise against Nation, and
Kingdom against Kingdom, there shall be Famines Pestilences and Earthquakes
in diverse places: False Prophets shall arise, Rebellion, Murder and Desolation
in all places; Factions, Schisms and Heresies in the Church; and Distractions,
Fears and Oppressions in the Commonwealth. Are not all these Judgments
fallen upon us? For the national Sins of this Kingdom are these things come
to pass? Who looks upon these bloody and unnatural Wars which have
continued the space of seven years amongst us? Where the most flourishing
Kingdom in the Christian World, is now become the Theater of Misery, and a
Spectacle of Lamentation; where Brother has slain his Brother, and the Son
has not spared to sheath his Sword in the Bowels of his Father, England! the
Glory of Europe, is now become the Scaene or Stage of Rebellion, Blood and
Murder. A Den of Vipers. A Cage of Uncleanenesse; and a Nursery of all Sects
and Schisme^. The Subjects of the most virtuous Prince that ever swayed the
Scepter in this Kingdom, have made it no Sin or Guilt to Sacrifice the Blood
of their Sovereign to their ambitious Fury.

How many forerunners of these our Calamities and Sorrows have been
heretofore Declared and Predicted, to forewarne us of the Evils to come; but
we have rejected and contemned them as Erroneous and Ridiculous, but our
sufferings have made us sensible what our Sin and security has brought upon
us.

I shall, for your better information, particularize some of the most
remarkable Miracles and Wonders that have appeared in these latter times.

As for instance; At Bradford, in Yorkshire, in the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred forty eight, there appeared in the Air the visions of two
several Armies, in Batalia skyrmishing one against another, with Colors
flying, the sound of Drumms were perfectly heard, and the noise of
Musquett-Reports, which continued the space of three hours; to the admiration
of many hundreds that were Spectators, and shortly after it vanished.

Again, near Skipton in the same County, not far from Denton (where the
Ld. General FAIRFAX was born) in the year of our Lord one thousand six
hundred forty nine, it rayned blood, of which my self was an Eyewitness, in
the company of many more.

In the same year (at six of the clock in the morning) being in June, two
Sons appeared, and continued visible the space of two hours.

What inordinate Thunders, Tempests and Earthquakes has been of late years;
great and impetuous Winds, and stormy weather, losses at Sea, with great
Inundations on the Land.

At Dublin in Ireland, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred
forty, Another wonderful sight in the Sky, where thousands of Byrds, called
Sterlings, did meet near the City, like two Armies, and fought; until many
were killed, and fell in great multitudes on the Earth.

The like was near Scarborough, not far from Rippon in Yorkshire, in the
year one thousand six hundred forty four, where thousands of Crows, called
Rookes, did meet and fight in two bodies, until an innumerable company were
killed and fell upon the ground.

In Norfolk, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred forty five, a
Child was borne, who presently spoke some certain things that should ensue in
these times, and lived not above two hours.

In Buckingham-shire in the year one thou^sand six hundred forty nine; A
Child was borne (near Alsbury) that declared some strange passages, which
should happen in this Kingdom, and lived not above three days, but dyed.

But I shall forbear to mention any more in this Nature (because I would not
seem tedious to the Reader:) And now to the Relation of this strange and
miraculous Wonder I promised you, which is Attested by many sufficient eye
Witnesses there present, that will aver and manifest this Relation for a
Truth, against the incredulous and unbeleeving times.

On Monday July the sixteenth, one thousand six hundred forty nine, near
Lempster in Hereford-shire (hard by a Village called the Hope, not far from
Corfe-Castle) Certain Workmen or Mowers, that went to cut down Grass or
Hay, in a very large and spacious Field containing above threescore Acres, and
being at their laborious Work (betwixt the hours often and eleven) they heard
the Crying of an Infant or a young Child, which they imagined to be in the
middle of the Field; but pausing a little while with giving attention to it,
not without admiration; they concluded unanimously, or all of them, to go to
the place from whence they heard the Voice; and comeing to the place in the
middle of the Grass or Field, they found a young Child, which was wraped up in
Swaddling Clouts, and to their Judgments appeared not to be above a quarter of
a year old: standing thus amazed with their eyes fixed upon the Child, at last
resolved to take it up, and to make some of the chief of the Town acquainted
with this Accident. But one of the Mowers or laboring Men (having never a
Child at all, replied he would take it home as his own, the rest of them
having made it known to the Town, the Child was brought to a house, where the
Inhabitants round about flocked together to see this Child; after every ones
Censure was past upon this Infant, they provided some sustenance for it,
suspecting it was hungry, which was Milk and Flower boiled in it (which that
Country calls Pap;) the Child eating very heartily of it, and being
therewith satisfied, begun to speak to all the People there present, and told
them that it was the best meat he did ever eat, which Miracle in an Infant
so young, bred admiration and astonishment in all the Spectators.

This Child told them further, That the Wars of England should continue three
years longer, and that Charles a young King, whose Father was put to death by
seventeene of his Subjects that Conspired his death long before, who for Acting
such a bloody Tragedy shall come to untimely ends, not any of them shall dye in
their Beds; saying also, that Innocent Blood calls for vengeance; and that
which they spilt in the first Month, shall in the same Month prove their
destruction, and His Son be restored to the Crown of England.

Again, this Child further related; that the Kingdom of Ireland shall
Proclaim him King of His Fathers Realms; and be the landing place from all
his Troubles and Exile: and after that, he shall Conquer England again, and
shall destroy his and his Fathers Enemies, and be a great and Powerful
Prince: Then shall this Land Flourish again: And in that Field where he was
found shall be a great and Bloody Battle fought, greater then any yet has
been in this Kingdom, where the young King, CHARLES, the Second of that name,
shall get the day, and win the Field.

The People and Inhabitants thereabouts, hearing these sayings, proceeding from
an Infant, were struck into great amazement, and after the Child had done
speaking, they resolved how to provide for him; but he Answered again, take no
care for Me; and withal desired they would carry Him to the place where they
found Him, which, according as he Commanded them, they did: And being brought
to the place they laid him down, he thanked them, and wished them all to love
one another, and relieve the oppressed, and succor the fatherless and the
widow, fear God and he will bless your Labor, be no timeservers, meddle
not with them that are given to change; observe these sayings, your reward
shall be in Heaven: My time is set; I have no more to say, but now shall leave
you. Uttering these words, Glory be to God on high, peace on earth etc. and so
vanished away.

Some of the Inhabitants do believe it to be an Angel sent from Heaven; some
are of opinion, that it was a Child newly borne, and left there by the Mother,
unto whom God gave Power and Strength to reveal his Will; but it has left a
deep Impression in the hearts of some of them. This Copy was taken by one that
was both an eye and ear witness of these sayings and predictions, which this
Infant revealed to all. His time of abode and continuance with us was about
three hours.

This Relation was Communicated from George Colly of Hope near Lempster, to a
friend in London to be published in Print, desiring three hundred Copies to
be sent him to bestow upon friends.

The Witnesses that attest this Relation to be Truth in every Particular; are,
Sampson Jones Gent. Henry Shipman, Richard Williams, John (...)


(...) (...) The young King, from King of Great-brittanny, is honored
(where-ere he comes*) as if he were Emperor of Christendom, and not a King of
three Kingdoms; and happy is that Prince can first dispatch Ambassadors to him
with Presents, and overtures of assisting him with men and money to recover his
Right; The King of France has not a little outdone the rest, by free offering
him 10000 French, and to pay them two years, besides 10000 pounds in Money; the
Duke of Orleance, Normandy, and Prince of C^ndy 50000 pounds; the King of
Denmark 10000 Men, and 10000 pound; the Queen of Swethland 10000 Men, and 20000
pounds; the States of Holland 50 Ships ready Manned and Victual'd for a year;
the King of Poland 5000 Men, and pay for them for three years; the King of
Spain 10000 Pistollets, etc. What a shame it is for Englishmen, that they
should have no more love or natural Affection to their Native Prince, and
rightful Sovereign, but to expose him to the Courtesy of Strangers, whilst
they stand adoring two or three Golden Calves of their own making!

Noll is gone from Bristol toward Milford Haven, and there sticks till 100000
pounds be sent him: Beer is but now a brewing to Balance his Ships: The Party
of Levellers have a New Design a foot; but that Harry Martin is loath to leave
his beloved Mistress Bettee in Coven-Garden, his Worships sinner.

Marquis Ormond has taken Rings-End, the Chief Fort that Commands all the
River between Dublin and the Sea; and likewise the Block-house on the other
side, and gained part of Dublin College, that lies so low, that the Castle has
no power over it: they have in readiness Petards, Morter-pieces, Great Ordnance
to batter, Sealling Ladders, Faggots and Ropes, and could take the City at
pleasure; but not without store of bloodshed, as well of their Friends, as
others in the City: Jones has betaken himself to the Castle, and is upon
Articles of Treaty for the Surrender; for the Famine is as bad, or worse, in
this little time, then at Colechester; for Jones has heaped up for himself in
the Castle, and exposed the rest to starving, which makes him generally Cursed:
It is Reported that Hunks, Venables, Mores, and Reynolds Regiments coming into
Dublin River, not thinking those Forts were taken, and thinking to Land; are
most cut off by Ordnance from the Forts; and Cromwels Son a Captain* is cut to
pieces.

FINIS.

