SWEARING DENIED IN THE New Covenant, And its pretended foundation RASED.

With the remnant of lies swept away. And the great and glorious name of Jesus
highly exalted, above every name, to which powerful Name, all Swearers, and
false Swearers, and Liars, Fighters, Plotters, and Persecutors, who are in the
strife against the Son of God, must bow and submit, or be broken in pieces, for
his wrath is kindled and his glittering sword is whet, to take vengeance of all
those that will not have him to reign over them, in Truth and Righteousness,
to the glory of God the Father.

By Morgan Watkins.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson at the Sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins Le-Grand.

Swearing denied in the New Covenant, and its pretended Foundation rased; with
the Remnant of lies swept away.
JEsus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; him has God the
Father highly exalted, and given him a name, which is above every Name, that at
the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc. and that every tongue should
confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, Phil.
29.10.11. Now if he be Lord, wherein is he honored? is it not in obeying his
Commands, and doing the thing that he says? as he says concerning the
disobedient; Why call you me Lord Lord, and do not the things which I say? so
it appears he that obeyes him not, has nothing to do to call him Lord, for
he whom he obeyes is his Lord; as its written, his Servants ye are whom ye
obey; he only enters the Kingdom that does the will of the Father, and this is
the will of the Father, that we should hear his Son; For this is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, of him Moses Prophesied saying,
him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you, and every
soul that will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people,
Act. 3.22, 23. And this is the day of trial in this Nation, who will hear him,
or refuse him; Who will choose to obey him, or man; who will fear him, or fear
man: And says Solomon, the fear of man brings a snare, Pro. 29.25. which
thing is now witnessed, whereby Thousands are catched, and under Condemnations;
but who so puts his trust in the Lord shall be safe, which thing also is
known to the obedient, and shall also be known to the sorrow of the
disobedient, for he will suddenly appear for us and plead our cause, and make
the innocence of it appear to the Nations round about, that they may fear and
tremble before him; who will make his Name glorious, which the Father has
given him, and is, and shall be known to be above very Name, which Name is a
strong Tower, and he that believes not in this Name, is condemned already; and
this is the condemnation, that Light is come into the world, etc. Into which
those that are gathered, and fly unto, are safe, for his presence and Power is
felt in the midst of them, and his glorious voice is heard in Sion; where he
reigns, let the people tremble at his great and terrible Name, for it is holy
and great in Sion, and he is high above all people; Therefore exalt the Lord
our God and worship at his holy Hill, for the Earth shall know we are his
people, and the Sheep of his Pasture, and his truth (into which we are
gathered) shall be exalted to all Generations; but the way of the wicked shall
be turned upside down, and that vain worship, that teaches for Doctrines the
Commandments of men, Mat 15.9. These be the blind guides that lead the blind
people into the ditch; but Christ teaches his Disciples to beware of their
leaven, that was their Doctrine, which then would have made void the commands
of God, and now would make void, or of no effect the Commands of his Son whom
the Father has given for a Commander to his people, and he that obeyes him
not, shall be cut off from his people; but his Sheep hear his voice, and keep
his sayings, who says, swear not at all; And herein is he acknowledged to be
Lord, by the doing of the thing he says, Luke 6.46. and this is to the glory
of God the Father, who has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above
every Name, above Abraham, above Moses, above David, above the Prophets, and
above the Angels, above every tongue of men and Angels, that have sworn, who
must bow to his Commands (who says swear not at all) and confess that he is
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, to the glory of God the Father, who says
every knee shall bow, and let all the Angels of God worship him, whose throne
is for ever and ever; A Scepter of righteousness is the Scepter of thy
Kingdom, Heb. 1.6.8. who said, Lo I come to do thy will O God, he takes away
the first, that he may establish the second, Heb. 10.9.

Now that which was an ordinance in old time, he takes away, saying it has
been said by them of old time, thou shall not for-swear thy self, but shall
perform unto the Lord thy Oaths; this of old was a service of God under the
first Covenant which was of works) to swear and perform their oaths; this was a
work acceptable to God, But the second Covenant being established upon better
premises, wherein God freely gave his own Son to be his Salvation to the ends of
the Earth; to bring that forth in man, which he requires of him; By writing
his Law in his heart, and putting his words in his inward parts, whereby he
comes to know the Lord, and be taught of him to know himself to be nothing, but
what he is in, and through him, who has all power; So of our selves we can do
nothing, therefore we cannot properly swear, being not our own, ( Mark) nor of
abillity to perform of our selves, any good thing, much less an Oath to the
Lord, for we who are come into the true rest, are not to think our own
thoughts, nor speak our own words, for Christ commanded to take no thought for
our life, what to eat or drink or put on, because we have not power of
ourselves, to add to ourselves; for which of you by taking thought can add one
Cubit to his Stature, therefore take no thought, or promise to your selves, nor
swear to do this, or that, or the other, for the power is in another, by whom
you draw your breath; Therefore we cannot promise any thing absolutely, being
not our own, nor born of the will of man, (then how can we swear) that stand
not in our own wills, but in the will of him who says swear not at all; for
the Apostle James reproves absolute promising, without relation to him who
has the power, go to now ye that say, To day and to morrow we will do such a
thing, James, 4.13. Whereas ye know not whether ye shall live till to morrow,
for that ye ought to say if the Lord will, verse the 15. Now to say, I will
swear if the Lord will, or if the Lord help me, is a tempting of God, and
willing of him to help to break his own command, or to help him to perform
that, which he commands him not to do; therefore leave off now ye swearers, and
false swearers, and forcers to swear, for the Lord will rebuke you with his
fiery indignation.

For the power that should perform the Oath is in him who is the Oath, Truth
and Covenant of God to us, and ends the Jews Oaths and Covenant, who says
swear not at all, (why) because says Christ, (that has all power) thou can
not make one hair white or black, so here is man's power and absoluteness
denied; who could not keep the first Covenant, which became to him
unprofitable, in that it was weak, Heb. 7.18. So he who required perfect
obedience, finding fault with it, which could make nothing perfect, took it
away, that he might establish the second in which alone God's power Christ
Jesus is absolute: who has obtained it, by the denial of his own will as he
was man, and in that his State of humiliation, took not upon him absoluteness,
but said I can do nothing of my self, Joh. 5.30. and here swear not, or as I
may say from his own words, could not swear of himself, for himself he denied,
but confessed, (which word Confess under the Law was Swear) to the glory of
the God the Father, in whom the power was absolute, and therefore he might
swear, who was of all power to perform his Oaths, Who is the head of Christ, 1
Cor. 11.3. who swear not, and commanded all whose head he is, not to swear at
all, so he that swears dishonors his head, and does contrary to his Command,
and also his example, who whilst he walked upon Earth, it cannot be proved he
swear at all, and the Apostle says, he that says he abides in him, ought
himself also so to walk even as he walked, 1 John 2.6. Now he that swears
breaks his Command, dishonours him whom he calls Lord, and walks contrary to
him, who is given to his people for an example and leader, a Commander, and the
Captain of their Salvation, the oath of God, who ends oaths, and did not swear,
but made a good Confession, to the glory of the Father, and said swear not at
all.

Object. But if any say, though we have not power, and are not absolute of our
selves, we swear but to our power, and so say, help me God.

Answ. If thou have not power thou art not to swear, least thou forswear thy
self; and if thy power be in Christ, thou can not expect that he will give it
thee, to break his command, for says Christ, without me ye can do nothing,
John 15.5. that is to say well-pleasing to God; but it is not well-pleasing to
him to break his Commands, (as many can now witness that have done it to their
misery, who are under dreadful Judgment tormented:) Now he that swears sins,
and does it against Christ, and so without him, for in him is no sin; but the
power of darkness being head, and the eye blind, whereby the Command should be
seen and felt to be the will of God, the understanding comes to be darkened, and
man takes counsel in this state of his enemy, the Judas in his own heart, who
betrays him by a pretense of liberty, and thereby brings him in to bondage,
and condemnation; but where the power is witnessed the Command is kept, which
denies swearing, and cannot call God to help to break the Command of his Son,
whom he has sent to do his will, in whom he is well pleased.

Object. But the Prophet Isaiah spoke of swearing, and as we judge, has
relation to the Gospel times, Isaiah 65.16.

Answ. Christ Jesus our great High Priest, Prophet, and King is come, is whom
the Law and the Prophets are fulfilled and ended, and he that is in him is in
Truth, and as he walks in Truth he answers the witness of God in all men's
Consciences, which is a surer Testimony then an Oath, because it stands in the
power of God, and the endless life; so that the life of the Son of God,
manifested in man, and reaching to the witness of God in all Consciences, ends
the occasion of an Oath, caused through unbelief, or doubting of the Truth in a
man; for one who is in Christ, to put his Brother who is in Christ to swear,
because he cannot believe him, is as it were to undervalue or put a lie upon
the Truth, and dishonor the holy Name by which he is called, for he that is in
Christ, knows that he which is born of him cannot lie, for he is kept by the
mighty power of God, that the wicked one touches him not, John 5.18. so among
the Brethren in Christ there is no place for an Oath, for there is no strife,
there is no lie, there is no fighter, plotter, killer, murderer, nor
disorderly person, but here is the true fear of God, and they that honor the
King, here is Christ the head of his Church, and every Member is his own order:
and those who trouble them, when they have all said, and done, scandalized,
reproached, and persecuted them, and tormented themselves with their vain
labor, must lie down in sorrow and confess, these are the Kings best
Subjects, who lift not a hand against him, neither can plot, nor contrive the
least evil against his Person and just power; for what they do against his
Person, or just power, they do against their own life, and the Truth they do
profess; for as we abide in the Truth, we can do no wrong to him nor any man
else, for Truth cannot wrong any man, neither those that are in it, but labors
for the good of all men, that all might come to the knowledge of it and be
saved, for he that walks in this path must do to every man, as he would have
every man to do to him, and this Law shall outlive all Laws to the contrary,
and this way, and they that walk in it, shall prosper, and all other shall soon
decay.

Object. But some may say, though some may be believed that walk as Christians,
yet others that walk in deceit are not to be believed.

Answ. I say, that those who are not in Truth are not to be believed though
they swear, for being in the transgression are captivated by the power of
darkness, who rules in the Children of disobedience, and these make little
Conscience of an Oath, and less to break it; for it is grown a fashion or
custom to take it, and also to break it, for you may see how little stead it
stood the King in formerly, and how little it advantaged all the several powers
since, and it will stand them in as little stead now, who trust to it; for how
did the Magistrates under the former powers, swear against King and House of
Lords, (and it may be had sworn once or twice before) and now swear for that
which formerly they swore against, there are but few but who are in the Truth
that will loose any thing for want of swearing, as is made manifest to all that
can see; and also those that love the Pope, and those that love the works of
the Devil, are unlikely by swearing to come to love the King, or be made true
Subjects to him, but those that love God, and keep his Commands, are they that
truly honor the King, and will be found faithful to him.

But something further to the Prophet Isaiah his words, which are, and be that
swears in the earth shall swear by the God of Truth, but he that is redeemed
from the earth swears not in the earth, but abiding in the Truth swears not
at all, for the former things are past away, and the Son of God is come, the
promise of God in whom the Prophets end, and all the promises o^ God in him are
yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us, 2 Cor. 1.20. for the word of
God, the Son of God, Jesus Christ the Truth of God, who was preached among the
Coriuths by the Apostle and others, was not yea and nay, but in him was yea;
and he that abides in the word, and the word in him, as in the Son of God, who
is yea, and amen, in Truth and Righteousness is in yea, but against Truth and
Righteousness is in nay, and what is more then this comes of evil; but he
that is in swearing is in the transgression, out of the Truth, and fallen under
Condemnation.

Isaiah prophesying in the time of the Law, when swearing was lawful, as
Circumcision, and other Ordinances were, as meats, and drinks, and diverse
washings, and carnal Ordinances imposed on them until the time of Reformation,
Heb. 9.^0. and the Prophet speaking of the calling of the Gentiles, who knew
not God, nor swear by his Name, but by their Idols and false Gods, and also of
a remnant of the Jews that he would bring forth, out of a great number who were
departed from him, that were as a smoke in his nose, whose Name should be left
for a curse, whom the Lord should slay and call his Servants (both Jews and
Gentiles that sought him) by another Name, who were to inherit his holy
Mountain; the which glory he mentions by way of illustrating the Jews worship
in its purity, which was to speak to their capacity, figuring forth the glory
to come, (which was to them invisible) by their worship in its purity, which
was visible and outward, and also that they should build houses, and plant
vineyards, and eat the fruit of them, and should enjoy the work of their hands,
and it should be (speaking by way of comparison) as the children of Israel
bring an Offering in a clean vessel into the bonse of the Lord, Isa. 66.20. And
I will take of them for Priests, and for Levites, and it shall come to pass,
that from one new Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all
flesh come to worship before me says the Lord, verse. 21, 23. so here you may
see the things mentioned under the Law, which are but the shadow of the good
things under the Gospel, and where the substance is come, the shadows are
abolished; and again, when it is said under the Law, every tongue shall swear,
when the Apostle Paul mentions the same Scripture in the time of the Gospel
(Mark) he says every tongue shall confess to God, as for example, Romans 14 11.
For it is written, as I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and
every tongue shall onfesse to God; Now see how it is written by the Prophet,
where Paul quotes it, Isa. 45.23. where it is written, every knee shall bow,
every tongue shall swear, here you may see plainly the Apostle changes it from
swear, to confess, because swearing was not to among Christians, and Paul again
in the Philippians 2.10, 11. where it is again mentioned in these words, that
every tongue shall confess (and not swear) that Jesus is the Lord, and here
you may plainly see, that the Commandment being changed, there was as
necessity that the words should be changed, according to the command of him who
said swear not at all, that his Name may be known to be above every Name of men
and Angels; Now this were enough for those that are not blind, to see the
Command changed by the Apostle himself, but those that will not hear the voice
of his Son, who speaks in their Consciences, will hardly hear the voice of his
Servants, though they speak by his Spirit.

Now I come to lay before you the Command of the Apostle James, who says, But
above all things my Brethren swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the
Earth, (Mark) neither by any other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay
nay, least ye fall into Condemnation, James 5.12.

Consider, above all things, is a word of mighty importance, that above all
snares of the Devil, we keep out of this, which above all things brings such
dishonor to our Lord Christ; (but those that know not his glorious Name, are
blind in this thing) for above all things in this his glory is chiefly
concerned, who is Gods Oath, and Covenant in righteousness, and truth, and
every true Christian is in Christ, Gods Covenant, in righteousness and truth,
first being in the Covenant (is not in himself) but in the power of God. 2.
Being in his Righteousness, can do no wicked thing, and therefore an Oath is
useless here, for it undervalues the power and righteousness of God, his Oath
and Covenant, which is to create us again in his own image, in his Son Christ
Jesus, which is the birth that sins not, which the wicked one cannot touch, 1
John 5.18.

Thirdly, he that is in the Truth Christ, is in that which the Devil is out of,
and there is no lie in Christ the Truth, and the that is in him speaks the
Truth, and does the Truth that he is in, the Spirit of Truth that cannot lie;
but he that swears he will be true, answers not the witness of God in men's
Consciences, but rather judges himself not true, but will be, and this will
which is out of the truth is man's, in which the power is not, for it is not in
him that wills, Romans 9.16. for Christ the Truth is the will of the Father,
brought forth in every true Christian, which will is our sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. The word is truth which sanctifies, sanctify them through thy
word, thy Word is Truth, John 17.17. and he that is sanctified through the
Truth, shows forth the Life, Truth, and Righteousness of God, which ends
Promises and Oaths, in him who is Yea and Amen for ever and ever.

But the true honor, in which God the Father is glorified, is in confessing
that his Son Jesus Christ is Lord, in bowing and submitting to his great Name,
(which is his power) in giving obedience to his Commands, though it cost us the
loss of all, even the laying down of our outward lives; this is a good
confession, and as Christ himself who swear not, but made a good confession
before Pontius Pilate, in the obedience of his Fathers Commands, and submitted
to the death, and abode in his Love, and obtained a Name, which is above every
name, and as he abode in his Fathers love, so we must abide in his love, which
is by giving up to the obedience of his Commands, who says swear not at all,
and those who love him, and follow him, obey and honor him.

And the Apostle James, who spoke by his spirit, said, above all things my
Brethren swear not, and says Christ if ye love me keep my Commandments, Joh.
14, 1. and says Paul, if any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
acursed, 1 Cor. 16.22. But they who imprison and persecute the people of God,
because they will not break the Commands of Christ, they love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, and woe is their portion, it had been better they had never been
born; for as many as are come into Christ, their yea is yea, and their nay nay,
and are out of Condemnation; for there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ, but where their yea is not yea, nor their nay nay, they are out of the
truth, and there is the lying, swearing, and for-swearing, and swearing cannot
bring into the truth, for it is against Christ the Truth, and James his Command
the Apostle of truth, and is under the Condemnation.

But the Common Objection among men (who know not the truth) is this, which
Paul mentions in the 6. of the Heb. and the 16. In these words; for men verily
swear by the greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is to them (mark not to us)
an end of all strife

Answ. The Apostle in this place mentioning the practices of men, which swear
in the old time, who swear by the greater, that it might be the greater
engagement to them to perform their Oaths, and to confess the God of Heaven to
be the greater, because it was the practice among men to swear by the greater,
and a command to the Jews; and so the Lord willing more abundantly to confirm
his promises to the seed, swear to man by himself, who was the greatest, (that
in old time) men were to swear by; but in the new Covenant old things were done
away, and all things were become new.

Object. But if it be said the Apostle spoke to the present practice among men.

Answ. I say it may be the practice among the Jews at this day, who are in the
unbelief cut off; but if it be, it is sin to them, as is all the rest of their
Ordinances which are ended in Christ, being that thereby they go about, (by the
practice of them) to establish a righteousness of their own, endeavoring to
make void the righteousness of Christ, who by their practice deny him to be
come, to whom Christ said, If ye believe not that I am he, you shall dye in
your sin, and whither I go ye cannot come, Job. 8.21.24.

Object. And again if it be said, that it was then a practice among men, and an
Oath or Confimation is to them an end of all strife.

Answ. I say it is a practice among men at this day, who are in strife, but
both these practices, swearing, and strife, are evil, and under Condemnation,
being both out of the truth, against Christ's Command and practice, and against
the Apostles Command, and the practice of them who walked in truth, and it is
so common now, that it is grown into a form of ungodliness, and all in it are
far from truth, that they cannot believe one another, without an oath, nor then
neither; for as swearing is common, so also is for-swearing, for without an
oath little Law or Justice is to be had, nor then neither, for him who is in
truth; but if a man can swear, he may soon have a Lawyer to lie for him, if he
be well paid beforehand, for he can draw up a form of lies, and say it is a
form of Law; And this is the way men take to end their money, and to begin the
strife, which many times continues while their money lasts, and then it may
soon be ended at home, by their neighbors, for these things the Land mourns,
and groans under these heavy burdens.

Again, if it were a practice among men, let us consider what men it were, that
it was practiced among, whether they are men of the World, or men in Christ,
(which were new men) but I shall make it appear, to be among the men of the
World, the carnal men who were in strife, and there the oath, and swearing was
to end it; but Christ the Truth, where he is received, and witnessed, strife
comes to be ended, and the Oath not to be used; but that it may appear what men
it were, read Jam. 3.14, 15, 16. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in
your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth; this wisdom is earthly,
sensual and divelish, for where envying and strife is (mark) there is Confusion
and every evil work. Can any be so blind as to think these things were among
the Apostles, and owned and practiced among the Brethren of Christ, who walked
in the Spirit? for these were the fruits of the flesh, the works of Babylon,
which is Confusion, and there is every evil work, which was not among the elect
People of God; for those that are carnal, walk as men says Paul, what men?
Such that are in strife, and swearing, 1 Cor. 3 3. For ye are yet carnal, for
whereas there is among you, envying and strife, and Divisions, are ye not
carnal and walk as men? Here is the word men, answering the words, for men
verily swear, which men you see the Apostles reproves here and in diverse
places, and in Romans 13.12.13. Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness,
and let us put on the Armor of Light, let us walk honestly as in the day, not
in Rioting and drunkenuess, nor in Chambering and wantonness, (mark) not in
strife and envying, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ; Here you may see that
strife is condemned to be one of the works of darkness, in such who had not put
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and these be the men that have not put on Christ, who
are in strife and swear to end it, and says Paul, let nothing be done through
strife, etc. Phil 2, 3. And the Servant of the Lord must not strive, Tim. 2.2.
So it is sufficently proved, that the Oath and Swearing was among them that
walked not in Christ the Truth, but among such that were Carnal, and walked in
darkness, in which they are now that are in envying and Strife, which be evil
works; and they that swear do another evil work to end it, and here the
beginning and the end is evil, being the work of the Devil.

But the Children of the Light, (whom the dark World in scorn call Quakers) are
come to the word which was in the beginning, (who ends the first Covenant) even
to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that
speaks better things then the blood of Abel; and we cannot refuse, nor turn
away from his voice, who now speaks from Heaven (which shakes both Heaven and
Earth) for we who are faithful, and hear the beloved Son of God, (who says
swear not at all, we do receive a Kingdom which cannot be moved (which is not
of this World, therefore the World sees it not) and having grace whereby we
may serve him acceptably, cannot but obey, reverence, and fear our God, who as
a consuming sire; And now for the obedience of his Commands, whom we serve,
reverence and fear, are we persecuted and imprisoned, (by those who neither
serve nor fear him) and our goods spoiled, contrary to the Law of God, and also
of the Nation; but in all these things we rejoice, and are more then
Conquerers, through him that has loved us, whose power and glorious presence is
witnessed among us; and his love is felt, in filling of us with the joy of his
spirit, by which we can freely forgive all our enemies, and pray that those who
dispitefully use us, may come to see their wicked way, to the way of
righteousness, where they may find mercy and be saved; But if they will not
hear, nor repent, nor speedily leave off the evil of their doings; I say Our
God who is a consuming fire, the Lord who is risen to plead the Innocence of
our cause, which is come before him, who is the God of the whole Earth, to whom
all vengance belongs, he will recompense them according to their deeds.

And is it not a shame for men, who would be called Christians, to persecute,
and imprison those who obey Christ, and keep his Commands, for obeying him, and
keeping his Commands, and walking as they have him, and his Apostles, for an
example? who said let us hold fast the Profession of our faith without
wavering, not forsakeing the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner
of sum is, but exhort one a another, following peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord; and who is he that can accuse us, that
we have not followed peace in our meetings, and holiness in our conversations?
but they it be who neither love peace, nor holiness in their Conversations,
that disturb us in our peaceable meetings, and Assemblies, as the manner of the
Churches of Christ were, and now are, who worship the Lord in spirit and in
truth, and as we are kept and abide in the truth, we can injure no man; but
walking in love, and doing to all men, as we would have all men should do to
us; But all men (though they may be called Christians) have not faith, and
these are the unreasonable men, who make war against the Lamb and his
followers; because they do show forth that life, which they that persecute them
do profess, and therein they are unreasonable and cruel; For if every one who
names the Name of Jesus, did depart from iniquity, persecution would soon
cease, and Love would increase; but woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with him;
but his blessing is, and shall be with his seed, and his spiritual presence
with his offspring, which has blossomed, and budded, and shall fill the face
of the Earth with fruit.

From one who waits to see the Lord exalt himself, over all this Enemies.

Morgan Watkins.
From Albans Common Goal, this 7th. of the 12th Month, 1660 Where I now suffer
bonds for the truth of God, and the Testimony of Jesus.
THE END.

