A LETER OF UNITY Tending, generally to a Peace, especially to that between
Presbyterian Independent
Opinion.

Written July 12. 1648

LONDON, Printed Anno. Dom. 1648.

SJR,
I Received your Letter, welcome to me, though empty of any news, which in
that you Father on the turbulency of these times, give me leave, Sir to tell
you it is your fault in part, that the times prove so, when as it is within the
power of your known wisdom and abilityes to have provided against the happening
of, or to compose the troublesomnesse of these times now they are befallen us.
A single person, amongst may more, can act but his part of work, but a man of
eminency and worth can exced his fellow workmen in the doing it. As it is the
ablest task of an honest and wise Citizen, to keep the City at Unity within it
self, so it is of each Member in a body politic to preserve that Body
unanimous and entire. The unhappy contest between Ye in your House, befalling
ye upon your victory, have again divided it into Presbyterian, Jndependent,
two mature and as yet unsettled Tenants. And it is much, that two opinions,
betwixt which there is no material difference, should cause a difference, yea
such an one, as if pursued, must prove destructive to your selves and friends.
To prove that they are not materially differing, is no hard task, the Persons
partaking with, and maintaining them may differ, each party striving to lead
up and multiply their parties following them. To show that there is no
considerable difference between the two Tenants. Or that they are both
uncertain, unsettled yet, you may please to observe the sound, yet reserved,
judgment of them both: First, The Presbyterian and the Covenanters maintaining
that Government, no man will think, that their Covenant does so presently
oblige, as that the Presbyterian Government should immediately and forthwith
commence or begin as soon as the Covenant is taken, but it is to be presumed,
then, when the War is ended, when a firm and well-grounded Peace is settled:
All Government whatsoever is incompatible with a Civil War, which destroys
and confounds all Laws and Order: So the Independent. who contends for
Liberty, etc. is not, or may not be for ought We know, simply and always
against all Government, peradventure only for a time, until he fees a quiet
and more calm time, wherein the Presbyterian, or any other wholesome, or good
form of Government may be without interuption and firmly settled. Then his
opinion so strictly for* Jndependency may alter, when oppurtunity shall serve,
without impeachment to his judgment, or inconstancy in his opinion. Neither is
Jndependency an abdication always of all Government, nor positively, any sect
at all: it may seem rather a privation of all Sects in Government, and how
long? until a composure and setlement of these present differences for a peace
is not settled as yet rather instead of it, an eminent and dreadful face of a
New War, this present Discord ocasioning the same. The privative particle [in]
in the word it self [Jndependant] implies as much as that he holds off, and
declines all bonds of Government, but no man knows, how long: His managing his
intended course in the maintaining this his Tenent, may resemble a Traveller's
purpose bound for his journey to a Country a far off, who deeming the next
way, to his journey's end to be unsafe and dangerous, goes therefore out of the
next way, stays sometimes by the way, goes sometimes back, always yet
providing and casting with himself what may make for, what against his rest
and quiet, when he comes to his journeyes end, which, notwithstanding these
hesitances, he intends, and has it always in his eye, as surely, as if he had
hastened thereunto: So it may fare with the Jndependent for ought can be
discerned to the contrary. He may aim at this or that particular form of
Government to be hereafter settled; and in this his contending for Liberty, may
desire peradventure to shake of this present Yoke of Government for a time,
which hard and heavilie preesseth him, thinking that without shaking off such a
yoke there can be no firm or settled Government at all. Not that he does
totally, or finally decline or detest all Government, either the Presbyterian,
or any other form, but that he expects a more free and fit season, for
establishing that which he intends, and aims at, namely upon the establishment
of a firm and lasting peace:

For there is not, therefore a certain or settled Peace, because (there are no
visible Forces appearing on the one side, or because the King does in his
passionate, and mournful words, (expressed of late in several his
Declarations) tell the People, How he longs for peace, lamenting the want of
it, how sensible he is of, how desirous to shun the effusion of more blood;
Neither is the Army therefore to be disbanded upon this Name or desire of
Peace: the war may break out again especially when as the conquering party,
the Parliament whose Army it is, and by whole aid they have gained the power,
is so much inveighed against, opposed, and by calumniating tongues, traduced
for the abusing their power to oppression, injustice, and unnecessary
protracting this War, Neither can the Parliament as yet, act in their full
strength to the settlement of Peace, They have enough to do to maintain their
own Power against a restless Enemy, who seeks all opportunities of
advantages of prevailing against them, So that, howbeit the end of each of
their desires (the King's the Parliament's) may be Peace, the ways of
attaining it, are differing, and so repugnant each to other, as we cannot
term this present cessation from a War, a safe or lasting peace.

On the other side, the Presbyterian for his Covenant sake drives at a
particular form of Government, subject yet to interpretation and dispute (to
See the Articles in the Covenant for the Presbiter Government.
be regulated according to God's Word to the best reformed Churches or the
like) wherefore it cannot have any positive or firm settlement in men's
consciences, until more precisely defined what it is, and to be regulated by
the like power, which did institute it. Now that these two Opinions no more
differing or crossing within themselves then a rasa tabula does differ from the
Character, which may now be printed in that Table, and anon blotted out again,
should break out into virulency and opposition each against other,
artificially and handsomely hatched by a third and malignant party who have bin
convicted, and censured for their malignancy and thereby by a Peace has seemed
to be well nigh settled, that that Party should, by your Division, now prevail
and become Judges of ye, and of your Friends, the executioners of their own
feirce malice; what a misery and confusion must befall us all, after an
expecting our security through your accord, and hoping through your sobriety,
and temper (next unto God's blessing) to have enjoyed an un-interrupted Peace?
Not that the success and victory obtained by your friends assistance should
inflame ye into discord about terms merely notionall, at least not universally
received and approved, because controverted as yet, and strongly By the
University of Oxford at a Convocation held there June 1. 1647.
objected against by Others of a contrary Diet to both the Presbyterian and
Jndependent, Terms also scarce understood, not heard of by the most part of
the People; who rather then they will undergo the charge and hardship of a
continued or second War, about opinions unknown, about Words unheard of,
except in the worst sense of Factious, Schismatic, rending from the ancient
and received form of Government, will choose rather to submit to the mercy of
a former or latter Enemy, and to be enslaved by enduring an Iron yoke, then to
be consumed by a lasting War.

If concerning these new, unheard of Tenants (which may be good and profitabl^
when retained, yet disturbing by reason of their Novity) Ye shall embroile your
selves, your Parliament and Army in a second War, haying so victoriously sped
by your mutual assisting one another in the first, and consequently loose what
ye have gained, ye cannot but foresee the event. The Quarrel seems to be
tripartite, between the Presbyterian, Jndependent, and the Kings party: you
wilnot find it so, but two Parties to join against a third, although being
fienely carried, it may otherwise outwardly appear. And those two, which in
their Bodies are most contiguous each to other, will sooner unite in their
accord to the subduing of the third, then having gained the power by degrees
extirpate the other also, and set up what they please themselves. So, having
prevailed through your dividings will by the hard chance of your example,
better manage their Victory to keep it, then Ye did, when Ye prevailed, which
We, the standers by, are most sensible of, who shall be scorned and trampled on
in your sufferings occasioned by your contention. The division was at first
betwixt the King's Party, and the Parliament, how occasioned, how prosecuted,
most men know, together what has bin the progress, what the success. To
breviate it in one word, (setting aside all emergent and collateral Disputings
and Debates, all Changes, Chances and Innovations, which have fallen out since
the beginning of this War, and are no proper effects thereof) The King
having suffered much wrong to be done by his subordinate Ministers of Justice,
to his Freeborn Subjects (which was not for 1.2. or 3. years only done but
for many, and until a Parliament was called) and no power in being to emulate
and match the Kings, save the Court of Parliament of Lord and Commons assembled
for vindicating such wrongs, as, for redress of greivances in the
Commonwealth, See the Statute 36. Edw. 3. cap. 10.
the proper end of instituting and ordaining a Parl. at the first. Those
Ministers of Justice were rescued by Arms and a strong hand from the hand of
Justice. To which by the way, the Kings friends recriminatorily, Object. That
the Parliament has done the like, and that therefore each Power (the Kings and
the Parliaments) are guilty of injustice of Oppression etc. So the Parliament
is engaged in a War, as ye are now enforced to secure and maintain
themselves, their friends, succeeding Parliaments, and the Laws the Sinews of
all peace, and in that they have as yet prevailed, wrestling with many
difficulties and finding yet reluctance, much repining and envy at their
proceedings, they imprison, impose an fine their Adversaries, yea they lay
Contributions and heavy Taxes on their Friends, amongst other the Subjects of
this Kingdom, until their intended work for a safe and lasting Peace be
finished, Nevertheless it is not to be thought that they offer this,
simpliciter per se, and with a purpose to continue in so doing, but per
accidens, being thereunto necessitated, for the maintenance of their power, for
defense of themselves and their Adherents. Hence was die first occasion, the
issue of these six years War, and will be the fuel of a New fire, kindling
through your discords, If not timely prevented. If the Parliament upon their
Victory, shall subdivide again, rending into new Opinions, and they so
earnestly maintained by each others Partisans, as that betwixt the K. and the
Parl. it cannot be, but that the more weak and vanquished Party of those two
(the Presbyterian and Independent) would rather adhere and apply themselves to
their first Adversary, to join with him for their assistance then to be overcom
by their last in this new subdivision. If you please to forecast what may
probably be the Event, how nearly ye are linked in a mutual botherhood with
another Nation, what has bin the end of your mutual League, the preservation
and maintenance of the Peace of both Kingdoms, consequently of the third. For
this rent rests not with us alone (...) of English Nation, it concerns our
united Friends, who have had an hand in settling the Presbyterian Government,
not that they contend happily to have it immediately to begin before the War
is ended, and in a rigid unalterable way to inure, or to endure for ever.
Another Parliament may alter and abrogate it, as this Parliament has, the
Episcopal, their Articles, Manifestoes, and Declarations do evidence no such
conceit of power or primacy over us, or our Parliaments, as to make any
Government of their devising perpetual amongst us, no more then any of our
devising, perpetual as unto them (We are governed by distinct and different
Laws from them, Neither is the Union betwixt Us and Them, any thing the less,
because of our several Forms of Government in Church and Commonwealth) but
during the time of these combustions, and They in part foreseeing the eminency
of our troubles, to join with, and assist us in the removing of them: Now to
forsake Them, or the Leagve entered into by Us and Them [one Article where* of is
the maintenance of the Presbyterian or such a like form of Government, yet
with an express limitation, how: with a tacit sense, when, where to bid
battle, both to them, and to your solemn Vow. Unless ye shall be evinced
by sufficient Arguments to the contrary; as where strength of Reason,
inevitable necessity, your endeavors for the maintenance of a firm and
well-grounded Peace still encountered by a Malignant and adverse Party, who can
yet insinuate [their desire of, and affections unto such a Peace) to be the
cause of your deserting it, For such respects and interests may in any
impartial and un-byassed Judgment, dispense with and make void your tie, or
Covenant, subject unto greater and more obliging Interests, even in the
covenanters eye, unless they be seasoned with much prejudice.

Withal consider, Sir the prowess, valor and success of your Army, the
faithfulness of your General, how victoriously he has sped in his designs
and enterprises of reducing the strong holds and fortresses held in opposition
unto ye, consider withal his Armies strength and power, in case they become
your Enemies, who have hitherto bin your friends, And to have it quarrel with
ye, or ye with it, and the City of London the place of your security, the
Arsenall and Bulwark of your safety, well rampierd with the prayers,
affections, and and hearty supplications unto Almighty God, of the ablest
Citizens for your prosperity, but now divided in it self, as We your friends,
ignorant how to demean our selves, when we see how many of your adherents
wavering now, and not fully or constantly resolved to continue partakers with
ye, standing neutrall ready rather upon your dissentings to betake themselves
to the party adverse to yours, finding in them consent and unity where we see
also what a confusion must attend the progress of a new War, the dangers,
jealousies, and uncertainties which most men will apprehend, or must be Subject
to, what a Revolution there will be of all things into a new distraction, for
howbeit the War seem near ended betwixt the King's Party and the
Parliament's, that being censured and punished for their delinquency in case
they should prevail, which cannot be without your Dividing (for all the
consultation, privy and close Actings and contriving are about, and how to
help the King to his former power, that thence his party may recover their
strength again] with what revenge they shall execute their malice on your
friends, under the Notion and Censure of being Rebels, and having gained the
power, make good, the Censure by the Sword.

In the doubtful event of the Victory (as which side shall prevail, which
shall be overcome) your Valiant Cheiftain shall be, or ye will suspect him so,
Courted by that Power which he has vanquished to be overcome himself, and what
the event? He which with five other more Lords and Gentlemen adherents to the
Parliament has bin by a clancular and privy Oath taken at Oxford [about four
years since] by the King's Party abiding, and repairing thither, sworn in the
fwearers Conscience to be a Traitor, Now the same Party do Court and smile on
him, whither to own him as their friend, or to use him as an instrument of
their hopes, assuring and setting before him his Majesty's grace and pardon for
what is past, And leaving it to the doutbfulnesse of that Question, Whither it
may be better for him to persist in his Active and Constant way for procuring
this Kingdoms Peace, so to run the hazard of being yet overcome, before he
has completed it, or to stand to his Majesty's pardon, in case he shall
revolt and assist the King, The Resolution of which Question depends upon the
various acceptions of his Judges in case of his being overcome, for whatsoever
the King's temporary and personal mercy may be in granting pardon to your
General, the Parties who have already adjudged him a Traitor, can by a
stronger influence on the King's affections take off the not working of such
pardon from any blemish to be cast upon his Majesty with that politic and
applauded principle, Amo proditionem, odi proditorem. Neither is a Pardon in
these hazardous and uncertain times so sure and full a reprive or safeguard to a
man, as his own Innocence is. A pardon is subject to reservations in the
pardoner, to disputes, as whither the Pardon be lightly pursued and duly
pleaded It has in it many perquisites and circumstances to make it complete,
not to be hereafter questioned; the Law has many wrestings and niceties in it,
especially in the practice and manner of pardoning, to render the true sense,
intricate, wherefore no certainty or lasting confidence in a Pardon had, And if
your General has out of an honest, noble, and clear integrity, God and his
own Conscience bearing him witness, and no man suspects the contrary, taken up
Arms to serve his Country, for the maintenance of their Just Liberties, a
sacred Text has poynted out the way which he is to take, by the comparison it
makes between an humane and Almighty Power, it is better to trust in God, who
can defend Him in his innocence, then to put any confidence in Princes, who can
pardon Crimes. These things need not to be set down before your veiw. Ye are
circumspect and wise to foresee and avoid your dangers if the earnest thirst
after making good your new opinions, mislead ye not into a continued discord.
Lastly, compare the power of your General and his Army ready now to invade the
City, with the condition of your friend in it divided now within it self, and
having of strangers many Incendiaries and close Pioneers in it to undermine
your strength, diverse of the Citizens along time your enemies, especially those
of the more loose and meaner sort, thirsting for, and ready to be in a
combustion to prey on the wealthier (your Friends) It is yet I verily presume
within the power of your wisdoms (God seconding your just endeavors) to
dispell these eminent clouds by complying with the Army, by reconciling those
two, between whom there seems to be, but is no real difference, unles the
strong malice, and exquisite subtilty of a third make it so, or the pride of
heart between the rigid Presbyterian, and strict Jndependent, both violent and
headstrong in their ways. The Author of Peace, and Giver of Grace to the
Humble, direct and prosper Ye in Your ways to both, So prays.

For Sir I. S. Knight, one of the Members of the House of Commons.
Your very affectionate and humble Servant. S W.

FINIS

