A Watch for a Wise-mans observation.


I.
ONe God there is, of Wisdom, Glory, Might,
One Faith there is, to guide our souls aright:
One Truth there is, that errors does descry.
One Baptism, for to know all Christians by.
II.
Two Testaments there are, the Old and New,
Wherein the Law, and Gospel thou may view:
The one for Works, and Deeds does precepts give,
The other says, the Just by faith shall live.
III.
Three Persons in the Glorious Trinity,
Make one true God, in perfect Unity,
The Father, Son and Holy Ghost, these three;
For ever equal and Eternal be.
IV
Four holy, blessed, Sanctified men,
For comfort of all Christians that did pen,
Our Saviors Birth, Life, Death and passion,
Whereon depends our Souls salvation.
V
Five Senses do in every man maintain,
A government of power to Rule and Reign,
Thy Hearing, Seeing, Tasting, Feeling, Smelling,
Which all at Death, will leave thee, and their dwelling
VI
Six days thou have allowed to labor in,
(So Merciful and good thy God has been)
Of seven, to himself he takes but one.
Oh rob him not of that, to leave him none.
VII
Seven liberal Arts, by a Divine Instinct,
Unto Man's understanding soul, are linckt:
Rhetorique, Grammar, Music, Geometry,
Arithmeticke, Logic, and Astronomy.
VIII
Eight Persons in the Arc, of righteous Noah,
Were saved, when for Sin God did destroy,
The foul defiled World, all creatures drowned,
Which in that Ship of safety were not found.
IX
Nine Muses like unto the Heavens Spheres,
To Sacred tunes entice inclining Ears:
To elevate sad melancholy mind,
And cheer the heart that is dolefully inclined.
X
In ten Precepts God has his Law declared,
Man breaks them all, and so unless God spared,
And in his Mercy did our Sins remit,
Our just reward, were the Infernal Pit.
XI.
Eleven Disciples did with Jesus pray,
When Judas did the Son of God betray,
Through Covetousness, for greedy gain he fell,
To be Perditions child condemned to Hell,
XII
Twelve Tribes there were amongst our fathers old,
Twelve Articles, our Christian faith does hold,
Twelve Gates to new Jerusalem there be,
Unto which City Christ bring thee and me.


The Emperor, King, Noble, and Beggar all, Must yield to Death, and come when
he does call. Where is Alexander? Where is Plato? Where is Croesus?
Mortuus est.
O Earth, of Earth, observe this well,
When Earth in Earth shall come to dwell,
Where Earth with Earth shall close remain,
Till Earth from Earth do rise again,
And Earth before his Judge do come,
For to receive a final doom.
If Earth on Earth had lived so,
That Earth no fruits of Faith can show:
Then what reward shall Earth expect,
That did on Earth his God neglect,
Oh serve the Lord with all thy power,
For here thou have no certain hour,
Remember man when thou came here,
How naked poor thou did appear,
And how again (what ere thou have)
Thou naked must return to Grave.
Thy wooden Chest, (a narrow place)
A Coffin lid close up thy face.
Thy soul (if saved) to heaven flies,
Thy body here a rotting (...)
Forsaken of thy friends and ^^^ine,
As thou on Earth had never been,
When they have brought thee to the grave,
And yielded Earth, what Earth does crave,
They back return from whence they came,
Till others do the very same,
In following them, as they did thee,
This course with all the world will be.
And here is thy portion and thy lot,
With men thou shall be soon forgot,
And so into oblivion pass,
With such a man sometimes he was:
But neither beauty, riches, strength,
Could give his life a minutes length.
Therefore, O man, think on thy state,
Before thy life be out of date:
Unto thy God for Mercy pray,
That at thy last and dying day,
The glorious Angels may thee bring,
Where blessed Saints for ever sing.
Amen.
London Printed by R. I. for Samuel Rand dwelling at Holborne-Bridge. 1650.


