A Dialogue betw^^^ Life and Death.

Very requisite for the Conte^plation of all Transitory Pilgrims, and pious
min^ed Ch^isti^^^.



(...) ^^^^on by W. W. and are to be sold by Edwar^ (...) (...) ^auls
Church-ya^d.

To the Worshipful, truly affecte^ and no less meritorious, Mr James Bis^
Senior Esquire: the Author wishes Grace, Mercy, and Peace. SIR,
THe manifold courtesies received at you^ hands, deserves a far more
gratificat^on than my ability, either the one way (...) the other is able to
give you: yet to b^ oblivious of all, were treb^e ingratitude And therefore to
shun so absurd an error, I have in my dutiful affection, (laying aside
Commic^ Thaleia) presented to your Worships view, Death Conquering, that must
be Conquered. Although the subject is not correspondent to festival times, yet
to (...) thought upon at all times: and so in conclusion (...) time omited. But
to make my Wings bigger then (...) Neast, were rediculous. And therefore in the
best (...) affection, I rest.

Your obliged, Richard Wates.

DIALOGVE BETWEEN LIFE AND DEATA.
The Speakers for life are Wisdom, Beauty, Wealth, Youth, and Age.
iconic representation of Death as a skeleton holding an arrow in one hand and
an hourglass in the other
Death begins, and proclaims his authority from whom he is sent.
FRom the Imperial Throne of your Creator
With this my large Commission I am sent,
My name is Death, which most so much abhor,
And would through (frailty this my sting prevent
But my Embassage no one may withstand,
Being sealed in Eden by the Almighties hand.
This sandy glass, which in my hand I bear,
Does measure out the time of mortal man:
Which being run, with this my darting spear,
I bring him to the grave, both pale and wan:
Nor King nor Keysar, nor the servile slave,
That can be privileged from the grave.
No golden bribes, though lean I am in show,
Shall cause me at fond worldlings once connive,
Nor pleading Orator (whose wisdom flow
Like to bright Pallas (shall his date survive:
Where Is brave Hector, Pompey Alexander;
Why gone by me that am the worlds commander.
There Is not a day does pass, but I do bring
A full filled catologue of the deads name,
Unto your dreadful Lord and heavenly King,
Some to their consolations, some their shame:
Where, in a book of brass, the total sum,
Are all recorded, till the judgment come.
The utmost Region of the earth I tread,
To find the Christian Pagan, fair and foul:
Millions of millions living I leave dead
Some with a blessed, some a cursed soul;
I cannot give omittance for an hour
Having my charge from the eternal poor.
Death's thy Advantage.


depiction of Death with his arrow confronting Youth
Death speaks to Youth.
THou that art youthful and art newly come,
To speak the prologue of a greater sum:
Yet err thy speech be ended, death does spy,
The period of thy sand; and thou must dye.
Youth pleads for it self.
But I am young, and in the prime of days,
Then, were it not ingratitude in thee
To nip the garland of my new grown Bays,
Before it come to full maturity?
I am but threescore years and ten, nay more
I may survive, ere nature gives me over.
Had we not example late in father Parre,
That lived a hundred forty, and twelve year's;
Although times glass to few do run so far,
Yet men of foure-scores gate there often appears;
Then were it not mere cruelty in death,
For to bereave my youthful days of breath.
Ah! let me live, that I the world may know,
And reap the joys my aged Sire has sown;
Let death to some sick pined person go,
Whose heavy yoke does make his heart to groan;
Upon my youth feed not thy malice fell,
Till I have drunk at Aristotle's well.
Death answers youth.
ALas poor youth! have thou not often s^ene
The silly Lamkin to the market come
Before his damme; true, it is thy days are green,
And now but entering to a greater sum:
But as the days, and hours, and months, and years
Come on upon thee, so come on thy cares.
Nor to abridge thy youthful days of life
Is malice shown; but now to cut thee down,
Is the road way to set thee free from strife,
And add unto thy soul a lasting Crown:
I shall acquit thee from a world of sins,
Which longer days (in losing) greatly wins.
And ah! were thou but capable to know,
The intricate designs of mortal man;
Now he is in the gulf of grief and woe,
Dogged at the heels with sad despair, and than
Perhaps raised high on proud ambitions wing,
Whilst he forgets his God and heavenly king.
Nor may I dally with thy tender days,
I must dispatch my errand being sent,
Then fear not silly youth, I bring the joys,
And free thee from all earthly discontent.
See, see, thy glass is run, take here this sheet,
And lay thee down at Deaths triumphant feet.
O happy Change.


depiction of Death, holding a shroud and standing over Youth
EVen such is man, that lives by breath,
Each moment changing unto death.
Arise, this is no place of rest.


depiction of Death with its arrow standing over Wisdom
Death speaks to Wisdom.
THou that have wisdom, and apprehend
As much as to poor mortal man does tend;
And rightly can discern earth, sea, and sky;
Yet man for all this wisedom's borne to dye.
Wisdom pleades for it self.
CAnnot my large Apologies acquit
My body from thy rage and cruel stroke?
Cannot my pregnant and ingenious wit
Study a new found way to slip thy yoke?
Cannot the muses and deep Arts divine
Prevent the cruel blow Death does assign?
Nor yet the knowledge of my mothers breast,
( Oxford and Cambridge) not one way devise
For to escape thee; or should I request
With tears of purple blood from weeping eyes?
Or with orations framed from Art most high,
Enough to pierce the ten fold Orbs and sky.
Death answers Wisdom.
HAd Jove begot thee in Minerva's arms,
And had more learning than e're mortal yet,
Or were thou drencht whereas the Muses swarms,
With holy raptures; yea, and round beset
With Angels for thee: yet know that I am
Inexorable to them, or man.
Where Is Solomon, that wise beloved King?
Prophets, and Prediviners, where are they?
Did not this impartial hand soon bring
Their bodies to be lodged in beds of clay?
And so must thine: for lo, thy glass is run,
No wisdom can preserve thee, Death being come.
What not dye, thou piece of proud earth.


depiction of Death attacking Beauty with its arrow
Death speaks to Beauty.
THou that have beauty, Princely hearts to move,
Enough to make cold death in fiery love;
Yet know fair dame, the beauty of thine eye
Must be ecclipsed, being borne to dye.
Wealth pleads for its self.
CAnnot my bags of gold with Death prevail?
Though I bring milions to escape thy stroke
So to be privileged from the gaile,
And not be subject to thy painful yoke;
I Will give thee all my revenewes beside,
So I in Golgatha may not be spide.
Take Crown and Scepter on the same condition
Jewels and accoutrements take them all,
So that my name from out thy strict commission
Be wholly cancelled that I never fall:
Thy looks are terrible, hidious, and thin,
That makes me tremble at my former sin.
Death answers to wealth.
WEre all the Mines that in the earth does lie,
Dug and converted to useful coin;
Jewels and treasure that your Ma chants buy
In land ajacent, or beyond the line:
Yet all were far too little to suffice,
For why? man's life cannot be bought with price.
Dives was rich, Pirrus a Crown did wear,
Croesus had millians yet one touch of mine,
Did cause them tremble with inward fear,
When wealth, and Life at once they must resign
Go, change the bags of gold for one poor sheet
And lay thee down at Deaths triumphant feet.
Only a grave remains for thee.


depiction of Death with its arrow confronting Old Age
Death speaks to old age.
THou that a hundred winters have ore-gone,
Living to see thy daughters daughters son;
(And many imperfections make thee cry;)
Yet it is infallible, all flesh must dye.
Age pleads for it self.
FVll fourscore years of age I am at least,
And yet the frailty of my flesh desire
Those fourscore years may farther be encreast;
But then considering how my senses tire,
I wish for Death, for why? I feel
Full many griefs, even from my crown to heel.
"Bald is my head where once my hair took place
"Dotage possesses the better part of sense;
"Furrows and wrincles grow within my face,
"My dried gums stand for my teeths defense,
"The port-holes of mine ears are stopped up quite
"A cloudy dimnesse has o'revaild my sight.
"My feet and ancles weak and feeble are
"That hardly can my upper part support:
"My legs and thighs and arms that brawny were:
"Now lanke, and thin, and lean appears for it,
"My inward parts does feelingly consume,
"Through Tissiek, Cough, continual coldness Rhume.
"My form grows crooked, stooping to the ground,
"Stinking my breath, my joints they tremble all,
"A teasty Coler in me does abound?
"Yea my whold Microcosme begins to fall;
"And yet me thinks (through fear) that I could crave
"One year or two forbearance from the grave.
Death answers old Age.
WOnder of wonders, that thy frame of clay,
Thy stinking carcass, and a trunk decayed
Should have desire to one poor future day;
O! rather wish my stroke be not delaid;
Thy strength ^t is impaired through grief and p^ine,
As borne a child, become a child again.
Thy glass is run, and nature gives thee over,
Earth must to earth, until the trump shall sound,
See thy Sands period not one minute more
Thou must survive; there is thy deadly wound.
Youth, Wisdom Beauty, Strngth, Wealth, nor old Age.
That can the fury of stern Death assuage.
Have thou forgot who suffered on the Cross,
That all believers should to heaven ascend?
And at thy downfall shall loud voices sing,
Death where is thy Conquest; Hell where is thy sting.
When thou shall swallowed be to the abis.
Of black Gehema, and the gulf of woe;
Then shall the voice of comfort, joy, and bliss
Be to the blessed: Come, and with me go
Into my Fathers Kingdom, and rceive
What neither Death nor Time shall from you reave.
Deaths Acelamation.
WHo can assist me with a stood of tears!
I may gush out whole rivers from mine eyes!
And sighs by millions, at the voice I hears!
That I must be excluded heavenly joys!
All mortals living, whilst you yet have breath
Live well, to dye, and dye, to live through Death.
Deaths Memorandum to the middle aged.
WHen I look in the glass, and note my hairs.
I see some gray, and other some impaires:
But looking farther on records I find
My date almost summed up, for man assigned:
Which rightly noting, then I straight begins
To number if I could my world of sins.
But find them numberless: it is not time then
To shake off drowsiness, and catch my pen?
It Is time for me, and all the world beside,
Oil in our Lamps with speed that we provide,
Lest that the Bridegroom come, we not prepared,
And so through Satan's Wiles become ensnared;
Yet think, that in uncertainties it is sure,
All flesh must dye, but when, none knows the hour.
Man's Meditation.
TO Meditate of Death, and of our end,
Cannot but make us tremble to offend:
Because as Death leaves us, and fast binds us,
Judgment as infallible will find us.
Another.
Physicians know (or else should know at least)
How man's health is impaired and how increast:
And often men's life prolongs through skill and Art,
But yet no Physic can withstand Deaths Dart.
Since that the life of wretched mortal man
Is but in length much like a span;
What curious care then should we have in this?
To spend one hairs breadth of that span amiss.
A Hymn of Praises, to the most blessed and glorious Trinity.
1.
SIng to the Lord all honor laud, and praise,
that did us raise
From earth whereon we tread
and being dead,
These corpse of earth, shall in the earth be led.
2.
Until the trumpe shall summon us to joys,
or sad annoyes:
Then now is the fittest time
for to refine
This drossie earth, and make it all divine.
3.
Sing to the Lord all honor, praise, and laud,
and him appland;
Seith we through Adams fall
were wretched all;
And yet through Christ his mercies did recall.
4.
And now through faith, to good works joined we
shall live with thee,
Where Saints and Angels dwell,
if we repel
Stans allurement, and the snares of hell.
5.
Sing to our Savior Christ laud, praise and honor,
under whose banner
Let us continual fight,
as firm and right,
Till World, the Flesh, and Devil be vanquished quite.
6.
And to the Holy Chost like praises sing,
that does us bring,
Preserving sanctity,
Love and Amity,
Thoughts pure, and chaste; abhorring vanity.
7.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost as right,
by day and night,
Let us give praises due,
and still pursue
The path that leads to bliss; bid sin a diew.
8.
Let us lay hold upon the present time,
Death comes in fine:
This life ended, all flesh must
Catch time, it passes by, and use it just.
(...) Allegorical Poem.
BEhold the towering tree, that whilome stood
In strength and beauty bravely midst the wood;
Whose far stretched l^mbs was shelter for the beasts,
And likewise for the birds to build their nest.

Is now hewn down, because he brought foth
Such fruits as tend to goodness and to worth:
So cast into the fire, and there to be
Burned, and consumed for an ill-fruited tree.
(...) Diverse Exhortations to cause all men to remember their ends: taken out
of the holy Scripture.
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, till thou return unto the
ground: for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and to dust thou
shall return Genesis 2.19.
depiction of a man digging with a shovel (illustrating the biblical passage)
Deaths first speech to Nature.
OLd Adam was condemned, and all his race,
To eat their bread in the sweat of their face
And Scripture says, that from the dust he came
And back to dust he must return again:
So this hard doom on Adams sons does lie
First they must labor here, then after dye.
Natures reply.
It Is true, this doom to Adams Sons is given,
To labor here on earth, and rest in heaven.
We must needs dye, and are as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again, neither does God respect any person, 2 Samuel 9.14.
depiction of a heavenly hand pouring water upon the earth (illustrating the
biblical passage)
Deaths second speech to Nature.
AS water that is powered on the ground,
Sinkes deeply in, and can no more be found
(For water spilt) who can again recover,
Such is thy life, thou shall not have another.
Natures reply.
Death to thy lie, Nature makes this reply,
That being changed, I shall live after I dye.
Nature shall rise from Mortality,
And live in heaven Eternally.
We are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as were our Fathers: our days
on earth are as a shadow, and there is no abiding. 1 Cron. 29.15.
depiction of a sojourner (illustrating the biblical passage)
Deaths fourth speech to Nature.
O Mortal man expect to meet with dangers
And with hard usage, for ye are all strangers,
And sojourners, such as your fathers were,
While ye like walking shadows do appear;
Walking while that the sun of life does stay,
Which setting, ye like shadows fleet a way.
Natures reply.
If man a shadow be, Christ is his sun,
Whom he does follow to his Kingdom.
My days are swifter then a Weavers Shitlle, Job 7.6.
depiction of a weaver's shuttle, an hourglass, and a mirror (illustrating the
biblical passage)
Dea^hs fourth spee^h to Nat^re.
TO show men's d^yes are fading and most fickle,
Thy days are swifter then a weavers shittle.
Then be not with hope of long life decev'd,
But know thy web of life is quickly wead'd,
For if thy ho^res like weavers shittle run,
Thy life like to a web, will soon be done.
Natures reply.
I care not for when this life's web is done,
(...) roabs of Immortality put on.
As the Cloud is consumed, and vanishes away: so he that goes down to the
Grave, shall come up no more, Job 7.9.
depiction of a cloud and a bow and arrow (illustrating the biblical passage)
Death fifth speech to Nature.
BEhold as Clouds do in a gloomy day,
Disperse consume, and vanish clean away,
Such is man's life; yet Clouds again do ris^,
But Man gone to the grave, unseen there lies.
Natures reply.
Man like sown seed lies in the ground unseene,
But both at last do rise again and spring.
And the voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass,
and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field. The gasse
withers, the flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it:
surely the people is grass. Esaias 40.67.
depiction of flowers of the field (illustrating the biblical passage
Deaths sixth speech to Nature.
WHat is man's life, when every thing may be,
An emblem to him of Mortality
He is but like the grass or the field flower,
That flourishes and fades in an hour.
Natures reply.
The wicked man indeed is like to grass,
His life does wither away and soon pass.
But those that virtuously spend here their hours,
Their names smell sweet on earth, like withered flowers.
My days are swifter then a Post, they fly away and I see no good. Job 9.25.
depiction of a post on horseback (illustrating the biblical passage)
Death seventh speech to Nature.
Man's life is but breaths bubble at the most
And all his days are swifter than a Post
They fly away before they are understood,
And man in all his life does see no good.
Natures reply.
He that does in few years to heaven climb,
Ends a long journey in a little time.
Behold thou have made my days as an hand breadth, and mine age is nothing
unto thee, Psalm. 39.5.
depiction of a hand (illustrating the biblical passage)
Deaths eight speech to Nature.
BEhold thy days are like unto a span,
Which stretched out, do yield the greater pain
The hand does ache extended at full length,
So age stretched out yields pain and want of strength.
Natures reply.
If I be old in grace, as well as years,
Then ages winter youthful spring appears.
For here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come, Heb. 13.14.
depiction of two sojourners passing a city (illustrating the biblical passage)
D^aths ninth speech to Nature.
THough here with lands, wives, houses ye do fit ye,
Yet ye below have no continuing City:
But in your earthly pilgrimage go on,
In seeking out a City that is to come.
Natures reply.
Our new Jerusalem in heaven stands,
Which is a City that is not built with hands.
What is our Life? it is even as a vapor, that appears for a little time,
and then vanishes away. James 4.14.
depiction of a cup with liquid evaporating from it (illustrating the biblical
passage)
Deaths tenth speech to Nature.
WHat is man's life? it is a burning Taper,
Or it is like unto a rising vapor:
Both for a little time appear and stay,
But afterward they vanish both away.
Natures reply.
That life which seems a vapor, proves Divine,
And like a bright star shall in Heaven shine.
We are passed away as a swift ship under sail, that hastes to the prey. Job
9.2.
depiction of a ship (illustrating the biblical passage)
Deaths eleventh speech to Nature.
AS a swift ship does on the Ocean glide
And cut the foaming Ocean unespy'de,
Such is man's life that quickly flies away,
Like to an Eagle hasting to his pray.
Natures reply.
Man's life is like a ship bound for heaven lies,
Or like an Eagle unto heaven flies.
For he remembered they were but flesh, and wind tha^ passes away, and comes
not again, Psalm. 78 39.
depiction of the wind (illustrating the biblical passage
Deaths twelfth speech to Nature.
LAstly, remember man is flesh and wind,
Flesh to the earth for worms meat is resigned
The wind does pass away, man's life's the same,
That passes like wind, and comes not again.
Natures reply.
Although my flesh must die, I am not sorry:
For after death I shall enjoy heavens glory.
Life and Death.
LIke to the Damask Rose you see,
Or like the blossom of the tree:
Or like the dainty flowers in May,
Or like the morning of the day,
Or like the Sun or like the shade,
Or like the Gourd that Jonas had:
Even such is man whose thread is spun,
Drawn out and cut, and so is done.
The Rose withers, the blossom blasteth,
The flowers fade, the morning hastes
The Sun sets, the shadow flies,
The Gourd consumes, and man he dies.
Like to the grass that is newly sprung,
Or like the tale that is new begune,
Or like a bird that is here to day,
Or like the pearly Dew in may:
Or like a thought, or like a dream,
Or like the gliding of a stream.
Even such is man who lives by breath,
Each moment subject unto death.
The grass withers, the Tale is ended,
The birds flowne, the dew's ascended,
The thought's past, the dream is gone,
T^^ waters gilde, Man's life is done.
Like to a Bubble in a Brook,
Or in a glass much like a look.
depiction of a weaver's shuttle, an hourglass, and a mirror

Or like a Shuttle from a Weavers hand,
Or like a Writing in the sand;
Or like an hure, or like a span,
Or the singing of a Swan.
Even such is man Whose life is gone,
Whilst nimblest tongue is telling one.
The Bubble's out, the look's forgot,
The Shttle's flung, the writings out:
The houre's not long, the span's but short,
The Swan's near death; man's in like sort.

