VOX NORWICI: OR, The Cry of NORWICH, Vindicating their MINISTERS.

WHEREIN, The City of Norwich, viz. the Court of Maioraltie, and
Common Council by their Act of Assembly; The rest of the well affected
Citizens, and Inhabitants, by the subscription of their names hereunto, do
vindicate their Ministers, Master Thornebacke, Master Carter, Master Stinnett,
Master Fletcher, Master Bond, Master Stukeley, Master Tossed, and Master
Mitchell, from the foul and false aspersions and slanders, which are
unchristianly thrown upon them in a lying and scurrilous Libell, lately come
forth, entitled, Vox Populi, or the Peoples cry against the Clergy, or rather
the voice of a Scismaticke projecting the discouragement, and driving away of
our faithful Teachers, but we hope his lies shall not so effect it, Ier. 48.30.

Jer. 6.28. They are all grievous Revolters, walking with slanders.

Psalm. 105.14, 15. He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he reproved Kings
for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my prophets no harm,

LONDON, Printed for William Franckling, and are to be sold by Richard
Tornlins, at the Sign of the Sun in Pie-Corner. MDCXLVI.

To the Impartial READER.
Reader,
Upon the 26th of August last past, 1646, being the day of the solemn Fast,
there came to our City a scurrilous and malicious pamphlet, or Libell,
entitled, Vox populi, or the peoples cry against the Clergy: wherein our most
godly and faithful Ministers; namely, Master John Thornebacke, Master John
Carter, Master ^illiam Stinnett, Master Phinees Fletche, Master John Bond,
Master John Stukeley, Master Thomas Tossed, and Master Nathaniell Mitchell, are
most maliciously traduced, slandered, and falsely accused.

Our Ministers will not be persuaded to engage their pens in answering that
fardell of untruths; partly; because they have other more necessary imploiments
for their precious time, but chiefly because they are humble and meek men, who
are resolved to tread in the steps of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ; who
when he was reviled, reviled not again, and when he suffered, threatened not;
but this we are assured of, that although they be willing in the gentleness of
their spirits to put up those intolerable injuries, yet God will not put them
up, neither can we their people who have lived under their Ministries, and
received so much comfort and benefit by them be silent, God and our
consciences, Religion and humanity binds us to vindicate them from those
gross and Diabolical slanders and aspersions which are cast upon them, and if
we should hold our peace, the stones would cry.

The great design of the Libell appears plainly; viz. through the sides of
our City Ministers, to wound (and if it were possible) at one blow) to take off
all the Orthodox Ministers, and fixed Stars of the Church of England; but
more especially to discourage and drive away from us all our godly and
faithful Ministers, and to leave us in a scattered condition, as sheep without
shepherds, or rather, to leave us as lambs in the midst of ravening wolves;
They would have our Ministers think that their peoples hears are set against
them, and their tongues cry out against them. But God knows, and all Israel
shall know, that our City generally (excepting only some malignants, and
members of separated Congregations) does honor, love, and reverence them for
their works sake; As appears by the Act of common Council, and this Treatise
following.

VOX NORWICI. A true Copy of the Act of Common Council.
Civitas Norwici.
Congregatio tent' die Mercurij, scilicet secundo die Septembris, Anno Regni
Domini Caroli, Dei gratia Angliae, Scot' Eranc' and Hybern' Rex, fidei
defensoris, etc. vicesimo secundo tempore Henrici Watts Mayor Civit' praed'
Iohan' Cory, and Williel' Rye vicecom' ejusdem Civitat'

We the Major, Sheriffs, Aldermen, and Common Counsel of the City of Norwich,
having seen a scandalous pamphlet, lately set forth, styled, Vox Populi, or the
peoples cry against the Clergy, do hereby declare, that we, nor any of us have
any hand, or did give any counsel or consent to the compiling thereof, until
it came to public view, and we are so far from countenancing of it, as that
we utterly disclaim it: And we do further declare, that there are several
particulars in the said Book, which do very falsely and scandalously impeach
and asperse the Ministers of this City, named in that pamphlet; And we do
heartily wish that the Author thereof may be found out and punished according
to the Law of the Land.

Baleston.

The Cry of NORWICH, Vindicating their Ministers.
IN that libellous Packet, called Vox populi, are contained many blasphemies,
heresies, errors, and malignant expressions.

To point at a few of them:

In the preface.
First, That difference in judgment in the mysteries of Divinity, is more our
sorrow then our sin; and the reason they give for this, is, because it is the
irresistible product of our depraved nature, etc. whence it follows they hold.

2. That the depravednesse of our nature by Adams fall is no sin to be sorrowed
for, or Original sin is no sin: and in that they do sorrow for it, they
sorrow for that which is no sin.

They say difference in affection, anger, and choler, etc. is more our sin
then our sorrow, whence it follows.

3. That difference in affection, and injuries to others, are sins of the
greatest magnitude, or sins against our neighbor, are greater then any
sins against God.

Their desires are merely to be let alone, whence it follows. In the book,
page 3. lin. 28.


4. They hold that every man must be left to the liberty of his conscience.

5. That it is a state-troubling principle to compel men against their
consciences, Page 12. lin. 7.
to Uniformity in Church Government.

6. That our solemn League and Covenant is the same to the Presbyter, that the
Masse-booke is to the Papist, Page 25. lin. 28
and the Service-booke to the Prelate.

These things we will not meddle withal, but leave them to be censured by
Authority, and confuted by the pens and tongues of the learned.

Neither list we to render evil for evil, or rebuke for rebuke, to revile
them that have reviled the servants of Jesus Christ, we dare not bring against
them any railing accusation, but only say to them, as the Archangell said to
the Devil, when he disputed about the body of Moses, The Lord rebuke thee.

We will meddle only with matters of fact, and be faithful witnesses in
behalf of our faithful Ministers, as we are bound by the ninth Commandment,
to clear them from those foul aspersions, and false accusations which are
cast upon them, that their innocence and integrity may appear to all the
world, we shall hold forth a Catalogue to public view, not a complete
enumeration of all the lies in the Libell, for that were an endless task
(every Page manifesting so many) but of some of them of the greatest magnitude,
lies with a witness, such as almost every child in Norwich of any discretion,
is able to testify the untruth of them; as,

First, they charge Master Thornebacke, that in his Sermon upon the 16h of June
at the Greeneyard, Page 1. lin. last.
he exhorted the people to strike in with some Petition, Page 5. lin. 20.
etc. and that this was seconded in the afternoon by Master Bond, He uttered
not a word to that effect.
who violently pressed the people according to the pattern delivered him in
the Mount ( meaning Master Thornebacke his Morning Sermon.

Answ. Where by the way, Reader thou may perceive that this Libeller does not
spare to abuse the divine Oracles of God, when he is in this jeering strain;
but concerning this we testify,

That Master Thornebacke, and Master Bond, did both of them in their Sermons
exhort the New Magistrate, and the whole City there present in general, to do
something to the utmost of their power, which might conduce to the public good
and settlement of truth and peace, but we do not remember any such word used in
either of their Sermons, as Petition or Remonstrance; But we believe it was the
desire of them, and the rest of the Ministers, not violently to press the
people to subscribe any Petition of theirs, but only to stir them up to be
active, in doing something by mature advice* which might tend to the peace and
benefit of Church and Commonwealth.

2. They charge our Ministers thus; Drunkards, Swearers, Gamesters, Liars,
Whoremongers, Adulterers, etc. are not petitioned against.

We answer, some of us have seen the Petition framed by the Ministers of
Norwich, and we testify, that in a special manner, it strikes expressly at
Blasphemy against God, Sabbath-breaking, Tippling, Gaming, Ale-houses-haunting,
etc. and the maine scope of it was to suppress sin, disorder, and profaneness,
to procure peace, and to advance the power of godliness.

Observe Reader the secret conveiance of these juglers the emphasis lies in
these words, we hear nothing almost, etc. and what is the reason our Ministers
reprove these sins daily in the Pulpit, but they are absent; viz. in Mrs
Ashwells chamber.
3. They charge our Ministers thus: We hear nothing almost in every Pulpit,
but Church Discipline, Uniformity, nothing against the known God, provoking
sins of the times, swearing lying, defrauding, cosening and overreaching one
another, little or nothing of the Doctrine of Faith toward God, repentance
from dead works, love amongst Brethren, Communion with God, Union with Christ,
fellowship with the Spirit, etc. These things are almost banished the Pulpits,
and we have nothing but the very forms and shell of Religion.

To this we answer, with amazement, and wonder at the impudency of these men in
putting forth such gross lies, the falsenesse whereof, are known to our whole
City, except only Recusants and Separatists that never frequent our
congregations, we do testify all of us, as eare-witnesses, that those very
sins they mention, were never more constantly and severely reproved, Faith and
Repentance, etc. never more faithfully and powerfully preached by any, then by
these our Ministers whom they nominate; and as for Discipline, and Uniformity,
we never heard any of them make it their work in any Sermon to preach of them,
if they meddle at any time with these, it is but a touch and away, as they meet
with occasion in their Text, their maine work is to lay a good foundation, and
to teach the substantial grounds of Christian Religion.

4. They say our Ministers were unwilling to let their Remonstrance be read in
the Court of Maioraltie, that they refused to let the Town Clarke read it, but
would read it themselves, and would not require the advice, Counsel, and help
of the Court.

We answer, the Remonstrance was read at least thrice, publicly in the Court,
the reason why it was read by one of themselves, was because there was but one
Copy, and that imperfect, interlined, blotted out in many places, and none
else could well read it, but one of themselves; yet to satisfy them, the Copy
of it was left in the Court, June 17* from morning till night, also upon the
19, of June the Common Council had it in their hands a competent time. The
Ministers were so far from refusing the advice of the Magistrates and Court,
that they did offer diverse times, that a Committee of three of four of them
might be appointed to join with so many of the Ministers, to advise about it,
alter it, and prepare it for another meeting; This being denied, the Ministers
thought it was to no end to part with their Copy; and having but one in all,
they took it away with them; by which it appears to all men, that our
Ministers did go to advise with the Court, and not having their approbation,
left off the prosecution of their Remonstrance, though they were encouraged by
many to go one with it, by getting hands among the people.

5. They tax our Ministers of Jesuiticall practices and undermining
principles. Page 7. line 7.


But they confute themselves, for page 5. line the 9. and 10. they confess the
Ministers appear public in their designs, we are sure that is not the
Jesuiticall way, for their principles are undermining and secret, here they
give themselves the lie.

6. They charge M. Thorneback, M. Carter, M. Stinnet, and the rest, page 8.
lin. 1.
that they take upon them to exercise authority over the Court, that they
proceed by way of command, expecting their obedience, that they should go when
the Ministers bid them go, etc. though it be to lick the dust at their feet.

We answer: here is a deal of malice, but not a word of truth, Master
Thornebacke and the rest, went all in a humble way to the Court, as
Petitioners, They did not threaten our chief Magistrate that they would set up
a Lecture and maintain it in despite of him, as some of you have done.
with their hats in their hands, they only contributed their advice, propounded
their fears, proposed a remedy, gave their reasons, and submitted all to the
wisdom of the Court: This is true, and if this be to exercise authority, let
the world judge.

7. Master Thornebacke, Master Carter, and the rest, are accused to be steered
by the deceitful campasse of carnal interests, and are moved and acted up and
down according to the motion of their primum mobile, worldly preferments, and
popular concurrencies, submitting themselves to the preceps of men, to
Surplice, Tippet, High-Altar, Liturgies, Homilies, Cannons, Injunctions of the
Bishop, Write, Preach for them, and glory in them; and as the times wheel
about, they can throw them all by, and be as zealous against them, as ever they
were for them, etc.

We answer, and testify before the Lord, that all this is so notoriously false
and scandalous that we even blush to read it, here we cannot satisfy in a
general way, we will therefore give some short account of our Ministers
severally.

Master Thornebacke since he came to Norwich, did never appear to us as a man
that had any eye or aim at worldly preferments, his preaching is against
prelaticall tyranny and ceremonies, but not for them, and though we can speak
positively only, for so long as he has lived with us; yet we conceive he was
ever the same that he appears now to be, and therefore we will give a hint of
what we have heard from good hands viz. That Master Thornebacke living in Essex
at Steeple-Bumsted in the heat and height of the Prelaticall persecution, had
an excommunication sent out against him which was never revoked to this day,
because he refused and opposed the constant wearing of the Surplice, and
reading of the Service-Booke Wednesdaies and Fridaies, and for persisting in
his inconformity after his citation to the Court, publicly and privately in
those times he proclaimed the fall of the Bishops for their Pride and
Insolency; he was offered a very little Parish, but a great living, some two
hundred pound perannum and he refused it because the work was little, and did
rather choose to take a place of far lesser means, where there was more of
Christ's work to do, this is his ambition of worldly preferment, all this we
have heard, and let Mr Thornebackes greatest enemies inquire, and they shall
find the truth of these things.

Master Carter has lived Minister of St. Peter's Parish now these Seventeen
years, except only that time in which he was banished by Bishop Wrenn, and his
Chancellor, we never could discern that ever he did seek after, or affect
any worldly preferment; he has had advantages of raising himself, but never
improved them so far, as ever we could see or hear, this we know he has
often been about to leave St Peter's Parish for a less people, and less
means, only as he professed out of the sense of his own weakness, being not
able to bear so great a burden as lies upon him: and as for the Prelaticall
ceremonies, he has ever groned under them, declaimed against them bitterly,
both publicly and privately, and because his conscience would not suffer him
to yield to their trash, he was unmercifully persecuted by Bishop Wrenn, and
his Chancellor suspended, deprived and molested: So he was forced to leave
Norfolk, and seek hiding places, he suffered with joy the spoiling of his
goods, and counted exile a Paradise, only to be free from the base trash of the
Prelates: He has ever been the same, keeping close to his principles; and if
he have varied in any thing, it has been in the increase of his detestation of
superstition and Prelacy: We all testify of seventeene years experience of
him, that these aspersions of him are foul, and the accusations most false and
gross.

Master Stinnett has lived Minister of Saint John's of Maddermarket Parish
thirty years, and upwards: His spiritual living is about twenty four pounds
ter^ annum; and although it be no more, we never heard that ever he sought any
other place for his preferment. If in some things he has conformed, it is no
more then some of the five Apologists have done: who have been seen in Norwich
to read the Let any in the Surplice, and use the Cross in Baptism; but that
it may appear he has ever showed a dislike of them, it is upon record, that
long ago he has been troubled and suspended, more then once, and another put
in his place, for neglecting the Book of Common Prayer, and other Ceremonies.

Master Fletcher, a learned, pious, and grave Divine, whose living has been
mean in the Country where he has shined as a light for many years: sure if
he had bin ambitious, he might have raised himself much higher, by his noble
friends, being a man of great relations. Since he came to Norwich, he has
carried himself like a grave and sound Minister of the Gospel, a workman
that needs not to be ashamed, and an enemy to Ceremonies, etc. as appears by
his being suspended in Bishop Wrens time for the omission of some Ceremonies

Master Bond, a hopeful and learned young man, he has for two years together
been coadjutor to Master Carter, that is his highest hitherto; yet we never
perceived, that ever he made after any worldly preferment, he never wore
Surplice since he was Minister, nor baptized with the Cross, nor observed any
Prelaticall Ceremony, but has preached and appeared against those ways often
zealously.

Master Stukeley is but a stranger in our City, of no long standing; but for
the time he has been amongst us, he never sought worldly preferments that we
know of, he has declared himself against Prelaticall Ceremonies, and joins
the right hand of fellowship, with the most godly party.

Master Tossed was bred, borne, and brought up amongst us, descended of a
religious Family, has been settled in a Pastoral charge some five years, his
Living not worth much above twenty two pounds per annum; yet we never heard he
sought for any worldly preferment; he never wore the Surplice since he was a
Minister in Norwich, nor observed other Ceremonies, but has often preached and
appeared against them.

Master Mitchell, a Citizen of Norwich borne, an able godly and precious young
man, he has some imploiment, but no settled station; he has refused places,
affording good means, but never that we know did seek for any worldly
preferment; he left off the wearing the Surplice (as can be proved) before he
left the college in Cambridge; he is clear of all the old taint that cleaves
to our Church.

And now let all the world judge the falsenesse of these accusations of our
faithful Ministers.

8. They accuse our Ministers, that they oppose, preach against, Page 12, 13.
and trouble those that do settle Church Government according to their
Covenant.

Observe Reader the secret craft and subtlety of these men; they would bear
the world in hand, that they desire peace and union with us, as they speak in
their Epistle, and yet they profess to have a way differing from us, and a
Covenant differing from the National Covenant: And they blame our Ministers,
because they preach against, and trouble them in settling Church Government
according to their covenant; which that ye may know what it is, we will give
you a touch of the particulars thereof: First, they will avouch the Lord to be
their God: Secondly, that they will endeavor to walk in all his ways:
Thirdly, that they willingly and humbly submit themselves to the government of
Christ: Fourthly, that they will labor to improve their communion; and fifthly
and lastly, they covenant that they will not confine themselves to the words of
this covenant. Now I would feign know of any rational man what these men are
tied unto by their covenant; yet how arrogantly do they bear themselves upon
their church, and privileges, and covenant, and we know not what, even till
they draw their necks out of the yoke of Christ; and under the name of the
church, they go about to kick out Gods Ministers and Ordinances, hating our
Ministers because they preach for, and endeavor to settle Church Government
according to our National Covenants. But O my soul, come not thou into their
Assemblies.

9. They speak as if our Ministers in their Remonstrance did desire the
Parliament Men to baptize their children. Page 13.


For answer to this, we who have seen the Remonstrance, do testify it is
false; For they petitioned for some order for Ordination of Ministers, who
might baptize and that none might be suffered to preach that will not baptize,
and not otherwise.

10. They tax our Ministers, that they have not taught our people to relieve
the poor, and that's the reason they are not provided for.

But our whole City knows that our Ministers have ever, but especially of late
laid down the Doctrine of Charity, and Alms, almost in all their Sermons, and
zealously pressed the care of the poor, even till they have reaped much ill
will of diverse; And God has made their Ministry so successful, as that the
Magistrates have doubled their relief by rates; so as the poor have hardly
been ever so well provided for as now they be. It is true, we cannot so well
acquit our selves of the poor, as your party can do; for you will not so
easily admit them, as you will do silke-gowns, for they shall be offered to
have their confessions to be made out for them: besides, you can get so many
good women to you, that their husbands cannot bear the charge of our poor,
because their wives prove so chargable to them.

11. They endeavor to asperse our Ministers with the guilt, Page 14. lin. 4.
Page 9. middle
and bring them under the suspicion of Malignancy.

But let the world inquire what Ministers in the Kingdom have preached more
against Malignants then they, who more for the Parliament, for the National
Covenant, Though not for your Covenant.
for Reformation, who baulkes the secrecy of Malignants more then they, who
have spent their estates in the Parliaments service more freely then they; you
must recant this as a most malicious and false accusation.

12. They charge our Ministers Remonstrance with this passage, Page 15.
that Traitors to the King were not executed.

The answer is ready; In all the Remonstrance which was presented to the
Common Council, June the 10th. there was not so much as the word Treason, or
Traitor named.

Reader, we will not tire thy patience any further, thou may by this time
judge of the Beast by the foot: This short collection of these few notorious
falsehoods, may teach thee what to think of the whole: And truly we must from
henceforth, call into question the truth and integrity of all those that go
this way, though never so glorious in profession.

One word only to the Authors and Abettors of this unchristian Libell, we
speak to you as Joshuah to Achan, you have troubled our Israel this day, now
therefore we pray you give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession
unto him, repent of your Injustice, ask God and the Ministers of the City of
Norwich (whom you have abused) forgiveness, least the Lord trouble you, and
all Israel perish for your wickedness.

The truth and substance of what is contained in this Book, for the clearing
and vindicating of our Ministers herein mentioned, Is avouched by us whose
names are hereunto subscribed, to be the general Vote of the whole City: And
if any man desire to be satisfied herein, they may repair to the house of
Hamond Craske, in the said City of Norwich, where they may see, the Inhabitants
of the said City, with one consent have subscribed their hands to several
Papers that testify the same.

Peter Thacker. Hamond Craske. Thomas Brown. Samp. Townsend. John Billingsley.
Nehemiah Bond. William Brown, Violes Benion. Edward Woodyard. John Ploasa^ts.
Thomas Hoth. Samp. Saberton. B^^. ^aker. William Took. R^^^^^ ^l^asants.


FINIS.

