TWO BRIEF MEDITATIONS I. OF MAGNANIMITY UNDER CROSSES: II. OF ACQUAINTANCE
With GOD.

BY E.W. Esquire.

Pene omnis vita Naufragium est. Salvian. l. 3. Sunt fata deum, sunt fata
locorum, Statius. In hoc profundum inquietumque projecti mare, alter^is
aestibu^ reciprocum, and modo allevans nos subitis increments, modo majoribus
damnis deserens, assidueque jactans, nunquam stabili consistimus loco. Pendemus
et fluctuamur, et alter in alterum allidimur, et aliquando Naufragium facimus:
semper timemus. Senec. consol. ad Polib. c. 28. LONDON, Printed by Thomas
Maxey, 1653.

To the nobly accomplished Pair, Dr JOHN GAUDEN, AND Mris ELIZABETH GAUDEN his
Wife.
Sir, Madam,
I Hold it an Heresy in Civility as well as Religion, to divorce those whom GOD
and their Loves have united, Ex affectu omnes introducuntur nuptiae, Justin.
cod. de Nupt. l. 26
not only in a near Relation, but a more dear Affection. And since I am highly
satisfied, Par pari jungatur conjux, quicquid impar diffider.
that no Marriage is more amply expressive of sincere love, and real
complacency, then is Yours, which God has blessed with a Diapason of Contents,
I cannot but bespeak You to pardon me, while I conjoyn You in this Dedication,
which tells the World, that it is much my ambition to appear a friend to Your
Virtues, and (in what I may) a requiter of Your Civilities. Accept therefore
(my noble Friends) these Papers, not as in the least proportionate to the real
service I should do you, nor as clad in such Tissues of Language and florid
Fancy, as would become me to prepare for entertainment of your curious eyes,
but as an earnest of that great respect, which shall be ever owned due to You,
from

Greenford this 30 of Novem. 1653. Sir, Madam Your humble Servant, and truly
affectionate Friend, ED. WATERHOUSE.

A MEDITATION OF MAGNANIMITY under Crosses.
THere is no man but as he is mortal, and by sin subjected to sorrow; so ought
he to prepare for, and submit to those Trials, Servitutis nomen culpa meruit,
non Natura. S. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 19. cap. 15.
which not Nature but Transgression has brought upon him. God created us for
his own service, and it had been our perfection to continue what he made us:
While Nature knew no Master but him, it needed no help, nor feared it any
hinderance in doing what was required of it. But when Curiosity deluded by the
varnish of the Serpents suggestion, had persuaded man to usurp upon God, in
exceeding the bounds of his Makers appointment, then rushed in those rebel
Passions, and troublous Diseases, as Gods avengers of that insolence which had
Pride and presumption for its Author and Encouragement.

Our Nature curbed by nothing but necessity, and bound to the peace by the
power of divine Sovereignty, began to sink under the sense of that Might it had
provoked, and that Mercy it had abused: God the protoplast, and grand exemplar
of pity, considering whereof we are made, by that promise (that he would not
strive with man always, Genesis 6.3.
seeing he was but dust,) securing us against utter ruin, calls our wandering
minds to contemplate, and hearts to bemoan that folly, which at once lost us
Innocence and Impassibilitie.

Now we are left to Passions, which switch and spur us without mercy, and like
all comers, knock at our gates for entrance: Love, Joy, Anger, Fear, etc. act
like tumultuous waves, their several parts in our minds and lives; yea, it is of
the Lords mercy, that the Jewel of Eternity is not lost in this crowd, and the
vessel in which our durable Treasure is, proves not prize to those Pirates that
surround her, and is not naufragated in those seas that rise high, Unum habuit
filium sine peccato, nullum sine flagello. Zech. 13.7.
and call to heaven for vengeance. In all the catalogue of Mankind, there was
but one who prescribed against sin, and that was the Man Gods Fellow; but not
one who could bring a writ of privilege from sorrow: for Christ, though the Son
of Love, was designed by God the Father to be the Captain of our salvation
perfect through sufferings; Heb. 2.10.
not as he deserved them, ^ Pet. 2.22.
for there was no sin in him, nor guile found in his mouth: but as he observed
the method of God, who by his death and passion called immortality to light.
Here is the great Trophie of a combating Christian, that no trial can
harmfully vanquish him, who is one with that Victor, who has triumphed over
all worldly evils, leading captivity captive, and condemning death in his body
on the tree.

But since the Man is elder then the Christian, Ezekiel. 16.6.
(God finds us in our blood, before he refines us by effectual vocation) and
Arguments from Nature seem more congruous to lead the Van of this discourse,
then those which being more precious and persuasive are as the reserve, for the
dead lift, to speed home execution, I shall by Gods leave, and by his
assistance, assign some arguments to fortify us against the utmost
disappointments our course of life can meet, and be made seemingly unhappy by.

And truly (me thinks) I hear my heart a suter to my pen in the words of Livius
Drusus, Si quid in te artis est, ita compon^ domum meam. ut quicquid agam ab
omnibus perspici possit: Velleius Paterculus l. 2. p. 28.
to the Architect that was to build his house, O Friend, if thou have any art,
so dispose mine house, (...) X^nopn. Memorab. 4.
that mine actions therein done may be visible to every eye. So would I frame
and model my Discourse, Satius est moribus Antiquorum prudentium vivere, quam
little tantum lingua and art loqui. Auson. lib. 2. cap. 33.
as one who desires to practice what he prescribes; preferring actions above
words and endeavoring rather to follow the Virtues of Wise men, then to speak
their Language.

And here, as the Poet of old, Inopem me copia fecit, There is so great a
harvest of Arguments, that it seems more then an Herculean labor to answer the
importunities of them, and becomes a strait to me to choose which of them shall
be Master of the feast, and Prince de l'Amour: for what is there in Nature
which contributes not to man's incommodation? from what quarter of this Globe
are not wafted to him engines of mischief? in what state, climate, age, is he
not infested with somewhat, (...).
which makes him cry out with him in Stobaeus, O that I were one day free from
trouble. And therefore, since every thing more or less serves to this
drudgery, I will omit curiosity of order, and produce them in that Method my
Genius presents them to me.

And the first Argument to allay impatience, The thing that has been is that
which shall be, Eccles. 1.9
and that which is done, is that which shall be done: That nothing is new under
the Sun: That Providence calculates every thing for the Meridian of its great
design: That not a sparrow falls to the ground, nor an hair from the head,
without the permission of God. The noble Homer tells us this, (...)
(...).
Homer V. 109. de Jove. Both good and evil come to men
By Gods appointment: bear them then.


He it is that so appoints the gests in the whole latitude of this vital
progress, that there is no turning out of the high road of Mankind, Misery; nor
no coming to the Upshot, Glory, but by these Cross-wayes: at which in the
processions of life, there are more Epistles of Complaint, then Gospels of Joy
rehearsed. God, who is Lord of all, condemns us his vassals to pay tribute de
alto and de basso, as our Predecessors have, whose Vices we continue, though
their Virtues be eraced. And if they who with great devotion and gallantry
lived to God and their Ages as eminent Tapers, and Magnalian Heroes, had
Crosses like snuffs to allay their brightness, and encumber their Comforts; We
who outweigh them not in worth, must not out-passe them in serenity: nor ought
we to expect our harbors free from Pirates, when others have been infested,
who had no less prize to provoke, but more care to prevent Assailants then have
we. He who in greatest brightness falls from that Heaven of luster in which not
long ago he glittred to beholders amazement; He that dies in strength, beauty,
fame, fortune, with friends bewailing; Poets acclamating, and what not, which
adds to the tumor and congeries of an earthly aggrandization, has companions
more then many in this Tragedy. He that by his ingenious avarice accumulated
Art, and made it his Monopoly, engrossing it in his brains, and thence
retailing it to men of less note, who deserved not the Epitaph of Anaxagoras,
(...), etc. -- Laertius in vita ejus, p. 98.
Here lies he that skilled was
In both worlds secrets: Anaxagoras.
Even he must resign to Mortality, and give quarto inevitable and unequal
Vicissitudes. (...). Mare. Antoniu. lib. 2.
Changes are the worlds degrees of ascent, by which it comes to perfection, and
thence returns back to dissolution. Darkness and light, heat and cold have
their times, and by their seasons of hight and decay make way for each other;
Lux quotidie interfecta resplendet, et tenebrae pari vice decedendo succedunt,
sidera defuncta rovtvescunt, Tompora ubi siniuntur, incipiunt; fructus
consumuntur et redeunt. Tertul. in apol. c. 48
the generation of one thing is the corruption of another. every thing in
nature is finite, and to hasten the period, there must be variation of ^orms
and shuffling of tempers. The worlds lubricity bids every one expect what any
one has undergone: when the sap falls, leaves decay, and the tree is
dismantled of its viridity, there seems to be a temporary recesse of Nature,
out of her Belcony into her Parlour: When the winds grow clamorous, and storms
belch out their Menaces, the King-fisher departs, and leaves the rougher
Choristers to their winter notes. Every thing has its season, and what has
been shall be, til the periodick Non ultra be declared, and our writ of Ease
sued out by the dissolution of all; To which the whole Creation tends, Romans
8.22.
and for which groaneth, but til which must labor with those troublous guests,
excesses. And since change betides every elementary compound, why should not we
men the rather provide against it? (...). Demetrius apud Stobaeum, Ser. 254. p.
840
for that we see it at greater distance, and ought with less dread then other
creatures, whose direction is from instincts less rational, and not more
certain. The very Heathen tell us, It is folly in grain, not to bear what we
cannot avoid, because necessary.

It was a brave resolution of Anaxagoras, who told, (...), etc. Plurarc. lib.
de Tranquil, animi
that his son was dead, replied, I knew him to be mortal when I begot him. And
it does no less become a man to consolidate himself against the inconstancies
of the world, from the assurance of heaven, then it does the hireling to
confront the dolor of his pains; with the comfort of his pay: for even in the
best of this world goods, felicity, there is not only care to get and keep it;
but a discord amongst the learned, in the termination and consistence of it.
Crates placed it in a prosperous Navigation, Stilpo in amplitude of power;
Symonides in the good will of ones Countrymen; Archyta in victory over Enemies;
Gorgias in pleasant Stories; Chrysippus in goodly Buildings; Antisthenes in
Fame after death; Eurypides in a beauteous Wife; Sophocles in Children;
Palaemon in Eloquence; Themistocles in Nobility; Eccles. 2.11
Aristides and Heraclitus in Wealth; and Solomon, wiser then them all,
concludes all things vanity; Prove. 15.15.
professing the continual feast, and unceasing Jubilee to be only in a good
conscience and a contented mind, which is ever merry, 1 Timothy 6.6
because never disappointed; for it resignes to God.

Me thinks now, I hear one of the old Philosophers upbraiding the vanity of
relying on things mundane, after this sort: Whither, O man, tendest thou? what
is thine industry bribed by? where thy treasure deposited? (...). Philiscus ad
Ciceronem apud Dionem. lib. 38. p. 73.
why seek thou life in death, stability in decay, glory in contempt, ease in
disorder? Own thy self to be more then this Universe; and see thou be the
same thou seem, which this is not. Credit no suggestions which lure thee
from thy self: to keep watch and ward at home, is to be safe. Thy fortune is
imbarqued in thy Mind, as that is, such is thy bliss: Without thee there is
little but chaffings, and puffs of boasting Nothings. The Favor of Caesar,
Pompey, Alexander; the Wealth of Craesus; the Eloquence of Tully and
Demosthenes; the Art of Aristotle and Archimedes, the strength of Hercules
serves not against Crosses and disharmonies: or if it does bear off those
baffles, yet not Death, which rides first or last in triumph over all worldly
greatness, and confines every thing which pretends exemption from other
Conquests. Why then pitchest thou (O man) upon these groundless bottoms, which
waft away, and with winged haste speed their flight through all seasons and
climats; yea change their Masters upon every pet or occasional disquiet? Look
to times diary; see if that beesom has not swept away Men, Things, Places,
Governments upon the account only of a concluded revolution: And when thou have
perpended that fatal systole, and sadly numbered out the measures of Mutation
which have fallen to the share of the most serious Men and useful Things, then
conclude, Vanity is impressed upon all, and that which has been shall be, till
Time cease, and the hourglass of Nature be exarenate. Then, then only may room
be made for better hopes, when Nature is refined, and that disforrested, which
so harbors our Virtues in its Coverts, that it degenerates for want of chase
and exercise, into that overgrown Monster, Ambition: For nothing but Vice
makes Change a burden to us; since Virtue loves those Trials that polish it.
Thus He.

And not amiss: For the mischief of provocations upon Disappointments, arises
from the combustible matter in us. If we were good, we would thank God for
trying us; since to try, where temptation gains no conquest, is to crown, or at
least to prepare for it; So true is that of (...). Apud Stob. ser. 254. p. 84^
Democritus, Magnanimity appears in nothing more then in meek demeanor amidst
merciless deceivings and unexpected failings.

And well need we this Preparation: Foul Natures, like ill-humoured bodies,
call for Purges. Those that will live healthily, desire as well the evacuation
of peccant, as augmentation of good humors; and therefore have not less
gratulated those Crosses and unfortunate frowns with which the Court Armours of
their Virtues have been charged, (...). Laertius in vita ejus. Stob. ser. 248
then their Birth or Marriage days. I read of Zeno, losing all in a wrack at
sea, yet giving thanks that he had his garments left, and that necessity
brought him to profess Philosophy; accounting loss of all nothing, so long as
Virtue, his mental Jewel, kept head above water, and survived.

Not that the Ancients did set light by these defeats, out of a stupid
nescience, or brutish ignorance, like those Indians who value glass above
gold, because they know no better; but merely from a through experience of the
danger that came from those favorable gusts of Fortune, which oftener cause
shipwreck then security, like vehement winds, driving Virtue on the Rocks of
Ambition and Luxury: which occasioned that prudent admonition, (...), Plutarch.
In prosperity to remember storms, and prepare for them. And if at any time
they have coveted prosperity and affluence, it has been for this cause
chiefly, that they might evade such ignominy as Envy casts on Pilots that are
on ground. (...). Theol. apud Stob. for. 248.
And as those Mariners that put to sea in calmest weather, carry Tackling
against a Storm; so have they in their day provided against that night, which
turns edg upon the noblest metal; yea makes it strike sail to that which before
it bare aloft from, (...), Theologi Stob. Sermon. 248.
as too much beneath the flounce of its project: which Romulus noted well, when
he told his friend, Harms are men's Tutors; many men are taught that by their
disappointments, which their obtainings could never teach them. Hence came it
to pass, that they stormed not like men cholerikly phrenzie; much less did they
opprobriously blaspheme the gods as the authors of their miseries, (...)
(...). --
Eryp. in Helen. In storming against the Gods no virtue's shown:
To bear what they appoint, has praise alone.
or justify their deserts of better things; nor in felonious outrage did they
rid themselves of life; but submitting with all mildness and grateful
moderation, (...), Isocrates.

Talis est Sapientis anim^^, qualis Mundi status supra lunam, semper illic
serenum est. Senec. Ep. 59.

Platonica familia nihil novimus nisi festum, and laetum, and solenne, et
superum, and coeleste. Apuleius in apolog.


receive them as a common fortune, which devolved contempt upon no man, but had
an happy issue betrothed to it, their Minds being like those things above the
Moon, in a continual serenity; Wisdom keeping a perpetual Sabbath in divine
appointments. Hence the Moralist characters the Wise man, least thinking of
good fortune, Sapientis est semper de fortuna cogitare, et sibi nihil de side
ejus promittere. Sen. benef. l. 4. c. 34.
not boldly concluding it his, but considering defeats, which like April
showrs, often mar the present Sunshine, though they produce the May-flowers of
aftercontent; resolving to be what he may, if not what he would: By which
artifice he deceives many, Tu illum putas premi malis, utitur.
who deem him lost in the wood of worldly mischiefs; whenas indeed he is never
more blessed, then when, with Proteus, he is fain to change shapes, to avoid
surprises; being with Phidias, Non ex Ebore tantum Phidias sciebat facere
simulachrum, etc. Sen. Ep. 85 Quamounque fortunam acciperit, aliquid ex illa
memorabile efficiet. Ibid.
able to frame a Mercury out of any material which will endure the tool, and
express his virtue in any condition: In riches, in poverty, abroad, at home,
as a Commander, as a private Soldier, in health, in Sickness: In every action
and station somewhat he will do worthy.

Do we not read the bravest of Earths gallants of both sexes, militating with
crosses, and extracting comforts from them? yea glorying in them as their
probatories and marks of Chivalry, which they reported as testimonials of their
emeritings? Is there any one but has met with these Adders, which nibble at
the heel; or any order, age, action of man but procreates this Satyr? One
finds a cross in his Nativity, and cries out of his uufortunate birth and
unnatural parents, who begat him to sorrow, and bring him up in sloth: One is a
plague to the Family, nay the Nation he lives in; another fires the world by
dissension, and makes all men crouch to the cross of his erection: One finds
his cross in his deformity, another in his beauty; one in his poverty,
another in his wealth; one in his youth, another in his age; one in his body,
another in his mind; one in his wife, another in her husband; one in his bed,
another in his Garden; one cries out of Science that he cannot gain, another of
Conscience that he cannot still: yea there is a Cross (past Lord have mercy
upon us) in the next world, which too few think upon and pepare for, Hell.

Some find their vexations (like Moths) rise out of themselves, and cry out in
the Fathers words, O flumen moris humani! S. August. in confess.
O cursed Corruption, how long will thou stain the purity of my best actions!
O deceitful heart, why consentest thou to felf-ruine? etc. Others complain of
Satan that tempts them; whenas, indeed, they run into that evil they ought to
pray against, Mali malorum Damonum and fictores, et saaerdotes, 'et cultores,
Orat. 38.
and avoid. Evil men (says Nazianzene) are the Makers and Worshippers of
evil Devils. Some cry out, that their Company infects and ingages them; and
yet they will not out of Sodom, but if they be by mercy dragged (as it were)
to Zoar, they look back with appetition and desire, having that in their
mouths, which the young man had, when told that vice would bring him to
blindness; Vale amicum Lumon.
Farewell (quoth he) dear sight. So they return like the dog to his vomit, and
the sow to her wallowing in the mire. Others decry the Age as bad, and
exemplary to evil; when alas, they promote the plague by their putid breath and
bloody hands, with which untainted they ought to cool the flame, and prevent
the riot. Some cry out of Heresy and Schism as the grief of their souls, and
that which makes them go mournning all the day long; whenas themselves have
some leaven as sour as Julian, or John of Leyden had. Others have no cross
more grievous to them, then to see Order and Learning (the beauty of God in the
face of this Commonwealth, the World) like the goodly Whale, sporting upon the
surface of the waters, and not yet mortally struck with the Harping irons of
men's displeasures.

Some cry out against Riches, because they have them not; others against
Poverty, because they fear it. Some would have Power out of others hands, that
they (as they pretend) may be secure: others fear security in change, and wish
rather to die nobly, then live doubtfully. Some hold it a punishment to be
commanded; others hold it no less not to be so, because they find that by
sorrow the heart is made better, and by service more humble and tractable. In
fine, the faces of men differ not more then their desires and fancies; Every
one thinks that an evil which he endures, and wishes the worse evil, to be rid
of the rod by which he is corrected, Ad hoc corrigit Dcus, ut emendet, ad hoc
emendat, ut glorifices.
but not amended; Amendment is the end of Gods punishment on his people. To
this end (says Saint Cyprian) does God correct, that he might amend; to this
end does he amend, that he may glorify.

I know there are some men beneficial to all they come near, or tamper with;
whom Fortune favors to a miracle: over whose ways, works, families all
felicities constellate, and in whom concenter; Vix ullius goutis, aetatis,
ordinis, hominem inveneris, cujus foelicitatem fortunae Metelli compares. l. 1.
p. 18
as if all sheafs were made to do homage to theirs, and no cross line permitted
by Heaven to be drawn upon them and theirs. Such an one was the famous Roman
Metellus, whom Paterculus sets forth not to be matched for his felicity in any
Age, Order, or Nation (almost) of men: in whose Family, at least twelve in
twelve years were either Censors, or Consuls, or Triumphed; Plut. l. 2. p. 29
who lived in troublesome times untouched, saw his four sons grown up, left
them behind him in great honors, all of them having been either Censors or
Consuls, or not long after so. lib. 1. p. 18
But this one swallow makes no summer; this Phoenix, the sole wonder of an age,
opposes not the consent of experience, That Crosses attend the best and most
of sublunary accommodations. The Poet tells us, Irus and est subito qui modo
Craesus erat. When Fortune frowns, full soon men see,
Craesus exchange with Irus poverty.


Since then nothing of this nature is new, prepare thou, O man, for any cross
that may, and fume not at any that does come upon thee: If the piety of thy
Calling as a Christian, persuade thee not (which God forbid) let the examples
of civilized heathens shame thee to a patient and generous submission. He is a
man of soft metal, who upon a small scratch, calls for the Chirurgian, Cum
Fortuna nimis contumaciter agit, qui accepto vulnere statim miscr esse
dissimilat, Sym. l. 1.
and gives over the Enemy: and he a too modest Lover, who interprets himself
denied, (...). Demetrius Phaler.
because courtlily delayed. It is a concluded rule, He who cannot bear ill, is
not worthy to be blessed with good Fortune. Well fare him in Stobaeus, who
ingenuously confesses his demeanor amidst ill accidents: (...)
(...)
(...). Philemon apud Stobaeum, ser. 254. p. 836

At Fortune ill (indeed) I grieve,
But Wisdom does my heart relieve:
Discretion's much in temper seen,
Reason in virtuous mindes's a Queen.
For Crosses are Natures burdens, and those must rest on some shoulders: Every
Citizen of the world must pay scot and lot in common with his neighbors, and
bear proportion of the toil and turmoile it affords. Remember, the patience of
man works to praise and pity; and his passion to contempt and obduration: For
who can do less then despise and parvipend him, (...) Clem. Alexandrin. Strom.
lib. 2.

Bonus, etiamsi serviat, liber est; malus, etiamsi regnet, servus est tot
dominorum quam vitiorum, Prosp. sent. 52


who knows not himself above the command of his Valet. He is a slave with a
vengeance, whose Laws are dictated by Lusts and Passions: and the Marches to
which to go, and beyond which not to go, are bounded by these irrational
Tyrants.

'Twas a noble and right Princely Moderation of Charles the Fifth, who having
presented to him by the Citizens of Antwerp, a rare piece of Hangings, in which
was represented the Battle of Pavia, with the names of Francis King of France,
and all the Noblemen and men of Blood taken and slain there, refused to accept
it, lest he should seem to upbraid to others their calamities and miseries: For
fit was he to rule Countries and men, who had perfected that Conquest over
passions, which few of the greatest Hectors ever attained to. That brave King
of Hungary, Matthias, who was one of the most victorious men in the field that
Christendom had; yet died of anger upon a slight occasion: Many Ambassadors
were with him, and he called for figs; answer was made, they were all eaten;
his rage was so great, that he fell into an Apoplexy, and so died. A fig for
that courage which rages against reason; I will never admire him whom Pompey's
spirit brings to Pompey's end.

This for the first Argument.

The next is like unto it, lusts; which fight against the soul, making them as
the Mountains of Gilboa, upon which neither dew nor rain of heavenly virtue,
falls. There is nothing more stimulative to a generous nature, then to follow,
if not outgoe those whose virtues in their respective ages have made them most
conspicuous and estimable. He spoke like a man, who said, The praises of
Myltiades awakened him: And no less he, whose Attempts took fire from the Train
of Alexander's Conquests. Who can read the story of Bias (who both overcame and
relieved the Mantineans, and by them had Memorials of Brass erected to him)
losing unfortunately in the City of Priene his Wife, Goods, and Children, who
were taken captive, yet uttering no speeches worse then these: If any one
seeing me deprived of my Country, Wife, Si quis quod patria caream, ^^od
conjuge, domo, liberis, bonisque omnibus orbatua sim, aliquid mcorum me
perdidisse, ideoque me contristari opportere dicunt, ii neque fortuna quid sit
sciunt, neque recte de Philosephia sentiunt. Patientiam mecum and Philosophiam
fero, and alieno exoneratus, nullius jam praeterquam mei solius curam gero.
Guev. l. 1. c. 21
Children, Fortune, conceive me sorrowful; or less contented in mind then
when I enjoyed them all to utmost improvement, let them know, they neither
skill what Fortune is, nor how great the force of Philosophy is in a virtuous
mind. In this I am happy, my left riches is Learning and Patience: I have care
of nothing but my self, how to keep within the boundary of Reason. Who (I say)
reading this, can ghess a virtuous mind less then happy, even in a condition as
low as envy and misfortune can sink it?

The soul of man is of a divine and immaterial substance, and delights in those
things which are of analogous offspring with it self. Major sum, et ad mojora
genitus, quam ut mancipium sim carnis meae. (...), etc. Laert. in vita ejus, p.
389
Tell Philosophers and men of gallant emulations, of great Presents, and grand
Fortunes to be accumulated from this or that inglorious action, they will reply
with him in Seneca, It becomes not our free minds to be vassals to foul
passions and lewd designs. When Alexander asks the Cynick what he shall give
him, his request is only that the King would stand out of the Sun, and not
hinder its access to him: valuing the light and comfort of those heavenly
beams, above the Behemoth of the Conquerors greatness and bounty.

Wise men have not ever been acclamators of external pomp; but rather of
internal purities, and unseen perfections. Cippus the Noble Roman returning
from the Conquest of his Enemies, being told by the Oracle, that if he entered
the gates of Rome, he should be King of it, sent into the City for the Senate
and People to come out to him, and without the City gave them an account of his
proceedings: And contenting himself with one acre of land on which to live,
willingly banished himself to a Country solitude.

He in Stobaeus cries out, Sermon. 249
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
To mortal man the chiefest bliss is Health:
A gallant. Wit is second: next comes Wealth
Gained by virtue, not obtained by stealth:
And last of all a pleasant life with friends,
Which never ends.


So Theognis, (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
If Riches separate were from sinful cares,
My life exempt might be from loss and snares:
Riches I would not wish; mine aim's to be
Blessed with content: to that a Votary.


For however Caius boast that he is a god, has accompanied with the Moon, and
commanded his Image to be worshipped: yet the merry Shoo-maker, (...). Dion. l.
59. p. 661
in spite of all his costly attire and pompous folly, censures him but a great
Nothing; since no man is great if wicked, and over-mastered by vice. (...).
Plutarch. Orat. 2. de Fortit. and Virtute Alex. magni.
Fortunateness separated from Virtue, is but a vanity, and will appear in
gaining good will, to be illiberal; in enduring labor, effeminate: 'twill be
superstition to God, cause the envy of good men, and break out into all
exorbitancies.

Therefore Socrates defined those happy only who were rich in their
Intellects, (...).

(...), Laertius in vita Diogenis lib. 6. page 378.


and practiced those Virtues they understood. This made Antisthenes prefer the
company of the Cinique (whom for his worth he was resolved to follow) beyond
fear of the smartest cudgel the Cinick had to fright him with. Some there are
that have thought Art and Learning worthy their enquiry, and have bought it at
loss of sleep, society, and almost of food; accounting all time lost that's
stolen from its pursuit; being exstimulated with the memory of this, That
Knowledge is an ample Theater and reward to it self; that the mind therewith
enriched is not in danger of the rape of thieves, nor corruption of Moths, no
nor the fret of Time, which the best of worldly things are subjected to, and by
which come not only not to be; but while they are, to be as if they were not:
Of which that of the Epigrammatist is true; Fundus Achamenidae fueram, nunc
cedo Menippo;
Mox alium rursus, mox aliumque sequar;
Vtque suum hic credit, sic me prius ille putavit,
Sed me, Fortunae sum, quiae nullus habet.
My Lord was Achamenidas, but now
Menippus has me purchased soil and bow:
Ere long I shall another owner have;
New Masters fortunes rise from th'elders grave.


That which only makes Change strange to us, (...) Plu^a^ch lib. de animi
tranquil. page 474. Edit. Paris.
is because we expect it not; for Wisdom directs to look upon this world as a
River which carries to and fro things in a hurry, and leaves little but sorrow
to those that most confide in, and most resign themselves to it.

The consideration of this made way for the reception of that Stoical Maxim,
Viro sapienti omnem suam felicitatem intra se esse repositam.
That a wise man's Treasure was magazined in his mind, and not in any thing out
of his power either to keep or get: which Socrates explicated in his Question
to Nicias the Athenians Groom, whom (leading the admired Horse) he asked, What
money that Horse had: The Groom wondered at the Question, and replied, As much
as any horse has, that is just none. O (quoth Socrates) If an Horse may be an
excellent and lovely Horse, and admired in every eye, that has neither Money
nor Goods, but the brave qualities of a generous Horse, Why may not a Man,
having eminent virtues, be a brave and gallant Man, though he have not the
Wealth of Craesus, or an Indian abundance; nay, though he want necessaries, and
is fain to earn, before he has them? Which Phocion also assented to, when he
refused the great Present of Gold sent him by Alexander, after his conquest in
Persia; asking of his servants, why the Conqueror singled him out as the object
of his bounty; Answer was made. Because he thinks thee most noble of all the
Greeks. O replied Phocion, Quoniam te omnium Gracerum optimum arbitratur Sinite
igitur me esse. inquit: hocion, quem ille autumnat, etc. Magnus quidem
Alexander, sed Phecion major: qui cum peuper esset, tantum munus cum muneris
autore contempserit. Sabellicus l. 2 Exemp. p. 24, 25.
Suffer me then to be what he opineth me to be: which I shall not, if being born
free, I make wealth the boundary of my care. Alexander is great, but Phocion is
greater; who though poor, has a spirit beyond either Alexander or his gifts.
Valerius Publicola, Indubitato argumento, Reipubl. domi forisque continenter
and sancte administrata.
that brave Roman (who thrice triumphed, and yet never before he deserved it)
dyed so poor, that he was fain to be buried at the public charge. An undoubted
sign of a noble mind, and of an unabused trust.

I know there are some that depreciate this Position, and are apt to undervalue
whatever is not laden with thick clay, and has not the equipage of worldly
triumph attending it: They judge Self-denial and Patience too much asnery for
a brave spirit to be captived by; and they are all upon the raunt, choosing with
that Heroic Queen, rather to have her Childrens heads chopped off, then their
amorous locks polled. To bear the grudgings of Fortune, and palsies of Time,
they impute to pusilanimity, not considering that we men are God and Nature's
Galleries, in which they hang forth their choicest pieces of Art, exposing them
to view, that their Master skill may be more notorious, and their Empire appear
more absolute, while their commands are answered with obedience, not dispute.

The Heathen man tells us, (...), etc. Marc. Antonin. l. 5. c. 27.

(...), Iamblichus de virture, ad Sopatrum.

Malae secundaeque res, opes, non ingenium mihi mutabunt. Salust. Orat.

(...). S. Chrysostomus.

(...), Plut. in Them.


that to live to the Gods is commendable, and that every good man aims to be
like God to the utmost of his capacity, and that no man copies better then he,
whose mind equally poysed, welcomes whatever is his lot, and acquiesces in
that portion, which is therefore best because his, and directed to him from a
wise and merciful Being: considering that every thing is ordered by a gracious
hand, which so connects things each to other, that they all in the end work
forth Issues of good and gain to them that are pious and patient: and therefore
the holy Apostle gives us the sum of Christianity and sound external bliss in
this, Phil. 4.11
I have learned in what estate soever I am, therewith to be content.

For alas, whatever this ignis fatuus the World, pays, as its largess for our
toil and vexation, is but tainted with sin, and dishonored by inconstancy.
Mark Anthony banishes Nonnus a Romon Senator, merely to have the precious
Opalus worth 300000 Crowns, which Nonnus wore in a Ring: but he was deceived;
for Nonnus, though he left much wealth behind him, carried that Jewel with him.
Riches have wings, and fly away, Prove. 23.5
maugre the birdlime of Care, with which we catch them, and whereby we hope to
keep them. Pro. 31.30.
Beauty is vain, favor is deceitful, and friends glide away as the brook;
Honors (like the palefac'd Sun) fore-run foul weather, and portend a storm as
infallibly as fire does promise heat, or air moisture. There is nothing so
perpetuated by Art, or dulcified by opinion, but has its allay entailed to it.
Kings have somewhat in Crowns and Robes of State, which makes them uneasy; and
the Soldier comes hardly by what he has, which Sosiphanes mentions
bewailingly, (...)
(...);
(...).
Unlucky men, in nothing happy ye,
That bloody Battles wage for mastery;
Leassors for term ye prove, no Lords of the Fee.
For (poor souls) one day lost, reduces them to complaints of ill Fortune;
perhaps puts Belisarius and Hannibal out of condition ever to put to Field
again. (...).
Yea Learning (after which the Scholar thirsts more then parched ground does
after showrs, preferring a dram of Wisdom before an ocean of Wealth) often
proves an Arab to life's comfort: And the very Eliabs and goodliest statured
sublunary things have for the most part written on them, as had Ezekiels Roll,
Ezekiel. 2. last.
Lamentation, and mourning, and woe.

Good God! how many hocus pocus tricks, how many mazes and turnings see we in
this Olleo of Elements, the world? What a forge of Disguizes and Mint of
follies is this Idol we adore; this Tabernacle we so eagerly covet, though we
see it ever versatile? how unnaturally does it bring up to ruin its
offspring, occasioning as many different ways of distaste, as there are
grains of sand in the Seas boundary, or drops of water in her storehouse? How
are the worthiest of her Procreates shrivelled up to nothing, by with-drawings
of Support, Avaritiae potentiorum subjectiubique inferiores sunt, quo quisque
infirmior, co praedae patet; minor apud illos esca majoris est. Beat. Ambros.
Hexam. 5.
and uneven distillations of influence! Too much of favor, makes some proud;
too little, others despond: Too great wealth, some oppress; too little, others
beg and want: too much power tempts some to Tyranny; too little makes others
submit against their wills, and meditate revenge against their natures.

Who would be a slave to such a regardless Mistress, that turns love the deaf
ear, and charges folly on the Marble for relenting in sympathy with the Skies,
who by showry tears express their charity to indigent and importunate pastures?
that kills the fatted calf for a scornful Prodigal, and minds not him that best
deserves. Noble Ulysses in his return to his Country, has misfortune like
Hailshot; is wracked on the Ciconian shore, thence losed, has the same
misfortune in Africa, after is fain to encounter a Cyclops in Sicily, thence
is forced by cross winds into Aetolia, and last of all, Alber. cognatus in Com.
in l. 1. Tom 2. Luciani.
is cast upon Sylla and Carybdis. Augustus Caesar, for all his Greatness,
cannot sleep, and when his noble Livia asked the reason; he replies, Who (Dear
heart) is a moment free from cares, who has so many enemies, not more vigilant
to ruin me, then one another? Yea, (...). Dion. l. ^5. p. 557. (...).
Plutarch. lib. animi tranq. p 475.
Marcus Antoninus, the mirror of men and Emperors, has upon him the black
cloud of an unchaste Wife, and a deboist Son; and Socrates, whom the Oracle
declared wisest of men then living, yet had the peoples envy; and two villainous
foes Melitus and Anytus, who may kill, but not harm him: Ill Fortune (quoth
he) may bring sickness on me, and take away mine estate; but to make him evil,
fearful, dejected, base and envious, who is good, constant, magnanimous,
liberal, that it cannot do: These and many others have been unfortunate; whenas
the Varlet Cleander (a Slave bought in the Market and carried to Rome to be a
drudge) had Rome at his pleasure, gets the favor of Commodus, gives Civil and
Senatorian honor at pleasure, sels Goverments, both Military and Civil, as and
to whom he pleased, (...) Dion. l. 72. p. 823
makes the Magistracy of Rome a refuge for fortuneless persons; yea, so chopped
and changed Government, that he made twenty five Consuls in one year, which the
Historian notes, was never done either before or after.

Why, Amor forma rationis oblivio est, and insania proximus. S. Hyeron. l. 1.
Adv. Jovinian.
O why should the reason of man suffer eclipse so far, as to give way to choose
a curtezan for her fair looks, while virtue in a less venust person is refused?
Or how shall men be defended from censure of madness, who are enamoured of that
Butchery, in which Creatures of greatest procerity are put to slaughter, Cuncta
mortalium incerta, quantoque plu^ (ipse Imperator) adoptus foret, tunto se
magis in Lubrico esse. Tiberius apud. Tacit. l. 1.
and things of raskal and macilent aspect, are fully provided for?

O mutable world, O mercless Fortune, how many have thou flattered into ruin,
and left there unpitied! How few have thou befriended with a peaceful old age,
whose youth thou have allured and trifled out in perishing vanities, to whom
thou have promised a perennity of Glory, Solet fatigari fortuna, solet postea
quam nimium indulsit, in fine deficere. Quintil. Declam. 271.
and yet sent them packing with Pompey in a Fly-boat! They that trust thee, are
sure to be ruined, and they that mistrust thee, to be secure; Cavete vobis
principes, as well befits thine as Loyola's Motto; for thou art what ever
Divine Justice permits, and Satanick malice can invent and send abroad
mischievous.

Let us read and consult the upshots of Greatness, and there will be little
cause for any passion but that of Tears, when we see the sons of Honor pass
through the fire to this Molech; and those Phaetons who managed the raines of
Power, hurled from their Chariot-box, into the abyss of servility and want;
yea, often with Actaeon, torn in pieces by their own Brood. Julius Caesar was
once so great in the world, V^rquiuon immerito^ cx maxima part Deo fimilis est
putatus; etc. Eutro. l. 7. p. 576. (...). Dion. l. 44. p. 235.
that the Roman Senate erected Temples to him, and decreed him the Title of
Caesar; nay, they so flattered him, that they allowed his sons and Nephews (of
which he had none) to be called Caesar's: yet at last he was murdered in the
Senate by the Senators. Pompey on a time was so victorious, that men called him
Agamemnon; yet when Casar prevailed, he was forced to fly Rome, and by a
treacherous Surprise comes to his end, the same day of the year that he had
triumphed upon after his Conquest of Mithridates and the Pirates; that (says
Dion) his end might not be as his entrance was, fortunate; (...), etc. Dion. l.
42. p. 188.
but allayed with somewhat which might declare him miserable. Vitellius made
Emperor by the Soldiers, became at last so odious to them, that they
apprehended him, bound him hand and foot, (...), Dion. l. 66. p. 743. (...),
etc. Dion. l. 58. p. 628.
and dragged him into the Market place, where they smote him with their fists,
tore off his beard, and shamefully reproached him. Sejanus, whom in the morning
all the people looked upon as a rising Star and Peerless Personage, whom
nothing was too worthy for; at night was guarded like a Villain, and hated as a
Traitor.

Was not Cato Major as wise and worthy a person in the Romans opinion, as any
of his age, Nemo in ea civitate majoribus est odiis exercitus, quadragies
sexies reus causam dixit, estque semper absolutus, etc. Sabellicus Exemplor. T.
4. l. 1. p. 19. Edit. Basileae.
yet none more tortured by envy then he, forty six times was he accused, and
absolved, his Eloquence and innocence ever bearing down his opposites malice.

Manlius, who kept the Roman Capitol, Servavit Capitolium M. Manlius saepius in
acie stetit pro patria^ strenueque demicavit, etc. Sabellicus l. 4. c. 3. Tom.
4. Edit. Basileae.
valiantly defended his Country, received many wounds, and preserved many
worthy Citizens by his own hazard, yet at last by vote of the people was
publicly condemned; and all (forsooth) upon a brute that he aspired to
somewhat above a private Citizen: by which action of theirs it appeared that
the Romans were impatient to have any one so great or so innocent, which the
Law would justify against their levity, and changeable petulancy.

Yea, of later times, are there not equal instances of the worlds inconstancy?
What think we of Paulo Vitelli, the great Florentine General put to death by
them, after all his famous Services, only upon suspicion? Of Hugoline
Girardescus, a noble Citizen of Pisa, chief of the Faction of the Guelphes; who
being in Supreme Command in Pisa, Luca, and their Territories, was surprised by
the Gibelines, a contrary Faction, and with his two sons and three Nephews,
shut up alive in the Castle, the keys of which were thrown into the River
Arno, so they starved to death. Filesacus Selector. l. 2. c. 9.
There are thousands of other instances produceable, but confessions need no
proof; no man will deny this, that dares justify himself to be a man; who may
seal to this from his own observation: so true is that of Metrodorus, Mortale
est omnium mortalium bonum, de his loquitur bonis, ad quae concurritur; nam
illud verum bonum non moritur, certum est, sempiternumque, sapientiact virtus
hoc u^um contingit immortale mortalibus. Senec. Ep. 98
Every worldly good is perishable; true good is durable and eternal; Wisdom
and Virtue abide immortal, and fade not for wind or weather, but retain that
grain color, which defies the tartest trial, and most defacing fally: (...).
Psalm. 112.6. Prove. 10.7.
And therefore 'twas good counsel that Antisthenes gave, Those (says he) that
would immortalize their names, must live to the precise rule of Piety and
Justice. To which Scripture suffragats, The Righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance, when the name of the wicked shall rot.

Let men dote on what they please, Content shall be my Darling; Ex mediocritate
fortuna pauciora esse pericula. Tacit. Annal. 14.
a modest mind satiated with what God assigns me, shall be my Prayer to
obtain, and praise of God, received; other things are but termers, and pass
away, leaving no print of their once abode with us: where is the Art of
Hypocrates, who saved others, but could not preserve his own life? What are
become of those Viragoes, who chased Nations into their Nets, and came into
Continents with fire and Sword, writing Laws in blood and wounds; these
Nephews of Nimrod, where are they? Where are Heraclitus, Democritus,
Aristotle, Plato? Are worms awed from their ashes? and is Putrefaction barred
seizure on them? Are not those honored names of Camillus, Caeso, Volefius,
Scipio, Cato, Trajan, Antonine, become Vassals to every Varlets tongue? Are
they not reproached by every Mimick, and hardly credited to have been the
distinctions of persons famous in their ages? Surely, it is clearer then the
light, that time has gullopp'd down men's merits, and caused an high silence on
them, so that they live only in the tender Monument of Virgin paper, and at the
Devotion of those that stain them to make them legible to after ages; the
counsel then of Marcus Antoninus is good, (...). l. 4. c. 33.
There is one piece of Prudence (quoth he) worthy practice, to have a just
mind, a sociable life, a true speech, a heart contented with whatsoever falls
out, as best for its good. These are things most worthy endeavor after, and
most beneficial when enjoyed.

Therefore mistake not (O man) the mark thou ought to level at, the Goal
thou should make to; thy figure tends to heaven, thence thy proportion is
appointed, thy bulk requires but little pabulary supply; if thy mind be not
bottomless, thy necessities will easily be answered: If thine eye be not
curious, thy stomach will not be squeamish; what ever is man's meat, will down,
and what will exclude cold, Sabellicus Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 8. p. 37. Edit.
Basiliae.
and comfort nature, sit upon thy back with honor and decency enough. Be thy
Diet as rude, and Vests as rough as were those of elder times, whose materials
were from the Beast and Field unplain'd, and in their Native colors and hue,
thou art not the first, nor shall be the last that must sit down in sorrow: If
comfort be in company, thou have enough to make up a sad consort with thee.

Far quam sortem patiuntur omnes,
Nemo recusant. -- Senec. in Troad.
Who does that fortune count his woe,
Which all men with him undergo?
So Merops comforts her self.

(...), etc. Eurypid. in Chresiph. Deprived of husband and of children dear,
To thee dame Nature I present my tear;
I see no comfort in this widowed state,
Save millions with me do participate.
The sorrows which in life I now endure,
To them, as unto me, shall soon endure.
Thus much for the second Argument.

The third Argument is, assert Valor; yea, there is nothing gives a more
substantial taste of worth, then these opportunities to display it in. (...).
Marc. Anton. l. 4.
Were not Aristides and Themistocles renowned by their banishments? Who had
heard of Hercules, (...). Philiscus ad Circeronem. Dion. l. 38. p. 76.
had not his combats with the Claeonaean Lion, and the Hydra, the Stag, the
Wild Boar, and many Gigantine and fierce men, whom heworsted, (...), etc.
Epictetus l. 2. c. 6. de provid.
and from whom he received many virrulent and threatening Charges, argued his
valor? What made Socrates greatly opinionated, Cicuta Socratem magnum fecis,
Catoni gladium assertorem Libertatis extorque magnam partem detraxeris gloriae:
Sonec. Ep. 13.
but the poison that he drank with as cheery a heart, as wine? And what greater
dishonor can be done to Cato, then to suppress the mention of those hazzards he
despised, to assert Public Liberty?

Tully brings in Popilius as a most generous and well poised Roman: Fortis and
corstans in optima ratione civis P. Popilius somper suit, tamen ejus in omni
vita, nihil est ad laudem allustrius quam calamitas ipsa. Cicero pro Dom. ^ua.
Et paulopost, M^telli clarum imperium in re militari fuit, Egregia censura,
omnis vita plena gravitatis tamou hujus viri laudom, ad sompiternam
memoriamacmpor is calamit as propagavit.
yet in nothing more laudably notorious, then in his undeserved, yet well borne
calamities. And Metellus as reaping praise and same from those tumultuous
times, and that prudent demeanor of his amidst them.

Yea, had not Livius Drusus been basely murdered by the people, he might (for
ought I know) have missed that honorable mention which he has from
Paterculus, Vir nobilissimus, eloquentissimus, sanctissimus, meliore in omnia,
ingenio animoque quam fortuna usus; hic tamen a civibus cultro caesus est.
Paterculus lib. 2. p. 28 Edit. Antwerp.
to be most Noble, most Eloquent, most Pious, more worthful both in body and
mind, then fortunate.

I am not of their minds, who so far indulge Epicurean ease, that they think
that life uncomfortable, which is clogged with any adversity, or cross gust of
touchy displeasure; Virtue has a Come to me, which strongly attracts, and with
undeniable Courtship, (...). Arist, Ethic. l. 3. c. 7.
obliges good minds to entertain her. Good men do suffer for goodness sake,
what to carnal minds and worldly ends, seems folly and loss; not because they
are not tempted to comply with a la modes; and to cry the popular language of
Great is Diana; but for that they know it is their duty to be what they ought,
and to submit to God for the event; which, what ever it is, they welcome, as
what is best, and most conducing to their ultimate felicity. And therefore in
the greatest storm and saddest night, wherein neither Moon nor Star of comfort
appears, they cry out with him in Seneca, Ep. 101.

What though mine hands, Debilem facito manu, Debilem pede, etc.
feet, thighs enfeebled be,
My bowed back, and loosened teeth you see;
If life abide, my spirit will disdain
Of multiplied torments to complain.
For courage carries men to view victory afar off, and to believe what they
love, gainable; yea, it often sollicites to muster against effeminacy and
impatience, and on that score whets endeavors to so keen an edge, that shall
by the truth of its metal, rescind all disaminations, though twined together
more cunningly, then was the Gordian knot; yea, it shall (by a kind of
confident augury) pre-occupate Victory, and make what we honestly desire ours,
before it actually be so. For as in Pictures the draught is well nigh
dispatched, where the ground lines are well ordered, and the proportion
regularly designed and expressed, so in all actions of the mind, there is fair
progress made, when resolution is taken, not excluding reasons consult; and
when what we ought, and how to do what we ought, precedes in our Design, what
we do.

I know there are no actions of men, but come under the tortures of censure,
and must pass, the ordeal of detraction, and commonly, as raskal Cattle come
not to the Shambles, Non min^^ p^riculum ex magna fama^ quam ex mala. Tacit.
annal. 3
but goodly and fat, so not the basest men and actions, but the best and
bravest hear worst, and are most broken and dismembered on the wheel of
prejudice. 'Twas a brave speech of the Emperor Manuel, Quid virtute dignum
unquam retribuit calumniosa interpretati^ malignorum? Nihil tam Sanctum quod
non audeat tentare calumnia. Nicet. Tom. 1.
What (says he) of true and Noble tendency, has not by ill will been
misnamed? Nothing so sacred but calumny profanes and deturpates; And the rise
hereof is envy, and that from those who neither can. Improbi vel tacitis
justorum moribus arguuntur. In Psalm. 118.
nor will imitate or excel that virtue they condemn; they know, in S. Ambrose
his words, there is no greater a blemish to their impure lives, then the holy
conversation of a Man, that is exact with God, and walks by the rule. Some have
the hap to be applauded, for what deserves censure and disfavour, Praelatio
alterius sine alterius contumelia non potest procedere, quia necelectio fine
reprobatione. Tercul. Apolog. 12.
as was that ignorant Scholar of Hyppomachus the Musician, who kept neither
touch nor time, yet was cried up for a rare Artist; Maximum erroris Argumentum
quod ab ignara turba laudaretur.
but his Masterprotested, that the praiseful clamors of the ignorant multitude,
palpably blemished him: for Virtue is seldom the darling of popularities, nor
Art the favorite of Crowds. Some men are fortunate all their lives; but envy
to be revenged on them, gnawes on their bones, and disquiets their ashes; the
famous Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, under King Henry the VI. was envied
his Tomb by certain French Monsieurs, who requested Lewis the XI to deface it;
saying, It was a reproach to their Nation to have such an enemy so honorably
Entom'b. Holinshed. p. 612.
But the wise and brave King replied, What Honor shall it be to us, or to you,
to break this Monument, and to pull out of the ground the dead bones of him,
whom in his life, neither my Father nor your Progenitors, with all their Power,
Puissance and Friends, were once able to make flee one foot backward; but by
his Strength, Wit, and Policy, kept them all out of the principal Dominions of
the Realm of France? Wherefore, I say, God have his soul, and let his body now
lie in rest, which when he was alive, would have disquieted the proudest of us
all. A noble speech, and an eternal honor to the mouth that spoke it: Lilia
mixta rosis. Some men are traduced when they are past answer, Semper quidem
vertutes sequitur invidia, feriuntque summos fulgura montes. S. Hieron. Ep. 27.
ad Eustochium.
and are indicted of Crimes in this lower bench, when they are acquitted in the
High Court of Heaven, from which there is no appeal, and to reverse which, no
Writ of Error lies: but most see themselves miserable by the malice and
inconstancy of those they have never enraged, but rather deserved of.

Gabinius the famous Roman General, prays to be discharged his Office not for
fear of the stab or poison of a discontented and irreligious Monk, (which befell
King John of England, and King Henry the IV. of France; a cursed engine of
Dispatch, which God has appointed Hell to revenge;) nor yet fearing the Votes
of the Senate to exoffice him, (he was a brave man, and they could not find a
meeter person for that charge;) but merely blaming the peoples inconstancyes:
(...), etc. Dion l. 36. p. 12. (...). Dion. l. 75. p. 863. (...). Dion l. 75.
p. 863. An major in co fuit doctrina a diis daiae copia, an malitiae qua
persequebantur illum aemulicrudclitac. Tusc. l. 5.
For who (says he) of sound mind will wish a life of Envy, or desire Power,
where Events, which no mortal eye can foresee, or hand prevent, are the
pledges of his fame or infamy; where good fortune causes envy, and ill
censure. Severus put two brave Commanders ( Crispus and Laetus) to death, upon
no other cause but Envy, because they had better skill in Conduct then himself.
Quintillus Plautianus, a chief and aged Roman Senator, who lived peaceably and
retired from Rome to avoid suspicion, and meddled with nothing; a man of great
years and veneration, yet was put to death by Severus, merely out of fear,
because he was an exemplary man. Anacharsis the brave Scythian, of whom Tully
says, That he knew not whether the Gods gave him the greater measure of
Learning, or his enemies of malice, came to his end, by the prosecution of
envy. Famous Narses, General to the Emperor Justine, a victorious Conqueror
over all his Masters foes, and a dread to the world, had many domestic enemies
that detracted from him, and so highly accused him, though without all color
of deserving such misusage, that he left his Charge, the Court, yea, and his
Master too, and in revenge brought the Lombards into Italy, who wasted it.
Cardinal Pool, after all his Legations in the Council of Trent, his observances
of the Pope and Cardinal Fernese; yea, notwithstanding his noble nature,
Genteel demeanor, cordial adhesion to the Court of Rome when the Pope died and
there was a choice to be made, was not chosen Pope, for suspicion of
Lutheranism (as was pretended) but rather for that they envied that one of so
winning a nature should have the Chair. Hist. Council Trent. p. 298.
Great Athanasius the hammer of Primitive Heresy, whom the Arians, Sozom. l.
4. c. 9. Theod. l. 1. c. 30
when they could not silence by Argument, sought to ruin by defamation; of him
they invented that he was a Magician, that he consulted with the Devil, that he
gulled the world with a Sanctimonious outside while his heart and life was
wicked, leacherous and what not which was odious; whereas indeed he was a a man
of men, and God cleared up his fame to the brightness of noon day. Browns
Addition to the Annals p. 326.
The great Favorite of Queen Elizabeth's time, the Earl of Essex, had these
shaking and burning fits of envy and glory, a long time upon him, he was in his
Mistress favor as was never any, of her Privy Council before 23 years of age,
Knight of the Gartar, Earl Marshal of England, General of her Forces by Sea and
Land, fortunate in the love of them; yet had he Envyers who so ill construed
and misrepresented his actions, that thereby he came to the block, and drew
many to death with him. Famous Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary to the Queen,
Knight of the Gartar, and Chancellor of the Duchy, was a man of great wisdom
and industry to promote his Mistress and the Nations Service, yet was he so
nibbled at by those Momusses his enemies whom he detected; and by others, whose
parts he obscured and therefore incurred their revenge and disaffection, that
having spent his estate, contracted many debts for service of the Public, lost
his credit by non-payment of them, and resting wholly unrecompensed (at least
to the proportion of his desert and labor) his heart broke, his enemies had
their desire, glorying in the obscurity of his Funerals, which were at S. Paul's
Church in the night time, without any Funeral Solemnity or magnificent
proceeding. There are multitudes of instances of this nature, as numerous
almost as the fishes were in the Disciples net, enough to overcharge this
paper, as they did that net; but I pass them by, concluding this with the dying
lamentation of famous Queen Elizabeth, who finding her self when she grew old
and sickly, slighted by her Courtiers as unfit for Government and applications
covertly made to the rising Sun, Browns Ann. Q. Eliz. p. 382
complained of her inconstant Favorites and false Courtiers, in these words,
They have yoaken my neck, Sapienti maju^ periculum ab invidia, quam navigarti a
tempestate, vel pralianti ab hostibus.
I have none now to trust, mine Estate is turned topside turvey. So true is
that of Apollonius Tyanaeus, Greater danger betides a wiseman from envy, then a
Sea man from a Tempest, or a Soldier from his enraged foe.

Sometimes self-love made the Thessalian women murder Lais the beautiful
Mistress of their youthful men, that so they might be less despised; sometime
the tickle of popular giddiness, Ad reprehendenda alia dicta and facta ardet
omnibus animus. Salian. de Ord. Religios.
eggs on to censure, and pursues desperately, what it hates, but understands
not: things by ill will, are ever represented worse then they are, and so as
may give some lovely blush to envyes meager deformity. Secta Stoicorum licet
apud imperitos male audiret, tanquam nimis dura, nullam benigniorem,
lenioremque esse, nullum amantiorem hominum. Senec. Clem. l. 2. c. 5.
Seneca tells us, that the Stoics, who were ill thought on by the ignorant, as
too rigid, were the most gentle and loving Sect of men.

Good Lord, that Satan should have such power in our passions, as to make our
eyes evil on good men and graceful actions! yea, so far to degenerate, as to
cross as much as in us lies, what God has crowned, and will support to full
growth? Who would think that Fulvius the Roman should coin a scoff for every
action of Antoninus, and charge on him neglect of the Senatorian gravity, in
going amongst the Captives, the day dedicated to Janus, and letting them touch
his garment, whereby they were enfranchised, and that he walked without his
train and Equipage of State? Or that Cardinal Langi should acknowledge the
Reformation of the Mass honest, the liberty of meats convenient, and the demand
just, to be disburthened of so many commandments of men, History Counsel Trent.
p. 55.
and yet cry out against Luther as a poor Monk, and a not to be endured
instrument in such a cause; or that Saint Jerome should be forced to complain,
that his detracting enemies were such, Scribere disposui si vitam tamen dominus
dederit, and si vituperatores mei saltem fugientem me, and inclusum persequi
desierint. In vita Malchi. Monachi.
that they carped at his words, and followed him with reproaches, even when he
both shunned all provocation of them, and was a Recluse: But that is true of
Xenophon and Velleius, (...). Xenophon. Paedag. Nunquam Eminentia invidia
carent, Vellcius lib 2.
Great parts occasion great envies; this Envy is the Gallows that Hamons have
for Mordecaies: in this day of mourning, the worlds Esaus plot revenge on
Jacobs. For as Caesar said (in his Oration against Ariovistus) Every thing that
transcends the Vulgar, (...), etc. Dion. l. 38. p. 84.
is subject to dislike and emulation, which breaks out into an array of
Subjects against Governors, and arives at the ruin of both.

Nor must it be strange to us, thus to suffer for well doing, since that good
actions and brave men have been mistaken and misused, arises from the good
pleasure of God, who by this, designs their clarification, and calls to wise
men to look about them, while these evils of Satan's malice, and man's envy
surround them: (...) Epictetus.
the Devil is no Loyterer, he is ever in his walk: the perpetual motion to
mischief is his, and he trains up his Instruments to assiduity, and ruining
vigilance; in every Garden-plot of Virtue he brings up weeds; over every clear
Heaven in the soul, he casts some dismal and unbeauteous cloud; his ill will to
man, is in combat with the best actions, though he fights against small and
great virtues in us; yet his main design is to surprise man's King, the Heart;
and if he miss that, he fumes and projects revenge, with great accurateness;
and when he sees the Michael of Mercy, with his Angellick Forces, come to the
rescue of man, by him assaulted, then he retreats to his small games, and
turns Adder, hissing out his poison upon all occasions: He has not only
Vinegar and Gall to imbitter the sufferings of good men, but the poison of Asps
to blemish their best actions and most spotless intents. Read we not in holy
Writ of the Devotion of Hannah, (begging a man child of God, and that not for
Politic, but Pious ends, that she might consecrate him to God) censured
Drunkenness, and that by a good man through, 1 Samuel 1.14.17.28.
his mistake? And of David's brethren miscalling his coming to the Army to be
pride of heart; when as, indeed, God led him thither, the better to bring his
pleasure about in the surprise of Goliath by his courage? Is not Jobs Sanctity
asserted Craft, Job 1.9, 10, 11
and his Godliness Gain, by Satan, who avers his love to God mercenary, and
his Zeal coolable, upon withdrawing of Blessings on him and his? Was not our
Lord Jesus traduced for a Wine bibler, Matthew. 1.19.12.24.
a friend of Publicans and sinners, a deceiver, Luke 11.15.
one that cast out Devils by Beelzebub? when as he in Superlative love and
stupendous Charity, came from the Region of Glory, and out of the bosom of
his Father to accomplish the Work of our Redemption, and to endow us with his
Grace and Glory, who were, and without him ever had been strangers to both; and
after he was ascended, and left his Apostles to seminate the Gospel, and to
impregnate the believing world, were they not accounted the very dregs of
mankind, Bablers, Seducers, enemies to Government, when indeed, they were to
serve, not rule; to obey, not resist; and had no other project but to
accomplish the glorious work of the Ministry, conversion of soul^, to which
they were consecrated? And in after times have not the Zeals, Sufferings, and
Labors of his Servants been nicknamed, and reproached as simplicity,
Singularity, Pertinacy, Ambition, Pride, and what not? yea, have not Arts and
Forces been mustered out to suppress and discourage; and often to destroy them?
Was not Julian against root and branch of Christianity? Did he not lay load on
the Christians backs, under pretense that they would rebel, whereas they knew
nothing more execrable, Christianus si nullius criminis no men est, ineptum
est; si nominis solius crimen est. Tertul. Apolog. c. 2. Abolendo rumori
intentu^ falsos testes subornavit, qui id factian a Christianis causarentur,
etc. Tacitus. Platina. Page 9.
and by Religion disallowed, then to rise against Authority? Were not
Christians before, then, and since, feign to beg favor for the very name of
Christianity? Was not Nero a wretched man, who notwithstanding his ingenious
breeding, and calm documents from his Master Seneca, sets fire on Rome, and
ruined the houses and fortunes of many of the noble Senators; and to color his
villainy, suborned Witnesses, who accused the Christians as Authors of the
conflagration, which caused such a Massacre of them, that for diverse nights
together the City was as light as day by the fires of their dispatch? And when
softer methods to ill designs have been in fashion, have not men piously
addicted, been disheartened by counsels and intimations, that had both Judas his
kiss and treachery in them? If Caelestine, as a holy man, coming to the
Popedom by an unusual providence, think to reform things amiss and grossly
scandalous to the Church, Caelestine, Caelestine, cede negotium supra vires.
he has a whisper, Caelestine, Caelestine, desist, the work is too great for
thy weakness to effect: and if the good man turns away from this by-path, and
keeps on in the track of his resolves, then there is a second whisper in plain
language, Caelestine, cede, si salvus esse cupis. Wolph. in Memor. ad Annum.
1294. Cent. 13. Sub nomine aterni spiritualisque Evangelii, verum Christi
Evangelium obliterare and antiquare. Idem. eodem loco. Platina in vita Alex.
Psalm. 119.
Caelestine, give over, if thou will be safe. Nay, has not the truth of God
been censured for Error and Heresy by Conclaves and Councels, when figments
under the name of the Spiritual and holy Gospel, asserting not the Law of God,
but the Spirit in man to be the touch of man's interest in God, have been
published, on purpose (says Wolphius) to suppress and abolish the Gospel of
Christ, which rests on Scripture for its Authority, and gives to Christians all
solid comfort, according to the testimony of King David, Had not thy word been
my delight, I had perished in mine affliction?

Yea, has not the Devil heretofore appeared, pretending Moses his meekness and
familiarity with God: and seduced many Christians to damnable Heresies and
impure practices, as that Impostor did by personating Moses, Platina in
Caelestin. 1. p. 63.
delude the Jews in Valentinians time? And was not the Emperor Julian (an
Apostate not only from Christ, but from his Order, for some think him a Priest
or Clergy man) more vexatious to the Christians by his moderate carriage at
first, Julianus clericus secundam quosdam, calidior caeteris persecutor, non vi
neque tormentis primo; sed praemiis, honoribus, blanditiis, persuasionibus,
majorem fere populi partem quam si atrocior fuisset, elicuit. Plat. in vita
Damasi 1 p. 54.
and his winning on the world through those his adulatorious and self denying
crafts, then all the persecuting Emperors besides? it is too too true, that the
Wolves heart in the Lambs skin did irreparable hurt.

Christ had Judas in his Family, and the Church has unnatural children in her
bowels; such as with Pilate wash their hands, but give sentence with the
outcries against her; Snakes in bosoms, who like treacherous confessors,
learn secrets, not to conceal, but reveal them; not to pity, but to propalate
men's follies. Delilahs, that by the Chimistry of look and lap, evirtuate
Sampsons love and strength, and return affection (which when not answered, is
treacherous to it self) the Granado and concave dispatch of falsehood.

How ought men to summon their wits to avoid these snares, which have fire in
their Foxtails? of what consequence it is to live lives harmless and open, when
there are such arts of blemish and defeat acted! He is wise that follows
Epiphanius, of whom Saint Jerome writes, That his life was so holy and
blameless, that even Heretics, Tantae venerationis fuit, ut regnantes
Haeretici, ignominiam suam putarent, si talem virum persequerentur. Epist. 61.
ad Pammachium.
who hated him for his Doctrine, were ashamed to appear against him, and
shunned the scandal of persecuting him. This will make us live peaceably, and
not groan under, nor grieve at the censures and unkindnesses of the world to
us; Ut quid enim de alterius hominis (...) de m^^ ipsius judicio solicitus sum,
cujus nec vituperio reprob^^, nec laud probatus inveniar. S. Bernardus de
tripl. gloria.
but teach us to take revenge on them, by pardon of, and prayer for them; and
in Gods time, their loves and admiration will be the returns of our prayers,
the rewards of our patience, and the crown of our constancy. He has not learned
the lesson of heathens, that cannot bear evil words and evil will from evil men.

(...), Maximi Collect. c. 10. and Stob. Tom. 2. c. 42.
etc. He that an ear to calumnies does give,
His mind with vice abounds, full ill does thrive,
Wit in his drony brains has made no hive.
For Marcus Antoninus, when he made his Defense against the malicious Charge of
envious Fulvius, concluded, All that he had learned from the wisest men in the
Universities of Rhodes, Hoc tantum fine hominibus colenda esse studia, ut
norint quo pacto inter maliciosos and inutiles eluctari debeant: non enim alius
est Doctrinae fructus, nifi ut vitam quis si^^eram and linguam occlusam habeat.
Gnev. l. 1. c. 39.
Naples, Capua, Tarentum, amounted to this only, to be able to keep innocence,
to deserve no blemish, but to bear it when it comes, with a mind unmoved, and
to live so as to shame it, and those that first endeavored to bring it on him.

Nay, what is more, he is not arrived to that which is the Jewel of this world,
the true use of reason (man's impropriation as it were;) no creature here below,
besides him, having it:) For that he can revenge wrongs, is somewhat he has in
common with beasts; but that he forgives them, is from a principle of grandeur
and princely bounty, from Reason canonized and heightened by the influences of
divine communication. When I hear men bravely accomplished, repine that they
cannot quit scores with their injurious foes, I think of that reply of S.
Anthony, which S. Jerome mentions he gave to blind Didimus, who complained he
wanted eyes: I wonder, quoth he, that a prudent man should grieve for the loss
of that, Miror prudentem virum ejus rei dolere damno, qua^^ formica, muscae,
and culices, habent; et non latari illius possessione, quam soli Sancti, and
Apostol^ meruerunt. In vita Anthonii, and apud Nicephor. l. 9. c. 17. Acts
20.35.
which flies, fleas and ants have; and not rejoice in that treasure in his
possession, which holy men and Apostles, yea Worthies only deserve and have: It
being a far more blessed thing to give pardon, then receive provocation.

I know this is not only a paradox to men of high mettle, who admire
punctilioes of Honor, and had rather die, then not dispute a tittle, or word
misplaced; but even to all who find it hard to suppress these Jebusites, the
inhabitants of our internal Canaan, whosoever long as we live, Josh. 15.62.
will be in us. Passions of all sorts are clamorous, and will have audience; and
if they come with Petitions, and make moderate requests, it is fit they should
be heard. God has placed them in us as the Angels that ascend and descend the
ladder of our lives, and while they are modest and bounded, they serve God, and
beautify man: Love and Joy makes me sociable; Fear and Anger makes me wary;
Sorrow prompts me to poysiness and solidity. Love makes me admire God in his
Nature, Works and administrations. Joy calls me to a testimony of my gratitude
for Mercie's favors, not only to necessity, but plenty. Fear aws me from
abuse of what enjoying I am happy, and wanting I may be miserable. Anger
evidenceth my dislike of that which is evil, and Sorrow my loss of what is
good; or at least apprehended so to be.

Passions in the Mind are like members in the body, good or evil in their
use: The hand acting Murder, the eye darting lust, the mouth speaking
blasphemy, the foot nimble to do mischief, is as far from the design of God
in creating them, as the passions concupiscible and irascible are, when they
are most exorbitant, and press hardest on man to tempt God, and dishonor
himself.

Passions (the elements of excellent Graces) have been vessels of honor in
Gods Family: Moses his Zeal, and Phinehas his Justice, David's Tenderness,
Jeremies Tears, and Peter's Penitency, are things offered to God with
acceptance. Our blessed Savior (who knew no sin, nor had sinful passion, yet)
was holily and harmlesly passionate at Lazarus his decease; he groaned, he
wept, John 11.
(Lazarus our friend sleeps:) Death was but a sleep to him whom Christ's tears
bemoaned, and his power resolved to awaken again to a worldly life: Verse. 11.
yea, not only Saints and Martyrs, but also Heathen men, whose chief riches
were in this, Conquests of Nature and inordinate appetite, have been notable
for this. Love is an open-handed passion, and cannot deny to the party it
loves, Tama tranquillitatis fuit, ut vultu^ nunquam mutaverit moerere vel
gaudio.
the key to the cabinet of life: Secrates his Aspasia, Aristotle's Hermia,
Plato's Archenassa, brought great infamies on those mirrors of Science: Marcus
Aurelius, whom Capitolinus reports to be of such a composed nature, that he
never changed countenance either for joy or grief, yet when his beloved
Faustina died, (...).
wept bitterly, and more then some thought was decent: but his Friend Pius
corrected the censorious unnaturalness of those Bachilour standers by, with
this, Permit him to be a man; neither Power nor Learning ought to cashier
affection. Permit ill^ ut homo sit; noque enim vel Philosophia vel imperium
tollis affect^s.
He deserves to be eternally in the horn-book, and never to come to the primer
of Esteem, who cannot water his plants, and his couch too, when he bids adieu
to such a Companion, as with the famous Duchess of Suffolk, will go a
pilgrimage with her Mr. Berty, Anno 1558. Holingsh. p. 1143. 1144.
and not think either her honor debased, or her life imbittered by such a
wander, with her Love, and for her Religion. Nay, I will be no bail for his
true answer of the Acton of Ingratitude brought against him, who has now,
heretofore had, or hereafter may have a Wife like that of Dionysius of
Syracuse, who takes him for better, for worse, An elegisti (...) secundarum
fortunarum sociam, non adversarum?
and would be the companion of his Banishments, as she had been of his
Greatness; and yet can bid her farewell with dry eyes, or an unbroken heart.
Solomon, for all his Wisdom, and Caesar in spite of his manliest stomach, here
bites the lip, and comes to this bar of tears, crying Guilty.

I have read of some that have dyed for Joy and Grief, for Love and Hatred;
yea, so active are the Passions in us, that it is not only hard, but almost
impossible to give man a better definition then Passion. Not Passions then
(simply,) but the exorbitancies of them are to be decryed, and suppressed.

I like not the frigidity of those whose resolves are so far North, that the
warmest love which Virtue presents them, hardly kindles, at most does not
inflame them, to pay their sacred debts in kind. Nor do I approve of that
impure madness and Amazon ardor which the young Duchess of Meron expressed to
Bruchgrave of Noremberg, Nisi prohiberent quatuor oculi. (...) Van. Manden.
disc. Moral. 7. in 6. Preceptum p. 838. (...). Cicer. ad Philiscum. Dion. l.
38. p. 71, Maximum sapientia and indicium, and officium, ut ipse ubique parsit,
idem que sit. Seneca.
son to Count Frederick Zollern; who hearing that he had said, that he could
love, and would marry the Duchess, if four eyes did not hinder (which she
interpreted to be her two children) with her own hands murdered them, to make
way for his enjoyment. Passion, as it is vitiated and deflected from its right
use, as fire out of the chimney, and water out of the channel, puts all into
confusion and misrule; this to prevent is the part and prime quality of a wise
man; and though it be easier to say then to do it; yet ought it to be the
endeavor of every sober mind, to attain this Mastery, without which, man is
never more in danger, then from these enemies of his own house; for then do we
provoke God to deprive us of good, and send evil things upon us, when we are
imtemperately acted by them to use them forbiddenly; and when we glorify not
God, but engage our selves to admire and prize them beyond that bound which God
has set us, and that value he has put on them. Lots wise may love Sodom as a
pleasant and useful place, but when once God discovers the sin of it, so
earnest a plea for Judgment, as that Hell out of Heaven is plague little enough
for the matchless pollution of it; then it is not safe to look back wishfully;
God can distinguish an eye of desire from that of pity; and he punishes
according to the tendency of the aim; he must needs give righteous judgment,
who weighs in the balance, touches by the Standard, and measures by the line
of Justice, every thought, word and work: therefore ought man to be exact and
wary, that there be not in his soul any guest without the wedding garment, any
desire or fear which is not qualified and brought into subjection: For as
temporal Thrones are never secure while any emulous Competitors continue in
power, unsubjected to the one, that pleads he has the right, or that resolves
he will have it; so in man's Mind there is no serenity while Passions importunity
be subjected to Reason's Empire, and the will of man strikes sail to the
pleasure of God: Which is the next Argument to be urged.

Hitherto I have borrowed Earrings (as it were) from Egyptians, drawn water
out of the wels of humane Learning, and produced Instances out of Moralists;
now I will be bold with the fruit of Paradise; such Arguments as being drawn
from Gods purpose and his Saints sufferings, ought to be very persuasive to us.

The first whereof is the Will of God, serenato, but be chastened, 1 Cor. 11.32.
that they might not be condemned with the world. God suffers his to be often
stung by the Taratantula of this World, that they may cry out for the music of
his Mercy for cure. Alas (O holy soul) this world is thy Pathmos, it is thine
Egypt, wherein thou have load of labors laid on thee by thy merciless
Taskmasters; it is thy nonage, and thy Gardians in it are such as sell thee to
what Vice, and what Mischief bidds most: it is the Den into which Gods Daniels
are shut, that they may by faith conquer difficulties, and civilize Lions;
Heaven that remains, is thy Rest, thy livery and seisin, thine emancipation.
God commands his to wait for that blessed reversion, to pray that it may come,
and till it comes to submit, to feed on short commons. O these children of the
Kingdom have often bread of sorrow, and water of affliction given them; yea, so
great exigents are they driven to, that sometimes they deceive the dogs, in
licking up the crumbs that fall from men's tables, whose portion is in this
world, Psalm. 17.14.
and whose bellies God fills with his hid treasures. And fit it is, they that
would succeed to Christ's purchase, Heaven, should clear the encumbrances, and
carry the crosses of this world exsultingly; not with repinings, not crying out
mournfully, Eusebius. l. 4.
but resolutely, as Polycurpus did, Malus miles est qui Imperatorem gemens
sequitur.
whom his persecutors burned, No matter (quoth he) what becomes of my body, so
my soul get to heaven. He is an ill soldier that follows his Commander
weeping: and as bad a Christian that comes to the stake lamenting, resolving to
keep his place in Paris, Foelix vita and beatitatis plena, semper ac vere
vitalis and in numinis comitatu, perpetuo boni participes. Sabellicus Exemplo.
l. 1. c. 6 Tom. 4. Jude ver. 14 Memento Philippe, te esse mortalem.
though he lose a Mansion in Paradise.

I read of the Saints of God glorious by sufferings, but never glorious without
them. Indeed Enoch (who lived heaven upon earth) is said to be translated
without any mention of sorrows (though I believe he had them from the wicked
world, of whom he prophesied:) But besides him do I find none but had these
mementoe's of mortality, and fescues to fear. Abraham the friend of God, was he
not in a strait, when Grace and Nature, like two violent torrents, met in him?
or like notable Advocates tempted him by turns, to gratify requests antipodick
each to other? God commands him as it were, to imbark his son, Genesis 22.2.
and hoist sail to the port he appoints, Moriah; Faith bids him get ready, the
wind was fair, the fraught beneficial, the return safe; no miscarrying, if we
keep Gods way on Gods errand. Well, when Abraham comes whither he is bound, what
must he do? He must unlade and ease the vessels of her burden, Isaac must be
sacrificed: Faith calls to him to run, not halt; to obey, not dispute, and that
because the supreme Power willed it, which was able to raise children to him
out of stones, and to remand life into its forsaken cell, Isaac's body. But
Nature much amused, boggled somewhat at the action; and Abraham (me thinks)
thus reasons; What, O Lord, my Son? What, mine only Son? the Son of the
Promise, and of mine old Age? What, Isaac? What? is effusion of innocent blood,
a child's by his Father, unlawful? And shall I be president to this cruelty?
Shall I, who am noted for sanctity, teach others upon occasion of passion and
displeasure to be Assassines of their Issue? That be far from thee, the Judge of
all the world to command from me the Father of the faithful, and of Isaac, to
do. O the good man's agony! Did he not (think ye) repent he was a Father, who
was commanded to unchilde his child, and destroy the temple of his sons body,
which not long before he was isntrumental to build, by Gods blessing on his
generative energie? In this difficulty, what course steers he? Abraham's Isaac,
and Abraham's God must not be Competitors; the Father of the faithful is
faithful to his Father, God, who commands and resolves Isaac for a Sacrifice.
Genesis 22.13.
But see the grace in the reward, Abraham above Nature prepares his son for
God; and God beyond nature provides a Lamb, hung by the horns for reprieve:
Abraham's Faith was not more mirculous, then Gods Mercy in accepting so poor an
exchange for so rich a captive. How ready is God to accept our wills for deeds!
God looks at the willing mind, and rewards Abraham's faith with Isaacks
freedom. Thus God tried Abraham; and were not his sorrows like those of a
woman in travel, fit only for his faith, the winds suitable to the sail that
this vessel of glory navigated by to Eternity?

Next was Moses the servant of God, who spoke with God as never mere man did,
Exodus 33.11.
face to face 40 days together in the Mount, ver. 28.
and was kept without food all that Lent, the power of God for that time
heaventizing his body, and giving it privilege from natural indigencies, and
satisfying it without their ordinary supplies; yet was this man not without
troubles and cross gales; One while his Wife with a feminine clamor, and in a
motherly rage cries out to him, Exodus 4.25.
Thou art a bloody Husband; words like the messenger of death, portentous and
ghastly; words that (deserved) which by no worthy husband ever can) are potent
enough to make a man turn Runagado, and exulate himself never to see Christian
or man more. Had Moses his demeanor been uncomely, he little deserved his Wife,
though a Zipporah; but since it was wise and husbandly, he less deserved the
taunt, especially since he was as beauteous a man in his married relation, as a
child in his Ark of reeds; and yet then Pharaohs Daughter was in love with
him; when as now Zipporah an Ethiopian (for marrying of whom Aaron and Miriam
were offended with him) turns upon him in a pettish reproach, Numb. 12.1.
Thou art a bloody Husband. This was evil enough for a good man to live under,
and too much for a good woman to traduce her husband by: but Moses replies not:
He was wise to leave the issue to God and her. It Was more fit he should prepare
for the peoples roughness, then reproach his own choice.

In Numb. 11.12. the people. (Rebels as he calls them) murmur against him; not
as he was Moses, but as he was their Magistrate; that makes the contumacy
against God, whose delegates Magistrates are. Well, what would the people have?
If they entreat Moses to pray for them, or to instruct them in their duty to
God, and one to another; he is ready to do by them, as they desire: but the
people like hell and the grave, cry Give, give: (infiniteness only can satisfy
the cravings of multitudes.) What then is it they would have? Food: Alas poor
souls, they are pardonable that are tempted to impatience by hunger, and
nakedness. Can a Magistrate condemn necessitous importunities? Or think he
does his duty, if he provide not supply for his people? Moses was mindful of
Israel, but Moses was but a man, Israel must come to their Prince with
reverence, and to their Priest with duty, especialy when they want: what they
have not, bread and water; and are in a wilderness, where barren soil yields
no corn, nor hard rocks water. Lord, what a pass was Moses brought to, when the
people, whom he (as Gods Captain Lieutenant) had led out of Egypt from hard
Masters and a harsh Prince, should now in the wilderness tempt God, and
reproach him, by expressing desires of returning to Egypt! yet so it was. Moses
heard all this, and much more: yea, to complete his sorrows, might not enter
the Land of Canaan, which was the reward of his long March in the wilderness,
but must up to the Mount, and die a remote and unknown death, without any ones
knowledge of of the place of his burial, or any pompous Ceremony: a sad exit to
Isreal's glorious General. But Moses was content to be punished for his distrust
at Meribah: Sin at the waters of strife, is punished by death on Abarim, Numb.
27.12, 14
the Mount of Passage.

A Patriarch, a General full of sorrows, matched by a King full of sorrows: and
let no man wonder; Crows often build in Steeples; and Polecats infest
Dove-coats. David the King, the man after Gods own heart, had a bedroule of
sorrows, as long as his life: His brethren hate him, Saul disgusts and pursues
him, so that he cries out, I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul; his Wife
Michol scoffs at him, the Amalekites surprise his Wives, 1 Samuel 30.
and the people of Ziklag murmr against him. O Lord, what a pack of troubles
was he in, who had Shimei's Curse, Absolom's Treason, and Amnon's lust to
labor with, and the discontent of them to overcome? Is it not a sad story that
he tells, of his going mourning all the day long, of his being chased as a
Partridg in the wilderness, of the sorrows of his heart, the slippings of his
feet, his fainting fits for love of God, and fear of his departing from him,
when trouble is near, and there is none to help? Can we consider the blood that
he shed, the sins (that blasphemed God, and imbased his Honor) even those
against Vrijah, and not conclude, they brought sorrows of heart upon him? It Is
too palpable that he was laden with troubles, who had such innate corruptions
to contest with, such unnatural obstructions to remove.

I shall not mention Joseph's, Job's, Noah's, Daniel's, Jeremie's, Jonah's,
with the other servants of God famous for afflictions on them; but cast anchor
in the sufferings of the blessed Virgin, our blessed Lord, and his blessed
Apostles and Saints; these mentioned, will dulcifie afflictions to us. The
married Virgin Mother of Christ, a miracle in her station; a Mother, yet a
Virgin, and miraculous in her Production, God, Man born of her, and born to us,
CHRIST JESUS; yet is there mention of a Sword that shall pierce to the heart of
this holy Saint, Luke 2. Like Mother like Son for suffering; not in the
quantity, but the truth: Saint Mary suffered (according to her proportion)
sorrows, as did Christ: but hers were drops to the Ocean of his. And the
Apostles and holy men of aftertimes have been afflicted and tormented, Heb.
11.38.
though of them the world was unworthy. If we peruse the Gospels and
Martyrologies, we shall find Peter tempted by presumption to follow Christ,
and by fear betrayed to deny him in the High Priests Hall: Thomas his
incredulity, that reduced faith to sense: and all the Apostles pusillanimity,
who fly from their Master, and dare not own him when apprehended. Do we not
think that Paul's thorn in the flesh, did macerate him? and twitch the Herod in
him, (when in the royal apparel, and on the throne of Self-admiration) with a
Mement^, that if Grace be not sufficient, Nature will be too strong to be kept
under? Was it not (think we) a bitter pill of after penance, to the Disciples,
that they cried not One and all? and went not with their Lord to Golgotha, as
readily as to the miraculous Meal, where five loaves and a few fishes fed five
thousand with advantage: Or to the Marriage at Cana, where he turned water into
wine; Or to the Mount, where he transfigured himself before them, and they saw
(to their infinite ravishment and delight) a model of heaven, and of his divine
clarification there?

Yea, Are not the sufferings of the Saints in all ages left on record as a
basis for our Faith, and a target for our security, that we may not despond, or
be like them who have lost Mast, Sails, Rudder, yea and Compass in the storm
of this world; but take heart, and quit our selves like men, though we have
sorrows on every side, and adversaries as the Church bad, the chief, who
prosper; for the Lord has afflicted her? Lament. 1. ver. 5. Since those that
belong to God, find, It Is good for them that they are afflicted; and know,
that in very faithfulness he afflicts them; yea, that there is fruitfulness
in this land of affliction, as Joseph said, Genesis 41. verse. 52. For as once
Vibius Crispus, a Companion of that Glutton Vitellius, who killed all his
Friends that kept company with him, said, Had I not been sick, (...), Dion lib.
65. p. 734.
that kept me from the Court, I had died of surfets for company with the rest:
So may many of Gods precious ones say, I had been lost eternally, had not God
brought me in by crosses and troubles, and made me loath the World, which has
in every angle of it shelves of danger, and rocks of shipwreck. It Is well noted
by S. Jerome, Josiah the holiest King of Juda was slain by the sword of the
Egyptians; Quid inter reges Jofia sanctius? Aegyptio mucrone interfectus est.
Quid Petro, quid Paulo sublimius? Neronionum gladium eruentarunt. Et ut de
hominibus taceam, Dei Filius sustinuit ignominiam cruck. Et tu put^^ beatos qui
falicitate istius seculi and diliciis fruuntur? Magna ira est quand^
peccantibus non irascitur Deus. Ep. 33. ad Castrutium.
Peter and Paul the great Apostles, were put to death by wicked Nero; yea, the
Son of God suffered by the Jews; and (Castrutius) do thou think the
prosperity of this world a portion for Gods beloved ones? God is never less in
love with men, then when they go unpunished, and have the world at will. God
then does afflict his, and his hear his voice, when he calls to them to afflict
themselves: not like creatures of envy, who when they want other objects to
torment, rend and perplex themselves by vain and impertinent angariations. God
loves not the sacrifices of fools, nor the devotion of mad men: He delights in
the reasonable services we offer. Religion is no heathenish digladiation, but
an holy imitation of Christ, and a willing resignation to the rule of his word:
It commands man to chasten Nature; not by destroying it, as that Philosopher
did his bags, which he threw away into the sea, Perdam te, ne perdas me. Aurum
deponere incipientium est, non perfectorum: fecit hoc Crates, Thebanus, fecit
Antistenes. Scipsum offerre Deo proprie Christianorum est, and Apostolerum. S.
Hyeron. Ep. 28. ad Lucinium.
that they might not throw him away. No man has any warrant for self-abuse: We
are not nostri, sed alieni juris; and God will see we shall not destroy his
work besides his will. We are to afflict our selves; but not as Macarius,
Asisias, Lewis the first of France, Lithophorus the Monk, Paconius, Caecilia,
Radigundus, Sarrae, and others, of which Sabellicus makes mention, Exemplor.
page 42. Nor as the Popish Pennances; who with the servants of Baal, whip and
dilaniate themselves; nor in that mistaken sense of Origin, who made himself an
Eunuch for the Kingdom of God: no, nor in that Hypocritick way which the
Prophet condemns, Isa. 58.5
Hanging down the head like a bulrush: or fasting and praying to smite with the
fist of wickedness: These are as smoke in Gods eyes, and have no better
entertainment from him, then Who required these things at your hands? Isa. 1.12.
The self-controll that he accepts and rewards, is that of Job, Job 42.6.
I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes; that of Mary, weeping at
Christ's feet; the devout Publicans prostration to beg pardon; the humble
confession in Jacobs words, and with Jacobs heart, Genesis 32.10.
I am not worthy of the truth and faithfulness that thou have showed to thy
servant. In fine, to do and suffer the will of God; and when thou have done
all, to think thy self an unprofitable servant.

This duty God enjoined the Jews of old, Levit, (...).
16.29. There is a statute for self-affliction: The LXX read it by, Ye shall
humble your souls; Afflictions on good men work humiliation: The pride of man
sullies Gods beauty in the soul, and the nipping frosts of affliction revive
and refresh it: (...)
The Hebrew word rendered Humble, signifies to answer and to testify, and to
attol the voice either in expression of joy or sorrow: A Metaphor possibly
taken from Musicians, who sing in parts, one side of the Quire answers the
other. God expects there should be an Antiphona betwixt his Judgments and our
souls: We should answer his castigations with emendations. True Humiliation is
not only the grace of a corner and closet; but it (when God calls) is on the
house top, accusing it self, and admiring God in public, that others may see,
and bless God on its behalf.

Nor was this only enjoined the Jews, as the law of their bondage, from which
Christians are manumitted; but continues still in force to the end of the
world: Sin and sorrow came into, and go out of the world together; one grave
(the Dissolution of all) lodges them both: till then, there is no parting
those whom God has chained together: Sin is sorrows merit, and sorrow is sins
malady; and we must be contented with these Sergeants to serve Execution on us
at the suit of our Maker. Sorrow is the Jordan that all Naamans must wash in:
(...). S. Basilius.
It becomes Misery to be humble; Our Lord Jesus commands us to be such, not
only toward God, whom we provoke all the day long; but also to one another,
as was Christ, who though Lord of all, washed his Disciples feet, and fed them
by miracle, yea paid their ransom in great charity, that by these actions of
condescension, and yet Grandeur, he might lesson them their duties and his
divinity. It Is a great degree of Christian perfection to follow Christ in the
regeneration; and to be what Saint Paul says he was, all things to all men for
Christ and the Gospels sake: He that considers Christ's exaltation thoroughly,
must take the rise of it from the center and bottom of it, his humiliation;
God forbid, says the Doctor of us Gentiles, Gal. 6.14.
that I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world. It seems, crosses
to Gods are great indications of divine love, not only for that God especially
errands them to his; that his saints and servants in all times have born them;
but also because Gods promise of comfort is to the afflicted. 2 Samuel 22.28. The
afflicted people thou will save; He hears the cry of the afflicted, Job
34.28. In all their afflictions, he was afflicted, Isa. 63.9. If afflictions
were not useful, God would not send them to his; if they were not expressionsof
love, he would never support his under them by his promises, he would not be a
strong fortress and refuge, Jer. 16.19. not a deliverer out of affliction, Ps.
18 27.

Methinks I hear the holy soul breaking forth into this Ejaculation. Welcome
crosses sanctified by Christ to his, welcome sorrows sweetened by him who bore
our sorrows, that ours might be less grievous to us; welcome stake the ladder
of eternity, which Martyrs kissed, and Virgins who were not defiled, wedded:
welcome prison, banishment, and loss of all for my Saviors sake, who after all
the sorrows of a troublous life is ascended up to take possession of glory, and
to draw me into fellowship with him; O my God, give me grace to welcome the
crosses I have, or further may have, as my Savior did his revilings, not
reviling again; not returning, but remitting injuries: Rejoice, O holy soul,
in those Monitors which rouse thee from thy sinful slumber: Remember the Co^k
crew, and minded Peter of a glorious Master denied, by a presumptuous servant:
And fear not but thy frailty may have an aspect of mercy as had his; the more
thou art at loss, the greater ought thy care be to seek God with more ardency,
and serve him with less indevotion: Trust not too much in any arm of flesh
which says, life and luster is in me, Falix necessitas quae in meliora
compellit, S. Aug. ep. 45.
all things here pass and repasse by uneven vicissitudes, and leave their
confidents in trouble and complaints. In the Lord Jehovah put thy confidence;
He only is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. O holy soul, thy time here
is but short, thy task great, thine opposites many; be diligent, improve
opportunities warily, practice that sacred chimistry; which from fetid simples,
outward crosses, extracts the precious Elixar of divine cordials: Be not weary
of well doing, study rather how to quit sin, then wave the cross; there is no
lesson it learns, but is savory; and thou art not to refuse the point of
Doctrine, it commends to thy meditation: Think upon good things had as trials
how thou would use them; and lost, how thou can bear them; bemoane not so
much what thou hopest for, but have not, as what thou have and usest not
aright: perhaps God hurls thy pride from the pinnacle whence it took rise:
Great thoughts are often confronted by him, who will have no Dagon of folly
cheek by joll with his Ark of Virtue. O consider, had thou not Babels in thy
brains? wast thou not of their mind, who thought of nothing but sitting at the
right and left hand of glory? If so, art thou not befriended, that payest fine
and ransom for thy Rebellion in the stubble and straw of an external Content?
Is God contented with a turtle Dove? and art thou discontented because he has
that which thou say was the Lamb that rested in thy bosom? Is any thing too
good for God? too great for him who is thine all? O holy soul, study thy self
better: God has been merciful to thee, thou art a gainer by every loss,
which if it had not betided thee, had endangered heaven. Lift up thine eyes,
the Canaan Mercy promises thee, is in view; that is thy Country, that thine
Inheritance, that the Haven to which thou art bound, and in which only thou
shall be safe. Cheer up (O holy soul) thy drooping spirits; Remember thy
treasure is in heaven; there ought also thy heart to be: Call upon thy Savior
in glory, and ask in his way, that thou may receive for his sake. Is any
thing too hard for God? Do not all things serve Providence, and laquey to
Power? Why does thy Faith misdoubt access to God, and success in those things
thou with Conscience and Wisdom managests. The holy confidence of a Believer
scales Heaven, and by an humble pertness obtains it: so great a prize is worth
waiting for, though it be attended with Serpents of craft, and Dragons of
felness. He that said, Though thou slay me, Job 13.15.
yet will I trust in thee, counsels thee to venture all thy welfare upon mercy:
There is no fear of miscarriage where good things in a good manner are prayed
for and pursued after: Then only we miss our wages, when we work amiss; Then
our Prayers are returned without answer, when we turn our Prayers into
Subsidies to lusts; when we pray for accommodations to our vices, and forget
that of our Savior, Matthew. 16.26.
What will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to lose his soul?

Much then has been written of the benefit of Afflictions: But the great
Argument, which puts all Question of the advantage of them out of question, is
behind; that is, the Sufferings of Christ; potent enough to force, a thaw on
Marbles, and to liquifie Adamants.

-- Quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis. --
Whosoever those troubles does conceive,
Cannot choose but from the heart to grieve.
He it was that went before his Apostles and Martyrs, in treading the
Wine Press of wrath: Like that Commander.

-- Monstrat tolerare labores,
Non jubet. --
To others he does not command
What he himself don't take in hand.
God appointed the Man of his right hand, his fellow: (Alas, we cannot drink of
the cup of wrath, nor be baptized with that baptism he was baptized with;) for
our sakes to be our forerunner in sorrows; Behold the Lamb of God who takes
away the sins of the world; declared a man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief. Isa. 53.

A man of sorrows: it is an Hebraism denoting fullness of sorrows, a sea of
sorrows in Christ's soul; Tristis cord propter multitudinem afflictionum
suarum. Rab. David in lib. Radicum. (...)
sin imputed, and mercy inherent, were at a holy contest (as it were) for
Mastery, and the pangs of such twins must needs be grievous. The word
(sorrows) comes from a root which signifies, to be weakened, and denotes a
sorrow internal, even to expiration; and the learned distinguish it from those
words which they express outward sorrows by: Verus bo^^o vere doluit. Gloss.
Lyrae.
Christ's sorrows were such as brought grief upon him, even to the decision of
the silver thread of his life.

Yet further, he is said to be acquainted with grief; the word rendered
acquainted, comes from a root that signifies to apprehend: (...)
And the Learned say, Verbum mentis et intellectus. Pagn. in verbo.
it is a word of the Mind and Understanding, importing that Christ was so
qualified, and obfirmated, that no sorrows (with reverence be it written)
could come amiss to him; he had a sinless Manhood to undergo, and a divine
power to overcome sorrows. God had made him the Churches rock, against which,
the waves of sorrow could not prevail. He must himself have armor of proof,
upon which, no humane Machination can hurtfully prevail, who is the captain
of a Christians salvation; and who has gloriously triumphed over all the
enemies of it.

Acquainted with grief: I cannot but renew the thoughts of these Sorrows of my
Savior, O beatum mortem, unde vita nostra nata est! O falicem stultitiam, quae
nostram p^perit sapientiam.
because his sorrows are my rejoycings; not as they were exprobratory from the
Jews, but as they are expiatory for me. There was not only dolor, but
external disdain, as the Jews managed the death of Christ, they crucified him,
and that between two thieves. (...), from a word near of kin to (...),
prophanari, or violari. John 19.34.
Might not this dishonor of Christ be reasonably thought a profanation of,
and violence done to his Excellency? He who was consecrated in the womb, had
sorrows in his soul, before on the cross wounds from spears in his side, that
he might appear to be A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, whose soul
had the propassion, before his body the Passion.

Yet further, verse 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to
grief: What means this? is there any degree of misery beyond that of a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with grief? Is not every twitch of anguish an Orator to
God and man's pity? What can be a depression more irrecoverable, then to be
condemned to the Cross? for the Son of God to bear the sins of men? yet this
puts a further emphasis on Christ's Suffering, God permitted him to be bruised
in the mortar of men's malice, that the fragrancy of his charity may affect his,
and make them admire him for this savor of his ointment. Cant. 1.3.


And it is well coupled (To bruise him, with It pleased the Lord:) God commended
his love to man by giving his San to die; an act of pure choice, and perfect
charity. (...) Simul affectum and acceptationem includit, Pagn. in verbo
Nothing could have moved Christ to come from heaven, to suffer on earth, but
free and unmerited benignity: Christ had a body given him to be broken for us,
that our Ransom might be effected, by his life's dissolution, our debts
solution. Thus it pleased the Lord; what to do? To bruise him, not to humble
him, as a Virgin robbed of her Ornament; (that could not be, Christ is what he
was, and ever will be, a Lamb without blemish; this Hellen of heaven has no
mole or black spot on the face of his glory.) though He was apprehended by
Club-men, yet was He Lord of Millions of Angels. The humiliation of Christ
consisted in this, that He should lie in the dust as man, Home rarus, home
singularis, home extra omnium hominum numcrum, and solus talis in hoc mundo.
Corn. Mussus in concione de Pass. hab^u Romae in Palatio.
who could not see corruption in the grave, because God: that he must die an
unusual way, who was an unusual Sacrifice. He must be bruised: Our Lord
Jesus, not like Jonah for disobedience, but like him in the tumultuous sea of
sorrow, had a grave prepared to lodge him in, till his time of detension was
over, and that of Ascension was come; then he opened Deaths prison doors, and
took a speedy course ^o heaven, where he is now sitting at the right hand of God
the Father.

O Lord, how great sorrows pressed upon Christ! What unparalleled grief had
he, who was the Son of God, and could not sin; the Son of God, and deserved not
to suffer! ('it is we (O Lord) that provoked thee, what did that Lamb do? Nay
rather, (Lord) what did he not do, that deserves our admiration and eternal
gratitude?) yet behold his sorrows.

Sorrow, that is an unworthy singular of detraction; such a prelation of
passion, calls for a plurality of expressive Gratitude. Come then (O holy soul)
to this sacred Audit, and behold sorrows numberless; Love without merit; O
opus absqu^ exemplo, O gratia sine merito, O amor sine mensura! Cornel. Mussus
Epis. Bitont. in Ser. de Passione Luke 2.
Charity beyond Measure: Had he not sorrow, who was the Son of God, yet became
the son of Man; and that of no King, no Grandee, but the reputed son of a
Carpenter, born in an Inn, in the Stable of that Inn; laid in the Manger of
that Stable? Had he not sorrow, who wanted a hole to hide his head in, bread to
feed upon (unless by Miracle) whose Followers were poor, whose Tribute was paid
by a fish, and Triumph solemnized by an Ass Colt, and by boughs and garments
spread in the way? Had he not sorrow, who spoke and did as never man (his
enemies being Judges) yet was traduced, envied, followed with Reproach,
betrayed by his own servant and put to death by his Country men, after a
shameful manner, and by a lingering and protracted Engine of dispatch, the
Cross, on which he was exposed to shame, naked, unpitied, reviled; given
Vinegar and Gall to; yea, as it were forsaken of God? What call ye this, if
not forrowes? Was, is, shall be any sorrows like these sorrows of Christ? When
his soul was made an offering for sin, his body subjected to, violence; yea,
body and soul for a time parted, to join God and man together, whom sin had
severed, and whom only his death could reconcile? Mat 2.7.45.
Well might the Sun refuse to give light to such a deed of darkness as was the
Jews cruelty, in crying to death their King, John 19.15
which the wisdom of Pilate hinted to them by way of Reproach, in these words,
Shall I crucify your King? Well might the vail of the Temple be rent, when the
Temple of his body, more glorious then Solomon's Temple, not made with hands, as
was that, but compaginated by the miraculous art of Omnipotency, was torn
apieces by cruelty. Matthew. 27.51, 52, 53.
Well might the graves open, and the dead yield themselves no longer prisoners,
when Jesus (Lord of the grave) was on his march to the grave. Well might the
dead appear to many in the holy City, since the City appeared but a grave of
dead men who knew not what they did, nor whom they acted cruelty upon. O holy
soul, since it is thine ambition to have Christ thy reward, resolve to follow
him, bearing his reproach: Fear not the infultings of men, nor the oppositions
of flesh and blood. If to accompany Christ to Golgotha be to be vile, be yet
more vile. The Cross of Christ has treasure under it; (...). Marcus Anton. ad
Silenum.
much glory results from contempts for his sake. There is nothing so becoming
thy holy Prosession as to imitate Christ. (...). Greg. Nissen. de relig.
Christian. Profes.
Christianity is nothing else but to live holily and die patiently, as did
Christ; and so much nearer him shall we be in glory, as we are here like him in
our Conversation. Christ made it his meat and drink to do his Fathers will.
Thou (O holy Soul) must not think his good pleasure thy penance; his
providence thy disappointment; his service thy slavery: He uttered no
discontent, thou must not rave and rage: He suffered contradiction of sinners,
thou must not expect approbation from them: He forgave his Enemies, thou must
not remember injuries to revenge them: Percussorem Episcopum ille condemnat,
qui dorsum suum posuis ad flagella, and maledicius non remaledicit. S. Hieron.
Epist. 83. ad Oceanum.
He came unto his own, and they received him not; thou must not wonder if thou
suffer from those whom thou have obliged: He wanted a hole to put his head in,
use thy plenty well, that thy Lord may say to thee, Well done, good and
faithful servant, and continue thee ruler in thine own house, which many thy
betters are not; who yet are not greater sinners then thou, though greater
sufferers. His usages, varyed from Hosannahs to Crucifige's, bids thee not
marvel. If the same breath blows hot and cold, or that Favor has a dark and
bright side to thee. He died (lastly) a shameful death; do not thou defeat a
noble death by a shameless life.

Thou (O holy Soul) have met with disappointments here; Who has not? Let thy
comfort be, that thou art (or ought to be) above all this world can afford:
Perhaps thy crosses have been in those things thou most admiredst; Thou art
well served, who love any thing passionately but God, whom thou should love
with all thy heart, with all thy mind, and with all thy might: thy defeats are
in the (...) of thy hoped for fruition. God sees thou art too indulgent to
flesh, and he loves to abase confidence in it. What to others proves Gold, to
thee becomes dross; Comfort thy self, thy best advantage is to come; Heaven
makes amends for all; those manageries thou think wise and wary, succeed not,
when and as thou would: wait upon God, there is more in the lot cast into the
lap then thou art aware of; honest endeavors in the end have sure pay; Patence
though late, profligates difficulty, and disarms petulant resolution: Mercy
often forms noble Mercuries of rude logs, and the greatest designs of beauty
from the dull lowrings of mortal opposition. That which is sown in weakness,
shall in Gods time rise in power, and bear down all that stand against it. Thou
lastly, art out of love with thy self; because thou can not have thy will of
this world; study to prepare for that better before thou desire a call from
this; death is a terror to those who have not part in the first Resurrection.

And if (O holy soul) thou find thy comforts come in, and thy God gives thee
access to him with boldness, then despise whatever would part thee and thy
joys; cheer up thy self with this, that Christ is thine, in his life thy
pattern; in his Spirit thy Comforter, in his Word thy Rule, in his death thine
Atonement, and in his glorious Session in Heaven thy Triumph; that he is thy
Sun, by whose influence thou shall be drawn up after him, that he is thy shield
to defend thee from evil, that he will give thee grace to glorify him in a
holy life before men, and grace thee with glory before his Pather and his holy
Angels.

But (O holy soul) all is not Gold that glisters, all sufferings are not
sanctified to sufferers, because Pride and Folly has Martyrs which Christ
crowns not, Christ's slock hear his voice, and not a strangers; keep in the
fold, not wander into by-ways; Let it be thy care to suffer not as a busy
body, not as an enemy to Government, and a subverter of Order and civil Peace;
Non erga qui propter iniquitatem, et propter Christianae unitatis impiam
divisionem; sed qui propter justitiam persecutionem patiuntur, ^bi Martyrs
very suns. S. Aug. Ep. 50. ad Bonifac. Countem.
(in these mistakes sober and prudent Christians ought not to be involved; nor
can any from just grounds of Magistratick severity against offenders, take
comfort in sufferings) but as a Christian Martyr: not with clamor, but
meekness; Ann. 33. Q. Eliz. Acts 7. last.
not reviling Powers, as did Hacket, but praying for persecuters, as did
Stephen, Lord lay not this sin (my suffering) to their charge. See (O holy
soul) thou cleanse the inside of the cup, and keep thy heart upright and trim;
Christ cares not for Pharisaicall outsides and ceremonious pomps: he delights
in the inner man, in those addresses that are made to him from a pure heart and
faith unfeigned: to evidence which to men (who judge by outward appearance) the
bodies concurrence in all devout and lowly demeanor, is requisite.

And since thou know him a Spirit, fear nothing more then a spiritlesse
offering, and believe nothing less acceptable to him, then to be denied the
Male of thy Flock, thy best and ripest parts. Take heed thou mistake not Leah
for Rachel, and choose the blear-eyed world, before Christ the Word, that from
the beginning to this moment speaks life and love to thee; And who (in all holy
reverence be it written) drank the health of Eternity to thee in his own blood,
Matthew. 26.58.
and invites thee to pledge him in that Eucharistick Nectar, which our holy
Mother the Church fills out to all worthy Communicants, and in which, 1 Cor.
11.25.
by command of him, they celebrate the memorial of his Passion. And if (O holy
Soul) the sorrows of thy life are too pressing for thee to prevail against,
Call thy Savior to thy rescue; He is a ready help in trouble; He is a door of
hope in the valley of Achor: Hos. 2.15. Achor vallis turbationis. Gloss.
He that was thine Antisignanus in sorrow, expects thou should follow his
Colors. There is no fear of suffering and dying with this Phocion of Eternity,
who for his Martyrs has Comforrs in, Nolitimere mori cum Phocione.
and Crowns after torments. This, this held up Primitive Saints, even to
generous contempt of Death. Saint Jerome reports, that Hylarion being to die,
with eyes fixed on heaven, thus spoke, My soul, go forth of thy prison the
body; Egredere, quid times? egredere anima mea, quid dubitas? Septuaginta prepe
aunis servisti Christo, et mortem times? In vita Hylar.
what fear thou? wherein doubtest thou? Thou have served Christ almost 70
years, and do thou now fear to dis?

I know it is a great work to obtain this Conquest, Turkish Hist. p. 220.
to bring a Bajazet of mortal pride into the Cage of Self-denial: yet the
Scholar of Christ must be this Tamberlaint, and con this Part exactly. Plus
debet Christi Discipulus praestare quam mundi Philosophus. S. Hieron. Epist.
26. ad Pammachum.
Christians, who excel Philosophers in their Wages, must also go beyond them
in their Work. And if (O holy Soul) thou retreatest, and dare not enter the
lists, it is a sign thou art unsatisfied of thy duty, and set light by thy
birthright, Heb. 11.8
which is no better evidenced to thee, then by Afflictions, the badg of
Legitimation. Consider therefore that whatever trouble befalls thee, is to file
off thy pollution, to give thy Virtue a transparency, and to make thee more
like him who is far above the Powers and Principalities of this vain World, and
its dulling and dangerous ^nvie. Bid therefore defiance to all that would
either court or compel thee to resign Faith, Hope, Charity, Patience,
Perseverance, or any other piece of thy holy Armor, to diffidence, and impsous
despair. Consider, every thing in this world shall have end; and then (if not
before) thy frailties and thine enemies injuries shall determine; and till
then, Breve putabe malum quod finis melior subsequetar. S. Hieron. ep. 25. ad
Blesillam.
bear them manfully: For though sorrow be in the night of this life, yet in the
Morning of Eternity joy shall be to those sons of the morning, on whom Christ
the Sun of Righteousness arises, for whom he is a Ransom, and to whom he
will be a glorious Benefactor. The consideration hereof makes a good man's
Departure hence more comfortable, then can be the puissantst Nimrod's: For
though Saladine the great Conqueror of Asia, Es Saladinus Asia Dominator ex
tante Regno tantisque opibus nibil aliud secum fert. Wolph. in Memor. ad ann.
1192.
carries nothing with him to his grave, of all his Power and Wealth, but his
winding sheet; yet does a holy soul expire, with assurance that he has a
building of God, not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.

Indeed, corporal death, as an avoydance of evils, and a safe port to a
tempestuous life, (...), Suidas in yerbo.
is accounted a great accommodation to man, and many have wished for it, that
they might unbend the bow of Nature, which by long girting grows feeble; but
these little dreamed of that judgment succeeding it, which all men must
expect, and which will make the greatest Foelix tremble: From the dread of that
the holy soul is freed; his Advocate is his Judge; the Accuser of impenitents
(Christ's precious blood,) is his Evidence for Mercy. He that has the blood of
this Lamb of God for his Laver, cannot but be clean; for it purges from all
sin: And he that by faith overcomes the world, ought not to fear the fear of
men, but to stay himself in expectation of that Livery of Luster, which Christ
has promised to those whose names are in the Book of Life, Rev. 3.5.
and whom he will publicly avow his, before the Father and the holy Angels. To
these death is sweet: Why sweet? it is their rest from labors, it is their
incoate Jubilee, it is their pass by the first guard which obstructs their
access to Christ, whom to love is their grace, and with whom to live their
glory; it is their Remove from a Valley of Tears to a Mount of Triumph; from a
tedious Service into an absolute Freedom, from Sorrows, to Joys; from wants,
to Plenty; from Pains to Pleasures; from Decay to Confistence. This is the
portion of Gods children; this is the Canaan for Israelites; this the Kingdom
prepared; this, the Top and Top-Gallant of a Christians Faith and Hope; on this
his eye of Faith is fixed; with this his hand of Love is joined; and after this
his foot of Perseverance speeds, refusing all discouragements with that
confidence, Heaven makes amends for all.

This I am sure, transcends the utmost bounds of Mortal largess, the greatest
Mirror of manhood, the likest unlimited Presidents of Soveraignety, can but
give Rewards and Honors impermanent as themselves are; these sons of Change
cannot draw what lot they please, and entail the Crown of Glory on whom they
most favor. The greatest indulgence Legal Right and general Obedience
expresses to Temporal Monarchs, is but that they declare the Heir to their
petty Dominions. Internal Virtues are not ex traduce, nor are External
Advantages ever entailed to our imperfect Bequests, God only can speak that
Peace which is melody to a holy ear: He can call the soul that is ready to
sink, as he did Peter on the water, Matthew. 14.29.
Come to me; and it is a happy ear that hears his voice and follows it. There
is no cause of fear when Obedience answers Divine. Commands. God never suffers
them to lose their labor, who duly seek what their soul lacks, and whom
their soul delights in, Himself; nor, is any man's Exit so conspicuous and
noble as his whose death has hope, and whose renewed life is Glory and
Eternity; for though all rest from their Labors when their bodies are
inhumated, Rev. 14.13.
yet are not all blessed, because works of Comfort follow only those who dye
recti in curia Coelesti, in amity with the Churches Prince, and the Believers
Pilot Christ Jesus. Luke 1.23, 31.
I will never envy the Prodigal's one fatted Calf, when I may have all my Faith
dare beg, and my Father will give; since my Savior assures me, it is but ask
and have, I will ask, but not, I trust, amiss. For Wisdom, to know how to live
exactly in doubtful times: Patience, whereby to undergo mischievous
provocations: Grace, to manage what I have aright, and acceptance of what I
do, while I strive to do what I can, and am humbled that I can be no more
serviceable to him, who deserves far above whatever creatures can think or do.

FINIS.
The Errata may be thus corrected:
In the first Meditation.

Page 3 line 14 read meet with, l 22 margin (...), p. 5 l 27 r quarter, p 9 l 9
r Coat Armor, p 8 l 32 r since, p 10 l 15 r Ruryp. p 23 l 27 ^ (...). p 25 boom
r (...), p 46 l 27 r those, p 47 l 17 r. rection p 50 l 27 m r particeps, p 53
l 22 r to one another, p 56 l 30 r had, p 59 l 30 r (...).

In the second Meditation.

P 4 l 3 [;] after ^^urred: p 9 l 25 r veliety, p 25 l 14 r exacts, p 28 l 28 r
sinners, p 32 l 21 r no need, p 34 l 15 r gift, p 36 l 18 r his sores p 38 l 2
r has, p 42 l 10 r Oracular, p 47 l 23 r retractation, p 51 l 11 r God, p 52 l
6 r days, mar r praesentior, p 59 l 6 r will it be

DIVINE MEDITATIONS ON ACQUAINTANCE With GOD.

BY E.W. Esquire.

There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord list up the light of
thy countenance upon us. Psalm. 4.6. Omnis copia quae non est Deus meus mihi est
egestas. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Maxey, 1653.

The Introduction.
WHen I first gave vent to these night Meditations by penning them, I had much
debate with my self, whether to conceal or publish them were most comely and
convenient; when I recollected the frequent prejudices that attend good
meanings, and the great odium that is cast on serious men by those triflers,
whose utmost ambition it is to blast the blessed fruit of Virtue, by their
unbenign breathes of detraction, and how few there are of the Genteel World,
that think any thing more poysie then Romances, worthy their perusal; I
condemned it to the heap of wast Papers, as that which curious eyes would view
with regret, and captious natures peruse with little calmness.

But for as much as I have hitherto often offended God, (I will accuse my self
and humbly implore his pardon) in sacrificing by fire many (though not
beauteous, yet undisfigured) children of my fancy, to silence, upon the Altar,
and on the account of Modesty, or perhaps Security, lest like unnatural
Absaloms they should riot against their Parent: My resolution for the future
is, and by Gods help shall be, to preserve such blessings of God on my Studies
as Memorials of his Mercy, and Excitations to my Gratitude.

In all earthly things there is change and sorrow, yea, the best Commodity our
Nature trafficks in, sometimes brings home loss, or disquiet; there is a toil
in multitude of Books, and a kind trouble in common friendship; in the Favor
of God only is Life, and in his Acquaintance Peace; the experience whereof m^de
me methodize this Meditation, and now print it.

In the latter clause of the counsel to Job, which most Versions read by
Thereby shall good come unto thee, or So shall thou have the best fruits, or So
shall thou have prosperity, or So shall good things happen unto thee, or So
shall thy fruit be in good things; or In them is good increased: I have rendered
it, So shall no evil come unto thee, which I humbly conceive is pardonable, the
peace of God in the former clause couching the good things of acquaintance with
God; and also there being no good, truly so called, which this protection from
evil comprehends not; for what ever defends us from the Fallacies of Satan,
this world and our own hearts, must needs leave us in Gods Blessing, as meet
Objects of his Mercy and Bounty. I will here conclude with this humble Petition
to God, That he would pardon the temerity of my pen, and accept of my plea in
Ephraims bemoaning words, After I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was
ashamed, etc. Jer. 31.19. And I trust that he that breaks not the bruised
reed, and quenches not the smoking flax, will not refuse this offering at my
hand.

October. 15. 1653. EDW. WATERHOUSE.

DIVINE MEDITATIONS ON ACQUAINTANCE WITH GOD, From those words in JOB, 22 Job
21.
Acquaint now thy self with GOD, and be at peace, so shall no evil come unto
thee.
It Was a competent and congruous Definition of Man which the Philosopher gave,
when he called him a sociable Creature, the nature of man being more receptive
and sparsive of good then any Creature, which has not reason to distinguish,
and entertain what it knows to be useful and conducing to content; for though
all creatures have the imperfect and first lines of sociation effigiated on
them, and in some degree or other affect their own species, or other creatures
which either suite or serve to their ends; yet is no desire so wisely impetuous
as that which originated from reason, is seconded by the assurance of
unquestionable Experience; nor do we soberly believe any thing so undoubtedly,
which has not the probate of a clear evidence, to the advantage of which the
life of man (pleasured by nothing more then generous and pious society) is a
clear and noble instance. That therefore Man, the Epitome of this Microcosm,
and the little Lord (next under his MAKER) of this glorious Pile of Divine
Architecture, might not mistake his match, and while he ought to seek a
Kingdom, find asses; or by vain delusions, and pretended nothings miss the Mark
of Eternity, and the Pawn of an unerring Conduct to that Canaan; This
Scripture, like a goodly Glass rightly modelled, and truly hung to a
Christians view, shows him the most real and incomparable object of the Soul,
illustrated from the Divinity of its nature, pure, unmixt, neither capable to
be tempted or to tempt; unless it be to a holy Love and happy Acquaintance,
which ends not worse, but better then it began, in temporal Peace, and in
eternal bless, abandoning evil either of sin or sufferings; all which are
comprised in these Words, Acquaint, etc.

Me thinks my Meditations fix on a double sort of subjects in this Scripture:
Self, GOD, Peace, Evil; in their natures different, for what less harmonius
then corruption and incorruption, then good and evil, then the best we wish
and the worst we fear? yet both accorded and united in the Term, Acquaint. Man
who ought to be linked to God by the bond of Love, as well as subjected to him
by the Law of obedience (as he has no adversary to fear, so no good to desire
beyond that Monarch GOD: who is all to the soul by way of completion, and to
the outward man by way of munition) by this means, may obtain felicity in
Acquainting himself with GOD, etc.

There is so much Treasure in this Scripture, that the rich Spoils of it are
beyond the capacity of men to conceive, or Angels to language; I shall confine
my thoughts to these ensuing Heads, as the Tracts by which to come to the
Mansion of holy Comfort residing in it.

1. What is meant by Acquaintance with GOD. 2. How it is to be attained. 3.
What Peace it is that those have which attain it. 4. How it may be said to
repel evil from us. 5. When this is to be sought after; These discussed, will
enodate the obscurity, and present the blessing in its true and Princely
Dress. OF the First ( Acquaintance with GOD:) I shall say in the Psalmists
Phrase, Psalm 87.3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou light sprung from on high, thou ray
of eternity, to which all mortal contents and Mundane confedracies are but as
atoms, yea non-entities. Acquaintance with God is somewhat stupendous, and
requires a touch from the Altar to decypher it; it is a beam of glory darting on
the face of a Child of glory; a Love-token erranded to signify the good will
of him that dwells in the Bush, to his that are among the pots, slurred amongst
the brambles, scratched; in the fire and in the water, abused debased, but not
forsaken; but this is rather an effect of it then a Description of it, that
which forms it is the being, and that which expatiates it is the wel-being of
it: For the more this grace (for less it is not) is meditated upon, the
greater are the touches of sweetness in the Souls visage, from this lovely
Pensill of the most lovely Artist. GOD: And therefore I shall conceive it to
ascend its Zenith by these Gradations.

1. Understanding, that must know him the chief good, or else it will never
desire him; man's intellect is the Bucket by which he draws, and the Ladder at
which he climbs to will and wed; the object he knows good, without this it is
as impossible to love and obey, as without eyes to judge of colors, or without
taste to discriminate Liquor and Meats, God has given the priority to this
faculty as that which must season to, and prepare appositely for the rest. And
truly, this is of the foundation and real nature of the rational soul; for
from this are we determined to be worthy (as to other creatures) of that
Supremacy and jurisdiction God has given us over them; for did not our
Understandings direct us to a carriage proportionate to the natures of
Creatures, and things, we should soon discover our follies to be too brutish
either to be admired or followed, and the Creation would soon renite obedience
to so senseless Governors. But blessed be God, he has not left us without a
witness of his liberality. He has informed our specious bodies with perfect
souls, and made a noble Lodging of State for himself, that high room, and top
battlement, our Understanding; which though too vast to be filled with the
little puncto's and contemptible grains of worldly nothings, yet receives
completion from God, and those apprehensions of him which he (in much
condescension to us) is pleased to vouchsafe us, not to make us proud of our
fatness, but provident to improve fullness to gratitude, and to serve him more
completely; who does good and is good, and from whom goodness effluxeth to all
creatures: for of his fullness they receive fullness.

That this Understanding is the Key of Discovery, and Acquaintance, needs no
second to confirm it; for even nature tells us by the Rule, that there is no
desire of what we know not, Ignoti nulla cupido.
and Scripture directs to this as the path to all gracious Intercourse with
God; in one passage of holy Writ I hear this asserted, Psalm. 9.10.
They that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee; in another, He that
comes to GOD, must believe that he is. Heb. 11.6.
Now effects imply causes, as Cisterns do Springs, and Rivers Seas: If God be
to be believed on, he must be conceived of, and understood by those that thus
believe him; for as articulation is consequent to generation, so is adhaesion
to assent, and assent to intellect:

The necessity of intellect to head the will and affections, which in a sort
complete acqaintance, is evincible from many things: from the order of God in
Creation and Nature, which makes this as the womb, at which port every thing
which tends in its progress to action, enters. The light natural, typical of
this internal Luminary, was the first Creature; as that which God erected to
give light to his Library, the World, which God compiled of nothing, by a power
eternal, complete, and indeterminable; and the first trial he put man upon,
was to touch his Intellect, and to try the magnetisme of that faculty, which
could draw all things to it, and incorporate it self with every thing: And if
when there was no distortion, if before the mis-rule which sin and Satan
brought into the Understanding; this was the tendency of that Faculty; It must
still remain what it was, as to the Nature and sacred Design of God, though
vayled and denegrated by accessions of sin, and contractions of punishments,
which by understanding any thing but God, and in order to God, is just up on it.

The faculty then is the same in its nature, in its employment; only the Rose
has prickles, the Swan deformed legs: Death is in the pot, if God does not
heal the waters, and turn our Understandings to that right object, Himself;
whom to know is life eternal, And whom to glorify as God, our most excellent
and only good, is the sole end of our creation.

Nor is the order of God in Creation, the only Instance of this precedence of
the Intellect; but experience attests this in the whole latitude of Instances,
the Heavens; by that instinct they have, as it were, and after their kind, do
their duty to earth, Man, nay their Maker; by a duct (which to them is in stead
of Intellect) do they serve times and seasons; do they remit, and extend
influence, according to the law of their first Cause; and the Birds and Beasts,
by their sensual Energy ( analogous in some sort to Intelect in man) direct
their course, and run their race; not attempting to love or fly that which is
not Good or Evil in their eye, and pleasing or displeasing to their Natures.
Now if that rule of the Schools be true, which neither is yet, nor ever will be
contradicted, That the work of Nature is the work of the God of Nature; Opus
Natura est opus Authe ris.
then what is the concurrent practice of Universal Nature, according to its
specific being, must be Positive and Absolute, and so from him who is the
Beginning and End of all things, and therefore most true. And so I have mounted
the first Step, the Understanding. Acquaintance imports Understanding; for how
shall Desire be heightened, but from Knowledge; and Knowledge be gained, but by
that Faculty, which is admissive and receptive of it? Rom 10.14.
How can they (says S. Paul) believe on him of whom they have not heard? and
how can they hear without a Preacher?

Nor is this Step consummative to our Acquaintance, if here we stay, pitching
this as the Non ultra, beyond which we will not go: for God has placed his
Seat on High, and the Rounds of the Ladder which reaches him are many; he will
have us engaged in much colluctation, many breathings and pantings, before we
come up to the Mount of Mercy, where Peace is, and Evil is not; and therefore
he cries out to man, second place, for his Heart, his Will, which is the Jewel
in this Cabinet of Glory: This, this to the Intellect, is as the Sails to the
Ship; takes the Winds gales, and carrys it to the Port of Loss or Gain: this,
this is the Womb in which are the Issues of life and death: this, this is the
Paradise, which we ought to guard with the Flaming Sword of an uninterrupted
and earnest Zeal; for as the Sails move the Ship, by reason of the wind which
acts upon them, and so is causal of their swelling, as they of the Ships
motion; and according to the quantity of the wind, so ordinarily is the way of
the Ship: so does this act upon the Intellects premises, admitting whatever
has the Watchword from that Sentinel. I say not, that the Will always
follows the rectified Understanding: but this I say, No man wills what is evil
under the notion of evil, Bonum and velle convertuntur.
for the Will and Good are convertible; and many greatest evils have some good
in conjunction with them, for which they are admitted, though as to the
predominant parts of them, they deservedly be termed and judged Evil; for
whatever erreth from the perfect Rule of Gods Law, and defaceth the Image of
God in the soul, has not the allowance of Heaven to make it current.

Now this Will of man is highly concerned to the completion of reasonable
Actions, it being the vehiculum which carries the Intellect to its Object, and
thereto unites it: the Understanding approves the Match, but the Will ties the
knot and adunates; as I must know before I can will, so must I will before I
can be acquainted with that I will; which is the reason why between things
averse there is no acquaintance properly so called, but rather an Antithesis
and Retrogade Motion; Contraryes meet not, nor cohabit they in intense degrees,
in the same Subject at one and the same time, because they are inconsistent,
and are made what they are by the non-being of each other: Fire is no fire, if
water prevail against it, for it is suppressed and led captive by the Victor;
and so water cease its moisture and liquidity, if the heat of the fire accede
it to Mastery; whereas other things that are not at this variance, meet like
Mercy and Peace, and kiss each other: Active heat, and Passive moisture, make
way for Generation; Steel and the Lodestone are in amity, and do with
eagerness approach each other; so is it in Love, by the will disposed of to any
object. There is no Sovereign more absolute, as to things subjected to his
will, then the will of man; for it wheels about the totum mobile in him. This
moved Samson to love Dalilah, Archimedes to dye with his Art; Judas to betray
his Master, Julian to Apostatize; and by Gods severity, this seals, as the
meritorius Cause, the wicked under unbelief, that they may be damned who have
pleasure in unrighteousness: for this once perverted and engaged, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.
the whole man is circumferred and hurled after the genius of its project: by
this are the affections alarmed and keened to good or evil; and without this
Velliety is nothing feasible, without the power of God come to aid; yea, and
that too deals mildly, by a sweet compulsion and insuperable persuasion,
transforming the soul from what it is, and as corrupted, would; into what it is
not, but ought to be: submissive to, sequacious of, and voluntarily captived by
God.

Now all the quarters of the inner man are beat up, and Proclamation is made in
the name of the great King of Heaven: now the word is, I am not what I was,
Isai. 26.13.
Other Lords have had dominion over me, but the desire of my soul is to thee,
and to the remembrance of thy Name: ver. 8.
now there is this only outcry, None but Christ, none but Christ.

That is the second Step, and the Advance is great. Acquaintauc is in a good
progress, when we understand the worth, and will that worth to be acquainted
with. But there is more Marches to be made to this Conquest; Psai. 132.2.
For he knows our thoughts afar off; yet in order to our Obedience, and his
declared Will, ought to be done by us again and again; the Canon is, Matthew. 7.7.
Ask, and ye shall have; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened. It Is a minute trifling boon that is not worth asking; God has entailed
Bliss to our Prayers and tears, not as the price, but the way to them: as he
hides not himself from his people that pray; so does he not own them that look
big with the Pharisee, and have too stiff knees to bend before him. Hab. 2.4.
He knows the heart is not upright, when it is unhumble, and condemns. it as a
false Character of a good heart not to ask Do thou (O man) conceive God the
best Good, and thy self miserable without him, and will thou not seek by
Prayers and tears to gain freedom? Do thou think he will ever be waiting to
be gracious, who ought to be waited upon because he is, and will be still so,
unless thou provoke him to turn his back, and not his face? Thou art blind, and
will thou not ask Eye Salve? Rev. 3.18.
Naked, and art thou too sturdy to beseech Christ to cast his Garment of
Salvation upon thee? If thou can not confess thy sins, 1 John 1.2, 9.
he declares not himself a Forgiver of sins; for his fidelity is engaged only
to Penitents. Will any man that's worthy, put his friendship upon an unwilling
party, or motion amity but upon the request of him, whom thereby he shall
oblige? It becomes those that will have part of another propriety, either to
beg or purchase it: all the Coin in thy purse, and the pride in thy heart, will
not capacitate thee to gain God for thy friend upon any terms, but repent and
believe: These are the wedding Garments which bring thee into the Feast of fat
things with approbation; and if thy holy Motions be as eager as they ought, and
as thy acquaintance with God deserves, then thou will not find a repulse; for
thy God is ready to meet those with open arms, who offer their service to him
upon bended knee, and with abashed faces.

Step 4. to Acquaintance with God is his Word, Psalm. 77.13. John 5.39. Psalm.
25.14.
his Servants, his ways. God is known by his out goings in his Sanctuary; the
Scriptures testify of him; his secrets are with them that fear him. If any man
be a seeker of God, him he hears. But above all, be sure of the favor of the
Well Beloved; he that comes from his hand, is carried into the Bedchamber, and
refreshed with the good things of his right hand. Christ's blood crosses the
Roll of Indictments, and discharges the guilt: If thy soul be dipped in that
blood, it will hold color against all waters, against all assayes to
interpose; perhaps Satan puts in his plea, and informs, thou art his; What
though? a stronger then he has taken possession. Suppose thy sins rest upon
thee as upon Mary Magdalen; yet if thou love much, why should not thou hope
to be forgiven, as was she? There is no sin in Mortal man can outpoise the
mercy in an immortal God; nor the merit of a spotless Savior, whose blood in
value out-prizes them as far as the noblest Gemme does the most vulgar pibble.
To this bounteous Emanuel (who when he was Rich became poor, that we through
his poverty might be made rich; who when he was in the bosom of his Father,
came to converse with men, that he might elevate men to communion with God in
Grace, and compartying with him in glory) do thou (O holy soul) conjoyn thy
self by a Covenant never to be broken. He, he it is that soders God and man,
that gives thee access with boldness to the Throne of Grace, that moves thee to
good, confirms thee in it, rewards thee for it, by the Holy Ghost, which the
Father sends in his name. Is thy Peace begun and perfected, thy Comfort
continued and increased? in the assurance of this, thou will live a life of
good example to men, Phil. 3.14. Psalm. 149.9.
and of glory to God, and after all, reach the mark of the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. For this honor have all his Saints.

And the better to keep thee in this, less and lower to that better good, it
becomes thee, O man, to attend on the revealed Will of God, that bears witness
to the Truth, Mercy, Justice, Patience, and other Holy Attributes of the Divine
Nature; it records also what thy duty (O man) is, Eccles. 12.24. Psalm. 7.11.
namely, To fear God and keep his Commandments, not only because he is angry
with the wicked every day, but because he by his love constraines thee, and
expects no returns from thee but thy self: Own him in all his holy Counsels,
Precepts, Threats, Ordinances, Servants, and love whatever bears his Image and
Superscription: Follow Peter in his tears and Faith, not in his frailty and
abnegation; thy Savior is thy Lord, and thou ought to own him for such, as
well on the Cross, as on the right hand of Glory; and his sevants ought to be
as dear to thee, when they are tormented, persecuted, afflicted (provided they
be steadfast, and such as suffer for well doing, on whom the Spirit of Glory
rests) as when applauded, preferred, and crowned; for this, if thou do,
entrance will be made thee into Acquaintance with thy God, whom to know, is to
be wise; and whom to live with, is to be happy.

Step 5. to Acquaintance with God, Phil. 2.5.
Let the same mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus: not the same
essentially, but the same dispositively; the same effectively; wish (in a holy
ardency and warrantable impatience) that you could oblige God as much by
service, as he does you by Creation, Preservation, and the good things of
Glory, which he promises; yea, rather wish to be like him in Grace and
Holiness, then in Greatness and Puissance: There is nothing works Acquaintance
so kindly and reasonably, as congruity; the Proverb is, Birds of a feather will
fly together: there is natuly a kind of Magic in assimulation; we love
Climates and Clothes, Books and Meats, Faces and Fashions, proportionable to
our Geniusses most; and the exterior sense is much at the Devotion of the
interior idea, and the fanciful Formatory: Did you ever see contrarys agree
while so? and not rather their friendliness bubble up from their union, as one
prevayling, forced the other into compliance? Or can it be imagined that God
and man should agree, while the one is too great to have equal, the other not
humble enough to own a Superior? In wordly conversation there is nothing more
distasted, and declines Acquaintance, then contrariety of Principle; yea it
often invites to hatred and hostile procedures, even where naturally there is
antithesis to contrariety, and altogether an ignorance of any demerit in the
object, saving this nude inconformity.

All Compounds are made of Simples that serve in their conjunction to the
proposed end; and though numerically they differ, yet in coagulo they conspire
to serve one univocal Design. In building, crooked, straight, long, short,
little, great, sappy, hearty Timbers conform to the model of the Edifice, and
the Surveyers Art. In medicines, simples laxative, retentive, hot, cold, by a
kindly, and even cooperation, recover health, and honor the Physician; which
otherwise would discredit the one, and endanger the other: the like effect has
compleasans in friendship, which is a marriage, not of Sexes, but minds; not to
purposes of Generation but Conversation. And therefore those mistake the Mark
much, who think to reduce God to their bounds, his holy nature to their impure
practices, and will be acquainted with him, not upon his own, but their own
terms. If they may have a Dalilah in their lap, if they may keep their right
eye and right hand, if when they go into the house of Rimmon they may be
pardoned, well and good: they are contented to enter amity with God. But if he
commands to cut off the right hand, and pluck out the right eye: Matthew. 5.29.
Genesis 12.1. Rev. 18.4.
if he call to them to leave their Country, to come out of Babylon, to forsake
father and mother; then with the rich man in the Gospel, they go away heavy,
crying out with him, Matthew. 19.22.
Non tanti emam poenitentiam: to these, Gadarens Swine are beyond Christ, glass
before pearls, and this little world in view, more precious then that better
in promise.

Well, but Acquaintance with God is never the worse because these covet it not
but upon cheap and dishonorable terms, which will not be yielded unto. Those
that know what it is to have the eyes of their Understanding opened, to
converse with God, not remotely (but as mortal Nature by Divine indulgence) may
with open face, 2 Cor. 3.18.
think all things loss and dung in comparison of it; accounting themselves
never estranged from the true end of their being, but when they are without the
Vail, when the lines of their inheritance are not cast out to them in this lot
of love, when they wander in the Wilderness of the wolrd, and commune not with
that God, whose comforts are above the world, who is whatever earth and heaven
can yield admired: for he is all in both, and nothing in either is delectable,
but what he is; nor are we ever truly our selves, but when we are like him, in
that partaking of his Divine Nature, which our being is capable of, and his
blessed purpose has designed us to.

Last Step to Acquaintance with God, Last Step.
is assiduous attendance on him: fits and gird, now and then visits seldom
amount to intimate friendship, those intervals and faint treatments, like cold
and indigested Meteors hang hovering, but never condense, and body into any
solidity, like dainty meats which rather puff up then feed; or like gay
clothes, which adorn more then comfort Nature: The greatest ingredient to many
men's friendship, is a Cap, or a Congee, Your humble Servant, and Passionately
yours, which wise persons eye as the purliew in which the Rascal Deer mostly,
the Nobler rarely; and therefore use those Modes rather in Symphony with the
plurality, then out of allowance and choice. Many in the matters of God, and in
Duties of Religion (whereby we should acquaint our selves with him) are as
fetchant and wavering, as these in less consequentials are: they wait not at
the posts of Wisdoms door; they come not early, they go not to bed late; they
eat not the bread of sorrow, that they might purchase this one thing necessary:
Earnest they are not, nor do they by a holy impetuosity and violence seize on
Heaven, not wrestle with God, not let him go til he bless them with his
Acquaintance; yet do they expect to partake of God as fully, as Zachary and
Elizabeth, who wait upon him daily, and walk in his Commandments without
reproof; but how vainly these expect grapes from thorns, and figs from
thistles, the Consequence shows; God keeps them at distance, he feeds them
with the husks; he loves those that fear him, not formidine poenae, sed
virtutis amore; and he values those highest who are most importunate,
undismissable, whom not a non decet will discourage from begging crumbs; Mat.
15.26, 27.
whom no Moment, no company will dishearten from resolving with Job, Though
thou killest me, Job 13.15.
yet will I trust in thee. These are the Merchants our Lord speaks of, who sell
all to purchase the Jewel of Divine Intercourse; these are they that cry out
for the light of Gods countenance, Psalm 4.
and care not what they suffer so they have it. To these humble prostrates are
the Doles of Heaven dealt out, on these that cry out, as Rachel did to Jacob,
Give me Grace, or else I dye, does God give the blessing of Acquaintance, and
for these and these only has he a Reserve, a Mansion in his Kingdom, Jerusalem
above, which is the vision of Peace; and in the fruition of which, by holy
Acquaintance with God as the way and means, we shall obtain adunition to God,
as the end and fruition of Peace in that felicity, for so says the next words,
Acquaint now thy self with God, and be at peace.

But stay man a while, There is somewhat intercurrent 'twixt Acquaintance and
Peace, there are bars and bounds to keep the Stage free from pester. God has
appointed Means and Degrees, by which to come at length to this Culmen, this
top of the Mount on which shall be our Transfiguration: Christ Moses and Elias
are to be met with when we can say our Christian Alphabet roundly, when we can
say, not only as Saint Paul, Phil. 3 12. Rev. 5.9, 10.
Nondum attigimetam, but sing that Epinichyon, Thou art worthy, O Lord, for
thou have redeemed us from sin, sorrow, the world, and made us Kings and
Priests to thee. Till then, there is aliquid agendum; if ever thou will come to
the end of thy race, it must be by the Means ordained to that end, which is the
second Scruple to be explicated. What are the Means of obtaining this
Acquaintance? The Solution of this is partly done in the foregoing
Consideration, and therefore will require the less answer here; the prescribed
Steps of assent are also many several Paces toward it; what is necessary to be
added by way of Illustration, is only this; God requires of every Acquaintance,
1. Reconciliation to Christ: 2. Resignation to his holy Spirit: 3. Adoration of
his Ordinances: 4. Admiration of his Works. 5. Renovation of life.

1 Reconciliation to Christ: coming to him that thou may have life, John
5.40.
runnest away from him: in stead of casting down thy self at his feet and
craving his pardon, thou hold up Weapons of unrighteousness against him: Is
this thy kindness to thy friend? Is this thy Loyalty to thy Prince? Is this the
Badge of Acquaintance and friendly intimacy? Do thou crown Christ with
thorns, and expect he should kiss thee with the kisses of his lips? Do thou
deliver him to the Corss, and look from him for a place in Paradise? Do
these rough hands of Esau, deserve from Isaak any Blessing? O man mistaken,
erring through the Delusion of thy Prospect, and the Temptation incumbent on thy
heart! Return, and seek to him by tears, whom thou have provoked by Treachery,
crave his blood, thine Atonement, which thou have shed in triumph to thy
Lusts; thou have made him thine Adversary by sin, humbly prostrate thy self as
his Purchase and Penitent: Let him see thy tears trickle down thy tender cheek,
from a pensive heart, and a gracious eye, that now look upon thy self with
greater scorn, then ever sinfully thou did upon him, when wickedly thou
said, I will not have this man reign over me; and let no hour, day, moment
pass without some earnest Petition for Reconciliation, That he would cease to
be what thou have deserved; thine Upbraider, Accuser, severe Judge: and be what
he has promised to all that turn to him with all their hearts, an Advocate, a
Lodestone, the Way, the Truth, and the Life: An Advocate, to plead thy Cause;
a Lodestone, to touch thy heart; the Way in which, and Truth by which thou
should walk; and the Life to crown thee after thy work done.

But perhaps thou concludest thy self at too great a loss to recover, too far
out of favor to be reingratiated? Why so? If where sin abounds, Romans 5.2^
Grace superabounds, there is hope for thee: Bespeak not (O man) thy denial, do
not stay thy career toward heaven, because thou fear the door of Grace is
shut. Such Conclusions may hinder thy endeavor, they cannot add to thy
comfort; therefore covet in the second place, Holy Spirit to thy comfort;
entertain him kindly, grieve him not by reiterated sins; quench him not by
averse obstinacy, An nescis (anima) te verecundum habere sponsum? This holy
Dove sent from the Deity, brings the Olive Branch with him; the Peace is bought
by Christ, but the Spirit seals and applies the Purchase; the Salve is rare,
but works not kindly, except that hand lays on the Plaster: therefore resign
thou thy self to the Spirit of God, let him rule in thee, and by his Steerage
be thou acted; follow this Star, it ever leads to Christ; hearken to his voice,
it is vox dilecti, its a clam, sweet, lovely, lightsome voice; be ravished with
this Music, which with Hyper-Syrene notes, charms most wisely; give up thy
self, soul and body to this Besieger, that summons thee to deliver up the
strong Holds of Sin and Satan to Christ the King of Saints, and the Savior of
his Body the Church. Make no terms with him, the Holy Ghost will not be tied to
Articles: He is free to intercede, and thou must be free to render: as he will
have good quarter, so gives he sure comfort. The soul that receives him, is
Scot-free from Terror and Fear of Divine displeasure, for this Guest secures
his Quarters; yea, the power of the Almighty overshadoweth those with Grace,
whose hearts are prepared to cry, Veni Spiritus Sancte. And till (O man) this
be thy temper, thou art as unfit for Acquaintance with God as for Heaven; of
which it is a real Type, and to which it is the Baptist: for as into Heaven
flesh and blood, qua such, cannot enter; so into familiarity with God can none
be admitted who have not the Test of this Comforter, who never bears witness
that they are the sons of God, who rest unreconciled to Christ, unresigned to
him.

But how may these Graces appear in me, may the soul say? God, Christ, and the
Holy Ghost have their Court in Heaven, I am in the Valley of Bochim, in the
frigid Zone of earthly vanities, where dust and ashes, worms, and no men,
live, and acclamate the Diana of Pomp and splendid nothing; my bucket is not
deep enough, my stature not high enough to reach Heaven; my bulk will not bear
those breadthy Sails which that Glory fills. What shall I do? How may I contract
acquaintance with God by union with Christ, and rendition to his Spirit? To
these the third Step is answer, Adore his Ordinances: Those are his Leidgers
which here he leaves to negotiate about affairs of Heaven; these are the
Chariots in which Eliahs are whirled thither; these bring forth, and there is
none barren amongst them; the good will of him that was in the bush are upon
these, Deuteronomy. 33.16.
which Atheism and Irreligion would separate and unbrother, as rejectitious and
illegitimate. God has appointed his Word for our Rule, his Ministers for our
Guide, his Sacraments for our Comfort, his Day for our Rest and Refection, his
Church for our Pillar and Ground of Truth; and those who adore not these are
not like to be Gods Acquaintance; Sovereignty will have no limits prescribed by
Subjects. Heaven knows no Method but that of its own dictation: Those that
will be beggars, must not be chusers: Interest with God is worth gaining by cap
in hand, and upon bended knee; and they deserve not to be heard in their
request, who request any thing contra formam Statuti inde editi; the
Declarative Law is, Search the Scriptures, John 5.3, 9. Luke 16.29.
for they do testify (says Christ) of me. And in another place: If they will
not bear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one rise
from the dead.

Wander not then (O soul) after wild phansies and blazing figments, exposed to
view, and set on broach of purpose to deceive and mislead ignorant and
inquisitive worldlings, who set the Crown on Coridons, and believe Christ the
Savior of the world, rather from his riding on an Ass-Colt, and obscure
parentage, then from his glorious attestation from Heaven, or his convincing
conversation here on earth; and judge nothing Sacred, but what is indeed common
and unclean: But (O soul) keep thou close to the Ordinances of Christ, which
his servants have received from him by the unquestionable tradition of the
Church, to the Truth of which the lives and deaths of holy Martyrs, and
glorious Confessors, have in all ages born witness; and do not believe that any
thing is so lovely and truly advantageous to thy peace, and orderly conduct, as
to serve thy God in that manner which he has appointed: and adore thou these
holy mysteries, Psalm. 46.4.
by which waters the City of God in thy soul, ought only to be made glad.

5 And though thus to do be to do more then many now will, yet is it not the
totum postulatum of thee: God (O man) requires of thee some tribute of praise;
the quit-rent of Gratitude. The Psalmist tells us in the person of God, Psalm.
50.23.
Whosoever offers me praise, honors me: and to give God the glory of his
Munificence, is but to offer him of his own; it is but to pay him our Fine in
his own Coin; 1 Cor. 4.7.
for what have we that we do not receive? And in no kind is this sense of our
obligation to God better resented by him, then by Admiration of his Works,
Admiration of his Works. And here me thinks I am enforced to exclamate with the
holy Pophet, Lord, what is Man? What his Being, Capacity, Dignity, that thou
should honor him with Contemplation of thee, and of those Works which set
thee out in thy back parts, though not to the ineffability of thine Essence?
Who, O, who wishes not his tongue were untied, and tipped with Eloquence,
excelling mortal Emulation, Psalm 150.2.
that he might give to God the glory due to his name, and praise him according
to his excellent greatness; not only for that he is high, not for that he is,
and there is none besides him; but for that he vouchsafes to look down upon us
here below, and calls us to contemplate his good Will, as well as matchless
Power in the Formation of things, and the orderly production of them! Here is
Matter to amuse the Secretary of Nature, and to puzzle the greatest Oedipus;
here is a full point to Plato's Eloquence, and Plotinus his Profundity. Who can
search the Center of that Idea which was in God, when he made the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, appointing them their seasons, influences, order, and sweetly tuning
them each to other? Who knows the Nature of Creatures animate and inanimate,
vegetive and sensitive; and can say of their Natures, as God does of the Seas
proud Waves, Hitherto and no further; this you can, and this you cannot do?
Where is he that sees the abyss of Providence, and penetrates into that privy
Chamber of Divinity, which is for Gods eye only? daring to affirm what shall
and shall not be; and the consequences of things natural and contingent? Sure,
no mortal man, undementated, dare so confide in Art, and dote so fondly on his
vain shadow, as to boast of this, which is Gods incommunicable Jewel, and the
Prerogative of his Crown. Our portion (Oman) is to wait Gods discovery; Secret
things belong to God, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Exodus 24.2.
but things revealed to us; and God forbid we should come nearer the Mount then
is indulged us, or endeavor after Wisdom beyond Sobriety; Our duty is to
acquaint our selves with God, not by knowing him as he is, for that's
impossible; but by knowing him as he manifests himself in works of Power,
Providence, Mercy; and in the improvement of what light we borrow from this
Lamp, we may see enough to make us in love with him, who made all things as,
and what they are, and to what they shall be: In him the Rich and the poor, the
wise and the simple, the Brute and the Rational, the Worm and the Angel, the
Fly and the Eagle, the Ant and the Elephant, the Mouse and the Lion, the Eele
and the Whale meet; God is the Maker of them all, and the same power went to
the production of the least as greatest; from him come winds and seasons, and
without him nothing is that is, nor shall be that he wills not: this is the sum
of what we can reach to in the folio of Contemplation and practice; for
whatever helps Art and Nature give us, come far shorter of the utmost extent of
Gods Works, than the shortest ladder is short of the Heaven we see, or the
impurest soul of that better Heaven we hope for: The best Meditation we can
make, is that of the Father, Si tale Artificium, qualis Artifex? si tale est
quod fecit, qualis est quifecit? If the courage of the Lion, strength of the
Elephant, capacity of the Whale, prudence of the Ant, continence of the Dove,
If the world be so variously fitted with necessaries, for delight, support, and
exercise of man, and his Nature so adapted to search into, and blessed to find
out and improve the secrets, and several qualities of things, creatures, and
continents, in some proportion suitable to his being, and Gods designment; has
he not great cause to cry out with that Kingly Prophet, Psalm. 139.14.19.1.
O how fearfully and how wonderfully am I made! for who can confess less then
this, The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
work?

But (O man) wander not too wildly in this wilderness, wherein are beasts of
Prey, uncouth paths, dismal upshots; thine errand and end is to admire the
works of God; that thou may do, it is thy duty, and Gods exact of thee so to
do, and thou thy self art a fair Text to such pious Meditations; God created
thee something of nothing, a Man, not a Toad, a Christian, not a Heathen, of
clear intellect not brutish, of right shape not deformed; and consider, this
calls for Gratitude. God has beautified thee with a bright Sun, refreshed thee
by a sweet gale of wind in thy sayls, thou art at the wished Port, supported by
a miraculous hand of Providence, he has discovered to thee thy dangers,
conducted thee in thy way, ministered to thy wants, when others not less his,
nor less themselves then thou, go mourning all the day long, are on their duty,
John 5.4.
waiting (with the Cripple) when the good Angel will come to their comfort, but
all in vain: No Butter sticks on their bread, their cake is dough, as the
Proverb is; All is fruitless; Remember the more thou receivest, the more thou
must return: Cui plus datur, ab illo plus exigitur; in fine, rather labor to
improve well that thou have, then to covet more to misuse it, and abuse thy
soul; for God expects from all men, as he sowes, so to reap; and thou art an
Unthrift on his Bounty, if thou returnest him not obedience and love, who has
crowned thee with Honor and Plenty above thy fellows.

But (O man) above all things, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
be not like Jesurun; spurn not with the heel; when thou art fat, forget not
the hand that feeds thee, and the paps of Providence that suckle thee; nor let
thine horns be exalted to worry and plague thy fellow servants of a lower Form
then thou art: This is not to be like God, good, gentle, and nigh unto all
those that call upon him; but liker the servant in the Gospel, Matthew. 32.32.
who took his fellow servant by the throat, when he himself was forgiven by his
Lord the greater Debt; yea, this is not to admire God, but to reproach him, as
misgiving Power and Greatness, and trusting it in the hands of those, who by it
prey upon, not protect the Sheep: This is not to admire the Works of God, but
to admire thy self, and to sacrifice to thine own Ambition and inordinacy, and
so to dishonor God who commands, Phil. 4.5.
Our Moderation should be known to all men; yea, this is to be unworthy of
Acquaintance with God, who is Shepherd of his Sheep, and delights in Lillyes,
things harmless and benign; and those that are not such, shall do well to
consider that of the Prophet, Jer. 30.16.
I will spoil the Spoiler; and steer another course for the future, even to
emendation of life; which brings up the rear of what God requires from those
that will be acquainted with him, and calls for my next Meditation.

5. Lastly, Renovation of Life is a chief adjunct to Acquaintance with God:
Light and darkness, Christ and Belial, Dagon and the Ark do not agree; new
cloth and old garments suit not, nor will generous Wine endure crazy bottles;
nor a Kingly mind brook the thatched cottage: There is nothing more averse to
the pure Nature of God, then the impure life of a sinner; his eye loathes, his
hand corrects, his heart relucts, his Word reproves, his Spirit labors against
it; he cannot but call with a loud voice, Jer. 44.4. Romans 1.18.
O do not that abominable thing which I hate; and correct, by revealing his
wrath from Heaven against the ungodliness of men: Till thou (O man) return to
him by Repentance, there is no peace with God to be hoped for, no amity to be
attained. The means to gain God, is to own thy self, and to return to thy
fathers love, Luke 15.18.
to weep over thy wanderings, and to drown thy sins in penitent tears, as did
Mary Magdalen and Peter. Then, then only are we worthy to be friends of God,
when we are not profane as Esau, but holy as Abraham; not rude as Nimrod, but
meek as Moses; not rebellious as Absalom, but devout as David; not treacherous
as Judas, but penitent as Peter; not vexatious as Saul, but courageous as Paul;
not embracing the world as did Demas, but contemning it and our selves, as
ought the Disciple of Christ, who must deny himself, and take up the Cross.
This, this is to be born again, Mark 8.34. John 3.3. Ephesians. 4.23. Isai. 1.16.
Romans 13.14, Ephesians, 5.11.
Nichodemus his lesson; this is to be renewed, in the spirit of our minds; this
is to cease to do evil, and learn to do well; this is to put on the Lord Jesus,
and to take no thought for the flesh; this is to have no fellowship with
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather to reprove them; this is to put off
the old man, and to put on the new man, Ephesians. 4.22, 24
which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness; this is to
lay the burden of our sins upon Christ, and to take the beauty of Holiness
from him: this is to gain heavens amnesty, to remove our sins far from us, as
the East is from the West, and to cause them to come no more in remembrance
before God; yea, this is to be thoroughly acquainted with God, and to have him
the souls Sun and Shield, who will give Grace and Glory, Psalm. 34.11.
and withhold no good thing from it.

These are the bona notabilia, which God keeps as the reward of Piety; as his
secrets, so his comforts are with those that fear him. Clusters of Canaan, grow
not upon Crabstocks of Sodom: Divine familiarity is not with mortal foedity:
They which will have God their Lord, must have his Rule for their Guide.
Penitence must supply the want of Innocence, or else God will deny acceptance:
It is not for me to say, I will return after, and be received first. God will
have his Doles of Mercy distributed to Pennancers; and the Oil of Gladness
returned to those faces whose heads were covered with ashes: A weeping eye is
no small Favorite with a merciful God, who not only greets with an Euge, Luke
15, 7.
returning sins, but commands an Exultate, in Heaven amongst the Angels for it;
and those that sow their wild oats in tears, shall reap their wages in due
time; namely, Mercy and Joy, in, Come ye Blessed of my Father, receive the
Mansion prepared for you, by Acquaintance with God; namely, Peace, which is the
third hinge of my Meditation, and follows in the Scripture, Acquaint now thy
self with God, and be at peace.

The third Quere is, What Peace it is those have who are acquainted with God?
And here silet lingua, stispet animus, deficit oration. Peace which passes
Understanding (such the Peace of God is) may well exceed utterance. The tongue
is the hearts Bell-man, and the cry is acording to the conception. As what food
nourishes not, will not transide into the members aggrandization; so what the
thought springs not, will never swell into words; Peace then, of this peace of
God, it is somewhat ineffabile, past finding out, it is hid in the hollow of
his hand, under his pavillion, from the strife of tongues, which in treating of
its peace, would break the peace of Truth. But (O my soul) is this the
forbidded tree? may not thou taste and not dye? Has God cabinetted up this
Jewel, and must not man see it and live? Is this the one thing necessary; yet
prohibited? Does God require that of me which is impossible to me? And are my
comforts surrounded with a flaming Sword, inaccessible? Nothing less? The well
is deep (O my soul) but thy backet is suitable; the Pearl is dear, but thy
price in hand will reach it; thy peace is precious, and it is deposited with
him, who has broke down the wall of Separation; Ephesians. 2.14.
there is a new and living way to this Holy of Holies, not by blood of Bulls
and Goats; but by the blood of Christ's Cross, the Christians glory, and
Signature of his Peace.

But is this peace a complete Armature and Panoply? Does it fit every part? Is
it proof in every joint; is there no soft place in it, through which the poison
of Satan's power or policy will pierce? Is it a sweet Nightingale in the breast,
as well as a Headpiece and Guard to the outward man? Yes sure, the peace
spoken of in this Scripture is every way lovely, like Jonathan, lovely in life,
and lovely in death; a great source of Joy to thee, while thou art on thy way,
and a glorious Epitaph on thy Monument, when thou have done thy work, and run
out thine Hourglass.

This Peace is Tripartite Pax Temporis. Or External Of vision to the Eye. This
Peace is Tripartite Pax Pectoris. Or Internal Of Contemplation to the Mind.
This Peace is Tripartite Pax Numinis. Or Eternal Of Fruition both to Soul and
Sense.
1 Peace outward, that is a fruit of Acquaintance with God: for thus he gives
his Beloved rest: that the Creatures are under thineawe, that the Elements are
thy Pavillion, the Clouds thy Cisterns, the Sun, Moon and Stars thy Tapers, the
earth thy Granary, the Cattle thy Food and Raiment, is from God who is good,
and does good. I do not say, that Peace is always the Badg of Grace, or that it
ever, in regard of Externities, fares well with those who are good. I know the
contrary, and so did David to his trouble long ago; and Job chap. 12.6.
complainins that the Tabernacles of Robbers prosper, and they that provoke God
are secure; yea and Jeremy reasons with God concerning his Judgments, Why do
the wicked prosper and those that hate God are exalted? Jer. 12.1. While holy
men are clad in sackcloth, and covered with ashes, go mourning all the day
long, have not (with their Savior) a hole to hide their heads in, nor a crumb
to feed their bellies, or a rag to cover their nakedness. Luke 16.19. Dan. 5.23.
Do I not read of Dives faring deliciously, of Nebuchadnezzar quaffing in the
holy vessels? yet the one wanting nothing but room to lay his wealth in, and
the other priding in the Babel that he had built for the glory of his Majesty?
And does not the same ear let in the Narrative of Elijahs poverty, fed by a
Raven; 1 King. 17. Act. 20.34.
and of Paul's necessities, supplied by the labor of his hands? Are not wicked
men's Oxen strong to labor? and see we not their persons and fortunes free from
captivity and restraint? when men more holy then they, having no oxen to labor
for them, are fain themselves to labor like oxen to tread out their support,
and to pay from the sweat of their brows, a tribute to their Tyrannous Masters;
who with more then Egyptian severity, lay load of brick, and withdraw the
allowance and furtherances thereto? If it be so, how is acquaintance with God a
way to outward peace?

I answer, Yes: it is the way to outward peace truly so called, that is, to
sanctified outward peace, which is peace in a proper and savoury sense: Mere
serenity of state, is as far from blessing, as ease is from health; which
seldom is propagated by it, but often impeached and deflowred. When peace and
prosperity is bestowed upon bad men, it is to reward some good thing in them:
some service they have done God; God leaves not those unrewarded, whom his own
bounty, not their propensions has made serviceable to him; or at least to
leave them without excuse, that they may be silent when they are judged. Isa.
45.1. and 4.
This is the portion that Hagars children have; this is the husk that Gods
prodigals feed upon; this is the mark they level at; like Hell and the Grave,
they cry Give, Give. And what do they gape after? It Is auri sacra fames,
Alexanders Conquests, Craesus his Wealth, Tully his Oratory, Metellus his
prosperity: these take up their prospectives, bound their aims, swell their
plumes: This fatted calf have these for their entertainment; Vltra neque spes,
neque timor; they consider not the sour sauce that follows this Passover. On
the contrary, When Affliction befalls the Godly, it is to ventilate, to winnow
their chafe from them, to correct them for frailty, and to chase them out of
their covert, in which they delighted themselves as on beds of Ivory, and in
ways of Roses: Suppurated sores must have Corrosives: It Is too much cruelty to
power in Oil, where there is need of mundifying: Afflictions and external
quassations are like thunder, purgations to the air: The Soul is never better
then when out of the Sunshine: Then it gathers up its garments, and crowds
close to God: Hos. 5.15.
In their afflictions they will seek me early.

Nor have the wicked prosperity and peace in peace; Aliquando sub hilari vultu
tristis animus. Solomon tells us, Pro. 14.13. Dan. 5.5
In the midst of laughter, the heart is sorrowful; sometimes there is an hand
on the wall, a red Cross of Gods displeasure on the fronts of our peace; There
is peace, peace, and no peace; Midas his misery, Erysickthons thirst, a
coveting eye and a nauseating stomach, a grand estate and a penurious soul:
Eccles. 6.2.
here is the evil under the Sun Solomon speaks of.

Sometimes prosperity and peace, as Riches is given to the hurt of the Owners;
Eccles. 5.3.
sometimes there is denied somewhat with it, for which it is appetible, as
Heirs, Health, Friends; Genesis 15.2. Prove. 10.22.
and ever there is denied to wicked men, Gods blessing on it, which brings no
sorrow with, nor after it: the absence of which, causes the dregs in the
bottom of all worldly peace to worldly minds, for it makes them cry out of
Prosperity, as captived Craesus did of Solon; O Solon, Solon, had I hearkened to
thy premonitions, I had never been so unprovided for bonds and captivity. Of
these then, that which the Apostle saves of the Unchaste widow, is most true,
they are dead when they live. 1 Timothy 5.6.
But to the Godly it is far otherwise their peace outward is ever sanctified,
not as to the present use of it (for they may faint in the Sunshine, they may
be lifted up through abundance of Revelation) but as to the Sacred end, and
ultimate result of it: God shall turn this by the Sacred Chemistry of
Omnipotency, into Good: Romans 8.28.
This is within the pale of All things work together for good to them that love
God.

Away then, thou Accuser of the Brethren, avoid thou Tempter to Evil, and thou
Mortar Piece of Divine Fury, Satan. Away ye children of Darkness, who hate
those of Light, because your deeds are evil; forbear your tauntings of those
whom the Lord has smitten; justify not those whose Iniquitous Balances have
made themselves only weighty, and all others too light: the Standard of
Justice is coming round; Dan. 5.25.
your doom is Mean tekel Vphursin; the glory of your forged Sanctimony is
defaced; God will humble the pride of men, and polish his rusted Saints, by the
arising beams of the Sun of Righteousness: The Churches Sovereign is at hand;
and though his first coming was in humility, his next will be in glory, to
ride in triumph over all feigned Piety, and to set these Goats of Lust and Rage
on his left hand; Lift up (O holy ones) your heads, Your Redemption draws nigh:
He that dyed for you, will own you, and expects you should own him, in
preserving his seamlesse coat from rents, and in keeping unity of Spirit,
though there be difference of Language. Peace be (O holy souls) to you, the
peace of this world, not by its gifts, but by Donation of him, who has
subjected all things; prepare your selves by holy love to deal out your Riches
to those that want; freely ye receive, freely give: O far be it from you to
give vinegar and gall to your brethren, since your Father in Heaven gives you
the generous liquor of Love, and bids you do as you would be done by. Take your
fills of the waters of outward plenty; Marah is cured, the bitterness of death
is past, Christ has by his Cross so crucified the world to you, that it is now
become your Vassal, not your Lord: remember there is the portion of Peace
annexed to Acquaintance with God, So do, and so have.

But is this all? are the grains of allowance only in Externals? Is my Carcass
more worthy then my Soul? What shall be done to that animula blandula, 2 Pet.
1.4.
which is after a sort Partaker of the DIVINE Nature? is there no accrewment to
that? Does God take care of Sparrowes, and of the hairs of our heads; and is
there no provision made for that which is the Nightingale of Eternity? Surely
yes, two for one; the double portion for this firstborn: One portion respects
its conjunction here with the body; and the other its separation from, and
glorification with the body in Heaven; the first in Grace, the second in Glory;
the first in via, the Comfort and Peace of a good Conscience; and the latter
and better, in Patria, of a good God, in a glorious Kingdom, Heaven.

2 Peace Internal; not Physical, sans Palpitation of the Heart; sans
exclamation of the Passions, or their crowing shrils in the brain: but peace
Metaphysical; the peace of God in the breast of man; God as it were incarnate,
sitting on the Tribunal of a Mortal Judicatory. Now the winter is past, the
storms are over, the singing of birds is come, the voice of the Turtle, of the
Primum Mobile, is heard; O Extatick Elamire! O Seraphick Ela! O Note stepped
aside from the Quire of Angels, to entice our Admirations! Does God dwell with
man? can these houses of clay contain him that is whatever is Infinite and
Incomprehensible, which he is? Be thou, O Lord, with my pen, and let it be
thine Instrument to decipher this, which is so rare, which is whatever Nature
can aspire to value.

Peace of Conscience, a Jewel which abates not price; a child of light admired
in all Ages. Persons, Countries sought after when not had, cherished where
possessed, deplored when lost; whom Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Christians valued, and to which they peered nothing.

Peace of conscience, the Salt that seasons Mirth, sweetens Sorrow, and the
Plummet that sounds the bottom of every coast, and discovers Shipwreck and
safety.

Peace of Conscience, the Touchstone of our innocence, the probate of our Zeal,
the Furnace of our Charity; for then only can we love God and our Neighbor when
his love is shed abroad in our hearts, by his holy Spirit, who works this peace
in us.

Peace of Conscience, that Phoenix nest made up of the Persumes of Graces, out
of which expiring, rises peace of Eternity.

Peace of Conscience, heaven on earth, glory in weakness, light in obscurity,
Abraham's bosom in Lazarus sores.

Peace of Conscience; Goshen in Egypt, Gods Segullah to the Alchimy of the
worlds Admirables; the fat kine of holy serenity, that by a miraculous
transposition swallow up all the lean kine of worldly cares, and confounds the
wisdom of secular interests.

Peace of Conscience, the Lily of the valleys in which Christ nestles; the Rose
of Sharon, on which the Sun of Righteousness smiles; to which Solomon's bravery
is but Beggary, and Herod's oratory but babbling.

Peace of Conscience, compared with which, Balm of Gilead is but like the
trifling Compound of a Quack Salve; and the Gold of Ophir but as dross and dung.

Peace of Conscience, to which Power and Policy, Arts and Armies, Councels and
Senates are but as Molehils to Mountains, Ants to Men, Atoms to the body of
this earth, and the dwindling light of the candle, to the center of light
enveloped in the Sun.

Peace, of Conscience, the Music, to which Orpheus, his Harp, and Arions Pipe,
helped on with Sirens voice, are but so many strains of perfect discord and
displeasing Harmony.

Peace of Conscience, the best companion of life, the sweetest Confessor at
death, the noblest Memorial after death; nay, the souls prodomus (next under
Christ) to Heaven, for thither it ran on Cornelius his errand, to display his
Alms; and thither it must go, to the credit and comfort of all that have it,
For there is none of this peace to the wicked, says my God.

Here, O profane worldlings, here, O wretched Politico's, ye are outstripped;
pleasures, profits, honors, have no suffrage in this confistory, they cannot
make their Masters partakers of this delight, to which all others are but
shadows, as far beneath them as drops to the Ocean. Neither Alexanders Power,
nor Solomon's Wisdom, nor Mithridates his Wealth, nor Justinians Learning, nor
Galens Receipts, nor Archimedes his Experiments can procure this; it is a gift
from above, descending from the Father of Lights, Jam. 1.17.
and referring the soul to him as the Author and Finisher of its Felicity.

Here is somewhat stupendous; but this, how far soever transcending the utmost
outward advantage, is but porch and prologue to those Magnalia Dei, those
Arcana Patriae, which neither eye has seen, nor ear have heard, nor entered
into the heart of man to think of; namely, the good things God has laid up in
heaven for those that fear him, not to be attained or enjoyed here (alas, our
Vessels are too narrow to receive that Ocean where there is incapability of
reception, there is no probability of retention:) if we cannot be in possession
while in the flesh, let us covet to depose this garment of incapability, and
thirst after that glory which Heaven exalts us to; specified to us in that
Jewel, Peace Eternal.

Acquaint now thy self with God and be at Peace; that is, be every way blessed;
within, in a serenity of mind; without, in a fortunate condition, exempt from
evils, or sanctified to thee in spite of evils; Prove. 17.7.
for when a man's ways please the Lord, he will make his enemies be at peace
with him; or without fail, above, in the beatitude of thy soul to all eternity.

This is the rest that remains to the people of God; Heb. 4.9. John 14.3.
this is the Mansion prepared by Christ, of which he took possession by his
Ascension, and in which he now is in Session at the right hand of God. This is
that Jerusalem above, Gal. 4.26.
which is free, the mother of us all, where Hallelujahs are Music, Angels
Choristers, the Divine Nature prospect, Saints Companions, and the Lamb Light
in the midst thereof.

This is Heaven, not in Enthusiastic rapsodies, not in fanatic Novelties, not
in raving Blasphemies, but in deed and truth.

This is Heaven, not that of pleasure in Amnons Lust, in Achans Wedg, in
Solomon's Wisdom, in Methuselahs long life, in Achitophels Craft, or in Judas
his gain by Treachery; but Heaven in the bosom of Christ, who is Exalted above
Principalities and Powers.

This is heaven, not in Types and Figures, not in dark and remote viewes, not
in variating forms, and unfixed Stations, but in real consistence, and
unalterable duration.

This is Heaven, not blemished by sin, not tedious through sorrow, not ruled by
sinful will, not vanquished by lawless power, not tainted by profaneness, not
deserted by time, not impairable in value and real worth, but ever what can be
wished for, and never less then it at any time was or is.

Lastly, This is Heaven, not infected with pride, not dejected with poverty,
not shrivelled with age, not scorched with heat, not determining with time.

Heaven, a Kingdom for its glory and capacity, purchased by the price of blood,
and the pre-appointment of Mercy; for not all, but for many, yet those a little
flock, those who are acquainted with God in grace, and by him rewarded with
this Peace.

Now I am in Meditation at the Ladders top; but have we spoke well of this
Canaan? Is not this Peace of eternity the least of our treatment, though in it
Christ be, Micah. 5.2.
as was Bethlehem Ephrata little amongst the Tribes of Judah, out of which
Christ came? Is not Isaak mistaken, and sent away with a small pittance, in
stead of the son of Hagar? What means my line upon line on other Subjects less
worthy, and my brevity on this head that exceeds them all.

Truly more Devotion then words, more Admitation then Oratory befits this
Subject; Scholastic Dispute, and eloquent Panegyricks are the Fucusses that
adorn this Elementary world, and please its Aerie Inhabitants; these are the
Diana's of vain men, and those Treasures which they pride in, and rely on, as
inexhaustible; and with these they delude souls, and dishonor him who
beautified us with that bravery, that we might honor him as our Creator,
follow him as our Pattern, yea fall down before him as our Judge. When I am in
Meditation of Heaven, I rather pray for a warm heart, and keen affections; for
abilities to believe in, and adhere to God, then for curious Speculations and
pathetick words; and therefore since faith must supply what sense cannot attain
to, and those things that are secret and ineffable, are rather to be adored,
then searched into, or written upon; I can here conclude this part of my
Meditation in the Wisemans words, The knowledge of this is too wonderful for me,
it is high, I cannot attain unto it.

And declining further thought of this Peace which here I cannot understand;
enquire into the evil we are assured to escape both here and hereafter, which
is the fourth Enquiry, How this Peace may be said to repel evil from us? in
that clause, So shall no evil come unto thee.

Peace and Evil are here opposed, not more in the words then sense. Evil like
the Canker eats out either our Peace, or at least eclipseth the comfort of it;
evil of sin deserves no peace; evil of punishment believes and finds no peace;
to the one peace is not, to the other it seems not to be, and so is not at all
as to the present discovery: That therefore the Holy Ghost might set every
Trophie upon its proper basis, I conceive him, using this order in this
Scripture, to teach us, that as Acquaintance with God is the way to peace, so
is the peace of God crowned with exemption from evil; and that none can expect
to have Gods custodye; but those which are in League and Amity with him; Be at
Peace, so shall no evil come unto thee.

No Evil, Not Satan, the Tempter to it, and the Traducer for it; Christ's Prayer
is our Antimure, Deliver us from evil; that is, from that evil one. From his
Power, 1 Pet. 5.8. Ephesians 6.11.
as the Lion that goes about seeking whom he may devour: From his Policy, for
we know his Methods, his pious Frauds, his Scriptum ests, his Lamblike,
Angellick manifestations, 2 Cor. 11.14. Matthew. 24.24.
his transformations into shows of Light and external sanctity, and all to
deceive, if possible, the very Elect.

From his Agents, who Ape-like act his part to much perfection ((...) and
(...)) make Merchandise of Faith and a good Conscience, care not what they do
to make Proselytes and pervert souls. This crafty Policrates, Satan, 2 Pet. 2.3.
moves every stone to his advantage, and has flags of all colors to hang out
for our surprise; he has Instruments that with the Zeal of old Arsenius seem
to forsake their Countries and Fortunes to devote themselves to God; his
Luciferi^ns, that come in the vests of innocence, Matthew. 7.15.
but inwardly are ravening wolves, having the poison of Asps under their
tongues, and the rancour of Devils in their hearts; whom Christ commands us to
beware of, Mat. 10.17. He has his Artemona's, that have such convicting
deportments that they lead men which way they lift, by their suaviloquius
charms, and compleasant influences; his Pharisees, that swallow down Widows
houses in the hollow of long Prayers; that are all to all men, that they might
reduce all men to be nothing to any but themselves; his Saduces that deny
Resurrection, Angels, Spirit, but what is theirs, those they cry up as Ocular,
execrating all that are not of their party, and cry not Grace, Grace to this
Apollyon of their designing. Lord, what a Gallamaufry of Frauds has this great
Engineere on foot? How is he furnished to deceive, who has not only the
tongues and pens of many men Learned, but lying Wonders and miraculous
Artifices at his service? But we know his methods, and may see this Apicius
gaping to devour all; contented with nothing but ruin and disorder, though he
cry out with Jehu, Behold my Zeal.

And it were well if men would try the spirits that now are abroad, for Satan
is often a Lying spirit in the mouth of Prophets, and a Prophesying spirit in
the mouth of Liars: and if he durst mingle himself with the Sons of God when
they came before him of old, may he not now be well mistrusted: Job 1.6.
though he quote Scripture with the zeal of a Seraphim, and in the meetings of
Christians pray and speak with notable evidence; he who durst appear before
Christ with Scripture abused to his own purpose, Matthew. 4.6.
dare do the like to Christians, whose weakness is more opportune to his
Conquest. He is that Evil one, who in his whites is a Devil of Deceit, in his
blacks a Devil of Malice, in his Crimsons a Devil of blood; a Devil in all
shapes, actions, senses, and happy is it for us that we know his Methods. And
Agents; not men of triffling talents, who need vulgar helps to make them
eminent; but men of great parts, noble wits, yea often noted lives; speaking to
wonder, writing to amazement, living to envy and example; the Leaders of Israel
sometimes caused them to err; Isai. 9.16.
The Priests divined a falsehood; the Devil of Saul's heart (in Samuel; flesh as
it were) is potent enough to misguide millions. O Lord what a Progress has the
mystery of iniquity made, when the Serpent stings the Dove to death; Religion
becomes politized. What an Egypt will Gunaan be, when Mannah is exchanged for
Garlic and Onions, when the Screech Owl extrudes the Turtle; and that be upon
us which the Jews feared, John 11.48. The Roman come and take away our
Religion, and (I pray God) not our place and Nation.

Is not this evil of the Devils designing? Is not the hand of hells Joab, Satan
in it, but the sword of the Lord and of his Gideon Christ Jesus shall prevent
this, though none stand in the gap; no Moses intercedes, no Phineas executes
Judgment; yet this Plague shall cease; God for his own namesake will turn those
Locusts (the Jesuits) back to their quarters; and make their Design as a red
sea to bury themselves in. The Thumbs of these Adonibezeks shall be cut off,
the Pride and Policy of these Absoloms become their ruins, So let all thine
enemies perish, O Lord.

Well, we have a sight of Satan in his power, and agents; now see him in his
Policy and end, which is to cut off Samsons locks; to destroy the Males of
Israel; to ruin all the Smithes and Forges by which our Spiritual weapons
should be edged to oppose him, and defend our selves against his assaults; thus
did the Philistims of old to Israel, 1 Samuel 13.9. But I hope God will turn
this Wisdom into Folly, and this. Babel: of Hope into a Babel of Defeat; yea, I
will bespeak these Gates of Hell to give way to the Rock of Ages, and to Christ
the Corner stone, who is with his Church to the end of the world; and I will
pray that the iniquity of their hearts may be forgiven them, who hate the
Church of England without a cause, and endeavor to subvert the Religion of it
against Scripture that asserts it.

And now is not custody from this evil an unspeakable Blessing? Is it not as
rain to the parched grass, and ought we not to receive this Mercy with the joy
of Harvest? Is it not a serious collect which deprecates Satan's success; while
he with Herod acts a Tragedy on Innocents; and labors to steal away the Babe
Christ out of his mothers lap the Church; his mother the Church; not to rob the
blessed Virgin of her Crown ( All Generations call her Blessed, because she
bare his body in her womb) but to right the Church against her Rival, the
Synagogue of Satan, which disowns her, and seeks Christ out of her, who
spiritually is only formed in her, from which evil, and the infatuation of it,
good Lord deliver us.

This is the first Evil (Satan) from which the Peace of God shields us, the
next is from Sin; like father, like child; a chip of the old block, a branch of
that Lie which was from the beginning.

From sin, the evil of inquination, that which defiles the man, defaces Gods
image, passes an eternal exile twixt the soul and him, for he has no
fellowship with unfruitful works of Darkness; His eye is on them that are
upright, Prove. 2. ult.
but he cutteth off the wicked from the earth, and rooteth out the
Transgressors.

From sin, the Evil of Angels, for because of folly beheld in them, they were
cast from Heaven; 1 Pet. 2.4. Isai 30.33.
the evil of Kings and great men, for whom Tophet is prepared of old; Sin, the
evil of men of low degree; sin, the evil of all; 1 John 5.19.
for the whole world groaneth under it, and lies in it.

From sin, the eyes grief, Genesis 3.6.66.
because by that it prevailed against Eve, by that against the sons of God of
the old world: Sin, the hearts ache; thus in Saint Paul crying out, Rom 7.24.
Psalm. 39.^.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!
Sin, the feets snare, against which David cautions, I said I will take heed to
my ways; Sin, the tongues temptation to speak unadvisedly; Sin, the Catholic
Cross to all that are crucified with Christ, and mystical members of him; Sin,
the breach of Gods Law, the grief of his Spirit, the price of his Son, the
torment of his Combatant, and the triumph of his Crowned ones; Sin, the Monster
of Paradise, for there it was plotted; the first born of life, for therein it
is acted; the plague of this world, on whose Stage it is attyred, and thence
maturated. Sin, something of nothing, a tumourous bubble of pestilent pride,
scorching Lust, and empty vanity, evaporating in nothing but the Lust of the
flesh, Lust of the eye, and the Pride of life.

Sin an evil inward in the thought, outward in the act, upward against God whom
it contemnes, and downward against earth whom it burdens, and all to gratify
him who is Prince of the Air, and rules in the hearts of the Children of
disobedience. Sin against the Creation, whom it disorders; against Redemption,
which it frustrates; against Sanctification, which it defies; against
Preservation, which it contradicts; against Salvation, which it abjures. Sin,
against which, as the greatest evil, God protests; to prevent which Angels
watch; to recall from which the Spirit sollicites; to direct how to avoid which,
the word is positive; against which to practice, the holy men of all ages are
presidents; yea, to expiate which the blood of Christ the Lamb of God was shed,
and his soul for it made an Offering.

What shall I say more against this which is so dishonorable to God, and ought
to be execrable to his people? but in the words of Moses, Cursed be he that
continues not in all the words of the Law to do them; that is, who desires not
to give sin the foil, by a contrary and constant course of virtue, according to
the will of God in his Word, and the assistance he has from God in this Race
to complete this resolution; for without that we can do nothing.

Well then, to be helped from this evil, is a mercy, a consequent of Gods peace
with the soul; that is clear from the Prophet, Thou will keep him in perfect
peace (or nearer the Original, in peace, peace) whose heart is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. He, O holy soul, that keeps thee never
slumbereth, his eye is on thy feet, to keep them; He keeps the feet of his
Saints, says Hannah: On thine eye, to hinder thy lust; on thy hand, to prevent
thy cruelty; on thy tongue, to suspend thine obscenity; on thy whole man, to
keep thee from sin, that it reign not in this mortal body of thine. He was with
Noah in the Ark, to keep him from despair of out-living the Flood, which
drowned the world; with Moses in the wilderness, to preserve him from
disbanding his rude multitude, whom God designed for Canaan, and inclining him
to bear the petulancies of popularities; rather then choose the contents of a
private retirement: He was with David in his flights from Saul, and fights with
Philistims: And kept him from desponding, upon assurance of a Kingdom for his
reward: He was with Jeremy in the Dungeon, and with Jonah in the Whales belly;
to sweeten straights to his, and to make them more pure in their enlargements.
He was with Peter's tongue, converting thousands at a Sermon, and making his
pride do penance where it offended, yea, weep out its own retraction. He was
with Paul by grace sufficient for him, when he saw the messenger of Satan
tempted him by abundant revelations to be lifted up above measure. In the fire
he is with his, and in the water he is with his: yea with you, O holy souls, he
is always, to the end of the world. With you (O holy souls) to keep you in all
your ways, to secure you in all your dangers, to resolve you in all your
doubts, to support you under all your sufferings, and with you to deliver you
out of them: With you as a Sun to enlighten, as a shield to defend, as an
Anchor to rest on, as a Pilot to guide you, and as a Champion to overcome your
fears. With you, to keep you in your Race, that you faint not; and with you,
to reward you with fullness of joy in his presence. This is second to the former
privilege, the peace of God keeps from Evil. 1. Satan: 2. Sin.

The third Viol is not yet past, Sorrow and Sufferings: those it also preserves
against, not that they dash not on us, but that they overwhelm us not; not that
they come not nigh, but that they come not over us to overcome us: Christ in
the Ship priviledgeth not from tossing, but drowning. I will not fear the
ranting Seas, if my rebuking Savior (whose voice those waves and winds obey)
be embarked with me. Mistake not (O holy souls) your Lesson; it is the voice
of your Beloved that says, In the world ye shall have Tribulation: Job 16.
last.
the Cross is your Saviors Sheep-mark, and those that are of his flock, brook
his Ear mark; their ear must not refuse the Trial Christ's side had; if that
was pierced, they must expect like measure; and those that will not follow him
in the Regeneration, have little cause to conclude him theirs in his Kingdom.
What (O man) will thou with thy Savior wear the Crown of Glory, and refuse
that other of Thorns with him? Will thou be acclamated for a Coheir, a King,
and Priest with Christ, and not be spit upon and derided with him here? Will thou drink the new wine with him in his Kingdom, and decline the Vinegar and
Gall here given him? Do thou hope to be drawn up after him, and not resolve
here to tread the Wine Press of wrath, to endure the contradiction of sinners
with him? If this thou look for, thou art on thy wander, far from thy Mark;
thou art of the rich young man's pack, who would keep Christ and his Wealth too,
or no Christ; Cresianus es, non Christianus; there is one thing necessary which
thou need, Deny thy self, take up the Cross, and follow Christ, to Mount
Calvary, before thou come to Mount Zion.

And O that this Meditation were but canon with many such Zelots as Julian was,
who grasp Power and worldly greatness with as eager tallons as Lions and
Panthers do Lambs and Infants, and think they never have enough, till they have
too much Mammon for Christ to cohabit with. These are they that are Saints, as
Peter was a Penitent, after many denyals and perjuries; not Saints because
penitent as was he, whom a Cock wakened; when these stop their ears against
good counsel, and harden their hearts against reproof; yea, hate him that
reproves in the Gate. These are they who love Christ when he is with those in
Princes Courts, clothed in soft Raiment, sat in Royal Apparel on the Throne,
when the people cry him up; but when he is traduced, when in the High Priests
Hall, when trampled upon, then they are gone like Summer birds in Winter; they
are all for a Pompous Reign on earth, before that more glorious Reign in
Heaven; and therefore they will secure themselves by might and main against all
danger and diminution here. Do these consider Christ had never been glorious,
but by sufferings, nor the Church been victorious but by the red Cross? How
much of holy Writ do these men make Apocryphal, while they entail external
prosperity to Saintship, and think none worthy to live, but those who look upon
the Cross as a curse, servile supplicium? What think they of those words of the
Lord Jesus, In the world ye (Who? my holy Apostles, as pure Saints as any
such, none excepted; nay, to whom compared, those are but as Jewish Sepulchers)
shall have affliction; not be afflicted, but have affliction, in the Abstract;
there shall be a kind of connaturality betwixt you and affliction. What judge
they of Saint Paul's peremptory position, All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffex persecution? What of Saint Peter's prediction of fiery Trials,
and Encouragements to prepare for them? Nay, what of our Saviors Benediction
on those that suffer for Righteousness sake? Are these Tales and Figments? Are
these Legends and Foysts? Are these Lillies of his field, not to be compared to
the Solomon's of their fancy in all his Royalty? I trow there is no man so fond,
but sees self more set up then Christ in this Pageant, for take away
sufferings, and where is Faith? where Charity? where Martyrdom? nay, where is,
or to what purpose that animative reference of the Holy Ghost displaying
Christ, glorious in witnessing a good confession before Pontius Pilate his
Judge, who could wash his hand, and protest Christ's innocence, and yet durst not
deliver him from the rage of the multitude No wonder they cry down Scripture,
and Fathers, and Church Stories, who cry up such wild, excentrick, worldly
subtilties for Religion, and own Christ with their mouths, as the Jews did
him on the Cross, only the more to reproach him.

Well, let these stray from the fold as wildly as they will, it is thy part (O
holy soul) to keep close to thy colors, Voti tunc Christianis erat pro Christi
nomine gladio percuti. S. Hieron. in vita Pauli Eremitae de Temp. Decii.
Christ looks thou should not only he ready to own, but of need be, to dye
for him; thou must expect sorrows, perhaps not such as with Spira will make
thee despair, turn thy back on Gone, as Ephraim did in the day of Battle; but
such as may exercise thy Grace, correct thine outgoings, mind thee of thine
end, admonish thee of thy duty, rouse thee to get thine Evidence ready, to make
thy Calling and Election sure, and by a holy end prepare thee for a blessed
Exchange.

The Promise is to be secure, not exempt; not that ye shall not to be
assaulted, but not be overcome; not that ye shall not be chastned, but that ye
shall not be condemned; not that evils shall not come near you, but that they
shall not domineer over you; not that ye shall not be buffetted by Satan, but
that Divine Grace shall be sufficient for you.

The Peace of God gained by Acquaintance with him, is no plea of prescription
against trouble and evil; but this it does, it modifies evil, so that it comes
not noxiously near a godly man, as it is evil, so its kept at distance, as it
is a Mark of Divine love, as it is a voice to reclaim, as it is commanded to be
Gods Monitor to us, so we must welcome it as did David, It is good for me that
I was afflicted; and pray for it as preventive Physic, that keeps us from
Plethorick Distempers. Many men may thank God for their crosses, without which
they had never come to Heaven: there is a most notable Story in the Legend, of
a blind woman, who besought Saint Bridget to give her sight; the Saint (so
called) at her entreaty, Quo presentor sum mundo, eo absentior sum Christo.
did; and when she had seen four dages, she desired Saint Bridget, that she
would take away her sight again, adding this for reason, The more I see of the
world, the less am I conversant with Christ.

4. Lastly, The peace in Acquaintance with God, will keep thee from thr Evil of
Evils, Death eternal. God suffers not his to fall into that pit, out of which
there is no redemption; His, as they have no part in the sin of the Damned, so
shall they not partake in the torment of the Damned: It Is not, Go ye Blessed,
but Go ye Cursed into everlasting sire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
And indeed, this is the Mercy of Mercies; this is one part of the Recompense of
Virtue and Godly life, that it shall not only have comfort in seeing God
gloriously waving the Banner of love over it, but becoming its Guard to Heaven,
and nullifying Satan's attempts on it; this is, that in which the mercy of God
shines as at noon tide, and comfortably exalts its self above Justice, as that
which crowns God, and renders him Beloved and admired of all that know him.

But perhaps (O man) thou art curious to know what this Death Eternal is? This
is a vanity, and if thou beware not, may be the vexation of thy spirit, but if
thou would ken the scantling of it, our blessed Lord has defined it to be
utter darkness, (...). 8.12.
where is weeping and watling, and gnashing of teeth; it is exile from God, and
judgment to the society of damned spirits, for ever.

Death Eternal, what is it not that is absolute tristicity? it is a living
death, and a dying life; it is the wages of sin, the sentence of Justice, the
utmost period of Plagues; a most exquisite misery, a most Merciless Torment, an
Eternal Passion! Eternal Death; it is misery to the eye, for it shall not see
God; it is a worm gnawing on the heart, for it shall consider the evil it has
done, for which is inflicted that evil it suffers; it is a vexation to the
senses, which to augment the tortures of their condition shall be renewed and
made more sensible; it is an excess which shall never have end, but be
eternally what it is, and impossible to be what it is not.

Death Eternal; it is the region of Blasphemy, the Caldron of Nimrods, Nero's
Judasses, those chambers of ruin into which they descend, who desert God by
sin, and are deserted by God in just Judgment. Death Eternal; it is a gulf
without bottom; a doom beyond ransom; a fire that burns, and is never
extinguished; and a restless craver, never satisfied.

What shall I say other then that of the Psalmist, Remember this ye that
frrget God, Psalm. 50.22.
lest he tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver.

These are the Evils from which peace in Acquaintance with God priviledgeth the
soul.

But how (cries the holy soul) comes this to be my privilege? How, O soul?
Surely not by thy merit, but 1. By the Mercy of God; which has bestowed that
good, as an Enticement to be his; God invites sinners to his Mercy. Isai. 30.18.
He waits to be gracious, he would have them come to the waters of Life and
drink freely; Matthew. 11.28.
he calls to you to come, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden;
he rewards them when they come, Those that come unto me, I will in no sort cast
away; he complains of them when they do not come, John 5.40.
They will not come unto me that they might have life. God in goodness begins
with man, and gives him cooperating Grace; and it is his own obduration that
makes Mercy retreat; while we are willing he assists us, but when we draw back,
he will have no pleasure in us. Mercy makes the Marriage betwixt God and the
Soul, and Peace is the Dowry that God gives his Beloved; those that are one
with him by Grace cannot be severed from him and themselves through Evil. Here
is the best Exchange for profit, here is the Indiaes of holy Riches, here is
Canaan flowing with Milk and Honey, here is the light which admits no darkness,
and the day that never sees night. here is the Price and the Pearl, the work,
and the wages: God to whom by faith we must run, and Mercy, which by faith from
him we may receive; here is the door by which we must enter into the joy of our
Master; and here is the Master, who will not shut the door against us, because
we come not before bid, nor can we stay there longer then welcome. By thee, O
Sun of the Morning, and first born of Heaven (for thou wast in the beginning)
is our Acquaintance wrought with God, and our evil from sin prevented.

2. This comes to be the holy souls privilege, from the Purchase of Christ;
P^t. 1.21.
He, he redeemed us, not only from our vain conversation, but from the wrath to
come; from the bondage of sin and Satan, into the glorious liberty of the sons
of God: Gal. 3.13. Romans 8.21. Ephesians 2.14.
It Is he that is our Peace, and it is he that keeps us from that Evil one. The
Redemption wrought by him on the Cross, was not only from wrath, but to
himself: He has redeemed us to himself out of every Nation, etc. Rev. 5.9, 10.
Not only to free us from the rage of sin and Satan, but to make us Kings and
Prists, to preserve us to his Heavenly Kingdom; and herein he is a Savior to
the utmost; to the utmost of men: Hebr. 7.25.
he is the Savior of his whole body, Jews, Gentiles, far, near, bond, free,
rich, poor, high, low, his Providence is over his whole family; his rain rains
upon bad as well as good. To the utmost of things, all cooperate hy his
interposition and ordination, to the good of his; the Graces of Godly men make
them admire him; the sins of others to watch over themselves more; nay, their
own failings carry them to God by Petition for pardon and grace sufficient for
them; the crosses they carry have Christ in them, the reproaches they suffer
have Christ with them, the glory they aim at, Christ will bring them to; Life,
which to many is a pleasure, Christ imbitters, and yet rescues them from any
provocation to impatience: they use it as the time wherein to work, but they
desire to be dissolved in Christ's time, For to be with him is best of all. To
the uttermost of time: his merit is a light unextinguishable, was, is, and ever
shall be: the Patriarks before, the Prophets in, the holy men after the Law got
to Heaven upon this wing, in this Chariot were they thither transported, in the
garment of this elder brother were they wrapped, for that only is the Wedding
garment; This is the one and only way; narrow, not open to all, but to those
that believe; but yet a sure way, bounded by the sure mercies of David; and
herein he is a Savior beyond all, a Superlative Redeemer, for he is eternal,
whereas others are but Temporary; he is complete, whereas others are but
partial. Where are Moses and Joshuah, David and Jeptha, who saved the Jews?
Where Caesar, Scipio, Metellus the Deliverers of the Romans? Where Codrus,
Themistocles, Photion, by whom the Greeks were delivered? These are dead, and
their Territories by others possessed; nay, their ashes are become the prey of
Tyrants, who glut themselves with revenges on their relicts: but Christ is the
Savior of his body, the Church; for ever he is, and ever will be the light in
the midst of it, and a wall of fire round about it; For Christ has purchased
its peace, and paid (with reverence be it conceived) for that interest in God,
which will keep off evil from coming to his.

3. This privilege from evil is the natural child of Acquaintance with God; God
never gives himself, without all that is his; and if all, then his peace, then
his protection from evil; the Prophet tells us of Gods speaking peace to his
people; Psalm. 85.8. Isai. 26.20.41.14. Psalm. 145.20
of his counsels to them to enter into rest till the indignation be over; of
his cordial, Fear not thou worm Jacob, I will be with thee: of his corrasive to
wicked men whom he will destroy. And whence (O holy soul) comes all this, but
from that proximity twixt God and the soul? This is the pay of our patience,
the result of our fidelity to God; he that follows the Lamb, Rev. 2.17.
shall not miss his white stone and new name. God never difmisses his without a
blessing, like that from the womb of the Morning; he gives them peace to poyse
them here amidst their many storms in this life, and he keeps evil far from
them; yea, that which is the greatest evil, after their deaths, eternal evil.

And now me thinks I am of S. Peter's mind on the Mount, It is good to be here:
here are three words in this Scripture, like the three Tabernacles in that:
Acquaintance with God, Peace and Protection from evil; and these are (as
Christ's face was transsigured) in a sort seraphickly expressed, and proposed
after a celestial method; here is Acquaintance; usually res doloris, a vanity
of vanity, in the multitude of which there is sorrow and distraction, strangely
meliorated by its adjunct, highly imbeautied by its entail to God, of a
Ceremony and a necessity made a virtue; Acquaint thy self with God. Next, here
is the Lady Peace, not like that of the world, with Rachel mourning, with
Thamar thrust out of doors after it has served a turn; but like the Queens
daughter, glorious within, as beloved of God, and beauteous without, as decked
with the Needle work of external accommodations: Lastly, here is evil
profligated and dismantled of its force; the Lion exungued, and the sting taken
out of the Serpents tail, as an effect of divine bounty, and this by the
Chimistry of God, who is able to bring good from evil.

What then remains to this Meditation, but to summon the last Quere to give in
its verdict? And that is the season when this Acquaintance with God is to be
had, and these consequences obtained, in the Particle now, Acquaint [now] thy
sef with God, etc.

Now: Season seasons every thing; the Wise man said it, Prove. 25.12.
A word in season is like apples if Gold in Pictures of Silver; a fair show,
but Metal upon Metal makes no Heraldry, but in a Picture 'twill pass, and so
will time pass, of which this now is a part, and the best part because present;
Acquaint now: Now; when? in life, in the day of time, in the season of Mercy,
in Youth, before time be not, thou go down into the grave, and be seen no more,
yea, before thou be gathered to dust, and worms feed upon thy flesh.

Now; not anon: Now, lest sickness, age, death prevent anon, and thou have no
time to groan for Peace, or cry for Mercy; our pardon is ever in danger, where
our repentance is in debate.

Now: this is to be wise for thy self (O soul) for it only is in thy
possession, what a day will bring forth thou know not, therefore hearken to
Wisdoms voice, While it is called to day; delays ought to be as past time, out
of thy power, since to work out now thy salvation with fear and trembling is
thy prudence.

Time has no longer a race than a Creature has, it is always on a swift Ebb,
ere long it will be low water, and then where the tree falls, it must lie: and
since time and tide stay for no man, O my soul, do thou watch them, and take
time to do thy task; eternity gives good wages. Remember who said, 2 Timothy 4.7.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
from henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness.

Now: not at the sixth or last hour of the day, for it is not certain whether
thou shall live upon this hazard to receive the penny of Eternity, which
follows the orderly expense of time; but now, this instant, moment set to thy
Tackling; the storm is great and thy vessel queasie, and therefore put in to
the next Harbor: What thou do, do quickly, Eccles. 9.^^.
For there is neither wisdom nor strength in the grave whither thou go, nor
ever will be in thy power to untie thy chain of torments, or regain a lost
happiness.

Therefore (O my soul) receive thou this counsel with joy, and perfect it by
holy industry, while thou have time, talents, and what may further help thee in
this blessed Husbandry and Sacred Thrift. Look not upon the Lions in the way,
the narrow passage to life eternal, the obloquies of men who will judge thee
mopish because thou labourest for that Jewel that thou have lost, and would
find again. These discouragements may work on lazy and thriftless souls, who
starve when there is bread enough in their fathers house: follow thou the
Saints of all ages, who by Faith and Patience inherit the Promises; and by
their holy example be thou stimulated to take the Cross for thy Title to the
Crown of Life; yea, contest thou for their Crown, not to rob them, but to right
thy self, who art born to equal hopes with them: and comfort thy self in that
promise of the holy Apostle (who is now at peace with God, and is taken from
the evil of this world unto the glory above) In due time ye shall reap if you
faint not. Gal. 6.9.


FINIS.

