THE CROWN OF Righteousness. Set Forth In A SERMON PREACHED At Stephens
Walbrook, May 1. 1656. At the Funeral of Thomas Hodges ESQVIRE.

By THOMAS WATSON, Minister of Stephens Walbrook, in the City of LONDON.

1 SAMUEL 2. 30. They that honor me, I will honor.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Cranford, at the sign of the Kings Head in Paul's
Churchyard, Anno Dom. 1656.

JUNE 10. 1656. Imprimatur Edmund Clamie.

TO THE Virtuous, and my worthy Friend, Mris MARY HODGES.
HONORED FRIEND!
IT was not my intention when I preached this Sermon, that it should go any
further then the Pulpit; But seeing you were pleased to request me to print it,
that I might herein gratify your desire, and exhibit a testimonial of that
respect which I did bear to your deceased Husband, I was willing to make it
more public, and the Lord make it profitable. You are sensible enough, I doubt
not, of the late loss you have sustained, I did therefore choose to treat on
this subject, that I might revive you with the hope of future gain: not
forgetting that of Solomon, Prove. 31. 6. Give wine to those that be of heavy
hearts.

The Jews have this form of Speech at their Funerals, whereby they would
cheer up the party surviving; Let thy consolation be in heaven Sic consolatio
tua in coeli^.
so I say to you, Look up to Heaven, let the Crown laidup comfort you The Lord
help you to make a sanctified use of this sad stroke of Providence; learn (dear
Friend) to make sure of Christ, when you cannot make sure of other relations.
Faith will Contract you to CHRIST, and if your Maker be your Husband, Isa. 54.
5.
Death shall not dissolve, but perfect the Union: Labor still to Anchor within
the vail, Hebr. 6. 9.
it is no casting Anchor downward; we break our earthly comforts while we lean
too hard on them, but I must not expatiate. I have here presented you with the
Sermon as I preached it, only I have cast in some few additionals, which
through straits of time I was then forced to omit. The blessing of the Almighty
rest upon you, and let that golden Oil be powered out upon your Posterity.
(...) Ignatius ad Heronem.


So prays THO. WATSON.
From my Study at Steph. Walbrook June 2. 1656.
IN OBITUM Thomae Hodges ARMIGERI.
LAurus Apollinoi nemoris ditissima proles
exulet, and crinem taxus opaca premat.
Et mea faerales humectent carmina guttae,
carmina lugubri, commemoranda sono.
Nuper enim tristi noctis squalore sepultus
eximiae cecidit maximus urbis honos.
Scilicet egregius generosi nobilis haeres,
quem tenuit verae Religionis amor.
Nullus amicorum lateri constantior haesit,
civibus aut passim clarior alter erit.
Non auri coluit radios, nec pauper ut esset
sponte, tenebroso carcere clausit opes.
Sed been divitiis quaesitis noverit uti;
sanctorum ut merit as possit habere preces.
Transegit placidam chasta cum Conjuge vitam
Exemplo natos, consitiisque regens.
Huc tamen, (O nigri rigor insatiabilis orci).
fatales ictos mors inopina dedit.
Ecce hic marmorea sopitum dormit in urna
corpus, at aethere as men's petit alta domus.
Illio terrestris discusso pondere limi
exultat, pseno necteris amne lavans.
O utinam digno celebrarem funus honor,
and tacito cineri debita jura darem.
Non cuperem violas mollisve rosaria pesti,
nempe haec vix tumulo congrua dona forent.
Non caret unguentis nec picti floribus horti,
quem sequitur famae nobilioris odor.
Edm. Hall.
THE CROWN OF Righteousness.
2 TIMOTHY 4. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day.
THe wise GOD, that he may invite and encourage the sons of men to holiness of
life, is pleased to set before their eyes the recompense of reward, that if the
equity of his Precepts does not prevail, the excellency of his Promise may.
God will have his people Volunteers in Religion, Psalm. 110. 3.
not forced with fear, but drawn with love; therefore he works upon them in
such a way as is most alluring and persuasive: he would catch men with a golden
bait, and tempt them to obedience by showing them what is laid up in heaven for
them; so in the Text, Henceforth there is a Crown of Righteousness laid up,
etc. A Crown? Oh infinite! for a Delinquent to have a pardon is well, but to
have a Crown set upon him, is no less rare, then stupendous.

A true Saint has a double Crown; one in this life, the other laid up. In this
life he has a Crown of Acceptance, Ephesians. 1. 6. He has made us accepted in
the beloved. Some render the word (...), he has made us favorites; Chrysostom.
Theophilact.
here is the Crown of acceptance, and in the life to come a Crown of
Righteousness. The glory of heaven is represented in Scripture under various
Similies, and Metaphors: Sometimes heaven is compared to a place of rest, Heb.
4. 9. it is the souls center. Eo feror quocunque fetor. Aug. lib. Consess.
Sometimes to an house not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Sometimes to an
inheritance in light, Golos. 1. 12. and in the Text the glory of heaven is set
forth by a Crown; the Circle is the most perfect figure. Significat Corona
perfectionem, ratione figurae circularis. Brondo.
This blessed Crown does incircle within it all perfection. I shall first break
up the ground of the Text by Explication, and then come to sow the seed of
Doctrine.

1. Henceforth] 1. (...), in posterum. Beza.
This word (...), henceforth, is a relative word; either first it may bear date
from the time of the Apostles conversion; Henceforth there is laid up a Crown:
as soon as a man is implanted into Christ, he stands entitled to a Crown. Or
secondly, this word Henceforth may relate to the end of his race and fight.
Paul had run through all the several stages of Christianity. He had finished
his course, and from henceforth says he, there is laid up a Crown. He knew his
work was done, and there was nothing now remaining, but to step out of the
world, and put on his Crown.

2. There is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness] 2. (...). Quest.
Quest. Why a Crown of Righteousness? it is a Crown of mercy; Psalm. 103. 4.
a Crown that free grace bestows; Why then is it called Corona justitiae, a
Crown of righteousness? Answ. 1. Negatively; not that we can by Answ. I. N^g.
our righteousness merit this Crown. Bellarmine builds his Doctrine of Merit
on this Text; Aquinas and Bonaventure say, that we merit this Crown ex
condigno, by way of condignitie. But the whole current of our Orthodox Divines
runs another way. Opera sanctorum non esse talia ut eis ex condigno debeatur
merces; asserunt. Gregorius, Hierom, Origin, Durandus.
And the Apostle makes a clear distinction between a reward bestowed by Merit,
and by Grace; Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death, but the gift Romans 6. 23.
of God (...).
is eternal life. Had the reward been by merit, the Apostle should have said,
the wages of God is eternal life. Gratia non est gratia ullo modo, nisi sir
gratuita omni modo. Aug. contra Pelag. and Celessium, lib. 2. c. 24. tom. 7.
Alas! how can we merit a Crown? before we merit we must satisfy, but we have
nothing to satisfy. How can finite Obedience satisfy infinite Justice?
Besides, what equality is there between our service, and the reward? What
proportion between the shedding of a Tear, and a Crown? So that we cannot by
our righteousness merit this Crown Munera sua coronat Deus, non meritatua.
Aug. Ep. 105.
.

I Answer therefore 2. Affirmatively, it is called a Answ. 2. Assir.
Crown of righteousness in a double sense. ^. Because it is Corona promissa,
it is a Crown promised, Promissum Dei cadit in debitum. Balduinus.
Revel. 2. 10. I will give thee a Crown. God having made this promise, Non
dicimus Deo, read quia accepisti, sed read quod tu promisisti. Aug
it is a righteous thing to bestow this Crown on us. Metcedem tribuit, non quod
uilo ipsum obsequio praeveniamus, sed quia eodem quo erga nos coepit
liberalitatis tenore, priora sua dona posterioribus cumulat. Calvin.
2. It is a Crown of righteousness, because it is Corona acquisita, a Crown
purchased; it is a Crown bought with the price of blood. It was so bought as it
was given, else where were God's mercy? And it was so given as it was bought,
else where were God's justice. This Crown swims to us through the blood of a
Savior. When Christ was hanging upon the Cross, he was purchasing a Crown for
us: and in this sense it is a Crown of righteousness; it is righteous with God
to give us the Crown which Jesus Christ has paid for so dearly.

3. This Crown is said to be laid up. 3. (...).
]

The Crown is kept in reversion. God does not presently broach the full vessels
of glory: he does not presently install us into our honor: it is Corona
recondita, a Crown laid up. The Saints are heirs under age; God does not crown
them till they are of age: the sons of Kings are often crowned during their
minority, some have been crowned in their cradle; Hen. 6. Speed Chron. p. 662.
but the heirs of glory must be of perfect stature before they are crowned.
God will give his children the ring, and the bracelets here, some of the
comforts of his Spirit, but not the Crown, we are all for present pay; we are
still putting off our repentance, yet would be putting on our Crown; God will
have us stay a while, the Crown is laid up.

Quest. But why is it laid up, why is not the Crown Quest. Answ. 1.
presently put on? Answ. 1. It is not fit that we should yet wear it, and that
for two reasons. 1. Our graces are imperfect in this life; Christianus mundus
est and mundandus. Aug. tract. 80. in Johan.
they are in their infancy and minority; therefore we are said to receive but
primitias, the first fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8. 23. non decimas, says
Luther; we are but Christians in fieri, Luther de profectu in Christian.
we have only some imperfect lineaments of grace drawn in us; our graces are
mingled with much corruption, as Gold in the Oar is mingled with dross; the
most refined soul has some lees and dregs of sin left in it. The life of grace
is said to be hid, Col. 3. 3. our faith is hid under unbelief, as the corn is
hid under the chaff; now if God should set the Crown upon us in this life, he
should crown our sins as well as our graces. Therefore the Crown is laid up. 2.
It Is not fit that we should yet wear the Crown, for then it would take us off
from doing our work; we should be idle in the Vineyard. Who will take pains
for a reward, when he has the reward already; therefore the Crown is laid up.
We must run the race before we wear the Crown.

2 The Crown is laid up to make heaven the sweeter. Answ. 2.
Quo longius defertur, eo suavius laetatur. Greg. in mor.
The longer we stay for our Crown, the sweeter it will be when it comes. The
absence of that which we desire, does but endear it to us the more when we
enjoy it. After all our sweating for heaven, all our praying, weeping, fasting,
how welcome will a Crown be? Therefore it is that God, though he will not
deny, yet he will delay our reward; it is a Crown laid up.

Quest. But if this Crown be laid up, when shall we wear it? this brings me to
the fourth and last particular in the Text.

4. In that day] 4. (...). Tertullian.
What day? Die obitus mei, says Tertullian. * In the day of my death. Justinus
and others are of opinion, that the Saints shall not receive this Crown till
the Resurrection. But Hierom confutes this opinion Elect is in morte datur
vitae Corona. Hierom.
The Souls of the elect shall be presently Crowned with joy and felicity; The
body indeed shall lie in the grave, as in a bed of perfume, till the
resurrection. Jacet in sepultura usque ad diem novisssimi sui adventus. Anselm.
That this rerurrection shall be is clear. Job. 19. 26. John. 5. 28.
Therefore it is that some of the ancients have called the grave (...) a
sleeping house, because this body shall awake again, and the Jews called their
burying place, The house of the living, s because they (...)
believed that life would come into them again at the resurrection, and till
then, the bodies of the Saints must wait for their preferment; but their Souls
shall be immediately Crowned after death.

Why else should Saint Paul desire to be dissolved, if he were not presently
Crowned with glory? It were better for believers to stay here, if they should
not be immediately with Christ. Here they are daily improving their stock of
grace, they are increasing the jewels of their Crown; though they sit in the
valley of tears, yet God often turns their water into wine, they have many
Praelibamina sweet tastes of Gods love; they have the bunches of grapes; If
Paul's Soul should sleep in his body (a drowsy opinion) then when he desired to
be dissolved, he wished that which was to his loss, but this Crown shall be
given in that day, die obitus, the day of our death. It cannot be half a days
journey between the Cross and Paradise.

The words being thus opened, fall into these three parts.

1. Here is a glorious reward, a Crown.

2. The adjournying of this reward, it is laid up.

3. The persons on whom it is bestowed; viz. Paul, and the rest of believers.
For me, and not for me only, but for all them that love Christ's appearing.

Doctr. That the righteous person shall wear the Crown of righteousness. For
the illustration of this, I shall do four things.

1. I shall enquire who this righteous person is. 1.


2. I shall evince it by Scripture, that the righteous 2.
person shall wear this blessed Crown.

3. I shall show you, wherein the reward of Glory 3.
is compared to a Crown.

4. Wherein this Crown of righteousness excells, 4.
and out-shines all earthly Crowns.

I. Who this (...) or righteous person is. I answer, I.
a man may be said to be righteous, two ways. 1. legally. Thus Adam while he
did wear the robe of 1.
innocence was legally righteous; he had that (...) a law of holiness written
in his heart, and his life was a living commentary upon it. He went exactly,
according to every institute of God; as a well made Dial goes with the Sun;
but this is lost and forfeited.

2. A man is said to be righteous Evangelically: And this righteousness is
twofold; either a righteousness 2.
by imputation. Romans 4. 6.
This righteousness is as truly ours to justify, as it is Christ's to give.
Or 2. a righteousness by implantation. Ezekiel 36. 29 27.
The one is by the merit of Christ: The other is by the Spirit of Christ. Now
this implanted righteousness is in the Soul as an intrinsecall quality; and if
it be of the right kind, it must be there three manner of ways. 1.
Righteousness must (...).
be in the Soul, Extensively, Subject^m denominatur a major^ part.
in every part; we do not call a Blackmore white, because he has white teeth.
Those are not said to be righteous, who can speak righteously, what are these
white teeth? righteousness like a holy leaven must diffuse, and swel it self
into every part, the understanding, will, affections. The very God of peace
sanctify you wholly, 1 These. 5. 23. 1 These. 5. 23.
Therefore grace is called the new man. (...). Col. 3. 10.
not a new eye, or a new tongue, but a new man. A Saint though he be righteous
but in part, yet he is righteous in every part. 2. Righteousness must be in the
Soul intensively. (...).
we call water hot, when it is hot in the third or fourth degree; he is not
said to be righteous who is tepid and neutrall in religion; This was Laodicea's
temper, Lukewarm, Revel. 2. 16. I would thou were cold or hot ver. 15. I would
thou were something; any thing rather then lukewarm: Righteousness must rise
up to some degree, David boiled over in holy zeal, Psalm. 119. 139.
Psalm. 3.
119. 139. My zeal has consumed me. 3. Righteousness 3.
must be in the Soul Perseveringly. (...).
It must abide, and continue. He is not a righteous person, that is good only
in a passion, either of fear or joy; hypocrites may seem righteous for a time,
so long as the wind sits that way, but it is quickly over; they change apace;
not unlike the herb Poleon whose leaves in the morning are white, at noon
purple, at night blue; Thus they change in their goodness, and are of diverse
minds, as Joseph's coat of diverse colors. Hypocrites for the most part live to
confute themselves; they are like Cataline of whom Salust observes, he had a
good and hopeful beginning, but a bad end. Bonis initiis malos exitus habuit.
Salust.
I have read of a certain people in India called Pandorae, that have white hoar
hairs in their youth, and in their old age black hairs. An emblem of
hypocrites, who at first look white and fair like Saints, but in their elder
years do blacken in wickedness; These men's religion was never in grain, they
are only to be judged righteous persons, who with Job hold fast their
integrity. Job 2. ver. 3. Feramus ergo fidei fructu^ ab adolescentia, augeamus
in juventute, compleamus in senectute. Ambrosedeabr. lib. 2. cap. 8.
There is a great deal of difference between the motion of a Watch, and the
beating of the Pulse: the one is quickly at an end, but the other proceeding
from a vital principle, is permanent, and constant, as long as there is life
the Pulse beats: True righteousness is a spiritual Pulse, which will be ever
beating. So much for the first, who this righteous person is.

2. The second particular which I will but glance at, is, that the righteous
person shall wear the Crown of righteousness. Jam. 1. 12. He shall receive the
Crown of Jam. 1. 12. Rev. 2 10.
life. And Rev. 2. 10. I will give thee the Crown of life. By both which
Scriptures you see, that a true Saint is heir to the Crown; The truth being so
apparent; I may say as they did in another sense, What needs there further
witness. Luke 22. 71
] I proceed therefore to the next thing.

3. To show you wherein the reward of glory is 3.
compared to a Crown. It is called here a Crown of 1.
Righteousness, and that in three respects. 1. a Crown is res splendida; Corona
insignem habet prae caeteris ornamentis dignitatem, Bern.
the Crown-roiall hung with jewels, is a splendid magnisicent thing. (...). 1
Pet. 5. 4.
Thus the Crown of Righteousness is most orient, and illustrious. For the
splendour of it, it is called a Crown of Glory. 1 Pet. 5. 4. It must needs be
glorious, because it is a Crown of Gods own making. Sin has made us our
Crosses, God has made us our Crown. What are all the beauties, and glories of
the world which have been esteemed most famous, in comparison of this Crown of
Righteousness? The Temple of Diana, Quid templum Dianae, quid Columna Solis,
quid Corona Apollinis aurea.
Mausolus Tomb, the Egyptian Pyramides, the Pillar of the Sun, which the
Heathens offered to Jupiter. The glory of this Crown is inexpressible. (...).
Cyril lib. 2. contr. Jul.
were the Angels themselves sent from heaven, to give us a description of this
Crown of Righteousness, they would sooner want words then matter. But here I
must draw a vail, as not being able to give you the (...), or dark shadow of
it; Nor can it be set out by all the lights of heaven; though every star were
turned into a Sun. 2.


2. A Crown is res ponderosa, a weighty thing. So is the Crown of
Righteousness; Corona haec non magis eximia quam ingens. Corn. a lap.
Therefore it is called by the Apostle, a weight of Glory. (...) 2 Cor. ^. 17.
We think our sufferings weighty, alas, they are light in comparison of our
Crown; This Crown of Righteousness, is so weighty, that it would soon
overwhelme us, if God did not make us able to bear it.] 3. a Crown is res
honorifica an honorable thing. Corona est insigne regiae potestatis. Brondo.
Thou Crownest him with honor Psalm. 8. 7. Therefore when King Ahashuerus asked
Haman, What shall be done to the man whom the King will * Psalm. 8. 7.
honor? Haman could think of nothing more honorable then the Crown. Let the
Crown royal which the King uses to wear be set upon his head Esther, 6. 8. A
Crown is not for every one, it will not fit every head; It is for Kings and
persons of renown to wear. What great honor was it to wear the Olympic
Crowns! Olympicae Coronae quae celebres erant in Asia and Grecia, olim tanti
aestimabantur ut (...) evchebatur in sublime, and isliusmodi Coronae eo in
praetio suerunt, ut non Pauci hoc decus ipsi vitae praetutulerunt sicut humanae
saelicitatis terminum. Co(...).
To which the Apostle seems here to allude. A Crown is a badge and ensign of
imperial honor. Diagoras ^^^^tres filios vidisset vincere and coronari eodem
Olympiae die, eumquo (...) adolescentes amplexi Coronis suis in patris caput
posilis, suaviarentur; cum^ue populus gr^tul^bundus stores undique in eum
jaceret, ibi in stadio, in oculis atque manibus filiorum animam efflavit,
Gellius lib. ^. cap. 15.
So this Crown of Righteousness is insigne honoris, it is an ensign of royalty
and excellence. Only those who are, e regio Sanguine n^ti, born of God, and
have the blood royal of heaven running in their Souls, do wear this blessed
Crown. The men of the world may heap up Silver as dust, but the Crown God
reserves only for them whom be has made Kings. Rev. 1. 6.

4. The last thing is, to show you wherein this Crown of Righteousness
exceeds, and out-shines all earthly crowns; That will appear in fix
particulars. 1. This Crown of Righteousness is, lawfully come by. It is a
Crown which God himself will set upon our head. The Lord, the righteous judge
will give it me at that day, says the Text. Therefore it is come by lawfully.
Other crowns are often usurped; As histories abundantly witness; they may be
called Crowns of unrighteousness, because they are unrighteously gotten. Julius
Caesar was wont to say, For a Crown it was lawful to violate any Oath. Si
violetur jus jurandum sit regni causa.
The Saints have not their Crown by usurpation, but by Election; They are
chosen to a Crown 2 These. 2. 13.


2. This Crown of Righteousness exceeds in pureness. 2.
Other Crowns are of a more feculent, drossie mettle, They have their troubles.
A Crown of gold cannot be made without thorns Seleucus rex dicere solebat, si
multi scirent quantum sit negotii tot Epistola^ mittere, ^^t curas subire, ne
humi diadema tollerent.
Herein the Crown of Righteousness excells. It is made of a purer metal, there
are no cares or crosses woven into it. It fills the Soul with melody; It
banisheth all sorrow from the heart, there can be no more sorrow in heaven,
then joy in hell.] 3. This Crown of Righteousness can never be lost or
forfeited. Other Crowns may be lost. 3.
(...) Agath.
The Crown is fallen from the head. Lam. 5. 16. Henry the sixth was honored
with the Crowns of two Kingdoms, France and England. The first was lost through
the faction of his Nobles, the other was twice plucked from his head, before
his death. Speed's Chr.
The Crown has many heirs and successors; How many have been deposed either by
fraud, or force. But this Crown of Righteousness can never be lost. God will
not say, Remove the diadem, take off the Crown. Ezekiel. 21. 16. This Crown is
set upon the head of Christ's Spouse, and Christ will never depose his Spouse.
There Is nothing unless sin can forfeit the Crown; but Believers shall be so
fixed in their Orb of sanctity, that they cannot have the least erring, or
retrograde motion.

4. This Crown of Righteousness is a never-fading Crown Corona haec non fit ex
rosis aut gemmis, flores isti ex quibus contexitur semper vi^idescunt,
repullulant semper.
Other crowns are like a garland of flowers that soon withers; Does the Crown
endure to all generations? Prove. 27. 4. All outward glory passes away as a
swift stream, or a ship in full sail; Crowns wear away and tumble into the
dust: But this Crown of Righteousness Fades not. Quid ubi cum flore morituro?
quid caput strophiala, aut dracontario, gloriae di idemati destinatum? Tertul.
de Coron. mil.
1 Pet. 5. 4. Eternity is a jewel of the Saints Crown; after Millions of
years, it will be as bright and splendent as at the first days wearing.

5. This Crown of Righteousness does not draw envy to it. David's own son envied
him, and sought to take his Crown from off his head. A Crown of gold is often
the mark for envy and ambition to shoot at: But this Crown of Righteousness
is free from envy. The white Lilly of peace is a flower that grows in this
Crown. One Saint in glory shall not envy another (...). Macar. hom. 33.
because all are Crowned; And though one Crown may be larger then another, yet
every one shall have as big a Crown as he is able to carry.

6. This Crown of Righteousness makes a man blessed; Earthly Crowns have no
such virtue in them; They rather make men cursed; they are so heavy that they
often sink men into hell; They make men's heads so giddy, that they stumble and
fall into Hurtful lusts. (...). 1 Timothy 6. 9.
But this Crown of Righteousness makes them blessed that wear it. The Hebrew
word to Crown, signifies, to Compass round. Because the Crown does compass them
that wear it with terrene felicity. The Saints shall have a sight of God to
eternity, (...)
This is the encompassing Crown. The Schoolmen place happiness in the Vision
of God. a Verb, significat (...) ambire, and circum^ingere.
But besides the Saints shall (...), have such communications of divine
excellencies, as they are capable to take in. This is the quintessence of
blessedness. In Coelesti beatitudine sine aliquo taedio manens aeternitas,
inspectio sola divinitatis efficit, ut beatius nihil esse possit. Cassidor. Ep.
lib. 2. (...) Psalm. 16. 11.
* Lombard. Aquin.
* (...). Macar. hom. 34.


Use. 1. Information, and it has four branches. 1. It Use 1. Infor. 1 Branch.
shows us that Religion is not imposed upon hard terms; God does not put us
upon things unreasonable, he does not cut us out work and give no reward,
behold, there is a Crown of Righteousness laid up. Joh. 6. 60.
When we * Non exemplis tantum sed praemiis ad Christu^ allicimur. Bern.
hear of the doctrine of Repentance, steeping our souls in brinish tears for
sin; the doctrine of Mortification, pulling out the right eye, we are ready to
cry out as they did, This is an hard saying, who can hear it? No beloved, Gods
terms are not unreasonable, he never sets us on work but we are sure of Double
pay; many sweet encouragements he gives us while we are doing the work, he
often strews our ways with Roses, shedding his love abroad into our hearts,
Romans 5. 5. filling us with joy in believing, Romans 15. verse 13. He that
has the least mercy from God in this kind, will die in his debt: but when
we look upon the recompense of reward, which does as far exceed our thoughts,
as it does surpass our deserts, Then surely we cannot say to God (without
wrong) as he Mat. 25. 24. I knew thee that thou art an hard man. If a King
should bid one take up his staff when it is fallen, and for that should settle
an annuity upon him for life, this were not unreasonable. When you have done
all (as our Lord Christ says) you are but unprofitable servants. Luke 17. 10.
What advantage do you bring to God? Yet for this poor inconsiderable nothing
there is a Crown laid up. Sure God does not invite you to your loss, nor can
you say he is a hard Master. Satan, who would discourage you from a strict holy
life, will he give bond to assure you of some hing equivalent to this Crown? As
Saul said in another sense, Will the son of Jesse give you fields and
vineyards, and make you Captains of thousands. 1 Samuel 22. 7.
So, will Satan who disparageth the ways of God give you Crowns to possess?
will he mend your wages? Alas! you know what wages he paies, his wages are
death, Romans 6.
and truly the less wages the better.

2 Branch. See here that which may raise in our hearts an holy indignation
against sin, it will make us forfeit our Crown. Sin is not only hateful in its
own nature, the most horrid, ugly, deformed thing; which made holy Anselm say,
That if he should behold the pains of Hell on one side, and the deformity of
Sin on the other, and he must of necessity choose one of these two; I would
(says he) rather throw my self into hell, then voluntarily commit one sin
against God. Anselm inter opusc. cap. 190. Fol. 82.
But besides the intrinsecall-filth that is in sin, (it being the very spirits
and quintessence of evil) this may cause in us an abhorrency of it; Sin would
degrade us of our honor, it would pluck away our Crown from our head; Think
what will the end of sin be? as Abner said to Joab, will it not be bitterness
in the latter end? 2 Samuel 2. 26.
If men before they did commit sin, would but sit down and rationally consider,
whether the present gain and sweetness in fin, would make amends for the
future loss, I believe it would put them into a cold sweat, and give some
check to their unbridled affections. Jacob took Esau by the heel. O? do not
look upon the smileing face of sin, but take it by the heel, look at the end of
it; It will bereaves us of our Crown. And can any thing countervail this loss?
When a man is tempted to Pride; let him remember this will swel his head so
big, that the Crown wilnot com on; Woe to the Crown of Pride! Isa. 28. 1. the
Crown of Pride will hinder him of the Crown of Righteousness. When he is
tempted to Lust, let him remember that for the enjoying the pleasures of sin
for a season, Hebr. 11. 25.
he hazards a Crown of immortality. (...).
And is there so much sweetness in sin, as is in a Crown? When he is tempted
to drunkenness, (a sin that does not only unchristian him but, un-man him) O
ignis infernalis luxuria! cujus sumus infamia, cujus flamma immunditia, cujus
finis gehenna. Hierom.
let him consider here it would uncrown him of his reason, and afterward
un-crown him of his happiness. When he is tempted to swearing, let him think
with himself, this is a sin which has nothing to render it delightful. Other
sins have a show of pleasure and profit, which is the (...).
bait men are drawn with. Capiuntur homines voluptate ut pisees hamo. Cicero
lib de sen ect.
But the swearer is brought to the devils hook without any bait. O! is it not
madness for these unfruitful works of darkness Ephesians. 5. 11.
to forfeit heaven. How will the devil reproach, and laugh at men? That they
should be so stupid, as for a rattle, to forego a Crown. Like those Indians,
who for pictures and glasse-beads will part with their gold. O! how should we
hate sin which will take away our Crown from us.

3. Branch. See here the misery of a wicked man, 3. Branch.
though he may be, Coronis aureis donatus, and flourish in his bravery while he
lives, yet when he dies he shall not have a Crown of Righteousness, but
Chains of Darkness. Jude, ver. 6.
Death carries him prisoner to hell, it leads him away to be Crucified. The
Egyptians as Plutarch reports at their feasts, brought in a Death'shead with
this Motto; Hoci ^tuens epulare. Plut.
Look upon this, and proceed in your banquet. The sinner who sports himself
with sin, and Crowns himself with Rose-buds, in the midst of all his mirth
and music; here is a Death's head for him to look on. The day of Death to him
will not be a day of Inauguration, but a day of Execution. How can the wicked
rejoice? Theophylact used to say, his estate is miserable that goes laughing to
hell. We may say of this laughter, it is mad, Eccles. 2. 2. Suppose ye saw a
man set in a rotten chair, under him a fire burning, over his head a Sword
hanging by a twine thread, and before him a table spread with variety of
delicacies, sure he would have but little stomach to eat, sitting in that
danger: So it is with a sinner, his Soul sits in his body as in a chair,
diseases like worms breed there, under him hell fire is burning, over his head
not a Crown, but a sword of Justice hangs, when death breaks this chair of the
body, he falls into the fire, and this fire is unquenchable. Luke 3. 17.
Multitude of tears cannot extinguish it, length of time cannot annihilate it.
Nor let the sinner expect any Charon to ferry him over that stygian-lake, (as
some have vainly fancied) Godw. antiq.
God has the Keys of hell, Rev. 1. 18. and besides thedamned are bound hand
and foot. Matt. 22. 13. So that there can be no coming out. O that this might
scare and affrightmen from their evil courses! The wicked when they are dying
must say to their Souls, as the Emperor Adrian; Animula, vagula, blandula, quo
vadis?
O my poor wandering Soul, whither art thou going? What will become of thee?
There remains nothing for sinners, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation. Heb. 10. 27. God will not say to them, Come
hither and be Crowned, but go ye cursed. Mat. 25. 41.


4. Branch. It shows us, as in a Scripture-Glasse, the happiness and nobility
of a righteous person. 4. Branch.
In his life he wears Stolam justitiae, a robe of righteousness. And after
death he wears Coronam justitiae, A Crown of Righteousness. I say 1. In his
life time he wears a Robe of Righteousness, Isa. 61 10. this is the
righteousness of Christ, in which he is looked upon and reputed as righteous
as Christ himself. 2 Cor. 5. 21. We are made the righteousness of God in him.
It Is not said, we are made the righteousness of Angels, but of God. 2. After
death he wears a Crown of righteousness. This Crown does incircle all
blessedness within it; Profectum ulterius don requi^i^, qui ad superna
pervenerit. Lactantius lib. 3. divin. instit.
The Saints are not perfectly happy till death, then comes the Crown. Here we
are but aeternitatis candidati, candidates and expectants of heaven. This is
but seed-time, we sow the seed of prayer, and water it with our tears, the
golden harvest is yet to reap. The Crown is laid up. When Craesus asked Solon
whohe thought happy? He told him one Tellus, a man that was dead. Ante obitum
nemo supremaque sancra felix Solon.
So a Christian is not perfectly happy till death; then the Crown shall be put
on. The Thracians in their funerals used music; and Theocritus observes, that
the Heathens had their (...), or funeral banquet, because of that felicity
which they supposed the parties deceased to participate of: when the mantle of
a Believers flesh drops off, then shall his soul ascend in a triumphant
chariot, and the garland of glory shall be set upon his head.

Use 2. Trial. Examine your selves whether you are Use 2. Trial. Quest. Answ.
the heirs of this Crown. Quest. But how may that be known? Answ. By this one
note; If you set the Crown on Christ's head while you live, he will set the
Crown on your head when you die. Have you wisdom to manage businesses of
concernment, strength to do duties, resist temptations, bear burdens? you will
not assume, or arrogate any thing to your selves, but let Christ wear the
Crown: Celarinus in quantum gloria sublimis, in tantum verecundia humilis,
Cypr. 1 Cor. 5. 10.
Thus Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more then they all, and yet not I.
This is the Inscription on Christ's vesture, and on his thigh, King of Kings,
Rev. 19. 16. Then we do what in us lies to make him King, when we set the Crown
of all upon his head. King Canutus (as Historians relate) took the Crown off
his own head and set it upon a Crucifix; so a good Christian takes the Crown of
honor and applause from his own head, and sets it upon the head of Christ:
This is hard for flesh and blood to stoop to; a proud heart will not easily
part with the Crown; he will commend Christ, and bid others bow the knee: only
in the throne he would be greater. Genesis 41. 40, 43.
But be assured there is no way for us to reign with Christ, but to let Christ
reign here.

Use 3. Exhortation; and it exhorts us to four things: Use 3. Ezhort. 1. Branch.
1. If there be a Crown laid up, it calls for our love to God. Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, 1 John 3. 1.
to give us a Crown. This is the highest enobling of a creature. If there be
love in a Crumb, what is there in a Crown? If there be love in
Pardoning-mercie, what is there in Crowning-mercie? (...).
It is a favor that we poor vermiculi, worms and no men, should be suffered
to live; but that Worms should be made Kings; Animam meam odio haberem si alibi
quam in Christo invenirem, Aug.
that Christ should be arreigned and we adorned; that the Curse should be laid
on his head, and the Crown set on ours, Behold what manner of love is this! It
is beyond all Hyperbole. And should not this make our hearts reverberate, and
echo back love. Rev. 1. 6. Gal. 3. 13.
Oh Christians! light your love at this fire; as burning glasses when the Sun
has shined on them they burn: God having so shined upon us in love, let our
hearts burn; and our love to God must be divinely qualified.

1. It must be a Genuine love; we must not love 1 Amor Genuinus.
him propter aliud, for something else, as a man loves a potion for health
sake; but as a man loves sweet Wine, for it self. We must love God for those
intrinsic excellencies in him, Jesus propter Jesum. Aug.
which are so alluring and amiable.

2. It must be a Voluntary love, Deuteronomy. 23. 23.
else it is not love 2. Amor elicitus.
but coaction: It must come freely, as water out of a Spring. It must be a
free will offering, not like the paying of a Tax.

3. It must be an Exuberant love; it must not be 3. Amor exuberans. Modo sine
modo. Bern.
stinted, not a few drops, but a stream; it must like Nilus, over flow the
banks.

4. It must be a Transcendent love; it must be of no 4. Amor praesignis.
ordinary extraction, but a choice, entire, superlative love; we must not only
give God the milk of our Love, but the cream; not only the truth of it, but
the spirits and quintessence. I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, and
the juice of my Pomgranates, Cant. 8. 2. If the Spouse has a cup which is more
juicie and spiced, Christ shall drink of that.

5. It must be a most Intense ardent love: The Sun 5. Amorintensivus. (...).
Greg. Nyss. Romans 12. 11.
shines as much as it can; such must our love to God be, ad ultimum virium, it
must boil over, but never give over. What unparalled love has God shown us.
Oh Christian! answer love with love. In love we may, as Bernard says,
reciprocate with God. In amore cum Deo reciprocare licitum est. Ber.
If God be angry, we must not be angry again, but if God love us, we must love
him again. O love God the Father, who has made this Crown for us; love God the
Son, who has bought this Crown for us; love God the Holy Ghost, who has made
us fit to wear this Crown.

2 Branch, Exhort. Let us pant, and breath after this 2. Branch.
happy condition. (...). Chrysostom. hom 6. ad These.
Does not the heir desire to be Crowned? Here we have a weight offin. Heb. 12.
1.
In heaven a weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4. 17.
How should our souls be big with desire to be gone hence, what is the world we
so dote on? It Is but a spacious prison, and should not we be willing to go out
of prison to be Crowned. The bird desires to go out of the cage, though it be
made of Gold. The Academicks compare the Soul of man to a foul, mounting with
her wings aloft: Pi^callom. lib. 10. Eth.
Every Saint is a true bird of Paradise, he is ever flying up toward heaven in
ardent and zealous affections, he longs to be out of this earthen cage of the
body, when with the Phaenix he shall receive his golden Coronet on his head,
and shine in glory as the Angels of God. Tully observes that Scipio when his
father had told him of Tully in somn. Scip.
ithat glory the soul should be invested with in a state of mmortality, Why
then says Scipio do I tarry thus long upon the earth? why do I not hasten to
dye? Methinks when we hear of this Crown of righteousness, which will so
infinitely enrich, and adorn the Soul, (...).
it should make us weary of this world, and long for the time of our solemn
inauguration. How did Paul desire to be dissolved. Mors non est iuteritus, sed
in^roitus.
Would not a man be willing to hoise up Seals and cross the waters, though
troublesome if he were-sure to be Crowned as soon as he came at shore. Why are
our Souls so earthly? (...). Chry. ad Hebr.
We love to be grazing in the worlds full pastures, and are afraid to dye.
Most men look so ghastly at the thoughts of death, as if they were rather going
to the Cross, then the Crown. O long for death! The Apostle calls death a
putting off our earthly Clothes, 2 Cor. 5. 4. This is all death does to us, if
we are in Christ, it puts off our Egredere anima* gredere; quid times?
clothes, and puts on a Crown. This should make us say as Hilarion, Go out my
Soul, go out, why tremblest thou? thou art going to receive a Crown. A believer
at death will be the happiest looser, and the happiest gainer. He will loose
his sins, he will gain Glory. The day of death is the Saints Coronation day.

3. Branch. Learn so to deport and demean your 3 Branch.
selves, that this Crown of Righteousness may be set upon your heads, when you
dye. Qu. How is that? Answ. Do three things.

1. If you would wear the Crown of Righteousness, 1.
find in your hearts the work of Righteousness, Isa. 32. 17. That is, the work
of Grace wrought in you; and this Work must be evidenced by a mighty change;
which is sometimes called an ingrafting, sometimes a Transforming. Grace makes a
Metamorphise; (...). Romans 12. 2.
it produces in the Soul a configuration, and likeness to Christ; first there
must be a Consecrating work, before a Crowning work. We read in Scripture in
the solemn inauguration of their Kings, first they anointed them, and then
they Crowned them. Z^dock the Priest took an horn of oil out of the
Tabernacle, and anointed solomon; * Unctio invisibilis gratia. Aug. tom. 9.
col. 6. o.
and after that he was Crowned: So there must be the unction of the Spirit
(...) Mac. ho^. 15 1 Kings 1. 39.
, 1 John 2. 20.
first God powrs on us the anointing oil of grace, and after the horn of oil,
then coms the Crown.

2. If you would wear the Crown of Righteousness, 2.
then walk in the way of Righteousness Prove. 12. 28. This is called in
Scripture, a walking (...) after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1. As the people of Israel
walked after the Pillar offire; and the wisemen walked after the Star; Mat. 2.
9.
which way the Star went, they went. And sometimes it is called a walking by
rule, Gal. 6. 16. Those that expect a Golden Crown, must walk by a Golden rule.
Be sure you walk with David's Candle and Lanthorn in your hand, Psalm. 119. 105.
He that walks in the dark, may soon be out of the way. Walk (...), Soberly, in
acts of temperance; (...), Righteously, in acts of Justice; (...), Godly, in
acts of Piety. Titus 3. 12.
Walk as Christ did upon earth; His life was (as one says) purer then the
Sunbeams. Chrysostom.
Copy out his life in yours; Be assured you shall never partake of the
privilege of Christ's death, unless you imitate the pattern of Christ's
life. Would you wear the Crown of Righteousness; walk in the way of
Righteousness; but alas this is a very untroden way. 1. Some know the way of
Righteousness, but do not walk in it; like the Graecians, of whom Plutarch
speaks, they knew what was honest, but did it not. 2. Others Commend the way of
Righteousness, but do not walk in it; like those that taste and commend the
wine but do not buy. 3. Others walk Antipodes, in stead of walking in the way,
they are good only at Crossing the way, they oppose the way of Righteousness,
such are persecutors. 2 Timothy 3. 8. 1 These. 2. 15.
4. Others walk a few steps in the way and then Go back again; Quid prodest
currere, and ante cursus metam deficere? Bern. Nonne Rhetor circa finem
orationis satagit clarior apparere, ut cum applausibus discedat? nonne
Gubernator si pelagum totum pertranseat, circa portum autem consringat ratem,
omnem perdit operam oleumque; sic iis convenit qui exordiis finem non
imposuerunt.
These are apostates. 2 Timothy 4. 10. As if there were any going to heaven
backward. 5. Others walk Half in the way, and half out; these are loose
professors, who though in some dogmaticals they dissent not from us, yet under a
notion of christian liberty, they do walk carelessly, and presumtuously, crying
up justification, that they may weaken the power of sanctification: They can
take that liberty, which others tremble to think off; Surely were there no
other Bible to read in, but the lives of some professors, we should read but
little Scripture there. 6. Others walk soberly a while in the way, but on a
sudden drinking in the poison of error, Nonnulli dum veritatis discipuli esse
nolunt humilime magistri erroris fiunt. Greg. lib. moral.
begin to be intoxicated with novel and dangerous opinions, who as the Apostle
says, Are turned aside after Satan. 1 Timothy 5. 15. Ignatius calls error the
invention of the Devil. (...). Ignatius Epist 2. ad Trallianos.
Basil calls it a Spiritual drunkenness; and when the head is giddy the feet
must needs reel. Loos principles, breed loos practices. 7. Others in stead of
walking in the way, do Traduce and slander the way of Righteousness. The way of
truth shall be evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 2. or as it is in the Greek, (...), it
shall be blasphemed. The men of the world give out, that the way of
Righteousness is a solitary way, and makes them melancholy that walk in it,
and that they must expect to loose their joy by the way; These forget that
golden saying of Austin, when a man is converted, and turned to God, his joy is
not taken away, but changed, Homine ad Deum converso, mutatur gaudium non
tollitur, Aug.
it is more sublime, and pure; And does not Solomon's Oracle tells us, that All
the ways of God are pleasantness.

Prove. 3. 17.
Take the most ruggid part of the way of religion, and it is pleasant walking;
Holy weeping seems at first very uncouth and disconsolate, but how often, while
the Saints weep for sin, does the Lord make them weep for joy. Psalm. 126. 6.
The water of repentance like rose water, while it drops from the still of the
eye, sends forth a sweet smell, which refreshes the Soul with inward
consolation. O what green branches! what full clusters of Grapes, hang all
along as we are walking in the way of Righteousness: How then dare men
calumniate?

8. Others Creep in the way, they do not walk; they go on but very slow, like
the motion of the eighth sphere. Those who look on can hardly tell whether they
make any progresseor no. They are dull in their heavenly motion, and had need
often pray with David for Gods free Spirit. Psalm. 51. 22.


9. Others walk quite besides the way. Those are profane persons, who dedicate
their lives to Bacchus, Qui vi^ilius peccant, Senec.
who border every step they take upon the Devils confines. They are like Asa,
diseased in their feet; 1 King. 16. 23
they walk as the Apostle says, (...) disorderly 1 These. 3. 11.
like soldiers that march out of rank and file. Jesus Christ does not only
send forth blood out of his sides to redeem us, but also water to cleanse us. 1
John 5. 6. They that have have not the power of the one to sanctify, may
question the benefit of the other to save. O! all you that would wear the Crown
of Righteousness, walk in the way of Righteousness; labor to keep up the
credit of religion in the world; walk (...), exactly, walk so that if we could
suppose the Bible to be lost, it might be found again in your lives. 2. If you
would wear the Crown of 3.
Righteousness, put 2. Tim. 4. 7.
on the Armor of Righteousness. 2 Cor. 6. 7. The meaning is if will you have
this Crown, you must fight for it. I have (says Paul) fought the good fight
Cer^ent singuli ut accipiant coronas vel de opere candidas, vel de passione
purpureas. Cyprian Epist. 9.
; a metaphor, as Chrysostom. and Ambrose observe, taken from wrestlers, who when
they had gotten the victory were Crowned. It Is Corona triumphalis, therefore
the Saints in glory are set forth with Palms in their hands Rev 7. 9. Corona
non promittitur nisi certantibus. Aug. 3. Tom.
in token of Victory. Christians must strive as in the Olympic combats; they
must not only be Ornati but Armati. Not only adorned with the jewel of
knowledge, but Armed with the breast plate of faith. 1 These. 5. 8.
Satan is a Lion in the way, there must be a pitched battle. This Crown is
worth contending for; A Christian shines most in his spiritual armor. This is
his sacred gallantry when he is like those soldiers Curtius speaks of Non auro
neque splendida vesle, sed ferro ^^^e^ere fulgentes. Quint, Curtius.
, who did not look gay in gold and glittering apparel, but shined in their
martial habit. The Crown in set upon the head of the conqueror; those
delicatuli, those dainty silken Christians that live at ease, Quid dicam de lis
Christianis, quibus cura est ut vestes been oleant, quibus ut crines calamistro
rotentur, quibus ut digiti annulis radient, and si via humidior siat, vix in
eam pedes comprimant. Hieron ad Eustoch.
and will not make the least sally out against the enemy, they shall have no
Crown, but be discarded for Cowards. Lycurgus would have no man's name written
upon his Sepulcher, but his that died manfully in war; God will write no man's
name in the book of life, but his that dies fighting. (...). Ignatius Epist. 8.
ad Polycarp.
When the Saints after all their Spiritual battles shall come to heaven
Conquerors, then (as it was said of Caesar,) shall their ensigns of honor be
hung up, Tribuuntur beatis Coronae aurcae, Rev. 4. 4. in signum tum potestatis
regiae, tum victoriae. Gerard. loc. Theo^. tom. 8.
then shall the Crown of Righteousness be set upon their head.

4. Branch, let this put spurs to our sluggish hearts, and make us act with
all our might for God. What wrestling? What sweating? 4. Branch.
How should we (...) provoke our selves to holiness? How should we spend, and
be spent for Christ, how should we strive to bring in some Crown-revenews to
our Lord and Master, when we consider, how infinitely it shall be rewarded.
While we are laying out for God, he is laying up for us, henceforth there is a
Crown laid up. How should this Crown add wings to prayer, and oil to the
flame of our zeal? O Christian let thy head study for Christ, let thy tongue
plead for him, let thy hands work for him! What honor and dignity has been
done to Mordecai says King Ahasuerus, Esther. 6. 3. enquire what has been
done for God. Me thinks we should sometimes go aside into our closets and weep,
to consider how little work we have done for God. Beloved, what a vaste
disproportion is there, between our work and our reward; * Quantum discrimen
inter sudorem and Coronam?
our sweat and our Crown. And it is but a while, a very little while before the
Crown shall be put on. The time is short, says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 7. 29.
(...).
We are ready to strike sail, we are almost at shore, and then we shall be
Crowned. O! improve the present season for the glory of God; The Crown is hard
by, you sail apace, work apace; and that I may put spirits into Christians,
and quicken their obedience, consider this, the more work you do for God, the
bigger Crown you shall wear. There are degrees of glory, Dispar est gloria
singulorum, attamen communis laetitia omnium. Aug. Med.
he that with his pound gained five, was made ruler over five Cities; Luke 19.
17.
but he that with his pound gained ten, was made ruler over ten Cities. Sicut
va^ie Deus saa dona sanctis in hoc mundo distribuens, cos inequaliter irradiat,
ita in caelis patet non sore aequalem gloriae modum. Calvin. lib. 3. Inst.
As one Star differs from another in glory, so one Crown differs from another
in glory. If there are degrees of torments in hell, thenby the same reason
there are degrees of glory in heaven. That there are degrees of torments is
evident, Luke 20. ult. Who for pretense make long prayers, the same shall
receive (...) greater damnation. They that do wrap sin in Religions mantle,
that entitle God to their wicked nesse, shall have an hotter place in hell;
even so there are gradations in happiness. Aretius, Anselm, Pet. Lom. Bernard.
How then should we abound in work, seeing we shall exceed in reward? * 1 Cor.
15.


Use. Here is a Gospel-hony comb, dropping comfort Use ult. Consolation.
into the hearts of the godly. How may this alleviate all the afflictions of
this life, and make these waters of Marah sweet and pleasant to drink of, There
is a Crown laid up. A Christian in this life has something to grieve him, and
yet something to comfort him. (...). Menand.
A true Saint is haeres Crucis, an heir of the Cross; if he wears any robes,
they are bloody; if any Crown, it is of Thorns: (...). Greg. Nazian.
but here is that may sweeten his sufferings, here is Wine mingled with his
myrrh, he * Nunc pluit and daro, nunc Jupiter aethere sulget.
shall be crowned in Paradise; This my brethren may change our mourning into
melody, our tears into triumph; though we bearth Cross, we shall wear the
Crown. (...). Chiys. hom. 27. ad Hebr.
and these sufferings cannot continue long, if our life be short, our
sufferings cannot be long: O how may this sweeten all the bitter cups we drink
of! Cleopatra put a jewel in her cup which contained the price of a Kingdom:
when we are drinking in our Wormwood cup, let this jewel be put into our cup to
make it drink more pleasantly, There Is a reward of glory. Though Death be in
the Cup, here is Sugar lies at the bottom, Henceforth there is a Crown of
Rightcousness laid up. So much for the Text, now to the occasion.

Sorry I am to be an Actor in this mournful Scene; It The Occasion.
might better have become some other, (grief often causing brokennesse of
expression) but I forbear to Apologize. We are here met to solemnize the
Funerals of THOMAS HODGES Esquire, who I believe was not more generally known
then loved. I shall not be Cicero pro Archia Poet.
such a (...) as Homer of Achilles: what I shall speak of him now interred,
shall be only some of my own observations. I hate to give flattering titles
Job. 32. 22.
; only seeing it is the last office of love I can do, suffer me to strew a few
flowers upon his Hearse: The Jews did (...), Embalme the bodies of their Dead,
and why may not Names be Embalmed.

1. He was not only a frequenter, but a very reverent hearer of the Word; and
to my best observation did seem to receive the truth not only in the light of
it, but in the love of it.

2. He was a great zealot, and opposite against error. He liked not to hear
Heterodox Preachers, as knowing that smooth tongues could easily put off bad
wares, he was a friend to Truth.

3. He was a great honourer and encourager of the lawfully Ordained Ministers;
I seldom heard him speak of such as were conscientious without some testimony of
respect; This I observed of him, he ever prized those Ministers most (not who
did smooth their tongues Jer. 23. 31. (...) qui lemsicant pagnin.
or did use to gingle out their words in the Pulpit, whose preaching was rather
musical, then medicinal, but) who did speak most to the conscience; Verba non
tam inflant is quam infla^ma^tis. 'Twas Bonaventures Encomium,
It was a good sign of a spiritual appetite, that he liked rather the
savouriness of the meat, then the garnishing of the dish.

4. He was vir sine fuco; a most true hearted man to his friend. He was no
(...) he knew not that art (which some have) at the same time to flatter, and
hate. The Romans painted friendship with her hand upon her heart; Fagius Com.
in Alpotheg.
An Hieroglyphical Emblem of a faithful friend, who fetches all words from
the bottom of his heart. This our friend deceased would speak plainly what was
in his mind. Not like those who have the honey of fair words in their mouth,
and the sting of malice in their heart.

5. He was one that did not sinfully comply with the humors of men. There are
too many who Froteus like, can change into any shape; who can sail with any
wind, especially if it blows preferment; this I may say of him, though death
did break him, the times could never bend him. He did often in my hearing b'ess
God for that liberal allowance, which providence had carved out to him, Fuit
annona sua contentus.
nor did he desire to increase his estate by increasing his guilt.

6. He was very Charitable to the poor; The age we live in, though it has the
Lamp of Profession, yet little of the Oil of Charity; It Is the sin of many rich
men though they have a flourishing estate, yet they have a withered hand, Luke
6. 6.
and cannot stretch it out to good uses. It was a serious and weighty speech of
Chrisostom. Feed (says he) the hungry with your Charity while you live, that
you feed not the fire of hell when you dye. (...). Chrysostom. in Phil. Sermon. 1.
There was a Temple erected at Athens, which they called the Temple of mercy;
it was dedicated to Charitable uses; And there could not be a greater reproach
laid upon any man, then to upbraid him with this, that he had not been in the
Temple of mercy. This may be the reproach of many rich men in this City, that
though they sometimes visit Gods Temple, in the frequenting public Ordinances,
yet they are seldom or never seen in the Temple of mercy. They can drink in a
full cup themselves, but will not let one drop fall beside to refresh the
bowels of the poor; Their arguments conclude still in Celarent. As for this
our friend deceased I must herein be his (...), and let it be his garland now
he is gone. He had not only an Estate, but an heart; though I often went to
him for works of Charity, he used not to make any excuse (which is only an
handsome denial) but his fingers dropped with the myrrh of liberality, which
is a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God; Ephesians. 5. 2.
He had indeed a free and noble spirit; he sailed equal between two rocks; he
avoided vain profusness, he hated a sordid penuriousness. When I came to him on
his deathbed, he told me that sin was the burden of his life, and that he cast
himself only upon the merits of Christ, but says he, How hard do I find it to
believe; which words were dropped out with many tears. It Is better to Complain
then presume. I might expatiate but I shall here contract my sails. These
things were commendable in him, ^utu^ae solicitatis praesagia. Bern.
and imitable by us. Here was good fruit which did adorn the Tree. It will be
our wisdom to Copy out what we see good in others, and to walk so unblameably
in holiness, that while we live we may have good hope through grace of a part
and interest in Christ; and when we dye, may receive that Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give at that day to all
them who love his appearing.

FINIS.
In marg. page 12. for (...) read (...).


