THE Voice of Conscience, TO All well meaning CITIZENS:
IF you desire to see a longer and more bloody War, and London (as the chief
seat thereof) weltring in its own blood, your Wives, Children, and Families,
starved and pined to death, through poverty, famine, and want of Trade, if you
would overthrow Parliaments for ever, and subject both them and all the people,
to the will of the King and his Courtiers.

If you desire to s^e Forreiners invade you on all hands, and many Armies at
once quartered throughout the Land, pulling hard for a new Conquest of this
miserably divided Nation, and if you desire to see your Wives and Daughters
ravished before your faces, and your Childrens brains dash^ against the stones
by lustful and blood-thirsty Cavaliers.

Follow then the steps and advice of your wealthy, headstrong Aldermen and
Common-Councelmen, in their hasty pu^suance of a personal Treaty with the
King: or (which will come to one) in ^^^^ving him out of the Armies power, for
if you do, flatter not your selves, but be assured, as certain ^s God is in
Heaven, you will see those miseries come to pass, and that swiftly too, you
will be (...) in an instant, without hope of remedy.

But if you abhor and would prevent these mischiefs, then avoid and detest
their engagement, from it is from a Serpent, it being a viper bred in your own
bowels, to destroy you; and if you have unadvisedly subscribed it, repent
speedily and recall your hands.

They most gr^tly delude you, and abuse the Parliament, in pretending they are
able, nay willing to prevent or suppress Tumults, trust them once and they will
never need to desire more, they will soon make it past a Treaty, and when you
lie at their mercy, complaining of the breach of their engagement, they will
deride and spurn you, and you shall not dare to open your mouths against them,
but if ye do, it shall be your death, night nor day you shall not with safety
go out of doors, but st^bbings and pistollings will be common at noone day.

O^ therefore, all ye that honor God, see this exceeding danger, before it be
too late, have patience, wait upon God in his way, run not to Egypt for help,
lean not on so broken a Reed, consider how this City has been threatened, and
by whom, how often plots have been covered under Treaties, destroy not all your
mercies through impatience: forsake not a just God (who hitherto has preserved
you) for any unjust man, that has long sought by all means to destroy and
enslave you: Leap not out of the pan into the fire.

Wait but a little while, and ye will see both City and Nation floorish;
distrust not, he that believes makes not haste, fear not, and ye will soon
see the salvation, that God is preparing for you by just means: This way which
now ye are put upon, being the most dangerous that can be, and such as cannot
be blessed; And had you^ Aldermen and Common councelmen any thing of God in
them, they would rather seek satisfaction for all the innocent blood that has
been spilt, then for a personal Treaty; which in stead of ending your troubles
(as they would make you believe) will be but the beginning of new sorrows. Which
(indeed) is just with God, for as he justly punishes sin without respect of
persons, so he requires that all whom he has authorized with power, should
impartially do the like; for of all the sins and abominations of the Land,
murder and innocent blood (chiefly of so many Thousands and ten Thousands) is
one of the most crying sins and great abominations, and until that be done
away by just satisfaction according to the Laws both of God and man, there is
no appearance of any wel-grounded Peace (whereof the Scots and their
confederates so much boast) but rather of utter ruin to all the three Nations.

For as the lives and estates of Saul and Ahab were taken, the one for sparing
Agag King of Ameleck* and the other Benhadad King of Syria, so it is as likely
and possible, as it is just and equitable, that God will in the first place so
deal with those who have justly accused the grand enemy of our peace, if they
instead of prosecution, make an unjust agreement, contrary to the revealed will
of God.

1 Samuel 15. 8. etc. 1 King 20. 42. Isai. 14. 18. 19. 20.
