Sr. HENRY VANE HIS SPEECH In the House of Commons, at a Committee for the Bill
against Episcopall-Government, Mr. HIDE sitting in the CHAIR. June 11. 1641.

LONDON. Printed for Francis Constable, 1641.

Sr. HENRY VANE HIS SPEECH, At a Committee for the Bill against Episcopal
Government, June 11. 1641.
Master Hide,
THe debate we are now upon is, whether the Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, Chancellors, etc. should be taken away out of the Church and Kingdom
of England: for the right stating whereof, we must remember the vote which past
yesterday, not only by this Committee, but the House, which was to this effect:
That this Government has bin found by long experience, to be a great
impediment to the perfect reformation and gowth of Religion, and very
prejudicial to the civil State.

So that then the Question will lie thus before us, Whether a Government, which
long experience has set so ill a Character upon, i^ing danger, not only to our
Religion, but the civil State, should be any longer continued amongst us, or
be utterly abolished? For my own part, I am of the opinion of those, who
conceive that the strength of reason already set down, in the Preamble to this
Bill, by yesterdayes vote, is a necessary decision of this Question: For one of
the maine ends for which Church Government is set up, is to advance and further
the perfect reformation and growth of Religion; which we have already voted,
this Government does contradict; so that it is destructive to the very end for
which it should be, and is most necessary and desirable; in which respect
certainly we have cause enough to lay it aside, not only as useless, in that
it attaines not its end, but as dangerous, in that it destroy^^ and con^dicts
it.

In the second place, we have voted it prejudicial to the civil State, as
having so powerful and ill an influence upon our Laws, the Prerogative of the
King, and liberties of the Subject, that it is like a spreading leprosy, which
leaves nothing untainted, and uninfected which it comes near.

May we not therefore well s^y of this Government, no our Savior in the fifth
of Matthew speaks of salt (give me leave upon this occasion to make use of
Scripture, as well as others have done in this debate) where it is said that
salt is good; but if the salt has lost its savor, wherewith will you season
it? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under
foot of men: so Church Government, in the general, is good, and that which is
necessary, and which we all desire; but when any particular form of it has
once lost its savor, by being destructive to its own ends, for which it is
set up, (as by our vote already passed we say this has) then surely, Sir, we
have no more to do but to cast it out, and endeavor, the best we can, to
provide ourselves a better.

But to this it has been said that the Government now in question, may be for
amended and reformed, that it needs not be pulled quite down or abolished:
because it is conceived, it has no original sin, or evil in it: or if it
have, it is said, regeneration will take that way.

Unto which I answer, I do consent that we should do with this Government, as
we are done by in regeneration, in which all old things are to pass away, and
all things are to become new, and this we must do, if we desire a perfect
reformation, and growth of our Religion, or good to our civil state. For the
whole Fabric of this building is so rotten and corrupt, from the very
foundation of it to the top, that if we pull it not down now, it will fall
about the ears of all those that endeavor it, within a very few years.

The universal rottenness, or corruption of this government, will most
evidently appear by a disquisition into these ensuing particulars.

First, Let us consider in what soil this root grows: Is it not in the Popes
Paradise? do not one and the same principles and grounds maintain the
Papacy, or universal Bishop, as do our Diocesan or Metropolitan Bishops? All
those authorities which have been brought us out of the Fathers and antiquity,
will they not as well, if not better, support the Popedom as the order of our
Bishops? So likewise all these arguments for its agreeableness to Monarchy,
and cure of Schism, do they not much more strongly hold for the
acknowledgement of the Pope, then for our Bishops? and yet have Monarchies
been ever a whit the more absolute for the Popes universal Monarchy? or their
Kingdoms less subject to schisms and seditions? whatsoever other kingdoms
have been, I am sure our Histories can tell us, this Kingdom has not: and
therefore we have cast him off long since, as he is foreign, though we have
not been without one in our own bowels. For the difference between a
Metropolitan, or Diocesan, or universal Bishop, is not of kinds, but of
degrees: and a Metropolitan or Diocesan Bishop is as ill able to perform the
duty of a Pastor to his Diocese or Province, as the Universal Bishop is able
to do it to the whole world: For the one cannot do but by Deputies, and no
more can the other; and therefore since we all confess the grounds upon which
the Papacy stands are rotten, how can we deny but these that maintain our
Bishops are so too, since they are one and the same?

In the second place, let us consider by what hand this root of Episcopacy was
planted, and how it came into the Church.

It is no difficult matter to find this out; for is not the very spirit of
this order, a spirit of pride, exalting it self in the Temple of God, over all
that is called God? First, exalting it self above its fellow Presbiters, under
the form of a Bishop; then over its fellow Bishops, under the title of
Archbishops, and so still mounting over those of its own profession, till it
come to be Pope, and then it sticks not to tread upon the necks of Princes,
Kings, and Emperors, and trample them under its feet. Also thus you may trace
it from it first rise, and discern by what spirit this order came into the
Church, and by what door; even by the back-doore of pride and ambition, not by
Christ Jesus. It is not a plant which Gods right hand has planted, but is full
of rottenness and corruption; that mystery of iniquity, which has wrought
thus long, and so fit to be plucked up, and removed out of the way.

Thirdly, Let us consider the very nature and quality of this tree, or root in
its self, whether it be good or corrupt in its own nature; we all know where
it is said, A good tree cannot bring forth corrupt fruit, nor a corrupt tree
good fruit: Do men gather grapes of thorns, or sigs of thistles? By its fruit
therefore we shall be sure to know it; and according as the fruits of the
Government have been amongst us, either in Church, of Commonwealth, so let it
stand, or fall with us.

In the Church.
AS it self came in by the back door into the Church, and was brought in by
the spirit of Antichrist, so it self has been the back-doore and inlet of
all superstition and corruption into the worship and doctrine of this Church,
and the means of hastening us back again to Rome. For proof of this, I
appeal to all our knowledges in late years past, the memory whereof is so
fresh, I need enter into no particulars.

A second fruit of this Government in the Church, has been the displacing of
the most godly and Conscientious Ministers; the vexing, punishing, and
banishing out of the Kingdom, the most religious of all sorts and conditions,
that would not comply with their superstitious inventions and ceremonies; in
one word, the turning the edge and power of their Government, against the very
life and power of Godliness; and the favor and protection of it unto all
profane, scandalous, and superstitious persons tha^ would uphold their party.
Thousands of examples might be given of this, if it were not most notorious.

A third fruit has been Scisme and Fractions within our selves, and Alienation
from all the reformed Churches abroad.

And lastly, the prodigious monster of the late Canons, whereby they had
designed the whole Nation to a perpetual slavery and bondage to themselves,
and their superstitious Inventions. These are the fruits of the Government in
the Church. Now let us consider these in the Civil State: As:

1 The countenancing all illegal Projects and proceedings, by teaching in
their pulpits the lawfulness of an arbitrary Power. 2 The overthrowing all
process at Common Law, that reflected never so little upon their Courts. 3 The
kindling a war between these two Nations, and blowing up the flame, as much
as in them lay, by their Councels, Canons, and Subsidies they granted to that
end. 4 The plots, practices, and Combinations during this Parliament; in all
which they seem to have been interested more or less.
Thus have they not contented themselves with encroachments upon our spiritual
privileges, but have envied us our Civil freedom, desiring to make us grind
in their mill, as the Philistims did Sampson, and to put out both our eyes. O
let us be avenged of these Philistims for our two eyes!

If then the tree be to be known by its fruits, I hope you see by this time
plainly the nature and quality of this tree.

In the last place, give me leave for a close of all to present to your
consideration the mischeifes, which the continuance of this Government does
threaten us with, if by the wisdom of this Committee they be not prevented.

1 The danger our Religion must ever be in, so long as it is in the hands of
such Governors, as can stand firmly in nothing more than its ruin; and whose
affinity with the Popish Hierarchy makes them more confident of the Papists,
than the professors of the reformed Religion, for their safety and subsistence.

Secondly, the unhappy condition our civil State is in, whilst the Bishops
have vote in the Lords house, being there as so many obstructions, in our body
Politic, to all good and wholesome Laws tending to salvation.

Thirdly, the improbability of settling any firm or durable peace, so long as
the cause of the war yet continues, and the bellows that blow up this flame.

Lastly, and that which I will assure you goes nearest to my heart, is the
check which we seem to give to Divine Providence, if we do not at this time
pull down this Government. For has not this Parliament been called,
continued, preserved, and secured, by the immediate finger of God, as it were
for this work? had we not else been swallowed up in many inevitable dangers, by
the practices and designs of these men and their party? Has not God left them
to themselves, as well in these things, as in the evil administration of their
Government, that he might lay them open unto us, and lead us, as it were, by
the hand, from the finding them to be the causes of our evil, to discern that
their rooting up must be our only cure? Let us not then halt any longer
between two opinions, but with one heart and resolution give glory to God, in
complying with his providence, and with the good safety and peace of this
Church and State, which is by passing this Bill we are now upon.

FINIS.

