A Most Worthy Speech, ^poken by the Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of WARWICK;
In the Head of his Army, November, 22. when he took his leave of them, and
delivered them under the Command of his Excellence the Earl of ESSEX.

Wherein is contained all the duties of a Christian Soldier, both toward God
and Man, with many religious advertisements, to deter them from swearing, and
taking the Name of the Lord in vain.

Whereunto is annexed a Caveat for the Cavaliers, being a true example of Gods
Judgment against one of that Crew, which rooke a pride in blaspheming against
God, and cursing the Roundheads.

London, Printed by T. Fawcet. Novem. 29. 1642.

A Caveat for the Cavaliers, or the Earl of Warwicks Caution to his ARMY
Being the truth of a Speech spoken by the said Earl, on the two and twentiteh
day of November, when he delivered them under the Command of the Earl of ESSEX.
NOble Countrymen,
you that are to fight in this just cause, to preserve your Kings Rights, the
Privilege of Parliament, and the whole Kingdoms safety, I have taken some
pains to write this my desire for you to follow, and then you must needs be
fortunate and happy, forbear this vain use of swearing, and blaspheming
against his Name, whose power is above man's power, set your minds on it and it
will come alone, for use bereedeth facillitie, facillitie engendereth
familiarity, familiarity makes readiness, readiness frames perfectness,
perfectness breeds custom, custom forces continuance, continuance
conveieth us to sencelesnesse, sencelesnesse lulleth us a sleep in the Cradle
of security, so that we fear not, not feel not, our desperate fall in the
painful Pit of Perjury, the unhappy reward whereof is perpetual infelicity.
Let us take heed then of swearing, or of the rash naming of God, without
reverence due unto his most glorious Name

What mockery and derision is this against Christ in the Church when his name
is sounded, to bend in token of reverence, and all the week after to swear by
him, as though he were worthy of no honor at all. The very Jews used to tear
their garments, when they supposed they heard any blasphemy; The Turks so
esteemed of their Mahomet, that they never vainly swear by his name, neither
do they admit unto Office of Government any Swearer, of what birth soever he
be, or though he be for any other quality never so notable. Among the Heathen
people (a shame to Christians) one Regulus a worthy Roman, being taken prisoner
by the Carthagenians, when they of Carthage desired rather to have their own
prisoners from the Romans they sent this Regulus to Rome without any gage or
pledge, save his faith only, when he was at Rome, he persuaded his Countrymen
that his message was not profitable for his Country, and for his oath sake,
uncompelled, he returned as a prisoner to Carthage alone without guard, where
after the most cruellest manner, that mischief of the most bloody minds could
invent, after such a sort that I never read the like.

They put him to death most terribly in this manner, they compassed him round
about with plankes which wear driven round with pricks, of Jron, the points
whereof were made exceeding sharp, so that he could not bow himself any way
without grievous wounds, whereof his flesh ranckling the longer he lived; the
more grivous would be his pain, waking or sleeping his feet must bear the
burden of his whole body, he might truly say I live, and so full well I dye,
so the Saguntinians, rather then they would break there faith, made unto the
Romans they endured willingly, all the punishments, that hunger, sword, and
fire could do unto them.

Livius remembers two Roman soldiers taken prisoners, dismissed by Hanyball
upon there oaths, to return again to his camp, the first subtily he left
his sword behind him, and when he was gone a good way from the camp he
returned again to fetch his sword, meaning by this subtle returning to save
his oath, and niver more return, but when this cause came to be disputed at
Rome, the heathen Romans sent him back again, as a perjured person, averting
that an oath ought so to be performed, as he unto whom the oath was made did
understand the promise.

The Law of the Egyptians was, that no Swearing should be used, but in lawful
cause, if any were proved perjured he lost his Head.

The Scythians had a Law likewise, that whosoever was proved perjured, he
should be thrown down the high Rock Tarperos, and therefore when they did
swear, they held a Stone in their hand, and protested, in this manner, if I
lie, or swear ought but truth, cast me violently from the Rock, as I ^ling
this Stone from me.

What a shame is this to Christians, that the heathen people that knew no God,
would not swear rashly, and if they did, what punishments they they suffered,
but we that profess Christ, swear rashly, and unreverently, and so we be
trusted when we swear, we care not after though we break our faith.

Dear Countrymen, and fellow soldiers, think but upon this, think what you
have undertook of the Cause you are to fight in, think against whom, the
bloody and inhumane Papists, they that keep your dear Anointed King from you;
those blaspheming and tiranous Cavaliers, that destroys and brings to utter
ruin every place where they come.

Therefore dear Countrymen follow not their evil Examples, to ravish Wives
and Virgins, to fire men's Barnes, and to destroy the Grain, for this they
daily do, with Oaths on Oaths that still they will go on in their most
divellish and most detestable practizes, but do you take thy counsel, and be
but ruled by me, and keep this in your thoughts we will quickly quell their
valiant voices, and fetch our King (spite of their Oaths) home to his royal
Throne.

A true Relation of the just judgment of God against a deboyst Cavalier, which
took a pride in blaspheming against God, and cursing the Roundheads.
ONe of my Lord Moons Cavaliers, this last week within six Miles of
Lanceston, having been making merry, and after dinner riding to his R^ndevouze,
he overtooke some honest Countrymen, that had been at Lanceston, at Market, who
rode together, being in number near twenty Horsemen, among whom this lusty
Cavalier upon his prancing Horse, daubed with gold Lace, with his losty Plume,
in his Montero, and riding up to them, saluted them in the manner following,
Damme-me where have all these Roundheads been to day, no Roundheads replied one
of them, but faithful Subjects to the King and Parliament.

Hang you said ^e, you have been all at an exercise, to hear a Sermon in a
Tub, a pox take you all, and swore most terribly; unto whom one of the company,
not able to abide such blaspheming abomination, in gentle words said unto him,
that he should answer for every idle word, the Cavalier in a scornful manner
rapt out another Oath, and said, take not thou care for me, but take care for
thy winding sheet, well said the other amend, for Death gives no warning, as
soon comes a Lambe-skin to the market, as an old Sheep, with that the
Cavalier rapt out oath after oath, biding him take no care for him, thus he
continued, till at length in their Journey they were to ride over a great
Bridge that went over an Arm of the Sea, upon which the gentleman swearing,
spurred his Horse, so that he leapt over the Bridge with the Cavalier on his
back, who as he was going cried aloud, Horse and man, and all to the Devil.

FINIS.

