NO NEVVS, BUT A LETTER TO EVERY BODY. PRESCRIBED, To your truly Beloved Self;
Any where: So that you be not resolved to be, who and where you should not be;
With Care and Speed, these be presented.
And Subscribed, Your daily Orator at the Throne of Grace, R. W.
Piscator, nisi eam imposuerit hamis escam, quam appetituros esse noverit
Pisciculos; fine spe praedae moratur in Scopulo. Petr: Arb.
Beloved Sir,
Without some (at least seeming) insolency; and little above the price of 2 d.
nothing, (now) will be read. But pardon his presumption in writing to all;
since he faithfully and truly does (as he is commanded) in praying for all. Let
him have leave to send to thee; who must send to GOD for thee; of what spirit
soever thou art; who neither dares nor can, exempt thee from his Prayers; who
dares not but daily make use of the most precious and Christian English
LITURGY.

So that (since Personal Treaties are so difficult) let me treat with thee,
thus as I may. The subject is of most High and General Concernment; our
National Miseries, Causes and Cures thereof. Nor can this Treaty be more
beneficial to any, then to those who (without an hardened Heart) are most
Averse from it; or engaged against it, and the Conscientious moments thereof.

First, concerning those who are (now) the first in the eye of all; the two
Houses. The two Houses, and 2. Oaths, etc.
And first, it is worthy of Consideration, whether or not, they have blasphemed
GOD and the King, by the foul sins of Perjury and Treason? As having given
unto GOD and the King, their Oaths for his Supremacy, and their Allegiance; But
have made themselves Supreme; imprisoning and denying to the King not only his
Native Rights; but also the poor comfort of Addresses (so much as by Letters)
of Wise, Children, friends or servants. Whereas neither the meanest worm, nor
odiousest Serpent in the Kingdom, by the Laws thereof, either is or ought to be
soused. And if so, who in Justice may make Addresses unto them? who may give
Credit unto them? or what Hopes can any man have from persisters in wilful
Perjury? or who may dare to be any ways Assisting, Aiding or of Council, in
most barbarous Treason? Such as should not be so much as named among Heathens.

CONCERNING PRIVILEGES OF PARLIAMENT. Privileges of Parliament.
If they be so great as is pretended; It is great pity, that some reasonable
and peaceable course is not taken for the manifestation of them, and their just
Grounds: When, whence, and How, they had their Beginnings, That men might
understand How far they are engaged to them; and how far they ought to engage
for them. If in this point matters be clear; How comes it to pass, that in all
this time care is not taken for the Answering of the FREEHOLDERS GRAND INQVEST?
which (with other Books of that Nature) tells us of Sir Edw: Coke (no friend to
the Prerogative) that in his whole Section of Parliamentary Privileges He sets
down but one (viz. Freedom from Arrests) and brings no proof for That.

If Freedom of Speech (wherein GOD forbid that Blasphemy and Treason should be
included) be one of them; Freedom of Speech.
How come so many to be ejected (daily by the prevailing Faction, as the wind
sits) out of both Houses? Or how shall their mouths be stopped, that Affirm,
That for these many years, there has been no Freedom for any thing but
Blasphemy and Treason, with their Appendants; The direct Contrarieties to all
the Ten Commandments of GOD; either in the whole or a principal part of each?
Or that the Privileges of Parliament have more need to be defended against
themselves, then against the King and the whole Kingdom besides? Or that
whereas the Army was formerly the Parliaments Army; Now the Parliament is the
Armies Parliament?

It is likewise considerable, Invasion of Privilege.
whether or no (as the Grandees have done by the rest of the Members) the
pretended Privilege of the House of Commons, has (like Pharaohs lean kine)
eaten up the Privileges of the House of Lords? If no; How comes it to pass,
that (for the satisfaction of the world, and for the clearing of the Accused)
punctual Answers are not given (or Ordered) to the forecited Books? If yea,
How shall any other man rest secure from their Invasions, who invade one
another; and rob amongst themselves; being empowred to do so by every one else?

So also; Usurpation over the Laws.
whether or no, Both Houses have invaded and trampled down the Laws of the
Land; heretofore celebrated, as the most glorious Birthright of the English
people, above all other Nations? If no; why is not satisfaction given or
endeavored to the honored writings of that Death-Defyer Justice Jenkins? who
assuredly has a very good Cause; or else is a very unadvised Man. And
certainly if his Cause proves good; He deserves to have his Statue erected in
all Places of public Judicature, and Societies of the Laws; yea his Memorial
in each Heart; and his Picture in each private House, which with the hazard of
his head, he endeavors to defend from violence. Do your Lawyers indeed know,
that he is an impregnable Defender of those Laws which they pretend to; but
fight against? If the Laws be not invaded; How comes it to pass, that it is
generally even in all men's mouths; that nothing is now so punished, as keeping
of the Laws? And that as the greatest of all guilts? But if yea; and the Laws
be indeed trampled down; who shall dare to be so undaring, as to prefer before
them (by which he glories to hold all three) either Liberty, Propriety, or
Life? Against any Opposers whatsoever; under any lawfully retriving the same?
Which Laws if they be not in force; How comes one man to exercise lawful
Authority over another? If they be; Is not the Murderer murdered, who is puc
to death, by virtue of a Commission under the present Broad Seal? And the whole
Land involved in the guilt of nocent, as well as of innocent Blood? And are not
they deepest in that gulf, who sit and judge against the Laws?

But it is far more considerable; whether or no, Vsu pation against the King.
they have invaded the Prerogative Royal. Inasmuch as the Lawmaker must needs
be of more sacred Authority, then the Law it self. In the violations of
particular Statutes, the Fruits of Justice are either spoiled or stolen; or
else a Branch is murdered: In the Body of the Laws, the Body of the Tree of
Justice is hewn down: But in the Regal Authority, the Tree is plucked up by
the Roots. Neither do the Laws of the Land acknowledge any other Root, then the
King. If it be otherwise, why then are not all our Law Books burnt? yea Mr.
Pims and St. John's Speeches? If it be so; Alas poor Rootlesse, Headless
People! Amongst whom nothing is visible, but devouring Crows, or devoured
carcasses! And doubtless, it is not more unnatural to have no Head, then it is
monstrous and dangerous to have many. By what name shall we now be called? Is
any wretched enough for us? What ever they shall Anabaptise themselves into;
they must forbear the ancient and most glorious of all their Titles: unless to
do quite contrary to both the Precepts and Example of CHRIST, must denominate
them Christians. CHRIST has laid his (now) no unjust Injunction upon us;
which he hallowed and made commendable, yea glorious unto us, as a most High
and precious Pattern (says St. Peter) for our necessary imitation; In
suffering under (without resistance of) a most unjust Tyrant. In whom their
wretched Plea against his noble Army of Martyrs of the pure Primitive Church
(blasting of their blessed Resolutions) could take no place. Certainly in him,
Non deerant vires. He had strength to resist: The Martyrs abhorred to try
whether they had or no. Thus it behoved Him to enter, and them to follow him
into glory. And other Defense then this, or Flight; Christian Religion, since
it came down from Heaven, never taught: yea never did not teach against; though
against the most barbarous (yea) of Heathen Tyrants.

If this he otherwise; Is there not so much conscionable charity left, Dr.
Hammond unanswered by Mr. Marshall.
as to Answer the Book of Doctor Hammond concerning Resistance of the lawful
Magistrate under coloun of Religion? How comes it to pass, that their Grand
Champion has now crossed his cudgels? Must the present Militia, and Council
of War, for ever want their engaged Advocate? With what contentment can his
Benefactors look upon Him? Or with what forchead can he look upon them, who for
these diverse years, has returned no Answer to that Tract (in that Book of Dr.
Hammonds) which begins thus. There is nothing more uningenuous or unjust, then
Mr. Marshals, etc. Must our undoing be the only Argument to rectify our
erroneous understandings? And must such -- men (contrary to the Doctrine and
Deaths of Christ and his Apostles) barely say us out of our Religion and
Allegiance; which, and by which we have solemnly sworn? Surely we could be
content to have kept our estates, or now voluntarily to resign, could they
bring us but one good Argument, to demonstrate a new way to Heaven. In the mean
time till this pity be afforded us, we shall be learning to forget our
inconsiderable losses; yea (and if need be, bloody crosses; while we have an
eye toward him, whom God has made so like to both the Royal David's; the
Father, who was constrained to dwell with Meshech; and the Son, who not having
of his own, an house to put his head in, was led away into the wilderness, to be
tempted out of his kingdom by the unreasonable Propositions of the Grand
Tempter. Since (for the raising of pious emulations in other Breasts; all of us
not having capability of being tempted like him alone) even visibility it self,
has already given him Livery and Seisin of the eight Blessednesses in Matt. 5.
As, for his Dominion upon Earth, GOD has united in him all the Titles of the
Britains, Saxons, Danes and Normans. And surely were the Angels of GOD to
choose us a King; fairer virtues and richer Christianity, could not present
themselves, to their choice, from out his whole Dominions, then what are
eminent in himself. Wherefore weep not for him, you Daughters of Jerusalem; but
weep for your selves and your Children: And forget not to bewail in your
prayers, those who obdurately (as yet) persist in the heating of this furnace
to the hight; which can but purify, not burn him. For our GOD is a consuming
fire.

But yet there remains a more dreadful considerable then all these; Usurpation
against God.
whether or no, (in all, or any of this) there has been any usurpation,
against or without GOD? This is most evident, That not Any thing which was once
Nothing, can have any just power, but by the Creators gift, who made it
something. And this is most certain, That there is no new Covenant, Grant, or
Demise, from the Creator, Scripture principles.
to be expected with mankind; since the date of the New Testament. That unto
GOD (and not the People) in both the Testaments, is asserted, the Dominion and
Kingship over his whole Creation. That for the regulating thereof, there can be
no just Authority, but what is instituted and set in order by GOD. That in
neither of the Testaments GOD has appointed, or permitted, or so much as
mentioned any other Form of Government then Monarchical. That in both the
Testaments GOD has constituted and declared for Government by Kings, and only
them: As the only visible Images of his One Majesty; and the only Supreme
and irresistible Administrators of his Divine Power, for the General External
Government of the whole Earth: since Mankind cannot expect, dare not endure,
that his dreadful Self should descend to govern us by his immediate Presence.
That GOD has constituted in the Family the Honor of the Father; In the
Kingdom the glory of the King; As visible degrees, and sensible steps for
Remembrancers unto us of our Duty to him: And as Touchstones of the Honor,
which we give unto the universal Parent and King of the whole world. That the
glory and riches of Kings, has ever been promised as Gods most glorious
earthly blessing; and looked upon as the greatest Admeasurement of his
temporal favors to any Nation: And that GOD has recorded to his own glory,
the magnificence of Kings; and never found fault (in them alone) with any
sumptuousness, which under him they have used to make themselves eminent in
the eyes of man. That under GODS visible Representer, and by obedience unto
him, Man only can have Title to the Blessings of the Earth.

That it is the Prerogative of God to be the sole Inquisitor and punisher of
those his Vicegerents, To restrain the Spirit of Princes; And to turn their
Hearts, Gods earthly Prerogative.
as it pleases him. That he who has promised to obedient People good Kings,
has reserved unto Himself Power to punish wicked people by wicked Princes.
That it is the Title of CHRIST (which he has dearly bought) to be the only
Potentate; King of Kings; and Lord of Lords. So that not all Mankind without
usurpation upon His Royal Prerogative, may presume against or upon that
Dignity; which is only his to bestow and censure. Under whom Christian Kings
are asserted into a more glorious Condition then any other Princes whatsoever.

That to be the Lord of hosts is the sole Prerogative of GOD. Which if it be
so; And that no Humane Authority may take away the life of any, The Militia.
whom GOD has created after his own Image: the Issues of life and death being
ever in the hands of the Creator; And that he must be more then Man's Brother,
who may presume to do thus: Then may no Man, but empowered from GOD by the
warranty of his Commission, either in Peace, or by war shed the blood of man.
And if GOD has given this Divine Authority unto Kings, and unto none else, The
guilt of Blood, where.
upon Record in his Registry: Then it appears where lies the guilt of all the
Blood spilt in the fields, or strangled upon the Tree, in these days of
calamity. If they have any plea in this particular, let them produce it; We
find the Power of the Sword throughout the whole current of holy Scripture,
committed unto Kings and to none else. If the Scriptures be silent concerning
their claim; then it appears who are the usurpers upon GOD, to take the Sword,
which must be given or not meddled with. Then who are the Blasphemers of GOD and
the King: who the miserable Sheme'is, that curse the Lords Anointed David, with
the loud crying imputation, of being A Man of Blood.

If these things be so; then it behooves every man, timely and sadly to bethink
himself, how far he has been an agent, assistant, or consentient herein: Who
Incendiaries.
yea how far he has not been an opposer of this wretched Sacrilege, committed
against the Almighty Creator, yea Redeemer of mankind! who is able to punish
all that rob him; but will most severely, those that rob him of his
Prerogative. But especially those who style themselves the Assembly of Divines,
and their subordinate Pulpiteers: who (as Rabshekah did) lead on all these
mischiefs, with The Name of the Lord. But chiefly Mr. Marshall, who led on the
Cause; but seems to take no care for the bringing of it off. And if this be not
the Case; they may not be accounted worthy of any crumme of their own, much
less of other men's bread, if they do not vindicate the two Houses; clear
themselves from the imputation of being the public Incendiaries; and free
themselves from the general curses of the poor suffering and exhausted people.

But in the next place. If the Mr. of the House be called Beelzebub; can or may
the servant think to escape? If GOD be usurped upon, Usurpations on the Church.
shall any man marvel if his Church be so used? in the profanation and
robbing of all the Houses of GOD in the Land! But will they indeed cause that
which we suppose to be the daily Sacrifice to cease? And in the room thereof
set up the Abomination of Desolation? Are not they of the other belief bad
enough, to be supposed to have tender Consciences? And will they not vouchsafe
to justify themselves; or to rectify us, The English Liturgy.
for whom also CHRIST dyed? Let their Rabbi's (to their Honor) show us, who
never heard, that ever there was (until these days) a Church constituted upon
the face of the Earth, without a public Liturgy! That ever God was so
dishonored, as to have his public worship entrusted to the weakness or
wickedness of all presumers! It will be supposed (till the contrary be made
apparent) that the present outcast Liturgy contains the Flowers, and Marrow of
all the Liturgies of the pure Primitive Ages; cleansed from the weeds and
rottenness, which the envious man, in the worlds declining times, had powered
forth into the Earth Otherwise, why do they not cast out of their Creed the
Article of the Catholic Church; if we have nothing to do with that which was
before us?

And why do they not satisfy the poor offended people; Directory Religion.
complaining that their whole Religion is now become ridiculous or odious: As
being turned into Pulpit-justlings: or else praying or giving of thanks for the
effusion of the blood of their Christian Brethren; and for the increase of
Heresies, Schisms, Rebellion, Robberies, etc? And that it is now come to
pass, that we have such a Religion, as we should have weather; if every man's
wish might be heard, and every Almanack-maker made a true Prophet: yea, that
they put upon GOD such a Service, that it is impossible for him to remain One
and the same, and to accept of it. That were he never so gracious, his
Almightinesse cannot grant all their requests: For that there is not one
Congregation, whose prayers (if it were possible for them to be all of one
mind) are not contrary to the prayers of many.

For GODS Cause, let there be something wherein all Israel may (which they
ought) as one man, The Communion of Saints, and the Lords Prayer.
join in the worship of the One GOD; otherwise why do they not put out that
part of the Article, The Communion of Saints? But since the Lords Prayer is
reprobated, what can be saved? Did not he who is the wisdom of the Father know?
or would not he whose charity dyed for his Enemies, take care for what was
absolute; when he appointed his Disciples, that when ever they prayed, they
should say, Our Father, etc. Is any thing that is made by GOD himself
unperfect? or were they while the Bridegroom was with them novices in respect
of us? Did not he teach them then to pray in the Spirit, when he taught them so
to pray; and bade them always to do so? or did he not provide against our
pretended Spirits, when he forbade them Battologies; the fruits of
unpremeditated vain bablings? And is not this all the hazardous public Service
(worse then none) wherewith the most high and most deserving Majesty must
(casually every where) be contented, or none? Must he be forced from all his
visible Temples here on Earth, into his dwelling place in Heaven? Which as it
gave the fashion to Moses, Solomon's and to our material Churches, So ought it
in the daily one Service thereof, prescribe unto ours, that his great Name may
be hallowed; and his Monarchical will, so done on Earth, as it is in his
exemplary Temple in Heaven. In a word, why do they not Assemble to the
Answering of Dr. Tailors. Book concerning Set Prayer?

But yet further then this; it is considerable, whether or no, they take the
course (as with the souls of many thousands condemned alive) so for the
strangling (before the womb) of all the souls of all succeeding Generations in
this Land? For if this be a true principle, which was delivered for such a one,
Posterity undone.
by the Grandees and leading men of that side, in the Conference at Hampton
Court, that no Sacrament can be administered, but by the Consecration of a
lawful Minister, (i.) In our English Liturgy Priest. Then apparent it will
easily be: no Bishop, no Priest: no Priest, no Sacrament; (now little used, and
less regarded.) And then, no Sacraments, no Church: no Church, no salvation.
That unto the Bishop, and to the Bishop alone, is committed the Authority of
sending Laborers into GODS Vineyard, for the continuance of a visible Church
of CHRIST, upon Earth, until his coming hither again. That usurping in matters
Ecclesiastical, against or without them (yea when the Ark of GODS Church does
indeed totter) is the dreadful and destructive sin of Schism: which St. Jer:
says is more abominable then Murder, Adultery, etc. That Bishops are the men
whose perpetuity (for the perpetuating of his Church) the GOD of Truth has
solemnly sworn, will be seasonably proved when GOD shall vouchsafe us a free
and lawful Synod: such a one as without the stain of Christianity, his people
may joyfully own. In the mean time, why do not our Pretenders afford a Reply to
Dr. Edw: Boughens Book? Will they eat his bread, and vouchsafe him neither an
Alms, nor an Answer?

The taking away also of Bishops Votes may be taken into consideration:
Abrogation of Bishops Votes.
which is looked upon as a taking away of the presence of GOD from the public
Consultations, in the persons of them upon whom the glorious character of
CHRIST'S Mediatorship is enstamped. The Tribe of the Lord being not thought
worthy to have any to represent them, except (at a side Table) those in a
servile condition, whom the general voice calls Priests of Jeroboam, Assemblers
pluralities. Sacrilege.
of their own Consecration (by their filling of their hands even unto scandal
unanswerable, etc.) And Schismatics after the order of Korah. As also the sin
of Sacrilege, which was not by the Apostle; thought of inferior rank to the
sin of Idolatry. It being forbidden in the same Commandment, and the positive
part thereof: viz. Thou shall not worship with thy body, nor serve with thy
goods, graven images; for I am a jealous God: they belong, and I will have them
without any rival paid unto me. And the offenses against these (to wit, the
honor with bodily worship, or consecration of goods to any false god; or the
robbing of me in either) I will vindicate upon the third and fourth generation
of those who shall voluntarily persist in these defiances of me. For certainly
GOD is not such a GOD, as to be jealous over, and threaten the want of that,
which he will not have. If (as Levit. 27.28.) Every devoted thing, be (in the
present tense) most holy unto the Lord: yea (as the Text implies) an Anathema
to the usurper of it; as was Achans wedge which brought all Israel under the
scourge of GOD. And if Ananias and his wife, devoting all, but keeping back
part (whereas without sin, they might otherwise have kept all, it being their
own) were set forth as deadly examples of GODS jealous wrath in this kind:
Then, what can be thought of them, who fly upon that which was never theirs;
but consecrated out of the magnificence of well affected Princes; And which the
Doners themselves might not have recalled. So that Sacrilege is a sin
generally and highly concernent of a whole Nation; The innocent and nocent:
especially if it bear the face of a public Act. In which point, serious men
conceive, that we now smart for the violations of the former Age.

And truly it is considerable; The Spirit of Antichrist.
that, in the times of such general impiety, it is just with God (as he had
foretold of the last days) to permit the Spirit of Antichrist (which in plain
English signifies an opposer of GODS Anointed, Kings and Priests) to seat it
self in the House of GOD: and intermedling in sacred things (without GODS Call
or Commission) to usurp Authority; As GOD, over all that is called GOD (as
Kings and chief Priests were sundry times in the Book of GOD) yea patiently
(for a time) to endure their usurpations against himself; who indeed is All
that ought to be worshipped: permitting in his jealousy the trampling down of
his Ordinances: Who had constituted the King to consult the Priest, in all
points of his Service; and by his designation to Act and Enact: And had
exemplified this general and eternal Rule, in the story of pious Jehoshaphat,
2 Chronicles. 19. appointing severally the chief Fathers of Israel the Priests and
Levites, for the judgments of the Lord and controversies in Religion; And
constituting over them Amariah the high Priest, over all of them in all matters
of the Lord; As Zebadiah the Chancellor, over all, in all matters of the King
or Kingdom. BUT I PROCEED TO THE CAUSES, etc.

And here leaving secret things to God; Secret things to God.
I shall without peremptorinesse of censure, only mention, what conscientious
men have reckoned, as in an high degree contrary to the revealed Word of GOD.
As first the sin of Sacrilege, acted in the days of our Fathers in the Reign
of Hen: 8. continued and increased ever since. Secondly, the easiness of our
Princes (incited by the fancifull importunity of this Nation) in sending
Assistance to the Subjects of foreign Princes, up in Arms against their
Sovereigns.

But there is enough visible, for the stirring up of this great Tempest of GODS
wrath. General causes of out woe.
The proud full Sea of our late peace and plenty. One wave raging against
another, and all of them against goodness. Wickedness warring against
wickednesses, but chiefly against GOD, his Church, and Religion; against Man,
Society and Honesty. The prophanations of Religion, and the religionsnesse of
profanation. The Angel of light in black; and the Angel of darkness in white.
The Teacher taught, and the Feeder starved. Sodom brought into the Body of the
Land, and leanness into the soul. Fullness and want at the same instant, both
in their extremities. The general desolation, wrought by Prodigality on the
one hand, and Covetousness on the other: both destroying all besides, and
pining of themselves. The natural unnaturalness of hatred; and the
hatefulness of self-love. The delicacies and uncleanness of Lust. Fraud and
falsehood got into the places of Truth and Honesty; and they turned out into the
others seats. The pride of those who knowing not themselves, think they know
all things, and that they may meddle with any thing, be it never so sacred. The
servile and idle bulie-headednesse of this Nation, affecting outlandish
fashions for their Religion also. Without whose Apes and Peacocks, we were once
unlikely to have had acquaintance with these hard names of Presbyterian.
Independent, or War. But these things superadded to the natural incivility
of ungovernable Northern robustuousnesse and intractability, may seem fuel
sufficient to enrage the flame against us: And the next conjoined unto these
will bring it home into our Houses.

The first may seem, an universal loathing of the providentiall ordinances of
GOD, Particularities in the Church.
and a sensual doting upon the wisdom of Man (which the Apostle calls
Divillish.) Hating of Dominions, and speaking evil of Dignities. In the
Church, itching ears, and fiery tongues; but numbnesse and frost otherwise in
the whole Man. Every man esteeming himself too good for the rank wherein GOD
has placed him, aspiring to teach his Teachers; to shear, yea as far as the
swords of their mouths could reach, to butcher their Shepherds. Following and
crying up those Hirelings, who could with greatest volubility decry those whom
GOD had set over them. Here, as in the weakest place, the mischief began.
First, no Bishop, then no King. But long it was before this Monster durst show
his teeth. The deluded People served an hard Apprentiship in unbelief of this.
The King himself could not persuade them, that their Liberty and propriety
would be lost with his Prerogative: both ensuing the ruins of the Church.

So in the State also; the King (of GODS own institution) became laid aside;
and a constitution of humane wisdom, set up in his Place and Power. For no man
can affirm, that GOD (whose are all the Kingdoms of the Earth, The ruin of the
Church more afflictive to the State, then to in self.
and whose Prerogative it is to set up, and pull down his own Deputies) did
ever constitute any other Government, but Monarchical. And this no man can
deny, that GOD is able, has promised, yea performed an hundred fold
compensation, to each man, who in obedience, to his Ordinance has suffered as
a Christian. That for his Churches sake, He has reproved even Kings; much more
will he those who assume that power which is sacred, and his, to themselves
without his Commission. That the Church in the Red Sea is in comfortable
safety: persecuting Egyptians are drowned in it. Yea, that under CHRIST, we
owe the Religion which we have, unto the sufferings of those, whose doctrine,
discipline and worship the world now accounts folly; so far forth, that it may
be doubted, whether if the Church had wanted persecuters, it had not now wanted
Members. And certainly he is a very evil man, whom the badnesse of the times
has not made better. And surely it concerns the glory of GOD to meet with
man in his own kind, and to make him to see to the full, the folly of that
wisdom, which makes him esteem himself never free enough, till he have cast off
his yoke, whose service only is his perfect freedom. Which now he may if he
will: One year of this Jobilee having cost the Land more beloved pelf, then all
it is Kings have drawn from it since the Conquest.

So that in this place it is considerable, whether or no, our present misery
was not then enacted, when the King (by humane ordinance, The first foundation
of these our miseries.
but never by Divine) was debarred from looking into his Subjects purses,
without consent in Parliament? By which means Kings, especially usurpers, for
such pottage as has been presented to them, have been necessitated to sell
their Birthrights [originally GGDS.] Which the present King [in part denying]
was enforced to break off a former Parliament, and to Declare against the
usurpation, irreligion, and injustice thereof; And withal, to make use of a
small part of the Prerogative, which God had given him. Which the Factious
having blasted amongst the generality, too well loving their purses; their
policy was by sinister means, at home and abroad (both in Scotland and France)
to bring him into such streights, as might force a Parliament from him, for
them to play their prizes in. But now the truth of this late unsufferable Court
flattery, is at length made clear, by those who at Present sit at the Helm.
And now it is no flattery to proclaim for them, that where the Sovereign
Authority is, there the lives and livelihoods of all must be at command. And
yet still the question sticks, whether the wisdom of GOD or Man be best to be
trusted?

In order to these followed on; The peoples surprise.
the universal bent of the people (in many places) blindly led on, by those
whose spirit of opposition commended for the only Patriots) to choose none but
such for this present Parliament. The Serpententine policy, diligence and
activity of the Faction, prevailed against the carelessness of the many of the
better sort, and the few of the best. So that in diverse places men were elected
not so fit for that employment, as peradventure for other Advancement. So that
it is here considerable, whether it does not concern the sleepers to bewail
their former neglects; and to take care (if GOD have not decreed the utter
ruin of their ill sought Liberty) that they be not outwitted, and out-acted
by those who are in their generation wiser then themselves.

Secondly, The idle City multitude fitto be practiced on.
this Parliament being met, and that in a place fitting for the designs of the
Contrivers; they had their desire, relying upon the multitude of the Plebs
urbica, whose wantonness and idleness had made busybodies; and whose
natural weakness or wickedness had made detesters of the Government, and
virtues of those, whom GOD had raised up amongst them, and set in his own place
over them. The Ringleaders knowing themselves to be thus backed, neglecting the
business of His Majesty (by whose Authority they met) first fell on work against
the peoples (the Electors) Privilege; casting out of doors, or out of
countenance, all those whom they could not bring into the same excess with
themselves, though by the people presented unto the King, to be by him invested
in as high Authority as any of them. This beginning, with the like continuance
has brought upon you, that which you now see and feel: which no Chronicle
shall be able to represent to you and yours. My Letter presumes not on the
particulars.

But yet to some, The two Houses whether free.
it may seem worthy the consideration; whether or no, the present two Houses be
free; that is, free from force? If they be not, why without more ado are not we
free from them? Sit liber Dominus qui volet esse meus. And it is an heavy
judgment of GOD, that Servants should rule over a People. If they be at this
present (to let pass former writings) why is not the History of Independency
confuted? Sundry arguments.
If they affirm their Freedom, we have multitudes of Arguments for their
solution. Scandalous writings and Petitions were justified by a Decree,
Petitions and free writings.
that it was Parliament time, and all Petitions were to be received, and all
free writers protected. But now it deserves death, to Petition; and little
less to use that conscionable advice, which the Laws of GOD command us, for
the snatching our of the fire, those whom we see in danger. If the former was
Liberty, what by the Rule of Contraries is the latter? And what is become of
the resolution of holy Job? If his Adversary should write a book against him,
to bind it to his Soul? But by this, they have hindered many wholesome Books
from being written; more from being published.

2. But not to mention the multitudes too well known to the most. At first
Arbitrary Power was declared against; and the Noble Strafford put to death,
Arbitrary power.
not for acting, but for a surmised intending of it. Now nothing but Arbitrary
power is practiced: yea and that in the hands of such Committee Men, as shame
it self is ashamed of.

3. At first, the Birthright of the Subject, the Laws of the Land were cried
up. The Laws
But now Birthright and life it self is forfeited for obedience to them: And
all the use that is made of the pretense of them, is by that to commit and
protect Sacrilege, Treason, Murder, Rapes, Robberies, etc.

4. At first, Arms were taken up to rescue the King from his evil Council: to
bring him into the desired embraces of his loyal Parliament: For King and
Parliament.
And the making of him a most glorious Prince. Now they have him, nothing is
more dreaded or abhorred, then his presence amongst them. He become like the
holy and just One, betrayed by Judas, imprisoned for his too good Deeds:
accused of Treason. Barabbas preferred to be set at liberty, before he be
heard. With a multitude of like inconsistencies and impieties: as many as the
Religions amongst us, and as glorious.

BUT AMONGST ALL THE MEANS that have been used for the consummating of these
our sinful miseries; Their deceitful means. Pretense of Religion.
none have been more dishonorable and odiously contrary to the unchangeable
GOD of Truth and Peace, then that Religion (which enjoyneth us under pain of
damnation, not to resist, that is, not to use Defensive Arms against him (in
the singular number) unto whom GOD has committed his Sword) that Religion (I
say) should be abused into the condition of an incendiary, and made to heat the
fire of hell for those whom CHRIST shed his blood for; That that should be now
truth, which is point blank contrary to the way which GOD put us in. So that if
GOD be true, One and the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: the contrary way
must lead to the contrary place.

The main Arts used in this kind were chiefly two. The one, against the
Religion established: the other for the plausible establishing of their own
fancles. The first was wrought by the odious aspersion of Popery, by them cast
upon the King, and his loyal Adherents; upon the Bishops, and their religious
Observers. But of this smoke only Time has cleared the Stage: Imputation of
Popery.
And it will daily further make good, that that which was suspected, by weak
men, was indeed the only way for the firm establishing of our Religion,
against the errors and innovations of Popery.

For the King; The King.
no words are honorable enough for the pourtraying of his most glorious
invincible constancy; and his most patient Christian wisdom; yea themselves
were not close enough to keep from the public view some of his private Letters
taken in his Cabinet, His friends
wherein he unbosomed himself to his most virtuous Queen. By which barbarous
act, they helped to defile this their own Project For his Adherents who like to
His, and Him their Moses; chose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a moment. The Almighty will be
their pay master: And if there be universities (...), and Learning enough, they
are not like altogether to be forgotten in this world.

For the Bishops and their Order; they are that which is most feared and hated
by the Papists. Bishops and
From which both Order and Persons (yea of those who have been worst used at
home) themselves who smart being Judges, they have received their mortal
blows. No, they must be men of other parts and principles (then the present
pageantry) who must maintain the Cause of GOD and his Church against that
learned and veterane Adversary. Book of Common Prayer.
And for the Book of Common Prayer, that is a thing most detested by them: who
suffer none (who may come to Sermons) to be present at that. But for the others
Directory, and Pulpittings: they are their joy, scorn, and laughter.

For the rest of the persecuted Clergy, The Clergy.
Experience has indifferently well undeceived the people, that the imputation
was, as false in it self, so dangerous to them. I shall instance but in one,
who was of many (if not of all others) most publicly clamoured against. Dr.
Cosins by name (whose Devotions it may be will come into better esteem) He
whom no despite could move or shake, though in exile, and in the thickest of
those our Adversaries, stands as an impregnable fortress; in public and
private, by Tongue and Pen, against the learned Jesuits, and others;
justifying that faith which under his Mother the Church of England, He ever
professed. Which I fear nothing either good or bad, can procure one of his
Adversaries here, once to attempt.

And here it is considerable; whether the Jesuit and Puritan be not like a Map
in plano, The Jesuit and Puritan.
or an Hoop stretched out at length. The ends seeming to be at all possible
distance, one from the other: but being reduced to use, must meet in the
breadth of an hair. They both under the title of Religion rob GOD of his
Prerogative: the one to enrich the Pope; the other to befool the people: Both
use the same or the like Arguments: and neither do it out of respect to them
for whom they pretend: but intend to enjoy themselves, what seemingly they
arrest for others.

The second of their Arts under this head, was by a specious name of a
Covenant, The Covenant.
to strike through the body of Episcopacy, into that of Monarchy: which by the
inconsiderate people was easily swallowed for an Act of Religion. It being
readily visible to those who only are superficialists in the Book of GOD, that
entering into Covenant for the better service of GOD, was often celebrated in
the Book of GOD. But it was not minded, that there was no such Covenant, or any
other then the renewing of that Covenant of GODS own making, through the whole
Scriptures: nor that, that ever was publicly attempted against, or without the
supreme Authority; the pride of such an act never having been once heard of
amongst the former Israel of GOD. Not observing that the matter of this Vow
(besides the usurpation upon the Divine power of the King, whose destruction
appears to have been the principal end thereof) contains the most dreadful
impieties, which ever yet were veiled under the mask of Religion: the cutting
off not of the persons, but of the Office of those unto whom GOD had sworn
Perpetuity: By which (as has been said) the Church was to have it is
continuance: and without which, no Church in any age or place has been, or can
be; and without which no Christian King can be established. So that we may put
the whole stake upon these two Issues. 1. Whether GOD has accepted of any
National Covenant, and this other then the renewing of that which himself made,
without the Supreme Authority? Or 2. whether, until this Age, there has been
any where, at any time any visible National Church without Bishops? In which
particular, unless GOD come to constitute a new, Man cannot. If He had never
done it, If Power, then Divine.
the authority of the whole Creature, cannot reach to constitute a Power. For
if it be power (says the Apostle) it must be Divine; of, and from GGD. In a
word, if GOD has indeed constituted, and has had a Church upon Earth for
these 1500. years; it, under CHRIST and his Apostles, has been, by, through
and under Bishops. Other fashion of Church never yet appeared for so long; then
what this Covenant vows, Root and Branch to destroy: and hereby the temporal
kingdom of GOD.

The Mechanical part of this our misery (in the hands of their Engineers, 2
Instruments of oud servitude.
and their not now servants) has been wrought by two main Instruments; the
wealth of the City, and the defection of the Navy. Upon the former, other
Nations looked with envious comfort: As upon the Liver too big for the Land,
like to inflame and corrupt the strength thereof. Upon the other with dread, as
upon the Arms and Legs of this Nation, too long sinewy and active for them. But
which (if Christianity could have subdued natural malice at home and abroad)
might have proved the Arsenall of Europe; and have carried our miseries home to
the doors of Christianities foes. Or yet have done better, and have carried
Christianity into the Pagan world; which certainly better deserves it, then we
who thus use it. Heu quantum potuit terrae caelique parari -- Hoc quem civiles
hauserunt sanguine dextrae?

For the City, I shall make bold to crave, whether or no, that be deniable,
which the general Complaint puts upon you? And whether or no, your selves
conceive, The Cities wealth.
that (for the greater part) your wealth has been so conscionably gotten, that
there can be sufficient ground for hopes, that it might be comfortably spent?
Or this: that the riches of the Country are transplanted into the City: and the
manners of the City sent out into the Country? That your pride has enflamed
the whole Kingdom? That your fraud has impoverished it? That your luxury has
infected it? and your illiberality except to vain glory, and your selves) has
spoiled, it is ancient Hospitality? But (which is the greatest mischief) that
the contagion of equal wantonness and new fanglednesse in Religion, has
spread it is pestilence into the veins, and vitals of the whole Nation? That you
could find millions for others, but for the King (the Ordinance of God) you
could not find pounds? That you have given so much; that you have no power to
keep any thing? except by your prudent and speedy reconciliation unto your most
gracious GOD, and your god-like King, by an honorable Treaty? The mercies of
both being like to prove your best Staple.

For the Navy; they have better Sea-room, The Navy Royal.
to bethink themselves (as they have blessedly begun) both of their duty, and
of the inexplicable good, which by doing of it, they may do to all, and
themselves. They have a GOD (whose wonders they see in the deep) who has
sufficient power; they have a King, who has sufficient goodness to reward them,
and his glorious Issue with them to enoble their religious courage; they have
the prayers of all the tried ones, whose Anchor holds through all their Land
shipwracks; who mourn in their souls for a time to celebrate their praises,
when they shall have brought full ballast, to settle an equal Treaty, for the
glory of GOD on high, Peace upon our Earth; and good will amongst men.

NOW CONCERNING THE REMEDY. Remedies.
Baal, nor kissed him with their mouths; who have not so much as petitioned
for any fifth part; but contentedly abandon the thoughts of their just
proprieties, From the world-despising Christian.
while the King wants his; and they (here) only want Him, under whom, and by
obedience to whom, they only can call any thing upon GODS Earth their own. To
them mine humble suit is, that with heavenly ardour they would endeavor more
and more to burn out the dross of their own frailties; That instead of
trembling at a seeming calamity, they would admire and celebrate the bounty of
GOD who has thought them worthy to suffer; and given them something, the
despising of which, might evidence their love to him. That, as truly spiritual
men, they may understand this to be All things.

From Gods glory, and Christ's imitation.
that his public worship will not be permitted, in those who aspire in the
greatest of humane perfections to represent on his Earth the service of his
Angels in Heaven; (when his bounty is extended to the greatest measure of the
receivers capability; and man's haughty unthankfulness, will thank, trust to,
and magnify, not his God but himself. Then it is most just with God to provide
for his greater glory, select men, who will neither be afraid nor ashamed to
have in them acted over again (for the raising up of an holy seed in a better
generation) the grateful sufferings of his Son CHRIST JESUS, and his blessed
Martyrs in Heaven.

that you would set forth the glory of CHRIST in intensive prayers, for those
who curse, In Christian charity.
hate, and persecute you, according to his example, gloriously followed by his
first (yea whole Army of Martyrs.) Lord lay not this sin to their charge. In
which particular, these our times have not altogether proved barren of right
Christian deaths in diverse specialties, not ever to be forgotten, though not to
be expected in the cancels of a Letter. Heroical examples.
Most eminently the Nobility and Gentry (for many) have an heroic sampler in
the most Noble Earl of Strafford: the Clergy in the most sublime humility of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, Moral duty.
who enjoy Crowns elsewhere, and shall have trophies here. And yet not to
forget our duty for another, as not to sell our coat to buy a sword; when ever
the King shall by himself, or lawful deputation, call for our lives, and
livelihoods: but even then to carry with you those right Christian affections,
as did the primitive Christians, when they withheld not themselves from the
wars of their Pagan Emperors. But never so to look backwards toward our
losses; or to our provision for those dear hostages of our affections, wife or
children (whom God has promised us, Hating all, for Christ.
to take for his, while we persist to do our duties to him) but to look
forwards toward the glory which is set before us, and to the good which we may
do to others, in fortifying them, toward the despising of all that this world
affords, with relation to the next. And yet we shall not do ill Christianly to
admonish our prosecutors; that had the great Turk himself conquered us (whereas
through the presumption and connivance of the respective Committees, sew or
none enjoy a fifth part, pretended to be allowed to wife and children) for 7
s.-6 d. a man, and the fourth part of our increase, Turkish mercy.
we might have been secure for the rest; yea and which is more then all the
rest, the Freedom of our Religion to boot. Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do.

For the others, who are abundantly the greater part, my Petition to them is;
Considerations for the major part.
that they would not despair, while CHRIST is in Heaven, his Word on Earth, and
they have hearts to follow the directions thereof. Let no man say it is
impossible: GOD may be importuned and overcome by many hands, by universal
prayers, and amendment: if we can but bring our selves to hate all, that stands
in competition with him. I desire not to represent unto them their miseries and
losses, which they are too sensible of, and too little of the blood wantonly
spilt; and the deaths of souls more precious. I only tell them, how for the
present they may avoid the sin, and for the future the punishment. Which, as
concerning their earthly estates, cannot be compassed, while the Houses
continue their resolutions. So long, they must have an Army, the Army will be
maintained, cannot but be insolent; while no man can account any thing his own
which they can take Covet therefore, what cannot he taken; And follow the
course, that may be taken.

You know, From the 2. Houses own Principle.
As your own duties of Christian Allegiance to be preferred before all that is
dear unto you: so the principle (though in it self most false and blasphemous)
which being theirs, and that by which they have prevailed against you and
yours, they may not with color of honesty desert. Which is this; That the
power of Dominion is originally in the People. Which is a desperate Assertion
refuted by the clear Word of GOD, and sundry Books yet unanswered. By you they
pretend to be entrusted with the government of the Land. And if they have not
this Power from you, they have it not otherwise by any Law of GOD or Man. And
if (as they most falsely pretend) you might reassume the Power from the King;
then certainly you may from them, to whom GOD neither has, nor you could give
them; and so their whole title (against you) must rest in force: which at first
they neither did or might pretend; and which every Tyrant would blush openly to
own.

2ly, you know that you are the major part of the Kingdom (at least 20. to one)
whose eyes either Religion or irreligious oppression has opened. Petitions
undid us.
And it is not unknown unto you, how in the beginning of this Parliament (while
you slept in lazy security) that Petitions, by the restlesnes of a few, were
extorted or forged, and presented in the general names of the several
Counties, and so received, as if they had been Catholic and orthodox: and from
these Players has proceeded our real Tragedy.

But here, I do not wish that you should go that way. My self dares not so far
acknowledge any authority, which my soul esteems to stand in armed opposition
against GOD and his Ordinances. And it is well known, how for this thing the
Petitioners of Surrey, and the compassionate Watermen lost their lives, without
any inquest upon that blood. How the Kentish and men of Essex for the same
cause were prosecuted with cruel war, and too bloody for Pen and Ink to
express. But (if so your selves be minded, and you do conceive the foregoing
Proposals worthy of your considerations) I could rather Petition you, in a
Declarative way, to take unto you; as, A Declaration.
the resolutions of freeborn men; so chiefly the modesty, sobriety, and
peaceablenes of Christians: so far forth, that (if it be possible) the
mouths of your greatest Adversaries may be stopped, and they enforced to blame
rather themselves, then the meekness of your sick liberty, breathing out it
self, in the way of religious charity, not of cumultuous and passionate Revenge
or Hatred. Expressing whether or no you intended or will endure the Arbitrary
Power of the Houses; their levying men and Arms, with Free quarter, Taxes,
Excise, etc. against or without the King. Whether you conceive this fitting to
be done, or that lawfully you may do it? Whether the submission you have
hitherto yielded was voluntary or forced? And whether or no (thankfully looking
back unto the former blessings (under Him enjoyed) you ought not to Petition
the King, and GOD Almighty for him, that He do not (by Treaty or otherwise)
part with the Militia, or any other part of his Prerogative Royal (which
appearing to be GODS) he may not with a safe Conscience, by any voluntary Act
acquit.

So also further to consider; whether it be not necessary to Petition his
Majesty; For a Synod.
that by his Authority A Synod (with all convenient speed) may be called? Such
as we may justify before GOD and Man: according to the examples of the ancient
Primitive Church: for the composing of Controversies, and the establishing of
Unity in Religion, and the public worship of GOD. And that all sorts of
Disputants may be invited, yea encouraged, with freedom and indemnity to
propose in writing, their several Desires and Reasons; and those to be entered
into the public Acts to remain upon Record for ever: that all men and Times
may see not only what was done, but why, and upon what grounds.

But in case neither Treaty nor Declarations avail, by their default; then to
consider, whether or no, it be necessary further to Declare, that you do revoke
your former Substitutions, Revocation of the pretended power of the House of
Commons.
whereby the House of Commons pretends in your Names to sit? And to protest
against their former Acts and Ordinances? And that according to your warranty
from the Word of GOD, you have taken unto you the resolutions, to deny your
selves; and comparatively, to hate wife and children, house and lands, trade
and traffic, and your own lives also, rather then you will do, or have any
thing, toward the maintaining of any, in opposition to the Ordinance of GOD;
before GOD shall pull down all stomachs against Unity, by his plague of famine,
which he makes apparent, that he can do it, by this unseasonable weather sent
now amongst us. Since the floods of our blood cannot effect it.

As also for the future that (if it shall please GOD to continue you alive to
make new Election) you will be as diligent (as others late have been) for the
choosing of men well affected to the Laws, Caveats for hereafter.
peace and order of this Kingdom and that you will pitch upon none, from whom
you have not sufficient evidence of their valuing of the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, formerly, and at the present of Election, No guard, but of
reputation and Innocence.
to have been, and to be by them taken; with sufficient Bonds and Penalties
upon Indentures between you and them, in these or the like particulars; and
that they will not admit of other Arms or Guards about them (except by
voluntary order from the King, if he finds cause) then the protection of their
own reputation and innocence: whereas nothing but the witchery of that abused
Name of Parliament could have abused you into the shame and sin, which their
force has brought upon your and whose Arms would soon fail, if the fraud of
that name was understood. THIS he presumes not to prescribe, but with all
Christian humility to present unto your considerations. Beseeching you not to
accept of private whisperings, or piece meal Answers, but to require public
and total satisfaction to these; and other your just complaints* And minding
of you, that (...) had a Clergy (whose neglect he forbears to relate amongst
the causes of your miseries who would have ^^^orred, that such things should
have been objected (for any thing taught or done in their times) and nor have
been at all, or so answered, etc.

FINIS.

