A Letter sent from the Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of Warwik, Admiral of the
Sea; to Mr. John Pim, Esquire; and by him presented by both House of
PARLIAMENT, July 6. 1642.

Mercurii 6 Iulii. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith printed and
published.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.



depiction of Sir Robert Rich, second Earl of Warwick (1587-1658)

LONDON, Printed by E.G. for I. Hunscot and I. Wright. 1642.

Master PIM.
BEfore these shall come to your hand, I make no doubt but Master Nicholls of
the House of Commons, has made both Houses a Relation of what has passed here
since I received his Majesty's Letters for the discharging me of the command of
the Fleet, whereby I was entrusted; Now I called a Counsel of War, and
acquainted them with his Majesty's Letters, and likewise with the Ordinance of
Parliament sent from the Houses for me to continue my charg, I confess it was
a great straight that I was put in between two commands that have so much
power over me, but when I consider the great care which I have ever observed
in the Parliaments of this Kingdom, for the good and safety of the King and
Kingdom, and every man's particular in them, and that they are that great
counsel by whose authority the Kings of England have ever spoken to their
Subjects; And likewise that the trust of this Fleet for the defense of his
Majesty, and the Kingdoms was committed to me, by them, and knowing the
integrity of my own heart to his Majesty, and Parliament, I resolved not to
desert that charge committed to my trust wherein God (blessed be his Name for
it) has made me hitherto so successful; but to continue it until I shall
be revoked by that authority that has entrusted me with it; which having
declared to my Captains at the Counsel of War, all of them unanimously and
cheerfully took the same resolution excepting five, which was the Rear
Admiral, Captain Fogge, Captain Burley, Captain Slingsby and Captain Wake:
All which five refused to come upon my Summons, as having no authority over
them, and got together round that night to make their defense against me,
only Captain Burley came in, and submitted to me, whereupon in the morning I
weighed my Anchors, and caused the rest of my Ships so to do, and came to an
Anchor round about them, and besieged them, and when I had made all things
ready I summoned them, Sir John Men's and Captain Fogge came in to me, but
Captain Slingsby, and Captain Wake stood out, whereupon I let fly a Gun over
them, and sent them word I had turned up the Glass upon them, if in that space
they came not in they must look for me aboard them, I sent to them by my
Boat, and most of the Boats in the Fleet, their answer was so peremptory that
my Masters, and Saylors grew so impatient on them, that although they had no
Arms in their Boats, at all yet God gave them such courage, and resolution,
as in a moment they entered them, took hold on their shrouds and seized upon
these Captains being armed with their Pistols and Swords, and struck their
Yards and Top-masts and brought them both to me; the like courage and
resolution was never seen amongst unarmed men, so as all was ended without
effusion of blood, which I must attribute to the great God of Heaven and Earth
only, who in the moment that I was ready to give fire on them, put such
courage into our men to act it, and so saved much blood. I hope the Parliament
will think of some course for all our Indempnities, and especially for the
officers of the Navy, and principal for the Surveyour of the Navy, my
Vice Admiral, a very able and good man; For my self I doubt not but they that
put me in this employment will preserve me for serving them faithfully.

I pray you Sir, be a means to Sir Robert Pie, and Mr. Green, that some money
may be sent us, for it has been often promised but we hear not of it. The
weather continuing stormy so long together, that we spend our Masts and
Top-masts, or some determent or other falls upon us daily, so that we are in
great extremity for want of money. Thus having nothing else to trouble you for
the present, only that you will be pleased to acquaint your House of Commons
with our proceedings, here I bid you farewell, and rest,

Your assured Friend, WARVVICK,
From aboard His Majesty's Ship the James in the Downs this 4. of July 1642.
FINIS.

