WISDOM AND INNOCENCE, OR PRUDENCE And SIMPLICITY, In the examples of The
SERPENT And the DOVE, Propounded to our imitation.

By Tho. Vane Doctor in Divinity and Physic.

LONDON. Printed for J.Crook, and J. Baker, and are to be Sold at the sign of
the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1652.

To the Right Honorable, MILDMAY, Earl of Westmorland, Baron Despencer and
Burwash, and.
MY LORD,
YOu who have bin my Patron, have most right to the Patronage of any thing that
is mine. Hence it is, that I presume to present this unto your Lordship; both
to confess my obligation, and express my gratitude. Which although it be in a
small proportion, yet seeing men do not refuse their dues, though never so
little; nor courteous men slight gratitude, although offered in never so small
a service; if it hold any proportion with the ability, or opportunity of the
offerer; I hope that this, under these considerations, shall not be rejected by
your Lordship, being tendered by him, who is,

Your Honors, Most humble, obliged, and grateful Servant, THO. VANE.

Of the Prudence of the Serpent, and Simplicity of the Dove.
CHAP. I.
OUR Savior Jesus Christ, sending forth his Apostles to preach unto the world,
and knowing well what enmity God put from the beginning betwixt the Seed of the
Woman, and the Serpent, and that from thence the children of this world should
persecute the children of God; like a wise Captain, discovers unto them the
strength and power of their Enemies, and withal furnishes them with arms fit
for their defense. He tells them, in the 10. chapter of S. Matthews Gospel,
that he came not to send peace, but the sword; that they must not look (like
Samson) to be lulled asleep in the lap of Dalila, but like Jona to be cast into
the sea, to appease the storm; to be swallowed up by the whales, the tyrannous
monsters of the earth; to be arraigned before the seats of justice; to be
chased from city to city, yea to have those in whose names are included the
greatest notes of friendship, to be as far from it in exercise, as they are
near it in title; and to have for a man's enemies, those of his own howshold. In
sum, to find nothing in the world, but a world of wolf-turn'd men as it is in
the 16. verse of the said chapter; Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the
midst of wolves: whence follows this instruction, Be ye therefore prudent as
serpents, and simple as doves. Christ also came (as he says) to seek and to
save that which was lost; Luke. 19.10.
and that which was lost in Adam being the wisdom of the understanding, and
the innocence of the will, he propounds unto us these two, as patterns to renew
them thereby, no beast being so wise as the Serpent, Genesis 3.1.
as the scripture says, who was therefore (in the brazen Serpent set up in the
wilderness) a type of Christ, who is the wisdom of the father; nor any so
simple and innocent as the Dove, which is therefore the Emblem of the Holy
Ghost, who is the fathers love.

Be prudent, to encounter with the policies of the world; be simple, and free
from pursuing the pleasures of the world. Be prudent, as serpents, to discover
the worlds snares; be simple, as doves, to cover their sins. Be prudent, as
serpents, to decline the worlds injuries; be simple, as doves, in not revenging
the injuries of the world. Be not altogether as Doves, left ye fall into
others dangers; be not altogether as Serpents, left ye endanger others: for as
prudence joined with malice, is not more prudence than wickedness, so
simplicity joined with ignorance, is not so much simplicity as folly. In
simplicity therefore avoid folly, in wisdom, malice. Prudence without
simplicity is the mother of evil doing; simplicity without prudence is the
mother of evil suffering; but prudence and simplicity joined together, are
like the two fires Castor and Pollux, whereof if one appear alone unto the
seamen, it threatens shipwreck, but both together promise a safe harbor: So
prudence and simplicity joined together, do cause all the actions for which we
embarque our selves, to arrive at the port of prosperous success; but parted
asunder, shipwreck our souls on the rocks of malice, or the flats of folly.
Therefore, as the Cherubims over the Ark had their faces toward each other,
and both toward the mercy seat; so must prudence and simplicity be joined
together, and both will tend unto blessedness.

Prudence is practical wisdom, and is (in the general) of very large
extent, consisting in the knowledge of what is best and fittest to be done in
all emergent occasions, and in working accordingly. It has also diverse parts,
and diverse kinds, which I intend not to pursue; my purpose only being to speak
of it so far forth and no further, than it may be attributed to some
particular actions of the Serpent, wherein there is (though not a realitie,
which is properly the habit of a reasonable soul) yet a resemblance of
spiritual wisdom, by our Savior thought worthy our imitation. Which
exhortation, though directed immediately to the Apostles only, yet is applyable
to every Christian. And as our Savior said to his auditors concerning
watching; What I say unto you, I say unto all, watch: Luke. 13.37.
So what he says in this case to his Apostles, he says unto all Christians,
Be prudent as serpents, and simple as doves. What therefore the cabinet of
truth, grave history, has preserved for us, concerning the wisdome-presenting
qualities of the Serpent, I will unlock, and proportionate our imitating
actions unto their just measure. Now the Prudence of the Serpent whereon our
imitation must attend, does emblazon it self in diverse particulars, which are
these that follow.

CHAP. II.
THE first is the renewing of his youth, with the handmaids thereof, the vigor
of his senses and their operations; which he effects on this manner. When he
feels the heavy plummets of age swiftly moving toward their end, the wheels
of the clock of life he thus winds up again, He fasteth certain days (says
Aristotle) whereby his body is dried, and his skin loosened, then by the eating
of a certain bitter herb, he does vomit up a virulent poisonous humor, which
was the cause of his infirmity: at length, that he may temper the roughness of
his skin, he bathes himself in water; and seeking a narrow chink or hole in
some rock or other place, he wriggles himself in, and forceably drawing himself
through slips off his skin; and lastly, resting in some such place, where the
sun does most favorably display his beams, he recovers a new skin, and hardens
it fit for his use; and with it, investeth himself with new vigor, adding
thereby cleenesse to his eyesight, strength to his bodies motion, increase to
his stomachs appetite and digestion: and by this means does he renew the
almost expired league between his body and his soul. This also affirms both
Avicen and Pliny. To this line of the Serpents example, must we apply our
imitation; renewing our lives by the works of Penance. First by Fasting,
whereby we shall dry up the flux of Intemperance; then by taking down into our
hearts a dose of the bitter herb of of Contrition, whereby we must vomit up of
the poison of sin, at our mouths by Confession; and washing our selves in our
tears, and in the river of the sanctuary the word of God, passing through the
straits of a firm resolution to serve God and forsake sin, we must put off the
old man with the lusts thereof; and by the heat of the sun, the love of Christ,
drying up our facility and proness unto sin, we must put on the new man,
Ephesians. 4.24.
which is created according unto God in justice and holiness of truth: and so
recovering new strength unto well-doeing, we shall more clearly understand
spiritual things, more ardently affect God and our neighbor, and more
earnestly hunger and thirst after righteousness: and thus shall we renew
again the life of grace in our decayed souls.

As abstemious John Baptist was the forerunner of the birth of Christ, so must
abstinence usher the new birth of a Christian; but the devil enters into the
voluptuous, as he did into the herd of swin; or as into Judas, when he had
eaten the sop. Prayer, the weapon by which we overcome even God himself, is by
nothing so much sharpened, as by Fasting. And therefore, in the whole current
of Scripture, shall we find these two in the examples of holy men linked
together, like the bells and pomegranates on the vestments of Aaron; Prayer
rendering a sweet sound, Fasting a sweet smell; which is therefore compared to
cinnamon and balsum, which drying up the corruption of dead bodies, keep them
sweet. Cum, S. Aug.
caro arescit per abstinentiam ab humore luxuriae, tunc reddit deo odorem
continentiae: when the humor of luxury is dried up in our flesh by abstinence,
then do we render unto God the sweet odor of continence. Neh. 1.4.
The Prophet Nehemia says, When I heard these words, I sat down, and wept,
and mourned many days; I fasted and prayed before the face of the God of
heaven. Also the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 9.3.
I turned my face unto my Lord God, to ask and beseech in fasting, sackcloth,
and ashes. And then did he receive an especial revelation concerning the birth
and death of Christ. St. Peter, when he was fasting saw the vision in the house
of Simon the tanner, Acts 10. Also Acts 13.2. As they ministered unto our Lord
and fasted, the Holy Ghost said unto them, separate Barnabas and Saul for the
work whereunto I have taken them. Here we see that fasting-prayer is most
pleasing unto God, even as emptie-bellied instruments, are sweetest to the
ears of men. Facilius per jejunium oration penetrat coelum, says S. Jsodore;
The darts of our prayers being headed with fasting, do more easily pierce the
heavens. And as fasting-spittle, as Pliny says, kills a serpent; so does
fasting-prayer put the devil to flight; and with him, the many troops of his
temptations, wherewith he assults our disarmed senses. And therefore our
Savior buckling himself to grapple with the devil, made this one piece of his
armor, as the Scripture says, He fasted forty days and forty nights. S.
August, says, Fasting does purge the mind, it englightens the soul, it subdues
the flessh unto the spirit, and moulds in a man an humble and contrite heart.
It purges the mind, by consuming and drying up the humor of luxury: even as
the fire which came down from heaven, licked up the water about the sacrifice
of Elias. It enlightens the soul, by lightning of the body, and freeing it
from those clogs of flesh, to which in not a few it is a prisoner: for the
bellies fulness, is mother of the minds dullness; and repletions of meat in
the body, breed obstructions of vice in the soul: whence says the Prophet
David, Psalm. 34.13.
Their iniquity has proceeded as it were out of fatness; then immediately
follows, They have thought and spoken wickedness. It subdues the flesh unto
the Spirit, by striking the swelling sayls of pride and incontinence, enabling
us to say with S. Paul, 1 Cor. 9.27.
I chastise my body, and bring it into servitude: and like Abraham, it casts
out the bondwoman and her children, the devil with his spawn of sin, not
suffering the handmaids of our affections, to advance themselves against their
mistress reason. And lastly, it makes our souls humble and contrite, as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 72.7.
I did humble my soul with fasting. And this is the second condition required
in the renewing of our lease of life.

The Passover was commanded to be eaten with bitter herbs; Exodus 12.8.
and they that will feed profitably upon Christ our Passover, must have their
hearts embittered with compunction and sorrow for their sins. Surgeons when a
bone that has been broken is set awry, are forced that they may set it right,
to break it again; so the rectitude of our souls being broken by our fall in
Adam, whereby we go halting all our lives after, that we may set our hearts
aright, which are thus wryed and crookeded by sin, we must break them again, by
an humble sorrow for all our sins. Which must not continue for one assault
alone, but we must multiply our strokes and breakings of our hard hearts,
until our sorrow swim in our eyes, and furrow our faces with our tears: even as
Moses by striking the rock twice, made a river of water to gush forth. And we
must be sorry, that we can be no more sorry, and with the men of Israel, 1
Kings, 30.
weep till we can weep no more. It is not enough to afflict our souls and bow
down our heads for a day; or to be like the marble, which is moist only against
wet weather, to weep only when the threatening storms of punishment hang over
our heads, remaining still inwardly as hard as the marble: For as S. Gregory
says, He that bewayleth his sins, yet does not forsake them, makes himself
liable to so much the greater punishment, by how much he contemns that pardon
which he might have attained by weeping. But if like the Israelites, we pass
through the red Sea of our tears of true Contrition, we shall leave all the
Egyptians, our sins, overwhelmed therein S. Aug. says, as Grief is the
companion of repentance, so Tears are the witnesses of grief; into which, if
we can melt our selves, like Niobe, through those doleful images, which
sorrow imprints in our over-tender hearts, for our outward losses of goods, or
friends, or the like; and cannot dischannell one rivolet from the fountains of
our eyes, as a tribute due for the Ocean of sorrow, which we owe unto the cause
of those losses, our sins; surely, we have either no sense of our sins, which
is bad; or no fear of Gods judgments, which is worse; or no love unto his
goodness, which is worst of all. For if we had, the heat of that love would
reflect so strongly on our hearts clouded with sin, that it would wholly
dissolve them into tearfull sorrow; even as the Sun printing hard his hot beams
upon a gross thick cloud, powrs it down into rain.

The Prophet David was of a far other temper, and yet had an excuse as
colorable as any one; being a man, and amongst men a soldier, and amongst
soldiers one of the hardiest, whom no danger could reach to fear, no temporal
damage to grieve; and yet such impression did sorrow make in his heart for sin,
that he says, I will wash my bed every night, and water my Couch with my
tears. O faelices lachrymae quas beata manus conditoris absterget; says S.
Bernard; O those happy tears which the favorable hand of God shall wipe away;
And O those happy eyes which have chosen rather to melt themselves into such
tears, than to lift themselves up with pride, to look aside with disdain, or
asquint with envy. These tears of Compunction and sorrow for our sins, do
afford us the same refreshing, that taking of soil does unto the hunted deer;
who being hotly pursued by hellhounds, the Devil and his temptations, and our
hearts embost and panting under their pursuit, are wonderfully refreshed and
restored to our lost strength, by washing our selves in the bath of our
relenting tears: into which who so enters, as into the troubled waters of
Bethesda's pool, is assuredly healed of his sins. If then the bitter sorrow for
sin, be the mother of such sweet and wished for effects, let us seal up our
desires with the words of S. Aug. Let repentance, bitter repentance, be the
continual companion of my days; grief, continual grief, the insatiate terror
of my life; and if I be not worthy to lift up my eyes to heaven in prayer, yet
at least I am worthy to put them out with weeping.

CHAP. III.
THe third thing required to the renewing of our lives, is Confession. The Dog,
when his stomach is surcharged with any hurtful meat, by eating grass vomits
it up again: so when we have burdened our consciences with ever-hurtfull sin,
we must by eating the bitter herb of Contrition, disgorge our sins at our
mouths by Confession. For as in a wound, so long as the iron, or steel, or any
part of that which gave the wound, remains, it obstructs the healing; so do
the remains of sin in the Conscience through non confession control the
influence of any remedy applied thereunto; as Solomon says, Prove. 28.13.
He that hides his sins shall not be directed, but he that shall confess and
forsake them, shall obtain mercy. An impostume breaking inwardly, threatens
death unto the party; but outwardly it is a means to purge and cleanse the
body: So sin suppressed and smothered within our hearts, does empoyson and
choke our souls; but breaking out at our mouths by Confession, it does purge
and clear the conscience, and like the breaking out of the lips in an ague, is
a sign of our amendment: So as S. Paul says, Romans 10.10.
With the mouth confession is made unto salvation.

Which Confession that it may be thus profitable, must be also general. When a
man's body sweats all over (say the Physicians) it is a sign of strength of
nature; but if it sweat in some parts and not in others, it is a symptom of
debility and weakness: and no less testimony is it of the weakness and
wickedness of the soul, if we do not purge our souls universally of all our
sins. These parcel Confessors, are like the children of Israel, who cast out
most of the heathen out of the land of Canaan, yet suffered the Gibeonites to
remain, and made a league with them; who thereby became as nails in their eyes,
Number. 33.55.
and spears in their sides: so the least sin that remains with us uncast out by
Confession, will be a prick unto our consciences, and an instrument of our
destruction. Now Confession as it must be accompanied by universality, so it
must be ushered by examination; whereby looking back into the book of our
consciences, wherein the names of all our sins are written, we must awaken the
remembrance of all our thoughts, words, and deeds, and muster them up together,
that so by Consession they may be cast forth: as a sick man, who being about to
take a Purge first takes a Preparative to open the passages, that so by the
purge they may be the more easily ejected.

And that we may amongst the millions of our actions, know which of them are to
be superscribed with the title of sin, we must have recourse unto the word of
God, as it is expounded unto us by the Church, and the Pastors thereof; which
like the Mariners card and compass, will demonstrate unto us, how near or far
off our actions are, from the immovable North Pole of Gods commandemants. And
as when the Sun shines not into a house, the air seems clear; but if it once
enter in at the window, it then appears full of motes and dust: so the light of
Gods word shining in our understandings, will discover an infinite number of
sins, which before its access, we could neither perceive, nor would we
believe. And as the word of God does show us our faults, so also does it
cleanse them, like unto a basin of water, wherein a man may both see the spots
in his face, and wherewith he may wash them away: as the Psalmist says, Ps.
118 9.
How shall a young man amend his way? by keeping of thy words. In this word of
God therefore, this river of the Sanctuary, in imitation of the Serpent, must
we wash our selves; which not unlike a certain water in Macedonia, which being
drank by the Sheep, makes them white; so this received into our hearts, does
blanch our souls with the whiteness of innocence. Now where the Well of Gods
word is deep, and a stone rolled on the mouth thereof, that is, is hard to be
understood, with Rachel, mentioned in the scripture, Genesis 2.9.
we must get some Jaacob to remove it; that is, some one that has wrestled
with God, as the name of Jaacob signifies, and that has thereby obtained his
assistance unto his studies and endeavors, that so he may administer unto us.
But let us beware, above all things, that we do not drink down the water of
Gods word, with the abusive interpretation of heretics; for then contrary to
the former effect of the Macedonian water, it will be like that water in the
troughes, for the sheep, wherein Jaacob laid his pilled rods, which made them
bring forth spotted lambs; so will this make us bring forth opinions erroneous,
black and foul.

The serpent, as I said in the beginning, after his fasting, his eating a
bitter herb, his casting up a poisonous humor, and his bathing himfelf in
water, seeks some narrow hole, through which drawing himself, he slips off his
old skin; and drying his slipperinesse in the sun, recovers a new one: so we,
after our fasting our eating of the bitter herb of contrition, and vomiting our
poisonous sins at our mouths by Confession, and having washed our selves in the
water of Gods word, must (passing through the streights of a firm resolution to
forsake our sins, and to serve God,) put off the old man with the lusts
thereof; and by the heat of the love of Christ, drying up our pronenesse unto
sin, put on the new man, Ephesians. 4.24.
which is created according unto God in justice, and holiness of truth.

Straight is the gate, Math. 7.14.
and narrow is the way (Says our Savior) which leads unto life; through
this straight way must we resolve to pass, that so we may divest our selves
of the old man, and invest our selves with the new; by departing from evil,
and turning unto good. Cease to do evil, Esaias. 1.16.17.
learn to do well; says the Prophet Esayas. Eschew evil and do good, says
the prophet David. It Is said, Psalm. 36.27.
that when the Eagle grows old, his beak is so crooked that he cannot eat his
meat; he therefore goes to a rock, beats his beak against it, until he have
broken it off, and then falls to his meat, and grows young again. So our
hearts growing crooked toward the earth and earthy things, whereby we cannot
receive the spiritual food of Gods word, and Sacraments, we must strike them
against the rock Christ Jesus, by considering both his precepts and example;
whereby the crookedness of our beaks shall be broken; that is, our earthly
affections rectified, and our souls directed unto God; whereby we shall be
enabled to feed upon Christ in his Word and Sacraments, and so renew again our
youth. As it is Psalm. 102.5. Who fileth thy desire with good things, and thy
youth shall be renewed as the eagles. And as Samuels mother, 1. Kings, 2.19.
(as the Scripture says) brought him a new coat at set times, when she went up
to offer the yearly sacrifice; so as often as we offer the sin-offering of a
contrite heart unto God, we must, casting off the old rags of sin, cloth
our-selves with the new robes of justice. For we must not think to wear this
new coat with our old; to wear the linsy-wolsy garments of religion and
wordlynesse together; a thing forbidden in the old law; nor yet with the Jews,
to cry hayl unto Christ, and yet crucify him; to make a profession of him in
words, and contradict it in deeds, This is to serve God and mammon; Math.
9.16.17.
to put new wine into old vessels, to patch old garments with new cloth, which
as our Savior says, is either impossible, or dangerous: therefore, as the
Scripture says, 1. Tim. 2.19.
Whosoever names the name of our Lord, let him depart from iniquity.

Moses when he went into the holy mount, put off his shoes; Elias when he
ascended into heaven, cast off his mantle; and Elisha when he went to serve the
Prophet, bad adieu to his father and mother: so when we enlist our selves in
the catalogue of Gods servants, we must put off the shoes of our evil
affections; we must cast off the cloak of our unrighteousness; and take our
leaves of all those sins, which either through our pronenesse unto them, or
their long familiarity and acquaintance with us, have so endeared themselves
unto us, that we are forced to reproach our selves with the title of their
acquaintance. Moses commanded that they that went unto the tabernacle, should
go out of the Camp; and we out of our sins, if we will go unto Christ.
Wherefore, as S. Paul says, Heb. 13.13.
let us go out unto him without the Camp. And being once out, let us not prove
retrograde in the sphere of goodness; nor with Lots wife look back unto Sodom;
nor say of any sin, as Lot did of Zoar, Genesis 19.20.
Is it not a little one? It is certain, the devil will be tempting of us to
turn back, and say unto us, as Solomon's mother did to him; I have a small suit
unto thee, 3. Kings. 2.22.
I pray deny me not; to which if we yield, as he foresaw, so we shall find,
that it will cost us no less than the loss of the kingdom, even the kingdom
of heaven. Therefore, having once cast out the old Adam out of the Paradise of
our souls, let us place there the Cherubin of grace with the flaming sword of
the Spirit, to resist the entrance of sin: and in all the temptations of the
world, the flesh, and the devil unto sin, let us answer in the words of the
spouse in the Canticles, I have put off my coat, Cant. 5.3.
how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? And
thus if we be renewed; as the serpent, by recovering a new skin, does with it
resume new strength, sees more clearly, moves more lively, feeds more heartily;
so shall we, by this means, enrich our selves with the strength of well doing;
we shall more clearly understand spiritual mysteries; we shall walk more
uprightly in the love of God and of our neighbor; we shall more eagerly feed
on and more strongly digest the spiritual food of Gods word and Sacraments: by
the nourishment whereof, we shall walk from grace to grace, until we come to
be perfect men in Christ Jesus; from grace unto glory, until we be perfect
Saints in the kingdom of heaven.

CHAP. IIII.
A Second property of wisdom in the serpent, worthy our imitation, is this;
The serpent by reason of that enmity which it has with mankind, to secure it
self from the danger of men's invasions, creeps away and hides it self under
bushes, and delights to dwell in deserts, and unfrequented places: so the
children of God, mindful of that irreconcilable enmity which God has put
betwixt that old mystical serpent the devil, with his viperous brood, wicked
men, and the seed of the woman, the Children of the holy Church, should shroud
themselves under Gods protection, who appeared unto Mayses in a bush; and with
Enoch, walk with God in the desert of divine contemplation; that so they may
baulk the company, and the consequents thereof, the mischiefs of the wicked.

The Poets feign of Arachne, that contending with Pallas, for the prize in
workmanship, and being conquered by her, disdaining at the ill success of her
enterprise, she did so swell with the poison of envy and hatred, that she
turned into a Spider: so the devil in the pride of his thoughts, contending
with his Maker, and by him, like lightning, being cast down from heaven, has
had his nature ever since transformed into a serpent, full of the deadly poison
of envy and hatred against God, and all good men: continually assaulting them,
either by battery, or undermyning; by open force, or secret fraud; by the
fierceness of the lion, or subtilty of the serpent. Which enmity of the devil
against God, like that which often happens betwixt the fathers of two potent
families here on earth, has devolved it self unto each others posterity; who
like Jaacob and Esau, struggle in the worlds womb, the earth, as if so little a
room were too straight a dwelling for so great enemies. Which enmity unveiled
it self in the worlds infancy betwixt Cain and Abell; who (as the Poets feign)
like the serpents teeth sown by Cadmus, were no sooner grown up, but the one
destroyed the other: Ismael scoffed at his brother Jsaac; Micol laughed at her
husband David, and king Ahab hated the Prophet Micaiah; and the reason was,
because he told the truth. It is the godlies goodness that purchases them
hatred for as likeness is the cause of liking so the contrariety of manners
produces contrary affections. God is light, the godly are enlightened; God is
truth, the godly are true: the devil is the Prince of darkness, the wicked are
darkened; the devil is the Father of lies, the wicked are liars; what communion
then betwixt light and darkness, truth and falsehood, Christ and Belial, John.
15.19.
God and the devil? Because ye are not of the world, says our Savior,
therefore the world hates you.

Now this hatred discovers it self, either against our bodies, or our souls;
either (as the Scripture speaks) like the great Bulls of Basin they
encompasse us on every side; or like the little foxes, they destroy Gods
vineyard. Thus in the dawning of the Churches day, by the tyranny of the
wicked, did the Prophets and holy men of God fall like the morning dew and the
seeds of grace which themselves had sown, they watered with their own blood.
Thus the holy Christian Martyrs in the noontide of the Churches day, when the
sun of persecution reflected on them as hotly as the noon-sun on Jonas head,
did calmly bleed oil to the Apostles lamps, whose bright flames yet serve to
light Posterity to heaven. Thus also these latter ages in some places, and at
some times, have paid as large a tribute of patience to heaven, and sufferance
in the world; as any that went before them; and have constantly kept the faith,
until they lost themselves in keeping it; like Naboth, who kept his
possession, with the loss of his blood. And thus in all ages have the diamonds
of the world, the godly, who were made to be pretiously set in the esteem of
men, been brought to the extremest degree of calamity, that witty cruelty could
invent, or unrelenting malice execute. And thus also did the non-such of
well-doing and evil suffering, our Savior Jesus Christ, by the malice and
cruelty of the Jews, surrender up a life more spotless than innocence, unto a
death most shameful and ignominious, even to the death of the Cross; the
horror of whose torments, left not where to add unto it, by the wishes of his
enemies. And if they do these things in the green wood, says he himself, Luke
23.31.
what shall be done in the dry?

Nor does the malice of the devil and wicked men stint it self here, or
satisfy it self with the suffering of our bodies; then were their assaults
little, their victories less; seeing that the virtuous, like the palm tree,
spring up by pressing; and like the Vine, spread further by pruning. The rod of
persecution, like Aarons rod that budded, does increase the godly, both for
number and goodness, making them both more and better. Therefore does the
devil lay siege unto our souls by the temptations of prosperity and pleasure
also, hoping that (as it is in the fable of the Wind and Sun, striving who
should make the wayfaring man put off his cloak) what foul means cannot, fair
means may effect. In which his two main engines are the flesh, and the world;
the flesh within us, the world without us. The flesh, he corrupts with
bliss-promising suggestions; which like a treacherous Citizen, betrayeth the
fort of our will, into the hand of him our enemy; and thus a man's enemies are
(as our Savior said they should be, Mat. 10.36.
) those of a man's own house. But with no better success then Tarpeia the
Vestall Nun betrayed the Capitol, bargaining for the bracelets on the enemies
hands; who when they were entered, did not cast their bracelets only, but their
bucklers also into her lap, which with their weight pressed her to death. Even so
the devil many times over-satisfying men's unlawful fleshly desires, with
their sinful weight, presses their souls into the pit of destruction.

The world also, I mean the wicked men thereof, he sets like so many lime-twigs
and snares to entrap our souls: and as fishermen do make one fish a bait to
catch another, so the devil does make a bad man, a bait to catch a good.
Wicked men are most pernicious creatures, and easily pull down vengeance upon
others, either by the desert of their sin, or by the infection: who, like men
that have the plague, out of a malignity of disposition which attends upon
their disease, desire to infect others, and to draw them, as the scripture
says, to the same confusion of luxury, 1 Pet. 4.4.
with themselves. Vicia ad vicinos serpunt and contactu nocent, says Seneca:
Sin amongst men is like the rot amongst Sheep, of a catching and infectious
quality: and he that thinks to partake the company of wicked men, and not
participate of their vices, multiplies the miracles, where walkers on the
water, with Peter, are not drowned; and in the fire, with the three children,
are not burnt. The nature of things is such, says S. Chrysostom, that where a
good man is joined with a bad, the bad is not bettered by the good, but the
good corrupted by the bad. As sickness, by accompanying the sick, is derived to
the healthy, but not so health unto the sick. And as the Salamander
extinguisheth the fire, and is not burnt therein; so the wicked amongst the
godly, are ready to quench the heat of their virtue, and not to be enflamed
thereby. Therefore says the Apostle S. Paul Be not companions with them:
Joseph by living in the Court, learned to swear by the life of Pharaoh; and
Peter, when he was amongst the high Priests servants denied his master. The
warmer he was by the high Priests fire, the colder he grew in love toward
God. Psalm. 105.35.
They were mingled among the Heathens, says the Prophet David of the children
of Israel, and what was the issue? They learned their works.

Therefore, as our Savior advises us, Beware of men. First of men whose
cruelty no meekness can assuage; of men, whose blood-thirstiness no lives can
quench; of men, from whose persecutions no place is secure; and if they
persecute you in one City, fly into another; let a discreet fear give wings
unto your feet, and a godly confidence steel unto your hearts. If opportunity
open a way unto your flight, refuse it not; if not, let an unrebated resolution
arm you for sufferance. Beware also of the company of wicked men, who like
bemyred dogs defile with fawning: For howsoever fishes living in the salt water
retain a fresh taste, and savor not of the brinish quality of the Sea wherein
they live; and it may be true, which Solinus reports of the river Tigris in
Armenia, that it passes many miles through the lake of Arethusa, and yet
mingles neither fishes nor waters with the lake, but is quite of an other
color from the same; yet, Inficitur terrae sordibus unda fluens:

Clear running streams are infected with the neighborhood of filthy soyls; and
pure men with the soul conversation of the wicked. Swallows (they say) would
not build in Thebes, because the walls thereof were so often besieged; nor let
good men, or those that desire to be such, hasten to the company of those,
whose mind-infecting manners, do threaten their destruction. Apoc. 18.4.
Be not partakers of her sins, that ye receive not of her plagues, says S.
John. The reason why our Savior would not give the Disciple, mentioned in the
Gospel, leave to go back to bury his dead Father, was (say some Divines) lest
his unbelieving kindred should corrupt him again; for bad men keep others from
goodness, as the dead carcasses did the raven from Noah's Ark. It was part of
the vow of the Nazarites, not to defile themselves with dead bodies; no more
should good men stain themselves with the dead conversation of the wicked.

Run we then from these, as Moses did from his rod turned to a Serpent; for if
we join our selves to Beelphegor, Psalm. 105.27.
we will, like the children of Israel, eat the offerings of the dead. And to
decline the cruelty of some, in the destruction of our bodies, whose rage
knows no mean; let us wisely (with the Serpent) fly into the wilderness,
where we shall find Jesus the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and the brazen
Serpent, which was there lifted up, who will encounter for us with that roaring
Lion and subtle Serpent the devil, with his viperous generation, and either
rescue us, or revenge our evils. And to avoid the contagious company of others,
whose motions, although more silent, yet not less deep or dangerous than the
other; yea much more, for this like lightning which melts the sword, but hurts
not the scabbard, passes through our Bodies, and empoysons our Souls with the
insinuating venom of sin: let us (with the Serpent) hide our selves in the
holes of the rock, in the wounds of the rock Christ Jesus, whose blood is more
Antidote, than all the sins of the Universe can be Poison: so shall we avoid
both the bodily and spiritual dangers whereunto the cruelty of some and the
contagion of other wicked men would expose us.

CHAP. V.
ANother work of prudence in the actions of the Serpent, by just title claming
our imitation, is this: The Serpent if he be assaulted, his chiefest care is
directed to the preservation of his Head, for which he exposes his whole body
to the danger; knowing that therein is the castle of his life; in so much that
when he is in danger, he winds himself round into many rings, placing his head
in the center; and (as Pliny says) if he have but two fingers length of his
body left with his head, his life will still remain in him: in like manner
should our endeavors bend themselves to hold our head Jesus Christ, and that
which does knit and cyment us to Christ, true faith and charity: for the
safeguard whereof, we should expose all else to hazard, and in comprison
whereof, we should neglect whatsoever of profit or delight the world can add
unto us; and say with S. Paul, Phil 3.8.
I account all things as dung, that I may gain Christ.

Natura est sui conservativa, says Philosophy, it is inbred in the nature of
each thing, to endeavor its own preservation; so is it in the nature of grace:
now when we cannot keep our selves from the endomagement of all parts, we
must learn from the wise Serpent, that our care of preservation must chiefly be
directed unto that, whose well-being does chiefly concern us. The fountain of
life in a Serpent, is in the head; and the life of a Christian is in Christ,
who is the head of his Church; as S. Paul says: Colos. 3.3.
your life is hid with Christ in God. If then our prosperity, wealth, honor,
liberty, or ought else that we enjoy, cannot be compatible with the
preservation of our head Christ Jesus, more than the ark of God in the temple
of Dagon; and that a dangerous suffering of evil, must only free us from the
danger of doing evil; of evils the least must fall under our election, and we
must choose rather (with S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles) to leave all
and follow Christ, than with Demas, to forsake Christ and follow the world.
Skin for skin, Job 2.4.
and all that a man has will he give for his life, said the devil, and truly,
of Job* wealth, honor, liberty, worldly peace, wife, children, and friends,
which are but skins, things slight, trivial, and superficial in comparison,
must we part with, to preserve the life of our souls, by the true faith, and
love of Christ; for he that does not forsake all, if need be, for him, is not
worthy of him; as he himself testifies. And what Cicero said of his Country,
which he held second to nothing in the merit of his respect, we may more truly
say of Christ, and true religion; Cari sunt parents, liberi, propinqui, amici,
at omnes omnium charitates patria una complexa est; Our Parents are dear unto
us, so are our children, our kindred, and acquaintance, but all the love of
those, does Religion alone comprize. If we did but justly poyse the poverty of
the worlds great riches, and the riches of a good Christian in his greatest
poverty; who holding Christ, has with him, the treasures of wisdom, and
goodness, who is the Magazine and Storehouse of them all; we would count it a
piece of folly in that man, who should abandon the one, to abound in the other,
below the degree of Esau's, who sold his birrh right for a mess of pottage, or
of Esop's dog, who snapping at the shadow, let go the substance. O how much
better is it to sit on Jobs dunghill, and with him to know that our Redeemer
lives; than in Solomon's throne with the Kings of the earth, or in Moses chair
with the Scribes and Pharisees, and to bandy our selves against Gods anointed
with the one; and to say well, and not do it, with the other.

Most true it is, that very many of the Children of God, like the ark of the
testament, which was continually hurried from place to place, until it was
settled in the glorious temple of Solomon; so are they, until they be settled in
the more glorious kingdom of heaven. And like Noah's Dove, which found no rest
until it returned to the ark; so they have their bodies worn with continual
afflictions; until they be laid up in the common wardrob of the grave. They
are exposed to almost as many miseries, as they live minutes; no place being so
barren of trouble, but can afford them a full-handed harvest thereof. They
wander, as the Apostle says, Heb. 11.27.
in sheepskins and goatskins, being in want, straightened, and afflicted: wherein
though the floods of affliction lift up their waves, and are ready to overwhelm
their souls; and the winds of temptation as ready to overturn them; yet if
with St. Peter they can stretch forth the hands of their faith unto Christ, he
will pluck their feet out of the danger that gapeth for them, and cover them
with the wings of his protection, as the Mercy-Seat covered the ark. And as the
Serpent, if he have but a small part of his body joined to his head, he still
lives: So the afflictions of the children of God, though they take from them
all that this world has added to them, yea their bodies from their souls, if
yet they keep their souls united unto Christ their head, they still preserve
their lives uncouquered: when as the wicked, whom every breath of disaster
drives away, whom the satisfying of every sinful desire shall force from that
power of godliness which they ought in each action to express, are dead while
they live: as the Apostle S. Jude says; Jude. 12.
twice dead, and plucked up by the roots.

If therefore the unstinted malice of the devil, should leave us with Job, as
naked as when we came out of our mothers womb; rob us of the instruments of
our earthly eternity, and our loves greatest inheritors, our children; deprive
us of our lives sweetest companion, our health; and print our bodies more full
of boyles and sores than Dive's dogs could have licked; and which doubles all
these, leave us nothing but a Wife, whose weakness he corrupts, as he did in
Paradise, to become a fellow-tempter with himself; and friends, who in the
depth of of this Misery shall rather make our griefs smart more with salt
upbraydings* than any way assuage them with the oil of consolation: and that
all this sharp siege be laid against us, to pluck us from our allegiance to
Christ, and to cut us off from being members of his body; we must willingly
banish all the but cobweb comforts of this life, to hold on the rock of comfort
Christ Jesus; with the disciples, we must forsake our nets to follow him; with
the Patriarch Joseph, leave our garments behind us and fly away, rather than
yield to any sinful pleasure which should separate us from him; yea, devesting
our selves of all our wealth, fly away naked, with the yong-man in the gospel,
rather than abandon our virtue which should apparel our minds. In which loss
of outward things, there is this advantage, that it is a great allay unto the
devils temptations; for as a Serpent (says Pliny) shuns a naked man, but
pursues a clothed; so the devil does not so easily assayl a poor man with
temptations, who with the possession, has also laid aside the affection of
temporal things: but he has a great advantage of prevayling over the rich; as
the Apostle says: They that will be rich, 1. Tim. 6.9.
fall into temptation, and a snar of the devil, and into many unprofitable and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in ruin and destruction. We must therefore
part with the fruit of our bodies, to preserve us from the sin of our souls;
and rank our friends, health, wife, yea life and all, in the number of trifles;
knowing how infinitely they are overballanced by the proper worth of Christ, as
also by the benefit which reflects upon us from him, Heb. 12.2.
who is the author and finisher of our faith: who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame, and sits at the
right hand of God.

Very many are the examples of heathen men, who for some private good unto
themselves, as the attainment of learning; or some public good unto their
Country, as the safety thereof, have willingly surrendered up themselves to
diverse forms of outward calamity. Democritus pulled out his own eyes; Crates
cast all his goods into the sea; Pythagoras banished himself from his native
soil; Anaxagoras neglected all public honors, all private contentment, that
he might let his thoughts loose wholly to the studdy of Philosophy. Ancurus the
son of Midas sacrifised his life to the floods, Curtius to the flames, that
they might fix their Countries in their former safety. Codrus the king of
Athens, when both he and his enemies had enquired at the oracle of Apollo, who
should be conquerors, and that it was answered, They whose king should fall in
the battle; hence it being proclaimed through both armies, that no hands fury
should direct it self against the king of the contrary side; Codrus to delude
the policy of his adversaries, shrouded under the habit of a common soldier,
mingled himself in the battle, and there with over-daring valor, provoked
death to seize upon him, and so preserved as many by his valiant death, as he
had done by his just life. And shall those heathen perform all these things,
for the gaining or keeping of some such thing, as can but in the second file
challenge a place in our affections; and shall not we do and suffer more, to
hold Christ in our hearts by faith and love? with whom the availes of the whole
world being counterpoysed, prove too light; as he himself testifies saying;
What does it profit a man, Math. 16.26.
if he win the whole word, and lose his own soul? But above all, matchless
herein have been the examples of holy Martyrs and Saints in all ages of the
Church, whose unspeakable sufferings for the love of Christ, and rather than
they would believe, or do, or so much as think a thought which was not
warranted by his word, were such, that though they could not win pity to their
suffering, or belief to their assertions, yet by their patience and courage in
suffering, they taught the highest degree of admiration to the hardest
conceits. Let then these great letters in the Christ-crosse-row, make up a
book for us, which running we may read, and copy out their actions for our
lives imitation.

But alas, how far are most men in these days strayed from the Serpentine
prudence of our forefathers, in their care of preserving their head Christ
Jesus, unassayled or at least unhurt? but rather, like Judas, who sold him for
thirty pence, many of us are ready to sell him thirty times for a penny. The
cruelty of the Jews, was piety compared to us; that which the most of them
did, was as S. Paul confesses of himself, Heb. 6.6.
ignorantly through unbeleef; but we profess we know him, profess we
believe in him, and yet crucify again to our selves the Son of God. When thou
contemnest or neglectest the Ordinances of God, thou spittest in thy Saviors
face; when thou disobeyest the just commandments of thy superiors, thou
plattest a crown of thorns on his head; when thy hands are hands of iniquity,
and thy feet are swift to shed blood, thou nailest his hands and his feet; when
thou oppressest, or do not relieve the poor, thou give him gall and vinegar
to drink; when thou do, or consentest to any thing which endomageth his
children, his Servants, thou cryest out with the Jews, crucify him, crucify
him. Qui in deum delinquit, eum relinquit: He that sins against God, forsakes
him. Whosoever purchases any profit, enjoys any pleasure, gives way unto
any Passion, satisfies himself in any action which Gods word has pronounced
unlawful, it is he, that contrary to the prudent serpent, hazards the loss of
his head, puts himself in danger to be separated from Christ to preserve his
hands or his feet, his hayr or his nails, or any thing that is of lower value;
and is like unto the Jews, who cried out, not him, but Barabbas.

Such are all covetous persons, whose greedy affections are like Pharaoh's lean
kin, which when they had eaten up the fat, it could not be perceived that they
had eaten it; but were still as evill-favoured as they were before: so these
men, whatsoever they devour, are never satisfied, but have their desires as
vast and empty as ever; and are like Apprentises Christ-masse-boxes, to take
all in, but to restore none till they be broken, nor they till they be dead.
Such are also the Receivers of bribes, who like Gehazi, when they receive a
bribe, believe they receive a Blessing, for so he called it; but as he found
it, so shall they, that a bitter Curse is couched under it: for whatsoever men
get by bribery, sacrilege, oppression, ufury, cosenage, forswearing, lying or
the like, is like to prove as fatal to them, as that piece of flesh which the
Eagle stole from the altar, that had a coal clave to it, which set her nest on
fire. Such also are all those who do spend their means as unlawfully as these
get it; who as S. Gregory says, when the poor members of Christ are pinched
with hunger and want, do profusely spend their Estates on harlots, on drink,
on dice, on balls, on plays, on vain and soul-killing pleasures: or else their
time in idleness, and impertinent visits; like one Vatia, on whom was made this
Epitaph: Here lies Vatia, who grew old in nothing but idleness. Or else in
vain, obscene, foolish, fruitless discourses, interlarding their speeches with
lies, to make them more plausible; powdring them with oaths, to make them (as
they think) more graceful. O what a folly is it in those men (and in whom
almost is not that folly?) that when they may hold Christ, and the consequent
thereof their Salvation, for denying of themselves unlawful gains or
pleasures, such as perish like Jonas gourd, as soon as they be sprung up, and
leave nothing behind them but repentance; when they may keep the true faith and
love of Christ with the loss of their lives, by which loss they shall gain it;
of their honors, of their estates, of their friends, for which they shall be
recompensed, even in this life, an hundred fold; will yet notwithstanding, with
Jeroboam, for the politic respect of keeping of his kingdom; with Peter, for
the declining of some bodily danger; with Ananias and Saphira, for withholding
back a little money; with Saul, for preserving the fattest of the Cattle; with
the man of Israel, for the unchaste embraces of a harlot; with Baltazar, for
c^rowsing in the cups of the Sanctuary; yea with our first Parents, for an
apple, or a piece of bread, as Solomon says, will transgress, and suffer
themselves to be separated from the fountain of life, Christ Jesus, rather than
say with holy Joseph, Genesis 39.
How can I do this evil, and sin against my God? O let not, let not the least
shadow of such weakness fall upon our souls, as shall make us prefer any thing
before our union with Christ, but let us (as we ought) witness the truth of the
Apostles, saying in our selves; Mat. 19.27.
We have forsaken all, and followed thee.

Now that which must knit and glue us unto Christ is faith; which while we
hold, we shall be able to quench all the fiery darts, the temptations of the
devil, as says the Apostle. The devil and his instruments the wicked, while
they rob us of our external felicities, do but as David did unto Saul, cut
off the lap of our garments; but if they force us from the fortress of our
faith, as he did unto Goliath, they cut off our heads. Let us therefore keep
faith and a good conscience, and make no shipwreck of that precious
merchandise, like Hymeneus and Alexander, reproved by S. Paul: but in all the
rough tempests of this life's calamities, let us anchor our faith and hope upon
Christ, who is the sure ground of our salvation. In all the Siren enchantments
of sinful pleasures, with Ulysses, let us tie our selves to the mainmast of a
strong, immovable, godly resolution; whereby whatsoever evil we suffer, or
seeming good we may enjoy to rent us from the stedfastness of our faith, we may
ever with such a calm, and constant indifferency give them entertainment, that
neither the one nor the other may remove us: but that we may still remain like
a man in an open field, who to which part of the horizon soever he sends his
eye, he himself is always in the center. And let us not like the dirty-minded
Gadarens, banish Christ out of our Country, for the loss of a few swine; nor
forsake our profession of him, nor swerve one hayrs breadth from the line of his
Commandments, to inherit whatsoever either profit, or pleasure, or ought else
has endeared to the eye of the world: seeing their purchase is care, their
possession trouble, their essence vanity, and their end misery. But rather in
the midst of this worlds conflicts, let us engrave that triumphant motto of S.
Paul on the Ensign of our Faith; Romans 8.35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish,
or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or persecution, or sword? I am certain that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor strength, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

CHAP. VI.
A Fourth exercise of Prudence in the Serpent, not unworthy our imitation, is
this: The Serpent when he swimmeth, to avoid the danger of drowning, keeps
his head always lifted above the waters: So we while we swim through the Sea
of this lives actions, must ever bear up the head of our reason, that we be not
drowned in pleasure and delight. The world is a Sea, and man a ship; adversity
is his ballast, prosperity his sayls, passions his Saylors, and reason his
Pilot, who sits at the helm to steer his course aright: adversity like ballast
keeps us even and steady; but when our over-busie passions do hoyse up more
sayls of pleasure, than our weak barks can bear, we run our selves under water,
and over-whelm our reason, and reasonable souls in the dead Sea of sin.

Of the two grand enemies of the soul, prosperity and adversity, this is more
horrid in the view, but that more dangerous in the event. A Summers Sunshine,
is the mother of more diseases, than a Winters Frost. The one seeks to make a
conquest on our virtue by force, and that makes us (like a besieged City)
fortify our selves more strongly for resistance; the other, by the treaties of
peace, by the tribute of gifts, seeks to bring our minds into servitude, and
this melts our souls, our too too easy souls into yielding. The fire burns
hotter by being blown on by the cold wind, but the Sun shining on it, well nigh
puts it out: so virtue flames more brightly, being blown on by the cold wind of
adversity, but is extinguished by the Sunshine of prosperity; like lime, which
is set on fire with water, and (as they say) is quenched with oil. That
prosperity does draw more to ruin, than adversity does drive, the Prophet David
does intimate; where he says, Psalm. 9.7.
a thousand shall fall besides thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand: There
is ten to one, whose virtue the right hand of prosperity does choke more than
the left hand of adversity does starve.

Yet this is not the legitimate issue of prosperity, but a bastard; not the
necessary effect thereof, but such a one, as unto which, our abuse thereof
gives birth. For God gives prosperity and delights unto us, as he gave Manna to
the children of Israel in the wilderness, to nourish and refresh our
else-fainting souls, whilst we travail through the stony and thorny wilderness
of this worlds troubles and encumbrances: but it is our abuse of it beyond his
prescription, which begets this evil effect; as the Israelites keeping their
Manna longer than was commanded, it turned into Worms. As S. Gregory says, non
est census in crimine, sed affectus: there is no evil in prosperity it self,
but in our over-love of it; which Spider-like, turns the sweetness of it to
poison in our selves. As it happened in Solomon, who abused the unparalleld
riches and glory of his kingdom, unto the love of strange women, and strange
Gods; which brought forth this effect also, even the renting of the greatest
part of the kingdom from his successors.

Pleasure like a Snayl, which creeps from the bottom to the top of the tree,
steals upon all, but chiefly on the highest; where it destroys the
ornaments of virtue, as that devours the leaves; leaving nothing behind but a
slimie tract of foul and infamous example. Of which we must therefore taste
very sparingly, as Jonathan did honey, only with the top of his rod; for as honey
eaten abundantly breeds much choler, so does the abundant sweetness of
pleasure, the bitterness of Gods wrath. The Dogs that drink at the river Nilus,
do but take a lap and away, for fear the Crocodiles should come and devour
them; we should but sip of the water of earthly delights, lest by our dwelling
thereon, we offer our souls a prey unto the devil. Pleasure is of a bewitching
and alluring nature, which advantage the devil takes against us, covertly
hiding some dangerous temptation under such a fair-seeming outside. Hanibal, to
entrap his enemies, mingled their wine with Mandrake, whose operation is
betwixt sleep and poison; so the devil with the wine of prosperity does mingle
the temptation of Security, which while we over-greedily suck in, we cast our
selves into the drowsy Lethargy of sin.

It is reported of a certain beautiful woman, that had so long accustomed her
self to poisons, by making them her ordinary food, that she brought her whole
constitution and complexion to be of the same power that the poison was, and
yet she retained so much outward sweetness, that she allured kings to her
embraces; even so prosperity and pleasure has so long pampered it self with
the poison of sin, that her nature is almost become infectious; and yet does
she provoke most men to her love, by retaining an outward beauty and color of
being the same she was. It behooveth us therefore to beware of her
enchantments, and not be won by the sweetness thereof, to forsake our right
unto the kingdom of heaven; nor to set up our rest here in this world, like the
two tribes and a half, who by the pleasantness of the land were persuaded to
dwell on this side Jordan, and not to enter into the land of Canaan. Which that
we may do we must (wisely imitating the Serpent) keep our heads above the
water, that is, not suffer our reason to be infatuated with pleasure, nor
drenched in the rivers of delight. But let us so bear her up, that she may bear
us up; for while a man keeps his head above water, his head will keep him from
drowning. And let our reason direct us in the due measure of pleasures that we
ought to take; which holding the resemblance of physic and not of food, if we
take too deep a draught thereof, it may destroy us.

But it is a misery which deserves a further degree of sorrow than tears can
express, to behold with what unstinted appetite men in these days (especially
those whom the bountiful hand of God has crowned with plenty) do pursue
their pleasures; as if they were born to no other end, but to live, and to wast
that life in voluptuousnes: and whereas we should take moderat pleasures only
to refresh us in the troubles of this life, they desire life only to enjoy
their pleasures: so that it has gained the place and credit of a proverb
amongst us, to say, what is a gentleman but his pleasure? And what is their
pleasure, but the pleasure of sin? who abusing the bounty of God, whereby he
has bestowed upon them the riches of this world, and their precious time, do
spend them in such unlawful actions, as would startle an honest man's heart to
think, and surprise him with horror to declare. Whose impious demeanor does
far surpass the wits and inventions of all libellers, in doing more
wickedness, than they could imagine; and conquering the examples of all past
ages with their transcendent impieties. In whom drunkenness, and gluttony,
pride, vanity, and luxury, have lost the name of vices by their frequent use,
and have purchased the privilege of being a man's warrantable manners: so that
not to be evil, is now counted the greatest evil, and to be so, the greatest
virtue; 1. Pet. 4.4.
in so much as (as S. Peter says) they wonder that you do not run together
with them, into the same confusion of luxury, speaking evil of you.

Seneca says, the time shall come wherein drunkenness shall be honored, and
it shall be counted a virtue to drink stoutly. That time came long since, and
still remains; wherein many are so buried in sleep and wine that that may be
verified of them, which was once spoken of the Emperor Bonosus, Non ut vivat
natus est, sed ut bibat; He is not born to live, but to drink; who being
afterward strangled with a halter, was thus jeasted at by the People; amphora
pendet non homo: it is a pitcher that is hanged and not a man. And in this
delight do men drown the head of their reason, and darken the eyes of their
understanding and so like blind men, fall from hence into the depth of all
other impieties. With Noah, they discover the nakedness of their dispositions
to the derision of every beholder; and are ready in they drunkenness, with
Alexander the great, to kill their dearest friends; with Marcus Antonius, to
vomit on the Tribunal; with Lot, to defile their own daughters: yea what
beastly evil is there amongst those, which nature herself shames to behold, to
which this vice opens not a way? St. Augustine reports of a certain young man,
who being drunk, ravished his mother, Stabd his Father, and wounded two of his
sisters to death. And therefore the Poets say, that Bacchus the Heathenish God
of wine, was born in thunder, and is usually painted with horns, because that
drunkards are always pushing and quarrelling, and their effects dangerous and
dreadful. And no less dangerous are the effects of gluttony, though not so
common, because more costly; and yet too too common: for do we not see, that
although heathenism be banished, yet Idolatry is still maintained amongst us;
and men having no other Idol, do idolize themselves; and make that dunghill
covered with snow, their bellies, their God; whose altars, their tables, they
make to crack with the weighty Sacrifice of their delicious viands: they
impoverish sea and land to enrich their tables, and tenter their inventions
with unheard of dainties, to please the witty gluttony of a meal. What hewing
and squaring is there of their bel^y-timber, their diet? while their souls in
the mean time (as the Prophet speaks) are daubed up with untempered mortar.
What cost is there? what curiosity, in despite of nature, to preserve things
beyond, or to hasten them before the time that she has allotted for their
season? And for the better relish of these their cates, they wish (with
Philox^nus) their necks as long as a cranes, that they may feel the more
sweetness in their meats and drinks. Meats for the belly, and the belly for
meats (says St. Paul) but God shall destroy both it and them.

To this do men add the excess of over-coftly apparel and perfumes, of
sumptuous buildings, and rich furniture, of revellings and dancings, pastimes
and sports; consuming therein more than would maintain an army; wearing the
price of a Lordship at their eats, yea at their shoes, with Poppea the wife
of Nero. They out vie the bravery of the Lillies, as much as they did Solomon's,
and strive to outshine the Stars in the number and luster of their precious
Stones; disdaining to let their feet touch that earth, wh^lst they live, which
their heads shall be covered with, when they are dead: whose glory, like a
flaming palace, while it shines consumes them, and in the end will bring them
to ashes. Lucius Plotius, who was proscribed in the Triumvirate, and Muleasses
the expulsed King of Tunis, were bound to bewayl the unhappy excess of costly
perfumes, who hiding themselves for fear, were betrayed to their enemies by the
smell of their sweet odors. And in these and the like kinds of excesses, do
men drown both their reason and their fortunes, both their souls and bodies;
and are not only passive, but active in their own ruin; they do not only
stand under a falling house, but pull it down upon them; and are not only
executed, which implies guiltiness; but they are executioners, which implies
dishonor; and executioners of themselves, which implies impiety. And when in
these prodigious impieties men have melted their patrimonies, they are forced
to continue their profuseness by injustice, oppression, cosenage, and all
kinds both of craft and cruelty; like birds and beasts of prey, satisfying
their own ravenous desires with the ruins of others; and making one sin the
fuel to another; with those shames of nature, and monsters of mankind, Nero,
Caligula, Domitian, and many others. But above all, the example of Cleopes a
king of Egypt is most remarkable in this kind, who wanting money to finish the
witness of his folly begun in the building of a Pyramid, and being barren of
all other means, basely prostituted the body of his most beautiful daughter,
to every slave that would bring one stone ready polished to the building
thereof. And although there are but few King* and Em^erours, or persons so
vastly rich, as to make themselves guilty of such monstrous impieties*
according to the uttermost extention thereof; yet in the intention and
vehemence of their desi^es (as their practice, according to their ability does
show) there are too many: who are the pictures of Sardanapalus, and Nero in
miniature* and their contents bound up in a smaller volume.

And no less then the most frequent of the former evils, does unlawful Lust
tyrannize amongst men, who consume therein their bodies and goods, their good
names and their souls: which is such a shameful nature* that it does fly the
naming, of such fearful consequences that they exceed the naming. Who is there
that (with holy Job) has made a covenant with his eyes, not to look upon a
woman to lust after her? and is not rather like unto Dinah the daughter of
Jacob, who went a gadding to see the maids of the Country, until she was none
her self? By whom the Stews are more boldly frequented than the Church, or at
least more willingly; 2 Pet. 2.14.
having eyes full of adultery (as says S. Peter) and that cannot cease to sin.
Such is the heat of their unlawful desires, that it cannot hide it self in
their hearts but must ^eep out at their eyes, which like burning-glasses,
collect the beams of beauty, which set their hearts on fire: on whom the law of
Zaleucus of Locris were deservedly executed, who commanded that the eyes of the
adulterer should be pulled out. Lust is an infernal fire, whose fuel is
gluttony and drunkenness, whose sparks are obscene words, whose ashes are
uncleanness, whose smoke is infamy, and whose end is torment. And in these and
many more voluptuous courses, do millions of men ruin their souls; into whom,
as into the herd of Swine, the devils do enter, and carry them headlong into
the deep of eternal perdition.

I deny not but there is a lawful use of all Gods creatures; he made (as the
Scripture says) Oil to make a man have a cheerful countenance, and wine and
bread to strengthen, man's heart; and there is a place allowed to silks, and
gold, and precious stones, both for our use and ornament; to each one according
to his ability, and dignity. They that are in Kings Courts, may wear soft
raiment; but it was the character of the rich glutton in the Gospel, to be
clothed in purple and fine linen, and to fare deliciously every day: and it
was the brand of the children of Israel, that they sat down to eat and to
drink, and rose up to play. We may have these things, but they must not have
us; their use must follow our reason, not tread it down; we may sometimes swim
in lawful pleasures, but we must never be drowned in them. But when our
pleasure in these earthly things does exceed the due measure, or our delights
direct themselves unto unlawful objects; yea, when we do not only abuse our
delights but delight in that abuse; when we do not only commit evil, but
rejoice in evil committed; flattering and hugging our selves in our abhorred
courses, like impious Nero that laughed at the flame of that great City that
himself had set on fire, yea when men proceed to such an height of w^ckedness
(and to such a he^ght they do proceed) that though they make the devil and his
fiends glad, yet they make them wonder more, to see that man of himself is
grown more exquisite in evil, than their temptations can instruct them, and
make them wish their wickedness were their own: then our Reason, and Piety* and
all good forsakes us; and we justly pull upon our selves that curse of the
Psalmist; Ps. 68.23.
Let their table be made a Snare unto them, a recompense, and a stumbling
block; Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see, and always bow down
their backs.

God indeed made Woman for man, Eve for Adam; yet he never said increase and
multiply, until they were married; to show that he has a curse, and not a
blessing for unlawful unions. He allows us the use of meats and drinks, but
we must take them seasonably as, Solomon says, for strength, Ecc. 1^.17.
and not for luxury. Heraclitus the Philosopher, being requested in a Sedition
to declare his opinion, how the City might be brought to live in peace and
concord; as soon as he was ascended the Pulpit, called for a cup of cold water,
wherein he strewed a little meal, and when he had drunk it off he descended
without speak^ng a word; but signifying thereby, after his dark manner, that so
the City should be without sedition, if they would forsake their superfluous
pleasures, and inure themselves, to temperance and hardness: so also shall we
allay the rebellion of passions, which lead us on to the looseness of pleasure,
raised against the Sovereignty of reason, if we apply a mean and moderation to
all our delights. Observing the same proportion in the dedicating of our
selves, our time and means unto Gods service, and our own lawful pleasures,
(for unto unlawful not an atome is to be allowed) that Noah did in receiving
the beasts into the ark; of which there were seven couple of clean to but two
of unclean; showing us thereby, that as the seven clean couple were for the
service of God, and the necessary sustenance of man; and the two unclean only
for delight and recreation so our time and means spent in worldly pleasures,
should be much less than that which we offer to the service of God, and our
own necessi^ies. And as Hunters will not suffer their hounds to eat much
carrion when they are to hunt because the strength thereof offends the
quickness of their sent, and hinders the pursuit of their game; so should we
forbear to glut our selves with carrion-pleasures, which do so infect our
minds, that they deprive us of delight in goodness, and hinder us from
prosecuting our devotions to God, and our endeavors in our callings. And
though men enjoy the pleasures of sin, yet they will last but for a season, as
S. Paul says; and then, as Saturn by whom the ancients did signify pleasure,
who was therefore so called, a Saturando, of glutting, as Isodore says, was
always painted most sorrowful; so the short line of their pleasures will end
in the period of sadness and repentance: as Boethius says, voluptates tristes
habent exitus, the pleasures of sin have bitter rivers through delicious
springs: and as Saint Paul says, Phil. 3.19.
whose end is destruction, whose belly is their God, and glory their shame, who
mind earthly things.

Let us therefore (as our Savior commands us) take heed that our hearts be not
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke 21.34.
nor with the cares nor pleasures of this life. And as the Apostle says*
Dearly beloved, 1 Pet. 2.11.
I beseech you as pilgrims and strangers, abstain from fleshly desires, which
fight against the soul. That so contenting our selves with that moderate
proportion of the Manna of pleasure, which God has allowed us while we
travail through the wilderness of this world, we may at the length possess the
land of Canaan, wherein all plenty of pleasures are perpetually resident: where
our desires shall never want satisfaction, nor satisfaction ever breed satiety:
where we shall enjoy the happy fellowship of Saints and Angels, and the most
blessed vision of God himself; Ps. 15.11.
in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore.

CHAP. VII.
THE last work of Prudence to which the serpents example does invite us, is
this that follows. It was the custom of those places where serpents did most
abound, to draw them out of their lurking holes with charms, and so destroy
them; as the Poet says.

Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis.

The cold Serpent in the meadows is burst with charme^.

Now the Serpent to prevent this danger, does stop his ears; as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 57.6.
like the deaf adder, which stops her ears, which will not hear the voice
of the charmers, and of the sorcerer enchanting wisely. Which she does (as S.
Jsodore says) by laying one ear close unto the ground, and stopping the other
ear with her tail: So ought we to resist the charms, that is, the
temptations of that grand Magic the devil, with his companions, the flesh
and the world, by the consideration of the end, signified by the serpents tail;
and with the memory of the worlds vanity, frailty, and inconstancy, as she
does by laying the other ear unto the ground.

The brittle frailty of this world, and of the vanities thereof, unto whose
fruition the devils temptations do so importunatly urge our minds, is as
certainly known to all, as it is seldom seriously thought on by any. For if it
were, how can we imagine, that men would be so indulgent to their crimes, and
so obedient to the devils suggestions, that a chime does not more closely
follow the stroke of the clock, than their practices his provocations; as if
the devil had granted them a perpetuity of pleasure, and sealed the monopoly
of sin to them, and to their heirs for ever. When as (alas) God shall quickly
take their delights from them, or them from their delights: their delights from
them, for as Solomon says, Riches will take the wings of an eagle, Pro. 23.5.
and will fly into heaven; or them from their delights, as our Savior says.
Thou fool, this night they take away thy soul. Luke. 12.20.
Moses well remembered how short lived they were like unto that flower which
Pliny speaks of which springs in the morning, is full blown at noon, and fades
at night; Heb. 11.25.
and therefore chose rather to be afflicted with the children of God, than to
enjoy the temporal pleasure of Sin: counting the reproach of Christ greater
riches, than the treasures of the Egiptians.

The world for the frailty and inconstancy thereof, is by S. John compared to a
sea; as he says in the Apocalips; Before the thron there was a sea of glass,
Apoc. 4.6.
like unto crystal; by which sea is meant the world, which for it is frailty is
glass, for it is unconstancy a sea. A sea swelling with pride, blew with envy,
boiling with anger, deep with averise, frothy with luxury. It is a Sea,
tempestuous with controversies, stormy with affl^ctions, tumultuous with
disorders. The sea yealds an obedient conformity to the motions of the moon,
and swells highest in a joyful imitation, when she is in the springtide of
her light, either toward the heavens, as in the change, or toward the earth*
as in the full; and as she does wax or wain, so does he either flow into a
pleurisy, or ebb into a consumption of his waters: and even thus is the world
the page of fortune, whose unconstant and ever-changing motions, do hurry
about, like spokes in a wheel, the condition of all mortals: as the Apostle
says; 1. Cor. 7.31.
The fashion of this world passes away. An hour-glasse does change it is
posture every hour, and that part which was even now above, is now below; that
which was even now full, is now empty; nor can one side be filled, but by
emptying the other; such is the world, every moment turned upside down, and men
are now full, now empty; Nor can they often fill themselves, without the ruin
or prejudice of others, yea many times, as Laban did to Jaacob, when men have
toyled in it is service many years, it rewards them with loathed Leah, instead
of loved Rachel. Like Jael it carries milk in one hand to nourish, and a
hammer and a nayl in the other to destroy; and as Joab did to Amasa, while it
kisseth us, it kills us. And although like the moon, it be sometimes at at
the full of glory yet is it even then like her also mingled with the spots of
adversity, and subject to the change of every moment. And therefore (as they
say) at the consecration of the Popes, the Master of the ceremonies goeing
before, carries in one hand a burning taper, in the other a stick with some
flax tied on the top thereof, which he setting on fire, cries with a loud
voice, Pater sancte, sic transit gloria mundi; Holy Father, so passes away the
glory of the world.

The plenty of histories in this kind exceeds our Arithmetique; every
particular man's condition, almost being a volume of the worlds frailty, and a
constant witness of it is inconstancy. Adonibezec in the first of the book of
Judges, who had been the triumphant Victor over seventy Kings, and in his
wanton cruelty cutting off the thumbs of their hands and feet, made them pick
up crumbs under his table; enforcing the act, yet depriving them of the power,
making them do that which he had disabled them to do, was ere long returned
with an equal measure, which made him cry out; Judge. 1.7.
As I have done, so God has rewarded me. Nabuchadonozor's unparalled
m^tamorphosis, who knows not? Who in the despite of Philosophy, proved in
himself the transmigration of Species, and from a man fell into a beast, in
nature now, as was in practice before; to show that when men sin against the
light of nature, they may suffer against the law of nature.

It is reported of Demetrius, one of Alexander the great his Captains, that in
the whole circle of his life, being threescore years and four, after the
measure of his age had styled him man, never continued three years in one
condition. Of Julius Caesar also, that great awer of the world, and tyrant over
the Commonwealth, it is doubted, whether in the whole course of his life.
Fortune were an indifferent arbitrer unto him of good and evil success* but
in the misery of his death, no doubt all his lives happiness was exceedingly
overballanc'd; who in the Zenith, and highest erection of his glory with three
and twenty wounds, the deepest whereof given by his dearest Brutus, and that in
the Court of his deadly enemy Pompey, yielded up his life a sacrifice to the
peoples liberty.

The like unhappy change pursued the ever-renowned, and once highly advanced
Captain Belisarius; who after he had triumphed over the Persians, and reduced
to the Roman obedience all Africa and Italy, which had been long possessed by
the Goths and Vandalls; and after he had brought one of the Kings of the
Vandalls to such a pass, that he begged three things; a loaf of bread a
sponge to wipe his eyes, and a harp to tune his sorrow to; his wife who was
given him for a help, became the only help to his destruction; whose insolent
behavior against the Empress, like winds thrown upon the Seas, raised such
billows of indignation in the Emperor, that they put this good man's fortune to
an utter shipwreck; who did not only lose all his goods, but the means whereby
he might get more, his sight; and was forced to beg his bread with Da obolo
Belisario Viator, and thus, though blind did most clearly see, the frailty of
this worlds felicity. Therefore Dionisius the King of Syracusa, represented the
brittle felicity of his kingdom unto his Parasite Damocles (which Damocles had
made to seem exceeding great, through the multiplying glass of his flattery,
by seating him in a royal throne, at a sumptuous Banquet, with all the state
and glory of the kingdom about him; but withal causing a naked sword to be
hung over his head, which was only held up by a horses hair, which every minute
threatened his destruction. It was likewise the custom of the Romans in their
triumphs, for a slave to ride behind in the Chariot with the triumpher, who did
often whisper unto him to look behind him: there was likewise a whip and a bell
tied to the Charyot, to admonish him, that notwithstanding the present
exaltation of his honor, he might be brought to such a degree of calamity as
to be scourged or put to death; of which the bell was the sign, it being the
custom of the old Romans, to ring a bell before a dead Corpse, lest any by
approaching too near should defile themselves thereby. Now if we would allow
these and the like images of the worlds frailty a place in our considerations;
and remember that all the glory, beauty, and pleasures thereof, are as truly
short as they are seeming sweet, and that though they be sweet in the enjoying
yet they are bitter in the end; surely it would so steel our resolutions
against the devils temptations, it would so stop our ears against the voice of
his charms, that fear standing at the door of our hearts, would resist the
entrance of sin into our souls: and teach us to apply such a mean and
moderation to all worldly endeavors, that as the Apostle says, we should use
this world as though we used it not. 1 Cor. 7.31.


The latter means whereby we must make deaf our ears, to the powerful charms of
the devils temptations, is the meditation of our own end; like the Serpent,
which stops her other ear with her tail Which meditation may justly claim the
exercise of our most serious thoughts, since the devils suggestions are chiefly
plotted for the undermining of this consideration; Who is therefore likened to
a Serpent, which biteth the horses heels, that he makes him cast his rider:
man's body is this horse his soul the rider, his heel his end; the meditation
whereof, if the devil do bereave us, we are overthrown both horse and man.
There is no stronger bit to curb the temptations of our unbridled flesh, than
to consider what a dear price we shall pay for our pleasures in our death, and
at our judgment. In all thy works, remember the last things, (says the
wiseman) and thou shall never sin. Eccles. 7.40.
The birds direct their passage through the air with their tayls, so do the
Fishes in the Sea; the rudders, motion guides the Ship and the beasts with
their tayls beat away the flies: temptations are flies, whence the Devil is
called Beelzebub, which signifies the God or Father of flies; all which are
repelled by the mediation of our end signified by the Serpents tail; and the
course of our actions for which we embarque our selves, thereby as by a rudder
rightly steered to the Port of happiness. When the devil tempts us to pride,
our flesh to lust, the world to vain delights, if we did but allow this
meditation of our end a full place in our thoughts, that we must die one day,
we may dye this day, and that after death comes judgment, wherein we must
satisfy to the uttermost farthing the great debt of our sins, and that in such
a manner and measure, as neither eloquence nor silence can express; surely I
think we should not (as many do) run on in evil faster than the devil can
drive them, and dare him to present them with a temptation which they dare not
execute: but rather like the Peacock, who when he looks upon the blackness of
his feet, lets fall his Plumes, and forgets the beauty of his train; So we
casting our thoughts down upon our end should neglect all the delights that
temptations promise in their sinful satisfaction. Every man when he is upon
his bed of sickness; when he is counting his last sand; when death is so near
him that he cannot turn his eyes from it, every one seeing it in his eyes;
then how many vows and promises does he offer up of ^esisting all temp^ation
unto sin, unto which he has formerly too easily consented if he may but by the
return of his health, renew again the almost expired league betwixt his body
and his soul. Yea even the devil himself as the old d^^^ich has it when he
wa^ sick would be a Monk and a holy man.

Aegrotat Demon, Monachus
tunc esse vol^bat
Convaluit Demon, Demon ut
ante fuit.
The Devil was sick, the Devil
a Monk would be,
The Devil was well, the Devil
a Monk was he.
But if we did in our healths entertain this consideration of death, and the
day of judgment; and make it as familiar and present to our minds, as the
approaches thereof are near unto the sick, no doubt but it would work in us the
same never failing effects.

If we did make remembrance, our Philips boy, to ring the knell of mortality
each morning in our ears; and if with S. Jerome, there were no action of our
life, in whose performance we did not think we heard the sound of the
Archangels trumpet, proclaming this convocation in our ears: Arise ye dead, and
come to judgment: if we did remember these tormenting flames which God has
prepared for the devil and wicked men; Isay 30.33.
whose fuel is fire and much wo^d, the breath of our Lord like a torrent of
brimstone enflaming it; which though it torment them, yet it shall not consume
them, as though they should have a period of their pains; but like the
Salamander they shall live still in the flame; and be denied, with Dives, a
drop of water, more than their tears; which will be so far from asswaging their
heat, that the saltness thereof shall increase their ames: and yet in the high
boiling of this their heat, such conflicts of punishment shall meet in them,
that through extreme cold, they shall gnash their teeth; for as our Savior
says, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. If I say, these
meditations were in us and did abound, surely, they would strengthen us to
strangle temptations in their conception, and to resist the untimely birth of
sin.

If the rich man mentioned in the Gospel, had thought that his soul should
have been hurried that night to hell he would never have dreamed of building
his barns bigger. Few men will steel at the gallows, or speak treason on the
rack; but it is our putting the evil day far from us, that makes every day
evil to us. We forget the evil of punishment, which make us commit the evil
of sin. Where we may prevent our sins by remembering of the punishment then we
think not on it; and when we think on it, which is not til we feel it then it
is to late to prevent it. O how humbly (think you) would the fallen Angels
behave themselves, if they were enthroniz'd in their ancient glory! O how
abstemiously would our first Parents have walked by the forbidden fruit, if
they might have been repossessed of their earthly Paradise! And how temperatly
would Dives have used the pleasures of this life, if he might have been
redeemed from hels tormenting flames! Let us then be as careful not to fall
into their evils, as they would be if they were risen out of them: which care,
the meditation thereof will mainly strengthen; as the oil of Scorpions does
heal their sting; that while death and hell are in us by remembrance, we may
never be in them by sufferance. For as it is said, if the Basilisk see a man
first, it kills him; but if a man see that first, he kills it: So if death see
and apprehend us first, being unprepared, it destroys us; but if we see it
first, by meditation and preparation, we kill it, and become the death of
death, and may justly take up that joyful acclamation of S. Paul; 1 Cor. 15.55.
O death where is thy victory? O death where is thy sting.

Yet all must dye: For deaths meditation though it take away the sting of
death, yet it takes not away the body of death. But here is the difference; that
death which is the wicked man's shipwreck, is the good man's harbor; where
striking sail, and casting anchor, he returns his lading with advantage to the
owner; that is, his soul fraught with good works unto God: leaving his bulk
still mored in the haven, which is but unrig'd to be new built again, and
fitted for an eternal voyage. And as that earth in which the men of China do
bury their clay, after a hundred years does render it purified, and refined,
and fit out of it to form their choysest dishes; so our graves, after many
years, shall restore us again, glorified, and immortalized, and fitted vessels
for the house of God.

Of the simplicity of the Dove.
CHAP. I.
AS the Serpent is the wisest amongst the Beasts of the field, and is therefore
propounded as the pattern of our imitation, in the virtue of wisdom; so the
Dove does far leave behind her, the examples of all the brute creatures in
the practice of simplicity. And therefore the Holy Ghost, who is the love of
the Father, which love is the Fountain of Simplicity deigned above others, in
the exhibition of his testimony of Christ, to invest his Deity with the form
of a Dove. Whose harmless simplicity, on which our imitation must attend
discovers it self (as Pliny says) in these particulars. First, she hurts
nothing with her claws. Secondly, she hurts nothing with her bill. Thirdly,
she wants a gall. Fourthly, she nourishes, and brings up both her own, and
others young ones. Now, these several pieces of the Doves simplicity do teach
us, that as she hurts nothing with her claws, no more should we throw any
evil upon others by our hands or actions. Secondly, as she hurts nothing with
her bill, no more ought we to prejudice any by our words. Thirdly, in that she
wants a gall, it forbids us to give birth unto a thought, which shall direct it
self against the good of our neighbor. The first notes unto us the simplicity
of our works; the second of our words; the third of our thoughts. Fourthly, in
that she nourishes others young-ones, we are directed not only to do no
evil, but also to do good, and that not to our own alone, but also to our
neighbors; yea, though they be our Enemies. These are the particulars, which
shall bound this brief discourse.

All works are intimated by the hands, as the principal instruments of
working; and therefore Pilat when he would assoyle himself of that impious act
of Christ's condemnation, washed his hands: And the Prophet David says; ^sal.
25.6
I will wash my hands among the innocent. Therefore did the Pharisees wear the
Commandments written about their hands, to intimate their performance. Now
they who are altogether barren in good works, are like unto Jeroboam, whose
right hand was dried up. And they who interline their good works with bad, are
not unlike Nehemiahs builders, who held a trowell in one hand to build, and a
sword in the other to destroy One evil action amongst many good ones, corrupts
the virtues of all the rest; like Pharaohs lean kine, that did eat up the fat:
or the Colloquintida in the young Prophets broth, which made them cry out; O
thou man of God, death is in thy pot. 4 King. 4.40.
And not only to do no wrong but even to do no hurt, though lawful, is very
suitable to the Doves Simplicity. Our Savior who gave us this precept, gave
himself also for an example, who amongst all his miracles enrowled in Sacred
writ, never did any that tended to destruction, but only in cursing the barren
figgtree.

S. Aug. says; all justice is comprehended in this word innocence; all
injustice reprehended. To the injustice of the hands or deeds, is referred
generally all actions that strike at the body or goods of our neighbor. God
says by Moses; Exodus 22.21, 22.
Thou shall do no injury to a stranger, neither oppress him; ye shall not
hurt the widow nor fatherless child. More particularly, to the injustice of
Magistrates, of Lawyers, and public officers; who corrupted through hope,
fear, hatred, or love; hope of preferment, fear of men's power, hatred of their
persons, or love sometimes to their persons, but most times to their money, have
renewed the ancient copies of injustice, yea and augmented them: Pleaders
tongues being like the tongue of a balance, their hands the scales, into one
of which if you put one pound, into the other two, the tongue will always
incline to that which is the heaviest. Who is there that in the general
execution of the place of Magistracy, or the particular designation to the
decision of a controversy, in the giving of voices in matters of Election, or
in their choice unto places of dignity which rest in their particular power,
swerveth not from the rule of justice, and simplicity? measuring the merit of
the person, not the quantity of the gift, or relation of kindred or
acquaintance: Like Titus Manlius, who in a case of justice gave Sentence
against his own Son. O no, Themystocles saying pleases them better, who being
requested to bear himself indifferently in his censure, answered; Be it far
from me not to pleasure my friends in all things.

Princes Courts do swarm with their flattering dependents, who either bridled
with the fear of their displeasure, or spurred on with the hope of preferment,
do bind themselves with the sale of the liberty, innocence, and simplicity of
their consciences, to run the same course with them, in avowing all their
enterprises, in obeying all their commands: like Pilat, who lest he should
strike against the rock of Caesar's offense, condemned the innocent Lamb of God
unto death; and Judas, who betrayed him for a piece of money.

The example of Martinus a Cardinal is very memorable; who traveling on his
way, one of his horses fell lame, which the Bishop of Florence supplied with
the free gift of another: which Bishop afterward coming to Rome, craved the
Patronage of the Cardinal in a cause of his; to whom he answered, first let me
redeem my liberty, and gave him another horse, and now (says he) if your cause
be just I am your Patron. I would this were the practice of all the Clergy; and
that of Philoxenus of all Courtiers; who (as Plutarch reports) being demanded
of Dionysius the King of Syracusa, what he thought of certain verses of his,
answered (according to his opinion) that they were naught, whereat the King
displeased condemned him to dig in the Quarry-pitts; but by the intercession
of friends being restored Dionysius demanded again what he thought of other
verses of his; but he knowing that they were naught and remembering his late
punishment, answered not a word, but called to one of the Guard, to carry him
again to the Quarry-pitts. And he that will not with Phyloxenus, rather suffer
evil then do it, may deservedly receive the just punishment of Syamnes a
certain Judge; who as Herodotus reports, being corrupted by money to give wrong
Sentence, King Cambyses caused his skin to be pulled off, and nailed to the
Tribunal; that they that succeeded, terrified by his example, might avoid his
wickedness.

Justice amongst the Ancients was supposed to be a Virgin, because she ought
always to be pure, simple, and incorrupt. And surely their wisdoms fail them,
who think that their corruption, injustice, and injurious handling of others,
can raise them to the true pitch of Greatness; seeing that like Jonathan, and
his armor-bearer, who clymed up to the top of a rock on their hands and feet
they rear themselves hereunto by grovelling, base and sordid means: For the
truth of greatness rests not in the height of worldly wealth, or honor, but
of justice and simplicity. And therefore Agiselaus observing the Asians usually
to crown their King of Persia, with the title of Great; wherein (says he) is
he greater than I, unless he be wiser or juster.

Now as the simplicity commended unto us, is likened to the Doves; so many of
the contrary vices, have their resemblance in the nature of other birds. There
is the desperate Cock, the contentious man, whose injurious quarrellings make
good the motto of Ishmael in himself, Genesis 16.12.
His hand against every man, and every man's hand against him. There is the
Peacock, the proud man, who contrary to the children of Israel, who thought
themselves grasshoppers in comparison of the Giants of Canaan, he thinks himself
a giant in worth and excellency, and all others but grasshoppers in comparison
of himself; when indeed he is but a swollen impostume, casting out rotten and
loathsome matter, in his words and actions. There is the Cuccow that lays her
eggs in the nests of other birds; the close adulterer, whose children sit at
other men's fire, and eat at other men's tables. There is the Swan that sings
sweetly, yet devours his own kind; such are flatterers and hypocrites, who as
our Savior says, Math. 23.14.
Praying long prayers devour widows houses. There is the Swallow, that stays
with us in the Summer, but flies away in the Winter; such are false friends,
who abide with us in our prosperity, and with it depart; showing that they were
friends to it, and not to us. There is the Cormorant, the covetous man, who
spares not to grind the faces of the poor, to withhold the hire of the
labourer, to cosen the fatherless and widow, yea any man; yea God himself, by
robbing of the Church, and with holding things consecrated with wicked Achan.
Who when they have ransacked the bowels of the earth for treasure, are forced
through their fears to hide them there again; like the Adders young, who being
newly come out of their damms belly, run thither again for safety, if
affrighted with any danger. There is also the Vulture that follows armies to
prey upon dead carcasses; the griping Usurer, who waits upon prodigal heirs to
devour their decaying fortune; unto whom whosoever seeks for succor, is like
unto a sheep which in a storm runs under a bramble for shelter, where he is
sure to leave part of his fleece behind him. These, and the like, are the
practices of those, who are not, as they ought to be, innocent and simple as
Doves.

CHAP. II.
THe second part of our Dove-like simplicity, consists in our not prejudicing
any in our words, as she hurts nothing with her bill. S. Paul's command is,
Tit. 3.2.
to speak evil of no man; which S. James knew to be so difficult, that he
says; James 3.2
If any man offend not in word, that same is a perfect man, and able also to
bridle the whole body. Nabals churlishness, Shemey's railing the childrens
mocking the infirmity of the Prophet Elizeus, derisions and upbraydings,
misconstruction of our neighbors actions, the divulging of the faults of our
brethren, false accusations against them, and detracting from their just merit,
these are words, which (as Solomon says) are like the prickings of a sword;
yet these are the unworthy and customary exercises of our tongues, amongst such
as are not unacquainted with the language of Canaan. Epist. Judae. 2.
Michael the Archangel, when disputing with the devil, he contended about the
body of Moses, durst not rail against him, but said, our Lord repress thee;
but these men speak evil of things they know not, says S. Jude; and by their
rash and precipate judgment of other men's actions, their misconstructions, and
interpreting to the evil part, let blood the good name of their brethren, even
to the fainting, yea death of their dear credit; and many times in the effect
thereof, to the destruction of their lives. Thus dealt the devil with Job, the
Children of Ammon with David, the Jews with our Savior. Impossible it is for a
man so evenly to deport himself, that his actions can escape the unjust
construction of fame-wounding tongues: such were the Pharisees in their censure
of Christ, and S. John Baptist; Math. 11.18. John came neither eating nor
drinking, and they say he has a Devil: the Son of man came eating and
drinking, and they say, behold a glutton, and a drinker of wine, a friend of
Publicans and sinners. These are the most direct Antipodes to the simplicity of
words; who, when they cannot find faults, do make them; and like corrupt
stomachs, turn all the good meat they eat into corruption.

Little less are they that wound the fame of their neighbors in tale-bearing
by revealing of their sins, and slidings: like impious Cham, who discovered and
derided the drunkenness of his father Noah; for which he was justly cursed.
And by every ones adding thereto in their reports, making it like a Snow-ball,
which, the further it rowls, the more it gathers. And in the mentioning of men's
worth by detracting from it, or allaying it with infamous aspersions; thinking
by disparaging others, to give the greater luster to their own commendations;
and to raise their own on the ruins of another man's good name. Calumniation is
the infallible note, not only of an unchristian, but also of an ignoble
disposition; and surely they are conscious to themselves of their own
unworthiness, who need the foyl of another man's fault, to set off their own
virtue. Hecuba when she was with child of Paris, dreamed that she was brought
to bed of a firebrand; and such indeed he afterward proved: So these men
deliver themselves of that foul-mouthed monster detraction, whose dangerous
effects are able to inflame the world with mutual discords. As S. Bernard
says; There is a detractor, who speaks but a word, and yet that word in a
moment does poison the ears, and wound the hearts of the hearers. Whose sting
like that of the venomous Tarantula, bred in the kingdom o^ Naples, which is
not to to be cured but by music, can find no remedy but the melody of a
sincere and patient mind; prepared to endure whatsoever it can inflict, yet
able to sponge out whatsoever it can object.

The name of Devil in the Greek (from whence it is derived) signifies a
Calumniator; and calumny and detraction (with all its kindred) are devilish
sins; whereby men go about like him, seeking whom they may devour: prying and
listening after the demeanor of other men, obscuring and extenuating their
good* but receiving the news of their evils with joy, and reporting and
augmenting them with uncharitable cruelty, and falsehood. In which case, King
Philip of Macedon his practice, is worthy our strictest imitation, who was wont
to say, That he was much beholding to the Athenians, for that they speaking
evil of him, were a great cause of making him a good man; for says he, I do
daily enforce my self, both by word and deed, to prove them liars.

Ismaels deriding his brother Isaac, is called in Scripture a persecution and
though they were but Children that mocked the Prophet Elizeus, calling him
bald-head, yet God severely punished them, by sending two Bears amongst them;
which destroyed two and forty. To reproach any, with either their natural, or
accidental infirmities, is a note of pride and insolence; whereby men triumph
over others, and are inwardly tickled with delight in themselves, while they
conceive themselves free from those things, they object against others. But as
they deal with their brethren, so God will deal with them; who as Solomon
says, Will scorn the scorners, and give grace to the meek.

Some there are indeed who speak fair and praise much, but it is but to deceive
and hurt; like the Spider that weaveth a curious web out of her own mouth to
catch poor flies entangled in her snare: and so they differ not in the end, but
in the way of doing evil; like Sampsons Foxes, who though their headsstood
contrary ways, yet they were tied together by the tayls. And this is more
contrary to simplicity than the rest of the vices of the tongue; for simplicity
signifies freedom from folds and doublings, ( Simplex, quasi sine plicis, say
the Grammarians;) but in such deceitful words, there is nothing but
doubleness. Judas his nayl master, his kiss and treason; Jaacobs voice, and
Esau's hands suit not well together it is like the practice of the Panther, who
by the sweetness of his breath inticeth passengers to draw near him and when
they are come within his reach, devours them: so does a deceitful man by fair
words and shows of friendship, invite men to trust him, and then deceives them.
Against this practice, the Prophet David does most bitterly exclaim, saying,
Psalm. 54.13.
If mine enemy had reproached me, I could have born it; and if he that hated
me, had spoken great things against me, I could perhaps have hid my self from
him; but it was thou that were of mine own mind, my guide, and my acquaintance,
who did eat pleasant meat together with me; we walked with consent in the
house of God: then follows; Let death come upon them, and let them go down
quick into hell; for wickedness is in their dwellings, and in the midst of
them.

I find nothing more frequently, nor more vehemently reproved in Scripture than
the abuse of the tongue: from whence we may gather, both the frequency and
heinousness of the fault; which is intimated by the Psalmist, where he says,
The sons of men, their teeth are weapons and darts, and their tongue a sharp
sword. And again, Psalm. 57.5
They have whetted their tongues like a sword, they have bent their bow, 63.4.
a bitter thing, that they might shoot secretly at the spotless. And therefore
he prays; 119. 2.
Deliver my soul, O Lord, from unjust lips, and from a deceitful tongue, S.
Jerome also affirms the same, saying, So great an itch toward this evil
has invaded the minds of men, that they that have forsaken all other vices,
do yet (as it were into a foreign snare) fall into this. Therefore as he
counsels; Never calumniate, or detract from any one, and study rather to
adorn your own life, than carp at an others. And remember the promise made by
the Prophet David; Psalm. 33.14.
What man is he that desires life, and longs to see good days? restrain thy
tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile.

CHAP. III.
THe third part of our privative Simplicity, consists in the meekness and
unconquerablenesse of the heart by anger, hatred, envy, desire of revenge, and
the like; wherein we imitate the simplicity of the Dove, in wanting of a gall.
Against wrath; hatred, and all ill will, the Church does teach us to pray, and
the Dove to practice: Whosoever is angry with his brother, Math. 5.22.
shall be guilty of judgment, says our Savior; and, he that hates him, 1 John 3.15.
is a manslayer, says St. John. And S. James, If you have bitter envy and
strife in your hearts, Jam. 3.14.
boast not. Can they then be simple as Doves, whose fiery spirits, like the
flint, are no sooner struck against the steel of a hard and contumelious word,
but presently they sparkle fire in the eyes of him that struck it? O no, for as
the Apostle says; Jam. 1.20.
The wrath of man does not work the justice of God. Yea, some there are whose
least thwart in their desire does boil up their blood to such a height, and
heat of fury, that nothing but the cold haud of death can quench or allay it:
as it is reported of Mathias King of Hungary, who sitting one day at dinner,
accompanied with Ambassadors from the King of France, called for Figs; and
receiving answer, that there were none, immediately fell into such a rage, that
it drove him into an Apoplexy, who never spoke word after, but as if his Soul
had been angry with his own body also, forsook it the next day, and dyed. And
therefore surely it was wittily feigned of the Poets, that Prometheus lacking
clay to finish his man, was forced to patch it up with parts taken from sundry
beasts; and amongst the rest, did put the heart of a furious Lion into the
breast of man.

Or can he be simple as the Dove, whose env^ous heart withholds his eyes from
looking aright upon any happy man? whose ears can bear the burden of no man's
praise; who contrary to the nature of all other plagues, is plagued with others
well being; making happiness, the ground of his unhappiness and good news the
cause of his sorrow; whose favor none can win but by being miserable: like
Porpises, which play and rejoice in a storm, but are struck with a silent
sadness in fair weather. Cain envied the acceptance of his brother Abel;
Rachel the fruitfulness of her sister Leah; and Saul the success of his
servant David; And it is reported of Themistocles, that all sleep was banished
from his eyes, through his extreme envy at the glory of Miltiades. Thus does
the envious heart work upon it self with inbred stings like the mountain Aetna,
which consumes its own bowels with inward burnings.

Or can they have any interest in this Dove-like simplicity, who for some small
and private injury, yea many times for the truth (for that is often the mother
of hatred) do prosecute each other with such deadly cruelty, and such
blood-thirsty revenge, as neither friendship, kindred, nor Religion can
conquer, nor the long tract of men's lives can wear out? Thus did the private
hatred betwixt Caesar and Pompey, pull down ruin on the Roman Empire. Thus
Arius disdaining at his repulse in aspyring to a Bishopric, broacht such an
heresy as overspread the whole Christian world; yea death it self on the one
party, in some, cannot destroy the hatred of the survivor: witness the Story
of Pope Stephen the sixth, who caused the body of his Predecessor Formosus, to
be taken up, and beheaded in the market place, and afterward cast into Tyber.
Yea death in both parties, which has killed the men, yet has not killed their
malice; if the story of Eteocles and Polynices be true which says, that when
they had by mutual wounds, made windows for each others soul to fly out at,
their bodies being burnt together, their very flames divided themselves, as
hating to be united in their dead bodies, who were so divided in their living
affections.

Thus homo homini Lupus, one man is a Wolf unto another; in whose hearts, and
hands, and mouths are the instruments of mischief; as the Prophet David says,
Psalm. 13.3.
Their throat is an open Sepulcher, they dealt deceitfully with their tongues,
the poison of Aspes is under their lips: whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood. Sorrow and unhappiness is in
their ways, and the way of peace they have not known, the fear of God is not
before their eyes. I have read that a string made of Wolfs guts, laid amongst a
knot of strings made of the guts of Sheep, corrupts and spoils them all: it is
a strange secret in nature, and serves to insinuate the malice of these Lycant
hropi, these Wolf-turn'd men, against the Sheep of Christ's flock: for which
cause our Savior gave us this commandment, saying, Behold I send you forth as
sheep in the midst of Wolves, be ye therefore prudent as Serpents, and simple
as Doves. Simple as Doves, 1 Pet. 3.9
not returning evil for evil, nor curse for curse, but on the contrary bless,
because you are called to this, to be heirs of blessing; as says S. Peter. S.
Paul also says; Romans 12.17.18.19.
Render evil for evil to no man. If it be possible, as much as in you is,
have peace with all men. Avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath, for
it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay, says our Lord. And as it is
reported of the walls of Bizantium, that they were so smoothly and closely
wrought, that they seemed to be but one stone; and of the building of Salomons
temple, that there was not so much as the noise of a hammer to be heard
therein: So should we have all our thoughts, our words, our deeds, so even, so
smooth so polisht, that they should not send forth the least noise of injury to
our neighbor, or sound of disaffection.

CHAP. IIII.
YEt this is not enough* to do no evil, but we must also do good: Christ
cursed the fig tree, not for any hurt it did, but because it did no good, it
brought forth no fruit. And this exercise of good, must not be centred in those
only which either prevent or return us with an equal measure, like the Scribes
and Pharisees, the Publicans and sinners; but it must expatiate and diffuse it
self, like the impartial Sun to all even to our enemies. And so we shall be
simple as Doves; who besides that they do no hurt to any living creature, do
also indifferently nourish both their own, and others young ones. Now this
practice of good, must receive its form from the former prohibitions of evil;
to wit, in thought, word and deed.

First then in thought, we must have our hearts suppled, and entendred with
charity, meekness, gentleness* humility, and patience. It was the greatest
commendation of Moses, that he was styled, Number. 12.3.
the meekest man upon earth: for which cause God conversed with him more
familiarly than ever he did with any, as the Scripture says, Exodus 33.11.
God talked with him face to face, as a man talks to his friend: and our
Savior says; Math. 11.29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto
your souls. The valleys are more fruitful than the mountains, and the
weightiest ears of corn bow down their heads the lowest toward the ground;
such are the riches of humility, disposing men like figures in arithmetique,
where the last in place is greatest in account. Our charity likewise expects
of us, that we should breath forth nothing but desires of bliss unto our
brethren; not suspecting evil without great ground; not believing evil
without strong proof; 1 Cor. 13.5.
for charity thinks no evil; as says the Apostle. And God has propounded
himself for an example unto us, to prevent our too easy taking up upon trust, a
prejudicial report against our brethren, in the eighteenth of Genesis, where
he says speaking of Sodom and Gomorrha those wicked Cities, Genesis 18.21.
I will go down and see whether they have done according to the cry that is
come up unto me, and if not so that I may know: not as if God were ignorant of
the truth of any thing, but for our instruction it is thus written, to teach us
(as Solomon says) that we should not apply our hearts to all words that are
spoken; Eccles. 7.22.
nor by too hasty belief, do that, which must be undone again.

Our patience likewise, in which our Savior commands us to possess our
souls, Luke 21.19.
claims of us an unresisting sufferance of evil; though there be whole
vollies of injuries discharged against us, yet must our hearts be in ury-proof,
and our patience preserve us un-hurt, unprovoked to anger, hatred, desire of
revenge, and their dangerous effects; for as Solomon says, Eccles. 7.10.
anger rests in the bosom of a fool. And although the Apostle bids us be
angry and sin not, Ephesians. 4.26.
yet it is but a permission, not a command; and I suppose, it is easier not to
be angry at all, than to be angry and not sin at all. For anger in man's breast
is like fire in an Oven, which if it be quite damd up, is extinguished; but
having but a little vent, is apt to rage too fiercely. Wherefore the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 4.32.
Be ye courteous one to another, and merciful, forgivi^g one another, even as
God for Christ's sake forgave you. Yea so far must our patience in injuries, and
our charitable return to those that have injured us proceed, that we must not
only cancel the debt of all their injuries, so that not so much, as in a
thought may we wish them any evil, as it is evil; but also, if any adverse
accident do befall them, we must be inwardly moved with a compassionate
sorrow for the same. As Job declaring his own innocence, testifies of himself;
Job 31.29
If I have rejoiced in the ruin of him that hated me, or have exulted that
evil found him out. And the Prophet David says, speaking of his enemies, I
mourned for him, as for mine own Mothers son. And thus shall we truly imitate
the Dove* who instead of singing does always mourn; and we shall always have
cause to do so, if we consider both the spiritual, and corporal evils of our
neighbors, throughout the world. To render evil for evil, is human frailty;
to render evil for good, is devilish impiety; to render good for evil is god
like purity: in which practice if we insist, we shall approach near unto the
pattern of the holy Ghost, and to that which above all other creatures does
best express his nature, the Doves; and so we shall be simple as Doves.

CHAP. V.
SEcondly, to maintain the simplicity of our words, they must take upon them a
mild, a gentle and charitable form; we must apparel our thoughts in the soft
raiment of meek and well-filed speech, and dress our words in the supple
accents of love of modesty, of courtesy, of truth. The Apostle Paul says to
Titus, Tit. 3.2.
Put them in remembrance, that they be modest, showing all meek^esse unto all
men. It was the saying of Vespasian the Emperor* that no man ought to depart
from the presence of a Prince displeased, such should be the gratiousnesse of
his words and answers; and such should be the practice of every Christian, as
S. Paul says again, Colos. 4.6
Let your speech be always gracious, seasoned with salt, that you may know how
you ought to give an answer to every one. And in the sudden over-sights of our
brethren committed either in word or deed without unseasonable scoffing or
derision mildly to overpasse them, not being cruel in another faults; for as
Solomon says; It is the glory of a man to pass by unjust things. And to give
the most gentle and favorable interpretation of all men's actions without the
severity of a rash and bitter censure, 1 Cor. 4.5
as the Apostle says; Judge not before the time. And if the certain notice of
any evil action of our neighbor come to our knowledge, like Noah's two Sons,
Sem and Japhe^, we must cover the nakedness thereof with the mantle of
silence; going backward as they did that if it were possible, we might hide it
even from our own eyes; for what S. P^ter said of love, 1 Pet. 4.8.
is true also of Simplicity, which is the effect of love that it covers a
multitude of sins. And let us say that surely the violence of some strong
temptation drove him into it, into which we our selves may fall if that the
especial grace of God do not support us.

Nor is this practice to be stinted only to those who wear the name of friends,
but it must be extended even to our enemies; as the Apostle says of the duty
of servants to their masters, Not only to the good and courteous, but also to
the froward If therefore we should be invaded by scoffing Ishmaels, or railing
Shemeyes, or receive any other unjust usage, we must not, (like the dog that
bites the stone, but regards not the hand that threw it) turn again to tender
rebuke for rebuke, but contrariwise bless, as the Apostle commands us: and
quiet our selves with the consideration of the Prophet David, who said
concerning Sheme^, 2 Kings 56.10.
Let him alone, that he may curse: for our Lord has commanded him that he
should curse David. I speak not here concerning Superiors, either
Ecclesiastical or Civil, who have power (no doubt) to reprove those that are
subject unto them; nor of notorious and heinous malefactors, such as Herod,
whom our Savior called Fox; such as Simon Magus, whom S. Peter in many words
sharply reproved; and suth as the heretic Marcion, whom St. Polycarp called
the eldest son of the Devil: for these no doubt deserved it in a most eminent
manner. God reproved the high Priest Eli, for not reproving his sons more
sharply; yet because we are almost all prone to bow too much on this side, it
is good (like a young tree that grows somewhat awry) bow to our selves as much
the other way; that so in time we may keep the middle. And let us remember two
examples of our Savior in this kind; one in the parable of the Supper, where
there was found one that had not on a wedding garment, to whom, though he were
a wicked man, the Master of the feast afforded a courteous compellation,
saying, Friend, Math. 22.12.
how came thou in hither? The other concerning the woman taken in adultery,
whom when he dismissed, it was with no worse words than these, Woman, John 8.1^
go thy ways and sin no more. And surely, if there be any means to prevent
the enraged hearts of men, from boiling our at their mouths in bitter words, or
breaking out at their hands in hurtful deeds, it is this; as Solomon says,
Prove. 15.10.
a soft answer breaks wrath, a hard word raises fury. Thus Abraham prevented
a breach between his own, and the family of Lot, saying, Genesis 13.8
Let there be no wrangling, I pray thee, betwixt thee and me, nor betwixt thy
sh^^pheards and my she^pheards, for we are brethren. Thus also spoke Gedeon in
the book of Judges, to the incensed men of Ephraim, Judges 8.2, 3.
saying, Is not a cluster of grapes of Ephraim better than a vintage of
Abt^zar? And the Scripture says, that when he had thus spoken, their spirits
were qui^ted, whereby they swelled against him. Even as the force of a bullet,
spit out of the fiery entrayles of a gun, is smothered in a soft pack of wool,
or quenched in the yielding water, when as encountering with a resisting wall it
batters it to pieces.

This government and restraint of the tongue, is a most difficult lesson in
Christianity, especially when men are highly provoked, either by injurious
words or deeds: which made S. James say, Every nature of beasts, James 3.7, 8.
and birds, and creeping things, and other things, are tamed, and have been
tamed by man, but the tongue no man can tame; it is an u^qui^t evil, full of
deadly poison. It is reported by Eusebius, that an unlearned man called Pamlus
requested a friend of his to teach him a Psalm, who when he had read unto him
the first verse of the 38. Psalm, I said I will keep my ways, that I aff^^^d
not with my tongue; would not suffer the next verse to be read, saying, I will
first learn to practice this: and when his teacher blamed him because he had
not seen him in six weeks after, he answered that he had not learned that
verse: and one asking him many years after, whether he had then learned it or
no; I am forty years old, says he, and yet I have not learned to fulfill it.
Which difficulty (as is usually in noble minds) should so much the more whet
our endeavors, and awaken our industry, that so in the government of our
tongues, we may arrive to the pitch of the example propounded to us, and be
simple as Doves.

CHAP. VI.
THirdly, it is not enough for us, like Dives dogs, only to lick men's sores
with our tongues, to give them good words only, but no further helps; but in
our actions also we must follow all men (so far as in us lies) yea, and
prevent them with our good turns; observing therein that order which S. Paul
sets down, Gal. 6.10
While we have time (says he) let us do good unto all, but especially to the
household of faith: and that time that Solomon mentions; Prove. 3.28.
Say not unto thy neighbor, go and come again to morrow, and I will give
thee, if thou can give now. We should be so covetous of doing good, that we
should seek, nay make occasions, rather than expect them; and that with a mind
so zealous of well-doing, that the world should sooner cease to afford
opportunities, than we want will to apprehend them; as S. Paul testifies of
the Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.3.
that to their power, yea, and beyond their power, they were willing: and as
Job witnesses of himself, Job 29. v. 11, 12, 15, 19.
I was an eye unto the blind, and a foot unto the lame; J was father of the
poor, the ear that heard did bless me, and the eye that saw gave testimony of
me, because I delivered the poor man that cried, and the pupil that had no
helper. And with good reason, for as St. Chrysostom says, it is much more
excellent to feed hungry Christ, (that is to say his members) than to raise one
from the dead in the name of Christ; for in this, Christ deserves at thy
hands, in that, thou deservest at his; for miracles thou art Gods debtor, for
mercy he is thine. And they that cannot contribute one sort of good works for
the assistance of their brethren, let them do another; for there is scarce any
so barren of power to do good, but that in something or other, either
spiritual or corporal, either great or little, he may be serviceable to his
neighbor; as the fable well expresses, which says, that when the Lion was
taken in a snare, the poor weak Mouse gave him his help, to gnaw the cords in
sunder. We must therefore like the taper, which burns it self out to give light
unto others, spend the talent that God has given us (next unto his glory) to
the benefit of our brethren; yea, to his glory in the benefit of our brethren,
as our savior says; Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

And this must be done, not only when we are hereunto invited by the counter
courtesies, or inoffensive necessities of others; but even then when we receive
from them the sharp encounters of contrary mischief. When we are assaulted with
injuries (in humane construction) beyond the ability of sufferance, or degree
of reconcilement, we must strike off the tally of all their injuries, and if
their need require, repay them with good turns; Romans 12.^0.
as St. Paul says, Jf thy enemy shall hunger, feed him; if thirst, give him to
drink: like the Patriarch Joseph, who rewarded the merciless cruelty of his
brethren, by preserving that life in them, which they would have destroyed in
him. The law of requital, is a principle deeply rooted in the nature of man;
whereby we deem, that if one have broken his duty unto us, by offering us an
injury, we are absolved from our duty to him, and may without the imputation of
wrong, requite him with an equal injury: but we must know, that the duty of
man unto man, is enjoined in Scripture without condition or limitation, Do good
unto all (says St. Paul) not only if they do good unto you (for that
exceeds not the righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees, which can never
enter into the kingdom of heaven) but though they do evil: as S. Paul says
again, Romans 12.21.
Be not overcome of evil; but overcome evil with good. To yield unto our
repentant enemies the favor of pardon, is a degree of Charity, of which there
is a shadow and image even in noble beasts; for the Lion (they say) abateth his
fierceness against any thing that does prostrate it self unto it. To pardon our
enemies persisting without satisfaction or submission, is a second degree of
Charity, which is found in the soft and gentle natures of some men. But to
pardon our persisting enemies, yea more, to deserve well of them by doing of
them good, and that not out of a bravery or greatness of the mind, which
delights in the fruit of its own virtue, but out of a heart appassionated
with sorrow for his misery (if he be in any) and entendred with the love and
desire of his good; this is the purest and the highest exaltation of fraternall
Charity, this is a simplicity imitating the divine nature, and the hardest
lesson in all Christianity.

Whose copy we have pencild out unco us in the practice of our Savior, who,
being God, and his enemies but men, did infinitely excel them in dignity, which
made their injuries infinite; and in power also, whereby he was able, either to
prevent their mischiefs, or escape them; yea, to speak them all into nothing
as well as his word at first gave them a being out of nothing; did yet
notwithstanding, with a love as great as their injuries were grievous, reward
their reproaches with his prayers; their buffetings with his balsome; their
treasons with his truth. They disgracefully spit on his eyes, and he with
spittle healed their eyes; they made the blood to issue out of him, and he
stopped the issues of blood in them; they took away a life from him, and he
restored life to many of them; yea that very life of his, which their cruelty
sacrificed to their revenge, did his love sacrifice for their redemption. There
was never sorrow like unto his sorrow, nor ever love like unto his love; both
being byeyond all example, and propounded to all for an example; which while we
make haste to imitate, Romans 12.20.
we shall upon our enemies heads heap coals of fire, (as the Aposlle speaks)
which shall either inflame them with a correspondency of affection, as heat
begets heat; or else, for their unrelenting hearts, shall serve to augment
their quenchless flames in hell. And for our selves receive we our comfort, in
the words of our Savior; Mat. 5.11.12.
Blessed are ye when they shall curse you, and persecute you, and speak all
manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake; rejoice and be glad, for great
is your reward in heaven. And thus if we order our thoughts our words, our
deeds, both negatively, by thinking, speaking, doing no evil; and positively,
by thinking, speaking, doing good; and this, not to our own alone, but even to
our enemies; we shall reach the height of the example propounded to us, and be
simple as Doves.

FINIS.

