THE PARLIAMENTS VINDICATION IN ANSWER TO Prince Ruperts DECLARATION.

By S. W. Esquire.

London, Printed in the Year 1642.

Prince RUPERT his Declaration.
IT will seem strange (no doubt) to see me in Print, my known disposition being
so contrary to this scribbling Age; and sure I had not put my self upon a
Declaration, if in common prudence I could have done otherwise.

I need not tell the world (for it is too well known) what malicious lying
Pamphlets are printed against me almost every morning, whereby those busy men
strive to render me as odious as they would have me, against whom doubtless I
had sooner declared, but that I well knew this mutinous lying spirit would be
easily convinced, but never silenced, which, as it cease at no time, so it
spares no person. And this was too manifest to me, by those bold, odious and
impossible untruths forged against His sacred Majesty, their own King and
Sovereign (and my Gracious and Royal Uncle) who is only guilty of this, that
he is too good to be their King; and to deal clearly, this was it furnished me
with sufficient patience, thinking it but reasonable, that I should be
slandered as well as His Majesty.

But since it has pleased my Lord Wharton to tell the whole City of London
openly at Guild Hall, and since to tell it all the world in print, that one
great cause of their preservation at Edgehill, was the barbarousnesse and
inhumanity of Prince Rupert and his Troopers, that we spared neither man,
woman, nor child, and the thing which we aim at is Pillage and Plundering, and
the way which we would come by it is murdering and destroying; since such a
charge as this comes from such a mouth, I hold my self bound in honor to speak
and tell that Lord, that as much of his Speech as concerns me, is no truer then
the rest of it, which for the most part is as false as any thing that has been
spoken or printed in London these two years: and had I known his Lordships
intention, I would have asked his reason either before or now at Keinton, if
his Lordship had but stayed so long as to be asked the question.

But me thinks I hear the credulous people say, What? was not the Kings
Standard rescued from them by force? were there so many as 20. of our men
killed by all the Kings Canons? was not our right Wing long under the power of
their Canons, so as some 17. shot of Canon shot against them, and yet not a man
of ours so much as hurt? Nay, were there not 3000. slain of the Kings Army, and
but 300. of ours? If these abominable untruths (with many more like them in his
Lordships Speech) be all true, then shall he freely charge me with
barbarousnesse and inhumanity; but if these be most gross falsities (as many
thousand worthy Gentlemen will take their oaths they are) then I must profess
I am sorry that any Baron of the English Nation should utter such foul
untruths, to deceive the poor abused Citizens of London with false report, and
so slander us. It Was ever my opinion, that no valiant man would speak a known
untruth; nor can I blame his Lordship, or any others faintheartednesse in so
bad a cause as theirs is, which doubtless is the reason why such Noblemen and
Gentry in His Majesty's Army, who hitherto had spent all their days in peace,
could then fight so valiantly [ex tempore] not valuing their lives, and
forgetting their dearest relations; so as our enemies in their hackney-railing
Pamphlets were forced to say, The Cavaliers (to give the Devil his due) fought
very valiantly: And indeed, had they not showed rather too much valor, our
enemies had had less bottom whereon to sound any untruths, whereof I take
this relation to be one of their Masterpieces of Forgeries, for that they slew
as many of ours, as we did of theirs, is as true, as that they beat us at
Sherbourn castle, and at Worcester.

Now for barbarousnesse and inhumanity to women and children, wherewith his
Lordship and those unpunished papers cried daily in the streets do continually
slander us, I must here profess, that I take that man to be no Soldier or
Gentleman, that will strike (much less kill) a woman or child, if it be in
his power to do the contrary: And I openly dare the most valiant and
quick-sighted of that lying Faction, to name the time, the person, or the
house, where any child or woman lost so much as a hair from their head by me,
or any of our Soldiers. In a battle, where two Armies fight, many one has
unfortunately killed his dearest friend, very often those whom willingly he would
otherwise have spared; and whether any woman or child were killed in this
fight, is more then I can justly say: I am sorry if there were. I speak not how
wilfully barbarous their Soldiers were to the Countess Rivers, to the Lady
Lucas in Essex, and likewise to like persons of quality in Kent, and other
places: Whom have we ever punished for speaking against us, as they most
Iewishly whipped to death a Citizen of London, for saying no more then what was
included in His Majesty's Proclamation. But since they name plunde^ing, whose
Moneys? nay, whose Arms have we taken away, unless theirs, who actually had,
or at least declared they would use them against His Majesty's Army? And for
that little cloth borrowed for our Soldiers, (wherewith their Pamphlets make
such a noise) His Majesty by Gods help will see it better paid for, then any
thing they have taken upon public Faith. Wh^^ house have we ransacked, as they
did the Earl of Northamptons? mangling and cutting in pieces rich chairs, beds,
stools and hangings; drinking as much, and as long as they were able, their
letting the rest run out upon the floor, when as the very Earl of Essex his
house at Chartley suffered not the least damage by us. What Churches have we
defaced, as they did at Canterbury, Oxford, Worcester, and many other places?
whose pockets have we picked ever to the value of three pence, under pretense of
searching for Letters, as they did in Glocestershire, and particularly this
last week at Windsor and Vxbridge? Is it not their usual practice first to
plunder a man's house of all plate and moneys, and then imprison him as a
Delinquent, for no other fault, but because he stood loyal to his Prince; as
if it were too little to take a man's estate, unless also they rob him of his
innocence? Have they not now stuffed all the prisons in London with Earls,
Lords, Bishops, Judges and Knights, Masters of Colleges, Lawyers, and
Gentlemen of all conditions and Counties? for what (God knows) themselves knew
not: insomuch as now they are enforced to find out new prisons for the
Knights, Aldermen, and substantial Citizens of London, who are now thrust in
thither only because they are suspected to love their King? Have they not by
imprisonment or threats muzzeled the mouths of the most grave and learned
Preachers of London? witness Doctor Featley, Doctor Hayward, Doctor
Holdsworth, Mr. Shute, Mr. Squire, Mr. Griffith, and many others (for so I am
informed these men are) because they preach that which their conscience tells
them is the known truth. And who are countenanced but ignorant and seditious
Teachers, who (like the Mass Priests of old) call mightily on the people for
their plate and money for their Patrons and themselves? who, besides their daily
Pulpit-treasons, vent such other Divinity, as if Luther were living, he would
blush to call them Protestants: And if this be not cruelty, injustice, and
tyranny, let God and posterity judge. Now for any looseness or incivility in
our soldiers more then what is incident and common to great Armies, I wish
they would not mention it, lest some impartial Readers, who know their
courses, understand it to be meant by some of their great Reformers, who are
that way as notoriously guilty as any: And for my self, I appeal to the
consciences of those Lords and Gentlemen, who are my daily witnesses, and to
those people mheresoever our Army has been, what they know or have observed in
my carriage, which might not become one of my quality, and the son of a King.
And whereas they slander us for Popish Cavaliers, I wish there were no more
Papists in their Army, then we have in ours; but to me it is no wonder with what
face they can slander us for men disaffected to the Protestant Religion, when
as their grand Reformers refuse to come to Church. For his sacred Majesty, I
have been a frequent witness in England (and all the world knows he ever
showed himself otherwise) and therefore hold it to be my part and duty to tell
them, that His Majesty is the most faithful and best defender of the
Protestant Religion of any Christian Prince in Europe, and is so accounted by
all the Princes in Christendom. And what a gracious supporter has he been in
particular to the queen of Bohemiah (my verteous Royal mother) and to the
Prince Elector, my Royal brother, no man can be ignorant of: if therefore in
common gratitude I do my utmost in defense of his Majesty, and that cause
whereof he has hitherto been so great and happy a patron; no ingenious man but
must think it most reasonable. And for my self, the world knows how deeply I
have smarted, and what perils I have undergone for the Protestant cause, what
stately large promises were offered me would I consent; and what a wretched
close imprisonment was threatened, if I refused to change my Religion, when I
was captive to the Emperor of Germany, enough to satisfy any man of
moderation: But if it be not sufficient, I would to God all English men were at
union amongst themselves, then with what alacrity would I venture my life to
serve this Kingdom against those cruel Popish Rebels in Ireland: for though I
will never fight in any unrighteous quarrel, yet to defend the King, Religion
and Laws of a Kingdom against Subjects, who are up in Arms against their Lord
and Sovereign, and such (all good wise men know this and that of Ireland to be)
though the pretense look several ways; such a cause my conscience tells me is
full of piety and justice: And if it please God to end my days in it, I shall
think my last breath spent with as much honor and Religion, as if I were taken
off my knees at my prayers. I think there is none that take me for a Coward;
for sure I fear not the face of any man alive, yet I should repute it the
greatest victory in the world, to see his Majesty enter London in peace,
without shedding one drop of blood: where, I dare say (God and His Majesty are
witnesses I lie not) no Citizen should be plundered of one penny or farthing,
whereby that ancient and famous City would manifestly perceive how desperately
it has been abused by most strange, false and bottomless untruths, for which
some body (without repentance) must be ashamed at the day of Judgment, if they
escape a condign legal punishment in this world. I therefore conclude with
this open profession (and I am confident our whole Army will say Amen unto it)
he that has any design against the Paotestant Religion, the Laws of England,
or hopes to enrich himself by pillaging the City of London, let him be
accursed: And so, whether peace or war, the Lord prosper the work of their
hands who stand for God and King Charles.

RVPERT.

The Parliaments Vindication, in ANSWER to Prince RVPERTS Declaration.
Prince Ruperts Declaration.
IT will seem strange no doubt to see me in print; my known disposition being
so contrary to this scribbling age, and sure I had not put my self upon a
Declaration, if in common prudence I could have done otherwise.

Answer.
His Excellence it seems is more merciful to paper than men, he plunders the
Kings loving people, and spares the Press for publishing his Declarations, and
then ascribes it to the goodness of his own disposition, discovered before his
coming hither, and which the Commonwealth has felt and known without any
further Declaration, since the picture of his mind is truly drawn in his
actions, and though resembling not new in Phisognomy, yet in firing and
plundering of Towns, and therefore his Decla. pend in favor of himself, can no
way right him in this not sembling but suffering age, as it will appear in this
following answer, and vindication to Prince Ruperts Declaration.

Dec. But since it has pleased my L. Wharton to tell the whole City of London
openly at Guild Hall, and (since to tell it all the world in print, that one
great cause of their preservation at Edgehill, was the barbarousnesse and
inhumanity of Prince Rupert and his Troopers, that we spared neither man women
nor child, and that we aim at pillage and plundering, and would come by it by
murdering and destroying, since such a charge as this comes from such a mouth,
I hold my self bound in honor to tell that Lord, that as much of his Speech as
concerns me, is no tr^er then the rest, which for the most part is all false.

Ans It may be answered, that my Lord Wharton knew that the great advantage
gotten at Edgehill had many concurrent causes, and though God was the most
supreme and immediate, yet there might be some mediate and adjacent causes,
since the barbarous inhumanity of Prince Ruperts troopers might give a sharp
edge to the swords and courages of our men, that had deeply imprinted in their
minds the cry and voice of the common people against them, every day bringing
in sufficient proof of their pillaging and plundering of the Country, ask the
men; and they do faithfully report that their beasts are driven away, their
houses plundered, and themselves utterly undone, the women affirm the same, and
therefore it is more safe to ground an argument from a general then a
particular affirmation, and to believe (as it is) that the country has been
most cruelly wronged by Prince Rupert, rather then that Prince R. is innocent
of these outrages which have been committed in the country, and therefore my
Lord Wharton may be vindicated to have spok nothing but truth as become a Noble
man, and that his Lordship was so far from shunning the meeting with him at
Keynton, that if he have no modesty (he dare tell him to his face that he is a
plundering Prince, and will with his sword make proof that there is nothing but
falsehood and forgery in his Declaration, published to deceive, who cannot be
imposed on by his flattering vindication, which goes forward thus.

Nor can I blame his Lordship, nor any other faint-hartednesse in so bad a
cause as theirs is; but that they slew as many of ours as we did of theirs, is
as true; as that they beat us at Sherbourn Cast it and at Worcester.

Prince Rupert would here made us believe that our men were faint-hearted, but
how can that appear, for if action be^ be the expressions of the heart, so
many of their numerous great Army had not been cut off, if our men had not
fought with undaunted resolution, having a great odds in number to discourage
them, and therefore wherein did their faint-hartednesse consist? or how could
they be faint-harted? for their cause that Prince Robert calls bad, was as good
as right could make it, they fought for Religion, the King and Parl. and the
liberties of the Subject; how could they then, having so great, so just, so
general a cause be faint-hearted? they knew that the malignant party
consisting of papists and such as belonged to their faction, Being the Popes
and bishops soldiers rather then the Kings stood ready to play the bloody game
of ware, where all must be gamsters, no spectators or lookers on, and all must
presently handle arms. so that their forces and resolutions being united, how
could they be faint-hearted? no, let Prince Rupert know that unless he will
account it faint-heartednesse to charge upon the Kings army with undaunted
courage, to recover the day when it was almost lost by the treachery or cowards
of some, to slay more men of theirs then we lost (for that is most certainly
true) and at lest to make the Earl of Essex remain master of the field,
Prince Rupert may blush to steal a victory by his own report, which the Kings
Army never obtained; and therefore it is evident that Prince Rupert does
unjustly charge our men with faint-heartednesse, and that he and his men were
driven away, and forced to run from Sherburne Castle and Worcester, is most
certainly known to all Soldiers, and therefore here does speak an known
untruth, that he may abuse us with false reports and slanders, as well as with
pillaging and plundering us, which is the next matter he excuses and disavows,
the contrary whereof shall be presently clearly eminiced and proved.

I openly dare his Lordship and the most quick sighted of that lying faction,
to name the time person or house, where any child or woman lost so mmch as a
heir from their head by me, er any of our Soldiers, I spoke not how wilfully
barbarous their Soldiers were to the Countess Rivers, to the Lady Lucas in
Essex, and likewise to the like persons of quality in Kent, and other places,
and since they speak of plundring, whose money nay whose arms have we taken
away? what house have we ranscaked, as they did the Earl of Northamptons.

Answ. Prince Ruport thinking to vindicate his own actions, has by forged
untruthes rendered himself more odious io the common people. But let us ask
him some questions whereby without question It will appear they murdered
diverse, pillaged and plundered many houses, and with a high hand every where
committed many ourrages throughout the whole country who were they that
compelled diverse of our most eminent Captains to ride stark naked on horse
back, while they followed them with reproachful and contumelous speeches,
calling them Parliament rouges, and Parliament dogs, was it not Prince Rupert
soldiers, and the Cavaliers, and who were they that drove our men like beasts
before their army? they took a religious Gentleman, and having fastened a cord
to his feet, dragged him about the town of Thistleworth, and being weary of
their cruelty cried at last why do we trouble our selves any longer with this
Parliament dog, and so shot him at last with his Pistol, and for their
plundering of houses, who has made the Country look like a desolate
wilderness, houses being pillaged and broken down, and the people fled away?
was it their kindness? their merciful dealing, or rather their cruel and
barbarous unmercifulness, and indeed by whom has this Kingdom been brought
to ruin and destruction but by Prince Rupert and the Cavaliers, it is no doubt
also that our Soldiers dealt better with the Countess Rivers and the Lady
Lucas, and other great personages, but it is well known that Prince Roberts
Soldiers did most shamefully pillage my Lord Says house as the Lord
Stamfords, and afterward not content therewith, they set it on fire and burnt
it to the ground, having as they alleged warrant uoder the Kings hand Seal
for their so doing, moreover he remembers with much shame and horror of
conscience, how when he came with his Army in a pillaging way to Kingston, all
the behavior of his soldiers there, was nothing else but a mixture of diverse
impieties, for they stole horses, broke open shops and took away their goods,
and to make their wickedness more transcendent, they profaned the sacred
Temple, converting the porch thereof into a stable for their horses, who ever
hear of greater impieties then these, and yet forsooth Prince Rupert does seek
to vindicate himself from plundering or any other cruelty, both which are well
known to be continually used in his Army.

Dec. Whose pockets have we picked ever to the value of three pence, under
pretense of searching for letters, as they lately did in Glocestershire? is it
not their usual practice first to plunder a man's house of all plate and
moneys, and then imprison him as a Delinquent.

Ans. It is a shame that a Prince should so far overreach himself in affirming
untruths, for I am of his opinion that they never took three pence out of any
ones pocket, being a booty of too small a value for such Royal Robbers, but
that they have took 2 or 3 hundred pound from diverse men, as is manifestly
known, nay even cariers coming up to London have been pillaged by them, and
wagons laden with cloth as they were carrying it up to London have bin
pillaged by them, nay, neither man woman nor child can pass upon the highway
in any security, but either they are murdered or pillaged by them; and yet
Prince Rupert would make us believe that their soldiers are of such an
excellent temper, that they will do no wrong to any one, that is, if the booty
be not of a considerable value, for then they will not stick to show the most
inhumane barbarousnesse that can be used; and being not satisfied with that
money which they bear about them, they have stripped men and women starke^ naked
even to their shirts and smocks, and so left them to the mercy of a dark and
cold night, to find the way home or else to perish in the fields, and if all
this former proceedings of theirs, be not cruelty, injustice and tyranny, let
God and the world judge: It is well known that none have with the Parliaments
consent been plundered at all, but that the soldiers in their marches hearing
of some notorious delinquents house, have stepped out of the way and disarmed
them of all Ammunition, because they knew that they were malignant enemies to
the King, Church, State, and Commonwealth, who under pretense of standing for
Ood and the King, are ill-affected to the peace of this Land, and would feign
if they could enduce again Popery into this Kingdom: the other part of his
accusation is only true when it is replied unto their Army, for they do daily
plunder the houses of such as stand for the King and Parliament, and all such
as are well-affected to them both, they include in the nvmber of malignants,
making them not only prisoners; but also to pay their lives down for affirming
that they wish well to the King and Parliament, as if they could not love both
together, when indeed he has no greater friends then those that he would
comply with his Parliament, which they so much hate, and to be revenged on them
has persuaded the King to make this civil War, and thus they will, murder,
and pillage all that profess their true affection to the King and Parliament,
and thus Prince Rupert would make us believe that he and his soldiers are just
and merciful, which we may sooner believe of a Butcher that kills sheep for the
goodness of the flesh, and so Prince Rupert kills and murders the Kings
subjects for their good affection to the King and Parliament.

Declar. What have they seen in me that might not become one of my quality and
a Kings son? And whereas they slander us for popish Cavaliers, I wish there
were no more Papists in their Army, then we have in ours.

Answ. It does not become the son of a King to strain and streach his words
beyond belief, as he has done in his late declaration, or to see a false
gloss on his actions; He should endeavor being a stranger unto this Kingdom,
to work a pacification between the King his Uncle and his Pa^liament; and not
to engage him in a civil War against his loving subjects, he should not
pillage and plunder towns and houses wheresoever he comes, as he did at
Reading, where he took away the Majors plate, and at other places; he should
not desire the effusion of blood, nor make his name odious to the common people
as he has done by his cruelty: and lastly, he should not have endeavored to
vindicate himself by a false vindication, accusing us and our soldiers for
those faults whereof himself is guilty, neither let him object that we have
more papist in our Army, then there be in theirs, for is well known, that their
whole Army does consist of men of desperate fortunes, papists, Damm'd
Cavaliers, and many dangereous malignants.

Declar. For though I will never fight in any unrighteous quarrel, yet to
defend the King, Religion and Laws of a Kingdom against Subjects, who are up
in arms against their Lord and Sovereign; and such (all good wise men know
this and that c Ireland to be) though the pretense look several ways, such a
cause my conscience tells me is full of piety and injustice.

Answ. This indeed has afair and specious protestation in outward appearrance,
yet his action contradict his words, or else his words are not full of that
sense which they ought to be, since P. Rupert is but an abettor in this war,
that does unnaturaly put the King up on those violent courses, under color and
pretense of the same cause which we maintain: For does not the Parliament and
all his Ma: loving subject, aim at no other end in this war, but to defend the
Kings persons now environed with a company of dangerous malignants, who deserv^
not the name of subjects, and also to the Religion pure and undefiled in it is
primitive essence, and to make Law the rule and square of all their actions,
all which both the King, Religion, and Law they will defend with their lives and
fortunes, and to this end (as the Parliaments many Meclarations do testify)
they have raised an Army under the conduct of the E. of Essex, and therefore it
is an unjust aspersion, which Pr. Rupert casts upon all his Majesty's loving
subjects, challenging them that they are up in Arms against their Lord and
Sovereign, whom they love and would willingly submit unto, in all christian
obedience. A son may love his father, and yet not affect those servants who he
is well assured has done his father wrong, and it is manifest that the Kings
gracious disposition has been much abused by wicked counselors and
malignants, and their true subjects may desire and seek their extirpation and
rooting out, and yet retain a loyal love and reverence of their lawful
Sovereign, and in this manner accursed be he that does not stand for the King,
as I am persuaded that all do even from the bottom of their heart: The cause
of Ireland is far different from that of England, for they stand for their
popish Religion against their King, we stand with the King and for the
protestant Religion; and therefore it is piety in us to defend Gods cause, and
justice in us to see that the King and Kingdom be not wronged by the impartial
carriages of some Delinquents, who would hold the balance of justice, and
weigh out unto us the Kings power and authority unto us as they please, to make
it light or heavy to bear, and while the King governes us they will govern the
King, that he shall do nothing but what is infused into them by their
counselors, and thus it is we and not Pr. Rupert that do rightly stand for
God rnd the King, and his great (though despised) Counsel the Parliament,
vvhoses ruin he desires.

Declar. I should repute it the greatest victory in the world, to see his
Majesty enter London in peace, without shedding one drop of blood, where I dare
say, no Citizen should be plundered of one penny or farthing, whereby that
imminent and famous City would manifestly perceive how much they have been
abused by most strange false and bottomless untruthe.

Answ. How can any reasonable man give credit that Prince Robert does so much
desire that the King should come unto London in a peaceable manner who it is
supposed has been the chief agent to provoke the King first to keep such a
distance in the north from the Parliament, and afterward to raise an Army, in
the conduct whereof he does appear so forward, and in the prosecution of which
war he has committed so many outrages his love unto the City of London does
appear in nothing the King advanced his army so near unto it. and whatsoever
is pretended to the contrary, Prince Rupert had a strong affection to the
wealth and riches of this populous City, whose streets he and his Cavaliers had
divided among themselves before their comeing hither, it had been hard trusting
to P. Ruperts mercy if he could have entered into the gates of the City, all
the money in my purse is sometimes not above a penny farthing, and yet if I had
gone in the habit of a Roundhead citizen as they call them, I do not think
but they would pillaged me, for that suspecting that I had more money about me,
for P. Rupert loves money no more theh the fox loved grapes, who despised them
because they hung out of his reach, so because he could not get into London.
Thus have I shall back those arowes which P. Rob. aimed at us, and yet I have
not hit him so home as a bullet would have done at Keynton bataile, for then he
would never have turned Ne^ter to deceive the world as he intended to do by
justifng of him self by a falce invective bitter pamphlet entitled Prince
Ruperts Declaration, which is thus in every particular confuted by a brief
answer.

FINIS.

