DIVINE MEDITATIONS ON ACQUAINTANCE With GOD.

BY E.W. Esquire.

There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord lift up the light of
thy countenance upon us. Psalm. 4.6.

Omnis copia quae non est Deus meus mihi est egestas.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Maxey, 1653.

The Introduction.
WHen I first gave vent to these night Meditations by penning them, I had much
debate with my self, whether to conceal or publish them were most comely and
convenient; when I recollected the frequent prejudices that attend good
meanings, and the great odium that is cast on serious men by those triflers,
whose utmost ambition it is to blast the blessed fruit of Virtue, by their
unbenign breathes of detraction, and how few there are of the Genteel World,
that think any thing more poysie then Romances, worthy their perusal; I
condemned it to the heap of wast Papers, as that which curious eyes would view
with regret, and captious natures peruse with little calmness.

But for as much as I have hitherto often offended God, (I will accuse my self
and humbly implore his pardon) in sacrificing by fire many (though not
beauteous, yet undisfigured) children of my fancy, to silence, upon the Altar,
and on the account of Modesty, or perhaps Security, lest like unnatural
Absaloms they should riot against their Parent: My resolution for the future
is, and by Gods help shall be, to preserve such blessings of God on my Studies
as Memorials of his Mercy, and Excitations to my Gratitude.

In all earthly things there is change and sorrow, yea, the best Commodity our
Nature trafficks in, sometimes brings home loss, or disquiet; there is a toil
in multitude of Books, and a kind trouble in common friendship; in the Favor
of God only is Life, and in his Acquaintance Peace; the experience whereof made
me methodize this Meditation, and now print it.

In the latter clause of the counsel to Job, which most Versions read by
Thereby shall good come unto thee, or So shall thou have the best fruits, or So
shall thou have prosperity, or So shall good things happen unto thee, or So
shall thy fruit be in good things; or In them is good increased: I have rendered
it, So shall no evil come unto thee, which I humbly conceive is pardonable, the
peace of God in the former clause couching the good things of acquaintance with
God; and also there being no good, truly so called, which this protection from
evil comprehends not; for what ever defends us from the Fallacies of Satan,
this world and our own hearts, must needs leave us in Gods Blessing, as meet
Objects of his Mercy and Bounty. I will here conclude with this humble Petition
to God, That he would pardon the temerity of my pen, and accept of my plea in
Ephraims bemoaning words, After I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was
ashamed, etc. Jer. 31.19. And I trust that he that breaks not the bruised
reed, and quenches not the smoking flax, will not refuse this offering at my
hand.

October. 15. 1653. EDW. WATERHOUSE.

DIVINE MEDITATIONS ON ACQUAINTANCE WITH GOD, From those words in JOB, 22 Job
21.
Acquaint now thy self with GOD, and be at peace, so shall no evil come unto
thee.
It Was a competent and congruous Definition of Man which the Philosopher gave,
when he called him a sociable Creature, the nature of man being more receptive
and sparsive of good then any Creature, which has not reason to distinguish,
and entertain what it knows to be useful and conducing to content; for though
all creatures have the imperfect and first lines of sociation effigiated on
them, and in some degree or other affect their own species, or other creatures
which either suite or serve to their ends; yet is no desire so wisely impetuous
as that which originated from reason, is seconded by the assurance of
unquestionable Experience; nor do we soberly believe any thing so undoubtedly,
which has not the probate of a clear evidence, to the advantage of which the
life of man (pleasured by nothing more then generous and pious society) is a
clear and noble instance. That therefore Man, the Epitome of this Microcosm,
and the little Lord (next under his MAKER) of this glorious Pile of Divine
Architecture, might not mistake his match, and while he ought to seek a
Kingdom, find asses; or by vain delusions, and pretended nothings miss the Mark
of Eternity, and the Pawn of an unerring Conduct to that Canaan; This
Scripture, like a goodly Glass rightly modelled, and truly hung to a
Christians view, shows him the most real and incomparable object of the Soul,
illustrated from the Divinity of its nature, pure, unmixt, neither capable to
be tempted or to tempt; unless it be to a holy Love and happy Acquaintance,
which ends not worse, but better then it began, in temporal Peace, and in
eternal bless, abandoning evil either of sin or sufferings; all which are
comprised in these Words, Acquaint, etc.

Me thinks my Meditations fix on a double sort of subjects in this Scripture:
Self, GOD, Peace, Evil; in their natures different, for what less harmonius
then corruption and incorruption, then good and evil, then the best we wish
and the worst we fear? yet both accorded and united in the Term, Acquaint. Man
who ought to be linked to God by the bond of Love, as well as subjected to him
by the Law of obedience (as he has no adversary to fear, so no good to defire
beyond that Monarch GOD: who is all to the soul by way of completion, and to
the outward man by way of munition) by this means, may obtain felicity in
Acquainting himself with GOD, etc.

There is so much Treasure in this Scripture, that the rich Spoils of it are
beyond the capacity of men to conceive, or Angels to language; I shall confine
my thoughts to these ensuing Heads, as the Tracts by which to come to the
Mansion of holy Comfort residing in it.

1. What is meant by Acquaintance with GOD. 2. How it is to be attained. 3.
What Peace it is that those have which attain it. 4. How it may be said to
repel evil from us. 5. When this is to be sought after; These discussed, will
enodate the obscurity, and present the blessing in its true and Princely Dress.

OF the First ( Acquaintance with GOD:) I shall say in the Psalmists Phrase,
Psalm 87.3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou light sprung from on high, thou ray
of eternity, to which all mortal contents and Mundane confedracies are but as
atoms, yea non-entities. Acquaintance with God is somewhat stupendous, and
requires a touch from the Altar to decypher it; it is a beam of glory darting on
the face of a Child of glory, a Love-token erranded to signify the good will
of him that dwells in the Bush, to his that are among the pots, slurred amongst
the brambles, scratched; in the fire and in the water, abused debased, but not
forsaken; but this is rather an effect of it then a Description of it, that
which forms it is the being, and that which expatiates it is the wel-being of
it: For the more this grace (for less it is not) is meditated upon, the
greater are the touches of sweetness in the Souls visage, from this lovely
Pensill of the most lovely Artist, GOD: And therefore I shall conceive it to
ascend its Zenith by these Gradations.

Understanding, that must know him the chief good, or else it will never desire
him; man's intellect is the Bucket by which he draws, and the Ladder at which
he climbs to will and wed; the object he knows good, without this it is as
impossible to love and obey, as without eyes to judge of colors, or without
taste to discriminate Liquor and Meats, God has given the priority to this
faculty as that which must season to, and prepare appositely for the rest. And
truly, this is of the foundation and real nature of the rational soul; for
from this are we determined to be worthy (as to other creatures) of that
Supremacy and jurisdiction God has given us over them; for did not our
Understandings direct us to a carriage proportionate to the natures of
Creatures, and things, we should soon discover our follies to be too brutish
either to be admired or followed, and the Creation would soon renite obedience
to so senseless Governors. But blessed be God, he has not left us without a
witness of his liberality. He has informed our specious bodies with perfect
souls, and made a noble Lodging of State for himself, that high room, and top
battlement, our Understanding; which though too vast to be filled with the
little puncto's and contemptible grains of worldly nothings, yet receives
completion from God, and those apprehensions of him which he (in much
condescension to us) is pleased to vouchsafe us, not to make us proud of our
fatness, but provident to improve fullness to gratitude, and to serve him more
completely; who does good and is good, and from whom goodness effluxeth to all
creatures: for of his fullness they receive fullness.

That this Understanding is the Key of Discovery, and Acquaintance, needs no
second to confirm it; for even nature tells us by the Rule, that there is no
desire of what we know not, Ignoti nulla cupido.
and Scripture directs to this as the path to all gracious Intercourse with
God; in one passage of holy Writ I hear this asserted, Psalm. 9.10.
They that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee; in another, He that
comes to GOD, must believe that he is. Heb. 11.6.
Now effects imply causes, as Cisterns do Springs, and Rivers Seas: If God be
to be believed on, he must be conceived of, and understood by those that thus
believe him; for as articulation is consequent to generation, so is adhaesion
to assent, and assent to intellect.

The necessity of intellect to head the will and affections, which in a sort
complete acqaintance, is evincible from many things: from the order of God in
Creation and Nature, which makes this as the womb, at which port every thing
which tends in its progress to action, enters. The light natural, typical of
this internal Luminary, was the first Creature; as that which God erected to
give light to his Library, the World, which God compiled of nothing, by a power
eternal, complete, and indeterminable; and the first trial he put man upon,
was to touch his Intellect, and to try the magnetisme of that faculty, which
could draw all things to it, and incorporate it self with every thing: And if
when there was no distortion, if befote the mis-rule which sin and Satan
brought into the Understanding; this was the tendency of that Faculty; It must
still remain what it was, as to the Nature and sacred Design of God, though
vayled and denegrated by accessions of sin, and contractions of punishments,
which by understanding any thing but God, and in order to God, is just up on it.

The faculty then is the same in its nature, in its employment; only the Rose
has prickles, the Swan deformed legs: Death is in the pot, if God does not
heal the waters, and turn our Understandings to that right object, Himself;
whom to know is life eternal, And whom to glorify as God, our most excellent
and only good, is the sole end of our creation.

Nor is the order of God in Creation, the only Instance of this precedence of
the Intellect; but experience attests this in the whole latitude of Instances,
the Heavens; by that instinct they have, as it were, and after their kind, do
their duty to earth, Man, nay their Maker; by a duct (which to them is in stead
of Intellect) do they serve times and seasons; do they remit, and extend
influence, according to the law of their first Cause; and the Birds and Beasts,
by their sensual Energy ( analogous in some sort to Intelect in man) direct
their course, and run their race; not attempting to love or fly that which is
not Good or Evil in their eye, and pleasing or displeasing to their Natures.
Now if that rule of the Schools be true, which neither is yet, nor ever will be
contradicted, That the work of Nature is the work of the God of Nature: Opus
Naturae est opus Authe ris.
then what is the concurrent practice of Universal Nature, according to its
specific being, must be Positive and Absolute, and so from him who is the
Beginning and End of all things, and therefore most true. And so I have mounted
the first Step, the Understanding. Acquaintance imports Understanding; for how
shall Desire be heightened, but from Knowledge; and Knowledge be gained, but by
that Faculty, Rom 10.14.
which is admissive and receptive of it? How can they (says S. Paul) believe
on him of whom they have not heard? and how can they hear without a Preacher?

Nor is this Step consummative to our Acquaintance, if here we stay, pitching
this as the Non ultra, beyond which we will not go: for God has placed his
Seat on High, and the Rounds of the Ladder which reaches him are many; he will
have us engaged in much colluctation, many breathings and pantings, before we
come up to the Mount of Mercy, where Peace is, and Evil is not; and therefore
he cries out to man, second place, for his Heart, his Will, which is the Jewel
in this Cabinet of Glory: This, this to the Intellect, is as the Sails to the
Ship; takes the Winds gales, and carrys it to the Port of Loss or Gain: this,
this is the Womb in which are the Issues of life and death: this, this is the
Paradise, which we ought to guard with the Flaming Sword of an uninterrupted
and earnest Zeal; for as the Sails move the Ship, by reason of the wind which
acts upon them, and so is causal of their swelling, as they of the Ships
motion; and according to the quantity of the wind, so ordinatily is the way of
the Ship: so does this act upon the Intellects premises, admitting whatever
has the Watchword from that Sentinel. I say not, that the Will always
follows the rectified Understanding: Bonum and velle convertuntur.
but this I say, No man wills what is evil under the notion of evil, for the
Will and Good are convertible; and many greatest evils have some good in
conjunction with them, for which they are admitted, though as to the
predominant parts of them, they deservedly be termed and judged Evil; for
whatever erreth from the perfect Rule of Gods Law, and defaceth the Image of
God in the soul, has not the allowance of Heaven to make it current.

Now this Will of man is highly concerned to the completion of reasonable
Actions, it being the vehiculum which carries the Intellect to its Object, and
thereto unites it: the Understanding approves the Match, but the Will ties the
knot and adunates; as I must know before I can will, so must I will before I
can be acquainted with that I will; which is the reason why between things
averse there is no acquaintance properly so called, but rather an Antithesis
and Retrogade Motion; Contraryes meet not, nor cohabit they in intense degrees,
in the same Subject at one and the same time, because they are inconsistent,
and are made what they are by the non being of each other: Fire is no fire, if
water prevail against it, for it is suppressed and led captive by the Victor;
and so water cease its moisture and liquidity, if the heat of the fire accede
it to Mastery; whereas other things that are not at this variance, meet like
Mercy and Peace, and kiss each other: Active heat, and Passive moisture, make
way for Generation; Steel and the Lodestone are in amity, and do with
eagerness approach each other; so is it in Love, by the will disposed of to any
object. There is no Sovereign more absolute, as to things subjected to his
will, then the will of man; for it wheels about the totum mobile in him. This
moved Samson to love Dalilah, Archimedes to dye with his Art; Judas to betray
his Master, Julian to Apostatize; and by Gods severity, this seals, as the
meritorius Cause, the wicked under unbelief, that they may be damned who have
pleasure in unrighteousness: for this once perverted and engaged, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.
the whole man is circumferred and hurled after the genius of its project: by
this are the affections alarmed and keened to good or evil; and without this
Velliety is nothing feasible, without the power of God come to aid; yea, and
that too deals mildly, by a sweet compulsion and insuperable persuasion,
transforming the soul from what it is, and as corrupted, would; into what it is
not, but ought to be: submissive to, sequacious of, and voluntarily captived by
God.

Now all the quarters of the inner man are beat up, and Proclamation is made in
the name of the great King of Heaven: now the word is, I am not what I was,
Isai. 26.13.
Other Lords have had dominion over me, but the desire of my soul is to thee,
and to the remembrance of thy Name: ver. 8.
now there is this only outcry, None but Christ, none but Christ.

That is the second Step, and the Advance is great. Acquaintauc is in a good
progress, when we understand the worth, and will that worth to be acquainted
with. But there is more Marches to be made to this Conquest; Psai. 132.2.
For he knows our thoughts afar off; yet in order to our Obedience, and his
declared Will, ought to be done by us again and again; the Canon is, Matthew. 7.7.
Ask, and ye shall have; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened. It Is a minute trifling boon that is not worth asking; God has entailed
Bliss to our Prayers and tears, not as the price, but the way to them: as he
hides not himself from his people that pray; so does he not own them that look
big with the Pharisee, and have too stiff knees to bend before him. Hab. 2.4.
He knows the heart is not upright, when it is unhumble, and condemns. it as a
false Character of a good heart not to ask Do thou (O man) conceive God the
best Good, and thy self miserable without him, and will thou not seek by
Prayers and tears to gain freedom? Do thou think he will ever be waiting to
be gracious, who ought to be waited upon because he is, and will be still so,
unless thou provoke him to turn his back, and not his face? Thou art blind, and
will thou not ask Eye Salve? Naked, and art thou too sturdy to beseech Christ
to cast his Garment of Salvation upon thee? Rev. 3.18.
If thou can not confess thy sins, 1 John 1.2, 9.
he declares not himself a Forgiver of sins; for his fidelity is engaged only
to Penitents. Will any man that's worthy, put his friendship upon an unwilling
party, or motion amity but upon the request of him, whom thereby he shall
oblige? It becomes those that will have part of another propriety, either to
beg or purchase it: all the Coin in thy purse, and the pride in thy heart, will
not capacitate thee to gain God for thy friend upon any terms, but repent and
believe: These are the wedding Garments which bring thee into the Feast of fat
things with approbation; and if thy holy Motions be as eager as they ought, and
as thy acquaintance with God deserves, then thou will not find a repulse; for
thy God is ready to meet those with open arms, who offer their service to him
upon bended knee, and with abashed faces.

Step 4. to Acquaintance with God is his Word, Psalm. 77.13. John 5.39. Psalm.
25.14.
his Servants, his ways. God is known by his out goings in his Sanctuary; the
Scriptures testify of him; his secrets are with them that fear him. If any man
be a seeker of God, him he hears. But above all, be sure of the favor of the
Well Beloved; he that comes from his hand, is carried into the Bedchamber, and
refreshed with the good things of his right hand. Christ's blood crosses the
Roll of Indictments, and discharges the guilt: If thy soul be dipped in that
blood, it will hold color against all waters, against all assayes to
interpose; perhaps Satan puts in his plea, and informs, thou art his; What
though? a stronger then he has taken possession. Suppose thy sins rest upon
thee as upon Mary Magdalen; yet if thou love much, why should not thou hope
to be forgiven, as was she? There is no sin in Mortal man can outpoise the
mercy in an immortal God; nor the merit of a spotless Savior, whose blood in
value out-prizes them as far as the noblest Gemme does the most vulgar pibble.
To this bounteous Emanuel (who when he was Rich became poor, that we through
his poverty might be made rich; who when he was in the bosom of his Father,
came to converse with men, that he might elevate men to communion with God in
Grace, and compartying with him in glory) do thou (O holy soul) conjoyn thy
self by a Covenant never to be broken. He, he it is that soders God and man,
that gives thee access with boldness to the Throne of Grace, that moves thee to
good, confirms thee in it, rewards thee for it, by the Holy Ghost, which the
Father sends in his name. Is thy Peace begun and perfected, thy Comfort
continued and increased? in the assurance of this, thou will live a life of
good example to men, Phil. 3.14. Psalm. 149.9.
and of glory to God, and after all, reach the mark of the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. For this honor have all his Saints.

And the better to keep thee in this, less and lower to that better good, it
becomes thee, O man, to attend on the revealed Will of God, that bears witness
to the Truth, Mercy, Justice, Patience, and other Holy Attributes of the Divine
Nature; it records also what thy duty (O man) is, Eccles. 12.24. Psalm. 7.11.
namely, To fear God and keep his Commandments, not only because he is angry
with the wicked every day, but because he by his love constraines thee, and
expects no returns from thee but thy self: Own him in all his holy Counsels,
Precepts, Threats, Ordinances, Servants, and love whatever bears his Image and
Superscription: Follow Peter in his tears and Faith, not in his frailty and
abnegation; thy Savior is thy Lord, and thou ought to own him for such, as
well on the Cross, as on the right hand of Glory; and his sevants ought to be
as dear to thee, when they are tormented, persecuted, afflicted (provided they
be steadfast, and such as suffer for well doing, on whom the Spirit of Glory
rests) as when applauded, preferred, and crowned; for this, if thou do,
entrance will be made thee into Acquaintance with thy God, whom to know, is to
be wise; and whom to live with, is to be happy.

Step 5. to Acquaintance with God, Phil. 2.5.
is identity of mind: therefore the Apostles says, Let the same mind be in you
which was in Christ Jesus: not the same essentially, but the same
dispositively, the same effectively; wish (in a holy ardency and warrantable
impatience) that you could oblige God as much by service, as he does you by
Creation, Preservation, and the good things of Glory, which he promises; yea,
rather wish to be like him in Grace and Holiness, then in Greatness and
Puissance: There is nothing works Acquaintance so kindly and reasonably, as
congruity; the Proverb is, Birds of a feather will fly together: there is
natuly a kind of Magic in assimulation; we love Climates and Clothes, Books
and Meats, Faces and Fashions, proportionable to our Geniusses most; and the
exterior sense is much at the Devotion of the interior idea, and the fanciful
Formatory: Did you ever see contrarys agree while so? and not rather their
friendliness bubble up from their union, as one prevayling, forced the other
into compliance? Or can it be imagined that God and man should agree, while the
one is too great to have equal, the other not humble enough to own a Superior?
In wordly conversation there is nothing more distasted, and declines
Acquaintance, then contrariety of Principle; yea it often invites to hatred and
hostile procedures, even where naturally there is antithesis to contrariety,
and altogether an ignorance of any demerit in the object, saving this nude
inconformity.

All Compounds are made of Simples that serve in their conjunction to the
proposed end; and though numerically they differ, yet in coagulo they conspire
to serve one univocal Design. In building, crooked, straight, long, short,
little, great, sappy, hearty Timbers conform to the model of the Edifice, and
the Surveyers Art. In medicines, simples laxative, retentive, hot, cold, by a
kindly, and even cooperation, recover health, and honor the Physician; which
otherwise would discredit the one, and endanger the other: the like effect has
compleasans in friendship, which is a marriage, not of Sexes, but minds; not to
purposes of Generation but Conversation. And therefore those mistake the Mark
much, who think to reduce God to their bounds, his holy nature to their impure
practices, and will be acquainted with him, not upon his own, but their own
terms. If they may have a Dalilah in their lap, if they may keep their right
eye and right hand, if when they go into the house of Rimmon they may be
pardoned, well and good: they are contented to enter amity with God. But if he
commands to cut off the right hand, and pluck out the right eye: Matthew. 5.29.
Genesis 12.1. Rev. 18.4.
if he call to them to leave their Country, to come out of Babylon, to forsake
father and mother; then with the rich man in the Gospel, they go away heavy,
crying out with him, Matthew. 19.22.
Non tanti emam poenitentiam: to these, Gadarens Swine are beyond Christ, glass
before pearls, and this little world in view, more precious then that better
in promise.

Well, but Acquaintance with God is never the worse because these cover it not
but upon cheap and dishonorable terms, which will not be yielded unto. Those
that know what it is to have the eyes of their Understanding opened, to
converse with God, not remotely (but as mortal Nature by Divine indulgence) may
with open face, 2 Cer. 3.18.
think all things loss and ^ung in comparison of it; accounting themselves
never estranged from the true end of their being, but when they are without the
Vail, when the lines of their inheritance are not cast out to them in this lot
of love, when they wander in the Wilderness of the wolrd, and commune not with
that God, whose comforts are above the world, who is whatever earth and heaven
can yield admired: for he is all in both, and nothing in either is delectable,
but what he is; nor are we ever truly our selves, but when we are like him, in
that partaking of his Divine Nature, which our being is capable of, and his
blessed purpose has designed us to.

Last Step to Acquaintance with God, seldom amount to intimate friendship,
those intervals and faint treatments, like cold and indigested Meteors hang
hovering, but never condense, and body into any solidity, like dainty meats
which rather puff up then feed; or like gay clothes, which adorn more then
comfort Nature: The greatest ingredient to many men's friendship, is a Cap, or a
Congee, Your humble Servant, and Passionately yours, which wise persons eye as
the purliew in which the Rascal Deer mostly, the Nobler rarely; and therefore
use those Modes rather in Symphony with the plurality, then out of allowance
and choice. Many in the matters of God, and in Duties of Religion (whereby we
should acquaint our selves with him) are as fetchant and wavering, as these in
less consequentials are: they wait not at the posts of Wisdoms door; they come
not early, they go not to bed late; they eat not the bread of sorrow, that they
might purchase this one thing necessary: Earnest they are not, nor do they by a
holy impetuosity and violence seize on Heaven, not wrestle with God, not let
him go til he bless them with his Acquaintance; yet do they expect to partake
of God as fully, as Zachary and Elizabeth, who wait upon him daily, and walk in
his Commandments without reproof; but how vainly these expect grapes from
thorns, and figs from thistles, the Consequence shows; God keeps them at
distance, he feeds them with the husks; he loves those that fear him, not
formidine poenae, sed virtutis amore; and he values those highest who are most
importunate, undismissable, whom not a non decet will discourage from begging
crumbs; Mat. 15.26, 27.
whom no Moment, no company will dishearten from resolving with Job, Though
thou killest me, Job 13.15.
yet will I trust in thee. These are the Merchants our Lord speaks of, who sell
all to purchase the Jewel of Divine Intercourse; these are they that cry out
for the light of Gods countenance, Psalm 4.
and care not what they suffer so they have it. To these humble prostrates are
the Doles of Heaven dealt out, on these that cry out, as Rachel did to Jacob,
Give me Grace, or else I dye, does God give the blessing of Acquaintance, and
for these and these only has he a Reserve, a Mansion in his Kingdom, Jerusalem
above, which is the vision of Peace; and in the fruition of which; by holy
Acquaintance with God as the way and means, we shall obtain adunition to God,
as the end and fruition of Peace in that felicity, for so says the next words,
Acquaint now thy self with God, and be at peace.

But stay man a while, There is somewhat intercurrent 'twixt Acquaintance and
Peace, there are bars and bounds to keep the Stage free from pester. God has
appointed Means and Degrees, by which to come at length to this Cusmen, this
top of the Mount on which shall be our Transfiguration: Christ Moses and Elias
are to be met with when we can say our Christian Alphabet roundly, when we can
say, not only as Saint Paul, Phil. 3.12. Rev. ^.9, 10.
Nondum attigimetam, but sing that Epinichyon, Thou art worthy, O Lord, for
thou have redeemed us from sin, sorrow, the world, and made us Kings and
Priests to thee. Till then, there is aliquid agendum; if ever thou will come to
the end of thy race, it must be by the Means ordained to that end, which is the
second Scruple to be explicated. What are the Means of obtaining this
Acquaintance? The Solution of this is partly done in the foregoing
Consideration, and therefore will require the less answer here; the prescribed
Steps of assent are also many several Paces toward it; what is necessary to be
added by way of Illustration, is only this; God requires of every Acquaintance,
1. Reconciliation to Christ: 2. Resignation to his holy Spirit: 3. Adoration of
his Ordinances: 4. Admiration of his Works. 5. Renovation of life.

Reconciliation to Christ: All sin is Hostility against him; it is Rebellion
against the Prince of Peace, and folly against him the Wisdom of the Father: He
came to unite God and thee, and thou (O man) labourest the Defeat of his
advent; the end of his descent from Heaven to earth, was to draw men after him;
thou in stead of coming to him that thou may have life, John 5.40.
runnest away from him: in stead of casting down thy self at his feet and
craving his pardon, thou hold up Weapons of unrighteousness against him: Is
this thy kindness to thy friend? Is this thy Loyalty to thy Prince? Is this the
Badge of Acquaintance and friendly intimacy? Do thou crown Christ with
thorns, and expect he should kiss thee with the kisses of his lips? Do thou
deliver him to the Corss, and look from him for a place in Paradise? Do
these rough hands of Esau, deserve from Isaak any Blessing? O man mistaken,
erring through the Delusion of thy Prospect, and the Temptation incumbent on thy
heart! Return, and seek to him by tears, whom thou have provoked by Treachery,
crave his blood, thine Atonement, which thou have shed in triumph to thy
Lusts; thou have made him thine Adversary by sin, humbly prostrate thy self as
his Purchase and Penitent: Let him see thy tears trickle down thy tender cheek,
from a pensive heart, and a gracious eye, that now look upon thy self with
greater scorn, then ever sinfully thou did upon him, when wickedly thou
said, I will not have this man reign over me; and let no hour, day, moment
pass without some earnest Petition for Reconciliation, That he would cease to
be what thou have deserved; thine Upbraider, Accuser, severe Judge: and be what
he has promised to all that turn to him with all their hearts, an Advocate, a
Lodestone, the Way, the Truth, and the Life: An Advocate, to plead thy Cause;
a Lodestone, to touch thy heart; the Way in which, and Truth by which thou
should walk; and the Life to crown thee after thy work done.

But perhaps thou concludest thy self at too great a loss to recover, too far
out of favor to be reingratiated? Why so? If where sin abounds, Romans 5.20.
Grace superabounds, there is hope for thee: Bespeak not (O man) thy denial, do
not stay thy career toward heaven, because thou fear the door of Grace is
shut. Such Conclusions may hinder thy endeavor, they cannot add to thy
comfort; therefore covet in the second place, Holy Spirit to thy comfort;
entertain him kindly, grieve him not by reiterated sins; quench him not by
averse obstinacy, Annescis (anima) te verecundum habere sponsum? This holy Dove
sent from the Deity, brings the Olive Branch with him; the Peace is bought by
Christ, but the Spirit seals and applies the Purchase; the Salve is rare, but
works not kindly, except that hand lays on the Plaster: therefore resign thou
thy self to the Spirit of God, let him rule in thee, and by his Steerage be
thou acted; follow this Star, it ever leads to Christ; hearken to his voice, it
is vox dilecti, its a calm, sweet, lovely, lightsome voice; be ravished with
this Music, which with Hyper-Syrene notes, charms most wisely; give up thy
self, soul and body to this Besieger, that summons thee to deliver up the
strong Holds of Sin and Satan to Christ the King of Saints, and the Savionr of
his Body the Church. Make no terms with him, the Holy Ghost will not be tied to
Articles: He is free to intercede, and thou must be free to render: as he will
have good quarter, so gives he sure comfort. The soul that receives him, is
Scot-free from Terror and Fear of Divine displeasure, for this Guest secures
his Quarters; yea, the power of the Almighty overshadoweth those with Grace,
whose hearts are prepared to cry, Veni Spiritus Sancte. And till (O man) this
be thy temper, thou art as unfit for Acquaintance with God as for Heaven; of
which it is a real Type, and to which it is the Baptist: for as into Heaven
flesh and blood, qua such, cannot enter; so into familiarity with God can none
be admitted who have not the Test of this Comforter, who never bears witness
that they are the sons of God, who rest unreconciled to Christ, unresigned to
him.

But how may these Graces appear in me, may the soul say? God, Christ, and the
Holy Ghost have their Court in Heaven, I am in the Valley of Bochim, in the
frigid Zone of earthly vanities, where dust and ashes, worms, and no men,
live, and acclamate the Diana of Pomp and splendid nothing; my bucket is not
deep enough, my stature not high enough to reach Heaven; my bulk will not bear
those breadthy Sails which that Glory fills. What shall I do? How may I contract
acquaintance with God by union with Christ, and rendition to his Spirit? Adore
his Ordinances: Those are his Leidgers which here he leaves to negotiate about
affairs of Heaven; these are the Chariots in which Eliahs are whirled thither;
these bring forth, and there is none barren amongst them; the good will of him
that was in the bush are upon these, Deuteronomy. 33.16.
which Atheism and Irreligion would separate and unbrother, as rejectitious and
illegitimate. God has appointed his Word for our Rule, his Ministers for our
Guide, his Sacraments for our Comfort, his Day for our Rest and Refection, his
Church for our Pillar and Ground of Truth; and those who adore not these are
not like to be Gods Acquaintance; Sovereignty will have no limits prescribed by
Subjects. Heaven knows no Method but that of its own dictation: Those that
will be beggars, must not be chusers: Interest with God is worth gaining by cap
in hand, and upon bended knee; and they deserve not to be heard in their
request, who request any thing contra formam Statuti inde editi; the
Declarative Law is, Search the Scriptures, John 5.3, 9. Luke 16.29.
for they do testify (says Christ) of me. And in another place: If they will
not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one rise
from the dead.

Wander not then (O soul) after wild phansies and blazing figments; exposed to
view, and set on broach of purpose to deceive and mislead ignorant and
inquisitive worldlings, who set the Crown on Coridons, and believe Christ the
Savior of the world, rather from his riding on an Ass-Colt, and obscure
parentage, then from his glorious attestation from Heaven, or his convincing
conversation here on earth; and judge nothing Sacred, but what is indeed common
and unclean: But (O soul) keep thou close to the Ordinances of Christ, which
his servants have received from him by the unquestionable tradition of the
Church, to the Truth of which the lives and deaths of holy Martyrs, and
glorious Confessors, have in all ages born witness; and do not believe that any
thing is so lovely and truly advantageous to thy peace, and orderly conduct, as
to serve thy God in that manner which he has appointed: and adore thou these
holy mysteries, Psalm. 46.4.
by which waters the City of God in thy soul, ought only to be made glad.

5 And though thus to do be to do more then many now will, yet is it not the
totum postulatum of thee: God (O man) requires of thee some tribute of praise;
the quit-rent of Gratitude. The Psalmist tells us in the person of God, Psalm.
50.23.
Whose offers me praise, honors me: and to give God the glory of his
Munificence, is but to offer him of his own; it is but to pay him our Fine in
his own Coin; 1 Cor. 4.7.
for what have we that we do not receive? And in no kind is this sense of our
obligation to God better resented by him, then by Admiration of his Works,
Admiration of his Works. And here me thinks I am enforced to exclamate with the
holy Pophet, Lord, what is Man? What his Being, Capacity, Dignity, that thou
should honor him with Contemplation of thee, and of those Works which set
thee out in thy back parts, though not to the ineffability of thine Essence?
Who, O, who wishes not his tongue were untied, and tipped with Eloquence,
excelling mortal Emulation, Psalm 150.2.
that he might give to God the glory due to his name, and praise him according
to his excellent greatness; not only for that he is high, not for that he is,
and there is none besides him; but for that he vouchsafes to look down upon us
here below, and calls us to contemplate his good Will, as well as matchless
Power in the Formation of things, and the orderly production of them! Here is
Matter to amuse the Secretary of Nature, and to puzzle the greatest Oedipus;
here is a full point to Plato's Eloquence, and Plotinus his Profundity. Who can
search the Center of that Idea which was in God, when he made the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, appointing them their seasons, influences, order, and sweetly tuning
them each to other? Who knows the Nature of Creatures animate and inanimate,
vegetive and sensitive; and can say of their Natures, as God does of the Seas
proud Waves, Hitherto and no further; this you can, and this you cannot do?
Where is he that sees the abyss of Providence, and penetrates into that privy
Chamber of Divinity, which is for Gods eye only? daring to affirm what shall
and shall not be; and the consequences of things natural and contingent? Sure,
no mortal man, undementated, dare so confide in Art, and dote so fondly on his
vain shadow, as to boast of this, which is Gods incommunicable Jewel, and the
Prerogative of his Crown. Our portion (Oman) is to wait Gods discovery; Secret
things belong to God, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Exodus 24.2.
but things revealed to us; and God forbid we should come nearer the Mount then
is indulged us, or endeavor after Wisdom beyond Sobriety; Our duty is to
acquaint our selves with God, not by knowing him as he is, for that's
impossible; but by knowing him as he manifests himself in works of Power,
Providence, Mercy; and in the improvement of what light we borrow from this
Lamp, we may see enough to make us in love with him, who made all things as,
and what they are, and to what they shall be: In him the Rich and the poor, the
wise and the simple, the Brute and the Rational, the Worm and the Angel, the
Fly and the Eagle, the Ant and the Elephant, the Mouse and the Lion, the Eele
and the Whale meet; God is the Maker of them all, and the same power went to
the production of the least as greatest; from him come winds and seasons, and
without him nothing is that is, nor shall be that he wills not: this is the sum
of what we can reach to in the folio of Contemplation and practice; for
whatever helps Art and Nature give us, come far shorter of the utmost extent of
Gods Works, than the shortest ladder is short of the Heaven we see, or the
impurest soul of that better Heaven we hope for: The best Meditation we can
make, is that of the Father, Si tale Artificium, qualis Artifex? si tale est
quod fecit, qualis est quifecit? If the courage of the Lion, strength of the
Elephant, capacity of the Whale, prudence of the Ant, continence of the Dove,
If the world be so variously fitted with necessaries, for delight, support, and
exercise of man, and his Nature so adapted to search into, and blessed to find
out and improve the secrets, and several qualities of things, creatures, and
continents, in some proportion suitable to his being, and Gods designment; has
he not great cause to cry out with that Kingly Prophet, Psalm. 139.14. 19.1.
O how fearfully and how wonderfully am I made! for who can confess less then
this, The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
Work?

But (O man) wander not too wildly in this wilderness, wherein are beasts of
Prey, uncouth paths, dismal upshots; thine errand and end is to admire the
works of God; that thou may do, it is thy duty, and Gods exact of thee so to
do, and thou thy self art a fair Text to such pious Meditations; God created
thee something of nothing, a Man, not a Toad, a Christian, not a Heathen, of
clear intellect not brutish, of right shape not deformed; and consider, this
calls for Gratitude. God has beautified thee with a bright Sun, refreshed thee
by a sweet gale of wind in thy sayls, thou art at the wished Port, supported by
a miraculous hand of Providence, he has discovered to thee thy dangers,
conducted thee in thy way, ministered to thy wants, when others not less his,
nor less themselves then thou, go mourning all the day long, are on their duty,
John 5.4.
waiting (with the Cripple) when the good Angel will come to their comfort, but
all in vain: No Butter sticks on their bread, their cake is dough, as the
Proverb is; All is fruitless; Remember the more thou receivest, the more thou
must return: Cui plus datur, ab illo plus exigitur; in fine, rather labor to
improve well that thou have, then to covet more to misuse it, and abuse thy
soul; for God expects from all men, as he sowes, so to reap; and thou art an
Unthrift on his Bounty, if thou returnest him not obedience and love, who has
crowned thee with Honor and Plenty above thy fellows.

But (O man) above all things, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
be not like Jesurun; spurn not with the heel; when thou art fat, forget not
the hand that feeds thee, and the paps of Providence that suckle thee; nor let
thine horns be exalted to worry and plague thy fellow servants of a lower Form
then thou art: This is not to be like God, good, gentle, and nigh unto all
those that call upon him; but liker the servant in the Gospel, Matthew. 32.32.
who took his fellow servant by the throat, when he himself was forgiven by his
Lord the greater Debt; yea, this is not to admire God, but to reproach him, as
misgiving Power and Greatness, and trusting it in the hands of those, who by it
prey upon, not protect the Sheep. This is not to admire the Works of God, but
to admire thy self, and to sacrifice to thine own Ambition and inordinacy, and
so to dishonor God who commands, Phil. 4.5.
Our Moderation should be known to all men; yea, this is to be unworthy of
Acquaintance with God, who is Shepherd of his Sheep, and delights in Lillyes,
things harmless and benign; and those that are not such, shall do well to
consider that of the Prophet, Jer. 30.16.
I will spoil the Spoiler; and steer another course for the future, even to
emendation of life; which brings up the rear of what God requires from those
that will be acquainted with him, and calls for my next Meditation.

Renovation of Life is a chief adjunct to Acquaintance with God: Light and
darkness, Christ and Belial, Dagon and the Ark do not agree; new cloth and old
garments suit not, nor will generous Wine endure crazy bottles; nor a Kingly
mind brook the thatched cottage: There is nothing more averse to the pure
Nature of God, then the impure life of a sinner; his eye loathes, his hand
corrects, his heart relucts, his Word reproves, his Spirit labors against it;
he cannot but call with a loud voice, Jer. 44.4. Romans 1.18.
O do not that abominable thing which I hate; and correct, by revealing his
wrath from Heaven against the ungodliness of men: Till thou (O man) return to
him by Repentance, there is no peace with God to be hoped for, no amity to be
attained. The means to gain God, is to own thy self, and to return to thy
fathers love, Luke 15.18.
to weep over thy wanderings, and to drown thy sins in penitent tears, as did
Mary Magdalen and Peter. Then, then only are we worthy to be friends of God,
when we are not profane as Esan, but holy as Abraham; not rude as Nimrod, but
meek as Moses; not rebellious as Absalom, but devout as David; not treacherous
as Judas, but penitent as Peter; not vexatious as Saul, but courageous as Paul;
not embracing the world as did Demas, but contemning it and our selves, as
ought the Disciple of Christ, who must deny himself, and take up the Cross.
This, this is to be born again, Mark 8.34. John 3.3. Ephesians. 4.23. Isai. 1.16.
Romans 13.14, Ephesians, 5.11.
Nichodemus his lesson; this is to be renewed in the spirit of our minds; this
is to cease to do evil, and learn to do well; this is to put on the Lord Jesus,
and to take no thought for the flesh; this is to have no fellowship with
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather to reprove them; this is to put off
the old man, and to put on the new man, Ephesians. 4. 22,24
which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness; this is to
lay the burden of our sins upon Christ, and to take the beauty of Holiness
from him: this is to gain heavens amnesty, to remove our sins far from us, as
the East is from the West, and to cause them to come no more in remembrance
before God; yea, this is to be thoroughly acquainted with God, and to have him
the souls Sun and Shield, who will give Grace and Glory, Psalm. 84.11.
and withhold no good thing from it.

These are the bona notabilia, which God keeps as the reward of Piety; as his
secrets, so his comforts are with those that fear him. Clusters of Canaan, grow
not upon Crabstocks of Sodom: Divine familiarity is not with mortal foedity:
They which will have God their Lord, must have his Rule for their Guide.
Penitence must supply the want of Innocence, or else God will deny acceptance:
it is not for me to say, I will return after, and be received first. God will
have his Doles of Mercy distributed to Pennancers; and the Oil of Gladness
returned to those faces whose heads were covered with ashes: A weeping eye is
no small Favorite with a merciful God, who not only greets with an Euge, Luke
15,7.
returning sins, but commands an Exultate, in Heaven amongst the Angels for it;
and those that sow their wild oats in tears, shall reap their wages in due
time; namely, Mercy and Joy, in, Come ye Blessed of my Father, receive the
Mansion prepared for you, by Acquaintance with God; namely, Peace, which is the
third hinge of my Meditation, and follows in the Scripture, Acquaint now thy
self with God, and be at peace.

What Peace it is those have who are acquainted with God? And here silet
lingua, stupet animus, deficit oration. Peace which passes Understanding (such
the Peace of God is) may well exceed utterance. The tongue is the hearts
Bell-man, and the cry is acording to the conception. As what food nourishes
not, will not transide into the members aggrandization; so what the thought
springs not, will never swell into words; Peace then, of this peace of God, it
is somewhat ineffabile, past finding out, it is hid in the hollow of his hand,
under his pavillion, from the strife of tongues, which in treating of its
peace, would break the peace of Truth. But (O my soul) is this the forbidded
tree? may not thou taste and not dye? Has God cabinetted up this Jewel, and
must not man see it and live? Is this the one thing necessary; yet prohibited?
Does God require that of me which is impossible to me? And are my comforts
surrounded with a flaming Sword inaccessible? Nothing less? The well is deep (O
my soul) but thy backet is suitable; the Pearl is dear, but thy price in hand
will reach it; thy peace is precious, and it is desposited with him, who has
broke down the wall of Separation; Ephesians. 2.14.
there is a new and living way to this Holy of Holies, not by blood of Bulls
and Goats; but by the blood of Christ's Cross, the Christians glory, and
Signature of his Peace.

But is this peace a complete Armature and Panoply? Does it fit every part? Is
it proof in every joint; is there no soft place in it, through which the poison
of Satan's power or policy will pierce? Is it a sweet Nightingale in the breast,
as well as a Headpiece and Guard to the outward man? Yes sure, the peace
spoken of in this Scripture is every way lovely, like Jonathan, lovely in life,
and lovely in death; a great source of Joy to thee, while thou art on thy way,
and a glorious Epitaph on thy Monument, when thou have done thy work, and run
out thine Hourglass.

This Peace is Tripartite Pax Temporis. Or External Of vision to the Eye. This
Peace is Tripartite Pax Pectoris. Or Internal Of Contemplation to the Mind.
This Peace is Tripartite Pax Numinis. Or Eternal Of Fruition both to Soul and
Sense.
1 Peace outward, that is a fruit of Acquaintance with God: for thus he gives
his Beloved rest: that the Creatures are under thine awe, that the Elements are
thy Pavillion, the Clouds thy Cisterns, the Sun, Moon and Stars thy Tapers, the
earth thy Granary, the Cattle thy Food and Raiment, is from God who is good,
and does good. I do not say, that Peace is always the Badg of Grace, or that it
ever, in regard of Externities, fares well with those who are good. I know the
contrary, and so did David to his trouble long ago; and Job chap. 12.6.
complainins that the Tabernacles of Robbers prosper, and they that provoke God
are secure; yea and Jeremy reasons with God concerning his Judgments, Why do
the wicked prosper and those that hate God are exalted? Jer. 12.1. While holy
men are clad in sackcloth, and covered with ashes, go mourning all the day
long, have not (with their Savior) a hole to hide their heads in, nor a crumb
to feed their bellies, or a rag to cover their nakedness. Luke 16.19. Dan. 5.23.
Do I not read of Dives faring deliciously, of Nebuchadnezzar quaffing in the
holy vessels? yet the one wanting nothing but room to lay his wealth in, and
the other priding in the Babel that he had built for the glory of his Majesty?
And does not the same ear let in the Narrative of Elijahs poverty, fed by a
Raven; 1 King. 17. Act. 20.34.
and of Paul's necessities, supplied by the labor of his hands? Are not wicked
men's Oxen strong to labor? and see we not their persons and fortunes free from
captivity and restraint? when men more holy then they, having no oxen to labor
for them, are fain themselves to labor like oxen to tread out their support,
and to pay from the sweat of their brows, a tribute to their Tyrannous Masters;
who with more then Egyptian severity, lay load of brick, and withdraw the
allowance and furtherances thereto? If it be so, how is acquaintance with God a
way to outward peace?

I answer, Yes: it is the way to outward peace truly so called, that is, to
sanctified outward peace, which is peace in a proper and savoury sense: Mere
serenity of state, is as far from blessing, as ease is from health; which
seldom is propagated by it, but often impeached and deflowred. When peace and
prosperity is bestowed upon bad men, it is to reward some good thing in them:
some service they have done God; God leaves not those unrewarded, whom his own
bounty, not their propensions has made serviceable to him; or at least to
leave them without excuse, that they may be silent when they are judged. Isa.
45.1. and 4.
This is the portion that Hagars children have; this is the husk that Gods
prodigals feed upon; this is the mark they level at; like Hell and the Grave,
they cry Give, Give. And what do they gape after? It Is auri sacra fames,
Alexanders Conquests, Craesus his Wealth, Tully his Oratory, Metellus his
prosperity: these take up their prospectives, bound their aims, swell their
plumes: This fatted calf have these for their entertainment; Vltra neque spes,
neque timor; they consider not the sour sauce that follows this Passover. On
the contrary, When Affliction befalls the Godly, it is to ventilate, to winnow
their chafe from them, to correct them for frailty, and to chase them out of
their covert, in which they delighted themselves as on beds of Ivory, and in
ways of Roses: Suppurated sores must have Corrosives: It Is too much cruelty to
power in Oil, where there is need of mundifying: Afflictions and external
quassations are like thunder, purgations to the air: The Soul is never better
then when out of the Sunshine: Then it gathers up its garments, and crowds
close to God: Hos. 5.15.
In their afflictions they will seek me early.

Nor have the wicked prosperity and peace in peace; Aliquando sub hilari vultn
tristis animus. Solomon tells us, Pro. 14.13. Dan. 5.5.
In the midst of laughter, the heart is sorrowful; sometimes there is an hand
on the wall, a red Cross of Gods displeasure on the fronts of our peace; There
is peace, peace, and no peace; Midas his misery, Erysickthons thirst, a
coveting eye and a nauseating stomach, a grand estate and a penurious soul:
Eccles. 6.2.
here is the evil under the Sun Solomon speaks of.

Sometimes prosperity and peace, as Riches is given to the hurt of the Owners;
Eccles. 5.3.
sometimes there is denied somewhat with it, for which it is appetible, as
Heirs, Health, Friends; Genesis 15.2. Prove. 10.22.
and ever there is denied to wicked men, Gods blessing on it, which brings no
sorrow with, nor after it: the absence of which, causes the dregs in the
bottom of all worldly peace to worldly minds, for it makes them cry out of
Prosperity, as captived Craesus did of Solon; O Solon, Solon, had I hearkened to
thy premonitions, I had never been so unprovided for bonds and captivity. Of
these then, that which the Apostle says of the Unchaste widow, is most true,
they are dead when they live. 1 Timothy 5.6.
But to the Godly it is far otherwise their peace outward is ever sanctified,
not as to the present use of it (for they may faint in the Sunshine, they may
be lifted up through abundance of Revelation) but as to the Sacred end, and
ultimate result of it: God shall turn this by the Sacred Chemistry of
Omnipotency, into Good: Romans 8.28.
This is within the pale of All things work together for good to them that love
God.

Away then, thou Accuser of the Brethren, avoid thou Tempter to Evil, and thou
Mortar Piece of Divine Fury, Satan. Away ye children of Darkness, who hate
those of Light, because your deeds are evil; forbear your tauntings of those
whom the Lord has smitten; justify not those whose Iniquitous Balances have
made themselves only weighty, and all others too light: the Standard of
Justice is coming round; Dan. 5.25.
your doom is Mean tekel Vpharsin; the glory of your forged Sanctimony is
defaced; God will humble the pride of men, and polish his rusted Saints, by the
arising beams of the Sun of Righteousness: The Churches Sovereign is at hand;
and though his first coming was in humility, his next will be in glory, to
ride in triumph over all feigned Piety, and to set these Goats of Lust and Rage
on his lest hand; Lift up. (O holy ones) your heads, Your Redemption draws
nigh: He that dyed for you, will own you, and expects you should own him, in
preserving his seamlesse coat from rents, and in keeping unity of Spirit,
though there be difference of Language. Peace be (O holy souls) to you, the
peace of this world, not by its gifts, but by Donation of him, who has
subjected all things; prepare your selves by holy love to deal out your Riches
to those that want; freely ye receive, freely give: O far be it from you to
give vinegar and gall to your brethren, since your Father in Heaven gives you
the generous liquor of Love, and bids you do as you would be done by. Take your
fills of the waters of outward plenty; Marah is cured, the bitterness of death
is past, Christ has by his Cross so crucified the world to you, that it is now
become your Vassal, not your Lord: remember there is the portion of Peace
annexed to Acquaintance with God, So do, and so have.

But is this all? are the grains of allowance only in Externals? Is my Carcass
more worthy then my Soul? What shall be done to that animula blandula, 2 Pet.
1.4.
which is after a sort Partaker of the DIVINE Nature? is there no accrewment to
that? Does God take care of Sparrowes, and of the hairs of our heads; and is
there no provision made for that which is the Nightingale of Eternity? Surely
yes, two for one; the double portion for this firstborn: One portion respects
its conjunction here with the body; and the other its separation from, and
glorification with the body in Heaven; the first in Grace, the second in Glory;
the first in via, the Comfort and Peace of a good Conscience; and the latter
and better, in Patria, of a good God, in a glorious Kingdom, Heaven.

Peace Internal; not Physical, sans Palpitation of the Heart; sans exclamation
of the Passions, or their crowing shrils in the brain: but peace Metaphysical;
the peace of God in the breast of man; God as it were incarnate, sitting on the
Tribunal of a Mortal Judicatory. Now the winter is past, the storms are over,
the singing of birds is come, the voice of the Turtle, of the Primum Mobile, is
heard: O Extatick Elamire! O Seraphick Ela! O Note stepped aside from the Quire
of Angels, to entice our Admirations! Does God dwell with man? can these houses
of clay contain him that is whatever is Infinite and Incomprehensible, which he
is? Be thou, O Lord, with my pen, and let it be thine Instrument to decipher
this, which is so rare, which is whatever Nature can aspire to value.

Peace of Conscience, a Jewel which abates not price; a child of light admired
in all Ages. Persons, Countries sought after when not had, cherished where
possessed, deplored when lost; whom Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Christians valued, and to which they peered nothing.

Peace of conscience, the Salt that seasons Mirth, sweetens Sorrow, and the
Plummet that sounds the bottom of every coast, and discovers Shipwreck and
safety.

Peace of Conscience, the Touchstone of our innocence, the probate of our Zeal,
the Furnace of our Charity; for then only can we love God and our Neighbor when
his love is shed abroad in our hearts, by his holy Spirit, who works this peace
in us.

Peace of Conscience, that Phoenix nest made up of the Perfumes of Graces, out
of which expiring, rises peace of Eternity.

Peace of Conscience, heaven on earth, glory in weakness, light in obscurity,
Abraham's bosom in Lazarus sores.

Peace of Conscience; Goshen in Egypt, Gods Segullah to the Alchimy of the
worlds Admirables; the fat kine of holy serenity, that by a miraculous
transposition swallow up all the lean kine of worldly cares, and confounds the
wisdom of secular interests.

Peace of Conscience, the Lily of the valleys in which Christ nestles; the Rose
of Sharon, on which the Sun of Righteousness smiles; to which Solomon's bravery
is but Beggary, and Herod's oratory but babbling.

Peace of Conscience, compared with which, Balm of Gilead is but like the
trifling Compound of a Quack Salve; and the Gold of Ophir but as dross and dung.

Peace of Conscience, to which Power and Policy, Arts and Armies, Councels and
Senates are but as Molehils to Mountains, Ants to Men, Atoms to the body of
this earth, and the dwindling light of the candle, to the center of light
enveloped in the Sun

Peace. of Conscience, the Music, to which Orpheus his Harp, and Arions Pipe,
helped on with Sirens voice, are but so many strains of perfect discord and
displeasing Harmony.

Peace of Conscience, the best companion of life, the sweetest Confessor at
death, the noblest Memorial after death; nay, the souls prodomus (next under
Christ) to Heaven, for thither it ran on Cornelius his errand, to display his
Alms; and thither it must go, to the credit and comfort of all that have it,
For there is none of this peace to the wicked, says my God.

Here, O profane worldlings, here, O wretched Politico's, ye are outstripped;
pleasures, profits, honors, have no suffrage in this consistory, they cannot
make their Masters partakers of this delight, to which all others are but
shadows, as far beneath them as drops to the Ocean. Neither Alexanders Power,
nor Solomon's Wisdom, nor Mithridates his Wealth, nor Justinians Learning, nor
Galens Receipts, nor Archimedes his Experiments can procure this; it is a gift
from above, descending from the Father of Lights, Jam. 1.17.
and referring the soul to him as the Author and Finisher of its Felicity.

Here is somewhat stupendous; but this, how far soever transcending the utmost
outward advantage, is but porch and prologue to those Magnal a Dei, those
Arcana Patriae, which neither eye has seen, nor ear have heard, nor entered
into the heart of man to think of; namely, the good things God has laid up in
heaven for those that fear him, not to be attained or enjoyed here (alas, our
Vessels are too narrow to receive that Ocean where there is incapability of
reception, there is no probability of retention:) if we cannot be in possession
while in the flesh, let us covet to depose this garment of incapability, and
thirst after that glory which Heaven exalts us to; specified to us in that
Jewel, Peace Eternal.

Acquaint now thy self with God and be at Peace; that is, be every way blessed;
within, in a serenity of mind; without, in a fortunate condition, exempt from
evils, or sanctified to thee in spite of evils; Prove. 17.7.
for when a man's ways please the Lord, he will make his enemies be at peace
with him; or without fail, above, in the beatitude of thy soul to all eternity.

This is the rest that remains to the people of God; Heb. 4.9. John 14.3.
this is the Mansion prepared by Christ, of which he took possession by his
Ascension, and in which he now is in Session at the right hand of God. This is
that Jerusalem above, Gal. 4.26.
which is free, the mother of us all, where Hallelujahs are Music, Angels
Choristers, the Divine Nature prospect, Saints Companions, and the Lamb Light
in the midst thereof.

This is Heaven, not in Enthusiastic rapsodies, not in fanatic Novelties, not
in raving Blasphemies, but in deed and truth.

This is Heaven, not that of pleasure in 'Amnons Lust, in Achans Wedg, in
Solomon's Wisdom, in Methuselahs long life, in Achitophels Craft, or in Judas
his gain by Treachery; but Heaven in the bosom of Christ, who is Exalted above
Principalities and Powers.

This is heaven, not in Types and Figures, not in dark and remote viewes, not
in variating forms, and unfixed Stations, but in real consistence, and
unalterable duration.

This is Heaven, not blemished by sin, not tedious through sorrow, not ruled by
sinful will, not vanquished by lawless power, not tainted by profaneness, not
deserted by time, not impairable in value and real worth, but ever what can be
wished for, and never less then it at any time was or is.

Lastly, This is Heaven, not infected with pride, not dejected with poverty,
not shrivelled with age, not scorched with heat, not determining with time.

Heaven, a Kingdom for its glory and capacity, purchased by the price of blood,
and the pre-appointment of Mercy; for not all, but for many, yet those a little
flock, those who are acquainted with God in grace, and by him rewarded with
this Peace.

Now I am in Meditation at the Ladders top; but have we spoke well of this
Canaan? Is not this Peace of eternity the least of our treatment, though in it
Christ be, as was Bethlehem Ephrata little amongst the Tribes of Judah, Micah.
5.2.
out of which Christ came? Is not Isaak mistaken, and sent away with a small
pittance, in stead of the son of Hagar? What means my line upon line on other
Subjects less worthy, and my brevity on this head that exceeds them all.

Truly more Devotion then words, more Admiration then Oratory befits this
Subject; Scholastic Dispute, and eloquent Panegyricks are the Fucusses that
adorn this Elementary world, and please its Aerie Inhabitants; these are the
Diana's of vain men, and those Treasures which they pride in, and rely on, as
inexhaustible; and with these they delude souls, and dishonor him who
beautified us with that bravery, that we might honor him as our Creator,
follow him as our Pattern, yea fall down before him as our Judge. When I am in
Meditation of Heaven, I rather pray for a warm heart, and keen affections; for
abilities to believe in, and adhere to God, then for curious Speculations and
pathetick words; and therefore since faith must supply what sense cannot attain
to, and those things that are secret and ineffable, are rather to be adored,
then searched into, or written upon; I can here conclude this part of my
Meditation in the Wisemans words, The knowledge of this is too Wonderful for me,
it is high, I cannot attain unto it.

And declining further thought of this Peace which here I cannot understand;
enquire into the evil we are assured to escape both here and hereafter, which
is the fourth Enquiry, How this Peace may be said to repel evil from us? in
that clause, So shall no evil come unto thee.

Peace and Evil are here opposed, not more in the words then sense. Evil like
the Canker eats out either our Peace, or at least eclipseth the comfort of it,
evil of sin deserves no peace; evil of punishment believes and finds no peace;
to the one peace is not, to the other it seems not to be, and so is not at all
as to the present discovery: That therefore the Holy Ghost might set every
Trophie upon its proper basis, I conceive him, using this order in this
Scripture, to teach us, that as Acquaintance with God is the way to peace, so
is the peace of God crowned with exemption from evil; and that none can expect
to have Gods custodye; but those which are in League and Amity with him; Be at
Peace, so shall no evil come unto thee.

No Evil, Not Satan, the Tempter to it, and the Traducer for it; Christ's Prayer
is our Antimure, Deliver us from evil; that is, from that evil one. From his
Power, 1 Pet. 5.8. Ephesians 6.11.
as the Lion that goes about seeking whom he may devour: From his Policy, for
we know his Methods, his pious Frauds, his Scriptum ests, his Lamblike,
Angellick manifestations, 2 Cor. 11.14. Matthew. 24.24.
his transformations into shows of Light and external sanctity, and all to
deceive, if possible, the very Elect.

From his Agents, who Ape-like act his part to much perfection ((...) and
(...)) make Merchandise of Faith and a good Conscience, care not what they do
to make Proselytes and pervert souls. This crafty Policrates, Satan, 2 Pet. 2.3.
moves every stone to his advantage, and has flags of all colors to hang out
for our surprise; he has Instruments that with the Zeal of old Arsenius seem
to forsake their Countries and Fortunes to devote themselves to God; his
Luciferians, that come in the vests of innocence, but inwardly are ravening
wolves, having the poison of Asps under their tongues, Matthew. 7.15.
and the rancour of Devils in their hearts; whom Christ commands us to beware
of, Mat. 10.17. He has his Artemova's, that have such convicting deportments
that they lead men which way they list, by their suaviloquius charms, and
compleasant influences; his Pharisees, that swallow down Widows houses in the
hollow of long Prayers; that are all to all men, that they might reduce all men
to be nothing to any but themselves; his Saduces that deny Resurrection,
Angels, Spirit, but what is theirs, those they cry up as Ocular, execrating all
that are not of their party, and cry not Grace, Grace to this Apollyon of their
designing. Lord, what a Gallamaufry of Frauds has this great Engineere on
foot? How is he furnished to deceive, who has not only the tongues and pens of
many men Learned, but lying Wonders and miraculous Artifices at his service?
But we know his methods, and may see this Apicius gaping to devour all;
contented with nothing but ruin and disorder, though he cry out with Jehu,
Behold my Zeal.

And it were well if men would try the spirits that now are abroad, for Satan
is often a Lying spirit in the mouth of Prophets, and a Prophesying spirit in
the mouth of Liars: and if he durst mingle himself with the Sons of God, when
they came before him of old, may he not now be well mistrusted: Job 1.6.
though he quote Scripture with the zeal of a Seraphim, and in the meetings of
Christians pray and speak with notable evidence; he who durst appear before
Christ with Scripture abused to his own purpose, Matthew. 4.6.
dare do the like to Christians, whose weakness is more opportune to his
Conquest. He is that Evil one, who in his whites is a Devil of Deceit, in his
blacks a Devil of Malice, in his Crimsons a Devil of blood; a Devil in all
shapes, actions, senses, and happy is it for us that we know his Methods. And
Agents; not men of triffling talents, who need vulgar helps to make them
eminent; but men of great parts, noble wits, yea often noted lives; speaking to
wonder, writing to amazement, living to envy and example; the Leaders of Israel
sometimes caused them to err; The Priests divined a falsehood; Isai. 9.16.
the Devil of Saul's heart (in Samuels flesh as it were) is potent enough to
misguide millions. O Lord what a Progress has the mystery of iniquity made,
when the Serpent stings the Dove to death; Religion becomes politized! What an
Egypt will Canaan be, when Mannah is exchanged for Garlic and Onions, when the
Screech Owl extrudes the Turtle; and that be upon us which the Jews feared,
John 11.48. The Roman come and take away our Religion, and (I pray God) not
our place and Nation.

Is not this evil of the Devils designing? Is not the hand of hells Joab, Satan
in it, but the sword of the Lord and of his Gideon Christ Jesus shall prevent
this, though none stand in the gap; no Moses intercedes, no Phineas executes
Judgment; yet this Plague shall cease; God for his own namesake will turn those
Locusts (the Jesuits) back to their quarters; and make their Design as a red
sea to bury themselves in. The Thumbs of these Adonibezeks shall be cut off,
the Pride and Policy of these Absoloms become their ruins, So let all thine
enemies perish, O Lord.

Well, we have a sight of Satan in his power, and agents; now see him in his
Policy and end, which is to cut off Samsons locks; to destroy the Males of
Israel; to ruin all the Smithes and Forges by which our Spiritual weapons
should be edged to oppose him, and defend our selves against his assaults; thus
did the Philistims of old to Israel, 1 Samuel 13.9. But I hope God will turn
this Wisdom into Folly, and this Babel of Hope into a Babel of Defeat; yea, I
will bespeak these Gates of Hell to give way to the Rock of Ages, and to Christ
the Corner stone, who is with his Church to the end of the world; and I will
pray that the iniquity of their hearts may be forgiven them, who hate the
Church of England without a cause, and endeavor to subvert the Religion of it
against Scripture that asserts it.

And now is not custody from this evil an unspeakable Blessing? Is it not as
rain to the parched grass, and ought we not to receive this Mercy with the joy
of Harvest? Is it not a serious collect which deprecates Satan's success; while
he with Herod acts a Tragedy on Innocents, and labors to steal away the Babe
Christ out of his mothers lap the Church; his mother the Church; not to rob the
blessed Virgin of her Crown ( All Generations call her Blessed, because she
bare his body in her womb) but to right the Church against her Rival, the
Synagogue of Satan, which disowns her, and seeks Christ out of her, who
spiritually is only formed in her, from which evil, and the infatuation of it,
good Lord deliver us.

This is the first Evil (Satan) from which the Peace of God shields us, the
next is from Sin; like father, like child; a chip of the old block, a branch of
that Lie which was from the beginning.

From sin, the evil of inquination, that which defiles the man, defaces Gods
image, passes an eternal exile twixt the soul and him, for he has no
fellowship with unfruitful works of Darkness; His eye is on them that are
upright, but he cutteth off the wicked from the earth, and rooteth out the
Transgressors. Prove. 2. ult.


From sin, the Evil of Angels, for because of folly beheld in them, they were
cast from Heaven; 1 Pet. 2.4. Isai 30 33.
the evil of Kings and great men, for whom Tophet is prepared of old; Sin, the
evil of men of low degree; sin, the evil of all; 1 John 5.19.
for the whole world greaneth under it, and lies in it.

From sin, the eyes grief, prevailed against Eve, Genesis 3.6. 6 6.
by that against the sons of God of the old world: Sin, the hearts ache; thus in
Saint Paul crying out, Rom 7.24. Psalm. 39.1.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!
Sin, the feets snare, against which David cautions, I said I will take heed to
my ways; Sin, the tongues temptation to speak unadvisedly; Sin, the Catholic
Cross to all that are crucified with Christ, and mystical members of him; Sin,
the breach of Gods Law, the grief of his Spirit, the price of his Son, the
torment of his Combatant, and the triumph of his Crowned ones; Sin, the Monster
of Paradise, for there it was plotted; the first born of life, for therein it
is acted; the plague of this world, on whose Stage it is attyred, and thence
maturated. Sin, something of nothing, a tumourous bubble of pestilent pride,
scorching Lust, and empty vanity, evaporating in nothing but the Lust of the
flesh, Lust of the eye, and the Pride of life.

Sin an evil inward in the thought, outward in the act, upward against God whom
it contemnes, and downward against earth whom it burdens, and all to gratify
him who is Prince of the Air, and rules in the hearts of the Children of
disobedience. Sin against the Creation, whom it disorders; against Redemption,
which it frustrates; against Sanctification, which it defies; against
Preservation, which it contradicts; against Salvation, which it abjures. Sin,
against which, as the greatest evil, God protests; to prevent which Angels
watch; to recall from which the Spirit sollicites; to direct how to avoid which,
the word is positive; against which to practice the holy men of all ages are
presidents; yea, to expiate which the blood of Christ the Lamb of God was shed,
and his soul for it made an Offering.

What shall I say more against this which is so dishonorable to God, and ought
to be execrable to his people? but in the words of Moses, Cursed be he that
continues not in all the words of the Law to do them; that is, who desires not
to give sin the foil, by a contrary and constant course of virtue, according to
the will of God in his Word, and the assistance he has from God in this Race
to complete this resolution; for without that we can do nothing.

Well then, to be helped from this evil, is a mercy, a consequent of Gods peace
with the soul; that is clear from the Prophet, Thou will keep him in perfect
peace (or nearer the Original, in peace, peace) whose heart is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. He. O holy soul, that keeps thee never
slumbereth, his eye is on thy feet, to keep them; He keeps the feet of his
Saints, says Hannah: On thine eye, to hinder thy lust; on thy hand, to prevent
thy cruelty; on thy tongue, to suspend thine obscenity; on thy whole man, to
keep thee from sin, that it reign not in this mortal body of thine. He was with
Noah in the Ark, to keep him from despair of out-living the Flood, which
drowned the world; with Moses in the wilderness, to preserve him from
disbanding his rude multitude, whom God designed for Canaan, and inclining him
to bear the petulancies of popularities; rather then choose the contents of a
private retirement: He was with David in his flights from Saul, and fights with
Philistims: And kept him from desponding, upon assurance of a Kingdom for his
reward: He was with Jeremy in the Dungeon, and with Jonah in the Whales belly;
to sweeten straights to his, and to make them more pure in their enlargements.
He was with Peter's tongue, converting thousands at a Sermon, and making his
pride do penance where it offended, yea, weep out its own retraction. He was
with Paul by grace sufficient for him, when he saw the messenger of Satan
tempted him by abundant revelations to be lifted up above measure. In the fire
he is with his, and in the water he is with his: yea with you, O holy souls, he
is always, to the end of the world. With you (O holy souls) to keep you in all
your ways, to secure you in all your dangers, to resolve you in all your
doubts, to support you under all your sufferings, and with you to deliver you
out of them: With you as a Sun to enlighten, as a shelld to defend, as an
Anchor to rest on, as a Pilot to guide you, and as a Champion to overcome your
fears. With you, to keep you in your Race, that you faint not; and with you,
to reward you with fullness of joy in his presence. This is second to the former
privilege, the peace of God keeps from Evil. 1. Satan: 2. Sin.

Sorrow and Sufferings: those it also preserves against, not that they dash not
on us, but that they overwhelm us not; not that they come not nigh, but that
they come not over us to overcome us: Christ in the Ship priviledgeth not from
tossing, but drowning. I will not fear the ranting Seas, if my rebuking Savior
(whose voice those waves and winds obey) be embarked with me. Mistake not (O
holy souls) your Lesson; it is the voice of your Beloved that says, In the
world ye shall have Tribulation: Job 16. last.
the Cross is your Saviors Sheep-mark, and those that are of his flock, brook
his Ear mark; their ear must not refuse the Trial Christ's side had; if that
was pierced, they must expect like measure; and those that will not follow him
in the Regeneration, have little cause to conclude him theirs in his Kingdom.
What (O man) will thou with thy Savior wear the Crown of Glory, and refuse
that other of Thorns with him? Will thou be acclamated for a Coheir, a King,
and Priest with Christ, and not be spit upon and derided with him here? Will thou drink the new wine with him in his Kingdom, and decline the Vinegar and
Gall here given him? Do thou hope to be drawn up after him, and not resolve
here to tread the Wine Press of wrath, to endure the contradiction of sinners
with him? If this thou look for, thou art on thy wander, far from thy Mark;
thou art of the rich young man's pack, who would keep Christ and his Wealth too,
or no Christ; Cresianus es, non Christianus; there is one thing necessary which
thou need, Deny thyself, take up the Cross, and follow Christ, to Mount
Calvary, before thou come to Mount Zion.

And O that this Meditation were but canon with many such Zelots as Julian was,
who grasp Power and worldly greatness with as eager tallons as Lions and
Panthers do Lambs and Infants, and think they never have enough, till they have
too much Mammon for Christ to cohabit with. These are they that are Saints, as
Peter was a Penitent, after many denyals and perjuries; not Saints because
penitent as was he, whom a Cock wakened; when these stop their ears against
good counsel, and harden their hearts against reproof; yea, hate him that
reproves in the Gate. These are they who love Christ when he is with those in
Princes Courts, clothed in soft Raiment, sat in Royal Apparel on the Throne,
when the people cry him up; but when he is traduced, when in the High Priests
Hall, when trampled upon, then they are gone like Summer birds in Winter; they
are all for a Pompous Reign on earth, before that more glorious Reign in
Heaven; and therefore they will secure themselves by might and main against all
danger and diminution here. Do these consider Christ had never been glorious,
but by sufferings, nor the Church been victorious but by the red Cross? How
much of holy Writ do these men make Apocryphal, while they entail external
prosperity to Saintship, and think none worthy to live, but those who look upon
the Cross as a curse, servile supplicium? What think they of those words of the
Lord Jesus, In the world ye (Who? my holy Apostles, as pure Saints as any
such, none excepted; nay, to whom compared, those are but as Jewish Sepulchers)
shall have affliction; not be afflicted, but have affliction, in the Abstract;
there shall be a kind of connaturality betwixt you and affliction. What judge
they of Saint Paul's peremptory position, All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer persecution? What of Saint Peter's prediction of fiery Trials,
and Encouragements to prepare for them? Nay, what of our Saviors Benediction
on those that suffer for Righteousness sake? Are these Tales and Figments? Are
these Legends and Foysts? Are these Lillies of his field, not to be compared to
the Solomon's of their fancy in all his Royalty? I trow there is no man so fond,
but sees self more set up then Christ in this Pageant; for take away
sufferings, and where is Faith? where Charity? where Martyrdom? nay, where is,
or to what purpose that animative reference of the Holy Ghost displaying
Christ, glorious in witnessing a good confession before Pentius Pilate his
Judge, who could wash his hand, and protest Christ's innocence, and yet durst not
deliver him from the rage of the multitude. No wonder they cry down Scripture,
and Fathers, and Church Stories, who cry up such wild, excentrick, worldly
subtilties for Religion, and own Christ with their mouths, as the Jews did
him on the Cross, only the more to reproach him.

Well, let these stray from the fold as wildly as they will, it is thy part (O
holy foul) to keep close to thy colors, Voti tunc Curistianis crat pro Christi
nomine gladio percuti. S. Hie^on. in vita Pauli Eremitae de Temp. Decii.
Christ looks thou should not only he ready to own, but of need be, to
dyefor him; thou must expect sorrows, perhaps not such as with Spira will make
thee despair, turn thy back on Gone, as Ephraim did in the day of Battle; but
such as may exercise thy Grace, correct thine outgoings, mind thee of thine
end, admonish thee of thy duty, rouse thee to get thine Evidence ready, to make
thy Calling and Election sure, and by a holy end prepare thee for a blessed
Exchange.

The Promise is to be secure, not exempt; not that ye shall not to be
assaulted, but not be overcome; not that ye shall not be chastned, but that ye
shall not be condemned; not that evils shall not come near you, but that they
shall not domineer over you; not that ye shall not be bu^fetted by Satan, but
that Divine Grace shall be sufficient for you.

The Peace of God gained by Acquaintance with him, is no plea of prescription
against trouble and evil; but this it does, it modifies evil, so that it comes
not noxiously near a godly man, as it is evil, so its kept at distance, as it
is a Mark of Divine love, as it is a voice to reclaim, as it is commanded to be
Gods Monitor to us, so we must welcome it as did David, It is good for me that
I was afflicted; and pray for it as preventive Physic, that keeps us from
Plethorick Distempers. Many men may thank God for their crosses, without which
they had never come to Heaven: there is a most notable Story in the Legend, of
a blind woman, who besought Saint Bridget to give her sight; the Saint (so
called) at her entreaty, Quo presentor sum mundo, co absen^ior sum Christo.
did; and when she had seen four dages, she desired Saint Bridget, that she
would take away her sight again, adding this for reason, The more I see of the
world, the less am I conversant with Christ.

4. Lastly, The peace in Acquaintance with God, will keep thee from thr Evil of
Evils, Death eternal. God suffers not his to fall into that pit, out of which
there is no redemption; His, as they have no part in the sin of the Damned, so
shall they not partake in the torment of the Damned: It Is not, Go ye Blessed,
but Go ye Cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
And indeed, this is the Mercy of Mercies; this is one part of the Recompense of
Virtue and Godly life, that it shall not only have comfort in seeing God
gloriously waving the Banner of love over it, but becoming its Guard to Heaven,
and nullifying Satan's attempts on it; this is, that in which the mercy of God
shines as at noon tide, and comfortably exalts its self above Justice, as that
which crowns God, and renders him Beloved and admired of all that know him.

But perhaps (O man) thou art curious to know what this Death Eternal is? This
is a vanity, and if thou beware not, may be the vexation of thy spirit, but if
thou would ken the scantling of it, our blessed Lord has defined it to be
utter darkness, Matthew. 8.12.
where is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; it is exile from God, and
judgment to the society of damned spirits, for ever.

Death Eternal, what is it not that is absolute tristicity? it is a living
death, and a dying life; it is the wages of sin, the sentence of Justice, the
utmost period of Plagues; a most exquisite misery, a most Merciless Torment, an
Eternal Passion! Eternal Death; it is misery to the eye, for it shall not see
God; it is a worm gnawing on the heart, for it shall consider the evil it has
done, for which is inflicted that evil it suffers; it is a vexation to the
senses, which to augment the tortures of their condition, shall be renewed and
made more sensible; it is an excess which shall never have end, but be
eternally what it is, and impossible to be what it is not.

Death Eternal; it is the region of Blasphemy, the Caldron of Nimrods, Nero's
Judasses, those chambers of ruin into which they descend, who desert God by
sin, and are deserted by God in just Judgment. Death Eternal; it is a gulf
without bottom; a doom beyond ransom; a fire that burns, and is never
extinguished; and a restless craver, never satisfied.

What shall I say other then that of the Psalmist, Remember this ye that
frrget God, Psalm. 50.2^.
lest he tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver.

These are the Evils from which peace in Acquaintance with God priviledgeth the
soul.

But how (cries the holy soul) comes this to be my privilege? How, O soul?
Surely not by thy merit, but 1. By the Mercy of God, which has bestowed that
good, as an Enticement to be his; God invites sinners to his Mercy. He waits
to be gracious, (...) 18.
he would have them come to the waters of Life and drink freely; (...) 11, 28.
he calls to you to come, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden;
he rewards them when they come, Those that come unto me, I will in no sort cast
away; he complains of them when they do not come, They will not come unto me
that they might have life. God in goodness begins with man, and gives him
cooperating Grace; and it is his own obduration that makes Mercy retreat;
while we are willing he assists us, but when we draw back, he will have no
pleasure in us. Mercy makes the Marriage betwixt God and the Soul, and Peace is
the Dowry that God gives his beloved; those that are one with him by Grace
cannot be severed from him and themselves through Evil. Here is the best
Exchange for profit, here is the Indiaes of holy Riches, here is Canaan flowing
with Milk and Honey, here is the light which admits no darkness, and the day
that never sees night. here is the Price and the Pearl, the work, and the
wages: God to whom by faith we must run, and Mercy, which by faith from him we
may receive; here is the door by which we must enter into the joy of our
Master; and here is the Master, who will not shut the door against us, because
we come not before bid, nor can we stay there longer then welcome. By thee, O
Sun of the Morning, and first born of Heaven (for thou wast in the beginning)
is our Acquaintance wrought with God, and our evil from sin prevented.

2. This comes to be the holy souls privilege, from the Purchase of Christ;
(...) 1.21.
He, he redeemed us, not only from our vain conversation, but from the wrath to
come; from the bondage of sin and Satan, into the glorious liberty of the sons
of God: Gal. 3.13. Romans 8.21. Ephesians. 2.14.
It Is he that is our Peace, and it is he that keeps us from that Evil one. The
Redemption wrought by him on the Cross, was not only from wrath, but to
himself: He has redeemed us to himself out of every Nation, etc. Rev. 5.9, 10.
Not only to free us from the rage of sin and Satan, but to make us Kings and
Prists, to preserve us to his Heavenly Kingdom; and herein he is a Savior to
the utmost; to the utmost of men: Heb. 7.25.
he is the Savior of his whole body, Jews, Gentiles, far, near, bond, free,
rich, poor, high, low, his Providence is over his whole family; his rain rains
upon bad as well as good. To the utmost of things, all cooperate hy his
interposition and ordination, to the good of his; the Graces of Godly men make
them admire him; the sins of others to watch over themselves more; nay, their
own failings carry them to God by Petition for pardon and grace sufficient for
them; the crosses they carry have Christ in them, the reproaches they suffer
have Christ with them, the glory they aim at, Christ will bring them to; Life,
which to many is a pleasure, Christ imbitters, and yet rescues them from any
provocation to impatience: they use it as the time wherein to work, but they
desire to be dissolved in Christ's time, For to be with him is best of all. To
the uttermost of time: his merit is a light unextinguishable, was, is, and ever
shall be: the Patriarks before, the Prophets in, the holy men after the Law got
to Heaven upon this wing, in this Chariot were they thither transported, in the
garment of this elder brother were they wrapped, for that only is the Wedding
garment; This is the one and only way; narrow, not open to all, but to those
that believe; but yet a sure way, bounded by the sure mercies of David; and
herein he is a Savior beyond all, a Superlative Redeemer, for he is eternal,
whereas others are but Temporary; he is complete, whereas others are but
partial. Where are Moses and Joshuah, David and Jeptha, who saved the Jews?
Where Caesar, Scipio, Metellus the Deliverers of the Romans? Where Codrus,
Themistocles, Photion, by whom the Greeks were delivered? These are dead, and
their Territories by others possessed; nay, their ashes are become the prey of
Tyrants, who glut themselves with revenges on their relicts; but Christ is the
Savior of his body, the Church; for ever he is, and ever will be the light in
the midst of it, and a wall of fire round about it; For Christ has purchased
its peace, and paid (with reverence be it conceived) for that interest in God,
which will keep off evil from coming to his.

3. This privilege from evil is the natural child of Acquaintance with God; God
never gives himself, without all that is his; and if all, then his peace, then
his protection from evil; the Prophet tells us of Gods speaking peace to his
people; Psalm. 85.8. Isai. 26.20.41.14. Psalm. 145.20
of his counsels to them to enter into rest till the indignation be over; of
his cordial, Fear not thou worm Jacob, I will be with thee: of his corrasive to
wicked men whom he will destroy. And whence (O holy soul) comes all this, but
from that proximity twixt God and the soul? This is the pay of our patience,
the result of our fidelity to God; Rev. 2.17.
he that follows the Lamb, shall not miss his white stone and new name. God
never dismisses his without a blessing, like that from the womb of the Morning;
he gives them peace to poyse them here amidst their many storms in this life,
and he keeps evil far from them; yea, that which is the greatest evil, after
their deaths, eternal evil.

And now me thinks I am of S. Peter's mind on the Mount, It is good to be here:
here are three words in this Scripture, like the three Tabernacles in that:
Acquaintance with God, Peace and Protection from evil; and these are (as
Christ's face was transfigured) in a sort seraphickly expressed, and proposed
after a celestial method; here is Acquaintance; usually res doloris, a vanity
of vanity, in the multitude of which there is sorrow and distraction, strangely
meliorated by its adjunct, highly imbeautied by its entail to God, of a
Ceremony and a necessity made a virtue; Acquaint thy self with God. Next, here
is the Lady Peace, not like that of the world, with Rachel mourning, with
Thamar thrust out of doors after it has served a turn; but like the Queens
daughter, glorious within, as beloved of God, and beauteous without, as decked
with the Needle work of external accommodations: Lastly, here is evil
profligated and dismantled of its force; the Lion exungued, and the sting taken
out of the Serpents tall, as an effect of divine bounty, and this by the
Chimistry of God, who is able to bring good from evil.

What then remains to this Meditation, but to summon the last Quere to give in
its verdict? And that is the season when this Acquaintance with God is to be
had, and these consequences obtained, in the Particle now, Acquaint [now] thy
sef with God, etc.

Now: Season seasons every thing; the Wise man said it, Prove. 25.12.
A word in season is like apples if Gold in Pictures of Silver; a fair show,
but Metal upon Metal makes no Hera^d^y, but in a Picture 'twill pass, and so
will time pass, of which this now is a part, and the best part because present;
Acquaint new? Now; when? in life, in the day of time, in the season of Mercy,
in Youth, before time be not, thou go down into the grave, and be seen no more,
yea, before thou be gathered to dust, and worms feed upon thy flesh.

Now; not anon: Now, left sickness, age, death prevent anon, and thou have no
time t o groan for Peace, or cry for Mercy; our pardon is ever in danger, where
our repentance is in debate.

Now: this is to be wise for thy self (O soul) for it only is in thy
possession, what a day will bring forth thou know not, therefore hearken to
Wisdoms voice, While it is called to day; delays ought to be as past time, out
of thy power, since to work out now thy salvation with fear and trembling is
thy prudence.

Time has no longer a race than a Creature has, it is always on a swift Ebb,
^ere long it will be low water, and then where the tree falls, it must lie: and
since time and tide stay for no man, O my soul, do thou watch them, and take
time to do thy task; eternity gives good wages. Remember who said, 2 Timothy 4.7.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
from henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness.

Now: not at the sixth or last hour of the day, for it is not certain whether
thou shall live upon this hazard to receive the penny of Eternity, which
follows the orderly expense of time; but now, this instant, moment set to thy
Tackling, the storm is great and thy vessel queasie, and therefore put in to
the next Harbor: What thou do, do quickly, Eccles. 9^^.
For there is neither wisdom nor strength in the grave whither thou go, nor
ever will be in thy power to untie thy chain of torments, or regain a lost
happiness.

Therefore (O my soul) receive thou this counsel with joy, and perfect it by
holy industry, while thou have time, talents, and what may further help thee in
this blessed Husbandry and Sacred Thrift. Look not upon the Lions in the way,
the narrow passage to life eternal, the obloquies of men who will judge thee
mopish, because thou labourest for that Jewel that thou have lost, and would
find again. These discouragements may work on lazy and thriftless souls, who
starve when there is bread enough in their fathers house: follow thou the
Saints of all ages, who by Faith and Patience inherit the Promises; and by
their holy example be thou stimulated to take the Cross for thy Title to the
Crown of Life; yea, contest thou for their Crown, not to rob them, but to right
thy self, who art born to equal hopes with them: and comfort thy self in that
promise of the holy Apostle (who is now at peace with God, Gal. 6.9.
and is taken from the evil of this world unto the glory above) In due time ye
shall reap if you faint not.

FINIS.

