A LETTER FROM Sir Henry Vane TO Sir ARTHVR HASILRIG. Dated 23 February, 1659.

LONDON: Printed for John Frost, 1659.

A LETTER from Sir Henry Vane to Sir Arthur Hasilrig.
Sir Henry to Sir Arthur sends greeting.
IF you are diseased in your mind (as thanks to the Devil I am at the writing
hereof) I am very glad. These are to give you notice, that I am safely arrived
at my House of Bellew, (praised be the Rump) my Daughter is something
distempered with such a tedious journey, but more afflicted at the breaking off
the match with young Lambert. You would do me a great favor therefore in
sending down Dr. Chamberlain, or if he cannot be spared from his Synagogue, to
pleasure me with the assistance of Dr. Dun; he is a Man-midwife, and will serve
the turn.

But now, good Sir, give me leave to tell you, that I take your la^e doings
against me very unkindly. Come! had not you better have been under the mis-rule
of a Committee of Safety, that courted your compliance with all the respect
imaginable, and had designed you for a Titulado upon that account? You may
remember how secure you were during the Tyrannous Arbitrary Reign of Oliver,
and how cautiously he demeaned himself toward you, and that not out of dread
of your honesty (for he knew you and I were as arrant Rogues as himself) but
because he was sensible the least Division or difference amongst Rebels would
be the Ruin of him and his Design: And as the Devil will have it, it has
through your haire-brain'd impudence, just so fallen out.

Nevertheless, I hope I may, on have occasion to thank you too, for your
intended injury to me; for if I were not fit company for you and your Knavish
Gang, then I am fit for honester company, and I may return to the discharge of
my Trust (with the same mind and willingness as Richard Cromwell does his
Fathers Funeral Debt) upon the Accounts of a Secluded Member: And I know no
reason why I may not be readmitted, for I have deserved well of this
Parliament; for had not my extravagant Counsel^ introduced and quickened these
Commotions, they had been out of Doors as well as my self.

I give you warning therefore that I am coming to Town, and I will sit there
in spite of your teeth, and promote a Vote to send you farther than Raby, even
to Jamaica; and I believe you will return me my thanks again, for on my seared
conscience you know not whither to run, or where to hide your impudent head.

But what think you Sir of a Volunteer for Dunkirk? get you with a Horse-pox to
Portsmouth, and take shipping there, if you can tell how to be let in; do but
see, Sir Arthur, with half an eye, the Transitory Pomp of this wicked world, I
dare warrant you, they would turn Tail to you, and tell you that you are a
Rumper, and highly entertain and caresse your Worship with Turnip tops; and
send you going with Troops of Curses to another gheffe Holl than Westminsters.

But yet I have so much respect for you, in my personal reflections upon your
Merit, that I could wish your. Portsmouth-acquired Authority had stood: for
then I could have opposed my single Headpiece against all the Plots, and the
most cunning Devices, the best Wits among you could have contrived against me;
now I know not how to deal with these Gamesters, that have stood by so long,
and I am afraid have seen so much more than we, that we must mend our sight by
the Spectacles of a Grate, and wish we had had eyes in our Arse.

Well Sir Arthur, we must be fellows in Misery, as well as we have been in
Mischief; put in Lambert -- and three merry Boys are we, though questionless
there are more of us in the same pickle; but we three are not only dip't, but
soused over head and ears in it. Pray remember my best Respects to my Lord
Whitlock: You may, if you please, acquaint Alderman Tichborne, Ireton, and
Praise-God Barebone with this. I think Fleetwood and Disbrow not worth
remembering, but do what you think fit. Pray excuse the trouble I have put you
to by the Prolixitie of this; for I could not choose but open my self to You,
as the Earth did for Abiram. If these Lines be not strong enough, let all the
Hemp in London make one for you. Fare ye well.

Your unlucky Complice, HENRY VANE.
Bellew this 23 of February, 1659.
FINIS.

