A Modest DISCOURSE, OF THE Piety, Charity and Policy OF ELDER TIMES AND
CHRISTIANS. Together With those their Virtues Paralleled by Christians Members
OF THE Church of ENGLAND.

By EDWARD WATERHOUSE Esquire

Conscientiae satis faciamus nihil in famam laboremus, sequatur vel mala dum
been moerearis.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Simon Miller, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Star in St Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

TO MY Most Dear and Indulgent Father, FRANCIS WATERHOUSE of Grenford in the
County of Middlesex, Esquire;.
SIR,
I Would fain testify my real duty and observance of you by some action that
most speaks me grateful to God and you for your extraordinary affection to me;
And since it is not my happiness to command an opportunity wherein I might
express the honest ambition I have to show (to that degree I know becomes me)
my sense of your favors, yet my confidence is that you will accept the humble
tender of him who now and ever craves your blessing, and subscribes himself,

Sir, Your dutiful and obedient Son, E. WATERHOUSE.

A Short View OF ANTIQUITY AND ELDER TIMES AND CHRISTIANS.
IT was an old and true complaint, that Truth has ever been crucified between
two Thieves, those I count Superstition and Innovation, the Churches Scylla and
Carybdis, at which in all her voyages thorow-the several Centuries of the
world she has been bulged, and sometimes near to a fatal miscarriage, while
she is threatened by the two rigid adhaesion of her professors; who as the Jews
of old, prefer Abraham before Christ, John 8.
antiquity before verity; and had rather have no Religion, then not that they
have been bred in and accustomed to, Josn. 9. 5.
though it be like the Gibeonites bread dry and moldy, and clouted with
unnecessary and vain Ceremonies: Another while she is in a storm from those
wanderers, who will seek abroad, when there is bread enough in their Fathers
house, being discontented at any thing which is not new, and desirous of every
thing but what is old: The vanity of these excesses (the utmost angles beyond
which man's pride and petulancy cannot go) God has in mercy to his Church, and
in right to his own glory (passive under their Tyrannies,) discovered in all
ages, setting notable brands of his displeasure on the ringleaders, and
impudent chieftains in this wickedness; some of them he has suffered so to be
swollen with pride, that the earth has not been able to bear their burden:
Others he has so flatted by detecting that brazen face, that to cover its
effrontery had the veyl of virgin verity, Jacobs voice but Esau's rough hands,
that like decryed actors, and bankrupt Mountebanks, they departed the stage
with a stink, and lost their course in that fog by which they designed to annoy
the Church.

As the best state of Man, Innocence; and the best place, Paradise, was chosen
by Satan to act his first and greatest craft in, so ever since has he taken
the purest times of the Church, as his harvest and gainfullest season of
temptation, vitiating and annoying them most dangerously with suppurated
Opinions, and ulcerous Doctrines; He thought that the way to overcome Adam was
by Eve the weaker vessel; and the Tyrociny and nonage of the Church, Quia
progrediendum a facililioribus.
he took for the fittest time to sow his tares in, because he expected less
resistance from Infancy then from further Growth. Even in our Lords time, the
devils Chapel goes up by Gods Church, Acts 8. 9.
Simon Magus peep^ forth; and no sooner our Lord ascended, but his Disciples
have beasts to contend with after the manner of men; 1 Cor. 15. 32.
then came in damnable Haeresies, such as that of Elymas in Claudius his time,
of Menander under Titus and other following Emperors, Eusebius. hist. l. 2. e.
12. and l. 3. c. 20, 21, 23.
of Ebion, Cerinthus and others, in which Ecclesiastical Writers are copious.
Histor. Magdeb. Ceut. 1. l. 2. c. 7. p. 368, 371.
Notwithstanding which torrent of Evil, it pleased God to raise up many valiant
and pregnant assertors of truth, who with great courage confronted these
affronters of faith, and rendered them so despicable, that no man who would be
thought any body consorted with them, but avoided them as the firstborn of
Satan, sent abroad to pervert souls and subvert Christianity It has been
observed, that the authors of errors and scismes in the Church, have been
Churchmen, either grossly weak, or proudly wilful, whose Ignorance or
pertinacy, has wooed them to forsake the wholesome form of words, and to take
up new Methods both of language and Doctrine, under which canting drolleryes
they utter the devices of their own brains, gain credulous proselytes, and
dishonor all who differ from them where they themselves disagree with truth
and order; (...). Stob. Sermon. 147. p. 488.
That as Agrippinus of old persuaded those which he condemned, that it was best
for them to be condemned, For (said he) I do not give sentence against them as
an enemy, or one that would ruin them, but as a good guardian, who dispatcheth
them out of that life, which they cannot live but in misery; so do these seduce
and lead away silly souls, and yet possess them that the only way to find
heaven above is to lose the Church below, and that Christ is not in his Word,
but in their fictitious dreams, where he has not appointed men to seek for,
nor promised men to find him.

Thus as C. Vir nobilis, ^l^quens, audax, suae alienae and fortunae and
pudicitiae prodigus, homo ingeniosissime nequam, and foecundus malo publico.
Paterc. l. 2. p. 450. Edit. Sylv.
Curio the Plebeian Tribune is charged by Paterculus to be the firebrand of
Romes Civil Wars, bold, prodigal of his own and others modesties and Fortunes,
ingeniously wicked, and able to public mischiess, so may these most justly be
stigmatized for the infamous, lewd Boutefeues of the Churches peace and purity,
and therefore prayed against in the Prophets words, Let them be as chafe
before the wind, and let the Angel of the Lord chase them, let their ways be
dark and slippery, and let the Angel of the Lord persecute them, Psa. 35. 5, 6.

And as all things produced are of the nature of their Producers, as is the
Artists skill such ordinarily is the Artifice, so happens it with errors and
disorders, mostly they resemble their Patrons; Crafty heads look before they
leap, and design their march by steps and grand paws, setting up as it were
with pinns and points the little baubles of their aims, and as those vent so
marshall they out greater and more: They know forbidden wares must not be sold
in market overt, therefore skulk they into bye-streets, and lodge they in the
suburbs out of the freedom, where the lewd varlets of wander lie; there and to
those they put their tinsil follies, and with those cheap and new, do they
outbrave the truth, which covets no greater honor then the touch: Some men's
eyes fail them, they believe every thing gold that glisters, because they are
moon-blind, and rather dark then clear, with such these crafty Merchants bartar
freely, taking Souls in exchange for their cheats; These principled to purposes
of seduction, like blind stallions, accost all comers, hit or miss; and most an
end succeed best with the multitude Nihil novi asserunt, quin hujusmodi
applaudente sibi perfidi^ simplices quidem and indoctos decipiunt, sed
Ecclesiasticos viros qui in lege Dei die and nocte meditantur decipere non
valent.
, for the blind must lead the blind, how else will they fall into the pit that
is dug for them by him, who deceitfully cries O coelum, but steereth to that
infernal center of which he is Prince, S. Hyeron. ad Ctesiphont. adv.
Pelagianos.
namely the bottomless pit?

But with others of a more florid and accurate nimbleness, Philosophi
Patriarchae Haereticorum Ecclesiae puritatem perversa maculavere doctrina, Idem
eodem loco.
he deals underboard, making them unawares Theomachize, turn the level of
their parts against Heaven, thus became the Philosophers Patriarchs of
Haeresies, and disturbers of truth by their corrupt doctrine, as Jerome upbraids
them; thus coggs he many into his lure, by prevailing with them to be
instruments in division and unsavory opinions, making believed and received
truths, as questionable as Guy of Warwick, Hi sunt fumi, hae caligines quibus
ex oculis hominum conaris lumen auferre.
Don Quixot, which many believe fancies, and reducing them to they may and
theey may not be, and by crying up rational and plausible axioms, S. Hierom.
advers. Ruffin. Apol. 3. Tom. 1. p. 672. edi^. Parisiens.
for dogmatick credends, as if God were accountable to man, and the Altar
religion not sacred, unless the gold of humane reason sanctified it, or as if
humane and depraved reason were the standard, to which the things of God are to
be reduced, and to which conformed: That as the Tyrant stretched every one he
took upon his bed, and fitted them to his beds proportion, by cutting them
shorter if they were too long, and stretching them longer if they were too
short; so these resolve every mystery of Christianity by that rule, which is
too weak to warrant them, too narrow to limit it.

These Errors that have marched under the white banner of Reason, as they have
been most plausible, so struck they most dangerously at the root of
Christianity, endangering the fall of that Tree, which with incomparable
procerity reaches Heaven, Non necesse habet convinci quod sua statim
professione blasphemum est: Eunomiani, Ariani, Macedoniani, nominibus seperati,
impietate concordes nullum notis laborem faciunt, loquuntur enim quod sentiunt.
Sola haec haeresis (Pelagiana) quae public crubescit loqui quod secreto docere
non metuit. Hyeron. ad Ctesi. adv. Pelagian. To. 1. p. 815.
serving the Church for a ladder of ascent thither; Other Opinions and Heresies
inchoated from immoralities, and seconded by persons debauched and profligate,
like Boorish uproars, soon decline and come to nothing; blasphemous tenants
need no confutation, they fall by their own weight, the Eunomian, Arian,
Macedonian haereticks, though they differ in Name yet agree in mischief; yet St
Jerome says, they dealt plainly with the world, and there needed no confutation
more then they gave themselves. But the Pelagian haeresie, that keeps it self
covert, does the mischief, this flies about and chatters in every corner, and
has so many secret evasions, that it is hard to charge it with any fault, to
cover which it has not a curious and well contrived black patch: There is no
Church-Traytor so horrid, as he that gives himself and his opinions, as
Caligula, Pius, optimus, maximus, etc. Monstrum non Princeps. Sueton. in Calig.
did the lovely titles of Pious, Great, Good, whenas he was rather a Monster
then a Prince (they are Suetonius his words,) so those Opinions are rather
blasphemy then piety; these Adamites figleaves never long covered their
nakedness, nor have the misling showers of their Oratory wet to the root of
sober minds, soon they have ripened, and as soon have been rotten again; But
those errors that have been dyed in the grain color of Reason, cladd in the
purple and noble vest of an exact liver, dressed with the garnishes of
Achitophels brain, (...). Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 3. c. 21.
have harmfully passed current, not only with the vulgar, whose faith is pinned
usually upon their Rulers sleeve, their Religion mercenary to his pleasure, and
their souls at his service; but with those that boast they have the discerning
of spirits, and can judge the Pearl of truth from the pibble of trash: upon this
hank, Novatus a crafty perjurious and inhumane fellow withdrew many excellent
Presbyters, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 31.
such as Maximus, Vrbanus, Sydonius, Celerinus, who yet were called off from
him, (...). Socrat. Eccles. hist. 6. c. 20.
and Sisinnius the Novatian Bishop, by his noble carriage and pleasant wit
beloved of all, and thought the most excellent man of his time; yet being a
Heretic did much hurt, and proved a great trouble to St Chrysostom.

As in all courses of life labor tends to rest, and the weary traveller longs
for his Inn, so in the minds Navigation there is a port wished for, Solomon
gave himself to know wisdom and folly, Eccl. 1. 17.
but when he had wearied himself with disquisition, he concludes all vanity;
making that the Ararat on which his floating Ark rested; Knowledge has its
bounds beyond which it must not go; God often suffers pride to border upon
parts, that Carthage might be Rome's alarm to watch; since she has a
politic foe, and there is no impossibility of surprisall, the love of God is
more seen in keeping his from the danger of a fall, then in suffering them to
behold the glory of this world in the vast speculations of their mind, and to
be on a pinnacle dangerously precipitous to gain the prospect; And if he that
gave himself to know every thing, when he knew most knew too little of himself,
may we not fear that many men of great parts often pry so far into the Book
of Eternity, into the cabinet of wisdom, into the counsels of Providence, that
at last they come away leprous, and prove infectious to others as well as
uncomfortable to themselves? He was a good man that cried out, Scientia mea me
damnat.

As Stars differ one from another in glory, so errors have been different in
their influence and malignant aspect on the Church, some errors have been of
the first magnitude, errors in the foundation, Eo acriores inimicitiae quo
injustiores.
those of Cerinthus, Montanus, Arius, Donatus, and others: These with others
little less vexatious, had their broach from men proud and discontented with
their condition; Arius was a Presbyter in the Church of Alexandria, and became
so great a pest to the Church merely out of envy against and ill will to
Alexander Bishop of that Sea, who was preferred before him, Theod. l. 1. c. 2.
(...). l. 6. c 35.
against whose Life and Doctrine he could take none advantage, and Novatus
because he would but could not be a Bishop set on foot that great mischief
which bore his Name, and not only so, but the devil took advantage to seduce
men of great parts to this design of error in the Church. Socratos tells us of
Dorotheus and Timotheus two Arian Bishops, ^ocrat. l. 7. c. 6.
great Clerks, (who revived Arianism when it was almost dead) yea, to perfect
his policy he takes women into the plot, and makes them his lying spirits,
Proctresses to his hellish Incantations; I have it from St Jerome, Ad
Ctesiphont. adv. Pelagianos.
who reports that Simon Magus was aided by Helen the harlot, Nicholas of
Antioch by the women he brought into common use there, Marcion by one he sent
before him to Rome, Apelles by Philomenes, Montanus by Prisca and Maximilla,
Arius by Constantia Sister to Constantine the Great, Donatus by Lucilia,
Zoroastes by Galla, and Elpidius by Agape; It seems it is a credulous world that
takes women's words in matters of this moment, and a crafty devil that knows the
cogent argument is from that charming Instrument Woman.

I need not recite the cursed machinations they set forth to serve their
designs, what politic practiques they enfranchised, what desperate untruths
they hatched, what glorious lights they obscured, what goats-hair and badgers
skins they used to attire their monster in, Sententias vestras prodidisse
superasse est: Patet prima front blasphemia, S. Hier. ad Ctes^phont. To. 1. p.
815.
to name is to blemish them enough. Nor will it be useful to tell the number
of their names, the times of their regency, the severalties of their poisonous
tenants, these are at large contained in the Church-Stories, elder and later;
My drift only is to be Antiquities Samaritan, and to give Bail to that Action
brought against her by ignorance, which indites her of many guilts which I hope
will be easily expiated for, and she appear to these later times tanquam inter
stellas luna minores.

And here with the curious Painter I must borrow colors from flints and
pibbles, and so work them into a compliance, as that they may answer the
requiries of what I intend, a lovely portraiture, which (when the utmost Art of
my pensill is evidenced) will be but imperfect, and complain that it has not
to its lively depiction a Saint Jerome who might raise a blush in their faces
that disparadge, and a confidence in their countenances that dare own it; I am
not ambitious to make this as he did the buckler of Minerva, which he made, and
in which he so cunningly inserted his own name, that it could not thence be
taken but with injury to the sculpture of that incomparable shield: no, it is
the least part of my thoughts to evidence any thing in this beyond an honest
heart, which I hope God will give me ever grace to show toward the Church and
State wherein I live, and in which I hope to die a true and Christian man; This
only I to all the world publish, that if (as 'twas said by the Orator of
Phydias He was an excellent Artist at any Statue, Dijs quae hominibus
conficiendis melior. Quint.
but chiefly about the gods) mine Excellency were in any thing, I would have it
more exact and signal when it is exercised about ought which concerns the
Church; for true is that of a great Preacher, Marshall Sermon. Curse Meroz. p. 49.
Our hands if skilful to write, should be employed as Sacretaries to the
Church, our feet as Messengers of the Church, our tongues as Advocates for the
Church, our wisdom and learning as Counselors for the Church, our wealth as
Stewards and Almoners for the Church. And well fare those excellent Christians
who made Church-work the labor of their lives, and Church-charity their heirs
at death, and that upon grounds of faith and holy love, not merit or hope of
supererrogating by them.

I do not here mean to collect all Disciplina jubemur deligere inimicos quoque
orare pro eis qui nos persequuntur, etc. Tertul. ad Scapulam. S. Cyprianus l.
3. ep. 10. Tert. l. de Mar.
those several virtues that those glorious golden ages of the Church excelled
in; as their diligent reading the Scriptures and hearing the word preached,
their devout prayers for those in authority, their loving and forgiving
enemies, their modesty and calmness of conversation, their fidelity to their
relations, their ministering to the necessities of the Saints in wants, and
visitings of such in prison; their exact continence, their care lest in Habits
they gave scandal, their courage for the truth, their serious observation of
Oaths, their industry in their callings, and those many other excellencies in
them (though by degrees allayed with much frailty,) least I should swell my
design into an unwelcome greatness; my scope is to cull out such of them as
most seem to rebuke those bravadoes of men in this age, who with
Hyper-Pharisaicall pride, commend their own piety from the dishonor cast upon
elder times and elder Christians, who were in no instance of true devotion
behind them.

I know there were blemishes in Antiquity, the ancient Fathers tell us of many
ridiculous follies in use, as vanity in clothing and habit, in baths, in
observation of the nativity of their children, in being present at sports and
interludes; their accompanying with pertinacious Haereticks; and sundry other
such follies, which here I defend not; for their virtues I appear against those
that mistake Antiquity, misnaming it for a pedlars pack, in which to one pure
Venice glass, there are wooden kanns, horn cupps, trifling rattles, and many
such ignoble trashes, as if it were a Mint of forgeries, the womb of Monsters
and Sier of Legends, terming its Religion policy, its charity meritmonging,
its unity combination, its Government a trap to catch men in who were not one
with it; and its All, a wilderness in which were more beasts of prey then birds
of Paradise; St Jerome spoke of such long since, Multa in orb generata sunt
monstra, Centauros, Syrenas, Vlulas, etc. Sola Gallia monstra non habuit, sed
viris fortissimis and eloquentissimis semper abundavit. Epist. 55. adv.
Vigilant.
The world, says he, produces many Monsters, Centaurs, Sirens, Owls,
Stymphalidae (birds whose nature is to darken the Sun rays) the Eremanthean
Boar, Nemaean Lion, the Chimaera and many headed Hydra; and he tells us Spain
produces some of them, only Gallia has no Monsters, but abounds with most
eloquent and warlike men: and happy had it been if Vigilantius had been
Dormitantius, and never been born, rather then prove a scar in that face which
before it produced him was lovely. It was the fault of that Pern Vigilantius,
to turn every way and at last to break out against the inoffensive honor of
Church relics then in account, and not abused to superstition, as since they
have shamefully been: And it shall be mine endeavor (with Gods blessing) to
bespeak due veneration of such things as are fit to be respected and retained
in Gospel times, and to be defended by Christian Magistrates.

I mean not herein to revive that Interim of Charles the fifth, Hist. Counsel
Trent. p. 295.
by making a medley of differences; nor will I take upon me to deal with men of
all sides, least that befalls me which usually trips up the heels of such
endeavors; all agree to oppugn, and every one rests more obstinate in
defending his own party: Nor will I approve, nay I do sadly lament the
preposterous folly of those, who make men heretics, and blazon them enemies to
Christ, for every difference almost, though not in Points essential, but
circumstantiall and rituall, as if they picked quarrels with their brethren out
of choice: The ancient Church in England did not so, forbid tells us, Sese
invicem venerabantur licet dissimiles caeremoniaes observarunt, sic Aidam
Episcopus, quamvis more Scotorum Pascha celebraret, tamen ab H^norio
Cantuariensi and Felice Orientalium Anglorum Episcopis, in honor est habitus.
Cent. 7. c. 7. p. 119. This Cachexie has been the Churches trouble and pest
too long; thanks to those hot heads, who cry out, Curse ye Meroz against all
that crow not to the same tune with them; these have made more heretics and
disloyal sons to the Church, then ever gained sober and submiss children: to
these that of Baro the Dalmatian to the Emperor Tyberius is applicable, (...).
Dion: l. 55. p. 570.
when having asked, Why his Countrytrymen had been long and so desperate
enemies to the Romans? he replied, Ye your selves are in fault, who send to
your flocks, not Sheepheards and Dogs, to keep them, but Wolves: I wish it
were well weighed by some; for as Albergatus that great Politician, Nam
aliquando tam inepti insamique homines inveniuntur ut iis quae parva sunt and
facilia, magna and arduae videantur, acerbasque res saevis modis exasperent,
neque negotium ullum proponere se callent, quam finistro, and inepto more illud
corrumpant and infaus^^um reddunt, Fab. Albergatus de Diss. Imper Eccles. cura.
p. 389.
wrote to the Cardinal Nephew to Pope Greg. 13. Sometimes the heat and
precipitances of men, exasperate small and composeable breaches, into great and
uncloseable gapps; by which ill offices of simplicity, if not design, hoped and
prayed for Peace and Union is defeated.

My prayer to God is for Humility and Moderation; I will not judge any thing
rashly, nor before the time, since the Lord is at hand; I wish the definitive
sentence, of this or that, which is under a problem and disputable, might be
referred to the just Judge, and that those that agree in the unity of faith, may
hold the bond of peace. Novit Deus qui sunt ejus, novit qui permaneant ad
coronam, qui permaneant ad flammam, novit in arca sua triticum, novit paleam,
novit segetem, novit zizania, caeteris autem est illud incognitum quae sunt
columbae and qui sunt corvi, St August. in 11. Johan.

I account the Church a Vineyard, wherein the grapes of Love, faith, patience,
selfdeniall, are to be gathered, to Christians comfort and refreshing, rather
then a threshing-floore, on which the flayls of furious smitings, and
boisterous baitings and boylings of passion are frequent. For my part as I have
ever yet, so I hope by the assistance of God I shall still offer my mite to the
Churches Treasury, and make my prayer an offering for her peace, accounting it
a greater honor to speak for her, now she is like Rachel blubbered, then if
she had more outward luster: And I wonder Christians should be otherwise
minded, who know Christ is in his Church, and his Word and Sacraments in his
Church, nay Heaven (in a kind) in the tenure of the Church; whose sins ye
remit they are remitted, the Church being the Tyring room in which we furnish
our selves for Eternities Halelujahs.

To those that are of other judgment, I shall say in Dyonisius his Laconick
Cook his words, when making by command of his Master a Laconian Bisque, which
Dyonisius disrellished, as unsavory; replied, I have not such ingredients here
as the Laconians have; O quoth Dyonisius, Weel have them sent for, and I Will see
them prepared and compounded: I but replied the Cook, ( Sir) you do not get a
stomach by exercise, nor do you bathe in the River Eurota as they do: (...),
Stobaeus Sermon. 117. p. 373.
My meaning is, The reason why the Church is no more their darling is, because
they are sick of sloth, abounding with full humors, and do not bathe
themselves in those refreshing streams of pious counsel and comfort, which the
Church as the spouse of Christ, lets run at wast to her children. (...),
Apollodorus. Horat.
What then I have to write shall be short; considering most readers impatience,
which loathes to view any thing that's long. -- cito dicta
Percipiunt dociles animi, retinentque fideles.
For I have ever held, (...).

When I propose Antiquity my Theme, I mean not Antiquity in the latitude, that
is God himself, He is the ancient of days, He is from everlasting to
everlastiug, He is veritas entis and radicis, this would be emptying the Sea
with a Cockle-shell, twould be to attempt with Icarus his waxen wings to fly
ore the Sea, and deserved his misfortunes in those waters. In this, Who at any
time has known the mind of God, or who has been his Counselor? This is a
Noli me tangere, which I hope thy restraining grace O Lord will ever forbid me
attempting: That Antiquity and those Elder times I drive at, is, that which is
opposed to yesterday, or later times; Antiquity, not as before the Flood, the
prints of that are perished with the old world; Antiquity not as amongst the
Jews, old things (in that sense) are past, all things are become new: but
Antiquity since Apostolic times, till these last, and I pray God not worst
times, that is the Antiquity I recommend.

I must do as one (...), having but a ridg to walk safely on, look least I
tripp; there are many detractors, who like Kerns in woods, are ready to snap,
yea often their malice breaks out and their trap falls, while good meaning is
but nibling at their baits, and not caught by them in their ginn of surprise.
Since I would not pay the tribute of my Pen to any party, but only to Truth,
they are not ingenuous, who rather wish for then pardon my failings; God forbid
I should honor my Savior more amongst the Doctors disputing in the Temple,
then in the manger; or think him less the Son of God, who inviteth little
children to come to him, and perfecteth praise out of their mouths, as well as
greater Scholars, Non minus placet Deo Hosanna puerorum quam Hallcluja^
virorum. B^ Andrews in Prefat to the Command.
gaining glory by their elaborate tongues and penns; the pen that blemishes
Christ in the least of his distributions, ought for ever to be execrable; Let O
Lord that right hand ever forget its cuuning, it is a weapon formed against thee
and must not prosper: My drift is, O praecidendam linguam a medicis, immo
in^anum (...) caput, ut qui l^qui nescit discat reticere, St Hieron. e^ 55.
advers Vigilant.
to show to the praise of Antiquity, not only what from the Apostles time has
been laudably practiced, in the great matters of moment to a Christians
security and comfort, but also in many advantageous and necessary things civil,
whose influence reaches to those that were without, in the conservation of
things and persons, in their respective nature and kind praiseworthy: I know
there are those, that since they question every thing, will not let my Card by
which I must steer (Church story) pass their torture and exception; they make
Ecclesiastical writers Judge and party, therefore grumble they much, for a good
Enquest; those that would have every thing new, would have new stories made, as
well as a new Heaven and a new earth, in which they would neither admit, nor
continue any thing that is old; If these taskmasters deny me straw I can make
no bricks; if they will not be tried by Good men and true, and hear those that
are secondarily Apostolic, Traditiones Ecclesiasticas praesertimquae fidei non
officiunt, ita observanda ut a majoribus tradita sunt, nec aliorum
consuetudinem aliorum contrario more subverti ad Lucinium ep. 28.
I must be plain with them in those words St Jerome used about Traditions, Where
they do not oppose truth, they are to be embraced, notwithstanding the
endeavors of any to the contrary, By their leave then I will use
Church-stories, and those as little suspected as may be, for I love not Hagar
while Sarah is in place, nor need I court Zipporahs where so many daughters of
'beauty suffragat.

First, Scripturae quidem perfectae sunt, quippe a Dei verbo and spiritu ejus
dictae, ^Iraeneus l. 2. c. 47.
I find Christian Antiquity vehemently contesting for the reverence of the holy
Scripture, as the perfect rule of faith, neither adding to, nor detracting from
the Canon, not only asserting it their tether and boundary, but exalting it as
a rampire against the invasions and intrusions of crafty men, and craftier
Satan, who endeavored to entice the Sons of God by the daughters of men, and
to make traditions, the Copper of Demetrius, pass for the current Coin of
Jesus, and this in them was not only zeal but holy policy; the sacred
Scriptures were the wells out of which they drew their comfort, their armories,
whence they took forth their weapons of spiritual warfare, lights for their
direction, and salt for their seasoning; should these have been pudled, and
robbed from them, how unprovided would the Church have been? she might well
have complained, Cant. 5. 7.
her veil was taken from her; Had this Ark been taken by the Philistims, 1 Samuel
4. 21.
the glory had been departed from the Israel of Gods Church: How much profane
mirth would the sons of Error have made with these Songs of Zion, had God
given them up into their power? But blessed be God the Church has ever had ane
held the Scriptures in high value, though not admitted all parts of it for
Canon at one and the same time; sometimes they found parts of it not in good
hands, as they thought; Eusebius. l. 3. c. 3.
other parts by Heretics were corrupted, and handed to them not as they were
in the autographon, but with emendations, to which were added many spurious and
rejectitious Gospels, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 19.
Prophecies and Epistles, fitted to answer the lying divination Satan had no
foot; other parts of Scripture not primario authenticae, the ancients allowed
to be read, sub regula morum, but not as a rule of faith Vtiles quidem and
commodi sunt, sed in numerum receptorum non referuntur. Epiphanius.
, but such only as were received from Prophets, and allowed by Christ Jesus
Lege Athanasium in Synopsi div. Script. Epiphanius lib. de Mensura and Pondere.
See Cent. 4. c. 4. p. 172, 173. hist. Magd.
, his Apostles, and their Scribes and Scholars, and their successors, has the
Church owned and adhered to, and those are the Books in the Canon of our holy
Mother the Church of England; not that all mouths have been stopped, or all
Christians agreed in the harmony, no all have not beleeeved Gods testimony in
the Churches report and traditional fidelity: Lib. 2. Apol. adv. Ruffin.
St Jerome tells us, that it was usual with heretics to corrupt Catholic
Authors; the Eunomians dealt thus with Clemens the elder, and Ruffinus is not
behind-hand for this trick, Apol. l. 3. To. 1. p. 782. Paris.
while he prefixed the Name of a holy Martyr to a book of Arrianisme; and
Evagrius charges them of entitling their heretical books, (...), l. 3. c. 31.
Tom. 2. p. 562.
with the Names of Holy, Orthodox men, such as Athanasius, Gregorius,
Thaumaturgus and Julius: (...). Theod. l. 2. c. 31.
in brief, Theodoret is round with them, telling us, they cared not what Law
they broke, what boldness and freedom they took for maintenance of their
wickedness; nay oftentimes they made it the masterpiece of their blasphemy, to
violate the holy Law of God. As men in groves cut this stick and that wand they
like, and leave the rest, so pick (erroneous men) this book and that passage
here and there, and leave the rest as useless; Whatever is contrary to their
device, and casts dirt in their face, they reject and disown, Gravis mal^
conscientiae lux est. Senec. ep. 122.
their darkness and the light of Scripture agrees not; Light is au ill guest to
an ill conscience; and because Scripture troubles their Owl eyes, and
dismantles their impostry, they cannot away with it: Tertullian perstringes the
Valentinians for their clucking into corners, and their sculking up and down,
and says, Our Doves-coat has no guile, Nostrae columbae domus simplex, etiam
in editis semper and apertis, and ad lucem adv. Valent. c. 3.
is open and visible to all comers, who have liberty to see and hear what we
do: And it is a Note unimprobated, that patrons and professors of error, and
none but such, have ever dishonored Scripture, or questioned its authority;
nor have ever any who had a grounded hope of Heaven by Gods mercy, held
themselves above Ordinances, as the means of attaining it; nor have they ever
picked and choos'd, culled and refused this and not that Ordinance, Psalm. 119.
but had respect to all Gods commands, and equally adored all his
dispensations: Charge an holy soul with queaziness in this kind, object to it,
that it loves not to be limited and enlarged by the word, not to humble it self
to God in prayer, not to obey Authority for the Lord and for conscience sake;
and it answers in Hazael's word, 1 King. 8. 17.
Am I a dog that I should do this? No, this spot is not the spot of Gods
people, 'twould be a sully which mountains of niter could not cleanse: It Is
true indeed in the interpretation of this or that particular Scripture, there
has been, yet is, and ever will be to the end of the world, different
opinions, and many passions have lathered so high, that charity has often
layen in the suds, as is the Proverb; even amongst men otherwise without
exception, as between St Augustine and St Jerome, See their Epistles in the 5t
Centuar. c. 8. p. 440. Hist. Magdeburg.
in the Exposition on the second Chap. of the Galatians, yea and in many things
and under many temptations, some of you have lived and spoken somewhat against
the majesty and authority of the holy Scripture, as Origin by Name, who
therefore confessed his errors, and publicly retracted them, as appears in his
Epistle to Fabian, Origines in Ep. ad Fabian. Romanum.
and as St Jerome testifies in his Epistle to Pammachius and Oceanus.

And therefore Legends Canons and Traditions brought into some Churches, as
grounds of belief, and made obligatory to the conscience, as only the holy
Scriptures ought to be held, are but of late date in the Christian Church; Quod
de Canonibus Ecclesiasticis mones gratias agimus, sed tu scito nihil nobis esse
antiquius quam Christi Jura serv^^c. Ep. 68.
for St Jerome, or Epiphanius in him writes thus to Theophilus, That thou
mindest us of Church-Canons we thank thee; but know this, that nothing is so
antique as the Laws and rights of Christ: And Father Marinarus in the Counsel
of Trent, denied that the Fathers made Traditions to stand in competition with
Scripture, but good man he was born down with the many voices that decried his
sound assertion, Hist. p. 152.
as that which better beseemed a Colloquie in Germany then a Counsel of the
universal Church; but what he said was nevertheless true because disliked by
those vipers; for as they then, so their predecessors long before cried up
Traditions, and perhaps they had it from the Jews (or rather from the devil,
the author of it both in Jews and others.) Our Lord Jesus arraigns the Jews,
for making void the Commandments of God by men's traditions, and transgressing
the Commandments of God by traditions, Matthew. 15. 3.
yea of rejecting the Commandments of God to fulfill them: and the Apostle St
Paul reproves this and cautions against it, Mark. 7. 9. Col. 2. 8.
Beware (says he) least any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ. Where the Apostle does not simply dehort from traditions in affirmance
of Scripture, or civil custom, but from such use of traditions as tends to the
eclipse of the testimony of truth in the word written, Quisquis es asserior
novorum dogmatum, quaeso ^e ut parcas humanis auribus, ut pareas fidei quae
Apostoli voce lauda^a est, cur post quadringentis annis ^ocere nes niteris,
quod ant^ nescivimus? cur profers in medium quod Paulus and Petrus edere
noluerunt? Vsque ad hunc diem fine ista doctrina mundus Christianus fuit, illam
senex tenebo fidem in qua puer, natus sum, St Hyeron. ep. 65.
which is transcendently above the witness of man; and therefore I cry out to
all those New-lights as St Jerome did, Spare your pains, hug not the cloud of
your conceits instead of the Juno truth: Why do you bring that to sale, which
the primitive Church for four hundred years never heard of? Why take you upon
your shoulders, that task which Peter and Paul never taught, nor were they now
alive would own; until this day the Christian world has been without this
Doctrine, and I in mine old age will profess that faith in which I was born,
and into which baptized. Would St Jerome have been stanch, had he lived to these
times, wherein old and sound Religion, is like wormeaten lumber cast into the
outhouses? or like unfashionable furniture, turned out of the chambers of note,
to adorn the Nursery, or the Chaplains lodgings? I trow he would; and had he,
he must have reproached many professors, who now would pull out the eyes of
those their Teachers, for whom, not many years since, they would have pulled
out their own. Gal. 4. 15.
But enough of this. I return to Traditions, which, while they contend with
Scripture, or are made as supplements to inch out Scripture (thought too
short,) I wholly disallow. Though I confess, I love ingenuous freedom, and I
believe Religion is not in many things so stiffgirt, as some ridgid people
suggest, while they portray it clubsisted, ready to smite every one it meets
with, Quid est aliud Ecclesiae (Romanae) potestas quae hodie jactatur quam
licentiosum and fine lege modoque in animas Imperium, quod eas miserrima
servitute opprimat. Calvinus de Ncess. Reform. Ecclesiae.
nay in a keenness, like Peter's sword, strait out, and off with the ear of
every opponent; yet do I not comply with the judgment of some, who rest on a
Counsel-Canon as on Gospel, and make less difference between them then is
almost discernable; because I fear it has somewhat of a popish smatch in it,
for were not the Popes infallibility, and the Popes virtuall presence and
authoritative influence in Counsels in part leaned to, some of our Profession
would be more nice in that kind then they are; I will contest in reverence and
duty to holy Counsels and Synods, lawfully called and convened, with any he
that is most a servant to them; God forbid I should depraetiate worth in any
man, or judge my self fit to censure, and not rather to be censured; John 13.
13.
but this I say, Da mihi Magistrum Christum, Da mihi Regulam S. Scripturam, In
matters of this weight I Will to the beam of the Sanctuary; no Master will I own
(as to imperation over my faith) but Christ; I like not to crave men's pardons,
as the Sicilian Ambassadors did Pope Martin the fourths blasphemously, Hist.
Cons. Tr. p. 161.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi miserere nobis: While they speak according
to Scripture I Will obey them, Si pro oraculis, habenda sunt quaelibet eorum
placita, ubi nulla exceptio, illi^ infinitum Imperium: Calvinu^ lib. de necess.
Refor. Eccles.
and take heed not to offend them, but if they prove illuminates, and
eccentrically wild, that they tell me Christ is in this Enthusiasm, and that
new Light, which neither I nor they understand, nor does Gods word clear out to
me, they are to me but as tinkling cymbals, I neither care for their Euge's,
Lege Humphredum in Puritano Jesuitismus, p. 86, 87.
nor fear I their Anathema's. Whatever then becomes of other Writings, my zeal
and vote shall be ever to preserve the renown of the holy Books of the old and
new Testament, let loose persons call them by those profane nicknames of
Lesbiam regulam, Evangelium nigrum, Theologiam atramentariam, nasum cereum, and
let Atheists deride them, they are the Christians Magna Charta for Heaven,
cursed be he that violates them to profane uses, they are the Christians
Canaan. Let profane worldlings look with bloody Gardner's eyes upon it, Acts
and Monuments, old Edit. p. 140 2.
and not endure to see the Book called Verbum Dei, yet the sincere Christian
values it as his Canaan, the milk and honey of which refreshes him against his
tedious march in the wilderness of this sinful and sorrowful life, accounting
all other Books as Egypts garlic and onyons, to its Manna and Quails. Judges 6.
This, this is full of the dew of Heaven as was Gideon's Fleece; when all other
Writings profit nothing, but are dry and sapless, it is the Iliads, which every
devout Alexander (who by faith overcomes the world) lodges in his noblest
Cabinet, his heart: It Is the Tree of life, on which hangs the Fruit of the
knowledge of good and evil; it is the Ark of God, in which (as it were) is the
pot of Manna and Aaron's rod, comfort and correction, therein are Gods staves
of beauty and bonds, his binding and his drawing cords; yea, therein the whole
duty of man both to God and his neighbor is comprised. Now judge, O man, what
could God do more for his Vineyard the Church, then he has done? In giving her
such an Oracle for her doubts, such a Light against her darkness, such a
Touchstone of her Purity, and her rivals adulteration. And what can the Church
do less in return to God, then by signal fidelity maintain the honor and
authority of this Canon deposited with her? Let that blasphemous new light,
Gangraena, p. 54
Mr Edwards mentions, call the Scriptures the golden Calf and brazen Serpent,
that set at variance King and Parliament, and Kingdom against Kingdom; that
things would never be well till the golden calf and brazen serpent were broken
to pieces; yet (next to heaven) I will venture all I have in the holy war for
Scripture; He that comes to surprise that Capitol, shall have my life his
sacrifice, and my prayers his curse: and let all Christian people say, Amen,
Amen.

This is the first Jewel in Antiquities Crown, her zeal for the reverence of
the holy Scriptures.

Secondly, The elder Church Christian was express about a Ministry and the
right qualification of Ministers, according to the holy Institution of our Lord
Jesus, the great Head, Doctor and Bishop of his Church, who left her not as
common, in which every Christian (as to the public use of gifts) had alike
right, but separated some to instruct, to exercise power of the Keys, to
continue succession, and to minister the holy things of the Gospel, by virtue
of an infallible promise of his cooperation with them to the end of the world.
This separation has been for many hundred years declared by Imposition of
hands, which the Church calls Ordination, and has Apostolic practice to
warrant it. In Acts 6. 6. Stephen is mentioned to be a man full of faith and of
the holy Ghost, yet did he not execute any Ministerial Office (upon account of
his gracious qualifications) till he was presented to the Apostles, they had
prayed for him, and laid their hands on him; a Scripture well to be weighed by
men of contrary judgment, especially since backed by the general practice of
the Church Catholic. For if the Churches fidelity in this Gospel Tradition
and Universally received Ordinance should be questioned, the Canon of holy
Writ, and all the Doctrines and Practices of Christianity will become
litigious, since the Church as the pillar and ground of truth, is the deliverer
and declarer of them. And we are not to doubt, Iraen ad Victor. (...) Per omnia
debemus Ecclesiae Catholicaeunitatem tenere nec in aliquo fidei and veritatis
hostibus cedere, S. Cyprianus ad Quirinu^^.
but that the holy Ghost, who leads into all truth* has rightly guided the
Catholic Church to this belief, since all holy men, of all times and
Churches, how different soever each from other in Rites and situation, have
agreed upon it, and accordingly declared themselves, and nothing has ever been
found against it, worthy the sway of our assents in contradiction to so
Ecumenical an acknowledgment.

And truly I much wonder any should be of contrary judgment, who ought to know
the validity of Antiquities, consent echoing to Scripture; were Scripture
silent, had the practice of Antiquity no footing therein, I should be as
unwilling to follow it, as any he that is most against it. For that of Reverend
Calvin is most true, Respons. ad versipellem.
Si in sola Antiquitate, etc. If Antiquity be only the Judge, then prodigious
heresies which brake out in Apostolic times, will become Catholic faith.
But when the Word of God gives rise to what in this kind Antiquity embraces,
and becomes precept or president to its practice, then is the Church to be
followed in such her warrantable customs and observations.

In the 28 Chapter of St Matthew, our Lord Jesus is mentioned to have ascended;
in the 16th verse the Eleven are said to go away into Galilee unto a mountain
where Jesus had appointed them, there he appears to them in a glorious
condition, which caused them to worship him as Emanuel; God, Man, Mediator. In
the 18th verse our Lord owns the donation of all power to him both in Heaven
and Earth, before this Christ is not mentioned so solemnly to transfer power
Ministerial to his Apostles; he asserts his own Authority before he gives them
theirs; that done, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, follows, which
compared with that other passage, As my Father has sent me, so send I you,
fully cleers to me, That transferrency of power Ministerial from God the Father
to God the Son, and from God the Son to his Apostles, and to their Successors
in the Ministry, who in Tertullian's phrase are the Hereditary Apostles and
Disciples of Christ. Haereditarii Christi discipuli.


I do not affirm, there is an equality of spiritual power in Ministers now to
that in the Apostles, no more then in the Apostles to that in Christ, all
Vessels are not of a capacity; if the Spirit were on him without measure, and
upon Apostles and Ministers restrained, and as they could bear, then we must
allow a disparity in the degree, Philip. 2. 9.
God gave him a Name above all names both in heaven and earth, says the
Apostles, and no creature must contend with its maker. But this I dare affirm,
That the power Spiritual and Ministerial which the A-Apostles expressed by
imposition of hands, and since in conformity to them, and upon the same ground
they do carry on, who are lawfully called to the Ministry in the Church
Christian, is as truly spiritual power in them, as in their Head from whom they
received it; and that the Church has now as clear a Charter for her Orders, as
the Apostles had for their Apostleships, the great Dr of us Gentiles is my
Author, God has set in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.
first Apostles; secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. Prophets and
Teachers, that is, Ministers as well as Apostles; both fixed by Christ as
necessary to carry on his spiritual building the Church; Both ministering
Spirits for the good of the Elect, both his good Angels, to summon from all
quarters his chosen ones, both useful, one to lay the foundation, and the
other to perfect the Structure.

I write not this to engage my self in controversies, I shall ever endeavor to
decline them, as well knowing they account nothing to Church peace, or
Religions purity; but this I must profess, that my judgment is flatly against
entrenchment upon Church Offices; let Christians employ their Gifts soberly,
and instruct themselves and their Families thoroughly, and they will find enough
of that task. If our Lord had laid the right of teaching in men's readinesses,
or their talkative abilities, he would have appeared to those multitudes of
people, whom he in the course of his life and Ministry taught, fed, and cured
of infirmities, and from whom he had approbation to do and speak, as never man
did or spoke; it is probable he might have found as nimble orators, as pregnant
gifted men in prayers, as great measure of self-denial in some of the people,
as was in Peter, James, John, or the rest of the Apostles: But he appears to
the Eleven met according to his appointment, and them he culls out of the mass
of the multitude to be the Churches Faetificators; and he bids them as ver. 19.
Go ye therefore, etc. Ye, an exclusive phrase as well as a personal; not only
ye as well as others, but ye only and above others, ye as the grand Masters and
(...) of Church edification; lay ye the foundation, let all the after-building
be according to your pattern from my prescript. And teach all Nations. These
Metropolitans had large Diocesses; Eleven to preach the world over; this
Commission must be largely taken, not restrained to their personal but
Doctrinal Visits, not to their lives, but to the perpetuity of their
succession, Ministerial not Apostolic, for can we think those few could
peragrate the Universe, into many parts of which there was then no means of
convoy or transport? or that the hourglass of their lives did not speed too
fast, for them to sow the seeds of grace in, to so many several and various
people, and Nations? or can the Apostles in any sense natural be said to
continue to the end of the world, till when Christ promises to be with them? I
tro no: most of the Apostles died within the first Century; If Christ's promise
was to continue them so long as he continued concurrence with them, then must
they not have seen death till the end of the world, for so long he says he
will be with them. And if they died so soon after, and the world has yet lasted
above 1500 years, and how long further it may last, God only knows: the
promise must be understood to the orderly succession of the Ministry in all the
ages of the Church, who are to carry on the Apostles Office of teaching and
exercising Discipline in it, to the end of the world. And this the Apostles
understood and followed in their practice, for though Judas fell from his
Apostleship, yet the Eleven by prayer and calling on God, were directed
specially to complete their number by the admission of Matthias, Act. 1. 15.
remembering that Christ Jesus had a work to carry on in the world, which
required the full help he had in his life time assigned to it; and though the
Apostles admitted none into the privilege of their order, but upon special
direction of the holy Ghost, as in the forementioned case of Matthias and St
Paul, whom the holy Ghost commanded to be separated as Ministers, yet were
Disciples, Evangelists, Bishops and Presbyters, by them chosen, and from them
sent; who in their succession carried on the work to this day, and those
learnedly bred, and humbly submitting themselves to Church-approbation, were
accounted worthy to labor in the Word and Doctrine, as Pastors, able to feed
the people with knowledge and understanding, as the Prophet has it, Jer. 3.
15. yea, and such men as St Paul exhorts Timothy to be, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study,
says he, to show thy self a workman, that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth.

The consideration of this, made Ministers anciently very modest to offer
themselves to this weighty charge, and the Fathers and Bishops very precise and
scrupulous in admitting any unto the care of souls, but such as were well
reputed, and had great knowledge both in Humane and Divine Learning. Saint
Jerome plainly tells us, Epist. ad Magnum Orator. Romanum.
that in his time the Church was so well served, that it was hard to tell
whether the Clergy excelled Eruditione seculi an scientia Scripturarum, Lib.
1. contr. Iulianum.
and St Cyrill says, Humane learning, est catechismus ad fidem. I will not
deny, but that great parts are often hindrances to the work of grace in the
soul, men will not come off to Christ without great ado who are wedged to the
wisdom of this world, which contradicts the wisdom of God in the foolishness
of preaching; learned Pharisees are apt to reproach Saint Paul's with the
titles of bablers; Ministers like him in Erasmus, In lib. de ratione I
heologiae.
who being 80 years of age, knew nothing higher in their calling, quam in
scholis Dialecticam ac Philosophicam vel docere vel decertare palestram, hic
sine fine, garrire, ad predicandum Christi Evangelium elinquem, etc. are in a
kind monsters, these set the ass upon Christi, not Christ upon the ass; this
to tolerate, is as Campanella well notes, In Apologia pro Galilaeo p. 26.
to measure Christ's rights by our straight and narrow model, to hide as
heathens do the light of Scripture under an Aristotelique bushel, for surely
the work of a Minister of Jesus Christ is, to preach the Word in and out of
season, to treat of the mysteries of faith, not to trade in frivolous questions
and nice subtilties, to acquaint the soul with what is Gods command and man's
duty, by prayers to move God to mercy, and by tears to prevoke men to pity
themselves, to raise a holy flame in the heart to God, and to every thing that
bears his likeness. Lib de rationa ver Theologiae
This, as Erasmus appositely notes, is the work of a Minister. And if some
Ministers would consider this, and more endeavor to be what God requires them,
their success would be greater then now it is; for when people see such
Ministers catching at this, and hunting after that advantage, instead of being
crucified to the world, and dead to the desires of it, crucifying the world by
their discourses, which preface it to bonds and blood, when they see them
Chemarims, whose fiery zeal and devout outsides serve only to palliate
covetuousness and pride, they are much offended at, and less resolute for the
honor and estimation of the Ministry. And alas, it is no new thing to see
Religion passive under politic projects, in coining which to the Churches
dishonor as well as Christ's, his pretended Vicar is not behind hand; for
since pride and state has bin incathedrated, the Priest is so confounded in
the Prince, the Christian simplicity so over-winged by politic craft, that
they not only forget to be humble, which Erasmus notes, In lib. ratio ver.
Theolog.
Nostri temporis Episcopi quidem suos habent pro servis Emptitiis imo pro
pecudibus; but also charge the Church with the burden of their spurious
productions, and deny her the Ordinances which Christ has indulged her. Doctor
Bramhal Bishop of Derry, p. 194, 195.
A learned Father of our Church, in his notable Treatise of Scisme, lately come
forth, has furnished me with a very pat and pregnant instance to this point;
The Pope (as head of the Church) to use their words, is to supply the Church
with all necessaries to Doctrine and Discipline, and to the preservation of a
succssion in the Church, to do which, he is to propagate the Episcopal Order,
in all places under subjection to him; upon the revolt of Portugal, he refused
to admit any new Bishops there, and the reason he gave, was, Lest by that he
should acknowledge or approve the Title of the present King against his
Catholic Son of Spain; by which neglect of his, the Episcopal Order in
Portugal and the Dominions annexed to that Crown was well near extinguished,
and scarce so many Bishops were left alive, or could be drawn together, as to
make a Canonical Ordination; Balatus Oviu^^ p. 2, 3.
the three Orders of Portugal did represent to the Pope, that in the Kingdom of
Portugal, and the Algarbians, wherein ought to have been three Metrapolitans,
and Suffragans, there was but one left; and he by the Popes Dispensation
nonresident, and in all the Astatique Provinces but one other, Lusitaniae
gemitus, p. 20.
and he both sickly and decrepit; and in all the Aphrican and American
Provinces, and the Island, not one surviving, so that as zealous as his
Holiness is for successions maintenance, he can be contented to endanger it to
take a revenge, or to show a displeasure. Thus between those who deny
Ordination, and others who for private ends disuse it, the Church suffers, and
Christ's holy Ordinance has not its due reverence, which the elder Christians
provided against, this made them nourish up young plants to supply the decay of
old Standard; they knew that dangerous men and errors would come in when
Apostolic men departed; and as old Ely nursed up young Samuel, so did they
cherish the youth of after hopes. 'Twas a good note of St Cyprian, that the
Devil has no greater envy against any, then men in place and eminency in the
Church, ut Gubernatore sublato, Epist. 3. lib. 1. ad Cornel.
atrocius atque violentius circa Ecclesiae naufragia grassetur. In the Emperor
Adrians time, when men were giddy, and had more itching ears, and inquisitive
heads then before, Egesippus notes a crowd of errors forced the Church, and he
assigns this for reason, Men of Apostolic abilities being dead, and those who
succeeded them being not so qualified to resist them by argument and the sacred
force of reason and Scripture, they broke in, tanquam in vacuam domum and
custode suo privatam. An Argument persuasive enough to Christians, that a
learned Ministry, and Schools of Institution, are necessary and useful, since
nothing more disorders then Error, nothing sooner discovers it then Art rightly
used, and carried on by the blessing of God. Alas error comes with a top-sail
charged with the colors of Truth, and so dexterously is the craft of this
pyracy couched, that none but an exact Artist can discover it. The Arians and
Orthodox differed but in one letter (...) and (...), Theod. l. 2. c. 6.
yet upon that depended the honor of Christ's coaequality and coessency with
the Father; how easily might zealous ignorance have dispensed with an Iota,
upon which so great a point of faith depended, and so have given way to Christ's
dishonor, had not the Fathers learnedly and with Athanasian mettle withstood
it?

O Christians, there is more goes to make up the Churches and Religions
prosperity then good meanings, there needs sound heads as well as honest
hearts, to make her terrible as an army with banners; Satan has more
sophistry, then a sigh, or an elevation of the eye (both good, both beseeming)
will enodate. His craft winds it self into company with the sons of God, and
ought he not be a notable craftsman who can cull the scabbed sheep out of the
flock of faithful ones? Lord what baits has he to beguile us with, an Apple for
Eve, a look-back for Lots wife, a Bathsheba for David, a witch of Endor for
Saul, self-love for Jo^as, and fear for Peter's temptation. And when he is most
swollen with malice, then his masque is holiness; Servetus, that blasphemous
Spaniard burnt at Geneva, called his errors, the restitution of Christianity.
And others, that are wanderers, hope to steal upon truth undiscerned by the
conduct of new words, and unused phrases, and ever when men in their nomination
of things do vary from the Law, which is the quintessence of reason, they do it
in a humor, which is the quintessence of fancy; and when men suppress their
opinions till they see a fit season, it is a sign they are more factors for fame
then Lovers of truth, and have a design of self, to which the night of this or
that policy, not the Sun-light of an honest and open ingenuity must give
furtherance. Answ. to Gods Love to mankind. p. 41. Molo verborum ambiguitates,
nolo mihi dici quod and aliter possit intelligi revelata facie gloriam Dei
contemplemur, quam'ille simplicitatem v^cat, Ego malitiam interpretor,
persuadere mihi vult quod pure credat, pure etiam and loquatur. Ep 61. ad
Pannuch.
The Right Reverend and Learned deceased Bishop of Salisbury tells us, that in
the Synod of Dort, when the fourteen Divines that had subscribed their opinions
in affirmance of Arminius his Doctrine, first were demanded by the Synod
severally, whether they now acknowledged for their Doctsine, that which
formerly they had set down in collatione Hagiensi, and published in print? not
one of those fourteen could be drawn to say in plain and expresst terms, that
he either held that Doctrine for true, or he held it not; but as St Jerome
wrote to Pammachi us concerning John Bishop of Jerusalem, I cannot brook
ambiguous words and sentences that bear two senses, truths are best in their
open dress; what he accounts simplicity, I call the malice of his style, loc
that believes aright, ought not to speak in a phrase unusual, unapproved by
true believers, and Orthodox Christians, Alas words are cheap; when Boner was
Elect of London, he said, he blamed Stokesly Bishop of London his Predecessor
for troubling those who had the Bible in English; saying* God willing, he did
not so much hinder, but I will as much further it, yet he proved a most bloody
wretch; and he can do little to his advantage that has not his quiver full of
them, and disperses them not about to the credulous vulgar, who are in some
tempers and on some occasions, so devoted to charity, that they give themselves
up to believe whatever is communicated to them, Socr. Eccl. hist. l. 7 c. 29.
(...). Idem codem loco.
in a serious manner, with invocation of God, and seeming selfdenial. When
Nestorius (after Sisinrius) became Bishop of Constantinople, he made an Oration
to the Emperor, in which he blasphemously said, O Emperor, clear the world of
Heresy, meaning the Orthodox belief, and I will give thee heaven for thy
reward; yet when this man had his preferment, he proved as great a plague to
those Cacodox Christians who were not of his mind, as to the Orthodox, for
within five days after he was settled in his See, he decreed demolition of the
Arians Church, and soon after vexed the Novatians because Paul their Bishop had
a good name, Socra. l. 7. c. 29.
and was thought a pious man; when once men swerve from Catholic Tenants and
Phrases, they run into a Cyclops den, both of infernal pride, and confusion,
and without great mercy, never return thence by repentance, but perish in their
gainsaying, for true is that of Tertullian, Quod apud multos unum invenitur,
non est erratum sed irradiatum.

And therefore as the Sceptiques of old by their upstart Pedantism, endeavored
abolition of all good learning, turning all into utrum's and questionary
debates; and for that reason were opposed by the Ancients and their followers,
with great mordacity; (...) ought these in their new Systems, (...) Divinity to
be treated as persons that have somewhat to vent contrary to the received
faith, who word it contrary to the received phrase; And those (says a learned
Bishop) that will arrogate to themselves a new Church or new Religion, Treatise
of Schism. p. 159
or new holy orders, must produce new miracles, new revelations, and new cloven
tongues for their justification: Till when, I shall join with the Church of
Christ in the belief, that the spirit of the Prophets is subject to the
Prophets, and that the Schools of the Prophets are most probable to acquaint
men with truth and peace, and to disseminate it amongst the people, as that
which will at once make happy both Church and State. And though as the Jews in
Christ's case, and the Heathens in Christians cases, bitterly inveighed,
sharpening powers against them, as stirrers up of the people to mutinies and
rebellions, so it be common now also to possess Governors with ill principles
in distrust of pious and regular Ministers and Professors, yet will it be found
upon search, that nothing lays so strong a ground of just Government as true
Religion; for besides that Gods restraint is upon them, and they dare not do
that in his eye, which will be rebuked by his word, and punished by his hand of
Justice, they cannot be ill subjects upon the account of retaliation; for where
they receive protection, they ex debito owe subjection, and are injurious and
ungrateful if they pay it not: And no Magistrate is so merciless to his own
fame, as he who neglects to be a nursing Father to the Church, and a Patron to
her Schools of learning, Digna certe res in qua totum occupetnr Parliamentum,
nisi enim haec semina dostrinae teneris animis tempestive sparsa fuerint,
quaenam in Republica vel exoriatur spes, vel adolescat virtus, vel effloreseat
pura Religio, and vera faelicitas? As the University of Oxford phraseth it in
their Letter to the Marquess of Northampton, temp. Edw. 6.

For take away the encouragements of learning, what despicable combinations of
men will Commonwealths be? what shall we do for learned Politicians, skilful
Physicians, subtle Lawyers, reverend Antiquaries, polite Orators, acurate
Logicians and Schoolmen, and facetious Poets, Non omnis fert omnia tellus --
God, and Nature (by his leave) makes us men, but it is Learning and Art renders
us wise and worthy; Houses of Learning are the Palaces in which these royal
wits are educated, and the world is as the field in which they scatter their
seeds of renown, and the stock on which they graft their noble Cyons; and
therefore as St Jerome after he had writ that Summary of Ecclesiastical Writers
from Christ's to his time, breaks out, Lib. de Script. Eccle.
Discant ergo Celsus, Porphyrius, Julianus, rapidi adversus Christum canes,
etc. Let them know (quoth he) who think the Church of Christ produces no
eloquent Writers, that they are deceived, for there has ever been a number of
such who in all times have ^lourished in her, and her have vindicated from that
imputation of rustical simplicity, that those Ethniques have charged on her. So
must I brand these enemies of Schools and learning, as underminers of order,
civility, and all good institution, and endeavourers to surprise the Capitol of
our Faith, when learned men, as the watch thereof are drawn off and discharged;
and therefore I appeal to such as prosecute Learning with contempt, Li 2. adv.
Jov.
in St Jerome's words to Jovinian, when rehearsing that of the Apostle, They are
clouds without water, he says, Nonne tibi videtur pinxisse sermo Apostolicus
Novam imperitiae factionem, aperiunt enim quasi fontes sapientiae qui aquam non
habent doctrinarum, promittunt imbrem velut nubes propheticae, ad quas
perveniat veritas Dei, and turbinibus exagitantur demonum and vitiorum. So he.
Alas, they are in a devious road to fame who endeavor Learnings ruin, and
deserve no nobler a memorial then Tanta fuer^ Syllana mala ut nihil addi posse
videretur. Non paratur gloaia aliena au^erendo and rapiendo, sed pria
dilargiendo. Guev. horolog. l. 1. c. 33. Vixis inter nos non consuetudi^e
peregrina sed gravitate. Romana Cassiod. l. 2. ep. 3.
Scylla had, whose evils were so great, that there was neither le^t place for
greater, nor number for more. That wise man of the Garamantes spoke truth to
Alexander, Glory arises not from violent substraction of what is another, but
from bestowing on others what is our own: the best way to be remembered for
gallant, is to write our memorial in the Table Adamant of a Charity and Bounty
that may outlast us. I love Aemilius his gravity and imitable worth, his
virtuous mind and Learned head, better then Aristippus his rapacious heart, In
purpura sub magna gravitatis superficie nepotatur. Tert. Apol. 4.
though it had to friend a grave countenance, and a purple robe: The Lord
deliver the Learned from those men, who would have the Name of Learned perish,
and their seed beg their bread, and give and preserve to them such Kings and
Protectors, as may speak comfortably to them as God did to his, He that
touches you, touches the apple of mine eye.

Thirdly, Antiquity and Elder times have been Zealous for Government and Order
in the Church, as the Church of Christ has no custom for contention, so not
for confusion: God is order, and good discipline is one way to make men conform
to God as orders Lawgiver. St Cyprian one of the first Fathers and a noble
Martyr, Lib. de habitu Virg. Disciplina custos spei, retinaculum fidei, dux
itineris salutaris, fomes atque nutrimentum bonae indolis magistra virtutis,
facit in Christo manner semper. Lib. de ver. Ecc. Reform ratioue.
defines Discipline, the keeper of hope, the conservative of faith, a good
conductor in our race of Christianity, a benefit reaching forth security and
increase to those that embrace her, and portending destruction to those that
refuse or neglect her: And Calvin when he disownes all Church usurpation, yet
concludes, That the Church has Laws of order, to promote concord and defend
government. And reason it should be so; Leges non alia tulit unquam vera Dei
Ecclesia nisi qu^e ad retinondum ordinem ad fovendam concordiam ad tuendam
disciplinam facerent.
for if God be order, and his administrations be orderly as himself, then
disorder, as nothing of his, ought to be kept out of the Church, to which it is
peculiarly an enemy.

The Church is a treasury, disorder robbs it; It Is a clear stream of living
water, disorder puddles it; It Is a fair and bright Heaven, disorder clouds and
inlowers it; It Is a chart virgin, disorder is an impure raptor and corrupts it;
It Is a precious orb of spicknard, disorder like dead flies putrifies it. The
foresight of this made our Lord Jesus bespangle his Church with gifts to all
purposes of Order and Ornnament. He has set (says St Paul) in the Church
first Apostles, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers; then gifts of healing, Helps to
Governments, diversities of tongues. And now I have found Church and Government
both in a Scripture, I hope I may without offense join them together,
Church Government; and assert that of Divine Institution. I think most parties
are agreed, that Government Ecclesiastique as well as Civil is of God: all the
litigation is, What this Ecclesiastique Government which is of God, is? By what
Name and Title it is distinguished and dignified? And God wot, the heat and
humor of peevish brains, have set Paul and Barnabas (as it were) asunder, nay
has made such a crack in Christian Eutaxie, 'that as Bernardas Dyas Bishop of
Calatrore said of the Church of Vicenza, Council of Trent hist. p. 252.
that may I of this Chuach of England, It is so disordered, that it requires
more an Apostle then a Bishop. Orpheus sooner charmed Pluto and Proserpina to
part with his Eurydice, then men amongst us be persuaded to part with their
passions, though all their swellings and monstrous impregnations, like that of
the mountains, produce only a Mouse, a most ridiculous and inglorious scabb of
self-conceited Leprosy. One party will have Church Discipline so precisely set
down in the Word of God, that nothing is left to Christian prudence to alter.
Others are diametrall to these, and make, with Cardinal Cusanus, Government
accountable to the times, Hist. Council Trent p. 159.
as he said Scripture was, and therefore to be expounded according to the
current rites, and yet (forsooth) it is not to be meant as if the Church at one
time expounds in one fashion and at another time in another sort; a Riddle!
the Scripture must be expounded according to the times, and the times according
to which Scripture is to be expounded, are now this, an on that; and yet the
Church must not be meant to expound it in one fashion at one time, and in
another fashion another time.

There are a third sort who fix the essentials of Government in Scripture,
Epist. 118. ad Januarium. Totum hoc ge^^e rerum liberas habet observationes nec
disciplina ulla est i^ his melior gravi prudentique Christiano quam us eo modo
aga^, quo agere videret Ecclesiam ad qu^^cunque fort^ devenerit; quod enim
neque contra fidem, neque contra bonos mor^^ inj^^gitur ^^diferenter est
babendum and little inter quos vivitur societate servandum, ego vero de haec
s^utentia etiam atque etiam cogitans ita semper habui, tanquam eam coelesti
oraculo susceperim.
and the collaterals they admit as left to the order of the particular Churches
of Christ: this I take to be most safe and moderate; and this St Augustine
delivers as his Opinion to Januarius long ago. These things (quoth be) are left
free; there is no appointment by God concerning them, prudent Christians are at
liberty to conform to whatever Church they come, and in which they live; for
whatever is enjoined not contrary to faith and good manners, ought to be
submitted to for peace and civil societies sake, and I (says the Father)
diligently considering this thoroughly, do deliver this as an Oracle receiving
confirmation from God. And truly this I judge to be the meaning of those
brotherly expressions that have and ought ever to ebb and flow from Christian
Churches to each other, and from the Protestant Churches especially: For if the
Church of England when it was under Episcopacy, saved the rights of other
Churches which were disciplinary, and condemned them not, but held
correspondency with them, giving them the right hand of fellowship, and the
other foreign Churches published their candor and approbation of Episcopacy
where it was constituted, and pressed obedience to it, witness Reverend In
Opusc. Conf. Gallic. p. 110. si^ in Ep. ad Regem Polon.
Calvi^ in diverse places and on diverse occasions, Learned Zanchy In Thesibus de
Re^or. Eccl. rat. and in Epist. ad Grindal.
, Grave Bucer. Lib. de Regno Christi.
, Eloquent Beza Ep. 23. ad Grind* Epis. and ep. 12. ad fratris quosdam
A^glicanos.
, Profound M^uline These. de notis Eccles. par. 2d^ These. 33.
, Accomplished Chamier De Papali Monarchia l. 3. c. 14. etc. 5 art. 6.
, yea, and multitudes of others of note in the Reformed Churches; then does
this arise from that apprehension, that the generals of Government being one
and the same under both Disciplines, Charity ought to pass the rest, to the
least injury of Christian Concord. Far be it from me to part whom God has
joined together: Wherein the Churches agree, let them mind the things that tend
to piety and unity, the rest God will reveal in his good time; In Respons. ad
Versipellem.
for as Calvin. after St Augustine determines it, Let every Church observe her
own Customs; It is profitable sometimes that Religion should have some variety,
so there be no ^mulation, and new things be not introduced for novelties sake.

The Churches of Christ then have agreed upon Government as appointed by God,
yea and about the persons interessed in it, those Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons, they never owned Armilustra's in which Soldiers were Priests, nor
Gifted men, unordained, for Church Officers, this is of late date, and no
pedigree has this presumption beyond our times. And I wish that these men who
arrogate to themselves* the Office of the Priesthood, would consider how
unqualified they are to it, and return to their callings, for by reason of
these wanderings, all the grand renown of Antiquity is blemished: For they to
gain a Name so themselves, reprobate all Church uses and Church-stories, and
make them matters of superstition and offense to tender Consciences; so wise
are the children of the world in their generation.

But for all their confidence, the Church of Christ will glory in that they
count her infirmities; she will preserve her Catalogues of Martyrs, Confessors,
Bishops, Presbyters; she will own Churches and Oratories set apart for her use,
Hist. Magdeb. i. 3. c. 6.
before Dioclesians time called (...), which daily increased in number and
magnificence. Cent. 5* c* 6.


She will own Lyturgies and set forms of Devotion, and can instance St James
chosen Bishop of ^erusalem by the Apostles, called Jacobus Liturgus from a
Liturgy he made for the use of that Church; Tert. lib. 2. ad Vxorem. Vide
Aegesippum.
Maronita asserting Litnrgies made by the Apostles for the Eastern and Western
Churches; Origin speaking of the (...), and Eusebius of the (...) and those
(...) used by the good Emperor Constantine in his Court, Li. 6. adv. Cells. Ds
vita Constant. l* 4. c. 17.
by Justin Martyr, Cyprian and others, upon which the painful Centurists
conclude, Cent. 2. c. 6.
Without doubt* certain forms of prayers public they then had; and they add,
Cent. 7. c. 6.
not to know and rehearse those forms of prayer, was in a kind to disown the
name of Christian; For as St Augustine said of the Donatists, then they ceased
to be o^r brethren, In Psa. 32. conc. 2. Tom. 8.
when they said not, Our Father which art in Heaven. And if set Forms be
erroneous, and to use them be an error, it is an error of the purest times, and
purest Christians; so long as Christians have Christ Jesus for their Patron and
pattern, they may use holy set Forms, not neglecting their exercise of graces
in due time and place, with much benefit.

I and the Church will avow set Forms of faith; Creeds and Systems of sound
Doctrine and belief, such as were the Creeds which they and we call the
Apostles, the Athanasian, the Nicene Creeds, Socr. l* 6. c. 8.
yea and those of Tertullian, Origin, Gregorius, Niccaesariensis, Nazianzen,
Victorinus, Hylarie, Basil Epiphanius, Da^asus and others* and singing of
Psalms in her meetings ever since Ignatius his time; witness also Plynie's
Epistle to the Emperor Trajan, which Eusebius records, l. 3. c. 27. And sundry
other things of like nature she owns without blushing, wondering that any should
distaste her for her fidelity.

And that order may appear to be the more conservative of whatever falls under
its Empire, I cannot but observe, how precisely the Heretic Church imitated
the Orthodox, and so notably did they ape it, that thereby they gained much
consistence to themselves, and gave much grievance to the Christians of more
purity then were they. Sanctus Hieronymus adv. Luciferianos.
The Arians had their Bishops and Presbyters, eight of them were in the famous
Counsel of Nice, Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 4. c, 63.
Nestorius was Bishop of Constantinople, and there is mention made of Paul a
Novatian Bishop and others, Sanct. Hyeron. de* Pastoribus To 4.
they had their places of meeting, in which were Scriptures read, Cent. 6. c.
9. etc. 12.
and Sacraments administered, their Creeds, yea and their Martyrs, such as
Metrodorus, Cent. 2. p. 287.
Themison and Alexander, Eusebius tells us that the Montanists boasted of their
Martyrs, Eus. l. 5. c. 15.
and no worder, for St Chrysostom gives us the reason, The Devil, says he,
has his humble and meek, chast^ and charitable, his fasters and prayers; of
every good thing that God made to man's salvation, he has a show and semblance,
To. 7* in Math. homil* 4. ad ^iu.
which he imploys to seduction to the end, that there may be no distinction
between real and seeming good, that plain-hearted men, who are artless in
distinguishing, may be caught by the snares of those whom they mistake for the
faithful servants of God. Thus that Father.

And may we not fear this old Serpent has been too busy in the differences in
Religion, not only abroad in the world, but also at home in this Church, while
he has made divisions amongst brethren, such as no age or story exceeds? O
Lord Jesus, how sad is it to think, that the legacy of peace, which thou
bequeathedst to thy Church is expended, nay defrauded, and lost in the crowd
and throng of private passions and private insolence! and that out of this
Church should come evil instruments, who not like thieves only steal grapes out
of the Vineyard, but like wild* Asses tread down all the Vines; such as Boner
who when truth is backed by power, shows himself a very exemplary Protestant,
Acts and Mon. Old Ed. p. 1061
but when the Lord Cromwell was dead (who preferred him for what of God he
thought was in him) then he proves the most pernicious Papist, and bloody fiend
that the Papacy here had: and truly I think there is no Church-enemy so great
as a waverer, who is not much beneath an Apostate, for he that is any thing to
gain an interest, will soon be nothing indeed to preserve it. And in all this
coil and hurry in this Hinnon of distasts, wherein our children of prudence
have been offered in sacrifice to the Molech of Passion; and Contest were
carried as Suid^s says, (...). Suidas in verbo* Ar^ani.
those were between Dorotheus and Ma^inus, both Arrians, more out of pride then
piety, to advance their own wills rather then to polish truth to a pervious
clarity, for what is the matter? speak Conscience, be ingenious, their faces
will gather blackness of reproach at the last day, whose have not now the blush
of full and free confession. Was Christ and his Cause, holiness and her Rights
the main drift, the cause of mounting the scaling-ladder against the Church?
speak ye sons of Levi, whose thunderbolts not long since rent all in sunder,
and whose virulent irritations made such wide breaches in charity. There was I
confess, ^ time when Priests were engaged in wars, but not with their brethren,
but Midianites, Numb. 31. 2.
not by choice but command of God. Ye grave men of the Clergy, who dissented
from what was established by Law, and hoped to have had your judgments
answered to their latitude in the change of Church-polity, suffer me, I beseech
you, to bemoan that ye should rise up in prosecution of your spiritual Fathers
and brethren, whose blemishes that Evangelique piety should have covered, and
for whose reformation, not ruin, ye should have strove in prayer with God, and
by petition to men, did ye well to be angry? have ye comfort in those
reproaches that some cast on you, when your frailty is displayed in the
Escocheon of your punishment? Genesis 49. 3* 4.
When Reuben grows unstable as water, and goes up to his fathers bed, no
wonder Jacob condemns him not to excel, though once he were the excellency of
dignity and of power; Ought ye not (O holy and pious souls) to have stood
between the living and the dead, and said to the destroyer (when he was no
adder to your voice) It is enough? How comes it to pass that ye call Christ
Lord, and do not as he commands you? forgive your brethren, not to seven, but
to seventy times seven, as often as they offend you? It Is sad, that Christ's
Banner should be the Standard of Church-discord, and that offenses should so
abundantly germinate, that every thing of order and decency must be censured
and suppressed. I have heard many of you offended with Bishops, from some of
which Order diverse of you had little encouragement, more injury and hard
dealing, but did you well therefore to punish the demerits of a few, with the
disgrace and vituperation of a whole Order? Must Episcopacy be Antichristian,
because some Bishops were (in a sort) unchristian, in imposing more upon you
then the Canons of the Church required from you? Was there no correction for
innovation and arrogance, but extirpation and abhorring? could not the faedity
of Ely's sons be charged on the Priesthood, to determine it? and shall the
peevish tartness of some Bishops persuade you to labor annihilation of
Episcopacy? Truly this seems to be hard; but God has begun with his Sanctuary,
and I appeal to ye grave, learned, and sacred Presbyters, ye siltrumpets to the
more numerous Rams horns, whose clamorous ravings have thus stuperated Church
affairs. Is single and pristine Episcopacy against the Word of God, or the use
of the purest Church? I know ye that are wise and worthy own not such
assertions; that which in Episcopacy offended you was Praelature; and why, I
beseech you, should the bounty of Kings and Princes be your exception? have
secular honors bestowed on Clergymen original sin? do they defile all, men
and all administrations? may not rich men preach the Gospel, as well as poor
men receive it, since mercy makes no distinction, that it may justify its
freedom and bounty? May not great Titles, ampl^ Revenues, full Tables,
minister to Christ, where well used? yea is not Religion more advantaged when
the professors of it are thus accoutred to all purposes of eminency? O but say
some, the Bishops were idle, bellygods, disfavourers of good men, Lords over
Gods heritage; God forbid any should be such, and have ^ontinued Bishops, and
God forbid any hereafter shall be permitted to be such, when God shall put it
into the heart of our Governors to bring home the banished Ark with triumph. I
am for Bishops who would make the Church happy, and religion flourish, such as
are for age fathers, for wisdom Senators, for gravity St^iques, for light
angels, for innocence Saints, for industry Laborers, for constancy Confessors,
for zeal Martyrs, of whom that may be said as of our Bishop Grindall, His Books
were his Bride, and his Study his Bride-chamber. And some such we had, who
might deservedly have this said of them, that St Bernard said of the ancient
Bishops of Rome, Fuerunt ante te qui se totos pascendis ovibus exponerent, etc.
that is, Lib. 4. de Con^i. ad Eugenium.
There were (O Eugenius) Bishops thy predecessors, who gloried only in their
tending their flocks, faithful Pastors, who thought nothing unworthy them,
which made for the safety of their charge, such as enriched not themselves with
the spoils of the widow, nay of Christ himself, but contented with little, as
freely they received, freely they gave. And were not such worthy Honor, and
liberal maintenance? or can these be carped at for unworthy or unsufficient,
unless envy and ill will be Attorney-Generall, and draw their Indictment?
Would it not be a paradox, to discard Ministers because Friar Bacon said long
ago, Some of them were better Lawyers then Preachers, more industrious Farmers,
then conscientious Husbandmen in Gods spiritual husbandry; honestly pay their
Landlord rent for his house in which they dwell, but allow not the lawful
Incumbent, (whom for the imputation of Malignancy they enter upon and eject,)
not the fifths allowed by Powers, no nor any thing if they can avoid it though
they eat his bread, while he starves and cries to God out of anguish. Consider
this, ye heretofore erring sons of the Church, whom it concerns rather to be
Oaks then Willows, burning and shining Lights, not portentuous Planets, and
passionate blazes, and search whether ye your selves were not as guilty of lack
of humility, as your discarded fathers for too much pride. For had ye thought
every one better then your selves, ye would not have snuffled against what is
the honor of Christians to submit to, Governments; and to pardon and not
revenge injuries; for, as that sad, Rollock has well observed, Only in the
School of Jesus, In his Lect. 23. on 1 These. 5. p. 288.
only in the Gospel, this point of Doctrine is taught and learned* That men
should not do evil for evil, but good for evil.

Indeed if there had been no other way to Christs^ triumph then by trampling
upon rejected Bishops and Presbyters, it had been fit his Hosanna's should have
been given him, though their skulls and bones had paved the way to his
procession; yea, I hope their piety would have been such, to have licked
willingly the dust of their own confusion, and to have cleared him when thus
they were judged; but when he delights in mercy rather then burnt-offerings, to
think to please him by entering into the gate of your brethren in the day of
their calamity, Obad. ver. 13.
or to lay hands on their substance in the day of their calamity* which God
charged on Edom as their sin* will never be approved by God or men as a virtue.

Ought ye not rather to have mourned in secret, and prayed that the iniquity of
men's hearts might have been forgiven them; and dealt with them in that
Gospel-way of admonition, and spiritual conviction, considering that the ways
of God are secret, and his purpose of good not ever to be discerned by us; that
many belong to God, who are missed, and will be recalled in Gods time; and that
to cause them to wander further, by oppression upon them, is a kind of
accessariness to their sin of intemperance? So long as God has left such
presidents of calling St Anthony Kingston a Commissioner at Mr Hoopers death to
be his convert, Acts and Mo^. Old Ed p. 1525 Page 986.
and Bishop Latimer from being Cross-keeper at Cambridg, and a violent opposer
of famous Mr Stafford, to be a glorious Confessor of his truth, ye should have
forborne tartness against those, who differed from you but in trifles: Abim^l^ch
was more just then Abraham, when Abraham would rather study his own outward
peace, in regarding his life, more then in guarding his wives modesty. Mistake
me not (ye Reverend Ministers of Christ whom my address in this kind concerns)
I am not discontented with you, I am no rejoycer in your failings, God knows I
daily bemoan you in private, and as occasion is, defend your Calling and rights
to my utmost power, and so by Gods grace, I hope ever to do; I am none of the
generation of those, who gave rise to that too true speech, profecto Laici
semper sunt inimici clericis. My desire is to honor your persons and
employment, yea to serve you hip and thigh; yet can I not forbear mention of
some of your mistakes, by which, you have caused many to wander out of the way,
and made your selves objects of reproach. I know God has yet reserved in the
Church, many grave and Learned Presbyters, who may justly be called Burning and
shining Lights; Lam. 1. 31.
yet I conceive, he has trodden under foot many of the mighty men in the midst
of her: and if God has heretofore suffered a spirit of delusion to be upon
some of his Prophets of old, for some time, and upon some occasions, and given
some of his servants up to great fondnesses, and caused the vision to cease to
them: If men of rare parts be permitted to lose themselves for a while in
errors, as did that famous Divine of Peru, D. Merick Causabon in Treat.
Enthusiasm. p. 77.
the Oracle of the American world, of whom, the Learned Son of a Learned
Father, tells us out of Acosta, that he grew so wild in his Divinity, that he
averred his holiness to be granted him above Angels and Apostles, that he was
proffered hypostaticall union with God, but refused it, with sundry other such
blasphemous passages. Or to admire their own conceits above what they deserve,
and think they see more into the Cryptick parts of Theology, then truly they
do; as did Napier the Lord of Marchiston, terming his Book, A plain discovery
of the Revelation of St John; and Forbs another Scot, his Book, An exquisite
Commentary upon the Revelation of St John; when the greatest Scholars, with
Castalio, profess their non intelligo of the thousand part of that Book, and
with Junius, Deodate, and BP* Andrews, declare, the mysteries in it are very,
hard, reserved under Gods secret seal, and beyond their reach: yea those that
wade deepest therein, do but besmear themselves and lose credit by their
confidence, as did Arias Montanus the Spaniard, See Pref. to the Revelation
Revealed.
and Johannes Brocardus, who lost himself in the exposition of that Book, who
thought to find Venice there: and a Belgic Doctor in the Synod of Dort, who
thought to find Grave Maurice there; and Mr Brightman, who believed (as says
mine Author) not only to find England, but also his two friends Cecil and
Walsingham there; If I say such mistakes have betided Learned and good men, why
may not many of you have been mistaken also? and why may it not become you
soberly to confess as did the holy Prophet, Thou have deceived us O Lord, and
we are deceived?

It Is worth* O ye Ministers of the Lord, it is worth your tears, to bewail and
your serious thoughts to consider, for there* is great offense taken by many
poor souls, upon your violent courses against your fathers and brethren, who
were more wounded by your Sermons and Exhortations, then from the secular
severity of Magistrates who would have been less strict toward them, had ye
not sharpened the Instruments of their dispatch; And therefore I beseech you
hear my motion to you seconded by two men of your own Coat, every way without
exception, the first my right worthy and meriting Friend Dr Gawden, whole words
are these, Apology for the Ministry, p. 17.
I desire both my self and others of my mind and profession may by an
ingenious acknowledgement of our failings be fitted for God and man's
absolution; both in present and after ages, that it may not be said that the
Ministers of England erred greatly and were punished sharply, yet knew not how
to repent humbly and truly, every one palliating their own errors and
transferring the blame and guilt upon others, when themselves were in some
things more blameable then any men; and merited in their own censures, to be
esteemed the chief of sinners. Thus he. The other to the same tune, is Learned
Mr. Baxter, Christian Concord. p. 96
who writing to the Ministers has this passage, Have not some of you so led the
way to seecet and open vilifying, deriding, contemning and aspersing your
brethren, that you, even you have been the means of raising those calumnies you
cannot allay? Have you not had yet time and means enough to observe, how God
has been offended with your unpeaceable proceedings, seeking to suppress and
subdue each other by force, rather then to win each other by love and evidence
of truth? And in another place; Page 99.
For my part (says he) I daily look death in the face, and live in a constant
expectation of my change, and therefore have the better assurance of being
faithful to my conscience; and I must needs profess, that when I look back
upon my life, I have more comfort in the least means that ever I used for the
Churches peace, then in all my most zealous contentious engagements. Thus he.
And what can be more fully written to their honors, and the shame of those
whose high stomachs incubate their confessions? But I know the wise in heart
will consider this, and for the rest, I pity, not reproach them; Zacheus is as
well to be imitated in restoration, as in his taking from men their rights,
etc.

Thus much of the head of Government, though I conceive it necessary to add
somewhat concerning Ceremonies; such I mean as are decent, and not
supernumerary; I know this is a noli me tangere,, and perhaps may be born out
of time; But yet since my aim is to please no party by a base parasitism, nor
to provoke any by a sarcastique freedom; I think fit to insinuate (with all
humility and submission) my thoughts about Ceremonies, which I look upon as
flesh and skin to the soulary part of Religion, as mounds and fences, to the
granaries of sound doctrine; I know as life, so Religion may be preserved by
plain clothes, and fewer rites, as well as by richer and more numerous;
Therefore I offer my conceptions not as a peremptory dictator, but as a
petitory Monitor; I confess the primitive times had little of Ceremonies, They
were in Persecution, and the Christians in them under restraints, not owned by
Magistrates, nor in any polity for a great while, Aliud fuit tunc tempus and
omnia suis temporibus aguntur, says St Augustine, Ep. 50.
but so soon as the condition of the Christian Church grew better, and
Emperors and great men showed themselves propitious to her, then prudence
dictated somewhat more lustrous and suitable to the prosperous condition of the
fixed Church, which ought not to be considered less then the garden of God,
wherein are things of variety and virtuous delight, as well as of absolute
necessity; And though I know all things in the Church should be done to
edification, yet do I not believe it unedi^ving to have in the Church various
expressions of Gods gifts to me^, all which tending to the admiration of God,
call man to be edified in the high and holy contemplation of his infinite
greatness, Bucer. in Resp. ad Hopperum.
who (^owithstanding his so liberal indulgence to man) is yet complete and
inexhaust; And therefore as Reverend Calvin well says against Versipellis,
Scimus quaecunque ad decorem and ordinem pertinent, non habenda esse prohumanis
placitis, quia divinitus approbantur, in respons. ad Versipellem.
Whatever is pertinent to Beauty and Order, we are not to account of humane
appointment but of divine approbation; So say I in the case of Ceremonies, so
far as they relate to the useful Order and Ornament of the Church, they are
not only not to be contemned, but honored and kept; And these that are hotly
violent against them qua such, had best consider, that there may be use of them
to do the drudgery of worship, and to stave off profaneness, and when they are
employed but as Cryars of Courts of Justice are, to mind men of their
reverence to what is sacred, and to learn them to be bare and submisse to their
betters, there is no ill construction can be reasonably made of them.

I know they have and ever will be (while men are ignorant, ambitious, and
worldly) subject to be abused, partly by the ignorance of superstitious people,
and partly by over activity of men of note in the Church, who of good purpose
introduced them, as did St Chrysostom Church-Musick into the Church at
Constantinople, Cent. 5. c. 6. p 361.
to prevent the Arians withdrawing of the Orthodox to their Church or Oratories
in which they had such Music: I know (I say) that by this and other means the
number of Ceremonies grew so great, that the Church was not able to abide them,
That St Augustine and many others greatly inveighed against them, and wished
correction of them. And therefore as all things of discipline and order,
constituted by man, may (upon just cause) be ordered and altered, as to
prudence shall seem most meet, Provided it be done in lawful manner, and by
persons lawfully called thereto; so endeavored many in the Church, to put a
stop to this evil, and to offer a remedy thereto.

But alas! It was a disease past cure, Men of estimation hugged their own Apes,
and in the customs and Rites of their own initiation, hung up Trophies and
Banners to their Memories, happy was he thought that could travel farthest in
this wilderness of imagination, and have the remarque of adding something to
Church-Solemnity, under pretense of some notable zeal, noble charity,
devout-rapture, matchless self-denial; so that at length the Ceremonies grew
to have no name but Legion for they were many, which made many holy men cry out
against them, and some profess, that the soul of Religion was overlaid by the
body, yea, Goldastus part. (...) p. ^9, 31.
every thing so out of order, that even Pope Adrian the 6. in his Instructions
to his Legate, professed, Scimus in hac sancta sede aliquot jam annis multa
abominanda fuisse: nay, for many years before him holy St Bernard cried out
against some of place, as more proggers for their own advantage then the glory
of Christianity; Ep. 33. ad Maurit. l. 4.
Vides omne Ecclesiasticum zelum ^ervere sola pro dignitate tuenda, honori
totum datur, sanctitati nihil aut parum. lib. 4. de Consid. ad Eugenium. Heu,
Heu, Domine Deus ipsi sunt in persecutione primi qui videntur in Ecclesia
primatum diligere! Yea, even in the Council of Trent (about the gathering and
managing of which more carnal policy was expressed then comported with the
simplicity of Christ* and the real honor of his pretended Vicar) there was a
loud out cry againsi extravagant Ceremonies; And that from the mouths of
Learned Prelates and Friars of the Papacy, Insomuch that Langi Archbishop of
Saltzburg said, It was but reasonable to be disburthened of them; But the Pope
and his party had too much gain by this craft to part with them cheaply: B^
Derry of Scisme, p. 161.
The College of Parish ^ Priests at Rome is now become a conclave of
Cardinals, and has Church-Princes, and the Pope Head of the Church, to rule it
which way it will: Dissert. de Imper. Eccles. p. 392.
yea, his Palace the Commonwealth of Christians, as Albergatus his words are to
the Cardinal Nephew to Gregory the 13th; They I say becoming so great must
have support. And finding this among the politic accoutrements of the Papacy,
could not give ought but a deaf ear to those endeavors, Nothing obtaining
audience at Rome but what has the Oratory of gain, or the impulse of
invincible necessity: The Cries and humble Remonstrances of the Waldenses,
Nicholaus Clemingius, Humphredus in Puritano Jesuitismus, part. 2. p. 354.
Petrus de Aliaco, Humbertus de Romania, Gulielmus Parisiensis, Petrarch,
Bernard, Adrian the 6th, Cornelius, Antonius, Picus Mirandula, Lawrentius
Cardinal of Ratisbon, Gilbertus the Monk, Durand the Schoolman; all which* in
their times importuned Reformation, produced nothing, those Addars of Rome
would not hear the voice of these charmers though they charmed wisely; till
Luther broke out no general Council could be gained, and when that was brought
about, there was such tricks, such postings from Trent to Rome, such designing
things to crafty and secular ends, such tying up of the Fathers and Prelates
there convened, that some of the braver spirits muttered, that the Pope did but
hold the world in hand, that he called that Council to reform the Church, but
that he ins^nded nothing less, which made the French Ambassador protest In the
Name of his Master and the French Church, Goldastus, Tom. 3. p. 571.
that they would not obey any thing concluded there, for as much as they were
the Decrees of Pope Pius the fourth rather then of the Council, all things
being done at Rome not at Trent.

Now (as it were) the Axe is laid to the Root of the Tree, Germany reaks ont
the heat Luther had roused up in her; Many of the Prelates (faithful enough to
the Papacy in spiritualibus) are not displeased at the cheque, that this new
appearance is expected to give to the career of the Conclavique policy, and
diverse Princes not only not oppose Luther, but openly mediate for him, and at
last prove protectors of him: The Germans naturally sturdy and rough enough,
adore this new risen Star, and use pretenses of zeal for warrants to violence
and extravagancy; Religious men and houses go to wrack, and all the symptoms of
popular dirity and confusion are visible.

Many partial Reformations there were in some parts of Germany and France, and
sundry Princes favored Luther, wherein his enterprises gratified their
interests, as to Supremacy and justification of Princely authority against the
Popes Usurpation, the Emperor Charles the 5th the then King of France, and
Henry the 8th of this Land, found not themselves aggrieved, Vnus in mundo Sol,
Lib. 2. de Legatis, Dissert. 29.
Vnus in regno Rex, Vna in Religione Religio, ne ubi non una, ubi multa, nulla
fiat, says the Politic Marselaer, as Luther by distracting the Papal affairs
did them no disservice, so silently they applauded him: but when once Religion
grew concerned, then all of them fell foul upon him, Henry the 8th wrote
against him, and the other two Princes prosecuted the Lutherans severely; So
God calling up Luther, and calling out of this life Henry the 8th, and the
Crown of his Land descending to his Son and Heir Edw. the 6th* Reformation
began to be in credit here also; In the short Reign of this blessed Josiah, by
the counsel of his godly Uncle (the Protector of his person and Government)
and by Learned Bishops and Presbyters, both of this and other Churches, the
Scheme of our Church Service and decency was ordered, and to such a degree
refined, that Spalatenses a Foreign calls our old Praier-Book, Breviarium
optime reformatum: And no otherwise thought our Parliaments of those times, as
5. and 6. Ed 6. c. 1. 1. Eliz. c. 2. 8. Eliz. c. Nihil vid^o in libro esse
descriptum quod non sit ex divinis literis desumptum, si non ad verbum ut
Psalmi and lectiones tamen sensu ut sunt collectae. Bucer. in censur. Ord. Ecc.
in A^g. p. 456.
1. call it a godly and virtuous Book, and a means together with the preaching
of the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments of the pouring forth of the
blessings of God upon the Land; Yea, when the Popish Parliament of pr^ Q. Mary
repealed the Act of the 6. Ed. 6. by which this uniformity of worship according
to the Common-Praier-Book was settled; The Stat. of 1 El. c. 2. says, That
Repeal of Q. Mary was to the great decay of the due honor ^f God, and
discomfort to the professors of the truth of Christ's Religion: But we are wiser
in our generation then those Fathers of Light our worthy Progenitors; We are
more holy then they, because less orderly, less solemn in our service of God
then they, yea, to excuse our selves; We pretene their Reformation was but
partial, whenas, God knows, there are who wisely believe that their
settlemenrs were such as will not be bettered by any their Successors. For
although they appointed set Forms of devotion for the Public as a help to
their weakness who could not pray without them, and as a prudent entertainment
of the Congregation, while it was gathering, which in great Parishes was long,
and unto Servants who came late, beneficial, for by that means could they get
time enough to Sermon, yet intended they it never to justle out the gifts of
men, whom God had specially enabled to extemporary prayer, who therefore were
left free to use their gifts both in their Families and before and after their
Sermons, Nor to soothe up people in ignorance, Vide Bucerum libro de Regno
Christi and in Resp. ad Hop.
or so to accustom them to Forms that they should never endeavor by seeking
more interest in God, to receive more ability from him. Nor did they appoint
Holy days to be kept in obedience to any Popish Canon, or in memory of Saints,
but upon civil reasons, thereby to give people ease from their hard labors,
and to call them to the service of God, in prayers and praising of him, as
says the Statute of 5, and 6 Ed. 6. c. 3. Neither has this Church kept decent
habits for her Ministry, out of a desire to symbolize with Popelings; but
according to the wisdom of the first Reformation, confirmed by the 30th
Injunction of Queen Elizabeth, wherein habits for order and distinction sake,
were enjoined Ministers in their Universities and Churches; These I say, though
carped at by many, were harmlesly settled, and some think might usefully have
been continued: but they are disused now, and how much purer our Religion has
been since they have been voted down, let the world judge. -- Nunc seges ubi
Troja fuit. Only if good pretentions were enough, the Donatists had them as
much as the Orthodox; yet 'twas observed justly of them, that their designs
were brought forth by passion, nourished by ambition, and confirmed by
covetousness. I will not say any thing of those, who whe^^ they had place,
misplaced things well ordered, let God plead his own cause. Ep. 39. ad virgins
Hermo^enses.
Aliter hominum livor, aliter Christus judicat, non eadem est sententia
tribunalis ejus and anguli susurronum, multae hominibus viae videntur justae
quae postea reperiuntur pravae, says St Jerome, Let men of fury and passion
rave as they list, being as St Gregory styles them appositely, Bellonae
sacerdotes, non Eccle^iae, Martis faces and tibicines, non Evangelii lumina,
Cometae infausti, pestis and dira omnia, non stellae salutares Christum
pronunciantes; yet my judgment shall be (with Gods leave) calm and moderate. I
will pray for a peaceable temper, and till I know better, conclude that
council, concerning forms and order in the Church, good, which reverend Calvin
wrote to the Protector forementioned, Epist. ad Protectorum.
Vt certa illa extet a qua pastoribus disc^dere non liceat: I crave leave of
the Reader for this excursion, which I thought necessary, and I hope he will
not condemn as offensive; A plain ingenious freedom best befits me, who am to
act no part but that of a good Christian, and therefore it shall be my constant
resolve, to rank flatterers, as Erasmus did Eriers, inter falsos fratres, who
the more holy they pretend to be, are the more execrable, for, nihil turpius
sanctis parasitis. But I leave them to their proper Judge, and make to the
third head of Antiquities Piety, which consists In care to countenance truth
and censure errors.

And here is good reason for this, if we consider the nature of truth, which
makes the soul free, not only in professing, but also in not fearing what may
be the consequence of boldly owning it, (...), Eusebius. de vita Constantini. l.
4. c. 62.
which armed the Martyrs with invincible courage, and made them, more then
conquerours over their fears and persecutors.

There is also much to be said for care to prevent growth of error even from
the nature of error, which (in the words of Constantine the Great) makes those
in whom it raigns, enemies to truth, promoters of dissension, and often of
assassination, counselors to every thing contrary to truth, favorers of
dangerous and fabulous evils; In a word, being under a show of piety great
offenders, and contagious to all that border on them. The good Emperor by sad
experience knew, what shifts and deluding courses the Arians took, to bring to
pass their designs: therefore laid he load of reproach on them; And that not
without cause; for first they conveyed their poison under gilded pills, and in
not to be understood expressions; and to such a clymax of vanity ascended they,
Theod. l. 1 c. 4. (...). Theod. l. 1. c. 4.
that they would allow none of the ancient Fathers to be compared to them, but
appla^ded themselves to be the only knowing men, the only men of self-denial,
the only men to whem Jesus Christ was revealed, and to whom such mysteries were
made known, as never came into the thought, or under the experience of any men
before them, that as Mahomet made use of an Epilepticall distemper in which to
arrogate to himself divine authority, so did these of an over self-conceit and
pride of soul, to be the only illuminates of their time. Lib. 1. c. 14. Socrat.
Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 22. (...). Theod. l. c. 14
Nay when Arius was called to account for his errors, he averred, he had
rejected them, and denied those to be his belief or doctrine, swearing that he
believed as did the Orthodox in the Nicene Counsel; yet for all this, holy
Macarius made it his prayer to God, to take Arius out of the Church, least
errors and heresies spawned too much for truth to overcome or outlustre them.
Eusebius. in vita ejus, c. 63. Socrat. l. 1. c. 5. Sozom. l. 1. c. 19.
And good man it fell out as he feared* for though the good Emperor took away
from them their meeting places, (...), loco precitoto.
and commanded their return to the Church, though they were condemned and
banished by the Emperor and Counsel of Nice, and their books commanded to be
burned, that there might be no record kept, Th^^d. l. 2. c. 31. p. 88. To. 2.
l. 2. c. 15. and c. 30.
neither of Arius nor his corrupt doctrine; yet after the death of Constantine,
they rallyed, and made a most dangerous charge on the Church, obtained (by
fraud) Bishoprics in the most eminent Cities, (...), Theod. l. 4. c. 19. and
l. 2. c. 8.
gather Counsels by power, abrogate and constitute what Laws they pleased,
though contrary to the Laws of God, and the Nicene Council; deprive the good
Bishops and banish them; Falsiy accuse blessed Athanasius, and in short
prosecute generally the Orthodox, by banishments, whippings, and exhaeredations
more like Barbarians then Christians.

The world then may view the tricks of these degenerous Church-wolves, who are
all for ruin and blood, whose moderation is utmost mischief, and whose mercy is
cruelty: such an one was the varlet Hacket, Brow^s ann. Q. Eliz. p. 49.
who in a private injury was so merciless, that as he was embracing an
engenious Schoolmaster, who came to be reconciled to him, bit off his nose; and
being entreated to restore it, that it might be sown on the face while the
wound was green, he refused, and like a dog devoured it. What would this fellow
extraordinarily called from God (as he and his accomplices gave out) have done
had he had people and power, would he not have been a John of Leyden, a Ket, an
every thing of menace and ruin? There are no enemies so pestilent to the Church
as Apostates; which made Plinius secundus a witty man cull out such as had been
revolted from the faith twenty years, and before his face sacrificed to the
gods, and worshipped the Emperors Image, as informers against the Church, lib.
10. ep. 79. I am not for fire and sword, See Tertull. Apolog. advers. Gent.
Verberari Christianorum proprium est, flagellare Christianos, Pilati and
Caiphae est officium, Athanasius.
yet am I of the mind of Cardinal Richlieu, whose Note is notable; Tolerata a
Regibus Religio, legitimum Regem vix tolerabat. I believe God is not ever in
the thunder and lightning of severity; In Testam. Politico.
but I know he is second to a thorow-paced and rightly religious courage for
him. It was no argument of Henry King of Navarr's zeal, who being a Protestant,
and pressed by Beza to appear for those of the Religion, made answer, That he
was their friend, but he resolved to put to sea no further then he could return
again if a storm arose. Religion ever has a still fire to try and refine,
though not ever a piercing one to melt and dissolve. The least holy Magistrates
can do, is to disown error, and to keep it under, that it say not as did the
bramble in Jothams Parable, Cur ergo non cogeret Ecclesia perditos silios ut
redirent, si porditi filij coegerunt alios ut perirent. Ep. 50 ad Bonif. Commit.
I will be King. Holy St Augustine cannot hold, but he professes, He knows no
reason but the Church may compel prodigals to return, as well as those
miscreants compel others to accompany them in their mischief: and a little
after he gives this caution, Sic enim error corrigendus est ovis, ut non in eo
corrumpatur signaculum redemptoris, that is, so the error of the sheep is to be
corrected, that the mark of the owner may not be defaced: It Is good to be
scrupulous in punishments, and I should ever desire to err of the right hand,
that is, by moderation. I like not passionate revenges acted upon pretensions
of zeal for God. Nor ought life and death to hang upon the thin twine of
mistakes, In Anglorum controversia moderationem tenui, cujus me non poenitet.
Calv. in Epist.
where first comes to hand goes to p^t; He that passes sentence of reprobation
on any man upon a bare difference in opinion, is as rash a Christian, or rather
as unchristian, as he was a rude rash Knight, Hollingsh. p. 1007.
Provost-Marshall to Ed. 6. his Forces in the West; who hearing a Miller had
been very active in the Western Rebellion, came to his mill, and called for the
Miller who then was abroad; his man came and made answer; Quoth the Marshall,
Are you the Miller of this Mill? yes quoth he* How long have you lived here?
About three years: Come along then sir, quoth he, to yonder tree, you shall
be hanged as a notable Traitor; But the fellow cried (Sir) I am not the Miller
but his servant; the Marshall hanged him for his falseness notwithstanding: and
when it was told him by some, that he was not the man aimed at, but his
servant; he put them off with this jest; Can he show himself a better servant,
then in being hanged for his Master? Had the braving Knight had sentence from
the Divine Law, he that thus causelessly shed man's blood, should have had the
Law of retaliation. What Powers and Judicial Magistrates may do, is too high
for me to determine; but my conscience according to Gods Canon, must be the
rule of my particular.

I do not find craft and cruelty in the catalogue of Virtues; God sealed in
Rev. 7. of all Tribes but only of Dan, now ^ Dans character ( Genesis 49.) is to
be a Serpent by the high way, an Adder by the path, that biteth the horse heel,
so that his rider shall fall backward. St Jerome blames Theophilus for too much
easiness, Super ^efaria haeresi quod multam patientiam geris, and put as
Ecclesiae visceribus incubantes tua posse corrigi lenitate, multis sanct is
displicet, ne dum paucorum paenitentiam praestolaris, nutrias audaciam
perditorum and factio rebustior fiat. Ep. 68.
and lays the increase and expatiation of error to his lenity; adding, That
such persons are never afraid to offend, where it is but ask and have pardon;
and good men are much discouraged, when patience gives aid to the factions of
error, and by not disturbing, encourages them.

I know it is hard to please parties, and almost impossible to be a good
Christian in difficult times; I do as little believe God to be in the flaming
bush of fierce and disorderly zeal, as in the soft prefaces of flattery. That
German Prince, who in the quarrels about Religion in Germany, was tormented so
much with the importunities of Calvinists and Lutherans, each desirous to gain
him, that he professed, Quid faciam nescio quo me vertam non invenio, tells me
the ridg they go upon, who are in high esteem, in ticklish times; the Esaus and
Jacobs in Nations wombs, put the Rebeckahs of integrity to grievous straits,
Genesis 25.
and hard throbbs: Mat. 5. 29.
Christ^ commands to put out the right eye, and cut off the right hand that
offends us, and we would fain please our selves in moderation; (...) would have
the younger blessed, and we would fain bless the elder: Holy Abraham makes as
bold with God as he may in the case of Sodom, and I cannot blame him for his
prayer for Ismaell, Genesis 17. 18.
that he might live in his sight: Psa. 74. 7.
they are not sons of Zyon, Mic. 2. 2.
that cry Down, down with enemies, even to the ground; that make men offenders
for words, that spoil a man and his her^tage, and can never forget and forgive
an injury.

It shall be my everlasting practice, Solos credit habendos --
to be tooth and nail for Candor; where I my self am concerned, Quisque Deos
quos ipse colit. Juven. Sat. 15. Sic ^igile^ tolera^tia ut non dormiat
disciplina. Aug. l. 17 de verb. Apost.
no malice I hope can provoke me to revenge, orobdure me against preterition of
enmities: but where injuries veirg upon Christ, where they encroach upon his
Seigniory in my soul, i will not displease my Lord by concealing what is an injury
to him; error is a purpresture, which the Tenants of the Lord of glory ought to
present as a grievance; I must not cut large thongs out of Christ's leather; the
Churches and every Christians power, is by and under, not besides or above
Christ's,

I find amongst the Ancients two chief practices for est^^ishment of truth and
conviction of error: One was to preach and write truth, taking all
opportunities to call their auditors and disciples together, and when their own
parts were ripest, and their hearers in fittest temper to be wrought upon, then
they catechized them, they explicated Scripture to them. In many of the Fathers
we find Homilies for every day almost, especially at some times of the year,
as also upon Feasts and great solemnities. And as their preachments were
frequent; so were their lives continued Sermons; those Pilgrims and strangers
here l'ved as having their conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. 1 Cor. 9. ult.
as bringing themselves under subjection, as dis^ntangled by the world; Nudas
latrones non time^; Quia mori paratus sum ideo latrones non tim^o. Hi^ar.
Eremita apud Sanctum Hier. in vita ejus.
I ever think moderate and unengaged men competentest Judges; Anchorites are
likest to give the truest account of divine contemplation; they who care not to
die, are most valiant for the truth, and value not those thieves of fear and
flattery, that misguide the most, to their own infamy and other men's seduction.
I read in St Jerome, of Anthony, Hilarion, Paul and Malchus, who left the world
out of zeal to serve Christ in a severity of life: and in the Church story,
there is frequent mention of Ignatius, Polycarpus, Athanasius and others, whose
whole lives were spent in circuit of doing good, instructing the ignorant,
convincing the obstinate, confirming the wavering, comforting the dejected,
reclaiming the exorbitant, and restoring the lapsed Christians. Not soliciting
their own gain, not laboring their own preferments, not jubilating their own
praises, not seen in Princes courts; Monachus in oppido ^ was as strange as
piseis in arid^.
not the Parasites of their Tables, not partakers of their pleasures, not busy
at public conventions of State, and seducing this and that man's soul, by the
tickle of his ear: No, this is the traffic and guise of pieties Apollyons, of
Court Sollicitors, Jesuited spirits, such as Philip the second of Spain, called
Clericos negotiatores, such as Marcus Antonius Columna Viceroy of Naples,
described to have la mente al cielo, le mani al mundo; l'anima al Diavolo, not
of Churchmen, men sacrated to God: The old Fathers were in fastings often, in
prayings often. much upon the perch of holy meditation; these Elijahs had left
the mantle of earthly care, when they passed to Heaven in the whirl of a holy
rapture: O hearts set on fire by divine charity! O hands elevated in zealous
oratory! O eyes fixed on Heaven in devout confidence! O souls in your Saviors
bosom while in your own breasts! What seek ye? for whom are ye pleaders? If ye
ask grace, ye have it; 'twas that which moved you to ask it: If ye seek a
Kingdom, it is yours, you have the prelibation in assurance, and ete long you
shall have the possession; are ye not contented to be happy your selves, but
would ye have others also joint partakers with you in your Crown; O inculpable
ambition! O immitable love! O grace like the giver of it, free and
indeterminable.

But if these Church-Champions saw error come in like a mighty flood, daring
with Goliath any to encounter it, then they took up the Sword of the Spirit, and
bestir'd themselves with all their might. St Jerome mentions not only Athanasius
encountering Arius, Apolog. 3. adv. Ruffin. p. 798. To. 1. Edi. Par.
and after him Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, but Origin taking Celsus to task,
and Methodius, Porphyrius: so St Augustine the Pelagians and Manichees, St
Cyprian the Jews and Novatians. And if Powers menaced rhem as the Proconsul did
St Cyprian, Faciam ut in sanguine tuo caeteri discant disciplinam, respondisse
dicitur Sanctus Cyprianus fiat voluntas Domini. Panam de adversis mundi ille
sentit cui and laetitia and gloria omnis in mundo est, ille moeret and deflet,
si male sibi sit in seculo, cui been non potest esse post seculum. Cyp. contra
Demet. Trast. 1
that he will write the Christians rules of obedience in his blood, all they
make of it, is, the will of God be done: they had no cursings and anathema's,
no bloody execrations, or unchristian imprecations on Governors, but holy
submissions to that Power, before which they had the honor to make their
confessions; Christ bore a highher price in ancient times, then a little pelth,
or a breath of favor, or a small compass of land amounted to: St Jerome tells
of famous Apollonius a Roman Senator, in the time of the Emperor Commodus,
who being by his servant discovered to be a Christian, and asked by the Senate
whether he were so, in all have replied, Yea, producing a large Confession of
his Faith, Veteri apud eos obtinente lege, absque negatione non dimitti
Christianos, qui semel ad eorum judi^i^ protracti essent. Sanct. Hieron. de
Script Eccles. Viget apud nos spei robur, and firmitas fidei. and inter ipsas
seculi labentis rui^as, erecta men's, and immobilis virtus, and nunquam nisi
laeta patientia, and de Deo suo semper anima secura.
which before them all he read; and by their decree was put to death, according
to an old custom among them, That no Christian convented before them, ever came
off with his life, without denial of his faith.

O glorious conquest of faith over frailty, when never men with more animosity
contested for temporal Crowns, then these for Martyrdom; never pusillanimy
more willing to save life, then these Martyrs daring to lose it for Christ's
sake! O stupendous masteries of nature, when destroying flames were to
Christians, as Jubilees to bondmen, that day of death, beyond this of life?
Lord what fair copies have our foul lives and faint deaths! How far short
ought we to come of Martyrs Crowns? S. Cyp. Tract. 1 contra Demet.
who have not in our selves the courage to dare, nor deserve to have from God
the honor to die for his cause.

O Antiquity, our shame, our accuser, how art thou acclamated by the Mercuries
and Orators of Ages, for thy Piety, Charity, Zeal, Order, there is no blemish
in thee, thou art all lovely compared to us; who envy thy praise, but follow
not the pattern. Alias cum Jove dextras j^ngere. Sueton. in vita ejus. p. 16.


Let then the world hang out what Trophies it will; let the Grandees and
excellentissimo's of it dream with Julius Coesar, Fundendo sanguinem and
patiendo magis quam faciendo contumelias Christi sundata est Ecclesia
p^rsecutionibus crevit Martyrijs coronata est. Ep 62. ad Theo. Quamvis nimius
and copiosus noster sit numerus. Ter. Ap. Cypr. contra Demetriad. See History
of those of Meridol and Cabriers Acts and Mon. In Apol. c. 30. Precantes sumus
pro Imperatoribus, vitam prolixam, Imperium securum, domum tutam exercitus
fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum probum orbem quictam.
that they are joining hands with Jupiter, and making a League offensive and
defensive between their two great Monarchies of Heaven and earth, the Church
will glory in nothing but the Cross of Christ, and in her Cross for his sake;
her peace is founded upon the blood of her Savior, and her increase owns much
the blood of Martyrs, as St Jerome elegantly. Religion for above a thousand
years together was (next to Gods mercy) supported by prayers and tears, It
never leaned on these worldly props of power, 'Twas never a bond of iniquity or
a holy League of disloyalty, Holy men never attempted to resist authority,
though they had number to make good their opposition; Their faith in God put
them upon prayer for their Princes, though Persecutors. We pray (says
Tertullian) for Emperors, that they may have long life, peaceable Raigns,
orderly Courts, Valiant Armies, Faithful Councels, Discreet, Subjects, and all
the world in amity with them: yea, so true were Christians to heathen
Governors, that they served them faithfully both in Armies and Councels;
Eusebius tells us of Marinus a Christian in great command in the Roman Army, and
of Astyrius a Christian, who was a Roman Senator, Lib. 7. cap. 14.
so much meditated they on that Scripture, There is no power but of God, and he
that resists the power resists the Ordinance of God, and he that resists shall
receive to himself damnation.

This O Princes and Rulers was the honor of ancient Christianity, that it
subjects to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, that is, If it cannot
lift up the hand to assert, it will lay down the neck to suffer; If it say not
Go up and prosper (as it cannot to a bad cause, because it dare not disobey God
in calling evil good,) yet it will pray that God would overrule men's designs
and out of them model his own glory, Vt aut igne humano vindicetur divina
secta, aut doleat pati in quo probatur. In Apolog.
For as Tertul. said well long ago, God forbid, those should contrive their
advancement by force whose glory it ought to be to suffer, and thence to have
the testimony of their fidelity; For Christians ought not to obey powers as
those Heretics called Sataniani did the devil, Ne noceant, but out of
conscience, because Power is of God, and Conscience is Gods Deputy to keep man
from misrule.

Thus much briefly for the piety of elder times in order to God, Now somewhat
of their Charity in order to themselves and others.

First, Elder Christians abounded in love one to another, Our Lord gave the
rule, Joh. 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples if ye
love one another; Time was when it passed Proverbially, Ecce quam diligunt
Christiani; When St Cyprian was led to Martyrdom, Moriamur sim^l cum Sancto
Episcopo. In vit. Cypr.
the whole people ran with him crying, Let us die together with the holy
Bishop; And when Christians were sick, Cen. 3. l. 6. p. 97.
though of diseases infectious, yet Christians would go to them and tend them,
though they died with them: A Christian must not be waspish, the nettle of
humor, that harms every one that touches it is a weed in Christ's garden, but
all Love, even to Enemies for his sake, who loved us when Enemies; so much and
no more know and believe we of God as we love him for his own, and our
Neighbor for his sake; Let men talk as they will, yet if they have a spirit of
opposition and cannot walk peaceably with their brother, yea, and in a great
measure with those without, I shall not think their condition ever the better:
If their principle be to be singular and unsociable, Vae soli, for as the
Father has it, Cum Deo manner non possunt qui esse in Ecclesia Dei unanimes
noluerunt, Tra. 3. de simp Praelatorum.
ardeant licet flammis, and ignibus traditi vel objecti bestiis, animas suas
ponunt, non erat illa fidei corona, sed poena perfidiae, nec religiosae
virtutis exitus gloriosus, sed desperationis interitus, Occidi talis potest,
coronari non potest.

There is nothing more reproachful to man then disunion; we are all Natures
progeny, and we should not strive to the distemper of the womb that nourishes
us to production; the sociable soul that God has infused into us, seems our
Director, that we should agree to serve our Creator, yea and one another in all
reasonable Offices of Civility; We see the Harmonij in nature, and that the
drift of every thing is to accomodate the end of God, in the inferiority and
superiority of things, there is no mutinies amongst the Creatures sensitive and
vegetative, The Supreme Lawgiver has implanted his Sovereign will on the
instinct of every creature, and it acts as and no otherwise then according to
that limitation and designment; Only Rational being are frayers and breakers
of the Peace: 'Twas an ill spirit in a Brother to imbrew (even in the beginning
of time and penury of men) his hands in his Brothers blood, yet Cain did this,
but he had a Mark of Vengeance set upon him for it: And 'twas fit he should be
branded for a Butcher who had no provocation but piety, no person but a brother
to act his murtherous villainy upon: How much more divine was the soul of
Abraham who would have no contention with Lot, for, quoth he, we are Brethren;
who put himself upon a holy colluctation with God for sinful Sodom, and would
not be denied till Mercy had put importunity to blush. St Bernard Ep. 6. writes
to Bruno to deal with certain Monks who had deserted their order, and he
prescribes the Method, Flectere oportet precibus, ratione convincere, and
columbinam eorum simplicitatem prudentia instruere serpentina, ne putent
obedientiam inobedienti adhaerere, etc. Yet alas! we are at but a word and a
blow, we make men offenders for words, for a trifle, a misplaced phrase, a
mistaken sense, a petulant carriage, cursing one another as Jews and Samaritans
did, Maledic Domine Nazaraeis etc. and e contra.
Morning and Evening in their Orisons. The judicious St Edw. Sandys notes, That
do the Psaltsgrave and Lantgrave whatever they could by inhibiting the
Lutherans to rail against the Calvinists, yet would they not be restrained but
professed openly, Surv. Western Religion. p. 172.
That they would sooner return to the Papacy then admit Sacramentary and
Predestinary Pestilence, meaning the Calvinist. So in the conference of
Mompelgart when Frederick Earl of Wertonburg exhorted nis Divines to
acknowledge Beza and his Company for Brethren, and to declare it by giving them
their hand, they refused it utterly, saying, they would pray to God to open
their eyes, and would do them any office of humanity and charity, Page 566, 567.
but they would not give them the right hand of Brotherhood, B. Salisbury's
Reply to Gods Love to mankind, p. 45. Sixtus Senensis Praef. in l. 5.
Biblioth. Sanct. p. 1. and 2.
because they were proved to be guilty Errorum teterrin^orum, that was the
doctrine of Election and Reprobation: A blemish which ancient Christianity knew
not, nay, which the Protestant Religion is now much reproached for, Ardebant
veteres tanto flucerae pietatis ardore, ut dum unum errorem omni virium conatu
destruere anuituntur, saepe in alterum oppositum errorem vel deciderint vel
quodammodo decidisse videantur.
I wish we were not so ambitious to be more wise and Learned in Arts of
reviling then our Forefathers were, and if there must be a trial of wits,
would to God the subject and matter of it may be somewhat else then the life
and honor of peace and Christian charity: For in most Church-contentions it
has fallen out, that one error opposed has brought up as great an one even
from the opposition: I know not what many think of contention and brawls, but
St Paul calls it a fruit of the flesh, and makes it exclusive of heaven, and St
John says, He that loves not his brother whom he has seen, cannot love God
whom he has not seen. In pure times Christians reckoned their love to Christ
by their love to his members, whom they relieved, (...). Socr. l. 7. c. 12.
as that excellent Bishop Chrysanthius did, out of his own estate, and by their
sound knowledge and skill in the things of God, accompanied with justice,
(...), ando. Eusebius. l. 1. c. 4.
modesty, patience under the hardest Trials, and advancing his glory, as they
had opportunity to do it, they evidenced their love to God, and to their
Brethren for his sake; This was the aemulation those holy men had to glorify
God by holy lives, that those that saw them might be ashamed of their
contradiction and persecution of them; Primitive Bishops were simple-hearted,
Eus. l. 6. c. 30. tells us, (...), etc.
not crafty and insighted in worldly policies, but abounding in the work of the
Lord, rich in faith and Scripture-knowledge, ready to do good, and to suffer
evil for so doing; Alas, Alas, it is not grace but perverse nature that byasses
men to varnish over their rotten posts with the gold and azure of the
Sanctuary; Holiness loves not the periodiques, how intentions and anon
remissions of Zeal; It loves not salutations of Markets, not the highest Seats
at Feasts, not the Title of Rabbi, not the shouts of popular madness: it is
delighted in converse with and likeness to God; It Is counting its glory from
its stripes above measure, its imprisonments, its labors, its watchings, its
fastings, and is cleared up to be what it is by its pureness, knowledge,
long-suffering, kindness, by the holy Ghost, and by love unfeigned, 2 Cor. 6.
5, 6. How do the Primitive times upbraid us, who yet boast that Christ is more
set up now then ever, Petron. Satyr. Admonebo populares meos, ut illos
populares caveant and fugiant qui (...) solent* and fimiarum more blandiuntur,
omnesque gestus effingunt, interim tamen v^lut flabella seditionis
circumcursant and ubique locorum populum concitant. Humfred. in Ep. Dedicat.
ante Puritano Jesuit.
while never any age gave greater Testimony to self-admiration then this does!
The Apostolic Counsel was, Let every one prefer another before himself, Now
Christians think of nothing but their own advantage; Nemo eorum coelum putat,
nemo jusjurandum servat, nemo Jovem pluris facit, sed omnes apertis oculos bona
sua computant. When Cardinal Caraffa a man of a strict life and humble diet,
comes to be Pope, then no diet would serve his turn but that befitted a Prince,
no ordinary solemnity at his Coronation, but an unusual pomp must be
expressed, then his way is in all actions, Hist. Council of Trent. p. ^91 Mat.
20. 26.
to keep his degree with magnificense, and to appear stately and sumptuou^,
then the humble Priests words are* That he was above all Princes, that he would
not have any Prince his Companion, but all Subjects under his feet, -- O
Prelate Oblivious of the Masters Mandate, It shall not be so amougst you; O
Mortal, prodigiously elated, and hellishly intumour'd by worldly ambition to a
contempt of those whom thou ought to honor? O Antichristian Monster, that
thus confrontest thy Lord, whose Vicar thou pretendest to be, but yet wilt be
loftier then was he, who took bread and fish not only before but also after his
resurrection, Joh. 21. 13, 14 and who washed his Disciples seet, when thou
countest Princes worthy only to be thy Footstool, whom God has elected to
power and place inferior only to himself! Nunquam ei in Pontificata ita been
fuisse annotari poterit, quin intra privatam vitam consistere, multo malle
videretur. Platina de Adriano 6^ p. 383. Sic de Pio secundo d. 329. Platina.
How unfit art thon to rule the Church of Christ who know not the mean of
Self-Government? How unlike is thy tongue to be infallible which has deceived
thee in this over-valuation of thy self! But thanks be to God though Paul the
4th be such a spirit, yet all Popes affected not that vanity: It Is said of
Adrian the 6th, That he was never so taken with the Popedom but he preferred a
private life above it. Platina p. 83.
Gregory the great would not be called Universal Bishop, Platina in vita ejus.
p. 243.
Cel^stine was loath to come from his Wilderness, and when he was forced to
Rome, was thought, for his humility, unfit to stay there, and therefore retired
again to his solitude; Marcellus the second would not change his Name l^st the
world should conclude honors had changed him; Hist. Council of Trent. p. 390
395.
Groperus Coloniensis refused the Cardinals Cap, and would not, from the favor
of Paul the 4th, receive either the Title or Ornaments: When I see men in holy
Orders greedy after prefermeuts, ravelling out their lives in progging after
great Friends and Fortunes, as if godliness were a Bustrophe, a course of
going forward and backward, to the right and left hand, for advantage sake: I
think of that Speech of the Lord Bardolf to Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury
made Chancellor to K. Holling. p. 159
John: Quid aliud cunctorum negotiantium vita nisi fraus and perjurium. Salv.
Sir, quoth he, If you would well consider the dignity and honor of your
calling, you would not yield to suffer this yoke of bondage to be laid on your
shoulders, and for my part it shall be ever my judgment to shun seekers of
preferment of men least worthy for, and least fitted to them: Fides integra non
manet, ubi magnitudo quaestuum spectatur. Tacitu^ Annal.
In the time of King Rufus there was an Abbots place void, and two Monks of the
Covent went to the Court, resolving to bid largely for it; Hollingsh. p. 18, 19.
The King perceiving their covetise, looked about his Privy-Chamber, and there
espied a private Monk that came to bear the other two Company, whom eyeing he
guessed a more sober and pious man; The King calling him asked him, What he
would give to be made Abbot of the Abbey: Nothing Sir, quoth he, for I entered
into this Profession of mere zeal, to the end that I might more quietly serve
God in purity and holiness of conversation; Say thou so, Replied the King,
Then thou art he that art worthy to govern the House: Honest men cannot with
Marcus Arethusius do the least evil to gain advantage, nay, to save life dare
not flatter as did Teridates, (...). Dion l. 63. p. 717.
when he came to Nero as to his God, and worshipped him as he did the Sun, for a
petty Crown under him; No, they are contented to be in their stations, and to
walk before God in the light of their own Candle, to keep within the
warrantable Circle of their Vocation, and if they see dangerous honors pursue
them, they fly it, and wish in David's words, Psa. 55. 6.
That they had the wings of a Dove that they might fly away and be at rest;
Thus did holy Moses disable himself being willing to be excused from rule,
Exodus 3. 11. God will send Moses, and Moses cries, Lord who am I that I should
go to Pharaoh, and bring forth the Children of Israel out of Egypt? God tells
him, He will be with him, It matters not much how weak the Instrument be which
God employs on his Embassies, since power goes along to perfect weakness;
Moses demurs yet, Nature will have a Miracle ere it resigns its doubtings; Whom
shall I say has sent me? What is thy Name? v. 14. God gives answer, that He by
whom Pharaoh is, and is King of Egypt sends thee, I AM THAT I AM sends thee: O
but my Lord, What if the Egyptians will not believe me upon my bare word? cap.
4. v. 1. God tells him he shall go provided, the rod in his hand shall become
miraculous, and his Call to that Office appear divine from the signs that God
gives of his extraordinary power, his Rod turns into a Serpent, and returns
into a Rod again, v. 3. His hand put into his bosom whole becomes leprous, and
put into his bosom again returns perfect and sound flesh, v. 6. and 7. And if
these two miraculous indigitations of Gods power prevail not, then a third is
appointed for Moses to convince them by; Take of the water of the River, and
pour it upon the dry Land, and it shall become blood upon the dry Land, v. 9,
One wonld think now Moses is at a Nonplus, Modesty ought not to diffide it
self where God by miracle affists, and by Election witnesses sufficiency, but
nothing will satisfy Moses but self-disablement, O Lord, cries he, I am not
eloquent, neither heretofore nor since thou have spoken to thy Servant, but I
am slow of speech and of a slow tongue, v. 10. And though God convince him,
that all utterance and enablement is from him, and promises him his might
shall accompany him, yet Moses not out of restive renitency but ingenious
humility, abaseth himself, O my Lord (says he) send I pray thee by the hand of
him thou will send, v. 13. It Is time for Moses to desist reasoning with
Majesty, when the anger of God began to be kindled against him, as it was, v.
14. So the Prophet Jeremy when God tells him he had appointed him a Prophet unto
the Nations, Jer. 1. 4. replies v. 6. Ah Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I
am a Child: as if God knew not what he did in choosing him his Messenger: but
God soon silenceth that modesty, ver. 8. Be not (says he) afraid of their
faces, for I am with thee: O the force of worth in an ingenious soul, which
inclines to depreciate rather then extol it self, Moses was therefore fit for
power before it sought him not he it, De honeribus profiteor, admisi dignitates
non ambivi, mereri eas volui prius quam assequi, nee tamen post meritum honores
admisissem, nisi ut honorarum Ludovicum. C. Richlieu in Testamento Christiano.
and Jeremy qualified to serve on Gods errand because he entered on it with
humility. And truly it has been noted that those who have been least desirous
and gaping after trusts, but rather avoided them as matters of trouble, have
proved best Executors and Feoffes of trust, and with clearest conscience
discharged them. When St Athanasius was to be made a Bishop, Sozomen tells us,
he hid himself; Lib. 2. c. 16.
And when Alexander the then dying Bishop of Alexandria called out for him, as
his Successor designed by God, Athanasius could not be found till by a special
Providence he was discovered: Socr. l. 7. c. 12.
so Chrysanthius the Novatian Bishop in Constantinople was taken from the
Court, where in his younger years he had been an Officer, and constrained to be
a Bishop, yea, and that in his old age, after he had been Lieutenant in Italy,
and Deputy in Britain for Theodosius the Emperor, and though he fled to avoid
the call of Sisinius who nominated him his Successor, yet the people never gave
over search of him till they compelled him to take his charge, and he well
deserved it, for he was a man famous above most both for prudenec and humility.

I know the bravest spirits have been engaged in affairs of Government, it is
fit stars of the first magnitude should enamell the firmament of rule, and
lead the lesser lights their march of service; and plain it is, that to be a
Moses to Israel, and a Joseph to Egypt, to have every sheaf bow to our sheaf,
carries much of cogency in it: most listen to so pleasing a temptation as
honor and profit, few with Joseph turn their ears from the sweet music of
advantage; this Helen inebriates great, wise, valiant men, with the wine of her
intoxication. But yet there have been those, who with the Olive, Fig Tree and
Vine, Judge. 9.
valued their contented meanness above greatness, to which is ever entailed
envy and trouble: and therefore a wise man concludes, Bono viro ad conscientiam
satis est non affectasse publicam curam. Sym. l. 10. c. 15.


It is (I confess) somewhat questionable, how men extraordinarily qualified,
and duly called to public trusts, can in duty to God and men quit them to
avoid their own trouble, since all men owe themselves to providence, and should
not, aut Deo, aut Patriae, aut Patri patriae deesse; but rather with Codrus,
offer themselves the price of their freedom. But it is without all doubt, that
he who does take rule, though he may be good to others, will hardly bring good
to himself, unless he be an Audax, in his element, when out-facing troubles:
Crowns and Robes of State have their burdens and terrors, Invident honori
invidcant and oneri. Apud. Salust.
and those who accept them are ill appaid, if they have not subsistence and
reverence by them. 'Twas a wise speech of Marius, to those that envy great men
their honor; Let them envy them their burdens. Ars prima regni posse te
invidiam pati. Seneca Her. Fur.
Men in power and place must expect people murmuring against and often
complotting the subversion of them; and they who have principles of rule in
their minds, are disturbed by men's envy, no more then mountains reel at the
casting of Moles, or Rocks melt away by the dashing of waves against them. And
if God the most sovereign and diffusive good, Guil. Parisions.
be invaded by the deicidiall sins of men, and threatened as much of
destructive insolence, as mortal worms can marshall out against him; men, like
themselves, how worthy, how Noble soever, must not go scotfree.

The consideration of which, puts those that accept rule, upon courses of
self-preservation, and therein of general peace, little perhaps to the genius
of their minds, were they in a private sphere, and makes them accounted by
some rather Principes necessarii quam boui; Trebell. Pollio c. 7. p. 257. Edit.
Silburg.
and dreaded as was Marius, of whom Tully said, Consulem habuimus tam severum,
tamque censorium, ut in ejus Magistratu, nemo pranderit, nemo coenaverit, nemo
dormierit. Since then the end of every Government is Peace and Order, Piety and
Property, the promoters of these are to be honored, and the impugners of them
severely dealt with, not only in the State but in the Church; For heresy,
error and scism, are the forlorn hope to civil broyls and disturbances.

And though God in mercy bring the grapes of Piety from the thorns of
presumption, and make the figgs of courage sprout out of the thistles of
contradiction, yet the natural child of Church busle, is irreligion and
barbarism, or at best but superstition; so true is that of St Augustiue, Epist.
ad Vinc.
Nunquam. faelix nunquam ferax Dei Ecclesia fuit, vel in diluvio Noachi, vel in
dispersione Abrahamitarum, vel in Egyptiaco exilio, vel in persequtione
Jezabelis, vel sub jugo Hieroboamitico, vel sub tyrannide Manasses, in sola
Davidica familia remansit Ecclesia Christi. So that Father.

Were this believed, we should have fewer differences in the Church then we
have, less smiting of the tongue and pen, then is in use (most unhappily)
amongst us. As children learn gaming by pinns and farthings, and after by
habituating themselves to play, stake pounds and hundreds, Manors and lands;
so men begin to carp at their brethren who vary but in expressions, and at last
differ toto coelo from them, and (as much as in them lies) rend them from the
body of Christ: If there be but the least dissent, presently he is to them as a
heaand a publican.

Alas, Neminem judicames, aut a jure communionis aliquem, Si diversum senserit,
amoventes. Conc. Carthag. de Bapt. Haeret.
the Ancients were more zealous but less touchy then we; they made men not
offenders for thoughts, and opinions in lesser matters; We, we are the
generation of those Enthusiasts that claim kin with the knowledge of the
Almighty, who would fain be thought to set an end to darkness, and to search
out all perfection; the hearts of men pass us not, but we dive into them; Such
a man is a Malignant in his heart, secretly disaffected to us, has a Pope in
his belly: these uncharitable pryings into men, have been and yet are frequent
amongst us; from these brambles, fire has come out and devoured the Cedars of
Lebanon, as the phrase ls, Judge. 19. 15. And to what end (I pray) this
curiosity? not to amend them, if evil, by good counsel, earnest prayer, civil
carriage toward them, but to take the advantage to triumph over, and to
endeavor the ruin of them: The Saints of God should be Doves, (that creature
the Father says, Job 28.
is harmless, neither has gall, nor does injury with its bill,) Simplex
animal, solle caret, rostro non laedit. S. Bern. Sermon. Purific. Isa. 10. 5.
Psa. 17. 13. M. Marshall in his Sermon Curse ye Meroz.
and not as was the Assyrian, rodds of Gods wrath; or as those in the Psalm,
Swords in Gods right hand; or if such, yet very warily and upon sound warrant
such; so says a man of breadth amongst us; Gods people must be wary whom they
curse, and take heed lest trifles cause their curse, and not impenitent and
implacable enmity against Christ: because no man knows the mind of God, every
one must use holy moderation in censure; but if some had not contradicted in
their practice such good doctrine, venting not hilastique but sarcastique
Divinity from their pulpits, we had not seen such confusion in the Church, nor
heard such different notes amongst Churchmen, as we have. What had been amiss
had wisely been amended, and those in the Ministry who had been insufficient or
immoral, admonished or rejected with some reasonable allowance to their
families; It Is hard measure, that the utmost farthing of a families felicity,
should be paid for the spot of the male of the flock. In Primitive times, all
those who professed Christianity held communion together as one Church,
notwithstanding difference of judgment in lesser things, and much corruption in
conversation. So say the the Learned Ministers of London, in their Vindication
of Presbyteriall Government, p. 139. What Fronton a Heathen said to Nerva, that
say I in the case of Liberty, It Is an ill Government which gives no Liberty,
(...). Dion l. 68. p. 769. Orat. 14.
but much worse which gives all liberty; Man must not bind or loose where God
has not: 'Twas holy Nazienzens observation long ago, That Antichrist would
gather strength by the dissentions of Christians, and it is a thing I have
(ever since these differences in our Church) feared that the violence of
parties would much endanger the surprise of our Religion, Because of the
mountain of Zyon which is desolate, the Foxes walk upon it, Exacerbatis utrique
animis 3^ nihil lene ac moderatum qu erebatur, and non minor insolentia
reformatorum quam Pontificiorum severitas and in utrisque petulantia summa
visebatur, Dinothus. de bello Belgico. l. 1. c. 46
Lam. 5. 18.

In the Netherlands difference, all things accounted more to parties then
peace; Hist. Council. Trent. p. 413. Dinothus lib. 1. p. 47.
the Papists cruelty and the Reformists violence, ended in a petulancy
destructive to the Church, for all that was the Churches, was swallowed up
between them; Granuell Bishop of Arras and the Cardinal of Lorrain, promoted
persecution of the Reformists, pretending the cause to be, zeal for God, and
advancement of his Religion, but the truth was, they aimed to be enriched by
the spoil of those that were condemned of heresy. On the other part, those of
the Religion, begin their outrages with Churches, break down the utensils of
service in them, carry away with them what was in them moveable, frighten the
religious men from their houses and Cloisters; leave no Church in Cities fit
for devotion, rifle Libraries and burn Books. I will not say as St Bernard of
old, and Luther from him, De Conpier. ad Eugen. l. 4.
Now Domini sed daemonis haec pascua, hi pastores. But this I will pray as good
Jacob did, Into such secrets let not my soul enter, mine honor be not thou
joined to such assemblies; for they who dare make the things of God their prey,
will make nothing of devouring the lives, liberties and formtunes of their
brethren.

Oh the divisions of Levi amongst us, which have not only caused great thoughts
of heart, but also broken out into big words; like the horses in St John's
vision, Rev. 9. Out of whose mouths have come forth, fire, and smoke, and
brimston, and from whose pens, bitter lines both of defiante, and unkind
crimination each of other. He that reads but the books of their furious
encounters, shall satisfy himself, that Ephraein has been against Manasses,
and Manasses against Ephraim; and I pray God that of Salvian be not applicable
to us all, Lib 7. de Gubern. Dei.
Quid prodesse nobis prarogativa illa religiosi nominis potest, quod nos
Catholicos dicimus, quod fideles esse jactamus, Quod Gothos and Vandalos
haeretici nominis exprebatione despicimus, cum ipsi haeretica pravitate
vivamus? I wish that they who talk so much of heresy, making every dissent an
error, would consider that mortals intellects differ as do their faces, Vt
multa facies sic corda diversa. St Hyeron.
and that the beauty of God is more or less in every creature and its capacity,
that in matters of this moment it is not safe to be ^ash, but to consider the
spirits, whether they be of God or no, and them to try by that trial which the
Law appoints trial of heresy, the Scriptures and the four first general
Counsels accordant with Scripture. For my part I will not with Philastrius,
Multa a Philastrio inter hareses numerari quae vere hareses non sunt.
Bellarmin. de Script. Eccles. ad ann. 380. Bochartus Geogr. Sacra. p. 71.
pronounce any man heretical for varying from me in opinion no more then any
man dumb whose language I hear not, nor when I hear understand; but rather
pray, that God by his grace will so direct me, that I practice what I know, and
endeavor to know what may be useful to my self and others: did this spirit
possess many, they would have more comfort from the small Violits of sincerity,
then the great garnishes of religions Tulips, which offer much content to the
sense, but less answer the (...) noble part of a Christian: Then would our
light rise out of obscurity, Isa 5. 8. 10.
and our darkness break forth into the brightness of noon day; then would one
thought of Charity chase a thousand, and a thousand put ten thousand
misprisions to flight; then would our spiritual Oxen be strong to Iahour, then
would the Church be at unity within it self; no axe or hammer of passion be
heard in her, but the oil of compassion distill from her, to heal the wounds
and close the breaches of her children. But O Lord who shall live when thou
do this? By whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? Tell us, we beseech
thee, how the bones which thou have broken shall rejoice, that we may pray for
the Churches Jubilee, and fast to entertain so blessed a feast as would be that
Epiphane; p. 534 edit. Sylburg.
for as Pomponius Laetus well writes, Christianos omnes sub un^ signo crucis
militare, nostram Religionem unicam esse Rempublicam, unicam ipsius Dei urbem
cujus nos cives sumus, and bellum inter nos esse non posse, nisi civil

But alas, the Church Christian has long been in her wasting fits, the
watchmen have smitten her; Eccl. 5. 7.
Novelties, words and projects have committed* wast, and we may well bring a
Devastavit against them. Ep. ad Rustic.
against them. St Jerome of old complained, Nunc sub religionis titulo
exercentur injusta compendia, and honor nominis Christiani fraudem, magis facit
quam patitur, intus Nero, foris Cato, totus ambiguus; The wits of Rome were
smart, when they added, to the (...) of Zeno, Hist. Counsel. Trent. p. 289.
the (...) of Heraclius, the (...) of Constance; the Interim of Charles the
fifth, as of no better import to the Church then those Imperial Constitutious:
And with leave of God and wise men, I think, I may add Reformation, as
sometimes it has been managed, for no less a damager to the State
Ecclesiasiasticall, then any open violence whatsoever. Let the times of H. 8.
be considered, What vast Possessions lost the Church, by his opposition to the
Pope, and the effects of it? And in Ed. 6th his Reign, more went from the
Church; yea there is who tells us, That one of the Visitirs of Oxford in Ed.
Preface to St Tho. Cheeks true subject to the rebel.
6. time, did so clearly purge the University Library of all Monuments of
superstition, that he left not one book init of all those goodly Manuscripts,
with which by the manificence of several Benefactors, that place was amply
furnished. So true is that of Trully, No injustice so gross, Nulla est
capitalior insustitia quam eorum qui tum cum maxim fallunt, id agunt, ut viri
boni esse videuntur. 4. Catilin. Holing shed. p. 42.
as that which they do who will be accounted good, that they may by that means
be more evil.

While I forget not Paulus Cremensis a Legate sent hither from Pope Honorius the
second, to redress the vices of the Clergy, and chiefly their lechery, whenas
he himself next day after he had bitterly inveighed against them, was found
abed with a common strumpet, I shall fear there may b^ errors in the greatest
pretenders, and look upon remedies as possible to exceed diseases in their ill
consequence. For in public outrages, Counsel Trent. p. 417.
not only Constantinus Pontius Confessor to Charles the fifth; in his retired
life a brave and holy man, is commanded to prison immediately upon his Lords
death, and that upon suspicion of heresy, but when dead, his statue is
demolished and disfigured by K. Philip of Spains Mandate. Rutilius the Roman.
Consul, destroys the Temple of Lucina, because his daughter while she was there
worshipping brings forth a dead child; Numa must be without a monument of his
piety, and Lucina without a Temple for her worship; but is was noted an ill
time in Rome, when status cujusque Dei in Senatus aestimatione pendebat.

All men naturally love themselves, and few scruple any thing that answers
their ends; Satan is an industrious droll, cogging us into designs of evil,
upon pretenses fair but not altogether warrantable. St Bern. (...) sermon. Sermon.
6.
Consuetudinis est saecularium hominum, ut cum honorem adipisci desiderant,
caeteros fibi prius per amorem acquirunt, cum vero adepti fuerint, elati
potestate eos ipsos, per timorem sibi postmodum, subjiciunt quibus prius
privati, non terrorem sed amorem exhibuerant. Theodor. lector. Collect. Eccles.
Hist. l. r.
If Timotheus Aelurus have desire to be Bishop of Alexandria, and Proterius
stood in his way, he will so order the matter, that before the Sea be void, the
Monks shall each of them be visited in the night, by one in grave habit and of
angelique speech, calling them by their respective Names, and in the Name and
by the Spirit of God (as is pretended) admonishing them to decline adhaesion to
Proterius, and to join themselves to Timotheus. Henry the eight cleared the
Point, That power would command any thing. Even Papists, such were the
Parliament, for their ease to avoid Citations and charges from Rome, divest the
Pope of his headship to place it on their Prince. Revenge is a great spur to
bad actions, as well as is ambition. There is a notable vilany fathered on the
Franciscans at Orleance, discovered in Anno 1534. after this manner: Lavater de
Spectris. c. 8. p. 35.
The chief Judge of Orleance his wife dying, requested of her husband, that she
might be buried in the Church belonging to the Franciscans; this was done, and
the Franciscans presented by the Praetor the deceaseds husband with six Pistols
(a bribe far beneath their avarice) but they resolved to have a better
gratification from a fall of wood of the Praetors, out of which they desired
some trees, which he denied them; that defeat so inflamed the Franciscans, that
they plotted to bruit it abroad, that his wife was damned for ever: To carry on
this villainy undiscerned, they suborn a young man to act his part so
notoriously, that by hideous noyses, at time of public devotions, he should
cause disturbance, and be prologue to the Tragedy; a Doctor of that order and
an exorcist, whose plot this was, (for he daily used these cheats) so designed
the scene, that no answer was to be made by the young man (if any question were
asked of him) but only by signs, which the exorcist only understood having
preappointed them; and so could report to the auditory: when the young man had
amused the people with dismal and ununderstood notes, the exorcist boldly
asked him, Whether he were a spirit or not? if a spirit, whose spirit? relating
the Names of all such as had been buried there: And when he named the Praetors
wife, the young man gave sign that he was the spirit of that Lady: Sleidau. l.
9.
Then the exorcist asked, if she were damned or no, and for what offense?
Whether for covetousness, or lust, or pride, or for want of practical charity,
or for the upstart heresy of Lutheranism? and what he meant by those clamours
and unquietnesses? whether the body there buried should be dug up and
carried elsewhere or not? To all which he by signs answered affirmatively,
which they prayed the Congregation there present to take knowledge of: yet upon
the Praetors complaint to the French King and Parliament of Paris, and
Commission issued forth to report the truth hereof, the wickedness of this
contrivance came to light, and the parties actors in it were severely sentenced
according to their deserts.

I find another story of the Dominicans as vild as this, Lib. de spectris. c.
7. p. 27.
acted at Bern in Switzerland: There being a great heat between them and the
Franciscans, about the Virgin Marys being conceived in Original sin; one
affirmiug, and the other denying it; the Dominicans, to determine the
controversy, purposed to evidence the truth of their opinion by Miracle: four
of the prime of their Order were privy to the contrivance, one of which was
Subprior, a Magician, who called up an evil spirit to assist them in the more
effectual conduct of this undertaking: The spirit appeared to them in the
shape of a Moor, and promised his assistance, provided they gave him an
Instrument signed with their own hands and Names written in their own bloods,
in testimony of their compact with him; which done, the evil spirit appeared an
assertor of the Dominicans Doctrine, threatening Purgatory to their opponents,
and overthrow to the City, unless they cast out the Franciscans thence; much
more of like trumpery there was discovered, to the shame of the Dominicans that
were privy to it: And therefore it is good to search the spirits, whether they
be of God or no. There is no action so vild but has a fair mask on it. See
Wilso^^ Hist. Great Brit. p. 108, 109, 110.
There was a famous cheat plotted by Romish Priests in Staffordshire, much of
kin to this, and discovered by the grave Bishop of Durham, and all to make way
for the Popish Doctrine of Miracles. It Is Satan's artifice to steal his surprise
in at some port of pleasure or profit; The Statues of Kings, the Miters of
Popes, and the Arms of States, sometimes hang out at common houses, and those
often of no good report; (...) I have seen the Holy Lamb, sign to a place of
tippling. Good men are often deluded by their own presumption, and lead into a
fairer belief of themselves then they deserve: We are all in love with our own
Apes, and we often hug them, till we smother reason the most beauteous child of
nature; yea there are no greater follies acted by any, then those that do vow
and declare most against them. Peter was a bold assertor of his fidelity;
Though all forsake thee, yet will not I, I Will die with thee, Lord Jesus; Matthew.
26. 35. yet he denied and forswore him for fear. In the troubles of the
Netherlands, the confederates protested before God and the world, Dinothus. l.
1. p. 14.
Nihil omnino velle, hoc foedere nostro moliri quod vel ad contemptum Dei, vel
ad diminutionem authoritatis and dignita it is Regiae statuumve suorum tendere
posfit: but it fell out otherwise, for when they had power, reason of State,
and necessity of self-preservation, made them do what they (as they published)
at first did not intend.

As in growth of bodies there are degrees, so in mischiefs there are the tender
plants of blushing, before the full years of sturdiness, uemo repent fit
turpissimus: 'Twas a good prayer of David, Psalm. 19. 13.
Who knows how often he offends, keep me from presumptuous sins: Man is never
nearer miscarriage then when he least fears it, nor is the heart ever more
treacherous, then when it sollicits with greatest earnestness, to lend an ear
to the delusion of a sycophant, or hearken to the propensions of our nature to
accommodate our ends. What plots did Gardener and the Lords of H. 8. Council
lay for Cranmer? Wricthsly and others for Q. Katherine Parr? yea and Tottis a
Priest, to prove that the Pater noster might be said to Saints, made a
blasphemous exposition thereof, contrary to the sense of Christ Jesus.
Katherine Mary Duchess of Mompensier, John Serres in Ann. 1589.
sister of the deceased Duke of Guise, was so horribly transported with malice
against the Protestant party, and had so great a desire of revenge upon the
King of France, that notwithstanding her nobler endowments, she dishonored her
self with that Jesuited varlet Clement (his murderer) the more to encourage
him in the accomplishment of his villainy, and to give him assurance of her
acceptance of that treasonable assassination. Pomponius Latus notes, that
Stipatores and ^ustodes Principum iosos principes ad omne genus sevitiae
armabant, In Constantio chloro. p. 233. edit. ^lyburgit.
Opinions and parties are humble at first, but when they are entered they like
ill humors in the body, steal away the nutriment, and force judgment into
some little angle and petty principality, whereas it ought to rule the whole
continent, and command in Chief; Opinion does by Reason, as Empericks by
people, fits with tricks quick and gross, to please all seasons and Companies,
sometimes it curdles Reason and makes it shrivle up into uncomely narrownesses,
another time like a thriftlesse Housekeeper, it opens doors for all comers; And
as that Friar refused none an Alms that asked for the Virgin Mary's sake, so if
Holiness to the Lord be upon the surface of it, the Cry is, Come in thou
blessed of the Lord. Men are (pardon the phrase) Jaels in this, and these
Sisera's they court into their hearts, offering them not the cold comforts of
hammers and nayls of dispatch, nor the pulse of slender welcome, but the Royal
fare of their fancy, yea, they dance about the May-poles of their late
acquaintence and guests, as David did before Gods Ark with all their might; But
it is pity they should want Michels to scoff at them, who are so taken with
novelties, and so pleased with Nothings; Lord what Mushromes and Cocks combs
are cooked to the gust^ of the curious pallated world? And how greedy are men
not only to devour a well-sauced poison, but to applaud the Cook that tempers
that Circoean Cup of their Enchantment? How many hopeful and virtuously
disposed minds may observing men view deflowred, Exodus 7. 9, 10.
whose parts (as Moses's Rod) have become Serpents, not to win peevish natures
to truth, but to further craft and harmful subtlety, which never returned again
into their Native purity, whose eloquent tongue like the beauties of the old
world have seduced well-inclined and easy Christians, to follow them into the
deluge of Errors, and to scoff at the Ark of Truth, the Church, as a mentitious
sigment; He was a wise man in his time who said, Sr. Henry W^ston.
Pruritus disputandi scabies Ecclesiae, Opinions and Disputations have begat
one another to the end of the Chapter of Church-peace, so that Religion is
wholly drowned in Opinion; Men are grown Monsters like that in Praepontis,
which had a great head but shriveled members; Ancient, sober, practical Piety
is almost lost, and men come to such an (...) of speculation, that they are
persuaded to be too wise for Instructors, too holy to observe Scripture-Rules,
too contentious to be endured almost in civil Societies: Hollerius his Italian
has spawned such Scorpion'd brains, that it is daugerous to converse with them
lest we be infected by them; So that as Pomponius Laesus said of the Christian
quarrels, that may we say of active spirits amongst us, Viri Sacrilegi mo^tuos
quiescentes turbant, templis minime parcunt ^avidi sanguinis civilis and
praedae, mali Daemones sic implicuere nostras mentes; ^ut relictis veris
hostibus, quos longa pace frui permittimus, in nos nostrorumque membra armatas
and sang^inolentas convertamus manus. Edit. Sylburg. p. 534.


How careful were ancient Christians to avoid all things that tended to
offense? What tenderness expresses the holy Apostle, when he professed, He
would rather never eat then offend his weak Brother? And the glorious Saints of
pristine piety and courage, when they denied themselves to gratify the
conscientious scruples of weak Christians! When they with tears bemoaned the
inadvertency of some to give, and the peevishness of others to take offense?
Optatus was much troubled that the Church should be disturbed by the Orthodox
licet, and the Donatists non licet; Tertull. ad Scapulam.
And Tertullian did not approve that Christians should be called either by the
Name of Albinians, or Nigrians, or Cassians, but that which is their proper
Name, Christians. It Is Satan's project to exartuate Religion by new names and
new factions amongst her professors, and to weaken the power of godliness by
introducing argumentation and debate, the pleasure of wits, and the Pensioner
of carnal policy: that as ingenious Florists, to pick the purses of witty
persons, delighted with their art, have so heightened flowers by
transplantations, preparations of mold, adumbrations of them at unbenign
seasons of the year, by cutting their Roots, and sundry such, not uncommendable
feats of their skill, that out of one single root of a Lilly has come forth
122 blowings, and amongst Roses, gillyflowers, and Pionies, incredible
varieties; So out of the glorious and pure Doctrines of Faith, which the
Apostles and their Followers comprised in repent and believe, there is put
forth such an ocean of points of Religion, and all of them pressed on the
people to be believed, that it is hard to find truth in the crowd of contests
about her, and easy to mistake as Mary did the gardener, Joh. 20. 15. Divinae
legis sententils quasi quibusdam velleribus sese obvolventes. Vincent. Lyrinens.
for Christ, error for truth, both pretending their Jus divinum's their
authoritative confidences, as their just Titles to men's beliefs, and blaming
men as restive and sottish if they resign not themselves to a senseless and
universal credulity.

In the mean time things of greater concernment are neglected, and the things
God slubbered over, and made to run counter one to another; disuse of
Church Government has made every man a Micah, Judge. 17. 5.
an appointer to himself of whatsoever likes him best, and a neglecter of those
services that the Christian Church through out the world embraced; there are
many that make preaching like the lean Kine in Pharaoh's dream, Genesis 41. 20.
to eat up all other Church-Ordinances, though never so beauteous and
well-favoured; public Prayers, and public Confessions of Faith, even that
which our Lord Jesus taught us in the Gospel, as the Form of Prayer of his own
dictation, hardly passes current; no nor is that Creed which bears the name of
the Apostles Creed, (which this Church has ever received, and her Martyrs in
Queen Mary's days, Fox Acts and Mon. p. 1400. old Edit.
by name Bishop Farrar, Hooper, the Bishops of Worcester and Gloucester, Tailor,
Philpot, Bradford, Cromt, Rogers, Saunders, Lawrence, Coverdale, owned, as that
they believed generally and particularly, censuring those to err from the
truth who do otherwise; and judicious Calvin says, In Opuscul in Ca^^ches. parv.
was the form of Confession which all Christians had in common amongst them, as
writ from the mouths of the Apostles, or faithfully collected out of their
Writings.) This Creed, I say, many think unfit to be rehearsed in
Congregations, and some are suspected to villifie it; yea the Sacraments of
Christ are almost obsoleted amongst us, O quot manipulos tritici eradicavit,
qui ante tempu^ Zyzania a tritico discernere festinat. Ex Epist. Leodiens.
advers. Paschalem Papam.
in some Parishes neither Sacrament, in others but one, and if that, so
restrained to particular persons, that there seems to be a tacit reproach laid
on those who are not of the number of Communicants, who therefore become
enemies to Ministers and their Messages, because they are in a kind cut off
from the Congregation.

I confess it is fit that holy things should be given to holy men, and it were
to be wished, all the Congregation were holy; but if perfection be reserved for
hereafter, Ministers must bear with the imperfections of their people, as well
as people with the over-rigidness of their Ministers. If people be not
scandalous, the Church never denied them the benefit of Sacraments; and if
Ministers be not overscrupulous, they will not begrudg men their Saviors
allowance. In my opinion it seems but reasonable, that people should give a
sober and free account of their faith to their lawful Pastor, in a loving and
unimperious way desiring it of them; but then Churchmen should be advised what
is competent knowledge in a Christian, and propose such questions to them, as
argue not a design rather to blunder them, then satisfy themselves of their
understanding. Ministers are fathers, and must bear with the infirmities of
their flocks, They must not be brambles, Vindic. Presbyt. Govern. p. 88.
Pastorcsesse bonos vicarios suos Christus jussit non voraces Lupos. Ulricus
Huttenus in Praefat. ad Leonem decimam Pontisicem. 1 Pet. 3. 15.
rending and tearing the people committed to their charge, but fig trees,
vines, and olivetrees, yielding them fatness, sweetness, and fruitfulness. To
such as these, I am persuaded no sober Christian dare deny an account of his
faith; For if the Apostles charge be, to be always ready to give answer to
every man that askoth you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness
and fear, then much more to the Ambassadors of Christ, his Ministers: His
Ministers, I say, by Church Mission, and Canonique Authority; not presumers,
who come unsent; for, as the Civilians well observe, Non sunt successores in
officio qui ad officium accedunt alio modo quam institutum est, to such
Ministers as are truly called, no man ought to deny a declaration of his faith,
as competently he is able. And with such discoveries I think Ministers ought to
rest satisfied, and the ignorance of their Parishioners to pity, pray for, and
by their best instruction to amend. And those Ministers whom a Parishioners
sober account and inoffensive conversation will not convince to admit as worthy
to communicate, may be feared to have somewhat more in their design, then the
glory of God, and the good of souls; and if they will not give testimony of
their candor while they live, their deathbeds will tell tales to the world,
little to their credit or comfort. Proelect. 42 in Apochryp. p. 53. col. 1.
Learned Dr Reynolds reports, that Luther when he lay upon his deathbed
acknowledged to Melancthon, In negotio coenae nimium esse factum, yet, says
the learned (Sir Simon D'ewes) taking counsel rather of men theu Gods Word,
Treatise Primit. Pract. Pres. Truth. p. 3.
for fear lest if he retracted them, the people would suspect the rest, and so
return to Popery, he accounted it best to declare his judgment in private.
Thus he.

Well fare the ancient Fathers, who valued truth above credit, yea conscience
above life. Lib. 1. c. 2.
Ruffinus tells us, that St Clement in his Apostolic Epistle, counsels all
his fellow Christians, rather to forsake him, then to part with the peace of
the Church, and to incur the danger of division. St Aug. lib. de vera Religione.
And St Aug. tells us, That in his time by the turbulencies of some in the
Church, many Orthodox and excellent Bishops and Presbyters were cast out of the
Church, and separated from their charges, yet they bore the disgrace and
persecution patiently, never making Schism or starting up heresy to annoy
Christianity thereby. Docebunt homines quam vero affectu and quanta sinceritate
charitatis Deo serviendum sit, hos coronat in occulto pater, in secreto videns.
Rarum hoc videtur genus, sed tamen exempla non desunt, immo plura sunt quam
credi potest. These men's demeanours (quoth he) teach the world, Neque in
confusione pagnerum, neque in purgamentis haereticorum, neque in languore
schismaticorum, neque in caecitate Judaeorum, quaereuda est religio, sed apnd
eos solos qui christiani eatholici vel orthodoxi nominantur, Id. eod. (...).
What the power of grace and sincerity is in the soul, and how God is to be
waited upon even while he hides his face from the seed of Jacob. But though
these (quoth the Father) be rare examples of self-denial, yet such presidents
there are, and those more then can be almost believed. For, as the same Father
proceeds, true Religion is neither to be found in the confusions of Pagans, nor
in the purgings of heretics, nor in the feebleness of schismatics, nor in the
blindness of Jews, but amongst those who are Orthodox and Catholic Christians.

And therefore the differences in this Church, upon these small grounds that
appear to us, were in no sort worth owning (by sober men) especially to the
degrees they are ascended to, but rather are to be deplored with tears of
blood; for those that have true Christian charity, would sooner part with much
of their own Interest, as did the true Mother, 1 King. 3. 27. then have the
Church divided: Let Astrologers, not knowing the true cause of the Celestial
motions, to salve the appearances, tell us of Eccentriques and Epicicles; and
Philosophers, when they are at a stand, pray aid from their occulta qualitas;
and Lawyers, when they know not well how to give things a bottom, tell us they
are in abaiance: and some late Divines fill our heads with dreams of the
Churches outward pomp here, That the Saints must be the great men of the world,
and must trample down every thing of Order and Antiquity: Let them tell us of
new Heavens and new Earths, whereinto are received such as the old never
willingly bore (for Lucifer was cast from Heaven for pride, and Corah and his
company were swallowed up by the earth, for mutiny against Magistracy,) and let
them bespeak mansions in that Novus Orbis, let them be Masters of rule in the
world in the Sun, and precious men in the Moon of their fancies, and there
promise themselves celestial clarity, I shall neither envy nor admire them the
more, but fear them as such as Salvian speaks of, Salvian. lib. 4.
Apud nonnullos Christi nomen non videatur jam sacramentum esse sed sermo, and
I shall pray that they may see their wanderings in time; and as the Father says
well, secundas tabulas habere modestiae, qui primas non habere sapientiae. For
let them cry out never so bitterly against regulations, and orderly forms and
establishments, yet they will hold tack, when their Tabernacles of ill-mixed
altogethers dissolve and become vain. For as a Learned Bishop of the Church
has lately observed; If foundations which were in their own nature good should
be destroyed for accessory abuses, B^ Derry in his Treatise of Schism. p. 38.
and for the faults of particular persons, we should neither leave a Sun in
Heaven, for that has been adored by Prgans, nor a spark of fire, or any
eminent creature upon earth, for they have all been abused. And since it is the
will of God that heresies and offenses must be, let all good Christians
patiently abide Gods trial by them. For as wise master builders out of the
chaos of rubbish raise beautiful frames of structure, so God out of the
janglings of Christians, by infinite and matchless wisdom compiles his glory.
Vtitur gentibus ad materiam operationis suae, hereticis ad probationem fidei
suae, schismaticis ad stabilimentum doctrinae suae, Judaeis ad comparationem
pulchritudinis suae, Lib. de vera Religione.
as St Augustine pithily.

Let then the devout Christian, not so much study policy as piety, not more
endeavor after power then peace; let the Ministers of God rather seek to deny,
then gratify themselves in any thing that is worldly, let the world alone to
those whose portion it is, they are greedy enough after it. Aurelian would
never take it for his glory, to have the children sing it and salute him with
an applause of his valor, for sla^ing thousands of the Sarmatians: Vnus homo
mill, mill; mill decollavimus; and adding mill, mill, mill; vincit qui
mill mill occidit, tantum vim habet nemo quantum fudit sanguinis, Flavius
Vopisc. p. 272.
If he were not wedded to the world, and resolved that Power was his heaven.
God forbid holy souls should when they see preferment shun them, and the world
frown on them, cry out as Eli's daughter in Law did, 1 Samuel 4. 21. when the Ark
was sursurpris'd, My glory is departed, the Ark of my safety and content is
taken: Let those delight in it, and boast of it, whose wisdom is carnal, and
opposite to God; who venture the double Ducket of Aeternity against this single
Penny of Earth; which that French King would not, when his brother counseled
him with small forces to sally out of Towers, upon the great Army of the Duke
of Main. Let politic Richlieu profess, Vt scirct orbis qualis and quantus est
Ludovicus, cujus radius and rivus est Richilius. In Testam. Christ.
that his desire to be Cardinal, Duke and Peer of France, was but to show the
world, what and how great his King and Master was, since he the Cardinal how
conspicuous soever; was but a ray from the Kings Sun, and a rivulet from his
Ocean: yet God sees another motive in the heart, then the tongue mentions: no
secret excludes the Sun of Righteousness from view, nor any shift the God of
Truth from weighing the temper of spirits, and discovering them to be what they
are, though with Balaam, they shift from place to place, and thing to thing, to
gain a subterfuge and opportunity of serving themselves most advantagiously,
Numb. 23.
yet at length God meets with them; and when their glasses are run, which
cannot be long, that glory which makes worthy men live for ever, dies with
such, and their memory of honor is enterred with them.

And though the most of men are convinced of the truth of this, yet how
greedily do such great spirits gullop down the world, and with what eagerness
do they profecute it, by a dangerous hospitality, which entertains Devils
oftener then Angels! What noble Paradoes does self-love make, forcing Religion
to be Chaplain to bless their banquets of Ambition, unto which they invite all
their admirers, and to warrant which they have such musters of Scriptures
(though misapplied and misunderstood) that they look like the Archangel Michael
and his forces, advancing to discomfort, as it were, the Devil and his Angels,
of contrarients diffidence, we know who said, Behold my zeal for the Lord of
Heasts, 2 King. 10. 16. yet ver. 18. and 31. his zeal was murder and idolatry.
Am I come up without the Lord against this place to destroy it, the Lord said
to me, go up against this Land and destroy it, were the words of Rabshecah, 2
King. 18. 25. yet God in Chap. 19. ver. 28. interprets this a rage and tumult
against him, and says, he will put his hook in his nose, and his bridle in his
lips, and turn him back by the way by which he came: yea by an Angel destroy
his host, and defend Jerusalem, as it is ver. 34, 35. I love not their
Principles, who make Religion usher to Lyon-like practices, as does the
Spaniard in the Indies, which they by force possess, and in which they have
put to the sword and other butcherly torments, millions, it is thought, both at
Cuba, Hayta, Peru, Panama, Mexico, and all under pretense of planting the
Catholic faith, and placing Christians in the room of Infidels: such courses
may thrive for a while, but in the end God will pluck up those poisonous roots
for medicine to others, that they may hear and fear, and do no more
presumptuously.

I cannot blame Heathens, who know and hope for no other Heaven but that of
temporal felicity and worldly greatness, to aim at it. I wonder not at Mahomet
the second the first Turkish Emperor, whom story tells us to be of no Religion
but a mere Atheist, worshipping no other God but good-fortune, thinking all
things lawful that agreed with his lust, Knolls in Turk. Hist. p. 337. Edit.
1631.
and keeping no league, promise or oath, longer then stood with his profit or
pleasure. No marvel though they think so well of themselves, who dare as did
Alexander, command their own deificacations; in days of their Triumphs,
Simulachrum Dei detraxit Suetonius in Octavio. p. 21.
with Octavius, remove the statues of the Nations god: Not only weep upon view
of the Image of one that lived before, and had been conqueror beyond him; but
also dream, I and have the confidence to tell the dream, that he had committed
a rape upon his mother, as did Julius Caesar, Orbis terrarum arbitrium portendi
interpretantes, Suetonius in Jul. Caesar. p. 2. Filesac. in Selecter. l. 1. p.
142.
which the standers by interpreted to portend his Empire over the world; or to
disown manhood, and to profess openly, Ira Dei ego sum and orbis vastitas, as
that Eastern Temires said of himself. These I say may not be wondered at. But
for Christians, who believe in a crucified Savior, and expect a Kingdom not
made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens: for them to take such bye paths,
and forsake the way of Christ Jesus, who bids us, strive to enter in at the
narrow gate, and decline the broad way which leads to destruction, is much my
wonder. For as Gregory Nazianzen piously writes; (...), etc. (...). Epist. 57.
Let Thrones, Princedomes, Greatness, Riches, Fortunes adieu, as vild and
contemptible glories, and theatrique follies, which perform nothing of what
they promise: it is the Christians part to make Gods word his delight, and to
study communion with God, as that which can only and lastingly make him happy,
etc. for Christianity is no abrodiaeton, wherein is professed pleasure and
delicacy, but mortification and self-denial

Yet not so strange as true; for there have no greater practiques of sensual
policy been acted by any, then Christians in name, and in profession such.
Pope Alexander wars against the French, and rather then that war should not
be followed; invites the Turk to his aid, and consents, that the money gathered
in Spain for a Crociata against the Infidels, should be employed against the
French. Coesar Borgia maligned his brother bastard the Duke of Candy, because
he was corrival with him in his Mistress, and for that their common father Pope
Alexander the 6th had bestowed great dignity on the Duke, hereupon Borgia
caused him to be murdered one night as he rode through the streets of Rome, and
after to be cast into Tyber. The same Borgia desired a match with the Daughter
of Frederick King of Naples, and to have in dower with her the Principality of
Taranto, not by that alliance to strengthen the Interest of declining
Frederick, but that thereby he might be the better able to justle him out and
distress him. Mauregat the 7th King of Oivedo and Leons, about the year after
Christ 383, that he might hold his Kingdom under the Moors who had invassail'd
all, made himself a Tributary to Abdiramis their King in Spain, Mari^a hist.
Hisp. ad an. 383
and though he were a Christian, yet consented to a Tribute uuworthy any
Christian, namely to yield him yearly 50 Damsels of Noble extract and lineage,
and as many other meaner men's daughters, and them to send him as a present to
his lust. Turk. Hist. p. 364.
Nicholaus Catalusius Prince of Mytelene, turned Turk, to gain the favor of
Mahomet the Great and save his life; after he was circumcised, Mahomet caused
him to be apprehended and put to death. Conc. of Trent p. 387.
Henry the second of France, burned many Protestants upon pretense of heresy,
and in favor of true Religion, as was said, but untruly, for it was but to
fill the purse of Diana Valentina the Kings Mistress of pleasure, to whom he had
given the confiscation of all goods for heresy throughout his Dominions. Turk.
History. p. 294. ad 298.
Vladislaus King of Hungary, concluded a very noble peace with Amurath, and
swore to it with very great solemnity, yet afterupon pretensions of very great
disadvantage to the Christians by that peace, and by solicitations of Cardinal
Julian, he broke it most barbarously, and was well paid for his
faedifragousness, in the loss of the battle of Varna. When the Turk in Charles
the 5th, his time invades Transylvania on the one side, and Ferdinand Archduke
of Austria puts hard for it on the other side, promising to keep it for the
young son of John Vayode, George Martinaccio Bishop of Veradino a man of
excellent wisdom and great reputation in that country, willing to keep it in
freedom; and being unable to wage war both with the Turk and Archduke at one
time, adhered to the Archduke, which the Austrians knew would effect their
purpose; they, to oblige the good Bishop, promised a Pension of 80000 Crowns,
and the Emperor obtained of the Pope a Cardinals Cap for him; but when the
Anstrians discovered, that nothing wrought with Martinaccio, to prefer the
house of Austria above his native country, some of the Archdukes ministers
had command to murder him, Counsel Trent, Page 373.
and they did 10, and the bruit was, that he held Intelligence with the Turk;
whenas, good man, he had nothing but honor and honesty in his eye, and they
blood in their hearts and on their hands.

But these are but pettytoes to the great Goliath Richlieu the late French
Cardinal, against whom the blood of many cries; but in chief that of Monsieur
Le Thou, the famous Historian and most accurate Scholar, whose memorial
published in the names of all the grandees of Europe, remembers great dishonor
to his once Eminence. The words, as I find them in a notable Author, Mercurio
de Vittorio Siri To. 2. lib. Terzo. p. 1234.
are these; Sub fortunatissimo Rege, nuper malis artibus fascinato, ob Reginae,
filiorum, parentis jura, summo studio, contra nefarios ausus, secundum regni
leges adserta, ob expetitam regalis familiae dignitatem libertatemque
Franciscum Augustum Thuanum, magnis adhuc in juventa virtutibus illustrem,
Baestia sevissima de Arena saphistica, Latro Cardinalis, Hostis senatus, Pestis
Patriae, dedecus Ecclesiae, per Tyrannicae potestatis satellites, subornata
judicio trucidavit, Omnes Europa tota Optimates praestantissimi, Thuani
desiderio, maestissimt posuere.

I forbear his projects on both the Queen-Mothers, Recueil de Pieces pour la
defense de la Reign M^re, Imprimee a Anvers. An. 1643.
let St Germine blazon them, though methinks one has already fully done it, in
these few words, Reginae matris beneficiis ditatus, curis prometus, and
potestate potentior factus, illam gratia regis, liberate, bonis, Gallia, and
demum exulem Coloniae vita privavit, ne mortuae parceret, supr^mas ejus
voluntates rescendi, and insepultum cadaver per quinque menses (post quos) ipse
extinctus est, incubiculo relinqui voluit: Thus my Author, But I enlarge not
this, nor do I call to memory the deaths of Memorancy, and many others, of
which he is said to have been notoriously guilty; that exquisite revenge on
Puyleaurens, gives an essay of the man* and tells us he was none of those that
did aperto vivere voto.

No marvel though a man of those tricks were termed seculi sui tormentum non
ornamentum. He must needs be covetous of glory, who was not ashamed to boast in
print, In Testam. Poli. Galliam subegit, etc. Angliam turbaevit. Europam lufit.
Volui fidelitatem necessariam esse non liberum, docui obedientiam caecam,
atque in hac part pene religiosos volui esse Francos, Perturbavi Madritensem
sapientiam, etc. who besides the violence acted at home, In Testam Contrario in
oodem Vittorio Syri.
discovered Spanish counsels before taken, revealed their secrets before
machinated, brought Madrid to Paris and kept Paris at its own distance from
Madrid, terrified Italy, shook Germany, vexed Spain, supported Lusitunia,
Lotharingia and Catilonia, supplied Sweden, spoiled Flanders, troubled England,
yea and made a disport of Europe, and utinam non and faxsit sibi alio in orb,
qui in hoc Europae suit; as that Author has it. Ex pede Herculem; Let men
judge then what tenebrious souls those men have, Rarissimus innocentiae and
popularitati locus in summa administratione relinquitur. Sabellic. l. 8. c. 2.
who will be the Gundomars and Protopoliticoes of their ages; Such I mean as
Lewis Debonair, Charles the bald of France, the Great Evan Vasilowick of
Muscovia, Don Pedro of Castile, and others; these are monsters, not men,
whodesign every minute for mischief to all that they think disaffected to them.
As did the forementioned Cardinal, of whom one says, Ainsi non seulement la
Royne Mere du Roy, Scir Germain en Recueil de Pieces. p. 12.
matis tout les grands du Royaume sont criminels, pour render le Cardinal
innocent Tout ainsi que sur les ruins de S. M. and de la plus grande party
des Princes de France, il a basli sa fortune, il faut aussi qu'on fond sa
gloire sue le des-honneur de tout ceux que'il a persecute, who refuse nothing
which accomodates their ends. I have it from Lottinus a man well versed in this
trade, De Sacris Cardinal, Comitijs in Thesauro Politico. p. 462.
Nullam quidem tantum est vitium quod non tolerabile aliquando existimetur, and
pro minus malo accipiatur, ita suadente rerum statu and semper sive occasion,
que quidem inconficiendo quolibet negotio; utramque, quod dicitur paginam
implet.

No wonder then the deathbeds of Statesmen wrings from them great pennances,
while they bemoan with Henry the fifth of this Land, Hollingsh. p. 713
that they have won the courtesies of men's knees, with the loss of many men's
heads, nay of their own souls. The confessions of two eminent in their times
are very remarkable; One Cardinal Woolsey, whom Charles the fifth called the
butchers curr, that had worryed the fairest Buck in Christendom: And was so
great as never any man before him, a subject, was in this land; ruled all, knew
all, enjoied all that heart could wish, yet lived to see himself accused of
Treason, seized upon, forsaken of his friends; insomuch that he cried out
bemoaningly, If I had served God as diligently as I have done the King,
Hollingsh p 917
he would not have given me over in my gray hairs; but it is the just reward
that I must receive for the diligent pains and study that I have had to do him
service, not regarding my service to God, but only to satisfy his pleasure.
Thus the Cardinal.

There is a second, a man of great experience and business, Browns Annals Q.
Eliz. p. 38.
Sr Thomas Randolph, who had been thrice Ambassador to the Peers in Scotland,
thrice to John Basilides Emperor of Russia, thrice to Queen Mary of Scotland
after her return from Frrnce, seven times to James the sixth of Scotland, once
to Charles the ninth, once to Henry the third of France; yet this Gentleman
writing a letter to Secretary Walsingham a little before his death, mentions
how fit and necessaay it was, that one (meaning Walsingham) should leave off
the tricks of a Secretary, and the other (meaning himself) of an Ambassador,
and employ their time before their death, in repentance for the sin of their
life: which occasions my mention of a passage in St German, Pa. 27. ad finem
where comparing the death of the Queen Mother with the Cardinal her enemy, he
says here was the difference que nostre Princess a acheuee la fienne en Royne
Tres Chrictienne and que son per sequuteur cest retire eu homme politic. So
true is that of the Emperor Otho, I had rather be Mucius, (...). Dion. l. 64.
p. 732.
Decius, Regulus, or any other worthy and unwanting private Citizen of Rome,
then Marius, or Cinna, or Sylla, or any of the other most potent men of that
Commonwealth.

The consideration of this presses hard upon all men to do good while they have
opportunity; all things here are casual, no man knows what a day may bring
forth. It Is a true note of Causabon, S. Wa. Rawleigh Pref. to his Hist. of the
World.
Dies hora, momentum, evertendis dominationibus sufficit quae Adamantinis
credebatur radicibus esse fundatae. Therefore wisdom lays up against an evil
day, ( versa rota fortunae, ante vesperum potest esse miserimus,) looks at
nothing so much as what is the most real and catholic good. All Christians
are to serve God, and their relations in their sphere, and according to their
proportion; but Princes and Governors chiefly are concerned to do worthily,
their families, their fames are at stake, yea their subjects weal or woe is
molded according to their care or neglect: Pomponius Laetus p. 535. Edit.
Sylburg.
Is it not a happy thing to rule and live so as to deserve Inscriptions on our
Monuments as Constantine had, Restitutor humani generis, propagator imperii,
ditionisque Romanae, and fundator eternae securitatis, Trebellius Pollio in
Claudio. p. 267
as Claudius had, Cujus vita probitas omnia quae in Republica gessit tantam
posteris famam dedere, ut Senatus Populusque Romanus, novis eam honoribus post
mortem affecerit. It was a Princely virtue in a vicious man Galba, Veterum
morem obstinatissime retinet; Sueton. in Galba
and he deserves the top step of the ascent of honor, who, dum privatus fuit
major privato visus, Hist. lib. 1.
as Tacitus says of one: They have too narrow souls for Sovereignty, who think
ought worthy their endeavor, but piety and power, and preserve those darlings
by any thing but Justice; Carior est mibi tota respublica consanguineis. Alex.
Severus apud Lamprid.
which Severus said was dearer to him then kindreds and alliances. Justice is
the great basis of Government; as it forbids Governors to be mock-shews,
sorting the Purple robe with the Reed (no emblem either of state or might,) so
it presents as amiable moderation; ( Aureliane clementer te age, si vis
vincere, was the Philosophers speech to Aurelian the Emperor; Flavius Vopisc.
in A^rel. p. 277.
) calling for distinction between offenses of infirmity, and malicious
contrivance; and awes from picking quarrels upon words and trifles, and on
grounds which may as well not be taken notice of, as remembered: It was no
inconspicuous virtue of Alexander Severus before-named; Moderationis tantae
fuit ut nemo unquam ab ejus latere submoveretur ut omnibus se blandum
effabilemque praeberet. Idem.
who sent no man sad from him, gave access to the meanest, expressed affability
to all, yet with success enough man aged his affairs: nor have Princes showed
themselves wiser in any thing, then by giving fair terms to enemies, rather
then either to hazard successes; or wast their own dominions to obtain
victory. Dioclesian said not amiss when he answered, That bounty and mercy were
the proper qualifications of Princes, Pompon. Laetus in titulo de Nemefi Dea.
p. 431 Comp. Romans hist.
and where these are not, Ducem esse debuisse non principem. Philip the second
of Spain, none of the most virtuous Princes, but foully stained in glory, yet
had this forethought to declare in the case of the Netherlands; Prim. Practice
Preserv. Truth. p. 58.
That it should be lawful for any that would not embrace the Roman Religion,
to depart from thence whethersoever they would, or else to sell their estates,
or to receive the profits of them wherever they were. And not many years after
he gave liberty to the Mahumetan Moors of Spain amounting to diverse thousands,
to depars freely thence, into any province of Africa, there to enjoy freedom
from the bloody Inquisitors; and with his own shipping conveyed many of them
safe into France, through which by the gracious permiffion of H. the Great, they
had safe and free passage.

Charles the ninth of France, did by his Agents earnestly solicit Jews de
Clermont Prince of Conde, and Jasper de Coligni Earl of Castilion, Admiral of
France, being chief directors and commanders of the Protestants affairs, to
depart France with the rest of the Religion, and that they might begin a
Plantation in the Island of Florida in America, he not only gave leave to the
first Expedition, which was undertaken by Ino Ribald in Anno 1562. but also at
the Admirals entreaty did very largely contribute to the second Navigation,
which was entered upon by Landover and other Protestants. And were there no
other motive to moderation then that of the Apostle, The Lord is at hand, it
were enough; a cogent argument to Christians; As if the Apostle had thus said;
Manage power wisely, use advantages warily, be thrifty Stewards of your talents
while ye are in office, the audit day is near, God is entering on his circuit to
enquire how his Miuisters have discharged their trust: He will have no pity on
that servant, who when he had his fellow servants on his knee beging pardon for
his sake, refused him. It is a shrewd brand of ignobleness in the Counsel of H.
8. who when they had, as they thought, the good Archbishop Cranmer on the hip,
and that he was accused of demerit against the State, suffered him to stand
without doors among the Lacquies and serving-men for the space of half an hour.
Brave spirits pity, See M. Fox in his Life.
not rejoice over the ruins of their betters; it is good for every one to
remember, the measure we mete to others will be measured to us again, therefore
let your moderation be known unto all men.

This also calls upon men in Rule, to remember Posterity by imitating elder
Christians, in raising, supporting and adding to things of public and lasting
piety, and unquestioned charity. In this sense that of the Apostle is very
pressing. To do good and distribute forget not, Heb. 13. 16.
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased: In this methinks it is good to
begin with God, and to remember what he increpates Hag. 1. 4. Is it time for
you to dwell in your seiled houses, Judaeos ita addictos esse suis domestacis
commodis suae quieti, suis etiam dilicijs, ut cultum Dei fere pro nihilo
ducerent. Haec causa est cur tam severe illis succens^at Propheta. Calvin. in
loc.
and to let this house ^ye waste? Mr Ca^vin notes well upon these words, That
much time had passed, and now God had given them peace, he expected that they
should not lie still, but build his house; but (says he) the Jews were so
indulgent to their private advantages, to their ease and delight, that they
thought the worship of God not worth looking after, so they had sacrifices and
an Altar, it mattered not where or what the place be in which they served God:
This was the cause that the Prophet had command from God so tartly to reprove
them. And truly the good man comes home to us; Nuuc, says he; quis gratis
accendit Dei altar, etc. Who amongst us takes care of Gods Altar? every one
looks after his advantage, in the mean time the Interest of God suffers, no
zeal for, no care of God; yea, what is worst of all, multi lucrum captant ex
evangelio, perinde ac si ars esset quaestuosa, that is, Many drive a subtle and
gainful way of Religion, making it serve their turns, and speak their
language; Thus he.

Much more pure and daefecated was Christianity in those ages (which many
amongst us called blind) but their deeds show otherwise: Then Churches and
Chapels, Houses (in their intent) for Religion and the honor of God, were
erected and liberally provided for, by their care and charity to the worlds
end: For my part I must judge faith by works, and if living charity appear, I
will not judge that a dead faith which moved it; they must have somewhat to say
in extenuation of other men's charities, who never mean to be renowned by any of
their own. De fundationibus Ecclesiarum and dotationibus per principes
honorifice loquitur, de rapi^is autem and expilationibus earum per Papas
justissime quaeritur. Humfred. Puritano Jesuitismus. p. 304.
Famous Wickliff magnifies the bounty of Princes to the Church, but he blames
highly, the rapines and damages done to them by unworthy Popes and particular
Interests. Far is it from any sober mind, to censure those who not only
appropriated the Tenth to God, but endowed him with all (in a kind) tbat they
did possess, who clothed naked Christ (with reverence be it written) in their
best vests, and never thought themselves richer then when they had expended all
they had to puchase him a rich seat, and prepare for him a goodly retinue, at
whose Tables he in his Members fed, and by whose bounty their necessities were
supplied, It is a sure fign of devout times, when Churches have their reverence
and decent attire as well as Courts of State and Law, when the Rights of God
and Religion are inviolate as well as those of men; B. Andrews Sermon Court
Christmas day An. 1610. p. 30
For as a Right Reverend Father of our Church long ago published, The two
Estates Civil and Ecclesiastical make the main angle in every Government: God
himself has severed them, and made these two to meet in one, not one to
malign and consume the other; And the happy combining of these two is the
strength of the head and of the whole building; If it bear but upon one of
them, it will certainly decay; It did so in Saul's time, he little regarded the
Ark, and less the Priests; David saw Saul's error, and in this Psalm. 75. 3.
where he sings ne perdas to a Commonwealth, Hic Romam deformem incendijs
veterib^s ac ruinis permissa si domini deessent aedificandi copia, Capitolium
aedem Pacis, Claudij monumenta reparavit: multaque nova instituit, per omnes
terras, quae jus est Romanum renovatae urbes cultu egregio. Aurel. victor, in
Epit. de Vespafian.
promises to have equal care of both Piliars, and to uphold them both. Thus
the Bishop.

It was reckoned also a sign of calm times and to the praise of Government,
when public buildings were raised, and decays provided against. Vespasian is
commended for a brave Prince, in that he gave liberty and encouragement to
build, in those wast places of Rome, which fire and sword had deformed; and at
his own charge repaired the Capitol, the Temple of Peace, and the Monument of
Claudius, yea in all places of the Roman Dominion, erected some Trophie of
public use and Ornament, and Paulus Diaconus tells us, Prout Imperatores vel
boni vel mali evaserint, ita minutebantur vel augebantur aedificia. lib. 6. de
gestis Romans Landatorum principum est, vitia rerumpublicarum plurima extirpare
and abolere, and praeclaris pae^riam ornare aedificijs. l. 1. c. 16. Inveni
lateritiam reilqui marmoream. Sueton. in octa. p. 24.
that as Emperors have been good or bad, so have public buildings been
either preserved or neglected; And Guevaera asserts it the duty of good
Governors not only to exterminate vices their Countries, but also to adorn
them with famous structures, a token that they are good Fathers of their
people, who by their liberality to posterity declare the duty of a noble Prince
to extend to the weal of Government first, and next to his own preservation by
it; Octavius might well justify himself no unprofitable Shepherd; When in his
Reign Rome had changed her russet for purple; In stead of clay become marble,
and Trajan deservedly has the honor of Dions pen, while he writes both in
times of Peace and War; (...). etc. Dion. l. 68 p. 772
He was a most eminent builder and repairer of Highways, Gates, Watercourses,
Guilds, to accomplish which his way was only that of virtue, He shed no man's
blood by the gain of whose estate he might defray his expense, (...), Id. ut
supra.
( for he was naturally what a Prince should be) magnifique, and of a great
soul, he envied, he ruined no man, but increased the honor and dignity of
worthy persons. And it is no less a note of Religious times and Princes;
Apollonius cum Templum Jovis Olympij essit ingressus, salve inquit bone Jupiter
qniusque adeo bonus es ut teipsum nobis communices, Apud Philostratum.
When rescue is made of Houses of God in possessions of men, and when those
that are ruined may own Powers their benefactors. Solomon the wisest of Princes
was a Temple-Builder, and those glorious ones whom God will own for his and
bless as his, are described; Not to be transformers of Churches into Barns and
Stables, Nor demolishers of Houses fit for men's habitation, but such as shall
build the old waste places, such as raise up the foundations of many
generations, such as shall be called (not in complement but justly) the
Repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in, Isa. 58. 12. In
Psalm. 74. 5. a man was famous according as he had lifted up Axes upon the thick
Trees, but now (says the Psalmist v. 6.) they brke down the carved work
thereof with Axes and Hammers, etc. And I am of the Opinion, That man which
dares profane any thing that relatively is Gods, though at greatest distance,
has some more then ordinary tincture of Atheism in him, and durst he, he
would, and when he sees time he will show it: Julian derided Churches and
Priests, and not long after blasphemed Christ himself; For our Lord who (by an
Heroique Act) cast out buyers and sellers out of the Temple, will not approve
those who buy and sell Temples: If he permitted not sellers of Doves in the
Temple, though it was very opportune for the Sacrificers, then not those who
sell the Temple in Sacrifice to other ends then those of Religion, which buys
to dedicate, not sels what is dedicated to God.

There is somewhat sacred in places consecrated to God, even by the light of
nature, for the Heathens who had no revelation held it so, which made them
avoid all injurious carriages to places of divine designment; As they thought
no wealth more thriftily expended then that which was laid out either in
Purchase of ground on which, or in building and adding to places built and
dedicated to their gods, so did they highly reproach all outrage on those
places or on any thing that related to them.

Therefore they acknowledged Temples sacred, Sacrum sacrove commodatum qui
rapsit parricida esto. Cicero pro Rosc.
and punished most severely those that did violence to them. In the Law of the
twelve Tables, It Is said, Facet and exemplum sacrilegi ophiusam bibere cogantur
qua po^a, terrores minasque serpentum observari aiant, ita ut mortem fibi ex
metu consciscant. Apud D. ^eatly Dip. dipped p. 214 De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 1, 2,
3.
Let him that steals away any holy thing, or dedicated to a holy use, be
punished as a Parricide: And the Aethiopians had a Law, that If any were
convinced of that Crime amongst them, there was a Potion given him to drink
made of compound Poison, which they had no sooner drank off but they rid
themselves of their lives, as conceiving they were stung with all kind of
Serpents. St Augustine tells us, that when the City of Rome was sacked by the
Goths and the barbarous Nations, Omnis humanitatis expertes, ad caedem alias
natae, yet they did not only spare the Temples and Churches, sed etiam Ethnicis
and omnibus promiscue qui ad Christianorum Templa confugissent; Yea, so far
were they proceeded in adoration of them, that they thought the ground on which
they stood, holy; though the building were erased, and the use interdicted,
which is affirmed by Trajan, whom Pliny brings in averring, Licet aedes
collapsa sit Religio ejus occupavit locum, therefore is it that I read of no
religious or civil man, much less Christian, ever allowing himself or others
in the demolition or expilation of any place or thing devoted to God, but
exploding it as that which he abominates and dare not practice nor approve of,
when and by whomsoever practiced. Learned Bucer has a Chapter which he
entitles, Lib. 1. de Regno Christi. c. 10. p. 45.
De restituendis Ecclesiarum Ceremonijs and sanctificatione Templorum, and
therein he has this further passage, Templa vocari in Scripturis Domus Dei and
domus Oratinis atque hinc agnoscere, quam horrendam ij faciunt divinae
Majestati contumeliam, qui templa domini habent pro deambulacris, locisque tam
prophanis ut in illis quaevis impura and prophana cum similibus, suis garrient
and pertractent. I read indeed of a Sicilian King, Res foeda. turpis, non
exponenda sine pudore and illi maximo stupori, urbi universae offendiculo, and
Senatui sacro-sanctae affendiculo: Gueu l. 1. c. 18.
that to enlarge his Palace pulled down an old Temple, but the good Emperor
Marc. Anton. was much offended at this fact, calling it a beastly and lewd
action, not to be spoken of without shame, protesting it was a matter of wonder
to him, and of scandal, not only to the whole City, Xerxes ante Navalem
congressionem 4000 armatorum Delphos ad Templum Apollinis diripiendum mifit,
quae tota manus nubibus and fulminibus deleta est. Justin hist. l. 2.
but to the sacred Senate; And Stories tell us of gripple men that have made
the things of God their prey, and suffered highly for their insolence: Xerxes
sent 4000 men to destroy the Delphique Temple, and bring away the precious
things that there were, but his whole Army was destroyed by Thunder and
Lightning from Heaven, Caepio the Roman Consul ransacked the Church of
Toulouse, Ipse and quicunque ex ed direptione aurum attigisset mis^ro,
cruciabilique exi^^ perierunt. Live. l. 67.
but the Historian tells us, That all that fingred the gold thence taken, lived
and died miserably; Marcus Crassus after he had taken 2000 Talents of Gold out
of the Temple of Jerusalem which Pompey left there, was no sooner past over the
River Euphrates but his whole Army was routed by the Parthians, and part of the
gold which he caused to be carried out of the Temple, was melted, and powered
into his mouth after he was slain, with these words, Now surfeit of Gold after
thy Death, wherewith thou could never be satisfied all thy life long. The
Japyges thought to be the Cretians, grew so wanton and proud of their
successes, that they despised the gods, brake down their Images, and destroyed
their Temples, as things needless and superfluous, but at last they were slain
by brazen Bals of fire from heaven: Herod hearing that vast Sums of money
were laid up for safety in the Temple, Steph. in verbo.
and hid in the Sepulcher of David, sent men of war to rifle the place, who in
digging as they came near the Coffins of David and Solomon, were destroyed by a
fire that brake out of the Cave, Ecce in Regione nostra Hipponensi quoniam came
Barbari non attigerunt, Clericorum Donatistarum and Circumcellionum latrocinia,
sic vastant Ecclesias, ut Barbarorum fortasse facta miliora sunt. Ep. 122.
Ecelesiae facultates in alienos usus converti^ sacrilegium esse dicunt
aessentior.
and burnt them to ashes. There are many other parallel Stories, not only of
Belshazzar, Leo Copronymus, Julian of the East, Felix, but also of Rotman,
Knipperdoling, Muncer, Phifer, and others of later times.

And truly as St Augustine complains of the Donatists, that they in their
outrages exceeded the very heathens, whose cruelties to theirs were mercies, so
may the Church say, the nearer the Church, the farther from God in goodness:
How little is God beholding to men when they keep up houses for their
Habitations, Calvinus ad Carolum quintu^ de Refor. Eccles.
and Rooms they use properly, but suffer Churches to fall down, or abuse some
of them to other uses then they were designed for. How much was Dioclesian
discommended, who contested for the privileges of his Palace, but cared not
what became of the places dedicated to God; And Nero who as much as in him lay,
butchered Christianity, decried not only the Ordinances, but the Feasts and
Solemnities of the Religion, yet then institutes his Juvenalia, (...) Dion. l.
61. ad finem. p. 698.
Feasts in memory of his beard then first cut; and to make the folly more
pompous, the hairs of it (forfooth) must be put into a case of gold, and be
consecrated to Jupiter; Aelia Catula, an old noble Matron, aged 80 years,
dances for triumph, and those that do least, make merry by singing and dancing.
It is no sign of great piety, when men are bold only upon the things of God.
When the World was under the power of Arians, Church-plate and Treasure was
seized upon, (...). Theo. hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 11.
and no place will serve the Tyrant Julian to piss against, but the Communion
Table; nay, when the bounty of a Constantine and Constantius shall be scoffed
at by an Apostate Foelix in these words, See how sumptuously the son of Mary is
served.

And no less impiety is it to rifle from the Churchman his maintenance, which
some of late endeavored, but God brought their counsels to naught, and their
devices to none effect. And just it was with God to scatter and disappoint
them, qui quaerunt mercedem Phineae sed operantur opera Zimri, that is, who cry
up Christ, and cry down his Servitors, who ought to live upon his Patrimony,
and who are to receive maintenance from the Altar which they tend: yea and
exclame against Magistrates who ought and do defend them. There is no need to
dispute the right of Tithes qua Maintenance The Christian Church in her purer
times, ever held Ministers worthy of maintenance, and of double honor for
their Calling sake, and feared much to detain or curtail their dues, or to
alter the species and manner of conveying it to them. Those Christians were
ever careful to give the labourer his hyre, and to minister temporals to such
as to them imparted spirituals.

And therefore till the time of H. 8. I find no Act of Parliament in this
Nation, that prescribes punishment for non-payment of Tithes, the people held
it so right a due to the Churchman, that they made no scruple of it, but if
they failed, the Law-spirituall punished them by penance; which they dreaded
so much, that they did seldom incur it: After that H. 8. had broke with the
Pope, and brought the Churchman under his lash, then every one trampled upon
the conquered worm: The Parliament of the 27th of his Reign seeing the
inconvenience, declared by Statute their judgment of such as refuse payment of
Tithes. And so they hold to this day, Hist. Counc. of Trent. p. 281.
and I hope ever will: for Caesar ought to be a son of the Church, Christ
only is Lord and Master of it: And let carnal and worldly spirits slight the
Church and her servitors, yet they will in conclusion find, that whenever
the Churches last day shall be at hand, the evening thereof will bring in the
States ruin and dissolution: So true is that of the Wiseman, He that robs
his father and mother, Prove. 28. 24.
and says it is no transgression, the same is the companion of a destroyer.

I know there are many who think sacriledg no sin, and the absorption of
Tithes no sacriledg, the Clergyman amongst those supernumeraries that ought to
be disbanded; and they would laugh to see Powers as dreadful to the Clergy, as
was King John, who accounted all spiritual m^n his enemies, and was himself an
enemy to them: Hollingshi. p. 172.
Or such times as that after when the Lord Chief Justice declared openly, Idem
p. 302.
Ye sirs that be Attorneys of my Lords the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and all
other the Clergy, declare unto your Masters and tell them, that from henceforth
there shall no Justice be done them in the Kings Courts, for any manner of
thing, although never so heinous wrong be done to them; but Justice shall be
had against them, to every one that will complain and require to have it: There
are some I fear, who would make the portion of God, not Benjamins, a worthy
portion; but an Ishmaels, an Issacars porton, a mean and worthless trifle; so
good Patriots they are, that they would dare God to curse the Nation as he did
the Jews in Mal. 3. for exceeding the deeds of the wicked, in robbing their
God, by taking away Tithes and Offerings, ver. 8, and 9. On which words Calvin
presents God speaking thus to the Jews; E^^e circuit totum mundum, non
reperietis tam effraenem licentium in Gentibus qualis inter vos grassatur,
Illae enim obsequium aliquod reddunt dijs suis, and sacrilegium illis est
abominabile, vos autem me fraudatis: An ago inferior sum Idolis vel deterior
est mea conditio quam illoru^. Calv. in loc
Compass ye the whole world, go into the most barbarous nests of the Heathens,
ye shall find no such gross licentiousness as is amongst you: For those
Nations barely by the light of nature, give reverence to their gods, and abhor
to take sacrilegiously what is devoted to them: But ye make no matter of
defrauding me of what is mine own, Am I inferior to Idols? is my prerogative
less dear to you, then that of false gods to those Nations? Such it is plain
there are, but blessed be God, I hope they will never prevail. For if Pharaohs
divinity, and Joseph's true piety abhorred to sell the Priests Lands, God forbid
that either their Lands or Tithes should be alienated in days that give
themselves the name of Reformation. And it ought seriously to be weighed by men
in Power, that besides the comeliness and piety of supporting those that are
Gods messengers, whose errand is to save our souls, and the gratitude that
ought to be expressed toward them, that are our instructors in good letters
(as generally Clergymen are) and the greatest Masters of Art: there is much
worldly wisdom evidenced in countenancing the Clergy; Magistrates are in
nothing more selfpreserving, then while they make the Ministry of their party,
and by protection of them conjure them their humble servants in all ways of
honor and honesty. And I think that if search be made in stories; the Clergy,
one time with another, have been as faithful and forward in all worthy
enterprises both of counsel and action as any; Cent. 8. cap. 6. p. 224.
which made Charles the Great (no mean politician) take their counsel and
consent in all his wars and expeditions.

I do not say but that the spirituality may sometimes oppose the civil
authority, and employ their interests as they did in Henry the second of France
his time for the Pope against him. Prudence in that case may hinder such
unkindness, and punish it, by preventing addition of what is combustible; State
Injunctious ought to repress causes of disturbance in any; for Magistrates must
not bear the sword in vain; but when the Churchman is quiet, and minds his
ministration, when he meddles with no secular things, any further then they
entrench upon Gods peculiar, and exalt themselves against what is called God,
then to be narrow toward him, is no argument of Christian Ingenuity.

I know there also are some, who think the Clergy of this Nation hardly dealt
with, when not only their preferments Ecclesiastical, but their Votes in
Convocations and Synods contemporary with Parliaments, and wontedly convened as
they, are also not allowed them: Nor has their body (which for number and
nature is very considerable,) any suffragans in the lay Counsels of the Nation,
Levi has none of this inheritance among their brethren. I confess I am one
that think somewhat of this unreasonable, especially since they are subjects,
considerable both for number and quality. But I would humbly beseech the
Ministry to adore Gods Justice in this case. Some of them looked out false
burdens and causes of banishment, as the phrase is Lament. 2. 14. Now all they
can expect, is food convenient for them, and the Crown of glory hereafter
prepared for them. I wish them the patience of Saints, and the victory of
Martyrs. It will become none of them to use Luthers Cedo nulli, but holy Bishop
Jewels courageous sobriety: I deny my living, I deny mine estimation, I deny my
Name, I deny my self, but the faith of Christ and truth of God I cannot deny:
And when God sees this temper in our Prophets, he will return, make up their
breaches, and heal their wounds; yea he will persuade Powers to set the Ark in
its proper place, 1 Chronicles. 15. 1.
and refer debates in Religion to religious and learned men; Pontifices
religionis sunt judices legis Senatores, was a Maxim of the Heathens: Sir Edw.
Deering his Speech against taking away Bishops Votes, p. 91.
For as a noble wit said in Parliament, Was it ever seen that Laymen should
determine upon doctrinall points of Divinity, Divines alone excluded? Theology
is not so low, so facile a trade; Let us maintain the Doctrines that are
established; to declare new, is not fit for our Assembly. So he. And till it
come to pass, that what concerns Religion, be considered by grave Bishops and
Presbyters, who in full convocation propose things orderly, debate them
scholastically, moderate them heartily, and report their conclusions to
Superiors faithfully, I expect no peace in the Church, no nor unity in the
civil body; we shall still be Ismeals to each other, Jer. 6. 14.
every ones hand will be against his neighbor; The hur^ of the daughter of our
people will be healed slightly; though some may cry peace, peace, there will be
no peace, as it follows, c. 8. v. 11. For matters of Religion are tender things
and to be handled gently; proper for the debates of an Usher, a Hall, a Morton,
a Bromrigg's chayr, environed with Learned and Reverend Assessors, the choice
of the Order of Presbyters; These well countenanced, may by Gods blessing,
bring Church-confusion into form; from other then such as these, I look for
nothing but wander; Nor do I expect this Nation will long be renowned for
Learning, unless not only those poor encouragements that yet continue, but
greater advantages be settled as rewards of Learning. Lectius. and Spanhemius
both professors at Geneva, Praescript. Theol. l. 2. Dubia Evang. 3. p. in Ep.
Ded.
much admire our Church-Honour and Orde, praying the continuance of it, as that
which by its liberal encouragement of Learning, highly contributes to the
multiplication of Truths-Champions; and good men, they may well commend it,
from the sad consequence they find of the contrary in their own country and
other Nations; whenas so grand a Master among them as Calvin, Beza in vita
Calvini prope finem.
was (for ought appears) kept so short, that all the gains of his life, left
not (Books and all) at his death, above 40lb sterling: Sure God was his
Library, as the Ravens were Elijahs purveyors, a Miracle alike in both.

Mine humble prayer therefore to our Governors is, that they would consider
the Churchman, and think how better to encourage Learned men. If in the
Military trade were no Offices of Command, which have great pay annexed to
them, who would covet to be more then ordinarily expert? who would venture life
if his General had not power to reward him? In State Affairs who spends his
whole life and pains, where places of Honor and Trust are not to be obtained?
Men that have great spirits, love (as Sr John Perot said of Sr Christopher
Hatton) to come to Court in Masks, Frgm Regal.
and to dance Galliards by which they c^per to their after-greatness. Who
planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? who makes an
experiment, and carries not away the secret and advantage of it? only in
Church Service there must be no advance, be the parts and pains never so
eminent. Alas they see little, that see not Ministers men as well as others,
that know them not to have Children and Families which require supplies, as
other men's do; that find not amongst them many pregnant wits and great
spirits, that with the Marigold love the warm beams of power, Egregios invitant
praemiae mores.
and glitter best in the Sunshine of favor; Hinc priscae redeunt arts,
foelicibus ind^, Ingeniis aperitur ^ter, dispectaque musae Colla levant. Claud.
in Paneg. ^1. In ^tilicon.
whom a sprig from the plume of Royalty much becomes and enlivens. In the
firmament all the Stars are, yet are not all of a use and magnitude, their
influence is according to their composition, situation, and the nature of the
subjects under their dominion. So in the Church, all Ministers are not all of
one size, or one way gifted, yet all useful in their orb, shining bright when
set in the proper candlesticks of their own genius and natural addiction. In
the Soldiery, some are excellent for the field, others for siedges, some for
designs, others for action, some for horse conduct, others for foot* some
desperate in single service, others with company; excellent Generals proportion
to every one that command in which they are best versed. The Lawyer is no less
renowned that forms a Pleading skilfully, that draws a Deed advisedly, that
resolves a Case maturely, then he that pleads aptly, and evidenceth to a Jury
eunningly: In the Court, he is as well thought fit to be employed in
negotiations with foreign States, that speaks little, but thinks more,
plodding through the touch marches of his entrust, as he to be sent on courtly
congies, and politic Ceremonies; who has no parts more noble* then to know
the rule of civility, and after what rate the exchange of ceremonies are? and
in what garb State-ministers are to be treated and accosted. The Physician that
is skillful in Anotomy, and knows the several vitiosities and atrophies that
the body is subject to and decayed by, is as much admired, as he that casts an
Urine well, and concludes by the Symptoms and his experience what a disease is,
and after writes* with quickness a recipe to cure it. In Mechanique Arts, all
are not alike excellent; some masons excel for waterwork, others for land:
Some smiths are rare for locks, others at Bars, and Guns, and Instruments of
Battery: Some gardiners have rare faculty in improving flowers; others no less
in ordering plants and trees: Shall we count no man a complete mariner, but he
that with Sr Francis Drake has compassed the world. A good Pilot is eldest
brother to the greatest Captain; and he that can keep his Vessel from the
Bishop and his Clerks* Rocks on the Western Coast in Southwales. Par. 1. Vowell
p. 78.
not less an arts-man, then be that goes a greater voyage. If in these Cases,
diversities of gifts are honored and rewarded, why not in ^ee Churchman, where
there are as great variety as in any Artist. whatsoever? If gifts are from God,
why are we partial, and esteem no gift but that of the Tongue; if a man have
Language to preach nimbly, and pray fluently, he is presently qualified; as if
God did, or men ought to choose Preachers as they do Parrots by their
l^quacity: If all talents are from God, then to be valued by us, as bestowed by
him for the Churches use. If the Bishop of great years, and having a great
charge, the care of his Diocese (and performing that conscientiously and
vigilantly according to his duty both by the sacred and Canonick Laws) do not
preach constantly, or but seldom, then the cry is, Belly-gods, idle: truly I am
positive a Bishop ought to have a gift of Preaching, and to use that gift as
frequently as he may, and mostly where in his Diocese there is greatest want,
and the constanter and abler our Bishops were in this kind, the greater has
been their renown, and the more the shame of those that reproach them; yet is
not preaching the sole work of a Bishop, he must take account of errors in
Doctrine and manners, which many have found when they have worthily discharged
it, a great burden: If God has set in his Church Governments, it is a labor
which equals any other: If there be any man not so extraordinarily gifted to a
quick preaching as are others, though he be vir omnium horaiu^* a Cock for his
early rising to his study, an Apollos; mighty in argum^nt and writing, an
universal Languager, that can read all Originals, and usefully impart them;
yet this gift of God must brand them to a reprobation: As if there were not
gainsayers to be provided against, and Heretics to be silenced by
disputation, as well as affections to be warmed and understandings to be
informed by frequent preachings. Our Religion has gained much by books of
Dispute against the Romanists, as well as by preaching practical Doctrine.

O but they say, Let every one be provided for properly: I say so too: But how?
but where? men's geniuses are directed by God when they tend to virtuous
studies, and the door is open to all that come and are fit for admission into
the Ministry. If there be a gracious heart and a competency of Learning, who
can forbid marriage to his Order. And when men are in a function must they not
live by it? If all preferments in the Church are reduced to Tithes, all
Ministers must to preaching, or rest unpreferred, perhaps starve. While there
were preferments and other courses of support, many whose talents were to more
knotty studies, turned that way, and performed such parts of service as they
themselves were best qualified for, the rest by deputies; (and they had been
sufficient ones) for ought I know the Church might have fared never the worse,
the spirit of Eliah is sometimes doubled upon Elisha. But now those helps are
removed and alienated, what shall those usefully gifted men do: Put some of
them are out of their Livings and Fellowships. Qualified many people say they
are not to the work of the Ministry; truly I think they are not fit for those
heavy ears, which deserve not the alarums of silver trumpets. What then? Must
they be exposed to shame, and want, and servitude? God forbid these vessels of
gold, which the liberality of Heaven gave in Ornament to this Church should be
transplanted, and others of no nobler mettle be set in room of them: I know
there are some Oaks, nay a great many, blessed be God, who have kept their
stations in this great fall of Church-timber, who are very able
master builders, and highly deserve of the Church of God; these cannot but
grieve to see, when those that fed delicately are desolate in the streets, they
that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghils, Lam. 4. 5. to hear the bells
of Aaron in such discord: yea they must needs lament, to see that the fire of
destruction, rather then that of purifying, has passed upon their brethren of
the Clergy, many of which were holy and good men though of different judgments.
My prayer to God is, that our Governors may consider the great scandal that
Religion is under, while by our Indignities to the Clergy, that are not all of
the current opinion, we not only turn a base calumny of our Jesuited
countreyman Campion into a Prophecy; but also help to fulfill it ( Nihil
putidius clero Anglicano, says he,) What a Jubilee does this cause to our
adversaries, when they see the Horsemen of our Israel dismounted, and the
Chariot of Government overthrown, at least disordered; and our garments of
beauty like a beggars vest, patched and clouted with shreds of all sorts and
colors; O what advantage do we give our adversaries, when our variances fill
us fuller of animosity then holy zeal, which bright Sun is seldom in the souls
firmament contemporary with the Moon of sensual passion: I wish that some would
give way, and others not take the way of their brethren, but all endeavor to
excel one another in humility. In moderateness: no man's humor is valuable
with Church peace: they who will carry all with high hand, and not bear with
their fellow Christians in lesser things, should consider the demeanor of
their Lord Christ; Ille servare docendo homines studuit, hi perdere armia
satagebant, that is, in Scripture phrase, He came to do the will of his Father,
and to bear the reproaches of sinners, when they must have their wills, or we
no peace with their consents. It was an excellent spirit of that gallant
Archbishop of Colen in Charles the fifth his time, and well were it if it were
diffused amongst us; for he (good man) when the Emperor resolved to put Prince
Adolph. in his place, making great warlike and invasive preparations against
his territories, which would not only have wasted them but the neighboring
countries, by which thousands of innocent people would suffer; generously, to
prevent that mischief, absolved his subjects from their Oaths, and resigned his
right. If they that are eager to propogate their own tenants* and cry up
themselves for men extraordinarily illuminated, would think themselves less,
and others more worthy then themselves, they would with Jonah, endure any
danger and diminution, rather then imperill multitudes of souls: in this case
that of the Poet is not true, Solamen miseris socior habuisse doloris. But I
hope God will persuade Lions and Lambs to lie down together; and use Learning
and calm breeding as an instrument (subservient to his grace) for effecting
here of; for as the Poet said

-- Didicisse fideliter arts,
Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros.
This made elder Christians to their love one to another, add a second
expression of charity, con^isting in care of educating youth, and nourishing
learned men in all Sciences, as their Tutors and Conductors. For as the best
built Vessels will miscarry if they have not good Pilots, and able Steersmen,
and the gainfullest Ports are lost, if the seasons of making them be not
observed: so are the greatest wits confounded by want of method, and all their
promised usefulness immerged in their misconduction. Mutius in vita ejus.
Charles the Great was a Prince of prudence and Royal Grandeur, Cent Mag deb. ^.
p. 6. p. 226. Lib. de Zelo vet. Ger. Princ. c. 9. Ergo Thersiten, Simonem
^oeteraque prodigia vetustatis and nos been sci^ ^^ and posteri frequentabunt,
Divum Aurelianum, Clarissimum Princip^m, Severissimum Imperatorem, quem totus
Romano nomini orbis est restitutus, posteri nescieus. Tiber. apud Vopiscu^.
aiming to raise pyramids of Renown to his Memory, and to be called the Patron
of Learning, of him Mutius reports, That he endowed men of Science, and eminent
Artists, with honorable pensions, and gave them personal respect. And in the
Imperial Laws there are numerous Constitutions to this purpose. Yea Lupoidus de
Babenberg tells us, that the old Germune Princes, and those Potestates of the
Roman Empire, held themselves in honor most bound (next the immediate service
of God) to encourage and disperse Learning thorowout their territories. And
though I doubt not but mercy has rewarded that Charity which is from them
accepted, Solus Maecenas vir Clarissimus sum cruditus deque bonis literis and
earum cultoribus optime meritus Musarum (...) nominem virtutum suarum preconem
scriptoremve potuit invenire. Meibonius in vita ejus. p. 7.
and there can be no addition to them by our Eulogium's, yet that their
examples may animate others to do worthily, and rest renowned, as they, I shall
enumerate such instances of charity as I judge pertinent to my purpose. For I
hold it very uncomely, that such worth (as was in a brave soul, the Jewel of
his time,) An Aurelian, who made the world Roman, learned and civil, should be
concealed. It seems to be a monstrous ingratitude, that such a fautor of
Learning as Maecenas, should have no Writer of his praise. If the Jews
presented the Builder of a Synagogue amongst them, as worthy Christ's
compassion, I will be bold to tender noble Emperors, Christian Kings, Learned
Popes, Puissant Princes, charitable Subjects, Founders of Schools of Learning,
in all quarters of Christendom as worthy of due honor and mention.

I mean not to mention those Asian Schools which we read of in Eusebius and
others, because I have elsewhere touched on them. Nor can it be expected, those
vo^illating times could afford such liberal Charities, as since Peace and
settlement has blessed the world with; those Academies were rude, because the
times were barbarous; but when Christianity became Epidemical, and Power was
baptized into the Name of Christ, then Charity displayed her self this way: No
Nation* but has her Academies and Schools public, Lege Prefat. ad Lud. liter.
Stur.
besides their private Gramman-Schools.

I f^^de about 20. Vt fitio and haeredi suo Conrado Imperium been ordinatum,
and doctis instructum and munitum illorum consilijs possidendum relinqueret.
Academies in Germany, one of which is that of Vienna, founded in An. 1239. by
the Emperor Frederick the second, to the end, that he might leave to his son
and successor Contrade, an orderly Empire abounding with learned men, and being
environed wi^^ heir. counsels b^^ght be invincible.

In Italy twelve, of which Bononia is most ancient, founded by Theodo sius
Junior, in Anno: 420. In the Charter whereof is this passage, If any one be so
bold and haughty, Si quis tantae fit audaciae etc.
injuriously to offend any Student going to or coming from this University, he
shall be punished with death.

In France 16. In the Netherlands 6. In Denmark and Poland 5. In Spain,
Arragon, Casteele and Portuagall, abo^t. 16. All which own for their Founders,
men of Piety, Bounty, and Blood.

Nor have our worthy Ancestors been remiss in this kind; for the two Sisters;
Cambridge Oxford.
whose milky breasts have nourished such multitudes of learned children, leave
testimony from a learned man and a Forraigner, Nullae in orb Christiano vel
(...) ha^^nt ad ^^^par^^d^s ecclefia^^ minist^^s commoditates quentus Anglia,
To have in them more commodities to encourage is (...) men, then all the world
besides: He that considers their great Revenues, august Stru^^ures, ample
Privileges, prudent Statutes, orderly Government, frequent Exercises, will
confess that their Founders were wise and noble, that their improvement ought
to be suitable, Bucer. l. 2. c. 6. de Reg. Christi.
and so blessed be God it has: What brave Princes they have educated, what
noble Statesmen they have completed, what renowned Churchmen they have
instructed, what able Countrey-Gentlemen they have accomplished, yea what
Catholick-Artists have there studied; the Nation, the World knows, and to the
Nations honor owns?

Do not the foundations there perennate the name of their Founders? are they
not lasting Pedegrees of honor to their Families? surely yes. We that are
living ought to praise God for their bounty, and to mention them with
gratitude, I will not repeat what elsewhere I mentioned; In my Apolog for
Learning and Learned men.
only know all men, that the Clergy have not been sparing in their bounty to
our Universities, no nor have the Nobility and Gentry withdrawn their helping
hand. By the noble Kings Edward the second and third was Kings College began
and finished; Cambridg^.
Elizabeth, Queen to Edw. the 4th and Henry the 6th, founded and enlarged
Queens College; Elizabe^h Countess of Clare, founded Clare Hall; Margaret
Countess of Richmond and Darby, stipended a Professor of Divinity, and added
much to Christ's and St John's College; John Keys founded Keys College; King
Hen the 8th, and his daughter Queen Mary, founded Trinity College; and Frances
Sydney Countess of Sussex founded Sidney College; and the last, but not the
least, is Emanuel College, founded by Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and one of the Privy Council to Queen Elizabeth, of late and famous
memory* whose zeal to God in that glorious Work, has been rewarded in the
success of men's Studies there, and their usefulness after in the Church and
State; in the number of which, the grave and pious B^ of Norwich yet, living
deservedly is reckoned, and it ^^^ely had one, though not bred in it, yet Head
of it, ( O mihi locum* suavem ubi incipit occasio sio memorandi and nom^^andi
suavissimi odor is virum,) Sanct. Bernadus l. 4. de Go^fr^do Carnol us Episc.
Dr Richard Holdisworth, a man of holy life, pure belief, matchless industry,
profound speculation, fitted both for the Ghaire and Pulpit. But alas, he is
dead, and it also must decay and come to a period; But O Lord cause the sun
that threatens its ruin never to arise; may that day never come, wherein good
men say, We have no pleasure in it; let it ever yield faithful and useful
persons both to Church and State; let no son of violence come near it; peace be
within its walls, and prosperity be to all its Members and B^^ne factors; for
it has been a fruitful Mother of many beauteous and admirable, virtuous and
learned Children; Quid faciam? Sanctus Hieron, ad Cromatium alios.
vocem pectori negare non valeo, amor ordinem nescit.

Nor has Oxford been without her number of Noble Benefactors; Oxford.
Of the Clergy I say here nothing, because they are otherwhere remembered:
Amongst the Laity, Baleol King of Scots whilehe was prsoner here founder of
Baleol College; Sr William Peter Secretary to Edw. 6th, augmenter of Exeter
College: Sr Thomas White Alderman of London, restorer and augmenter of St
John's: Dr Hugh Price Founder of Alban Hall: and Mr Wadham Founder of Wadham
College, are (with all due veneration) to be remembered: Nay I could wish, our
emulation were to excel them, in this or some such kind of bounty; Men live in
a charity longer then in children, and obtain a Name better then those of
sons and daughters; but if we be too cold and chill to be provoked to do
good, I pray God never to permit us to do evil; if Learning be not advanced,
let it never be injured by us: 'Twas a brave speech of H. 8th in the Parliament
house Anno 37 Regni, If I contrary to your expectation, should suffer the
Ministers of the Church to decay, Hollingsh p. 971 F^lic^m igitur hanc domum
quae juvandis instituta est literis, cui a teri etiam debentur seculi hujus
dotes? cujus alterius beneficio revocatae ab interitu Graecae pariter ac
Latinae sunt litera. Huttonus in Praefat. Vallae ad Leon. 10. Pontif. Roman.
or Learning which is so great as Jewel to be minished, or poor, or miserable,
to be u^relitved; you might say that I were no trusty friend to you, nor
charitable to mine, even Christian, neither a lover to the public wealth, nor
yet one that feared God. And it is the glory of the Medicean family, that they
have ever loved Learning, and cherished Learned men, for which they are noted
to be blessed with riches and honor above most houses fn Europe. Let men in
place and power take heed, all they do to inoculate their Names into the stock
and rolls of Royalty, amounts to nothink if they disoblige the Learned; for
though prowess and hardiness, diligence and wealth, are great advancements to
glory, yet they are things perishable, and have no influence on succession;
when the Lion is dead or disarmed, then every body beards him, (and Goliath
deserves to be infulted upon, who defied, when in his array, and in the head of
Philistims, both Isreal's God and Isreal's host:) but he that has been a
bounteous and brave Prince, good in Office to Religion and Learning, may expect
after his death to live in the eternity of Historians pens and Orators tongues,
Tu ille orbis amor illud humani gencris delicium restorator Pacis, belloru^
extinctor, author securitatis, turbarum sedator, Pater studiorum, fomes
literarum, opeim ^rum artium, foelicis ingeni^rum cultus reparator. Idem eodem
loco.
and have Encomiums like that of Leo the tenth; Thou O Learned Leo, art the
worlds darling; all mankind are enamoured with thee, as the restorer of peace,
the determiner of war, the establisher of safety, the calmer of strifes, the
father of studies, and the fosterer of student, the great Patron of ingenuity.
And for my part I almost think Cardinal Richilicu half recompensed for all the
invectives against him, in that Epitaph the Schoo^s of Sorbon made upon him;
I Will mention but part of it to avoid prolixity.

Hic oriundus a Regibus aut pro Regibus, Superavit seipsum, major aliis and
semper se minor, Vittoria Syri Mercur.
etc. And then concludes; Though Richlieu be dead, yet his wisedem lives to
move Europe; yea he lives in the Schools of Sorbon, in which nothing dies, but
has immortality of fame: The knowledge of this has so convinced great
spirits, that they, next to the Gods, have been awed by nothing more then the
fear of being disgusted by men of Learning; Though Caesar made great changes in
Rome, yet he not only dealt gently, but liberally with Learned men. Suctonius
in vita ejus p 9. Edit. Sylburg.
Omnes medicinam Romae professores and liberalium artium doctores, quo
libentius and ipsi urbem incol^rent, and caeteri appeterent, civitate donavit.

There are other instances of the charity of Elder times, to poor of all sorts,
whether of Noble houses decayed, or ingenious Callings antiquated, or the like,
but I pass them by; concluding, that no encouragement to Art answers those of
Rewards and Honors: for as Sr Edward Deering witily wrote, Page 112.
Great Rewards do beget great. Endeavors: and certainly when the Great Basin
and Ewer are taken out of the Lottery, you shall have few adventurers for small
plate and spoons only: If any man could cut the Moon all out into little
Stars, although we might have still the same Moon, or as much in small
pieces, yet we shall want both light influence.

Thus much of the second Head, under which I reduced the glory of Elder Times,
their Charity.

I come, now to the last, The Policy of former times; not that Policy of
Circum vention, but of Government, by which Laws, honesty, property and civil
order were immured.

I do not propose any Scholasticall or nice stating of these severalities,
under heads precisely to their nature, but so I rank them, Demosthenes says
well. (...) Stob. Sermon. 143.
as may give me method to write of, and the Reader some little delight to read
them.

As then the foundations of buildings are first to be well laid before the
superstructure can go forward; so in affairs of Government, (...) Demosth. M.
Pym Earl of Straffords Case. page 4.
the reason and method is univocall; Laws are the supports of Government; which
made the Philosopher say, No Laws no Cities: Laws, are the boundaries of lust
and lawlesness, (...). Nisi potestas publica esset alter alterum vivum
degluitiret. Prove. Hobr. apud Grot. de jure belli and pac. l. 1. p. 92.
Without them lust (says Mr Pym) will be a Law, Covetousness and Ambition will
become Laws: Laws are as necessary to Polities, as Physicians to natural
bodies, and as Cyrus said well, They must needs be unjust, Who will not be
obsequious to Laws, which are beneficial to all; and when they are just and
lasting, equally respect all that are to be bound by them. It is the frailty of
our nature to trespass upon lenity; therefore wise men care not how severe
Magistrates are when they are just, because they resolve not to provoke. (...).
Governors that are prudent, consider Laws under two regards, as initiall and
constitutive, as subsidiary and establishing what is already well disposed;
Apud Stobaeum Sermon. 143.
for changes seldom advance peace, but multiply the care and insecurity of the
changers; to prevent which, Governors eye disorders at that distance, in which
they are least dangerous, and put irons in them, ere they break prison to
public annoyance; as an advised Physician, who sees a disease in the matrix of
ill humors, when (as it were) the materia ex qua is hardly massed, Apelles ex
unicae lineae ductu, Solo Protogeni tunoiuit.
long before it be articulate and quick; or as Apelles, who saw Protogenes his
art in the carriage of his pensill but half a line: Plin. l. 37. c. 18.
Laws, like nets ought to lie round, to compass all offenders: and those who
(being subjects) hope by their greatness to be privileged from the command of
them, either meet with no Governors worthy their place, or no Laws worthy
their Name: The general end of Laws is Order, for all Laws are either
mandative of duty, or tuitive of property, or remunerative of virtue, or
punitive of vice, all which tend to Order, and Order is then rightly cared for,
when to Superiors duty, to Equals love, to Inferiors pity, and to all Justice
is given, and wherever these are in any sort omitted, either the Law is too
short, or the Executioner too remiss.

God as he is the first in Order and Dignity, so the great and Supreme Law
giver, when first he permitted man's prog up and down the world for a
livelihood, he gave him his Credentials according to which he should negotiate,
This was the (...) the unwritten Law, graven by the finger of God in the Tables
of Man's heart, though blurred by sin, yet never so to be erased, but that it
had power of accusing or condemning, so said the Apostle, for when the Gentiles
which have not the Law do by nature the things contained in the Law, these
having not the Law are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law
written in their hearts, Romans 2. 14, 55
their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or
excusing one another.

What this radical Law was, and how far it reached is somewhat above me to
determine: But this is plain, that from the right use of this Law there is
enough to make us know God, our selves, and our Neighbor, and to abhor injury
to any of them. It Is true, God explained this Law by superadded Laws which he
gave his people the Jews, and according to the equity of which we Christians
proceed, but he never superseded or nulled that Primitive Law; But rather
strengthens it by these latter. Though the fairest draught of this Law was that
on the heart of Adam, yet the remains of that divine Art is admirable in the
heart of every man, who from that is taught to love and fear God as the most
excellent good, and to do every thing as in his sight, yea, not to do
wickedness because of the divine adversation to it. There are amongst the
Learned those that specify the heads of this Law written in the heart; Our
late deceased Seldom out of the Rabbis reduces them to six heads, Cap. 2. de
Synedriis Judaeorum.
Idolatry, Blasphemy against God, Shedding of blood, Incest, Theft, judicial
Proceedings, and they farther say, that after the Flood there was added a
Seventh against eating of blood.

I purpose not to say any thing of this further then to show the necessity of
Laws to keep Nature in awe, and the great use of them; For what Saint
Chrysostom says of Governors that say I of Laws, (...).
their right hand, If people had no Rulers and Magistrates, men would have
lives less calm then wild beasts do, and would not only snarl at but wholly
devour one another. As God commended the use of Laws by his first compiling of
them, so has he principled man with dispositions desirous of and conformable
to Laws; No Family, no combination, no number of men but have their Laws,
Customs, and usages according to which in matters of all natures they proceed;
If there be any Casus omissi, they consult about them, and make prudent
provisions concerning them for the future.

The Law of nature is the general Law of mankind; A Law immutable has been
and ever will be what it was till it cease by dissolution; What was to Adam a
sin by the light of Nature, is no less a sin to us by light of the same
nature: To disobey our Creator, To forget reverence to our own selves, To do
injury to those that live with us; These and sundry such things are abusions to
nature, and against the law of it.

Upon this Text of Nature, Men in all ages have largely commented, and the
several Laws of Nations are as so many Pandects and multiform Cases upon the
Institutions of God in nature, God has given man understanding to proportion
Government to the best advantage of civil society; The Authority to rule is
Gods, the frame of Government men's; They at first order it as seems best to the
advantage of them and their people. In all Governments there has been great
care to compile Laws with advice, and to execute them answerably; Therefore the
more innocent times and people resigned themselves and theirs to the pleasure
and conduct of their Religious and holy men, or to such martial spirits as yet
were guided by them, and wholly rested on their sagacity for conduct: It was no
vulgar policy to possess people that Lawmakers had colloquy with the gods in
the contexture of their Laws, the nature of man by a voluntary and yet in a
sort awed propension, believing best of that which came from the divine
supervising: And indeed there were no Laws ever made or continued good, but
such as have their pattern from that luster and equity which is in the divine
Law, whether in pure Nature or in sacred writ; For while Lawmakers consulted
with themselves and endeavored to enter^ize their powers, and entail to their
Families the glory of Soveraignties, they were apt to embase Laws by mixtures
of injury, which lacquied to their Usurpations; And while they had rewards and
honors to bestow, wanted not Parafites to excite them thereto, and Orators to
defend them, with pretended Reason for so doing; But when they consulted with
Right, Equity and Justice, and considered that to oppress others to right ones
self was injury, and a plausible ground of the oppresseds conspiracy against
their oppressors, and that they ought not to do as they would not be done by,
then they betook themselves to equaller distributions, or to such designs of
prudence as gave them honorable establishments by consent; And so Volenti non
sit injuria.

Of all the Lawgivers that I read of none more absolute then Moses, yet none
more ingenious, the nobility of his mind and the tenderness of his conscience
would not permit him to fix rule upon his Family, he left the dispose of it to
God whose it was. There is a second much to be admired, It was Mycithus Servant
to Anaxilaus Tyrant of the Rhegini, Steph. in verbo. Macrob. Satur. l. 1. c. 11.
who had by his dying Master commended to him the Government of his Kingdom and
Children; But he carried himself so gently and justly all the time of his
Viceroyship, That the people thought themselves governed by a person neither
unmeet for rule, nor too mean for the place; And when his Regency grew out by
the full age of his masters children, he resigned his power to them, and
therewith the riches he had accumulated, accounting himself only their Steward,
and contented himself, parvo viatico, living at Olympia to old age, very
privately, but with great respect and serenity; A great temptation to be other
then he was, but a greater virtue to be as he was. These two (I say) denied
themselves much, and were excellent Rulers, but for the most part Lawgivers
have done otherwise, Fuerunt bona principia quod oppressam voluit defendere
civitatem, Julius Exuperantius in Opus. de Sylla.
mali Eventus quod superatis dominis and ducibus savis gravius ipse civitatem
quassavit, qui se publicae calamitatis fore promiserat defensorem. And many
times in so doing not amiss; For where no injury is done who so fit for
Government as those who know the Rule of Government, and will use what means
conduces to the Preservation of Government against all who either by fraud
endeavor to subvert, ot by hostility to vanquish it as a Subject to their
Levelling Triumphs.

Of all the Heathen Worthies none more famous for their Laws then Lycurgus
among the Greeks, and Numa in the Roman Commonwealth, the former wrote his
Laws in blood, having the Sergeants of Death attending those that violated
them, and but requisite it was he should so do who had fierce and fallacious
Greeks to deal with: where Sampsons of destruction are there must be cords of
Adamant to keep them under with: The latter was so mild, that next to the care
of the gods, for he was ( Religion^ deditissimus) he thought nothing more
precious then persuasion or compulsive on men then a convicting moderation; And
so often as I read of his politic Laws, I am amazed to think how he that
never did any warlike thing, or ever had any powered force about him, should do
and settle as he did, and never be opposed in it; But then was then, government
as an ordinance of the gods was honored, and men were not so hardy to provoke
De^ties, but zealous by all means they could to appease them, and preserve them
tutolar of them; This made Government easy, and Laws fewer in number and less
tart in their nature.

The adaptation of Laws to persons and times, explorates notably the counsel of
Lawmakers. All Nations are not to be indulged or prohibited alike, nor at all
times, nor in all methods and ways; As in language and habit so in
conversation, Governors are in policy to comply somewhat with their Subjects;
Rattles please children, and small concessions people, who if enraged will rest
satisfied with nothing beneath their own will, and perhaps their Magistrates
ruin, but yet that is sometimes to be withstood when they ask what is neither
fit for the Magistrate to grant or them to have.

Of all Laws those of Justinians methodizing commonly called the Civil Laws or
Laws of Nations, are the largest for extent, as the Common Laws of England are
the most free in their concessions and indulgence; Of the first to say much is
needless, there are infiuity of Volumes in commendation of them: Indeed the
peace and communicat^e sociablenesse of one Nation with another, the stability
of their pacts and amities, the bounds of mine and thine so justly kept, are
Testimonies more then can be refuted: somewhat then of the chief heads of the
goodness of ancient Laws and Canons.

1. They established Propriety, and declared the rule of Justice, not only
between man and man, Nation and Natio, but also between Subject and Sovereign,
yea, in a sort betwixt God and Man.

By Laws Canonique and Civil were Religious men and Religious things set apart
continued and preserved to Religious uses. Had it not been for good Magistrates
such as Constantine, Theodosius, and later as worthy; There had been a seizure
of all the Houses of God in the world to the use of Profaneness, Priests might
have wandered in Wildernesses, Sabbaths have given way to Wakes, Sermons to
Interludes, Sacraments to Bacchanalian Feasts. Had it not been for Laws the
strongest had been the best, and the wickedest the wisest man, for such
sometimes thrive most: The beggar would have prayed no dole at the rich man's
gate, Nor the rich man have had out of which to bestow an alms, nor yet to
relieve himself: Had it not been for Laws vices would have been virtues and
virtues have heard the reproach of pusillanimity. Were not Laws, small offenses
would be beneath and great above punishment; Nay, what could be an offense when
there was no rule against which it was an offense? It were well for Nero and
his Sect of monsters if there were neither Clerk to recor nor Law to bound
their follies: But it is to the good of humane society, that there is this
restraint upon exorbitancy, and this encouragement to good and order.

The Ancients were very zealously addicted to their Laws and Customs, not more
out of superstition then policy, they knew that uno dato absurdo, mill
sequuntur, therefore when they saw mischief bold and menacing, they gave it, if
not the ill welcome of a sturdy allay, yet of a taunt and scornful invective,
sometimes the cry is fures privatorum furtorum in nervo atque in compedibus
vitam agunt, Aul Gell. l. 11. c. 18.
Fures publici auro atque purpura, sacrilegia minuta puniurtur magna in
triumphis feruntur, Seneca cp. 88.
and when virtues declined, and outrages played their prize, but for trial of
activity, yet were they punished with much useful severity, Cato Vticensis his
Son was banished but for breaking the pitcher of a girl that brought it by him
with water, which she had drawn for her use; And the Son of Famous Cinna but
for robbing an Orchard, and yet both these offenders were children under 15.
years of age apeece. Acrius illo aevo in errata joco admissa, ^pist. ad Poll.
quam hodie in flagitia serio, and ex destinato facta. And when changes for the
worse grew epidemicall, then even mild Marcus Antoninus gravely and resolutely
censures them: Ita me (mi Pollio) Dij ament Immortales, ita manu^ in bellis
Mavors meam regat, ut qui nostro aevo habetur, etc. Gu^v. cap. 2. p. 9.
So (my Pollio) let the immortal gods love me, so may my hand be prosperous in
war as I judge rightly, that he who in this time is of most exemplary
conversation, hardly is compararable to the most dissolute of former times. And
in another place bemoaning Rome he ^anches out into this Pathetique, Hanecine
Romam illam esse credis? Vbi priscis temporibus, and in aurco illo saculo senes
erant honoratissimi, etc. p. 15. l. 1. c. 3.
Can this be believed to be Rome, in which anciently and in the golden Age
lived venerable Fathers, modest young men, well-disciplin'd Soldiers, most
just Senators and Censors; Is this Rome nothing loss so far from what
wontedly it was, that it has no footstep, no shadow, no appearance of old
Rome. And Paterculus seconds him, In somnum a vigiliis, ab armis ad voluptates,
a negotiis ad ociu^ conversa civitas. l. 3. c. 3.
Rome is not what it was, Watchings are turned to dead sleeps, courage is
drowned in effaeminacy, industry invaded by idleness. O the happiness of
those Ages wherein Scipio Aemilianus lived, Qui nihil in vita nisi laudandum,
etc. Pater. l. 1. de Sc. Aem.
who said, thought, or did nothing but what was praiseworthy: And Aemilius
Paulus, A man as fully meriting praise as virtue could make him; Virum in
tantil laudandum, in quantum virtus intelligi potest, and Cato, homo virtuti
simillimus and per omnia ingenio Diu quam hominibus propior, qui nunquam recte.
etc. Paterc. p. 37.
And Cate one most like virtue and in wisdom liker a God then man, who never
did well for vainglory but because he could not do otherwise, who judged that
most reasonable which was most just, whose mind was ever under the power of
virtue, and concluded that best which was his part to undergo. Or Livius
Drusius whom Paterculus calls the most noble, Vir nobiliissimus eloquentissimus,
sanctissimus. p. 28.
the most eloquent, the most devout of men. Well might those be called the
gemmy Ages which abounded with such not almost to be credited Worthies, the
least flaw in the manners of men will appear, when such polisht Tables of
crystal stand amongst them, who both have wisdom to make Laws, and credit
enough with the people to sway them to obedience to them so made. And as their
Laws were dear to you, so was every thing of order and honesty much in their
eyes to preserve and deliver over to posterity, what care took they to keep up
the pale of distinction? how unwilling to suffer Ataxie to peep through the
least cranny of Government? What exemplary outsides did they speak by to after
ages? How observant were they of gestures and habits, Vestis aspera, Zona peuic
a, cibus locustae melque silvestre. omnia virtutu^ continentiae preparata S.
Hier. ep. 4. ad Rustic. S. Cypr. ac Heb Virgin, Tert, dr Hab. Mulier.
which if not comely and according to warrantable and customary mode, heard
ill; There was no rank of persons but kept precisely to their fashions and
robes, and were ridiculous out of them: How vehemently did St Cyprian and
Tertullian inveigh against Christian women, imitating heathens in their attire,
recalling them from their vain tricking and trimming, their embroideries and
costly arrays to the wonted way of Matron-like modesty? Caput maritis
subijcite, and sati^ orua^ae eritis, manus lanis occupate pedes domi figite,
and plusquam in auro fulgebunt, vefilte vos ser^co probitatis, byssino
sanctitatis, purpura pudicitiae, taliter pigmentatae, Deum habebitis amatorem.
Lib. de cultu Foeminae.
and in a persuasive and oratorious address courts them to bedeck, themselves
with virtues beseeming them; To be loyal and loving to their Husbands, to be
houswisly, to keep home, to clothe themseves with the scarlet and purple of
sweetness, piety, modesty more becoming them then gold and persumes,
concluding so set out, Even God will be in love with you: And this they did not
only in order to God whom Christians ought not to displease no not by
appearance of evil, but to avoid the scandal of contrary doing, and to signify
that this world and the vanities of it were no further useful to them, nor
valued by them, when it fitted them, for running their race with patience, that
so they might reach the reward with certainty: A good lesson for sober Ladies
to learn, for Certes that of the Civilians is most true, Si quidem meretricia
vest faeminae, non matrum familiarum vestitae fuissent. Salmuch. in Paneicoll.
li. 1. tit. 45.
No action of inquiry lies in soro saeculi, for attempting the chastity of a
woman, if she be habited as a lewd person, and not as a grave and civilly
fashioned woman.

Nor are we to think habits of light and impertinent consequence, since
Antiquity eyed them as suspiciously dangerous to steal in vices by their
excess, and to import more then they seem upon the first examen of them to do.
The Romans honored Cato for his grave habit: And the Satyrist upbraid one that
was vian that way.

Non pudet ad morem discincti vivere nattae? Perseus Satyr. 3


And Sulla in Suetonius counsels the Senate to beware of Julius Caesar, Vt male
prescinctum pueru^ caverent. Sueto. in Julio Ca^sare.
as one that was ominously clad. Yea Maecenas the favorite of Augustus, is by
the Poet blamed as is believed under the name of Malchinus. Horat. l. 1. Satyr.
11. Merbomius de Maecen. p. 119.


Malchinus tunicis demessis ambulat. And nothing had like to have ruined
Alexander so much, as that mutiny in his army about change of his Macedonian
habit and manners for the Persian.

I know God is no respecter of persons and habits, he views the heart, and if
that be upright, all is well toward him: but man who judges by the judgment
of discretion and visibility, cannot but conclude a weighty mind concerned to
express it self in an unantique habit, for clothes and company tell tales in a
mute but significant language.

As to the stating of fashions I pretend nothing, nor think I there is any
precise rule to be observed; it is one of those (...) and arbitrary things
which prudence and custom justly may be dictator of: Only the restraint is
against vanity and affectation of what is not suitable to our station and
condition, to our sex and age: Vests of youth ill beseem backs of age, and as
badly suit, as Esaus rough hands with Jacobs smooth voice; or as Instruments,
which by their discordant notes, unadapted to answer each other, are wide from
making up a consort: Observation and conversation are the best conductors
herein: Religion has no rule to prescribe in lesser things, where convenience,
and a due proportion to our condition is studied, and offense not vainly given.
Only methinks it is not fit that persons whose Ancestors were as it were
anonymous, should arrogate Paragaudae's, which became only those whose families
were supreme, and whose commands were sovereign. I wish Christians to study the
adorning of their souls, and to look that they abound in faith and good works.
Lib. de Coron. Militis.
Hic est habitus victoriae nostrae haec palmata vestis, as Tertullian said
alluding to the garments of Triumph used by the Heathens. And after that not to
despise things of civil distinction, but advance them. For order and honorary
differences are moral and universally owned by mankind, and not cancelled by
Christianity, which corroborates, and to all worthy ends, improves them.

Next, the Ancients were full of ingenuity disdaining to molest neighbors; and
infer violence upon no grounds of provocation, they thought national
compacts too sacred to be violated upon reasons unreasonable in the judgment
of honor and conscience. The Historian tells us, the Romans always took arms
upon weighty and just grounds. Force is ill employed, when injuries may be
recompensed upon the demands of the sufferer, and as harsh does it seem to
generous ears, to buy victory rather then win it. I know the common rule is
that which Livy reports of the Grecians, Fallax hostem quum vi superare
gloriosius duxerant. l. 42. Non fraud neque occultis sed palam populum Romanum
hosts suos ulcisci solere.
who held it more glorious to outwit then out fight an enemy. And this
Adgandestricus a Prince of the Catti knew well, which made him profer his
service to the Romans to poison Ariminus their enemy, which they bravely
refused, saying, the Romans did not use private means to dispatch enemies, but
to reduce them by force in the field. And truly it befitted Roman spirits to do
nothing in the dark, for by how much the more their craft, by so much less
their prowess wherein they chiefly gloried, appeared; Nobis non placet praecio
aut praemio aut dolis pugnare. lib. 3. c. 9.
according to that of Aurellius, who tells us, That amongst them was counted
generous and gallant, which was obtained by courage: When men were loather to
incur the shame of an ill accomplished victory, Malo me fortunae paenitcat
qua^ victoriae pudeat, Curtius v. 4. Sum^a faederum Roma^oru^ religio est.
Florust. 1. c. 6.
then undergo the penance of an honest misfortune; when leagues were not
beleagured, and victor'd, by unjust sollicitings of advantage to the prejudice
of right. Let the Consul Pius be a warning to all men in command, by Commission
from Romans, for he overcame the Sarmatae by wine, whom he should have dealt
with by battle; and though he saved Roman blood, yet he lost Roman glory, for
which he was adjudged to lose his life, and the reason the Senators ordered to
be epitaph'd, upon him was,

Hoc voluere Patres Romani extare sepulchrum.
Vt Ducibus foret* exemplum speculumque futuris.
Nam justis hosts precibus placare vel armis
Vincere non vitiis, his deliciosa decorum est,
Vna quibus cordi est, Romanae gloriae gentis.
Further they were very express in asserting the honor and rights of
Magistrates, and defending them as the defenders of Church and State; Nemo
human^ potestatem nisi qui prius divinam contempsit.
for since Government is of God, Governors, while such, are to be reverenced
by men under their subjection: and well they deserve it: For true Princes are
as he in Stobaeus said of them, (...). Sermon. 142. p. 527. (...). Idem p. 152.
Not swayed by avarice but reason, favor honest freedom, practice magnanimity,
and contemn neither the meanest friend, or abjects foe. But remember to take
and consider. Agatho^s counsel, that They rule men: Ought to rule according to
law: And must not ever rule. This well digested will make them glorious in the
Catalogues of fame, and only covetous to deserve of their dominions, 'Twill
entitle them to the blessing that attends peacemakers and peacepreservers. For
what argues greater policy or merit in Princes, then To keep their Countries
peaceable. In peace the Learned thrive, and the ruder are instructed. In peace
the Gentleman keeps hospitallity, and the pesant gains wealth. In peace the
Merchant sends to sea roundly, and the Lawyer quotes his books and presidents
boldly. In peace both Minister and people frequent their Churches, not fearing
to have their blood mingled with their sacrifice. In fine, Peace assures men
the command of their own, and gives a general content, because a general
good. The Historian giving an account of blessed times in Rome, Paterculus.
sums them up thu^, T^^c finita sunt bellae civilia; sepulta exter^a revocata
pa^^ sopitus ^bique a^morum furor, restituta vis legibus judic^^s authoritas
senatui majestas, redi^t cultus agris; sacris honos, securitas hominibus, certa
cuique rerum suarum possessio. And if the Magistrate be the instrument of so
great emolument to subjects, if he manage his affairs with clemency, shunning
cruelty as the falsest guards of Government; if he prevent factious and
uproars, which sometimes make such havocks of men, as would force a
compassionate Patriot to cry out with Me^^^rates, (...). Plutarch. Apot. p. 191.
O unhappy country which within thy self have destroyed so many worthy men as
would have sufficed to conquer all the Nations barbarous. Wherein can he be
loved and encouraged beyond his deserts? Kings, Princes and Fathers of their
countries must have the honor of reverence to their persons, of obedience to
their laws, of patience to their punishments, of maintenance to their estates,
and of fidelity to their crowns: and if Governors be less careful and
obliging, To pray for their amendment, is more Christian, then to contrive
their ruin. God has armed his Saints with prayers and faith, by which they
overcome the world and all the injuries of it. And good men own Gods will,
confining and concluding theirs: what they want in the hands of force and
power* they have in the wings of faith and prayer* and by how much the liker
men they are who revenge injuries* the more of the likeness of God they have
who pass them by as unworthy their revenge.

Next elder times were considerable in their care to educate their children,
Lib. de Instit. p^erorum ad Magist. Germ.
which Luther says, is res seria and quae Christi universaeque Christianitatis
plurimum intersit, not lightly and to antique frolicknesse, but to the precise
square of virtue, and in proportion to their fut^re probabilities and dispose
of life: C^to would do nothing before his children but what he would do before
the vestall Nuns; And good Parents will not permit Children to do ought in
their sight which is ^ncomely without reproof and high disallowance; There is
nothing so great a f^et to the minds Nobility as idleness and inoccupancy,
which made the elder ages educate their children thriftily, and in some kind
of toil: The Patriarchs and their posterity kept flocks, watching them by day
and night; And most of the Nations Eastern and Northern busied their youth in
some Art manual, not only to keep their fancy from wander, but also to be a
hidden stock for them whatever distress God should cast them into; It is a
good Proverb amongst us, Breeding is no burden; If many men's hands and arts
had not ministered to their necessities, they might have begged their bread, and
been bare-back'd for want of clothing: It was a notable Providence of
Ethelward the Grandchilde of great Alfred the Saxon, who had many children,
Sons and Daughters (all after great Princes and Princesses) yet thus they were
brought up; Fox Mon. Old Edit. p. 149. Johan. de Reg. In Epitaph. advers.
His Daughters he set to spinning, and to the needle, his Sons to the study of
Learning, Vt quasi Philosophi ad Rempublicam gerendam non jam rudes
procederent, a very noble President worthy the imitation of every one, who (as
the Proverb says) knows his beginning but not his ending, and may be brought
to a condition so abject and necessitous, that he may wish he had been the
child of a Corydon rather then heir to a greater person: That may befall any
one which reproachfully is written of Cardinal Richlieu, Parvus cinis modo est
qui magnus ignis fuit, teter fumus nunc est* qui nuper coruscans splendour,
^omnium oculos perstringebat. Inheritances are no durable Freeholds of
mortality, Riches have wings, and that which has wings will away; Honors are
the bitter sweets which choke more then they make happy; In the Court of H. 8.
was a Noblemans Son that said, It was enough for Noblemens Sons to wind their
horn, and carry their Hawk fair, and that Study was for children of a meaner
rank; To whom Doctor Pace nobly replied, that then Noblemen must be content
that their Sons wind their horns and carry their Hawks, while meaner men's Sons
do wield affairs of State. Those only are praearm'd against changes who rest
upon this world but as uncertain, and know how to lay their mouths in the dust,
when there is only hope for them in their humiliation, and to earn their bread
by labor when toil and travel is by God designed their portion and penance;
Let no man disdain poverty and reproach the abjectnesse of that condition, lest
he curse himself and his posterity, who may time enough, and sooner then they
expect, come to eclipse; Families have ebbs, and honors have their Syncope's;
Sad is the Story of the great warlike Belisarius who served the Emperor
Justinian, and wanted nothing that this world could present to his
accommodation, whom his Master loved, and his soldiers so respected that they
would not disobey his commands in any thing, Suidas sets him out as a guard to
property, none of his Soldiers durst violate any man, nor take any fruit from
the Trees in their march, so valiant and expert in conduct that with 8000
Greeks he chased almost 200000 Goths out of Italy, recovered all Asia from the
Vandals, and by a grave and resolute Epistle to Totilas the Goth, diverted his
course against Rome, and prevented its ruin; Yet this man after all his merit
is by the power of Trebonianus Chancellor to the Emperor* Zonar. Tom. 3.
annal. in Justin. Procopius and Crini^us de hon. discipline. l. 9. c. 6.
reduced to such a condition, that he was not only (as write some) stripped of
all, and a guard set upon him, as a public enemy, but (as others report) had
his eyes put out, and was reduced to such want, that he was enforced to get a
little shed by the Highway sideclampt up, wherein he kept, making moan to the
passers by, and praying them thus, Date stipem Belifario, quem rerum prospere
gestarum magnitudo extulit, and nec error, sed livor, and inimicorum invidentia
excoecavit.

There is then policy in Parents to breed children thriftily and to industry,
and prudence in Children while they may, to take it, and to imbibe it with all
greediness; Forasmuch as the evil day may come wherein what we can do will
more steed us then Moneys, Lands, Friends, times may come that will try the
greatest and dismount the proudest, happy he that has his Quiver full of those
artifices that may befriend him in his want, which idleness and vain education
will not do. I will conclude this head of Elder times policy in writing of
Books warily, and cautioning that Books of public offense to true Religion,
be either not written, or when written suppressed, or at least stigmatized;
There is nothing more to the honor of God then to propagate his Gospel by pen,
and to confute gainsayers at distance and by argument, And by nothing is error
more wo^nded then when it is denied safe conduct, when it passes by chance and
as a spy, not by license; St Augustine tells us of Imperial Laws made against
both heathen worships, heretical writings and outrages; And I read of
Marcianus his Edict against nice and useless disputations of divine Mysteries,
Epist. 48. De correct. Donatist. l. 17. l. 5. de Sum.
yea Honorius and Theodosius commanded the Books of profane men written
against the honor of Religion, and in defiance of the Church, to be burned; In
St Jeroms time Origens Book (...) was ill resented by the Orthodox; Ruffinus
and Pammachius carp at the father for translating it, and charge the errors
therein upon him, as making them legible by his Edition of them, which
otherwise would not have been understood; Apol. Hieron 1. advers. Ruffin.
And St Jerome is forced to answer it thus, What I did I did to discover Truth,
Do you think me an Interpreter? Proditor fui, prodidi haereticum ut Ecclesiam
ab haereticis vindicarem. Ruffinus is charged by Pope Anast^sius to have
affixed a Martyrs Name to an heretical Book, Epist. ad Episc. Johan.
on purpose to have it take more and spread farther; The Book of the Trinity
charged on Tertullian was not his, Hicron. Apol. l. 2.
no nor St Cyprians, but a Novatians: Si quid d^trimenti passa est Religio,
ille non intulit qui prohibuit. Car. Richli^us in Testam. Christ.
It has been ever a course in the Church of God to censure and inhibit Books
and Disputations which tend to destruction and not to edification, and is so
far from being, an entrenchment on Christian Liberty, or a burden to tender
consciences, that it argues a high and holy zeal well becoming Christian
polities and governors, 'twas good counsel Maecenas gave Augustus, Vt ipse Deos
moribus patriae receptos colat and ad eundem cultum alios compellat, nec Deorum
contemptorem qu^m permittat, Meibgnius p. 35
aut prestigiatorem tolerot haud dubium nihil magni futurum qui deos
contempserit.

Having thus shortly given a touch upon some of the most remarkable Virtues of
Antiquity and Elder Christians; My conclusion aims to draw an humble parallel
to these excellent presidents from the notable Christians and Christian
practices of this once glorious Church the Church of England: I know,
Comparisons are odious, and it ill becomes us to vye with Fathers and Martyrs,
whose lives have been lights, and deaths harvests to aftertimes, yet in this
case I conceive it pardonable to advance the mercy of God to us by this just
and warrantable Vindication, Nostris peccatis barbari fortes sunt nostris
vitiis Romanus superatur exercitus. S. Hiero. Ep. 3. De morte Nepot. Hist.
Council of Trent. p. 275*
and the rather because our mothers miseries seem to be a most triumphant
gratification to her enemies, making them conclude her forsaken of God because
smitten by men, and advantageth the interest of the Papacy, as Cardinal
Sfondrato upon the like grounds in his Negotiations with Charles the fifth*
noted: To give then this inflammation some lenitive, and to return their
insultation a gentle refutation; I shall hope by Gods leave to present her as
famous for order and enconragement of Learning, and her professors as
remarkable for their piety, charity, and policy as any Christians that preceded
them, and that not only before but also since the Reformation of this Church in
the abjuration of Popery.

First then, The Church of England since the Reformation has had sundry pious
Princes and Prelates, who have with warm zeal maintained the honor of
Scripture, allowing it the only rule of faith both in the direct precepts and
necessary divine consequences drawn from it, forbidding all traditions in
competition with it, all adulteration in allay of it, and commanding its
translation purely out of not understood tongues, into the mother Language,
that people might know and hear the will of God i^ his Word declared to them,
and celebrating all Church-services, so as people may be most edified by them;
This was no small advance from Popery that Religion grew English* that care was
taken that in the Lessons and Liturgies of our Service pure Scripture was read;
and if any of the Apocrypha, which but rarely, yet that only which was morally
virtuous, and least to be suspected or offensive.

In this Church, not only Martyrs in the days of Queen Mary died, but also
Bishops and Presbyters numberless ever since, have preached and wrote for the
honor of holy Scripture, as that which contains all things necessary to
salvation, So declare the articles of our Church. Art. 39.
And though (with grief I write it) all of place and learning amongst us, have
not given Scripture that testimony in their lives, but that a moral Epictetus,
or a Seneca might upbraid them: yet the Church in her aggregate consideration,
and thousands eminent in her, have personally attested their obedience to
Scripture, and brought all doctrines to the test of it, according to that of
the Prophet, Isa. 8. 20.
To the law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to that, it is
because there is no light in them. Therefore in the Stat. 1 Eliz. c. 1. Not the
Pope, not partial and factious Conventions, but the Scripture is the judge of
heresies, and Counsels rightly convened, judging according to it. This the
Laity declared not but upon serious consultation with the Clergy in
Convocation, that so every sanction might have its due weight.

I know there have been those that contrary to Scripture have brought in, Non
facit Ecclesiastica dignitas Christianum, non omnes Episcopi sunt Episcopi,
attendis Petrum, sed and Judam considera; Stephanam suspicis, sed and Nicholaum
respice. Sanctus Hieron. ad Heliod. Ep. 1.
though (blessed be God they had no rooting) dangerous doctrines and practices,
threatening overthrow to our well-ordered Discipline, by their innovating
pragmatiqueness, but these were not owned by any public Canons or State laws,
but upbraided as encroachments, and openly disgraced as scarres to our
Religion; and some of those that furthered this have accounted to God and men,
and therefore are to be passed over without further censure. The Church has
ever been stanch and her doctrine Apostolic, barked at by many, but
overturned by none: traduced for new and worthless, but upon search found to
be, As the apple trees among the trees of the wood, shady and fruitful,
comfortable in life, and pleasant at the hour of death. This made the L.
Cromwell in H. 8. time, in his last speech near his death, call to the people
to bear witness, that he died in the Catholic faith, not doubting in any
article of his faith, no nor doubting in any Sacrament of the Church: And all
this, because the articles of faith were not founded upon St Francs, St
Dominick, this Pope, or that Council, but upon the Scriptures, upon Prophets
and Apostles, Jesus Christ being chief corner stone.

2. This Church has answered primitive times in care of Government
Ecclesiastique. No Nation in the world had a more thriving Church then we: In
none more purity, state, decency, learning then we: In no Church the Clergy
more honestly privileged and respected, then in ours; wherein Government was
not at the Ordinaries pleasure, but limited and confined by Laws, and fettered
to prevent impertinent domineering. In this Government, according to the
pattern of elder times was avowed the Power of Rulers and Princes over all
persons within, and pretenders from without their Dominions, though not their
power in sacris, yet circa sacros, and in sacros, which every person in Orders
was to subscribe to; 1 Eliz. c. 1. confirmed by 5 Eliz. 1. so Canon. 1.
Convocat. Anno 1640. In this was maintained the antique Episcopacy, as of
Divine right, and of annexed Prelacy as of civil foundation and Regal bounty:
the sacred Order of Presbytery and the validity of Ordination by Imposition of
hands, and holy separation to to the Ministry.

Thirdly, This Church of England has answered Antiquity in countenancing Truth
and opposing Error both in Doctrine and Manners: It has ever yielded stout
Princes, who have been warm and kindled in the Cause of God, Ep. 3. ad Heliod
de morte Nepotiani lectione assiduae^ and meditatione diuturna pectus suum
bibliothe^am fecerat Christi.
against errors of all sorts. Prelates and Preachers have flourished in it,
whose breasts and brains by constant reading and meditation became Christ's
Libraries. As St Jerome says of Nepotian, They that consider but the expenses
and rewards given by Ed. the 6. to learned men sent for hither to assist in our
refinement; the grave Council took in the declaring of the Christian faith,
and doctrine of the Sacraments, 13 Eliz. c. 12. 39 Articles.
for avoiding of diversity of opinions, and for establishing of consent
touching true Religion, the zeal and open Protestation of many of our Prelates
and Professor^ against Toleration of Popery: In his letter to K J. against a
toleration about the Spanish match. About Anno 1603.
By name* the not long since deceased Primate of England, Archbishop Abbot, Mr
Powell Chaplain to the then Bishop of London, Dr Su^liff Dean of Worcester, Dr
Wills, Dr Hackwell and others: Yea all the Archbishops and Bishops of Ireland,
as appears by the Instrument read and pronounced by the then famous B. of
Derry, Doctor Downham, before God and the whole Estate of Ireland, at the
Cathedral of Dublin: The proceedings of King James with the States of Holland
in the case of Vo^stius, and against others in the Synod of Dort, the Synod of
this Nation in Anno 1640. Can. 3* and 4. against Socinianism, yea and the
judgments against Ham^unt, Holingshed. p. 1299.
21 Eliz. Anno 1579. and Lewis, 25 of the same Queen, and Hacket with others;
together with the many excellent laws, and prudent sanctions, for promoting the
honor of God, by encouraging preaching, praying, and holy exercises, by
commanding sanctification of the Lords day, and prohibiting any servile work
therein, with sundry other provisions of like nature. They (I say) that well
weigh these things cannot but commend our Churches well-grounded zeal. I wish
those that rend from her would consider what St Jerome said to some in his time,
Adv. Luciferian*
Segregas te cum tuis vermulis, and nov^m balneum aperis, si te Angelus aliquis
aut Apostolus rebaptizavit, non infringo quod sequeris; si vero in sinu meo
natus, si uberum meorum lacte nutritus, adversum me gladium levas, read quod
dedi, and esto si potes aliter Christianus.

Fourthly, This Church of England has had the blessing of God accompanying her
in her ways of study and practice, of general learning, and holy preaching:
'Twere endless to enumerate the learned Bishops, laborious Presbyters, renowned
Physicians, accomplished Lawyers, florid Philologers, and practical Clerks bred
up in her: yea so great, so considerable they were, Answ. to the Nonconform.
Petition, p 31.
that the whole Body of the University of Oxford, in An. 1603. published, There
were then more learned men in the Ministry in this Land, then were to be found
amongst all the Ministers of the Religion, in France, Flaunders, Denmark,
Germany, Poland, Geneva, Scotland, or all Europe beside.

This touch concerning the piety of our Church. Sic sententiam temperasti ut
nec simplicibus displiceres, nec tuos offenderes. Sanctus Hyer. de Epiphanio.
No less her charity: This Church was much at unity with it self, few snarling
or factious spiritati's in her, all her notes were by the book: her language
Canonique, things were so carried, Nemo urgetur in aspera quae far non potest
nulli quod recusat imponitur, nec ideo condemnatur a caeteris quod in eis se
imitandis fatetur invalidum, charitati virtus, charitati sermo charitati vultus
aptetur coitur in unam conspiraturque charitatem hanc violare tanquam Deum
netas ducitur. Sanctus Aug. de moribus vest. Eccles. c. 32. and 33.
as offense to tender consciences might be as much as possible avoided; I know
there were ever, and ever will be smaller differences in the Church, and who
can help it, since God concludes them necessary, that those who are approved
might be made manifest, etc. I am not ignorant that many bitter invectives and
hot ragings were current between the Disciplinarian and Conformable party, but
yet (I trust I may say) they kept the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,
and were not alienated in affection each from other.

Nor were they wanting in works of Charity to the poor, Gods poor, and the
Nations poor, to both there are instances of charity, since the Reformation and
extrusion of the Pope. I Will begin with the renowned liberality of King Ed. the
6. who by the advice of that after famous Martyr, Dr Ridley, then Lord Bishop
of London: and after his Sermon preached at the Court upon mercy and charity,
was moved to found the Hospitals of Christ, for poor Orphans, and of St Thomas
and St Bartholmews for diseased people, besides which he gave great relief to
housekeepers at their own houses: To perfect which charity the Bishop
traveled greatly, and brought the Citizens of London into the work: To them
and their successors for ever he gave the charge thereof, and on them settled
lands to the value of 100l per annum, with license to take lands in Mortmaine
to the yearly value of 4000 Mark: all which he settled not above two days
before his death. At which time in the hearing of his Council he uttered these
words, Lord God, I yield thee most hearty thanks, Holingshed p. 1082.
that thou have given me life thus long to finish this work to the glory of thy
Name.

The greatest and most noble Work that ever I read of done by One man, and he a
subject, Survey London p. 479, 480.
was that of the Memorable Gentleman Mr Thomas Sutton* the Princely Founder of
the Charterhouse, Suttons Hospitals Case. 10. Report.
for the entertainment of youth and decayed Gentlemen, who by maims in the
Wars, or other casualties had been ruined. The provision there is so
bounteous, that it has scarce a match to it in Europe, the very house and
appurtenances cost* him to purchase 13000l, which he endowed with five Manors
in Essex, two in Lincoln, and eight in Wiltshire, besides very many rich
Pasture grounds of near 4000. Acres in that County, Two in Cambridgeshire*
besides his Lands in Hackney Marsh and Tottenham in the County of Middlesex,
and with all and singular the Woods, Reversions, Presentations, and Rights of
him the said Thomas Sutton in any the aforesaid Manors. Over and above this he
has given great gifts to poor Towns, to mend Highways, to loans of young men
to set up trade with gratis; To the Prisons, to certain Colleges, to make
additions to his Hospital ^5000lb, and to the Treasury of the House to defend
their right, if need were 1000lb and other Gifts he has given right liberally.
Next The Royal Foundations of the Exchange for the meeting of persons of trade
and business, and Gresham College by Sr Thomas Gresham, in part of which poor
people are lodged and provided for, and in the rest Lecturers in all the Arts
are allowed, is a most memorable act of charity and bounty.

So also is that of Sr Thomas White Lord Mayor of the City of London, Surv. p.
91.
who first purchased Gloucester Hall in Oxford, and then founded and endowed St
John's College, Built also Grammar Schools at Bristol, Reading, and a College at
Higham Ferryes; Gave great Legacies to poor Clothiers, Good Stocks to 18 great
Towns in England; And other things he did of like remark.

But give me leave to mention the charitable Foundation of Sion College, which
truly was a very gallant work and much an Ornament to this Metropolis, and
would be a greater, were the Library (capacious enough to contain Books) more
filled with them, and when I consider the diffusivenesse of such a work, and
how much to oblige the public a bounty of this nature does import: I cannot
but much encourage men to think no expense of money more provident for
preservation of their memory then this, I judge men to live in the fame of a
bountiful charity, more then in Children or in any Escocheon of honor.

But I proceed to the numerous Hospitals and Houses of Relief in the trust of
the most faithful Trustees of this Nations Charity, the worthy Societies of
London, the charitable distributions that they make, the compassionate hearts
they express to their poor, precisely according to the will of the Testators,
and the bounty of their Legacies increase, testifies their fidelity; I should
swell too big to name the Charities of the Lord Viscount Cambden, Sir John
Ramsey, Mr Kenrick, Mr Lamb, Mr Randolph, Alder. Hayden, Mr Blundell, M.
Chilcot, Mr Rogers, Mr Fuller, Mr Russell, Mr Gale, Mr Palin, Mr D^ve, M,
Jones, Mr Goddard, Mr Aloworth, Sir William Cockain, and memorable St Paul
Pindar; And herein they shame those of whoever they are who distort things
charitably given to other uses then the Donor appointed, which causes that of
Ennius to be verified, Benefacta male locata, malefacta arbitror.

This for a short View of Reformation-Charity.

I come now to assert the Reformations imitation in point of policy, Policy,
not of fraud, but necessary preservation, and that in the point of Laws which
are the Tropicks upon which weal and woe wheel and move, wisdom commended and
made, and courage preserved them so made from contempt* That I have to add is
my Observation, that good Laws were chief in the care of the best times, It was
wont to be the ambition of Governors to serve the Church first, and respect
her security most; The Learned Vivaldus speaking of the Excellency of the Kings
of France says, Semper pro legibus and juribus Ecclesiae Dei, summorumque
Pontificum soli fideliter decertarunt, and in times past with us Acts of
Parliament began with something like this, In honorem Dei and sanctae matris
Ecclesiae statuimus: So begins (in effect) Magna Charta, pro West. 25. Ed. 1. 1
and 2 Ed. 3. the 5. 15. 25. 28. Ed. 3. and many others: yea, to secure the
Church was the first care of the Parliament, Ed. 6. ann. 1. c. 1. 1 El. c. 2. 1
K. James 4. 3 of the same King c. 4. and 5. And it was a brave Speech of Sir
Edward Deering in the Parliament 10 Nov. 1640. had it been hearkened to; Let
the Sword reach from the North to the South, and a general perdition of all our
remaining rights and safety, Book Speeches page 8.
threaten as in open view, It shall be so far from making me to decline the
first settling of Religion, that I shall ever argue and rather conclude it thus,
The more great, the more eminent our perils of this world are, the stronger and
quicker ought our care to be for the glory of God and the pure Law of our souls.

I neither may wholly omit nor shall I write much of our Laws, though I think
they make the best judgment of happiness who rely on that foundation which the
experience of many hundred years has given proof of, and deservedly ought they
to be admired, while they assert property and abhor injustice: yea, when they
are so necessary to keep Subjects up to the duty of Loyalty* that a great
Master of them wrote not long since, He that takes away the Laws takes away not
the allegiance of one Subject alone but of the whole Kingdom* L. Chapter Justice St
John's Arg. E. Strafford. p. 60.
and therefore corrupt Judges and he^dy Parasites who desgrace the good Laws of
this Nation* and misguide Governors (who with reason and warrant enough
enquire of and are conducted by them as men of skill, and as they think
conscience) have ever been severely punished, and by few ^ober persons pitied,
as by name Hubert de Burgh, Pierce, Gaveston and the Spencers, Trifilion and
the Earl of Oxford, Henry de la Pool, Lord Hastings, Sir. Ed. Cook p. Instit.
Catesby, and the Duke of Buckingham, Empson and Dudley, Card. Wolsey, yea, for
injustice all the Judges in H. 4. time but M^tingham and Beckingham were
removed and f^ned, so that he that considers the punishment of Trea^on^,
Instit. p. 224, 225. and 146, 147.
Murder, Rapes, Riots, and all kinds of injury, that weighs* the ^ecurity of
trials for life and livelihoods by Juries of Gentlemen and Freeholders of
fortune and fidelity* he that views the Judges in their circuits, the Justices
of Peace in their Shire^, Mayors and Bailiffs in their Corporations, and
Constables in their Liberties, would wonder any disorder should arise, much
more pass unpunished. But alas men are but men, and God suffers some to give
their conscience challenge to disturb them: Judges who are men of years,
fortune, and learning, sworn to do right and to preserve men in so doing, are
highly accountable to God, if fear or favor make them warp: they should
remember what that Noble Virgin Queen said, 3. Instit. p. 79.
when her Attorney General came near her, and the Lord Burleigh told her, Here
is your Graces Attorney General, Qui sequitur pro Domina Regina, No, said she,
I Will have the words altered, Qui sequitur pro Domina Veritate: and when they do
not as they ought between Prince and People, man and man, Hollingsh. p. 456.
they deserve the judgment which Judge Belknap spoke of, and which they often
adjudge lesser offenders to then themselves, and if by craft or the favor of
men, Page 1100.
they escape punishment here, God sometimes suffers them to run the course of
Morgans and Hankeford, P. about 10 Ed. 4. 1458. 1459.
and others, yea, of one who a little before his end dreamed, that he saw all
the devils in hell haling and tugging him in pieces, and all those whom he had
murdered crying out for vengeance against him, which the historian says,
Polidor. Virgil. in R. 3.
Non esse somnium sed conscientiam scelerum. I know there are great temptations
on brave men, even in the best times* Man is altogether vanity, and acted by
motives altogether unworthy him, yet ought good men to eye God and consider his
commands, which bound Governors to rule justly and soberly, as well as
Subjects to obey loyalty and will take account of the errors in both, and in
both punish them; Thus much for the goodness of our Laws and the zeal of our
Countrymen to them.

After the example of Antiquity this Nation has been very observant of their
habits, not so changeable as the French, nor so austere as the Spaniard, but
between both, the dress of wise men being ordinarily such as has least of
prodigality in the matter, and affectation in the manner of setting it forth* I
know it was an old itch of this Nation to affect the guises of other people;
Hollingshed. par. 1. p. 172.
Andrew Board an English Priest going about to paint an English man, drew diverse
designs of him, at last was fain to draw him a naked man with a pair of Sheers
in one hand and cloth in another, as who should say, Fashion your Garment to
your own mind, for none can please you; And upon this reason were there diverse
Acts of Parliament in Ed. 3. and Ed. 5. H. 8. P. and Mary, and Q. Elizabeth
reigns, made against excess of apparel, but by the 1 Jacob, all were repealed,
so that now I thin^ no act is in force for apparel, yet it is pity we of this
Nation are not of our selves more regular then we are: the best cure for
excess herein is Governors Presidents: how are things altered since H. Cook
3. instit. p. 199. S. Bern. l. 3. c. 5. de Consid.
6. time, when that renowned Prince did wear his Gown of less value then 40s,
but we take a greater swinge, and forma vestium deformitatis mentium and morum
est indicium, says the Father.

Further, This Nation has ever been observant of Leagues with Foreign Princes,
Promissa sunt servanda is a maxim in every Nation that is just, And they that
herein deserve the stigma of falsehood need no additional infamy; For Articles
of peace and war ought to have audience above all Pleas of private profit and
advantage, and therefore the ancient honor of us is very great abroad: Si
violandum est jus, etc. aliis rebus pictatem colas. Sueton. in Jul. Caes. p. 6.
Edit. Sylburg.
Our Princes did not like Julius Caesar more eye greatness then veracity, but
precisely kept them to the conditions agreed upon, and from them varied not,
for as they who have fortunes will take heed to enter into bonds because they
have solvent estates, so Princes of honor will not break the confederacies
they make upon slieght grounds, because their reputation is built upon their
fidelity. The faithfulness of God is one of his glorious Attributes, and the
truth of a Prince one of the prime Ornaments in his Crown, For the Throne is
established by righteousness. But above all, our Loyalty to our Princes for
the most part has been notorious and imitable, We have recognized their
Crowns, supported their estate, obeyed their Laws, defended their persons,
affronted their enemies, prayed for their lives, and not rejoiced in their
deaths or ruins, and that not only when they have been Octavius's perpetuo
sani, Ut optimi status author dicar Sueton. in Ost, p. 24. Edit. Sylburg.
so benign that they might deservingly be called Patrons of general peace, and
such as by the change they brought, occasioned not the people to repent their
power: But when with Bassiaenus they proved Princes of fury and extraordinary
frailty, Erasm in praef. ad Script. Romans
then even then we honored them as Gods Vicegerents, and were so far from
derogating from their dignities, that we paid indisputable and legal obedience
to them; The daily prayers of our Church were for deliverance against all
sedition and evil conspiracy, as well as false doctrine and heresy, hardness
of heart and contempt of Gods Word and Commandments; And therefore I pray that
all men in power may ever rule justly, and men under power obey readily; For
jealousies in States do but provoke Governors to get and preserve high power,
and nourish thoughts in Subjects how to dissipate and scatter it.

Nor have we deceived the expectations of our following the good pattern of
Elder times in education of Youth, for although the vanity of some is so great
and unreasonable that they think no condition of life honorable and ingenious
but that of idleness and violence, yet the sober Englishman has a very
friendly eye on callings that employ younger Children, and augment families to
a very conspicuous magnitude: and if we view the great Families of Nobility and
Gentry in this Nation, who now for the most part have the great estates and
most prosperous fortunes, many of them will be found within less then 200 years
to have been the products of men of laborious professions, by which chiefly if
not altogether their Ancestors accumulated that fortune upon the tiptoe of
which they overlook others of greater antiquity though now less conspicuous;
And though I know many would tugg much to have their pedigrees rifled, and the
top of their descent to be from the City and the Innes of Court, yet I will not
doubt to assert, that as many of the new great ones have come thence as from
Court or Camp, or Schools, or all.

God has commanded men to labor, and condemned him to toil as the punishment
of his sin, and the Apostle says, 1 These. 3. 10.
He that will not labor let him not eat; There is no bread so sour and
innutritive as that of idleness, no labor so uncomfortable as that of being
illaborious, for besides that it brings naught home, and clothes a man with
rags, yea, makes him useless in his generation, it is accompanied with many
dangerous vices, and prostituting debaucheries, the minde^ of man like places
constagnated contract filth for lack of motion; As vessels decay more by disuse
then by age; This makes the thrifty Father dispose his Son to a profession
which will both advance his preferment and secure his virtue, there is no
course of life but if in it God blesses honest endeavors, will yield a
livelihood, though some by a secret hand of God to show his power (that the
race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor bread to the wise,
nor riches to men of understanding) miscarry and bring their noble of wit to a
nine-pence of wealth; But yet Callings are not to be neglected, for they have
fruitful wombs, and nourish men to a very great growth of eminency. Let every
Artist then be encouraged; but in some cases there is a great lamentation to be
taken up, the differences amongst us have anticipated a great part of the
Nation, who by precended disaffection, or real disgust, are either forcibly
excluded, or voluntarily withdraw themselves from public view and service, so
that multitudes of them will be exposed to want, or to what is second to it
obscurity, and be forced to retreat out of fight, that no body see their
reduced penury, to contemn them rather then pity it. And some I doubt will be
tempted to courses of desperation, to the dishonor of their Families and Parts.

To prevent which it were well worthy Governors, to give all the liberty of
life and luster they (with security to their own power) may, that so hopes of
subsistence may bail indigent men, if of parts, from impatience, and engaging
in vilanous actions, and encourage them to be civil and orderly in expectation
of the good Angel that may stir the healing waters, into which for cure they
desire to be cast. For surely there is no labor base which relieves nature and
answers need, no calling but comports with honor, where it supports it, and
without which honor would be honourless; and he is much to be pitied, who has
hands and head, and has not taught them some subserviency to his necessities;
it is a loose breeding and degenerous, which provided not some stay against an
evil time. The learned and worthy Sr Ino Cheek, Tutor to Edw. 6. being one of
those that avowed the Title of the Lady Jane, for which he was fain upon Queen
Mary's coming to the Crown to fly, was glad to take up his old Trade, and rely
upon that hidden Treasure of Parts, which rendered him fit to be chosen
Professor of the Greek Tongue at Sirasburg. See his Life Printed 1641.
They are too coy, who wholly trust on Lands and Moneys, and cannot labor, not
want, but are miserable when they miss a ceremonious folly; they never mean to
be Martyrs, or be prescribed, or suffer under the force of barbarous Rebels, as
the Irish Nobility and Gentry have done a long time, who can do nothing but
eat, and drink, and sleep, and play, and talk. It is good to be Clerkly and
acquainted with business, to be handy and disposed to Country thrift; a very
great wisdom to be able (through Gods blessing) to do something toward
subsistence, Quaelibet patria Ingenioso patria, Ingenuity and courage has given
entertainment to great minds and persons, when their friends and Tenants have
disowned, and their Lands yielded them no bread.

I will conclude the Parallel of the Church and Professors of England, with
those of elder times, in writing Books warily, and so as truth had honor by
them: and the better to promote this, here was ever an Imprimatur to pass upon
all Books publicly to be vented; and the Licensers were bound to take notice
exactly of all things that went under their eye, as they would answer the
neglect upon their censure, and great displeasure of Authority. I know that
Books have stolen into light, Vives in praefatione ad vigiliam Scipionis, p 68.
which had they received their deserts, should have been, as Vives says, Cum
authoribus suis ex toto consortio humani generis eliminandi and deportandi in
insulam ubi solae degunt ferae, aut in illas Africae desertas arenas, ubi nihil
nascitur praeter venena, Books derogatory to God, to Government, to civil
property, profane, scurrilous, and every way detestable, they are not to be
charged as faults on our Supervisors, so long as they declare against them when
they see them, or would proceed against the Authors of them, if they could be
discovered. But in Books of controversy, our Church has been exact, and
allowed those her best Champions, who have least wandered from sound Authors
and Doctrines. A just weight and balance gives adversaries least advantage.
Some in controversy are so rigid, that they give no way, keeping so high a
dam, that all bursts in pieces by their severity. Maledicta ista charitas sit
quae servatur cum jactura doctrinae fidei, cui omnia cedere debent, charitas,
Apostolus, Angelus e Coelo. Lutherus in Ep. ad Galatas.
Others yield so far, that they are at last nonplust how to make an honorable
retreat to their party, and not lose what may give their enemy the boast of
conquest. Ex utroque periculum, In rough Seas shores are safe, so rocks be
avoided. Passion is an ill ingredient to contests, especially when it is
permanent, and such as does not suit viro constanti, therefore those who have
with least acrimony entered the lists of controversy, have been most success
full; for it is easy in an humor, or out of high animosity, to say that which
shall disadvantage a whole profession.

But this, God be blessed, few of our Church have done; we have in all
controversies so carried Arguments, that there has no blemish rested on us,
but that which we account our virtue, that we are constant. And as our
Polemiques so our practical Books have been rare, and by all Christians that
could read and understand them requested: What accounts has our Nation had,
and yet has, from her Preachers and Writers of the treasures of art and holy
Theology? what rare discourses are there extant in all Sciences, on all
Subjects, for all Seasons? The world judges our Church and Nation Learned to a
wonder, and yet some amongst us (who know better) prefer foreign counsels and
models above those at home, which I think (with submission to their better
judgments) will appear when moderated most convenient and useful to carry on
peace and piety amongst us; Indeed I should rejoice to see beauty and order in
Church Matters, and I bless God for so much of it as yet there is: that which
grieves me is, that the Charret-wheels of our settlement go so slow, that
passions are more in request then prayers and tears, and that men fear not to
run mad when (to use a woman's phrase) they bark against the Crucifix, Fox Act.
and Mon. Hist. of Merind. and Cabriers.
and revile the Spouse of Christ, of whom they ought not to speak but calmly
and with reverence; It is no good Argument of Gods being amongst us, when we
are thus broken in judgment, and so evileyed to one another; Ad ann. 57. p.
437. Tom. 1. Praeclara Christianitatis lau^ estcum nullo habere negotium, quod
si ex aliqua vexatione and tentatione lis alicui oriatur curer ut ea
transigatur, etiamsi detrimentum pati debeat.
But I hope God will send Peace and Truth in our days; I trust to see Religion
and Learning a praise in the earth; My ambition is to find that in Christians
now adays, that Baroniu^ notes was soon after Christ's time; It was (says he)
Christians praise tc have little to do which arose to a debate, but if casually
Christians were at variance, care was to take it up and avoid scandal. For our
Lord has given the rule, to be at peace one with another.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 14. marg. read M. Marshall. p. 43. l. 21. r. to the Ministry, p. 76. l.
15. r. infesti. p. 82. l. 22. r. Versipelles. p. 90. l. 9. r. pretend. p. 92.
l. 20. r. omina. p. 93. l. 17. r. there. p. 95. mar. r. (...). p. 96. l. 15. r.
ingenious. p. 98. l. 15. r. should. p. 121. l. 27. r. Feoffees. p. 125. l. 18.
for presumption r. persecution. page 126. l. 20. r. Teechy. p. 128 l. 2. r. it.
p. 138. l. 20. for purposed r. proposed. p. 153. l. 19. r. habuere p. 162. l.
25. r. Austrians. p. 192. l. 6. r. Ismaels. p. 199. l. 3. r. horarum. l. 9. r.
him l. 28. r. that. p. 199. l. 11. r. had they. p. 204. l. ult. r. vacillating.
p. 208. marg. r. Bernardus. p. 223. l. 19. r. communicative.


