A DISCOVERY OF THE POPES PRIDE, AMBITION and CRUELTY, In a Tyrannical,
Barbarous and Bloody manner exercised on Emperors, Kings, and Kingdoms: The
Miseries, Ruin, and Desolations by them brought on the Christian world.

WITH Their vicious and unchaste lives, their wicked practices for obtaining
the Popedom, by Murders, Poysonings, etc.

By J. V.

LONDON, Printed for William Raybould at the Sign of the Unicorn in
Pauls-Church-yard, 1651.

The Contents.
PHilip the second King of Spain, his offer of Marriage with Q. Elizabeth
rejected.

The practice of the Guises with the Q. of Scots, against the Crown of England.

The Rebellion of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, the Pope sends
Letters to the King of Spain, and K. of Portugal, to send an Army to invade
England.

Leo: Dacres joining with the Rebels, indevoureth to deliver the Q. of Scots,
after a sharp conflict with the Lo. of Hunsdon is put to flight.

James FitZ-Morris of the House of Desmond, raises Rebellion in Ireland.

Thomas and Edward Stanley with others conspire against the Queen.

Don John of Austria, his perpetual (but treacherous) Edict for Peace.

Stucley, his design against Ireland, turned another way by the K. of
Portugal.

James Fitz-Morris, his second attempt to reduce Ireland to Popery.

San: Josephus an Italian, sent by the Pope and K. of Spain with 700.
Spaniards and Italians into Ireland.

Campian, Sherewin and others, coming into England, taken and condemned for
Treason.

Somervile, his desperate attempt against the Queens Person.

Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, thrust out of England, for practicing with
Throgmorton and others to invade the Land.

D. Parry, for practicing the Queens death executed.

Savage and others, their attempt to kill the Queen.

The French Ambassador, his plot to kill the Queen.

The Spanish Armado, in Anno 1588.

D. LopeZ his attempt to poison the Queen.

Squires practice to poison the Queens Saddle.

Tyrone, his Rebellion in Ireland.

Garnet, Catesby and others, their attempt for Invasion of England.

The Hellish Gunpowder Treason.

Sir Griffin Markham and others, their conspiracy against King James.

The present bloody Rebellion in Ireland.

The cruel Massacre at Paris.

The Murder of Henry the 3d.

The Murder of Henry the 4th.

Gentle Reader,
THou may evidently see by this ensuing discourse, what are the fruits and
effects of Popery, how the Popes have kindled the fire amongst all the Princes
and States of Europe, and like Balaam the false Prophet, troubled us with their
wiles, cursed the Church and State of England, and by their Incendiaries, the
Priests and Jesuits (for effecting their own pernicious and divellish
designs) have stirred up one Nation against an other, and all Christendom
against the English, tainted many a great House, and endangered their Lives and
Estates, to the ruin of great and Noble Families in this Kingdom.

Plots, Conspiracies and Attempts of Domestic and Foreign Enemies, of the
Romish Religion, against the Princes and Kingdoms of England, Scotland and
IRELAND, etc.
THose which make descriptions of large Countries in small Tables, offend not
against truth, though somewhat against quantity, so Pliny tells us.
Notwithstanding with much convenience, ease to the beholder, and truth of
observation, things are presented to our eyes in those little draughts, that
the very places themselves being viewed with great trouble and loss of time,
cannot yield more benefit to the most diligent, oftentimes not so much.
Wherefore especially, because the Argument cannot be now unseasonable (for the
abridgement of the Commentaries of large Histories, is not unlike Maps of
Kingdoms) I have here collected out of diverse Authors, which have severally
handled parts of this subject, into one, The chief conspiracies and attempts
against the Kingdoms alone and immediately of great Brittany and Ireland, or
else mediately through the sides of the Princes of these Countries, by Traitors
at home or abroad, of the Romish Religion, or foreign Enemies, by treacherous
courses of those of the same bloody superstition. The beginning I make the
first time of Reformation of Religion here in England under Queen Elizabeth,
and the extent unto this present year. I begin no higher then Queen
Elizabeth, because the Reformation of Henry the eight was but in part, and the
other of King Edward, was an interrupted one, by the sudden succession of his
sister Qu. Mary; the rather, because, for ought we know, there was no great
matter plotted against this hopeful young Prince, that was not rather from
ambition, (if there was any such) then from a desire of subverting Religion.
Not but thaa the Enemies of our Religion and Kingdom, had us then in their
minds, but other ways there were, before bloody and desperate practices were
to be taken in hand, to be first entered into, of less difficulty, and more
hopeful success. And these are the steps the adversaries of our Religion use
to tread, who thirsting after England, labor first to bring us back to Rome,
by striving to make our selves hate our own Religion, and leave that God which
brought us out of the Land of Egypt, bewitching us with glorious Idolatry of
the golden Calvs of Rome, introducing ignorance and blindness, that we may when
our eyes are out, patiently grind in the Mill of slavery. If this course fail,
the next is by poison, murder, and force of Arms, to draw us to Sodom and
Egypt.

The Reformation of England and Ireland fall under one time, and because that
of Scotland also differs not many years in age, they may all be brought in
one account. With the Plots are jointly handled the Deliverances, which in some
respect or other may very well be called great, either in regard of the misery
we had fallen into, (if God had not prevented them) of the slavery of soul and
body, and this agrees with all: Or else for the strangeness of the
discoveries of their mischiefs, (sometime almost miraculous) before they have
come to their birth, or disappointing them of their purposes, when the Authors
have put them in practice; and these two respects, the one or the other, which
may well denominate Gods goodness to us, in disappointing them to be great,
may be found in all likewise. So that for these mercies received, we ought to
ascribe to our Deliverer that which is due unto him, the praise of his own
work, and continual thanks for his mercies, which even to this day, is from
those Deliverances of the days of old, extended; we should have bin then
betrayed, but we had now bin slaves, both we, our selves and ours; one Plot,
had it succeeded, had bin the betraying of England at once to them, who love
themselves too well to have lost it easily, and are so wise, that they endure
no Traitors, but for themselves, nor can endure any that loves his Country but
a Spaniard. We may learn also to trust in him, even now particularly, who is
the same yesterday and to day, and for ever, nor is his hand shortened that he
cannot save, nor his ear heavy that he cannot hear those that call upon him,
lifting up pure hands in sincerity of heart: although the sins of our Nation in
general, may justly provoke our God to punish us by them that hate us, for
that cause, that instead of extirpating Popery and superstition (a thing nor
hard to be done in humane reason, if the children of Papists were carefully
educated under Protestant Tutors) we think their Religion tolerable, and
nothing so dangerous to soul or body as some men seem to make it. Should we not
detest and abhor the Religion of such a generation, as count they do God
good service, by killing us? witness the bloody Persecution under Qu. Mary,
and the damnable plot of the Gun-powder-Treason. Yet some there are that would
seem Protestants, and yet deny that their cruelty was such, as the Author of
the English Martyrology makes the Marian persecution to be: Others of no small
esteem in the Church of England, instead of acknowledging Foxes History a
Monument of Martyrs, call it a Book fraught with Traitors and Heretics. And
for the Gunpowder conspiracy, some affirm it the deeds of a few malcontents,
far from the approbation of the Catholics, others as falsely, that there
was no such Treason intended, but that it was an invention of him, whom in
reverence I forbear to name. But yet this may encourage us, that God will
still preserve us, for their sakes that have now and heretofore stoutly
defended Gods true Religion, and that in very many places of this Land, we have
had those that with all their power have opposed the very beginnings of Popery.
But wonderful it is, and scarcely credible, that any should so much have
forgotten the Gun-powder-Treason, as to say, that they would rather trust a
Papist then a Puritan; as if they believed not there was any such Treason, or
had forgotten it; or that they thought that those whom men call Puritans, were
traitorously minded, and bloody persons. In the most Reverend and Judicious
Assembly of this Kingdom, a Member of that Assembly, declared in particulars,
how the best men have bin branded with the name of Puritan, (it was where any
man might freely have spoken) yet no man contradicted him. If it be given
sometime to the best, without question those ordinarily called by that bie
name, are none of the worst; because from likeness at least diverse men have
one Name. We will acknowledge hypocrites among them, but because one is such,
no man will conclude they must be all so. No man of us almost abhors the
name of Protestant to be given him, and yet of these, some will lie, others
will steal, and a third sort will do worse. Since this Parliament (perhaps I
imagine the time, and reason aright) the Jesuits and Jesuited have invented a
strange name for such men, and let fall the reproach of Puritan. They call them
by a figurative name, which is ignorantly spoken by most, falsely by all; and as
the roundest figure is of the largest capacity, so they have shaped them a
name, which larger then Precisian, Brownist, or the like, surroundeth every
one, that thinks it not a just thing to rail against the Parliament, or curse
the Fathers of his Country. But I desire not to be called, but to be totus
teres atque rotundus. So much by the way; to fall upon the business now.

The King of Spain offers Marriage to the Queen.
AT the beginning of the reign of Qu. Elizabeth, Philip the second of Spain
sought to win her to him by Marriage, not doubting to procure a dispensation
for the Incest, but was as wisely answered, as he wickedly and craftily
intended, that the Queen could not so soon forget her Sisters death, she
knowing it to be a part of discretion to keep in hope so potent an Adversary,
if he should be incensed by a denial (her own Kingdom, by reason of the change
of Religion, and the depriving of many Popish Bishops, which the blinded people
had in some esteem, among many other alterations, being of doubtful
affections) till she could better provide for her own security. The Spaniard in
the mean time perceived that his suit was not like to succeed; when the thought
of uniting England to Spain by the marriage of Q. Elizabeth, if like her
sister Mary she proved not barren, was taken away, he took hold on the next
occasion.

The practice of the Guises with the Queen of Scots against ENGLAND.
MAry now Queen of Scots, Daughter and heir apparent unto James the fifth, and
Wife unto Francis Dauphine of France, Daughter of Mary of Loraine, who was
Sister unto the Duke of Guise. She, after the death of Qu. Mary of England,
being encouraged thereunto by the Guises her Uncles, usurpeth the Arms of
England, uniting them to the Arms of Scotland, on her plate, in the windows
of her house, and on her servants coats, declaring her self thereby Queen of
England. Her meaning was well understood, and this (it is very probable) in the
fourth year of Qu. Elizabeth, made Arthur Poole and his Brethren, descended of
George Duke of Clarence, Brother to Edward the fourth, and Anthony Fortescue
their Brother in law, with their confederates, to conspire secretly to fly unto
the Guises in France, and thence, and with their help, to come with an Army
into Wales, and there to proclaim the Queen of Scots Queen of England, and
Arthur Poole Duke of Clarence. God was pleased in a very good time to discover
this Plot. For had they gone thither, and discovered their intents, it had (if
God had not powerfully opposed it) not only animated the Guises to have
seconded them, and furnished them with men and money, but having returned into
Wales, they would have gathered great forces to augment their numbers, and put
the Queen to the incomparable trouble and danger of a civil war. Beside all
this, she had at this time on every side enemies abroad, the French King, the
King of Spain, the Guisian and Popish faction in Scotland. The loyal people
of Scotland were so unable to help her, that they stood in need of her help.
The Low Countries were under Spanish tyranny, and a convenient place from
whence to annoy this Kingdom. The Conspiratours confessed that they did not
intend to put in practice this thing, during the life of our Queen; for indeed
they were made believe by predictions of Popish Astrologians, that Qu.
Elizabeth could not live above one year. The good Queen notwithstanding
pardoned their lives, after sentence of death upon them, from their own
confession.

And how zealously the Guises endeavored to invade England, may appear by the
inclination of Sebastian Martigius sent into Scotland, by the counsel of the
Guises (for about those times their alone counsels were principally followed)
with Horse and Foot, to assist in the civil war of Scotland, who could
hardly be restrained from invading England presently, and first of all,
presuming (no question) on the aid of Papists in England, from intelligence
held with them here. For otherwise what could a 1000. Horse, and not very many
Foot do in respect of conquering all England? Now was the Queen of Scots in
France, and although the Regency of Scotland was put into the hands of the
Marquess of Hamilion, yet the power of the Qu. Dowager with her French faction
did so increase, and on the other side the authority of the Marquess Regent so
abate, that after the promise from the French King of 12000. crowns by the
year, and Duchy of Castle Herald, to which was added the preferment of all the
Marquesses chief kindred, the Marquess resigned his place into the hands of
Mary of Loraigne Qu. Dowager; a thing for a woman to be Regent in Scotland, but
once before known. She had made many promises unto the Scots of the freedom of
exercising the Protestant Religion, but being now settled in the Regency, she
discovered her mind wholly bent to alter Religion. She told her friends in
plain terms, that though the Ministers whom she named should preach more
honestly, or (as she called it) more sincerely then they had done, yet they
should all be banished. She expressed at the death of a young man, whom she
seemed to bewail, being slain, for that his father had not rather excused him,
being a stout defender of the reformed Religion, that she was cruelly minded
toward the Professors thereof. Easter also was commanded to be celebrated
after the Romish custom. For these and diverse other overtures of her,
Messengers were sent unto her, to desire her to be good to the Protestants, and
to remember the many promises she had made unto them to that end. But all in
vain. She told the Earl of Glencarne, and Sir John Cambell, who were sent
unto her; that performance of promises was to be expected from Princes, no
farther then stood with their profit. Upon this they told one another that they
then renounced all obedience and duty toward her. Violence now with art was to
be used for effecting her purpose touching Religion.

Hereupon advice was given by Labrosse a French Commander in Scotland, to put
to death all the Nobility of Scotland, for that the people being bereaved of
their heads, would after be easily brought to undergo any yoke; but that
things might appear with a more pleasing color, there was a show, as if the
Queen had labored, and would endeavor to convince her adversaries in Religion
by no other way but by arguments. Into Scotland were sent 3. Sorbon Doctors
with the Bishop of Amiens. But with what safety might any man dispute with
them, when he that did so was in the midst of his armed enemies, and there was
greatest fear of violence from the disputers themselves. For the Bishop of
Amiens counseled the Queen Regent, that if any there were which should be
found to dispute against these Romish Decrees, he should be put to death, yea
even those who but seemed to be of another mind only, We are not informed that
the Qu. Regent put in practice the foregoing counsels, perhaps the time was
not altogether seasonable, nor do we take every single action, which might
conduce to the subverting of Religion, to be a conspiracy: but we may well
esteem by the Queens words, the Counselors and Commanders intents and
purposes, the placing of such a Regent, all this to be a continued conspiracy,
to strangle in the birth the Church of Scotland, having yet scarcely taken
breath in the world. Not long after the Qu. Regent dies, and although it will
perhaps be said, there was no discovery of any conspiracy which was in acting
(as to put to death all the Nobility, or all that would dare dispute against
the Bishop or Doctors, could be no easy task to go about; the latter,
because the death of their last Martyr Walter Mill did seem so grievous unto
them, and if any more should suffer, how would such a thing be taken by
Frenchmen, people of another Nation?) It may be objected from the above named
arguments, that there wanted no endeavor. After the death of the Mother, the
Daughter returning into Scotland, was married unto Henry Lord Darnley, who
being of the same Religion with the Queen, and they both a brothers and sisters
children, did strongly maintain Popery against the Protestant Religion. We
cannot imagine here that any thing should be contrived against the lives of
those Princes by a Popish party to overthrow Religion. For to subvert Religion
no way could be found better, then by maintaining in life and honor such
Princes as these two were, who professed and maintained Popery; as contrarily
to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties and the like, the best means are thorough
the sides of such Kings and Queens as are projectors and maintainers of them.
So the holy Scripture declares by word and example, I will smite the Shepherd
and the sheep shall be scattered. For this Queen was so far from furthering
the establishment of Religion, nay from connivence at those who should go
about any such matter, that she professed that she would follow the example of
her cousin Qu. Mary of England, which was no other thing then maintaining in
her dominions the Pope and Popery, and punishing the contrary minded as
Heretics. It will not be thought (I suppose) that either the Papists at home
in Scotland, or those in France, or else where, would go about to take away the
lives of such Princes, whose lives secured their Religion. For what was
attempted against the life (and most unhappily succeeded,) of the King, was not
any way to subvert Popery; because the deed was committed, and the plot chiefly
laid by Papists. It rather was undertaken against the life of this Prince, by
some, to make way for their own family to inherit the Crown of Scotland, by
others, to get the Kingdom, and admit any Religion. But those which look
farther into matters judge this act to be committed against a Professor of the
Romish Religion, that he being taken out of the way, another might succeed,
which had greater power and friends to bring to pass, what K. Henry the Queens
husband, had a mind, but not power enough to do. And that made those which were
no enemies to the King in point of Religion, not dislike the Treason for the
ends sake. I cannot be of their minds altogether, who judge that of the Queen
of Scots, being now in restraint in England, not long before married to Earl
Bothnile, and presently to desire a divorce from him, and to require that he
should be summoned within the space of a very few days, to return into the
Kingdom, to make answer and defense to the Queens suit of divorce, to have
proceeded from the changing fancy of the Queen, not so much from conscience.
For it was as well known before her departure into England, as after, that
Earl Bothnile had a wife living when he married the Queen; in so much that at
the publishing of the banes of their Matrimony, one stood up in the Church and
forbad them. It was generally thought that it was, that a way might be open for
the Duke of Norfolk, who then made suit unto her. He indeed was such a man, as
being of great wealth, mighty in friends, and singular abilities of mind, could
better bring about what was desired; then a man of no great riches at any time,
but was now in extreme poverty and disgrace in the Dominions of the King of
Denmark, and notoriously infamous for his crimes in Scotland.

The Rebellion of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland.
AT this time the King of Spain wrote unto the Duke of Norfolk, to join with
the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, to raise a Rebellion in England,
and to the Earl of Ormond to do the like in Ireland. These Letters were shown
unto Qu. Elizabeth by the Duke and the Earl; that from hence at least might
appear their loyalty.

Nevertheless, whether by the advice of the Bishop of Rosse, who lay as
Ambassador at London for the Queen of Scots, and one Rodolf a Florentine,
going in the appearance of a Merchant factor, or purposing of himself,
whatsoever he might pretend, he privately sought to marry the Q. of Scots (she
being next heir to the Crown of England) contrary to his promise made unto his
Sovereign Q. Elizabeth. The Q. of Scots and the Duke participate of one
another mind, by Letters written in hidden characters. Neither was this a
matter only supposed; but the Dukes Secretary, one Hieford, who was commanded
by the Duke to burn such Letters as came from the Qu. of Scots, but did it
not, and hid them under a mat in his chamber, and being under examination, he
caused them to be reduced. This was when the two Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland had secretly complotted to raise Arms, and not long after the
Dukes apprehension, they fell into open Rebellion. One of the Letters which was
shown at the Dukes arraignment was to this purpose. That the Qu. was sorry
that the said Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland were in Arms, before
the Dukes forces were ready. This was undertaken after that Pope Pius quintus
had in Bulls from Rome printed, and sent to Ridolf, absolved Q. Elizabeth's
Subjects from their allegiance. The Pope persuaded the Spaniard to assist the
conspiratours, that his affairs in the Netherlands might prosper the better:
and the French did the like, that the Qu. of England might be less able to
send aid to the Protestants in France Northumberland and Westmerland having
thus taken Arms, supplies and moneys failing, withdrew themselves into
Scotland, Norfolk was thrown into prison. Ridolf being in custody, for whom the
Pope had appointed 150000, crowns to the partners in the Treason. He being with
the Pope, is sent by him to the Spaniard, to press him to give assistance to
the King of Portugal also for the same purpose. He wrote also to the Duke of
Norfolk promising to send him aid. The Popes letter to the Spaniard was, that
he should send an Army out of the Low Countries to invade England. And this
very thing the Spaniard endeavored.

There was now a difference betwixt Q Elizabeth and the Spaniard, about money
sent by him to the Duke of Alva, but was intercepted by the Queen, and that was
one pretense that the Spaniard had for his dealing against our Queen and
Kingdom. But the Duke of Norfolk was put to death. Nor is this the Relation of
an English Protestant, but of a Papist (a good part whereof had not bin known
but for him) one Hieronimus Calena. The Book was printed at Rome, by the
privilege of ^ius quintus, 1588. The Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland,
seduced by one Morton a Priest; and at Duresme set up the Mass, thence they
marched to Clifford moore, where hearing that the Queen of Scots was removed to
Coventry, that the Earl of Sussex was sent with strong forces against them,
and that Sir George Bows was behind them, and had fortified Bernards Castle,
that Scroupe and Cumberland had fortified Carliel, and had also an Army in
readiness, that the soldiers of Barwick and the power of Northumberland were in
New Castle, besieged Bernards Castle, and took it on conditions. Then for fear
of the Earl of Sussex they fled to Hexam, thence by bie-wayes to Naworth
Castle, from that place into Scotland, and from thence was Northumberland sent,
and here beheaded, Westmerland escaped into the Netherlands, where with a poor
pension under the Spaniard, he lived poorly all his days.

Dacres his endeavor to deliver the Scots Queen.
IN the Year 1569. Leonard Dacres, second son of William Lord Dacres of
Gillesland, being grieved to see a very great patrimony go from him to the
daughters of the Baron, whom the Duke of Norfolk their Father in law had
joined in marriage with his sons, grew revengefull, and joining with the
Rebels, endeavored to deliver the Queen of Scots; yet a little before being at
the Court, promised to assist the Queen his Sovereign against the Rebels, but
treacherously he undertook to kill the L. Scroup and Bishop of Carleil, to
whose custody the Scottish Queen was committed, but he failing in the
performance, took Grastock Castle, holding it as his own, and gathered
Soldiers. The L. Hunsdon met him with the trained Soldiers of Barwick, and
after a sharp conflict overcommeth him, and Dacres fled into Scotland, from
thence into the Netherlands, where at Lovaine he lived and dyed poorly.

Fitz-Morris raises Rebellion in Ireland.
IN this Year Edmund and Peter Butler, brethren to the Earl of Ormond,
joining with James Fitz-Morris, of the house of Desmond, entered into a
conspiracy against Qu. Elizabeth; and to further it, came Joannes Mendoza
secretly out of Spain. The Earl of Ormond going into Ireland, caused them to
submit; they were imprisoned, and for their brother the Earls sake, not
brought to trial. The Lord Deputy, and Sir Humphrey Gilbert (through Gods
assistance) appeased that rebellion. It is clear enough that this rebellion in
Ireland, arose from the Spaniard as the first mover, for to this end he sent
Mendoza into Ireland, and had not long before written to the Earl, brother to
the two Rebels, to raise a rebellion in Ireland.

Stanleys Conspiracy.
IN the Year 1570. under a color of delivering the Queen of Scots, Thomas
Stanley and Edward, younger sons of the Earl of Darby, Thomas Jerard Rolston,
Hall, with others in Darby-shiere, conspired; but the son of Rolston which was
pensioner to the Queen, disclosed the conspiracy. All but Hall were impisoned.
Hall escaped into the Isle of Man, thence by the commendation of the Bish. of
Rosse, he was sent into Dunbretan; whence (the Castle being won) he was brought
to London and suffered death.

Dissimulation of Don John of Austria.
IN the Year 1576. Don John of Austria coming into the Low Countries as
Governor, sent Gastellus to Qu. Elizabeth, pretending a perpetual Edict for
peace. The Queen as if ignorant of any bad intent, sent Rogers to congratulate
Don John's Edict; yet she knew that Don John had conceived a certain hope of
marrying the Qu. of Scots, and of enjoying Scotland and England, intending to
invade the Isle of Man, that from thence he might out of Ireland, the north of
England. and Scotland also (where he knew were many Papists) invade England.
This man to help forward this great design, practiced secretly with the Pope
and with the King of Spain, for the Havens of Biscay But the King of Spain
neglected him in this desire, accounting England and Scotland, a morsel fitter
for his own palate.

During this treaty of perpetual peace, this treacherous Don treats secretly
with the Scottish Queen about the marriage: and the better to work his own ends,
took diverse Towns and Castles in the Low Countries by treachery, and wrote into
Spain, that for the invasion of the Netherlands, it would be best to seize on
first the Towns of Zealand, before the more inland places; and that England
might with the more ease be first invaded. The Queen in the mean while
prepares for war; but God cut off this her enemy very suddenly, before the
fruits of his high thoughts were ripe.

Stueleys design against Ireland.
NOt long before this time in Ireland, Thomas Stucley a prodigal, riotous and
needy Englishman, discontented for that he lost the Stewardship of Wexford,
breathes out contumelies against the Queen, and betaketh himself to the Pope,
with whom he treats, and boasts that he will subdue Ireland with 3000. men,
and burn the Queens Navy. Pope Pius quintus, had a great opinion of him. After
him Gregory the 13. and the King of Spain, consulted together to invade
England and Ireland at once. The Pope aimed to get for his Son James
Boncompayno, the Kingdom of Ireland, and the Spaniard chiefly to imitate the
course of Qu. Elizabeth (who to keep the Spaniard busy abroad, secretly sent
aid to the Dutch) that he might withdraw her help from the Low Countries. But
because the strength of England consists chiefly in the Navy, the King of
Spain sets the Merchants of Italy, and the Netherlands a work, to hire the
Merchants ships of England, and so to send them away in very long voyages, that
the ships being from home, and Stucley joining with the Rebels of Ireland, the
Queens Navy might be over-thrown by a greater. The Pope gave him very great
Titles in Ireland, and sent under his command 800. Italians, the Spaniard
paying the soldiers. Stucley then went to Sebastian King of Portugal, to
entreat him to be chief Conductor, but was persuaded by the said King, and the
King by Abdallas son Mahomet, to go first unto the African war, where both
King Sebastian and himself lost their lives. And thus God overthrew their
wicked counsels for that time.

Fitz-Morris his second attempt against Ireland.
ANno Domini 1579. James Fitz-Morris formerly having fled into France, being
pardoned for a former Rebellion in Ireland, goes now to the Spaniard, and is
by him sent unto the Pope, to consult with him about his request, which was to
reduce that Kingdom by force of Arms unto Popery. The Pope, at the earnest
sult of Nicolas Sanders an English, and Alan an Irish Priest, gave Fitz-Morris
some money to that intent, and sends him back to the Spaniard, from whence
with his Priests, 3. ships and a few Soldiers, he arrived at Smerwick in Kerry
in Ireland, and raises a Fort there. Thomas Courtney an Englishman, presently
surpriseth the ships. John and James, brethren to the Earl of Desmond, join
themselves to Fitz-Morris who was their Kinsman. The Earl of Desmond (although
he pretended the contrary) favored them, drew forces together, and by this
pretense of Desmond, caused the Earl of Clanrickard who came to oppose them,
to withdraw himself. Fitz-Morris seeing few Irish come to his aid, under
pretense of going in pilgrimage to the holy cross of Tipperary, went toward
Conaught and Vlster, to draw forces together: whose horses being tired, he took
some horses from the Plough of William a Burgh his kinsman, and being pursued
by the sons of William a Burgh, Fitz-Morris perceiving that, told his cousin
Theobalda Burgh, that it was no time now to fall out about horses, but to join
with him in the business of rebellion, for which he was come into Ireland.
These brethren had bin in a former rebellion, but now declared unto Fitz-Morris
their sorrow for it, yet now fighting with Fitz-Morris to recover the horses,
both the brethren, and some others were slain. Sir William Drury was then Lord
Deputy, who sent for the Earl of Desmond, who made a promise by his wife to
the Deputy, that he and his men would fight against the Rebels. He dissembled
long; but after that Malbey had defeated John his brothers forces, and had sent
for Desmond to come unto him about Rekel a Town of Desmond, he plainly
discovered his rebellion.

That night the Rebels set upon Malbeys Tents, but were disappointed. Afterward
Desmond was sent for (to come in person) by the Lord Deputy Pelham, who
succeeded the deceased Sir William Drury; but excuses himself by a letter
sent by his wife. The Earl of Ormond was sent unto him, that he should deliver
Sanders the Priest, the Castles of Carigofoile and Asketton, and to submit
himself absolutely. The prosecuting of him was committed to the Earl of
Ormond, who ruined Conilo, the Rebels only refuge; he hanged the Bayliffe of
Youghall at his door, for refusing to take an English garrison into the Town,
besieged the Spaniards in Strangicall, but they withdrew themselves, and after
were all killed; and so hard he pressed Desmond and his brethren, that madly
they entreated the chief Justice to take their parts. Afterward the Justice
sent for the Nobility of Munster to come to him, and would not dismiss them,
till they had given pledges that they would assist against the Rebels. They
made the Baron of Lixenaw yield himself, took Carigofoil Castle, killed and
hanged all the Spaniards in it, and the Captain also an Italian.

San Josephus with 700. Spaniards sent into Ireland.
THe next Year, 1580. 700. Spaniards and Italians came to divert the Qu.
Forces, rather then to conquer Ireland; they landed at Smerwick, under the
command of San Josephus an Italian, they fortified it and called it Fort Delor;
but being followed by the Earl of Ormond, they withdrew thence into a valley
called Glammingel. Some prisoners of them were taken, who confessed they were
700, and that Arms were brought for 5000, and that more were expected from
Spain; that to conquer Ireland, the Spaniard and Pope had resolved, and
therefore sent into the hands of Sanders, Desmond and his brother John, a vast
sum of money. That night the Spaniards and Italians returned to their Fort,
which so soon as Ordinance could be brought, and Winter was returned with the
Ships of war from England, was on every side besieged, and after 5 days taken.
The common Soldiers Italians and Spaniards, were put to the sword, the Irish
hanged: only the Captains of the former were preserved. Three years after,
Desmond wandering like a vagabond, had his arm almost cut off by a common
Soldier, before he was known, and after was slain. Nicolas Sanders was almost
famished in the Woods, and died stark mad. This year 1580. Priests and
Seminaries much increasing in England, severe Laws were enacted against them.
These were for the most part bred in the English College of Doway, founded (by
the procurement of Alan, sometimes a student in Oxford, afterward Priest and
Cardinal) in the year 1568. Afterward under Requesenius government in the
Low Countries, when the wars were betwixt England and Spain, the fugitives were
thrust from thence, and 2. Colleges erected for them, one at Rhemes, the other
at Rome, the first by the Guises, the 2d by Gregory the 13. From these places
rose in England, Hanse, Nelson, Main, Sherward Priests, who reported Q.
Elizabeth to be an Heretic, and so ought to be deposed; for which they
suffered. In the aforesaid year 1580. Robert Parsons, a man of a turbulent
spirit and impudent, Campian a more modest man, both Jesuits; they to serve
the Catholics turns, obtained of Pope Gregory an interpretation of Pius his
Bull against Q Elizabeth, that it bound the Q. and Heretics always, but not
Catholics, till a convenient season. Campian wrote a Book entitled 10 Reasons
in defense of Rome. M. Chark answered him soberly. Parsons wrote against Chark
virulently: but Camp. 10 Reasons were thoroughly answered by D. Whitaker.

Campian and others condemned.
EDmund Campian, Ralfe Sherwin, Luke Kirby, Alexander Briant, were taken in the
year 1581, as Traitors to the Q. and State, and condemned for coming into
England to stir up sedition. Still more and more Priests came into England, and
for their dangerous doctrine, that Princes excommunicate were to be thrown out
of their Kingdoms; that Princes of any other then the Roman Religion had lost
their Kingly dignity; that those who had taken orders were freed from Princes
jurisdiction, and not bound by their Laws, it was enacted 1582. that it should
be treason to dissuade any Subject from his allegiance, and from the Religion
established in England, etc.

Somerviles attempt to kill the Queen.
AN: Dom: 1583. diverse Priests and Jesuits wrote dangerous books against Q.
Eliz. and certain other Princes excommunicated: which prevailed so far, that
one Somervil a Gentleman, breathing out nothing but blood against the
Protestants, secretly sought entrance into the Queens presence, with a drawn
sword set upon one or two in his way; and being apprehended, confessed that he
purposed to have killed the Queen. Ed. Arden his father in law, a Gentleman of
Warwick-shiere, and Arderns wife, and their daughter Somervils wife, and Hall a
Priest, were condemned as guilty of Somervils practice. After 3 days Somervile
was found strangled in prison (for fear of revealing it, as was thought) where
he lay, and Ardern was hanged the next day.

Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador thrust out of England.
IN 1584. some English Gentlemen began to practice the delivery of the Qu. of
Scots, Francis Throgmorton was suspected by letters written to the Qu. of
Scots, and intercepted. Presently Thomas Lord Paget, and Charles Arundell a
Courtier, left the Land secretly. Henry Earl of Northumberland and Philip
Earl of Arundel were commanded to their houses. And there was great cause of
circumspection; for the Papists by printed Books, incited the Maids of Honor
to do that against the Qu. that Judith did against Holofernes. Yet was the
Queens mercy such, that she caused 70. Priests to be sent out of England. The
chief of them were Gasper Heywood, who of all the Jesuits first came into
England, James Bosgrave, John Heart, and Edward Rishton, who presently after
wrote a book against the Queen. At this time Bernardinus Mendoza the Spanish
Ambassador, was thrust out of England, for practicing Treason against the
State. He having dealt with Throgmorton and others, to bring in strangers to
invade the Land, as appeared by Throgmortons action, who being apprehended,
sent one of his packets to Mendoza: his other packets being searched, there was
found a catalogue of all the Havens in England, fit to land in, and another of
all the Noblemen in England, which favored the Romish Religion. And he did not
deny that he had promised his help to Mendoza, and the help of those Nobles it
was fit he should deal with.

A Popish practice against Qu. Elizabeth discovered, not without a miracle, by
Creightous torn Papers, a Scottish Jesuit.
QUeen Elizabeth, that rare Paragon of her Sex, and that fairly flourishing
Flower, which Traitors (though often attempted) could never nip, nor crop up,
being a Princess, both prudent, pious and pitiful; seeking (therefore) a
fair opportunity and suitable means to set the Queen of Scots (at those times
tainted with some treasonable practices against her Crown and Person) at
liberty; and for that purpose sent Sr. William Wade (who was then returned out
of Spain) to confer with her of the means thereunto. And the good Queen was
about to send Sr. Walter Mildmay to bring this aim of hers to further issue.
But some terrors and fears in the interim brake-out between them, which
disturbed that intention; especially by a notable discovery by certain papers,
which one Creighton a Jesuit sailing into Scotland did then tear in pieces
when he was apprehended in the Ship by Dutch-Pirates at Sea, whose person being
by them ceased-on, he took forth his papers (wherein it seems the project of a
traitorous plot against Qu. Elizabeth at that time, was described) tore them
into small pieces, and with all his force threw them into the Sea. But see how
the Lords good providence ordered it; as they flew in the air, the wind blew
stiffly, by force whereof they were all blown back again into the ship, even in
a miraculous manner, as the Jesuit himself confessed, when he saw it. Which
papers were all kept and gathered together, sent to England to Sr. William Wade
aforesaid, and with much labor and singular skill, so joined and set together
again, that he found they contained a notable new plot (among many other) of
the Popes, the Spaniards and the Guises resolution to invade England. Whereupon,
and by reason of many other rumors of dangers intended against the Queen and
whole Kingdom of England, a great number of all sorts of men (out of common
charity and to show their love and affectionate care of the welfare of the
Queen and State) bound themselves by an association (as then it was called) by
mutual promises and subscriptions of hands and seals to prosecute all such
(by all their force and might, even unto death) that should attempt any thing
against the life of the Queen, or welfare of the Kingdom. Now the Queen of
Scots took this as a thing devised to bring her into danger, and she also was
so continually set upon by seditious spirits, who if they may but have access
are able to draw the greatest Princes to destruction. And what have bin their
practices from time to time, but to bring great personages and greatest
Families to ruin. Lamentable experience shows openly the fruit of their malice
and mischievous plots of treason, which they impiously and audaciously call and
count nothing else, but advancing of their Catholic cause. Now the Scots-Queen
(led on by her blind guides) dealt most importunely with the Pope and Spaniard,
by Sir Francis Englefield, that by all means they would with speed undertake
their intended business, namely, the invasion of our Realm. For the advancing
whereof, the Pope and Spaniard had resolved on these points.

1. That Qu. Elizabeth should be deprived of her Kingdom.

2. That the King of Scots, a manifest favourer of heresy, should utterly be
dis-inherited of the Kingdom of England.

3. That the Scots-Queen should marry some noble man of England that was a
Catholic.

4. That this man must be chosen King of England by the Catholics of England.

5. That this choice so made must be confirmed by the Pope.

6. That the children of him, so chosen, begotten of the Scots-Queen must be
declared Successors in the Kingdom.

All these things were confirmed to be true by the testimony of one Heart a
Priest. Who was that noble Englishman that should marry the Scots-Queen was
much enquired after by Sir Francis Walsingham with all diligence, but not
certainly found out; yet there was strong suspicion of Henry Howard brother to
the Duke of Norfolk, who was noble by birth, unmarried, and a fast favourer of
that Religion, and in great grace and favor with them. All these things were
discovered by this Creighton the Jesuits torn Papers, as aforesaid. And all
this their plotting and contriving of France, Spain and the Pope against
Queen Elizabeth and King James, for no other cause, but for their Religion,
which they had now fairly begun to establish among their people.

Parry executed for Treason.
IN the year 1585. William Parry a Welch-man and Doctor of Law, spoke against
that Law, which in the Parliament then held, was exhibited, and called it a
bloody Law. Presently after he was accused of practicing the Queens death. He
confessed voluntarily in the Tower, that having obtained the Queens pardon for
breaking into the chamber and wounding one Hare (for which he was condemned) he
being a sworn fervant to the Queen. From England he went into France, and was
reconciled. Afterward at Venice, in consultation with Benedict Palmeus, he told
him that he had found out a way to help the afflicted Catholics in England: if
the Pope or some learned Divines would approve it as lawful. The Jesuit
Palmius approved it: Next in France, one Morgan drew him to consent to murder
the Queen if it should prove lawful. This act the Popes Nuntio Ragazonius
commended. Parry afterward having access to the Queen, showed her all, and not
long after Cardinal Come his letter approving the enterprise. Now he takes a
new resolution to perform it, encouraged specially by D. Alins Book, teaching
that Princes excommunicate are to be spoiled of their Kingdoms and lives. These
with many other things, Parry confessed before the Lord Hunsdon, Sr.
Christopher Hatton, and Sr. Francis Walsingham. In Westminster Hall the heads
of his accusation being read, he confessed himself guilty. He died in the
Palace-yard before Westminster Hall, not once calling on the name of God. At
this time also Henry Earl of Northumb: for entering into traitorous counsels
with Paget and the Guises, to invade England, was cast into the Tower, where he
was found dead, being shot with 3. bullets under his left pap, the chamber door
bolted in the inside. A pistol was found in his chamber, and himself the
author of his own death. Thus from time to time the most noble Families of
England, have bin seduced and ruined by the false and bewitching counsels of
Jesuits and Seminaries.

Savages attempt to kill the Queen.
NOw again there was a most abominable treason conspired and voluntarily
confessed by the conspirators. One Gifford a Doctor in Divinity, Gilbert
Gifford, and Hodgeson Priests, persuaded one John Savage a bloody fellow to
undertake to kill Queen Elizabeth: To hide their mischievous intents more
cunningly from the Queens Counsel, who were very careful to foresee all
danger, they wrote a Book, in which they advise the Papists in England, not to
go about to hurt the Queen. For they were to use no other weapons against
their Prince, then the Christian weapons of Tears, Fasting, Prayers and the
like; and most cunningly also these Foxes spread a rumor, that George Gifford,
one of the Queens Pensioners had sworn to kill the Queen, and for that cause
had gotten from the Guises a very great sum of Money. The Easter following
John Ballard an English Priest of the College of Rhemes, was come into
England, who had bin trying the minds of Papists in England and Scotland. He
had dealt with Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador in France, Charles Paget and
others for the invasion of England. And although it seemed to be a very hard
work, yet he had sworn to use his utmost endeavor in it, and also for the
liberty of the Queen of Scots. At Whitsuntide, in a Soldiers habit, and under
the name of Captain Fortescue, he had a conference in London with Anthony
Babington, a young Gentleman of Darby-shiere, Romishly affected, who not long
before in France, had conference with Thomas Morgan and the Bishop of Glasco,
the Scotch Queens Ambassador. He was drawn by them, showing him most assured
hopes of honor from her, to addict himself to them; and by their means had
favorable letters from her. Ballard and Babington conferred together
concerning the invasion of England; but it was not deemed a thing could be
done, Queen Elizabeth being alive. Then Ballard informed Babington, that Savage
had undertook to kill her. Babingtons advice was, that it should not be
committed to Savage alone, least perhaps he might be hindered, but to six
resolute men, of which number Savage should be one. Upon this Babington took
into his consideration the Ports, in which the invaders should land the
confederates, that should join in the act of murdering Q. Elizabeth, and
delivering the Scots-Queen. In the mean time a letter was brought from the
imprisoned Queen to Babington in a secret character, blaming Babingtons long
silence; but he excused it, because she was under the custody of Sr. Amice
Paulet a severe keeper, declared unto her, that which Ballard and he had
resolved before, and that himself with one hundred more would deliver her. The
purpose by her letters unto Babington was commended: and it was advised that it
should be undertaken considerately, and nothing should be moved before they
were sure of external forces; that they should make an association, as if they
feared the Puritans, that some tumults might be raised in Ireland, while the
thing should be done here; That Arundell and his brethren, and Northumb: should
be drawn to the side; Westmerland, Paget and others called home. The way to
deliver the Scots-Queen, was appointed, to overthrow a Coach in the gate, or
set the Stables on fire, or intercept her as she rode to take the air, betwixt
Chartly and Stafford. Babington undertook for rewards to all that should give
their help. He had gotten unto him Edward Windsor, the Lord Windsores brother,
Thomas Salisbury, Charles Tinley the Queens Pensioner, Chidioe Tichburne,
Edward Abingdon, whose father was the Queens Cofferer, Robert Gage, John
Travers, John Charnick, John Jones, Savage, Barnwell an Irish Gent. Henry Dun,
Clark of the first fruits Office; and one Polly also joined himself, who was
thought to reveal all to Sir Francis Walsingham. Abingdon, Barnwell, Charnick
and Savage, took an Oath to kill her with their own hands. Babington enjoined
that whosoever was admitted into the conspiracy, should take the Oath of
secrecy. They were so confident of the success, that they did not fear to
cause the undertakers of the Treason to be pictured together, which picture
being seen of the Queen, she knew only Barnwell, and seeing him a good way off,
she blamed the neglect of guarding her person. This fellow afterward gave it
out, that if the conspirator had bin present, the deed might easily have bin
done. That the aid from France might not be wanting, leave was obtained for
Ballard to pass ove^ thither for money, under a false name, and Babington was
to follow; who that he might the more cunningly work his ends, pretended to Sir
Franci^ Walsingham, that he had a desire to go into France, to discover what
the fugitives plotted for the delivery of the Scots-Queen. Walsingham seemed
very much to like the matter, and to commend Babingtons resolution, but upon
pretenses, delayed his going. This was known to Walsingham, either out of a
singular faculty he had to find out Treasons, or else by the means of Gilbert
Gifford a Priest, who was sent out of France to encourage Savage in his wicked
resolution, and that letters might safely be transmitted by him to the Q. of
Scots. Gifford corrupted with money, or for fear, revealed the plot to
Walsingham, and promised to communicate unto him, all his letters. Walsingham
kindly used him, sent him into Stafford-shiere to Sir Amice Paulet, in a letter
persuading Sir Amice, to suffer some of his servants to be corrupted by him.
Gifford for some gold prevailed with Sir Amice his Brewer, who conveyed the
letters to and from Gifford, which by messengers for that end appointed, came
ever to the hands of Sir Francis Walsingham, who coppied out the letters, and
by the art of Thomas Philips found out the character, and by the help of one
Gregory sealed them up, that none could suspect them opened, and then sent the
letters as they were directed. The Queen hereupon commanded Ballard to be
apprehended, which was done Babington advised presently to send Savage and
Charnike to kill the Queen. Babington entreats leave of Walsingham to go
into France, and sueth for Ballards liberty, who would be of use to him for
discovery, and to avoid suspicion. Sir Francis keeps him back with delays,
and draws him to his own house. Skidmore Sir Francis servant, was commanded
to observe him strictly, and to go with him, pretending, least he should be
taken with Messengers. This letter being read (for the command was written) by
Skidmore, was perceived and read also by Babington sitting by him, who supping
with Sr. Francis man in a Tavern, pretending to rise to go pay the reckoning,
left his Cloak and Rapier, and fled. Then Barnwell, Gage, Dun, Charnoke being
in the mean time proclaimed. Traitors, fled into the Woods, and after were
concealed, fed and clothed in rusticall habit, by one Bellamy at Harrow on the
hill. After 10 days they were found and brought to London. Salisbury was taken
in Stafford-shiere and Traverse also, Jones in Wales, not privy to the
conspiracy, but he concealed them, and furnished Salisbury and his man with a
changed Cloak. Windsor was not found, Gilford was sent into France as an Exile
and the^^ dyed.

Sept: 13. 7 of the conspirators being brought to Judgment, confessed themselves
guilty, and were condemned of Treason; other 7. the next day pleaded not
guilty, but were guilty and condemned. Polly though guilty, yet for confessing
something to Sr. Fran. Walsingham, was not brought to Judgment; on the 20. the
first 7. were hanged and quartered in S. Giles Fields, where they used to meet.

The French Ambassadors plot to kill the Queen.
IN the Year 1587. Obespineus the French Ambassador of the Guisian faction,
conferred with William Stafford to kill Q. Elizabeth, Stafford refused it, but
commended one Moody in prison, Trappius Secretary to the said Ambassador, in
the absence of Stafford conferred with Moody about the deed, Moody proposed
poison or a bag of Gunpowder, Trappius disliked it, and wished rather for such
a man as the Burgundian, which killed the Prince of Orange; this thing Stafford
revealed to the Counsel, Trappius was apprehended going into France, and
afterward the Ambassador, Moody, Stafford, Trappius, all accused the Ambassador
before the Lords, who sent for the Ambassador. Stafford beginning to speak, was
interrupted by the Ambassador, saying that Stafford first proposed it to him,
who if he did not desist, threatened to send him bound hand and foot to the
Queen; Stafford upon his knees with great protestations affirmed, that the
Ambassador first moved it, the Ambassador was admonished to take heed of such
crimes, and dismissed by Burley, insinuating unto him, that it was more the
Queens clemency, then that his office claimed any such favor.

The Spanish Armado.
IN the year 1588. was set out by the King of Spain for the conquest of
England, the invincible (as they called it) Navy, for this purpose the Duke of
Parma had an Army in Flanders of one hundred and three Companies of Foot, and
three thousand Horse, amongst which were seven hundred English fugitives, the
Bull of Pius quintus, for excommunicating Qu. Elizabeth is renewed by Sixtus
quintus, and a plenary Indulgence granted to all which would join against
England. The Queen prepared a Navy also, and makes the L. Charles Howard
Admiral, and sends him into the West, to join with Sr. Fra. Drake
Vice Admiral, Henry Seimour, second son to the Duke of Somerset with 40. Ships
English and Dutch, is appointed to stop Parma's coming forth; upon the Land
Southward, were placed 20000 men, another Army of 22000 Foot and a 1000 horse
at Tilbury under Leicester; another Army guarded the person of the Queen,
consisting of 34000 Foot, and 2000. Horse under Henry L. Hunsdon. The counsel
of war, decreed that all places commodious to land in, should be strengthened
with Men and Ammunition, which places should be defended with the trained Bands
in the Maritime Countries, to hinder the Enemies landing, if he should land,
then they should waste the Country round about, that he might find no more
relief then he brought, and that they should keep him in continual Alarums. To
secure the Qu. at home from Papists, some were committed to Wisbitch Castle.
There was in the mean time a Treaty of Peace from the Spaniards, even till the
Fleet was almost come to the English-coast. The Spanish Fleet consisted of 130
Ships, 19290 Soldiers, Mariners 8350, chained Rowers, 2080. Great Ordnance
2630. they loosed out of the River of Tagus, 3. Ships by the help of David Guin
an English servant, and the Turkish Rowers, were carried into France, the rest
of this mighty Fleet, was by Gods help overthrown and dispersed, with 8. fire
Ships, made to cut their Cables weigh their Anchors, and fly confusedly, and
the Admiral Gallyasse was taken; when they began again to gather together,
they were battered and torn, diverse of them perishing in the Sea: so a Navy 3.
years in preparing, was overthrown in a Month, many of their men being slain
and drowned, diverse of their Ships sunck and taken (not 100 Englishmen lost,
and but one Ship) driven about Scotland, Orchades and Ireland, much impaired,
and returned with shame, Gods Name be honored.

Lopez his undertaking to poison the Queen.
IN the Year 1593. one Stephen Ferrera de Gama, which came with Don Antonio,
the expulsed K. of Portugal into England, and afterward sought to be
reconciled to the K. of Spain, being of inward familiarity with one Roger
Lopez a Portugues, the Queens Physician, prevailed with him to promise to
poison Q. Elizabeth. Ferrera writes to Ibarra the K. of Spains Secretary at
wars, about the promise of Lopez, and his requiring for the undertaking 50000.
Crowns. Ferrera promised him, that there should one come in the habit of a
Mariner to him, who should bring him the value of 50000. Crowns in Rubies and
Diamonds, this was Lopez own confession, who added also, that it could not be
but that the King of Spain was acquainted with the matter, for the money was to
come from the King of Spain, he further confessed, that Stephen Ferrera told
him, that if he would offer to the Count Fuentes this great service to poison
her Majesty, he should want no money, and hereupon he was content that Ferrera
should write to t^^ Count Fuentes, or Secretary Ibarra, to assure them that the
Doctor would undertake to poison her: this secret was discovered by letters
which were intercepted, (for all letters to any Portugues, and every Portugues
coming from beyond Sea, was to be stayed) superscribed to Diego Hernandes,
from Francis Torres; Diego Hernandes, Ferrera confessed to be himself; Francis
Torres was one Manoel Lowys, who had served the King of Portugal, but remained
now at Bruxels, about Count Fuentes, the letter was very mystical, and
pretended merchandise, as that the Merchants on the other side, did commend his
wares, etc. assuring him of good return, etc. and therefore desired him to
continue there some time. They commended the Jewel he sent, and reported how
the Amber and Musk was highly esteemed, and spoke of broad Cloth, Scarlet,
threads of Pearl, Dyamond, etc. which letter was confessed to be in Answer to
that was written by Lopez, to take away the Queens life; more letters there
were to the foresaid purpose from Secretary Ibarra to Stephen Ferrera, and from
the Count Fuentes at Bruxells. Stephen Ferrera told Peter Ferrera his Keeper,
that himself and Lopez had written into Spain, and made offer to give the Qu.
poison.

Squires Practice to poison the Queens Saddle.
ANno Dom: 1596. one Edward Squire, sometimes a Scrivener at Grenewich,
afterward a deputy Purveyer for the Queens Stable, in S. Francis Drakes last
voyage, was taken prisoner and carried into Spain, and being set at liberty,
one Walpole a Jesuit grew acquainted with him, and got him into the
Inquisition, whence he returned a resolved Papist, he persuaded Squire to
undertake to poison the Pummell of the Queens Saddle, and to make him
constant, made Squire receive the Sacrament upon it, he then gave him the
poison, showing that he should take it in a double bladder, and should prick
the bladder full of hoales in the upper part when he should use it, (carrying
it within a thick glove for the safety of his hand) should after turn it
downward, pressing the bladder upon the Pummell of the Queens Saddle. This
Squire confessed. Squire is now in Spain, and for his safer dispatch into
England, it was devised, that two Spanish prisoners taken at Cales, should be
exchanged for Squire and one Rowles, that it might not be thought that Squire
came over but as a redeemed captive. The Monday sevennight after Squire
returned into England, he understanding the Horses were in preparing for the
Queens riding abroad, laid his hand, and crushed the poison upon the Pummell
of the Queens Saddle, saying, God save the Qu., the Qu. rode abroad, and as it
should seem laid not her hand upon the place, or else received no hurt (through
Gods goodness) by touching it, Walpole counting of it as of a thing done,
imparted it to some principal fugitives there, but being disappointed of his
hope, supposing Squire to have been false; to be revenged on him, sent one
hither (who should pretend to have stolen from thence) with letters, wherein
the plot of Squire was contained, this letter was pretended to be stolen out of
one of their Studies, Squire being apprehended confessed all without any rigor,
but after denied that he put it in execution, although he acknowledged he
consented to it in the Plot, at length he confessed the putting it in execution
also.

Earl of Tyrones Rebellion.
ANno Dom: 1597. Hugh a Bastard made Earl of Tyrone by Q. Eliz: pardoned also
by her for a murder, and usurping the Title of Oneale, set on by the Spaniard,
with whom he had lived a fugitive, assaulted the Fort of Blackwater, and at
that very time when he wrote to S. John Norris the English General, that he
might be dealt mildly withal, least he should run on the rocks of rebellion,
wrote also to Kildare to side with him, the Qu: desiring to spare shedding of
blood, agreed unto a conference with him by her Commissioners, the Rebel not
liking the conditions proposed by the Commissioners, departed and spoiled the
Country about Blackwater, and plucked down the Town of Dunganon. The Country
wasted, and no victual to be had, Tyrone presented to the General a Petition,
craving pardon upon his knees, at the foot of the Qu: picture; and in the mean
time dealt for aid out of Spain, the K. of Spain promised him aid,
requiring him to admit of no Articles of peace with the English, hereupon
(though there was a cessation of Arms) he burns and spoileth the Country,
then he put on again his old habit of dissimulation and sues for pardon,
presently by shufling or neglect, Conaught and Vlster revolted, then he fell to
rebellion again, and about the Blackwater overthrew 1500. English, then the
Earl of Essex coming General into Ireland, he cleared Munster, thence went
into Lemster against the O Conors and O Neales, whom he vanquished, he sent
thence S. Conyers Clifford against Ororke, himself going another way, to
distract the Forces of Tyrone, but S. Conyers was slain, and his Forces
defeated, Tyrone coming near to the General, he declared, he desired not to
fight but parley of peace, which was denied, afterward he obtained conference
with the L. General, and then another conference, where it was concluded, that
next day Commissioners should meet to treat of peace, then was the L. General
sent for into England, after whose departure Tyrone takes the Field again, in
the time of cessation of Arms, the Spaniard sent him some Money and
Ammunition, the Popes Indulgences, and a Plume of Peacock-Feathers.

Anno 1600. The L. Mountioy came into Ireland, as Lieutenant General, and in
diverse small skirmishes beat the Rebels. The Spaniard to further the Rebellion,
sent Don John de Aquila with 2000. old trained Soldiers, with some Irish
fugitives, who landed at Kingsale. There were also at that same time, 2000.
Spaniards more arrived at Been-haven, Ballimore and Castle-haven. The L. Deputy
encamped near Kingsale, S. Richard Levison with two of the Queens Ships
blockt up the Haven: and on both sides the Town was battered. Then S. Richard
Levison sunk five of their Ships. To these Spaniards, Odonel betook himself,
and presently after Tyrone, Orork, Raymund, Burk, Mac Mahon, Randul, Mac Surly,
and Tirrell, with the chief of the Nobility, in all 6000. Foot, and 500.
Horse. Tyrone on a hill not far from the Camp, made a bravado two days
together, as if he would give the English Battle. The L. Deputy at the foot
of the hill, chose a convenient plot to fight with him, but Tyrone sounds a
retreat, whom the L. General followed, and forced to make a stand in midst of
a bogge: where by the E. of Clanrikard, their Horse were routed, and defeated.
Alonso O. Campo one of the Spanish Generals, and six Ensign-bearers, were
taken prisoners, and the Ensigns taken by the English, and 1200. Spaniards
slain. Tyrone was forced to fly into Vlster, Odonel fled into Spain, the rest
hid themselves. The L. General returned to Kingsale to batter it, in 6. days
space, the enemy attempted nothing against him. The Don John offers
conditions of surrendering the Town; which propounded, the L. General (the
English being wearied out with a Winters siege) agrees with the Spaniard on
certain Articles, and takes possession of the Town, and sends away all the
Spaniards, as well as those in this Town, into Spain. The next Spring the
General pursues Tyrone into Vlster, and spoileth the Country; upon which the
Rebels make haste to come in unto the Deputy, and Tyrone beggeth pardon upon
his knees. From Dublin Tyrone should have bin carried into England, but the
Queens death hindered that, and K. James pardoned him. Afterward he entered into
another conspiracy with Ocane, but being sent for with a Process, to answer a
suite which the Bishop of Derry had against him, and fearing he had bin sent
for for his conspiracy, he fled out of Ireland.

Garnet, Catesby and others, labor to invade England.
IN the last Year of Queen Elizabeth, there was a plot laid against her by
Garnet, Catesby and others, that the Spaniard should join with the Papists
here, in the Invasion of England. Winter was sent into Spain for that purpose,
and Creswell the ledger Jesuit in Spain, Don Pedro Francisco, second Secretary
of State, and the Duke of Lerma, assured Winter that this Message would be very
acceptable to the K. of Spain. Then had Winter an Answer by Count Miranda,
that the K. would bestow 100000. Crowns toward the expedition, and at the next
Spring at farthest, would set his foot in England, Winter returns, and
acquainteth Garnet, Catesby and Tresham with all, and they others; but before
the next Spring the Queen died.

The Gun-powder-Treason.
AT the Queens death, Christopher Wright was sent into Spain, and Guy Fawkes
also from Bruxels by S. William Stanley, to advertise them there, that K. James
was as violent against the Catholics, as Q Elizabeth, and therefore urged the
Spaniard to prosecute the old design. The Jesuits privately suggested that
they should not admit him into England, as being an heretic, Catesby held,
that the K. being an heretic, forfeiteth his Kingdom before any sentence
pronounced. The Parl: was dissolved the 7th. of July, which the K. held, and
prorogued till the 7^h. of February. Catesby at Lambeth broke with Winter about
blowing up the Parliament House. Winter told him that it struck at the root,
but what and if it should not take effect? Catesby won Winter to consent, but
first (said he) go over and win the Constable, to obtain more favor for
Catholics; and if you may bring over with you some confident Gentlemen, as M.
Fawkes. Winter went, met with the Constable at Bergin, and delivered his
Message. The Constable answered, that his Master commanded him to do all good
offices for the Catholics; but he showed the Constable nothing of the matter.
Fawkes and Winter came both into England. This plot of blowing up the
Parliament House, after an Oath of secrecy, and the Sacrament received upon it,
Catesby disclosed it to Percy, and Winter, and Wright to Fawkes. Percy hired
the House, Fawkes was pretended to be Percies man, and Names himself Johnson,
and kept the keys of the House till the adjournment of the Parliament: at
which time all the conspirators departed into the Country. A House was hired at
Lambeth by Percy, to keep the Powder and Wood for the mine, to which it was to
be conveyed. When the plot had taken effect, what should they do? Percy, with
two or three of them, with a dozen more, would seize on the Duke, and carry him
away. The Lady Elizabeth was to be surprised at a hunting near the L.
Harringtons. They would save from the Parliament, first Catholics, then some
particular persons. While they wrought in the mine, they fed on baked meats,
that they might not go forth. At Candlemas the Powder is brought over, about
which time working in the mine, they came against a sto^^ wall; when hearing a
rushing noise of Coals, they feared they were discovered; But it was only the
moving of Coals to be sold, which Cellar Fawkes hired, 20. Barrells of Powder
they had provided, which they hid with Billets and Fagots. Fawkes went into
Flanders to acquaint therewith Stanley and Owen, Stanley was not there; Owen
approved it. Percy and Catesby met at the Bathe; and it was agreed, that
Catesby should call in whom he thought best, the number being small. He called
in Sir Everard Digby, and afterward M. Tresham. The Parliament was anew
prorogued till the 5. of November. Then the conspirators all went into the
Country, and returned 10. days before the Parliament, and hearing that the
Prince would be absent from the Parliament, said they would then seize on the
Prince, and let alone the Duke. Saturday before the Kings return (which was on
Thursday) a letter in the street was delivered to the L. Mounteagles man, to
put into his Masters hand: It had neither date nor superscription, and by the
Lord was that night sent to the Earl of Salisbury, who made acquainted with it
the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Worcester and
Northampton. The Letter was this.

My Lord,
OVt of the love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of your
preservation, Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your life, to devise
some excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament. For God and Man
have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time. And think not slightly
of this advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may
expect the event in safety: for though there be no appearance of any storm,
yet I say, they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet they
shall not see who hurt them. This counsel is not to be contemned, because it
may do you good, and can do you no harm: for the danger is past so soon as
you shall have burned this Letter. And I hope God will give you the grace to
make good use of it; to whose holy protection I commend you.


Friday following the King read it, who considering the sentence therein
expressed (that they should receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet
should not know who hurt them) and joining it to the sentence (for the danger
is past so soon as you shall have burned this Letter) did suspect the danger
mentioned, to be some sudden danger of blowing up with Powder. Afterward it
was determined the Lord Chamberlain should view both above and beneath the
Parliament Houses. Which the L. Chamberlain having done, found in a Vault
under the upper House, great store of Billets, faggots and Coals, and casting
his eye aside, a fellow standing ^y, which called himself Percy's man, that
had hired the Cellar. The K. supposing that Gunpowder might be hid under that
Wood and Coals, caused a further search to be made. Whereupon Sir Thomas
Knevet went about the Parliament House with a small number, to search more
narrowly, the midnight next after, where he found Fawkes standing without
doors, booted and spurd, and apprehended him; then in search under the Wood
and Coals, 36. Barrells of Gunpowder, and about the Traitor three Matches, and
other Instruments fit for that wicked purpose were found, which wicked intent
of blowing up the House, he instantly confessed; affirming, that if he had bin
in the House, he would not have failed to blow up both himself and them. In
this mine wrought Catesby, Robert Winter, Esquires. Thomas Percy, Thomas
Winter, John Wright, Christ: Wright, Guido Fawkes, Gentlemen, and Bates,
Catesbyes man. Sir Everard Digby, Ambrose Rookewood, Francis Tresham, Esquires,
John Grant, Gent: and Robert Keys, were made acquainted with the plot, but
wrought not in the mine. After Fawkes apprehension, the Traitors poast away,
and pretending Religion they would fight for, gathered in open Rebellion all
they could, which number never exceeded 80. They wandered thorough
Warwick-sheire, to Worcester-sheire, and thence to the borders of
Stafford-sheire, and having gotten themselves into a House, they obstinately
refused to yield to the Sheriff, but (through Gods providence) a less
quantity of Powder then 2. pounds, taking fire, did so mangle some, disable
others, that having begged pardon on their knees for their crime, of God, they
desperately exposed themselves to the peoples fury, 3. of the chief joined
back to back, and two of them were killed with one shot, Catesby and Percy,
Winter was taken alive. So all of them were killed, beaten or taken.

The conspiracy of Sir Griffin Markham and others.
ANno Dom: 1603. George Brook, Sir Griffin Markham, Watson and Clerk Priests,
entered into a conspiracy against K. James (it was said) to surprise Prince
Henry, to keep the King and Prince in the Tower, or to carry them to Dover
Castle, and there to obtain their own pardons, a toleration for Religion, and
Removal of some Counselors. Diverse beside these were accused, and condemned;
but Brook confessed he did it, but by a Commission from the King, to try the
faithfulness of the Kings Subjects; but he could produce no such Commission.
Sir Griffin Markham confessed that he intended foreign Invasion and Alteration
of Religion, but not to destroy the King, as was in the indictment. Watson and
Clerk confessed they drew the Gentlemen into the plot, houlding the King for no
King till he was Crowned. Of them all only Watson, Clerk and Brook suffered
death.

The Massacre and Treason in Ireland, extracted out of the Irish Remonstranc^
and Irelands Tears.
Upon the 23 day of October, 1641. a most prodigious and nefarious viper
gnawing the bowels of its native-parent Ireland, burst out of the womb thereof,
and visibly appeared most epidemically destructive to that whole State and
Kingdom. It had lien long (as some of the Rebels reported) undiscovered, but
was all that while hatching by many hot and high-built hopes, both by foreign
and domestic encouragements. The accursed Midwives of this bastard-birth were
Popish-Priests, Friars and Jesuits, together with other firebrarnds and
incendiaries of that State and Kingdom. Their hideous and hellish hopes were
mightily supported and corroborated by strong assistance from Spain, France
and Flanders, together with deeply engaged assurance of full correspondency in
England, and an equivalent party in Scotland, besides their great
encouragements by Popish Bulls from Rome, authorizing the speedy and immediate
Surrender of all such places of strength as they had beleagured, promising free
pardon of all sins whatsoever before hand committed by any of them, tending to
the advancement of this great work, thundering (or rather roaring) out
excommunications against any that should refuse so to join with them therein,
terming themselves the Catholic Army, and the ground of their work (as all
their abominable and bloody plots are) the Catholike-cause. Their desperate and
most divellish resolution was therein not to leave a drop of English blood in
Ireland, and so consequently not the least spark or glimpse of the Gospel and
pure Protestant Religion, giving out in words and designing in their hearts,
that the Tower of London, the Castle of Edenborough and the Castle of Dublin
were to be surprised by their Faction in all these places all upon one day. In
all which time (this therefore might the more easily have bin done, especially
in Ireland) there was not the least fear or suspicion of treachery; yet there
were (a little before the day of this bloudy-birth) secretly gathered together
about 400 Irish Papists, elected out of most parts of Ireland, desperate and
damnably bloody minded persons, designed for this horrid and hellish attempt,
who had all privately convayed and sheltered themselves in several places of
the City and Suburbs of Dublin, waiting and expecting the time and watchword,
when to give the onset. In this plot all the Popish Nobility and men of
quality in Ireland were interessed, and it was professed by that most impious
and barbarous Arch-Rebell Sr. Philim O Neal, that what he and they did was by
the consent of the Parliament in Ireland. Yea some of them have bin so
impiously audacious, as to profess and persuade others of their accursed
confederates to believe that they had regal authority for it, and were so bold
as to term themselves ^he Queens Army.

And for the more strongly prosecution of this their most exorbitant villainy,
the Conspirators and Traitors entered into a most accursed Covenant (just as our
Popish-Pouder-Traitors did in their damnable design) and bound themselves by
an oath of Confederation and Secrecy, Reily a prime Popish-Priest and others
(like his father the Devil) compassing the Earth far and near to draw into
their conspiracy such as had not before bin therewith acquainted, as also to
satisfy all scruples (if any arose in any of their minds) about the
lawfullnesse of their actions, just as Garnet that old Romish Jesuiticall Fox
did with his Pouder-conspirators, 1605. And whereas they falsely have masked this
their most inhumane Treason and Rebellion under the Kings name, pretending his
authority and all they did or do in obedience to his Majesty, and tender
respect to his Royal Prerogative; yet it has bin by some others of them
professed that they intended to have a King of their own, yea that they had one
already, some saying Tyrone was he, others Sir Philim O Neal, who has bin
audaciously and traitorously honored with the style of his Majesty, and that
they will (with the assistance of Spain and France) set footing in England
(having completed their own devilish Irish-work) and after that in Scotland,
where all things being settled to their desires, the whole forces of Ireland in
way of retribution and acknowledgement of gratitude was intended (as has bin
confessed) for the King of Spain against the Hollanders. Such mighty and
invincible Conquerours had they made themselves in their own conceits and
most bold and bloody imaginations. Unto which their horrible disloyalty and
unparalleld treachery and Rebellion, they added most execrable expressions of
unheard of hatred and inhumane barbarity to the Subjects of the English-Nation;
Banishment or perpetual slavery were the greatest favors that would have bin
afforded them, their general profession being for a general extirpation, even
to the last and least drop of English-blood from among them. Yea and that which
transcends all former extents of rage and unpattern'd wrath and malignity, not
so much as an English beast, or any of that breed was to be left alive in that
whole Kingdom. And as the hearts and tongues of these most base and abominable
Traitors and Rebels, were boundlesly and extremely cruel in intention and
profession: So it pleased the Lord for the sins of his people there, to permit
power unto these barbarous Rebels to act with their hands the most accursed and
profane perpetrations that ever Christian eyes beheld or ears have heard of,
both for impiety against God and his holy Gospel, and almost unexpressible
inhumanity toward the true Professors thereof among them, blaspheming our God,
stripping his Servants stark naked, and then bidding them go to their God to
be clothed again; breaking into Churches, burning Pulpits, with extreme
hatred to our Religion, and exceedingly tryumphing in all their impieties.
Dragging some Professors of the Gospel by the hair of their heads through
the Streets into the Churches, and there stripping and whipping them, and with
most cruel and taunting terms abusing them, telling them if they came to
morrow they should hear the like Sermon. Yea so excessively impious was their
hatred to the Gospel of Christ, that they took the sacred books of the holy
Scriptures and cast them into kennels and puddles of dirt and mire, treading
them under-foot and leaping and skipping on them and (o horrid impiety) causing
a bagg-pipe to play all the while, and bidding a plague upon them, saying they
were the cause of all quarrels, and burning some, and saying it was hellfire
that was then flaming, and wishing they had all the Bibles in Christendom that
they might use them so.

And as for the most inhumane and more than Scythian cruelties of these Irish
Canibals, and most barbarous blood-sucking Tygres, of whom we may most properly
say, as Jacob did of his bloody sons Simeon and Levi in their massacre of the
Shechemites, Genesis 49.7. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their
wrath for it was cruel. Yea certainly more cruel than ever any eye did see or
ear did hear, yea, I say, past the most exquisite historical expressions of
any ancient or modern Relations; witness their stripping stark-naked, men, women
and children, even children sucking their poor mothers breasts, whereby
multitudes of all sorts, ages and Sexes in the extremity of that cold season
of frost and snow, have most lamentably perished; women being dragged up and
down naked; women in childbed drawn out thence and cast into prison; one
delivered of a child, while she was hanging; one ripped up ( horresco referens)
and two children taken out of her, and all cast unto and eaten up by Swine. One
stabbed in the breast her child sucking. An infant cruelly murdered, whom they
found sucking his dead mother, slain by them the day before. A child of 14
years of age taken from his mother, in her sight cast into a Bog-pit and held
under water while he was drowned. Together with many other yet more horrid,
hideous and more than savage or beast-like barbarities, too terrible for me any
farther to relate, but may be more fully found in that most lamentable
Remonstrance of this Irish-Rebellion, and all there proved by testimonies on
Oath, whereunto I referr the Reader. Which makes me call to mind that old
observation, proverbially spoken of Ireland, which is, That no poisonous
Serpent will live on Irish-ground; which how true in the historical meaning, I
know not; but now I am sure it is most false in the mystical meaning of it; for
here it seems that Satan's Serpentine seed, a brood of most poisonous
native-Serpents, Adders and Snakes of villainy and cruelty do live, yea and
thrive there also; but I trust, but for a season, for certainly, the Lord, the
most righteous Judge of all men, and severe revenger of all wrongs, will not
suffer such horrible impieties and unpattern'd cruelties to go unpunished, but
will undoubtedly ruinate such a pestilent generation of Romish Vipers and
Babilonish blood-suckers as these are, which he has already most blessedly
begun. First, by his most gracious and timely discovery of their main plot, the
taking of the City of Dublin, which was indeed the Master-peice of their
intended Epidemical mischief, but prevented (I say) by the Lords great mercy
and good providence, in a most strange manner, by a native Irish Gentleman, one
M. Owen Mack-Connell, once Servant to that pious and most worthy Gentleman Sir
John Clotworthy, and this also by a most remarkable way and work of the Lords
special providence, as is more particularly and punctually related in the
preamble of Irelands Tears, to which I refer the Reader. And secondly by the
Lords most glorious and victorious over-powring the out-ragious power and
petulancy of those barbarous miscreants now in open Rebellion by the hands of a
very small remnant of poor Protestants there among them, who (by reason of the
most unhappy distractions and unnatural civill-discords raised up among us in
England by the Popish Faction also, and their Pontifician abettors) cannot be
by us so sufficiently supplied with men and arms, as is fit and much desired;
therefore, I say, the Lord of Hoasts abhorring and abominating such atrocious
and hell-fomented blasphemies, murders and merciless cruelties, makes his
just indignation and wrath to prosecute and pursue them at the heels, giving
those small and inconsiderable companies such admirable and even almost
miraculous victories over them, as most evidently declare the hand of the Lord
to be against them, and his gracious purpose utterly to supplant and
exterminate such devillishly desperate and intolerably barbarous and bloody
Rebels and Traitors, the lively lims and lineaments of that bloody Strumpet of
Rome.

The most bloody Massacre at Paris, Anno 1572. extracted out of the French
History, truly and briefly related.
ANd now (good Reader) give me leave a little to seem to digress (not so much
from the matter, as) from the persons and places at first propounded, and to
look but a little into our neighbor Kingdom of France, where, I say, I shall
only vary from personages, but the subject matter the same with the former,
setting forth the bloody plots and conspiracies of the Popish Faction among
them also against those of the reformed Protestant Religion in France, and
especially in that most butcherly and barbarous Massacre at Paris, where it
primarily and chiefly began to be cruelly acted and executed on Gods innocent
lambs, marked out to the slaughter before hand. And thus it was in brief.

In the years 1571. and 72. Charles the ninth, then K. of France, the said K.
the then Duke of Guise and others of the Romish Faction, bearing a most
inveterate hatred (which was craftily concealed) against those of the Religion,
and in special against the then most renowned Admiral of France, whose Piety,
Prudence and Prowess was such and in so high esteem of all both friends and
foes also, that whiles he subsisted and survived, the Popish-party (maugre
their malice) could do nothing, to any purpose, to the prejudice of the cause
of the Religion. At last a plot was laid most craftily and cruelly, under
pretense of a marriage between the Prince of Navarr, a noble and pious Prince
of the Religion, and the Kings Sister, by which snare to bring the said Prince,
the Admiral and the rest of the heads of the Religion to the Court and City of
Paris, that so these heads being first smitten-off, the inferior members
thereof might the more easily be destroyed. Under this color, I say, the King
invites the Admiral to the Court at Paris, pretends a fair correspondence and
agreement of all matters in difference 'twixt his Majesty and those of the
Religion, especially himself and the Admiral, and a reconcilement also
between this noble Admiral and the Duke of Guise. In which interim, one
Lignerolles a French Gentleman was openly slain in the Court, for discovering
some secrets concerning this plot against those of the Religion, and the
Cardinal of Chastillon (then in England and ready to depart thence for France)
brother to the Admiral of France, was poisoned by one of his Chamberlaines and
dyed thereof, to the great grief of all his friends and servants.

The most noble and religious Admiral on the Kings invitation comes to Paris,
was (with extraordinary fair shows of love and regal respect) most welcomely
entertained, both he and diverse others of the Religion that came with him. The
foresaid marriage was not long after solemnized in Paris with great pretenses
of joy and content on all sides expressed, in most sumptuous and liberal
feasts and banquets; Maskes and dances (the sweet innocent Princes, little
dreaming of such a dance to be now a leading by the King, Queen Mother and Duke
of Guise, with the rest of their Romish bloody faction, as stained, nay steeped
all their dainties in streams of their hearts blood) in so much as 'twas
admired to see such a seeming friendly mixture of those of the Religion with
the Romish Catholics, just like so many lambs among so many greedy wolvs. Now
whiles every one employed himself in such like mirth and jollity, diverse that
were sent for by the K., Q-Mother and Du. of Guise, that so they might be sure
to be the stronger party, speedily arrived in Paris; the Catastrophe of all
that follows having bin made not long before among them, the Dukes of Guise and
Anjon being the principal actors openly seen in this wicked work, who resolved
not to let the Admiral depart out of Paris, but there to dispatch him and all
such as should endeavor to defend him. Now it so fell out that one morning the
Admiral coming out of the Lonure, and going to dine at his lodging, being on
foot, and (without least suspicion of any villainy to be attempted against him)
as he was reading a Petition, one shot at him with a harquebush, the bullet
whereof took away the forefinger of his right hand and hurt him in the
left-arme, the villain that shot escaped by flight, a horse standing ready to
post him away after he had done the deed. The noble Admiral being thereupon
brought to his lodging, showed most singular Piety, Constancy and Patience
under his Surgeons hands, was visited by diverse Lords and Gentlemen of the
Religion, the K. of Navarr (now the K. of France his brother in law) and the
Prince of Conde. The French K. also, though a maine plotter in the work,
craftily complained to these Princes of the mischief thus happened, protesting
his sorrow, and swearing revenge and severe execution of Justice on the
offender, whosoever he were.

The K. himself also went to visit the Admiral, making many serious and deep
protestations of his high esteem of his loyalty and fidelity to his Person and
Crown always, and that he held and esteemed him a most discreet and valiant
Commander in Arms, and that therefore he much respected him, with many such like
French complements. Immediately after the Kings departure the K. of Navarr and
the Prince of Conde, were certainly, but very secretly informed of the intended
massacre on all of the Religion, and advised as speedily as they could to get
away out of Paris, and to be assured that that blow given to the Admiral, was
but the beginning of the Tragedy; but alas good Princes, they so much confided
on the Kings vows and promises, that they rejected this advise and counsel, and
stayed there still. About Saturday evening being the 23. of Aug. 1572. certain
Protestant Genesis offered themselves to watch that night with the good Admiral,
but Teligny his son in law would not suffer them, but dismissed them with many
thanks, little suspecting (still) any approaching or precipitating danger on
his father. Night being come-on, the Duke of Guises Lieut. in this action,
which now at this present was to be declared to the Duke of Anjon, sent for all
the Captains of the Switzers and companies of Strangers (which still increased)
into the Town; showing them his Commissions to kill the Admir. and all his
partakers, exhorting them to be courageous in shedding of blood and making
spoil of them, and appointed their Troops to be placed where he thought
meetest. About midnight it was informed to all the Popish Assemblies in the
Town, that the like to this massacre should be done to all of the Religion
throughout the whole Realm, and that the watchword of the general massacre
should be the great bell of the Palace, which should be rung at the break of
day, and the badge of the Executioners should be a white Handkerchief tied upon
their sleeves, and a white cross in their hats. The Duke of Guise with his
bloody minded associates had charge to begin at the Admirals lodgings. The
mighty noise of armor and running up and down with very many lighted torches,
soon after midnight, made many of those of the Religion that were lodged near
the Admiral, to come out of their lodgings and to go into the street to
enquire of their acquaintances, what this noise meant at such an undue hour,
but being anxiously answered, they went on still toward the Lonure, where the
Duke of Guise and his bloody Comrades were attending the deed, where those
innocent Lambs of the Religion were fast set upon, and assaulted by the Dukes
guard. Then presently they rang S. Germans bell in the Palace, whereupon one
Cosseins a French-fury, perceiving the Duke of Guise coming with his Troops,
knocks at the Admirals gate, between 2 and 3 of the clock in the morning, being
Sunday the 24. of August, 1572. La-bonne one of the Admirals attendants opens
the gate, and was instantly stabbed by Cosseins; the 2d door going up the
stairs, being soon burst open, they came to the Admirals chamber, where his own
guard of Switzers were, one of them was slain with an harquebush. And while
Cosseins was jumbling at the chamber-doore, one Cornatan ran up into the
chamber, and being asked by the Admiral (who had caused his men to lift him
out of his bed, and in his night-gowne, having assisted his Ministers in
fervent Prayer, and most humbly commended his soul to his Savior Christ Jesus)
what all this hurly burly meant, Cornatan his servant answered, my Lord, it is
God that calls for us, the house is entered by force, and there is no means of
resistance. The good Admiral, then, replied, it is not long since I disposed
my self to die, save you your selves, if it be possible, for you cannot save my
life, and therefore I commit my soul into the hands and mercy of God. Presently
hereupon his attendants began to shift for themselves and to fly for their
lives, and some of them got up into the top of the house, and found a window to
issue out of the roof and so into gutters, but most of them were slain in the
next houses; but Cornatan and Merlin a godly Minister, escaped, and were
miraculously preserved. The Admirals Chamber-doore being now opened, 7 or 8
armed men with their Targets entered into it, and one Besmes, servant to the
Duke of Guise, with a naked Sword in his hand o^fering him the point, whereupon
the good Admiral, said unto him, Young man, thou ought to respect mine age
and infirmity, yet shall thou not shorten my life, with that Besmes thrust his
Sword into the Admirals body, and redoubling the blow upon the Admirals head,
every one of the rest also gave him a blow, in such sort, that he fell upon the
ground and so lay gasping. The Duke of Guise and others, staying below in the
Court and hearing the blows, asked if they had done, and commanded the body to
be thrown out of the window, which was presently done, by that villain Besmes
and his companions. Now the blows that he had on his head, and the blood
covering his face had so disfigured him, that the Duke of Guise hardly knew
him, whereupon stooping down and wiping his face with his hankerchief, he said,
now I know him, it is he indeed, and therewith gave him a kick with his foot on
his face being dead, whom all the murderers of France extremely feared being
alive. Which done, he left the Admirals house, accompanied with his most bloody
train, and began to cry about the Streets; courage, fellow Soldiers, we have
made a good beginning, let us now to the rest, for the King commands it,
repeating those words often, with great Majesty, for the King commands it, it
is his pleasure, it is his express commandment, just as our Romish and
Atheistical Prelates and Popish-Courtiers do now a days cry out to us, and
did ever of latter times, laying all the odium of their impious villainies and
cruelties on the Kings Majesty, saying still 'twas his pleasure it should be
so. Now presently thereupon the Palace Clock struck, and then a noise was
heard all about the streets of Paris, saying that the Hugonets (for so the
Romish Catholics term the true Protestants in France) were in arms (they
being all, alas, in their beds, far from any such thoughts) and meant to kill
the King (just as our powder-Traitors intended, had their plot taken effect, to
have slandered the Puritans in England, to have bin the Authors of that
hellish-Treason) to whom the Admiralls head was carried and presented, ^
and to the Queen Mother of France, and then imbalmed and sent to Rome to the
Pope and Cardinal of Lorraine. The Common People (like Priest, like people)
ran to the Admirals lodging, where they cut off his hands and his privy
members, and drew his body for the space of three days about the Town; which
done it was borne to the Gibbet of Montfaucon and there hanged by the feet. The
Gentlemen officers of the Chamber, Governors, Tutours and household Servants of
the King of Navarr, the French Kings brother in law, lately married to his
sister, and of the Prince of Conde, were driven out of their Chambers where
they slept in the Lonure, and forced into the Court, were there massacred in
the Kings own presence. The like was done to the Lords and Gentlemen that lay
round about the Admiralls lodgings, and then throughout the Town, in such sort
that the number slain that Sunday at night and the 2 next days ensuing, within
the Town or City of Paris and the Suburbs thereof, was esteemed to be above
10000 persons, Lords, Gentlemen, Pages, Servants, Justices of all sorts,
Scholars, Lawyers, Physicians, Merchants, Artificers, Women, Maids, and Boys,
not sparing little children in their Cradles, no nor in their Mothers bellies.
The Courtiers of the Kings guard and strangers that massacred these Gentlemen,
said, that in one day, by weapons and disorder they had ended those processes,
which pen, paper, sentences of Justice nor open war could not find the means
to do or execute in 12 years space. And thus these most honorable Protestant
Lords and Gentlemen, falsely accused and slandered of conspiracies and practices
against the King, being stark naked, thinking only upon their rest, scarce
awakened out of their sleep, utterly unarmed, in the hands of infinite,
cruel, crafty and most treacherous enemies, not having so much leisure as to
breath, were barbarously slain, some in their beds, others on the roofes of
houses, and in whatsoever other places, where they might be found. It would be
too tedious to recite at large the names and surnames of all the honorable
personages of diverse qualities that were then slain and butchered, it suffices
that their names are written in heaven, and that their death (though shameful
and despicable in the sight and presence of men of this world) is precious in
the sight of the Lords most holy Majesty.

Now let the tender hearted Christian Reader, but consider and ponder in his
heart, how strange and horrible a thing it might be in a great Town or City, to
see at the least 60000 men with Pistols, Pikes, Courtlasses, Ponyards, Knives
and other such bloody instruments, run swearing and blaspheming the sacred
Majesty of God throughout the streets, and into men's houses, where most cruelly
they massacred all whomsoever of the Religion they met, without regard of
estate, condition, sex or age, the streets paved with bodies cut and hewed in
pieces, the gates and entries of houses, Palaces and public places died with
blood. A horrible plague of shoutings and howlings of the murderers mixed with
continual blows of Pistols and Calivers, together with the pitiful cries of
those that were murdered, the bodies cast out at windows upon the stones,
drawn through the dirt with strange noise and whistlings, the breaking open of
doors and windows with bills, stones and other furious instruments, the spoiling
and plundering of houses, Carts carrying away the spoils and dead bodies,
which were thrown into the river of Soame, all red with blood, which ran in
great streams through the Town, and from the Kings Palace into the said river.

As for the King of Navarr himself, and the Prince of Conde, they were called
into the Kings presence, who must himself speak with them, who with his own
mouth certified them, what had thus past all this while, adding that he had
saved their lives only upon condition that they should renounce their Religion,
and follow his; otherwise that they must look for the like punishment that
their Adherents had and should receive. The King of Navarr besought the King to
remember his promise of alliance newly contracted, and not to constrain him in
his Religion. The Prince of Conde also more fervently answered, that the King
had given his faith unto him and to all those of the Religion, with so solemn a
Protestation and Vow, ^
that he could not be persuaded that his Majesty would falsify such an
authentic oath, and that thereupon he had thus far yielded to his Majesty's
demands, and faithfully performed what he had required of him on this
assurance. But as touching the Religion, whereof the King had granted him the
free exercise, and God the true knowledge, to whom he was to make an account
therein, for this his Religion, he said, he was fully resolved to remain most
constant therein, and which he would always maintain to be true, although it
were with the loss of his life. This answer of the Prince, set the King into
such a choler that he began to call him rebel, seditious and son of a
seditious person, with horrible threatenings to cause them to loose their heads,
if within 3 days they took not better counsel: and indeed these threatenings,
and other crafty carriages in this way, so wrought on both these Princes, at
last, that they, forsook their Faith and first Love, and turned to Romish
abominations.

Now the King perceiving that this massacre of Paris* would not quench the
fire, but rather kindle it the more, fearing least those of the Religion in his
other Provinces and Towns might assemble and unite themselves together, and so
give them new work; he with the speedy advise of his Counselors, sent two
Messengers with two several Messages, the one to the Governors and seditious
Catholics of his remoter Towns, wherein were many of the Religion, with
express command to massacre them; the other containing certain Letters to the
Governors of Provinces, by which he pretended this Massacre to be perpetrated
by the Duke of Guise, and the Admiral to be murdered on a particular and
private quarrel twixt them two, and that the Kings honest meaning and
intention was utterly against these things, and seriously to maintain his
former Edict of a general Pacification; and therefore that his care and
vigilance had ceased it the same day it began; and yet (as my Author records
in his History) on the Tewsday following, being the 26. of the same August, the
King accompanied with his Brethren and the chiefest of his Court, went to his
Court of Parliament, and there publicly declared in express terms, that
whatsoever had happened in Paris, was done, not only by his consent, but also by
his commandment, and of his own motion. And as for his other former mentioned
Message and Letter to other Towns and Provinces, for the massacring of those
of the Religion among them also; his bloody command herein was immediately put
in execution at Lions and many other places, where the poor Protestants were
murdered and massacred in most hideous and horrible manner, by those
merciless and inhumane Butchers of bloody Rome, who knocked down the innocent
Christians among them, as so many dogs, cut their throats, ^^angled their
bodies, slashed off their hands with great sharp knives, as on their knees they
held them up to the villains, praying for the sparing of their lives; yea, and
were known to rip up their bellies and take out their fat from their bowels,
and to sell it to their Apothecaries to make medicines. Thus also in those
remoter parts from Paris were very many thousands of the Religion murdered,
without any difference or distinction either of Sex or Age. And so deeply
enraged was the King and his adherents, and so desperately resolved to root out
and extirpate the memory of those of the Religion, especially of any note or
eminency, that the King having at last got into his custody one Briquemant a
noble French Gentleman, of the age of seventy years, one that had valiantly
employed himself in the Service of the Kings of France, having been found in
the House of the Ambassador of England, then resident in France, wherein he
had hid himself, whiles the greatest fury of the massacre was executed, was by
the Kings command put in close prison, together with another virtuous Gentleman
Cavagnes Master of the Requests, both which Gentlemen bare great affection,
both unto the Religion, and also unto the renowned Admiral, and were
themselves of great esteem and reputation in France; but the King having them
now fast in hold, threatened to tear them in pieces upon the rack, if they
would not write and sign with their hands, that they had conspired with the
Admiral to kill the King, his Brethren, the Queen and the King of Navarr. But
they having most constantly and justly refused to avouch so horrible a lie
against their own and their godly friends innocencies, were racked and cruelly
tormented, and by a most unjust sentence of the Court of Parliament in Paris,
they were both declared guilty of Treason and condemned to be hanged upon a
gibbet, which was accordingly executed. The Queen Mother leading the King, her
two sons and the King of Navarr her brother in law to see the Execution. Her
Counselors thinking that at this last exploit, what they had wickedly
projected (namely, the false transferring of the cause of this bloody massacre
on a treasonable plot, intended by the Admiral and others of the Religion
against the King, as was forementioned) would now be wrought out and effected,
if Briquemant in presence of all the people, now at the time of his expected
death would ask pardon of the King, withal (to work it on the more) sending
one to him to certify and assure him that so he might easily save his life,
for the King was merciful, and that he should have pardon, if he would desire
it, confessing this fact wherewith he was charged. But Briquemant answered
boldly and with a good courage; that it belonged not unto him, but to the King
to ask pardon of God for such an heinous offense: That he would never ask
pardon for a fault, wherein he had not offended, but knew himself to be most
innocent, whereof he called GOD to witness, desiring him to pardon the Kings
so great disloyalty and cruelty. Cavagnes also the other noble Gentleman, did
the like until he dyed. Insomuch that this execution (contrary to the Kings
expectation) served to no other end, but more to publish the iniquity of all
those cruel homicides, and of all their most pernicious counsels.

The treacherous murder of Henry the 3d King of France, by a Jacobine Monk,
Anno 1589. extracted out of the French History.
Henry the 3d. King of France, making war against a great associat^on of his
Subjects, assembled together in Paris, under the name of the Leaguers, for the
advancement of the Catholics in France, and under the command and conduct of
the Duke de Main, and other heads of that League, whose wicked practices and
insolences against those of the Religion, the King much distasted and
discountenanced. The King of Navarr also joining with the King of France in
pursuit of the Leaguers; to bring them into better obedience, and thereby having
chaced the forces of the Leaguers, and put them to the worse, and cooped them
up at last within the walls of Paris, and by that means brought them into much
danger, and distress and fear of a total overthrow.

Hereupon the Duke de Main and his confederats within Paris, began to sit close
in counsel, to advise what was best to be done; and seeing the K so near them
and strong about them, either of necessity, like to urge them to a battle, or
else to begirt them so close with a siege, that there would be small or no hope
to escape: And considering that by these the Kings late so prosperous
progressions in his affairs, their own thereby went much to ruin; Resolved
that there was no other means left them to stand it out (especially being
proclaimed guilty of high treason against their chief head the K.) than by
executing some notable exploit in procuring the death of the K. their Mr. and
Sovereign Lord. Now some certain weeks before, a young Iacobine Monck, by
name Friar Jacques Clement, a man drowned in all wickedness, having passed
through the hands of certain Confessors, and conferred with some Jesuits and
others of that rabble, he was for a kind of promising dexterity in any villainy,
found meet to strike so great a stroke. Was urged and put forward therein, yea
and in the end the D. de Main himself, the sister of the D Montpensieur and
others of that Catholic Combination had conference with him in diverse places,
who requested and encouraged him to persevere in this good determination of
his, which they said they knew to arise in him from extraordinary inspirations
from above, for the full performance of so renowned a service to the holy
Union, the Catholic Church of Rome, and his dear Country, they promised him
also Abbot-ships, Bishoprics, and whatsoever else he would desire: this wicked
fellow thus divellishly documented and stimulated to this desperate deed,
remained for certain days, sometime with the Duchess Montpensieur, who among
the Parisians was termed the holy-vvidow, sometimes with his Prior, and
sometimes with the Jesuits. This Monck, I say, being thus made to drink in
fury and madness to the deed, by so many allurements, entertainments promises
and protestations of felicity, temporal and eternal, resolved within himself,
and seriously promised them all to kill the K. Now in the interim, the
Parisians or common people of the City, who thought nothing, nor knew any
thing of their cruel practices, began to talk of nothing more, than of
yielding themselves to their K, and had greatly rebated their spleen and
choler against their Sovereign. Which the Duke de Main, together with his
complotters perceiving, they caused the most zealous Sorbonists and Jesuits to
preach and exhort, that they should yet have patience for 7 or 8 days longer,
in which interim, assuring them they should see and perceive some wonderful
matter come to pass, that would make amends for their patient expectation, and
produce much good to their holy Union. The Monck being now fully ordered and
instructed for the execution of the designed plot, departed from Paris and went
toward St Clon. As soon as he was departed the D. de Main caused more then 200
of the principal Citizens and other rich men whom he knew to have friends and
credit with the K party, to be taken prisoners, as a gage, to save his Monck,
if after the attempt he were stayed or arrested. The Monck being come to S.
Clon, and presented to speak with the K., he having fained that he had letters
from the president of Harlay and Credence on his part, the K. caused him to be
called into his Chamber, where was none with the K, save only the L of
Bellegard, chief Genesis of the same, and the Procurator general, whom he desired
to retire a while, the more privately to give ear and audience unto him; the
undaunted villain having addressed himself with a countenance very modest and
demure, near the K. person. The Monck now perceiving himself alone with the K.
and an opportunity put into his hand to do the deed he mainly came for,
confirming his audacious countenance more and more fixedly, drew out of one of
his sleeves a paper, which he presented to the K. and out of the other, a sharp
knife, with which he violently and suddenly sheathed a thrust within the K.
small ribs, the K. being seriously reading the presented paper, but thereupon
perceiving himself wounded, plucked the knife out of the vvound, and therewith
struck the Monck above the eye, and thereupon some of h^s Gentlemen hearing a
noise and much bustling within, came running in most violently, who seeing what
was done, and moved with wrath at the indignity of so execrable a fact, could
not contain, but forthwith killed the murderer with their Swords, who there
expired and went (like Judas) to his own place, being canonized and adored for
this deed by those of the Romish-League, but detested and abhorred by those
that clave to the dignity-royall and party of the Religion. The K. being
carried to his bed, the Physicians and Surgeons dressed his wound, and
supposed it had not bin mortal, but the next day, he dyed of it, and left the
Crown of France to his brother, Henry D. of Burbon and K. of Navarr.

The most deplorable and execrable murder of Henry the 4th. K of France, by
one Francis Raviliack. Extracted also out of the French History.
HEnry the 4th D of Burbon and K of Navarr, a Prince of the most famous and
glorious memory, that ever France brought forth, yea I say most renowned, loved
and feared for his piety and prowess, and many other most rare and princely
virtues, being right Heir apparent and true Successor to the Crown of
France, after the forementioned murder and untimely death of his brother
Henry the 3d yet extremely maligned and desperately opposed from the fair and
peaceable possession of the diadem of France, by those most impious
assassinates and bloody Tigers of the most falsely pretended holy Union or
Catholic Leaguers aforesaid, for the very same reason, for which they so
inveterately hated and conspired against his deceased brother, viz his
publicly declared good will and affection toward those of the Religion,
commonly called by their ignominious name of Hugonets in France, as our true
professors of the Gospel in England, were wont to be branded with the
contemptuous name of Puritans, and now by a company of base block-heads, most
foolishly termed Roundheads. On this main, if not only ground of wrath and
dislike this most noble and Heroic Prince, having long time bin (I say) kept
out from the just enjoyment of his lawful inheritance, pestered and perplexed
with many and tedious troubles and bloody battles with his Subjects of France
the Leaguers, who were mightily animated therein, and assisted by a strong
Spanish Faction among them; but in all these great wars and mountainous
disturbances the most renowned and courageous Prince went Master of the field,
a most constant conqueror, having as the French History records of him,
triumphed over his enemies, in at the least 12 set-battles or pight fields,
still unconquerable by the greatest forces and deepest stratagems, that his
adversaries were able to bring against him, yet such is the unstable state and
wheeling condition of the best and bravest things of this life; that this so
renowned and so undaunted Prince (especially having at the first openly professed
the true Religion, and long so continued, yet at last moved and overcome, not
only to make an edict of maintaining the two Religions in his Kingdoms, but in
his own person to make public profession of the Romish abomination, and going
openly to Mass, to the unspeakable sadding of the hearts of his best Subjects,
those of the Religion) this noble Prince, I say, at last, was permitted to fall
into the perfidious power of a base and despicable villain to destroy him. For,
notvvithstanding that they of the Catholic Leaguer and holy-Union (is they
entitled themselves) I mean the Romanists had now got such hold of him, in
the snares of their Romish Religion: yet the Jesuiticall Faction, being very
jealous and suspicious of him, and much fearing his revolt from them (as indeed
he still gave them some causes thereof in the course of his regal government,
by his fair carriage and facile grants of many extraordinary privileges to
those of the Religion) they therefore, at last, suborned and enticed one Fran:
Raviliack, a French man, borne in Angonlesme, to kill this noble King, dealing
with him, just as they did with that Monck forementioned in the former
Relation, promising and protesting mighty remunerations, large rewards and
high preferments on the performance of the deed, leading the fellow into a
fools Paradise of high Hopes, they persuaded him that it was a most
meritorious work, and so at length fully wrought him to their wills therein,
seeming to admire his person, already transformed into an angelical
apparition, so glorious, that they durst hardly behold him for the beauty and
luster that was upon him, now upon this his so virtuous and valerous a
resolution. Thus, I say, this execrable villain and bloody assassinate went
forth from them, with a most stony and immarbled heart and brazen fore head to
do this most cruel and accursed deed. And watching his opportunity, upon a
Friday, which was the next day after the Coronation of his Qu. this Henry the
great (for so we may justly entitle him) being in Paris, about 3 of the clock
in that afternoon, and intending to go to his Arcenall, took his Caroch, and
as a Prince who then seemed to live without fear or suspicion of any of his
people, living in such a fair correspondency, as he then did (but this mixture
of Religions being most abominable in the eyes of the Lord) between both
Religions, but as he passed on through the City accompanied with very few of
his Nobility, or without taking, for his better assurance either Archers or any
of his usual guard, not far from St. Innocents, this villain following his
Majesty, and seeing his Caroch stayed by a Cart, which met and stopped their
passage, Ravilliac, taking this opportunity, as having kept close by the
Caroch, and the King fitting in the boot thereof, he suddenly and desperately
assaulted the King with a long and most sharp knife, made of purpose for this
wicked use, with which he gave him 2 wounds in the left side, the first was
given near the shoulder, which entered not far, but only razed the skin, the
(...) was mortal, that blow entering betwixt the 5t and 6t rib, cutting a
sunder the vein leading to the heart, and this wound was so deep that it
reached into the Cava vena, which also was pierced with the point of the knife.
This most noble and renowned Prince, finding himself wounded to death, lost his
speech upon the instant, by reason of the abundance of blood, which issued out
of his mouth, therefore they turned the Caroch toward the Lonure (the villain
Raviliac, being first laid hold on and kept in safe custody) where he was no
sooner arrived, but he rendered his soul into the hands of Almighty God, the
great Creator and just disposer of all things. Thus this great and invincible
Prince, whom neither so many nor so mighty enemies in open field, could ever
vanquish or overcome, was suddenly subdued by the hands of a most wicked and
ignoble villain. That Prince in whom the French Histories, observe 3 remarkable
miracles or rare mysteries, namely, that he was a King and had no Crown; he
was a husband, but had no wife; he waged war and had no money: which seeming
riddle is thus resolved; he was King of France, but was long time kept from the
kingly possession of his Crown and Royalty. He was married, but could not enjoy
his Queen: He waged war but not being able to pay his Soldiers, his
neighbor Princes came in as Volunteers and served in his wars at their own
charge. Yea, I say, such a noble and renowned Prince, in matter of Religion, in
his former days especially, that it being observed by some of his Nobles,
Commanders in arms, how much he confided in those of the Religion, in most of
his greatest and weightiest affairs, some of them said unto him, they marvelled
he would so much rely on their fidelity. To whom his answer was as pithy as
pious, that he would never be afraid to confide in those, the principles of
whose Religion was, Never to eat their God, nor kill their King. Now from all
these remarkable passages of the plots and conspiracies of these barbarous and
bloody minded Romanists, I vvish the godly and impartial Reader, whose eyes
the Lord has in any measure opened to see the truth of things; to take notice
briefly of these 3 particulars.

First of the admirable providence and good hand of God in preserving those
Princes and States from the most puissant forces, and most politic frauds and
villainies of Traitors and enemies of his Truth and Gospel, so long as they
loyally loved and embraced it; this being most clear and evident in our
blessed Qu Elizabeth of ever glorious memory, in the state of Geneva, Holland,
and such like.

Secondly, of the high displeasure and just jealousy of the Lord against those
Princes or people who halt 'twixt 2 opinions in matter of Religion, or
maintain mixtures in his pure worship, which he has also manifested against
Princes, otherwise most noble and renowned, potent and prudent, permitting and
raising up base and ignoble hands to bereave them of their lives, as has bin
clearly demonstrated in these two last great Princes of France, Henry 3d and
Henry 4th, and might be farther proved by many such like Presidents extant in
History.

Thirdly and lastly, of the most bloody and blasphemous principles of Romes
Religion, teaching and encouraging the practice and perpetration of such horrid
and hideous murders and massacres of the Lords most harmless and innocent
lambs justifying King-killing and Country-destroying machinations, plots and
conspiracies, and all these under a most execrable pretense of advancing their
Catholik-cause, forsooth, as if the Lord, the pure and holy God of Heaven, ever
intended to build his Church with such base and bloody materials, which must
needs be most blasphemous to say or once think. Most worthily therefore is Rome
said to be founded and finished in its crimson architecture of blood; whether
we respect material Rome in its first rise and original, first founded in the
blood of Rhemus murdered by his brother Romulus, the very first King of Rome:
or spiritual Rome, the mother of spiritual Whoredoms, molded and maintained
all along by those Popish- Caines, in the blood of their more righteous
brethren, Gods beloved Abels.

Wherefore I desire that the use of this 3 fold observation, may be, first
inseparable love of God in cleaving fast to his soul-saving Truth and Gospel:
and secondly irreconciliable hatred of that abominable and diabolical Religion
of Rome, which thus delights in the most fearful and final destruction of
souls and bodies.

FINIS.

