THE HOLY LONGING: Or, The SAINTS DESIRE To be with CHRIST: Delivered in a
SERMON At Al-hallows Lumbard-street, Aug. 24. 1658. At the Funeral of Mr. JACOB
STOCK.

By THOMAS WATSON Minister of Stephens Walbrook in the CITY of LONDON.

I would not live always

, Job 7. 16. In this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our
house which is from heaven,

2 Cor. 5. 2. Mors porta gloriae.

Bernard. London, Printed by E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1659.

TO THE VIRTUOUS, His much esteemed Friend, Mrs. ELIZABETH STOCK.
Loving friend,
THough I was put upon some straits of time, (other occasions intervening when
this Sermon was to be preached) yet at your request to me to publish it, and
the desire of some of your Relations to whom I stand obliged, I knew not how in
civility to deny. The subject of this following discourse, is, The Saints
desire to be with Christ; and surely if Christ be all in all, Col. 3. 11. all
marrow and sweetness, no wonder that they who can claim a propriety, desire
possession, and thirst after the embraces of that dear Savior, in whose
presence is fullness of joy Ps. 16. 1^.
as touching the present sad providence wherewith the Lord has exercised you,
let not your heart despond; though God allows you tears, yet you may not mourn
without hope, nor beyond measure; let them that weep, be as if they wept not, 1
Cor. 7. 30. If God has given you Christ, you have enough, you need not envy
any living, or over-grieve him who is dead In uno salvatore omnes florent
gemmae ad salutem.
; The starlight of Relations is superabundantly recompensed with the golden
beams of this Sun of righteousness. If these few lines ensuing may do good
to any, adding some holy oil to the flame of their affections, ungluing them
from the world, and fixing their hearts more upon the Lord Jesus, I have what I
aimed at; I shall leave all to the blessing of the Almighty, and rest,

From my Study at Stephens Walbrook. November. 3. 1658. Yours, In all Christian
service, THOMAS WATSON.

ERRATA.
Page 16. for (...) read (...). for (...) r. (...). p. 17. for (...) r. (...).

PHILIPP. 1. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ which is far better.


WE are met to solemnize the Funerals of our friend deceased, and so perform
the last Office of love. A glass of Mortality is here set before us, wherein
we may see our own fragil condition. There is a sentence passed upon us all;
statutum est, -- it is appointed unto men once to dye, Heb. 9. 27. So that our
life is but a short Reprieval from death, which is granted to a condemned man.

A wise man's life (says Plato) is nothing else but a contemplation of death.
The Lord would have us inure our selves to dying thoughts, Deuteronomy. 3. 2. 29.
and as it were by meditation often to stretch our selves upon our death bed.
God clothed our first Parents with skins of dead Beasts, and feeds us with dead
flesh, that so often as we see the death of other creatures, we might not
forget our own.

The Text presents to us Saint Paul in an holy pathos, or fit of longing to be
with Christ. His heart was with Christ, and he wanted only the swift wing of
death to carry him thither. I am (says he) in a straight betwixt two, having a
desire to depart, and be with Christ, which is far better.

I shall briefly explain the terms as they lie in order.

I am in a straight betwixt two. (...), I am hemmed in, in diversa trahor
Velasquez.
it may allude to a Castle which is so straightly beleaguered and hemmed in, that
it has no way to make a sally out. Significat constringere, and coarctare,
sicut sit in obsidionibus. Chemnit. Harm.
It fared now with Saint Paul, as with a woman that has her children at home
with her, and her husband beyond the Seas, she would fain be with her husband,
yet loath to leave her children: So Paul would gladly have been with Christ, but
was loath to leave the Philippians, his spiritual children.

Having a desire to depart. Note 1.
1. The Apostle does not say oportet, I must depart, but cupio, I desire to
depart. All men must depart. Ea lege nati sumus.


-- Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum Tabernas regumque turres. Hor. lib.
1. Carm. Ode 4.
-- There is a dying principle in all; the frame and contexture of their body
is earthly, and tends to a dissolution. Nebuchadnezzars image, though it had an
head of gold, yet feet of clay, Dan. 2. 23. Take the strongest man, let him be
Sampson or Hercules, of whom we may say as the Poet, -- Illi robur and as
triplex circa pectus erat. -- Hor.


Yet he stands upon feet of clay; he is but pulvis animatus, and must moulder
away in time, death will come with an Habeas corpus at last. Tamerlain a
Scythian Captain, the terror of his time, died with three fits of an ague.
Paulus Jovius Elog. lib. 2.


The Grammarian who declines all other Nouns, knows not how to decline death.
Is my strength (says Job) the strength of stones? Job 6. 12. Suppose it were,
yet, -- gutta cavat lapidem, -- the continual dropping of sickness would in
time wear away this stone. There is no such thing as an earthly eternity; death
is called the house appointed for all living, Job 30. 23.

But though death be in it self necessary, to Saint Paul it was voluntary; it
was not so much a debt, as a vote; Mori velit non ex debito, sed ex
beneplacito. Bern.
not so much Paul's task, as his choice; he does not say, I must be dissolved,
but I would be dissolved. Having a desire to depart.

2. The Apostle does not say, Note 2.
having a desire to dye, but to depart; [a lenifying word] which does much take
off the sharp edge of death, and make it less formidable. This phrase [to
depart] (...) may refer

1. To Soldiers that pitch their Tents in the Field, and upon the least word
of command from their General, loosen the cords of their Tent, and pluck up the
stakes, and march forward. Eo referri solet cum milites tentoriorum in quibus
ad breve tempus commorati sunt, fuues dissolvunt. Velasq.
So death does but loosen the silver cord, Eccles. 12. 6.
which fastened the soul in its earthly Tent, and a Christian marches forward
to the Heavenly Canaan.

Or, 2. This word [to depart] may be a Metaphor taken from Mariners, who loosen
Anchor that they may sail from one Port to another: Significat anchoram solvere.
So Paul desired to loosen Anchor; death to a believer is but loosning the
Anchor, and sailing from one Port to another, from earth to heaven.

Beza renders this word [to depart] a putting off the harness. Metaphora ab
iis sumpta, qui curru vecti cum ad locum destinatum pervenerint (...) dicuntur,
quod equorum lora, and vincula solvere consueverunt. Beza.
Hierom reads it, migrare ex hospitio. The world is an Inn, we are Travelers
who take up our lodging here for a night, Paul longed to be out of his Inn.

And to be with Christ. The Apostle had three great desires, and they were all
centred upon Christ. One was to be found in Christ; Phil. 3. 9.
the other was to magnify Christ; Phil. 1. 20.
the third was to be with Christ. Phil. 1. 23.


Here observe two things.

1. Paul does not say I desire to depart and be in heaven, but to be (...) with
Christ; it is Christ's presence makes heaven, (...).
as the Kings presence makes the Court. It Is not the Cherubims or Seraphims
which make Paradise; the Lamb is the light thereof, Rev. 21. 23.

2. From the connection of the words, having a desire to depart and to be with
Christ; we clearly see that the soul of a believer does not sleep in the body
after death, (a drowsy opinion) but goes immediately to Christ. Dicunt
Anabaptistae animas usque ad resurrectionem corporum sopore quodam pressas, nec
in bono esse nec in malo. Estius.
Upon the divorce of the soul from the body, there follows an Espousal of the
soul to Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 8. Absent from the body, present with the Lord.
Justorumanimae, m^x us hujus carnis claustra exeunt, in caelestibus sedibus
recipiuntur. Anselm.
It were better for believers to stay here, if they did not presently go to
Christ after death. For here the Saints are daily improving their graces, here
they have many praelibamina, sweet tastes of Gods love, so that it were better
to stay here; and Paul wished that which would be to his loss, if the soul
should sleep in the body, and not go immediately after death to Christ. Electis
in morte datur vitae corona, Hierom.


Which is far better. (...), a believer is no looser by death. His change is
for the better; a science that is grafted into a better stock, and planted in a
better soil is no ways damnified. A believer after death is set into a better
STOCK, Christ; and is planted in a better soil, Heaven; this can be no loss,
but an advantage. Well therefore may the Apostle say, to be with Christ is far
better.

In the words there are these three parts. 1. Saint Paul's choice; to be with
Christ. 2. The excellency of his choice; it is far better. 3. The nodus, or
the strait he was in; coarctor, I am in a strait betwixt two; this holy man was
in a great dilemma, he was straightened between service and reward. (...)
Chrysostom. in loc.
He was desirous of glory, yet willing to adjourn his own happiness, and stay
out of heaven a while, that he might be a means to bring others thither.
Egregium erga Deum (...) specimen.


From the words thus opened, there are three observations.

1. It is the desire of a true Saint to remove from hence, and be with Christ.

2. To be with Christ is far better; how much better it is, we shall better
understand when we are in heaven; some Angel is best able to speak to this
point.

3. That which stays a Saint here in the World, is a desire of doing service;
This did cast the balance with the Apostle, and was the only tempting motive
to keep him here awhile, he looked upon his abode in the flesh, as an
opportunity of service. Ver. 24.
* Paul was willing to dye, yet content to live, that he might be a Factor for
Christ upon earth.

I shall at this time insist upon the first proposition. Doct.
That it is the desire of a true Saint to remove from hence, and to be with
Christ; this proposition has two branches; of each distinctly.

having a desire to depart. What a wicked man fears, that a godly man hopes
for. I desire says Paul to depart; a sinner cries loath to depart, he does not
say come Lord Jesus, but Stay Lord Jesus; he would live always here, he knows
no other heaven but this, and it is death to him to be turned out of his heaven.
Psa. 49. 11.
* It was the speech of Axiochus the Philosopher when he was to dye, Shall I be
deprived of this light? shall I leave all my sweet delights? Hac luce privabor,
his orbabor bonis?
David calls death a going out of the World, Psalm. 39. 13. A wicked man does
not go out, but is dragged out; he is like a Tenant who has gotten possession,
and will not out of the house, till the Sergeants pull him out. If a wicked man
were put to his choice, he would never come where God is; he would choose the
Serpents curse, to eat dust, Genesis 3. 14. but not return to dust. If a wicked
man might be voti compos, have his wish, he would serve no other God but his
belly, * Phil. 3. 19.
and to this he would ever liberally pour drink offerings.

But a soul enlivened and ennobled with a principle of grace, looks upon the
World as a Wilderness wherein are fiery Serpents, and he desires to get out of
this Wilderness. Simeon having taken Christ in his arms, cries out, Lord, now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, Luke 2. 29. He that has taken Christ
in the arms of his faith, will sing Simeons song, Lord, let thy servant
depart. David prayed to know the measure of his days, Psalm. 39. 4. because
(says Theodoret) he desired to hear the good news of deaths approach. (...).
Theodoret.
The Saints of God have looked upon themselves as imprisoned in the body, and
have longed for a Jayle delivery. Corpus Graeci (...) vocant, quia in eo anima
quasi (...).


The bird desires to go out of the Cage, though it be made of gold. Stulti est
compedes licet aureas amare.


Hiliaron chides himself that he was no more willing to die; Go forth my soul,
what fear thou? Egredere anima, egredere; quid times?


Ignatius was desirous of Martyrdom, that he might gain the presence of Christ
in glory. (...) Ignat. Epist. 7. ad Ant.


A Christian of the right breed is ambitiously desirous to put off the earthly
clothes of his body, and make his bed in the grave; (...). Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad
Antioch.
how is this bed perfumed with Christ's lying in it? a pillow of down, is not so
sweet as a pillow of dust; a regenerate person looking upon himself as held
with the earthen fetter of the flesh, and his soul put into a movable
Sepulcher, (...) quasi (...). Plat. in Cratylo.
cries out with David, O that I had wings like a Dove, that I might fly away
and be at rest. Psalm. 55. 6.

And indeed no wonder a true Saint does desire a dismiss, and is so earnest to
have his Pass to be gone from hence; Ab hoc corpore suga and elapsio pro summo
munere desideratur. Austin.
if we consider how beneficial death is to a child of God, it puts a period to
all his evils: in particular, there are ten evils that death will put an end to.

Saturn, which has a malignant influence; it is the womb of our sorrows, and
the grave of our comforts. (...). Macar. hom. 16.


Sin is the sinners bond, Acts 8. 23. and the Saints burden, Psalm. 38. 3. How
is a believer tired out with his corruptions? I am weary of my life (says
Rebecca) because of the daughters of Heth, Genesis 27. 46. That which makes a
child of God weary of his life, is his proud, unbelieving heart: Saint Paul
could better carry his iron Chain, than his sins; O wretched man that I am!
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7. 24. When grace spurs
the soul forward, the curben bit of sin checks it, and pulls it back again.
There is much of the Old man in the new man; (...).
There is a party in every regenerate heart that is true to the Devil; a party
that will not pray, that will not believe. A Christian is like a bowl with a
double byas, he has an earthly byas upon his will, and a spiritual byas, and
these draw him several ways; the evil I would not, that do I, Romans 7. 19.
Sin mingles it self with our holy things; we cannot act either our duties or
our graces without sin; we are like children who cannot write without blotting!
the sweet Rose of grace does not grow without its prickles? (...). Macar. hom.
8.
No wonder then a believer desires to depart; death will free him from his
spiritual distempers; when he has done breathing, he shall have done sinning.
(...).

Austin) is nothing but a tentation; T^nt^t error ut decipiat, tentat dolor ut
frangat tentat libido ut accendat, tentat typhus ut extollat. Austin.
we tread upon snares: Satan is ever casting in the Angle of a tentation, to
see whether we will bite; he knows how to suit his tentations; he tempted
Achan with a wedge of gold; he tempted David with beauty; we cannot lock the
door of our heart so fast by prayer, but a tentation will enter: (...).
Sometimes Satan comes more furiously, as a Red Dragon; sometimes more slily,
as a Serpent; sometimes he baits his hook with Scripture, and tempts to sin
under a mask of Religion, as when he tempts to evil, that good may come of it
Romans 3. 8.
. Thus can he transform himself into an Angel of light.

Is it not a grievous thing for a Virgin to have her chastity daily assaulted?
Is it not sad to have the Devils bullets continually flying about our ears? No
wonder then a believer is willing to depart; death will set him out of
gunshot, he shall never be troubled with Satan's fiery darts any more; though
grace puts a child of God out of the Devils possession, it is death only frees
him from the Devils tentation.

there is torment in fear, 1 John 4. 18. Cicero calls fear one of the three
plagues of Mankind; and the best of the Saints (...), are haunted with this
evil spirit; they cannot rejoice without trembling; the believer fears lest his
heart should put a cheat upon him, he fears God does not love him he fears lest
he should tire in his march to heaven; the best faith may sometimes have its
fears, (...). Socr.
as the best stars have their twinkling. These fears (as Socrates says) arm
a man against himself; they are very afflictive, leaving sad impressions of
melancholy behind. No wonder then a believer longs to depart out of this life;
why should he fear that which frees him from fear? the King of terror makes
all fear vanish.

Rev. 7. 17. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; weeping is
nothing but a cloud of sorrow gathered in the heart, dropping into water. A
Christian often has none to keep him company, but his own griefs and sorrows;
he sits as Israel by the Rivers weeping; as soon as the child is born, it
weeps; when Moses was born, he was laid in an Ark of bulrushes, where he did as
it were baptize himself with his own tears, Exodus 2. 6. And behold the babe
wept; ever since we looked upon the Tree of knowledge, our eyes have watered;
there are many things to occasion weeping.

-- quidque facis lachrymis opus est. -- Ovid.
1. Our sins; who can look into his own heart with dry eyes?

2. Loss of relations, which is like the pulling a limb from the body; Joseph
wept over his dead father, Genesis 50. 1. Well then, it is not to be admired that a
believer desires to depart from hence; he shall leave the valley of tears; the
bottle of tears shall be stopped; his water shall be turned into wine, his
mourning into music, his lamentations into Hallelujahs: death is the
handkerchief to wipe off all tears.

man is born to trouble, Job 5. 7. he is the natural heir to it. This life is
subject to injury (...). Menand.
; we do not (as Seneca says) finish our troubles while we live here, but
change them. Quisque suos patimur manes. Every one has his cross to carry;
sometimes poverty pincheth, sometimes sickness tortures, sometimes Lawsuits
vex; man is like a Tennis-ball, bandied up and down by providence; while wicked
men are in the world, never look for rest. These troubled Seas (as the Prophet
calls them) Isa. 57. 20
will be casting forth their foam and mire upon the godly; and well then may a
believer say his Nunc dimittis, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart.
Death gives a child of God his quietus est Mors molestiam idimit. Isidor.
, it sends him a Writ of ease, Job 3. 17. There (that is, in the grave) the
wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest.

cares. Care is vexatious and anxious, it eats out the comfort of life; the
Greek word for care (...), comes from a primitive that signifies to cut the
heart in pieces; care does fret as a canker, it discruciates the mind, it
breaks the sleep, it wastes the spirits, this is the wrack which the soul is
stretched upon. It Is hard, I had almost said impossible, to shake off this
viper of care while we live; all our comforts are careful comforts; care is to
the mind, as a burden to the back, it loads the spirits, and with over-loading
sinks them; care is a fruit of the curse; Adams want of care, has brought us
to care; have you not sometimes seen the bryar growing by the honey-suckle, so
that you cannot well gather the honey-suckle, but you are scratched with the
bryar? Thus in gathering riches, how is the head and heart pricked with care?
and is there not great reason why a child of God should desire to depart? is it
good being among the briars? death is the cure of care; we are thoughtful and
solicitous how to get such an estate, how to provide for such a child; now
death comes to a believer as a friend, and says, Never perplex and distract
thy mind thus, I will free thee from all these heart-killing cares; I will
strike but once, and that stroke shall relieve thee.

did hide thy face, and I was troubled, Psalm. 30. 7. The soul in desertion,
is within an inch of despair; in affliction the world is against a man, in
tentation Satan is against a man, in desertion God is against a man. Alstead
calls desertion an agony of conscience; Agon conscientiae, anxietas infernalis.
this made the Prophet Jonah call the Whales belly the belly of hell, because
he was deserted there; Jonah 2. 2, 4. Out of the belly of hell cried I, then I
said I am cast out of thy sight.

Heman grew distracted upon the suspension of Gods favor, Psalm. 88. 16. While
I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted; but death will free from desertion: a
believer after death shall never see any more Eclipses; God will draw aside the
Curtain, and pull off his vail, and the soul shall be for ever sunning it self
in the light of Gods countenance.

Agur, Prove. 30. 2. I have not the understanding of a man. Since the fall, the
lamp of reason burns dim; there are many arcana naturae, knots in nature that
we cannot untie. Why Nilus should overflow in summer, when by the course of
nature waters are lowest; why the Lodestone should incline to the pole star;
why the Sea should be higher than the earth, yet not drown it. How the bones
grow in the womb, Eccles. 11. 5. Many of these things are riddles and
paradoxes; by eating of the Tree of knowledge, we have lost the key of
knowledge; Luke 11. 52.
how are we maimed in our intellectuals! by the fall we have lost our
headpiece; there are some diseases which would make Galens head ache to find
out. The River Euripus was too deep for Aristotle; the Poet could say, Felix
qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Virg. Geor. l. 2.
--

Socrates said on his deathbed, there were many things which he had yet to
learn; our knowledge is like the twilight, dim and duskish: the greatest part
of our knowledge, is not so much as the least part of our ignorance, all which
considered, no wonder to hear this language from a Saint, cupio dissolvi, I
have a desire to depart; death crowns a Christian with fullness of knowledge;
when he is snuffed by death, the candle of his understanding will burn
brighter; at death a child of God does perfectly recover the use of his reason.

primitias Spiritus, the first fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8. 23. The best
Christian is like a child put out to Nurse, he is very weak in grace, faith is
feeble, love lukewarm; grace though it be not dead, it is sickly, Rev. 3. 2.
Strengthen the things which are ready to dye; grace is like gold in the oar,
drossy and impure; the most refined soul has some dregs; this Motto may be
written upon a Christians graces; -- plurima desunt -- he that shoots furthest
in holiness, comes short of the mark of perfection Eccles. 7. 20.
; well then may a believer desire to be dissolved, death will free him from all
the imperfections of his holiness; it will make him pure as the Angels, not
having spot or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5. 27.

Pet. 2. 11. A Christian walks with his Pilgrims staff in his hand, the staff
of the promise in the hand of faith; Considerandum est renunciasse nos mundo,
and tanquam hospites and peregrinos isthic interim degere. Cyprian de Mortal.
now death will put an end to this Pilgrimage; it takes away the Pilgrims
staff, and sets a crown upon his head; no wonder that the gracious soul cries
out with Saint Paul, having a desire to depart.

Object.
Object. But against this it may be objected, some of the Saints have prayed
against death; Hezekiah when the message of death was brought, prayed against
it, and wept sore, Isa. 38. 2, 3. so that Hezekiah had not a desire to depart.

Answ. 1.
Answ. 1. Hezekiah did not pray simply against death, but in a limited sense,
at that time; there might be several reasons assigned why at that time death
was not welcome to him.

As, 1. Hezekiah desired to live awhile longer, that he might do more work for
God, ver. 38. The dead cannot praise thee; intimating, that if he had been then
taken off by death, he was capable of doing God no more service; he was loath to
be cut down, till he had borne more fruit. Besides, had he then died in the
infancy of Reformation, the adversaries of God would have insulted, and made
songs of triumph at his Funeral.

2. Hezekiah was unwilling to dye at that time, because he wanted issue. God
had promised to David, 1 King. 8. 25. That those of his line which were godly,
should not want some of their seed to succeed them in the Throne; now in this
respect it was a great discomfort to Hezekiah to dye childlesse; for he might
have thought himself no better than an hypocrite, inasmuch as God had promised
issue to the Kings of David's line that feared him. Upon these, and other
considerations, Hezekiah might pray against death at that juncture of time.

And whereas it may be said that many of Gods children are unwilling to dye. I
answer, a Christian is a compounded creature, flesh and spirit, and from this
composition there may be a conflict between the fear of death and the desire of
death, but at last the spiritual part prevails; and as faith grows stronger,
fears grow weaker; thus it was with Paul, having a desire to depart

So much for the first branch of the doctrine, that it is the desire of a true
Saint to be gone from hence; [having a desire to depart.]

2. I proceed now to the second branch of the doctrine, that it is a Saints
desire to be with Christ. Saint Paul longed to lie on that soft pillow where
John the beloved Disciple did, viz. the bosom of Jesus Joh. 21. 20.
; There had been little comfort in departing, if the Apostle had not put in
this word, to be with Christ. Death will make a glorious change to a believer;
it is but crossing the mare mortuum, the dead Sea, and he shall be with Christ.
Death to a child of God is like the Whirlwind to the Prophet Eliah, it blew
off his mantle, but carried the Prophet up to heaven. So death is a boisterous
wind which blows off the mantle fo the flesh, (for the body is but the mantle
the soul is wrapped in) but it carries the soul up to Christ; the day of a
believers dissolution, is the day of his coronation. Though death be a bitter
cup, here is sugar at the bottom, it translates the soul of a believer to
Christ; though the flesh calls death the last enemy, 1 Cor. 15.
yet faith calls it the best friend, it brings a man to Christ, which is far
better.

This word (...), to be with Christ, implies three things, Intuition. Fruition.
Duration.


1. To be with Christ, implies, Intuition, 1 John 3. 2. We shall see him as he
is; here we see him as he is not; he is not mutable, he is not mortal; in
heaven we shall see him as he is. When Socrates was to die, he comforted
himself with this, that he should go to the place where he should see Homer and
Musaeus, and other Worthies who lived in the Age before him. A believer may
comfort himself with this, that he shall see Christ; here we see him but
through a glass darkly; but what will it be, when he shall be bespangled in all
his Embroidery, and shall show forth himself in his full glory to his Saints!
In calesti vita sine aliquo taedio manens aternitas, inspectio sola divinitatis
efficit ut beatius nihil esse possit Cassidor. Ep. l. 5.
He in Lucian said to his friend, I will show thee all the glory of Greece,
when thou have seen Solon, thou have seen all: So he that sees Jesus Christ,
sees all the glory of Paradise, Christ being the mirror of beauty, the
quintessence of happiness.

Some ask the question how and in what manner we shall see Christ, whether we
shall see his Godhead with bodily eyes? it is not good to be wise above what
is written; thus far I think may with modesty be asserted, that we shall with
our bodily eyes, behold Christ's humane nature! His glory as a Mediator shall
be visible to the Saints, and shall be beheld by glorified eyes; in this sense
that Scripture is to be understood, Job 19. 25. with these eyes shall I see
God; great and amazing will that glory be which shall sparkle from the humane
nature of Christ; if his transfiguration was so glorious, Mat. 17. 2.
what will his inauguration be. Austin wished that he might have seen three
things before he died; Paul in the Pulpit, Rome in its glory, and Christ in the
flesh; but what were that to this sight of Christ in heaven? we shall behold
not a crucified body, but a glorified body.

Fruition; we shall not only see him, but enjoy him: therefore in Scripture the
Saints are said not only to behold him, but to be glorified with him, Romans 8.
17. and glory is said not only to be revealed to us, but in us, Romans 8. 18. And
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25. 21. not only see it, but enter
into it. A man may see a fair Arbor drawn upon the Wall, but he cannot enter
into it; this glory of heaven may be entered into; as the sponge sucks in the
wine, so there shall be a libation and sucking in of glory; from this fruition
of Christ, a torrent of divine joy will flow into the soul.

Duration, 1 These. 4. 17. So shall we ever be with the Lord; the (...), the
fashion of the world passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 31. Earthly comforts though they
may be sweet, they are swift; Plutarch reports of Alexander that he caused to
be painted on a Table a Sword within a Wheel: implying, that what he had
gotten by his Sword was subject to be turned about with the Wheel of
providence; if we had the longest Lease of these things, it would soon be run
out; but this privilege of being with Christ, runs parallel with eternity: so
shall we be ever with the Lord.

Use 1. Inform. Branch 1.
Use 1. See from hence the difference between a believers departing and a
wicked man's departing; to a believer it is an happy departing, to a wicked man,
it is a sad departing, there is nothing but departing; he departs out of this
life, and he departs from Christ, depart from me ye cursed; he departs from
beams of glory, into flames of fire; he departs from the society of Angels,
into the fellowship of Devils, Mat. 25. 41. He has never done departing; it is
mors sine morte, the wicked shall be ever consuming, yet never consumed; they
may tremble to think of departing, well may the mourners go about the street
when a wicked man dies; hell may rightly be called bochim the place of weepers.
Mat 8. 12.


2. Branch
See how little cause a child of God has to fear death, when it carries him to
Christ. This is a deathbed cordial; we are naturally possessed with a strange
kind of palpitation and trembling at the thoughts of death, as if we were in a
shaking palsy (...). Chrysostom.
, whereas there is nothing more really advantageous to a Christian; death is a
bridge that leads to the Paradise of God; all the hurt that death does to a
believer, is to carry him to Christ, and is not that far better? death pulls
off the rags of the body, and puts Christ's Robes upon the soul. The serious
consideration of this would make a believer above the desire of life, and the
fear of death.

Object.
Object. But may a child of God say, I could rejoice at the gain of death, but
I fear the pain of death. I desire the Haven, but I tremble at the voyage.

Answ. 1.
Answ. 1. In other cases we do not refuse pain; there is pain in the setting of
a bone, in the launcing of a sore, yet we endure the pain contentedly, because
it is in ordine ad sanitatem, in order to a cure. Death is an healing thing, it
will cure a Christian of all his wounds; by making one issue, it cures all the
rest.

Job felt so many miseries, that he did choose rather to die than live, Job 7.
5. and 15. My flesh is clothed with worms, my skin is broken and become
loathsome, so that my soul chooses strangling and death, rather than life; the
life of man is a continual catastrophe and is interwoven with miseries: Mors
equidem non est mala, sed iter ad mortem miserum. ^rasm.
some have felt more pain in their life, then others have at their death.

light is death* compared with the weight of glory? 1 Cor. 4. 17. how short, in
respect of eternity? the present suffering is not worthy of the glory which
shall be revealed in the children of God, Romans 8. 18.

Moabites thought the waters had been blood, when they received only a color
and tincture from the Sunbeams, 2 King. 3. 23. we fancy death worse than it
is, we look upon it through a multiplying glass; fear makes a Christian see
double; shut the eye of sense, and open the eye of faith, and death will appear
less formidable.

Use 2. Trial.
Use 2. Let us then put our selves upon a scrutiny and trial whether we are
persons that shall go to Christ when we dye? it is certain we shall depart, but
the question is whether shall we go to Christ?

Quest.
Quest. How may that be known?

Answ.
Answ. If we are in Christ while we live, we shall go to Christ, when we dye;
union is the ground of privilege; we must be in Christ, before we can be with
Christ (...). Ig^
; many hope to go to Christ when they dye, but they are not in Christ; are they
in Christ that do not know him? are they in Christ that hate him in his
Ministers, in his Ordinances? oh labor to be in Christ.

Quest.
Quest. How is that?

Answ.
Answ. By faith; faith is the uniting grace, it is (...) as Chrysostom speaks;
it is the vital, radical, cardinal grace: this gives the interest. Faith is the
queen of the graces; by faith we take Christ as a husband, and give up our
selves to him as a Lord; faith is a Christ approptiating grace; it has both a
relying and an applying faculty; Christ is the Ring, faith is the finger that
puts on this Ring; faith opens the Orifice in Christ's sides, and drinks in his
blood Per fidem Christi sanguinem sugimus and iuter redemptoris nostri vulnera
linguam figimus. Cypr.
; faith is both justifying and sanctifying; it fetches blood out of Christ's
sides to pardon, and water out of his sides to purge, 1 John 5. 6. Oh with all
gettings get faith.

Quest.
Quest. But there is much deceit about this grace? The Cyprian Diamond (says
Pliny) looks like the true Indian Diamond, but it is not of the right kind, it
will break with the Hammer. The Devil has his bad wares, and counterfeit
graces to put off; how therefore shall we know a true faith from a false and
spurious?

Answ.
Answ. I shall give you two differencing notes.

Acts 2. 37. (...), they were pricked at their hearts; here was the first
budding of faith; you never saw a flower grow out of a stone, nor faith out of
an heart of stone. Faith is an herb that grows always in a moist soil, in a
weeping eye and a broken heart; Mark 9. 24. The father of the child cried out
with tears, Lord I believe. This flag of faith grows in the water.

virtutem insitam, some virtue latent in it; so we may say of precious faith;
it has hidden virtue in it, it is very operative, it works out sin, Acts 15. 9.
It works by love, Gal. 5. 6. it is full of good works, James 2. 17. it makes
the tongue speak for Christ, the head study, the hands work, the feet run in
the ways of his commandments; faith comes with power upon the heart, 2 These.
1. 11. The work of faith with power Addit conatum quendam and elevationem
animi. Aquin.
, it has a restraining and constraining power; by this we may know whether
ours be a true faith or no. I have read of a father who had three sons, and
being to dye, he left in his Will all his estate to that son who could find
his Ring with the Jewel which had a healing virtue; the case was brought before
the Judges, the two Elder sons counterfeited a Ring, but the younger son
brought the true Ring, which was proved by the virtue of it, whereupon his
fathers estate went to him; to this Ring I may compare faith, there is a
counterfeit faith in the world, but if we can find this Ring of faith which
has the virtue in it, both purgative and operative, this is the true faith
which does interest us in and entitle us to Jesus Christ, and if we are in
Christ while we live, we shall be with Christ when we dye; where faith gives a
propriety, death gives a possession.

Use 3. Comfort.
Use 3. Here is then comfort in the death of our Religious friends, (...).
Chrysostom.
, though they depart from us, yet (...), they go to Christ which is far
better; we should mourn for them who are living, yet dead in sin; and
rejoice for them who are dead, yet live with Christ; This our dear brother
interred, had holy pangs of desire which seemed no less strong than the pangs
of he panted after God as his ultimate and supreme perfection; he did often
with joy repeat the words of the Text, and seemed to roll them as honey under
his tongue; we may therefore entertain good hopes of him that he is placed in
that Paradise of God which he thirsted after, I wished him to look up to the
merits of Christ; I must (says he) rest there or no where. O what a comfort is
this to think that our friends are not only taken away from the evil to come
Isa. 57. 1.
, but that they are with Christ; why should we be sad at their preferment? they
have their Crown, 2 Timothy 4. 8. their Throne, Revel. 3. 21. their white Robes,
Revel. 7. 9. Why should we weep immoderately for them who have all tears wiped
from their eyes? they enter into the joy of their Lord; and why should we be
swallowed up of grief for them who are swallowed up of joy Mors non est
interitus sed introitus, non est exitus sed transitus. Cypr. de mortal. Austin
Epist. 6.
; they that dye in the Lord, are not amissi, but praemissi Mors non est
interitus sed introitus, non est exitus sed transitus. Cypr. de mortal. Austin
Epist. 6.
, they are not lost, but sent a little before, we shall shortly overtake them.
It Is but awhile when godly friends shall meet in heaven, and feast together at
the supper of the Lamb, Revel. 19. 9. It Is but a while when the Saints shall
lie together in Christ's bosom, that hive of sweetness, that bed of perfume.
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, Revel. 14. 13. Why should we mourn
excessively for them who are blessed? Oh let us not weep at the felicity of our
friends, but rather long to depart and be with Christ, when we shall drink of
those Rivers of pleasure which run at his right hand for evermore.

FINIS.
AN ELEGY Upon the much lamented death of his dear Friend Mr. Stock.
MUses avaunt, I need you not to inspire
My duller veins with your Poetic fire.
Such an occasion as a doleful Urn,
Cannot but make even Parrots Poets turn;
And dumb-born children speak like Cro^sus son,
To see their Parents struck at* every stone
Can then turn Vocal Mourner, such an Hearse*
Will make Tully himself to pour forth Verse.
Oh happy they who knew thee not, if there
Be any such within our Hemispheare!
'T was blessed ignorance thee not to know,
That kept them from the knowledge of their woe;
From direful fears, from griefs soul-piercing dart,
From restless palpitations of the heart.
Methinks I dare not represent thy worth,
(How vast it was) nor set thy praises forth.
Friends, tell not Cambridge that her crown is gone,
Nor London what great cause she has to mourn.
Wake not that Lion, grief; and give no vent
To those fierce streams of raging discontent:
Lest Jordan like, they quickly overflow
Their banks, and drown us in this common woe.
His parts so high, that if death had not shown
Thy mortal state; I had not feared to own
Thee for some nobler creature; and his fire
Of zeal was such as glows in that best Quire
Of Seraphims; there was both light and heat,
And all that here below is wondered at:
Was Plato's doctrine true, this was the man,
The Idea of a solid Christian?
When all the earth turned round, and wheeled about,
Reeling now here, now there, ever in doubt,
Drunk with opinions, he still like the Sun,
Stood firm and fixed in his station.
His knowledge deep and large, yet never made
Him dare the Preathers Office to invade.
He never liked to go beyond his reach,
Willing he was to learn, though apt to teach.
I Will add no more, for if I should display
His matchless treasures, I should fright away
Belief, and make doubtful posterity
Conclude, I did not write an History
Of what thou wast; (for who will believe one span
Could grasp of worth so vast an Ocean?)
But feign a person in whose name to show
What men should be, not what in thee was true.
Mat. Pool.

Upon the much to be lamented death of that hopeful Gentleman, Mr. JACOB STOCK,
who died in the flower of his age, etc.
THus deaths devouring Sithe stays not for time,
But cuts our choicest Flowers down in their prime:
With too much speed she antidates the day,
And croppeth off our July flowers in May;
Yea, with an avaritious hand to mock
Our future hopes, she robs us of our STOCK;
Not moved with sweetness, piety or parts,
With dearest friends, with wives sad eyes and hearts;
As if the plants of such rare use and show,
Might not in a Terrestial Garden grow;
In The highest Paradise she has him set,
Where the selectest Nurseries of the earth are met.
Where like transplanted stemmes, he now redoubles
His breadth and sweetness, being grown rich by troubles.
So we our losses shall complain no more;
We Have lost our STOCK, but he increast the store.
And to that glorious place such beauty brings,
As decks * the Garland of the King of Kings.
By a friend.

The Muses Threnody, and Faiths Epinichion; Or a funeral Elogy upon the worthy
of all memory, Mr. JACOB STOCK.
FA. -- What! naught but weep, sad Muse? Up, dry thine eyes,
Hang head no more, see how he winged flies
Among the Cherubs; once I saw him dwell
Within the Microcosme of a shell:
Now perch't in heaven; Come, let us up and look him,
A fever hatched him, then the Angels took him.

Mu. -- Ah! I Am undone,
He was my Benjamin, my only son,
Idolatry I would not recontrive,
Or else I Would call him Moses Redivive
For skill in Egypts Arts; Methinks I see
Their Hieroglicks in Logometrie.
Great Livye in small skins, or Philadelph
The old worlds wonder pi'ld up in a shelf.
All Euclids lines concentred in a point,
And Ptol'mys broken Spears right set in joint.

Fa. -- Peace babbling Muse, do thou think such man
Can grasped be within thy narrow span,
Or fully measured with thy Pigmies feet,
'Bout whom the widest Orbs could never meet?
His soul's a pledge in Goshen, spare your groans,
Joseph will shortly send for Jacobs bones.

C. C.

Upon the death of my Worthy Friend Mr. JACOB STOCK.
HE only knows, who knows how thou did live,
How much for loss of thee it is fit to grieve;
And yet our tears would fail us if we were
To every virtue bound to pay a tear;
For all those virtues which dispersed shine
In several lives, unite their beams in thine;
Thou wast not only kind or liberal,
Modest or just, or temperate, but all;
And among all Religion did sway,
As the first sphere turns all the orbs one way.
Ah! why so soon snatched hence! it is true by noon
Thy early virtue all its work had done;
But yet thou should have lived more leisurely,
That we might have observed and followed thee;
Not pent thy life up in so narrow space,
Where whilst each virtue striving for a place,
Crowds to get in before it be too late,
Thou liv'st too fast for us to imitate.
Since then much of thy life is lost, we will try
Some nobler thing, to live as thou did dye.
I. T.

FINIS.

