A CONTINUATION of Sir PHILIP SYDNEY's ARCADIA: Wherein is handled The LOVES of
AMPHIALUS and HELENA Queen of Corinth, Prince PLANGUS and ERONA.

With the History of the LOVES of Old Claius and Young Strephon to Urania.

Written by a young Gentlewoman, Mris A. W.

LONDON, Printed by William Bentley, and are to be sold by Thomas Heath, near
the Pyazza of the Coven-Garden. Anno Dom. 1651.

To the two unparalleld SISTERS, and Patterns of Virtue, The Lady ANNE
PERPOINT, and The Lady GRACE PERPOINT,
Daughters to the Right Honorable the Marquess of DORCHESTER.
IF I had not observed that the greatest humility, reigns in the bosoms of the
Noblest Personages, I should not presume to Dedicate this most unworthie
Fabric to your Honors; especially when I consider the poorness of my
endeavors, and admire the Learned Sidney's Pastimes; Whereof I beseech you
charitably to believe, that my ambition was not raised to so high a pitch, as
the Title now manifests it to be, until I received Commands from those that
cannot be disobeyed. But however, if your Ladyships will graciously vouchsafe
to peruse such a confused Theme, I shall harbor the better opinion of it, and
shall acknowledge my self, as in all Gratefulness,

Your Honors devoted Servant, A. W.

The STATIONER to the ingenious READER.
MArvel not to find Heroic Sidney's renowned Fancy pursued to a close by a
Feminine Pen: Rather admire his prophetical spirit now as much, as his Heroical
before. Lo here Pigmalion's breathing statue, Sir Philip's fantasy incarnate:
both Pamela's Majesty, and Philoclea's Humility expressed to the life, in the
person and style of this Virago. In brief, no other than the lively Ghost of
Sydney, by a happy transmigration, speaks through the organs of this inspired
Mine rva. If any Critical ear, disrealish the shrilness of the Note; let it be
tuned to Apollo's Lyre, and the harmony will soon be perceived to be much
better; and the Lady appear much more delightful to her Musidorus: So wishes

Thine and Her servant, T. H.

On the Ingenious CONTINUATION of Sir PHILIP SYDNEY's ARCADIA;
By Mistress A. W.
NO thing does greater disadvantage bring
Than by too great commending of a thing;
Thus Beauty's injured, when the searching eye
Deceived by others over flattery:
Finding that less, was magnified before,
Thinks there is none, because there is no more.
Art suffers too by this, for too great praise
Withers the greenness of the Poets Bays:
For when men's expectations rise too high,
There Is nothing seen or read will satisfy.
This fault is epidemical, do but ore-look
The Stationers Stall, it is spoke in every book:
Where some are so voluminous become
With Prefaces of this kind, as scarce a room
Is left for the Authors self. But I can quit
My self of this, till now I never writ:
Nor had I done it now, but that a She
Did tempt my pressing for her company;
From whence when she is returned, pray use her well,
She Is young, but yet ingeniously will tell
You pretty Stories, and handsomely will set
An end to what great Sydney did beget,
But never perfected, these Embryons she
Does Mid wife forth in full maturitie.
Nor is it, where things are left undone, a sin,
To seek to end what greater ones begin.
Therefore who ere reads their ingenious style,
Not with a Frown compare them, but a Smile.
She does not write for Critics, for who ere
Loves for to be censorious, forbear.
Then this of both, let nothing else be said,
This Sydney's self did write, but this a Maid.
H. P. M.

To the Ingenious LADY, the Author of the Continuation of Sir Philip Sydney's
ARCADIA.
FAir Author! though your Sex secure you so,
That all your Dictates will for Classick go:
Yet to be liked thus only, will sound less
Our Approbation, than our Tenderness.
Because the Civil World will judgment spend,
That we are bound in Manhood to commend.
Taking our praises level from that sight
Of what you are, more than from what you write.
Whence Critick-wits this nice pretense will find,
That we our Courtship speak, but not our Mind.
But when they single each respect apart,
Viewing the Virgin there, and here the Art:
Their Prejudice will then to wonder reach,
Not spent on both United, but on Each.
For though the Stars shine in a Beauteous Sphere.
Yet are they not more Stars, for shining there:
But would boast luster of as great a force,
Though their containing Orbs were dim and course.
F. L.

On the Continuation of Sir Philip Sydney's ARCADIA.
By Mistress A. W.
MVch of the Terrene Globe concealed does lie,
Cheating the Searchers curious industry:
ARCADIA too, till now, but partly was discri'd;
Sydney her beauty viewed, fell Lovesick and died
Ere he could show the world her perfect state
And glory, interrupted by his Fate.
Amazement at her Frame did him betray,
In each rare Feature too too long a stay:
Till being, benighted, left imperfect this
Earth's Paradise, to possess me perfect is,
In pity of the loss, and to repair't, believe
His gallant generous spirit, a reprieve
From's sleeping dust has punchas't, Deaths malice
Defying with a timely Metempsychosis.
He breathes through female Organs, yet retains
His masculine vigor in Heroic strains.
Who hears't may some brave Amazon seam to be,
Not Mars but Mercury's Champion, Zelmane.
And well he may: for doubtless such is she,
Perfection givest' Arcadia's Geographie.
Arcadia thus henceforth disputed is,
Whether Sir Philip's or the Countesses.
F. W

To Mistress A. W. Upon her ADDITIONALS to Sir PHILIP SYDNEY's ARCADIA.
IF a Male Soul, by Transmigration, can
Pass to a Female, and Her spirits Man,
Then sure some sparks of Sydney's soul have flown
Into your breast, which may in time be blown
To flames, for it is the course of Enthean fire
To warm by degrees, and brains to inspire,
As Buds to Blossoms, Blossoms turn to Fruit,
So Wits ask time to ripen, and recruit;
But Yours gives Time the start, as all may see
By these smooth strains of early Poefie,
Which lik^ Rays of one kind may well aspire,
If Phoebus please to a Sydneyan fire.
JAM. HOVVEL.

On the Continuation of Sir Philip Sydney's ARCADIA;
By Mistress A. W.
LAy by your Needles, Ladies, take the Pen,
The only difference 'twixt you and Men.
It Is Tyranny to keep your Sex in aw,
And make Wit suffer by a Salick Law.
Good Wine does need no Bush, pure Wit no Beard;
Since all Souls equal are, let all be heard.
That the great World might nere decay, the Main,
What in this Coast is lost, in that does gain:
So when in Sydney's death Wit ebbed in Men,
It has its Springtide in a Female Pen.
A single Bough shall other Works approve,
Thine shall be Crowned with all DODONA's-Grove.
F. VAUGHAN.

A CONTINUATION of Sr PHILIP SYDNEY's ARCADIA.
Wherein is handled the Loves of Amphialus and Helen Queen of Corinth, Prince
Plangus and Erona: With the History of the Loves of old Claius and young
Strephon to Urania.
IN the time that Basilius King of Arcadia, with Genecea his Queen, and his two
renowned daughters, the Paragons of the World, Pamela and Philoclea, were
retired from the Court to a private lodge amongst the shepherds, there to
refresh themselves with their pleasant and harmless sports. In the time that
Pyrocles, son and heir to the good Evarchus King of Macedon, disguised himself
to an Amazonian Lady, for the love of his Venus, the sweet Philoclea. And
Musidorus Prince of Thassalia disrobed himself of his glorions raiment, and put
on Shepherds weeds, for the sight of the stately Pamela. And when Cupid
displayed his quivers throughout his circle, and brought the famousest Princes
in the world to adore his mothers beauty: Then Prince Plangus, son to the King
of Iberia, at the first view of Erona, a Queen in Lydia, was made a Prisoner to
her who was a Prisoner. And he whose resolutions were altogether fixed on the
rare beauty of Erona, resolved with himself, either to release his
incomparable Jewel out of a doleful Prison, or else to loose his life in the
enterprise.

Then he became an humble suitor to Artaxia, Queen of Armenia, under whose
custody the fair Lady was, telling her his life was bound up in Erona's. And
then would he vow it was pity so sweet a creature should pass by the pleasures
of her life in so solitary a place. And sometimes he would pray for her, and
then again he would praise her. But Artaxia would no ways be persuaded to any
compassion: the more he desired, the more she denied, which he perceiving, with
a soft voice and deep sigh, he brake out into these words,

Great Queen, if my grief and groans cannot mollify your heart, nor the
rememberance that once I was your beloved Kinsman, nor yet the beauty of Erona
can be a sufficient remedy to cure your anger; yet call to mind she was your
royal Brothers Mistress; and can you imagine that he would have endured the
thought that Eronas blood should so innocently be shed! no, but assure your
self, that whenever a drop of it is spilt, out of his ashes there will rise a
Revenger to root you out of your Kingdom.

But Artaxia arose out of her throne with a graceful Majesty, and did protest
she would be revenged on her brothers murderers: for, said she, although my
brother did love and honor Erona too well, yet her hate of him was the cause
of his being slain, and of his subjects overthrow. And Prince Plangus, if your
affections be never so extremely set upon Erona, yet I am resolved to keep her
life in my power. But because you shall have no occasion given you, to brand me
with the title of Tyrant Queen, in the word of a Princess I do promise you,
that if within two years after the day of my brothers death, you can procure
Prince Pyrocles and Musidorus to accept of a combat against two others of my
choosing, to obtain the liberty of Erona; if they overcome those Knights of my
electing, that day shall Erona be at her own disposal: but if my Champions
manifest their valor to that height, as to receive the victory, the same day
Eronas body shall be consumed to ashes, and I shall endeavor to gratify
their courage.

Plangus joyfully accepted of this proposition, since he could obtain no
better. And well he knew the Princes cared not for their proud looks, nor
feared the glittering of their swords; yet little did he know the craftiness of
Artaxia. But such subtle Policy seldom ends with an happy conclusion.

And now in hopes of a prosperous journey, he bends his course toward Greece,
there to deliver his message, upon which his life depended. But he had not
traveled many days, before he had surprised a Letter, the superscription was
to Plaxirtus, brother to Leonatus King of Paphlagonia; he without fear or
dread, brake it open, and read it. He had no sooner perused it over, but that
he wished it closed again. Then cried he out aloud, Can it be possible? is
Artaxia such a deceitful Politician? can her lips utter that which is so far
at distance from her heart? and can flattering make her seem the less cruel?
No sure, her very name will be hateful to all Posterity.

See here, says he to some of his servants that were with him, see here a
Letter from Artaxia to Plexirtus, how she praises him for a treacherous act,
how she condoles with him for the death of Pyrocles and Musidorus, the two
gloriousest Princes that ever lived in the world; how she promises him to end
the Tragedy with a Comedy; she tells him the Gods set to their help to revenge
her brothers death; and then she acknoledges her self and her Kingdom his,
according to her proclamation.

Thus Plangus was breathing out his griefs, but had not altogether eased
himself, before he was interrupted by a messenger, who not being accustomed to
complements, came to him, and certified him that he came from Armenia, and that
he was servant to that Nobleman, to whom Artaxia and he reposed so much
confidence in, to entrust Erona to be under his charge; and that now,
contrary, to the Articles agreed upon between them, Plaxirtus had brought the
news to Artaxia of the death of Pyrocles and Musidorus, which had been procured
by his contrivance; and said he, she has married him in requital. And by this
time he has besieged my Lords Castle where Erona is confined. Then my Lord
having intelligence of it, immediately sent me after you, to let you understand
that he was not furnished with conveniences well enough to hold out long:
therefore as you love Erona, so come with speed to relieve her. Now I have
finished my message, and I must be gone. So with less reverence than he used
when he came, he hastily went his way. Plangus being cast into such an
astonishment, that he let him go at his pleasure, without so much as inquiring
after Eronas welfare. But at length, he rouzed himself out of his amazement,
and then would have poured out his soul in complaints, had he not espied his
news-monger galloping almost out of his sight, then sending his eyes after him,
he made a virtue of necessity, and contented themselves that they were
spectatours of the nimble Nag, which showed his unwillingness to rest his foot
upon the ground, before he entered his native soil. This tempted Plangus to
discover his fancy, which he did in these terms, certainly said he,

There is a charm in Beauty, that Beast do homage to, and must obey; that now
makes the Nag to trip so fast away to do Erona service. Shall I then be worse
than a beast? no, although I cannot pass along with thee; yet my heart shall
always keep before thee. And dear Erona, though now I turn my face from thee,
yet my deeds shall always declare to be for thee, and shall endeavor to clear
the clouds that now obscure thy brightness.

Thus, between hope and despair, he mounted his horse, and commanding his
servants to follow him, he resolved to go into Macedon, to report the news to
Evarchus, of his sons and nephews death. For he was persuaded, that Evarchus
would not be backward from bringing to due punishment the causers of his
unspeakable loss. And by that means he thought he might handsomely show his
valor, and prove it upon his Ladies enemies. Yet sometimes fears would make
conspiracies within him, and almost overwhelm him, until he recalled his
senses, and considered, that it was not a daunted spirit that could serve
Erona. Then setting spurs to his horse, he traveled in a night and a day
without once opening his lips; silence, in his opinion being the best companion
to a troubled mind.

But at last he entered into the pleasant country of Arcadia, which was
adorned with stately woods: No cries were heard there but of the lambs, and
they in sport too sounded their voices to make their playfellow lambs answer
them again in imitation of the like. And the abundance of shadie trees that
were there, were so beautiful with the sweet melody of birds, that any one,
save lovesick Plangus, might think it a sufficient harmony to draw away their
delight from any other vanity of the world. Besides, there were the Shepherds
piping to their pretty Shepherdesses, whilst they cheerfully sang to pleasure
them again. In this sweet place, he sat himself down, with an intention to rest
his wearied limbs under a branched tree, whilst his servants refreshed
themselves, and baited their horses, but no ease could be harbored in his
disquieted heart, his eyes being no sooner closed, but that he imagined he saw
Erona burning in their unmercifull fire: at which sight he staringly opened
them, and determined with himself, that since sleep would procure no comfort to
him, other then Tragical scenes, he would never enjoy any contentment before he
had settled Erona in her throne in safety.

He had not been long in this perplexity, before he was kindly examined the
cause of his sadness. Plangus hearing the question, and musing extremely who it
should be that to his thinking should ask so strange an one, heaved up his
head, which before he had carelessly held down, and seeing only an ancient man
attended by his two Daughters, and hoping he would be a companion suitable to
his disposition, he courteously answered him, that it would be but a trouble to
him to understand the occasion of his grief, for, said he, it will be too
melancholy a story to rehearse to you, unless you were in a capacity to help
me.

It is possible I might do you service, replied the old man; for now you are in
Arcadia, where I am King, and having retired from my Court to a private Lodge,
which is seated in a Grove hardby, I with my two daughters, happening now to
walk for recreation into this pleasant place, and I perceiving you being a
stranger, lying in such a forlorn posture, I must confess it was incivilitie in
me to disturb you, but my compassion would submit to no causalities that could
hinder my desired knowledge. And now I hope it will be no inconvenience to you
to relate your own History to me.

But Plangus, with humble reverence excused his denial, and beseeched Basilius
first to grant him his pardon, since it was a fault of ignorance, and not of
perverseness. And that he promised himself, that he would choose rather to be his
Chyrurgian to heal his wounds, than in the least to mar or make them.

Basilius would suffer him no longer to go on with his frivolous civilities,
and telling him they should serve his turn, made him sit down. Then Plangus
related all circumstances in the same manner, that afterward the divine
Philoclea sweetly declared to her lover, the admirable Pyrocles. And believe
me, she told it with more liveliness and quickness of wit, than Plangus did
himself: For oftentimes his thought was strayed from his story, to sigh, with
gazing upon the splendour of Pamela and Philoclea, for he conceited that in
their beauties he might see Eronas. But alas poor Prince! Cupid in that had
blinded him, for although Erona might deserve a large share of praises, yet the
two Sisters could not be paralelled. But when he had concluded his passionate
relation, he earnestly craved releafe of Basilius: who answered him, that he
governed a quiet and a peaceable Country, and that he should very unwillingly
teach his people the way of dissension; but yet he would command a Guard of
Arcadians to conduct him safe into Macedon.

Plangus, in lowly submission, congratulated with Basilius for that favor,
believing that time and entreatie would amplify his goodness, according to his
ability. Then as he was appointing a place where the Arcadians should meet
him, his servants presented themselves to him, and certified him, that the day
was far spent, and that it would be necessary for him to go to the next town,
and there to lodge that night. Plangus, very well liked of their advice, that
he might have the more freedom to contrive his best way to act his part he had
already begun to play. Then after they had ended their sundry discourses, he
parted from Basilius and the two surpassing sisters.

Now Eronas beauty had grounded such an impression in his heart, that no other
thought, but of her perfections, could enter into his. She was his Image, her
he worshipped, and her he would for ever magnify. And until he came near the
City, he busied his fancy in extolling his Lady. But there he was received
by the governor of the Town with as great gallantrie as could be expected,
considering the short warning Basilius gave them, there wanting no cost that
might be pleasing either to his eye or taste. A stately supper being provided,
which was garnished with a royal banquet, sent from Basilius; and all was
finished in so gorgeous a manner, that Plangus did assure himself he was no
ordinary, nor yet unwelcom Guest. But all the sweet music with the plenty of
delicates was no more to Plangus, than the rememberance of his own misfortune.
Yet having a Princely care not to show himself unthankful to the meanest
supporter of his undeserved Festivals, he would oftentimes praise them for
their bounty to him a stranger, and one that was no way able to make them the
least requital, but they replied, that his acceptance was as much, and more
than they deserved or expected. Then after they had a good while parlied
together upon several occasions, the Citizens returned to their houses, and
Plangus went to his lodging, then prostrating himself before Cupid for his
happy success in fulfilling of his own desires, beseeched him to unite Erona's
affection as firmly to him, as his was unmovable to her; and that both might
be so well preserved, that at length they might enjoy the happy fruition of
real friendship between him and Erona, at whose name he ended; and as if he
received his life from thence, he fell into a little slumber, which continued
for so short a time, that when he awaked, the clouds were not separated to give
way to the approaching day, that was then extremely wished for by him, who
de^ermined to spend the hourglass of his life in defense of his esteemed
mistress.

By that time he had run over his thoughts to the end of his intended
enterprises, Phoebus spread his beams over his curtains, which cast so great a
reflection upon him, that though his eyes were still dissembling sleep, yet the
Suns brightness made him gaze about him, and seeing it so sweet a morning, he
believed it to be an emblem of his prosperous success. In this persuasion he
arose, and charging his servants to be in a readiness, he walked into a
Gallerie, where multitudes stood waiting for his presence* he kindly saluting
them, and repeating his former speeches of courtesy and gratitude, he
commanded his man to bring out his Steed; and then taking his leave of the
Arcadians, saving the residue which Basilius appointed t^ wait on him, he
raised himself upon the beast, which gently received him as willing to bear so
loved a burden, and sprightly ambled along: but Plangus was forced to hold his
bridle, and teach his Nag his bounds were no further than his Commission, by
reason of a calling from a young Shepherd, who speedily running to Plangus, and
in a breathless manner he certified him that he was sent by his Lord Basilius
to excuse his absence, the occasion being his retiredness to so private a
place, that with no conveniencie he could entertain him there agreeable to his
greatness, nor yet to remove so far so suddenly.

Plangus requested the Shepherd to return his thanks and obedience to his
Sovereign, and seeing it was a matter of no greater importance, he would endure
no longer hindrances, but set spurs to his horse and gallopped away with all
expedition: but not without some turbulent passages that he was fain to endure,
before he could attain to his desired haven: yet at last he arrived under the
Dominions of Evarchus in Macedon, where he was welcomed by a company of
dolorous persons, who without entreatie would participate with him in his
sorrows: but alas! there were few comforters, all the people seeming like
shadows, in regard of the miss they had of their young Prince, who after he had
brought so many Kings in subjection under his prowess and valor, should now
himself be lost, none knowing where or how; but perpetually hearkening to
several relations, which put them into more fears and doubts every day than
they were in before.

Musidorus wanted not bewailing neither; for well they knew Pyrocles life was
bound up in his, and that he loved and respected the Macedonians as much for
Pyrocles sake, as he did the Thessalians for his own sake, and that they
learned one another virtuous qualities, which were equally distributed between
them; therefore the whole Kingdom groaned under burthensom calamities for their
witnessed loss: but by the entrance of Plangus, who was a stranger to them,
their complaints were turned into whisperings, and their sighs into
lisstenings, all being earnest to know who he was, and the cause of his Posting
from city to city toward the Court. Some would believe the worst, and then
would swear they did see sadness in his face; others would persuade themselves,
it was his hasty traveling that made him seem careful But Plangus not staying
to hearken to their mistrustfull uncertainties, kept on his former pace, till
he was come within a mile of the Palace, where he was stopped by one Kalodolus,
an ancient servant belonging to Musidorus, who hearing of the coming of a
Forreigner, and infinitely longing to hear from his dear Master, and meeting
Plangus, he fell down at his feet, and besought him to have commiseration upon
him, and tell him of the safety of Musidorus.

This request silenced Plangus for a while, who could not imagine what reply to
make to him: but having considered a little better of it, he brake his silence
on this fashion. Sir, it grieves me extremely that I cannot give you such
satisfactorie answer as I wish I could: however do not afflict your self, for I
dare assure you that he is happy, being a more glorious Prince, and far
greater than all the Kingdoms of the World could make him.

Why? is he dead? said Kalodolus; then all virtue is fled away: but I will
follow thee Musidorus, where ere thou be, I will not stay behind. Then
snatching out a Rapier from him that was nearest him, he would have sent his
soul to Pluto, had it not been prevented by the quick eye of Plangus, who
apprehending his danger, leaped upon him, and with violence wrung the Rapier
out of his hand, but yet he would not be pacified for a time, nor persuaded
from practicing his intended mischief, till reason over-swaying his patience,
made him become a moderator of his own rashness; for said he, What good can my
death do to Musidorus? shall I my self destroy, and do my Prince the wrong? no,
I will live as long as fortune pleases, and guide my steps about the world, till
I have found his Tomb, where I will solemnize such Obsequies as may be thought
worthy to be titled the Funeral of so worthy a Prince. Then I will weep my self
to tears upon his grave, to water that illustrious Plant, that certainly must
needs spring up and flourish; for it is impossible so rare a thing can be
obscured in the earth.

Here Kalodolus speech was stopped by a flood, that would endure no longer to
be hid within his aged carcass. And the noble Plangus answered him with sighs,
as if his heart would break: then they both looked so steadfastly in pity upon
one another, that if a Painter had been present, he could not take, nor have a
livelier Masterpiece of sorrow than this lover and servant represented, they
being both void of comfort, and equally afflicted, until Plangus plucked up his
dead spirits, and adviced Kalodolus to cease his complaints, and not to suffer
grief to overrun his patience, for since Musidorus was dead, the only service
he could do for him, was to help forward the revenging of the Actors in his
death. And then he required him to direct him the way to Evarchus: which
command Kalodolus instantly obeyed. And guiding himt brough stately Courts,
paved all with Marble, and compassed in with Marble pillars, that were adorned
with such goodly proportioned Statues, that had not Plangus been employed with
matters of consequence, he would not so regardlesly have passed by them,
without prying into their Story; which might perhaps have been beneficial unto
him, to know the several tricks of warlike Hercules, as was there curiously
engraven by famous Antiquaries. But Plangus thoughts were higher flown than
these Portaitures could reach to; those he valued like shadows in comparison of
his valiant enterprises, that artificially his invention would lay before him,
as if it were accomplished already. And in that unsatisfied persuasion he was
brought to Evarchus, whose sight awakened him from his fabulous fantasy. And
then with a sad reverence he kneeled down.

But the good King would not fuffer that, but lifting him up, he entreated him
to use no such ceremonies, but to discourse that which he earnestly wished to
know without any delays. So Plangus being extreme willing to fulfill Evarchus
charge, though first to bring him by degrees to the hearing of those mournful
tidings, he began with this Prologue:

Most gracious Sir, did I not consider your wisdom in governing your passions,
far surmounting other men's, I should not so abruptly presume to be the
messenger of such unfortunate news, as now I am. But since my life is hazarded
in several respects, I know your goodness will no way persevere against me, for
necessity has no rule, and that is the reason which now inforces me to
manifest that unto you, which I am loath to utter: But I assure my self, that
your Majesty will no way despise the sovereign salve called Patience, that is
a present Remedy for all afflictions.

Know then, great King, that the mirrours of virtue, the famous Pyrocles your
son, and Musidorus your nephew are treacherously slain by the bloody plot of
Plaxirtus, false Brother to Leonatus King of Paphlagonia, and revealed to me by
the surprisal of a letter of congratulation from Artaxia Queen of Armenia,
under whose power Erona Queen of Lydia is a prisoner; and without speedy
succor, she will be put to death in the cruellest way that can be imagined, by
the same instruments that exposed her Champions to theirs: But yet Sir, they
have left behind them so precious a name, that their adversaries cannot
blemish: and so long as their better part flourishes on earth, all the realitie
that can be showed for the lesser, is to go on courageously, and revenge your
loss, and to give Apollo thanks for their leaving so glorious a memory behind
them.

Thus Plangus ended, without further mentioning Erona, until Evarchus grief was
somewhat digested: which he did perceive extremely to over-sway him, by the
changing of blood in his face, that perpetually going and coming, would
sometime wax pale and wan; and then would flush, as if he threatened to make
Plaxirtus smart for all his villainy. And in this conflict of sorrow and anger
he continued a great space: but at last they both yielded to reason, and
Evarchus wisely became the Judge of the Sessions; for said he,

It is Justice to bring murderers to their deserved punishments. And because
you Prince Plangus testify your self to be such an affectionate Friend to my
dear Children, show your self one in their revenge; you I will entrust to be
the General of my Army; prove as valiant now as you have ever done; let all
your aim be at Plaxirtus; and if possible, convey him hither alive, that he may
die a public spectacle of shame and terror before all the People. And I give
you free liberty to use your power in the release of that distressed Lady you
spoke of, for certainly their hearts are infinitely hardened for any mischief:
but for Artaxia, remember she is a woman, and subject to degrees of Passion as
well as man. But alas! she desired the destruction of Pyrocles and Musidorus,
and now she has rendered her recompense to Plaxirtus for that abominable deed.
O the thought of that Action reaches further than my compassion: but I will
resign my power to you, therefore though you grow Victorious, yet strengthen
your self with discretion, and let not rashness nor faintheartedness prevail
over you. Now go on with your intentions, and prosper, whilst I end my days in
solitariness.

Evarchus had no sooner done, but he bowed to the earth, as if he wished to be
there quickly; and then after he had signed a Commission for raising of an
Army, he withdrew into his chamber, and Plangus waited upon him to the
entrance, and so they parted; one to temperate melancholy, the other to Hope
intermixed with cares: for though Plangus was loaded with troublesome
employments, yet those he took for refreshments, because the foundation of them
was laid for Erona's sake. But Evarchus grieved, as he had too just cause, to
think that he should never more behold the joy of his heart again; and so he
continued without the least show of a contented mind, yet not with a desperate
rage. A large and rare Theme might be Chronicled of his wisely governed
Passions; but that is too pregnant a virtue for my dull capacity to go on with.

Therefore surrendering that to sharp wits, I will only mention Plangus happy
success that he obtained in Macedon; for in short time he levied an Army,
sufficient to conquer all Armenia, every one being desirous to revenge their
Princes quarrel, and thought it a preferment to be the meanest Soldier; then
being all in a readiness, they march away. But Plangus before he went, sent his
Ambassadors to Delphos, to know of the Oracle his Destiny, and just as he was
managing his Army, in their march they returned with this answer;

That he should be Victorious over his Enemies, if so be he would be vigilant
in guiding his Forces in a way of deliberation; and not to venture to show his
Valor, in over-rash attempts in a Bravado before his Mistress, which
oftentimes has been the cause of the Routing a magnificent Army: but he must
remember the eyes of all the World were upon him as their Defense and Shield,
whose wisdom must preserve them from their furious enemies.

This Oracle infinitely comforted Plangus; and when he had given thanks to
Apollo for his proclaimed prosperous Fortune, he kept on his march to Armenia;
whom we will leave for a time.

Now I will discover some Passages that passed between Amphialus Nephew to
Basileus the King of Arcadia, and Helena Queen of Corinth, how that after she
had carried him away in a Lighter from Arcadia, what bitter complaints she made
for him, until she had brought him to Corinth, that would be to pitiful a
subject to stay on; therefore leaving that to several conjectures, I will only
rehearse those particulars that united those rare Persons together to both
their abundant felicity.

When Helena had conveyed her beloved Amphialus to her renowned City Corinth,
and lodged him in the richest furnished Chamber that could be devised, yet all
she thought too mean for such an incomparable Guest: then she advised with her
skillful Chyrurgeons how she might have his wounds healed; and had always an
especial care to see the salves applied to them her self; and when all was
finished, she passed away the day with sighs by senceless Amphialus, who lay so
quietly, that for a great time none could perceive the least motion of life in
him: but at last the Chyrurgeons avouched they could find warm blood strive for
life in his (now in all likelihood) curable wounds. Which speech of theirs did
make Helena wash her fair face with her tears for joy, when before it had not
touched a drop of water, from the time that she found Amphialus in so woeful a
condition. Then began she to discourse with him, as if he could mind her what
she said.

Tell me dear Amphialus, said she, what occasion have I given you to make you
hate me? have I not ever honored and loved you far above my self? O yes! and
if I had a thousand lives to lose, I would venture them all for your sake. But
since that is a impossible thing, propound to me the most probable way for me
to purchase you, and I dare undertake it, be it never so dangerous: But if it
be the Princess Philoclea that lies as a block in my way, so that I must either
continue where I am, or else stumble over it and be made quite hopeless yet let
me counsel you as a faithful friend, not to engage your affections to one that
is so negligent of it, but rather bestow it upon me that will accept of it. Oh
hear me, and have pity on me, O Amphialus, Amphialus!

Then she flung her self down upon his bed, with a resolution not to stir
before she had discerned some sign of life in outward appearance. And as she
was earnestly looking upon him, she espied his eyes a stealing open; but
immediately, with a long fetched sigh, he closed them up again, as grieving for
their tenderness they could not gaze upon beauty. But Helena replying with
twenty to his one, went on with her lovesick speeches.

Alas poor Prince! said she, is it thy hard fortune to receive thy life again
in sighs? has such il-favoured spleens no place to settle in, but in thy noble
breast, which shines in goodness? Cheer up, dear Prince, and let not thy
greatest Foe find cause to tax thee with the least blemish.

Longer she would have proceeded in her bemoaning of Amphialus, had she not
been interrupted by the Chyrurgeons that were in the chamber, and hearing her
voice, came instantly to her, and kneeling down, entreated her to abandon the
chamber, for as much as her presence and complaints caused disturbance in
Amphialus, and procured nothing but that which was hurtful to her own person:
and then they assured her, that if she would forbear his company, they could
perfect the cure in half the time, that otherwise they should be constrained to
be tedious in, by reason that her sad speeches would ground such an impression
in him in his weakness, that it would be as much as their skill could reach
unto, to keep his wounds from growing worser than better. These persuasions of
the Chyrurgeons had a very great influence over Helena, and she forsaking her
former passions, guarded her self with a long Robe of wise considerations, and
departed his chamber without any show of fondess, to the admiration of all
beholders. Yet she never neglected the care of Amphialus, but diligently
enquired after his amendment, that she might know all passages as punctually,
as if she had been with him. In this golden mean of Patience she continued so
long, till Amphialus had revived somewhat his decayed spirits, and the
Chyrurgeons had so well overcome his wounds, that by degrees he was brought to
walk about his chamber; but always he would be crossing his Arms, knocking his
Breast, and breathing speeches to himself in so woeful a manner, as would make
the hardest heart burst into a deluge of tears. Yet all this time he never
examined by what means he was conveyed thither, nor any other question that
concerned Helena's or his own condition. And so for a great while he imprisoned
himself in such ignorance, till by the coming of a young Gentleman, named
Clytiphon, son to Kaleander, a Noble man of Arcadia, his concealed estate, and
all other circumstances that had happened in Arcadia from his departure from
thence, were declared to Amphialus wonder and astonishment.

For this Clytifon was sent as an Ambassador to Amphialus from his uncle the
King of Arcadia, to congratulate with him for his recoverie, and to certify
him of his Cosins deliverance out of his Castle, by the prowess of Prince
Pyrocles and Musidorus; and how they disguised themselves for the love of
Pamela and Philoclea, with all the several attempts that they practiced to
obtain their desired enterprise. (As their bringing Amaxius to submit to their
mercy, Pyrocles having granted him his life on condition he would acknowledge
it) and finally to give him notice, that the nuptials of Pyrocles and
Philoclea, with Musidorus and Pamela were only deferred for the time they
could hear from Amphialus. This was the chief of Clytifons Embassage, which he
carefully obeyed.

But before he entered into Corinth, the City swelled with rumor, every one
being greedy to know that which nothing concerned them. But Clytifon knowing
it was not a time of dalliance, hastened to the Palace, where he was waited for
by Helena, whose watchful eyes and attentive ears could not pass by any
suspicious whisperings, but would always make strict inquiry of the cause of
them. So now she believing the credible report, would needs come down her self,
attended with a train of Ladies, to welcome the Ambassador to her Court, when
as soon as she perceived a glimpse of him, she perfectly knew him to be that
noble Clytifon, whom before she had been beholding to for his excellent
company. Then whilst she was showing her courtesy to him for his former
civilities, he with an humble reverence, yet supported with a Garb of Majesty,
came to her after the manner of an Ambassador, and presenting mighty high
commendations to her from all the Princes that resided in Arcadia, she besought
him to accept of such poor entertainment as her ability could make him. Then
leading him into the Presence (it being in the afternoon) she commanded a
delicate Collation to be set before him, which was fulfilled so quickly and so
decently, that Clytifon could not choose but sit and extol their comely order;
and within a while fell to eating those rarities that Helena had provided for
him; but she would not be persuaded to taste of any, her troubled mind was too
full of jealousies and fears, to think of pleasing her appetite. Sometime she
mistrusted that Basileus had sent for Amphialus to be tried by the Law for his
Mother Cecropia's stealing away his Daughters, that he might have a fair
pretense to take away his life. But quickly she vanquished that doubt by
another that she imagined to be most probable, which was, that Philoclea's
heart might be mollified, and that she underhand had made choice of Clytifon
to be her Proxy, in wishing Amphialus to pursue his former Petition to
Philoclea, that she with the more modesty might grant him his request. This
fancy of Helena made such a wound within her breast, that a thousand of sighs
had free passage there, and in silence she did think out her complaints; until
Clytifon had disordered the artificial curiosities with tasting of their
goodness, and had sufficed his natural hunger. Then Helena taking him aside
from the company that came to gaze upon him, with many shows of grief she
conjured him, that if ever he had been real to any friend, to show himself one
to her, who vowed faithfulness and secrecy: but yet if it were a matter of
such weighty importance, as he could not repose so much confidence in her,
being a Princes of another Country, yet she entreated him to certify her
whether it concerned Amphialus, or in his her own ruin.

Clytifon had hardly patience to hear her out, but removed her fears on this
manner: Cheer up great Queen, said he, those cloudie shadows of discontent and
fears never do good but hurt, and wrong your Beauty, that otherwise would be
the sweetest, and the singular Flower that could be found in the large Garden
of the world. Cheer up then and rejoice at joyful tidings: for to the
amazement of all, the two ever blessed Princes, Pyrocles and Musidorus, are by
many strange accidents found to be alive, though disguised, within my
Sovereigns Lodges (from being gallant Soldiers) the one to a woman, the other
to a comely Shepherd, which was brought to pass by the industry of blind
Cupid, who takes pleasure in wounding the best of undaunted spirits. But yet he
has dealt so favorable with these incomparable Persons, that he has equally
wounded Pamela and Philoclea to them again: so that now Arcadia waits only for
the nuptials finishing, to be made happy in having so glorious a Prince to
reign over them, and that is delayed only for the time that they might hear
from my Lord Amphialus.

Helena's joy at the hearing of this news, was too great for my dull
expression, yet after she had moderated her excessive mirth, and brought it
within the bounds of reason, she feared that Amphialus would be so overcome
with despairing grief, that nothing but death could end his misery. Then fell
she at Clytifon's feet, and begged of him not to be over-hastie in declaring
his Embassage to Amphialus, but to compass him in by degrees to the hearing of
it. This request of hers Clytifon courteously promised to perform. And she
guiding him to Amphialus chamber door, desired him to walk in, and departed.

But Amphialus espying Clytifon, and leaping upon him, and then lovingly
embracing him, said, How do thou Clytifon? thou look as if thou meanedst
to chide me; but spare your labor, I will do that my self, nay, and more if
Philoclea would command it, let her desire my heart and she shall have it, and
with mine own hand I Will pluck it out to give her, yet think it all too little to
excuse my crime. But she is gracious and noble, answered Clytifon, and will be
readier to forgive, than you can be to beg your pardon of her. But I will
never presume to ask forgiveness, replied Amphialus, since I deserve all
punishments. Though you do, said Clytifon, yet if you will present your self
unto her in an humble and submissive way, and cast off your former Suit, I
durst assure you she would not only grant your life, but would also receive
you to her favor as her near Kinsman. If I could think so, replied Amphialus,
I should be highly contented far above my deserts or wishes, and said
Clytifon, would you be pleased to hear that she were married to another or else
likely to be so suddenly? Yes with all my soul answered Amphialus, but yet
upon condition, that it may be to her all flourishing happiness. As for my own
particular, that is the least thing I regard or hope for, only as I said
before, that the Princess Philoclea may be endowed with all felicity, that will
procure to me an uncontrouled blessedness.

Then Clytifon asked him if he would accept of him to be the bearer of a letter
from him to Philoclea? which he promised carefully to deliver, if it were such
an one as might be received without scruple. Amphialus answered he would gladly
write to Philoclea, but it should no way be prejudicial to him, he intending
only to manifest his grief for her ill usage in his Castle; and to let her
know how ready he was to welcome any punishment she would inflict upon him.
Then after more such speeches passed between them, Clytifon rehearsed the truth
of his message. Which at first Amphialus heard with trembling, until Clytifon
remembered him of his former discourse, that nothing that could make Philoclea
happy, should ever make him unhappie. Then rousing up himself, he wished
Clytifon to leave him to his privacie, that he might have the more liberty to
endite a letter worthy of her acceptance; Clytifon being to carry it away the
next morning. So he, without the least contradiction, left Amphialus, who being
alone fell into a passion (as afterward he confessed) that had almost made him
senseless, until time that wears out all things, recaled his memory back to
him again, which first discovered it self thus:

Alas miserable Amphialus! thou imployest thy self to extol thy Rival, and
meanest to make it thy recreation to do so always. Now I can remember the
Amazon Lady that fought so gallantly with me in the Arcadian woods, for the
Princess Philoclea's Glove; what blows she struck at me, and with what
nimbleness she avoided mine, when I aimed at her in mine own defense. I must
confess it daunted me to see a woman rant so over me, but yet it made me the
more admire her valor, and brought down my former loftiness, to wonder at my
timourousness. But since she is discovered to be the noble Pyrocles, I shall be
so far from hiding that disguised exploit of his, that I shall blazon it about
the world in triumph, as an honor for me to be overcome by him; and it shall
never be said, that envy of my Rival shall make me obscure his worth, for I
shall applaud his wisdom in making so rare a choice. Nor did I ever hear of any
that could deserve him better than the divine Philoclea. Then grieve no more
Amphialus, at thy Ladies happiness, since in hers all thine consists; but
prepare thy self to obey her commands, be they never so contrary to thy nature.

With these resolutions, although with a shaking hand, he began to write his
letters. But Clytifon, as soon as he came out of the chamber, was received by
Helena, to whom he related Amphialus and his whole discourse. And she being in
hope to make him a fortunate messenger for her proceeding, used him with all
the courtesy that could be. And then by her favors she enticed him to her
bait, and made him as much her humble servant, as he was Amphialus: For then he
had promised to be a nimble Post to them both: and he must be conducted to his
lodging, and Helena to her closet.

Where she began too hard a task for her distracted mind, a letter she did
write unto Philoclea, but that did no way please her, it was not sufficiently
adorned with Rhetoric for so rare a Princess. Another she did like reasonable
well, but that was so blured with her tears, that the best of eyes could not
read it. More she wrote, and found blemishes in them all. But at last being
tired with scribing so long upon one subject, she resolved that the next should
go what ere it were, which in earnest proved the worst of all. But yet because
you shall understand the enditment of it, it is set down as ensues. The
Superscription was,

For the virtuous Princes Philoclea.
Sweet Princess,
DId I not hear in what raptures of happiness your Divine self is involved, or
could I in the least comprehend the splendour of your goodness to spread upon
your distressed Cousin Amphialus, I should willingly resign up all my claim to
felicity, so that you, of far worthier endowments, might enjoy it. But since
it has pleased the destinies to place you in the highest firmament of
contentment, that you may with the more ease behold the calamity of your
Admirer, let me therefore entreat you to show your compassion to him by
mildness, and suffer his punishment, may be sincere affection to me; and you
will infinitely above measure oblige your devoted servant,

HELENA of Corinth.


Often did she peruse this Letter to find out cavils in it, until sleep would
endure no longer to be resisted, nor hindered from seizing on so pure a soul,
which she evidenced by letting her letter fall out of her delicate proportioned
hand that held it: then fell she into slumbers, and starts would now and then
afright her, but those she ended with sighs, and fell asleep again, and then
she passed away the remainder of the night with variety of dreams, until the
approaching day roused up her senses, and remembered her it was high time for
Lovers to be stirring. Then she being always mindful of such observations,
took her letter, and making it fortunate with her prayers, she carried it into
the Presence, where she stayed for Clytifon, who was receiving his farewell of
Amphialus.

For after Amphialus had finished his humble suit, as he termed it, and had
endured a tedious night, Clytifon must needs be sent for to prescribe the
likeliest medicine for a lovesick remedy. Clytifon could not be asked an
harder question, for he himself would gladly have taken Physic, had he been
sure of the cure. Tell me Clytifon, said he, is there no help for a troubled
mind? no cordial to bring sleep into these eyes of mine? If you will submit
your actions, replied Clytifon, to my approbation, I will set you in a perfect
way of quietness, though it should procure mine own endless misery. He
deserves no Physician, answered Amphialus, that will not accept of his advice,
when it is so freely proffered him. Know then, said Clytifon, your only way to
obtain contentment, is to honor, nay, and love her who so entirely loves and
respects you. O stay there, cried out Amphialus, and do not weigh me down with
clogs of grief, I am balanced sufficiently already, why do you with more
burdens strive to sink me? nothing but Philoclea's commands I find can enter
into my heart, and they may strike me dead. Fly then Clytifon, fly as swiftly
as Phoebus can, and make a quick return to let me know Philoclea's censure
equal to my deserts. With these words he gave Clytifon his letter, and with a
sad gesture turned away. But Clytifon without deferring went his way; though
first he received Helena's, and with many protestations vowed to further her
undertakings.

And now I will leave these two lovers in longing expectation of his return,
and will trace along with Clytifon to accompany him, he being destitute almost
of any comfort, by reason his affections were so extremely engaged to Helena's
beauty, that nothing but envious death could aswage it. This caused such a
conflict to arise between Cupid's discharged Bow, and Clytifon's making his
own wounds to gape with contrarying the God of loves commands, and hastening
from the Mistress of his desires to gain her to another: that oftentimes he was
turning back to discover his intentions to her. But this design he vanquished
by confuting himself.

It is true said he, I ride apace toward mine own overthrow; but since it was
her charge, how dare I harbor a thought of refusing? no it is her gracious
pleasure to vouchsafe me to be her Messenger, and shall I loose her esteemed
favors, which I infinitely hazard if I do not manifest my faithful endeavors
in gaining Amphialus to be her Husband, but I will choose to be her loyal
Servant, rather than to her sweet self an importunate Suitor. And I should
account my self ever happy, could it lie in my power to further hers; but I am
unworthy to receive such a Title as a poor Instrument to redeem her Majesty to
her former felicity: however I will show my willingness, by my nimbleness; and
then teaching his Steed to give a gallant caper, he speedily rode away, and
without the least hinderance he quickly set footing in the Country of Arcadia,
where he was welcomed by Peals of Bells, and Shoutings of People, with variety
of sports contrived by young children: besides the pleasant Shepherds blowed
their pipes, whilst the pretty Sheperdesses chanted out their praises of
their great God Pan. All these harmless pastimes were ordered so conveniently,
that he might have a perfect view of them as he went by: and all was to declare
the joy they conceived for Clytifon's safe return, whose stay they heard was
the only delayance of the Princes Nuptials. And as he rode along, the silly
Lambs did welcome him with leaps, whilst the Fox that lurked in his private
corner to catch them, discovered himself to do homage unto Clytifon, and by
that means lost his game; yet he chearing himself up with hopes of a more
plentiful prey hereafter, returned to his former craft, and received that
misfortune as a just recompense of his carelessness.

Thus Clytifon's thoughts were taken up by sundry objects, till he had traced
along ground so far as to the City of Matenia: there he might see Noble
Personages glory with their employment, and to esteem themselves to be
regarded were they not set to work. There he might behold the Palace richly
furnishing, and all the houses gaudily decking up. There he might hear of
abundance of several inventions for Masks, and other curious sights that
might be delightful to the eye. But Clytifon passed by all these rare Scenes,
they being in comparison of his fantasy, by him reputed superfluous.

And now his eye was fixed upon the Lodge that shadowed the wonders of the
world, and was seated about two miles distance from Matenia. Thither with
eagerness he goes, where he was only saluted by the diligent servants that
directed him to the grove adjoining to the Lodge, where the Princes just before
were walked for recreation. Then as he went gazing about him, he discerned
Evarchus King of Macedon, who signified his joy for his Sons and Nephews, to
him, revived lives, by his lifted up hands and eyes, which with great devotion
he rendered to the Gods in thankfulness.

For it happened after Plangus departure from Macedon with an Army, Evarchus
fearing his love-lines would give opportunity for sadness to overcome his
languishing spirit, made a journey into Arcadia to visit his ancient Friend
Basilius. And after many strange accidents had apparently been discovered, as
the famous Sir Philip Sydney fully declares, Pyrocles and Musidorus were found
to be alive; and now he tarried in Arcadia to see his blessedness completed in
their Marriages. And in the mean time he dispatched a messenger to Plangus to
encourage him with those welcome tidings. And then the good King confined
himself wholly to the continual praises of the Divine providence for his
unlooked for comfort. And now straying from the rest of the Princely company,
he fell to his wonted contemplations, and never moved from his devout posture,
till Clytifon's sudden approach into his sight, made him start, and withal
raised him.

Then Evarchus examined him how the noble Gentleman Amphialus did? but Clytifon
was so mightily dashed with his disturbing of Evarchus, that he let silence be
both his Answer and Pleader for his presumption, which Evarchus perceiving,
brought him into that solitary Arbor where Pyrocles in his disguizement had the
privilege to resort: There sat Basilius with Genecea his Queen, and he
lovingly condoling with her for her former sufferings that she was then a
sounding in his attentive ears, but at Evarchus and Clytifons entrance they
rose up, and graciously saluting Clytifon, they commanded him to repeat those
Adventures that had befallen him at Corinth, if they were remarkable; but
Evarchus prevailed with them to have patience, that Philoclea, whom it most
concerned, might hear as soon as any; then they all went to the young Princes,
and found them so well employed, that had they not espied them, they would in
pity have passed by, and not disturbed them.

Pyrocles and Musidorus being seated upon a Fountains brim, where in the
middle Cupids Image was placed, ready the second time to have wounded them; but
they not minding him, strived who should with the comeliest grace, and highest
Rhetoric extol their Mistresses; whilst the fair Pamela, with lovely
Philoclea tied the truest Lovers knot in grass, that ever yet was tied; and
now and then would pick a Flower to show their Art, to tell the virtue of it;
in these harmless pleasures their Parents found them busied.

Then Basilius coming to Philoclea, told her that Cliftion had brought her
news of her servant Amphialus, and she modestly blushing, replied, that she
should be glad to hear of her Cosins health; then Basilius desired them all to
sit down, that they might lend the better attention to Clytifon; but he in
reverence to his Sovereign, would stand, till Basilius laid his commands upon
him to the contrary: then Clytifon recounted all circumstances saving that
about himself, as I have set down; and when he had ended, he presented
Philoclea with Helena's and Amphialus Letters, which she courteously received,
and when she had broken them open, she read them, but with such Crystal
streams all the time droping from her Rosy cheeks, that had Venus been by,
she would have preserved them in a Glass to wash her faice withal, to make
her the more beautiful; and then her Servant Pyrocles gently wiped them away;
but seeing them yet distill, he was angry, and showed it on this manner. It is a
hard Riddle to me, said he, that a Lover should write such a regardless Letter,
to grieve and mar that face that he so much adored. He would longer have chid
Amphialus, but that Evarchus advised him to take the Letter from his sorrowful
Lady, which she willingly resigned unto him; and he read as follows.

For the Incomparable PRINCESS, the Princess Philoclea.
MADAM,
I Am confident, you have heard what affection I have harbored in my heart,
your (though unknown to me) most barbarous usage, and that I might clear mine
innocence of such an heinous crime, with what a Tragical act I heaped up
misery upon misery, which has infinitely overwhelmed my distracted soul; and
now I only rest in expectation of your commands. I beseech you let it be so
pitiful, that it may procure eternal ease to my extreme perplexity; and
nothing can diminish that but Death by your appointment; and that to me shall
be most welcome; and I shall account my self happy in obeying your desires at
the last moment, which I vow to accomplish what ere it be, with cheerfulness;
and with this undaunted resolution, I will ever continue to be,

Your faithful, though unworthy Servant, AMPHIALUS.


Whilst Pyrocles was reading this, the sweet Philoclea stopped the remainder of
her tears, till she had taken a view of Helena's. Then she entreated her
Pyrocles to read over her Cousin Amphialus lines to her again. And she
attentively listening to his passionate Phrases, the second time she renewed
her weeping deluge: but the stately Pamela said, her Cousin did wisely to cast
himself into the Power of her sister, he knew her clemency, and considered it
was his safest way to do so, before he set footing in Arcadia.

Then they all persuaded Philoclea not to grieve for that which she might
remedy, and adviced her to go and write a letter to Amphialus, and in it to
command him to put in execution Helena's demands. She immediately arose, and at
her rising made the flowers to hang down their heads for want of her presence:
but her breath being a sweeter perfume than the scent of the choicest Flowers,
made her careless of their sorrow; for she not minding them, went her way; and
Pyrocles, who could be as well out of his life, as from her company, followed
after her, and would needs wait upon her to the lodge; and there he staid till
she had written her Letter.

Which she had no sooner ended, and Pyrocles perused, but that ingenious
Clytifon was ready upon his Horse to receive it, that he might with speed
convey it to Corinth. So after abundance of commendations from Philoclea to
Helena and Amphialus, he parted, and without any remarkable Passage, he quickly
attained to his journeys end: where he was received between hope and fear by
Helena, who hearing of his return, withdrew into a private room, and then sent
for him; but as soon as he was entered into her sight, she cried out.

Good Sir, do not break my heart with delayance; is there any possibility for
me to live? if there be none, O speak, that I may die! and end my fears: for if
Amphialus doom be death; I am resolved not to live one minute after him. But
Clytifon, as desirous to give her ease, as she could be to ask it of him,
answered, That now the joyful time was near at hand that Amphialus and she
should be united together, and should flourish with all happiness that could be
imagined; I beseech you do not flatter me, said Helena, such vain persuasions
will do no good, but make my fall the higher, and so more dangerous. Madam,
replied Clytifon, let me beg the favor of you to believe me, and if I have
told you any falsehood, say I was never trusty to my Friend, and you cannot
punish me more to my vexation: but here is a Letter from my Lord to Amphialus,
that will verify me of the truth: Upon this Helena was brought to believe that
felicity to her, that she so long has wished for, and caused vermilion Red to
die her cheeks in preparation to receive their welcome Guest: and then her
earnestness grew impatient of deferrings, she longing to pry into Phyloclea's
letters, therefore sealing up her lips from further questions, she directed
Clytifon to Amphialus, and then she left him.

Amphialus in the mean time, whose bowels earned for Clytifon's return,
listened to all whisperings. So then he seeing the Attendants so busy in their
private discourses, he enquired whether Clytifon was come? just as he entered
his presence. Then after due civilities passed between them, Clytifon delivered
up his charge to Amphialus, who used many ceremonies before he would presume to
touch it; but when he was better advised, he joyfully embraced it, and by
degrees he intruded upon it, for first he brake the seal, and then he made his
protestation.

Now I do vow and promise before Cupid, whose dart has so cruelly wounded me,
and before Venus, to whose beauty I am so much a slave, never in the least to
resist Philoclea's lines; but I will show my duty to her by my willingness to
obey her pleasure. And you my Lord Clytifon, with this Noble company are
witnesses of this my Protestation.

Thus concluded he his solemn vow, and then he carefully unfolded the treasure
of his life, with a belief that every fold drew him nearer than other to
Paradise: and when he read it, the curiousest eye could not epsy the least
motion of discontent to reside in him; but he rather seemed as a Conqueror
that had suddenly surprised unlookt-for comfort, which much conduced to the joy
of the beholders. And when he had fully delighted his eyes with Philoclea's
gracious lines, he changed his note from admiring her perfections, to blazon
his now amorous Phrases of Helena's worth; and then the sweet behavior of
Helena to him in his calamity extended to his memory, which made him
extremely wonder at the hidden virtues of Philoclea's letters, for working so
great a cure in his understanding: therefore now assuring himself the Gods had
destined Helena to be his Spouse, in pursuance of their pleasure, and of his
own happiness, he sent to her in an humble manner to entreat her company.
Which Message, poor Queen, she heard as joyfully, as she could have done, had
Mercury posted from Heaven to bring her tidings of her transporting thither:
but yet trembling possessed her delicate body, and would not leave her, before
she had presented her self to Amphialus; who taking her by the white, yet
shaking, hand, gratefully thanked her for her many favors: and then telling
her he should study a requital, besought her to hear the letter that his Cousin
Philoclea had honored him with. But Helena answered with blushes, whilst he
read the letter, thus,

For her highly-esteemed Cousin, the Lord AMPHIALUS.
Worthy Cousin,
MIght I partake with the Gods in their interest in you, I would not be kept in
such ignorance and amazement, as I am at this present; but I would thoroughly
search what just occasions I have ever given you, to hazard your person with
such sad apprehensions of my anger, as I hear without speedy remedy will
deprive you of all future felicity. But laying by all that ambitious thought,
in earnest, Cousin, I must needs tell you, how without comparison it troubles
me, that you should think me so severe and unnatural, to torment you with a
second death, for that fault, which you have by so many evident signs
manifested your self to be innocent of, and if you had been guilty as you are
not, I should rather choose to mitigate your crime, than any way to heighten
it. But yet I will not profusely let slip that advantage, which you have so
freely left to my discretion, but will use it as an ornament to make you
happy, yet not in way of authority, but as a Petitioner I humbly crave of you
not to refuse Beauty and Honor when it is so virtuously presented to you by
the famous Queen Helena, whose love-lines surpasses all others.

Therefore if you esteem of me, prove it by entirely loving of her, who, I am
sure, will endow you with all such blessings as may enrich your contentment.
And now with full satisfaction, that you will grant me my request, I close up
these abrupt lines, and am immoveably,

Your faithful Cousin and Servant, PHILOCLEA.


Here the sweet Philoclea ended, and Amphialus with a low congee began to speak
to Helena in this manner: Fair Queen, what excuse I shall make for my long
incivilitie to your singular self, I know not, nor can I imagine with what
confidence to beg of you the perfecting of these compassionate lines; therefore
for pity sake accept of my cast-down eyes for my Soliciters, and let your
goodness plead for my backwardness in submitting to that duty of love to you,
when the greatest Princes tremble at your sight, and worship you as their
Image. Madam, suffer your Answer may be pitiful, since I acknowledge mine
error.

My Lord, replied Helena, there is no cause given here to induce you to renew
your grief, if my yielding my self to your noble disposal may be valued as a
sufficient satisfactory Argument to ease you, that has ever been my endeavor
in all virtuous ways to compass.

The more may be imputed to my unworthiness, answered Amphialus; now I am
surprised with shame in having so dull an apprehension, such a stony heart to
refuse so rare a Person as your divine self; but the Gods are just, for now the
wheel of Fortune is turned, and if you please to revenge your wrong upon me the
instrument, you cannot stab me with a sharper spear, than your denial.

Why, said Helena, do you force me to repeat my real affections to you so
often? is it your jealousy of my constancy? if it be that, with thanks to my
Goddess Diana, I avouch, that I never harbored the least unchaste thought to
scandalize or blemish my purity.

Now I may clallenge you, replied Amphialus, for searching out new sorrows to
your self; but pardon me dear Madam, for my rash presumption with chiding you
for one fault, when I my self am burdened with so many, and believe me, my
highest ambition is to hear your heavenly voice sound out the Harmony of your
love within mine ears; and when you vouchsafe me that, none can parallel with me
in happiness.

Thus they passed away the day with these, and afterward more fond
expressions; and amongst them they concluded to make a journey into Arcadia,
and for the greater Triumph, to celebrat their nuptials with the other renowned
Princes, now in the height of their superfluous complements, the news of the
happy success of Philoclea's Letter had so spread about, that such abundance of
the City flocked to the Palace to see Amphialus, that Helena was forced to
command the Officers, not to let any have admission, until some important
business, they were to consult upon, might be accomplished; and then she
promised free Passage to all: This caused every one to retire to their houses,
and Helena and Amphialus after a while spared some time to advise with Clytifon
to consider of the probablest way for them to go into Arcadia; the people of
Corinth being in great expectation of their solemnizing the wedding there.

Then Clytifon counseled them on this manner. The surest way that I can think
on is, to lay open your real intentions to the Peers of your Land, that by
degrees, it may be published to the Vulgar; also declare that you will not
yield to any thing that may prove to their prejudice; but if they will not
receive that as satisfactory, but argue that it is a disparagement for their
Country to suffer their Princess to depart from thence, and be transported into
another, to have her marriage finished; you may easily prevent their future
dislike of that particular; since the dishonor of your Country concerns you
most; and in all reason you should have the most especial care to preserve it;
you may please them with telling them, you do intend to make your Kingdom
famous by the splendour of those Princes that now reside in Arcadia; and then
you will solemnize your wedding with the same points that you use when you are
there: and I am persuaded their dissentions will be quieted.

The Counsel of Clytifon was no way rejected, but very well esteemed by the
Royal lovers, who showed their thankfulness by the large Theams they made of
their judgments to him: and then telling him, that they must still be more
obliged to him, they entreated him to let his return to Arcadia be a little
sooner than theirs, to give the Princely family intelligence of their following
after; because they were yet in their private lodge, it would not be commodious
for them to come unto them unawares. Clytifon replied, That none should do that
Service but himself; then Amphialus told him it was high time for him to make
good his words, for Queen Helena, and his own intention was to be at Matenia
suddenly; thus after a few more speeches passed, Clytifon took his leave, and
dispatched away with all expedition.

In the mean time Helena gallantly played her game; for at the immediate time
of Clytifon's departure from Corinth, she proclaimed free Liberty for her
Subjects access unto her: then Amphialus and she being arrayed in glorious
Apparel, removed from their withdrawing Rooms into the Presence, and there
seated themselves in the Throne: their Nobles coming to them in their ranks,
and kissing both their hands, rendered in all lowly manner their joy for their
Queens careful choice, in making so brave a Prince their high Lord. Then
Helena declared her mind to them as Clytifon advised her, which at first
startled them, but she argued in her own defense so wisely, that she quickly
confuted and pacified those disturbers. But after them came Knights, Gentlemen,
Citizens, in such abundance, that they confined the Princess to their patience
for a Week together. Besides, the Country Peasants, and all sorts of
Mechanics, that with admiration pressed to gaze upon them. But when their
tedious task was over, they spent some time in pleasing their fancies with the
contrivance of stately curiosities, for the honor of their Nuptials. Amphialus
and Helena concurring so well together, that nothing was commended by the one,
but instantly it was highly approved of and valued by the other. Which
combining of these, was a rare example for the under-workmen, they endeavoring
to follow their Superiors Rule, delighting in these fellows judgments, did to
the lovers joy, unexpectedly finish their Art.

Then all accommodations being prepared in a readiness, they departed from
Corinth, their pomp being thus ordered, Three Chariots drawn by six horses
apiece, came whirling to the gate, the first was for six Noble men being of
Amphialus his Bedchamber. That Chariot was lined with green Figerd-velvet,
richly fringed; signifying the Princes loves. The Horses were black; to
manifest their mourning for being so long exiled from their loves. The next
Chariot was lined with white Satin, embroidered with gold, that was to witness
their innocence, their love being virtuous: in that went six Ladies,
attendants upon Helena. The third and last was for Helena and Amphialus, that
was lined with blue, embroidered with Pearls and precious Stones, the Horses
wore plumes of Feathers; the Coachman, Postilian, and six Footmens liveries
were blew, as an Emblem of their constancy, and embroidered as the Chariot
was. On this triumphant manner they went to Arcadia, besides an innumerable
company of Coaches and Hors-men that belonged to the Court; which keeping on a
moderate pace, in short time fafely set footing there: and the flying report,
that would not be stoped for any man's pleasure, quickly gave notice to the
Princes of Helena's and Amphialus being come.

But they had before removed to their Palace, being in perpetual expectation of
their company: and to show how glad they were to enjoy it, Musidorus and
Pamela, with Pyrocles, going altogether in a Coach, went out a good distance
from the City to meet them: which they could hardly compass to do, by reason
of the multitudes that went to see that magnificent Sight; until they had
appointed Officers to beat a Lane: so that at last they made a narrow passage.
It was an incomparable Sight to see Helena and Amphialus greet Philoclea? what
low congies they made to her, as if she had been their Goddess! whilst she
courteously reverenced them again. Then Helena and she stood admiring one
another Beauty, till Amphialus had saluted the other Princes, and yet
returned soon enough to break their silence. Ladies, said he, there is no
occasion given to stir up sadness in Rebellion against mirth and happiness, for
here we may see Love coupled together, when we have known by experiments it to
have been dispersed by many strange accidents. And most sweet Princess
Philoclea, by your gracious lines I am preserved from perpetual misery, to
enjoy a Crown endowed with all felicity. But yet, Madam, all that I can do or
say in requital, is to let you know that I am and ever shall be, your humble
Servant.

I beseech you Cousin, replied Philoclea, do not your self that injury, to
confess you were thrust forward to your contentment. And seriously, when I
obtained a sight of this rare Queen, I was astonished at your former
backwardness. But since Cupid did play his part so cunningly as to make you
blind, I am extreme glad that I could be an instrument worthy to recover your
decayed eyes and languishing spirits; and I am beholding to your goondess in
obeying my request. Here Philoclea ended; and Amphialus was furnished with a
Reply.

When Musidorus brought in Pamela to Helena, whom she civily welcomed to
Arcadia; but upon Amphialus she looked aloft, as not deserving to be regarded
by her. Which Musidorus perceiving, he secretly persuaded her to look
favorably upon him. Whose advice was received by her as a command that she
durst not withstand. So she altering her disdainfulness into cheerfulness, bent
her discourse to Amphialus, that at last they grew excellent company for one
another, and so continued; till their thoughts were taken up with amazement at
sight of Clytifon, who came hallowing to them; and with signs pointed to them
to have into their Chariots. But they not understanding his meaning, delayed
their speed, till he came nearer, and certified them that there was a Messenger
come from Plangus to Evarchus, but he would not be persuaded to deliver his
business, before Musidorus and Pyrocles were present.

This news struck Pamela and Philoclea into an extremity of sadness; for then
Plangus story was renewed into their memory, which made them suspect it was
some envious errand to separate their affections; but their beloved Princes
used all persuasions that might comfort them, and then led them to Amphialus
Chariot, that being the largest, and in that regard the most convenient; they
being too full of perplexity to mind matters of State, went altogether, that
they might the better pass away the time with company.

Then in a distracted manner they went to Matenea, and quietly passed through
the Streets till they came to the Palace, where they had much ado to enter, by
reason of the throng that was there making enquiries after the Armenian
Messenger; yet at last the Princess obtained entrance; where Helena and
Amphialus were with all respect welcomed by Basilius and Genecea: and when many
Complements were consummate, they all went to the Presence, where Evarchus and
the Messenger were. Then Evarchus told them there was a business of consequence
to discover, and he wished them to give audience to it; Then all noise being
appeased; the Messenger turning to Evarchus, said these following words.

Most renowned King; Prince Plangus, General of your forces in Armenia, has
sent me to recount unto your Majesty the truth of his proceedings since his
departure from Macedon; which if your Majesty please to hear, I shall in a
little time bring it about to his present Condition. Know then, Gracious Sir,
Prince Plangus had hardly set footing in the Armenian Land, before he was
surprised by the unfortunate News of his Lady Erona's being delivered up into
the power of her Tyrannical enemies. You may imagine what discouragement this
was to him at his first entrance, to be almost deprived of his chiefest
victory: but yet he hid his grief, showing his undaunted spirit to his Army;
he doubled their march, and at length overtook the Forces of the deceitful
Plaxirtus, and with loss of a few men, he so disordered them, that he and all
his Army marched through the midst of our Adversaries, whilst they like
frighted men stood gazing on us; yet we not altogether trusting to our
safeties, to their amazement, placed a a reasonable company in Ambush to hold
them play, if they should venture to fall on us; and we having Intelligence
that Plaxirtus himself was but a mile before us, attended by a small Guard,
because of his Confidence in his forces that were behind him, pursued him: and
he not doubting but that we were of his confederacy, turned back his Horse,
and staid that we might overtake him, thinking thereby to do us a favor: but
Prince Plangus not having patience to see him so well pleased, galloped toward
him; which Plaxirtus seeing, and knowing his own guilt, began to distrust that
then he should receive a due reward; and then he cried out, Are we friends? Are
we friends? but Prince Plangus riding to him, clasped him about the wast, and
gallantly threw him off his horse, and then answered him, That he should be
always his friend to do him such courtesies as they were; which the Guard
hearing, they showed us that they were expert in running, though not in
fighting, for in a moment they were all fled away: then Prince Plangus having
his greatest Adversary at his feet, and studying the most convenient way to
fulfill your Majesty's desire, to preserve him alive, till he might be more
openly put to death: just than a Trumpeter came to him from Artaxia, with a
paper in his hand, which he delivered to Plaxitus, wherein Artaxia declared,
That her Cousin Plangus, whom she entertained civilly in her Court, was risen in
Arms against her, and had brought Foreigners to invade her Land; and that he
had not only forgotten her former kindness to him, but also broken the laws of
Nature, she being his near kinswoman; and not only with her, but also with her
dear and lawful Husband Plaxirtus, whom he had taken and made a Prisoner; and
she further declared, That whatsoever cruelty be inflicted upon Plaxirtus, she
would do the like, or worse to Erona. And if he did not quickly send her a
satisfactorie Answer, she would begin with Erona first, and make her endure the
greatest torments that she could possibly, and live.

This put Prince Plangus into a world of confused cogitations? for very
unwilling he was to let go unrevenged the bloody contriver of these Princes
supposed murder: and if he did not in some degree yield to that, then this
beloved Lady Erona must suffer those intolerable tortures. But when he was in
the height of passion, to think that from a victor he must become Slave, we
might perceive a Traveller guided to us by some of the Soldiers. At that sight
Prince Plangus entreated the Trumpeter to stay till he had known the meaning of
the strangers coming. He was your happy Messenger, O King, that delivered the
Queen Erona from misery. He it was that brought the joyful news of the safety
of these famous Princes to perplexed Prince Plangus. And that so well revived
him, that after he had worshipped Apollo for such an unlookt for blessing, he
cheerfully dispatched away the Trumpeter with his answer, that now the
Treachery of Plaxirtus was brought to naught, for Pyrocles and Musidorus were
miraculously preserved, and lived to be examples of virtue: and if she would
stand to the former Articles, Plaxirtus should be set at liberty, now the
renowned Princes want your assistance in defense of the Lady Erona, whose life
is now in your power; for by me Plaxirtus an Anaxius challenge you to answer
them in a Combat for the distressed Queen, and if you prove victorious over
them, the same day Erona shall be freed from her imprisonment: but if the
contrary side prevail, at that time Erona must be put to death. These are the
Articles before agreed upon, and now the second time resolved on. If you will
hazard your Persons in the Quarrel, the whole Kingdom of Armenia being in
expectation of your valor, that may end the differences.

Thus the Messenger concluded, and Pyrocles and Musidorus sent him back to
Armenia, with promise of their speedy following after him. It would have made
a Rock, had it been by, burst out in tears in reference to the company. And
had Narcissus been never ravished with his own conceited beauty, yet had he
been there, he would have wept into fountains, to see the best of Princes
turmoiled in waves of affections: And Fortune deluding them, persuaded them
they were near refreshment, when they were environed with their chiefest
calamities. Here you might see Pamela with her Arms wreathed about Musidorus,
as if she intended there should be her rest, till he had granted her request,
and her cast-down eyes and weepings that bedewed her pure cheeks did witness
her abundant sorrow. But at last, wiping them away, she contested with
Musidorus and her self on this manner:

Dear Musidorus, do not part from her to whom you have so often plighted your
faith. If you love me, as you vow you do, why will you abandon my presence? oh
do not break my heart with your inconstancy, nor stain your other virtues with
such a crime, as never can be washed away; therefore stay, or else confute me
with your reason, and then I shall hate my passion, and contemn my self, for
valuing my interest in your affections above the main treasure, so accounted by
the heavenly and earthly society, in keeping an honorable and unblemished
reputation; which if you can do, and yet leave me, I will never show my self
such a ridiculous lover as to be your hinderance. My thrice dearer than my
self, replied Musidorus, do not afflict me with the word Inconstancy; if I
were guilty, then might you justly tax me with it. But far be the thought of
infidelity from me: and believe me Lady, Plaxirtus cannot pierce his sword
deeper into my heart, than these sharp words, which proceeded from your sweet
lips have done. But for my Combat in Armenia, that is so necessary, that none
can decide the Quarrel, unless it be my Cousin Pyrocles and my self, by reason
of Artaxia and Plaxirtus thirsting for our lives, they will never suffer Erona
to be released from prison, before they have vented their malice upon us, in as
great a measure as their ability can give them leave. And besides, should I
refuse, it would redound so extremely upon my renown, that every one would be
ready to object, that since a Woman prevailed over me, I am directly
cowardized. And now, dear Lady, I dare presume you will rather let me venture
my life in defense of so just a cause, than to let it go unrevenged to my
deserved infamy.

Poor Pamela all this while seemed like one in a trance, not having power to
contradict Musidorus in his pleadings, nor yet able to submit her yielding to
them; but made her tears and sighs her advocates, when he with all persuasions
sought to comfort her. And in the mean time the sweet Philoclea, who lay
grovelling at her Pyrocles feet, and would not be removed, expressed her grief
in these mournful complaints.

Ah me! said she, that I should be born under such an unfortunate Planet of
unhappie events that daily afflict me! tell me, my Pyrocles the cause that
makes you so willingly hazard your person in such dangerous attempts? if you
can tax me with any errors, to my self unknown, that might work your
displeasure, O tell me what they are that I may mend, and study some easier
waw to punish me than by your intended death. But if nothing else may reconcile
me to you, yet show your clemency, and let your own blessed hand first end my
misery.

Here she stopped, and perceiving Pyrocles to be in as amazed condition as she
her self was, not knowing what to do or say to appease her sorrow, she
premeditated, that now or never was her time to keep him with her in safety,
and then she suddenly arose from the ground, and standing a while in great
devotion, at last she cried out;

Now am I ready to receive thy harmless Spear into my heart, now show thy love
and pity to me quickly, and preserve me not alive to endure such terror as
cannot be charmed away, unless you will promise me the enjoyment of your
company. But Pyrocles started up, and catching her in his arms, adviced her
not to give way to sorrow, the hater of Beauty, to rule over her; nor yet to
mistrust she ever offended him, but that she was more precious to him than the
world could be; and that he made no question but that he should return again
from Armenia to enjoy her with peace and happiness.

With these and many more such expressions, he strived to cheer her up. But she
still kept on bewailing her ill fortune, and would not be pacified: until
Musidorus came to her and entreated her to go to her Sister Pemela, and to show
her discretion by moderating her passion, that she might be a motive to reduce
her Sister to follow her example, who now lay weltering in her tears. These
tidings persuaded her to defer her own cares, that she might in some measure
work a cure in her sister, whom she valued, next to her Pyrocles, above all the
world. And then she would not delay the time with bemoaning herself, but
hastily went her way supported by the two illustrious branches of the forest,
Pyrocles and Musidorus.

But as she went there represented to her view the two ancient Kings, Evarchus
and Basilius walking to and fro like shadows, and looked as they would have
done, had one come out of the Grave to warn them to prepare themselves in short
time to come to them. This doleful sight had like to have prevailed over her,
and made her fall into a Relapse of passion; but the rememberance of the task
she was going about suppressed those vapors. And being come withi the sight of
Pamela, whose deluge was stayed a little to pause, that it might issue more
freshly and eagerly at Philocleas presence) whom as soon as she espied, she
perceived her hidden discontent, and rebuked one this manner.

Sister, think not your dissembling smiles can entise me to follow your
example, for I can as perfectly see through you into your grieved heart, as if
you were transparent, and know your pain that now you endeavor to conceal. Oh!
leave these counterfeits, and you will be a far more acceptable comforter unto
me.

Poor Philoclea could no longer withstand the batteries of Pamela, but
confessed her forced mirth, and then instead of asswaging, they augmented one
another sorrows with such lamentable moans, that Pyrocles and Musidorus were
forced to give way to Sighs, till their thoughts were surprised by the coming
of Clytifon, who brought them word, that the two Kings stayed at the door to
speak with them. Then they softly went out of the Chamber, and were received by
Basileus and Evarchus, who told them, that since it stood so much upon their
Honors to endeavor to redeem that distressed Lady, they advised them not to
linger in the performance of it, for nothing was in their way to cause any
delay, and the sooner they went, the sooner by Apollo's assistance they might
return: To whose mercy they recommended them, and commanded them, that when
they had obtained a prosperous journey, and had vanquished their enemies, not
to be negligent in sending them word of it, that they might be sharers in their
joy as well as their sorrow. Then after both the Kings had made them happy
with their blessings, they sent them away.

Though first Pyrocles and Musidorus would needs take a review of their Ladies
Pavilion, but not of their Persons, out of consideration that it would but
double their affliction: and then reverencing the carpet on which they used to
tread, they took their leave of the desolate Chamber, and did resolve to travel
alone. Had not Kalodolus, Musidoru's faithful Servant, made a vow that no
occasions should persuade him to leave his master again; so that Musidorus,
seeing there was no remedy, yielded to his desires. Nor could Amphialus noble
heart well brook to stay behind, for oftentimes he entreated them that he might
go a second for them, or else a servant to them. But they answered him that he
could not do them better Service than to accompany his Cosins, and make much of
them in their absence: then, after they had accomplished some more Complements,
they parted, Amphialus to his charge, and the Princes committed themselves into
the hands of wavering Fortune. Who having already showed them her frowns, would
now pleasure them with her smiles, which first she discovered by conveying them
safely to Armenia, where they were wellcomed unanimosly by all, but especially
by Plangus, who could hardly confine his joy within the bounds of reason.

But the Princes being mindful of his business, desires Plangus to hasten their
Combat, because their Ladies were in a despairing condition of ever seeing them
again, and they assured him they did not fear to enter within the compass of
Plaxirtus, so long as it was by the public agreement, and not by secret
practices* Plangus certified them that all things were prepared for their
accommodation, and that they might, if they pleased, exercise their valor upon
their enemies the next morning. And that two Scaffolds were erected, the one
for Artaxia, she intending to be a Beholder, the other for Erona, who is to be
brought thither guarded as a Prisoner, and in her sight there is a Stake in
readiness to consume her, if they be overcome. This last he uttered in such
mournful expressions, that Pyrocles and Musidorus vowed to spend their hearts
blood, but that they would release and deliver Erona from the power of Artaxia.

And before they would refresh themselves with Plangus entertainments, they
dispatched a Trumpeter to Plexirtus and Anaxius to certify them, they were
come to answer their challenge, and had set apart the next morning for that
purpose: the Trumpeter soon returned with this reply, that the sooner it was,
the more advantageous it would prove to them, and they would not fail to meet
them at the place and time appointed. Thus they agreed upon the next morning;
and when the Prince had partaked of Plangus Supper, they yielded to sleep,
which forsook them not till the promised time was near at hand.

Early in the morning Plaxirtus and Anaxius puffed up with Pride; and not
questioning but that they should be Conquerours, put on their Armor, and
mounting their steeds, galloped to the List. And Artaxia, thinking to vent her
spleen with gazing at the overthrow of the Princes, came to the Scaffold
attired in all her costly and glorious apparel, and with as great a Train as
she would have had, were she to have been spectator of her Husbands Coronation,
King of Armenia.

Within awhile was Erona brought guarded by a Band of Soldiers to her
Scaffold, where she might see the end of her misery by the Fire, or otherwise
by Pyrocles and Musidorus victory: but she, being wearied out of her life by
sundry afflictions, looked as gladly upon the fiery Stake, as she did upon her
famous Champions who were then entered the list, and waving their swords about
their heads; Pyrocles encountered Anaxius and Musidorus Plaxirtus. Then entered
they into so fierce a fight, that it goes beyond my memory to declare all the
passages thereof: but both Parties showed such magnanimity of Courage, that for
a long time none could discern who should be victors; Till at length Musidorus
gave a fatal thrust to Plaxirtus, who being before faint with loss of blood,
fell from his Steed, and in the fall clasht his Armor in pieces; and then his
Steed, for joy that he was eased of such a wicked burden, pranced over his
disgraced master, and not suffering him to die such an honorable death as by
Musidorus Sword, trampled out his guts, while Plaxirtus, with curses in his
mouth, ended his hateful life.

Then Pirocles redoubled his blows so eagerly upon Anaxius, that he could no
longer withstand them, but gnashing his teeth for anger, he fell at Pyrocles
feet and died. Thus pride and Treachery received their just reward.

But then Artaxia's glory was turned into mourning, and her rich attire into,
rags as soon as she perceived Plaxirtus wounded, his blood gushing out, his
Horse treading on him, and he himself dying with bitter groans and frantic
speeches, which he breathed out at his last moment for fear of further
torments: she tare off her hair, and rent her cloths in so enraged a manner,
that she drew all eyes from the corpse in wonder and amasement on her. Nor could
any thing regulate her fury, but she violently run down to the corpse, and
there breathed out her complaints.

In which time Plangus called his Soldiers together, and went up to the other
scaffold to release Erona; though at first he was forced to make a way with his
sword, the Guard resolving not to surrender her, till they had received a
further command from Artaxia: but Plangus made them repent their strictness,
and ask Erona pardon for it. And after he was revived with a warm kiss from her
hand, he led her down to Pyrocles and Musidorus: Who having forgot the former
injuries Artaxia had done them, courteously persuaded her not to bemoan him,
whose memory was reproachful to all the world, for valuing his one
deceitfulness above virtue; and then they told her, it would be more for her
renown, to solemnize for him such obsequies as are seeming for a Prince, he
being of the race, although he learned not to follow their example; and then to
proclaim her sorrow for joining with him in his mischief. Many more speeches
they used to her, some to abate her grief, and others to assuage her malice;
but at first she would listen to none; yet afterward being better advised, she
sent for two magnificent Hearses, and before she would suffer Plaxirtus his
corpse to be laid in, she pronounced her resolution on this manner:

Since it has pleased Apollo, who has the Government of all things on earth,
to suffer Plaxirtus to fall by your prowess, I do here by this dead body vow
to you, to end my life in Widowhood. And you Cousin Plangus, whom I have so
infinitely wronged with this fair Lady Erona, to you I do resign up the
Authority of my Kingdom, being, after my decease, the lawful Successor. I
shall desire only a competencie to keep me from famishment: but if these your
valiant Champions will have you go to Arcadia, to finish your Marriage there,
in that time I will be your trusty Deputy, to order your affairs here in
Armenia, until you return from thence. Then she commanded the corpse to be laid
in the Hearse, and taking leave of the Royal company, she went along with it.

Now the Princes had time to take notice of Erona's sadness. And Plangus, who
had been all this time courting her to be his Mistress, could obtain no favor
from her, but far-fetcht sighs, and now and then Crystal drops distilling from
their fountains. These apparent signs of her disconsolate mind, grounded a
great deal of cares in the hearts of the Princes, who bending all their
endeavors to insinuate Plangus into her affections, they first sifted her with
these Questions; Whether her being preserved from the cruelty of Plaxirtus,
was the cause of her coffeehouse? or whether, she grieved for her
deliverance? and therefore hated them for fighting in her defense? These
Questions put Erona into such Quondaries, that she could not, for a while,
determine what to answer. But at last she pitched upon true sincerity, and
freely displayed her griefs to them, in these terms:

Do not, I beseech you, plead ignorance of that which is so palpable. Have you
not heard how they tortured my Husband Antifalus to death? why then do you
renew it in my memory? which might have been prevented if you, Prince Plangus,
had showed your realitie to me, as you protested you would by Policy set him
at liberty, but all was neglected and Antifalus was barbarously murdered, and
yet you are not ashamed to presume upon my weakness, in pretending you are my
Servant, that you may the second time deceive me. Longer she would have chidden
Plangus; but that he falling down humbly begged she would have consideration
upon him, and hear him. Then with silence she admitted him, and he declared,
how that according to his promise made to her Sacred self, he did prosecute so
faithfully, that he brought all things to a readiness, and might have been
perfected, but that the timorous Antifalus discovered the whole Plot the same
night it was to be put in execution. And this without any scruple, he would
take his oath was true. Erona considered very much of this saying of Plangus:
and Pyrocles and Musidorus watching their opportunity, just as she was
replying, interrupted her, and told her they were confident she might give
credit to what Plangus had spoken; and if she durst rely upon their advice,
they would recommend him to her for her Husband, as soon as the greatest
Monarch in the world. These Princes seconding Plangus in his excuses, mitigated
Erona's pensivenes, so that cheerfully she yielded her self to be at Pyrocles
and Musidorus disposing: for, said she, I am bound by so many Obligations to
you, that I cannot suffer my requital to be a refusal. Only I desire that
Prince Plangus may approve the truth of his words with an Oath, as he himself
has propounded. Which he willingly did upon that condition, and she accepted
of him as her betrothed Husband. And Cupid by degrees so skillfully drew her
affection to him, that she was as firmly Planguses, as ever she was Antifaluses
to the abundant joy of all their friends.

Now Pyrocles and Musidorus employments being in every particular accomplished
as well as could be wished, They remembering the charge of Evarchus to them;
together with the cares of their sorrowful Ladies, they presently sent a Post
to Arcadia to signify the news of their safety: but yet there remained the
care of dispatching their Army into their native Country Macedon. And as they
were conferring which way they might compass that matter of such consequence
quickly, Kalodolus being at the counsel put in his verdict, which was liked
very well, and instantly put in practice; for he having a special friend in
whom he very much confided, he advised that he might be trusted to be General
in Plangus room, that they might orderly go home, and after they were paid
their due, to dismiss them and let them go to their own Houses.

When all this was performed: they commanded all conveniences to be prepared
for their own accommodation about their return to Arcadia; but for curiosities
they would not stay for them, but limited a day for their departure. In which
time Erona employed her inventions about a Present for Pamela and Philoclea,
which she was very ambitious of, they being the mistresses of Musidorus and
Pyrocles, to whom she acknowledged her self infinitely engaged; and without
delayance, she set all her Maids to work the Story of their love, from the
fountain to the happy conclusion: which by her busy fancy she shadowed so
artificially, that when it was perfected, and she had showed it to the Princes,
they vowed that had they not known by experience those passages to have been
gone and past, they should have believed they were then in acting in that piece
of workmanship.

Now all the work was ended, their necessaries were in a readiness, fair and
temperate weather bespake their fuller happiness. All these so well concurring,
enticed the Princes to begin their journey. And Fortune, dealing favorably,
conducted them safely and speedily to the Arcadian Court. Where they were
received with such joy by their Consorts, and Parents especially, and by all in
general, as it would make two large a story to recount all their discourses,
with their affectionate expressions that passed between the Royal lovers.
Passing by all other, give me leave to tell you, it was a pretty sight to see
the four Ladies, Pamela and Philoclea, with Helena and Erona, admiring one
another perfections, all of them having the worst opinions of themselves, and
the better of their neighbors. Therefore to decide the controversy, Philoclea
entreated her Pyrocles, to make a motion to Musidoru's, Plangus, and Amphialus
to spend their judgments upon them. Pyrocles immediately obeyed her; but
esteemed best of their own mistresses.

Pyrocles liked Philoclea best, became her sparkling eyes, pure complexion,
and sweet features were crowned with such modest courtesy, that she ravished
all her Beholders, and persuaded them they were in Paradise, when they were in
her heavenly Angel-like company, Earth not affording her fellow.

Musidorus avouched, his fair Pamela was always clad with such a Majesty, as
bespake her a Queen in spite of the Destines; yet that Majesty was so well
composed with Humility, that it seemed but an out case to a more excellent
inward virtue.

Then came Plangu's turn, who said that in his judgment, Erona deserved to be
extolled in the highest measure, for though her splendour was something darkened
by her sadness and sufferings, yet under that veil her brightness did appear to
shoot forth beams of goodness to every one that did approach her Presence.

Amphialus was last, who protested there could not be a lovelier creature than
Helena was, so adorned with all gifts of Nature, that he verily believed if she
had tempted Adonis, as Venus did, he could not in the least have denied her.
And he assured himself, that by the determination of the Gods, they being in
love with her themselves, Cupid had struck him blind, that in the mean time
they might pursue their love; but seeing she was resolved to accept of no other
but him, they for pity sake opened his eyes: and now he was amazed at his
former perverseness. This conceit of Amphialus made the Ladies exceeding
merry. Till Evarchus came to them and spoke thus:

Young Princes, I came now to remember you how often you have been by several
accidents, frustrated of your desired Felicity: you see a little blast alters
your happiness into a world of sorrows. Therefore harken to my counsel, whose
gray hairs witness my better experience of the world than your green years. Do
not linger away the time in Courtship: that is as bad as to be carelessly rash.
Finish therefore the knot, that no crosses or calamities can unfinish, without
further deferrings.

This command of Evarchus, did not at all displease the four Bridegrooms.
Nothing hindered now but their agreeing about the day; and that made no long
disputation neither, for two days following happened to be Pamela's. Birthday,
and that they concluded should be the Bridalday.

Now the night before these happy Nuptials, Erona presented Pamela and
Phyloclea with her rare piece of work, which they received with thanks and
admiration; and for the honor of Erona (she being the inventor of it) they
caused it to be hung up by the Image of Cupid in the Temple, and after passed
the night in quietness.

Early in the morning the Sun shot forth his glorious beams, and awakened the
lovers. But when they were up, he hid himself a while within the waterie
clouds, weeping that they were brighter Suns than he: yet when they were
gaurded with their nuptial Robes, he dispersed the clouds again, and cleared
his eyes, that he might with envy gaze upon their luster; and the Brides
without disdain yielded their beauties to his perusal. When the Middle-day had
almost run his course to the Afternoon, the four Bride-grooms imitating one
another in their Apparel, were all in gray cloth embroydered with gold, richly
clad, yet not fantastic; in their left hands they held their swords, but in
their right their Brides.

First went Musidorus leading his fair Princess Pamela, whose comely behavior
and sweet sympathy, manifested her joy, that then Musidorus and she should be
so united to live and die together. Upon her head she bare an imperial Diadem,
which agreed comparatively to her stately mind. Her Garments were cloth of
Tissue, that in a careless fashion hanged loose about her. And round her Neck
she wore a Chain of Orient Pearl. Upon her Alabaster shoulders a blue Scarf was
cast, that being whirled sometimes with the wind, did seem to blow her to
Hymen's Temple. Six virgin Nimphs attired in White attended on her. The two
foremost perfumed the air as they went with their odiferous sweets; but that
was superfluous, for Pamela's breath left a far more fragrant scent than the
artificial curiosities could do; next to them followed two other Virgins with
Holie-water in their hands, which they sprinkled as they went, to purify all
sinful vapors; but that also was needless, for no harm durst come near the
Virtuous Pamela, whose looks could charm even wicked Fiends: then the two last
followed Pamela, bearing up her train. Thus was she guarded to the Temple with
her beloved Musidorus; and after them went Pyrocles and Philoclea, Plangus and
his Erona, and Amphialus with his Helena, all in the same order as Musidorus
and Pamela: then the Priest united their hands, and as their hands, so their
hearts together; and the former cruelty of Fortune was ever after turned into
pity.

The Temple where these Nuptial Rites were thus celebrated, was situate in a
garden, or rather a Paradise for its delightfulness; the murmuring of the
waters that flowed from a Fonntain at first entrance dividing, themselves into
four streams, seeming to threaten, and yet enticing the comers to venture
further; the Fountains bedecked with the Images of Diana and her Maids, the
Goddess figured with an austere countenance, pointing to the lust-full Venus,
whose Statue at a little distance stood, as she with lacivious actions
endeavored to entrap the modest Boy Adonis, but Hymen on the other side
disputes, those whom his Priests unite, cannot be styled Venu's, but Diana's.
The perfumed flowers grew so thick in the direct way to the Temple, that they
served for Carpets to consecrate the Mortals feet before they approached into
it: the Temple was built of Marble; the outsides adorned with Portratures of
the Gods. Fortune was seated at the frontier of it, which at the least motion
of the beholder, represented a several gesture. And all the Gods, in their
degrees, sat presidents to the observers.

The inside was not so uniform as artificial, it winding into several circles
in the passage to the sacred place: and all the way were emblems in Marble, of
the calamities of Lovers before they can be set in Hymen's Temple; many of them
representing the Princes sufferings. The middle of the Temple is not so
gorgeous as decent, where there met with the Princes, some of Hymen's Officers
attired in white robes trailing on the ground. These presented the Bride-grooms
with Swords and Balances, and their Brides with Laurel; and when they had here
sounded a sweet harmony to Hymen, they went back from the Temple to the Court.

Where you may conjecture with what joy they were received by Evarchus,
Basilius, and Genecia, they all pouring out their blessings upon them. Then
passed they away the remainder of the day with all sorts of Music, Dancing,
and other varieties of mirth.

Whilst a famous Mask was presenting in the greatest glory to the view of the
Princes, and an innumerable company of noble Personages: Mopsa, sole heir to
Damatas, who was by Basilius favor, the Princess Pamela's Governor, when she
resided in the Lodge, went to Philoclea, and wrying her neck one way and her
mouth another, she squeazed out these ensuing words. Fair Princess, I intend
not to forget the promise you made me, when I told you a part of a curious
tale, how you assured me your Weding Gown, if I would afford to finish my
Story on that welcome day: but now the greatest part of the day is run away,
and you are raised so high on your tip-toes, that you do not vouchsafe me to be
in your books, but choose rather to gaze upon these strange sights, than to
remember me, or your Gown. The sweet Philoclea could not forbear blushing to
hear Mopsa reprove her so sharply; but to make her silent for the present, she
renewed her promise, and Mopsa very impatiently stayed out the vanishing of
their Scenes; which when Philoclea perceived, she smilingly led Mopsa by her
hand into the midst of the Royal company, where she left her to exercise her
discretion; and withdrawing at a distance from her, she discovered to her
Paramour Pyrocles, Mopsa's ambition, who immediately caused all noises to be
hushed, that he might with the greater attention hearken to Mopsa, and observe
all her actions though never so absurd. But Mopsa vallued not the laughter of
her beholders, her little apprehension had already seized on Philoclea's
glittering Gown, and she imagined it hung upon her mothie Karkass; and in that
firm persuasion she stood looking upon her self like a Peacock, until Pyrocles
called to her, which made her skip, and rub her eyes before she could discern
her self to be yet in her rustie Feathers. Yet afterward, playing with her
hands, for the more grace; she brake forth into these ensuing words.

It seems best to my liking to rehearse the first part of my Story in brief,
that so ye may the better relish the Latter. There was a King, (the chiefest
man in all his Country) who had a pretty Daughter, who as she was sitting at
a window, a sprightly Knight came to her, and with his dilly Phrases won her
to be his own, and stealing out of her Fathers Castle, with many honey kisses,
he conjured her not to enquire after his name, for that the water-Nimphs would
then snatch him from her: howbeit one time, in a darksom wood, her teeth were
set so on edge, that she asked, and he presently with a piteous howling
vanished away. Then she, after she had endured such hardship as she never had
endured in all her lifetime, went back to one of her Ants, who gave her a Nutt,
charging her not to open it before she fell into extremity; from her, she went
to another Ant, and she gave her another Nut, counselling her (said Mopsa) in
the same words that her first Ant had done before her, and so sent her packing:
But she one day being as weary as my fathers black horse is, when he has rode
a good journey on him, sat her down upon a Mole-hil, and making huge complaints
for her mishaps, a grisly old woman came to her, commanding her to open one of
the Nuts; and she considering, that of a little meddling comes great ease,
broke it open, for nothing venture, nothing have, which Proverb she found
wondrous true; for within the shell she found a paper, which discovered that
her Knight was chained in an ugly hole under ground in the same wood where she
lost him. But one Swallow makes no summer; wherefore she cracked her other Nut,
from whence there flew out gold and silver in such abundance, that the old
Woman falling down upon her stumps, scrambled up her lap full, and yet left the
joyful maid her load: Need makes the old wife trot; nay, it made both the old
and young to trot, and to lug away their bags of money: and when they came to a
lane with twenty several paths, the old Woman took her leave of the Kings
dainty Daughter, bidding her lay down the money, and it should guide her to her
Knight: with that she laid it down, and the money tumbled the direct way before
her.

At this passage Mopsa conceiting that she saw Mammons treasure so near her,
opened her mouth, which was of a sufficient wideness, and wadled along as if
she had been practizing to catch flies there: which if she had, the prisoners
might have recreated their wings within their prison walls; they were so large.
The princely Society could not forbear simparing at Mopsa's ravishment, and
had burst out into a public mirth, had they not been surprised with a better
object.

Which at first view appeared to be the Goddess Flora and her Nymphs, their
addorning imitating hers, but when they drew near, they discerned their errors,
it being Urania, a fair Shepherdess, who might be very well taken for Flora;
for although it was impossible for her to excel the Goddess in beauty, yet
without controlement, in Pamela's and Philoclea's absence she might parallel the
most transcendent: on either side of this Urania, there walked the two
Shepherds, Strephon and Claius, with their eyes fixed on her in celestial
admiration: their countenances resembled despair more than hope, and
earnestness more than confidence: these addressed themselves unto the Princess,
leaving the pretty Sheperdess at a short distance with her companions, who in
Troops attended her; and prostrating themselves at their feet, they burst out
into bitter tears.

Musidorus, who was then raised to the height of temporal blessings, disdained
not to acknowledge them to have been the Founders of his happiness, repeating
in public, how they had preserved him from the dangers of the Seas: but Claius
and Strephon could not suborn their weepings, but continued weltring in their
tears, which astonished and struck a sadness into the least relenting spirits;
all being ignorant of the Accident, except Musidorus, who surmized the truth.

Now whilst they expected the issue, Mopsa laid hold on Philoclea, and with
many a vinegar look, besought her to hear out her Tale: and for fear she should
be deprived of her Gown, without depending on a reply, she pursued her Story
in these her accustomed expressions. Leading her, said Mopsa, to the very Caves
mouth, where her Knight vented a thousand grievous groans, then in her hearing,
she might then joyfully sing, fast bind, fast find, for there the Witches bound
him, and there his Sweetheart found him, where they pleasured one another with
their sugar-kisses; and after a good while, she unchained him, and then they
lovingly set them down and slept all night in the Cave, because haste makes
waste; but the next morning, she showed him her monstrous vast sums of money,
which so affrighted him, that he clinging his eyes fast together, was not able
to say, Both to a Goose hardly: yet at last she persuaded him, and he peeped
up, and waxed the merriest man upon earth when he had got himself free, and his
Mistress again with such store of Riches: for then the old woman, that had
advised the Kings Daughter to open her nuts, and to lay down the money,
appeared to him, and released him of his Bondage by Witchcraft, for ever after:
wherefore the Knight, and his own sweet darling went back to the Kings Court,
as jocundly as could be, and with some of their money they bought them a brave
Coach and Horses, just such as are in my fathers stable at home, and in such
pomp they went to the King their Father, who entertained them bravely,
pleasing them with delicate sights, as Puppet-plaies, and stately Fairs; and
their riches increased daily, and they lived gallantly, as long as they had a
jot of breath in their bodies.

Thus finished Mopsa her tedious Tale, which though it was very ridiculous, yet
wanted it not applauses from all the Auditors: and Philoclea in requital,
presented her with her Bridal Roabs, telling her, she deserved larger
encouragements to elevate her wit; and more speeches she used in Mopsa's
commendation, whose partial senses were subject to believe all such rare
realities; in which blind opinion I will leave her;

To return to the disconsolate Shepherds Claius and Strephon, who when they had
wept their passionate Fountains dry, they looked about with adoration upon the
pretty Urania, as the reviver of their languishing hopes, and Strephon
yielding to Claius the pre-eminence by reason of his years, he with great
reverence to Basilius with the Bride-grooms and Brides,

Thus spoke; Dread Sovereign, and most Illustrious Princes, we beseech you not
to reckon it among the number of misdemeanors, that we shadow the brightness of
this Nuptial day with our clowdie Fortunes, since our aim is to disperse our
envious mists, and to make it the more glorious by celebrating a Feast; and
though our triumph cannot amount to such splendour as the four great Monarchs
does, whose flourishing Dominions can only satisfy their gladness by their
Princes pomp; yet harbor the belief (pardon me if I say amiss) that our Bride
may equal yours in Beauty, though not in rich attire, and in noble virtues,
though not in Courtly accoutrements; her Soul, the Impartial Diadem of her
delicate Body, is certainly incomparable to all other of her sex, though
heavenly. This Mistress of perfections is Urania the Shepherdess, she it is
that causes my eyes to ebb and flow, my joints to tremble at her looks, and my
self to perish at her frowns; but I will not insist too much (upon your
Highness patience) on this Subject, her self is an evident witness of all, and
more than I have Charactered: and Gracious Sirs, as I am bound by all duty and
Allegiance to live under the servitude of my Lord Basilius, as well as under
his protection: so am I not confined from gratefulness to such as will obliege
me in this my prostrate condition, or in any extremity; for the Destinies have
allotted such cruel Fates to my Friend Claius and me, whose entire affections
are never to be severed, that we both are slaves to Urania's pierceing Eyes! Oh
we both are vassals to her devoted graces; yet so much do we esteem of our
unfeigned Friendship that we will rather abandon all happiness, than to cause a
discontent, or suspicion of our real wishes of one another prosperity; out of
which intention, we submit to be ruled by the judgment of you, renowned
Bridegrooms, whose prudence and justice is not to be swayed by any partiality;
to you it is that we do humbly petition, to distinguish which of us two may
best deserve to be admitted into Urania's spotless thoughts, as her lawful
Husband.

Claius had not ceased his suit so suddenly, but that Strephon interrupted him
thus abruptly:

Good Claius, bar the passage of thy tongue, and grant me liberty to speak and
ease my fierce torment: the reverence I bear to your age, and my sincerity to
your person, permitted you to disburden your fancy first, but not to deprive
me of the same privilege. Know then, most excellent Princes, that this
incomparable Urania, (O her virtues cannot be expressed by humane creatures!
for at the very mentioning of her name my tongue faltered, and my self condemns
my self for being too presumptuous, but yet this once we strive against her
powers that thus possesses me, and will not be persuaded from telling you that)
she is compounded so artificially, as she cannot be paralleld nor described;
for believe it, she is above the capacity of the most studious Philosopher:
and do not harbor, I beseech you, a prejudicial opinion of her, under the
notion of her entertaining two lovers at one instant, since it has been always
contrary to her chaste disposition, to accept of the least motion concerning a
married life; and for Platonic Courtiers, her heavenly modesty is a palpable
witness of her innocence. Besides the many dolorous hours that my friend
Claius and I have passed away, our only recreation we enjoyed being in
recounting the careless actions she used when we declared our passions, and
commending our choice though she was cruel. But when this your happy day was
prefixed, she shot forth beams of goodness on us, and in charity she
concluded, that her intentions were far from our destructions; and since now
she perceived our lives were in jeopardie, and we depended only upon her
reply, she would no longer keep us in suspense, but was resolved her Nuptials
should be solemnized on this day, following the example of the two Royal
Sisters whom she ever adored. And because she would not be an instrument to
disturb that knot of Friendship between Claius and me, she referred her choice
to your wisdoms, worthy Sirs, the excellent Sisters Bride-grooms, you it is
whom she desires to pronounce either my felicity, or my overthrow.

Then Strephon, closing his speech with an innumerable company of long-fetcht
sighs, departed to his Goddess Urania, who was environed by her fellow
Shepherdesses, which in admiration, love, or envy stood gazing on her; but he
pressed through the thickest of them to do homage to her sweet self, she
looking on him carelessly, without either respecting or disdaining him.

But aged Claius had cast himself at the Princes feet, where he pleaded for his
own felicity on this manner;

Consider my ancient years, and in compassion think how easily grief may cut
off the term of my life; when youthful Strephon may baffle with Love, and
Court some other Dame, I Will find him one who shall be as pleasing to his eyes,
as Urania is in mine; unless the fates have raised him to be my victorious
Rival. But alas, O tell me Strephon! did I ever injure thee, that thou seek
my untimely death? have not thou ever been in my sight as a jewel of an
unvalued rate? why do thou then recompense me so unkindly? I know thou will
argue, that the passion of Love with a Woman, and with such an one as Urania
is, cannot be contradicted by the nearest relations. But I pray thee Strephon,
cannot the importunities of me, thy Foster-friend, regulate, nay assuage thy
passions, to keep me from perishing? Now Strephon, when he had revived his
drooping heart, with perusing the delicate Urania, and fearing that Claius was
supplicating to Pyrocles and Musidorus for her, he returned back, happening to
come at the minute when Claius questioned him; to whom he thus replied: What
the Gods have appointed, cannot be prevented, nor quenched by the powerfullest
persuasions of any Mortal: and let that suffice. Claius being so fully answered
to his conjecture, rested silent to hear his sentence. Strephon, who was of a
more sprightly constitution, recreated himself sometimes with glosing upon
Urania, and then to observe the looks of the Princes as they were conferring
together, about what to determine on concerning them. Besides his Pastoral songs
that he sounded in Urania's praise.

But the Princes, who were then in serious consultation, listened to Basilius,
who advised them in this manner:

Despise not Claius his complaints, though he be afflicted with the infirmities
of old age; youthful Strephon may seem more real and pleasing to the eye, yet
Claius his heart, I am confident, is the firmest settled; Youth is wavering,
Age is constant; Youth admires Novelties, Age Antiquities: Claius has learned
experience by age to delight Urania with such fancies as may be suitable to her
disposition; Strephon's tender years cannot attain to any knowledge, but as his
own Genius leads him. Wherefore consider before you denounce your Sentence,
whether Urania may not be Claiu's Spouse better than Strephon's.

Pyrocles knowing that Basiliu's aim was to plead in defense of Dotage,
refrained to make any other reply than, What you command Sir, we must and will
obey. For as he was both by Birth and Education a Prince, so had he not
neglected to be instructed in the duty of a Subject. Not that he was forced to
acknowledge it to Basiliu's as his due, any otherwise then as his goodness
enduced him to; that he might be a pattern to draw the Arcadians to follow his
example, they wholly determining to be ruled that day by Pyrocles and
Musidorus, who after Basiliu's decease was to be their successive King. And
they were not ignorant of the intimacie between his Cosen Pyrocles and him;
wherefore they reverenced and observed both their actions. But the Princes
Musidorus and Pyrocles, to avoid the rumors of the People that thronged about
them, to over-hear their resolution concerning the Shepherds, retired to an
Arbour-walk, where none but the sweet society of Birds attented them: there
Pyrocles ripped open his supposition to Musidorus, which was to this effect.

My dear Cosen, said he, for of that honored Title my memory shall never be
frustrated, do thou not imagine Basilius guiltiness, when he pleads for dotage
so extremely? he has not unburdened his conscience yet of his amorousness of
me in my Amazons Metamorphosis: I know it stings him by the Arguments he
supports. However he may cease his fears of my discovering his courtship, for I
have always persevered in Allegiance and duty to my Father, my King; nor do I
doubt my failing now in those Principles, since I have you my worthy Cosen so
near me. Musidorus embracing his Cosen, protested that he harbored the same
fancy, and said he, the stammering of his words declared the certainty: but
did you not admire the heavenly behavior of my Pamela to day, when she
ascended into the Temple, how her soul seemed to fly with her body to that
sanctified place, as transported with entering into so holy an Habitation which
was too sacred for any other but her self. And replied Pyrocles, Philoclea
might be admitted with her, whose Humility did seem to guard her, or else sure
she had stumbled; so lightly did she set her feet upon the Pavement, lest she
should profane it. And sometimes dropping Agonies did so surprise her, that she
seemed to contemplate with divine mystery; and then to look down upon her own
unworthiness with such humbleness as made her most into tears, as it were for
soaring above her elements. Whilst the Princes were discoursing in
commendations of their Brides.

Claius in the presence of Basilius and the remaining Princes, fell down and
fainted. Strephon stood thumping his breast, and crying, O Musidorus! think
upon us who succored you, and let not a third Rival deprive us of the
incomparable Urania. This unexpected passion of the Shepherd's, astonished the
senses of all the beholders: yet none were so stupid as to neglect their
serviceable care: yea Urania her self, though just before when Pamela and
Philoclea sent and entreated her company, she had returned a modest refusal;
yet now perceiving Strephon's and Claiu's distress, she tarried not to hear the
news by Harbingers, but went the foremost to relieve them: upon distracted
Strephon she smiled, saying, Is Fortune thine enemy Strephon? but her voice
sounded so harmoniously in his ears, that he disclaimed all sadness, promising
himself the victory. She then absented from him, that she might work as
effectual and sudden a cure upon aged Claius, who gastfully lay foaming on the
ground, yet that terrible sight was not so obnoxious to her as to oversway her
compassion, she pinched and pulled him, endeavoring to restore his life again;
but nothing would recover him, until she breathed on him with stooping near
him, and pronouncing these words:

Unhappie Claius, whose life depends upon a woman! this once look up, and speak
me blameless. Have not I ever abhord the thought of Strephons or your ruins?
yes sure, I have, and have dallied with you both, apprehending eithers danger,
if I should forsake one, and resign my self up to the others disposal; neither
have I regarded the piping of the Shepherds, nor the songs of the
Shepherdesses: and on Festival days, when they have elected me Queen of their
Triumphs, I have excused my self, and retired into solitary Groves, where I
have spent the day in musing upon my Lovers desperate conditions, and studying
for the probablest Antidotes that might cure their distempers, without
blemishing mine own reputation. But that was so hard a task, that I could never
accomplish it. Claius age could not endure such a penalty as my denial without
miscarriage: and Strephon's working brain would not receive it without
practicing a Tragedy upon himself. Wherefore I made patience my friend, and
coyness my favorite, neither slighting, nor esteeming their large allusious of
my Beauty and their Passion, which they often repeated, until the reports of the
consummating of the Princesses Nuptials were confirmed. And then I resolved,
that as I abhorred murder, so I would no longer admit them into my company,
before the Priest of Pan has united me to one of them, that then I might
without derogating from my honor, by censorious suspicions, enjoy the society
of him whom the Princes shall select to be my wedded Husband. So indifferent is
my choice of these two constant Friends, and unmovable Servants.

Before Urania had finished these words, Claius in a rapture of joy, roused up
his drowned spirits. And then Urania retired back to her fellow Sheperdesses;
but the Princes were so inquisitive to know what acccident had brought Claius
and Strephon into such despairing Agonies, that they would not permit them to
tender their service to Urania at her present departure, for desire of
questioning them. Strephon made this quick reply; that a stranger presumed to
gaze upon Urania; and his feet going as nimbly as his tongue, he tripped after
her, not asking leave of the concours of People that thronged about him.

But aged Claius, whose tongue was livelier than his feet, spoke after this
manner:

My greedy eyes, said he, being dazzled with looking too long upon Urania, who
is adorned with as glorious beams as Phoebus can boast in his brightest day; I
yielded them respite, giving them leave to take a view of mortals, clearing
their dimness with their equal light; but there I did epsy an hautie Youth,
who scoffingly stared upon me, seeming to call me insolent, for striving to
purchase Urania, and conceiting himself to be worthier of her, he did so
amorously seal his eyes upon her, that sundry times he made her paint her
cheeks with harmless blushes: and my jealous fancy comprehending no other
reason, than that as he obtained free access with his eyes, so he might with
his person; I rendering my self into the hands of cruel death.

The Princess could no longer tolerate Claius in his ungrounded mistrusts, but
interrupted him, by enforming him that Basilius had sent for Musidorus and
Pyrocles; the Messenger happening to come at the immediate time when they were
extolling their Mistresses; but then they left off that subject till a more
convenient hour, and applied their Answer to the Intelligencer, promising to
follow speedily: yet contrary to their resolutions, they lingered in the way,
a doalfull voice persuading them to stand and hearken, which sounded out these
words.

Fair Titan, why do thou deride me with thy smiles, when I do homage to thy
resplendent beams! and you pleasant Bells, why do ye not compel your notes to
ring me to my Funeral? for since she is tyrannous, why should I live to endure
her torments? my Superiors triumph in their Loves: my Fellow shepherds can
boast of theirs: it is wretched Philisides, oh it is I that am singularly
miserable, made so by a beautiful, yet cruel Mistress; the Princess knew him
to be Philisides the despairing Shepherd by his sorrowful subject; and he
rising from under an hedge, discovered himself to be the same: there the
Princess leaving him in a forlorn posture, hastened to their other company, to
execute their Office, which they had agreed upon as they went: Claius and
Strephon were amazed at their sight, their fear commanding them to give way to
sorrow, but their hopes bad them both to bury sadness in the lake of Oblivion:
in this unsettled condition they continued not long, the division of their
thoughts being suppressed by the Sentence which Musidorus uttered thus.

An Oration might be acceptable to the ears of these Auditors, but that the
Evening desires me not to be tedious, especially to these expecting Lovers: in
compassion to you both, oh Claius and Strephon, I do heartily wish there were
two Urania's, and should be exceeding well content, if some others were to
decide this business, than my Cosen Pyrocles and my self, he for my sake being
equally obliged with me to you for your unspeakable courtesy to me when I
was a distressed stranger, and encompassed by the frowns of Fortune; our
affections to you both may be evenly balanced, but your activitie cannot be
justly summoned together: Claiu's age manifests a dullness, and Strephon's
youth his lightsomness; or else your worthiest exploits, without disputing,
might conquer Urania. At this Claius, as if he had been revived, ventured to
jump, but his heels served him a trick, teaching him to kiss his mother Earth,
as more suitable to his ancient years than a young Shepherdess was: but he
vexing at so public a disaster, fell in a rage upon Strephon, who esteemed it
more Nobleness to hold his hands, than to recompense his blows, Claius holding
in disdain his backwardness, left his eagerness, and turning to the Princess
with tears in his eyes, he beseeched them, if it should be his unhappiness to
be deprived of Urania, to grant him the privilege of her presence, though at
as great a distance as possibly he could discern her, Strephon not knowing the
subtlety of Fortune, and doubting the worst, desisted not from craving the
like favor: the Princess mercifully yielded to their requests, and Musidorus
proceeded in his sentence.

Urania deserves to possess the first lodgings of the wisest hearts, she is too
pure to be a second; out of which consideration, we have resolved that you
shall both swear by the sacred Name of Pan, whether you have ever been defiled
with another object, or have been afflicted with Cupids dart, though in a
virtuous way; which if you both can protest against, we will prohibit this
invention, and determine on some other; and if but one can clear himself, he
shall be acknowledged the fittest Husband for her

Strephon without scruple offered to take his Oath; Claius, though he was
enticed by the force of Beauty, yet his Conscience withdrew him from perjuring
himself, persuading him to defer the time: the Princess perceiving his
slowness, guessed the matter, and lest he should be surprised with the vanities
of this world, they commanded him and Strephon to convey Urania to the Temple:
Musidorus and Pyrocles, with Pamela and Philoclea, and the other Royal
Bridegromes and Brides, besides the resort of shepherds and shepherdesses
attending on them: where being come, Claius and Strephon ascended to the Altar,
and with great reverence Strephon professed his Innocence from Female
Creatures, and withal his chaste affection, which he constantly bare to
Urania: and Claius with jealous devotion affirmed that Urania was a precious
Jewel, locked up in the Treasury of his heart, which none could bereave him
of, unless they murdered him, neither spared he room for any other to abide
there, but her Divine self: yet he could not deny, but that in his younger
days his indulgent Fantasy had seized upon a Shepherdess, though not with
any other entire affection than as her pretty songs enveigled him; and since
he had wholly abandoned her, and cleaved to Urania, the severest Justice could
not make that a sufficient pretense to give away his elected Spouse.

Thus Claius advocated for himself; but Pyrocles and Musidorus caused silence
to be made, and then Musidorus said;

For as much as you have referred your selves, before evident Witness, to the
judgment of Prince Pyrocles and my self; who without any expulsion to your
side, have sincerely bestowed it upon you; we will admit of no addresses to
recall our judgments, for that were to accuse our selves of Infidelity; but we
will not see it put in execution: and S^rephon shall enjoy his first Love, the
Shepherdess Urania, and Claius may dwell in the view of her, to save him from
perishing.

Strephon, as a man who newly embraced a life ransomed from the power of
hateful death, to inhabit a glorious Paradise, snatched Urania from out of the
hands of amazed Claius, and in a ravishment ran for the Priest of Pan, who in
the midst of the throng, consumated their Union. This last Couple wanted not
aplauses, though they were inferior to the other in dignity; for Straphons
comeliness, and Urania's gracefulness seemed to adorn their harmless roabs:
their becoming Modesty enthralled the hearts of their observers, their
courtesy conquered the eyes of their profession, that beheld in what
estimation they were with the Princes, and their happiness equalled the
greatest Personages.

But alas, in Strephon's felicity consists Claiu's misery, his grief being so
infinite, that his passages of tears was stopped, and a frantic Brain
possessed him more than a Womanish sorrow, against this life he exclaimed,
Strephon and himself he abhorred, and endeavoring to set a Period to his
afflictions, he brake out into these words: Proud love, who gloriest in
tormenting mortals, this once moderate thy rage by dispatching me quickly from
under thy Tyranny; for in what have I displeased thee, you cannot signify, I
have so faithfully served to your cruelty. But now to gratify me, you plunder
me of my only blessing, and yet in derision you make me to live. But O Cupid!
if any pity or remorse dares harbor in thee, as thou have deeply wounded me,
so directly slay me, and I shall entitle thee merciful. But if thou fliest
from such a compassionate act, then Prince Musidorus and Pyrocles, whose fame
is enriched with goodness, replenish it more by my speedy destruction and make
me breathless. And Shepherds and Shepherdesses, let not the dreadful Name of
Tragedy affright you, my Death will be the obsequies of a Comedy; therefore if
any spleen reign victor in you, revenge your self upon me that am the most
contemptible wretch.

This Speech he uttered with such distracted actions, that terrified the women
and afflicted the men. But at appointment of the Princes they conveyed him to
some private habitation, where he had attendants, who oftentimes prevented him
from mischieving himself. But for Strephon and Urania, the Princes solemnly
invited them to their society for that evening, where at Pamela's and
Philoclea's entreaties, they retiring to a pleasant summer House, Strephon
rehearsed these passages concerning Urania, Claius, and himself, on this manner:

To recollect Urania's virtues, or what surpassing beauty engaged Claius and
me to be her servants, would be superfluous, since her divine self is present
to merit divine, praises from the dullest spectators Only first her pretty
innocence withdrew our eyes from gazing on the stars, to salute her heavenly
spheres that reflected upon us as she passed by. For Claius and I having
separated our Flocks from our neighboring shepherds into a fresh and sweet
pasture, where none frequented or trod the pleasant grass, but savage Satyrs,
and dancing Fairies, we espied a Tree, whose flourishing branches seemed to
fortify themselves against the heat of the sun, and we enticed by the shadow,
repaired to it: there we lay down, purposing to try our skill in describing
the pitiful decorums of the shepherds that were enchanted by Cupids quiver, to
adore the fair beauty of Mortals: but the wonderful Justice of the highest
Powers, taught us to acknowledge our frailty, by inflicting the like
punishment upon us: for as we were reproching their lovesick infirmities, fair
Urania, enduced by a Sparrow that flew from her when she had courteously bred
it up, pursued after it, to take it prisoner, her course bending toward us:
but when she had surprised it, she confined it to a Paradise, putting it
between the pillows of her Breast, and checking it no otherwise than with her
harmless kisses, she went away, leaving Claius and my carcass behind her, but
our souls cleaved immoveably unto her, and fixing our eyes upon one another, as
ashamed of our prodigious censoriousness of our Neighbors, we suffered not our
lips to open, till we were acquainted with the subject that did triumph over
us; but sounding our Bell, we secured our Flocks, and hastened to repose our
selves upon our beds, but our memory of the most Divine Urania taught us a
more watchful lesson than drousiness: her Image, which was engraven in our
fancy, disdained to be blurred by our forgetfulness, wherefore the restless
night we passed over with sighs, reviling the Fates for burying our felicity
in the depth of adversity, so hard and explete did we account it ever to
obtain Urania; and though Claius and I were one another Rivalls, both aiming
at one, yet did it not any way mittigate our friendship, I applauding Claius
choice, and he mine; neither did we ignorantly admire our judgments, but did
enquire, and receive the approbation of a multitude of Swains, who with
abundant devotion extolled Urania's worth: yet Fortune, that favors not the
purest souls, knit her brows, frowning upon our Goddess Urania, who mildly
strived to wash them away with her Crystal tears: the occasion I heard her
whisper out one time, when she imagined little, and I resided so near her, in
these sweetly expressed, yet dollorous words.

Too great a burden for me to bear oppresses me, Antaxius is too officious in
his love, I wish he were more calm; my Parents rigor is too too intolerable,
unless my disobedience had been palpable; I have never offended them wilfully,
no not in this their desired Match, except they interpret my silence for a
refusal, that being the only symptom of my discontent, nor do I reveal my
affection to any but to thee my Sparrow, who can not discover it with thy
chirping, and that note of thine is to me condoling, and cheerful; my
disconsolate Heart not knowing how to value any other melodious sounds: but
alas my incredulity of the divine Providence may justly reprove and punish
me; yet since I do humbly acknowledge thy alsufficiencie, let thy Mercy
chastise me, and deliver me from the thraldom of Antaxius.

Then wiping her bedewed eyes, she arose, as confident her devout Prayers had
conjured the Gods to pity her distress, and beseeching the Deities to make me
their instrument; called after her. Fair Creature, pardon me if I profane your
sacred Title with a feeble one, since your humility vouchsafes earthly
troubles to perplex you; and believe me, the Fabric of this world is built
upon diverse motions, it can boast of no firm foundation; the rarest Beauties in
their age seldom escape advers Billows, and boisterous winds, and without
relying on a Rock, their perishing is sure: wherefore, sweet Nymph, accept of
me to be your Rock, and questionless you shall be preserved from all
tempestuous weathers.

Urania trusting in no other Power, than what was celestial, looked up to the
Element, where seeing no heavenly Object, she cast her eyes down, fixing them
upon me with such blessedness, as struck me to the ground, not being capable of
assisting my self; however I fed upon her voice, which she displayed in this
language.

What a presumptuous mortal art thou to frame thy self to be a God, that by
such a pretense thou may insult over me? For better Powers cannot support me
from furious storms. This spoken, she went away, as loathing the sight of such
a blasphemous serpent, as she thought me to be. Which I perceiving, and rowsing
my self from out of a transe, I began to cry, O stay, stay, stay, but she deaf
to my persuasions, hastened beyond the limits of mine eyes; but the rebounding
of my words sounded in the ears of the Pastor Claius, who was with his and my
Flock at a little distance from me. He harkening to my voice, and discerning me
to wander out of the close, his jealous brain supposed the reason, and walking
as swiftly as his aged legs would suffer him, he found me out, his
inquisitiveness enforcing me not to be niggardly in my answers, which were so
tedious, that the Sun vanished from our Horizon, as tired with our unnecessary
speeches, and took his farewell, highing him to his Eastern home. But at length
Claius and I yielding our selves to silence though not to rest, experience had
taught us to despair of sleeping, until Cupids wounds wear curable. And early
in the morning when the Sheperdesses had driven their Flocks into the Pastures,
we lingering with ours, that we might see the place made happy with Urania's
abiding there, her Enemy Antaxius the wealthy Heardsman, driven by a
flattering current of his success, approached near us, not scrupulous in asking
Urania's harbor: we making much of our opportunity directed him the contrary
way from her, to the Island of Citherea, her Parents dwelling there, only they
had trusted her with the Flock on this side the River, to feed them with a
livelier pasture. But we protested to him, that in the morning we saw the Grass
to weep for her departure, and the seas dance with joy that she relied on their
mildness. Antaxius easily believed our intilligence, and thanking us for it, he
hastened to overtake her: and we pleased with our prosperous subtletie, drove
our Flocks to a Pasture adjoining to Urania's, and entreating Pan to be their
Guardian, we left them to try Fortunes courtesy.

Urania blushing at our presence, at mine especially, who had before abruptly
assaulted her, seemed to rebuke me with it, as in earnest so it did, my
trembling witnessed my guiltiness, and my tears and sighs my repentance: my
slowness to utterance allowed Claius a convenient time to discover his passion
to Urania, the policy used to Antaxius, he forbore to repeat, until my
repentance had obtained a pardon, and then he related in what expedition we
sent away her undesired suitor; which at first vanished the red from her face,
her fears usurping in her tender breast, lest her Parents should doubt her
safety at Antaxius report. Yet when she remembered her absence might extinguish
Antaxtus lust, her vermilion came back to mixture, and adorned her, as
detesting to be deprived of such an Alabaster shelter.

Claius made Poesies in her praise to please her, dedicating to her service all
his studies. My art in framing of Garlands, showing the flowers natural
curiousitie in their variety of shades, a device that sets them forth most
perfectly I did teach her; oftentimes presenting her with the choicest of my
Flock, when she would accept of them; and if Wolves or other ravenous beasts
had happened to lurk that way, I never left hunting them till their hands
evidenced me their Conqueror, which I used to lay at Urania's feet; other
tricks I invented to be admitted into her society.

Here Strephon stopped: but the Princes entreated him to go on. Which happiness
of mine, says he, continued not long without interruption. Antaxius learning
that Claius and I pretended affection to Urania, he proudly landed at our
haven, rudely carrying her away without resistance. Her commands, that could
not be disobeyed, ordained the contrary. Then it was, most gracious Prince
Musidorus that you escaped the seas, O then it was that Urania floted on them,
and we bitterly bemoaned our loss. Certainly by the appointment of the Gods the
Ocean waxed so calm, yet about where she was embarked, the waters murmured,
and the winds sweetly whistled, combining their voices so harmoniously, that
she might really believe, they conspired to crown her with some unexpected
blessing; as indeed so they: had for when we had conducted you to my Lord
Kalenders house, we received a Letter from our adored Goddess. We might have
been justly taxed of incredulity at the first view of it, our rememberance of
her uncivil Carrier demollishing all hopeful thoughts; but when we had more
believingly read over and saluted those heavenly lines, we taking a short
farewell of your Highness, conformed our pace to our eagerest disposition, and
came to the Sands against the Island of Citherea; where not caring for any
other passage but Charon's Boat, we committed our selves to heavens protection,
and fixed our eyes upon Urania's Island, leaping into the sea, there we had
like to have participated of Leander's entertainment, but our luckie Stars
preserved us to better fortune. The waves growing turbulent, the winds roared,
the skies thickened, and all tempestuous weather threatened to combine against
us. My Friend Claiu's faint limbs I was glad to support with my tired ones, and
we both had perished and resigned our breaths to the Giver, but that the storm
forced a Bark to cast Anchor, and harbor in our Coast, from whence we had not
swom far, though the Billows had thrown us up and down, as contemning us for
our presumption in pursuing our loves to Urania, but the company in the Bark,
weighing our calamities, and their own too, should they neglect so charitable
an act as endeavoring to help us, imagining the Gods would be deaf to their
prayers, if they were careless of ours: they let their sails fly toward us,
and lengthening the cord of their Cock-boat, they sent it to us; we skilled in
their meaning laid hold on it, and by degrees we purchased the in-sides for our
security, they pulling us to the Bark, helped us in.

Where we were gazed on with astonishment by all; neither were our eyes
indebted to theirs, so many of Urania's Associats did we epsy in the Bark to
look upon; and amongst the rest there was Antaxius: Oh Claius, had thou been
here, thou would have justified thy paleness, and my choleric flushes, that
with zeal strove for Victory over our haughty Rival; who being vexed at the
sight of us, and minding nothing so much as our fatal ruin, stretched his
voice, which was most hideous, to condemn us. What monsters are these, said he,
that you have had pity upon? their Phiysiognomies resemble ours, but the shape
is different; therefore hurl them overboard, lest they do drown us with their
Enchantment. The gulf of Salt Water that flew out of our mouths, and our wett
garments that hung confusedly, with his aggravations pierced into the stupid
senses of the Company, who doubted whether we were very Claius and Strephon or
no, yet dreaded to question us: my anger for Antaxius unworthie affronting us,
could not be moderated, but acting the fierceness of a Tygar, I fell upon him,
and flung him into the sea, where he deservedly tasted of such pleasures, as
he had allotted for us: such is the wisdom of the higher Powers to recompense
what is due.

The affrighted People fled into their Cabins, the Pilot and Sailors forsaking
their employments, hid themselves under the Decks: but all this time I never
ceased to pray for Urania's safeguard, being ignorant of the chance that
brought Antaxius thither, or where she resided; her letters signifying only
how much she wished to see us, our vowed friendship obliging her in all
virtuous ways to honor us: but having quelled the courage of the Sailors, the
storm asswaging, we showed our authority, commanding them to strike their sail
to the Island of Citherea: and giving a visit to our Prisoners in the Cabins,
we entreated them to suppress all prejudicial conceit of us, who never intended
to injure them, though we had revenged our selves upon Antaxius for
scandalizing us, and persuading them barbarously to murder us, under the
pretense of Sea Monsters: nor did we neglect to tell them how infinitely they
would favor us, in relating what accident had enticed Antaxius to that Bark,
without his Mistress Urania, who was reported to be his only delight.

The young Shepherd Lalus, being present, interrupted me thus: Urania disdains
to be the Mistress of so base a fellow, though his importunity both to her
nearest relations, and to her divine self, forced her to grant him the
privilege of Charactering her perfections in Poetry, amongst which he had
declared his Lust, shadowing it with the title of Love, when he might as well
transform a Dove to a Kite, or a Wolf to a Lamb, as lust to Love; Urania
abhorring him for it, charged me, who am bound to obey her charge, to be urgent
with Antaxius to come this voyage with me. I assaulted him with the question;
he thought it no ways requisite for his proceedings, but at her persuasions he
ceased to argue: This Voyage we intended for a cheerful one, but it has
proved a fatal one to him, though a fortunate one to Urania; for she as far
excels Antaxius in deserts, as our Princess Pamela does Mopsa, Master Dameta's
daughter.

At this passage the Princess smiled, and Strephon blushed at his true, yet
blunt expression: but longing to be freed from Tautalogizing, his modesty not
suffering him to Court Urania there, he persisted in his rehearsal.

It afflicted me to reckon; O I could not reckon the number of Rivals that
waited to frustrate me of my felicity, all that ever beheld her, commended
her, few they were that did not Court her, but most lived in hopes to enjoy
her; however I dissembled my grief, and congratulated with Lalus for his
courteous relation, telling him, I had seen that Paragon, and did as much
admire her, as I could any of her sex, though my delight consisted chiefly in
other recreations, than to extol a woman. This drift of mine enticed him
earnestly to better my opinion, and in his highest Rhetoric, he labored to
inform me concerning the Passion of Love, that though it were mixed with
bitterness, in consideration of some griefs that follow it, yet seldom it is.
but that the conclusion is happy. I making as though I listened not to his
discourse, sung a song, the subject whereof tended against Love and Women: he
increasing in his desires to work my conversion, determined to bring me to
Urania. I willingly seemed to yield to his request, Claius wondered at my
disguised heart, yet held his peace, trusting to my poor discretion.

Now the Seamen, bringing us news of our safe arrival in the Ports of
Citherea, we landed, releasing the Bark; I could hardly confine my joy within
so small a compass as my heart, when I went upon the ground where she had
trod, and not reveal it; but I restrained it as much as possibly I could,
slighting his description of Urania's worth. But alas my hopes of the success,
my designment might have, was frustrated; upon so tottering a climat do we
Mortals restless live, that when we think we have escaped the dangerousest
storms, our feet stand upon the brims, ready to be blown down at evry flirt of
wind, to the depth of misery.

For Urania, my secret Jewel, and Lalus that reveiled me, was missing, not to
public Pastorals, nor yet solitary Retirements, but by the foul practices of
a Knight named Lacemon, who violently carried her away from her sheep, whilst
she was complaining of Claius and my tedious absence; the reporter of this
doleful News lay hid under a hedge, the glistering of rude Lacemon's Armor
advising him to conceal himself; such was the cowardliness of the simple Swain.

Lalus would have murdered him, had not we by force withheld him; yet I made
him feel the stroke of my Cudgel, to make him repent his folly, a poor revenge
for so heinous a trespass, yet that disburdened me of a greater, so subject are
we in affliction to double our error with a crime more odious: Urania was lost,
yet the memory of her Name, Virtue or Beauty could never be expired: neither
did we linger in pursuance of Lacemon, nor in her search, whose heavenly soul,
as we imagined, must needs perfume and leave a scent where it had breathed,
which was the sign that we besought the Sacred Powers to grant, might be our
convoy to her. Then Lalus departed from us, choosing his path; Claius and I
would not be separated, if possibly we could avoid it. I know not whether this
unwillingness to part with me proceeded from a jealous humor, his nature being
always inclinable to it; but I am sure, mine was real, doubting not, but what
the Divine Providence had agreed on, should be accomplished what ere it were.

The byest ways, as we conceived, might be the likeliest to find Urania,
Lacemon having many: his felicity, since he had deprived the Land of its
Goddess, and we as deeply engaged against him, our presumptuous Rival, as any
other, searched the most suspicious Corners; but no tidings could be heard of
Urania up the Island, where we had wandered, except profane ones; for ask the
Swains that sluggishly sat nodding by some of their scattered sheep, whose
fellows had been devoured by Wolves, through the carelessness of their
Shepherds, when we examined them concerning Urania, whom we described by her
Prayers and tears made to a Knight accoutred in a Martial habit; their reply
would be so absurd, nay between sleeping and waking, diverse did affirm they saw
her, directing us to unseemly Mortals, who indeed had usurped Urania's Name,
though they came short of her perfections. I cannot judge which was victor in
me of Rage and Sorrow; furious I was at the counterfeit Urania's, and
desperate, despairing of ever finding the real one.

At this passage Strephon burst out into floods of tears, which he endeavored
to conceal, excusing his too large rehearsal, and desired to break off; but the
Princess earnestness to hear Urania rescued from the power of Lacemon, induced
him to proceed on this manner: My chollerick Passion I vented upon the stupid
men, instructing them to entitle their Dames with some meaner Name than Urania,
under penalty of their lives, which they dearly valued: and then Claius and I
renewed our languishing travels.

When we had passed through the public and remote places of the Island,
meeting with no obstacles in the way, either by Friends or Enemies, we crossed
the Ocean, landing at the sands over against the Island, we continued not
there, though we could not determine where we had best continue, but a Pilgrims
life we resolved on, unless Uraina's unexpected security should forbid it;
when therefore we had traced about the Confines of Arcadia, without any
comfortable reports of her, we rose with the Sun, to take a longer journey, but
the tiredness of our legs prolonged the time, and so proved faithful
instruments to further our felicity, by delaying our haste: Upon a bank we
sat down, chasing at the grass for looking fresh and green in Urania's
absence; and Claius folding his arms, and casting his eyes on the ground, as a
fit object for him to view, especially when he pitched on such a subject as
deserved opposition, as he then did; uttering these words:

Seldom it is, but the fairest Physiognomies harbor the foulest souls, all
reason proves it so; nay the Gods abhor partiality; why then should they adorn
a Creature so richly surpassing above the rest visibly, and yet give her a foul
answerable? Urania! O Urania! I will not, no I durst not say unchaste, though
the Summers mourn not for her exilement, nor the Birds cease from their various
notes, which comfort we heretofore apprehended they made to invite Urania to
reside altogether in the Woods; nor yet the Shepherds refrain from their
pleasant sports; nor do the Shepherdesses neglect their care of medicining
their tender Lambs, to celebrate a Day in their bewailings.

Age we reckon stands at the gate of Death: yet Claius years was a Target to
defend him from it, otherwise I should not have thought a reply a sufficient
revenge, which I did in these terms. A suspicious head is as great a torment as
I could wish to light upon Lacemon, besides the unjustness of it, your
uncharitable censures may too soon redound upon you, when repentance has lost
its opportunity to crave and receive a pardon: expose not your self to that
crime, which never can be purged away, should it damage the reputation of
those that imitate Diana's qualities in as great a measure as her Beauty; for
if the Gods have bestowed on them reasonable souls, why should we pine at their
industry to make them admirable: You argue, that the Summer keeps its natural
course, though Urania is missing, which is a manifest testimony of her
virtues, boisterous and cold weather being a foe to Travelers, but the warm Sun
is delightful; and the birds proudly chant their Tunes, for I am confident,
they ravish her far above the lofty expressions of Lacemon: neither wonder at
the mirth and employments of the Shepherds and Shepherdesses, for the Virgins
are glad to exercise their inventions, to charm back the belief of Urania's
loss, so darksom and odious is it to them, the Shepherds their Paramours
fostering (though with sadness) their busy fancies.

Claius fixing his eyes on the ground, as convinced of his error, sought not to
frame an excuse, yet to show that Age had not deprived him of his senses; he
thus spoke: An odoriferous scent seems to command me to rest silent, and to
bear the blame without controulment, and dreadfulness mixed with hope possess
me. O Strephon, Strephon, faithfully conceal my folly, I beseech thee.

At this sudden Allarm, I gazed about me, an happy sight, though an amazed
one approaching near me, Urania it was, with her arms spread, and cries in her
mouth, which mentioned murder, her hair contemptibly hung about her, though
delicate; and patience and anger seemed to combat in her rosy cheeks for the
Victory; but at the last, abundance of Crystal tears became the Arbiter,
which when she had vented; she distributed to us these words:

Never was I yet in the Turret of felicity, but I have stumbled, and fell to
the pit of adversity: Antaxius, in the Island of Citherea lustfully expects
me; and here, if I continue, the Fury Lacemon will overtake me; O whither
shall I fly for safety? my pity would not suffer me to retain her in
ignorance, wherefore I related Antaxius death: her silence seemed to condemn me
of rashness, for granting him no time of repentance; but my excuse was
prevented by the ragefull coming of Lacemon, who with eyes sparkling, and
Armor stained with blood, an Emblem of the Tragedy he had committed, holding
in his right hand a spear, and a shield in his left, he mustered up to us; we
nothing dreading, but Urania's trembleing, with our staves, weak instruments
(as he imagined) to resist him, made toward him: he disdaining Claius age, and
my youth, exercised neither vigilance to withstand our blows, nor strength to
repay them: I vexed at his so slight regard of my valor, and persuading Claius
to retire to Urania, who willingly yielded to my counsel; I renewed the
encounter, and with such fierceness, that Lacemon was forced to stand on his
own defense; his want of experience might be the cause of his overthrow; for I
am certain I can boast but of little that caused it, though the fortune of my
blows proved fatal to him, thrusting him off his horse, and beating out his
brains: his life was so hateful, that his death was welcomed by most, and
commiserated of none: Urania highly commended my action, too large a recompense
for so poor a desert, yet I thanked the Gods for giving me such success as she
thought worthy of her acceptance; and waiting upon her to the Island of
Citherea, by the way she yielded to our request, gracefully delivering these
words.

The motions of this world I cannot comprehend, but with confusion, so
unexpectedly do they surprise me, Antaxius by Lalus instigations, trusted to
the Seas fidelity, your compulsion forcing them to deceive him, in whose
banishment I sent a Letter to you, wherein I acknowledged your sincere
affection, and by all the ties of virtuous friendship, conjured you not to
deny me your Counsel or Company in my extremity; and happening to repose my
self upon the Clifts, my harmless Sparrow I set down at a little distance from
me, learning it to come at my inducement, the pretty fool, with shivering
wings aspired to mount toward me; but the Tiger Lacemon, or Monster, for his
disposition could never pretend to humanity, being prepared in a readiness to
commit such a treacherous act, came from a darksom hole, suitable to his
practices, and seized on me and my Sparrow for Prisoners, and conveying us to
his provided Boat, we were sailed over, and by him conducted to this Country
of Arcadia, where in a Cave he has enclosed me: and perceiving, that I
consorted with my Bird, and delighted in its Innocence, a virtue which he
mortally detested, he unmercifully murdered it, lingeringly tormenting it to
death, whilst my Sparrow with its dying looks, seemed to check me, for enduring
its sufferance without resistance: thus he endeavored to terrify me with his
cruelty, but if it were possible, it made me more enflamed to withstand his
assaults; neither threats, nor entreaties were wanting to tempt me to his base
desires, but I absolutely refused him, till necessity persuaded me to try the
effect of Policy.

His own reports signifying Phalantus Helena, the Queen of Corinths Brothers
defiance to the Arcadian Knights, his Lance willing to defend his Mistress
Sortesia's beauty against other Champions; I counterfeited earnestness to
Lacemon, in exercising his skill to purchase my glory: he puffed up with hopes
of future success, considering it was the first time that I had employed him,
and so publicly, with all expedition, hasted to the lodge with my Picture,
where by a thrust from off his horse, he was made to leave my Picture to
reverence Sortasia's surpassing one; with a cloudie soul, he returned to me, I
being compassed to stay within his bounds, so many bars and bolts frustrating
my escape; but by his muttering I discerned his discontent, an humor that best
suited his condition: I strictly examined concerning my Pictures triumph, and
his Fortune, he studying to delude me, replied, That business of importance had
enforced Bisilius to defer the challenge for awhile, out of which regard, he,
by the example of other Noble Personages, resigned up my Picture to the
custody of the Governor of Basilius lodge, and should be extremely well
pleased, if I would vouchsafe him my company into the fresh air; few
persuasions served to remove me from that stifling cave, besides the hopes that
I relied upon of your encountering Lacemon; but little imagined the Shepherd
Lalus would be the first; kind Lalus! it was the least of my thoughts of thy so
cheerfully loosing thy life for the preservation of mine; for when Lacemon had
with boastings, for not being overcome by any of his subjected Rivalls, brought
me near the confines of Arcadia, swelling with pride, his rough Arms rudely
striving with me: then it was that Lalus succored me with his own fatal ruin:
for though I was by Lacemon desguised, by his suggestion, I knowing no other
sign, he discovered me to be Urania: his desire to rescue me from Lacemon,
extinguished the reprehension of his own eminent danger, his courage, though
exceeding Lacemons, yet his strength and shield was far inferior to him, in the
heat of the blows, before conquest, was decided on either side; I fled from
dreadful Lacemon,

His speedy pursuance after me, might be a means to preserve Lalus life, yet I
doubt it, Lacemons bloody Armor prenominating his wicked action* But I
protest, that I had rather my skin should imitate Pan's, and my complexion
Vulcan's, than that any one Tragedy should be committed in its defense.

Fountains running from Urania's sparkling eyes, stopped the remainder of her
speech. Lalus being my assured Rival, mitigated very much my sorrow for him.
However, lest I should forfeit Urania's favor, I seemed sad, yet strived with
it, that I might be a more acceptable instrument to moderate hers. Neither was
Claius negligent in his love, but with Rhetorical speeches he sought to win on
her affections; and the Island of Citharea in awhile flourished with her adored
Goddess. Her Parents in heavenly raptures welcomed home their dearest Daughter,
keeping her watchfully under their eyes, and jealous of our depriving them of
her the second time, though we had safely delivered her into their hands. And
Urania her self suspecting our often resorting to her, might redound to her
prejudice, made excuses to abandon our company. But death in a short time
appeared in his visage to Urania's Parents, carrying them to the Elizian
fields: she then having the liberty to dispose of her self, which she with
confinement did, not delighting in the Pastorals, nor yet in our society,
until this happy Day was nominated. And now great Princes, I humbly beseech
you to pardon this my tedious Relation.

The Princes courteously declared Strephon to be worthiest of Urania, the
particulars of his exploits witnesing it Basilius on that day preferring him in
his Court, honoring him with Knighthood, and both he and his Lady Urania
lived in great reputation with all, obtaining love and esteem from the
stateliest Cedar to lowest shrub.

But when Cynthia drew her curtains, cammanding the Princes to hide themselves
within their Pavilions, and they retiring to obey her; just then an unusual
voice sounded to them, and close behind it rushed in Lalus the Shepherd: anger
composed with reverence beset him, both being so officious, that reverence
environed Passion within the compass of civilitie, and Passion allowed
Reverence to show a pretty decent behavior, though not affected; both dying
cheeks with ruddiness, whilst he applying his speech to Pyrocles and Musidorus
spoke to this purpose:

Great Princes, I will not presume to question your Justice, but your
knowledge. It was I that gave Lacemon his deaths wound. Strephon did but lessen
his torments by quick dispatching him when he fled from me, pretending Urania
was his only happiness that he desired to enjoy, and not my blood.

The Princes certifying Lalus, that other arguments enjoined them to bestow
Urania on Strephon, they left him, but not so disconsolate for Urania' s loss,
as to keep his eloquence from courting other Shepherdesses, in as high a degree
as ever he did her. But aged Claius, having wrestled with death all the night,
not that he desired to live, but unwilling to leave off calling on Urania,
blessed Urania! yet in the morning he was overcome, resigning up his breath
with her name in his mouth. Basilius had him sumptuously buried, and Musidorus
caused a famous Monument to be built in his memory. On the top of it, before
the Sun had fully dried it, there was found Philisides the despairing Shepherd
dead, yet not by other practices than a deep melancholy that over-pressed his
heart: these lines were engraven on a stone that lay by him. Judge not
uncharitably; but believe the expression of a dying man; No poisonous draught
have I tasted of, nor any self-murdering instruments have I used to shorten my
miserable life: for by the authority of the Gods, the time of my end was
concealed from all but my self. I am sure it came not unwished for, for why
should I live to be despised of her, whom above all the world I honored? I
will forbear to name her, because my Reval shall not triumph in my death, nor
yet condemn me for coveting so rare a Person. My ambition is to have the tears
of the Arcadian Beauties shed at my Funeral, and sprinkled on my Hearss; and
when my body is so magnificently embalmed, let it be interred with Claius two
Lovers, both finishing their lives for their Mistresses sakes, his is publicly
known to be Urania, my Breast is the Cabinet where mine is fixed, and if you
rip that open, you will find it; though perhaps not so perfect as I could wish
it were, the Cabinet melting into tears for its unkindness. And now farewell all
the world; and I beseech the Divine Powers to bind Cupids hands from wounding,
unless he have a certain salve to cure them.

Thus died Philisides; his Will being faithfully performed by the Princes and
the beauteous Princesses, with Urania and other pretty Shepherdesses, needing
no imprecations faithfully bemoan his death, burying him with plenty of tears.

Thus were there Nuptials finished with sadness. But before the solemnities
were quite over, there came more Princes that had partaken of the benefit of
Musidorus and Pyrocle's valor, with Presents of gratitude for their Brides,
Pamela and Philoclea. Then after all Ceremonies accomplished, they retired
severally to their flourishing Kingdoms of Thessalia and Macedon, and Armenia,
with Corinth, where they increased in riches, and were fruitful in their
renowned Families. And when they had sufficiently participated of the pleasures
of this world, they resigned their Crowns to their lawful Successors, and
ended their days in Peace and Quietness.

FINIS.

