AN ANSWER TO W. R. HIS NARRATION of the Opinions and Practices of the Churches
lately erected in New England.

Vindicating those Godly and Orthodoxall Churches, from more then an hundred
imputations fathered on them and their Church way, by the said W. R. in his
Book.

Wherein is plainly proved, 1. That the grounds of his Narration are sandy
and insufficient. 2. That the manner of his handling it, unloving and irregular.
3. That the matter of it, full of gross mistakes and diverse contradictions. 4.
That the quotations extremely wrested, and out of measure abused. 5. That his
Marginall notes impertinent and injurious.


By THOMAS WELDE, Pastor of the Church of Roxborough in NEW ENGLAND.

Jude 10. They speak evil of things they know not. Prove. 18.17. He that is
first in his own case seems just, but his neighbor comes after and
searches him. This is Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Pain for H. Overton, and are to be sold at his shop
entering into Pope's Head Alley out of Lumbard-Streete. 1644.

THE EPISTLE TO THE REDAER.
THere was a law in Israel, Deuteronomy. 22.18, 19
that if any man did bring an ill name upon a Virgin of Israel, the matter was
to come before the Elders, and he was to be chastised, and amerced an hundred
shekells of silver.

There is one, W. R. (if thou know the man) that has brought many ill
reports, not upon one Virgin, but all the Virgin-Churches of New England: When
thou see him do so much as bring him forth to Answer this law, Tell him, we
purpose to try an Action with him, and have satisfaction from him. And if he
says, he has not raised these reports himself, but had them from others:
Then tell him again from us, that cannot satisfy, for we have learned from
divine and humane laws, that if any be taken reporting of slanders (as we
shall abundantly show he has do^ his Narrative) he may be charged as the
raiser of ^ (...) he can clear himself by bringing such Authors into light
as will own them. Dut. 17.6. 2 Cor. 13.1. 1 Timothy 5.19.
But if he will not, or cannot; we must lay them at his own door. Its for
all the several reports in his book brought against us and our ways, we
expect the rule of Moses and the Apo-stle Paul, that in the mouth of two or
three witnesses and not under every matter should be established to produce
Barrow, Brown, Robinson, etc. for Authors; (for they were dead before
New England Churches were borne,) or H. W. T. P. and I know not what private
letters lying by him in his study (for we know not their voice,) nor let him
say, it was told me, (as he often does) for we protest against such testimony,
nor I was informedso, etc. for sama est mendax and prejudice hardly speaks
well of any. Tell him we will go to aged Paul (he was a good Divine) to be
our Vmpire to determine what witness we must have in a case of accusation, and
to his verdict we will stand, which is set down plainly 1 Timothy 5.19.

Three things more let me say to the reader, and I have done.

1. Wonder not, this Answer staid so long, for it had certainly taken his
narrative by the heel, but that some special providence (whose distracted
lines) intercepted; the truth is, I thought it should need no other Answer
then it self; until I perceived some ill effects of it.

2* But why do I undertake this work? Answer, 1. I am one of the nearest
kinsmen to those Churches of any other man in these parts, and therefore I take
my self bound to the name of my Brethren (in a righteous way) and (not let it
die) through my neglect. 2. Few or none are here, have had more experience of
New England Church courses then my self, through many years continuance with
them, and to whom I am returning when God makes way: and am therefore able to
speak on certainty, and with conscience where W. R. departs from the truth in
his relations. 3. I have been pressed by word of mouth, and sundry letters to
do it; therefore if I should hold my peace when I am called to speak, and see
so many innocent Churches suffer, I should not lift up my face to God, nor my
Brethren there. God knows my spirit, how exceeding loath I was to controvert
with a Brother, (though but a defendant) and to uncover his nakedness, but
when God calls I am bound with Moses, (when he saw the Ebrew did wrong to his
Brother) to say, why smitest thou thy fellow? Exodus 2.13.


3. Touching the answer it self, some things I would say, 1 I think it not
meet to answer all I could, nor to every particular, especially in his
Marginall extravagances, that would be too tedious; For our principal passages
being answered unto, the rest will fall of themselves. 2. Nor to answer any
thing in his book, so often as he repeates it, for diverse things are fetched
over by him, some three, some four several times; what his reasons are,
himself can best give account. 3. Neither is it possible for me to answer the
sayings of his private letters lying by him, (such a ground of Church stories
as I never heard of,) because I know neither who they are, nor what their own
words are, or if I did, were it material. 4. Thou see I have a three fold
work to answer: 1. his Articles, 2 his quotations, 3 his Margent. All which I
have indeavored faithfully as in Gods presence to do: what oversight or
infirmity has passed my pen therein, I crave thy pardon, for we are weak
men and (God knows) too apt to forget our selves in greater things then these.
5. What I here write, is only from my self, (if any weakness appear)
impute it not I pray thee to the case in hand, or our Churches judgments
there, but to my own frailty rather. 6. Nor is it my scope to discuss the
points of Discipline, (that work is in abler hands) but I look upon his
book, as an historical narration, and accordingly I frame my answer. 7.
Though he brings not the words of any of his Authors cited (which had been
fairer, and might have kept him in closer bonds) yet I have done it for him,
especially in the last six or eight Chapters, that you may judge whether he
has dealt fairly with them or no. 8. When I recite W. R. his words in his
narration, you will see I have dealt heartily with him, either mentioning his
very words, or so many of them as contain their full strength, whereto my
answer tends. 9. When at any time, in my answer, I say, such an Article, or
such a clause is untrue, or is false; I am not willing to impute the falsity
thereof to the Authors knowledge, (I would judge otherwise of him then so,) but
to the thing it self asserted; which may be done through his misinformation,
or mistake: I will say no more; but commit thy spirit to the wise guidance of
the Father of lights, who in Christ Jesus lead thee by the hand into all truth
and peace.

Thine T. W.

The Reader may take a short view of some Particulars in W. R. his Narration;
As they are made to appear in his Book by the Page, and Line, as follows.
Unfound passages. Untrue Relations. Falsified quotations. Page. Line. Page.
Line. Page. Line. 4 25 1 15 17 6 5 20 2 21 18 20 6 7. 24. 37 5 20 19 14. 24 7
5. 15 6 23 20 24 8 28 20 3. 32. vlt. 24 35 9 whole page 25 2 last 25 18. 23 18
26 39 10 25 23. 31. 40 24 39 37 whole page 26 5 29 17. 28 38 whole page 32 3
last 36 28 51 whole page 57 16 40 15 56 9 58 1. 2. 27 52 1. 9. 26 57 5. 10.
vlt. 59 22 53 2. 11. 22 59 6. 33 60 23, etc. 54 3. 10 60 11 61 38 58 33 62 11.
25. ad fin. 62 11. 25. ad fin. 61 21. 26 66 4 last 63 1. 9 64 1, 9. 25 67 6.
12. 22 64 14 65 13 ad finem. 68 4. 7. 12 67 25. 18

There are some things in W. R. his Narration that carry a face of
contradiction: I propound them to his review: in his own words, sense, and
pages. Thus they stand.
That Sacraments are to be Administered to the Members of the same Church only.
Narration p. 35. Art. 5. and vide p. 38. Art. 4. The Churches do, and may,
mutualiy, partake each with other in the Sacraments. p. 37. Art. 31. p. 10.
Art. 7


That They conceive some to be true Christians, whether they be in Church
estate or no. p. 33. Art. 1. Whosoever becomes not a settled member of a Church,
they account him wicked, profane, and a graceless person. p. 29. Art. 1. p.
12. Art. 12.


He says, concerning the judgments and practices of the Churches generally in
New England
That They may, and do constitute new Churches without the consent of the
Christian State. p. 20. last line, p 49. Art. 2. and latter end of the Marg.
Before they do enter into Church estate, notice is first given thereof to the
Magistrate or the Christian State. p. 21. Art. 4. And (by a law of the State)
none can enter without such knowledge given to the Magistrate. p. 21. Art. 2.


That They may, and do set up new Churches in the midst of, and against the
mind of the Churches. p. 49. Art. 2. and latter end of Margent. Notice is given
thereof to the neighboring Churches, that such as please may be present. p.
21. Art. 4.


That The Church Covenant is that, whereby all the Members of the Society are
united to Christ. p. 12. Art. 1. Many are within the Church Covenant, that are
not within the Covenant of Grace, and so not united to Christ. p. 14. Art. 3.


That The Churches of New England are of one and the same way in Discipline
without any material difference. p. 1. Art. 1. They are not of the same way,
but sometimes of 2. contrary ways, sometimes of 3. several ways at once, and
that in very material points. p. 10. Art. 8. p. 16. Art. 8. p. 13. Art. 3. and
4. p. 27. Art. 11.


we in New England go different ways, so the contradictions come from our
selves, not from him. Answ. No, for We are all of the same way, and differ not
in any material point, as himself plainly says. chap. 1. Art. 1. 2 His
Narration speaks what the Churches in New England do generally, as Title. p.
1. Now it is impossible that they can generally go two ways at once.

Answ. Then let him make this appear (and that will be hard to do) for his
quoted Authors speak the self same thing.

An Answer to VV. R. his Narration of the Opinions and Practices of the
Churches lately erected in New England.
An Answer to the PREFACE.
IT would grieve a tender heart to hear this man call God and his Conscience
to witness how highly he honors and loves those that are in Church ways, and
by and by to assault with horrible untruths, and bitter invectives the Churches
of New England, (whom God has been pleased to honor in the hearts of
thousands of his precious Saints) which one would think hardly credible, that
any that goes under the notion of honesty, much less of godliness, should
venture to do.

He blames the Brethren of the Independent way, (as he styles them) that were
and are in London, for breaking a solemn agreement; to produce a narrative of
their Doctrine and practice, and yet did not, yea would not perform^ it.

1. Some of us profess solemnly we never so much as heard of any promise,
therefore were far enough from breaking it; W. R. lay it upon the Independent
Brethren in London without exception?

2. What was done by any of them herein, was freely from themselves (as I am
informed by them) that by some manifestation of their Judgments and practices,
they might clear themselves from misapprehensions and mistakes; so that if
they did it not, themselves were like to suffer most.

3. This they made performance of in their late Apology, so far as might
satisfy in a rational way, but if he expected more, where lies the fault?

4. If they did not this, so soon as he would have had them, let him know,
the extreme distractions of these times, and the public service of some of
these brethren (who were employed by the State, for a good space together)
might justly hinder greater things then this. Now, see what little cause the
Narratour had to cast such a blot on the names of his Honored Brethren (as he
calls them.)

Many were drawn aside, their Churches and Ministry slighted, neglected,
deserted, -- yea contumeliously and scornefully reproached as Antichristian,
Babylonish, false and Null, etc.

Psalm. 11.3.
May we not say with the Psalmist, If the foundations be cast down, what has
the innocent done?

2. They are not alone in these reproaches, our selves also are fellow sufferers
with them herein, from diverse Sectaries now in London, whose usual tones and
dialects these words (he mentions) are, and not the voice of Independents.

That some of our way (contrary to our promise and Pactions) have impetously,
both in Pulpit and Press labored to promote the popular government, and to
make all men disrelish and abominate the Presbyterian way.



2. When we did appear in Pulpit or Press, whether it was without instigation
or no, and how sparing we have been, ever since, (until some late forced
replies) and how inoffensive in our carriages and preachings, we leave to all
godly to judge.

3. Instance (but) in the Holland Brethrens Apology; was it Impetuously done,
was it A MOCK NARRATIVE, A MERE GVLL? (as this man most abusively styles it)
was it not rather full of Peaceablenesse, modesty and candor, and seasonably
needful? as that Reverend man affirmed in Print.

4. Does not W. R. know that about this time of promises and Pactions, or a
while after our Brethren, of the Presbyterian way did write a Letter into
Scotland with many of their hands to it, telling the Ministers there they did
approve of their Government, and would join in the furtherance of it. Now for
him to bind our hands, and seal up our mouths, and then underhand at the
same time to fore-determine the matter, and be engaged in that way before any
solemn dispute, and yet to accuse us for breaking Pactions, seems neither
rational nor fair. Other things I shall speak to the Preface afterward in
answer to the book: Only this, he will make the Reader believe, (to forestall
him) that there are some seeming contradictions in our Tenets and apparent
repugnances to the letter of Scripture, or light of common sense. But what
real contradictions are in his Narrative, and manifest repugnances in his
Animadversions, to Scripture rules, light of reason, and common sense too, (by
the help of God) I shall make to appear, but with a sad heart (I must tell
him) that such things should be written by a Brother whom we have so much
esteemed and reverenced: but seeing now it is done (rather then so many
precious Saints and Churches should suffer wrongfully) I am forced to uncover.
If others be rightly informed and himself convinced, I have my ends.

To the Narration in general.
AS he says, he had laid by the thoughts of it a good while, through many
discouragements. So (I conceive) if he had cast them by for ever, and made the
place of conception their grave, he had dealt better for the truth and
himself. But he is very angry for want of Narratives. One he must have, and
one he will have, be it right or wrong, and if neither New England nor Holland
Brethren be worth a Narrative, let him come, he will frame one himself. And
this shall be no MOCK NARRATIVE, NO MERE GVLL, as the Holland Brethren
produced, but a more solid thing: Now what it is will appear if we weigh three
things.

That the grounds on which he builds it, are sandy and insufficient.

The manner of his proceeding, unloving and irregular.

The matter of it, 1. Full of gross mistakes, contrarieties to the

First for his grounds.
You would think that the grounds on which all his work is founded, and all
New England Churches taxed, had need be sound, even, adequate, or else he
will not prove himself a wise builder. But they are these three. 1. Our own
printed Books. 2. Private letters. 3. Other good intelligences, (as himself
says in his Title.)

For the printed books which he quotes, they are the writings of W. R.
himself was one*) 3. Nor intended by them for the press, much less to be
made a standard to prove our Churches opinions and ways by, but published by
some well-minded here, without their knowledge, yea against the minds of some
of them. Yet if he had kept close to these in his narration, he had saved his
credit, and my pains, but (you shall see) he has so abused and wrested them
(I dare say in wel-neere an hundred places) that his assertions are, not their
sayings and words, but his own, and they will leave him to quit himself as
well as he can; For as Scripture it self (the rule of all things) abused is no
Scripture, so the writings of men perverted are no more theirs. This we shall
make plentifully appear.

Sundry private letters lying by him, (as he says) sent from New England;
(but names only two letters of their names) are another ground of his story.
And whatsoever any one of these writs* (though never so privately, and unknown
to any other man in any of all the Churches,) must needs be the opinion of all
the Churches in New England. But to show the invalidity, yea, and impossibility
of this to be a good ground, Consider,

1. These are incompetent proofs, and liable to great and just exceptions. For
1. Some, there, are contrary to us in their opinions, Antinomians, Familists,
Antichurchians, etc. and even some of his cited letters (as near as we can
gather) are from some of these. 2. Others that write letters from thence, are
weak in judgment, not understanding what the Churches hold, or not able to
express aright what they themselves understand; are all these fit to be the
Churches interpreters? Does not W. R. himself in his preface say, Scribimus
omnes indocti doctique. 3. Others may be novices and not well verst in our way,
nor ripe to give the Churches verdict. 4. Some others, happily, are but in part
of our judgment, and not come off fully to the Churches practices there. 5.
Others are prejudiced against the place and persons; and prejudice (himself
knows) can hardly speak well. And (we know) diverse such have wrote letters,
which (it is like) are fallen into his hands: Therefore these cannot be built
upon for competent witnesses.

And whereas he says in his Postcript. page 50. That these letters come from
Members of Churches, and many from Ministers of the Word. It is answered, That
Members of Churches, and Ministers too,

2. A testimony, against whole Churches had need be sure, that men may trust
unto it. But how can we be assured, 1. Whether such letters as he cites were
ever written from New England or no, (for I have good ground to question,
because he thrusts in T. G. to I. G. amongst his New England letters, and yet
these men never came there, though himself faith in postscript, page 51. ult.
l. That his letters come from Members of our Churches in New England.) And as
he adds some, so he may add more for ought I know. 2. If such letters were
sent, how can we be assured, that such expressions (as he reports) are in those
letters? 2. Or such a scope, (as he puts upon them) to be collected from those
expressions? All these must be cleared before we can ground any thing upon
them. But W. R. tells us so. Ans. So he tells us other stories in this book,
that are as far from truth, as Old-England is from New: which we have no faith
to credit. 2. If he has so extremely mistaken the printed letters, which he
knows we can come at to peruse, how can we, or any else, be assured that he
has not more abused his private letters, which no eye but his own may see?

3. Suppose none of the mentioned exceptions can be had, but that the writers
of the letters be as honest, sound, able men as can be imagined, and suppose we
could be assured of the particulars recited; yet all this will not serve,
because they are but single men, and write as private persons, their own
thoughts, not as be trusted by any commission from the Churches, to write their
common Judgments. Therefore no ground to esteem their letters of such
authentical force, unless he can prove they were allowed by the Churches, or
were men Apostolical, that could not err in writing. 4 If this be a good
ground to prove Churches judgments by private letters: mark what absurdities
will ensue. 1. That we must believe that the Churches of New England deny a
power of votes, ordinarily, to the people, because Mr. Parker a Pastor there
wrote so. And so of necessity we must believe a falsehood. 2. That if W. R. and
two or three more, should write into New England of their allowance of the
lawfulness of an imposed Common Prayer book; then we may write and print it,
(for so does W. R.) that the Churches and Ministers in Old-England, do
generally allow such impositions. 3. Then any few envious or malicious persons
in a Church, may bring a scandal (unavoydable) upon any Church in the world,
if what they say and hold should be accounted the Churches judgment, where
they live. 4. Then the Churches of England are all Antinomian, and
Familisticall, because (on our knowledge) such letters have been written from
some in these Churches as professedly mainetaine such opinions: how absurd
these conclusions would be, let any ind fferent man judge.

5. Yea, (to sink this unreasonable dealing of his) [ITS IMPOSSIBLE] that this
should be a sound discovery of the Churches judgment and practice there,
because many of these letters cited speak contrary one to another, (as
himself well knows) and his Narration fully expresses) yet all the Churches
in New England, (says W. R. himself in his 1. page.) are of one and the same
way in Church Government, and what may be said of any one may be believed of
all: Therefore it is impossible that his letters (which speak contraries) can
be a sufficient ground of testimony for our Church way, which is but only one.
And for him to produce them, as a proof of what they cannot possible make
good, appears not only A SEEMING CONTRADICTION, but against light of COMMON
SENSE, which he falsely imputes to us, but we truly to him.

6. Lastly, we appeal for a conclusion of this Argument, from W. R. in a
distemper to the same man in his right mind, to tell us, now ingenuously, if
this be a good Argument, by one man's writing to prove the Churches judgment.
No says W. R. (page 3. line 4. of this very book) it is not, for such a book
(says he) called our way of the Churches, proves not, that they hold a
platform of Discipline in New England, and why. Because it was compiled by one
particular man, and not consented to by the rest. What can be more full?

But he leanes not upon the testimony of any one letter,

If he did so, it were insufficient as is proved,

But he will tell us that he produces not these private letters and
manuscripts by themselves alone to prove our judgments, New England; but as
joined with the printed book^s or papers, to make the story complete.

But it is not so neither,
for in abundance of places he produces none of the printed books at all for
proof, but only ^hese private letters, as his only ground. As Cap. 1. Art. 2.
Cap. ^^ Art. 2. medio. and Art. 4. And Art. 5. And Art. 11. Cap. 4. Art. 9. And
page 17. page 18. page 19. Cap. 5. Art. 2. And Art. 3. And Art. 4. And Art. 5.
And Art. 6. And Art. 7. And Art. 8. And Art. 9. And Art. 10. And Art. 11. Cap.
6. Art. 10. Cap. 7. Art. 4. Art. 5. Art. 6. Art. 7. Cap. 9. 9. And above twenty
more, mentioned in the Margent and the postscript. Therefore it is evident he
grounds a very great part of his Narration upon these private writings, which
are altogether insufficient, as we have proved upon demonstrated reasons.

But he was not there himself an eyewitness to behold things; he produced
the best grounds he had for his Narrative.

What calling had he more then others,

But see his third ground, he has OTHER GOOD INTELLIGENCES,

1. Who can witness he has such Intelligence?

2. That this is GOOD Intelligence?

3. Where are those good Intelligencers? let them come face to face and be
tried: but if they be peeping behind the door, we own them not for good
Intelligencers.

Thus we have seen the unsoundnesse of this foundation whereon he builds his
story, and the Axlettee on which all the burden lies, being thus broken, the
NARRATIVE must needs fall without any further opposition.



1. UNLOVING. Witness 1. All those calumnies, he strives with all his might,
(though to no purpose) to cast upon his, so much HONORED BRETHREN, from the
beginning of his Preface to the end of his Postscript. 2. His crosse-grained
animadversions, where are so many quibs, gibs, scoffs, and far-fetched
collections, to make New England men and their ways odious to the world,
together with his dark and doubtful expressions, (often dropped out) which may
easily be taken by the Reader in the worst sense: As though ^e reserved his
evasions if he should be put to it 3. His style full of bitterness, that a man
may know who the writeris: though he put down but two letters of his name. 4.
That he will (against all ^^mmon sense) needs make us as much differing from
the Churches ^ England, as the most rigid Brownists, yea in some respects more;
and this he strongly contends for, though we (professedly) in our writings,
preachings, practices manifest the contrary, and testify as often as occasion
serves, the great dislike, and of their rigid Separation. 5. As he has cast us
out of his own heart, so he labors to bring all men out of conceit with us,
the Churches here, the Parliament, the Assembly, the whole Kingdom, 3.
Kingdoms, yea, all other Churches and Nations: As if we and all our
Church-courses were a compound of absurdity and folly: But in this, as in the
rest, we commit our case to God that judges righteously, who can clear us as
the light, Psalm. 37.


As his dealing is unloving, so irregular for it is directly against the Apostles
rule, 1. Tim. 5.19. AGAINST AN ELDER RECEIVE NOT AN ACCVSATION, BUT BEFORE TWO
OR THREE VVITNESSES. Where it is plain, that Timothy himself must not receive
so much as (one) accusation against any one Elder of a Church, but before two
or three witnesses that are able to make it good, (so tender is God of the
names of his Ministers.) But W. R. so far forgets himself, and this blessed
rule, that he receives.

1. Not one, but MANY accusations (as his book shows.) 2. Not against some
one Elder, but in a manner, ALL THE ELDERS, YEA AND MEMBERS TOO, AND ALL THE
CHVRCHES IN N. E. 3. And all this not upon report of TWO OR THREE VVITNESSES,
but some one single testimony. 4. Yea, not so much as one single witness
produced BEFORE us, as the text requires, but only he himself says, he
has such and such a letter by him, tells him so: So that (upon the point)
there is not one legal witness, but all the testimony is involved upon
himself only, (a most incompetent man) and unfit to be an Informer, an accuser
and a witness too, much less in the room of two or three witnesses. 5. And
(which is yet more) the does not only receive these accusations, but [reports
them to others,] yea divulge and print them to the whole world. 6. And all this
too, with as great infamy, damage and wrong before the Churches and Kingdom,
as may be imagined and at such a time also, as never was in our age, when as
the Parliament and assembly both sit at once, consulting about
Church Discipline. 7. And he stays not in the bare reporting these
accusations, but [So] reports them, as one [labouring to draw all others into
the like error, of believing them.] 8. And (which is worse then all the rest)
he brings such reports against us, as, 1. It Is nothing to him, whether they be
true or false. 2. Yea, which he certainly knows are false.

The former of these I prove from his own words in his Postscript,
page 50. I undertake not (says he) to report things (in New England,) as
really there they are, WHETHER THEIR REPORTS BE TRVE OR FALSE IS NOTHING TO ME.
The latter appears, in that, in sundry places of his book, he relates things
that are (ex diametro) contrary each to other, (both which he well knows
cannot possibly be true) and yet lets both stand still on record against us,
and then infers bitter invectives, in his animadversions, from such contrary
reports. You will stand amazed at this dealing, (I suppose) which (I conceive)
I am bound to discover, that the world may see how we are abused by him, and
clear us in their apprehensions.

Thus for his grounds and manner of dealing. I come now to the

Answer to the Title. A Narration of some Church-courses generally held in
opinion, and practiced by the Churches lately erected in New England.
W. R. his undertaking in his book. It is to make a Narration (not of some
particular men's practices here and there in New England, (but of the opinions
and practices of whole Churches there, and) not of some one or two Churches
(for that is too narrow, still for his scope,) but of THE CHVRCHES in
New England (indefinitely.) And that you may know for certain he means to tell
you what [all] the Churches there do hold and practice, and (not sometimes,
but) in their constant course (he says plainly,) they are the Church courses
GENERALLY held by the Churches in New England, which he will declare; So that
though he speaks but of some Church courses, yet those he does mention must be
such, as are generally held and practiced by the Churches there. The
performance of which in its latitude (let him know) we expect, and if he comes
short of this, unless he revoke his title, he will do us wrong.

Answer to CHAP. I.
THe sum of Art. 1. and its Margent is That the Churches of

England, and also in private commmunion with them, etc.

2. Though we should practice some of the same things they do in Discipline,
does that make the way evil, simply because they do it? First, he must prove
that the Separatists practice nothing right at all, or else that we must not,
because they do it.

3. Himself has fully answered for us, Preface page 3. who says to this
effect. Though in Discipline men generally act like others,) he means the
Separatist.) yet if in their opinion of these practices, and in the ground^ of
them, they not only differ, but stiffly ^ppso^ them, the just repute of such
persons is to be preserved. We need look no further to clear us from censure,
then to W. R. himself. For it is well know ne we differ from them in our
opinions and grounds of our practice, and how we hate opposed rigid Separatists
in that very point, let our own writings witness; Discourse of Covenant. 36.
37. 38. 52.

Here note (once for all) he says, that the churches in New England are of one
and the same way in Discipline without any material difference: And this he
would have remembered all along his book. I hope he will not start from this
afterward, I pray him to mind it.

He says Art 2. We have no Platformes agreed upon amongst us.

1. We hold it not unlawful to have a Platform of Church Government, i. e. a
confession of the Discipline of Christ,

2. Yet we see no Grounds to impose such a Platform upon Churches, but leave
them to their liberty therein, because (we know not that) Christ ever enjoined
it, and therefore we desire W. R. not to stumble at our Churches, much less,
take upon him, so masterly, to control us because we have it not.

To the Marginalls of Art. 2.

He wonders how we so soon fell into such an exact form of Discipline

We answer him, (yea he tells us himself,

But, why do no other Churches in the world (says he) besides your

Blessed be God, it is not so, many thousands do see and follow it,

2. Most of such, as do not walk in, but oppose our way, are they that either
have not heard our grounds, or else have not impartially weighed them, and
hence have received a prejudice against our practice.

3. To reveal light being a free act of the father of light, he may choose
what truths he will manifest, and when, and to whom, and in what measure he
will dispense them, as Christ says Mat. 25.11. Father I thank thee thou have
revealed these things, -- so it is Father, because thy good will is so.

we tie our selves to a president, why not rather to a platform?

John 4.42. They were first led to Christ by the woman, yet after believed on
him for his own sake, and the truth they discerned to be in him. Ob.


All our Churches (says he) in New England, and their members, do clearly
see the shining light of Discipline, by a clear evidence of the way revealed
to them, and yet do^ ti^ themselves to a president?


then we need no spectacles of a president; or if we tie our selves to a
president, it is because we conceive we have not full and clear light of our
own.

But we have had divisions amongst us.

England, (which I fear) is your own case this day, and yet no blame (you will
say.)

2. Through rich mercy, they are long since subdued by the light and power of
his truth: O that you could say the same of all the loose opinions here, (if
the will of God were so) for which we sigh daily to heaven on your behalf,
and dare not reproach you with it.

3. When these divisions did FALL, it was whiles our discipline STOOD, which
shows that our Discipline bred them not, but destroyed them rather.

If an imposed platform by imperious power be unlawful (in others) why do
we so rigorrously press others to our president?

on whom it is pressed cannot be lawful: but for us to make the perfect word
our pattern, then carefully inform others therein, and after i^formation
lead them by it, is certainly much differing from the other, and far from a
slavish invitation by our selves, or rig^^^ pressing of a president upon
others, both which here he imputes very unjustly to us. As God has kept us
hitherto from such imperious rigor, so I hope, by his grace he will ever do.

But we forbear giving of our privileges to such as conform not to our

1. If it were our way and not Christ's,

2. It is no more then all other societies in the world do, who first require
conformity before they permit to any the enjoyment of their liberties.

3. Do we any more herein, then the Reverend Assembly themselves at this day,
who would not willingly admit unto Church-imployments and privileges, any of a
contrary judgment in point of Discipline? And yet, (I hope) you will not say,
that either these or those exercise rigor.

But we will not own such as sister Churches that differ from us (though

Do not the Churches of England differ from us not only in some things, but
in many (as W. R.
himself says) and yet we own them as sister Churches, witness his own
quoted Authors, Discourse of Covenant, p. 36. at large. Mr. Cottons printed
letter. All which affirm in effect, and some in words, that we bless the
wombes that bare us, and the paps that gave us suck: We entreat W. R. (in the
spirit of meekness) to clear himself from a slander in such a general
accusation of his brethren.

Yet we more rigidly impose our pattern then any Churches ever did.

How great an aspersion this is, I leave others to judge,
deprive, banish, imprison any for dissenting from us in matters of discipline,
as of late in England, for nonconformity? Or to raise a bloody war for Bishops
and a Service book, as against our Brethren in Scotland? or to slander,
falsify Authors, render many godly Churches odious to the world, as W. R.
himself has done in this book (merely) for difference from him in point of
Church Government? We have indeed, Civilly and Ecclesiastically, censured
diverse there amongst us, but it was for obstinacy in weighty points in
Religion, sedition in the state, scandalous practices, as also manifest
contempt of the Churches of Christ there, but not any for inconformity in
Church Discipline.

Answer to CHAP. II.
That we currently hold there is no visible Church, but a particular, and that
we deny an universal visible Church [IN ANY SENSE.]

There is no Church (properly so called) wherein Ordinances may be
administered, but a particularly only. Yet we acknowledge also IN SOME SENSE a
Domestical Church, Phil. 2. To the Church in thy house; and an UNIVERSAL
Church consisting of all visible believers, according to 1 Timothy 3.15. And this
HIMSELF grants we hold, Marg. 2. Art. 2. Why then does he say we deny an
universal visible CHVRCHIN ANY SENSE?

He stumbles at the smalnes of the number of members in our Churches, at their
first erection. 7. 8. 9. (says he) and on this string he harpes four or five
times at least in this book.

1. What number expressly shall make a Church is not set down in Scripture. In
Adams and Noah's time when there was not above 7. 8. or 9. persons, will he
deny the being of a Church? And what will he make of Christ his family, where
were not above 12. besides himself? And of the first foundationalls of the
famous Church of Ephesus who were about 12. Art. 19. 1. 7. and Biz^ on that
place says, Paul then planted a Church amongst the Ephesians.

2. When our number is thus small, it is only in the very first infancy of it,
it abides not so, but members are speedily, and daily added, until they be (as
he blames us for not being) a complete organicall body Hence ^hese objections
also in his Marg answered, OF WANT OF EMPLOYMENT AND MAINTENANCE for the
Officers, in regard of their small number.

We deny all representative Churches in a power of judicature.

their whole Church, and the Presbytery in the place of all their Churches, to
bind the one or the other to stand to their decrees, unless we had Apostles
on earth again, for Church Officers, yet even they were very tender in this
point.

To the Margent to Art 1.

^t he may prove the number of 7. 8. or 9 too small, to admini^ Mat. 18.15, 16.
an

He says, The Apostles Churches consisted of many thousands.

1. Not in their first beginnings, Acts 1.15, and this is the time of our
Churches we now speak of.

2. Their grouth was sudden, and by an extraordinary way, (certain thousands
being added in two days,) and so necessity enforced their abode together at
present.

3. They continued not long so great a body, but were soon dispersed by Saul's
persecution of them, Act. 8.1.

4. While they did hold together, they might possibly meet to edification, as
well as in some of our Churches here in London, as Cripple-Gate, Olives,
Sepulchers and others, where the Ministers voice may reach to edification, 4.
5. 6. 7000. souls, every Lords day. Vid. Mr. Mathers book, page Therefore for
him to say it is not possible, etc. is too large.

He tells us our Churches cannot be gathered in country Villages, especially
etc. where so few Saints are, etc.

1. That is the fault of people, not of the rule, nor of the way;

2. They may partake of all Ordinances, as they did, except the Sacraments, and
(such as are fit) of those also, in best times, and ways as may be ordered for
most convenience.

3. He must not limit Gods power, who by the word rightly dispensed and his
blessing thereon, Genesis 13.14.
can raise a people for himself beyond all (our thoughts, Ephesians. 3.10.
as he has done elsewhere.

Art. 2. to prove in confutation of us) that in some sense, M 9.3
there is an universal visible Church.




I wonder at the man, who says, 1. That we hold what we do. ^^ 2. Then
pretends to prove it, but falsifies his Authors. 3. Then makes confutation of
his own sayings, as if they were ours. 4. Then flings reproaches on us for such
sayings, which are not ours, but his. 5. (To make us amends) in the end of his
Margent, he fathers all upon our mutablenesse, saying. [sometimes] we
acknowledge an universal visible Church, but usually deny it; and yet even in
this also, he slanders, not bringing (nor being able to bring, I verily
believe) one word of proof, that ever we denied it: Let him make those things
good, or humbly confess his error.

Though we deny (in Art. 3.) the Officers of one Church power to represent
their Church in her judicature, etc. yet sometimes we are forced to use
messengers to represent the whole body, as at the constitution of a new Church,
and private examination of Members to be admitted, etc.

Thus he would bear the world in hand, (if you will believe him) that our
practice does cross our Principles, but there is no such thing, for here he
proves not, neither can, that we deny a Church that liberty, (which all
societies in the world have, i. e.) to depute and delegate her Officers, in
some particular cases (as in her name and stead) to represent the whole body:
for this is no more then the Church of Antioch did, Act. 15.2. and then our
selves frequently do, in some instance he mentions and diverse others.

But what is this to the giving those Officers generally a power of judicature
in and over that Church: and a compound Presbytery, in and over all their
Churches, whom (he says) they represent? because we deny the latter, do we
therefore the former?

3 It is meet he should take notice of a double aspersion (without any show of
ground or proof) cast upon us. 1. That we deny any representation of
Churches. 2. That we cross our principles, in practicing what we deny; both
these imputations, (I hope) he will honestly acquit us of.

In the difinition (says he) of a Church the Officers are left out.

He knows well that a definition must accord to the lowest degree of the thing
defined, therefore we use to put in only essentialls and not all integralls
into the definition: for suppose the Officers of a Church be taken away by
death (...) it, yet (I hope) he will not say, that in the vacancy, the Church
cease to be, Officers are not simply for the being, but the well being of a
Church.

See how he adulterates his quotation, in two or three Articles of this Chapter.

1. (He says) his Author assumes, Answ. to q. p. 10.
we hold there is no visible Church but a particular. But his Author says, no
visible Church (properly so called) but a particular, so W. R. leaves out the
middle words, just as in Mat. 4.6. whereby the sense is exceedingly altered,
since a Church improperly so called, is yet a church.

2. He says, [we currently hold this;] but his Author speaks modestly in these
words, we know not any, etc. Ans. to 32. q. page 9. Ans. to 9. Pos. 66.

3. He says, we hold there is no universal visible Church [in any sense;] but
his Author says only, we know no such visible Catholic Church, wherein the
seals are to be dispensed] Ans. to 9. Pos. 66. A man with half an eye may
discern this is not square dealing.

Answer to CHAP. III.
THis Chapter is spent in laying down what qualifications the Churches of
New England require in persons of age that are admitted Members.

He tells us (to name but the heads in brief.) [ That they must be real
Saints, sincere Believers, men of meek and humble spirit^ and sincere ends,
and that the Church in admitting of them, does make exact trial, 1. by letters
of recommendation, 2. or testimony of Members, 3. experience of their
conversation, 4. by examination of their knowledge and the work of grace,
first in private, then in public, 5. that they be such (which he says is
much desired) as can cleave together in opinion and affection, 6. that they
cohabite as near as may be, for the better mutual watchfulness, 7. that they
be such as know what belong to Church Covenant, approve it and seek ^^]

I pray W. R. (speak now as a Christian and as a man of God,) ^ there any
thing in all this you have said, that you can blame in our practice, 1. for
desiring to have all our members (if it might be) of such a spiritual stamp
and character as this, and 2. for endeavoring by trial (what lies in us) to
find out such as say that they are Jews and are not, but do lie, 3. and
having discovered such, for keeping them from polluting the holy seals and
other Ordinances of God to his dishonor, and their own ruin, 4. or if we (as
far as our light and line reaches, for we have no spirit of infallability,
Find them sound in the faith, for receiving, encouraging, comforting them, what
hurt is in all this? I tell you, W. R. if your self and some others did take
more exact pains in the trial of your people, and fitting them for the
enjoyment of Church Priviledges, it would never repent you.

Now, although these particulars recited, do justify us and our proceedings;
yet mark his dealing, first in his Articles, then in the Margent of his
chapter.

That we require in persons to be admitted, not only to be common, bu^ [choyce
Christians.]

^ns.
It by ch^y^, he me^n^s eminent Christians, it is very false, for we accept
Christians of the lowest form, and never reject any for want of parts or
eminency of grace, i^ we can discern in them an heart smitten with sense of
sin and need of Christ joined with a blameless conversation, though very weak
in knowledge and faith, etc. we dare not refuse but embosome them in the Lord.

And h^mselfe (when he will speak the naked truth) confesses as much Art 8
and tells us what great indulgence we use in the admitting members.

Let the Reader take notice, that upon perusal of his Authors quoted, he shall
not find any one sentence or word tending to justify his saying her^in.

if any be admitted that is not a real Saint, he is false matter of the
visible Church.

^nswer.
This he boldly affirms, but not one word of proof, nor truth. We hold no such
thing; for a visible Saint may be true matter of a visible Church, when
admitted a member, upon his profession of godliness and taking the Covenant as
Achan, Judas, Ananias, and Saphira, were all true matter of the visible (though
not of the invisible) Church, else they had never been admitted, into the
Churches. And that our Churches in New-Eng. hold so, vid. 1. 2. Ans. to 32 9.
50. Discourse of the Covenant page 5.

Hence now, what will become of all his long Margent to Article 12. where he
keeps a great stir in confuting us by four tedious arguments of an error we
never held, but it is one of his own framing. So all his labor therein is
lost; and some dishonor gained, he said in his preface he would bring proof
for every material thing not proved before; yet he breaks his word, because
he had a mind to have it true, that it might reflect upon us.

That every one that is admitted is brought before the whole Church (though
never so many) to make their Declarations in public, and wonders in his
margent that we should be so harsh in our dealing, as not to betrust the Elders
and some private men with their examinations. Art. 6.

He is again besides the truth, W. R. does to us. As for that question in his
margent, Why may not the Officers be trusted with their examinations, etc. Ans.
So they are, frequently, according to your wish.

In the same Article he says, That in the public their Declarations must

It Is not so, for though some few be unsatisfied,

For his Quotations cited to prove both these last mentioned, good Reader

All I say to W. R. is this; How can this stand with simplicity and truth?

He would make men believe Art. 8. that SOMETIMES we go contrary

Do but mark his dealing in this his proof of our unconstancy for the self
same author, and page he quoted to prove the rigor of our admissions, Answ. to
32. quest. p. 8. he brings this for the one and the other as if the same pen
had written contradictions in the same page, yet no show of any such thing will
appear if you peruse the place; I leave the Reader to judge.

That such members in one Church in N. E. as are received to the Sacrament in 7.

Though we hold it a convenient thing (especially for such as live far off,
and altogether unknown to any of the Church, We do require letters
testimonial from the congregations in Old-England, for such as come from
thence, before we admit them to the Sacram^nts, whereas such as come from one
Church to another in New England we receive because these Churches in N. E. are
better known to us the^ the other. See him this testimony favors him.

That if any amongst us do not seek and desire Church fellowship in our way,
(...) account them DESPISERS OF IT, YEA WICKED AND GRACELESS PERSONS.


^nsw.
To which I answer with detestation, (GOD FORBID.) We speaket^ (as knowing God
hears all our words) We hope we are far from such a spirit: for we know
well, that many gracious and precious Saints there amongst us may, and
sometimes do, for a good time abstain from seeking and desiring Church
fellowship for other grounds then DESPITE WICKEDNESS, AND GRACELESNES.

Sometimes because they are not settled in a place: sometimes because they
desire more experience of the Ministers and people where they should join:
some for want of clear light and full conviction of the Church-wayes we walk
in: and some others out of many fears about their own spiritual estate
before God, judging themselves (through temptation) out of a state of grace;
and dare no^ venture upon the Seals, etc. whom we yet esteem^ precious Souls
and have labored by all arguments, we were able, to encourage to come into
Church fellowship.


See what cause therefore he has in his marginalls to this Article to upbraid
us, for harshnes uncharitableness, and forgetting the royal law of love in
this point, etc. whereas he forgets the law of love and trust also, in such
reports as these are.
And for these quotations cited of Answ. to 32. q. p. 21. and Answ. to 9. pos.
p 69. (we boldly say and do here challenge him with it) that there is not one
word therein to bear him out; and therefore I do here lay this report upon
himself, as the raiser of it, let him defend it, or humbly take the blame.

Besides these blurs he puts upon us in the text, he attempts no less in his
large marginall comments on this chap. by many objections raised against us,
(besides those we have taken away already.)

^bject.
As that we keep our Church doors so close shut, and why may not fair
overtures and shows of Grace in such as offer themselves, be sufficient for
admission? and what need such narrow searching and sounding of men's hearts to
the bottom? and that Christ never made such rules, and the Apostles and their
Churches never practiced the lik^, and that real and internal holiness is
not required to make a member, but only federall and external, etc.

Matt. 3.6. Act. 8 37, 38. Acts 19.18.9 Romans 17. and 15.34. Ephesians. 1.1. 1 Cor.
9.13. 2 Cor. 8.5 Where is plainly expressed, what frame such were of. They
confessed their sins; They professed their Faith; They believed in the Lord
Jesus, with all their heart. They confessed and showed their work. They openly
burnt as many c^^iuring books as ^^^e mo^th no less then fifty thousand
pieces of silver. They were man beloved of God, Called to be Saints; Full of
goodness, filled with knowledge. The faith of some of them spoken of through
the world; Faithful in Christ Jesus; Professed their subjection to Christ;
gave up themselves first to the Lord, and there to the Church by the will of
God. Now let W. R. speak, is here only federall and external holiness, were
here only fair Overtures and some shows of grace? but if we go further
their his principles carry him: Then we keep our Church doors too close;
Then he cries out; its against charity, against christian wisdom, against
Justice and all; and then why will not Overtures and shows serve our turnest I
tell you these Overtures etc shows (W. R.) have done mischief enough already,
(a man would think) to Christ his Kingdom, and to these poor English
Churches, its even hightime (sure) to press on further now then Overtures,
first you were for stinted Liturgies, and now plead for Overtures; whither
next?

But to Margent on Article 4. What need^ we be so nice in our admissions, Acts
9.27. upon Barnabas testimony alone, and Phoebe, Romans 16.1. upon Paul^ bare
testimony.

1. For Paul admission; If you would consider, Paul: 2 The high esteem and
credit that Barnabas (who gave testimony of him) had in the Churches hearts,
(as Acts 11.24. Acts 4.36. Acts 13.2. and 13 7. and 15.25.) And thirdly, The
fullness of his testimony which he gave in for Paul, Acts 9.27. you will easily
answer your self, that there were more grounds for his admission then ever
were required of any member into a New England Church.

Secondly, For the admission of Phoebe by Paul's testimony only, Romans 16.1 Its
answered, Paul's bare estimony was more then twenty men's words in the Churches
hearts: 2 But here is a great mistake, for Phoebe was not by Paul's testimony
admitted into Church fellowship (for she was already a member of the Church of
Ce^chrea, yea and a servant of it too, viz. either a widow of that Church, or
sent from that Church to Rome upon some special business) but she was only
recommended by Paul to the Church of Rome, during the time of her abode amongst
them, not for any admission into the Church at Rome, but for assistance in some
business, Romans 16.2.)

What need is there of Verbal declarations of the work of Grace? for if they
be as Marg. Art. 5.

1. It may, and does satisfy our own consciences,

2. God (who often takes the wise in their own craft, 1 Cor. 1.19.) lays open
such hypocrites, while they seek to deceive others, (as frequent experience
has shown us in the very act of their trial.)

3. Those that are sound do manifest the sweet smell of their graces by such
declarations. Therefore it is not bootlesse.

It seems a thing impossible to such good souls as know not the time and
manner of their conversion, or have forgotten it, to give account thereof
satisfyingly to a multitude, seeing also their manner of inquiry is strict,
and the matter inquired into, the spiritual soul points.

Pet. 3.15.
what meant Peter to direct all believers to be always ready to give an
answer to every man of the hope that is in them? If they must give this answer
to all (even to persecutors themselves,) (as the Text intends) of the grounds
of their hope, is it impossible that these good souls should render account to
their godly brethren, who in a loving way demand it, and for their own good
too?

2. What if they know not the time, order and manner of their conversion, yet,
if they can give any evidence of Christ, now in them by the workings of his
Spirit for present, though they know not how Christ came at first into them,
its sufficient.

If an account of their grace must be given, were it not better to have a set
and standing rule written and recorded without variation in all the Churches?
ibid.

^nswer.
Would he have us make a New England Primer, a set form? this were a way
indeed to bring all to a formal course, and to teach every one (though no
grace or experience at all of Christ in his heart) to learn (by rote) this
form, and then all were well.

W. R. was (as we heard even now) first, for common prayers, and then for
Overtures and shows, and now you have him for standing forms; You shall see
him go further anon, are not your fingers singed enough yet with such
formalities? Its time to cease.

Through your strict examinations multitudes of our English in N. E. that were
reputed godly, are kept out of Church Order, and themselves and little ones
little better then heathens, Marg. on Art. 6.

^^sw.
Many, for want of examination of themselves and trial by others, that went, in
common view, for sound ones, possibly (and that not without good cause) upon
due trial may be found too light, when weighed in Gods balance, and its
better for such to be discovered here, then hereafter, to their eternal ruin:

2. Many do keep out of Church Order upon sundry other grounds above said,
and out of choice, and not through strait examination.

3 But that the non-admitted are esteemed by us, or do live like Heathens, is
an untrue and unsavory imputation: Where we see any breathings of Christ in
any, we esteem them as Christians, we love them dearly, and carry our selves
accordingly to them and theirs, though not yet in Church fellowship with us,
(God himself is our record against such calumnies,) where we see no grace as
yet wrought, we labor in all meekness to bring them to Christ, and in mean
time take Christian care of them and their little ones, as those that may be
heirs of the same grace with our selves: do men all this to heathens?

But why are men of differing opinions, and men of harsh and rugged
dispositions, though otherwise Godly, kept out from your Churches? Marg to Art.
9.

1. If men's opinions be such as destroy faith, or the power of holiness,
New England lately were, (though now laid prostrate by the light and power of
the word) or such as do directly cross and eradicave the fundamentalls of our
Church Government, and the persons that hold these til opinions are factious
and turbulent: It Is no wonder though we be slow in admitting such as we know
will destroy either the power of godliness, or our Churches peace; but if they
d^ffer only in some inferior points (as you speak) and be of sober spirits,
it is known, we admit such and live in peace together with them.

2. We never knew men of sour and cynicall dispositions naturally, merely
for that, if otherwise they appear godly, and labor against such distempers,
to be kept out of Church Fellowship amongst us.

But if any man deny the Church Covenant, or doubt of it, your Church doors
11. end.

We pray you goods W. R. speak not against common sense; Psalm. 110.3. Or if he
doubts of the lawfulness of it, is it lawful for him to enter into it
doubtingly, or for us to offer it, seeing whatsoever is not of faith is sin?
Romans 14. last.

But to say, our Church doors are [for ever] shut against him, is a speech as
untrue as harsh, for as we wait on God to afford, and on him to receive light,
so we are as glad when he is informed therein, and are ready to open our Church
doors wide to receive him.

Some other things more slight I pass by in his Marginalls on this Chap. for
brevity, the substance of all which may be referred to some or other of these
heads.

Answer to CHAP. IIII.
HE says, (Art. 1. 2. 6. 7.) That we account a public vocal and express
Covenant -- to be the only absolute necessary constituting form of a true
Church, without which no true Church nor true members, but all (...) concubine^.

^sw.
He utterly mistakes the subject of the question, for those Authors he quotes,
declare not what it is that makes a TRVE Church, but a ^V^^ congregationall
Church, as it is refined according to the platform of the Gospel: And to such
a Church, (say they) is required an explicit Covenant. And that they do
intend only such a Church, is plain.

1. Because there are in the description of that Church they mean, such
particulars (as himself lays it down, Art. 6.) as can belong only to a pure
Church, as, 1 That they walk in all the holy ordinances of God; 2 According to
the will of God; 3 In one Congregation. All which (we know) every Church
(though true) does not, (ergo.)

2. If we hold that to every true Church this explicit Covenant is necessary,
for the constituting of it, then we should deny the Churches of En (for in
them is not such an explicit solemn public Church Covenant) to be true
Churches: but that is far from us, as Discourse of Covenant. p. 36. 37. 38.
ergo.

3. The express words of Answer to 32. quest. 38. 39. (from which he quotes
this 1 Article) (if consulted with) will tell you that a pure Church is the
Church intended. Therefore it is clear, when we make such a Covenant (as W. R.
expresses) necessary, it is, to a Church, as it is completed in all her
integrals according to the perfection required in the Gospel, and not to the
essence of every Church.

This one thing being cleared, what will now become of all his Marginal
collections, exclamations, insultations on the 1. 3. 8. Art. He cries out of
our unheard of rigidnesse, as if we would touch the freehold of the Churches of
England, and all the Churches in the world. But all his invectives are as
arrows shot into the air; for we hold no such thing as he exclaimes at.

That without this solemn express Covenant, no true Church or Church members,
but all are harlots and concubines, Art. 1. (the quotes Discourse of Covenant,
page 14. 18, 19 20, 21, 24. to prove it.



that members are united to Christ by the Church Covenant.


1. A Paradox we never knew before, or ever heard of in New England; for we
profess freely we know no mean or instrument of union to Christ, but faith
in the Covenant of grace.

2. This is a device of his own brain, for which we boldly again challenge
him as being a thing not possibly to be proved in any of our quoted writings in
print, let him (if he be able) prove himself honest by making it good, or
confess his fault (as becomes a Christian;) we profess our hearts are justly
grieved at this dealing, and the Spirit of Christ in heaven also is (we fear)
made sad hereby.

3. In this also he contradicts his own relation Art. 3. where he plainly
says, that many that be within the Church Covenant are not in the Covenant of
Grace (and so not in Christ;) and yet here he says, that by the Church
Covenant a man is united to Christ. So the Church Covenant does unite us to
Christ, and it does not unite to Christ; how can both these be true? This is
too frequent with him, to lay things that are contradictory to our charge; and
not a word of proof from the Authors, as any ground of it. This I lay on him
as a further charge.

He reports Art. 2. That we hold, that joining our selves in all holy
fellowship, cannot knit a man as a member of a Church. And quotes Dis. of Cov.
page 21. for his proof.

1. The Author has not one word to bear him out.

2. We wonder what the man means to affirms this; [joyning ones self in holy
fellowship] (he knows) is our usual and frequent description of the Church
Covenant, when we speak most punctually to it,
and do commonly for that end, cite Jer. 50.5. Act. 9.26.

3. That very Author, and page, he cites to prove, we hold, that joining our
selves in holy fellowship cannot knit a man as a member in Covenant; speaks
directly the contrary, in these words. When joining, (says the Author) is
used for a man's taking on him voluntarily a new relation, (as in this case he
does) there it always implies a Covenant.

In Art. 3. and 4. he would make as though we our selves speak contrary we hold
our Church Covenant to be distinct from the Covenant of Grace: in the other
place, That it is not distinct, but as a part from the whole. But we must
digest grosser things then this in his narrations: consult with his Author, and
you shall see nothing to countenance him; yea he quotes the same Authors for
both.

In Art. 7. He tells us, We hold our Church Covenant must be v^call: but that
silent consent is sufficient, and there proves it by Genesis 17.7. and Deuteronomy. 29.10.

Whereas he had reported before of our rigorous exacting of our Covenant, no
Churches at all without this explicit Covenant, etc. Now in Art. 8. he pulls
down all he has built, and tells us that we hold that a bare consent and
agreement to be members will serve; And that men's implicit intentions to do
such a thing may suffice.

^sw. 1.
He grossly falsifies his Author brought to prove this minsing of the Covenant,
Discourse of Covenant. p. 21. 22. where is not one word that way, and (which
much aggravates) he still quotes the very same Author, and p. for our minsing
of the Covenant, that he did (in Art 1.) for our rigorous exacting of it.

2. He slandereth us, to make the world believe we run contrary ways,
sometimes by over rigorous exacting the Covenant: sometimes again, that (after
all our rigor) we bring it so low, almost to nothing: whereas in all our
writings (I profess it solemnly) there is no show at all of any such differing
practice.

3. Hence also, the ground being rotten, his Marginall construction falls on
his own head.


4. He does not only abuse his Author and us, but himself also, who said in
Cap. 1. Art. 2. That New England Churches walk in the same way without any
material difference; and yet this is the third time he has taxed us for
grossly differing from our selves: How can these things be? See how many gross
faulterings in one poor article, what are in all his book?

That we promise willingly and meekely to submit to Christian Discipline
without murmuring.

2. That we willingly will do nothing to the offense of the Church, but be
willing to take advice for our selves and ours, as occasion shall be presented.

3. That we will not be forward in the congregation to show our own parts and
gifts in speaking or scrupling nor discover the failings of our brethren.


Now what spirit (but W. R.) would startle, scoff, and quarrel (as he does in
his marginalls.) page 17. 18. 19. at such plaine-hearted and found expressions
as these, being all clearly grounded on Scripture?

He is angry with us also, that we mention not (in our Covenants) more
particular sins and duties then we do, and yet is offended that we mention
any at all; how shall we please him?


He tells us again, that the former of these Covenants is us fit for wedding as
the constitution of a visible Church.

New England to some particular Persons here, who being Ministers of Churches
there (says he) yet accept of settled employments, even charge of souls here,
and how can they watch over their Church?

I know but two Ministers of the Churches there, England at this time, and how
far both those are from settled employment, much more from taking livings (as
these words [charge of soules] imply) God, their own consciences, and the
people (to whom they at present preach) can testify (little to the comfort and
credit of any that thus slander them, I advise him to reflect upon his words,
and see if there be not something in them to be repented of, and recalled.

But how can such (so far distant) watch over their Church; and e contra.

That hand of Providence, that, upon weighty causes, and with their
as in like manner it does to other Persons, that are absent from their
Families and Churches by long sea-voyages, wars, etc.

And yet note, that W. R. is the more blamable in these carpings at the
Covenants mentioned, because he is convinced in his conscience (as his own
words are, Page 17.)

1. That all things in those two forms of the Covenant (in a fair
construction) [are very good.]

2. That if any other interpretation be made of any thing therein, it is no
better then [an harsh constuction.] It is not without a special finger of God,
that himself should first commend, the matter of the Covenants; to be very
good; and blame any other construction that should be made of it, as harsh. And
yet should imediately, in his very next words, fall upon such harsh
constructions in sundry particulars, as he has done.

He reports in Art. 11. as strange and gross an untruth (to call it by the
fairest term) and that without any ground at all: i. e. That we hold [that
this our Church Covenant (as it is distinguished from the covenant of Grace) is
that Covenant which is sealed by the Sacraments, and for the sealing and
ratifying of which the Sacraments were principally ordained of God.]

I stand amazed at this report, wherein these 4. things lie plain,

1. That our Church Covenant is that covenant which is sealed by both
Sacraments.

2. That this Church Covenant, (thus distinguished from the covenant of Grace)
is sealed by the Sacraments.

3. That the sealing of this Church Covenant was the end of Gods ordaining the
Sacraments.

4. The principal end. W. R. Now prove all these, else you will prove your
self unfaithful.

All his proof we can see is Ans. to 9. Pos. p. 63. 66. I Will relate the very
words, that he may have nothing to allege. [ Baptism (says the Author)
serves to seal to our Justification, as circumcision did; yet not that alone,
but also the whole covenant (i. e. of Grace) with all the privileges, as
Adoption, Act. 2.38. and sanctification, Gal. 3.26.27. Tit. 3.5. fellowship
with Christ, Tit. 3.5. The salvation of our Souls, Mat. 20.23. and the
resurrection of our Bodies, 1 Pet. 3.21. and not only the covenant of Grace,
which is common to all believers, but Church covenant also, which is peculiar
to confederates, according to 1 Cor. 2.15.29.]

Now here is not said, that the Church Covenant is [the thing] sealed, much
less the principal end of this ordaining the Sacraments, least of all that
the Church Covenant (as distinguished from the covenant of Grace) is the
principal end of the Sacraments; but all that is said, is this, that though
Justification and the whole Covenant of Grace be the principal things sealed
in their circumcision, and our Baptism, yet all the privileges of the covenant
of Grace, and the Church covenant also are not without their share and benefit
in the Sacrament. How far this expression comes short of his assertion, let
others judge.

Now see his marginal note upon this Art. [ Here is (says this commenter) a
piece or two of such Divinity, as I never read, but Vno absurdo dato mill
sequuntur I could resort, Here is such an absurd foysting in of untruths as I
never hardly read in Heathen or Christ^an writers: and having taken liberty in
a few things at first now they come in by troops. As he has had very ill
success hitherto all the chapter through, let us see if he will speed any
better at the last close.

Infants that were admitted Members by the covenant of their Parents, are not
yet permitted to receive the Lords Supper, when they are come to years,
until, 1. They have run through all the foresaid course of public, and
private examination, 2. Profession of their faith, 3. Declaration of the manner
of their confession. 4. Personal, vocal, and express entering into the same
covenant as others of years have done before them, and as if they never had
been made Members before.

And for this practice he cites only Ans. to 32. q. p. 20. 21.

How he deals herein, see that place. If there be not more in his promises,
then are in his proof. All that the Author says is this, That there ought to
be a renewing of their covenant, or a new profession of their interest in the
covenant, and walking according to it; and professes modestly too, these are
but their present thoughts not settled determinatively, for want of occasion to
bring it into practice, yet he brings him in, as speaking conclusively; and
with a lumber of additions, deviations, alterations of his own putting in, for
where is now his running through all the foresaid courses of private and
public examination (he mentions) where is his declaraition of the manner of
their conversion? Where is his personal, vocal and express entering intr the
same covenant, as if they had never been received Members before? Whose words
are all these? Nay, the Author expressly tells us, that children are entered
into Church covenant already, and do but renew their covenant, and he says
they must enter in afresh, as if they had never yet been received at all.

This we must tell him, is not fair dealing, and what will now become of his
marginall note upon the Article so mistaken?

Many other collections (besides what we have answered to already) he makes in
his marginall notes on this chapter, by way of objection against us, which
deserve a little answering: as,

In his margent to Article 2. A strange yet bold assertion (says he*) That Job
and Melchisedec were no Members of the visible Church.

I entreat the Reader to see if his Authors quoted for these words, Ans. to 34
37. says is this. We make no question of the salvation of Job and his friends,
yet it is a great question whether they were of any visible Church or no, (and
gives his reason) seeing the visible Church in those times seemed to be
appropriated to the posterity of Abraham, etc. of whose line it cannot easily
be proved that all these men did come. And all the other cited Author ( Cns. to
9. Pos. 66.) says, is this. We no where read (there is this reason) that
Milchisedec, Job and his four friends were circumcised, neither do we believe
they were: Now see whether 1. we say and conclude, that these holy men were in
no Church, 2. if we boldly assert it, 3. without good show of reason, 4. if
there needs a marginall confutation.

He says, that Baptism, though it does not really admit infants into the
visible

He speaks besides the point, for the question is, not 1. formally and in the
ceremony, but really, admit Members: 2. not Infants but men of years: 3. not
into the visible Church, but a particular congregation; so he might have spared
this labor, which makes nothing for him, or against us.

To his long Margent to the 3. Article, wherein he grants a covenant in i. e.
that we make this vocal and express covenant necessarily for that
constituting of a true Church, and say that all societies are whores and
Concubines without it (a speech abhorted of us) I pass it by, and tell him
that what he builds upon such rotten foundations, will ruere mole sua.

He makes four false suppositions, and then draws sundry conclusions page 15.
16.

As first that we hold the Church Covenant is the Covenant of grace.

2. That in our Church Covenant we hold it necessary and a thing essential to
the Covenant, to make repetition of the whole covenant of grace.

3. That our covenanting to perform duties to our own Church hinders our
communion with, and care of all other Churches: Which things being nothing so,
but mere mistakes, all his collections from them vanish in the air.

4. That some men do enter into this Covenant, and yet are unsatisfied, that
it is a way of God, and so cannot safely engage themselves by this covenant.
Which also (being a mere fancy of his own) I pass by.

i. e. That if we have a set fo^^^ of a Church Covenant imposed upon all that
enter into the Church,
and this read in a book, why may we not as well have a set form of Prayer
and leiturgie to be read in Churches?

^sw.
The Narratour shows still a good mind to set forms, it is the third time he
has been harping on this string.

First, for Overtures and shows in members, then for set and standing rules
(or forms) in admissions, now for set forms of prayer, and that in Churches,
are to be read also in a book. He was hard driven for arguments, else he would
never have produced this as a ground for set forms of prayer in Churches. For
(he might know) there is a large breadth of difference betwixt a Covenant and a
prayer. For 1 the one is presented to God himself only. The other to man also.

2. The several Articles and all branches of the one had need be certainly
known and agreed on beforehand, that they may punctually and deliberately know
what the particulars are they engage themselves to God in; no such ground for
our Petitions in prayer.

3. The one had need to be written for remembrance, lest we should forget,
(in tract of time) what the several branches were we bound our selves unto,
according to Jer. 50.5. [A perpetual Covenant not to be forgotten.] I know no
such ground for our Petitions in Prayer, nay it is impossible to do it.

4. Set forms of prayer are a stinting of the Spirit, who has promised to
enlarge our spirits, by helping our infirmities in prayer, as well in matter as
manner, in What, as well as How to Pray. Romans 8.26. We know no such promise
for extemporary assistance in the matter and form of a Covenant.

5. Reading prayer in a book hinders the affection (which is one principal
thing in prayer,) but our maine work, whiles the Covenant (which we take) is
rehearsing, is attention, judgment, consideration, all which are not hindered,
but much furthered and helped by distinct reading of it.

6. By reading of a set form of prayer in the Church, the Ministers gifts
(which Christ has given him for that end. Ephesians. 4.8.11.) are obscured, and in
great degree buried, and the presenting to God the several and continual
necessities of the congregation extremely hindered and restrained: Neither of
which are done by a set form of a Covenant agreed unto, and read at the taking
of it.

7. We have express warrant in Scripture for a form of words and writing of a
Covenant, (which is the very thing we are blamed for) see ( Neh. 9.38. And
because of all this we make a sure Covenant, and write it and seal to it. And
Nehem. 10.29. to the end of the chap. there are set down the express
Articles, form and words of the Covenant that was written and subscribed and
sealed by them. Let him show us the like warrant in the word for a Liturgy or
set form of book prayer for a congregation. I much wonder that a grave
learned man, (especial in such reforming times as these should so far forget
himself as to make such parallels, and talk still of Liturgies.

He says 1. in this Marginall, that the Church imposes that set form of
Covenant (invented by one or more) upon all the Members of that Church.

He reports in the 9. Article (to which this Marginall belongs,) That

Both which are great mistakes. 1 To the former, an imposing of the covenant
upon the members.

2. The other is mistaken likewise. For any Church has and takes liberty as
they shall see just cause (if there be a defect or error in the matter or form
of their Covenant made at first) to alter it, and renew it before the Lord, and
bind not themselves to continue in any oversight, because they once fell into
it: and some Churches have so done.

But w^ may here see what a task W. R. has undertaken to make Narratives of
Church-courses in such places, where himself never came, but rests upon
uncertain and various relations; This is one reason why he so often stumbles
in the dark, and rusheth upon so many foul mistakes in every Chapter. I hope
it will instruct him for future times. Semel insanivimus omnes.

Answer to CHAP. V.
HE is at a set (in Art. 1. and 2. and their Marginalls) and falls a wondering
at the contradiction in them. For in Art. 1. he says, That men may in New
England constitute a Church without consent from the Magistrate or neighbor
Churches: yet in Art. 2. that there is a general Court-law, that no Church
shall be set up in New England without the consent of the Magistrate and
neighbor Churches. Hereat he stands amazed, and sets his Reader to do so too.

^ns.
I will do him the favor to help him out of this straight, and salve his
credit, by telling him; There is no contradiction at all in his Articles; do
but distinguish of times and you untie the knot.

For there was a time in New England (for some few years space) before such a
law was made, and then Churches did use to gather, without any notice given to
Magistrates or other Churches.

But after the opinions grew on, and experience discovered the danger, there
was a law made that none must constitute any Church but first give notice
thereof to Magistrates and Churches, and since that this course is duly
observed. So both your Art. (W. R.) (you see) are true, and your report honest
and right.

Yet, withal let me give [you] a few Animadversions, by way of brotherly
counsel, and I pray take them well.

1. See, what it is to wrong so many godly Saints, and faithful Churches upon
private various informations, and your own mistakes, and so break that 9.
Commandment of our ever blessed God.

2. Whiles you live, undertake no more Narratives of Church-courses in places
you are no better acquainted withal; lest (at unawarrs) unhappily you speak
evil of things you know not.

3. When a matter lies before you, that admits a double construction; be sure
you ever take it in the better, and not in the worser sense. In those two
reports, you see one good sense (which indeed is the truth) and that I have
given you: Another bad, and that your self have taken, for when you stood
amazed in your Marginalls at the contrariety of the reports; in the conclusion
who must be beaten but either your Informer or else New England Churches, for
practicing such foul, yea more foul contradictions (as you are pleased to
speak) and yet note, you see neither he nor they, but your self only is in
all the blame.

q. p. 43. where there is not one word nor jot to prove that the Churches in
New England are erected without the Magistrates cogniscence.

Then for the proof of both the Articles (where this contradiction lies) he
produces R. M. to W. R. and makes him the father of that monstrous birth of a
foul contradiction now this R. M. is a godly and Reverent Teacher of a Church
there, who would not write such a seeming contradiction without clearing of it
some way or other. Ever have we found him sober and wary in all his
expressions. 2. This R. M. is his old loving friend also (who I know does
dearly respect him,) now I beseech you W. R. in the bowels of Christ, to
consider if this be an act of love toward your dear friend, without his
consent, to discover his letters to the world which were written to your self
in private, (for those that know you both cannot but know who this R. M. to W.
R. is) 2. to make him the Author of contradictions; 3. so to fall upon him in
your Margent, (whom you know so loving a friend, and so godly a man) as one
that reports to you such things for truth as they neither hold nor practice in
N. E.

Which is little better then to give him the lie, I leave my thoughts with you,
desiring you to take notice of it.

In Art. 3. 4. to the end of the chapter, he reports (and that truly excepting
New England.

As, That such Persons as are to enter into Church fellowship do beforehand
often meet privately, to be inwardly acquainted with each other spirits by
conference, prayer, and mutual examination of each other, till they have
approved themselves to each others conscience as in the sight of God, and
before they join, they give notice to the Magistrate and neighbour-Churches,
that such as please may be present at the place, and time of their meeting, to
give them advice, direction, etc. the day appointed is kept with fasting,
prayer, and preaching, etc. toward the end of the day each of those persons
now to be Churched, makes public profession of his faith and the work of
grace in his soul, etc. when the Messengers of the Magistrates and Churches
have heard and considered, if they be unsatisfied (or any stander by) they make
their objections, etc. and if still unsatisfied, they forbid them to enter into
Church fellowship, and so remain without the pale of the Church as they did
before; but if they be sati^fied, the said Persons enter into covenant, then
the said Messengers give them the right hand of fellowship, and returning back
make report to their Churches that sent them.

Now what can W. R. their ways. Yet W. R. fails in his dealing with them in
diverse points, which I desire to advertise him of in the spirit of meekness.

Churches, he well knows the meaning of that word; It does not become gravitie
and holiness to give such deriding words, nor ludere cum sanctis, God hears
all our words, and sees the scope of our hearts therein. But if he meant
innocently in it, I should be sorry, that I once named it.



^nsw.
But there is no such thing done, the Magistrates come themselves in person if
they can, or if not, they send no Deputies or Messengers, the Churches indeed
send Messengers (commonly their Elders) to lend them a word of counsel if they
need, being more experienced in those ways, then (commonly) new beginners are,
to join their prayers with theirs and to give them the right hand of
fellowship: But the Magistrates send no Deputies.

That if the Messengers or any standers by be unsatisfied, they make their
objections as they think fit, until they be satisfied.

Then (in his Marginalls upon it) It Is an hard thing (says he) to satisfy all
comers, in what they please; If any objection be against his life, it must be
presently, and openly declared before the country. This is little wisdom,
less charity.

^ns.
Here are many unwise and uncharitable passages laid unjustly to our charge, and
all those without any proof at all but only H. W. I. W. and who knows where
to consult with them?

As 1. That any stander by, yea all comers may question or object, 2. and that
even what they please, 3. if any failings be in their lives they are presently
and openly declared before all the country. Which things are nothing so: For 1.
None may speak a word, but soberly and orderly; And 2. not without leave
desired and granted; 3. nor how much he will, nor what he please; but things
very weighty and necessary, And 4. not of any failings to their disparagement.
For if they be unsatisfied with any of them in point of discipline, or matters
of fact, they are first to deal with them in private, seeing they know before
both the Persons, that are then to join, and the time and occasion of that
days meeting. And (I am confident) never a Godly sober man will write other
wise: It Is little wi^dome or charity (I am sure) for him to affirm things so
contrary to the truth.

That if the M ssengers be unsatisfied with any of those that are about to
enter into Church fellowship, they are forbidden to enter into Church estate.

^nswer.
This is as wide as the rest. For the Messengers never arrogated to themselves
such power to this day, nay they professedly express against it, constantly in
such meetings) as to forbid their entrance into Church estate. The most they
do (at any time in this case) is, to desire leave to be faithful in
interposing their counsel, and that only, when they see very great cause: And
withal leave them to their Christian liberty.

Now having answered to the Articles, we will speak something to those of the
Marginalls, on this 5. chapter, which are not touched already.

He tells us, Mar. to Art. 2. that there are too many here who run the same

But 1. he knows, (or may know at least) that this opinion is utterly against
our Judgment, practice, and established Jaws in New England,

2. Nor does it any whit reflect upon our cause, (which he is too ready upon
this or any occasion to disgrace) for none are more dependant upon Magistracy,
then those (they call Independants,) from whose principles they never sucked
that dangerous opinion, therefore he did not well to give such by-blowes to
innocent persons and ways.

3. If this should be a blot to our cause, that some of our Church Way hold ill
opinions; let him make it appear, that none of his way are grossly tainted with
Popish and Arminian leavin, or else blot out, this Margent.

(He says) Margent to Art 2. (It seems to him) we have little less then a
compound Presbytery set up amongst us, and Church-Canons in act, though not
and gives his instances for this.

1. As it is (says he) an agreement amongst the Churches and Ministers, that
no Church shall be set up there without the knowledge of other Churches: [There
is a compound Presbyterie]

2. That no man shall preach or vent any new or uncouth tenants, until first
he has communicated them with his fellow Ministers. [A very good Canon.]

3. That such as are to enter into Church estate, do use to meet together
before hand to acquaint themselves in private with each other spiritual estate,
[a Canon]

1. Do Canons bind people to obedience,

2, Do Presbyteries consist of whole Churches, for he says, (as it is an
agreement of Churches as well as Ministers its little less then a compound
Presbytery) If Ministers and people both do rule, who shall be ruled over by
this Presbytery?

3. He answers the thing and contradicts himself (both at once,) for he says
Art. 2. this giving notice to Magistrates and Churches, of a Church to be
erected, is by a law of the general court, and cannot be as he says in
Margent; and agreement of Churches, therefore no Ecclesiastical Canon. Suppose
many Godly Ministers in London should agree amongst themselves, that every one
should preach down the superstition of (that they call) Christmas; and promise
each other, that (till they should give in their reasons to the contrary) they
would not preach for or against discipline: would W. R. call this agreement a
Presbytery, or a Canon?

Let him see then how extremely wide he is in the other.

If Churches (says he) send Deputies or Messengers to represent themselves,
and to act in their room, why not in a Synod as well? Marg. to Art. 6.

^nsw.
If Churches send their messengers, or chosen men, to confer and consult only
in a Synod in their names, without any Authority of concluding and determining
of matters, or (much less) binding their Churches to what they determine of,
(which is our case in New England (as we have said) I know nothing against such
a practice: But if Synods do more, and go further, his allegation is to no
purpose,

If so much time (says he) be spent in joining seven or eight persons together
into one Church, how much time would be requisite to join 3000 together? but
the Apostles went a shorter way. Marg. to Art. 10.

^sw.
Consider first, 1 The Gifts, Graces and ability of discerning, that were in
the Apostles above any Minister now living, who as they were able to preach
with less time of study, so to dispatch and turn over weighty business with
more speed and dexterity, then we are.

2 The extraordinary, wonderful and visible stroke of God upon the spirits and
hearts of men that heard Peter at that time; the meeting; the language; their
understanding of it; Gods assistance of Peter, and blessing on the word, all
extraordinary: Such a day, such a Sermon, such effects as never were before,
nor like to be, to the end of the world; so the power of God was remarkable in
their conversion, so also in their expression and demonstration of it; So that
there needed little trial when God spoke himself from Heaven.

Answer to CHAP. VI.
That we hold, that Christ has invested with all power any that are in
Church Fellowship, that though they be all illiterate, yet they may make and
examine all their Officers, and unmake and depose them when they see cause so
to do, and preach expound and apply the word with all Authority, yea and do
it without any ref^rence at all to their Officers (as Officers) when they have
them.

^nsw.
If I did delight in retorting, I could say of these words, as he of Holland
Ministers Apology, They are a mere Gull, for almost so many words so many
mistakes. The Narratour should have done well first to have proved all the
Churches and Ministers in New England men out of their wits, and void of
common sense, and then he might more easily have made the world believe they
hold and practice such a congeries of absurdities and impossibilities; For else
many of them there being well known to be learned, godly, and sober men, no
wise men will believe him that they can hold, that 1. Illiterate men can
examine Pastors fitness. 2. Depose them at pleasure. 3. Preach, expound, and
apply the word with all authority. 4. And that without any reference to their
Officers at all. 5. And (which is m^st strange) that Christ himself has
invested these illiterate ones with all power to do all these things.


For 1. It is a received practice amongst us, that when any combine into a
Church, there is one at least of them endued with able parts of humane and
divine learning, that either has been a Minister in our native country, or is
fit to be one amongst them, who usually and frequently preaches to them after
they are united. So that al of them are not men illiterate,
and W. R. himself knows this to be true, for the Answer to the 32. quest.
42. (which is very page he here quotes) directly says this in so many words:

2. That those illiterate men do examine their Ministers abilities, and that we
hold they ought; is another great mistake, for so we should put men upon a
work beyond their reach, which were idle; whereas the truth is, that (if the
suffici^ncy of such men as they intend to call into office be not well known
to them) they use to call in the help and assistance of Elders in other
Churches to surveigh their abilities, and to inform them therein, that thereby
(as well as by their own experience of them and discerning of their gifts)
they may be able to give in their suffrage for election when the time comes.

3. For their unmaking and deposing them again when they see cause; We hold
and profess it a thing most injurious to Jesus Christ himself in heaven and
to his Ministers on earth, and such a thing, as (not only Christ will summon
Churches at the great day to answer unto, but) our Churches there will also
expect satisfaction from them for it, if they should thus depose Ministers (as
he says) when they see cause, unless Christ himself shall see good cause to
allow their fact to be done according to the rules of his own word. We are so
far from holding this, that we protest against such practices.

And to show how wary we are in this point, no Church dares trust her own
judgment: but our manner is, as his quoted Author speaks. Answer to 34. q.
of p. 41. Our practice is in removal of Ministers to have counsel and
assistance from sister Churches.

4. Whereas he says also, That we hold that men illiterate should preach with
all authority (which is a work and a task for the ablest Ministers to
perform) is as far from us, as any of the other. For though we deny not,
but in some case, some able judicious experienced Christians, may humbly and
soberly, when necessity requires, as in the want of Ministers and being invited
thereunto, dispense now and then a word of exhortation to their brethren. This
is far enough from Preaching in an ordinary way, with all Authority; which
are words of his own, put in without any ground.

5. But for him to add that we hold they may thus preach when they have
Officers, and that without any reference at all to them, is extremely contrary
to our practice, and furthest from the truth. For this would directly cross
Christ his institution of calling Officers in his Church, and make mere
ciphers of them, whose Office it is not only to preach, but to rule and
govern the Assembly, to open the door of speech to any in the congregation,
and to shut it up by silence, so that none may so much as speak without his
allowance.


And this expression of his is contrary to his own Narration in Art. 8. where
he says, That some of the Acts we ascribe to our Ministers in Office, are to
declare unto their people the mind of God, and to moderate in Church-meetings:
yet here he speaks clean contrary to himself and the truth also.


6. For him to add, That we hold that Christ has invested these illiterate
men with all power to do all these things, so far beyond their power, and
all ordinary possibility, contrary to all rule, and to his own institution; is
to put upon us one of the grossest absurdities that ever was heard of; even to
make Christ cross himself, and to be a patron of confusion in his own house,
by investing them with all power to oppose his own rules of Order.

Now let us see what grounds our Nartatour has to lay all these charges
against us. You will think, sure his proofs are strong, or he would never
have ventured, to blemish so many thousands of Gods faithful I servants in
such sore accusations as these. True he quotes many, and (that I might see his
bottom,) I have surveied all the printed Authors in every page quoted;
and (I solemnly profess it) that none of these particulars rehearsed as he
has laid them down, much less in them all, will any of them bear him out:
and I desire the Reader to try, whether I blame him justly or no, by perusing
the books.

But that you may see how soberly and cautiously his quoted Authors speak of
Churches using their liberty, I will write their own words. Ans. to 32. q. 44.
We conceive every Church has right from Christ to transact all their Church
business, (but mark the cautions) If so be they be able and carry matters
justly, and according to the rules of the word. How different are those words
from his? yet this is the very place he cites.

You say, W. R. you undertake only to tell a story of New England Church way,
but now you make a story of your own, and frame it, and mould it after your
own fashion. You can so add and alter as to make it speak as you please,
that we and our ways may seem odious to the Churches.
Is this a truthing of it in love (as you spoke in the last words of your
Postscript?) and dare you pray for a blessing on your book (as in the last
words of your preface you do, saying) Now the blessing of heaven go with this
poor Pamphlet, when it is so stuffed and bumbasted with such fearful
untruths and slanders?

Art. 3. All which (Church matters) we claim power (says he) to our

Authority is either immediately from the person, from the rule, and that some
call doctrinall, (no less binding then the other.) The former in transacting
Church matters, we use not, for want of Scripture grounds, that Christ has
given any other Churches or their Officers power over us. The latter upon al
occasions we improve by calling in the assistance of other Churches, and hold
our selves bound to follow their counsel as far as it is grounded on the
word.

Art. 6. He says we hold the Church (if she conceives that the Officers do

If he means (while they abide in their Office) they may do this, Col. 4.17.
and if great need require, they may admonish him, and if no other means will
possibly cure, they may at last for incorrigble going on in manifest abuse of
his place, excommunicate him: but in no wi^e, while he abides in O^fice to
resume their power, and enter upon his work. And observe him again quoting
his Author to bear him out in his speeches, who is not for him, but against
him. Ans. to 32. q. 58. where he says, that no member without breach of order,
and presuming above his place, may do our Ministerial acts of Church
Government, but the Presbyters may only do them, Which Ans. of ours does
also take off those Marginalls, page 26. and saves us further labor, and part
of the 7. Art. also that speaks to the same effect.

He says Art. 7. We hold the Officers are all but the Churches Servants in

That all Officers are the Churches Servants was no strange thing to a Minister
far better then any of us, 2 Cor. 4 5. Our selves your servants for Christ's
his sake. But (because he must needs keep his hands inure) he will in this,
(as almost in all his Articles) be still adding something of his own, to
blurre the business. Therefore he says, we hold O ficers but the Church^s
servants, which word [but] implies a vilifying of Ministers and their place:
whereas we have learned to esteem them very highly for their works sake, 1.
These. 5.13. and also that they are only servants, nothing, but, servants;
whereas we know they are Governors also. 2. ^^ adds another expression of his
own, in propriety of speech, and makes a great stir in his Marg. on that
Article, that a Minister should be a servant in propriety of speech, (whereas
it is his own addition, and not our speech.)

Heb. 13.17. with 2 Cor. 4 5. And Christ himself is both, and so is the
greatest Prince in the world, a servant to the Common weal. But his spirit is
loath to acknowledge this, and labors to evade it, by such arguments as the
Bishops made use of for their sole power in the Church; but we know, to be
servants of the Church, is no other then to be for the Church, and not the
Church for them equally; And so he that is a ruler in the Church may be well
said to be a servant. In this case the max^m of law holds good in Divinity,
that a King is singulis mayor, universis minor, so the Church Officers are
singulis maiores, Ecclesia minores.

That every member (except women and those under age) has equal power even
with the Ministers themselves in propounding, obiecting, answering, and
judicial decreeing, and giving sentence in all matters of the Church
whatsoever, whether pertaining to Doctrine or practice.

^sw.
The relator of a story, (especially, when he pretends and promises to write
nothing material but from his cited Authors) should be faithful,
and not make bold grossly to vary from the matter, manner, words, scope and
all, much less to cite Authors that speak against him; but if you read his
Author, Ans. to 32 q. p. 44. (the place cited even now) you will find, That
the Church (indeed) has a right within her self, to transact her own
matters, but how? according to the rights of the word: did the word ever give
people liberty equal with the Minister? does it not professedly condemn such
doing in the Church? and yet this is the only printed Author of our own, that
we can come at, brought to justify this absurd Article.

Besides, all men know (that are seen in our ways) it is against our
principles, to have people propound and give sentence in the Churches decrees,
these being acts of rule proper to the Officers, as Ans. to 32. q. 57. 58.
plainly speaks; and yet he faith, we hold the people have power, yea equal
power, and that with the Ministers themselves, even in all matters of the
Church whatsoever.

Now what will become of his Marg. on this Art. full of exclamation and
clamout? This body (says he) is all an eye, all tongue, all Governors, all
teachers, contrary to the Apostles rule, etc. wherein he fights with a shadow,
and we leave him so to do.

that we hold all things ought to have a full debate in the presence of the
whole society, until all be satisfied.

Mark his words how large, 1 All things. 2 A full debate. 3 It ought to be so
before the whole society? till all be satisfied: And not one word (we can come
at) to prove any of these universalls, whereas (the truth is) we neither hold
so, nor practice so; but bring as few matters as possible, into the Assembly,
rather laboring to take all things up in private, and then make as short work
in public, (when they must needs come there) as may be.

Now what will become of that long Marginall wherein (so ungroundly) he makes
invectives against us and our popular government: (as he is pleased injuriously
to term it) for making store of work in our congregations, in hearing,
debating, examining all matters till all be satisfied, which will take up
(says he) not an hour or two in a week, nor in every day of the week, nor
scarce all the whole week time will suffice to finish business in that kind
that may fall out; and tire Ministers and People, and break the Sabbath, by
keeping Courts thereon, etc. And so goes on at random to speak evil of things
he knows not, whereas many of our Churches are often for many days together,
and weeks, and months also, free from such heaps of matters as he dreams
of, and oftentimes from any at all.

But this is his dealing, first he makes an Article of his own, for words,
matter, manner, with diverse universalls in it, expressly contrary to the truth,
and without one word of authority for it, and then draws his own collections
from it, with course language and bitter invectives.

In Art. 11. he deals exceeding ill (at least) in 6. particulars in this Some
(says he) affirm, that the major part carries matters; others, that unless
all do agree, nothing proceeds, some, that things are not carried by voices at
all, but by truth and according to God.

1. Let the Reader note well, [generally] held by the Churches in New England,
as in the title page 1. And that the Churches in New England walk in one way:
And yet here he brings 3 relations, crossing each other of our practices in a
very material point of Discipline. How can the Churches practice one way and
yet go 3. contrary ways at once? and how can he truly relate such things as
are [generally] held by all the Churches, and yet tells us, how they hold and
practice 3. several things at the same time? For (I confess) if he had
undertaken to declare the practices of some particular men only, and not of
Churches; or of some Churches, not of the Churches of New England in general:
Or if all those Churches were not of one, and the same way, (but he professes
they are, and that without any material difference) then his task were easier
to show how they walk in 3. several ways at once. But now I leave him to
untie the knot, and save his credit.

2. Here he pretends to bring Authors to prove that the Churches in
New England,
(who walk in one and the same way) do walk in 3. several ways: Do his
Authors speak true? how then do we walk in one and the same way without any
material difference, (as he said when he would make his advantage by it) do
they speak false? why then does he bring such for the ground of his Narrative,
that so abuse him and us? or else does he mistake their words, or falsify
them? (that is worst of all) In either of which, we must needs innocently
suffer.

Here you see his speech verified in his Postscript, page 50. That whether the
reports he brings be true or false, it is nothing to him.

3. Now we will scan his Authors quoted, to see whether the blame lies on them
or himself, the first pretended proof is Ans. to 32. q. page 60. 61. 62.

That the whole body must agree, else nothing can be done. Whereas this Author
says no such thing, but the contrary rather, that is; That if the whole body
accord not at first, but the minor part disagreeth, there are other means
partly within them^^lves, and partly by calling in help^ from other Churches to
bring matters to an issue. This plainly shows that some things may be done,
when all agree not.

The 2. proof is for this. That some things are not carried by vo^^es at all,
but by truth and right according to God. And cites Ans. to 32. q 58 60. who
says to this effect, that the word is the only rule whereby all Church votes
are carried; and that matters are not to be carried [only] that is far enough
from [not a all*] by multitud^s of voices. For though the word of truth, (we
all grant) be the only rule of Church proceedings, yet the means of all
transactions in our Church must be the lively voices of the Saints, etc. Thus
his proofs failing, who must be the father of this untruth, cast upon
New England, you may well judge.


4. Note yet further, whereas he quotes Ans. to 32. q. 61. to prove, that
unless all agree nothing can be done: Yet from the same Author, and selfsame
page (in the end of this same 11. Art.) he concludes that though some di^agree,
yet matters may b^ ended, and the rest proceed. That as he often speaks
contrary to himself, so he can make his Author do the same if he list, and
can (as ships use to do at sea) sail contrary ways with the same wind.

5. And yet (which is worse then the other) he would seem to hide and cloak
this dea^ing of his, and lay the fault upon our variableness, and say
[sometimes they grant, etc.] as if we were (like the wind) s^metimes one way,
and som^tim^s another, yet all is from the same Author in the same page, at the
same time. And often you will find this word [sometime] to be brought in
throughout the book in the same sense (as here,) to make the world believe
that our judgments and practices are variable, and to defend him self from a
blow in case he be questioned.

6. If a lesser number (says he) dissent from the greater, neither can give
satisfaction to them, or will receive it from them, and e contra; but still
persist in dissenting, then the major part (after due forbearance and calling
in the counsel of neighboring Churches) admonish -- and censure them.

This (he says in the Margent) is harsh dealing and uncharitable and foolish,
yea destructive, and spares no words that might lay load upon us. Yea, but it
may be his grounds for proof are sound, and so he may be the more bold to
blame us: but he cites only Answer to 32. q. 58. 61. whose words are, If it
appears that such ^s dissent from the mayor part be [factiously or partially
carried] -- and after the rest have labored to convince them by the rule, yet
still they continu^ [obstinate] they are admonished -- etc.

Now speak W. R. is this fair dealing, first to pretend proofs,
and leave out the most material words, and secondly blame us for harshnesse
when there is no cause; here you see is 1 faction, 2 partiality, 3 both those
appearing, 4 obstinacy, 5 continuing in obstinacy after means used according
to rule; all these before the censure of admonition passed; but you in your
relation leave out all these words of your Authors and put in such of your own
as will not so much enforce a censure as these, and then tax us (at your
pleasure) and make bitter invectives against us in your Margent? If I should
have retorted and said, This dealing of yours is harsh, uncharitable, foolish,
destructive, etc. it would have troubled you: (yet you are but a single person,
those whom you reproach are whole Churches, many Churches of Saints) but we
have learned what the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2.23. and to forbear. This Article
being thus laid prostrate, there is nothing at all in his Marginal extraction
worth answer.

He blames us Art. 12. That we deny unto the Church all power to make

1. He has falsified his printed Authors alleged for this Art. Ans. Col. Cap.
7. where is not a syllable of things indifferent, for whereas they indeed
deny Churches power to make laws about Church Government, etc. their words
and meaning are expressed, it is only in such matters where the Scripture has
made laws already and therefore they say, The Churches have no power to make
laws, but to observe those laws which Christ has given and commanded, and
do allege, Mat. 28.20. Deuteronomy. 33.3. John 20.27. None (I hope) can think this
a thing indifferent for us to add laws to Christ his own laws, and this is
all they say.

2. If you mean [by making of lawes] inferring of plain and necessary
conclusions from their proper grounds in Scripture, we grant a power in a
Church so to do: yet so, as they shall not be binding, unless the evidence of
the consequence be made appear, as Romans 14.5.22.23. But i^ [by making of
lawes] you mean a drawing of conclusions from r^mote Principles, such as the
Bishops were wont to do. [All things must be decently done and in order,]
therefore a Surplice, a Cross in Baptism a bowing at the Altar, etc. we deny
it, as an inlet of all humane inventions.

Many of the Marginalls of this 6 Chap. are already answered, some few remain,
as

Who would not long to be churched seeing they are endued with such a vast
power? 23.

I can tell you who longs not for Churching, it is W. R. himself, who with
heart, ^sw.
hand, and pen thus opposes it; but why do not his teeth also water after it?
It is I suppose because the people have a voice in Church matters, and
Ministers cannot carry all. 2 Why do you think W. R. that peoples teeth
should so much water after this way? seeing they are under many watchful eyes,
a strict Covenant, disgraces in the world, sharp censures (and overharsh too
if all you say be true) therefore, why should they so much desire these ways
think you (they being so cross to corruption that would have elbowroom)
unless they did see and feel our beauty and warmth of Christ in them? This is
the true and real cause.

The word (says h) and the Sacraments should be both settled on the 23.

To Pre^ch by Office (which is the preaching that Christ there gives in
commission to his Disciples being called to be Apostles) is proper only to
Ministers, ^swer.
who are to wait upon teaching, Romans 12.7. and this preaching and the
administration of the Sacraments are ever joined together in the same person.
But there is a preaching in a large sense. i. e sometimes to apply a word of
instruction, exhortation, consolation, if necessity shall require, according to
their talent, being invited thereunto, and this may be common to other godly
and able Christians, though not called into Office, as Art 8. 1. 4. where the
whole Church (except the Apostles) were scattered by persecution, and they that
were so scattered: (without distinction of Ministers or people) went to and fro
preaching, therefore others (besides Ministers) in some case may preach the
word; if you take [preach] in a larger sense.

of Peoples unabilitie of judging, electing, voting, etc. from Holland and
Boston, etc.

1. The best people on earth may have their hour of temptation; and personal
failings do not hinder the goodness or truth of the rule. ^nsw.


2. What Church in the world has not possibly, first or last, given or else
may give strange instances of humane frailty: but still you count their way
good.

3. Even those Churches you mention were able at other times, both before and
since, to act, as becomes prudent and godly men, though possibly at that time
they might show themselves to be but men.

4. These persons recovered out of their error, and lay not in it: you should
have mentioned this as well as that.

If the Officers through scruple of conscience, perhaps) refuse to act
according

A most unjust and slanderous report, and without any word of proof;

They complain in print, that their Ministers are slighted amongst them, yea
And mentions for this Cot. on 2 vial. p. 24. of whose words judge, and you
shall not find one word to warrant him.

All his invectives against us on the 11. Article Marg. for extorting a consent
is exceeding slanderous, and not a word true, nor any tittle of proof, for
none are ever admonished for dissenting, but for faction and obstinacy, as his
Authors speak, as was said before.

Let me hear tell the Reader, there are sundry unsound and uncouth passages in
this chap. (as indeed through the whole book) which for brevity. I am forced
to pass by, and (indeed) not worth my time. I entreat thee to take all his
sayings with a grain of salt: knowing from what spirit they proceed.

Answer to CHAP. VII.
IN this 1. Art. there are three things that will be found too light.

1. He affirms, we say, all men are bound to be settled members of a particular
Church.

Yet in his Margent, he affirms, we allow some to be admitted transient
members for a time only. Now to be [setled] and yet (transient) are terms
contradictory, and how the Churches of New England (for they are still the
subject of this discourse) can bind all their members to be [setled*] and yet
allow some to be transient. I know not; He must grant, either a contradiction
in his own words, or prove one in our practice.

2. He affirms we say, That whosoever is not a member of such a Church as is
before described. (i. e. A New England Church) is for the time without the
visible Church of Christ, and quotes Ans. to 32 q. page 11.

That Author is abused, for he says not, Church, as you described, i. e. of a
N. E. Church, are without the visible Church, ^ns. to 32. q. 38.
but that if men be not members of [some particular Church or other] they --
may [in some respect] be said to be without the power and privileges of the
visible Church: (as the Answ. to 9. pos. p. 62. to which this Author points
makes it evident.) Now W. R. I hope knows we hold there are other particular
congregations both in England and else where, (besides our own) that are true
Churches of Christ; of any of which, if they be members, it is sufficient to
make them within the visible Church of Christ. Yet see, how against our
expressed judgments plain words, and the mind of his Authors, he would make
us odious, by laying such a gross tenent to our charge.

3. That whosoever do not become settled members of our Churches, are accounted
despisers, etc. yea wicked and profane.

^nswer.
He again rowles the same unhappy stone he did once before, cap. 3. art. 12.
but you will say; sure; his proofs are strong which make him bold to assert
this, (now) the second time: Therefore I entreat the Reader but to review his
proofs which I will relate verbatim. Ans. to 9. Pos. 62. is one of them he
brings (which says thus,) We maintain communion with all [godly persons,]
though they be not in Church fellowship with us: and Idem. p. 69. To be without
Church fellowship is the case of some believers, and Ans. to 32. q. 11. is
(another of his quoted Authors, whose words are these,) Some Christians that
are not without Christ, yet are not within any particular Church.


These are the Authors and pages he brings to prove the clean contrary, i. e.
that we account all non-members, wicked, and profane men, and yet they
directly say, Some such are godly persons, believers Christ, etc.

Yea, he has an expression (as he lays it down) exceeding gross, which is
this; That whosoever does not become a settled member (if possibly he can)
sins; And (mark what follows) [whether he can or no] -- he is accounted
-- profane and wicked. He would make us up for the most absurd men that ever
lived; that whether m^n can (possibly) (for so his word is) enjoy Church
fellowship or no, he is counted a profane man: But the blemish will, and must
needs fall upon himself.



1. Q. If it be very inconvenient and discommodious to join at present, may
they not delay a while?

He answers, we say [no,] but the place to which he points (Ans. to 32. (...)
quest. p. 38.) says not so, but thus. A man is always bound to join himself
to some Church or other, if possibly he can. Now does not W. R. know there is
[a p^ssibility of convenience] which the Answer must needs mean? for it is a
constant and allowed course in New England for more to forbear joining to any
Church for a time, after they come thither, merely to avoid discommodious
inconveniences, which over hasty joining sometimes puts men upon.

2. Quest. Why do we not give the same liberty to all to be transient M^mbers,
as we do to some?

Ans. Because all are not so free to abide with this or that Church, where they
join at present, (as others are (by reason of some strong desires and
pre-ingagements of joining with some other congregation, which at present they
cannot remove unto, or else the other (as yet,) not entered into
Church Fellowship, and so unfit to receive them at present.

3. Quest. How does this agree with the tenor of the Covenant, that limits no
tim^?

Ans. There may be, (and is) such a clause put into the Covenant of a transient
member, viz. [during their abode with that congregation.]

Quest. 4. How does this agree with the sense of the Covenant, that binds them
to ask counsel of the Church in case of removeall?

Ans. I know not what informations he has received, I should know our practice
as well as W. R. (after my 10. years experience, having been present, at very
many Church-gatherings) but I never heard (or heard of) such a clause put into
any Covenant, and yet three times in his book he mention^ this: Let him learn
hereafter: 1. to be slow in believing informations, 2 slower to print them to
the world, 3. ready to retract them, if nor done already.

He says, Art. 5 That if the examiners conceive a man not fit to enter

He should h^ve added [only for the present] else he leaves the Reader to
conceive that such a person is staid from Church fellowship for ever, which
hims^^^e knows to be untrue, as appears by his own words, in the 7. Art. w
^re he says, that such a Person is staid only for a time, whiles all things
are cl ared.

To his Margent Art. 7. That if the party be a Woman, or weak, who is to

Is not this contradictory to what he said, Chap. 3, Art. 6.
That the declaration of their knowledge and grace must be made in public,
before all the Church though never so many. Now to press all to make their
declaration before the whole Assembly, and yet to accept of some weaker ones
doing of it, more privately (which indeed is the truth) are a contradiction.

Here he makes two objections.

How shall the Church know the fitness of such, (i. e. as are examined in
private?

By the testimony of such godly men whom they betrust with their trial; who
(though they have not absolute power to determine yet) making such report to
the Church as they accept, the Church proceed to admit them.

^bject.
Why is this favor shown to some, not to others, is not this to be partial?
contrary to 1 Timothy 5.21.

Jacob would not overdrive the feabler sort of Ewes and lambs) lest they
should miscarry.

That infants of parents that are no members are accounted to be without the
visible Church, and in the same estate with the Children of Turks and
Heathens, etc. and writes in the Margent, cold comfort to Christstian Parents,
and cold charity to their Infants.

^nsw.
1. It were cold comfort indeed, if that he said were true, but (blessed be God)
it is not so. For though such infants be not as yet Members of this or that
particular Church there, yet (he knows) we account them (and their Parents)
Members of the visible Churches of England, witness^ our writings in print,
discourse of Covenant page 36. etc. Therefore he much forgets himself, to say,
we account them to be without the visible Church.

2. To say, we esteem them as Children of Turks and Heathens, is a most
uncharitable and groundless censure, unworthy of his pen or our practice, to
which we answered before. The Lord forgive him such hard speeches.

For his quotations ( Ans. to 33. q. 20. 21. and Ans. to 9. Pos. 61. 62) if
they will afford him the least word or show for either of these particulars,
I Will take the blame for ever, let any please to peruse them.

But he forgets the law in Israel of amercing and striping the man that brings
an ill report upon a Virgin of Israel, I must mind him of it.

Answer to CHAP. VIII.
This chapter is spent (especially the Margent) in invectives against the
strictness of our Church Covenant, that restrains men, that they cannot have
elbow room, and be at loose end, when they please. I will gather the strength
of all he speaks in this chapter into some objections, and very briefly answer
them.

A member (says he) cannot remove from a Church without our consents, sought
and obtained. Art. 1.

^ns.
It crosses the nature of all Covenants in the world, for to dissolve the
Covenant without the consent of the other: And shall this engagement, so
solemn, so sacred, so deliberate, be loosed at pleasure, (by a man's removal
when and whither he pleases, and it may be also not without apparent sin
without acquainting the Church withal, and getting approbation from the^?

The Church may be partial in their own cause, may not some of other Churches
page 32. Marg.

Shall a man infringe this Covenant, that the Church may be partial? Let this
Church be [first] consulted withal, rather then any other, (and good reason
too,) for the Covenant is made with her: and if it appear she is (indeed)
partial, then let the counsel of other Churches and Ministers be called in,
which was never yet denied any Member, and I hope never will be.

But what need a man consult with the whole Church? what if his reasons be
secret,

The Covenant being made with the whole,

If the Church covenant binds so fast, then (as the Disciples said of marriage)
32.

1. A gracious sp;irit counts it no bondage but freedom, Ex. 21.5.6
let none be weary of this but all be as the servant in the Law, that might
have gone out free, yet (loving his Master well) chose rather to abide with him
for ever.

2. Yet it any man be desirous, and steadfastly bent to depart, the Church never
holds him against his will, though she sees little or no weight in his reasons,
and I hope it is not the case of marriage, so easily to be dissolved.

But if the Church be not satisfied with his reasons, he goes away tacitly
accused,

Sure I am, this is accusing, slanderous, and cursed language: Deuteronomy 22.^ 19.
not fit for a sober and grave man, by that law in Israel, W. R. would go
near to be amercied and striped for this defamation. What would he have them
do when they cannot be satisfied with the grounds of his departure? must they
needs act against light and conscience, and say they are satisfied, when they
are not, especially when they see a brother (happily) running into evil, or
danger, by such a removal? All they can do, is (through indulgence) to
suspend their vote and leave him to his own liberty. And yet they will neither
accuse or slander him, much less curse him or cast him out: These are words
fit for nothing but retraction, and repentance.

If men be once ^^tred into covenant, he is so riveted into it that he can
hardly ever get out of it, but must continue in it, though perhaps against his
conscience. Ibid.



2. If any should be convinced in his conscience (as you say) that there is sin
in it, and should (after all means of information used) solemnly profes and
make it appear ingenuously, that he dares not in conscience proceed on in
those ways; I know no Church that will detain him?

How shall this man, thus dismissed without the Churches approbation and
Letters of recommendation be received into any other Church?

^nswer.
How many lines does he spend (to no purpose) about untying this knot? and when
he cannot unloose it,
(for that he knows not our practices there) he falls out extremely with us,
and our way as harsh and rigid.

I have read of Harpia (a lame woman in Seneca) who still complained of the
roughness of the way that made her limpe, but faw not her own lamenesse to
be the cause. I will not stand to make application, but unloose his knot, by
telling him; Though a Church cannot see cause enough to commend such a person
as we speak of, to another Church, for his Departure from them, as being not
clear in it themselves, yet (he being a godly man, and of a good conversation
in the general) they may and do use to commend him for his godliness, etc.
and in prudence, conceal any supposed error, or infirmity in his departure
from them: And upon such a testimony he is received, and so need not be left
as an Heathen.

Answer to CHAP. IX.

That we in New England conceive men may be true Christians, whether they be
in Church estate or no. But chap. 7. Art. 1. he affirmed absolutely, that
whosoever is not a settled member of a particular Church is accounted by us
profane and wicked.

New England Churches count the same men, at the same time, to be true
Christians, and yet profane and wicked? See what a story this must needs be,
that is thus full of contradictions to it self, and in no small and trivial
things, but in the greatest points of our Church Discipline.

we say, that the Sacraments and some other Church Ordinances are to be
administered, and do belong only to the members of the same Church, and not to
the members of any other Churches.

He speaks flatly contrary to this, cap. 10. Art. 1. in these words, We grant
that several Churches have a communion amongst themselves -- in some
Church-ordinances, as Sacraments: how can both be true? They hold, and they
hold not; They do, and they do not: speaking still of the Churches of New
England generally without the least restraint or distinction; yea as if he had
studied to make his contradiction full, he expressly and in both parts of it
mentions the Sacraments; that we deny communion, in special, in
[Sacraments] and we grant a communion, in special, in the [Sacraments:] and
again, this communion (says he) is neither betwixt Ministers nor members, and
this communion is both betwixt Ministers and members. And both of them within a
leaf one of the other, in his book.

W. R. himself must of necessity grant one of these three things; either, 1 a
manifest contradiction by himself in a maine point in his story. Or 2. that
his Authors or intelligences have written or spoken contrary concerning our
way. And so a man would think he has little ground (in conscience) to build
his Narration upon their testimony. Or thirdly, that has abused them at his
pleasure, and warped their words to what sense he list, all which are very ill
in a Narrator.

Furthermore, I here confidently avouch, and shall make it good; that those
printed writers by him cited, are all consistent to themselves in this point of
administration of Sacraments to members of other Churches, and not one of them
crossing another or himself. Therefore I must again (but with grief of heart
to lay such load on a brother) lay this dealing upon him, in the sight of all
that have been misled by his Narration.

Nay, I will say more; If I can not prove plainly that these Authors cited do
not only not justify him, but write point-blanck against him, I will bear the
blame. vid. Ans. 9. Pos. 62. We do not (say they) appropriate the seals only
to members of our own Church, excluding all other Churches of Christ. and Cot.
Cat. p. 7. The supper (says he) is dispensed to the faithful of the same
body, or recommended to them by a like body, and Ans. to 9. Pos. 78. in these
words. The members of other Churches do mutually communicate at each others
Churches, even as often as Gods providence leads them, and they desire it.

Lastly, if all this be not enough to open his abusing us and the truth; I will
go further to show you, that he still cites the very same Author to prove both
parts of this contradiction; (and this is no new thing, but frequent with him.)
For in cap. 9. Art. 1. he cites Ans. to 9. Pos. 62. to prove we hold communion
with other Churches and their members: and also cap. 10. 1. he cites the same
Author and page for one Churches communion with another in the Sacrament. But
herein Art. 5. when he would prove the contrary. i. e. that we hold no
communion with other Church members in the Sacrament: he brings the self same
Author and page for that end, i. e. Ans. to 9. Pos. page 62, etc.

And thus he does not with that mentioned one Author only, but serves the rest
in like manner, as Ans. to 32. q. Apol. R.M. to E.B. must all come in to avouch
both parts of his contradiction; the one in chap. 10. 1. for communion; the
other in Art. 4. 5. of this 9. chap. against Communion. And this he does not
this once only, but in other places in this book (as we have showed; and
shall again) and yet these Authors give him no occasion thereto, but speak
all the self same thing plainly, and constantly without any variation.

We hold that a man that is sui juris, may not lawfully stand a member of such
a Church in which he cannot enjoy all Gods ordinances, or where any corruption
is suffered, but if he be joined to it, he must separate from it.

New England, but of the Parish Churches in Old-England; nor of all the
Churches in Old-England, but of such only, where a man either cannot enjoy
some ordinances of God; or else live there without sinful conformity: (for
this was written by his Author in the time of the Bishops reign.)

2. He alters the Authors words and meaning, and that grossly, for he says,
we hold a man must not continue in such a Church where any corruption is
[suffered unreformed.] But his Author says, in such parish assemblies where a
man shall and must (himself) conform to those corruptions, there his standing
is unlawful. Ans. to 32. q. 32. So he leaves out the very nerves and strength
of the place which is the ground of our both with drawing. i. e. a necessity of
sinning.

N. E. Primer in admissions of members, 3. for book prayers, 4. now, (and that
more fully then before) for [imposed] prayers and set Leiturgies: whither he
will go next, I know not. If God had not pitifully left him to himself in
this Narration, (I am confident) he would not have come thus far as to have
used such arguments as these, that if we in New England allow set forms of
Psalms, and of blessings of the people, and forms of Church-covenants; and of
Catechizing, etc. Why not as well set forms of prayers imposed? But to this
having answered before, I leave him to the Father of truth to show him his
error.

Answer to CHAP. X.
We grant that several Churches have a communion amongst themselves, whereby
they do and may partake with each other in the Sacraments.

Of the contradiction between this and and chap. 9. Art. 4 5.

Only here note 1 the fulness of affirmation (in this Art.) for our communion
with other Churches in the Sacrament; we have (says he) a communion amongst
our selves. 2 in the Sacraments, (in special,) 3 with several Churches, 4 we
do and may partake, 5 each with other, 6 mutually, 7 and this both betwixt
Ministers and people, and 8 we not only practice this, but grant it may be so;
And yet when he comes to speak of the other part of the contradiction ( i. e.
that we have no communion in the Sacraments) (as if he studied to cross
himself) he is as full in his denial of it. vid. cap. 9. Art 4 5. 2. Note how
thick his sayings and unsayings fall in. Cap. 9. Art. 1.
He affirms, we hold Communion with other Churches and Church members, and
then presently in 4, 5. Art. of the very same chap. he expressly denies, that we
hold any such communion: Then again in the very next chap. (the 10.) Art. 1.
he says, as full as can be, that we hold communion mutually with other
Churches; and by in chap. 12. 8. as fully and expressly denies again that we
hold any such thing. The man being an able and judicious man in other things,
it is more remarkable, he should be thus extremely left to confound himself,
while he sought to confound our poor innocent Churches. Let any carefully
observe in all these things mentioned, whether I have not dealt heartily with
him, or no.

Art. 2. He reports, 1 That one Church may give power to another over any of
her members for excommunication. 2 That the Minister of one Church may convey
power to the Ministers of another for the administration of the Sacraments.

Neither of both which do we hold or practice. The only Author cited (that
we can come at is Cot. Cat. p. 7. whose words are these. The Supper is
dispensed by the Minister to the faithful of the same Church, or to such as
are commended to them by a like body: See if here be one tittle to bear him out.

Yet from these assertions (which he says) we hold, he flings rebukes upon us
in his comments upon his own Text. p. 37. whereas indeed we might reprove
his, 1 misreporting, 2 abusing his Author, 3 reproving us without cause.

Without letters of recommendation from one Church and Minister to another,
(says he Art. 3.) in any case, to administer any Church ordinance to any
Church member but their own upon any pretense whatsoever.

1. Here is neither truth nor proof to be seen.

2. Letters of recommendation for public participation, are not sent from one
Minister to another, but from a Church to a Church.

3. We hold it not unlawful (but do often practice) to receive other members
to communion with us without letters; especially if they be known to any of
our Church, else such letters are desirable; but he says, We do it not in
any case, upon any pretense whatsoever, which is utterly false and without
proof.

That we are so strait-laced, that if a company of godly people should sit
near us (where our power reaches) differing from us only in some points of
Church Government, they should not only not be owned as a sister Church, but
should be in danger of severe punishment by our Magistrate.

H. W. who this should be, (I profess) I cannot tell, unless some malignant
or back-friend amongst us there, or whether such a thing were ever written in
these words and sense, I know not; and if it be certainly so written, and from
a godly man, yet it is but one single witness and I am forbidden (and so are
all others) 1 Timothy 5.19. to receive an accusation against one Elder, (much more
against all the Elders and Churches in New England without two or three
witnesses: therefore we dare not believe it.

2. To this very point in hand, the Ans. to 32. 9. p. 82, 83. speaks fully and
fairly, which W. R. well knowing, (for it was written to himself amongst
others*) deals not heartily to conceal that Answer of a printed book from
known Authors of credit in New England, because it is fair and loving (for
what other ground could he have?) and bring in the Answer of H.W. (a man we
know not) which is harsh and distasteful; how can the concealing of that, and
relating of this seem ingenuous, or friendly to us, or the truth?

Answer to CHAP. XI.
HE makes report of a groundless course (as he calls it) in the Church at
Cambridge in New England, where (says he) the people use to meet together
privately, each one to hold forth the work of grace in his or her soul, from
the first conversion to that day, so that their Pastor might know their growth
in grace. And, (says also) that (as some report) the end of this meeting was
to cast out by excommunication, non-proficients.

a groundless meeting; and so cast dirt upon it? for he makes proof of no
other end besides that.

2. Did these godly people ever cast any out of the Church there, merely for
non-proficiency?

3. He has still forgotten that rule in 1 Timothy 3.19. that requires two or
three witnesses to be brought forth, etc. who yet proceeds upon (I know not
what) relations to believe and report, yea and print to the view of the world,
what (in his opinion) may detract from a Reverend Elder, and a godly Church
also.

No marvel, he calls his Book [a poor pamphlet,] truly it is so indeed, if
all things we have discovered in it be well weighed; and it will appear yet
poorer (before we have done) to any candid reader. It is our humble suit to
heaven, that God will discover to himself the weakness and error of his
dealings herein, for the humbling of his spirit.

Answer to CHAP. XII.
A Short Answer might serve to this long Chapter, for most of it (as also of
the two next) is but a repetition of things spoken once or twice, (some of
them) thrice before, and answered to already. He said in the beginning of his
preface he wanted not work^, but (it seems) now toward the end of his book,
he is more at leisure, (and so he thinks his reader is also,) else why he
should so double and treble the very same things (totidem verbis) I know not,
unless happily to make a deeper impression of his own mistakes in his reader.

In Art. 1. he tells us, that after a Church is gathered, it is often some
years

Whereas it is our usual and constant course (as has been said) not to
gather any Church; until they have one amongst themselves,

In his Marg. on that Art. he says he is told to his comfort, that many
Old-England, are there laid aside, because they aim at men of special parts.

1. We desire proof for this aspersion unjustly cast on us,

2. That good Ministers are laid aside there, 2. many good Ministers, 3 on this
ground, because they aim at men of special abilities And whereas he says, he
was told so, that is not sufficient: Let him produce his Authors, or it must
lie on him.

I wonder he counts it strange (in Art. 3.) that we should desire to have a

Is it not a thing most natural for a body to employ it is own Members?

To the 4 Art. of ordaining Ministers by private men.

Let him not wonder at this, for Numb. 8.10. he may see, the Levites were
Church Officers, and the Children of Israel were not; yet the Children of
Israel did lay their hands upon the Levites; And though all the Children of
Israel could not do this, yet some principal ones did it instead of the rest.
So it may be lawful in some case to do the like. 2. If people have a power of
election of Officers, (which is the greater) then why may they not ordain them
(which is the less) unto the office which before they elected them to? But I
refer the Reader to see more of this, in Mr. Mathers late answer to Mr.
Herle, page 45.

We hold the imposition of hands of the Presbytery, but a mere formality.

^nswer.
Does he judge all the Churches and Ministers of Christ, there, so devoyd of
Religion, reason or the light of common sense, as to account a venerable
Ordinance of God [a mere formality?]

But that you may see whether he deals well with us or no, vid. Ans. to 34. q.
p. 67. where its expressly said, That though the essence of a Ministers call
consists in Election, yet we look at ordination by imposition of hands,
necesary by divine institution] can he with any show of reason explicate a
thing [necessary by divine institution] by [a mere formality,] is this right
commenting upon the text? And note also that this very place cited is one
proof he brings for this Article, but whether for him or directly against him,
I pray judge.

For the other printed proof (discourse of Covenant, p. 23.) I confidently
affirm there is not any one word, or the least show for such an expression,
let the Reader prove whether I wrong him or no, but only that people have power
to choose their own Officers.

Let him not delude the world by thwacking quotations on his Articles, when
it is an usual thing that some of them speak nothing for him, others directly
against him.

That all that are elected by the people to prea^h (which is one chief duty of
the Pastor) and do receive by compact the dues by law to the Pastor, ^^uld
be their Pastor.

Act. 8.4. The scattered Church, without respect to an office, are said to
[preach] the word every where. Now if a man be called by a congregation, to
exercise his gift in this work of preaching only, and not to be a Pastor to
them: should he not exceed the bounds of his call, if he should be (as W. R.
would have him) a Pastor to that people? And by this reason also he condemns
all Lecturers (and I suppose himself in so doing) (for they are called to
preach, yet no man looks on them) or they on themselves, as Pastors of that
place, where they so exercise. As for the dues he receives for his preaching,
whether more or less, by a compact or otherwise, whether of the same kind with
the Pastor or not) is not material, for it is his call, not his wages, makes
him a Pastor or no Pastor.

In the Marg. of the 6. Art. he says, that one Pastor or Teacher alone, or

It has neither proof nor truth,

Art. 7. That in our practice we usually confound the Pastors and Teachers
office,

This has no more truth then the other, Romans 12.7, 8. Though in such
congregations where there is but one, he labors to improve his talent both
ways, for the present necessity till that defect be supplied, (as good reason
he has so to do.) And for his proof, (see how punctual he is) he turns us
to Mr. Cot. Sermons on the Revel. and other Texts. Would he have us look over
all Master Cot. Sermons, which may be at least 500. or 1000 pages, to find his
proofs, and when we have done, we shall be just where we were, for Mr. Cot.
(we know) is expressly contrary to him, and for that we turn him not to all his
Sermons as he does us, but to one certain place in his Cat. p. 2. whose words
are these; The Pastors special work is to attend upon exhortation; The
Teacher on Doctrine: and his own, and others practices there run accordingly.

In the Marg. to this Article he says, That some of us do question the
Communion 2 that others, (to uphold it) have invented a power in one Minister
to translate his own power to another Minister to administer the seals and
censures to any of their members.

Both these are ungrounded, unproved, expressions,

As for that Inference he seems to draw that every Ministerial act and
irregularly done it seems void, and so millions of persons unbaptised to this
day.

This might have been spared for that maxim in law well approved of by Divines
in this case (quod fieri non debuit factum val^t) holds good here. Zipporah had
to have circumcised her son (for it was proper to the man, as Genesis 17.9.23.)
yet being done, it was not void or null, and though a Priest (popishly
affected) should baptize a child with many invented superstitious, the child is
not looked on as unbaptised

To Art. 9. he says, we hold, All other acts besides administration of the
Sacraments are common to members, as well as to Ministers.

1. It is not true, (we hold no such thing.)

2. The proof he brings no whit reaches it.

3. It is directly against his own Authors, he builds upon Answer to 32. q. p.
57. The calling (says he) of Assemblies, and dismissing them, preaching the
word and prayer, administering the seals, permitting to speak in the Assembly,
enjoining silence, voting of matters, pronouncing of censures, etc. These are
acts which the Presbyters may do and no other members.

4. It is contrary to himself, chap. 6. Art. 8. where he setts down the
several acts which he himself says we ascent unto our Officers.

That if a Minister who lays down his ministry upon just grounds he is now
become as a mere private man.

[meere private man;] but he is not able to speak without disparaging.

That the end of our Ministry is only the building up of men already
converted, (as supposing our members are all real saints already,) nor are we
bound by our Office to attend to conversion of souls, and if any be converted
by us, it is accidental.



As for the Author cited to prove this Art. ( Ans. to 32. q. 80. 81.) he
offords him not one title toward it; therefore I look upon this Art. as a
devised thing of his own, as a great part of his book is.)




So still he keeps his old custom, 1 frames a false Art. of his own, (as if it
were ou^s;) 2 Then pretends a proof, which is none; 3 Then falls out with us
for holding such absurdities; 4 Lastly draws his inferences from his own
premises: this is his dealing all along his book.

And then, (to make all up) he fall a taxing some brethren of that way here,
for two things, 1 for neglecting to build up their own Churches at home;
whereas he should first have proved, that they have not a call to be absent for
a time for their Churches good, and with their consent.

2. For laboring to convert others here, not so much to grace (says he) as to
our Church Covenant. But let our own Sermons preached (not in corners, but) in
the face of thousands testify for us before God and men what the scope of our
preaching has been and is.

He tell us Art. 14. First, That the Ministers in New England are maintained 2.
That this is cast in according to their weekly gains, 3 and distributed to
them according as the Deacons think fit.

Here are three particulars affirmed, and hardly any one of them true: Cor. 16
1. Yet so as (if there be much given in.) Some Churches do (though others do
not) appoint the over plus [towards] the Ministers maintenance, 2 This is not
given in by the peoplee, according to their weekly gains, (for that is an
addition of his own) but as God has blessed them with an estate in the
general, for suppose a member that is rich, though he has not gained but lost
the week last past, yet he contributes on the Lords day following; 3 nor is
this dispensed to the Ministers (in those Churches where any part of it is so
given) though by the hands of the Deacons yet not (for proportion) as they
please, for this were to set the Deacons, above the Pastor and Teacher) but by
the Church, who usually twice in the year or oftener, do meet to consult and
determine of the sum to be allowed for that year to their Ministers, and to
raise it, either from the Churches treasury (so much of it as there is to be
had,) or by a contribution to be then made on purpose.

8. And for one proof of all those he brings Ans. to 32. q. 77. wherein is
nothing to prove any one of the particulars mentiond, but somethings rather
against him. For there it is said, 1 that our Ministers maintenance must be
honorable for his person, charge, and for hospitality; 2. not as alms and
courtesy, but as debt and duty, and to be paid according to rules of justice,
etc. 3 but for a way of settled and stinted maintenance there is nothing done
that may (mark this) [except from year to year.] do but compare these words
with his narration.

Now upon these premises unfoundly laid, he builds many clamorous
constructions in his Marg. which of themselves must needs fall with the ruins
of their foundation, without any trouble of mine.

Then he falls upon some of us in particular (whosoever they are) for

1. I must here profess solemly (as in the fight of God) for my part,
compounding at all, much less strictly (as he says) require so much, and so
much, least of all, refuse to preach, when such sums of the peoples own
voluntary profering lie unperformed; But yet notwithstanding, go on as
painefully and constantly in their preaching to them, as before.

2. Let me ask him one question, (for it is the third time he has been
harping on this string,) that if he (on good grounds) knows any to do
otherwise, were it not a better way, more loving and suitable to the rule of
Christians admonition, (in personal failings,) to deal privately and
perticularly with such brethren, (for there are but very few of them here, and
it were easily done.) Then (in stead of telling themselves) to print it to the
world to their discredit? But if he indeed knows none (as I verily believe he
does not, but goes upon surmises, and so casts imputations upon them
ungroundedly, the sin is the greater, and God (I hope) will find a time (in
mercy) to deal with his conscience about it.

He holds still his old course, 1. a false Article 2. pretended proof, 3.
inferences at pleasure, 4 invectives against us, his arrows are shot against a
brazen wall, let him take heed, least by a divine hand they rebound back.

Paul's rule, 1 Timothy 5.19. he is to produce two or three witnesses for one
accusation, yet he makes three several accusations and that of three Churches,
without any one witness, therefore till the true father appears, we must
still lay the brat at his door.

Answer to CHAP. XIII.
Of private men prophesying, etc. It is answered before, for this is his fifth
time of repeating it (even to loathing,) It is high time to have done with it
now.

But the oftener he has said his lesson, the worse he has learned it, for
there is scarce one right word in this Art. either consonant to the truth, or
his Authors quoted for it; as I shall make it appear by comparing his article
with the Authors words: ^t. Cat. p. 6. ^lles them ^ophets.
his 1 Author is Ans. to 32. q. p. 77. 78. first W. R. says; this prophesying
is done by [meere] private men. His Author tells us, men happily endued with a
gift of Prophecy. 2 He says, they preach for confutation, as if they must be
polemicall men able to wade through controversies But not one word of that in
the Author. 3 He says, they expound and apply the word with all authority, but
no word sounding that way in the Author these words [with all authority] being
properly applied by Paul to the off^c^rs, not to the Prophets Tit. 2.15. 4 He
says, this Prophesying is ordinary: the Author says, they are not called to
Prophesying ordinarily (if by ordinary he means frequently and usually,) but
sparingly and seldom, frequently when the Officers ar^ sick or absent, etc.

His other Author cited is Mr. Cot. Cat. p. 6. and as in the other quotations
he added diverse particulars of his own which the Author never mentioned: So in
this (as corruptly) he leaves out many material things which would have given
light to the point in hand. To instance, such (says Mr Cot.) as prophecy must,
1 be allowed for Prophets, 2 not prophecy till the Elders have done, 3 not
unless the time permit, 4 and then also they must be first called thereunto by
the Elders. But W. R. has not one word of all these: that so much serve to
clear our practice.

Grant a Narratour, but this liberty, to add, alter, and abstract as he
please, and when he please, and then what kind of Narration (do you think)
will he make? had I time to anotomize all his Articles, as I have done this,
and compare his proofs, I should make him appear more fully, but I give only
a touch for brevity.

2. He would here cast a blur by saying, there is a book printed called a
Sermon preached at Plymouth by a comber of wool. But I entreat the Reader to
put him to his proofs, for he produces no other grounds, but [I am
certified,] so he might scandalize all the Churches in the world.

3. He comes in with [some of them] tells us that Prophesying is seldom used,
that so he might cast a blot on us, as if we were at variance amongst our
selves (which course he often takes) and that [some of us] are for frequent,
others for seldom Prophesying, and yet (do but mark the man,) it is not
Authors, and Authors he quotes to prove this (as one would think he should,)
but only one, and the same Author which he quoted before; and (which is more)
this Author not one hairs breadth varying in his speech.

He says in this Marg. 1 that some of our people have their farms so far 2
that the people of late grow more violent in claiming their pretended liberty
of prophesying; 3 deserting and contemning their own Ministers and Churches
because they are not suffered to enjoy it.

I should know New England as well as I. P. or M. B. or any of his informers,
London to the godly Ministers and people of the city? I will lay this (as all
other calumnious aspersions, ungroundedly cast upon our Churches) upon his
back, as the raiser of them, until he produces two or three witnesses before
us that will avouch them according to Paul's rule. 1 Timothy 5.19.

To Art. 2. After their Preaching (says he) they take upon them to bless the
III.
as the Ministers do.

I desire his grounds and proofs (for here he brings none, i. e. that Answer
to 32. q. 38. (whom he has often quoted) expressly says, that blessing the
people in the name of the Lord is an act proper to our Officers, which no
member may presume to do.

We have (says he) a course before our dismission (i. e. of the Assembly) to
give leave to any -- publicly to propound their doubts, make their objections,
and to argue pro and con, and in his Marg. makes a grievous and bitter outcry
against us for so doing, and adds also, that it is an abrupt course at first
dash openly to implead the Minister of error before all the people -- and that
it is scandalous and reproachful, -- it argues not so much civility, piety,
charity, nor prudence, etc.

Answer. ^de 9.
1. If a better then himself durst not reproach one worse then our selves,
though he had ground enough to have done it; (I hope) then W. R. dare not
without any ground at al^, bring these sore accusations against so many
Churches.

But what his proofs are, you shall see Mr. Cot. Cat. p. 6. (whose words are
these) It may be lawful for any (except women) to ask questions at the month
of the Prophets. 1 Mr. Cot. speaks only of asking questions [of the Prophets]
(i. e. such members as prophecy) he adds [of the Ministers also.] 2. Mr. Cot.
seems to speak of the matter then delivered only, for he mentions no other.
He adds [ matters formerly delivered also,] 3 Mr. Cot. excepts women; He says,
[leave is given to any] without exception. 4 Mr. Cot. speaks soberly, [ it may
be lawful: he speaks peremptorily, [wee have a course, etc.] 5 Mr. Cot.
allows only to [aske questions,] but he adds (a bedroule of his own to make
us odious) they may (says he) object argue pro and con about any matter, etc.
yea, they do abruptly, at the first dash openly implead the Minister of error
delivered before all the people, -- So as it is a scandal to the people and a
reproach to the Minister, etc. all this is his own addition.

Then for the other cited Author (Answer to 32 q. 78) he deals more grosely
with him then the former, who is in a manner point-blanck against him, yet he
boldly gives him up for an Author: his words are these, we never knew any
Minister that did call upon the people thus to do, (i. e. to propound
questions) and such calling upon them is far from us, some think the people
have a liberty to ask a question -- upon very urgent and weighty cause, none
judge the ordinary practice of it necessary, but (if not meekely and wisely
carried inconvenient, if not utterly unlawful, and therefore such asking of
questions is seldom, used in any, in most Churches near. True it is in the
times of the opinions some were bold in this kind, but these men are long
since gone -- the Synod and Sermons have reproved this disorder, so that a man
may now live from one end of the year to another in these congregations, and
not hear any man opening his mouth in such kind of questions. These the
Authors words.


Now good reader, do us the favor to give righteous judgment, whether these
words cited by him make for him, or against him, where is, 1 giving leave, 2 a
course of giving leave? 3 to any? 4 to object and urge pro and con? and 6
(which is horribly gross) to implead the Minister of error at the first dash,
and that openly before all the people, etc. Whereas his own cited Authors tells
him the contrary: 1 That it is done not often, but seldom. 2 Not many
questions, but a question. 3 Not upon slight, but weighty and very urgent
grounds: 4 Not rashly and boldly, but wisely and meekely. 5 And this not
per^mptorily concluded of by all, but [some only think they have a liberty.] 6
And not that it is now so much done, but was for a time, by the bold
opinionist, who are now chased away long ago. See what a vast gulf betwixt
the Author and W. R.

Now for him to read over distinctly all these expressions in this book (for
that answer was written to himself from godly men in New England) yet to
produce it, as a proof for his Art. and the Marg. (which in common sense is
contrary to it,) I stand amazed at it, and wonder with what face he could print
it, or having done it, how he can let his book be kept from the fire thus long?

Yet further note, our Narratour undertakes to relate only such Church-courses
as are [generally] by the Church in New England practiced (as page 1. title.)
How then can he (with honesty) bring in this [asking of questions] amongst such
kind of general Church courses of ours, whereas his Author plainly says,
this asking of questions is not [Generally] practiced, nor by [all] the
Churches, but [sildome in any] Church, and in most Churches [never at all] and
that one may live (as he says) from one end of the year to another, in our
congregations and not here [any man] open his mouth in such kind of questions?
What will not W. R. boldly attempt against his brethren of the independent way,
and their Churches, that cites these very words I have related, to prove such
Church courses in New England, as are generally practiced amongst us?

Answer to CHAP. XIIII.
TO Marg. on the Title, Some (says he) grow shie of the word [independent]

If the word be rightly taken, (as in Answer to 32. q. 46. it is expounded,)
for one Church that is not under the power of another, or in subjection to a
Presbytery, but as having received power from Christ to govern her self
according to his laws. Then all accord to it. But if the word [Independent]
be abusively taken, (as it is often with the vulgar) for such a Society as are
neither subject to Magistracy, nor regard the counsel of other Churches, but
are a conceipted and selfe-sufficient people, that stand only on their own
legs. Then we have cause to be shie of a word, that may render us odious
without cause.

To Marg. of 1 Art. That we have store of imperative Churches who may



We hold our Church power absolute and imperial.

ministerial, which is far from [absolute and imperiall] (words fitter for
Emperors of this world then the Churches of the Saints.) I charge it on his
conscience (as in the sight of God) either to make this appear, or else
vindicate us (as becomes an honest Christian to do.

And for his two printed Authors cited (for we cannot come at his private
letters) if there be any one word, or show of ground from them to maintain his
speech: Let me bear the shame of it, for I here avouch the contrary, under my
hand.



^nsw.
1. The Reader may well see it is his own saying not ours, for he brings no
proof but from Barrow and Johnson, who cannot well give in their testimony for
our Church ways in New England, because they never came there, yea were in
their graves (both or one) long before ever we had a being in New England.

2. There is no truth in it, for we hold a Church may delegate some men, and
send them forth in their names and stead, with authority to act for them in
this or that particular business of trust as Act. 15.2. And yet he has boldly
now twice or thrice affirmed the same thing of us, and brings no proof at all
for it; and it is answered before cap. 2. Art. 3.

Yet some tells us, (says he) that Mr. P. and Mr. W. were sent hither by the
Churches to negotiate for them, etc.

Some tell us? Sir, you are a man of judgment and gravity, able to instruct
others; You know you may not blemish your brethren, and sl^nder Churches upon
such poor and weak grounds, as [it is reported, I am informed, some tell us.]
And yet how often in your book, have you used this course of dealing toward
your bretbren and their Churches? (Some tell us) indeed, is warrant enough for
people that have no other business, to make three farthing books of and
thereby fill the world with tales: but oh, far be it from any Reverend
brother to blot his paper so unwarrantably.

2. Though your ground of this report be weak, yet (it seems) your credence
is strong, for you make inferences from these premises against us. And as your
ground is bad, so your end in relating of it is as bad, i. e. to cast a blot
upon our Churches, as if their practices did cross their principles.

3. What will you say now W. R. if your informations prove false, as indeed
they do; for neither did their own Churches, nor all the Churches send Mr. P.
and Mr. W. but the whole state of New England (or General Court) with one
consent upon some special employments which cannot yet be all finished.

Now I have told you the truth, let me give you a few Animadversions. 1 Bestow
to believe ought against your brethren hereafter. 2 Slower to report it to
others. 3 But never print it, without manifest grounds and a good call. 4 If
you have done otherwise, be swift to recall it.

To Marg. of Art. 4. wherein he disputes against us about our non-communion, by
two arguments.

1. Because non-communion is in substance the very same with Synodicall
excommunications, (he says) a man is cast out of the Church, and given up to
Satan as well as by excommunication.

If it be so, W. R. 1 Why have you said so often (in opposition to our way) that
our Churches have no power over one another; [authoritative.] Whereas, if they
be not obeyed (it seems) they can pass as sore a censure as all your
Synodicall Authority? For you can do no more (by it) then excommunicate, and
so far (you say) we can proceed.

3. Why then do you call us, abusively, [Independants?] for (by your saying)
it stands us in hand [to depend] as much upon other Churches, for counsel and
admonition, as you on a Presbytery or Synod, or they will give us up to Satan,
as well as a Synod.

4. Why then do not you accord with us in this point of Non-communion; (seeing
in it your selves and we can comfortably close) rather then strive with your
brethren for Synodicall excommunication, to which their judgments cannot
yield* seeing that is the same in effect with this? This being attended to will
end a great part of the difference?

But whiles we oppose Synodicall excommunication, we establish it (says he) by
standing for non-communion it being the same in effect with the other. ibid.

Though W. R. thinks they are both one, I cannot. For that is positive,
withdraw, and call in that only (which once they gave (which is the right hand
of fellowship) by the other the Synod or Classis take away that which they
never gave, or had power to bestow (which is the excommunicates membership in
their own Church) So that when we stand for the one (as having no rule to carry
us further,) we do not establish the other: This is his first argument against
us about non-communion.

The second, that it is more cruel, and more dangerous then Synodall
excommunication.



But his arguments for the cruelty and danger of Non-communion are these four
Reasons.

1. Because by this, whole Churches (says he) may come to be cast out Ans. So
they may as well by a Synod excommunication, for if a Synod has power to cast
out one member of other Churches, then) by the same reason) 2. 6. 10. and so a
whole Church as well, and Churches too, for where will you stop? 2. By this,
(says he) the Church deserted is left to it self in their error. Ans. Look
what means public or private a Synod may use for any man or Churches
regaining, the very same means (to the highest extent) may the other Churches
use likewise. 3 This causes endless rents. Ans. Show in any point wherein, or
why more then the other. 4 This (says he) hinders not the infection of others,
but that by cutting off the rotten members the rest are kept sound. Answ. Do
not this cross what he said before? that by non-communion a man is cast out
and delivered up to Satan? yet here he denies it. Ob.


Popular Government is one cause of Schisms in New England, and quotes Mr.
Parkers letter. Answ. Blessed be God, that under that Government of ours (which
you call or rather miscall Popular) the very neck of Schisms, and vile
opinions, (brought to us from hence) was broken; When here amongst you where
there is not such a Government, they walk bolt upright amongst you and crow
aloud. You shall do better to lay aside this objection till a Presbyterian
Government have healed these sore breaches in these Churches here.

Answer to CHAP. XV.
We hold the Magistrate cannot lawfully compel men to enter into a Covenant
with God.

a National Covenant; But you must take his own words, as for proof he
brings none, (and I believe he cannot) but Bar. and Rob. which never came
there, and the Apology which (as he says) lies by him: As long as I lived
there I never heard or knew the Churches held so. But he must have leave to say
any thing.

Marg. says, that many of us hold the Magistrate has nothing to do in

Let him know, and all others that all the Churches with us do abhor that
vile opinion; Some, I believe, Road-Island and some others banished from us,
do hold so, but those are gone out from us, and are not of us (as it is said)
1 John 2.19. If he had considered this distinction of the blessed Apostle, he
durst not have said many of us hold so. This must go amongst other aspersions
to be revoked of, and recalled.

Art. 2. That we hold, that Christians may and ought to set up new Church^s, 1
without the consent of a Christian State: 2 yea, against their commands: 3
their peremptory cammands:
4 and against the established laws of that State: 5 yea and in the midst of
and against the minds of such Churches as we freely acknowledge the true
Churches of God.

He reserved a strange Article for the last; If I had not read it,

To all which I say, 1 there is neither truth in it, nor any proof of all, for
any of these six, except the first. But God and men, our consciences, and
writings, our professions, and constant practices will rebuke, and testify
against this misreport. For now you would (in reason) expect some proofs,
would you not? for this accusation;
You shall hear his cited Author himself speak. Answ. to 32. q p. 35, 36.
(which says thus.) Observing the things commanded of God, in a peaceable way,
yielding due reverence to all in Authority, I and praying for them. This
observing Gods Ordinances cannot be unlawful for lack of the command of man.
The scope of all his Author speaks is this, That Christians may observe Gods
Ordinances though they have no command from the Magistrate so to do; now where
is doing of this against his commands? His peremptory command, yea against his
laws? and established laws? and not the laws of an Heathen, but a Christian
State? and not against a State only, but against the minds of all the Churches
of God amongst us? These are all his own additions, that so he might load his
brethren with contempt. How durst he bring in all these words as his Authors,
and yet he knows they all are his own!

2. As it is against truth and without ground, ^o it is contrary to himself
and his own words Chap. 5. Art. 2. and Art. 4. where he expresses that notice
must be, and is given to the Magistrates and Churches before their joining in
Church fellowship. Yet here in this Art he says, we hold (...) and ought to
do it without their consents, and against their minds; how can th^se agree?

And whereas he quotes R. M. to prove that before Churches joyn^ they give
notice thereof to the Magistrate and other Churches; yet here he bring the same
R. M to prove, we may and do join without their consent.

Let this also be noted, that he speaks not only of our judgment, what we
hold, we may and ought to do in this case; but of our practice also, what we
[doe,] as appears in last words of the Margent: we look he should make that
good also, i. e. that in our practice we do thus oppose State and Churches in
our joining in Church fellowship.

5. He again crosses himself, for in this Art, he says, we hold that
Christians may and ought to set up new Churches against the minds of other
Churches, and yet he in his Marg. says, that we deny them (i. e. himself and
some others) any liberty to do thus.

Ans. He must prove either that we hold him and the rest no Christians, or that
we cross our own rules and principles, or else freely acknowledge a mistake in
his word.

Thus having done with his Book; I should now come to the Postscript, which I
was fully purposed to have answered also: But now seeing my book (far beyond
expectation) swelling, I should be loath to tire out the Reader; besides I have
touched upon many things therein already, and the rest (most of them being built
upon his book) must of themselves fall with it, and yet if it be requisite and
worth the while, I shall be ready to do it, when I see cause.

A Postscript to W. R.
NOw, I entreat you, in the bowels of Christ and the spirit of meekness, to
review your own work, weigh my Answer without prejudice; and consider well how
many precious Saints, and godly Churches (dear to Christ, persecuted
heretofore by Prelates, loving to your self) without their least stimulation of
you in this kind, you have in your Narration extremely wronged, whether through
overmuch credulity, incogitancie, or otherwise, I dispute not. Sure I am it is
done; and so done, that it is almost incredible, (as one would think) but you
should, now, at least see your error; which if God shall open your eyes in
whole or in part, to do (as I humbly beseech him you may) it will be your
honor, ^xod. 21.^3, 34.
and no small argument of your self denial, to recall. There was a law in
Israel, that he that dug a pit, was not to leave it open but cover it, else
what ever damage happened he was to make it good. You are able to make
application. Solomon, Austin, etc. never gained so much, as by their
retractations. There are some sins, God will not sense up the pardon of, till
satisfaction be made by the party: Defamation is one of them. It will be no
grief of heart, but much comfort, to remember (when you are about to leave
this world,) that although, through praecipitancy, you did blemish your
Brethren, yet) after consideration you did again as readily, wipe away the
blot, by a brotherly vindication as for as truth required; which if ^^^ter
conviction) you shall for bear to do upon what pretense soever, how will you
be able to lie down in your grave in peace?

FINIS.

