A PLEA FOR Alms; Delivered in a SERMON AT THE SPITAL, Before a Solemn
Assembly of the City, on Tuesday in Easter Week, April. 13. 1658.

By THOMAS WATSON Minister of Stephens Walbrook Land.

(...).

Chrysostom. But who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him how dwells the love of God in
him?

1 John 3. 17. London, Printed for Thomas Parkburst at the three Crowns
over against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheap Side. 1658.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Richard Chiverton, Lord Major; The Right
Worshipful, the Sheriffs, with the rest of the Aldermen of the Famous CITY of
LONDON.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
MY own indexterity and unfitness to appear thus Publicly, needs some
Apology; But your acceptance is my encouragement; and the order from your
Honorable Court, Carries so much Authority with it, as to add some weight to
that which dares not plead worth. I was the more inclinable to publish this
Discourse, because though the theme be common, yet the practice of it is rare
and unusual. Contentions never more hot, Charity never more cold, a sign
Iniquity abounds. The zeal of our forefathers condemns us, we with Rachel
have better eyes, but they with Leah were more fruitful. We are so far (at
least the generality of men) from building Churches and Almes-houses, that we
are more ready to pull them down. How is TRUTH in these days forsaken, and
CHARITY forgotten! We may say of many they are miserable rich, their affections
toward public advancements and disbursements, are like the scales of the
Leviathan, shut up together, as with a close seal, Job. 41. 15. Saint Ambrose
says that when we relieve not one, whom we see ready to perish with hunger, we
are the cause of his death. Pasce fame morientem fi non paveris occidisti. Ambr
If this rule hold true, there are more guilty of the breach of the sixth
Commandment than we are aware of. When shall we see a resurrection of Charity,
which seems to lie dead and buried? Sure, it will not be, unless God work a
miracle upon men's hearts. The good Lord by his Spirit cleave the rocks in our
bosoms, that the water of repentance, and the wine of Charity may flow forth!
O that England might have that encomium as once Athens, to be the Nursery of
Humanity; believe it, Charity is the best policy; by helping others we heal our
selves, Job 29. 13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me.
As the poor had Jobs alms, so he had their prayers, and he fared the better.
Christ's poor are Favorites of the Court of heaven, and you that give them of
your gold, they can unlock heaven by the golden key of prayer, and set God a
work on your behalf. The merciful man has many intercessours, which made
Hierom to say, that it is almost impossible that God should not hear the
prayers of so many. ^ene impossible multorum preces non exaudiri.
Why should there be the least regret, or recoyling in our hearts, why should
Charity stick in the birth? It would be our glory, if it might be said of us,
as St. Paul speaks of those Evangelical, or rather Angelical Christians, 1
These. 3. 9. As touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you. O
how forgetful are we of that breast of mercy which feeds us, those golden wings
which cover us! Surely did we keep a (...) or register of Gods favors to us,
we would as Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. Strom. 7.
says, give Alms to testify our gratitude. But I shall avoid Prolixnes; this
Sermon which you did hear with seriousness and affection, craves now your
candor, and comes under your Patrociny. What was once said to Aegidius of
Norinberg concerning David's words in the 118 Psalm. They are verba vivenda non
legenda. The same may I say concerning these few notions, they are not so much
to be read over, as to be lived over. Your liberality to them that are in want,
will give the best gloss upon the Text. The Lord has set you in public
places, and that you may become public blessings in your generation, walking
in the fear of God, and shining forth in a bible-conversation, shall be the
prayer of him who is,

Your Honors, And Worships servant, In the work of the Lord, THOMAS WATSON.
From my Study at Stephens Walbrook. July 7. 1658.
ERRATA.
Page 2. marg. for ruin read ruinae. for (...) p. 21. r. (...), for (...) p.
32. r. (...)

A PLEA FOR ALMS.
PSALM. 112. 9. He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his Righteousness
endures for ever.


THe Prophet David inspired from heaven, does in this Psalm decipher a good
man; and he describes him two ways.

Sanctity; and that first in general, he is one that fears God, ver. 1. 2. In
particular; he is charitable minded, ver. 5. 9.

safety; non commovebitur in saeculum, he shall not be moved for ever, ver. 6.
he stands impregnable, being planted upon the Rock of Ages. Though evil times
come, he is not terrified, Si fractus illabatur orbis impavidum ferient ruin.
Hor.
he shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the
Lord, ver. 8. Guilt is the breeder of fear, Isa. 33. 14. The sinners in Sion
are afraid, trembling has surprised the hypocrites; and a little thing will
affright, Lev. 26. 36. The sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them. Trepident
increduli ad minimas quasque sinistri rumoris auras, imo ad fol^i volantis
strepitum. Mollerus.
It is not affliction without, but sin within creates fear; it is the wind
within the bowels of the earth, makes an Earthquake; but Religion is the best
antidote against these heart-killing fears. Fieri quidem non potest quin
expavescant nonnihil pii nam si nullo sensu tangantur, stuporis esset; sed hoc
vult spiritus sanctus, fideles non de spe decidere, non languefieri, sed unico
Deo niti omnesque in illum curas, suavi, and sedato animo proijcere.
The fear of God drives out all other fear; missa triumphalem non tangunt
fulmina laurum; the godly man insults over danger; with the Leviathan, he
laughs at the shaking of a Spear, Job 41. 29. When there is a Tempest abroad,
he has music at home; he is settled by faith, as a Ship at Anchor, or as a
weight in the Center: His heart is fixed trusting in the Lord.

I shall at this time, consider the godly man as he is described by his
sanctity, specified under the notion of charity and munificence, in these
words, dispersit dedit egenis. -- He has dispersed, he has given to the poor,
his righteousness endures for ever.

Mercy is a weighty matter of the Law, Mat. 23. 23. And never can it more
seasonably be pressed than upon a day of such Solemnity, wherein we commemorate
the noble bounty of many worthy and famous men, whose acts of benificence and
liberality are left behind as so many monuments of their Piety and Renown to
succeeding Ages.

Give me leave to open the Terms; [ He has dispersed.]

Metaphora ab agricolis sumpta. It Is a Metaphor taken from Husbandmen, who
scatter, and disperse their seed in the furrows of the field, expecting
afterward a crop: So the good man scatters the precious seed of his charity
abroad, and this seed is not lost, but afterward springs up into a crop.

[ He has given to the poor.]

The Hebrew word for poor in Scripture (...) seu (...) signifies one that is
empty, or drawn dry. Exhaustus, opibus attenuatus Drusius.
It is a Metaphor taken from Ponds, or Rivers that are drawn dry. So, the poor
are exhausted of their strength, beauty, substance; like Ponds they are dried
up, therefore they must be filled again with the silver streams of Charity;

[ His righteousness.]

By righteousness (as most agreeable to the Context.) I understand, the work
of inherent grace in the heart, displaying and evidencing it self in works of
mercy and bountifulness.

[ Endures for ever.]

Either first, the comfort of his Righteousness endures. He has sweet peace
and satisfaction in his own mind. Or, Secondly, the Honor of it endures.
According to the Hebrew phrase, (...) the memorial of his goodness stands as a
Monument of Fame not to be forgotten. Or, Thirdly, the Reward of his
Righteousness endures. He reapes the fruit of his Charity for ever. So R.
Kimchi. and others interpret it.

The words thus opened, fall into these four parts. 1. The Benefactour. He.
viz. the man fearing God. 2. His bounty, he has dispersed. 3. The object. The
poor. 4. The Trophy, or Ensign of his honor displayed. His righteousness
endures for ever. Or if you will, the text consists of two things. 1. The
godly man's benignity. He has dispersed. 2. His Benediction. His righteousness
endures for ever.

Doct.
The Observation from the words is this. Doct. That a godly man is a liberal
man. The Hebrew word for godly, (...) signifies merciful. The more godly, the
more merciful; a good man does not like the Snake twist within himself, his
motion is direct, not circular. He is a (...) a public diffusive blessing in
the place where he lives, Psalm. 37. 26. He is ever merciful and lends. As a
Noblemans servant is known by the livery he wears: So is a servant of Christ
known by this livery of mercifulness and charity.

There are two Channels in which the stream of Charity must run.

Charity to 1. The souls of others. 2. The wants of others.


1. Charity to the souls of others. This is spiritualis eleemosyna, a
spiritual alms. Indeed this is the highest kind of charity. The soul is the
most precious thing, (...) etc. Macar.
It Is a vessel of honor, it is a bud of eternity, it is a sparkle lighted by the
breath of God, it is a rich diamond set in a wring of clay. The soul has the
Image of God to beautify it, the blood of God to redeem it: it being therefore
of so high a descent, sprung from the Ancient of days, of so noble an extract,
that Charity which is shown to the soul must needs be the greatest.

This is Charity to souls, when we see others* in their blood, and we pity
them; if I weep (says Austin) for that body from which the soul is departed,
how should I weep for that soul from which God is departed. This is Charity to
souls when we see men in the gall of bitterness, and we labor by council,
admonition, reproof, to pull them out of their natural estate as the Angel did
Lot out of Sodom; Genesis 19. 6. Genesis 19. 6.
God made a Law, Exodus 23. 5. that whosoever did see his enemies ass bying
under a burden, he should help him; on which words says Chrysostom, we will
help a Beast that is fallen under a burden, and shall we not extend relief to
those who are fallen under a worse burden of sin? To let others go on in sin
securely, is not Charity but Cruelty. If a man's house were on fire, and another
should see it, and not tell him of it for fear of waking him, were not this
cruelty? did he not deserve to be indighted? when we see the souls of others
sleeping the sleep of death, and the fire of Gods wrath ready to burn about
their ears, and we are silent, is not this to be accessory to their death?

When there is a toleration given, That if men will to hell, none shall stop
them, is this Charity to souls?

Meminerit princeps non solum quantum sibi commissum, sed quatenus permissum
sit. Cicero.
Oh I beseech you, if you have any bowels, strengthen the weak, reduce the
wandering, raise up them that are fallen, James 5. 20. He which converteth the
sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death.

2. Charity to the wants of others; This the text properly intends, and it
stands in three things.

1. A judicious consideration. 2. A tender commiseration. 3. A liberal
contribution.
Psalm. 41. 1. Blessed is he that considers the poor. And you must consider
four things,



Chrysostom calls poverty the highway to heaven, yet he that keeps this road
will go weeping thither. (...). Consider the poor. Behold their tears, their
sighs, their dying groans. Look upon the deep furrows made in their faces,
and consider if there be not reason why you should scatter your seed in these
furrows? Pro pallio vestem laceram, pro pulvinari lapidem. The poor man feeds
upon sorrow, he drinks tears, Psalm. 80. 5. Like Jacob in a windy night he has
the clouds for his Canopy, and a stone for his Pillow.

Nay further, consider that oftentimes poverty becomes not only a cross, but a
snare; it exposes to much evil. (...).
Which made Agur pray, Give me not poverty, Prove. 3. 8. Want puts men upon
indirect Courses. The poor will venture their souls for money; which is like
throwing Diamonds at Payre-Trees. If the Rich would wisely consider this, they
might be a means of preventing much sin.

Jericho had not been wounded and left half dead, the good Samaritane who
poured wine and oil into his wounds had not been known.

Hectora quis nosset felix si Troja -- fuisset. Eccles. 11. 2. Give a portion
to seven and also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be upon the
earth. We cannot promise our selves always Halcyon days. God knows how soon
any of us may change our pasture. The Cup which now runs over with wine, may
be filled with the waters of Marah, Ruth 1. 21. I went out full, and the Lord
has brought me home again empty. How many have we seen like Bajazet, and
Bellizarius, invested with great Lordships and Possessions, who have on a
sudden brought their Manor to a Morsel;

Irus erit subito, qui modo Croesus erat. So that, it is wisdom (in this sense)
to consider the poor; remember how soon the scene may alter, we may be put in
the poors dress, and if adversity come it will rejoice us to think, that while
we had an estate, we did lay it out upon Christ's indigent members.

This is the first thing in Charity, a judicious consideration.

Isa. 58. 10. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry; bounty begins in pity.
Quis ignoret ex ea appellatione esse miserecordiam quod miserum cor faciat
condolentis alieno malo. Aug. Tom. 1. lib. 1.
The Hebrew word for mercy, (...) signifies bowels; Christ first had compassion
on the multitude, then he wrought a miracle to feed them, Mat. 15. 32. Charity
which wants compassion is brutish. The bruit Creatures can releeve us many
ways, but cannot pity us. It Is a kind of Cruelty (says Quintilian) to feed
one in want, and not to sympathize with him. True Religion begets tenderness;
(...) Greg. Nazianz.
as it melts the heart in tears of contrition toward God, so in bowels of
compassion toward others. Isa. 11. 16. My bowels shall sound as an harp. Let
me allude, when your bowels of pity sound, then your Alms make sweet Music in
the ears of God.

Deuteronomy. 15. 8. If there be a poor man within thy gates thou shall open thy hand
wide unto him. The Hebrew word in the Text, (...) to disperse, signifies a
largeness of bounty; Non habet hic locum sordida tenacitas. Musculus.
it must be like water that overflowes the banks. Non tenuitur erogandum
pauxillum aliquid. If God has enriched you with estates, and made his Candle
(as Job says) to shine upon your Tabernacle, you must not incircle and
engrosse all to your selves, but be as the Moon which having received its light
from the Sun, lets it shine to the world. The Ancients (as Bazil and Lorinus
observe Oleum charitatis symbolum.
) made oil to be the Emblem of Charity. The golden oil of your mercy must
like Aarons oil run down upon the poor which are the lower skirts of the
garment.

This liberal disbursement to the necessities of others, God commands. Grace
compels.


God commands. There is an express Statute Law, Levit. 25. 35. If thy brother
be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shall releeve him. The
Hebrew word is (...) Thou shall strengthen him, put under him a a silver crutch
when he is falling.

It Is worth our observation, what great care God took of the poor, besides what
was given privately, God made many Laws for the public and visible relief of
the poor, Exodus 23. 11. The seventh year thou shall let the land rest and lie
still, that the poor of thy people may eat, etc. Gods intention in this Law was
that the poor should be liberally provided for. Ordinabatur ad commodum
pauperum. Cornel. a lap.
They might freely eat of any thing which did grow of it self this seventh
year; whether of herbs, vines, or Olive Trees. If it be asked how the poor
could live only on these fruits, there being (as it is probable) no Corn
growing then? For answer, Cajetan is of opinion they lived by selling these
fruits, and so converting them into money, lived upon the price of the fruits.

Lev. 19. 9
There is another Law made, Leviticus 19. 9. And when ye reap the harvest of
your land, thou shall not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shall
thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest. See how God indulged the poor; some
Corners of the field were for the poors sake to be left uncut, and when the
owners did reap, they must not go too near the earth with their sickle, the
vulgar latin reads it, non tondebis usque ad solum. Thou shall not shear to
the very ground. Something like an after-crop must be left. The shorter ears
of Corn, and such as did lie bending to the ground were to be reserved for the
poor, says Tostatus.

And God made another Law in favor of the poor, Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. At the end
of three years thou shall bring forth the Tithe of thy increase the same year,
and thou shall lay it up in thy gates, and the Levite, and the fatherless, and
the Widow which are within thy gates shall come, and shall eat, and be
satisfied. The Hebrews write that every third year, besides the first tyth
given to Levi, which was Number. 18. 21.
called the perpetual tyth, Numbers 18. 21. the Jews did set apart another
tyth of their increase, for the use of the Widows and Orphans, and that was
called the tyth of the poor. Sol. Jarchi. Besides at the Jews Solemn
Festivals, the poor were to have a share, Deuteronomy. 16. 11.

And as relieving the necessitous, was commanded under the Law, so it stands in
force under the Gospel, 1 Timothy 16. 17, 8. Charge them that be rich in this
world, that they (...) do good, that they be rich in good works, etc. It Is not
only a counsel but a charge; and the non-attendency to it runs men into a
Gospel-premunire. Thus we have seen the mind of God in this particular of
Charity. Let all good Christians comment upon it in their practice. What
benefit is there of gold while it is imbowell'd, and locked up in the Mine? And
what is it the better to have a great estate, if it be so hoarded and
cloistered up, as never to see the light?

commands, so grace compels to works of mercy and benificence, 2 Cor. 14. The
love of Christ constrains. Grace comes with Majesty upon the heart. It Is not in
sermon but virtute. Grace does not lie as a sleepy habit in the soul, but will
put forth it self in vigorous and glorious actings; grace can no more be
concealed than fire. Like new wine it will have vent, Si operari renuit gratia
non est.
grace does not lie in the heart as a stone in the earth, but as seed in the
earth, it will spring up into good works.

Inform.
Use 1. Inform. It may serve to justify the Church of England against the
calumny of malevolent men. Julian upbraided the Christians, that they were
Solifidians; and the Church of Rome lays upon us this aspersion that we are
against good works. Indeed we plead not for the merit of them, Asserunt
ponticifij, bona opera (...) esse peccati, mortis terrores vincere, neque
miserecordia Dei, and propitiatore Christo egere quas in operibus opiniones, ut
impias damnamus. Melancthon. De Justif. Debitorem ipse se Dominus secit non
accipiendo sed promittendo. Austin in Psalm. 83.
but we are for the use of them, Titus 3. 14. Let ours also learn to maintain
good works for necessary uses. We preach they are needful, both necessitate
precepti, and medij. We read the Angels had wings and hands under their wings,
Ezekiel. 1. 8. It may be an hieroglyphical emblem of this truth; Christians must
not only have the wings of faith to fly, but hands under their wings to work
the works of mercy. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that you
maintain constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to
maintain good works. Titus 1. 8. The Lamp of faith must be filled with the
oil of Charity. Faith alone justifies, but justifying faith is not alone.
Fides sola justificat, sed fides justificans non est sola.
You may as well separate weight from lead, or heat from fire, as works from
faith. Good works though they are not the causes of salvation, yet they are
evidences. Bona opera sunt via ad regnum non causa regnandi. Bern.
Though they are not the foundation, yet they are the superstructure. Faith
must not be built upon works, but works must be built upon faith. Romans 7. 4. Ye
are married to another that ye should bring forth fruit unto God. Faith is the
Spouse which marries Christ, and good works are the children which faith bears.
For the vindication of the Doctrine of our Church, and in the honor of good
works, I shall lay down these four Aphorisms.

distinct from faith. It Is vain to imagine that works are included in faith,
as the Diamond is enclosed in the Ring; No, they are distinct, as the sap in
the Vine is different from the clusters that grow upon it.

touch-stoneof faith. Show me thy faith by thy works, Jam. 2. 18. Sicut seres
habet ad es^e ita ad operari. Aquinas.
Works are faiths letters of credence to show. If (says Saint Bernard) thou
see a man in operibus strenuum, full of good works, then by the Rule of
Charity thou art not to doubt of his faith. We judge of the health of the body
by the pulse, where the blood stirs and operates: O Christian, judge of the
health of thy faith by the pulse of Charity; it is with faith as with a Deed in
Law. To make a Deed in Law valid, there are three things requisite. The
Writing, the Seal, the Witnesses; So for the Trial and Confirmation of faith,
there must be these three things; The Writing, viz. the Word of God, the Seal,
the Spirit of God, the Witnesses, good works. Bring your faith to this
Scripturetouch-stone. Faith does justify works; Works do testify faith.
Opera justificatorum gratiae Dei effectus sunt, and movente and adjuvante
Spiritu sancto fiunt. Synod. Moguntin. cap. 8.


honor faith; as the fruit adornes the Tree. Let the liberality of thy hand
(says Clemens Alexandrinus) be the Ornament of thy faith, and wear it as an
holy bracelet about thy wrists. Job. 29. 15 I was eyes to the blind, and feet
was I to the lame, I put on righteousness and it clothed me, my judgment was
as a Robe and a Diadem. While Job was pleading the cause of the poor, this was
the ensign of his honor it clothed him as a Robe, and crowned him as a
Diadem.

This is that takes off the odium, and obloquy from Religion, and makes others
speak well of holiness, when they see good works, as handmaids waiting upon
this Queen.



1. Because they are of a more noble diffusive nature. Though faith be more
needful for our selves, yet works are more beneficial to others. Fidei est
accipere Charitatis distribuere. Austin.
Faith is a receptive grace, it is all for selfinterest, it moves within its
own sphere; works are for the good of others. And it is a more blessed thing
to give, than to receive.

2. Good works are more visible and conspicuous than faith. Faith is a more
occult grace. It may lie hid in the heart and not be seen, but when works are
joined with it, now it shines forth in its native beauty; Though a garden be
never so decked with flowers, yet they are not seen till the light come: So the
heart of a Christian may be enriched with Faith, but it is like a flower in the
night, it is not seen till works come; when this light shines before men, then
faith appears in its orient Colors.

Reproof.
Use 2. Reproof. If this be the effigies of a good man, he is of a charitable
disposition, then it does sharply reprove those that are far from this temper,
who are all for gathering, but nothing for dispeirsing. Mancipati pecuniis. Sen.
They move only within the Circle of their own interest; but do not indulge
the necessities of others. They have a flourishing estate, but like him in the
Gospel, they have a withered hand and cannot stretch it out to good uses. They
have all quoad (...) not quoad (...). These are like the churl Nabal, 1 Samuel
25. 11. shall I take my bread and my water and give it unto men whom I know not
whence they be. 'Twas said of the Emperor Pertinax, he had Augustum imperium,
angustum animum.
a large Empire, but a narrow scanty heart.

There was a Temple at Athens, which was called the Temple of mercy, it was
dedicated to charitable uses, and it was the greatest reproach to upbraid one
with this, that he had never been in the Temple of mercy; It Is the greatest
disgrace to a Christian to be unmercifull; covetous men while they enrich
themselves, they debase themselves, setting up a Monopoly, and committing
Idolatry with Mammon; Thus making themselves lower than their Angels, as God
made them lower than his Angels. In the time of Pestilence it is sad to have
your houses shut up, but it is worse to have your hearts shut up; Covetous
persons are like the Leviathan, Job. 41. 24. Their hearts are firm as a stone.
You may as well extract oil out of a flint, as the golden Oil of Charity out
of their flinty hearts. The Philisopher says, that the coldness of the heart
is a presage of death. Cord infi igidato moritur animal.
when men's affections to works of mercy are frozen, This coldness at heart is
ominous, and does sadly portend that they are dead in sin. We read in the Law
that the Shelfish was accounted unclean. This might probably be one reason,
because the meat of it was enclosed in the shell, and it was hard to come by:
They are to be reckoned among the unclean, who enclose all their estate within
the shell of their own Cabinet, and will not let others be the better for it.
How many have lost their souls by being so saving.

There are some who perhaps will give the poor good words, and that is all.
(...). Ignat.
Jam. 2. 15. If a brother, or sister be naked and destitute of food, and one of
you say to them, depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled, notwithstanding you
give them not those things which are needful, what does it profit? Good words
are but a cold kind of Charity; Veritas fundatur in aliquo esse.
the poor cannot live as the Camelion upon this air. Let your words be as
smooth as oil, they will not heal the wounded, let them drop as the honycomb,
they will not feed the hungry, 1 Cor 13. 1. Though I speak with the tongue of
Angels and have not charity, I am but as a Tinckling Symball. It Is better to be
charitable as a Saint, than eloquent as an Angel. Such as are cruel to the
poor, let me tell you, you unchristian your selves. Unmercifulness is the
sin of the Heathen, Romans 1. 31. while you put off the bowels of charity, you
put off the badge of Christianity. St. James speaks a sad word, Jam. 2. 13.
for he shall have judgment without mercy, that showed no mercy. Dives denied
Lazarus a crumb of bread, and Dives was denied a drop of water; at the last
day, behold the sinners indightment, Mat. 25. 42. I was an hungered and ye gave
me no meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me no drink. Christ does not say ye took
away my meat, but ye gave me none, ye did not feed my members, Then follows
the sentence, ite maledicti, Depart from me ye cursed: When Christ's poor come
to your doors, and you bid them depart from you, the time may come when you
shall knock at heaven Gate, and Christ will say, go from my door, depart from
me ye cursed.

In short, Covetousness is a foolish sin, God gave the Rich man in the
Gospel that appellation, (...). Thou fool, Luke 12. 20. The Covetous man does
not enjoy what he does possess; He imbitters his own life, he discruciates
himself with care, either how to get or how to increase, or how to secure an
estate; and what is the issue and result? often as a just reward of sordid
penuriousnesse God does blast and wither him in his (...), etc.
outward estate. That saying of Gregory Nazianzene is to be seriously weighed,
God many times lets the thief take away, and the Moth consume that which is
injuriously and uncharitably withheld from the poor.

Before I leave this use, I am sorry that any who go for honest men, should be
brought into the indightment; I mean that any Professors, should be impeached
as guilty of this sin of covetousness and unmercifulness; Sure I am Gods
Elect put on bowels, Coloss. 3. 12. I tell you these devout Misers are the
reproach of Christianity, they are wens and spots in the face of Religion.
Truly, I know not well what to make of them, I remember Aelian in his History
reports that in India there is a Griffin having four feet and wings, his bill
like the Eagles, It Is hard whether to rank him among the beasts, or the foul.
So I may say of Penurious Votaries, they have the wings of profession by which
they seem to fly to heaven, but the feet of beasts, walking on the earth, and
even licking the dust, It Is hard where to rank these, whether among the godly,
or the wicked. Oh take heed, that seeing your Religion will not destroy your
Covetousness, at last your Covetousness does not destroy your Religion. The
Fabulist tells us a story of the Hedg-hog, that came to the Cony-burroughs in
stormy weather, and desired harbor, promising that he would be a quiet ghuest,
but when once he had gotten entertainment, he set up his prickles, and did
never leave till he had thrust the poor conies out of their buroughs: So
covetousness, though it has many fair pleas to insinuate and wind it self
into the heart, yet as soon as you have let it in, this thorn will never leave
pricking till it has choked all good beginnings, and thrust all Religion out
of your hearts.

Exhort.
Use 3. I proceed next to the exhortation, to beseech you all who hear me this
day, to put on bowels of mercies; be ready to indulge the miseries and
necessities of others; St. Ambrose calls charity the sum of Christianity,
and the Apostle makes it the very definition of Religion, Jam. 1. ult. Pure
Religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit the
fatherless and the widows in their affliction. The poor are tanquam in
sepulchro, as it were in the grave, the comfort of their life is buried, O help
with your merciful hands, to raise them out of the Sepulcher. God sends his
springs into the valleys, Psalm. 104. 10. let the springs of your charity run
among the valleys of poverty. Your sweetest, and most benign influences should
fall upon the lower grounds; what is all your seeming devotion without bounty
and mercifulness? I have known many (says Basil) pray and fast, but relieve
not such as are in distress; they are for a zeal that puts them to no
charges; (...) Basil.
what are they the better ( says he) for all their seeming virtue? We read the
incense was to be laid upon the fire. Lev. 16. 13. The flame of devotion must
be perfumed with the incense of Charity. Aaron was to have a bell and a
Pomgranate. The Pomgranate (as some of the learned observe) was a Symbol of
good works. They want the Pomgranate (says Gregory Nazianzene) who have no
good works. The wise men did not only bow the knee to Christ, but present him
with gold mirrh and Frankincense Mat. 2. 11. Pretenses of zeal are
insufficient; we must not only worship Christ, but bestow something upon his
members, this is to present Christ with gold and frankincense. Isaac would not
bless Jacob by the voice, but he feels and handles him, and supposing them to
be Esaus hands, he blessed him. God will not bless you by your voice, your
loud prayers, your devout discourses, but if he feel Esaus hands, if your hands
have wrought good works, then he will bless you. Si de^it charitas frustra
habentur caetera. Aug.


Let me exhort you therefore to deeds of mercy, let your fingers drop with the
mirrh of liberality. Sow your golden seed; in this sense it is lawful to put
out your money to use, when you lay it out for good uses. Remember that
excellent saying of St. Austin, give those things to the poor which you cannot
keep, that you may receive those things which you cannot lose. Da quod non
potes retinere, ut recipias quod non potes amittere.


There are many occasions of exercising your pious charity. Pauper ubique
jacet -- hear the Orphans cry, pity the Widows tears. Some there are who want
employment, it would do well to set their wheel a going; others who are past
employment be as eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame: Some whole families
are sinking, if your merciful hands do not help to shore them up.

I cannot be unmindful of the Universities, which are ecclesiae plantaria, (as
Chemnitius calls them,) the nurceries of the Church. They may be compared to
that Persian Tree Theophrastus speaks of, which does bud, blossom, and bear
ripe fruit at the same time; Oh let these plants be watered with your silver
drops, cast not salt, but gold, into these springs, that from thence may flow
forth many Celestial streams, both of learning and piety, to refresh THIS CITY
of our God.

Before I come to press you with arguments to liberality and munificence,
there are three objections lie in the way, which I shall endeavor to remove.



Answ. Let Basil. answer this. Wells (says he) which have their water drawn,
spring ever more freely. (...) Basil.
Prove. 11. 25. the Liberal soul shall be made fat. Luther speaks of a Monastery
in Austria which was very rich while it gave annually to the poor, but when it
left off giving, the Monastery began to decay. There is nothing lost by doing
our duty; an estate may be imparted, yet not impaired. The flowers yield honey
to the Be, yet hurt not their own fruit. When the candle of prosperity shines
upon us, we may light our neighbor that is in the dark, and have never the
less light our selves; whatever is disbursed to pious uses, God does bring it
in some other way; as the loaves in breaking multiplied, or as the widows oil
increased by pouring out, 1 Kings 17. 16. 1 King. 17. 16.




Answ. If you cannot do so much, yet do something. Let there be quantitas
virtutis, though there be not quantitas molis. The Widows two mites cast into
the treasury, were accepted, Non. (...) sed (...). Heinsius.
Luke 21. God (as Chrysostom observes) looked not at the smallness of her
gift, but the largeness of her heart: in the Law he that could not bring a
Lamb for an offering, if he brought but two Turtle Doves it sufficed. We read
Exodus 35. The people brought gold and silver and Gaots hair to the building of
the Tabernacle. On which place (says Origin.) I desire Lord, to bring
something to the building of thy Temple, if not Gold to make the mercyseat on;
if not silk to make the Curtains on, yet a little Goats hair, that I may not
be found in the number of those that have brought nothing to thy Temple.



Answ. 1. Have thou to bestow upon thy lusts? have thou money to feed thy
pride, thy Epicurisme, and have thou nothing to releeve the poor members of
Christ?

2. Answ. Admit this excuse to be real, that you have not such an estate, yet
you may do something wherein you may express your mercy to the poor; you may
Sympathize with them, pray for them, speak a word of comfort to them, Isa. 40.
2. speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem. If you can give them no gold, you may
speak a word in season which may be as apples of gold in pictures of silver;
nay more, you may be helpful to the poor, by stirring up others who have
estates to relieve them; as it is with the wind, if a man be hungry, the wind
will not fill him, but it can blow the fails of the Mill, and make it grind
Corn for the use of man: So though thou have not an estate thy self, to help
him who is in want, yet thou may stir up others to help him; thou may
blow the sails of their affections, causing them to show mercy, and so may
help thy brother by a proxy.

Having answered these Objections, let me pursue the Exhortation to mercy and
liberality. I shall lay down several Arguments, which I desire you to weigh in
the balance of Reason, and Conscience.

Argument 1. To be diffusively good, is the great end of our Creation, Ephesians.
2. 10. Created in Christ Jesus to good works. Every Creature answers the end
of its Creation. The Star shines, the Bird sings, the Plant bears, the end of
life is service. (...) Ignatius.
He that does not answer his end in respect of usefulness, cannot enjoy his
end in respect of happiness. Many says Seneca have been long in the world,
but have not lived, they have done no good. Telluris inutile pondus. -- An
unuseful person serves for nothing but to cumber the ground, and because he is
barren of figs, he shall be fruitful in Curses. Heb. 6. 8.


Argument 2. By this we resemble God, who is a God of mercy. (...). Macar.
He is said to delight in mercy, Micah 7. 18. His mercies are over all his
works, Psalm. 145. 9. He requites good for evil. Like the clouds, which receive
ill vapors from us, but return them to us again in sweet showers. There is
not a creature lives, but tastes of the mercies of God; every Bird says Ambrose
does in its kind sing hymns of praise to God for his bounty; but men and
Angels in a more peculiar manner taste the cream and quintessence of Gods
mercies.

temporal mercies have you received? Every time you draw your breath, you suck
in mercy; every bit of bread you eat the hand of mercy carves it to you; you
never drink but in a golden Cup of mercy.

spiritual mercies has God invested some of you with? Pardoning, Adopting,
Saving mercy. The Picture of Gods mercy can never be drawn to the full; you
cannot take the breadth of his mercy, for it is infinite, nor the height of it,
for it reaches above the clouds, nor the length of it, for it is from
everlasting to everlasting, Psalm 103. 17. The works of mercy are the glory of
the Godhead. Moses prays, Lord show me thy glory, Exodus 33. 18. says God, I
will make all my goodness to pass before thee, Ver. 19. God does account
himself most glorious in the shining robes of his mercy. Now by works of
mercy, we resemble the God of mercy. We are bid to draw our lines according to
this Copy. Luke 6. 36. Be you merciful, (...), as your Father also is merciful.

Argument. Alms are a sacrifice, Heb. 13. 16. Todo good, and to communicate,
forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. (...) When you are
distributing to the poor, it is as if you were praying, as if you were
worshipping God. There are two sorts of sacrifices, expiatory, the sacrifice of
Christ's blood, and gratulatory, the sacrifice of Alms. This says holy
Greenham, is more acceptable to God than any other sacrifice, Acts 10. 4. The
Angel said to Cornelius, thy Alms are come up for a memorial before God. The
backs of the poor are the Altar on which this sacrifice is to be offered up.

Argument 4. We our selves live upon Alms. Other Creatures do liberally
contribute to our necessities. The Sun has not its light for it self, but for
us. It does enrich us with its golden beams, the earth brings us a fruitful
crop, and to show how joyful a mother she is in bringing forth, the Psalmist
says, the Valleys are covered with Corn, they shout for joy, they also sing,
Psalm 65. 13. One creature gives us wool, another oil, another silk. We are
fain to go a begging to the Creation. Shall every Creature be for the good of
man, and man only be for himself.

Argument 5. We are to extend our liberality by virtue of a membership. Isaiah
58. 7. That thou hide not thy self from thy own flesh. The poor are ex eodem
luto, Pars est propter totum.
they are fellow members of the same body. The members do by a Law of equity
and sympathy contribute one to another; the eye conveyes light to the body, the
heart blood, the head spirits. That is a dead member in the body which does not
communicate to the rest. Thus it is also in the body politic; let no man think
it is too far below him to mind the wants and necessities of others; it is
pity but that hand should be cut off, which disdaines to pluck a thorn out of
the foot. It is spoken in the honor of that Renowned Princess, the Emperesse
of Theodosius the great, that she did her self visit the sick, and prepare
relief for them with her own imperial hands.

Argument 6. We are not Lords of an estate, but Stewards; and how soon may we
hear that word, read rationem, Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou
may be no longer Steward, Luke 16. 2. An estate is a talent to trade with,
it is as dangerous to hide our talent, Defossoauro incubare dicitur qui pecuniam
inu^ilem detinet. Grotius.
as to spend it, Mat. 25. 25, 30. If the covetous man keeps his gold too long,
it will begin to rust, and the rust of it will witness against him. Jam. 5. 3.


Argument 7. The examples of others who have been famous, and renowned for acts
of Charity.

merit than bounty. Trajan the Emperor did rend off a piece of his own robe to
wrap his soldiers wounds. Christ did more, he made a medicine of his body and
blood to heal us, Isaiah 53. 5. By his stripes ye are healed. Here was a
pattern of Charity without a parallel. (...) Greg. Nyssen.


Jews are noted in this kind. It Is a rabbinical observation, that those who
live devoutly among the Jews, distribute a tenth part of their estate among
the poor; and they give so freely (says Philo the Jew) as if by giving, they
hoped to receive some great gratuity; now if the Jews are so devoted to works
of mercy, who live without Priest, without Temple, without Messiah; shall not
we much more who profess our faith in the blessed Messiah?

Titus Vespasian, he was so inured to works of mercy, that remembering he had
given nothing that day, cried out diem perdidi, I have lost a day. It Is
reported of some of the Turks that they have servants whom they employ on
purpose to enquire what poor they have, and they send relief to them; and the
Turks have a saying, in their Alcoran, that if men knew what a blessed thing
it were to distribute Alms, rather than spare, they would give some of their
own flesh to relieve the poor; and shall not a Christians Creed be better than
a Turks Alcoran.

But (Right Honorable and Beloved,) we are not left this day without witness.
I desire to speak it to the glory of God, and the Renown of this City, there
has been both in the days of our worthy Progenitors, and is still to this day
among many of you, a spirit of sympathy and compassion.

Regia creed mihi res est succurrere lapsis. When poor indigent creatures have
been as Moses, laid in the Ark of bulrushes ready to sink in the waters of
affliction, you have been temporal saviors to them, and have drawn them out of
the waters with a golden cord. When they have been ready to make their own
grave, vou have built them Hospitals. The milk of your Charity has nursed them
up, and while they have sat under your vines, they have eat the sweet grape;
we read that they showed Peter the garments and coats which Dorcas made, Acts
9. 39. And may we not this day behold the COATS which have been made to cloth
the indigent. Go on still to do worthily in Ephrata, and by these your acts of
munificence to blazen your Coat of Arms, and eternize your fame.

of Alms is a glorious work, and let me tell you, it is no unfruitful work.
(...). Theodoret.
They that sow mercy, shall reap mercy. Whatsoever is disbursed to the poor, is
given to Christ. Mat. 25. 40. Inasmuch as you have done it to one of the least
of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. The poor man's hand is Christ's
Treasury, and there is nothing lost which is put there. Manus pauperis est
Christi gazophylacium. Chrysologus.


In this life. The Charitable man is crowned with a blessing. He is blessed.

1. In his person, Psalm. 41. 1. Blessed is he that considers the poor. God
casts a favorable aspect upon him.

2. Blessed in his name. So it is in the Text, his horn shall be exalted with
honor; and Psalm 112. 6. He shall be had in everlasting lasting remembrance,
his name shall be gloriously enbalm'd.

3. Blessed in his estate. Omni rerum copia affluet, Prove. 11. 25. The liberal
soul shall be made fat. He shall not only have the venison, but the blessing.

4. Blessed in his posterity, Psalm. 37. 26. He is ever merciful and lends,
his seed is blessed. He shall not only leave an estate behind, but a blessing
behind to his children; and God will see that the Entail shall not be cut off.

5. Blessed in his negotiations, Deuteronomy. 15. 10. For this thing the Lord thy God
shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand
unto. The Charitable man shall be blessed in his building, planting, journying;
whatever he is about, a blessing shall empty it self upon him. Quicquid
calcaverit rosa fiet. -- He shall be a prosperous man. The honey-combe of a
blessing shall be still dropping upon him.

6. Blessed with long life, Psalm. 41. 2. The Lord will preserve him and keep
him alive. Restituet eum Deus, qui antea morti vicinu* and longiore vita
donabit. Moller.
He has helped to keep others alive, and God will keep him alive; Is there any
thing then lost by Charity? It spinnes out the silver thread of life. Many are
taken away the sooner for their unmercifulness; because their hearts are
straightened, their lives are shortened.

in the life to come. Aristotle joins these two together, (...) and Aristot.
Rhet.
(...), liberality and utility. God will reward the merciful man, though not
for his works, yet according to his works, Revel. 20. 12. I saw the dead,
small and great stand before God, and the books were opened, and the dead were
judged out of those things which were written in the books according to their
works. As God has a bottle to put your tears in, so he has a book to write
your Alms in. As God will put a vail over his peoples sins, so he will set a
Crown upon their works. The way to lay up, is to lay out. Other parts of your
estate you leave behind, Eccles. 2. 18, 19.
but that which is given* to Christ's poor is hoarded up in heaven! That is a
blessed kind of giving, which though it makes the purse lighter, it makes the
Crown heavier.

Whatever Alms you distribute, 1. You shall have good security, Prove. 19. 17.
He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, and Eccles. 11. 1.
that which he has given will he pay him again. Luke 6. 38
There is Gods counter-band to save you harmless, which is better security
than any public faith; yet here is our Unbelief and Atheism, we will not take
Gods Bond; we commonly put our deeds of mercy among our desperate debts.

with overplus. For a wedge of gold, which you have parted with, you shall
have a weight of glory. For a Cup of cold water, you shall have Rivers of
pleasure, which run at Gods right hand for evermore. The Interest comes to
infinitely more than the Principal. Pliny writes of a Country in Africa,
where the people for every bushel of seed they sow, receive an hundred and
fifty fold increase. For every penny you drop into Christ's Treasury, you shall
receive above a thousand fold increase. Your after-crop of glory will be so
great, that though you are still reaping, you will never be able to inn the
whole harvest. Let this persuade rich men to honor the Lord with their
substance.

Before I conclude, let me lay down some rules briefly concerning your Charity,
that it may be the sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God.

Deuteronomy. 15. 10. Thou shall give, and thy heart shall not be grieved, etc. that
is, thou shall not be troubled at parting with thy money; he that gives
grievingly, gives grudgingly. Charity must flow like spring water. Non
quaeritur quantum sed quo animo detur. Ambr.
The heart must be the spring, the hand the pipe, the poor the cistern. God
loves a cheerful giver; be not like the Crab, which has all the verjuyce
squeezed and pressed out. You must not give to the poor, as if you were
delivering your purse on the highway. Charity without Alacrity, is rather a
fine, than an offering; it is rather doing of penance, than giving of Alms.
Charity must be like the myrrh which drops from the Tree without cutting, or
forcing. Beneficium est magis affectu quam effectu. Seneca.


Isaiah 58. 7. To deal thy bread to the hungry. It must be de tuo pane. The
word for alms in the Syriack, signifies justice; to show that Alms must be of
that which is justly gotten. The Scripture puts them together, Micah 6. 8. To
do justice, to love mercy, we must not make ex rapina holocaustum, a sacrifice
of sacrilege. Qui male parta dispergit, injustitia ejus manet in saeculum.
Musculus.
Isaiah 61. 8. For I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt-offering.
He that shall build an Hospital with goods ill-gotten, displayes the Ensign of
his Pride, and sets up the Monument of his shame.

in Christ and for Christ.

in Christ. Labor that your persons may be in Christ. -- We are accepted in
him. Ephesians 1. 6. Origin, Chrysostom, and Peter Martyr affirm that the
best works not springing from a root of faith are lost.

The Pelagians thought to have posed Austin with that question, whether it was
sin in the Heathen Non perseipsum, factum propeccato habetur, etc.
to clothe the naked. Austin answered rightly, the doing of good is not in it
self simply evil, but proceeding of infidelity, it becomes evil. Mat. 7. 18
Heb. 11. 6.
Titus 1. 15. To them that are unbelieving, is nothing pure. That fruit is most
sweet and genine which is brought forth in the Vine; John 15. 4. Out of Christ
all our Almsdeeds are but the fruit of the Wild-Olive. Faciunt gentes ea quae
legis sunt ethice non Evangelice, bona opera agunt, sed non been. Macovii. loc.
com.
They are not good works, but dead works.

for Christ. viz. For his sake, that you may testify your love to him; love
mellowes and ripens our Almsdeeds; it makes them a precious perfume to God.
(...). Cyril.
As Mary did out of love bring her ointments and sweet spices to anoint Christ's
dead body: so out of love to Christ, bring your ointments, and anoint his
living body, his Saints and Members.

of this dead fly in the Box of ointment. When Moses face did shine, he put a
veil over it; so while your light shines before men, and they see your good
works, cover your selves with the veil of humility. As the silk-worme, while
she weaves her curious works, hides her self within the silk, and is not seen:
so we should hide our selves from Pride and Vainglory.

'Twas the sin of the Pharisees while they were distributing Alms, Nec illa
perfecta est liberalitas si jactantiae causa largiaris. Ambrose.
they did buccina canere, blow the Trumpet, Mat. 6. 2. They did not give their
Alms, but sell them for applause. A proud man casts his bread upon the waters,
as the Fisherman casts his angle upon the waters; he angles for vain glory. I
have read of one Cosmus Medices, a Rich Citizen of Florence, that he confessed
to a near friend of his, he built so many magnificent Structures, and spent so
much on Scholars and Libraries, not for any love to Learning, but to raise up
to himself, the Trophyes of Fame and Renown. Burt. Melan.
An humble soul denies himself, yea, even annihilates himself; he thinks how
little it is he can do for God, Jerem. Patriarch. Censur. Orient. cap. 6.
and if he could do more, it were but a due debt, therefore looks upon all his
works as if he had done nothing. (...) etc. Macar.
The Saints are brought in at the last day, ^as disowning their works of
Charity, Matthew 25. 37. Lord when saw we thee an hungered and fed thee, or
thirsty and gave thee drink. A good Christian does not only empty his hand of
Alms, but empties his heart of pride; while he raises the poor out of the
dust, he qaies himself in the dust. Nihi humilitat^ altius. Mar* celly. l. 2.
Works of mercy must be like the Cassia, which is a sweet spice, but grows
low.

Vox pau^ perum mouet prudentiam i^ dandis eleemosynis adhibendam esse Mollerus.
It Is said of the merciful man, he orders his affairs with discretion. Psalm
112. 5. There is a great deal of wisdom in distinguishing between them that
have sinned themselves into poverty, and who by the hand of God are brought
into poverty. Discretion in the Distribution of Alms, consists in two things.
1. In finding out a fit object. 2. In taking the fit season.


Episcopus Constantinopolitanus mittens pecuniam ad Calliopum P^esbyte^um.
Nicenum quam erogaret in ^a^peres, ^ubet ut in ^largiendo hoc unum ^pecter ut
indigentes alat. illos praesertim qui mendicare eru^escunt.
Raise the hedge where it is lowest, feed the Lamp which is going out. 2. Give
to those who may probably be most serviceable; Though we bestow cost and
dressing upon a weak plant, yet not upon a dead plant. Breed up such as may
help to build the house of Israel, Ruth 4. 11. That may be pillars in Church
and State, not Caterpillars, making your Charity to blush.

the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, Ecclesiastes 12. 6.
Qui cito dat bis dat. Make your hands your Executors, not as some who do
reserve all they give till the term of life is ready to expire. And truly
what is then bestowed, is not given away, but taken away by death. It Is not
charity but necessity. Oh do not so marry your selves to money, that you are
resolved nothing shall part you but death. Be not like the Medlar which is
never good till it be rotten. A Covetous man may be compared to a Christmas
Box, he receives money, but parts with none, till death breaks this Box in
pieces, then the silver and gold comes tumbling out. Give in time of health;
these are the Alms which God takes notice of, and (as Calvin says) puts
into his book of accounts.

receive it. We should (says Nazianzene) give (...) a thank-offering to God,
that we are in the number of givers, and not receivers. Bless God for a
willing mind. To have not only an estate, but an heart is matter of
gratulation. Set the Crown of your thankfulness, upon the head of free grace.

FINIS.

