Mr. Edwards Pen NO SLANDER: OR, The Gangraena once more searched: Which being
found very full of corrupt matter, that part of his foul Mouth is seringed, and
washed with a Moderate Answer, given by THO: WEB, to that part of his Book,
wherein Mr. Edwards charge him for delivering several Antinomian Doctrines.
In which Answer is proved, that many things wherewith Mr. Edwards charge him,
is false. ALSO, That Mr. EDWARDS charging any in such a nature is contrary to
Rule, and against all Examples in Scripture, and tends unto division in these
distracting times.

By THOMAS WEB.

1 COR. 16.14. Let all your things be done in Charity.

2 COR, 13.8. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

EPHESIANS. 4.31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil
speaking, depart away from you, with all malice.

Verse. 32. And be ye kind one to another, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

London, Printed by Jane Coe, and are to be sold by Henry Overton, at his Shop
in Pope's Head Alley. 1646.

Mr. Edwards Pen no Slander.
IT is my hearts grief that I am engaged, to use my Pen, in matters that
requires a publik satisfaction, in answring of M. Edwards; but in as much as I
apprehend, that its the will of God, I am satisfied, and am willing to give him
an Answer: though I am altogether unwilling, that hatred should naswer hatred,
and malice malice; but that love may give M. Edwards his hatred, a sweet and
Christian-like Answer, and that in much patience: Also, that truth may appear
for me, and not my self (who desires nothing more then the braces of Peace and
Truth) in answering of M. Edwards, that part of his Gangraena, wherein he
charges me with many things; and where withal he seeks, not only to take
away my good name, but (also) against all Christianity, my livelihood. O that
we could but live, answering Paul's Bowels of Compassion, sweetly in a
Christ-like love one toward another.

Mr. Edwards is pleased to begin thus, (speaking of me by name) he says, that
I was charged before the Honorable House of Lords, for delivering blasphemous
Doctrines, which (he says) I have recanted of: this is his first Charge.

Its true indeed, that I was before the House of Lords; but I wonder, and its
something strange, that I should recant of those blasphemous doctrines, when
indeed, as unto me they were read, I did not own them: Its true, there was many
Doctrines read over unto me, by the Clerk of the Lords House, which would admit
of dangerous and blasphemous Constructions, and were of dangerous consequences;
indeed quite contrary unto my judgment, or opinion: but I having liberty to
declare my self concerning them before that Honorable House; I did both to the
House, and to those worthy Ministers of the Synod, who were appointed to
examine me; and as I thought did give good satisfaction, as did appear by my
releasement out of Prison (only there did remain a little money business.)
Now if this were a recantation, I refer it to wise judicious considerations.

But grant it were a recantation, I had then whereof, not to be ashamed but to
glory, in respect of mercy showed me, in recanting of them; but is it not
against common reason, that Mr. Edwards should divulge the same in public, to
the rendering of me odious to the world, and bereaving me of my livelihood,
which that he does in taking away my good name, which as the wiseman says, is
better then great abundance of worldly riches, as by sad experience is woefully
witnessed: would it be a point of wisdom for a Father, if that after his Son
should confess his fault, and turn from it, that his Father should declare the
same to the world, whereby his Child were rendered odious, and thereby lost his
good name: O let in this case common reason stand between Mr. Edwards and my
self.

Secondly, grant that I had recanted of such sad blasphemous doctrines, O what
cause of rejoicing; and it had been his duty to a praised God for it on my
behalf, knowing that praise waits for God in Syon. God waits to do us good,
and to be merciful unto us, and we should wait to praise God and to let pass
no opportunity, nor receive no mercy, but praise should be given forth to God:
But how does Mr. Edwards wait upon God, as for every beam of love to praise
God, who sends forth the glorious beams thereof to the Sons of men, when he in
his writing vents nothing but self and hatred, in the rendering me odious to the
world, as if my recantation had bin an error, and so the things of which I did
recant were truth. Certainly, he was very zealous, but not according to
knowledge; for knowledge would (as I conceive) have taught him otherwise (even
to have praised God with me on my behalf) for convincing of me of those
dangerous and blasphemous doctrines, there being no work of God. But what (of
us all) worthy of all praise, but more especially the work of God, which to us
is one of the greatest miracles wrought by divine power (even the turning of a
soul from error unto truth) knowing, that the not knowing of God, and the way
of God, in a true manner, or Gospel way, does deprive the soul of many sweet
and precious enjoyments of God, and Gospel privileges, (also) that he that
turns a soul from sin, saves it from Hell. O that Mr. Edwards would take
it, and seriously consider of it, whether he be greater then the Angels in
Heaven; or whether pride be greater in him then in them: for certainly one of
these must be, in as much as there is great joy amongst them, over one sinner
that turns from his way: Now if they stoop down to us poor Creatures, so as to
rejoice at our returning from sin unto God (oh why should not Mr. Edwards)
(nay) and how does God himself embrace and provide a fatted Calf for his
prodigal Son, that returns home unto him? now if so be, I have bin a prodigal
Son (as indeed in some measure I have been) and have fed upon husks (which he
terms blasphemous Doctrines) and at last I have turned, or God has drawn me
from them to truth, O what cause is here of Mr. Edwards embracing of me, and
taking me into his love and favor, seeing that God has done it before him?
but how does he praise God (nay he is) though in love I write it, as truly I
must be plain, in his ways, far below God in his ways; for God embraces and
sweetly busses that soul that turns to him, and provides a fatted Calfe for
the poor soul sweetly to feed upon; but he is so far from embracing of me,
that he seeks not only to make me odious to himself, but also to the world;
and he is so far from providing a fatted Calfe, as that if he could I fear
he would provide for me; a lean and poor price, and a sower and bitter bite,
as does appear by his writings; and not only for me, but for the precious
Elect and beloved ones of God, that are not in every thing of his judgment,
truly, I could heartily wish that we were all of one heart and one mind,
praising, and rejoysing in the Lord; but seeing its not so, nor neither I nor
Mr. Edwards can tell how to fulfill our wills therein, and indeed as I may so
say, its not the will of God so to have it as yet, O why should he or any
murmr against the hand of God herein, or envy those who are not in every
thing of his Judgment? or why should he seek to render them odious unto the
world (whom I am confident neither he nor any can say are odious unto God) a
most sad thing to censure of, and that which would if rightly applied, draw
blood from the heart; as it has done by many precious ones, and indeed is
below the protection the perfection of Saints; for that leads them to walk in
ways they know and do agree in, and if in any thing they be otherwise minded,
God will reveal that unto them, here is now perfection, and a Gospel spirit;
but now Mr. Edwards is so far from this perfection, and walking this Gospel
path, that he neither exhorts, or seeks to walk with any, that with him in
every thing does not agree; nor yet praise God with me on my behalf, who as he
writes, has recanted of former blaspheamies, wherein confident I am, we did
disagree; which implies both want of Knowledge, and want of Love; want of
Knowledge in that he knows not what the duty of one Christian is to another,
when there is a Christian convinced of his error (nay) this is a great duty
toward God; because that when we praise God, in the behalf of one converted;
we do therein advance God, and as in duty we are bound, declare his works,
which for his Saints he works in Syon, holding him forth to the souls
convincer.

Secondly it implies want of love, that if he knew what were his Christian
duty, want of love to carry him forth to perform his duty toward any, even
the least and meanest of all Saints. Its true, I am a stranger to him, and he
to me; yet not so strange but we believe each other to be Christians, now if he
had, had any love toward me, or Christianity, it would have carried him forth
to have acted the acts of Christianity, or if he had not believed me to be a
Christian, yet knowing that love to all, and prayers for all, is acceptable
with God, true love would for Gods sake a carried him forth, to act toward me
or any above himself, or may infirmities; true love John says, casts out
fear; even so it casts out of the spiritual soul truly loving all
declinations to the contrary, and draws it to live above its own glory, or
self, and the weaknesses of others in love with them; as Luther says, in
Christ and in his fellow-Saints, out of self, as self in them, sweetly as
theirs: O if this were our practice one toward another, then would we praise
and joy in the Lord, for the behalf one of another.

But me thinks I hear some friends in the Lord speak, in the behalf of Mr.
Edwards his practice (saying) how could he do any otherwise then he has done?
when as he says, I have since my recantation been in Suffolk, Essex, and Kent,
venting Antinomian doctrines.

O let the Sons and friends of Syon judge, whether if I had vented since my
recantation Antinomian Doctrines, it were a sufficient reason for his practice,
when as I never from him did receive any brotherly or friendly admonition; and
the Scripture says, that if thy Brother trespass, thou should not presently
tell it the Church, till after twice or thrice admonishment: but how does he
trace this Gospell-path? when without any admonishment he divulges me to the
world; a most sad thing, that he who professes himself to be a Gospel
Minister, should not, nor does not himself tread Gospel-paths, but he himself
is a transgressour thereof. Truly, if I may herein be judge, I conceive, that
if rightly considered of, it makes much against him, and that because of my
recantation, as he calls it; for if so be that I had recanted of Doctrines
blasphemous, then I conceive it was an Argument sufficient enough to carry him
forth, as follows (viz.) not as his Brethren did, but in a brotherly manner
to have informed me of the erroneousnesse of those (namelesse) Antinomian
Doctrines, which as he says, I have vented; for if his Brethrens information
caused me to recant, then surely it will appear to any reasonoble man, that
their experience of my wilingnes not only to hear their information; but also
to receive the same, would have been to any reasonable man, a sufficient
Argument to have caused him to have informed me (not with a prison) but in a
Gospel way, to have opened to me, the mystery of the Scripture; whereby I might
have been brought to a true understanding thereof, and to have seen the
erroneousnesse of those Antinomian doctrines, and how far they come short of
truth, and are destructive to truth, and I in the end might sweetly a been
brought; to live in the enjoyment of Truth; which indeed my soul much hungers
after.

Secondly, it would have been an Argument conducing, to have caused him to have
left his brotherly and Saint-like information with me in the will of God, and
he himself patiently to have waited in prayer at the throne of Grace; that his
brotherly information might have wrought upon me, (knowing) that that God, that
caused me to recant of those blaspheamous doctrines; remains still the same
God, and is now as able, if he please to enable me recant of the Antinomian
doctrines also, and so he and I might sweetly have fed upon the discovery of
divine mysteries, and I through the same, might have been brought to leave and
say farewell to all things that are contrary to sound doctrine.

But truly I fear, and therefore I mourn, that he is a stranger to this life
of Gospel-living, to this life of Saints (but no wonder, its a hidden, and so a
misterious life) as it appears, for where there is one petition put up to God,
either for me, or those who are styled Independents, there is ten to one, put
up to God and the Parliament against us, for our banishment; but here is mine
and their comfort, that though through our weaknesses we may be banished out of
his and other men's favor, yet they cannot banish us out of Gods favor, and
though he mourn and murmr at our being employed in offices for the State, and
so may degrade us of the same, yet his murmurings cannot degrade us of that
which is the all glory, even of dwelling in, and enjoying all spiritual
blessings, in heavenly places, here is joy full of glory, and I doubt not but
this honor will remain, let him do what he can (even the worlds reading and
spelling out of Christ in our books, when it may not in his.)

Mr. Edwards, in his book writes, that I have been in Essex, Suffolk, and
Kent, where I have vented Antinomian doctrines, its true I have been in these
three Counties, but for venting Antinomian: doctrins, that I am ignorant of;
but I humbly desire Mr. Edwards, that if he writes again, he would be willing
to explain what he means by Antinomianisme, and where my doctrine was such,
for Suffolk he names not the particulars of my doctrine, it may be, its because
he knows them not, or if he does know, its because it was against
covetuousnesse, but it seems by the story, that what doctrine soever it were,
its called by him Antinomianisme (well) but if to set up Christ, and to beat
down covetuousnesse, be so, I did do it, and I hope God will still carry me
forth so to do, and the Scripture I there spoke from, was Act. 5.11. and if
there be man or woman that can charge me with delivering Antinomians doctrins,
I in a brotherly manner desire to be informed.

And he says further, that I would have taught in public, if the Minister had
not hindered me; surely his informer is fe'd, well, which makes him to inform
him any thing, its no matter whether they be true or false, any thing to please
children; for while I was in Suffolk which, was not a week, I taught four
times, twice on the Lords day, and twice the Wednesday following which was the
fast day, and not once in private, the Towns name is Stock, near Clare in
Suffolk, nor was I hindered by any Minister, as he writes, nor was there any one
Minister in the County that was moved to let me teach, and the Town wherein I
was, was then destitute of a Minister.

For Essex he says, I taught in one Mr. Sparrowes house of Colchester against
all baptism, truly several times I did speak in the said house, and being
occasioned, through the dispute of some honest people that are under baptism,
touching the same, and I being engaged in the same dispute, did deliver my
self as follows.

First, viz. that the Scripture puts a difference between the baptism of John
and the baptism of Christ; John's being of water, and Christ's being of the Holy
Ghost, according as is witnessed by these ensuing Scriptures, Math 3.11.

Secondly, that John's baptism which was water, did end at the coming of
Christ, as John 3.30. and that because it manifested a Christ to come unto
Jsrael, who being already come, is ceased. John 1.31. which I having premised,
I gave out my thoughts; that there must be a second institution of baptism with
water, or else it is not of that weight, as many of our friends take it to be,
which institution I read not of in any part of the New Testament; I mean, that
CHRIST in his person did not institute the same, as I read of; And in Matthew.
Chapt. the 28. where my friends conceive that CHRIST did institute that
Ordinance of water which they practice, I conceive it may as well be applied to
any other Baptism as that of the holy Ghost, as to water, the Text not naming
of water; yet notwithstanding I did not then, nor do I now deny the practice of
it; only as I said then, so I say now; by way of exhortation desiring those my
friends not to make such a division about it, knowing that neither circumcision
nor uncircumcision avails any thing, save only the Baptism of the holy
Spirit, which is the New Creature, entreating of them to look more after the
said baptism, and then would our divisions about the former cease; and we
being baptized by one Spirit into one Body, should sweetly live in and to one
another, as members of one body: Now those my friends that were then present
could not give me satisfaction, in proving Baptism with water to be instituted
by Christ, or in any part of the New Testament was given forth by him, while
personally upon earth to his Apostles; And Paul says, He was not sent to
Baptize, but to preach; 1 Cor. 1.17. But if Mr. Edwards will be pleased to
appear in the proving of it, I shall much praise God for it, and shall
acknowledge him to be my Father in Christ.

A second thing which Mr. Edwards writes I delivered in the said house is, That
a Saint may say he is equal with Christ, and count it no robbery. I could wish
with all my heart, that he would (if it had been an error) have done God so
much service, as to have disproved it; I was speaking out of Joh. 7.22. the
words are there; The glory which thou gave me I have given them, that they
may be one, even as thou Father and I am one. From these words, after some time
spent, in showing what this glory was in the general, I came to the
particulars or drawing of it out in branches; and the first was, Gods love the
same unto the Saints as unto Christ; which I proved by many reasons, which now
I shall not name: but there being amongst many Scriptures, one very pertinent
to the thing, I named it; which is, Verse. 23. Thou have loved them as thou have
loved me. Christ sets forth the Fathers love to the Saints, by the Fathers love
to him, as thou have loved me: I opened this word (as) wherein lies much,
which is not now my business, only I humbly entreat Mr. Edwards, that if he
judge it to be an error, that he would prove it so to be, for he leaving a
thing neither proving nor yet disproving of it to be a truth, makes me with
many, think that he believes it to be a truth, but would not have the Saints to
know of it, or else because the world not being to judge of such things, but is
ready to speak evil of dignities (even of what they know not) he presents it
them, that so I might become the more odious and vile in their sight, and truly
if it be an error, as I desire him to prove, I shall leave it, rejoicing in
the Lord, for his love in taking me off from it. But blame me not if I still
remain in the same judgment, having (as I conceive) the Word of God to be my
rule, provided I meet with a fair and candid interpretation of my words, as
Romans 8. Ephesians. 1.3. 1 John 4.17. But if God by any shall give me forth an
understanding of these Scriptures, which is contrary to what I bring them for,
I am one who am not willing to withstand truth, but desire to be overcome by
truth in every thing, though it come but from the hands of the poorest creature
under heaven, whose Scholar I am ready to be, when ever God shall teach me any
thing by him.

A third thing which Mr. Edwards charges me withal, is how that I being
talking with an honest Christian in Colchester, should use this expression;
That it was not lawful to say God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, for then there were three Gods; and it was demanded of me, whether I
spoke this as my judgment, or only for Argument sake? But I was silent.

It Is my delight to converse with Zions lovers, and indeed many I did converse
withal while I was at Colchester, but not to any of them did I so deliver my
self, so that I am charged falsely; nor indeed is it, or ever was it my
judgment: but I truly believe God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, and yet but one; taking the said God (that is the father) to be both
Son and Holy Ghost, and so but one God, though God the Father, God the Son,
and God the Holy Ghost; a mystery, which at this time is not my work to unfold.

A fourth Charge is, how that I should say, That I had other points to speak of
to them, but there was a Wolf crept in among the Fold; (indeed Mr. Edwards was
then at Colchester) but at that time I knew it not, nor did I use such an
expression, nor had I my thoughts of him at that time, but a guilty conscience
is a great matter, insomuch as what it speaks, the man thinks that all knows
it, even as Thieves take Trees for men; but if I had spoke those words, what
would it afford him, if he were to sell it at the best rate? Sure I am that if
I had, I had but spoke the truth for he would have had me complained of; but he
met with few such spirits as himself, God be thanked for it, for the Shepherd
(Christ) will not suffer his sheep to be a prey to the Wolf (persecution)
therefore to Him be honor and glory in the Church.

Now is it not a sad thing, that Mr. Edwards should receive a sword to fight
against the anointed of the Lord, and not know wether he received it from the
hand of truth, and with the same sword cause the anointed to bleed, pricking
them with it as if it were the sword of the Spirit, received by him at the
hands of Truth; when indeed and in truth its neither, but a Jewish Spear: The
infirmities of the Saints is not that sword by which the Spirit fights, no it is
the Word of God, and prayer, that sword alone which Gospel Ministers should
fight withal against the Saints infirmities, Ephesians. 6.17. Nor is any other
sword given by the hand of Truth to Gospel Ministers, save only the Word of
God, Matthew. 10.10. and Chapt. 28. Ephesians. 6.17. With which swords they are to
fight against, not the Saints neither, but their infirmities; was it not a
Jewish Spear wherewith the Jews fought against Christ? (even his infirmities)
but they found none, but such as they called infirmities? Even so, how Jewishly
do men fight against the Kings Sons, when they take their infirmities, nay
such as they call infirmities, to fight against them withal? Truly my heart
bleeds within me to consider of it, and in beholding of the Kings Sons, lying
some beaten, some wounded, and some slain by the Kings servants, well may we
call for mourning indeed, when that Ministers the Kings servants, shall kill
and slay the Saints, the Kings Sons, with a Spear: Oh what heart cannot but
break to see this?

Had it been an infirmity in me to have said, I have many things to repeat of,
but a Wolf is crept in among the fold, when Christ himself gives it as a
caution to his Disciples, Matthew. 10.16,17. Behold I send you forth as Sheep
amongst Wolves, be ye therefore as wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.
Beware of men, for they will deliver you up to Councels, and they will scourge
you in their Synagogues, etc. Nay and it was the Apostle Paul, still to beware
of such; amongst them that are perfect, declare I the things of God in a
mystery, 1 Cor. 2.6. And see how he withstood the false Brethren, that would
have brought Paul in bondage in the use of his liberty, Gal. 2.3. So truly,
it is both Mr. Edward's duty and mine to beware of Wolves.

But I praise God, I did not use such an expression, not because the expression
is not good, but because those people that credit all for Gospel which Mr.
Edwards writes, may see the contrary, and so be humbled for it; For truly to my
grief, I heat many of all sorts, Presbyterian as well as others, cry out of his
Book, saying, That where there is one true tale, there be twenty and ten false
ones; and the parties, as many as I have spoken with who are therein mentioned,
are sad to think that he should be so far blinded, as to be lead to speak
evil of those, who cordially love the truth, and desire to love him as
themselves.

A fifth Charge is, How that upon November last I was talking with a Citizen,
and told him, that the golden Calf, the Scriptures was fallen, and I hope that
all would be Anabaptists, and so be of my judgment.

It Is strange, and unto me a contradiction, that I should so speak to a
namelesse Citizen, and yet my self an earnest seeker after the knowledge of the
same, and desire to walk in every thing according to the Scripture: Nay
further, that I should hope they would be all Anabaptists, when as they fetch
no ground for their practice, out of any thing but Scripture: Now that I should
be a well-willer to these, and yet deny Scripture, is a mere contradiction. And
truly I speak the truth, I do with an unfeigned detestation utterly detest
against it, or any opinion that shall lead me to the questioning of the truth
of Scripture, in the least measure, and am so far from denying of it, as that
when ever God shall be pleased to call me to it, I am willing to lay down my
life for the truth of it.

In his sixth Charge, Mr. Edwards also speaks of my being in Kent; Where (as he
says) I vented Antinomian Doctrines: but he does not tell the particulars of
it, so that I cannot give him a particular answer; only this, if to teach
Faith and Repentance be Antinomianisme, then I taught it: But he writes, how
that in the Town of Milton in Kent, I taught for the Minister thereof, and in
my second and third Sermon, delivered strange Antinomian doctrines, so that a
150. of the people would not hear me, and that there was two complaints made to
the Justices against me, whereupon they would not let me live in the County:
also that I should say it were better for a man to sit and be drunk in an
Alehouse, then to be compelled to go to Church against his conscience.

Truly, I am by Mr. Edwards, so engaged to appear in public, as that I cannot
appear; but that will appear with me which I know by some will not be well
accepted of: and truly its much against my nature; to err any otherwise then to
bury all the infirmities (of the infirmist) but seeing I must put penn to
paper, I receive this charge into 3. heads, as follows.

viz. First is, that in my second and third Sermon I delivered strange
Antinomian: doctrines etc.

Its true I taught certain times for Mr. Symonds by name, their Minister
there, and three Sermons I taught in his hearing, which by him, was not
excepted against, but was very well approved of, as will appear by sufficient
witnesses, if required; and for what I taught in his absence, it was no ways
contradicting, or disagreeable with what I taught in his presence, and if there
were a hundred and fifty (which was but supposed) that did absent themselves
from hearing of me, I challenge all or any of them, to disprove by Scripture,
or argument, what I delivered amongst them, or any for them, (Mr. Edwards if he
can) for truly I am not afraid, that what I delivered should be brought to the
touchstone, Gods word, there to be tried by any; but what if there had been a
hundred and fifty, that had absented themselves from hearing of me, it would
not follow, that what I taught was Antinomianisme, nay if I or any should judge
the Presbyterian way, by that rule, it would be condemned by all, to be the
Antichristian way; for confident I am, that there is none; of many of the
Presbyterian Ministers, but the better part of their parish absent themselves
from hearing of them, again sure I am, that if any did absent themselves from
hearing of me, if Mr. Symonds speak the truth to me, they did no more by me
then they did by him; his word was there that I should not be troubled at it,
for they did so by him, and that his opposers were the great ones, and indeed
if Antinomianisme was the cause (as alas poor people they do not know what it
is) they had as much cause to absent from hearing of him, as from hearing of
me, he teaching as much Antinomianisme as I taught.

The second head is, that two complaints was made against me to the Justices,
so that they would not let me live in the County.

First, what complaints were made against me, that I am ignorant of, but as I
understand by one who was intimate with one of the Justices, they were such
complaints, as could not without shame to the complayner be mentioned to me;
the Justices words were these, that Mr. Symonds then Minister at M^lton, should
depart the place, in as much as that he made several complaints to him against
me, but when I appeared he could say nothing.

Secondly, there came forth a warrant from the Justices to the Bosselder of
Milton; for the bringing of me before them, the warrant to my best remembrance
was to this effect. That whereas Thomas Web living in the Town of Milton, has
both in public and private vented erroneous doctrines, to the dishonor of
God, to the destruction of all religion, and vilifying of civil Magistrates;
These are to require you, etc.

A most strange warrant, and I a most strange person, as the Justices here has
formed me; if that mentioned in the warrant could be proved against me; but see
the strangeness of men, I did appear before the Justices, according to their
warrant, expecting to have heard a charge, according to what was expressed in
the warrant, and to know my accusers, which was but reasonable, and being
called into the room where the Justices was, and two ministers instead of
giving me a lawful charge according to what the warrant did express, Justice
Hindrick by name, would have asked me questions; but I refusing to answer, he
told me I had divided the Town of Milton, I desiring to know my accuers, he
told me the second time, that I had taught false doctrine. I still desiring to
see my accusers, instead of naming any, also instead of giving me a charge
according to the nature of the warrant, the said Justice Hindrick charges me
with things, which was but my opinion delivered in private; As first, that I
should say that Magistrates had no power in the Kingdom of God, and his
Christ. The second was, that I should say, That a Minister of the Gospel, if
cast among the Jews to teach the Gospel, his liberty was, to suffer his
Converts to be circumcised, for the Gospel sake, as the Apostle Paul did
Timothy. Now if herein I had justice and honest dealing, let any man judge;
when as I by a warrant from the Justices was apprehended, in which I was
charged as you may read; and at my appearance before them, should be charged
with that for erroneous, which was but the use of my liberty, as a freeborn
Denizon of England (even my opinion to certain Queries in private) not
doctrinally delivered, but merely by way of opinion; if herein I had justice
let any judge. Nay herein I suffered much wrongfully, in as much as the Warrant
appearing with such sad charges, did tend much to my hurt in rendering me odious
to many honest and religious people, when as nothing was nor could be proved
against me whereby I did justly deserve it, but some short time after my
appearance, though nothing could be proved against me, the same Justices issued
forth another Warrant, for my departing the Town within ten days after the
sight thereof. A short warning, and indeed a sad sentence, when I had my Wife
lying on her Bed of sickness, in such a weak manner, as none thought she would
ever have risen out of her Bed; but if the question should be demanded of me,
why this cruelty (as it can be termed no less) was used? Truly, for my part,
I cannot give a sufficient answer, nay I must be silent for I cannot tell only
as I may judge, it was a zeal without knowledge, and will without a love was
the reason of it; This Mr. Edwards mentions, as if so be I left the County
through the said Warrant; truly I would have him to know, that I would not give
an Arbitrary Government so much footing in Enland, and it is well known to all
in the Town; First, that I was in the Town, three Weeks after the ten days
were expired; and secondly, that I had not stirred out of the Town upon so
slight terms, but would have had justice done on one side or other had I not
through the persuasions of some friends in London, removed my wife to London,
hoping that change of Air would have done her some good.

Third head, It was better for a man to be drunk in an Alehouse, then to be
compelled to go to Church against his conscience. Truly, there is no
conscientious man but hates drunkenness, and I utterly deny that ever I spoke
such words; nor was it ever in my thoughts, but in the time while I was before
the Justices, Justice Hindrick demanded of me, whether he might not being in
authority, compel a man from Alehouse to Church? My answer was, That I
thought (as also his experience might witness) that there was many a man at
Church which had rather be at an Alehouse; wherein we did agree: Yet
notwithstanding, what the Justices reason was I know not, he himself did
endeavou^ to give a false interpretation of my words (saying) that I spoke as
Mr. Edwards indee^ did write; but before we parted, I did clear my self before
them; and yet Mr. Edwards names it in his Book! which is neither wise nor just,
for him to raise up that which was buried, and that which is not true. But I
much blame (not Mr. Edwards) but his Informer who was present, and if I mistake
not, a man not to be believed; for while I was before the Justices, he pleaded
against me for being an Independent, and yet he himself the next morning,
speaking with an honest Christian man of the same Town, told him; That he did
hope the Independents would have the day. Nay since his leaving of the same
Town, and being without a benefice, told a Gentleman of Newbery, who was to
seek out for an honest Minister, that he was an Independent (any thing to get a
Benefice) I might name many things, wherein I might prove him not to be a man
worthy to be believed; but love constraines me for the Gospels sake, rather to
pity and weep over him, then to speak or do any thing that may conduce to his
hurt, though he was a man that sought and used many ways to prejudice me; but
I may say as the Wiseman says, He is fallen into that pit which he himself
dug for me; he sought to make me odious and in the end he himself became
odious, so that I see my enemy fall before me, insomuch that not one in the
Town would lodge him, except it were the Devils Shop-houses, as he himself calls
them (Alehouses I mean) which made him to leave the Town, to whom he was then
Minister; but I forbear, leaving both him and my self to God, that if it be his
will we may both receive his Image, whereby we may walk one toward another as
becomes Brethren. So I conclude, with an humble request to Mr. Edwards, that
for the time to come, he would be pleased to believe none, let them come with
what fair pretenses soever, though it be against the Independents, but what his
eyes sees, and his ears hear, the contrary being that which gives abuse:

First, to the Gospel, in that the Professors thereof should take up base and
beggarly informations one against another, which in these our days is the
Gospels reproach.

Secondly, it gives abuse to both the Honorable Houses of Parliament: First,
in presenting that unto them as Accusations, which cannot with safety to the
presenter be deposed of oath, as bare informations cannot; but I could wish,
seeing he has presented so many accusations to the Honorable Houses, they
would please to call him to depose it upon oath; for if nothing as an
accusation is to be given in to any inferior Court, much less into that,
without it can be deposited upon oath: Secondly, in the presenting of these
things to the Highest Court in England, where ought to be none but matters of
the highes^ nature, which is not fit to be heard in an inferior Court, nay
such things as will cause a gracious heart to blush, and to stop his ear in the
reading of; now that such things should be presented to the Honorable Houses,
wherein are so many spiritual and gracious hearts! I hope I need not mention
any one thing, but I leave the Christian to the reading of his book: Now what
abuses he has here offered to the Honorable House, let all that truly love
them judge?

In the third place, he mightily wrongs the Cause, wherein those that are truly
cordial to the Parliament are deeply engaged; First, in giving the common
enemy not only cause to blaspheme, but also an advantage against us, and this
he does, by divulging abroad to the world the differences that are amongst: us:
Secondly, he wrongs the Cause, which is this bleeding Kingdoms good, in that
through his false accusing those, who are as real for the PARLIAMENT and this
Kingdoms good as himself (if without offense I may make comparisons) for I
know that many who have done great service for the Parliament and Kingdom,
have disserted their service; because that while they have been fighting
against the common enemy, they themselves have been fought against by him, and
others; and for their service done the Parliament, they have been (both in
Pulpit and Press) divulged to the world under the names of Heretics,
Schismatics, and many other such like names, which have disheartened many, and
caused them to leave the service; Truly, me thinks that if Mr. Edwards was
cordial in his love toward the good of this dying Kingdom, he would have hid
and covered the infirmities if he did see any, of those who are willing to die,
rather then this Kingdom or the Parliament thereof should die (in the
destroying of the common enemy) what if his honor had fallen by the infirmities
of those who were as aforesaid? me thinks if he had not been altogether for
himself, but had altogether aimed and sought after the Kingdoms good, he would
willingly have lost his honor, rather then this Kingdom and its Parliament
should dye, in the losing of their privileges; which is the honor, glory, and
life of both; to which the privilege, honor, and life of one man is nothing:
It Is a sad thing that a Kingdom should die, Parliament die, and all because we
cannot pass by honor and others infirmities, even one of another! Oh who
cannot but pass by all for this Kingdoms good? Nay sad it is, that Ministers
who have taught, do not do so: (what will become of this dying Kingdom?) this
is sad: But this is sadder, even that Brethren, for whom Christ died and shed
his precious blood, that they should not hide each others infirmities, but are
ready and daily do pierce tongue and pen, like Jewish spears, into each others
sides, whereby they bleed and dye by the hand one of another. Oh who cannot but
mourn, in the hearing and reading railing accusations of one brother against
another? Christ laid down his life for us, that we might lay down our lives one
for another: but oh, how do we dye one for another, when we set forth railing
accusations one against another? Christ denied all, that he might bring us to
all, and that when we were enemies: but do we deny our selves and all, to bring
those that are out of our judgment to the knowledge of the truth, whereby they
may sweetly close with us, as one with and in the truth? O no, what disputes,
what railings and heart-burnings, nay what praying is there one against
another? so that whereas we should seek after and pray one for another good,
we pray and seek after the contrary (even the ruin and destruction one of
another) and that of Brethren: Oh who cannot but die, in the beholding one
Brother die by the hands of another, for whom CHRIST died.

FINIS.

