THE Way to get RAIN: By way of Question and Answer.

Showing the true Cause both of too much want, and too much abundance of RAIN.

With the only remedy and means to remove either of these judgments when they
are upon us.

As also showing what we must do upon the removal of either of these
Judgments.

Job 38, 30. The waters are hid as with a stone, and the face of the deep is
frozen.

LONDON: Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1649.

The way to get Rain.
Question.

WHo has the disposing of the rain and showers?

Ans. The Lord only.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By these places of Scripture, Job 5.8, 9, 10. I would seek unto God, and
unto God would I commit my Cause, which does great things and unsearchable, yea
mavelous things without number; who gives rain upon the earth, and sends
waters upon the fields: Job 36.27.
For he makes small the drops of water; they pour down rain according to the
vapor thereof. Job 37.6. For he says to the snow, Be thou upon the earth;
likewise to the small rain, and the latter rain. Jer. 5.24. Neither say they
in their hearts, Let us now fear the Lord our God, that gives rain, both the
former and the latter rain in their season. Psalm. 147.8. Who covers the
heaven with clouds; who prepares rain for the earth. Acts 14.17. And gave us
rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons.

Q. Why does the earth sometimes want rain?

A. Because the Lord in judgment with holds it from the earth.

Q How prove you that?

A. By these places of Scripture, Genesis 2.5. For the Lord God had not caused it
to rain upon the earth. Amos 4.7. And I also have withholden the rain from
you, when there were yet three months to the harvest; and caused it to rain
upon one City, and not upon another.

Q. And why does the Lord sometimes withhold the rain from the earth?

A. Because of the wickedness of the people that dwell on the earth.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By these places or Scripture, Lev. 26.18, 19. And if ye will not yet for
all this hearken unto me, then will I punish you seven times more for your
sins; and I will break the ride of your power and I will make your heaven as
Iron and your earth as brass. Jer. 3.2, 3. Thou have poluted thy Land with thy
whoredoms, and with thy wickedness, therefore have the showers been
withholden, and there has been no latter rain.

Q. And why has the earth sometimes too much rain?

An. Because the Lord is pleased in judgeme^t to send it.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By these places of Scripture, Job 36.26, 27, 28. Behold God is great, and
we know him not; neither can the number of his years be searched out, for he
makes small the drops of water; they power d^wne rain according to the vapor
thereof, which the clouds do drop and distill upon man abundantly. Job 38.25.
Who has divided a water course for the overflowing of waters. Job 28.26. When
he made a Decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning and for the thunder.

Q. And why does the Lord sometimes send too much rain upon the earth?

A. Because of the wickedness of the people that dwell on the earth.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By these place? of Scripture, Genesis 6.13. and 7.12. And God said, unto Noah,
the end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence
through them; and behold I will destroy them with the earth; And the rain was
upon the earth forty day^s and forty nights. Ezekiel. 38.18, 22. And it shall come
to pass at that same time, when Gog shall come against the Land of Israel,
says the Lo^d God, that my fury shall come up in my face; and I will plead
against him with pestilence, and with blood, and I will rain upon him, and
upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him an overflowing rain.

Q And for what sins does the Lord sometimes in judgment withhold rain from
the earth when it wants it?

A. For five special sins.

Q. And which is the first sin for which the Lord does sometimes in judgment
withhold rain from the earth, when it wants it.

A. The first sin is Idolatry.

Q. How do you prove that?

A. I prove it out or Deu. 11 16, 17. where it is said, Take heed to your
selves, that your hearts be not deceived, and ye turn aside and serve other
gods, and worship them, and then the Lords wra^h be kindled against you, and he
shut up the heaven that there be no rain.

Q. And which is the second sin, for which the Lord does sometimes in judgment
with hold rain from the earth when it wants it.

A. For disobedience to his commandments.

A. How do you prove that?

A. I prove it out of Deuteronomy. 28.15.13, 24. where it is said, But it shall come to
pass, if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord, to observe to do
all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day, the heaven
that is over thy head, shall be b^asse; and the earth that is under thee, shall
be iron; and the Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust.

Q. And what is the third sin for which the Lord does sometimes in judgment
withhold rain from the earth when it wants it.

An. For not bringing forth fruit answerable to the means and mercies bestowed
upon a people.

Q. How prove you that?

A. I prove it out of Isa 5.4, 5, 6. where it is said, What could have been
done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it; wherefore when I looked
that it should bring forth grapes, it brought forth wild grapes. And now I
will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard; I will take away the hedge
thereof, and it shall be eaten up, and break down the wall thereof, and it
shall be trodden down; and I will lay it waste; it shall not be pruned nor
dug, but there shall come up thorns and briars; I will also command the
clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

Q. And what is the fourth sin, for which the Lord does sometimes in judgment
withhold rain from the earth when it is wanting?

A. It is the sin of oppression and cruelty toward the poor.

Q. How prove you that?

A. I prove it out of Amos 4.1, 7. where it is said, Hear this word ye Kine of
Bashan, that are in the mountain of Samaria, which oppress the poor, which
crush the needy; and I also have withholden the rain from you, when there were
yet three months to harvest, and caused it to rain upon one City, and not
upon another.

Q. And what is the fifth sin for which the Lord does sometimes in judgment
withhold rain from the earth, when it is wanting?

A. It is the sin of neglecting Gods ordinances, or omitting his worship when
he requires it.

Q. How prove you that?

A. I prove it out of Zech. 4.17. where it is said: And it shall be, that
whosoever will not come up of all the families of the earth unto Jerusalem, to
worship the King the Lord of Hoasts, even upon him shall be no rain.

Q. And for what sins does the Lord sometimes in judgment send too much rain
upon the earth?

A. For two especial sins.

Q. And which is the first sin for which the Lord does sometimes in judgment
send too much rain upon the earth?

A. It is the sin of unequal and ungodly marriages; when Gods people in their
matching, have more respect to beauty and worldly considerations, then to piety
and godliness.

Q. How prove you that?

A. I prove it out of Genesis 6.2, 3. Genesis 7.1,2. Compared together, where it is
said that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and
they took them wives of all that they chose; And the Lord said my spirit shall
not always strive with man, because he is but flesh, yet his days shall be an
hundred and twenty years* and the windows of heaven were opened, and the
Rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

Qu. And which is the second Sin, for which the Lord does sometimes in
Judgment send too much Rain upon the earth?

A. It is the soothing up of wicked men in their sins, and not denouncing
judgments against them, as there is cause.

Q. How prove you that?

A. I prove it out of Ezekiel. 13.10 13. Where it is said, Because even because
they have seduced my people, saying peace, and there was no peace, and one
built up a wall, and lo others daubed it with untempered mortar: Therefore
thus says the Lord God, I will even rent it with a stormy wind in my fury,
and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger.

Q. Then it seems if we would obtain Rain in the time of drought, we must
expect it only from the Lord?

A. Yea indeed, if the Lord alone have the disposing of the Rain, then we are
there to we expect it from the Plannets, nor from the Clouds, though the sky be
over spread with them, no nor yet from the wind, though it be in the South,
for all such things are but the vanities of the Gentiles, of whom it is said,
Jer. 14.22 By way of interogation, which implys a plain negation.

Are there any among the vanities of the Gen^les that can cause Rain, or can
the heavens give showers, art thou not he O Lord our God, therefore we will
wait upon thee, for thou have made all these things?

The Lord only is the Father of the Rain, and has begotten the drops of the
dew, and therefore we are to expect it only from him,

Q. But what must we do that we may obtain Rain at the hands of the Lord,
now in the time of drought?

A. We must use such means as the Lord has prescribed us.

Q. And what means has the Lord prescribed?

A. That you shall find set down, 2 Chro. 7.13.14. Where the Lord says, If I
shut up heaven that there be no Rain, It my people which are called by my
name, shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
evil ways, then will I hear in heaven and forgive their sins, and heal
their Land.

Q. Then I perceive the first thing we must do, is to humble our selves, but
how shall we do that truly,

A. If we would humble our selves truly, we must seriously examine our selves
what sins we have been guilty of, and especially as touching those sins,
for which as you heard the Lord with holds Rain.

Q. I pray you instruct me a little farther in this point, and repeat those
Sins again, for which the Lord withholds Rain in the time of drought?

A. The first is Idolatry, and therefore if you would truly humble your self
for your sins, examine your self whether you have not loved, desired feared,
and trusted in some creature, either more then in God, or equal with God. The
Second is, disobeydience to Gods Commandments, and therefore if you would
truly humble your self, you must examine your heart and life by some
spiritual exposition of the ten Commandments. The third is, not bringing
forth fruit answerable to the means and mercies bestowed on us, and therefore
if you would truly humble your self, you must examine your self whether you
have grown in grace, and been filled with the fruits of righteousness,
answerable to those means and mercies, which the Lord has bestowed on you.
The fourth sin is, oppression and cruelty to the poor, and therefore if you
would truly humble your self, you must examine your self whether you have not
taken all advantages to enhance the prises of such Commodities, as you have
dealt in, and thereby oppressed the poor and needy. The last sin is,
neglecting Gods Ordinance, and therefore if you would truly humble your self
for your sins, you must examine your self, whether you have not sometimes
omitted prayer, hearing, reading, and receiving the sacrament, when you might
and ought.

Q. Well, the next thing we must do is to pray, but how shall we do that
aright

A. It is the spirit of Jesus Christ only that can teach you to pray aright,
But if you stand in need of, and do desire a brief plat-forme of prayer for
Rain, now in the time of drought, then say from your heart,

O most holy and gracious Lord, for we do here acknowledge before thee, that
we have sinned aginst thee; we have broken every one of thy holy and just
Commandments, for we have loved, desired, feared, and trusted in the
creatures; yea, and delighted in the creature more then in thee, we have been
very unthankful in the time of plenty, and have not brought forth fruit
answerable to the means and mercies bestowed upon us; we have omitted prayer,
hearing, reading and receiving the sacrament, when thou have called us
thereunto, we have taken thy tytles, atributes, word and works in vain, by
using them ignorantly, irreverently, and after a formal coursary manner, we
have profaned thy day, by thinking our own thoughts speaking our own words,
and doing our own works, we have been disobedient to superiors, and been
much failing and wanting in our duties to inferiors; we have been rashly and
sinfully angry, and not free from malice and envy, neither have we been free
from unchaste and lustful thoughts we have immoderatly desired to be rich, and
have not always dealt so uprightly and justly, in buying and selling, in
borrowing and lending, as we ought we have sometimes contemned, and and thought
too basely of others, and have been guilty of evil surmisings and wrongful
suspicion, and have sometimes rashly and unjustly judged, and sensured others,
and spoken evil of them behind their backs, finally, O Lord we have been
guilty of covetousenesse, and discontentednesse with our present, condition,
and have had inward longings for that which has belonged to other men.

Now Lord for these and other sins whereof we have been guilty, we have justly
deserved damnation in hell, how much more this judgment and chastisement of
excessive drought and want of Rain; But yet seeing thou have been pleased to
declare thy self to be abundantly gracious and merciful in thy son Jesus
Christ, and do require us to seek thy fatherly face in him, lo we come to
seek thy face, and to meet thee in him, praying and beseeching thee to
manifest thy self in him to be a most gracious merciful and reconciled
Father, in pardoning and forgiving these and all our other sins, and to turn
our hearts against them, and to give us victory over them, and heal our land
of this immoderate drought and want of Rain. O Lord though our iniquities,
Jer. 14.7.
testify against us, do thou it for thy name sake, for our backslidings are
many: O Lord we read that Eliah was a man subject to the like passions that we
be, Jam. 5.17.18.
and he prayed earnestly that it might not Rain, and it Rained not on the
earth by the space of three years and six months, and he prayed again, and
the heavens gave Rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit; Now therefore O
Lord we pray thee hear us for thy mercy sake. Are there any among the vanities
of the gentiles that can give us Rain, or can the heavens give showers, art
not thou he O Lord our God* therefore we will wait on thee, for thou have made
al these things, Jer. 14.22.

Q. And will the Lord hear our prayer if we thus pray, and will he send us
Rain?

A. Doubtless if we could thus humbly acknowledge our Sins, and thus by prayer
seek Gods facein Christ, and then truly turn from our evil ways, God would
according to his promise forgive our sins and heal our Land, it is our
iniquities, which do separate between us and our God, and hinder the showers
from coming down upon us, and therefore if we could but turn from our
iniquities, and yield obedience to his Commandments, he would send us Rain,
according to his gracious promise, Levit. 26.3, 4. If ye walk in my Statues,
and keep my Commandments and do them, then will I give you Rain in due season,
and the Land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield
their fruit, and again, Dev. 11.13.14. And it shall come to pass, If you
shall barken diligently to my commandments, which I command you this day to
love the Lord your God, and to serve him with all your heart, and with all your
soul, that I will give you the Rain of your Land in due season, the first
Rain, and the latter Rain, that thou may gather in thy Corn, and thy Wine,
and thine Oil.

Yea, to conclude, then the Lord would say unto us, ask ye of the Lord Rain,
in the the time of the latter Rain, so the Lord shall make bright clouds,
Zech. 10.1.
and give them showers of Rain to every one grass in the feilds.

Q. And what if after we have used all these means, the Lord be pleased either
to send us Rain in the time of excessive drought, or to send us fair weather
in the time of excessive Rain, what must we do then?

A. Then we must from our hearts say with David, Psa. 115. 1. Not unto us O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory for thy mercy and thy truth
sake; And we must not only thank the Lord with our lips, but also in our
lives, by fearing to do any thing, which may displease him, and endeavoring
to do all things that may please him.

FINIS.

