THE VVelsh-mans PROPOSITIONS TO THE Archbishop of York, Commander in chief
before CONOVVAY Castle in WALES.

WITH Their new Laws, and Orders of War propounded by them, and a motion for
PEACE.



Printed in the Year, of her Cosen Taffies Carier, 1646.

The Welch-mans Propositions to the Archbishop of YORK, Commander in Chief
before Conoway Castle in Wales.
May please her Crase-Cozen,
Her is very clad with all her heart plood, tat your crave Lordshet was shut
door again you, and te tivill Cavelier turn you out, cause you now pe honest
a while, whether her will or no, to help take her none house; for if her Lord
crace take it, the King may have her when her can cath her (mark her now) but
pray her crace here her what can say (for take her coosen Taffies counsel,
for) te Castle Conoway is very strong, and tey shoot fire, and pullet, pounce
pounce; and if her come near will make holes in her Beshit gown, and tear
her fine lawne sleeves, and her will nere loose her life, grace and all, now my
Lord hear what her say.

1. Her very well know tat in this Tevils place, be crete Cavaliers, mad
Priests, surly Porters, Irish Rebels, and Ratcatchers, and when her comes
near, her Crace not go too near, but hover about and cry Ka, ka, ka, ka, and
be sure if te plagg Rogues comes out, her fly far enough, least her get te
pullet, or fire in her Breech.

2. Her very well know, tat her Lord-crase love to hunt te Fox in te Forest,
and the Cony into Court, and her so love Puffe-Coate in te Camp, and
placke-coate in te Church. But pray her crace, take heed of te curse of a
Cuckold, and te pride of a Prelate, nor let te Plack-coate be too covetous, nor
her cosens fall out mong her none self.

3. Her pray send to the Lord of Worcester, tat run into all her Welch-holes
with te Jrish Rebels: will her coe to te Devell and all, pray let her take her
Petition.

Good Lord-shete, plame not her pen,
Spare her self, give us your men.
Deliver Ragland-Castle then,
We Will send you York to say Amen.
4. Messe-Lord let her crase take her cosen fery cood counsel, for her know
her much offend te Parliament, for joining wite te Tefill Cafaliers, and preach
again te Roundheads, her now proves a Rattle-head her self for it, but mark
here now, her would have her crase now to purchase Arches old Coat, that her
may plead her cosen Arches privilege, And her will be then Arch-foole, and
Arch-Beshet and all, and if that will not make her escape Scot-free, then make a
mourning Cloak of her Canon-call gown; and that will hide her foole-coate,
and her wise man both.

5. Her would have counsel her crase, for send a Scout for Londou, to her
falient command, and fight before Conoway, her send for Newcastle, for tell her
at Court, when her come to York, her will leave to shoot pullet, and toss
Tennis Ball, when meet to Court there, her send to the Counsel of War, for
see how many Captains; her Lord-shets made Cafaliers when the Roundheads went
down) are now found traitors, her send to Clergy, to see what they are
preparing in stead of the Miter. Let her get a Jesuit too for play at
wily-beguily, and send one Scout to play at bo peep with the Sotch Army.

6. Her would pray that her Crace will send a Petition to the General in the
name of all her cosens of Wales, signed by her cosen Taffie, and cosen Ienkin,
ap Williams, ap Roperts, ap Thomas, ap Shon, and all her creat plood shentile
folk, and it is is her petition:

That Shon-a morgan shentilman of Wales, being sick of the Northern disease,
desires him to send some honest Soldiers that will not plunder: for her have
had some come to her Besse ap Ioane, her nowne wife, and call, You whore, give
her for her Dinner, or her will cut her throat; then her give a shoulder of
Mutton, a Robin-run-ith-hole, and fill her belly with couse-bobby her nown
self: and to Soldier, when eat her Dinner, drink all her drink, knock down
her lambs, kill her poultry, and vex her plood, would keep her wife up all
night before her nown face, whether her will or no; but her has tem now in a
trap in Conoway, her would have more honest Soldiers to fetch tem out by both
cares, whether her will or no. All her cosens in all her principality of Wales,
will contribute, and give at the least fifteenscore shillings, a creat deal for
one country, her pray let her General know.

7. Her hear tat te Lords and Iuncto, or Conventicle, what call you, that sat
at Oxford, are broke up, and will fight no more against the Parliament: her
desire that her faliant Contrymen that have hate their all this while, when
they come home, may be presented with a golden Calfe of half a score
shillings price for a peace offering.

8. That you will send in a Catalogue of the Kings Champions into Conoway
Castle to the Governor (to see to how little purpose he holds it out) with the
accidents that have befallen them, as you see it written in this paper.

Falkland is dead, Rupert is fled, Digby is run away,
Bristoll is flying, Cottington dying and Dupper left for to pray,
Dives is at hand, Strangwayes cannot stand, Jarmin gives a call,
The Juncto is flying, their cause is a dying, Fairfax conquers all.
9. That her cosen shentlemen of Wales make her creat Dinner for the cood Lord
crace, and her prethren Bishit Prelates, and creat Priests to make merry with,
when her take Connoway from the Cavaliers, and her shall have cood sheere
provided for her; her tell her what would have ten, mark her creat Feast.

Her would have a Woodcock pie, dressed of her Lordshits nown fashion and a Lamb
pasty for the rest of her guests, but her love no more Dear. Her dress for
cutup dish, two pickled Lords, sealed of the Oxford fashion, and a calves head
for her crace standing dish, and for sauce her will have Couse-bobby and creen
leekes make fery cood salad. And her will be fery merry, mark her here now: her
Cafalier make no such feasts, but have Irish rebels tears for her drink, and
dine in the Castle of Care: they have play their music, and their Tenor is
vox Regis, for their Base, vox Clerici, their Discords vox Concilii, but pray
her crace let her feast have for her Tenor vox Parliamentorum, for her treble,
vox popull; for her counter vox pauperis: for her mean vox puri, for her
consort vox coeli, and for her comfort vox Dei.

10. That her cood Mess Lord may have the Welsh Caranto sung at her Craces
chamber window, that her cosen Taffy, may hear it too, which is this.

The cunning D ane, the pride of Spain, and Orleaus Duke lay out,
The Irish Wild, the French men mild, and Dunkirk bold and stout,
Had joined arms, and vowed great harms to Britain they would bring
The Parliament did them prevent, but Scots have got the King.
The English men both bold and strong, the Scottish stout and hardy,
The valiant Welshmen will be first to take the Papists tardy.
The Parliament by sea and land, will pull their courage down,
And make men know King Charles must keep the Jesuits from the Crown.
11. That her send to her prother Beshit at Worcester, cause before her
compound with the Parliament, her may have her letter if her can get it, and
give the Parliament Drummers good store of wine (if her can have it) to
forbear beating, and call on the Canoniers and Soldiers to forbear shooting,
that so the noise of the Guns and Trums may not drown the sound of the Organs
for her little time her stay in Worcester, cause since her lost Worcester, her
Organs played pull her down.

12. That her may no more fight with her prethren and cosens at home, but all
join against the rebel Irish, that cut our British Protestants throats, and
then Thou Irish ken, We fear thee not, our quarrel is to fight,
Oneal weel lash, Glamorgan slash, and Musgrave put to flight.
And by command weel have their land as soon as they are slain,
Then with all speed, weel do the deed, Taffy will fight amain,


But after her Van has carbonado'd the rebels in her march; like so many
Capons, and sent them to Dublin for a present, her Lord Beshit may bring up the
Rear, to see that none of her cosens forsake her colors.

The Welsh-mans new Laws and Orders of War, for her Cosen Taffies Camps in
Wales.
1. THat her be not too forward to fight with any of her none flesh and blood,
until her know why and wherefore, nor kill her no more, cause her Cozen Taffy
love te Parliament but love her self too. 2. Item, That if her loose her
Colors in the field to cheaters at Dice, her be cashiered for a fool. 3.
Item, If any Soldier learn, or use more terms of Art in his exercise then
his Captain can teach him, her shall then ride the public horse. 4. Item, If
any Captain cannot understand his Colonels directions for the word of command,
her shall forfeit a Goose for her slender judgment. 5. Item, That no Sutler
trust the Soldiers with too much meat; for fear her surfeit, upon pain of
none payment thereof. 6. Item, That if any Trooper shall sell her create horse
and saddle, her shall fight on foot till her by valor get her a horse to ride
on. 7. That none of all her Cosen Taffies Soldiers march nearer to the enemy,
nor pursue upon a sally nearer their works then her Officers dare lead the
way, least when they have fought, they be left in the lurch. 8. Item, That
whatsoever any Soldier can get by fighting and bring away from her enemy, her
shall keep hit none self, if her do not spend it.
FINIS.

