THE CLERK OF ASSIZE, JUDGES-MARSHALL, AND CRIER: BEING The true Manner and
Form of the Proceedings at the Assizes and General Goale-Delivery, both in the
Crown Court, and Nisi Prius Court, AND The Right ways of entering of all
Pleas, Verdicts, Judgments, and Orders in either of the said Courts. By T. W.
To which is Added An ancient Brief Tract of the Common Laws of ENGLAND,
written in Latin,

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop within the
Inner Temple Gate, 1660.

TO THE READER.
THE Government of this Nation being now again happily brought into its ancient
and right Course, and that the Proceedings in Courts of Justice to be in the
Kings name, and in Latin, and Court-hand (the good old way.) I have (for the
Information and Direction of such Officers as are to be employed for the
dispatch of the businesses at the Assizes, and were not well acquainted with
the ways and manner of Proceedings there, in the time of the late King) set
forth and published this small Manuel, wherein not only the Clerk of Assize,
and other Associates may be fully furnished with instructions, to discharge the
Duties of the several places: But the Marshalls, Cryers, and other the Judges
Officers may find all such Oaths and Words as are by them to be administered,
and used, both in the Crown court, and Nisi Prius Court. To which I have also
added the way and manner of entering all Orders, Pleas, Verdicts, and Judgments
in either of the said Courts: And I doubt not but it will give good
satisfaction to such persons as have occasion to use such Instructions, and be
offensive to none,

Farewell.
The Clerk of the Assizes, Judges, and Marshalls, and Cryers directions: Being
The manner and form of Proceedings at the Assizes and general Goale-Delivery,
holden by his Majesty's Justices according to the Law and custom of ENGLAND.
FIRST, when the Court is set, the Crier must make three Proclamations.

Then the Clerk of Assize must cause him to say as follows,

Viz.

My Lords, the Kings Justice straightly charge and command all manner of
persons to keep silence, and hear the Kings Majesty's Commissions openly read,
upon pain of imprisonment.

Then must the Clark of the Assizes read.

1 Patent of Assize. 2 The Patent of Association 3 The Writ of Admittance. 4
The Writ Si non omnes.
And then must say, God save the King.

Essoines.
Then the Crier must make one Proclamation, and say,

If any man will be essoined in Assize of Novel disseisin, Assize of
Mortdauncester, Certificate of Assize, meis ultrum, or Attaint, let him come
forth and he shall be heard.

Sheriffs returns of the summons of Assize.
Then the Crier must make another Proclamation, and say,

Sheriff of the County of L. return the Precepts and Writs of Assize, and Nisi
prius to thee directed and delivered, upon pain and peril, etc.

Then the Crier must make another Proclamation, and say,

All manner of Persons that have any Writs of Assize, or Records of Nisi prius
to be put into the Court, put them in forthwith, or none shall be received.

Then must the Crier make another Proclamation, and say,

All Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King within the County of
L. answer to your names at the first call, The form of calling the Justices
and other Officers.
upon pain and peril that may fall thereon.

Then the Clerk of the Assize must name them as they are returned in the
Callender, and the Crier must call them.

When they are called, then must the Crier say, all Coroners of our Sovereign
Lord the King, within the County of L. answer to your names as you shall be
called every man at the first call, upon pain and peril that shall fall
thereon.

Then they must be called as they are returned in the Callender.

When they are called, then must be called all Stewards of Liberties of our
Sovereign Lord the King, etc. by th ir names as they are returned.

After must be called the chief Constables as they are returned, and after them
the Bailiffs of the Hundreds as they are returned.

Giving unto them their styles in the first place as all Stewards, etc. And
when they are done, all chief Constables, etc. And when they are done, then all
Bailiffs of Hundreds, etc.

Then must the Crier make a Proclamation, and say,

My Lords, the Kings Justices straightly charge and command all manner of
persons to keep silence, and hear the Kings Majesty's Commissions of Oyer and
Terminer, and general Jail-delivery to be openly read, upon pain of
imprisonment.

Then must the Clerk of the Assizes read the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer,
and general Jail-delivery, that done, say, God save the King.

Then must the Crier make a Proclamation, and say,

Calling for return of Inquisitions.
All Justices of Peace, Coroners, Stewards of Leets and Liberties, and other
Officers that have taken any Inquisitions, Indictments, or Recognizances,
whereby you have let any man to bail, put in your Records thereof forthwith,
that my Lords, the Kings Justices may proceed.

Then must the Crier make another Proclamation, and say,

Form of calling the grand Jury.
You good men that be impannelled to enquire for our Sovereign Lord the King,
for the body of the County of L. answer to your names every man at the first
call, upon pain and peril that shall fall thereon.

Then the grand Jury must be called by name, and when they have appeared, they
must be sworn by the Marshall.

The foreman must lay his hand on the Book, and then the Marshall gives the
oath as follows.

You as foreman of this Inquest for the body of this County of L. you shall
diligently inquire, The oath of the grand Jury.
and a true presentment make of all such matters and things as shall be given
you in charge: the Kings Majesty's Council, your fellows, and your own you
shall keep secret, you shall present no man for envy, hatred, or malice,
neither shall you leave any man unpresented for love, fear, favor, or
affection, or hope of reward, but you shall present things truly as they come
to your knowledge, according to the best of your understanding, so God help you.

The rest of the grand Jury are sworn as follows.

The same oath which your foreman has taken on his part, you and every of you
on your behalf, shall well and truly observe and keep, so help you God.

When the grand Jury is sworn, the Crier must make Proclamation, and say,

Charge giving.
My Lords the Kings Justices, straightly charge and command all persons to keep
silence whilst the charge is in giving to the grand Jury, upon pain of
imprisonment

When the charge is given, the Crier must make a Proclamation, and say,

All manner of persons that have any Bills of Indictment to put unto the great
Inquest, put them into the Court first, that my Lords the Kings Justices may
peruse them, or else they shall not be received.

Calling of Prosecutors.
Then must be called the parties that are bound to prosecute by their
Recognizances put in by the Justices, that they may get their Bills made
against the Prisoners, and be sworn unto them by the Crier, and sent to the
grand Jury to give Evidence.

All this for the most part is finished the first day in the forenoon, And then
the Court rising.

The Clerk of the Goal fileth up his Recognizances delivered in Court, Filing
of the Recognizances.
such as are to prosecute against offenders upon one file, and such as are for
appearance of offenders called bailes upon another file, and all examinations
taken before Justices of Peace upon a third file, and takes a little Note or
Callender of them for the ready finding of them out as shall happen.

When the Court fitteth in the afternoon, they send for the grand Jury, who
when they appear, the Clerk of Assize calls them by their names, and
demands of them if they be agreed of any Bills, if they say yea, the Clerk of
the Assize bids them present them to the Court, and upon the delivery of them,
he says,

You are content the Court shall amend form, and false Latin, altering matter
of no substance in those Bills which you have found.

The grand Jury say yea, and so they go together again.

Then does the Clerk of the Assize file up the Bills which are found upon
Filing the Bills.
the file with the Callender and Precept for summoning of the Assize formerly
returned by the Sheriff, and that being orderly done, and the Jailor having
brought his Prisoners to the Hall,

The Crier makes Proclamation, and says,

My Lords the Kings Justices straightly charge and command all persons to keep
silence, for now they will proceed upon the Pleas of the Crown to the
arraignment of Prisoners upon life and death, and that all persons that have
any evidence to give against any of the Prisoners, draw near and give your
attendance upon forfeiting your Recognizances.

Then does the Clerk of the Assize begin with his first indictment upon the
file in order, and bids the Jailor set the Prisoner named in that Indictment
to the Bar; If he be let to bail, and not in the Goal, then the Clerk causes
the Crier to call him on this manner,

Calling of bailes.
A. B. come forth, save thee and thy bail, or else thou forfeitest thy
Recognizance.

If he appear not, then call the sureties on this manner,

J. W. and T. S. with their additions as they are written, bring forth A. B.
whom you undertook to have here this day, or else you forfeit your Recognizance.

If he appears not, then the Clerk of the Assizes passes by that Indictment,
and calls to the Jailer to set forth the Prisoner named in the next
Indictment, and when he is at the Bar, the Clerk of the Assizes says unto him
as follows.

Thou art here indicted by the name of J. S. for that thou, etc. and so read
all the Indictment in English, and then ask him, what say thou, art thou
guilty of this murder, or what it is for whereof thou stands indicted, or not
guilty, if he says not guilty, Then the Clerk of the Assizes must ask him, how
will thou be tried, If he say by God and the Country. Then must the Clerk of
Assize say God send thee a good deliverance and write over his head in the
Indictment Po. Se. So proceed to the next until so many are arraigned as will
serve for a petty Jury to pass upon.

If any Prisoner (...) arraignment confess hi^ (...) must be written Confession.
over his head in the Indictment, this (Cogn.) and so he is set by till the
time of giving Judgment.

If any Prisoner upon his Arraignment does refuse to be tried by his Country,
and yet plead non cul, then must be written over his head in the Indictment
these words. Stat mutus, and he must be set by till Judgment giving, unless he
plead to his Country in the interim.

When enough of Prisoners are arraigned to be tried by a petty Jury then must
the Clerk of Assize call to the Sheriff for a pannell of Jurors to try the
Prisoners, and then know of the Judge how many he will have tried by that Jury.

Calling of the Jury of life and death.
Then he must call the Jury thus, you good men that be impannelled to inquire
between our Sovereign Lord the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar answer to
your names every man at the first call, upon pain and peril that shall fall
thereon.

When the Jury has appeared, then must the Clerk of the Assize call the
Prisoners to the Bar that shall be tried by the Jury, every man by his name,
and then say unto them,

Challenge allowed to the Prisoners.
These good men that were last called, and have here appeared, are those that
shall pass between our Sovereign Lord the King, and you upon your lives and
your deaths, that therefore you or any of you will challenge them, or any of
them; you may challenge them as they come to the Book to be sworn, before they
be sworn, and you shall be heard.

Then must the Crier make a Proclamation, and say,

If any man can inform my Lords the Kings Justices, the Kings Sergeant,
Information for the King against the Prisoners.
or the Kings Attorney, or this Inquest to be taken between our Sovereign Lord
the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar of any Treason, Murder, Felony, or other
Misdemeanor committed or done by the Prisoners at the Bar, or any of them, let
them come forth and they shall be heard, the Prisoners stand at the Bar upon
their deliverance.

Then must the Clerk of Assize call the Jury to be sworn every man severally,
Note that every Juror must lay his hand on the Book and look toward the
Prisoners. Oath of the Jury of life and death.
and the Marshall must swear them all severally on this manner.

You shall well and truly try, and true deliverance make between our Sovereign
Lord the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar, whom you shall have in charge
according to your Evidence, so help you God.

Counting of the Jury.
When they are all sworn, the Clerk of Assize must cause the Crier to count them
as he reads their names, and that done, he must ask them whether they be all
sworn or not, if they say yea,

Then they must divide themselves at the Bar, some on one side, some on the
other.

Then the Clerk of the Assizes must call the Prisoner named in the first
Indictment upon the file, as he has pleaded in order to the Bar, and bid him
hold up his hand, and then say to the Jury,

Look upon the Prisoner you that be sworn, and hearken to his cause.

Charge of the Jury of life and death.
You shall understand that he stands indicted by the name of, etc. as in the
Indictment, for that he, etc. and read the Indictment as he did upon the
arraignment, and that done, the Clerk of the Assizes must immediately say, upon
this Indictment he has been arraigned, upon his arraignment, he has pleaded
not guilty, and for his trial has put himself upon God and the Country, which
Country are you, so that your charge is to enquire whether he be guilty of this
Felony whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty, if you find him guilty, you
shall enquire what Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels he had at the time of
the Felony committed, or at any time sithence: if you find him not guilty, then
shall you enquire if he did fly for it or not, if you find that he did fly
for it, then you shall enquire what Goods or Chattels he had at the time when
he did fly for it, or at any time sithence; if you find him not guilty, nor
that he fly for it, say so and no more, and hear your Evidence.

Then must the Clerk of Assize direct the Crier to call the witnesses as they
be subscribed to the Indictment. Calling of witnesses.


That done, the Judge hears the witnesses for the King upon oath, and for the
Prisoner without oath, and so they proceed to the next Prisoner, as the
Indictments are filed in order, with this difference only.

When the Clerk of Assize has read over the Indictment as before, he only
says as follows, viz.

Upon this Indictment he has been arraigned, upon his arraignment he has
pleaded not guilty, and for his trial he has put himself upon God and his
Country, which Country you are, so that your charge is to enquire whether he be
guilty of this Felony whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty, and further to
inquire of him as you had in charge to inquire of the first Prisoner, and hear
your Evidence.

And then call the witnesses upon that cause as they are subscribed to the
Indictment.

After they are heard then if the Prisoner desires that any witnesses be heard
for him, they must be called also, but they must speak without oath.

When that Prisoner has done, then they proceed to the next, and so one after
another, till the Jury be fully charged.

Reading of Proclamations.
In the mean time as the Prisoners are upon their several trials, the Clerk
that keeps the Goal Book, looks out every examination of every Prisoner as
his cause is in hearing, and if it be Evidence for the King, he reads it to
the Jury.

Bill of causes.
Also he makes ready a Note of the Juries names, and subscribeth the Prisoners
names, and their offenses as they stand charged, withal underneath the same,
and when the Jury is ready to go from the Bar, he delivers it unto them for
their better direction and help of their memory to know who they have in charge.

When the Jury is gone from the Bar, Sending for the grand Jury.
if there be not Indictments found enough to charge another Jury, the Court
does send to the grand Jury to bring in some more Bills if they are ready, and
in the mean time, or some other time when the Court is at leisure.

The Clerk of the Goal Book calls the chief Constables to deliver in their
Presentiments. Taking the Constables Presentiments.


Which done, the Court takes the appearance of the grand Jury as aforesaid,
and proceeds to the arraignment of Prisoners and trials of them, as before
is expressed until all be done.

When the Jury of life and death are agreed, Taking of the Verdict of the Jury
of life and death.
and come to the Court to give their Verdict. The Clerk of Assize must first
call them by name, and ask them if they be agreed of their Verdict, and who
shall say for them, and call the first Prisoner to the Bar, and bid him hold up
his hand.

Then say to the Jury, look upon the Prisoner you that be sworn, what say you,
is he guilty of the Felony whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty,

If they say guilty.

Then ask what Lands, or Tenements, Goods, or Chattels had he at the time of
the Felony committed, or at any time sithence.

If they find any, they must be Recorded: but their common answer is, none to
our knowledge.

If the Jury say, not guilty.

Then ask if he did fly for it or not, if they find a flight, it must be
Recorded, but their common answer is, not to our knowledge.

And so must the Clerk of Assize proceed to every Prisoner particularly, which
the Jury has in charge, writing after the words (Po. se.) over the several
names of the Prisoners, Cul. or non cul. as the Verdict is, and then he must
say to the Jury, hearken to your Verdict as the Court records it, and then he
repeateth it in this manner.

You say A.B. is guilty of the Felony whereof he stands indicted.

That C. D. is not guilty, and so of the rest.

And then concludes, and so you say all,

And bid them put in their Bill of causes.

Memorand. Trial of Riotors and Trespassers.
that all Indictments upon Riots, Trespasses, and other misdemeanors under the
degree of Felony, the parties whereunto are either in Prison, or bound to
appear by Recognizance; upon their appearance, they must be tried after the
Felons.

And those that are found guilty, the Judge imposes a Fine upon them, and
other punishment as he finds the nature of the offense.

After all the Indictments preferred to the grand Jury be returned into the
Court, or before if leisure permit, Delivering of Prisoners by Proclamation.
the Clerk of the Goal calls over all his bailes that are not formerly called
upon their arraignments, there being no Bills preferred against them, and upon
their appearance, he acquainteth the Judge with who committed them, and the
reason thereof, as it is expressed in the Recognizance, and how no man comes
against them, and likewise he peruseth the Goal Prisoners, and Bail
Prisoners, against whom the Bills of Indictment are returned ignoramus, and
against whom there are no Indictments preferred, and informs the Judge of
their cases, and if no man comes against them during the Assizes, they are
delivered by Proclamation, as follows.

Proclamation.
If any man can inform my Lords the Kings Justices, the Kings Sergeant, or the
Kings Attorney, of any Treason, Murder, Felony, or any other misdemeanor
committed or done by A. B. etc. and name them all, or any of them now Prisoners
at the Bar, let him come forth, and he shall be heard, the Prisoners stand upon
their deliverance.

Form of keeping the Goal Book.
Note that the Clerk that keeps the Goal Book in the beginning of the Assizes
sets down in the Book first a note of the day when the Assizes is holden,
and the Judges name and Sheriffs name in a short compendious manner used for
that purpose, ut patet in libro.

Next unto that he sets down the Prisoners names as they are returned by the
Sheriff in the Calender, beginning with the reprives formerly left in the
Goal, and then the rest in order, leaving a reasonable distance betwixt every
name, and so also of all bailes, for which he has Recognizance returned in by
the Justices.

And when any Indictment is found against any Prisoner, and he arraigned
thereupon: he sets down briefly his offense, at the end of his name, as (for
a Mare) or the like, and if the Prisoner put himself upon the Country, then be
writes over his name (Po. Se.) And if he will not be tried by the Country,
then he writes over his name Stat. mutus, and if the Prisoner continue
obstinate, and will not be tried, then he adpeth thereto (Pen. fort and Dur.)
And if if the Prisoner confess the fact upon his arraignment, then he writes
over his name (Cogn.) And when a Prisoner is tried and found guilty, and had no
goods, he adds unto the former words, Po. se. cul. ca. null. And if the
prisoner be found not guilty, nor that he did fly, then he adds to the
former words, Po se. non cul. nec r. And if the Prisoner be found guilty of
petty Larceny, then he writes to the former words (Po. se. cul. de parva
felon va. xd. flag.) And if the Prisoner be found guilty of a Felony, wherein
he may have benefit of Clergy, and the Prisoner demand the same and can read,
then he adds to the former words Po. se. cul. ca. null. pe. li. le. cre. And
if the Prisoner cannot read when his Book is allowed him, then he adds to the
words, Pe. li. sed not legit Jo. sus. but if the offense whereof the Prisoner
is found guilty, be such as the benefit of Clergy cannot be allowed by Law,
then he writes unto the former words, Po. se. cul. ca. null. Ss. And against
such Prisoners as ignoramus is found upon the Bill preferred against them, he
writes in the Margent behind their names severally (Ign.) And the offense
severally before their names (as for a Gelding) and the like, and over his head
(Del.) and over the names of such Prisoners as there are nothing against, he
writes (Del.) and over such names as do not appear upon their Recognizance,
being called, he writes (defalt.) And after such names as are to be sent to
the house of Correction, he writes (to be sent to the House of Correction) or
r. Dom. Correctionis, for the better explanation hereof, I have written this
small form underneath, if the Prisoner be twice indicted, then the two offenses
after the name, and the figure of 2 behind it.

Po. se. cul. ca. null. Ss. 2 Ss. md.


Johes Do for a Mare, for Lynnens.

Po. se. cul. ca. null. pe. li. le. cre. Md.


Ricus Roo for Heifers and Sheep.

Po. se. cul. ca. null. flag.

Thomas Denn for Lynnens the value of ten pence.

Po. se. non. cul. nec. r.

Willus Fenn for six Oxen, 3 Md.
two Weathers, for a Hog. Ign.


Adamus del Pie for Burglary.

Note that where he begins to enter his Bailes, he writes (B) in the
Margent.

defalt

Fransciscus Mye. B.


Stat. mut. pen. fort. and dur.

Joes Trimtram for murder.

Po. se. cul. ca. null. pe. li. sed non legit. Jo. Sus. Md.


Nichus Skillington for eight Ewes. Sus. md.


Some other forms there be, which as they arise are set down after the natures
of the offenses: The Goal Book is full of examples, and therefore I omit them
here.

Also all orders made by the Court for continuance of any man in Prison, or
sending any to the house of Correction, all Fines set upon any Prisoner for
Trespass, all Defaults upon Recognizance to answer, all orders for
Attachments, and other Warrants, and all submissions of Recusants are usually
recorded in the Goal Book, and also Writs of good behavior.

Callender.
Note also, that he that keeps the Goal Book, having made perfect his
Callender, as the Verdicts are given, he does draw out into a sheet of Paper in
the first place the names of such as are to suffer death under one title, the
names of such as are to have benefit of Clergy under another title, such as are
guilty of petty Larcenie under another title such as are found not guilty
under another title, and such as are to be delivered by Proclamation, against
whom there is nothing in Court under the last title.

And under the first title such as stand mute, if any be, by themselves, and in
another place, such as are to be sent to the house of Correction.

That Callender being made perfect and delivered to the Judge, and he ready to
give Judgment, the Clerk of Assize causes the Jailer to set all the Prisoners
found guilty above petty Larceny, to the Bar, and says unto them thus,

You do remember that before this time you have been severally indicted for
several Felonies, The form of calling the Prisoners to judgment.
and some of you for Murder by you done and committed; upon your Indictments,
you have been arraigned, and have severally pleaded not guilty; and for your
trials you have severally put your selves upon God and the Country, which
Country has found you guilty, what can you now say for your selves, why
according to Law you should not have Judgment to suffer death, and then ask
them by name severally.

What say thou A. B. etc.

Then if he claim his Clergy, Clergy.
and may have it by Law, the Ordinary must be called to show him the Book, and
when he has showed it to him, the Clerk of Assize must say, legit ut clericus
vel non.

If the Ordinary say legit, then must the Prisoner be burned in the hand: but
if the Ordinary says non legit, the Prisoner must be executed.

When all have had benefit of Clergy, which may have it by Law; then does the
Judge (after an exhortation made to the Prisoners that are to suffer death)
give Judgment, and such Prisoners against whom no man prosecuteth, and against
whom ignoramus is found, being proclaimed as aforesaid, the Jailer is commanded
to take away his Goal.

Then does the Court send for the Grand Jury; but you must note by the way that
whilst the Court is in trying the Prisoners as aforesaid, some one of the
Clerks does take a note of all the Recusants presented by Constables out of
their presentements, And does make them into a bill of Indictment in form of
Law; and does send both it and the presentiments to the Grand Jury, and now, if
not before at their coming in they deliver the same bill together with their
presentiments of other greivances, and having so done they are usually
discharged, except extraordinary business alter it.

Proclaiming of Recusants.
If the Indictment against the Recusants be found, then does the Clerk of Assize
cause the Crier to make a proclamation, and then Reading the names and the
Crier repeating them with their additions as they are in the indictment, he
concludes after the last name thus, Being indicted at these Assizes for not
coming to the Church by the space of one month (or more as it is laid in the
Indictment) yield your bodies to the Sheriff of this County, so that he may
have the same before the Kings Majesty's Justices at the next Assizes, and
general Jail-delivery to be holden for this County, or else you, and every of
you shall be convicted of Recusancy, according to the form of the Statute in
that case made and provided.

This being done, the Judge having heard some Greivances as are complained of
unto him concerning misdemeanors, and the like.

The Crier makes three Proclamations to adjurne the Assizes.

And then says, Adjurning of the Assizes.
All manner of Persons that have here appeared before my Lords the Kings
Justices, at these Assizes and general Jail-delivery may now depart in Gods
peace, and the Kings, and keep your day here upon a new Summons, and God save
the King, and so the Court rises.

And note that if the Nisi prius are not ended, they are adjurned over to that
Court, and when they have done they make this general adjurnment.

Note also that at every rising of the Court it is adjorned over by
Proclamation to such an hour in the afternoon, or in the morning until the
Assizes be ended.

Note that where it is said, the Crier must say such and such words, if he be
not expert himself, the Clerk of Assize must direct him.

Note also that all such persons against whom the Sheriff returns Cepi Corpus
upon any Writ of Assizes delivered unto him, ought to be called in Court in
convenient time, if they appear not otherwise.

Note also, that where it is said the Clerk of Assize must do such and such
things, they are usually done by the Associate for that side.

Note also, that in calling the Justices of Peace, Coroners, Stewards of
Liberties, chief Constables, and Bailiffs of Hundreds, and grand Juries, and
other Juries, their appearances are marked with () and their defaults left
blanck in the Margent, except the Judge set a Fine upon any of them for not
appearing, then that is set down in the Margent.

Note that such Clerks as make Indictments are in Action as long as occasion
requires about them, and Writs of Restitution, or to remove Prisoners, etc.
but their employment is of that nature, that it cannot be here expressed.

Your Clerks employment concerning making Subpoena's, and taking appearances
upon Presentiments. I suppose you sufficiently know, and so have I done on the
Goal side: there are other observations which practice must make manifest.

The Proceedings on the Nisi Prius.
WHen the Court is set and Records and Writs put into the Court fit for trial:
the Crier must make a Proclamation, and the Clerk must direct him to say,

You good men of the Nisi prius summoned to appear here this day, Calling the
Jury.
betwixt A B. Plaintiff, and C. D. Defendant, answer to your names, every man
at the first call, and save your Issues.

Then must they be called by name with this conclusion, thou loosest a mark in
issues to every one of them. And if a full Jury do not appear, then call the
defaults without addition, and then if twelve do not appear, say Vous avis null
inquest.

Calling the Defendant.
Then call the Defendant C. D. come forth or this Inquest shall be taken in thy
default, this must be done thrice, if the Defendant appear not, then must the
Clerk write on the back of the Pannell, per defalt.

Challenge.
Then the Clerk must say, Plaintiffs guard ure. Challenge, and so call the Jury
to the Book to be sworn; and as they come to the Book the Marshall must swear
them, unless the Plaintiff challenge any of them, which if he does, they must
stand by till the rest be sworn to eleven more in rank as they appear, and
then the Clerk must ask the Plaintiff why he challenges such a man.

Then the Plaintiff showing his cause, if it be sufficient, the verity shall be
tried by two other sworn upon the same Jury, if they find the cause true, then
he shall be spared, otherwise he shall be sworn.

If he be spared, and there do not appear enough on the principal Pannell to
make a full Jury, then the Plaintiff must pray in tales de Circumstantibus.

Which being granted by the Judge. Tales.


The Sheriff must return some names for that purpose, such as are then within
view of the Court.

And then the Clerk must direct the Crier to call them on this manner.

You good men of the Tales newly returned according to the form of the Statute,
answer to your names every man at the first call, and save your Issues, or upon
pain and peril, etc.

Then they appearing must be sworn with the other Jurors.

You shall well and truly try the Issue of this Nisi prius, between the
parties, Their oath.
according to your Evidence, so help you God.

And when they are sworn they must be counted, and asked if they be all sworn,
and bid stand together and hear your charge.

Then must the Associate for that side read the Record, Charge of the Jury on
the Nisi prius.
and charge the Jury as the Record is, what they are to inquire, the certainty
cannot be here expressed.

Then do the Council on both sides open the Cause one after another, the
Plaintiffs Council first, if the proof lie on his side, otherwise the
Defendants, and produce such witnesses as do prove such matters as they
allege, etc.

In the interim does the Clerk file the Writ, Pannell, and Record together.

Copy of the Issue.
And makes a Copy of the Juries names, and the Issue they are to try, and when
the Council have done, he delivers it to the Jury; and a Bailiff being sworn
to keep them till they be agreed, without meat, drink etc. they depart from the
Bar, and when they are agreed, they return to give their Verdict.

Taking the Verdict.
Then does the Clerk call them by their names, and ask them if they be agreed of
their Verdict, and who shall say for them.

Then must the party be called thrice.

A. B. come forth, or else thou loosest thy Writ of Nisi prius.

If he appear not, then the Defendant must pay the Jury, and the fees of the
Court, and have the nonsuit recorded.

But if the Plaintiff appear, then the Clerk asks the Jury.

What say you, do you find for the Plaintiff, or for the Defendant, and what
costs and damages according as the cause is, and so be enters it on the back
of the Pannell, and repeats it to the Jury.

Note that in all causes that come by Nisi prius, betwixt party and party, if
the Jury appear not full, the Prosecutor of the Record may have a Tales if he
pray it.

Note also, that if the Defendant appear not when he is called, he loses the
benefit of his challenge to the Jurors, but if he appear he may challenge them.

And many other things may happen in execution of this business which time and
observation will make perfect.

In the mean time you must take these as the Heads.

The Term business.
Returning of Postea's.
FIrst the returning of all the Postea's which must be done on the backside of
the Records, tried at the Assizes, which must be done as they are called for by
the Attorneys, for such as are agreed will not he called for at all.

Out of Process.
The putting of all such persons out of Process as have appeared at the Assizes,
and are discharged, and entering of them in a Book for that purpose. Into Process.


The putting of all such persons into Process as are newly presented by the
grand Juries, and chief Constables, at the last Assizes, and entering them into
the Book of Process.

Making of Process.
The writing over the Process again for every Shire, and delivering of them to
the several Sheriffs to be executed.

Certifying of Convicts and Inquisitions.
The certifying of the Convictions of all such as were burned in the hands
throughout the whole Circuit, and also all Inquisitions of Fe lo de se, per
infortunium and ex visitatione Dei, returned by the Coroners this last Circuit
into the Crown Office.

The drawing up, Special Verdicts.
and entering of all special Verdicts of the last Circuit, and others behind,
if any be.

The certifying of the conviction of all the Recusants convicted at these
Assizes into the Exchequer in Easter Term. Convictions of Recusants.


The making of a little short Certificate to the Lord Keeper, Making
Certificates.
of all the notorious facts in the Circuit when the Judges shall call for it
according to the truth of the proceedings.

The making of the great Estreate in Michaelmas Term, General Estreate.
of all forfeitures of Justices of Peace, Coroners, Stewards of Liberties,
chief Constables, Bailiffs of Hundreds, and grand Juries for their not
appearance for the whole year, and of all convicted Recusants at Summer
Assizes, the Amerciaments upon all persons for Nusances and Trespasses, and the
Issues returned by the Sheriff upon the Process of the Assizes for the whole
preceding year, whereupon no appearance has been made; and the returning of
the same into the Exchequer. The forms and Copies of which Estreats from time
to time returned, are extant among other Records of the Office.

Traverses.
The drawing up of Traverses in form of pleading for all such as have taken
order for the same at the Assizes, or shall take order in Term time, to any
Indictments of Trespass, Riots, Conversion, Depopulation, decay of Highways
and Bridges, or the like, and the entering of them upon the Traverse Roll, and
making out of Venire facias upon the same Traverses.

Process against Felons.
The putting of all such as are indicted of Felony, and are at large into Process.

Against indicted Trespassors.
The putting of all such as are indicted for Riots, and other Trespasses into
Process.

Note that the first Process in Felony is a Capias returnable the next Assizes,
and after that an Exigent.

Process in Felony and Trespass.
Note also, that the first Process in Trespass is a Venire facias returnable at
the next Assizes, and after that, a Capias or Distringas, as the Sheriff shall
return the party sufficient or insufficient.

And if a Capias, then ca. alia plura, and exigent, one going forth when the
other is returned, unless the party appear.

And if a Distringas, then a Distress infinite until the party appear.

The form of all which Process are extant in the Office.

Some other occasions, as returning of Cerciorari's into the Crown Office to
remove Indictments, happen now and then, which a skillful Clerk will easily
perform.

Note in trials of Prisoners if any woman be convicted of Felony, Woman Felons
being with child.
she shall be asked what she can say for her self, why she should not suffer
death according to the Law.

If she say she is with Child,

Then must the Sheriff return a Jury of women, who must be sworn, and charged
to try whether the Prisoner be quick with child or not, and then they take the
Prisoner and go together, and when they return, to give their Verdict, if they
say she is quick with child, the execution of that Prisoner is respited til she
be delivered, but if the Jury say she is not with quick child, then she shall
be executed.

The form of the Oath.

You as fore-matron of this Jury, shall swear that you shall search and try the
Prisoner at the Bar, whether she be with quick child, and thereof a true
Verdict shall return, so God help you.

The same oath your fore-matron has taken, on her part you shall also take and
observe, so God help you.

The Verdict.

In Dower.
Inquiratur si vir obierit sezitus de tenementis praedictis in dominico suo ut
de feodo, aut de feodo talliato. Et si ita invenirint tunc quantum tenementa
illa valent per annum in omnibus exitibus ultra reprisces juxta vera valor
eorundem and quantum tempus dilabitur a tempore mortis praedicti viri. Et quae
Dampna, petens sustinet tam occasion detentionis datae quam premisis.

Quare impedit.
Enquire if the Church be full or not, if it be full, at whose presentation; and
if six months be past since the last avoidance, and of what value it is by the
year, and Costs and Damages.

En Dower nota.
The Jury finding the dying Seized, they must assesse Costs and Damages, but if
they find the Husband was Seized, but did not dye so, then no Costs nor
damages, but only the value of the Land.

In Detinue. Si pro quer. de valor rei detent. and custag. and dampna.

In Debt. Custag. and dampna.

Transgr. Consimile.

Ejectione firmae. Consimile.

Nuisance. Consimile.

In Replevin. Damages for both parties, and costs.

In Account. No damages no costs.

In Wast. Only treble damages.

In Placito terrae. Nulla dampna nec custagia.

Warrantia Carta. Consimile.

Conventione. Dampna and custagia per queren.

Assize. Consimile.

Prohibition. Si pro quer. tum enquir. de exitibus and non plus.

Partitione facienda. Si pro quer. tunc de exit. and non plus.

En brevie de Entry in le per. Custag. and dampna.

En Action de debet sur Statut. E 6. qua extra ponent decimas. The treble value
only, and neither costs nor damages.

In all real Actions, generally no more then the Issue.

PRINCIPIA SIVE MAXIMA LEGUM ANGLIA A GALLICO SERMON COLLECTA.

Principia sive maxima legum Angliae a Gallico sermon collecta.
FIlius senior patri succedet in hereditate pre juniori. Si non sunt filii sed
filie tunc omnes filie simul succedent patri ut una here is: and si nec sunt
filii nec filie tunc secundum leges Anglie fratri vel sorori: and si non sit
frater nec soror, tunc alteri consanguineo vel consanguinie proximiori
dequocumque longo gradu sit ab illo qui ultimo possessus fuit descendet
hereditas: and si non sit aliquis here is generalis nec specialis, tunc ad
dominum feodi ut escaeta sua hereditas illa revertetur.

Per antiquam regni consuetudinem terra a filio ad patrem vel ad matrem nec ad
alium antecessorem in recto lineo existendum nunquam descendet sive ascendet
sed potius ad dominum feodi revertetur.

Si frater medius terras perquirit in feodo and obiit sine herede de corpore
suo procreato, tunc fratri seniori ex antiqua consuetudine regni descendet
hereditas and non juntori. Si terra descendet alicui ex part patris and ille
obiit sine herede de corpore suo, tunc hereditas illa descendet proximis
heredibus suis ex part patris: and si heredes non habuerit ex part patris,
tunc hereditas illa ad dominum feodi illius ut escaeta sua revertetur and ad
heredes ex part matris sue minime descendet.

Si quis perquiret terras sibi and heredibus suis and obiit sine herede de
corpore suo ut predicitur, tunc terra illa descendet proximo heredi ex part
patris sui si talem heredem habuerit.

Et si nullum talem heredem ex part patris habuerit tunc ad proximum heredem
suum ex part matris sue descendet.

Ex consuetudine regni habetur quod filius natus ante matrimonium est bastardus
licet per eundem ventrem fuerit genitus.

Bastardia generalis alligata debet probari and triari per juratam and non per
ordinarium.

Bona and catalla duabus personis conjunctum datam manebunt diutius viventi per
jus accrescendi.

Nullus ultiones aut districtiones faciat absque consideratione curie domini
regis licet dampnum vel injuria sibi fiant a vicino suo.

Bona and catalla nec realia nec personalia nunquam transient ad heredem sed ad
executores nisi in aliqua patria ex consuetudine speciali aliter habeatur.

Vir habebit jure suo proprio omnia bona personalia que fuerint uxoris sue
tempore matrimonii interdos solempnizati vel post. Per utlagariam bona utlegati
domino regi sunt confiscata. Lex and consuetudo habetur in Anglia quod vir
habebit totam hereditatem uxoris sue pro termino vite ejusdem viri de qua vir
seisitus sive in feodo vel in feodo talliato in jure uxoris sue post sponsalia
inter eos solempnizata ut tenens per legem Anglie prolem per uxorem suam
habuerit alias nihil de hereditate illa gaudebit.

Habetur consuetudo quod uxor habebit tertiam partem hereditatis viri sui de
qua vir suus fuit seisitus in facto vel lege post sponsalia inter eos
celebrata, sive prolem habuerit sive non pro termino vite sue nomine dotis: sed
in hoc casu oportet quod uxor tempore mortis viri sui sit ad minus etatis novem
annorum quia alias dotes non habebit.

Antiqua lex and consuetudo habetur in Anglia quod post mortem tenentis per
servitium militare, Dominus de quo tenens ille terram suam tenuit habebit
custodiam maritagium heredis sui et terre sue quousque here is ille ad etatem,
xxi. annorum pervenerit si masculus fuerit. Et si here is ille in tali casu
fuerit plene etatis. xxi. annorum tempore mortis antecessoris sui, tunc solvet
domino suo relenium quod per antiquam consuetudinem regni non fuerit certum:
sed per statutum magne carte assignantur in certo. i. ad c. s. pro integro
feodo militis, et sic secundum porcionem: Et si here is talis tenentis sit femina
et ille tempore mortis antecessoris sui sit etatis.xiiii. annorum et ultra, non
erit in costodia sed sol vet relenium ut supra. Sed si femina illa tempore
mortis antecessoris sui fuerit infra etatem.xiiii. annorum, tunc per antiquam
consuetudinem Regni erit in custodia solum usque, xiiii. annos ut supra: Sed
per statutum West. primi erit in custodia in tali casu usque ad. xv. annorum.

De terra tenta in socagio ex antiqua consuetudine Regni proximus amicus
heredis cui hereditas illa descendere non poterit habebit custodiam illius
heredis et terre sue usque ad etatem ejusdem heredis.xiiii. annorum, et tunc
here is ille intrare poterit. Eccum here is ille ad etatem.xxi. annorum pervenerit,
custos reddet ei compotum de proficuis inde receptis pro toto tempore quo
proficua inde recepit.

Tali here is in socagio pro relenio suo redditum suum duplicabit in anno proximo
sequente mortem antecessoris sui.

Antiqua lex et consuetudo habentur in Anglia quod absque liberatione seisine
nihil liberi tenementi alicujus terre per modum feofamenti transire feofato,
licet ficcaria feofamenti inde facta et deliberata.

Voluntas facta de terra unde testator tempore mortis sue seisitus fuerit
nullius affectus in lege existit: nisi sit consuetudo quod valeret: ut in
civitate London habetur.

Status ad terminum vite ex antiqua lege et consuetudine regni reputatur fore
liberum tenementum propter quod oportet haberi inde liberatio seisine ut pre
dicitur: sed dimissio ad terminum annorum non est liberum tenementum in lege
sed catalle reale, ideo non est necesse ut fiat inde liberatio seisine.

Per antiquam consuetudinem regni pro reditu servitio et pro reditum reservato
super dimissione facta ad terminum vite vel annorum, sive ad voluntatem quis
potest distringere, licet non exprimatur quod distringere potest, and in tali
casu potest distringere avaria tenentis statim postquam avaria illa super
terram taliter tentam sive dimissani inveniri possint: sed avaria alterius quam
tenentis que ibidem invenientur distringere non potest quousque avaria illa in
terra predicta levantes et cubantes invenientur, sed pro debito super
obligatione aut contractu nec pro compoto sive arreragiis compotis nec pro
similibus nullus distringere potest.

Per antiquam legem et consuetudinem regni, omnes exitus qui emergent in aliqua
curia de recordo infra regnum nisi pauci de quibus non est hic necesse
tractandum, debent triari per.xii. liberos et legales homines de viseneto, et
qui nulli parcium ulla affinitate attingent ei in aliis curiis que non sunt de
recordo, ut in com. hundred, curia, baronis et similibus, exitus triari debent
per sacramentum partium et non aliter, nisi er consensu partium.

Habetur in legibus Anglie quod scutagium incertum facit servicium militare et
quod scutagium certum facit socagium.

Prescriptio in proficuis capiendo extra terras alterius facit jus.

Limitatio prescriptionis generaliter sumpta est a tempore cujus contrarii
memoria hominum non existit.

Sit tenens in brevi de scire facias placitat non tenuram generalem petens
potest petere executionem sub periculo suo sed in aliis brevibus oportet
petentem in tali casu breve suum manu tenere.

In brevibus realibus ubi dampna non sunt recuperanda tenens potest disclamare
contra quam disclamationem petens non potest breve suum manutenere sed breve
cassabitur et si veritas sit quod est tenens tunc petens potest licite in
terram illam intrare.

Assignatus fieri potest de terra datis in feodum ad terminum vite, l' annorum.
Licet nulla mentio fiat de assignatis, eadem lex est de redditu, concesso, etc.
sed aliter est de garrantia et de conventione.

Conditio ad evacuandum liberum tenementum fine scripto placitari non potest.

Relaxatio sive confirmatio facta per eum qui tempore relaxationis vel
confirmationis illius fact nullum jus inde habent, vaeua est in lege licet jus
ei postea adveniret nisi sit cum garrantia.

Ius l' titulus actionis quod solum in action dependet alteri vendi non potest
nisi solum terram tenenti.

In action debiti super contractu defendens potest sacramentum prestare quod
nihil debet, licet fuit testis contractus, aliter est super breve de debito
prosecuto super dimissione terre facta ad terminum annorum vel ad voluntatem.

Si breve de exigendo in casu felony aliquem dirigatur, bona sua domino regi
sint statim confiscata.

Si filius in vita patris sit attinctus, licet postea cartam perdonationis a
rege optineat, tamen sanguis corruptus est et here is patri suo esse non poterit,
Ita quod in tali casu post mortem patris, terra illa escaebit, nec fratri suo
juniori si fratrem habeat nullo modo descendere potest.

Si vir alienaverit terram uxoris sue et obiit, uxor intrare non potest, sed
breve quod dicitur cui in vita impetrare oportet.

Villanus ante ingressum factum per dominum suum licite potest terras suas dare
et vendere cuicumque voluerit, et venditio illa sive donum illud firma and
stabilia in lege existunt: eadem quoque lex habetur de bonis et catallis, sed
si dominus ejus ea prius seisierit domino pertinent.

Si quis felonus furatus fuerit bona ad valentiam xii. d. vel ultra morte
punietur: et si sit infra valentiam, xii. d. vocatur perva latrocinia et non
punietur morte sed aliter secundum discretionem Iustitiariorum.

In favorem vite ille qui arramatus est super indictamento felonis potest
calumniare peremptory xxxvi. juratores, quod si ultra illum munerum aliquem
calumpniaverit peremtorie seipsum condempnat quia legem recusavit: sed cum
causa potest tot juratores calumpniare quot causas potest probare.

Terra cujuslibus in lege est ab aliis inclusa nisi ex antiquo se includere
teneant.

Redditus, communia, pasture revercio vel similia que non jacent in manuali
occupatione non possunt alteri dari nec concedi sine scriptio.

Ille qui recuperaverit debita vel dampna in curia regis per talem actionem
ubi-breve de capias jacuit in originali infra annum post illam recuperationem
potest habere breve de capias ad satisfaciendum, per quod defendens capietur et
prisone committetur, a qua non exiet donec debita et dampna plene persolverit.

Si relaxatio aut confirmatio fiat et qui nullam possessionem habent in terris
illis tempere illius relaxationis sive confirmationis fact vacua est ac
nullius vigore in lege.

Nullus potest dominum regem disseisire nec dominus rex aliquem disseisire
potuerit, ita quod liberum tenementum per talem disseisinam transfertur de rege
ad alium nec e contra. Nullum liberum tenementum potest domino regi dari nec ab
eo transferri nisi per materiam de recordo, tanta est in lege reg. excel.

In quibusdam brevibus fit processus per summonicione attachiamentum et
distringas infinite et in quibusdam per capias infinite et in quibusdam per
utiagariam et quod in brevibus realibus fiet processus persummonicionem, magnum
cape ante apparentiam and per pervum cape post apparentiam.

Mandans aliquam transgressionem fieri, est transgressor.

Ille qui habent possessionem terrarum licet injuste, tamen jus habent versus
omnes preter versus eum qui verum jus inde habent.

Actio realis prosecuta versus aliquem qui nihil habet in repetita, cassanda
est in lege.

Alienatio tenentis l' ingressus in religionem pendente brevi versus eum nec si
tenens fiat nilles aut si tenens sit mulier et virum ceperit pendente brevi,
breve non cassabit.

Si terra aliqua et redditus aliquis exiens de eadem terra in una manu remanent
de simili statu et simili securitate tituli redditus ille extinctus est.

Si terra aliqua descenderit ei qui jus habet ad eandem terram in meliore jure
suo, si noluerit in lege judicabitur.

Si duo tituli concurrant senior tituli est preferendus.

Quilibet pro dampnis avariorum suorum in pascendo et terram alterius
conculcando respondere tenetur nisi sit inde justificationis causa.

Si petens pendente brevi suo intrat in rem petitam breve cassabit,

In Kentia est quedam consuetudo que vocatur Gavelkend ubi omnes fratres simul
hereditabunt sicut sorores ad communem legem.

Perticularis consuetudo habetur que vocatur Borough-english ubi filius junior
solum patri succedet: ut est in villa Nottingham et in civitate London alia
consuetudo habetur quod illi qui in civitate illa sunt liberi, possunt per
testamenta sua terras suas etiam de quibus seisite existunt legalie cuicumque
voluerint, nisi ad manum mortuam et quod ille qui sunt cives et liberi ibidem
etiam ad manum mortuam terras suas legare poterint.

In Gavelkynd licet pater suspendatur, tamen filius patri in hereditatem
succedet.

In insula hominis qui furatur caponem vel gallinam suspendetur, si vero equum
non suspendetur.

In aliqua patria per consuetudinem specialem mulier habebit medietatem
hereditatis viri sui nomine dotis quamdiu sola vixit.

In aliqua patria vir habebit medietatem hereditatis uxoris sue pro termino
vite sue licet etiam prolem per eum non habuerit.

In aliqua patria infans cum sit etate xv. annorum potest feofamentum facere
and in alia patria cum sit ulna panni metire, etc.

In aliquibus dominiis liberi tenentes possunt terras suas in curia domini sui
sursum reddere per virgam vel aliter secundum usum curie illius, and in tali
casu per illam sursum redditionem liberum tenementum inde transibit ad illum
cui fit illa sursum redditio absque aliqua liberatione ser sive inde fienda.

In Gavelkynd garrantia inde facta descendet solum super filium seniorem qui
est here is ad communem legem.

Garrantia facta per infantem qui per consuetudinem feofamentum fecerit vacua
est in lege.

Relaxatio similiter per eum facta vacua etiam est in lege.

Si quis obligatus in obligatione pecunias solverit et acquietantiam non
reperit vel captam perdit quod tunc illa solutio secundum legem Anglie nihil ei
prodest.

Iuditia in curiis domini regis reddita non adnihilentur sine errore attincta
l' breve de certificatione nove disseisive.

Si duo teneant alique boscum conjunctim et unus eorum totum boscum succidet et
omnes proficues inde convertit ad opus suum proprium in isto casu socius nullum
inde habet remedium versus eum ad communem legem.

Si quis fecerit factum feofamenti pluribus de una acra terre et virtute illius
facit liberationem seisive uni eorum nomine omnium. In isto casu omnes tam
absentes quam presents habent jus in acra illa in lege: sed aliter esset si
talis liberatio seisive facta fuerit uni nomine pluriorum absentium sive facto
quia tunc illi cui facta fuerit liberantia seisive haberet solum jus in illa
acra secundum legem and alii nihil inde haberent.

Si quis seifitus de quodam manerio ad quod habet communiam pasture pertinente
and quandam advocationem appendentem facit feofamentum manerii predicti alteri
ex mero motu suo and non dicit habendum sibi, etc. cum pertinentiis. In isto
casu feofatus habet jus ex lege solum ad manerium predictum et ad communiam
pasture predicte and non advocationem predictam. Sed si feofamentum factum
fuisset de manerio predicto habendum sibi et heredibus suis cum pertinentiis,
tunc feofat. haberet jus ad manerium predictum et ad communiam illam ac etiam
ad advocationem in lege.

Si dominus rex seisitus de manerio cum advocatione eidem manerio pertinente ex
mero motu dederit idem manerium alteri per litteras suas patentes, habebit sibi
et hered. suis cum pertinentiis. In isto casu cui fit donum non habet jus ad
advocationem predictam in lege: sed si littere patentes fuissent taliter fact
scilicet habend. manerium, etc. sibi and heredibus suis cum advocatione
predicta tunc haberent jus ad manerium and advoca. predic. in lege.

Si dominus Rex faciet seisiri in manibus suis manerium cum pertinentiis
ratione custody ad quod est quedam advocateo pertinens. Et cum here is ad plenam
etatem pervencrit dominus rex facit ei liberationem extra Cancellariam de
maneriis predictis per hec verba cum pertinentiis, advocatio transit heredi.
Licet expressa mentio minime fiat de advocatione ita quodd. here is ille ad
proximam vocationem habet jus presentandi ad ecclesiam illam in lege.

Si quis fecerit dimissionem ad terminum annorum, reddendo sibi et heredibus
suis, x. s. per annum ad festum sancti michaelis, etc. sub condition quod si
redditus predictus aretro fuerit per xl. dies, etc. quod tunc been licebit
dimissori and heredibus suis reintrare, and postea reditus predictus aretro
extiterit, and dimissor petit and demandat redditum secundum formam legis and
obiit, and here is suus intrat: intratio illa est bona and justa in lege: Sed si
pater suus non demandasset redditum in vita sua and here is suus post mortem suam
secisset demandam and pro defectu solutitnis, reintrasset tunc reintratio illa
non fuisset bona in lege.

Si tenens in dote seminaverit agros suos and obiit ante maturitatem granorum
grana illa pertinent executioribus tenentis in dote per legem and non ipsi in
reversione, aliter est de herbis and fructibus.

Si mulier semina verit terram suam and postea virum reperit and vir ante
seperationem obiit, tunc blada illa pertinent mulieri in lege: sed aliter esset
si vir post matrimonium seminasset terram quia tunc blada illa executoribus
viri pertinerent in lege.

Si quis de terra aliqua seisitus terram illam alter legate legatio illa
secundum legem anglie vacua est, nulliusque vigoris and here is suus terram illam
habebit.

Si quis alteri dederit terram per hoc verba habend. and tenend. sibi
imperpetuum intendens quod terram illam habebit sibi and heredibus suis, in hoc
casu cui terra illa data est terram illam solum habebit ad terminum vite sue
and post mortem ad donatorem revertetur per legem.

Si quis dimiserit terram and redditum quem prius habuit, alteri ad terminum
vite and tenens de terra unde redditus exiit attornaverit ut oportet posteaque
predictus tenens ad. terminum vite terram and redditum predictum alienaverit
per terminum vite alterius ^in feodo, tunc ille in revertione secundum legem
Anglie terram illam intrare and tenere potest: sed redditum illum habere non
potest. Nam secundum lelegem anglie terra predicta per predicta alienationem
forisfacta est and non redditus.

Filius not. post matrimonium hereditate patris gaudebit pre filio nato ante
matrimonium, et causa est quia lex et consuetudo Anglie talem habet ut
legittimum et filium natum ante matrimonium bastardum judicat.

Si terra detur viro ex uxori sue et tertie person in feodo et postea vir
terram illam aliena verit et obiit, mulier medietatem illius terre recuperabit.
Sed si terra detur viro and mulieri non maritate and tertie person: and postea
vir and mulier illa simul maritentur et postea vir ille alienaverit and obiit,
in illo casu mulier solum tertia partem recuperabit per legem Anglie.

Emptor jus habet erga omnes ad bona empta in feriis l' marcatis dum conscius
prime proprietatis non fuerit, ita quod emptor tolnetum solvat aut aliud
fecerit pro tali emptione secundum consuetudinem feria R. illa R.

Deodanda forisfacta sunt regi cuicumque prius pertinebant, and causa illa
quare forisfacta sunt non habentur nisi qua lex judicat ea forisfieri and per
ala ipsius mortui disponi.

Dominus rex habebit catalla utlegato R. felonum fugitiorum ac waynfetorum ac
extrahuras bona confiscata dum secundum legem cum debito circumstantiis
forisfacta sunt: Sed bona illorum qui solum indictati sunt pro felonia vel
murdro non sunt forisfacta in lege quousque ille indictatus secundum legem
anglie attinctus sit.

Si tenens cessaverit perbiennium l' si tenens teneri de domino suo in curia de
recordo disclama verit, l' si tenens ad terminum vite in brevi de quod intur
clamat feodum clamat l' in action reali auxilium de alio quod de ipso in
revertione petit, l' si Abbas et conventus terram fundationis dominis sue
alienaverit. In his casibus and his similibus forisfacta est terra et nulla
alia causa habetur nisi quia terra illa in casubus predictis secundum legem
forisfacta est.

Blada crescentia super terram dimissam ad terminum annorum in fine termini
pertinent ipsi in revertione: sed aliter est de bladum tenentum ad terminum
vite.

Executor tenentis ad terminum vite habebit bladam crescentiam per legem anglie.

Successor rector unius Ecclesie habebit blada crescen. cum decimis per legem
ecclesie.

Si dimissio fiat de certa terra ad terminum vite remanere inde rectis
heredibus Iohannis and style. Si in isto casu tenens ad ter. vite obierit in
vita Iohannis at style, tunc tempora illa ad donatorem revertetur. Sed hoc
intelligendum est, cum remanere illud factum fuerit ex mero motu quia remanere
illud vacuum est in lege. Sed in illo casu si Johannes at style cui remanere
illud limitatum fuit obiit in vita tenentis ad terminum vite tunc remanere
illud esset bonum in lege.

In casu predicto si Johannes at style obiit vivente, tenente ad terminum vite
habens filiam and heredem uxore sua cum filio pregnante post eaque tenens ad
terminum vite obiit and filia ut in remanere illud ut here is intrat just ut
poterit, posteaque filius natus est qui tunc here is patri suo in lege censetur.
Tamen filia terra predicta gaudebit imper petuum, quia lex talis est quod jus
inde filie pertinet.

Si infans etate, xx. annorum habens se et sua gubernare terram suam vendiderit
and cum pecunia inde recepta aliam terram majoris precii quam fuerit, prima
emittet possidet, potest terram primam repetere per legem.

Per liberationem seisine factam per aliquem qui est plene etatis extra
prisonam nec viro coopertam, transfertur possessio and jus ei cui talis fit
seisine liberatio.

Si quis impanellatus in aliqua jurata per breve de districtione apparere
noluer it. Lex anglie vult quod exitus perdat qui pro rege ex antiqua
consuetudine regni levari possunt tam de terra uxoris etiam post mortem viri
sui qui eos foris fecerit quod de terra illius in revertione cum per tenentem
suum ad terminum vite jam mortuum forisfacti fuerint,

Vbi duo tituli concurrunt senior titulus est preferendus.

Si quis fecerit alteri feofamentum in feodo de certa terra habend. sibi et
heredibus suis sub condition quod si feofatus inde aliquem alterum feofari
contingerit quod tunc bonum licebit feofatori and heredibus suis in terra illa
reintrare and eam ut impristome statu suo rehabete predicto feofamento non
abstante conditio predicta in lege anglie vacua existit nullinsque vigoris nec
licebit feofatori reintrare licet feofatus faciat feofament. contra formam
conditionis illius.

Similis lex habetur, si super statu feodi simplicis facta fuerit conditio quod
feofatus non fecerit vastum. Talis conditio etiam vacua esset in lege. Sed si
conditio facta fuisset quod non feofaret talem l' talem, etc. conditio illa
esset bona quia non esset facto suo nec statu feodi simplicis mere contraria,
nam alios potit inde feofare.

Si quis intendens alteri dare terram in feodo simplici facit ei factum in quo
continetur quod habebit terram illam imperpetuum intendens quod per hoc verbum
imperpetuum habebit terram illam sibi et heredibus suis in hoc casu frustrata
est intentio in lege, nam solum habet terram illam ad terminum vite.

Si quis dederit alteri terram quam habent ad terminum vite, xx. annorum
habendum sibi and heredibus suis, intendens quod heredes illius cui terram
illam conscesserit terra illa gaudebit durante termino illo frustrata est
intentio: eo quod non est ordinata secundum legem ut supra. Nam executores sui
secundum legem in illo casu termino illo gaudebunt et non heredum.

Si quis dat terram viro and uxori sue, and tertie person intendens quod
quilibet eorum tertiam partem inde acciperet, frustrata est intentio nam vir
and mulier ut una persona in lege computantur et nisi uniam partem ut una sola
persona capient: et sic vir and uxor solum medietatem inde contra intentionem
donatoris habebunt and tertia persona capiet aliam medietatem.

Lex Anglie non est quod omnes conditio facta sine scripto sit vacua: sed quod
non potest placitare sine scripto.

Si teneus in tallio post possibilitatem exitus extincti fecerit vastum non
tenetur restituere sibi in reversione ad valorem rei vastate secundum legem.

Si quis utlegatus fuerit super action in qua returnatum fuit quod defendens
fuit quinto exactus cum secundum veritatem nunquam fuerit exactus dominus rex
potest bona talia utlagati ut sua retinere.

Executores non tenentur restituere dampna pro personali transgressione facta
per testatorum secundum legem Anglie.

Si quis obierit seisitus de C. acris terre and post ejus mortem vir filie sue
and heredis statim post notitiam mortis patris uxoris sue ceperit iter ad
intrandum in terram illam: sed antiquam ad terram illam venire poterit uxor sua
obiit. Non erit tenens per legem Anglie posito quod prolem habuerit.

Si redditus alicui concadatur percipiendus de duabus acris terre and postea
ille cui fit illa concessio perquirat unam acram dictarum duarum acrarum terre
and factum est ei inde feofamentum totus redditus predictus extinctus est
secundum legem.

Si nativus concedatur uni ad terminum vite, and nativus ille perquirat terras
sibi and heredibus suis in isto casu tenens ad terminum vite intrabit in terras
illas and gaudebit sibi and heredibus suis secundum legem Anglie.

Si quis habens filium natum ante matrimonium and alium post matrimonium per
ultimam voluntatem suam legate filio and heredi suo omnia bona sua qui natus est
post matrimonium gaudebit legatis patris.

In debito versus heredem respondentem quod nihil habet per discensum and
inventeum est per Jurat. quod habet unam acram terre, Executio fiet de omnibus
bonis suis pro suo falso pl^ito.

In debito versus executorum respondentem and facientes aliud placitum in
barram quod plene administraverunt, and inventum est per Jurat. contra eos
executio fiet de bonis suis propriis per suo falsa placito.

Si unus executum obiit, bona testat. manebunt executorum vinente. Nam ille
erit onoratus executione testamenti testatoris et non executores.

Si unus administrat. obiit sui executorum non possunt administrare bona
intestati: sed Ordinarius faciat novas litteras ad ministrandum.

Si executorum non vendunt terras divisas here is intrabit, quia nullus alius
terras illas vendere potest.

Nullus habebit auxilium de domino rege si dominus rex non fuerit damnificat.

Terra data homini habend. tamdiu talis arbor cressit. est bonum feodum simplex
deternabile super vita.

Terra divisis uni imperpetuum habet feodum simplex in terra illa.

Terra data uni imperpetuum non habent feodum simplex sed est tenens ad
terminum vite de terra illa.

Curie domini regis.
CAncellaria regis est curia in qua inter alia impetrantur brevia originalia
aliis curis regis juxta necessitatem querentium dirigenda,

Remedium per comunmem legem non datum, petendum est in Cancellaria.

Nemo recedet a Cancellario sine remedio.

Bancus regis est curia in qua tractantur proditiones, murdra, homicidia,
felon. and alia coutra pacem Regis facta.

Communis bancus est curia in qua tractantur communia placita, ut de terris and
tenementis and de debitis et de catallis et his similibus.

Scaccarie regis, est curia in qua tractantur diversa negotia ipsum dominum
regem solummodo tangentia ut de Vice. Escaeta, receptoribus, Ballivis, and
aliis officiariis regis and his similibus he curie.

Sunt curie de Recordo, quia illi qui in eis president per litteras patentes
regis assignare debent.

Habentque curie ille multas et diversas aucthoritates, de quibus non est ad
presens dicendum.

Diverse alie curie in regno Anglie sunt minoris tamen aucthoritatis quam curie
predicte.

Nam in quolibet com. infra regnum est quedam curiam que vocatur Comitatus, et
alia que vocatur turnus Vicecomitis: et in quolibet manerio infra regnum
habetur quedam curia eidem manerio incidens, que vocatur curia Baronis: et in
omnibus nundinis et feriis habetur quedam curia iisdem feriis iucidens que
vocatur curia Pedis pulverisati, que solum tenebitur tempore feriarum illarum.

Ex antiqua consuetudine regni habetur quod omnes faciant et recipiant
justitiam in curia regis, et illa consuetudo confirmatur per statutum de
Marlebrig. ca. ii. quod tale est. Omnes tam majores quam minores justitiam
faciant et recipiant in curia regis, et nullus ultiones aut districtiones
faciat absque consideratione curie domini regis licet dampnum vel injuria sibi
fiant a vicino suo.

Ex consuetudine regni habetur quod nullus mittetur ad respondendum nec
judicetur nisi secundum legem terre. Et hec consuetudo confirmatur per Magnam
cartam. ca. xxvi. ubi sic habetur, nullus liber homo capietur aut inprisonetur
aut disseisie tur aut aliquo modo destruetur, nec super eum ibimus, nec super
eum mittemus nisi per legale judicium parium suorum et per legem terre.

Alie quoque generales consuetudines regni Anglie habentur que vim Regis
retinent, nec absque perliamento mutari possunt.

Anno xxxviii. regni Regis Henrici octavi.

THE TABLE.
THe manner of calling the Court Page 1. How the Patents must be read Page 2.
The manner how to call the Sheriffs Page 3. How to call the Justices of the
Peace Page 3. How to call the Coroners, Stewards, and High Constables Page 3.
When the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer are to be read Page 4. How to call
the Grand Jury Page 4. The Oath given to the Grand Jury Page 5. The manner of
calling the Prosecutors against the Prisoners Page 6. The manner of fyling the
Recognizances and bill Page 7. The manner of Arraynment of the Prisoner, and
calling the bayls Page 8. The manner of entering of the Prisoners Pleas and
Confessions Page 9. The manner of calling the Jury of Life and Death Page 10.
The oath given to the Jury of Life and Death Page 11. The trial of the
Prisoners Page 12. The manner of taking the Verdict of the Jury of Life and
Death Page 15. The Constables presentiments Page 15 16. The manner of the Trial
of Ryotors and Trespassors Page 17. The manner of delivery of the Prisoners by
Proclamation Page 17. The form of keeping of the Goal book Page 18. The
manner of the Callender for the Judge before he proceeds to sentence Page 19.
The form of calling the Prisoners to hear Judgment Page 23. Allowing the
Clergy Page 23. The manner of giving Judgment Page 24. The Proclamation
against ^ecusants Page 25. The Adjurning of the Assizes Page 25. The Proceeding
on the Nisi prius side Page 27. Calling the Jury Page 28. Calling the defendant
Page 28. Challenges Page 28. Returning and calling the Tales Page 29. The
Juries oath Page 29. The Charge to the Jury of Nisi prius Page 29. Taking the
verdict Page 30. 31. The manner of returning the Posteas Page 32. The manner of
all kinds of Verdicts Page 33. 34. Conviction of Recusants Page 33. General
Estreate Page 33. Traverses Page 34. Processes, Felons, Trespassors, and
Trespasses Page 34. Women Felons, being with Child Page 35. Verdicts in Dower,
Quare Impedit, etc. Page 36, 37.
FINIS.

