LETTERS FROM SAFFRON-WALDEN THE Generals Head Quarters, By way of Apology
and Vindication of the Army under his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, of some
late groundless aspersions cast upon them.

Together with a true Account of the proceedings and Resolutions of that Army
upon the late Resolves and Declaration of the Parliament concerning the
Petition of the Officers and Soldiers in the Army, to his Excellency Sir
THOMAS FAIRFAX.

Also the Copy of a second Petition from the County of ESSEX, intended to both
the Houses of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1647.

Letters from Saffron Walden, the GENERALS Headquarters.
SIR,
I Suppose you are not ignorant of the late command sent unto the General to
publish a Declaration at the Head of his several Regiments, requiring them to
desist from going on in that Petition they were about to present unto him: I
thought fit by this to acquaint you, That in obedience to the Commands of the
Parliament. His Excellency has caused the same to be published, and the
Soldiers acquiesce therein (such is their obedience and respect unto the
General,) though at the reading it, some of the Soldiers gave out, it was an
hard case with them, that they that had fought for the liberty of the Subjects
of England, should be denied the liberty of a Subject to petition, though it be
to their General in an humble way, and merely in things relating to them as
soldiers, (meddling neither with Church Government, nor state affairs,) and
withal submitting it to the Generals Judgment for approbation, or
correction, as he saw cause, and though, they said, they did desist in this
Petition, yet since it was published to the World, that their proceedings
tended to such a nature as to deserve to be declared enemies, if they persisted
therein, they purpose to publish to the world a vindication of their innocence
from those groundless Opinions had of them, and hope to have Justice done upon
the missinformers, this they say, they intend to do in an humble and a
submissive way, and though their mouths be stopped from a liberty of Petitioning,
yet their honor is so dear unto them, that they say, they are resolved of a
vindication, so as it shall be neither offensive to the Parliament, nor the
General. To regulate Offenses, and allay heats in Armies, sometimes prudence
is more prevailing, then things tending to provocation, and it had bin W^sedome
in the County of Essex in the first violent Petition, to have forborne to have
published the same in Print, wherein they possess the World, That this Army
came to inslave the Country, and to awe the Parliament. I send you here
enclosed a Copy of a second Petition of that County, contrived and printed
privately in London, and sent down hither in print (no man knows from whom) to
the several Hundreds, and parishes to be read the next Lords day in all
Churches, as you will see by the direction: The Soldiers will not hinder
others Petitioning against them even in their own presence, and yet, they say,
they must be denied to petition for themselves, be their cause never so just,
who can blame the County of Essex, or any county in this Kingdom else to
desire a present disbanding since the work is done, it is as much irksome to
us, when there is no need of Soldiers to Quarter upon the Country, as it can be
to the Country to quarter us; yet no petition that has bin put out in print
lately against this Army for the disbanding of it has ever yet expressed so
much affection, love, or requital unto the Army, for what they have done for
them as to mediate or desire. That as they would have them disbanded, so that
care may be taken, the poor soldier that has bin so faithful and
expeditious in their service might be considered for their arreares at the
disbanding and what (says the soldier) makes the army liable to these
reproaches, unless it be for finishing their work so soon, and have they
fought to maintain the Petition of Right, and be denied a Right of petitioning
themselves: Sir Having given you this brief account: I remain.

Walden. April 3. 1647. Your affectionate friend. T VV.

To the Right Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses assembled in
Parliament, The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the County of ESSEX.
Humbly Shows,
THat in all Exigences having freely and with the first engaged themselves, to
the utmost hazard of their lives, and exhausted their estates for the support
of the Kingdom in its native Rights and liberties, and by Gods blessing the
successes have been answerable in some degree to their desires, by which we
sit in peace, and your selves in security, with a full possession of the hearts
of the people, and now fearing least by the miscarrying on the Military charges
beyond the necessity of the work, and the ability of the people now much
weakened, by a dearth sharper then the late devouring sword, you should h^zard
the loss of your selves and friends, not so much from the alienation of their
affections [which yet is not to be neglected, as their disabilities to serve
you, which may arise from the Army now on foot, after six months C^ssation of
all hostility here, and so bleedingly called for, to the saving of an other
Kingdom, as also from so numerous a party in this County: shortly by their
quarters, like to equal all precedent charges, and to surmonnt the worst, and
heaviest of our former taxes, especially by the manner of their being Imposed
upon us.

Your Petitioners do humbly offer to your Prudence the speedy disbanding of the
Army: as a plenary Expedient against the worst, That in General may be feared
by you and us: And the Removal of it from the Conntie by which you shall
continue absolute Masters and disposers of them and theirs, in all your pious
and faithful undertakings for the future, and that God will assist you for all
your safeties, is and shall be the daily prayers of your Petitioners.


The minister is desired to publish this Petition April 4th. and to have two
sheets of paper to take the names of those that will freely join in it, the
one to be presented to the House of Lords, and the other unto the House of
Commons.

This Petition was sent from London to Joseph Hall High Constable in little
Bardfield, and they are to be published in every Parish Church in this County
of Essex, and in every parish to gather hands to it with this further direction
Written in the printed paper wherein they are desired (as many as can
conveniently) to meet at Shealford Langthrine the 8th of April to go to London
with the same.

SIR,
WHilst our enemies appeared only as men out of place and authority, and we
looked upon them as the common enemies of the Kingdom, we conceived there might
be something done to vindicate our actions upon the public stage; but now the
disease is grown so Epidemicall, that all our endeavous are like to prove
invalid. And indeed those who are now prejudiced against us, are our
superiors; nay further, those whom we looked upon as our best friends: (and the
wounds of friends are grievous;) who would have thought that so modest and
moderate an address as the late petition drawn up to be subscribed by the
Army, to be presented to the General, would have raised so much dust? Or, have
the Soldiers only, who have been instruments to recover the lost liberties of
the Nation, fought themselves into slavery? sure there is a right of
petitioning for us, as well as there was a Petition of Right once for the
Parliament: if we had bin so rash as at first adventure to have knocked with a
Petition at the Parliaments doors, it might have been censured as too saucie
and malapert: For Soldiers to represent their grievances to their General, is
a liberty which the Law of nature and Nations will not deny; for this was to
go no further, but left to his Excellency to retract, or represent, as he
thought either fit or seasonable.

The first Vote of the House of Commons for the stopping of the Petition seemed
strange to us, and we could not but have a very deep sense of our unhappiness
in being misunderstood in our clear intentions, which are no other then by way
of petition to represent the inconveniences which must necessarily befall the
Army after disbanding, which the Parliament through multiplicity of business
might not so well provide against; besides, some have already suffered for want
of a general act of indemnity, and many Officers (as I believe is obvious to
your eyes) have been starved for want of subsistence, whilst they sought to
obtain their arreares. But how great a cause of amazement and astonishment was
it to us to see a second Declaration of both Houses, of the second of March,
wherein that Petition is declared to tend to a parting the Army into a
distemper and mutiny, to put conditions upon the Parliament, and obstruct the
relief of Ireland; That they should pronounce their high dislike thereof, and
that they would proceed against the promoters as enemies to the state, and
disturbers of the public peace. But that which yet heightens the amazement,
is, that such a Declaration should be grounded upon Letters and informations of
so slight credit, which if I might be so bold, I might term both frivolous and
fictions. One of the Letters directed to Col. Harley says that at a Rendezvous
of the said Colonels Regiment the Petition was read and signed by 1100 hands,
and such as refused it were threatened to be cashiered. The Muster-master will
tell you there was not a thousand mustered the last muster: and yet 1100 set
their hands, and the rest ^00000 were cashiered: But this is not all the
discovery. The other Regiments were coming up; And says one, except the
Parliament take high resolutions, they will inslave the Kingdom. To answer
this, there were none came from the Notth, but Sir Hardres Wallers, and that
was sent for at Major General Skippons request, who complained, that the
Country there was not able to bear it: And Colonel Herberts, and Colonel
Hamonds Regiments being about Chester ready for transpotation for Ireland, but
(their good will not accepted) coming back toward the rest of the Army: But
another member acquaints the House, that those who would not subscribe the
Petition were to be left out of the Muster-Roll. And another says that he
heard Lieutenant General H. and other Officers were to reside at the
Head-quarter to receive subscriptions: yet not one of them received a paper or
subscription, nor any brought in at that time. But this was not all; there was
another Letter from an Officer of Colonel Rossiters (who would do nothing
without his Colonels consent) and he takes exceptions at nothing but at the
desiring the Royal assent: This Colonel Fines very excellently vindicated the
same day in the house, declaring, that there was nothing desired more then what
the Parliament themselves demanded in the Propositions; (but Colonel Rossiter
had thanks and his Regiment voted their Arreares.)

Sir, give me leave a little to clear up the intentions of the Army: for that
charge of mutiny, I can assure you there was no such thing, the Petition being
generally approved of, and whole Regiments unanimously subscribed it, except
here and there some indifferent Commanders seemed to oppose it; the truth is,
it is the Masterpiece of our Enemies to suppress it in such high Language, if
it were possible to bring the Army to a mutiny, and so put an odium upon them
at the last, which they could not hitherto fasten. For putting conditions upon
the Parliament, I dare speak the hearts of the Petitioners (the Commanders
I Am sure) it never entered into their thoughts: and I may say the like for the
obstructing of Ireland, and add further, That the Parliament will find those
men who were most forward in this Petition, more ready to go for Ireland then
any of the septemdecem viri, who only to curry favor, and ingratiate
themselves have tendered their service (in a declaration which I suppose you
have seen) leaving the conditions, conduct, indemnity, and arreares at
pleasure, which indeed they may, for most of them will never come there; nay
Captain Burges, Cap. Pennyfather and some others of them do deny that ever
they subscribed the same, and declare against it, and I believe few of them
will have any of their soldiers to comply with them; for one of them, Colonel
-- I persuade my self he will scarce appear in the head of his Regiment; I Am
sure he will find little acceptance there upon his proposition for Ireland: But
he, Colonel F. Colonel S. and the rest, are right men, and fit to be employed
in that service.

Sir, I could relate to you many of their juglings and conspirings, but time
will discover all things; Ex ungue leonem. This may suffice to acquaint you how
much the disgrace, if not the destruction of the Army, is now resolved on;
nothing must please that comes from it be it never so legal, just and
innocent: All aggravating Petitions must be received against it, though they
come with never so inconsiderable a testimony, as Essex late Petition; and what
think, you of an other drawn up in London and sent down printed into Essex;
where respecting the Army, you have such expressions as these: The people now
much weakened by a dearth sharper then the late devouring sword, also that
there is so numerous a party in that County shortly by their quarters like to
equal all precedent charges, and to surmount the worst and heaviest of their
former taxes; which is so unreasonable and inhumane a slander, that Hell it
self could not have invented a more lying invective against the Army; yet this
as before was sent from London to diverse in Essex, and particularly to one
Joseph Hall high Constable in little Barfield, and the like was sent to the
Minister of Saffron Walden, to be published in every parish Church in the
County of Essex, and every Parish to get hands to it; further directions are
also written in the printed paper wherein they are desired (as many as can
conveniently) to meet at Shealford-Laughirne the eight of April to go to
London with the same, yet the Army are so innocent as not to hinder it. And now
you have the issue of all; and truly I hope the godly party in the Army (and
the greatest part of them too) will willingly and readily submit to the
disposal of the Parliament, and in that the dispensations of God toward them,
and as they have served the Kingdom, in doing so, they will now be subservient
to divine providence in suffering, for that is the condition we must now look
for: And oh, that we could stand still and see the salvation of God; for my
own part I am so far from pleading any ways for an Anarchy, that I think
the Parliament to be a Magistracy ordained of God to whom we are to submit in
civil things by doing or suffering; Let things move in a violent and popular
way and all will come to confusion. Sir I have been the larger in this to
satisfy both you and others, and truly I am so zealous for the vindication of
the Army that I could do no less; if all should be silent, the stones would
cry out.

I had sent you the Petition of the Army, (that you and the world may judge of
it, it being represented so dangerous) but finding just now it is made
public, I have only sent you the Petition drawn up at London, to be
obtruded upon the County of Essex; leaving that also to the censure of all
rational men with this Quere: Whether is most destructive, a Petition drawn
up and subscribed by unanimous consent, or a Petition contrived to be imposed
upon men against their desires and resolutions? for so is that sent into Essex;
for so far as I have inquired into the dispositions of the County, and have
been up and down as far as Colchester, I find few of them complaining, if
any at all, and a good part of the County is exempted from quarter by the
Armies keeping their distance twenty five miles from London: yet, if a man will
beat a dog he may son find a staff; I shall add no more; let this
suffice at present, from

Walden, April. 3. 1647. Your real Friend, R. S.

FINIS.

