A PREPARATIVE FOR THE FAST, OR, A sovereigne Balsome for the cure of the
distempers of the times.

by Job Weall apothecary

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Richard Lownds, at his shop adjoining to Ludgate,
1642.

A PREPARATIVE FOR the Fast, etc.
WHo that is embarked in the Common Vessel, interested and engaged by the Laws
both of Nature and Religion; to mayntain the Truth and Peace of the Church and
State, will not at this time of their apparent distress, lend his helping
hand, and give his best assistance (as far as lawfully he may) to any
probable way, to close up those fatal wounds that have bin made therein?

To that end (according to my mean ability) I have, yet once again,
adventured to cast in my Mite, and to present a Sovereigne and infallible Balm
to heal all our Solutions of Unity whatsoever.

Much good may come by making use thereof, and no small danger by the neglect
thereof. If you shall find it consonant to Gods Truth, beware how you contemn
and defer the use of it. However it be accepted, it shall comfort me that I
discharged my Duty, Conscience, and true affection, to the best of my
understanding, for the peace and welfare of the Church and State, (though to my
own prejudice.) But to my purpose.

The most sacred Word of God, and the Laws and Ordinances of Man grounded
thereon, are those Oracles which afford Theorems and Aphorisms, as well for the
knowledge of our present condition, as also for the true indication and perfect
cure of the same, and which will one day be the Judge of us and all the World.

The Disease whereof the Church and State in general labor at this present
time, is a Solutio Continuitatis, a solution of Unity. This (in Physic) is
that Morbus communis, or preternaturall affect, which alike incommodates the
functions of either part, and is variously procured by (and I pray God we see
it not accompanied with) Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures and Luxations.

The Primary and Antecedent cause of all these Disunions and Disjunctions, are
most certainly our most heinous sins, whereby we have justly provoked the
Almighty to wrath and indignation against us.

The Secondary, Isntrumental, and Conjunct causes, are the Malicious and
Seditious practices of the Jesuited Papists, and the Schismatic, factious,
and sinister endeavors also, of others, and their adherents likewise; both of
them being made the Heretical instruments of the Devil, unnatually to Divide
and Rent, the Head from the Body, or the Body from the Head, that he might the
better rule and prevail against both, and the Truth, Peace, and Prosperity of
our Church and Commonweal.

I am not ignorant that many good Patriots and nehemiahs, true Friends to the
Church and State, are scandalously branded with those names, but I fear that
some seem to be when they are not, and it is one thing to be falsely called so,
and another thing to be so really indeed: For such certainly there are, whom
God in his good time will make manifest, who unlawfully go about to sever them
whom God has joined together, to divide and rent the Truth and Peace of the
Church and State. These indeed (according to Saint Paul in the Galathians)
trouble, and intend to pervert the Gospel: But (says he) though that an Angel
from Heaven preach unto you otherwise then the Truth, Let him be accursed.

The signs of this Disease have been sufficiently made known, and they are
apparent in their effects, these gaping wounds, both in Church and State,
pitties their beholders and friends to see them. The Prognostics are of great
danger, and threaten the subversion and dissolution of the whole Body, and
this may justly be feared, if the complication of this Disease be well weighed
with the manifold and malignant Symptoms wherewith the Body languished before;
this tends to the very expiration of the animal and vital spirits the life it
self; And that which makes the Omen worse, is, that Instruments for Cure are
not only neglected, but despised.

This treble cord of Unity, to which our Ship was fastened in those storms, is
cracked, and shipwreck feared; Our partition Wall is broken down, or at
leastwise uncaemented, and ready to fall, whereby we are exposed as well to
Foreign as intestine mischiefs. This divide and scatter, if it be not
prevented, will be no small curse to Jacob and Israel: and our Savior (if we
will believe him) tells us, that the issue of a Kingdom divided against it
self will be destruction.

The Remedies as they ought to be contrary to the effects, so they must have
respect to the causes, for till they be removed the effects will not cease.

That irritating and primarie cause that has made a Separation between our
good God and us, are our sins, these are those noisome and infectious vapors
that have ascended up, and by their interposition and Eclipse of Gods gracious
goodness, have produced malignant and pestiferous influences on us.

To you that are so much distempered at this time, give me leave before I come
to propound you a cure, to advise with you first, that you may be the more
willing to embrace and undergo it; To which purpose let me entreat you
diligently and consideratly to read over and meditate on the second Chapter of
the first Epistle to St. Peter, if you be religiously inclined, which I hear
you much profess, it will make you the better listen to what I shall
afterward say unto you for the same end. In the next place I would advise you
to resolve to be contented to refer your selves to your Prudent Physicians,
Whom God has made as happy instruments of his mercy for your recoverie; and
let me entreat you to be persuaded by those that are, and always have been,
your true friends, and have loved, and desired your welfare as their own: Be
confident that they know your disease, and several distempers, and the
several causes of them, and have provided (to their great charge and pains)
fit Remedies for you, if you will be patient, and conform to their directions,
without which all their skill, care and cost, will be of no avail to you: Your
Disease for want thereof has grown more difficult of Cure, and has
contracted to it other desperate diseases, and is now become of such a
phreneticall disposition, that it transports you beyond your self, and has
depraved, and corrupted your judgment, And your distracted fears and
Phantasmes make causlesse jealousies in you, even of your best friends, and
make you sometimes to offend them that most commiserate and endeavor to heal
you.

Your actions now will not endure the touchstone of Common sense and Reason,
nor the law of the Land, nor the Balance of the Sanctuary, wherein you desire
to be weighed; insomuch that unless a speedy remedy be applied, you are like
to destroy your self and all yours, and it may be everlastingly too. Therefore
while you do enjoy at sometimes a little better understanding, let the light
of common reason prevail with you. If the benefits of recovery will not invite
you to incline to a cure, yet let the terrors and torment of thy diseases, and
Death allure thee, and the consideration of thy Parents and friends, or thy
wife, children, estate, and all that is thine or theirs: Besides, remember that
thy life is not thine own to dispose of, thou must know that it is but lent
thee for the service of thy Creator, thou shall as well answer for the neglect
of that due means God has appointed thee for thy recoverie, As for laying of
violent hands upon thy self or any other, both of them being Murder in the
sight of God. So likewise if the blessings and Commodities of Unity and Order
will not prevail with thee, Let the discommodities and terrors of Discord and
disorder affright thee to it. Suppose thy self and all thou have, or can
call dear and precious to thee, either for the present or the future, were
embarked only in one Vessel, and it in a great storm, amongst rocks,
quicksands, and Pirates, and your only Cable that holds and preserves you from
ruin were almost cracked in sunder, Would thou be so far from lending thy
hand to mend it, that thou would cut and break it more. Certainly no man in
the same Ship that understands himselfs, but will account thee a mad man for so
doing, and hinder thee from doing it. Again, if there were but one Bulwark or
partion-wall that keeps us from our bloody enemies, and the cruelties of our
adversaries, would thou be one of them that should pull it down; Think upon
the hydeous roaring of Cannons, the tormenting murders, bloody Massacres, and
lamentable cries of thy Parents, Wife, Children or Friends, and loss of all,
it may be of thine own soul and theirs likewise. Again, consider of those
bounds and Fences which keep in the violence of the Fire, and the rage of the
Waters, which within their due bounds are useful and profitable for thee, will thou be so senseless to pull the fire out of the Chimney into the middle of
thy house, where Gun powder and other combustible matter is? Will thou break
down those banks, and let the Ocean in to make a perpetual deluge and
inundation of all? Or let me demand of thee if thou have so much judgment to
discern it, whether in thy warfare thou would not observe military
discipline? Would thou be one of them that should endeavor to break
those ranks and forms thy General and Commanders order thee to fight in, and
thereby to let the enemy make an inrode upon thy route, and disorder, and so
bring thee to confusion? and you must know this may happen, by so small a
matter, as the loss of one nail of an horse shoe, inan Army, and therefore
how behoveful is it for thy Commanders, and thee also, to take care, and
prevent all disorder whatsoever in the least appearance. Wherefore now as it
stands thus desperate, you are to be the more patient and willing to submit
your self to your Physicians care and fidelity. Be confident that they will
do nothing but for thy good, for they and theirs are likewise interressed
therein. Thou must be contented to have thy ulcers and putulent wounds cleansed
before they are bound up, and Fractures and Dislocations are not so easily
united and reduced to the service of the body without some dolor; Peradventure
some of thy wounds are gangrened, and have contracted so much virulencie, that
there must be amputation and dismembring of that joint; But be well assured
that thy Physicians will not order it so to be, unless they find absolute
necessity, and then thou will find it better to part with a limme, then lose
thy life. Peradventure they may see cause to make some evacuation of thy
redundant and peccant humors which hinder thy wounds from healing, and are apt
to bring thee into other distempers. When they see it fitting; they will give
thee Cordials to comfort thee, and to give thee rest for thy unsettled and
distempered spirits, if they find it to conduce to thy good. By this time I
hope you are resolved to be patient, and therefore now I will apply my self to
the Remedies.

Let this Principle be granted (which indeed is not to be denied) that all
afflictions come from God, and all injuries whatsoever do befall us, by the
Providence of the Almighty, and then we may presently draw these Conclusions;
That the instrument must do that which the Almighty will have it to do, And
that it can go no farther then he pleases to order it, and therefore we must
first apply our selves to him to remove it from whom it comes.

The Disease indicates a necessity of a speedy Unition and Reconciliation to be
made with the Almighty (whom we have offended and provoked to wrath) in and by
the Mediation and intercession of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Speedy I
say, because that a little delay may bring a great deal of danger, few days
neglect in this case may hazard thy life, And if this Remedy prevail not
sentence of Death may pass upon you sooner then you are aware. Procrastination
in wounds and other diseases often makes them incurable. Continuance in sin is
not the way to make satisfaction to God, Confession, and Contrition begets
remission, when obstinacy heaps on further punishment. Do thou think to
escape Gods hand by murmuring against him? Be well assured, if the sword of
Justice prevails not, it may be the Plague or Famine shall, or some severe
judgment. Thou shall get nothing by thy impatience; for thou art not able to
resist the Almighty, and if he takes the rod into his hand again, he will
make thee feel it to the purpose. Let me rather advise thee to submit to the
mercy of so gracious and loving a Father; and not to stand to the terror and
anger of the Almighty. That we may meet God in the way of his Judgments by
Prayers and true Repentance, that sweet Incense which will correct and
dissipate those malevolent aspects. It has been heartily prayed for, and
endeavored, that there might be a general monthly day of Humiliation, for
the blessing of the Parliament with Unanimous proceedings, for the settling of
Religion in Truth and Peace, for the composing of distractions at Home, and for
the distresses and seasonable relief of our Brethren in Ireland, for aversion
of those impendent judgments over our heads. Not forgetting to give thanks to
the Lord, for those manifold Mercies we have received, and for all good means
conducing to our relief.

That these days may take the better success and effect, As a praeparatory
thereunto, it may prove useful and beneficial, if some grave Orthodox
Divines, and Christians, well settled and affected to the Truth, and Peace of the
Church and State, did meet and consider of those chief and provoking Sins of
this Kingdom, which are those efficient and impulsive causes of our disunions
and distiesses at this time.

There are questionless general sins of Nations as well as of particular
persons, whereby God is provoked to wrath.

There may be sins of Superiors, as well as sins of Interiours, there may
be sins in the Court, and sins in the Parliament. Sins of Universities,
and sins of those streams that flow from thence, sins of the City, and
sins of the Country, sins of the Clergy, and (which is to be lamented)
scandalous, seditious, and Schismatic sins of Professors, and such as
take themselves to be (and peradventure some of them are) of Gods own Isael
and chosen people, wherewith God is, and will be much incensed and offended.

When these are well discovered (and notice also given by Advice of Authority)
that true Repentance may be faithfully and respectively preached, and
Reformation in general and particular endeavored, otherwise the cure will be
but Palliative, and Master left for Recidivation. Humiliation without
Reformation is but Hypocrisy, which will end in Apostacy. There must be true
and plain dealing with the Almighty, he sees and knows every man's heart and
ways, and ponders all our doings.

It is not any particular blaming one another will excuse us to him, not the
Cities crying out on the Country, or Country on the City, or the like. Every
one must put his hand to this genreall work; every one that has had but one
hand in breaking down our Partition wall, must lend both hands to build it up
again: But those that have lent both their hands to pull it down, and more
then their own hands too, as well in the Primary as in the isntrumental
cause, had need to give more then ordinary diligence to the speedy rebuilding
thereof again. And whosoever that is not willing to put his helping hand
hereunto, let him partake of those miseries which his own hands have wrought.

It agrees not with my disposition to grate and stir in those wounds, they have
already by some bin laid open, and may indue time be more largely discovered by
others, to whom it properly belongs. I shall rather lend my hand to close them
up, to which end till better Remedies are found out, I shall make bold to
recommend and Present a most sovereign and precious Balm for all Solutions of
Unity whatsoever. It is composed of many several Ingredients of admirable
virtue. It is Saint Paul's Balsamum Charitatis. It is his Sine quibus esse nole.
You shall find the Receipt in the first of Corinthians the 13 Chapter: where
also you may ready the Description of the several Virtues and Operations
thereof. Charity (says he) suffers long, and is kind, Charity envies not,
Charity vaunts not it self, Is not puffed up, does not behave it self
unseemly, seeks not her own; is not easily provoked, thinks no evil,
Rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth: Bears all things,
Believes all things, hops all things, eudureth all things.

The farther excellency and necessity thereof, is expressed in the said
Chapter. Though I speak with the tongues of men and of Angels (says he) and
have not Charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinckling Cymball, and
though I have the gift of Prophecic, and anderstand all mysteries and all
knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and
have no Charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the
poor, and though I give my Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it
profits me nothing.

Charity never fails, but whether there be Prophecies shall fail, whether
there be tongues they shall cease, whether there be Knowledge it shall vanish
away. And now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three, but the greatest
of these is Charity. This Composition includes the Prophet Micahs Tripharmacum,
viz. To do justly, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. And what
does the Lord require more of thee O Man, says the Prophet.

This is that Balsamum Sympatheticum, the true Panacca that will heal all our
rents and divisions, and it does not only cure for the present, but preserves
for the future, wear it as a Prophyactick about thee, and go notwithout it.
He that rejects it, put a mark upon him, and according to Solomon's advice in
the 24 Pro. Meddle not with him, for he fears not God and the King, and is
given to sedition. Avoid such an one as thou would do a Viper, a Crocodile,
a Basilisk, or one that is infected with the Plague.

Our wounds being bound up with this Balm, (it has been likewise humbly
sought, and prayed for) that Religion may be settled both in Doctrine and
Discipline with all due and convenient speed, and all Protestants, especially
Ministers, united therein by Protestation, and satisfactory explanations and
reasons published thereof.

That the Conversion of all Papists and other Heretical and Schismatic
Subjects in the Kingdom, who have erred and gone astray from the Truth, may in
all charitable and Christian manner be endeavored with to be reduced home to
the Church; showing them the necessity of our Separation from them, or rathers
as it is indeed their Apostacy from the true Church with which we partake, the
danger of the condition they are in, the benefit of embracing these, and the
like gracious invitations, extending to the good of their souls, bodies, and
estates. Thus many of them, who certainly belong unto God, may be brought home
to him, and made useful and serviceable, the rest left inexcusable to God, the
World, and their own consciences.

That justice and judgment may be executed on such as have received such
putrefaction, that by their virulencie they infect and endanger others.

That the several languishing, oppressed, whose cries have entered the ears of
the Lord (some of whom for several years have received almost deadly wounds
for the mayatenance of the public good) may in good time be relieved and
redressed.

That the well deserving may be encourage, Virtue advanced, and Vice depressed.

Thus God will be pacified, and we united and reconciled to him, and amongst
our selves. Thus all those incoveniences and Mischiefs which we fear, by Gods
blessing on the unanimous endeavors of the Parliament, may turn to our great
blessing and commodity.

Thus our Ship will arrive safely at her desired Port.

Thus our treble Cord, and Partition Wall, will be made stronger then ever.

Thus those bloody, fiery and malignant Configurations (which hang over our
heads) will be speedily terminated, and their revolutions prevented for the
future, and we shall receive more benign and favorable influences and
aspects from above, then ever we had before.

Thus we shall begin a new World, or at leastwise make a happy Conclusion of
an old, Wherein God will give us one heart, and one Way (as it is in Jeremiah)
that we may fear him for ever, for the good of us and our Children after us.

God I say will do it, for He and He only is able to unite and heal all our
Solutions, and therefore, Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be
given the Glory and Praise, now and for evermore. Amen.

I. W.

PErlegi Tractatum hunc ingeniosum, in quo nihil inveniri potest, quod non sit
pium, religiosum, bonismoribus, legibusque sanis maxim consentaneum: cessent
itaque virulentae malevolorum linguae hoc (ut optima imo quidem omnia solent)
carpere opusculum, acerbitatis suae virus in Authorem candidum evomere
erubescant; and dum morosos and imprudentes nostri hujus saeculi homunciones
(quorum insipidis palatis nihil nisi proprii cerebelli figmenta sapit) ad
rectam rationis legumque normam reducere conatur, ab omnibus (quibus curae est
pax and serena Ecclesiae heu nimis nunc temporis dilaceratae tranquillitas)
laudem, uti been meretur, consequartur.


