Dolor, ac Voluptas, invicem cedunt. OR ENGLANDS Glorious Change, by Calling
Home of KING CHARLES THE SECOND. Together with the Royalists Exaltation* And
the Phanatiques Diminution.
COme Muse; did ever joy in recreating,
And solace of thy self in nominating
Dangers expelled; When in a calm of Peace,
Thou resting lie, as in a Bed at ease.
Did ever hear that War was sought of any
Unless by those which (as their Trade) kept many
Sluggards, and such, who nothing had to leese,
Except it were their Clothes, their Lice, and Fleas.
Peace ea^nt for such, then soon absent your selves,
It is a Rock that must destroy these Elves;
They hang their heads, yet dare not seem to cry,
At this their unexpected misery.
They know that if they vissibly do frown,
There is a rod will whip their Stomachs down.
Our worthy General, whose echoed fame,
Shall sing aloud great Trophies of his name.
'Twas he that came here as a Favorite,
Who seemingly did own the Rumpers right,
Not through his fear, 'twas through his policy,
To period the Kingdoms misery,
Not by a bloody fight, there need no more,
Such massacring as we have had before.
Such waste of blood in stopping of that flame,
Which through the fire of Swords had raised the same.
Go Lobsters hide your selves within the deep,
That is the fittest place for you to creep.
Show not your heads Phanatiques, our intent,
Is for to serve the King and Parliament.
You as the wicked weeds amongst good Corn,
Shall by your deepest Roots from thence be torn;
You Cobblers, Plough-men, which thought it no crime,
With others means, to make your selves sublime.
Know wee've a King a coming (long Exiled)
To punish you, but oh he is far to mild:
He don't delight his name abroad to spread,
Or make his Foes by Rigor his name dread:
He Is merciful, firm in his undertaking,
His old, and trusty Friends, in not forsaking,
Pitiful unto such who have deserved
His angry Brow, and from his Cause have swerved;
But woe to you, new Lords, your first degree,
Had been a Thousand times more fit for ye.
And you Poor Royalists, which were a prey,
Unto those Wolves, and long time obscure lay,
Advance your selves, lift up your heads on high,
Your Shepherds looks, will make the Wolves to fly
Your long expected CHARLES is coming home,
Never such joy ere came to Christendom.
Our Nation like a Ship e'ne over blown,
Our Laws, Lives, Liberties, e'ne over thrown,
Our Churches jeered, our Ministers dispis'd,
Nothing for Christianity is prized;
But what is allowed, by the Quaking Dogs,
Who were in swarms, resembling Egypts Frogs.
Till God beholding us, did pity take,
Destroying them, even for his Gospels sake;
And for a MOSES, he a MONK did send,
Who with his rod, did us from them defend.
Then let us not ascribe this unto Fate,
Or unto Chance, as being fortunate;
But unto The Almighty God, who did portend
These blessings for us, give praise to --
THE END.
T. W.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1660.


