CURE FOR A CUCKOLD. A PLEASANT COMEDY, As it has been several times Acted
with great Applause.

Written by JOHN VVEBSTER and WILLIAM ROWLEY.

Placere Cupio.
London, Printed by Tho. Johnson, and are to be sold by Francis Kirkman, at his
Shop at the Sign of John Fletchers Head, over against the Angel Inn, on the
Backside of St. Clements, without Temple Bar. 1661.

The Stationer, to the Judicious Reader.
Gentlemen,
IT was not long (...) I was only a Book-Reader, and not a Bookseller, which
Quality (my former Employment somewhat failing, and I being unwilling to be
idle) I have now lately taken on me. It has been my fancy and delight (ere
since I knew any thing) to converse with Books; and the pleasure I have taken
in those of this nature, (viz. Plays) has bin so extraordinary, that it has
bin much to my cost; (...) I have been (as we term it) a Gatherer of Plays for
some years, and I am confident I have more of several sorts than any man in
England, Bookseller, or other: I can at any time show 700 in number, which is
within a small matter all that were ever printed. Many of these I have several
times over, and intend as I sell, to purchase more; All, or any of which, I
shall be ready either to sell or lend to you upon reasonable Considerations.

In order to the increasing of my Store, I have now this Term printed and
published three, viz. This called A Cure for a Cuckold, and another called, The
Thracian Wonder; and the third called, Gammer Gurtons Needle. Two of these
three were never printed, the third, viz. Gammer Gurtons Needle, has bin
formerly printed, but it is almost an hundred years since. As for this Play, I
need not speak any thing in its Commendation, the Authors names, Webster and
Rowley, are (to knowing men) sufficient to declare its worth: several persons
remember the Acting of it, and say that it then pleased generally well; and let
me tell you, in my judgment it is an excellent old Play. The Expedient of
Curing a Cuckold (after the manner set down in this Play) has bin tried to my
knowledge, and therefore I may say Probatum est. I should, I doubt, be too
tedious, or else I would say somewhat in defense of this, and in Commendation
of (...) in general, but I question not but you have read what abler Pens than
mine have writ in their Vindication. Gentlemen, I hope you will so encourage me
in my beginnings, that I may be induced to proceed to do you service, and that
I may frequently have occasion in this nature, to subscribe my self

Your Servant, Francis Kirkman.

Dramatis Personae.
VVOodroff, a Justice of the Peace, Father to Annabel. Franckford a Merchant,
Brother in Law to Woodroff. Lessingham a Gentleman in love with Clare. Bonvile
a Gentleman, the Bridegroom and Husband to Annabel. Raymond, Eustace, Lyonel,
and Grover, Gallants invited to the Wedding. Rochfield, a young Gentleman, and
a Thief. Compass, a Seaman. Pettifog, and Dodge, two Attorneys. A Councellor.
Two Clients. Two Boys. A Saylor. Luce Wife to Franckford, and Sister to
Woodroff. Annabel the Bride, and Wife to Bonvile. Clare, Lessingham's Mistress.
Urse, Wife to Compass. Nurse. A Waiting Woman.
A CURE for a CUCKOLD.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Lessingham and Clare. Less. THis is a place of feasting and of joy, and
as in Triumphs and Ovations here, nothing save state and pleasure.


Clare. It Is confessed.


Less. A day of Mirth and solemn Jubilee.


Clare. For such as can be merry.


Less. A happy Nuptial, since a like pair of Fortunes suitable, equality in
Birth, parity in years, and in affection no way different are this day sweetly
coupled.


Clare. It Is a Marriage.


Less. True Lady, and a noble president me thinks for us to follow: why should
these outstrip us in our loves, that have not yet out-gone us in our time.

If we thus loose our best, and not to be recovered hours unprofitably spent,
we shall be held mere Trewants in Loves school.


Clare. That Is a study in which I never-shall ambition have to become graduate.


Less. Lady, you are sad: this Jovial Meeting puts me in a spirit to be made
such.

We two are Guests invited, and meet by purpose, not by accident; where is then
a place more opportunely fit, in which we may solicit our own Loves, than
before this example?


Clare. In a word, I purpose not to marry.


Less. By your favor, for as I ever to this present hour have studied your
observance, so from henceforth I now will study plainness, I have loved you
beyond my self, mis-spended for your sake many a fair hour, which might have
been employed to pleasure, or to profit, have neglected duty to them from whom
my being came, my parents; but my hopeful studies most.

I have stolen time from all my choice delights, and robbed my self, (...) have
told me as fair, as rich, I never thought 'em so, and lost all these in hope to
find out you, resolve me then for Christian charity. Think you an Answer of
that ^rozen nature is a sufficient satisfaction for so many more then needful
services?


Clare. I have said, Sir.


Less. Whence might this distaste arise? Be at least so kind to perfect me in
that: Is it of some dislike lately conceived of this my person, which perhaps
may grow from calumny and scandal? if not that, some late received Melancholy
in you: if neither, your perverse and peevish will, to which I most i^^ly it.


Clare. Be it what it can, or may be, thus it is,
And with this Answer pray rest satisfied.
In all these travels, windings, and indents,
Paths, and bypath which many have sought out,
There Is but one only road, and that alone
To my fruition; which who so finds out,
It Is like he may enjoy me: but that failing,
I ever am mine own.

Less. Oh name it, Sweet. I am already in a Labyrinth until you guide me out.


Clare. I Will to my Chamber,
May you be pleased, unto your misspent time
To add but some few minutes. By my Maid
You shall hear further from me.
Exit.
Less. I Will attend you.
What more can I desire, than be resolved
Of such a long suspense. Here Is now the period
Of much expectation.
Enter Raymond, Eustace, Lyonel, and Grover, Gallants.
Raym. What? you alone
Retired to privacy,
Of such a goodly confluence, all prepared
To grace the present Nuptials?

Less. I have heard some say, men are never less alone, then when alone, such
power has meditation.


Eust. Oh these choice Beauties that are this day assembled! But of all, fair
Mistress Clare, the Bride excepted still, she bears away the prize.


Lion. And worthily; for, setting off her present melancholy, she is without
taxation.


Grov. I conceive the cause of her so sudden discontent.


Raym. It Is far out of my way.


Grov. I Will speak it then: In all estates, professions, or degrees in Arts or
Sciences, there is a kind of Emulation; likewise so in this: There Is a Maid
this day married, a choice Beauty. Now Mrs. Clare, a Virgin of like Age, and
Fortunes correspondent, apprehending time lost in her that is in another gained,
may upon this. For who knows women's thoughts grow into this deep sadness?


Raym. Like enough.


Less. You are pleasant, Gentlemen,
Or else perhaps, though I know many have pursued her Love,

Grov. (And you amongst the rest) with pardon Sir,
Yet she might cast some more peculiar eye
On some that not respects her,
Enter Wayting-woman.
Less. That Is my fear which you now make your sport.


Wom. A Letter, Sir.


Less. From whom?


Wom. My Mistress.


Less. She has kept her promise, and I will read it, though I in the same know
my own death included.


Wom. Fare you well, Sir.

Exit.
Less. Prove all thy friends, find out the best and nearest,
Kill for my sake that Friend that loves thee dearest.
Her servant, nay her hand and character,
All meeting in my ruin! Read again,
Prove all thy Friends, find out the best and nearest,
Kill for my sake that Friend that loves the dearest.
And what might that one be? It Is a strange difficulty,
And it will ask much council.
Exit Less.
Raym. Lessingham has left us on the sudden.


Eust. Sure the occasion was of that Letter sent him.


Lion. (...) be it was some Challenge.


Grov. Challenge, never dream it:
Are such things sent by women?
Enter Woodroff, A^abel, B^^vile, Franckfor^, Luce, and Nurse.
Raym. 'Twere an Heresy
To conceive but such a thought.

Lion. Tush, all the difference
Begot this day, must be at night decided
Betwixt the Bride and Bridegroom. Here both come.

Wood. What did you call the Gentleman we met But now in some distraction?


Bon. Lessingham: A most approved and noble friend of mine, and one of our
prime Guests.


Wood. He seemed to me
Somewhat in mind distempered. What concern
Those private humors ours so public Mirth
In such a time of Revels? Mistress Clare,
I miss her too. Why Gallants, have you suffered her
Thus to be lost amongst you?

Anna. Dinner done, unknown to any, she retired her self.


Wood. Sick of the Maid perhaps, because she fees
You Mistress Bride, her School- and Play-fellow
So suddenly turned Wife.

Franck. 'Twas shrewdly guest.


Wood. Go find her out: Fie Gentlemen, within
The Music plays unto the silent walls,
And no man there to grace it: when I was young,
At such a Meeting I have so bestir'd me,
Till I have made the pale Green-fickness Girls
Blush like the Rubie, and drop pearls apace
Down from their Ivory foreheads: In those days
I have cut Capers thus high. Nay, in Gentlemen,
And single out the Ladies.

Raym. Well advised. Nay Mrs. Bride, you shall along with us; for without you
all is nothing.


Anna. Willingly, with Mr. Bridegrooms leave.


Bon. Oh my best Joy, this day I am your servant.


Wood. True, this day; she his, her whole life after, so it should be: only
this day a Groom to do her service, for which the full remainder of his age he
may write Master. I ha^^ ^^e it yet, and so I hope still shall do. Sister Luce,
may I presume my brother Franckford can say as much, and truly?


Luce. Sir, he may, I freely give him leave.


Wood. Observe that brother, she freely gives you leave; But who gives leave,
the Master or the servant?


Franck. You Are pleasant, and it becomes you well, but this day most; that
having but one Daughter, have bestowed her to your great hope and comfort.


Wood. I have one: would you could say so, Sister; but your barrenness has
given your husband freedom, if he please, to seek his pastime elsewhere.


Luce. Well, well brother, though you may taunt me that have never yet been
blessed with issue, spare my husband pray, for he may have a By-blow, or an Heir
that you never heard of.


Franck. Oh fie wife, make not my fault too public.


Luce. Yet himself keep within compass.


Franck. If you love me, Sweet.


Luce. Nay I have done.


Wood. But if he have not, Wench, I would he had, the hurt I wish you both.
Prithee, thine ear a little.


Nurse. Your boy grows up, and it is a chopping Lad, A man even in the Cradle.


Fran. Softly Nurse:


Nurse. One of the forwardst infants, how it will crow And chirrup like a
Sparrow! I fear shortly it will breed teeth, you must provide him therefore a
Corral, with a Whistle and a Chain.


Fran. He shall have any thing.


Nurse. He Is now quite out of Blankets.

Fran. There Is a Piece, provide him what he wants, only good Nurse prithee at
this time be silent.


Nurse. A Charm to bind any Nurses tongue that is living.


Wood. Come, we are mist among the younger Frye,
Gravity oft-times becomes the sports of youth, espe^ially
At such Solemnities, and it were sin
Not in our Age to show what we have bin.
Exeunt. Enter Lessingham sad, with a Letter in his hand.
Less. Amicitia nihil dedit natura ma us nec rarius, So says my Author. If
then powerful Nature in all her bounties showred upon mankind, found none more
rare and precious than this one we call Friendship, oh to what a Monster would
this trans-shape me, to be made that he to violate such goodness! To kill any
had been a sad Injunction, but a Friend! nay, of all Friends the most approved!
A Task, hell till this day could never parallel: And yet this woman has a
power of me beyond all virtue, virtue, almost grace. What might her hidden
purpose be in this? unless she apprehend some fantasi that no such thing has
being: -- and as kindred and claims to Crowns are worn out of the world, so the
name Friend? 'T may be 'twas her conceit. I have tried those that have
professed much for coin; nay sometimes slighter courtesies, yet found 'em cold
enough, -- so perhaps she, which makes her thus opinion'd. -- If in the former,
and therefore better days, 'twas held so rare, who knows but in these last and
worser times, it may be now with justice banished the earth. I Am full of
thoughts, and this my troubled breast distempered with a thousand fantasies,
something I must resolve. I Will first make proof if such a thing there be; which
having found, 'Twixt Love and Friendship 'twill be a brave Fight,

To prove in man which claims the greatest right.

Enter Raymond, Eustace, Lyonel, and Grover.
Raym. What, Master Lessingham!
You that were wont to be composed of mirth,
All spirit and fire. -- Alacrity it self, like the luster of a late bright
shining Sun, now wrapped in clouds and darkness!

Lion. Prithee be merry,
Thy dullness sads the half part of the house,
And deads that spirit which thou wast wont to quicken,
And half spent to give Life too.

Less. Gentlemen, such as have cause for sport, I shall wish ever
To make of it the present benefit
While it exists. -- Content is still short breathed,
When it was mine I did so. If now yours,
I pray make your best use on it.

Lion. Riddles and Paradoxes:
Come, come, some Crotchers come into thy pate,
And I will know the cause on it.

Grov. So will I, or I protest never leave thee.


Eust. It Is a business proper to my self, -- one that concerns no second person.


Grov. How Is that? not a friend?


Less. Why, is there any such?


Grov. Do you question that? what do you take me for?


Eust. I Sir, or me? It Is many months ago since we betwixt us interchang'd
that name, and of my part never broken.


Lion. Troth, nor mine.


Raym. If you make question of a Friend, I pray
Number not me the last in your accomp^,
That would be crowned in your opinion first.

Less. You all speak nobly. But amongst you all

Can such a one be found?


Raym. Not one amongst us, but would be proud to wear the character of noble
Friendship. In the name of which, and of all us here present, I entreat, expose
to us the grief that troubles you.


Less. I shall, and briefly: If ever Gentleman sunk beneath scandal, or his
reputation never to be recovered, suffered, and for want of one whom I may call
a Friend, then mine is now in danger.


Raym. I Will redeem't, though with my life's dear hazard.


Eust. I pray Sir, be to us open breasted.


Less. Then it is thus: There is to be performed a Monamachy-Combat, or Duel,
Time, Place, and Weapon agreed betwixt us. Had it touched my self, and my self
only, I had then been happy; but I by composition am engaged to bring with me
my Second, and he too, not as the Law of Combat is, to stand aloof and see fair
play, bring off his Friend, but to engage his person; both must fight, and
either of them dangerous.


Eust. Of all things, I do not like this fighting.


Less. Now Gentlemen, of this so great a courtesy
I am at this instant merely destitute.

Raym. The time.


Less. By eight a clock to morrow.


Raym. How unhappily things may fall out, I am just at that hour upon some late
conceived Discontents, to atone me to my father, otherwise of all the rest you
had commanded me your Second, and your Servant.


Lion. Pray the Place?


Less. Callis-Sands.


Lion. It once was fatal to a friend of mine, and a near kinsman, for which I
vowed then, and deeply too, never to see that ground: But if it had been
elsewhere, one of them had before mine been worms-meat.


Grov. What Is the weapon?


Less. Single-sword.


Grov. Of all that you could na^^, A thing I never practiced, -- Had it been
Rapier -- or that, and Poniard, where men use rather slight than force, I had
been then your Man; being young, I strained the sinews of my arm, since then to
me 'twas never serviceable.


Eust. In troth Sir, had it been a money-matter,
I could have stood your friend, but as for sighting
I was ever out at that.
Exeunt Gallants. Enter Bonvile.
Less. Well, farewell Gentlemen,
But where is the Friend in all this? tush, she is wise,
And knows there is no such thing beneath the moon:
I now applaud her judgment.

Bon. Why how now friend, this Discontent which now
Is so unseason'd, makes me question what
I never durst doubt before, your Love to me,
Does it proceed from Envy of my Bliss
Which this day crowns me with? Or have you been
A secret Rival in my happiness?
And grieve to see me owner of those Joys,
Which you could wish your own?

Less. Banish such thoughts,
Or you shall wrong the truest faithful Friendship
Man e're could boast of, oh mine honor, Sir,
It Is that which makes me wear this brow of sorrow:
Were that free from the power of Calumny.
But pardon me, that being now a dying
Which is so near to man, if part we cannot
With pleasant looks.

Bon. Do but speak the burden, and I protest to take it off from you, and lay
it on my self.


Less. 'Twere a request, impudence without blushing could not ask, it bears
with it such injury.


Bon. Yet must I know it.


Less. Receive it then. -- But I entreat you sir, not to imagine that I
apprehend a thought to further my intent by you, from you it is least suspected.
-- 'Twas my fortune to entertain a Quarrel with a Gentleman, the Field betwixt
us challenged, -- place and time, and these to be performed not without
Seconds. I have relied on many seeming friends, but cannot bless my memory with
one dares venture in my Quarrel.


Bon. Is this all?


Less. It is enough to make all temperature
Convert to fury. -- Sir, my Reputation
(The life and soul of Honor) is at stake,
In danger to be lost. -- The word of Coward
Still printed in the name of Lessingham.

Bon. Not while there is a Bonvile. -- May I live poor,
And die despised, not having one sad friend
To wait upon my Hearse, if I survive
The ruin of that Honor. -- Sir, the time?

Less. Above all spare me -- for that once known,
You Will cancel this your promise, and unsay
Your friendly proffer. -- Neither can I blame you,
Had you confirmed it with a thousand Oaths,
The Heavens would look with mercy, not with justice
On your offense, should you enfringe 'em all.
Soon after Sunrise upon Callis-sands,
To morrow we should meet -- now to defer
Time one half hour, I should but forfeit all.
But Sir, of all men living, this alas
Concerns you least; -- For shall I be the man
To rob you of this nights felicity,
And make your Bride a Widow, -- her soft bed
No witness of those joys this night expects?

Bon. I still prefer my friend before my pleasure,
Which is not lost for ever -- but adjourned
For more mature employment.

Less. Will you go then?


Bon. I am resolved I will.


Less. And instantly?


Bon. With all thespeed celerity can make.


Less. You do not weigh those inconveniences this Action meets with. -- Your
departure hence will breed a strange distraction in your friends, distrust of
Love in your fair virtuous Bride, whose eyes perhaps may never more be blessed
with your dear sight: since you may meet a grave, and that not amongst your
noble Ancestors, but amongst strangers, almost enemies.


Bon, This were enough to shake a weak resolve,
It moves not me. Take horse as secretly
As you well may: my Groom shall make mine ready*
With all speed possible, unknown to any.
Enter Annabel.
Less. But Sir, the Bride.


An. Did you not see the Key that is to unlock my Carckanet and Bracelets? Now
in troth I am afraid it is lost.


Bon. No Sweet, I have it: I found it lie at random in your Chamber, and knowing
you would miss it, laid it by: it is safe I warrant you.


An. Then my fear's past: but till you give it back, my Neck and Arms are still
your Prisoners.


Bon. But you shall find they have a gentle Jailer.


An. So I hope. Within you are much enquired of.


Bon. Sweet, I follow. Dover?


Less. Yes, that is the place.


Bon. If you be there before me, hire a Barque, I shall not fail to meet you.

Exeunt.
Less. Was ever known a man so miserably blessed as I? I have have no sooner
found the greatest good, man in this pilgrimage of Life can meet, but I must
make the womb where 'twas conceived, the Tomb to bury it, and the first hour it
lives,

The last it must breath? Yet there is a Fate

That sways and governs above woman's hate.

Exit.
Explicit. Act. 1.
Actus secundus. Seena prima.
Enter Rochfield a young Gentleman. Roch. A Younger Brother? it is a poor
Calling (though not unlawful) very hard to live on; the elder fool inherits all
the Lands, and we that follow Legacies of Wit, and get 'em when we can too. Why
should Law (if we be lawful and legitimate) leave us without an equal divident?
Or why compels it not our Fathers else to cease from getting, when they want to
give? No sure, our Mothers will never agree to that, they love to groan,
although the Gallows echo and groan together for us. From the first we travel
forth, t'other's our journeys end. I must forward, to beg is out of my way, and
borrowing is out of date: The old road, the old highway '^ must be, and I am
in it, the place will serve for a young beginner, for this is the first day I set
open shop; success then sweet L^^^rna, I have heard that Thieves adore thee for
a Deity.

Enter Annabel and a servant. I would not purchase by thee, but to eat,

And it is too churlish to deny me meat.

Soft, here may be a booty.


An. Horsed, say thou?


Ser. Yes Mistress, with Lessingham.


An. Alack, I know not what to doubt or fear, I know not well whether't be well
or ill: but sure it is no custom for the Groom to leave his Bride upon the
Nuptial day. I am so young and ignorant a Scholar, yes, and it proves so: I talk
away perhaps that might be yet recovered. Prithee run, the fore-path may
advantage thee to meet 'em, or the Ferry which is not two miles before, may
trouble 'em until thou come in ken, and if thou do, prithee enforce thy
voice to overtake thine eyes, cry out, and crave for me but one word before his
departure. I will not stay him, say, beyond his pleasure; nor rudely ask the
cause, if he be willing to keep it from me. Charge him by all the love. But I
stay thee too long. Run, run.


Ser. If I had wings I would spread 'em now, Mistress.

Exit.
An. I Will make the best speed after that I can,

Yet I am not well acquainted with the path:

My fears I fear me will misguide me too.

Exit.
Roch. There Is good movables I perceive, what ere the ready Coin be, who ever
owns her, she is mine now: the next ground has a most pregnant hollow for the
purpose.

Exit Enter servant running over. Enter Annabel, after her Rochfield.
An. I Am at a doubt already where I am.


Roch. I Will help you, Mistress, well overtaken.


An. Defend me goodness. What are you?

Roch. A m^n.
An. An honest man, I hope.


Roch. In some degrees hot, not altogether cold,

So far as rank poison, yet dangerous

As I may be dressed: I am an honest thief.


An. Honest and Thief hold small affinity, I never heard they were a kin
before, pray Heaven I find it now.


Roch. I tell you my name.


An. Then honest thief, since you have taught me so, for I Will enquire no other,
use me honestly.


Roch. Thus then I Will use you: First then to prove me honest, I will not violate
your Chastity, (that is no part yet of my profession) be you Wife or Virgin.


An. I am both, Sir.


Roch. This then it seems should be your Wedding Day, and these the hours of
interim to keep you in that double state. Come then, I Will be brief, for I Will not
hinder your defired Hymen: You have about you some superfluous Toys, which my
lanck hungry pockets would contrive with much more profit, and more privacy;
you have an idle Chain which keeps your Neck a Prisoner, a Mannacle I take it,
about your wrist too. If these prove Emblems of the combined Hemp to halter
mine, the Fates take their pleasure, these are set down to be your Ransom, and
there the Thief is proved.


An. I will confess both, and the last forget; you shall be only honest in
this deed. Pray you take it, I entreat you to it, and then you steal 'em not.


Roch. You may deliver 'em.


An. Indeed I cannot: if you observe, Sir, they are both locked about me, and
the Key I have not; happily you are furnished with some instrument, that may
unloose 'em.


Roch. No in troth, Lady, I am but a Fresh-man,
I never read further than this Book you see,
And this very day is my beginning too:
These picking Laws I am to study yet.

An. Oh, do not show me that, Sir, it is too frightful:
Good, hurt me not, for I do yield 'em freely:
Use but your hands, perhaps their strength will serve
To tear 'em from me without much detriment,
Somewhat I will endure.

Roch. Well, sweet Lady, y' are the best Patient for a young Physician, that I
think e're was practiced on. I Will use you as gently as I can, as I Am an honest
Thief. No? wilt not do? do I hurt you, Lady?


An. Not much, Sir.


Roch. I Would be loath at all, I cannot do it.

She draws his sword
An. Nay then you shall not, Sir. You a Thief,
And guard your self no better? No further read?
Yet out in your own book? A bad Clerk, are you not?

Roch. I by Saint Nicholas, Lady, sweet Lady.


An. Sir, I have now a Masculine vigor, and will redeem my self with purchase
too. What money have you?


Roch. Not a cross, by this foolish hand of mine.


An. No money. 'Twere pity then to take this from thee: I know thou wilt use me
never the worse for this, take it again, I know not how to use it: A frown had
taken't from me, which thou had not. And now hear and believe me, on my knees
I make the Protestation, Forbear to take what violence and danger must
dissolve, if I forgo 'em now, I do assure you would not strike my head off for
my Chain, nor my hand for this, how to deliver 'em otherwise I know not;
Accompany me back unto my house, it is not far off, by all the Vows which this
day I have tied unto my wedded husband, the honor yet equal with my Cradle
purity (if you will tax me) to the hoped joys the blessings of the bed,
posterity, or what ought else by woman may be pledged, I will deliver you in
ready Coin, the full and dearest esteem of what you crave.


Roch. Ha, ready money is the prize I look for, it walks without suspicion any
where, when Chains and Jewels may be stayed and called before the Constable:
But,


An. But? Can you doubt? You saw I gave you my advantage up: Did you e're think
a woman to be true?


Roch. Thought 's free. I have heard of some few, Lady, Very few indeed.


An. Will you add one more to your belief?


Roch They were fewer than the Articles of my Belief; therefore I have room for
you, and will believe you. Stay: you will ransom your Jewels with ready Coin, so
may you do, and then discover me.


An. Shall I reiterate the Vows I made

To this injunction, or new ones coin?


Roch. Neither, I Will trust you: if you do destroy a Thief that never yet did
Robbery, then farewell I, and mercy fall upon me. I knew one once fifteen years
Courtier, owl'd, and he was buried e're he took a Bribe^ it may be my case in
the worser way. Come, you know your path back.


An. Yes, I shall guide you.


Roch. Your arm, I Will lead with greater dread than will.
Nor do you fear, tho in thiefs handling still.
Exeunt. Enter two Boys, one with a child in his arms.
1 Boy. I say 'twas fair play.


2 Boy. To snatch up stakes: I say you should not say so, if the child were
out of mine arms.


1 Boy. I then thou would lay about like a man, but the child will not be out of
thine arms this five years, and then thou have a prentiship to serve to a boy
afterward.

Enter Compass.
2 Boy. So sir, you know you have the advantage of me.


1 Boy. I Am sure you have the odds of me, you are two to one. But soft Jack who
comes here? if a Point will make us friends, we will not fall out.


2 Boy. Oh the pity, it is Gaffer Compass! They said he was dead three years ago.


1 Boy. Did not he dance the Hobbyhorse in Hackney-Morrice once?


2 Boy. Yes, yes, at Green-goose Fair, as honest and as poor a man.


Comp. Black-wall, sweet Black-wall, do I see thy white cheeks again? I have
brought some Brine from sea for thee: tears that might be tied in a True-love
Knot, for they are fresh salt indeed. Oh beautiful Black-wall! if Urfe my wife be
living to this day, though she die to morrow, sweet Fates!


2 Boy. Alas, let us put him out of his dumps for pity sake:
Welcome home, Gaffer Compass, welcome home, Gaffer.

Compass. My pretty youths, I thank you. Honest Jack! what a little man art
thou grown since I saw thee? Thou have got a child since, methinks.


2 Boy. I am fain to keep it, you see, whosoever got it, Gaffer: it may be
another man's case as well as mine.


Comp. Say true, Jack: and whose pretty knave is it?


2 Boy. One that I mean to make a younger brother if he live to it, Gaffer. But
I can tell you news: You have a brave Boy of your own wifes: oh* is a shot to
this ^ig.


Comp. Have I Jack? I Will o^ thee a dozen of Points for this news


2 Boy. Oh it is a chopping Boy! it cannot choose you know, Gaffer, it was so
long a breeding.


Comp. How long, Jack?


2 Boy. You know it is four year ago since you went to sea, and your child is
but a Quarter old yet.


Comp. What pl^guy boys are bred now adays?


1 Boy Pray Gaffer, how long may a child be breeding before it is born?


Comp. That is as things are and prove, child; the soil has a great hand in it
too, the Horizon, and the Cilme; these things you will understand when you go to
sea. In some parts of London hard by, you shall have a Bride married to day,
and brought to Bed within a month after, sometimes within three weeks, a
fortnight.


1 Boy. Oh horrible.


Comp. True as I tell you Lads: in another place you shall have a couple of
Drones, do what they ean, shift Lodgings, Beds, Bed-fellows, yet not a child
in ten years.


2 Boy. Oh pitiful.


Comp. Now it varies again by that time you come at Wapping, Radcliff,
Lymehouse, and here with us at Black-wall, our children come uncertainly, as
the wind serves: sometimes here we are supposed to be away three or four year
together, it is nothing so; we are at home and gone again, when no body knows
on it: if you will believe me, I have been at Surrat as this day, I have taken the
Longboat (a fair Gale with me) been here a bed with my wife by twelve a Clock
at night, up and gone again in the morning and no man the wiser, if you will believe
me.


2 Boy. Yes, yes Gaffer, I have thought so many times that you or somebody else
have been at home, I lie at next wall, and I have heard a noise in your chamber
all night long.


Comp. Right, why that was I, yet thou never saws^ me.


2 Boy. No indeed, Gaffer.


Comp. No, I warrant thee, I was a thousand leagues off e're thou were up. But
Jack, I have been loath to ask all this while for discomforting my self, how
does my wife? is she living?


2 Boy. Oh never better, Gaffer, never so lusty, and truly she wears better
clothes than she was wont in your days, especially on Holidays, fair Gowns,
brave Petticoats, and fine Smocks, they say that have seen 'em; and some of the
neighbors reports that they were taken up at London.


Comp. Like enough: they must be paid for, Jack:


2 Boy. And good reason, Gaffer.


Comp. Well Jack, thou shall have the honor on it, go tell my wife the joyful
tidings of my return.


2 Boy. That I will, for she heard you were dead long ago.

Exit
1 Boy. Nay sir, I Will be as forward as you, by your leave.

Exit.
Comp. Well wife, if I be one of the Livery, I thank thee,
The Hornets are a great Company, there may be
An Alderman amongst us one day, it is but changing
Our Copy, and then we are no more to be called
By our old Brotherhood.
Enter Compass his wife.
Wife. Oh my sweet Compass, art thou come again?


Comp. Oh Urse, give me leave to shed, the fountain of Love
Will have their course; though I cannot sing at first sight,
Yet I can cry before I see. I am new come into the world,
And children cry before they laugh a fair while.

Wife. And so thou art, sweet Compass, new born indeed; for Rumor laid thee out
for dead long since, I never thought to see this face again. I heard thou were
dived to the bottom of the sea, and taken up a Lodging in the Sands, never to
come to Black-wall again.


Comp. I was going indeed wife, but I turned back: I heard an ill report of my
neighbors, Sharks and Sword-fishes, and the like, whose companies I did not
like: come kiss my tears now sweet Urse, sorrow begins to ebb.


Wife. A thousand times welcome home, sweet Compass.


Comp. An Ocean of thanks, and that will hold 'em: and Urse, how goes all at
home? or cannot all go yet? Lanck still? will 't never be full Sea at our Wharf?


Wife. Alas, husband.


Comp. A lass or a lad, wench, I should be glad of both: I did look for a pair
of Compasses before this day.


Wife. And you from home?


Comp. I from home? why though I be from home, and other of our neighbors from
home, it is not fit all should be from home, so the town might be left
desolate, and our neighbors of Bow might come further from the Itacus, and
inhabit here.


Wife. I Am glad you are merry, sweet husband.


Comp. Merry? nay, I Will be merrier yet, why should I ^e sorry? I hope my boy 's
well, is he not? I looked for another by this time.


Wife. What boy, husband?


Comp. What boy? why the boy I got when I came home in the Cock-boat one night,
about a year ago? you have not forgotten't, I hope? I think I left behind for
a boy, and a boy I must be answered: I Am sure I was not drunk, it could be no
girl.


Wife. Nay then I do perceive my fault is known. Dear man, your pardon.


Comp. Pardon. Why thou have not made away my boy, have thou? I Will hang thee if
there were never a whore in London more, if thou have hurt but his little toe.


Wife. Your long absence, with rumor of your death,
After long bettery I was surprised.

Comp. Surprised? I cannot blame thee: Black-wall, if it were double
black-walled, cannot hold out always, no more than Lymehouse, or Chadwell, or
the strongest Suburbs about London, and when it comes to that, woe be to the
City too.


Wife. Pursued by gifts and promises I yielded: Consider husband, I am a woman,
neither the first nor last of such Offenders, it is true, I have a child.


Comp. Ha, you? and what shall I have then I pray? will not you labor for me as
I shall do for you? Because I was out o'th way when 'twas gotten, shall I loose
my share? There Is better Law amongst the Players yet; for a fellow shall have
his share though he do not play that day: if you look for any part of my fours
Years wages, I will have half the boy.


Wife. If you can forgive me, I shall be joyed at it.


Comp. Forgive thee, for what? for doing me a pleasure? and what is he that
would seem to father my child?


Wife. A man sir, whom in better courtesies we have been beholding too: the
Merchant, Mr. Franckford.


Comp. I Will acknowledge no other courtesies: for this I am beholding to him, and
I would requite it if his wife were young enough. Though he be one of our
Merchants at Sea, he shall give me leave to be Owner at home. And where 's my
boy? shall I see him?


Wife. He Is nu^st at Bed^al-green: it is now too late,
To morrow I Will bring you to it, if you please.

Comp. I would thou could bring me another by to morrow.
Come, we will eat and to bed, and if a fair Gale come,
We Will hoist sheets, and set forwards.
Let fainting fools sie fick upon their scorns,
I Will teach a Cuckold how to hide his horns.
Exeunt. Enter Woodroff, Franckford, Raymond, Eustace, Grover, Lyonel, Clare,
Luce.
Wood. This wants a president, that a Bridegroom should so discreet and
decently observe his Forms, Postures, all customary Rites belonging to the
Table, and then hide himself from his expected wages in the bed.


Franck. Let this be forgotten too, that it remains not a first example.


Raym. Keep it amongst us, lest it beget too much unfruitful sorrow: most
likely it is that love to Lessingham has fastened on him, we all denied.


Eust. It Is more certain than likely. I know it is so.


Grov. Conceal then: the event may be well enough.


Wood. The Bride my daughter, she is hidden too:
This las^ hour she has not been seen with us.

Raym. Perhaps they are together.


Eust. And then we make too strict an inquisition, under correction of fair
modesty, should they be stolen away to bed together, what would you say to that?


Wood. I would say, Speed 'em well,
Enter Nurse. And if no worse news comes, I Will never weep for it.
How now, have thou any tidings?

Nurse. Yes forsooth, I have tidings.


Wood. Of any one that is lost?


Nurse. Of one that is found again, forsooth.


Wood. Oh, he was lost, it seems then?


Franck. This tidin^s comes to me, I guess Sir.


Nurse. Yes truly does it, sir.


Raym. I, has old Lads work for young Nurses?


Eust. Yes, when they groan toward their second infancy.


Clare. I fear my self most guilty for the absence of the Bridegroom: what our
wills will do (...) he adi^^^ peevishness, to bring out (...) discre^^^^^ ^^
(...)? Lessingham's mistaken, quite out o'th way of my purpose too.


Franck. Returned?


Nurse. And all discovered.


Franck. A fool rid him further off. Let him nor Come near the child.


Nurse. Nor see it, if it be your charge.


Franck. It is, and strictly.


Nurse. To morrow morning, as I hear, he purposes to come to ^ed^al-green, his
wi^e with him.


Franck. He shall be met there; yet if he fore-st^^^ my co^ing, keep the child
safe.


Nurse. If he be the earlier up, he shall arive at the proverb.

Exit Nurse. Enter ^^^hfield and Annabel.
Wood. So, so, there is some good luck yet,

The Bride 's in sight again.


Anna. Father, and Gentlemen all, beseech you entr^^^ this Gentleman with all
courresie, he is a loving kinsman of my ^^^viles, that kindly came to (...) our
Wedding; but a^ the day falls out, you see (...)* I person^^^ both Groom and
Bride; only your help to make this welcome better.


Wood. Most dea^ly.


Raym. To all, assure you sir.


Wood. But where is the Bridegroom, Girl? We are all at a nonplus here, at a
stand, quite out, the Music ceased, and dancing ^^^bated, not a light beel
amongst us; my Cousin (...) as cloudy here as on a washing-day.


Clare. It is because you will not dance with me,

I should then shake it off.


Anna. It Is I have cause to be the sad one now, if any be: but I have
questioned with my meditations, and they have ^end'red well and comfortably to
the worst fear I found: Suppose this day he had long since appointed to his foe
to meet, and fetch a Reputation from him (which is the dearest Jewel unto man)
Say he do fight, I know his goodness such, that all those Powers that love it
are his guard, and ill cannot beride him.


Wood. Prithee peace, thou wilt make us all Cowards to ^^ar a woman instruct so
valiantly. Come, the Music, I Will dance ^^y self rather than thus put down,
what, I am ri^e a little yet.


Anna. Only this Gentleman, pray you be free in welcome too, I tell you I was
in a fear when first I saw him.


Roch. Ha? she will tell.


Anna. I had quite lost my way in my first amazement, but he so fairly came to
my recovery, in his kind conduct, gave me such loving comforts to my fears:
('it was he instructed me in what I spoke) and many better than I have told you
yet, you shall hear more anon.


Roch. So, she will out with 't.


Anna. I must, I see, supply both places still: Come, when I have seen you back
to your pleasure, I will return to you, Sir: we must discourse more of my
Bonvile yet.


Omnes. A noble Bride 'faith.


Clare. You have your wishes, and you may be merry, Mine have over-gone me.

Exeunt. Manent Rochfield solus.
Roch. It is the tremblingst trade to be a Thief, h'ad need have all the world
bound to the peace, besides the bushes, and the phanes of houses; every thing
that moves he goes in fear of 's life on. A furr-gown'd Cat, and meet her in
the night, she stares with a Constables eye upon him; and every Dog, a
Watchman; a black Cow and a Calf with a white face after her, shows like a
surly Justice and his Clerk; and if the Baby go but to the bag, it is ink and
paper for a Mittimus: Sure I shall never thrive on it, and it may be I shall
need take no care, I may be now at my journeys end, or but the Goals distance,
and so to' th to other place: I trust a woman with a secret worth a hanging, is
that well? I could find in my heart to run away yet. And that were base too,
to run from a woman; I can lay claim to nothing but her Vows, and they shall
strengthen me.

Enter Annabel.
Anna. See sir, my promise, there is twenty Pieces, the full value I vow, of
what they cost.


Roch. Lady, do not trap me like a Sumpter-horse, and then spur-gall me till I
break my wind: if the Constable be at the door, let his fair staff appear,
perhaps I may corrupt him with this Gold.


Anna. Nay? then if you-mistrust me: Father, Gentlemen, Mr. Raymond, Eustnce.

Enter all as before, and a Saylor-
Wood. How now, what is the matter, Girl?


Anna. For shame will you bid your Kinsman welcome: No one but I will lay a
hand on him,

Leave him alone, and all a revelli^^*


Wood. Oh, is that it. Welcome, welcome heartily, I thought the Bridegroom had
been returned. But I have news, Annabel: this fellow brought it. Welcome Sir,
why you tremble methinks, Sir.


Anna. Some agony of anger it is, believe it, his entertainment is so cold and
feeble.


Raym. Pray be cheered, Sir.


Roch. I Am wondrous well, sir, 'twas the Gentleman's mistake.


Wood. 'Twas my hand shook belike, then you must pardon Age, I was stiffer
once. But as I was saying, I should by promise see the Sea to morrow, it is
meant for Physic as low as Lee or Margets: I have a Vessel riding forth,
Gentlemen, it is called the God-speed too, though I say it, a brave one, well and
richly fraughted; and I can tell you she carries a Letter of Mart in her mouth
too, and twenty roaring Boys on both sides on her, Star-board and Lar-board.
What say you now, to make you all Adventurers? you shall have fair dealing,
that I Will promise you.


Raym. A very good motion, sir I begin, there is my ten pieces.


Eust. I second 'em with these.


Grov. My ten in the third place.


Roch. And Sir, if you refuse not a proffet'd love, take my ten Pieces with you
too.


Wood. Yours; above all the rest, Sir.


Anna. Then make 'em above, venture ten more.


Roch. Alas Lady, it is a younger brothers portion, and all in one Bottom.


Anna. At my encouragement, Sir, your credit (if you want Sir) shall not sit
down under that sum returned.


Eoch. With all m^ heart, Lady. There Sir: So she has fisht for her Gold back,
and caught it; I am no thief now.


Wood. I shall make here a pretty Assurance.


Roch. Sir, I shall have a suit to you.


Wood. You are likely to obtain it then, Sir.


Roch. That I may keep you company to Sea, and attend you back; I am a little
traveled.


Wood. And heartily thank you too, sir.


Anna. Why, that is well said. Pray you be merry though your Kinsman be absent,
I am (...), the worst part of him, yet that shall serve to give you welco^e: to
morrow may show you what this night will not, and be full assured,

Unless your twenty Pieces be ill ^ent,

Nothing shall give you cause of Discontent.

There Is ten more, Sir.


Roch. Why should I fear? Fouter o^'t, I Will be merry now spite of the Hangman.

Exeunt.
Finis Actus secundus.
ACT 3. SCENE. 1.
Enter Lessingham and Bonvile. Bon. WE are first in the field: I think your Enemy
is staid at Dover, or some other Port, we hear not of his landing.


Less. I am confident he is come over.


Bon. You look methinks fresh colored.


Less. Like a red Morning, friend, that still foretells a stormy day to follow^:
But methinks now I observe your face, that you look pale, there is death in it
already.


Bon. I could chide your error, do you take me for a Coward? A Coward is not
his own friend, much less can he be another man's. Know, Sir, I am come hither
to instruct you by my generous example, to kill your enemy, whose name as yet I
never questioned.


Less. Nor dare I name him yet, for d^-heartning you.


Bon. I do begin to doubt the goodness of your Quarrel.


Less. Now you hav't; for I protest that I must fight with one from whom in the
whole course of our acquaintance, I never did receive the least injury.


Bon. It may be the forgetful Wine beg^t some sudden blow, and thereupon it is
Challenge, however you are engaged; and for my part I will not, take your
course, my unlucky friend, to say your Conscience grows pale and heartless,
maintaining a bad Cause: fight as Lawyers plead; who gain the best of
reputation when they can fetch a bad Cause smoothly off: you are in, and (...)
through.


Less. Oh my friend, the noblest ever man had: when (...) threw me upon this
business, I made trr^d of diverse had p^^^est to me much love, and found their
friendship like the effects that kept our company together, Wine and Riot:
giddy and sinking I had found 'em often, brave Seconds at pluralities of Healths,
but when it came to the proof, my Gentlemen appeared to me as promising and
failing as cozening Lotteries; but then I found this Jewel worth a thousand
Counterfeits: I did but name my Engagement, and you flew unto my succor with
that cheerfulness, as a great General hastes to a Battle, when that the chief
of the adverse part is a man glorious, but of ample fame: you left your
Bridal-bed to find your Deathbed, and herein you most nobly expressed, that the
affection 'tween two loyal friends is far beyond the love of man to woman, and
is more near allied to eternity. What better friends part could be showed in the
world? it transcends all! My father gave me life, but you stand by my honor
when it is falling, and nobly under-propt it with your sword. But now you have
done me all this service, how? how shall I requite this? how return my grateful
recompense for all this love? For it am I come hither with full purpose to kill
you.


Bon. Ha?


Less. Yes: I have no opposite in the would but your self: There, read the
Warrant for your death.


Bon. It Is a woman's hand.


Less. And it is a bad hand too: the most of 'em speak fair, write foul, mean
worse.


Bon. Kill me! away, you jest.


Less. Such jest as your sharp-witted Gallants use to utter, and loose their
friends; Read there how I am fettered in a woman's proud Command: I do Love
madly, and must do madly: deadliest Hellebore or vomit of a To^d is qualified
poison to the malice of a woman.


Bon. And kill that friend? Strange!


Less You may see, Sir, although the Tenure by which Land was held in Villenage
be quite extinct in England, yet you have women there at this day living, make
a number of slayes.


Bon. And kill that friend? She mocks you upon my life, she does Equivocate:
her meaning is; you cherish in your breast either self-love, (...) pride, as
your best friend, and she wishes you would kill that.


Less. Sure her Command is more bloody; for she loathes me, and has put, as she
imagines, this impossible task, for ever to be quit and free from me; but such
is the violence of my affection, that I must undergo it. Draw your sword, and
guard your self, though I fight in fury, I shall kill you in cold blood, for I
protest it is done in heart-sorrow.


Bon. I Will not fight with you, for I have much advantage; the truth is, I wear a
privy Coat.


Less. Prithee put it off then, if then be manly.


Bon. The defense I mean, is the justice of my Cause that would guard me, and
fly to thy destruction: what confide^^e thou wearest in a bad cause, I am
likely to kill thee if I fight, and then you fail to effect your Mrs. bidding,
or to enjoy the fruit of 't; I have ever wished thy happiness, and vow I now so
much affect it in compassion of my friends sorrow, make thy way to it.


Less. That were a cruel Murder.


Bon. Believed it is never intended otherwise, when it is a woman's bidding.


Less. Oh the necessity of my fate.


Bon. You shed tears.


Less. And yet must on in my cruel purpose: a Judge methinks looks lovelyest
when he weeps, pronouncing of deaths Sentence: how I stagger in my resolve!
guard thee, for I came hither to do, and not to suffer; wilt not yet be
persuaded to defend thee? turn the point, advance it from the ground above thy
head, and let it underprop thee otherwise, in a bold resistance.


Bon. Stay. Thy injunction was, thou should kill thy friend.


Less. It was.


Bon. Observe me, he wrongs me most, ought to offend me least, and they that
study man, say of a friend, there is nothing in the world that is harder found,
nor sooner lost: thou came to kill thy friend, and thou may brag thou have
don't; for here for ever all friendship dies between us, and my heart for
bringing forth any effects of love, shall be as barren to thee as this sand we
tread on; cruel, and inconstant as the Sea that beats upon this Beach. We now
are severed: thus have thou slain thy friend, and satisfied what the Witch thy
Mrs. bad thee. Go and report that thou have slain thy friend.


Less. I am served right.


Bon. And now that I do cease to be thy friend, (...) will fight with thee as
thine enemy, I came not over idly to do nothing.


Less. Oh friend!


Bon. Friend? The naming of that word shall be the quarrel. What do I know but
that thou love my wife, and f^ind'st this plot to divide me from her (...),
and that this Letter here is counterfeit? Will you advanc^ Sir.


Less. Not a blow; 'twould appear ill in either of us to fight: in you unmanly;
for believe it Sir, you have disarmed me already, done away all power of
resistance in me, it would show beastly to do wrong to the dead: to me you say,
you are dead for ever, lost on Callis-sands, by the cruelty of a woman; yet
remember you had a noble friend, whose love to you shall continue after death:
shall I go over in the same Barque with you?


Bon. Not for you town of Callis, you know it is dangerous living at Sea, with a
dead body.


Less. Oh you mock me, may you enjoy all your noble wishes.


Bon. And may you find a better friend then I, and better keep him.

Exeunt. Enter Nurse, Compass, and his Wife.
Nurse. Indeed you must pardon me, Goodman Compass, I have no authority to
deliver, no not (...) let you see the Child; to tell you true, I have command
unto the contrary.


Comp. Command. From whom?


Nurse. By the father of it.


Comp. The father: Who am I?


Nurse. Not the father sure. The Civil Law has found it otherwise.


Comp. The Civil Law: why then the Uncivil Law shall make it mine again; I Will be
as dreadful as a Shrov^-tuesday to thee, I will tear thy Cottage but I will see
my Child.


Nurse. Speak but half so much again, I Will call the Constable, and lay Burglary
to thy charge.


Wife. My good husband, be patient. And prithee Nurse let him see the Child.


Nurse. Indeed I dare not: the father first delivered me the Child, he pays me
well, and weekly for my pains, and to his use I keep it.


Comp. Why thou white Bastard-breeder, is not this the mother?


Nurse. Yes, I grant you that.


Comp. Do thou? and I grant it too: And is not the Child mine own then by
the wifes Coppy-hold?


Nurse. The Law must try that.


Comp. Law? Do think I Will be but a Father in Law? all the Law betwixt
Black-wall and Tuttle-street, and there is a pretty deal, shall not keep it from
me mine own flesh and blood? who does use to get my children but my self?


Nurse. Nay, you must look to that, I never knew you get any.


Comp. Never? put on a clean Bmock and try me, if thou dare, three to one I
get a Bastard on thee to morrow morning between one and three.


Nurse. I Will see thee hanged first.

Enter Franckford and Luce.
Comp. So thou shall too.


Nurse. Oh here is the father, now pray talk with him.


Franck. Good morrow Neighbor: morrow to you both.


Comp. Both? Morrow to you and your wife too.


Franck. I would speak calmly with you.


Comp. I know what belongs to a Calm and a Storm too. A cold word with you: You
have tied your Mare in my ground.


Franck. No, it was my Nag.


Comp. I will cut off your Nags tail, and make his rump make Hair-buttons, if
e're I take him there again.


Franck. Well sir, but to the Main.


Comp. Main. Yes, and I Will clip his Main too, and crop his ears too, do you
mark? and back gaul him, and spur-gaul him, do you note? And slit his Nose, do
you smell me now, Sir? Unbritch his Barrel, and discharge his Bullets: I Will gird
him till he stinks, you smell me now I Am sure.


Franck. You are too rough neighbor, to maintain.


Comp. Maintain? you shall not maintain no child of mine, my wife does not
bestow her labor to that purpose,


Franck. You are too speedy: I will not maintain


Comp. No marry shall you not.


Franck. The deed to be lawful: I have repented it, and to the Law given
satisfaction, my purse has paid for it.


Bemp. Your purse: 'twas my wifes purse. You brought in the Coin indeed, but it
was found base and counterfeit.


Franck. I would treat colder with you, if you be pleased.


Comp. Pleased? yes I am pleased well enough, s^^ve me so still: I am going
again to sea one of these days, you know where I dwell, yet you will but loose your
labor, get as many children as you can, you shall keep none of them, Franck.
You are mad.


Comp. If I be horn-mad, what is that to you?


Franck. I leave off milder phrase, and then tell you plain you are a


Comp. A what? what am I?


Fr. A Coxcomb.


Comp. A Coxcomb? I knew 'twould begin with a C.


Franck. The child is mine, I am the father of it; As it is past the deed,
it is past the shame, I do acknowledge, and will enjoy it.


Comp. Yes, when you can get it again, is it not my wifes labor? I Am sure she is
the mother, you may be as far off the father as I am; for my wife's acquainted
with more Whore-masters besides your self, and crafty Merchants too.


Wife. No indeed husband, to make my offense both least and most, I knew no
other man, he is the begetter, but the child is mine, I bred and bore it, and I
will not lo^^^ it.


Luce. The childe's my husbands, Dame, and he must have it: I do allow my
sufferance to the deed, in sien I never yet was fruitful to him, and in my
barrenness excuse my wrong.


Comp. Let him dung his own ground better at home, then if he plant his Reddish
roots in my garden, I Will eat 'em with bread and Salt, though I get no Mutt on to
'em; what tho your husband lent my wife your distaff, shall not the yarn be
mine* I Will have the head, let him carry the spindle home again.


Fr. Forebear more words, then let the Law try it: mean time Nurse keep the
child, and to keep it better here take more pay beforehand. There Is money for
thee.


Comp. There Is money for me too, keep it for me, Nurse: give him both thy dugs
at once: I pay for thy right dug.


Nurs. I have two hands you see, Gentlemen this does but show how the law will
hamper you: even thus you must be used.


Fr. The law shall show which is the worthier Gender: a Schoolboy can do it.


Comp. I Will whip that Schoolboy that declines the child from my wife and her
heirs: do not I know my wifes case the Genetive Case, and that is Huju^ as great
a case as can be.


Fr. Well, fare you well, we shall meet in another place. Come Luce

Exit.
Comp. Meet her in the same place again if you dare, and do your worst: must we
go to (...) our Childrennow a days? No marvel if the Lawyers grow rich; but
e're the Law shall have a Lymb, a Leg, a Joint, a Nayl,

I will spend more then a whole child in getting,

Some win by play, and others by, by betting.

Exeunt. Enter Raymond, Eustace, Lyonel, Grover, Annabel, Clare.
Lion. Whence was that Letter sent?


Ann. From Dover* Si^


Lion. And does that satisfy you what was the cause of his going over?


Ann. It does: yet had he only sent this it had bin sufficient.


Ray. Why, what is that?


Ann. His Will, wherein he has estated me in all his land.


Eust. He Is gone to fight.


Lion. Lessinghams second certain.


Ann. And I am lost, lost in it for ever.


Clare. Oh fool Lessingham, thou have mistook my injunction utterly, utterly
mistook it, and I am mad, stark mad with my own thoughts, not knowing what
event their going over will come too; it is too late now for my tongue to cry my
heart mercy, would I could be senceless till I hear of their return: I fear me
both are lost.


Ray. Who should it be Lessinghams gone to fight with?


Eust. Faith I cannot possibly conjecture.


Ann. Miserable creature! a Maid, a Wife, and Widow in the compass of two days.


Ray. Are you sad too?


Clare. I am not very well, Sir.


Ray. I must put life in you.


Clare. Let me go, Sir.


Ray. I do love you in spite of your heart.


Clare. Believe it there was never a fitter time to express it; for my heart
has a great deal of spite in it.


Ray. I will discourse to you fine fancies.


Clare. Fine fooleries, will you not?


Ray. By this hand I love you, and will court you.


Clare. Fie, you can command your tongue, and I my ears to hear you no further.


Ray. On my reputation, she is off o'th hindges strangely*

Ent. Woodroff. Rochfeild* and a saylor.
Wood. Daughter, good news.


An. What is my husband heard of?


Wood. That Is not the business; but you have here a Cousin you may be mainly
proud of, an I am sorry it is by you^ h^^^^nds kindred, not your own, that we
mig^^ boast to have so brave a man in our Alliance.


Ann. What so soon returned? you have made but a short voyage howsoever you are
to me most welcome.


Roch. Lady thanks, it is you have made me your own creature, of all my being
fortunes and poor fame, if I have purchased any, and of which I no way boast,
n^ext the high providence, you have bin the sole creatress.


Ann. Oh deer Cousin, you are grateful above merit, what occasion drew you so
soon from Sea?.


Wood Such an occasion, as I may bless Heaven for, you thank their bounty, and
all of us be joyful.


Ann. Tell us how.


Wood. Nay daughter, the discourse will best appear in his relation, where he
fails, I Will help.


Roch. Not to molest your patience with recital of every vain, and needless
Circumstance, 'twas briefly thus: Scarce having reached to Margets, bound on our
voyage, suddenly in view appeared to us three Spanish men of War, these having
spied the English Cross advance, salute us with a piece to have us strike, ours
better spirited and no way daunted, at their unequal odds, though but one
bottom, returned 'em fire for fire: the fight begins, and dreadful on the
sudden, still they proffered to board us, still we bravely beat 'em off.


Wood. But daughter, mark the Event.


Roch. Sea room we got, our ship being swift of sail, it helped us much, yet two
unfortunate shot, one struck the Captains head off, and the other with an
unlucky splinter laid the Master dead on the hatches; all our spirits then
failed us.


Wood. Not all, you shall hear further, daughter.


Roch. For none was left to manage, nothing now was talked of but to yield up
ship and goods, and mediate for our peace.


Wood. Nay Cous. proceed.


Roch. Excuse me, I entreat you, for what is more, has already past my memory.


Wood. But mine it never can: Then he stood up, and with his oratory made us
again to recollect our spirits so late dejected.


Roch. Pray Sir.


Wood. I Will speak't out; by unite consent then the command was his, and 'twas
his place now to bestir him, down he went below, and put the Lin-stocks in the
Gunners hands, they ply their ordinance bravely, then again up to the decks;
courage is there renewed, fear now not found amongst us: within less then four
hours fight two of their ships were sunk, both foundered, and soon swallowed:
not long after the three begins to wallow, lies on the Lee to stop her leakes,
then boldly we come on, boarded and took her, and she is now our prize.


Sail. Of this we were eye witness.


Wood. And many more brave boys of us, besides my self for one; never was,
Gentlemen, a Sea fight better managed.


Roch. Thanks to Heaven we have saved our own, dammaged the enemy, and to our
Nations glory, we bring home honor and profit.


Wood. In which Cousin Rochfeild, you as a venturer have a double share,
besides the name of Captain, and in that a second benefit, but most of all, way
to more great employment.


Roch. Thus your bounty has been to me a blessing.


Ray. Sir, we are all indebted to your valor, this beginning may make us of
small venturers, to become hereafter wealthy Merchants.


Wood. Daughter and Gentlemen, this is the man was born to to make us all, come
enter, enter; we will in and feast, he is in the Bridegrooms absence my chief
guest.

Exeunt.
Finis Actus Tertii.
ACT. 4. SCENE 1.
Enter Compass, Wife, Lyonel, and Pettifog the Attorney, and one Boy. Comp.
THree Tuns do you call this Tavern? it has a good neighbor of Guild Hall, Mr.
Pettifog. Show a room boy.


Boy. Welcome Gentlemen.


Comp. What? art thou here Hodge!


Boy. I am glad you are in health, sir.


Comp. This was the honest Crack-roap first gave me tidings of my wifes
fruitfulness. Art bound Prentice?


Boy. Yes, Sir.


Comp. May thou long jumble Bastard most artificially, to the profit of thy
Master, and pleasure of thy Mistress.


Boy. What Wine drink ye, Gentlemen?


Lion. What Wine rellishes your p^llate, good Mr. P^ttifog?


Pet. Nay, ask the woman.


Comp. Ellegant for her, I know her Di^t.


Pet. Believe me, I ^^n her thank for it, I am of her side.


Comp. Marry, and reason, sir, we have entertained you for our Atorney.


Boy. A Cup of neat Allegant?


Comp. Yes, but do not make it speak Welsh, boy.


Boy. How mean you?


Comp. Put no Me^^^glin in it, ye rogue.

They sit down, Pettifog pulls ou^ ^^p^rs.
Boy. Not a drop, as I am crew Britain.

Enter Franckford, Eustace, Luce, and Mr. Dodge a Lawyer to another Table, and
a Drawer.
Fr. Show a private room, Drawer.


Dr. Welcome Gentlemen.


Eust. As far as you can from noise, boy.


Dr. Further this way then, sir; for in the next room there are three or four
Fish-wives taking up a brabling business.


Fr. Let Us not sit near them by any means.


Dodge. Fill Canary, sirrah.


Fr. And what do you think of my Cause, Mr. Dodge?


Dodge. Oh we shall carry it most indubitably: you have money to go through
with the business, and ne'ro fear it but we will trownce 'em, you are the true
Father.


Luce. The mother will confess as much.


Dodge. Yes Mistress, we have taken her Affidavit. Look you sir, here is the
Answer to his Declaration.


Fr. You may think strange, sir, that I am at charge to call a Charge upon me:
but it is truth, I made a Purch^se lately, and in that I did estate the Child,
'bout which I Am sued, Joynt-purchaser in all the Land I bought: now that is one
reason that I should have care, besides the ^ye of blood, to keep the Child
under my wing, and see it carefully instructed in those fair Abilities may make
it worthy hereafter to be mine, and enjoy the Land I have provided for it.


Luce. Right, and I councel'd you to make that Purchase; and therefore I Will not
have the Child brought up by such a Coxcomb as now sues for him, he would bring
him up only to be a Swa^ber: he was born a Merchant and a Gentleman, and he
shall live and die so.


Dodge. Worthy Mistress, I drink to you: you are a good woman, and but few of
so noble a patience.

Enter 2 Boy. Enter boy. Score a quart of Allegant t'oth' Woodcock.

Enter 1 Boy like a Musician.
1 Boy. Will you have any music, Gentlemen?


Comp. Music amongst Lawyers? here is nothing but discord. What, Rafe! here is
another of my young Cuckoes I heard last April, before I heard the Nightingale:
no music, good Rafe: here boy, your father was a Tailor, and methinks by your
leering eye you should take after him. A good boy, make a leg handsomely, scrape
your self out of our company. And what do you think of my Suit, sir?


Pet. Why, look you, sir: The Defendant was arrested first by Latitate in an
Action of Trespass.


Comp. And a Lawyer told me it should have been an Action of the Case, should
it not wife?


Wife. I have no skill in Law, sir: but you heard a Lawyer say so.


Pet. I, but your Action of the Case is in that point too ticklish.


Comp. But what do you think, shall I overthrow my adversary?


Pet. Sans question: The child is none of yours: what of that? I marry a widow
is possessed of a Ward, shall not I have the tuition of that Ward? Now sir, you
lie at a stronger Ward; for partus sequitur ventrem, says the Civil Law: and if
you were within compass of the four Seas, as the common Law goes, the child
shall be yours certain.


Comp. There Is some comfort in that yet. Oh your Atorneys in Guild Hall have a
fine time on it.


Lion. You are in effect both Judge and Jury your selves.


Comp. And how you will laugh at your Clients when you sit in a Tavern, and
call them Coxcombs, and whip up a Cause, as a Barber trims his Customers on a
Christmas Eve, a snip, a wipe, and away.


Pet. That Is ordinary, sir: you shall have the like at a Nisi Prius. Oh you are
welcome, Sir.

Enter 1 Client.
1 Client. Sir, you will be mindful of my Suit.


Pet. As I am religious, I Will drink to you.


1 Client. I thank you. By your favor, Mistress. I have much business and
cannot stay; but there is money for a quart of Wine.


Comp. By no means.


1 Client. I have said, Sir.

Exit. Enter 2 Client.
Pet. He Is my Client sir, and he must pay; this is my tribute. Custom is not
more truly paid in the Sound of Denmark.


2 Client. Good sir, be careful of my business.


Pet. Your Declaration's drawn, sir: I Will drink to you.


2 Client. I cannot drink this morning; but there is money for a pottle of Wine.


Pet. Oh good sir.


2 Client. I have done, sir. Morrow, Gentlemen.

Exit.
Comp. We shall drink good cheap, Mr. Pettifog.


Pet. And we sat here long you would say so. I have sare here in this Tavern but
one half hour, drunk but three pin^^ of wine, and what with the offering of my
Clients in that short time, I have got nine shillings clear, and paid all the
Reckoning.


Lion. Almost a Counselors Fee.


Pet. And a great one as the world goes in Guild Hall; for now our young Clerks
share with 'em, to help 'em to Clients.


Comp. I don't think but that the Cucking-stool is an enemy to a number of
brables, that would else be determined by Law.


Pet. It Is so indeed, sir: My Client that came in now, sues his neighbor for
kicking his Dog, and using the defamatory speeches, Come out Cuckolds curr.


Lion. And what shall you recover upon this speech?


Pet. In Guild Hall I assure you, the other that came in was an Informer, a
precious knaye.


Comp. Will not the Ballad of Flood that was pressed, make them leave their
knavery?


Pet. I Will tell you how he was served: This Informer comes into Turnball-street
to a Victualling-house, and there falls in league with a Wench.


Comp. A Tweak, or Bronstrops, I learnt that name in a Play.


Pet. Had belike some private dealings with her, and there got a Goose.


Comp. I would he had got two, I cannot away with an Informer


Pet. Now sir, this fellow in revenge of this, informs against the Bawd that
kept the house, that she used Cannes in her house; (...) the cunning Jade comes
me into 'th Court, and there deposes that she gave him true Winchester measure.


Comp. Marry, I th^nk her with all my heart for it.

Ent. Drawer
Draw. Here Is a Gen^leman, one Justice Woodroff enquires for Mr. Franckford.
Fr. Oh, my brother and the other Compremiser come to take up the business.

Enter Councellor and Woodroff.
Wood. We have conferred and labored for your peace, unless your stubborness
prohibit it; and be assured, as we can determine it, the Law will end, for we
have sought the Cases.


Comp. If the Child fall to my share, I am content to end upon any conditions,
the Law shall run on headlong else.


Fr. Your purse must run by like a Footman then.


Comp. (...) purse shall run open mouthed at thee.


Coun. My friend, be calm, you shall hear the reasons: I have stood up for you,
pleaded your Cause, but am overthrown, yet no fur^her yielded than your own
pleasure; you may go on in Law if you refuse our Censure.


Comp. I will yield to nothing but my Child.


Coun. It Is then as vain in us to seek your peace, yet take the reasons with
you: This Gentleman first speaks, a Justice to me, and observe it, A child
that is base and illegitimate born, the father found, who (if the need require
it) secures the charge and damage of the Parish but the father? who charged
with education but the father? then by clear consequence he ought for what he
pays for, to enjoy. Come to the strength of reason, upon which the Law is
grounded: the earth brings forth, this ground or that, her Crop of Wheat or
Rye, whether shall the Seeds-man enjoy the sheaf, or leave it to the earth that
brought it forth? The summer tree brings forth her natural fruit, spreads her
large arms, who but the lord of it shall pluck Apples, or command the lops? or
shall they sink into the root again? it is still most clear upon the Fathers part.


Comp. All this Law I deny, and will be mine own Lawyer. Is not the earth our
Mother? And shall not the earth have all her children again? I would see that
Law durst keep any of us back, she will have Lawyers and all first, tho they be
none of her best children. My wife is the mother, and so much for the
Civil-law. Now I come again, and y' are gone at the Common Law: suppose this is
my ground, I keep a Sow upon it, as it might be my wife, you keep a Boar, as it
might be my adversary here; your (...) comes fo^ming into my ground, jumbles
with my Sow, and ^^llowes in her mire, my Sow cries week* as if she had Pigs in
her belly, who shall keep these Pigs? he the Boar, or she the Sow?


Wood. Past other alteration, I am changed, the Law is on the Mothers part.


Coun. For me, I am strong in your opi^^^n, I never knew my judgment err so
far, I was confirmed upon the other part, and now am flat against it.


Wood. Sir you must yield, believe it there is no Law can relieve you.


Fr. I found it in my self: well sir, the child 's your wifes, I Will strive no
further in it, and being so near unto agreement, let us go quite through to it;
forgive my fault, and I forgive my charges, nor will I take back the
inherit^nce I made unto it.


Comp. Nay, there you shall find me kind too, I have a pottle of Claret, and
a Capon to supper for you; but no more Mutton for you, not a bit.


Ray. Yes a shoulder, and we will be there too, or a leg opened with Venison sauce.


Comp. No legs opened by your leave; not no such fawce.


Wood. Well brother, and neighbor, I am glad you are friends.


Omnes. All, all joy at it.

Exeunt Wood. Fr. and (...).
Comp. Urse, come kiss Urse, all friends.


Ray. Stay sir, one thing I would advise you, it is Council worth; Fee, tho I be
no Lawyer, it is Physic indeed, and cu^es Cuckoldry, to keep that ^ightful
brand out of your forehead, that it shall not dare to meet or look out at any
window to you, it is better then an Onion to a green wound in the left hand made
by fire, it takes out scar and all.


Comp. This were a rare receipt, I Will content you for your skill.


Ray. Make here a flat divorce between your selves, be you no husband, not let
her be no wife, within two hours you may s^lute again, woo, and wed afresh, and
then the Cuckold's blotted. This medicine is approved.


Comp. Excellent, and I thank you: Urse, I renounce thee, and I renounce my
self from thee; thou art a Widow, Urse, I will go hang my self two hours, and
so long thou shall drown thy self, then will we meet again in the Pease-field by
Bishops-Hall, and as the Swads and the Cods shall instruct us, we will talk of a
new matter.


Wife. I will be ruled, fare you well sir.

Exit wife.
Comp. Farewell widow, remember time and place, change your Clothes too, do ye
hear, widow? Sir, I am beholding to your good Council.


Ray. But you will not follow your own so far I hope? you said you would hang your
self.


Comp. No I have devised a better way, I will go drink my self dead for an
hour, then when I awake ^gen, I am a fresh new man, and so I go a wo^ing.


Ray. That Is handsome, and I Will lend thee a dagger.


Comp. For the long Weapon let me alone then.

Exeunt. Enter Lessingham and Clare.
Clare. Oh sir, are you returned? I do expect to hear strange news now.


Less. I have none to tell you, I am only to relate I have done ill at a
woman's bidding, that is I hope no news: yet wherefore do I call that ill, begers
my absolute happiness? you now are mine, I must enjoy you solely.


Clare. By what warrant?


Less. By your own condition, I have been at Callis, performed your will, drawn
my revengful sword, and slain my nearest and best friend in the world I had, for
your sake.


Clare. Slain your friend for my sake?


Less. A most sad truth.


Clare. And your best friend?


Less. My chiefest.


Clare. Then of all men you are most miserable, nor have you ought furthered
your suit in this, though I enjoined you to it, for I had thought that I had
been the best esteemed friend you had in the world.


Less. Ye did not wish I hope, that I should have murdered you?


Clare. You shall perceive more of that hereafter: But I pray fit tell me, for
I do freeze with expectation of it, it chills my heart with horror till I know
what friends blood you have sacrificed to your fury and to my fatal sport, this
bloody Riddle? who is it you have slain?


Less. Bonvile the Bridegroom.


Clare. Say? Oh you have struck him dead thorough my heart, in being true to
me, you have proved in this the falsest Traitor: oh I am lost for ever: yet
wherefore am I lost? rather recovered from a deadly witchcraft, and upon his
grave I will not gather Rue, but Violets to bless my wedding strewings; good
sir tell'me, are you certain he is dead?


Less. Never, never to be recovered.


Clare. Why now sir, I do love you, with an entire heart, I could dance
methinks, never did wine or mu^^ch stir in woman, a sweerer touch of Mirth, I
will marry you, instantly r^arry you.


Less. This woman has strange changes, you are takne strangely with his death.


Clare. I Will give the reason I have to be thus extasied with joy: know (...),
that you have slain my dearest friend, and faralest enemy.


Less. Most strange!


Clare. It Is true, you have taken a mass of Lead from off my heart, for ever
would have sunk it in despair; when you beheld me yesterday, I stood as if a
Merchant walking on the Downs, should see some goodly Vessel of his own sunk
before his face in the Harbor, and my heart retained no more heat then a man that
toils, and vain'y labors to put out the flames that burns his house to the
bottom. I will tell you a strange concealment, sir, and till this minute never
revealed, and I will tell it now, smiling and not blushing; I did love that
Bonvyle, (not as I ought, but as a woman might that is beyond reason,) I did
do^t upon him, tho he near knew often, and beholding him before my face wedded
unto another, and all my interest in him forfeited, I fell into despair, (...)
that instant you urging your Suit to me, and I thinki^^ (...) I had been your
only friend in the world, I heartily did wish you would have killed that friend
your self, to have ended all my sorrow, and had prepared it, that unwittingly
you should have don't by poison.


Less. Strange amazement!


Clare. The effects of a strange Love.


Less. It Is a dream sure.


Clare. No it is real sir, believe it.


Less. Would it were not.


Clare. that sir, you have done bravely, it is your Mistress that tells you, you
have done so.


Less. But my Conscience*
Is of Council against you, and pleads otherwise:
Virtue in her past actions glories still,
But vice throws loathed looks on former ill.
But did you love this Bonvile?

Clare. Strangely sir, almost to a degree of madness.


Less. Trust a woman? never henceforward, I will rather trust the winds which
Lapland Witches sell to men, all that they have is feigned, their teeth, their
hair, their blushes, nay their conscience too is feigned, let 'em paint, load
themselves with Clo^h of Tissue, they cannot yet hide woman, that will appear
and disgrace all. The necessity of my fate! certain this woman has bewitched me
here, for I cannot choose but love her. Oh how faral this might have proved, I
would it had for me, it would not grieve me, tho my sword had split his heart
in sunder, I had then destroyed o^e that may prove my Rival; oh but then what
had my horror bin, my guilt of conscience? I know some do ill at women's bidding
in the Dog Days, and repent all the Winter after: no, I account it treble
happiness that Bonvile lives, but it is my chiefest glory that our friendship is
divided.


Clare. Noble friend, why do you talk to your self?


Less. Should you do so, you would talk to an ill woman, fare you well, for ever
fare you well; I will do somewhat to make as fatal breach and difference in
Bonviles love as mine, I am fixed in it, my melancholy and the devil shall
fashion't.


Clare. You will not leave me thus?


Less. Leave you for ever, and may my friends blood whom you loved so deerly,
for ever lie impostumed in your breast, and in the end choke you. Woman's cruelty

This black and fatal thread has ever spun,

It must undo, or else it is undone.

Exit.
Clare. I am every way lost, and no means to (...) ^^e, but blessed repentance:
what two unvalued Jewels am I at once deprived of? now I suffer deservedly,
there is no prosperity settled, Fortune plays ever with our good or ill,

Like Cross and Pile, and turns up which she will.

Enter Bonvile. Friend?


Clare. Oh you are the welcomest under heaven: ^essingham did but fright me,
yet I fear that you are hurt to danger.


Bon. Not a scratch.


Clare. Indeed you look exceeding well, methinks.


Bon. I have bin Sea-sick lately, and we count that excellent Physic. How does
my Annabel^


Clare. As well sir, as the fear of such a loss as your esteemed self, will
suffer her.


Bon. Have you seen Lessingham since he returned?


Clare. He departed hence but now, and left with me a report had almost killed
me.


Bon. What was that?


Clare. That he had killed you.


Bon. So he has.


Clare. You mock me.


Bon. He has killed me for a friend, for ever silenc't all (...) between us;
you may now go and embrace him, for he has fulfilled the purpose of that Letter.

Gives her a Letter*
Clare. Oh I know it.

She gives him another And had you known this which I meant to have sent you an
hour before you mere married to your wife, the Riddle had been constr^ed.


Bon. Strange! this expresses that you did love me.


Clare. With a violent affection.


Bon. Violent indeed; for it seems it was your purpose to have ended it in
violence on your friend: the unfortunate Lessingham unwittingly should have
been the Executioner.


Clare. It Is true.


Bon. And do you love me still?


Clare. I may easily confess it, since my extremity is such that I must needs
speak or die,


Bon. And you would enjoy me though I am married?


Clare. No indeed not I sir: you are to sleep with a sweet Bedfellow would
knit the brow at that.


Bon. Come, come, a woman's telling truth makes amends for her playing false.
You would en^oy me*


Clare. If you were a Bachelor or Widower,

Before all the great Ones living.


Bon. But it is impossible to give you present satisfaction, for my Wife is
young and heal^hful; and I like the summer and the harvest of our Love, which
yet I have not tasted of, so well, that and you will credit me, for me her days
shall never be shortened: let your reason therefore turn you another way, and
call to mind with best observance, the accomplished graces of that brave
Gentleman whom late you sent to his destruction: A man so every way deserving,
no one action of his in all his life time e're degraded him from the honor he
was born too; think (...) observant he will prove to you in nobler request, that
so obeyed you in a bad one:

And remember that before you engaged him to an act
Of horror, to the killing of his friend,
He bore his steerage true in every part,
Led by the Compass of a noble heart.

Clare. Why do you praise him thus? You said but now he was utterly lost to
you* now 't appears you are friends, else you 'd not deliver of him such a
worthy commendation.


Bon. You mistake, utterly mistake that I am friends with him, in speaking this
good of him: To what purpose do I praise him? only to this fatal end, that you
might fall in love and league with him. And what worse office can I do in the
world unto my enemy, than to endeavor by all means possible to marry him unto a
Whore? and there I think she stands.


Clare. Is Whore a name to be beloved? If not, what reason have I ever to love
that man puts it upon me falsely? You have wrought a strange alteration in me:
were I a man, I would drive you with my sword into the field, and there put my
wrong to silence. Go, you are not worthy to be a woman's friend in the least part
that concerns honorable reputation; for you are a Liar.


Bon. I will love you now with a noble observance, if you will continue this
hate unto me: gather all those graces from whence you have fallen yonder, where
you have left 'em in Lessingham, he that must be your husband; And though
henceforth I cease to be his friend, I will appear his noblest enemy, and work
reconcilement 'tween you.


Clare. No, you shall not, you shall not marry him to a Strumpet; for that word
I shall ever hate you.


Less. And for that one deed,
I shall ever love you. Come, convert your thoughts
To him that best deserves 'em, Lessingham.
It Is most certain you have done him wrong,
But your repentance and compassion now
May make amends: disperse this melancholy,
And on that turn of Fortunes Wheel depend,
When all Calamities will mend, or end.
Exeunt. Enter Compass, Raymond, Eustaco, Lyonel, Grover.
Comp. Gentlemen, as you have been witness to our Divorce,
You shall now be ^^^dence to our next meeting,
Which I look for every minute, if you please Gentlemen.

Ray. We came for the same purpose, man.


Comp. I do think you will see me come off with as smooth
A forehead, make my Wife as honest a woman once more,
As a man sometimes would desire, I mean of her (...),
And a teeming woman as she has been. Nay surely I
Do think to make the Child as lawful a child too,
As a couple of unmarried people can beget; and let
It be begotten when the father is beyond Sea, as this
Was: do but note.
Enter Wife.
Eust. It Is that we (...) for.


Comp. You have wai^^d the good hour: see, she comes, a little room I beseech
you, silence and observation.


Ray. All your own, sir.


Comp. Good morrow fair Maid.


Wife. Mistaken in both sir, neither fair, nor Maid.


Comp. No? a married woman.


Wife. That Is it I was sir, a poor widow now.


Comp. A widow? Nay then I must make a little bold with you, '(...) a kin to
mine own case, I am a wiveless husband too, how long have you been a widow
pray? nay, do not weep.


Wife. I cannot choose to think the loss I had.


Comp. He was an honest man to thee it seems.


Wife. Honest quoth, a, oh.


Comp. By my feek, and those are great losses, an honest man is not to be found
in every hole, nor every street, if I took a whole parish in sometimes I might
say true, for stinking Mackarel may be cried for new.


Ray. Some what sententious.


Eust. Oh, silence was an Article enjoined.


Comp. And how long is it since you lost your honest husband?


Wife. Oh the memory is too fresh, and your sight makes my sorrow double.


Comp. My sight? why was he like me?


Wife. Your left hand to your right, is not more like.


Comp. Nay then I cannot blame thee to weep, an honest man I warrant him, and
thou had a great loss of him; such a proportion, so limbed, so colored, so
fed.


Ray. Yes faith, and so taught too.


Eust. Nay, will you break the Law?


Wife. Twins were never liker.


Comp. Well, I love him the better, whatsoever is become of him, and how many
children did he leave thee at his departure?


Wife. Only one sir.


Comp. A Boy, or a Girl?


Wife. A Boy, Sir.


Comp. Just ^i^e one ease still ^ my wife, rest ^er soul, left ^e a Boy too, a
chopping Boy I warrant.


Wife. Yes if you call 'em so.


Comp. I, mine is a chopping Boy, I mean to make either a Cook or a Butcher of
him for those are your chopping Boys. And what profession was your husband of*


Wife. He went to Sea, sir, and there (...) his living.


Comp. Mine own faculty too, and you can like a man of that p^ofession well?


Wife. For his sweet sake whom I so deerly loved, more dee^ly lost, I must
think well of it.


Comp. Must you? I do think then thou must venture to Sea once again, if thou^'t
be ruled by me.


Wife. Oh Sir, but there is one thing more burdensome to us, then most of others
wives, which moves me a little to d^staste it, long time we endure the (...) of
our husbands, sometimes many years, and then if any slip in woman be, as long
vacations may make Lawyers hungry, and Tradesmen cheaper penny-worths afford,
(then otherwise they would for ready coin) scandals fly out, and we poor souls
branded with want on living, and incontinency, when alas (consider) can we do
withal?


Comp. They are fools, and not say (...) that do not consider that, I Am sure
your husband was not of that mind, if he were like me.


Wife. No indeed, he would bear kind and honestly.


Comp. He was the wiser, alack your land and fresh water men
Never understand what wonders are done at Sea; yet
They may observe a shore, that a Hen having tasted
The Cock, kill him, and she shall lay Eggs afterward.

Wife. That Is very true indeed.


Comp. And so may women, why not? may not a man get two or three children at
once? One must be born before another, you know.


Wife. Even this discretion my sweet husband had: You more and more resemble
him.


Comp. Then if they knew what things are done at sea, where
The Winds themselves do copulate, and bring forth issue,
As thus: In the old wo^ld there were* but ^our in all,
As Nor, East, Sou, and West these dwelt far from ^^e another,
Yet by meeting they have engendered Nor-East, Sou-East,
Sou-West, Nor-West, then they were eight* Of them*
Were begotten Nor-Nor-East, Nor-Nor-West, Sou-Sou-East,
Sou-Sou-West, and those two So us were Sou-East and Sou*West
Daughters, and indeed there is a family now of 32 of 'em,
That they have filled every corner of the wo^ld, and yet for
All this, you see these baudy Bellows-menders when they
Come asho^e, will be offering to take up Women's coats
In the street.

Wife. Still my husbands discretion!

Comp. So I say, if your Land-men did understand that we send Winds from Sea,
to do our commendations to our wives, they would not blame you as they do.


Wife. We cannot help it.

Comp. But you shall help it. Can you love me, widow?

Wife. If I durst confess what I do think, sir,
I know what I would say.

Comp. Durst confess? Why whom do you fear? here is none but honest Gentlemen my
friends; let them hear, and Never blush for it.


Wife. I shall be thought too weak to yield at first.


Ray. Tush, that is niceness; come, we heard all the rest,
The first true stroke of love sinks thee deepest,
If you love him, say so.

Comp. I have a Boy of mine own, I tell you that before hand,
You shall not need to fear me that way.

Wife. Then I do love him.


Comp. So here will be man and wife to morrow then, what though
We meet strangers, we may love one another
Never the worse for that. Gentlemen, I invite
You all to my Wedding.

Omnes. We Will all attend it.


Comp. Did not I tell you, I would fetch it off fair, let any
Man lay a Cuckold to my charge, if he dares now.

Ray. It Is slander who ever does it.


Comp. Nay, it will come to P^^ty Lassery at least, and without
Compass of the general pardon too, or I Will bring him to a
Foul sheet, if he has never a clean one, or let me
Hear him that will say I am not father to the child I begot.

Eust. None will adventure any of those.


Comp. Or that my wife that shall be, is not as honest a woman, as some other
men's wives are?


Ray. No question of that.


Comp. How fine and sleek my brows are now?


Eust. I when you are married, they I come to themselves again.


Comp. You may call me Bridegroom if you please now,
For the Guests are bidden.

Omnes. Good Master Bridegroom.


Comp. Come Widow then, ere the next Ebb and Tide,
If I be Bridegroom, thou shall be the Bride.
Exeunt.
Finis Actus quartii.
ACT. 5. SCENE 1.
Enter Rochfield and Annabel. Roch. BElieve me, I was never more ambitious, or
covetous, if I may call it so, of any fortune greater than this one, but to
behold his face.


Ann. And now is the time; for from a much feared danger as
I heard, he is late come over.

Roch. And not seen you yet? it is some unkindness.


Ann. You may think it so; but for my part, sir, I account it none: what know I
but some business of import and weighty consequence, more near to him then any
formal Complement to me, may for a time detain him: I presume no jealousy can
be asperst on him, for which he cannor well ^^ology.


Roch. You are a Creature every way complete,
As good a Wife, as Woman; so whose sake
As I in duty am endeer'd to you,
So shall I owe him service.
Enter Lessingham.
Less. The ways to Love, and Crowns, lie both through blood, for in 'em both
all Lets must be removed, it could be styled no true ambition else. I am grown
big with pro^ect: Project, said I? Rather with sudden mischief; which without

A speedy birth fills me with painful throws,
And I am now in labor. Th^^^s occasion
That give me a fit ground to work upon,
It should be Rochfield, one since our departure
It seems ingrafted in this Family:
Indeed the Houses Minion, since from the Lord
To the lowest Groom, all with unite consent
Speak him so largely. Nor as it appears
By this their private Conference, is he grown
Least in the Brides ^^inion. A foundation
On which I will erect ^^rave Revenge.

Ann. Sir,-What kind Offices lies in your way
To do for him, I shall be thankful for,
And reckon them mine own.

Roch. In acknowledgement I kiss your hand, so with a gratitude never to be
forgot, I take my leave.


Ann. I mine of you, with hourly expectation
Of a long-lookt for husband.
Exit.
Roch. May it thrive according to your wishes.


Less. Now Is my turn. Without offense, Sir, may I beg your name?


Roch. It Is that I never yet denied to any, nor will to you that seem a
Gentleman: it is Rochfield.


Less. Rochfield? You are then the man whose nobleness, virtue, valor, and good
parts, have voice'd you loud. Dover and Sandwich, Marget, and all the Coast is
full of you: but more, as an Eyewitness of all these, and with most truth, the
Master of this house has given them large expressions.


Roch. Therein his love exceeded much my merit.


Less. That Is your modesty:
Now I as one that goodness love in all men,
And honoring that which is but found in few,
Desire to know you better.

Roch. Pray your name?


Less. Lessingham.


Roch. A friend to Mr. Bonvile?


Less. In the number of those which he esteems most dear to him, he reckons me
not last.


Roch. So I have heard.


Less. Sir, you have cause ^oble^s the lucky Planer
Beneath which you were (...) ^was a bright star
And then shined cle^^ upon you for as you
Are every way well par^ed, so I ^old you.
In all designs marked to be fortunate.

Roch. Pray do (...) str^^^h your love to flattery,
'T may call it then in question; grow I pray you
To some particulars.

Less. I have observed but late your parting with the Virgin
Bride, and therein some affection

Roch. How?


Less. With pardon, in this I still app^^^d your happiness, and praise the
blessed influence of your stars: for how can it be possible that she, unkindly
left upon the B^ide-day, and disappointed of those Nuptial sweets that night
expected, but should take the occasion so fairly offered? Nay, and stand
excused as well in detestation of a scorn, scarce in a husband heard of, as
selecting a Gentleman in all things so complete, to do her those neglected
offices, her youth and beauty justly challenges.


Roch. Some plot to wrong the Bride, and I now
Will marry Craft with Cunning, if he will bite,
I Will give him line to play on: were your case
You being young as I am, would you intermit
So fair and sweet occasion?

Less. Yet mis-conceive me not, I do entreat you;
To think I can be of that easy wit,
Or of that malice to defame a Lady,
Were she so kind so to expose her self,
Nor is she such a creature.

Less. On this foundation I can build higher still, (sir I beleiv't)
I hear you two call Cousins; comes your kindred
By the Woodreffs, o^ the Bonviles?

Roch. From neither, it is a word of courtesy
Late interchanged betwixt us, otherwise
We are foreign as two strangers.

Less. Better still.


Roch. I would not have you grow too inward with me
Upon so small a knowledge; yet to satisfy you,
And in some kind too to delight my self,
Those Bracelets and the Carckanet she wears,
She gave me once.

Less. They were the first, and special Tokens past betwixt her and her husband.


Roch. It Is confessed: what I have said, I have said: Sir, you have power perhaps
to wrong m^^or to in ^re her; this you may do, but as you are a Gentleman I
hope you will do neither.


Less. 'Trust upon it.
Exit Rochfi^ld. If I drown I Will sink some along withme;
Enter Woodroff. For of all miseries I hold that chief,
Wretched to be, when none co-pa^^s our grief.
Here Is another Anvile to work on: I must now
Make this my Masterpiece; for your old Foxes
Are seldom taken in Springes.

Wood. What, my Friend!
You are happily returned; and yet I (...)
Somewhat to make it perfect. Where Is your Friend,
My Son in Law?

Less. Oh sir!


Wood. I pray sir resolve me; for I do suffer strangely till I know if he be in
safety.


Less. Fare you well: It Is not fit
I should relate his danger.

Wood. I must know it. I have a Quarrel to you already, for enticing my Son in
Law to go over: Tell me quickly, or I shall make it grea^er.


Less. Then truth is, he is dangerously wounded.


Wood. But he is not dead I hope?


Less. No sir, not dead; yet sure your daughter may take liberty to choose
another.


Wood. Why that gives him dead.


Less. Upon my life Sir, no; your son's in health
As well as I am.

Wood. Strange! you deliver Riddles.


Less. I told you he was wounded, and it is true,
He is wounded in his Reputation.
I told you likewise, which I am lo^h to repeat,
That your fair-Daughter might take liberty
To embrace another. That Is the consequence
That makes my best Friend wounded in his Fame.
This is all I can deliver.

Wood. I must have more often;
For I do sweat already, and I Will sweat more;
It Is good they say to c^^e Aches, and o'th sudden
I am sore from head to foot, let me taste the worst.

Less. Know Sir, if ever there (...) truth in falsehood,
Then it is most true, your Daug^^^^ plays most false
With Bonvile, and has chose for her Favorite
The man that now past by me, Rochfield.

Wood. Say? I would thou had spoke this on Callis-sands,
And I within my Sword and Ponyards length
Of that false throat of thine. I pray sir, tell me
Of what Kin or Alliance do you take me
To the Gentlewoman you late mentioned?

Less. You are her Father.

Wood. Why then of all men living, do you address
This Report to me, that ought of all men b^^thing
To have been the laft o'th Roll, except the husband,
That should have heard often?

Less. For her honor Sir, and yours;
That your good Council may rec^aim her.

Wood. I thank you.

Less. She has departed sir, upon my knowledge,
With Jewels, and with Bracelets, the first Pledges,
And confirmation of the unhappy Contract
Between her self and husband.

Wood. To whom?

Less. To Rochfield.

Wood. Be not abused: but now,
Even now I saw her wear them.

Less. Very likely; it is fit, hearing her husband is returned,
That she should re-deliver 'em.

Wood. But pray sir tell me,
How is it likely she could part with 'em,
When they are locked about her Neck and Wrists,
And the Key with her husband?

Less. Oh sir, that is but practice;
She has got a trick to use another Key
Besides her husbands.

Wood. Sirrah, you do lie;
And were I to pay down a hundred pounds
For every Lie given, as men pay Twelve pence,
And worthily, for Swearing, I would give thee
The Lie, nay though it were in the Court of Honor
So often, till of the Thousands I am worth,
I had not left a hundred. For is it likely
So brave a Gentleman as Rochfield is,
That did so much at Sea to save my life,
Should now on Land shorten my wretched days,
In ruining my Daughter? A rank Lie!
Have you spread this to any but my self?

Less. I am no Intelligencer.

Wood. Why then it is yet a secret?
And that it may rest so, Draw; I Will take order
You shall prate of it no further.

Less. Oh, my Sword
Is enchanted, Sir, and will not out o'th Scabbard:
I will leave you, sir; yet say not I give ground,
For it is your own you stand on.
Enter Bonvile and Clare. Clare here with Bonvile? excellent! on this
I have more to work. This goes to Annabel,
And it may increase the Whirlwinde.
Exit.
Bon. How now, Sir? Come, I know this choler bred in you
For the Voyage which I took at his entreaty;
But I must reconcile you.

Wood. On my credit
There Is no such matter. I will tell you Sir,
And I will tell it in laughter: The Cause of it
Is so poor, so ridiculous, so impossible
To be believed! Ha, (...) he came even now
And told me that one Rochfield, now a Guest
(And most worthy Sir, to be so) in my House,
Is grown exceedingly familiar with my Daughter.

Bon. Ha?

Wood. Your wife, and that he has had favors from her.

Bon. Favors?
Love Tokens I did call 'em in my youth;
Lures to which Gallants spread their wings, and stoop
In Ladies bosoms. Nay, he was so false
To Truth and all good Manners, that those Jewels
You locked about her Neck, he did protest
She had given to Rochfield? Ha! methinks o'th sudden
You do change color. Sir, I would not have you
Believe this in least part: My Daughter's honest,
And my Guess is a noble Fellow: And for this
Slander delivered me by Lessingham,
I would have cut his throat.

Bon. As I your Daughters,
If I find not the Jewels 'bout her.

Clare. Are you returned
With the Italian Plague upon you, Jealousy?

Wood. Suppose that Lessingham should love my Daughter,
And thereupon fashion your going over,
As now your Jealousy, the stronger way
So to divide you, there were a fine Crotcher!
Do you stagger still? If you continue thus,
Enter Rochfield and Annabel I vo v you are not worth a welcome home
Neither from her, nor me. See, here she comes.

Clare. I have brought you home a Jewel.

Ann. Wear it your self;
For these I wear are Fetters, not Favors.

Clare. I looked for better welcome.

Roch. Noble sir, I must woo your better knowledge?

Bon. Oh dear sir,
My Wife will bespeak it for you.

Roch. Ha? your Wife.

VVood. Bear with him, sir, he is strangely off o'th hinges.

Bon. The Jewels are in the right place; but the Jewel
Of her heart sticks yonder. You are angry with me
For my going over.

Ann. Happily more angry for your coming over.

Bon. I sent you my Will from Dover?

Ann. Yes Sir.

Bon. Fetch it.

Ann. I shall Sir, but leave your Self-will with you.
Exit.
VVood. This is fine, the woman will be mad too.

Bon. Sir, I would speak with you.

Roch. And I with you of all men living.

Bon. I must have satisfaction from you.

Roch. Sir, it grows upon the time of payment.

Wood. What Is that? what is that? I Will have no whispering.
Enter Annabel with a Will.
An. Look you, there is the Pattent
Of your deadly affection to me.

Bon. It Is welcome,
When I gave my self for dead, I then made over
My Land unto you, now I find your love
Dead to me, I will alter't.

An. Use your pleasure,
A man may make a garment for the Moon,
Rather then fit your Constancy.

Wood. How Is this? Alter your Will.

Bon. It Is in mine own disposing,
Certainly I will alter't.

Wood. Will you so my friend?
Why then I will alter mine too.
I had estated thee, thou peevish fellow,
In forty thousand pounds after my death,
I can find another Executor.

Bon. Pray sir, do,
Mine I Will alter without question.

Wood. Do hear me?
And if I change not mine within this two hours,
May my Executors cozen all my kindred
To whom I bequeath Legacies.

Bon. I am for a Lawyer, sir.

VVood. And I will be with one as soon as thy self,
Though thou ridest post to the devil.

Roch. Stay let me follow, and cool him.

VVood. Oh by no means,
You Will put a quarrel upon him for the wrong,
H'as done my Daughter.

Roch. No believe it sir, he is my wished friend.

Wood. Oh come, I know the way often;
Carry it like a French quarrel, privately whisper
Appoint to meet, and cut each others throats
With Cringes and Embraces, I protest
I will not suffer you exchange a word
Without I over hear't.

Roch. Use your pleasure.
Exit Woodroff, Rochfield.
Clare. You are like to make fine work now.

An. Nay, you are like to make a finer buissiness often.

Clare. Come, come, I must sowder you together.

An. You? why I heard
A bird sing lately, you are the only cause
Works the division.

Clare. Who? As thou ever lovedst me,
For I long, though I am a Maid, for it.

An. Lessingham.

Clare. Why then I do protest my self first cause
Of the wrong, which he has put upon you both,
Which please you to walk in, I shall make good
In a short relation; come I Will be the clew
To lead you forth this Labyrinth, this toil
Of a supposed and causeless Jealousy.
Cankers touch choicest fruit with their infection,
And Fevers seize those of the best complexion.
Exeunt. Enter Woodroff and Rochfield.
Wood. Sir, have I not said I love you? if I have,
You may believed before an Oracle,
For there is no trick in it, but the honest sense.

Roch. Believe it, that I do, sir.

Wood. Your love must then
Be as plain with mine, that they may suit together:
I say you must not fight with my son Bonvile.

Roch. Not fight with him, sir?

VVood No, Not fight with him, sir.
I grant you may be wronged, and I dare swear
So is my child, but he is the husband, you know,
The woman's lord, and must not always be told
Of his faults neither, I say you must not fight.

Roch. I Will swear it, if you please sir.

Wood. And forswear I know it
E're you lay open the secrets of your valor,
It Is enough for me I saw you whisper,
And I know what belongs to it.

Roch. To no such end, assure you.
Enter Lessingham.
Wood. I say you cannot fight with him.
If you be my friend, for I must use you,
Yonder Is my foe, and you must be my Second,
Prepare the Slanderer, and get another
Better then thy self too; for here is my Second,
One that will fetch him up, and fierk him too.
Get your tools, I know the way to Callis-sands,
If that be your Fence-school, he will show you tricks 'faith,
He Will let blood your Calumny, your best guard
Will come to a Peccavi I believe.

Less. Sir, if that be your quarrel,
He Is a party in it, and must maintain
The side with me, from him I collected
All those Circumstances concern your Daughter,
His own tongue's confession.

Wood. Who from him?
He will belie to do thee a pleasure then,
If he speak any ill upon himself,
I know he never could do an injury.

Roch. So please you, I Will relate it, sir.
Enter Bonvile, Annabel, Clare.
VVood. Before her husband then, and here he is
In friendly posture with my Daughter too;
I like that well. Son Bridegroom, and Lady Bride,
If you will hear a man defame himself,
(For so he must if he say any ill,) then listen.

Bon. Sir, I have heard this story, and meet with your opinion in his goodness,
the repitition will be needless.


Roch. Your father ^as not, Sir. I Will be brief in the delivery.


VVood. Do, do then, I long to hear it.


Roch. The first acquaintance I had with your Daughter,
Was on the Wedding-Eve.

VVood. So, it is not ended yet, methinks.


Roch. I would have robbed her.


VVood. Ah, thief.


Roch. That Chain and Bracelet which she wears upon her, she ransomed with the
full esteem in Gold, which was with you my Venture.


VVood. Ah, thief again.


Roch. For any attempt against her honor, I vow I had no Thought on.


VVood. An honest thief 'faith yet.


Roch. Which she as nobly recompensed, brought me home,
And in her own discretion thought it meet,
For cover of my shame, to call me Cousin.

VVood. Call a thief Cousin? Why, and so she might,
For the Gold she gave thee, she stole from her husband,
'Twas all his now, yet 'twas a good Girl too.

Roch. The rest you know, sir.


VVood. Which was worth all the rest, thy valor Lad; but I Will have that in
Print, because I can no better utter it.


Roch. Thus (Jade unto my Wants, and spurred by my Necessities) I was going,
but by that Ladies council I was staid; (for that Discourse was our
familiarity.) And this you may take for my Recantation, I am no more a thief.


VVood. A blessing on thy heart,
And this was the first time I warrant thee too.

Roch. Your charitable Censure is not wronged in that.


VVood. No, I knew 't could be but the first time at most;
But for thee (brave Valor) I have in store,
That thou shall need to be a thief no more.
Soft Music. Ha? What Is this Music?

Bon. It chimes a Jopaean to your Wedding, sir, if this be your Bride.


Less. Can you forgive me? some wild distractions had overturned my own
condition, and spilt the goodness you once knew in me, but I have carefully
recovered it, and overthrown the fury on it.


Clare. It was my cause that you were so possessed, and all these troubles have
from my peevish will origi^^^: I d^^ep^nt, though you forgive me not.


Less. You have no need for your repentance then which is due to it: all is now
as at first it was wisnt to be.


Wood. Why, that is well said of all sides. But soft, this Music has some other
meaning: Another Wedding toward, Good speed, good speed.

Enter Compass and the four Gallants, Bride between Franckford ^^d another,
Luce, Nurse, and Child.
Comp. We thank you, sir.


Wood. Stay, stay, our neighbor Compass, is it not?


Comp. That was, and may be again to morrow, this day Master Bridegroom.


Wood. Oh! give you joy. But sir, if I be not mistaken, you were married before
now; how long is it since your wife died?


Comp. Ever since yesterday, sir.


Wood. Why, she is scarce buried yet then.


Comp. No indeed, I mean to dig her grave soon, I had no leisure yet.


Wood. And was not your fair Bride married before?


Wife. Yes indeed, sir.


Wood. And how long since your husband departed?


Wife. Just when my husbands wife died.


Wood. Bless us Hymen, are not these both the same parties?


Bon. Most certain, sir.


Wood. What Marriage call you this?


Comp. This is called Shedding of Horns, sir.


VVood. How?


Less. Like enough, but they may grow again next year.


VVood. This is a new trick.


Comp. Yes sir, because we did not like the old trick.


VVood. Brother, you are a helper in this design too.


Fr. The Father to give the Bride, sir.


Comp. And I am his son, sir, and all the sons he has; and this is his
Grandchild, and my elder brother, you will think this strange now.


Wood. Then it seems he begat this before you?


Comp. Before me? not so sir, I was far enough off when 'twas done; yet let me
see him dares say, this is not my Child; and this my father.


Bon. You cannot see him here, I think sir.


Wood. Twice married! Can it hold?


Comp. Hold? It should hold the better, a wise man would think, when it is tied
of two knots.


Wood. Methinks it should rather unloose the first,

And between 'em both make up one Negative.


Eust. No sir, for though it hold on the contrary, yet two Affirmatives make no
Negative.


Wood. Cry you mercy, sir.


Comp. Make what you will, this little Negative was my wifes laying, and I
Affirm it to be mine own.


Wood. This proves the marriage before substantial, having this issue


Comp. It Is mended now sir; for being double married, I may now have two
children at a birth, if I can get 'em. Do You think I Will be five years about one,
as I was before?


Eust. The like has bin done for the loss of the Wedding-ring, And to settle a
new peace before disjoynted.


Lion. But this indeed sir, was especially done, to avoid the word of Scandal,
that foul word which the fatal Monologist cannot al^er.


Wood. Cuckoo.


Comp. What Is that, the Nighting^le?


Wood. A Night-bird, much good may do you, sir.


Comp. I Will thank you when I Am at Supper. Come Father, Child, and Bride; and
for your part Father, whatsoever he, or he, or the other says, you shall be as
welcome as in my the other wifes days.


Fr. I thank you, sir.


Wood. Nay, take us with you, Gentlemen:

One Wedding we have yet to solemnize,

The first is still imperfect. Such troubles

Have drowned our Music: but now I hope all is friends.

Get you to Bed, and there the Wedding ends.


Comp. And so good night, my Bride and I Will to bed:

He that has Horns, thus let him learn to shed.

Exeunt.
FINIS.
If any Gentlemen please to repair to my House aforesaid, they may be furnished
with all manner of English, or French Histories, Romances, or Poetry; which are
to be sold, or read for reasonable Considerations.


