Mr. TILLAM'S ACCOUNT EXAMINED, OR, A brief Reply to his unchristian Account of
some passages of Providence.

By a Friend to Truth, and to Mr. Tillam's own Soul, if GOD have not sealed him
down under hardness of heart.

Written for the sake of such poor honest souls in Colchester, and the parts
adjacent, as are Misled through his Enchantments.

Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a man full of talk
be justified?

Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man
make thee ashamed?

Joh 11.2, 3. London, Printed for the Author, 1657.

An Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
PEradventure, a Reply to Mr. Tillam's pretended Christian Account was long
since expected, but, upon sufficient reason, a delay was made. It was some time
before the parties most concerned in it (living at a distance) could know of
his Pamphlet: But chiefly, after it was drawn up, it was judged fit, by some
interessed in the business, to lay it aside, hoping that his folly would be made
manifest enough by his own proceedings; which indeed is already done in great
part, especially to pious and prudent Christians; And, I doubt not, but it will
be discovered more and more daily. But in regard of his vain triumphs, and
because there are many weak, harmless, and well meaning people in danger of
being further deluded by him, it is now resolved to present the Man to the open
view of the world, that his untruths, scandals, and dangerous designs may make
all more cautious whom they confide in, and depend upon, in so great
concernment as that of Religion. Upon this, and other accounts (Reader) thou
shall here find such a discovery of Mr. T. T. written, not out of envy to him,
but pity to others misled by him, as (I hope) will make thee sensible of the
bottom of his design in coming to Colchester, which he pretends to be guided
to, by a hand of Providence; but upon perusal of this, I believe, thou will
find, it was rather a Plot than a Providence, being the last adventure of a
necessitated person, that must shift for himself somewhere, discarded by those
in the North who first gave him credit, and having his 40 l. per ann. withdrawn
by the Commissioners there. Yet no doubt a providence it was too, but such a
one as that of Colchester Siege, which prevented the suffering of other places
when the Enemy was garrisoned there. And I wish, that as that party had their
last considerable motion terminated within the walls of Colchester (the
adjacent parts being sufficiently alarumed by their being there) so also Mr.
Tillam may make your miserable Town the ultimate stage of his progress. It Is
pity other places should ever be troubled with such a guest as sets the house
on fire where ever he comes, making it his business to divide and sow discord
amongst Brethren; By which (if there were nothing else) it may be easily
gathered of what fraternity he is. It is abundantly known what their Religion
is, whose aim is division; knowing how to retire into union among themselves,
and meet together in one center, though the lines drawn from it stand at a
distance in the circumference. Doubtless Mr. Tillam's slighting Mr. Prin's
charge (of his being a Papist) is a Masterpiece: It Is more policity for Mr. T.
to contemn than answer so fair a probability. His own acknowledgement that he
has been a Papist, together with his Romish trinkets, Extreme Unction, Washing
of feet, pretenses to infallibility (the choicest Jewels in the Popes Triple
Crown) for all he speaks must be taken as the Oracles of God, without any
consulting others, though never so pious and prudent; these things I say may
strongly persuade a sober man to suspect a papist in the bottom. But I shall
not judge him, Reader, let me only persuade thee to lay aside prejudice, and
thou shall here find Mr. Tillam passing judgment upon himself; for most of the
particulars charged upon him in this book, are no other but such as dropped from
his own Pen or Tongue; and therefore, if any wrong be done him, he may thank
himself for it. But I shall hold thee no longer in the Porch; if thou will know
more, read further; let thine own eyes be thy informers.

That which follows is a Letter written by Mr Robert Eaton to a friend of his,
which he desired him to print.

Worthy and endeared Friend;
I Having at last met with Mr. Tillam's Pamphlet, falsely entitled, A Christian
Account, I thought good in the first place to give you an account of him, and
then of those passages in his Pamphlet which relate to me. This Tillam, who is
not ashamed to call the Censures which the Church and People of God have passed
upon him, The Trials of his grace, was for a short time an Aporthecary, but
fince having assumed to be an Anabaptistical Minister, by reason of his
fasticusness, pride, and turbulency of Spirit, has been like a ball of
Wildfire tossed from one end of the Nation to another; scattering his
peslilent errors with very great impudence and boldness in every place where
he has come. Now though I had heard in Lancashire, and other places (before my
removal from Dedham) of the dangerous conditions of this man, and what
disturbance he had made in several places, in venting and propagating his
Errors, yet now I am more fully certified of the truth of those things which
there I heard.

For brevity sake I shall only give you an account of Mr. Samuel Eaton's, who
is Pastor of the Church of Duckenfield in Cheshire, before whom one of Mr.
Tillam's causes was examined, and by whom Mr. Tillam's Excommunication out of
the Church at Wrexam was declared just and regular: Mr. Sam. Eaton's words are
these, Mr. Tillam was excommunicated first by the Church at Wrexam, and
afterward his Excommunication was found and declared just by the Church at
Duckenfield, The causes of his Excommunication were several; among others were
these; The proof of several untruths told by him, intolerable pride, together
with a visible design to divide the Church, etc. but that he withdrew himself,
and that his withdrawing (as Mr. Tillam excuses the matter) was the cause of
his Excommunication, is utterly false, and a mere evasion; fir they were fully
resolved to cast him out before he did withdraw himself, and he withdrew
himself purposely to evade the sentence: And many that were his Disciples, and
Rebaptized by him, when they heard things laid open, were satisfied to the
justness of the sentence pronounced against him.

Thus far Mr. Sam. Eaton gave me an account of him: Now whether a man so
eminent as Mr. Sam. Eaton (in a business where he can have no by-respects) is
to be believed, or Mr. Tillam (one cause of whose Excommunication was lying)
let all men judge.

As for that Church of Anabaptists in Cheshire which he so much magnifies in
his book, I shall not meddle with them, only this I shall say, that some of
them, though under the Ordinance (as their expression is) for which Mr. Tillam
has, and does show so much zeal, and therefore more likely to favor Mr.
Tillam's cause; Yet (I say) some of them do disown him, as not fit to be
communicated withal; and others have told me, that he is disowned by their
whole Church; yea some of that sweet society (as Mr. Tillam calls them) do
suspect him to be a Jesuit; and several grounds they have of their suspicion,
as themselves have related to me.

First, because he has acknowledged that once he was a Papist; and again he
has confessed (as some of them have told me) that he has been at Rome.

Secondly, they have observed him to deliver doctrines in favor of
Justification by Works: And truly though he so slightly pass over that which
Mr. Prin charges him withal, yet, I think, he ought, there being so much
ground of suspicion, to have labored more for his vindication in that
particular, than merely to say, It is a gross slander.

Now as for those passages in his Pamphlet which relate to me; Though I have
understood by several persons, that he has not only a false tongue, but also a
brazen face, yet I conceive he would never have been so impudent as to have
uttered such a reproach without the least ground, but that he hoped it would
never have come to my knowledge, I being now so far remote. But I have now at
last providentially obtained a sight of his Pamphlet, and for my own
vidication, I shall give an account of all that passed betwixt him and me,
whence he has taken an hint to forg all those reproaches he casleth upon me.

I being occasionally with Mr. Malyn, Secretary to the Lord Protector, and with
Mr. Wakering, and some other Gentlemen at Whitehall, there was mention made of
this same Tillam, and the Instrument whereby he was authorized to preach in any
vacant place, which Mr. Malyn hearing of, said, He was very confident he never
had any such Instrument granted him by the Protector: And that there never was
any granted him, he told me, and some Gentlemen there, after that he had been
with his Highness the Lord Protector to enquire about it. Yea he added further,
that an Order should issue out to apprehend him. What I then heard, I related
to some particular persons, whom I occasionally had some discourse withal
concerning Mr. Tillam.

Some weeks after Mr. Tillam came to me, charging me that I should say
hisInstrument was conterfeited: To whom I answered it was not so: But
nevertheless what I had heard, and from whom I heard it, as I had told others,
so now also I would acquaint him, and all that is abovementioned touching the
discourse with Mr. Malyn concerning him and his Instrument, I related to him;
and added, that if any wrong were done him, he must seek to Mr. Malyn,
Secretary to the Lord Protector, for reparations. Yet I further told him, if he
would produce his Instrument, and if upon the sight of it I should be convinced
that it was a reality, upon a Christian Account I would tell those persons who
heard the former relation from me, that I had since seen his Instrument, and
that it was a real thing. Now that this is the truth and the substance of all
that which was said by me, those two eminent Ministers that Mr. Tillam speaks
of in his Pamphlet ( viz. Mr. Hudson of Capel, and Mr. Walker of Assington) will
attest. And if this be the truth, and those forenamed Ministers will give
testimony to it (as they say they will) then either both I and they are liars,
and stirred up by Satan, the Father of lies (as Mr. Tillam expresses it) or
else Mr. Tillam (who for lying, among other things, was Excommunicate, and so
given up to the Father of lies) has not yet repented of, nor is delivered from
that sin, but seems now rather to have habituated himself unto it, as I shall
make appear by a passage or two in his book, which savours much of that lying
spirit.

Not to stand to show how little ground Mr. Tillam had, upon my relating of
what I heard, to bottom those expressions of his upon, ( viz. That I
calumniated him, that I falsely accused him, that I confidently affirmed, that
his Instrument was conterfeited) little untruths are not worthy to be taken
notice of, when they come from Mr. Tillam's either Tongue or Pen.

But such a Forchead of brass, and such a Conscience of brawn has he, that he
is not afraid, nor ashamed to say, after my falsehood was discovered.

But when was this discovery made? in what place? and before what witnesses? He
that helped him to make that (I mean his Father of lies) must either help him
with another, or else this will appear to be, as it is, a loud one.

But Mr. Tillam says, That I (with two eminent Ministers) labored for peace.

To labor for peace I know is a Christian duty, yet not with an Excommunicate
person. And how I and the abovesaid Ministers labored for peace with Mr.
Tillam, you shall judge by that which follows.

First, I shall ask Mr. Tillam, whether I went from Dedham to him at
Colchester, or he came from Colchester to me at Dedham? If he came to me,
hitherto Mr. Tillam (and not I) labored and took the pains.

Secondly, when Mr. Tillam was at Dedham, whether I sought after, and went to
him, or he to me? If he to me, then hitherto also Mr. Tillam, and not I,
labored and took the pains.

Thirdly, after Mr. Tillam was at my house, whether I labored any further, or
took any more pains with him, than speaking the words rehearsed before? Indeed
this I did, having heard that Mr. Tillam had been convicted of, and
excommunicated for lying, among other things (though then I had not certain
proof of it, as now I have) I desired those two forenamed Ministers, being
then at my house, to hear what should pass in discourse betwixt us, lest Mr.
Tillam should afterward (according to his manner) bespatter me, as he had done
some others with gross untruths, and his Pamphlet may evidence I had good
reason so to do.

But that I labored for peace myself, further than is expressed before, or
that I ever desired either of those eminent Ministers to labor for peace on my
behalf, is false, and it comes from Mr. Tillam's Father of lies.

In the third page of his book he mentions a project of mine, what it is I know
not, unless it be this honest one, That an Impostor who grows worse and worse,
deceiving, and being deceived, may be discovered. But what ever project I had,
this I discern to be one in Mr. Tillam, who that he may breed prejudices in his
Disciples against the Testimony of those that bear witness against him, uses
to say, they are his enemies; as if all those persons, that in several parts of
this Nation, have testified against Mr. Tillam and his ways (whereof some are
eminent for learning and religion) were acted from a principle of envy and
malice against him, and not from zeal to God and his truth.

But that that Great untruth ( viz. an eminent discovery of my Falsehood) may
not be thought a slip of his Pen, but a deliberate birth, formed by the Father
of lies, he repeats it, and puts an emphasis upon it, page 3. (not dictating
any falsehood, so eminently discovered) all that I shall say to this, is only
thus much; That I never had any discourse with Mr. Tillam in all my life, but
that which was mentioned before in my own house at Dedham, when those two
Ministers with some others were there; And if those two Reverend Ministers (Mr.
Hudson, and Mr. Walker) will not testify that it is eminently false, that
there was any falsehood discovered in me at that time, then let not only this,
but all the rest that Mr. Tillam is charged withal, be said at my door.

But I shall not any further trouble my self with him; God (I hope) will in
short time lay him open, what he is, that he may proceed no further inseducing
simple and unwary souls.

Your affectionate Friend Robert Eaton.

The following sheets were done by another hand; in the Vindication of Mr.
Hammond: when you shall find a satisfactory Answer to the Reminder of Mr.
Tillam's abusive Pamphlet.

Mr. Tillam's Account Examined.
MR. Tillam's glozing Pamphlet within these very few days coming to my hands,
and perceiving (with great grief of heart) his old spirit of pride, vainglory,
boasting, lying, and slandering, tunning through the veins thereof; and
understanding that Mr. Hammond (who with a breath could have blown away all his
vapourings, if he had been willing to have stirred in his own cause) not
willing to meddle with such an incurable creature; hereupon my spirit was drawn
forth (not so much for his sake, as to undeceive such honest hearts as are
abused by his hypocrisy) to pull off his Mask, and let them see the man in his
proper shape.

1. That he is a man boared in the ear, branded and stigmatized in the
forehead, by the most godly persons wheresoever he yet came, when they once
knew him well (though at the first, through his fawning and glozing carriage
they were for a while deluded by him) For,

First, he is with one consent given up to Satan by the whole Church of Wrexam,
which though he labor to shuffle off, yet the restimony of one twenty godly
men (for so they will be proved to be in spite of all his aspersions) (when
sober men hold the scales) shall over balance the single testimony of one man,
in his own cause, who is a Liar upon record.

Secondly, when his case was judiciously heard and scanned by such godly
Elders, and the Church of Cheshire, to which himself appealed, they concluded
the Censure just, and rolled the same stone upon him in thse words (as Mr.
Tillam himself writes, p. 6.) That he was to be looked upon as neither an
Elder, nor a Member of the Church of Wrexmham, but to be left to the world as a
man without.

Thirdly, then after this, Conversing with the Anabaptist-Church in Newcastle,
he so carries himself (though at the first, who but Mr, Tillam) that they
presented to the Church at London, twelve several Artiles against him.

Fourthly, he also falls so foul with the three Congregational Ministers in
Newcastle (Mr. weld, Mr. Hammond, and Mr. Durant, whom God and his Servants are
pleased graciously to own) that they are forced to vindicate themselves to the
world in print (which they never did against any man before) to paint him out
to the life.

Fifthly, after this (as if he studied to imitate Ishmael, To have his hand
against every man, and procure every man's hand against him) he breaks with the
Church at London (in whose very bosom he lay for a while, till they perceived
his frame) who cast him off with much indignation, as (still) it appears by his
own confession in his book, p. 19. (for we have most of all these things from
his own words.)

Sixthly, at last his own Church at Hexam (such was his carriage toward them)
falls into two pieces; and one part of the two, discards him. Now, if these be
not Black marks, or Flesh-brands; if these things will not prove him to go out
from all places [ like a snuff] which words he so pitifully snuffs at, Let
wise and sober men judge.

2. Observe all along his course of life, and his Book also, that whereas all
Godly men in Scripture, and our own experience, so suffer usually from the
Enemies of Grace, wicked and ungodly men which is an honorable thing, 1 Pet.
1.14. Mat. 5.10, 11. For the Spirit of God and Glory rests upon such.) Now
this man's case is quite otherwise: For, still, he is opposed, and contested
withal, and rejected by the Godly, yea, and most usually the most eminent for
godliness, in all places wheresoever he comes, at wrexam, Cheshire, Newcastle,
London, and now at Colchester; i. e. by godly Christians, faithful Ministers,
Pastor, Teachers, Elders, yea, whole Churches, and that in the ghest degree of
Censures that ever Jesus Christ ordained in his Churches, Excommunication it
self.

And again, whereas other godly men suffer as Christians, for well doing (which
is a blessed thing) this man is still buffered, not for his good deeds, but for
his faults, scandals, pride, slanders, etc. And.

(Which is exceedingly to be noted) good men usually are opposed and fought
against by men of differring judgments and practices from themselves; as
Congregational men by Presbyterial, Paedobaptists by Antipaedobaptists,
Orthodox by Arminians, Socinians, and Protestants by Papists; but this man (as
if he were born to strife) is still opposed by men of his own judgment and
practice in Doctrine and Discipline. Were not the Church of Wrexam, and that of
Cheshire, and the three Ministers of Newcastle of his own judgment and
practice in point of Discipline? Did not the Anabaptist Church nof Newcastle,
and that of London, jump with him in point of Baptism? Yet he is a man not
only disgusted by all these, but one not sufferable to abide among them, and
out he must as an incorrigible person, without reconciliation; which how clear
it speaks in point of his intolerable turbulency of spirit, and what an alarm
it rings in all their ears who are misled through his subtle insinuations, I
leave to all men to judge.

3. A common Liar is generally accounted a vile person, a son of Belial, one of
the basest among men; but to gather up all his gross lies and slanders were too
heavy a task; for certainly he has driven an old Trade therein: For,

First, he was cast out of Wrexam Church for lying, as one principal crime
among others.

Secondly, he is rejected by the Church at London for making and maintaining a
lie; see his own words, page 19. It was concluded (says Mr. Tillam himself)
that I lied, and they presently declared a withdrawing from me (with these
words added, which are) he has grievously sinned against the Rule of Christ,
Col. 3.9. Lie not one to anther: Wherefore we have put him away from us, and
shall have no communion with him, that he may be ashamed. This from his own
words; and this was done deliberately, after much scanning, by a whole Church.

Thirdly, there are many manifest lies in this his book, as, that Mr. Hammond
was Vicar of Newcastle (which he writes to disgrace Mr. Hammond) whereas he is
only Lecturer and Teacher to a Congregational Church, and absolutely refused to
be Vicar, which Mr. Tillam cannot but know, being so often conversant in
Newcastle.

Fourthly, another abominable lie against that Reverend Man, in these words,
whither have those surseiting feasts of Newcastle (says he) transported Mr.
Hammond? how strangely have those luxurious banques increased choler in this
corpulent Gentleman? For, besides the odious contempt in the manner of his
writing which he casts upon this faithful servant of Christ (so much beloved
and honored by the Saints) he most impudently and palpably slanders him for
intemperance; for all Newcastle knows, that though Mr. Hammond be often and
earnestly invited to Feasts, yet he has absolutely refused (to avoid all
occasions) to come at any feast, great or small, to one or other, for these two
years together, except at one time that was unavoydable.

Fifthly, he boldly vaunts, that God made himself an instrument of detecting
the false Jew, wherein (besides that vainglorious vapouring, in assuming to
himself what is not due) he tells a most manifest falshhood; for it is
notoriously known to Mr. Go. Dauson, Mr. Hammond, Mr. Durant, and others, that
he did what he could when they were about convincing the false Jew, to defend
him and harden his heart, till they were all grieved and ashamed at his
practice.

Sixthly, another falsehood, that Mr. Hammond was basfled in the dispute about
Baptism; which impudency of his is stupendous; for above a hundred persons
present will witness the exceeding freedom of Mr. Hammond, whose arguments were
as a Rod held over him all the dispute, and that Mr. Tillam, to his utter
confusion (if he could tell how to be ashamed) was so non-pluss'd, and baffled
to purpose, that one of his own party was driven to confess it, and to chide
him off, and take up the bucklers, whiles all the time after Mr. Tillam sat
dumb; which calls to mind a seventh lie; He told Mr. George Hodshan, when he
came first into the North, that he was for the Baptism of the Infants of
Believers, when it manifestly appears, he was at the same time an Anabaptist.

per me Geo. Hodshan.

Lastly, for a full conviction of his lies, see the bundle of urtruths, written
by the Newcastle Ministers against Mr. Tillam.

Now this Lying is such a sin as it makes a man so unlike God, into whose image
all his children are cast, and so like the devil, who is the Father of lies,
and so unlike the Saints, who are a generation that will not lie, Isa. 63.9.
that it deserves the heaviest censure of Excommunicaon, Rev. 22.15. Without
(the new Jerusalem) shall be dogs, and whoremonges, and murderers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes lies. See (Mr. Tillam) what
copesmates Liars are matched withal, and what is their censure; and yet you
are angry with the Church at London for rejecting you for lying, and giving you
no warning, whereas the Rule it self (you see) gives no such direction for any
warning; but it being once proved (as it seems the London Church averred) you
were to be presently sent without among the dogs.

4. observe his proud boasting, and vaunting high language, almost in every
page of his book (and indeed all his writings and actings do fulsomly tang of
that spirit) In the front of his book he begins, Thanks to my Lord and King,
who has enabled me, so that he counted me faithful, putting me into the
Ministry. Which are the words of the greatest Apostle on earth, and that in
the height of his zeal; yet this man dares apply them to himself, which I
believe never any Minister, that knows himself, dares noce do. So that he is
(if you will believe him) an able Minister, a faithful Minister, and, as he
says afterward, a welling Minister, and a Minister that labors with his
whole soul in the work; whereas humble spirits are ever fearful to think
highly of themselves, much more to lift up themselves in print, by vapouring
terms, and high titles. Furthermore, you have him ever and anon vaunting of
the multitude of his hearers and followers, and great success in his Ministry
in every place, that he could gather a Church of Saints in a years space in
such or such place where he came; which (by the way) shows his doctrine and
practice very suitable to carnal hearts, that can so easily take with him in
all places where he comes, whereas the doctrine of the best Minister under
heaven is so cross to corrupt nature, that it cannot be digested; but his
doctrine and opinions go glib down, and can bring in souls tiick and
threefold; it is but touch and take. And I cannot omit how often this poor man
boasTs in high language of his sufferings, and calls them sufferings for
Christ's sake, and for his names sake, and all in obedience to him; whereas
(presumptuous man) thou may know, it was (all along) for thy faults,
scandals, lies, turbulency, faction and disembling from the first till now. Was
it for Christ's sake thou were given up to Satan by the Church of Wrexam? Was it
for thy good deeds thou were condemned by the Church in Cheshire? Was it for
the honor of Christ that the Church in London rose up against thee (and the
three Ministers in Newcastle writ against thee?) was it nor for a lie
maintained against so many evidences? and have thou the face to father all thy
wretched dealings on Christ? will he maintain thee in a course of sin, and crown
thee for it? what tender heart can digest such impudency and hypocrisy?

5. Observe what contempt, scorns, and base calumnies he (all along his book)
casts out again all that stand in his way, be they never so holy, never so
many; be they godly Saints, Ministers, whole Churches, all is one, if they
speak or a and against him, the sparkles of his anger (in a vile contemptuous
manner) shall fly in their faces; this is the very spirit of his Book. So (like
the Dragon) he spews out whole floods of contempt, to drown them and their
reputations if he could; to instance but in two or three particulars. 1. How
shamefully does he reproach the whole Church of Wrexam, that cast him out, and
the one and twenty Members, as if they were the vilest persons on earth (but
who will believe him, they being known godly men?) and all this to justify
himself, and avoid the dint of their consure, as page 9, 10. at large? 2. Then
again, how he reproaches the Church at Newcastle, because they articled against
him, page 19. 3. Then when London Church Excommunicated him, see his shameful
reproaching of them, as acting irregularly, and against light of conscience;
and what not? No marvel therefore if he reproach Mr. Weld, Mr. Hammond, Mr.
Eaton, Hugh Prichard (these are but single persons) when he flies (like a wasp)
in the face of whole Churches; and (that which is under this head remarkable)
i. e. that all such as bear witness against him, he falls soul upon them, as
envious persons, as if there were no evil at all in him to testify against;
no, no, it is only the good they saw in him, his good success, the attendance on
his Ministry, and Gods blessing on his labors, these are the things, the good
things in him (as he would fain persuade the world) they envy. when I preached
(says he) in Cheshire, I saw the power of God, and (then adds) there I
incurred Mr. Eaton's displeasure. Why dare thou say, that holy Man (Mr.
Eaton) was displeased at the power of God in thee? And within two lines after
he speaks as bad of the Church of Wrexam; The Church of Wrexam (says he) was
troubled at my success. Now to make men envious persons at the grace of God in
others, is to make them the very devils eldest Sons, and himself must needs be
God (or in Gods place) to judge their very hearts, that it was Gods grace in
him that moved them to bear witness against him. Whither will the venom and
malice of this man's spirit carry him?

6. As he casts down to Hell almost all that oppose him, so he lifts up to
Heaven all that side with him, or favor him in his way; witness his extreme
flattery of the Magistrates in Coldester that favor him; witness also his high
elevating those three men at Hexam that certified for him (and there were but
three in all) and how easy a matter it is for any man to bring three men in a
whole County to attest any thing in a man's behalf, and subscribe what he
himself shall draw, and bring to them to subscribe, all men know. Yet, alas!
some of us know what pitiful men some of those three are, whom he sets our,
as if the most eminent in the whole County. Alas, alas, the man dares say any
thing, bad or good, of any man to serve his own turn. It this man be not a
dawber, a scraper with his nails for men's favors, an insinuating flatterer for
his own ends, I never knew any. He will verify what Mr. Hammond writ of him;
He is (says Mr. Hammond) the most fawning man till you discover him; and,
then, the most loose-tongued man in reviling. Is it not just so?

7. Mark his railing: The poison of Alps is under his lips, his mouth and style
is full of cursing and bitterness; for these are his usual terms, Men stirred
up by the Devil, Slanderers, Rigid ones, False liars, Men born from beneath,
Sons of the earth, Absoloms, Joabs, Whited sepulchers, Full of horrid
hypocrisy and iniquity; that woeful hypocrite, that proud disorderly Church,
that proud scornful Haman, etc. These are his expressions, and that against
any, even against the most godly and eminent in grace, that do but oppose him.
And, though to write, or speak such things of a man, when matters are proved
upon Record against him by a cloud of witnesses (as those things are which I
hold forth against him, as lying, boasting, vaunting, etc. which I have proved,
either directly from his own words, or the Testimony of whole Churches)
although this (I say) be just against himself, and no wrong donetherein, yet
for him to belch out such vile reproaches, when no just cause is given, such
language in him is plain railing, whereas giving him his own terms, when
matters are proved against him, is but righteous dealing.

8. It Is an usual thing with him throughout his whole book, to set his own
single testimony against all that contest with him; be his Adversaries never so
holy, never so many, yet his own bare word must pass for current, against the
subscription of the one and twenty Members, yea the whole Church of Wrexam, the
Elders of the Church in Cheshire, the Baptized Church in Newcastle, the three
Ministers of the Congregational Churches there, the whole Church at London,
etc. whereas Moses, Paul, and Christ himself tell us, that in the mouth of two
or three witnesses every truth shall be established; here are three, ten,
twenty, yea whole Churches, and yet all are false, and deluded, he only speaks
the truth, himself being witness. If this be not the very spirit of his book,
let any man that has not forfeited his reason, judge. And from whence (do we
think) comes this, from Heaven, or from Hell?

9. His Instability is notorious. He was once, by his own confession a Papist,
then a Protestant again (if he may be believed) (though some of his own friends
do shrewdly suspect him to be still a Papist in his heart, and that his
turning Church-divider at Wrexam, and Dipper afterward, was but a turning
every stone, and trying every side, to see where he might best advance a Popish
design) at last, as if weary of every thing, he falls now to the Holy kiss,
Washing the Saints feet, Anointing with Oil (some say to six Sacraments) to
denial of the Trinity of Persons, Original sin of Infants, etc. When, and where
will this man stop? Nay, so far is he deluded and intoxicated, that he calls
this giddiness in running out to unsound fancies, and dangerous opinions,
obedience to Christ, page 13. And as he is weary of truth, so of all persons,
societies, and places too, where ever he yet came. In the Church of Wrexam (so
much admired by him at the first) he stays but eighteen Months, and then it is
such a corrupt society, that he is glad he is out of it. Then to Cheshire he
hastens, there is the only Church, but he plays such pranks there, that he is
soon discovered. Then away into the South; from the South into the North he
goes, Hexam is the place, and there he has a glorious people (if ye will credit
his report) (for still all his Geese are Swans) But Hexam grows stale, the
South is more desirable, and Colchester, of all places of England, is the only
place; and there you shall have him as long as you of Colchester shall court
him with applause, honor, and liberal gifts (for want of which he was
pitifully pined at Hexam) but as soon as you discover him, as others have done,
you shall find him indeed, to go out like a snuff; for do but run through the
story of his life, or read but his own Pamphlet, and you shall see how after a
little while he has set fire on every place where he came, and run away by the
light of it.

10. But, above all, his notorious abuse of Scripture is intolerable, making
the blessed Holy Ghost (the Author of it) to serve his lust, and execute his
revenge upon all such as contest against his sin; as if he himself were that
righteous one whom the Holy Ghost intended in those Scriptures he quotes, to
vindicate and maintain, be his cause never so bad, and to condemn all his
opposers, be they never so holy and good; and to strike at them as his most
inveterate, incorrigible enemies, as Scribes, Pharisecs, persecutors of Christ,
his Apostles, and Prophets: Do but peruse a little some of the scriptures he
cites, and see if he would not design his godly adversaries to the bottomless
pit, Psalm. 55.20, 21. Jer. 9.4, 5. Jer. 20, 10, 11. Hos. 4.7. Acts 17.5. Acts
21.28. 1 Pet. 4.14. to 18. Mat. 6.4. Mat. 23.27, 28. What height of pride,
arrogance, impudency, malice, and revenge this man is grown unto, I leave to
godly tender hearts to judge. Is it a small thing to grieve men, but will thou
grieve my God also? Isa. 7.13.

Thus having given you a little taste of the man (and truly but a little, for it
were endless to print him out in all his lineaments) but by the Lions paw you
may gather the proportion of all the other parts of the beast, I shall now
proceed to wipe off such aspersions as he casts without fear upon some dear
servants of God in his Book, and leave all other things as not worth the while.

First, for Mr. Hammond (a man so eminently known, that he is above the reach
of his slanderous pen) yet because he has so plainly laid him open to the
world, he must be the mark for Mr. Tillam to shoot his venomous arrows at: The
cause was this (for Mr. Hammond upon this account has been desired to declare
the whole matter) who says as follows;

That he with some others having discovered the Conversion of the Jew (whom Mr.
Tillam baptized, and so boasted of) to be a cheat, published his Popish design
to the world; but Mr. Tillam perceiving the Romish plot and himself unvailed,
wrote a most false, slanderous Pamphlet against the discoverers, charging them
with thirteen untruths, to which they replied again, revealing the notorious
lying, boasting, slandering spirit of the man; to which Mr. Tillam wrote
another Reply, full of froth, lying, and folly, and sent a Copy of it in a
braving way to Mr. Hammond, who returned him a sharp Answer in a private
Letter; and likewise told him, that Mr. Eaton had given a large account of him,
and withal sent him a copy of Mr. Eaton's Letter, wherein Mr. Eaton declares
the righteous dealing of the Church of Wrexam against him (the substance of
which you have in Mr. Robert Eaton's Letter) and that he turned Anabaptist upon
it, and proved a great disturber in those parts.

Ita testor Sam. Hammond.

And was not all this plain dealing by Mr. Hammond? Thus things lay buried a
great while, but at last Mr. Tillam and Mr. Anderton having discovered the
wickedness one of another, his Church at Hexam brake into two pieces: He then
being discarded of all men, writes an insinuating Letter to Mr. Hammond (as one
begging his favor) who (out of the goodness of his disposition, ready to
forget all wrongs, upon the least relenting of his worst enemy) writes back
again, that the thoughts of those former quarrels were buried in his heart,
etc. Though at that very time, and when he came to this house, he still dealt
plainly, in reproving of him. But afterward; Mr. Tillam still proceeding in
his old strain of scandal, Providence calling upon Mr. Hammond to declare his
knowledge of him, he judged himself bound in conscience to reveal him to such
as desired an account of him, the Cause of God calling for it; and he does
appeal to the Great God, and any gracious spirit, whether there were
dissimulation, gross dissimulation and hypocrisy to amazement in all this? his
Conscience bears him witness that there was not. As for his charge of Feasting,
and calling Mr. Hammond Vicar of Newcastle (which are two evident falsehoods) it
shows he has not yet left his old trade of Lying. His calling him proud Haman,
with allusion to his name, and Pope Boniface, in relation to that feature of
face which God and Nature has given him, speaks a childish wanton sinful
spirit in Mr. Tillam, and let him know, that God will one day have an account
of idle words.

But he says Mr. Hammond entertained him kindly, and added the courtesy of
New wine: I say it was ill-bestowed on such an ungrateful man, as quarrels
with love; worthy the next time he comes to be thrust out of doors among the
beggars. All men that know Mr. Hammond, well know him to be a Gentleman, and
full of courtesy to all that set foot over his threshold; and he endeavored
to conquer this unworthy man by kindness, especially looking at him, as seeming
now to repent of his former miscarriages, and is not this a trim requital?
Again, his proclaiming Mr. Hammond so rigid against Anabaptists, is another
great slander; for he never preached against them; he carries it most lovingly
in all civil converse toward them; his spirit and principle carry much
moderation to men of different judgments. It Is true, he disputed about the
point of Baptism with Mr. Tillam, when Providence called him to it, wherein Mr.
Tillam was so silenced, that his denying of it since, has demonstrated to many
who heard that dispute, that he dares say any thing to save himself, and
slander others. And for Mr. Hammond's moderation upon several accounts to Mr.
Tillam, sure his own conscience will witness against him, if he deny it. yea,
his own mouth has often said it, and here he unworthily upbraids Mr. Hammond
for it; yea he boldly tells the world, that Mr. Anderton's ejection was because
he called Mr. Hammond Pope Boniface, which (as Mr. Hammond professes) he never
knew Mr. Anderton ever said so, till now he read it in Mr. Tillam's Pamphlet.
But it is upon record he was ejected for Non-residency, and notorious
Sabbath-breaking; so that it appears Mr. Tillam will say any thing.

Secondly, for Mr. Weld, he tells the world ( page 7.20, 21.) he kindly invited
him to his house in a Letter, with much seeming affection, and yet all but
gross dissimulation. Since Mr. Tillam's book came out, Mr. Weld has been
consulted withal, and desired to write the truth of the business, whose very
words again are these;

I must sincerely profess (being called thereto) that although I am not of the
Newcastle Churches judgment of the unlawfulness of being sent out to Preach by
Commissioners and Ministers, yet I cannot clear Mr. Tillam, nor vindicate his
innocence, in denying that he had such an order to Preach as the Newcastle
Church charged him withal, page 20. For when I look into their three first
Articles, page 16. wherein their charge of his receiving order from the
Commissioners lies, I plainly see the full substance of their charge to be
true in each Article.

For, whereas the Church say, 1. That he came to the Priest (they mean
Ministers) (by the way I could wish no such word of contempt were used) this is
truth, for he came to such of us as were appointed to examine Ministers to be
sent out to Preach, and told us, he came to us for that end, and we conferred
with him in order thereunto.

2. The Church says, that he preached before them (that is, the Ministers) for
the trial of his Gifts, this is as true; for he preached at Nicholas on a
Thursday Lecture, where diverse of the Ministers were present to hear his Gifts,
and brought relation to the Commissioners, and the rest of the Ministers; and
he was also tried by personal examination before the Commissioners, this also
is true.

3. That he was by the Propagators and Ministers sent to preach at Hexam, and
by an Order under the Commissioners hands, as other Ministers have, and that
without the least taking notice of his being sent out by the Church at London.
These things are so clear, that himself cannot, and no man will with any face
deny it. Now how Mr. Tillam dares call this a false Charge, and so accuse the
whole Church at Newcastle, for saying that which so many know to be true, I
much wonder; for I must in this particular clear the Church, and deeply blame
him.

And for his saying he can show my Letter to vindicate him in this, my Answer
is, I known not how he may alter the words, or invert the sense, but I here
challenge him to produce such a Letter from my hand as contradicts what I have
here written, and I Will bear the blame; but he has abused the Church and me,
the Lord give him repentance. The truth of these things I affirm on my personal
knowledge, and subscribe my name,

Tho. Weld.


Thirdly, he not only abuses particular persons, Mr. Weld, Mr. Hammond, Mr.
Eaton, Hugh Prichard, etc. but he lets fly against whole Churches, as the
Church of Wrexam, which he accuses of excissive pride, gross error, envy at
his person, profaneness, strange disorder about Baptism, and many other
enormities among them, page 9, 10. And the Church at Newcastle, they are a
company of rigid ones, false accusers, violent, page 19, 20. And the Church at
London, they deal irregularly, and hastily withdraw without giving him warning;
they will not hear the truth, though not abundantly testified. So that their
censure is null and void. Thus he proceeds to rage, and fight, and tear, and
(like the drunken man in the Proverbs) to cast firebrarnds at all that stand in
his way. Answer all his folly I will not, but this.

First: We have neither allowance from the Word or from Reason to believe one
word of all these allegations against so many godly men; where is the mouth of
two or three witnesses? And if against an Elder only without two or three
witnesses we must not receive one accusation, how dare we receive these, so
manifold, deep, and hideous accusations against whole Churches and Elders too?
The Accuser also being found no competent witness, being in his hot blood, in
a way of recrimination, and a known liar, as has been proved; therefore if he
should say ten times as much, it is all nothing without further proof.

Secondly: What he does say against those Churches, especially that of Wrexam,
is but a proclaiming his malice and ignorance in Church Discipline: For,

1. He spends many words to declare, he was not excommunicate out of the Church
of Wrexam, but that he went out of himself, and proclaimed himself none of
theirs. But let me ask this knowing man, if he ever learned from Christ, that a
Member, when the Church is dealing with him, in order to a Censure, and he
seeing the blow a coming, to award it off, withdraws himself, saying, he
rejects the Church, and disclaims them, and so they proceed against him for
contempt, whether (I say) such a one is not justly Excommunicate, and whether
such a censure be not a real and lawful Censure? else any man, just before
the sentence is denounced may withdraw, and so no man living need be
Excommunicated; and then it will follow, Christ ordained that Censure in vain;
yet in this silly, sinful shift he pleases himself, and deludes Babes with
this pretense.

Object. Yea, but they are a very corrupt Church, and therefore their Censure
is contemptible.

Answ. 1. As before was said, we dare not believe one word of all he says out
of Gods way.

2. If this that you say had been true, is this the way for you to reject them,
and Excommunicate your self? No, you should first have cleared your self of
those gross things laid to your own charge.

Secondly, humbly, and with all meckness have presented their disorders to
their consideration.

3. You should have endeavored to convince them.

4. And have waited with patience, if peradventure God would at any time have
given them repentance. And then,

5. Desired leave to refer the matter to other Elders and Churches, who might
without prejudice, or partiality have weighed the strength of what you alleged
against them; and after all to have desired leave in all humility to withdraw,
in case no satisfaction could be had, and not to fling away disorderly, when in
a way of censure for your faults, and say, you renounce the Church. This is, 1.
Plain Schism. 2. Intolerable Pride. 3. Contempt of the Church.


4. Contempt of Christ's Ordinances, and consequently of Christ himself the
Institutor of it, and (which makes all worse) he still justifies himself in all
this. Besides for a member to cut off it self without consent of the body, is a
thing unnatural and monstrous, never heard of in the Gospel.

Secondly: He grossly abuses, and shamefully bespattered the Church at London
in sundry particulars, but we see he can do no other. We shall observe but two
or three things more, and conclude.

First: He tells you, in a vaunt, p. 14. he had not only 80 l. per annum, but
40 l. per augmentation; but he tells you not withal, that this was before the
Commissioners well knew him, and that as soon as they saw his spirit and
carriage with the same hands they gave him the Augmentation, they took it from
him again, as judging him unworthy of it; and how that after it was gone, he
crouched to the Commissioners, and insinuated fawningly to some of the
Ministers to get it regained, but it never could, and whether it was not one
great cause of his leaving the North, I leave to be considered. Truly, some of
us well know they never saw the Commissioners more ashamed of settling any man
than of his settlement at Hexam, and resolved for his sake as long as they
should sit, to know men better before they settled them, and never be so
cheated by any man's glosing and hypocritical pretenses, as by his. But it was
too late to repent after it was done.

2. He vaunts often in two or three of his Pamphlets, what a company of Saints,
and precious people he had at Hexam, and how his Church flourished; but tells
you not of his tarrying there so long, that so few would come to hear him, that
it was time to lay the key under the door, and give up.

3. He professes that he receives none to Baptism but such as he judges to be
precious Saints; and yet it is proved against him, that he baptized some persons
at Stokesbey, and in Cheshire, etc. that made no profession of their faith at
all; and this himself grants, page 17. How can such be known to be precious
Saints? and how does this accord with John Baptists practice, who Baptized none
but such as made confession of their sins, Mat. 5. or Philips practice, who
requires the Eunuch to confess his faith, Acts 8.37? But this man (it seems)
dares say any thing, or do any thing; it is no new thing to hear him
contradicting the practice of others, or his own principles. But to what end
do I waste Ink and Paper in answering him, whom I have so little hopes to
reclaim? I will therefore turn the stream into another chanel, and by way of
Conclusion direct my speech to those plain-hearted, well-meaning Christians
misled by him in the Town of Colchester, and elsewhere.

You Colchester Christians and others, that have lent your ears to this
Seedsman of Sedition, and happily think, that in entertaining this Stranger,
you have entertained an Angel of God, do but a little view his face in this
glass, and see if his countenance be like that of an Angel. Is he not here
plainly convicted of boasting, lying, slandering, and many other sin? Has he
not for these crimes been taxed by faithful Ministers, and censured by whole
Churches, and is all this nothing? Can you expect a blessing from the God of
Heaven while you harbor such a one in your bosoms as he has sealed up under a
spiritual judgment, with which (as a rod at his back) he ranges up and down
the world, and is not humbled, but rather hardened by it? Take heed you bring
not the guilt of his sin on your own heads; For (I call God to witness) it is
not the man, but his sin I all along strike at; and a sin both foully practiced,
and fully proved against him, the horrid sin of Lying (among many other) a sin
so hateful to God, Prove. 12.22. yea so loathsome in the very nostrils of
Nature, that among the savage Indians, he that told a lie thrice, was condemned
to perpetual silence, if Aelian may be credited; this is (it seems by his own
confession in his book) the grand crime for which Mr. Tillam stands
Excommunicate; for which I shall not need to judge him, two Churches having
already passed sentence upon him, guided (I suppose) by that rule of Christ,
Mat. 12.34. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; as the
Physician looking on the sick man's tongue, when he sees that foul, concludes
it is worse within.

(Christians) let me deal a little with your consciences; do you take the word
of Christ for your rule? How then dare you hear him that will not hear the
Church? Or by what Scripture-ground can you take him for your Pastor, whom you
are to look upon as a Heathen or a Publican? And that by express warrant from
Christ himself, Mat. 18.17. Yea let me ask you further, how unlikely is it,
that he should be to you a Preacher of truth, who has been rejected by others
as a venture of falsehood? Indeed what has he to do to take Gods covenant into
hismouth, hating to be reformed? And how unfit is he to be a Preacher, whom the
Churches of Christ have judged unfit to be a Member? What Truths he has
Preached among you, I know not; but if he has spoken to you the words of Truth
and Soberness, he is both much manded since he left the North, and
misunderstood by some of eminent note in the South, who have affirmed, and will
maintain it to his face, that he has dealt most unfaithfully in some of the
main truths of the Gospel, as, denying Infants to be guilty of Original sin
till they come to act sin, and affirming, that we are not justified by the same
justifying Faith that Luther and the first Reformers were justified by (to say
nothing of his new Ordinances, new Sacraments, new Sabbath, that he contends
for) these are no small and petty Errors.

The good Lord open your eyes that you may see the evil of those dangerous
Principles he has scattered among you: And let me beseech you, in the bowels of
Christ (as a well-wisher to your souls, though a stranger to your persons) that
you would take heed of being carried about with these diverse and strange
doctrines, yea with any one of them: For if Satan can but draw you into one,
he will quickly lead you into all. He that says yea to the Devil in a
little, shall not say him nay when he pleases. In the fear of God I beseech
you consider how you will be able to look Christ in the face another day, when
your own Consciences will tell you, you have parted with his Truths upon the
bare word of a branded Liar. My record is on high, that I have not written
these few lines out of envy, spleen, or passion, but out of pity and
compassion to your souls: Read all before you censure; compare Mr. Tillam's
Pamphlet with these Papers, and I suppose he will be sufficiently answered, and
all sober-minded Christians abundantly satisfied.

A Catalogue of many pernicious Principles and false Doctrines, publicly in
the Pulpit, and elsewhere asserted by Mr. Tho: Tillam in the Town of Colchester.
FIrst: That we are not justified by the same justifying Faith that our
Forefathers were justified by. Secondly: That Antichrist shall not be destroyed
till Christ's personal appearing the second time in the flesh, and that whoever
teaches otherwise is a deluder. Thirdly: That children are not guilty of
original sin till they act sin. Fourthly: That Love Feasts, washing the
Disciples feet, the Holy kiss, and Anointing the Sick with oil, are Ordinances
still to be observed in the Churches of Christ. Fifthly: That the Lord Christ
was a Carpenter, but neither House, nor Ship-Carpenter, but a Yoke-maker; to
prove which he cited, Mat. 11.29. Sixthly: That those whom he lays his hands
upon and blesses, are as really blessed, as those whom Christ blessed when he
was upon earth. Seventhly: That Baptizing in the Name of the Eather, Son, and
Holy Ghost, as so far from being the substantial form of Baptism, that it is
scarce a circumstance in Baptism. Eighthly: That there is none truly called to
the Ministry, but by Visions Dreams. Revelations, or immediately from Heaven.
Ninthly: That not any Infant Baptism is of God. Tenthly: That the First day of
the week is not our Christian Sabbath.
These things can be proved against him, by diverse witnesses to each.

FINIS.

