A BRIEF NARRATION OF THE PRACTICES OF THE Churches in New England.

Written in private to one that desired information therein; by an Inhabitant
there, a Friend to Truth and Peace.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew. Simmons for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard, 1645.

A BRIEF NARRATION of the practices of the Churches in NEW ENGLAND.
PREFACE.
Mr scope in this Declaration is only to answer your own desire, and clear
our way from some misapprehensions, which (I plainly see) have been suggested
to you against our proceedings. what weakness may fall from my pen in this
relation, impute it to my own slenderness, not to the cause in our hands.
Dirige, and corrige, Jesu benignissime.

OUr practice in Discipline consists in these six heads especially.

1. In gathering or founding our Churches. 2. In calling Officers; as, Pastors,
Teachers, Ruling Elders, Deacons. 3. In solemn Church-worship. 4. In admitting
of members. 5. In recommendations, and dismissions of members to other
Churches. 6. In censuring delinquent members, by Admonition. Excommunication.

For the first; such as do intend to gather into Church-followship, 1.
Gathering the Church.
do often in private meet together, and seriously examine the spiritual
conditions one of another, even until they be mutually satisfied, in the
judgment of charity of the truth of grace, of each other, of all such as they
intend to make the foundationalls of that Church. Which done, they certify the
Magistrates, and all near adjoining Churches, of their intentions to erect a
Church, and the day when they purpose to meet in public for that end; and
this is done,

1. To show they are not ashamed of the light.

2. To crave the help of their prayers, and the assistance of their counsel in
so weighty a work, being better experienced in those ways of Christ then
themselves as yet are.

3. To clear their own proceedings in their Brethrens consciences, that they
seeing their entrance to be according to the Rule, may accept of them more
comfortably into communion, as any occasion shall require. When the day
appointed is come, and some deputed persons sent from all the neighbor
Churches (which usually are the teaching and ruling Elders) there present, and
most part of that day solemnly spent in fasting and praying for a blessing upon
that enterprise: Then one of them (chosen to order the work of the day) stands
up and speaks to the other of the Brethren, that they may now begin to act what
they met that day for, which is, to join together into holy fellowship, if the
will and pleasure of the Lord be so, and withal, desires then, that whereas
they have manifested already Gods gracious workings upon their hearts to each
other in private, now they would do the same again before the Churches in
public.

Then himself begins, Confession.
and makes confession of his faith in all the principles of Religon, and then a
declaration of his effectual calling to Christ, and how God has carried on
the work of grace, (viz. Repentance from dead works, and faith toward God,
both of which they insist upon) in his soul to that day.

Then all the rest do the like, which done, to the satisfaction of the Brethren
present, they give testimony of the godly and approved life and conversation of
each other.

After this, Covenant.
they enter into a sacred and solemn Covenant, engagement, profession (call it
what you please) whereby they protest and promise (by the help of Christ) to
walk together as becomes a Church of God, See Cottons Way in New England, p. 8.
in all duties of holiness before the Lord, and in all brotherly love and
faithfulness to each other, according unto God, withal producing their
Covenant, agreed on before amongst themselves, then read it before the
Assembly, and then either subscribe their hands to it, or testify by word of
mouth their agreement thereto.

Then the Brethren of other Churches (some in the name of the rest) reaching
forth the right hand of fellowship unto them, bear witness to their
proceedings to be according to God, testify their acceptance of them into
brotherly fellowship, and do exhort them also in the Lord, to proceed according
to those beginnings; and so prayers made, and praises given unto God, and a
Psalm sung, the blessing is pronounced, and the Congregation dissolved.

The Churches thus gathered, 2. Calling of Officers. Acts 6.3.
they look out from among themselves such who are fit for office; and if none
among them be so (though usually those that join into a Church, have one
amongst them upon whom their eye is, for such employment) they seek to the Lord
of the Harvest to direct them elsewhere; Matthew. 9.38.
and (because Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists have no successors appointed in
Scripture) the ordinary officers we use to call, Ephesians. 4.10.
are Elders Teaching Pastors Teachers.
Ruling.
Deacons


The Pastors office properly, is to bend himself to exhortation. Pastors.
Teachers. Romans 12.7, 8.


The Teachers office to give himself to instruction in points of doctrine,
explication of Scripture, confutation of error, etc.

The ruling Elder to order the Assemblies, Ruling-Elders.
to look to the life and conversation of the whole Church, and to visit from
house to house, to see how all thrive in godliness, while the other give
themselves to the Word and Doctrine, and all of them together to govern the
House of God, and also to prepare in private all matters for Church, and to
survey the estates, and ripen all such as are to be admitted in the Church,
before they produce them in public, etc.

The Deacons office is to have a diligent eye, to look into the necessities of
the Church, and with a tender heart, Deacons.
and careful hand supply them from the Church Treasury with such things as
they need for necessity, convenience and comfort, and to see that none want,
but honorably to supply them, even before they fall into any extremity, or be
forced to crave help from the Church; and therefore he is, To Collect
diligently To Keep faithfully To Distribute carefully


the Churches treasure, Acts 6.2.
that so he may serve the Tables, which is the proper work; the Lords Table,
Ministers table, and the poores table.

To the Deacons office, Deacon. 1 Timothy 5.3.
we would add Deaconesses, where such may be had, according to which should be
widows of the Church, faithful, approved, and full of good works, who may
give themselves to works of mercy cheerfully; and to be serviceable also to
those that are sick, when the Deacon so conveniently cannot, and sometime so
modestly may not send their help as that sex may.

And here behold (by the way) the faithful and tender care of our blessed
Lord, that fully provides in those officers for the necessities of all his
Saints: Ephesians. 4.12.
viz. By Pastors, Teacher, Elders, Deacons, Widows, and has given them their
names, works, and titles in his House, which are fully sufficient for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edification of
the body of Christ, less then which would be too little, more then which would
be too much; for if the mind and judgment of his Saints be well informed and
instructed in what they ought to know, believe and do, (which is the work and
office of the Teacher;) and if the conscience be convinced, the will bowed to
holy obedience, the affections rectified and set upon their object, (which is
the office and work of the Pastor) if the life and conversation be well ordered
also, (which is the proper employment of the ruling Elder) and if all things be
beautifully ordered and governed in the House of God, in all the administration
hereof, (which is the joint work of them all together) there and then also, if
the outward man be provided for convenienly, comfortably, and timely, that no
lack be there, no crying and complaining in our streets for want of supply
(which is the office of the Deacons,) and if the sick be helped, refreshed,
comforted, (which is the office of the Deaconesse) then there is full provision
for the necessity of the Saints; all which Christ has given us here: these we
have, and more then these, we are like six fingers to an hand; now these (we
say) and no others, being the officers which are in our eyes to call, we
proceed to election, and then to ordination in this manner following.

First, the men that we are to call to office, are our own members, 1.
Election. Acts 6.
or, if members of other Churches, they join with the Church which calls them,
before they have any propriety in them, or power in the Lord over them, to call
them to office in that body; then they are well known and approved by some
convenient space of trial, seeing we must lay hands suddenly on no man; 1 Timothy
5.22.
and we discern, that not only his gifts, graces, and frame of spirit are in
themselves desirable and commendable, but in some good measure also suitable,
and fit for that people: For every worthy man is not fit for every godly
people, no more then every glove is fit for every hand, nor every key fit to
open every lock, though happily it be a key of gold, another of Iron, which is
fit, may be better. They being thus approved, the Church her self, over which
he is to be an overseer, calls him, and none other for them: as Acts 16.3.
those, I say, whose souls he is to take the charge of, call him, and submit
themselves to his administration in the Lord, and not some of the Church, as
the officers only, if there be any, or the people only, but all of us, with
joint consent, as one man, or at least the greater part, elect an officer over
us: So we read that the Primitive Church was carried in all their votes and
elections, Acts 1.23.26. and 14.23.
Acts 23.

All things thus ripened for election, when we are to elect a Pastor, Teacher,
or ruling Elder, we give notice thereof to the Magistrate, and all the next
adjoining Churches, who, and when, and to what office we ordain him unto, and
entreat their presence and company with us, for their brotherly counsel and
assistance; when the day is come, and well spent in preaching, fasting and
prayer, as Acts 13.2, 3. then one of themselves appointed to oversee the work
of the day, stands up, and is inquired of the Church, if none after this solemn
seeking of God for his counsel and direction in that weighty work, they still
resolve to proceed in the seeking such a one to be Pastor or Teacher, as before
they resolved to do: Then having taken their silence for a testimony of their
purpose, he tells them, now he sees all is clear for his Call, he desires
the Brethren to testify their votes, in calling such a one to such an office,
by holding up their hands: which being done, he desires of the party to know
if he accepts of the Call to the office which the Brethren in the name of
Christ has given him to exercise in the Church after his acceptance expressed,
the Elder requires of the Church to promise solemnly by Christ's help to do the
duties of a Church to him, as to a Pastor or Teacher, viz. to submit to him in
the Lord, to be obedient to his doctrine, to love him, to give that respect to
him that Christ commands and requires: also that the same engagement from him,
to do all the duties of a Pastor or Teacher to them.

The Election being finished, Ordination.
they proceed to Ordination, which is nothing but a setting apart for, and
putting him into that office to which be is elected, and committing the whole
charge into his hands, or laying it on his shoulders before the Lord, and this
is done by imposition of hands and prayer. The Elders of the same Church (if
there be any) do impose their hands, if there be none but himself is the first,
then two or three of the principal and most grave and eminent Christians,
being required by the body, do in the name of Christ and the Church; and this
is no unusual thing in Scripture, as we conceive: Numb. 8.10.
Moses must bring the Levites to be consecrated before the Lord, and the
children of Israel must lay their hands on them, and then Aaron shall offer
them to the Lord; so also Zadock the Priest was consecrated, 1 Chro. 29.22
and Solomon anointed by the Congregation. In time of which imposition of hands,

1.

2.

3. 2 Cor. 5.10.
before whom he must shortly appear to give an account of all those souls
committed to his charge by the great Shepherd, Christ Jesus himself, Number.
27.20.
that he be diligent, faithful, careful, and constant, in a full discharge
of that great charge laid upon him.

After this, the Elders of the Church, some in the name of the rest, Gal. 2.9.
do give him the right hand of fellowship, in the sight of all the Assembly,
and testify their brotherly respect unto him: and after thankfulness to God
for his gracious gifts bestowed on him, do exhort him in the Lord, to fulfill
his ministration received from the Lord; and so after praises given to God by
him, in the name of the Church, he dissolves the Assembly with a blessing.

For our calling of Deacons, Deacons.
we judge it not necessary (because we want a rule) to effect it with fasting
and prayer, as in the Ordination of other Officers, but the Brethren look out
from among themselves men fitly qualified according to the rule of the Word,
Acts 6.3. 1 Timothy 3.8, 9. and after due approose made them, the Elders upon some
Lords day, or other public meeting, do ordain him to the office, and appoint
him over that business by prayer, and imposition of hands.

The Church thus gathered and furnished with able helpers for edification,
proceeds to all public administrations in the body, 3. Solemn worship.
wherein our desire and care above all things is, to have all, and no more then
all the Ordinances of Christ himself; Deuteronomy. 12.32.
and all those (as far as God is pleased to lend light) in the native purity
and simplicity, without any dressings or paintings of humane inventions. We
use not to read in the public Assemblies, Reading:
Records or Writings of men, but (that alone, which is able to make the man of
God perfectly and thoroughly furnished to all good works) the pure Word of God
it self; and that all things may be done to best edification, Exposition.
we use to expound and apply the Word unto the people, as occasion permits;
and because we desire to sing, (as well as to read) the pure Word of God, it
being an Ordinance of God, as sacred as the other, we have endeavored, Nehem.
8.8.
according to our light and time, to retranslate the Psalms as near the
original as we could, into meeter, Singing of Psalms.
because the former translation was very defective, and sing them in the
Churches according thereunto. For Prayer, we use not any prescribed forms, or
stinted Liturgies, but seeing the Ministers of Christ are called as well to
give themselves to prayer as to the ministry of the Word, Prayer. Acts 6.4.
we pray as that blessed inditer of our Prayers (who teaches what to pray as
we ought) helping our insirmities, according to the peoples necessities, the
present occasion, and the work of Christ in our hands requires: Romans 8.26.
We administer the seals of the Covenant not to all, but only to believers, or
their seed, which are either in covenant with our selves, or with some other
Church of Christ; for though we verily believe there are many precious Saints
amongst us, who with their children are under the Covenant of Grace, through
faith in Christ, whom we tenderly embrace, and esteem dear unto us, because
they are so to Christ Jesus himself, and are ready to give to such approved
ones, the right hand of fellowship, in case they shall desire it, yet seeing
such are not liable and subject to the Churches censure, it is not meet they
should partake of the Churches privileges, therefore we have hitherto for
born it until further light shall appear.

For the administration of the Supper, Sacrament of Supper. 1 Cor. 11.25.
because Christ bids us do it often, we commonly have it monthly, though we
tie not our selves to any set time, but alter it as often as good reason
appears, and for better remembrance of the duty, and preparation thereunto,
the Elders give notice the Lords day before, and stirs them to an holy
preparation for so holy a duty: When the time of solemn action is come, the
Pastor sets apart the Elements for so sacred employment, he blesses the bread,
he breaks it in the sight of all the people, declaring withal, and applying
the signification of those holy Rites and Actions: He distributes it to those
who be near about him, Acts 6.2.
and gives the rest to the Deacons hands, who stand ready (according to their
office attending on the Table) to give unto all the people, not bowing or
kneeling, which are forms of worship that never came into Christ's mind, Matthew.
26.20. Luke 22.27. to 30.
so far as we know, to appoint, nor any way suitable to a Table Gesture, but in
that posture of body, in which Christ himself gave it unto his Disciples: After
the bread he takes the cup, and blesses it distinctly by it self; for so our
Lord Christ did, Matthew. 26.26.27.29.
he powers out the wine, and distributes it; this done, a Psalm is sung,
Prayers returned, and the congregation dissolved. Mat. 26.30.
We also take our liberty to solemnize holy feastings and fasting days, as
God gives occasion, by his extraordinary hand of providence of special mercy
or judgment, either to our selves or native country, or other churches.

For the admitting of additionall members to those that are the fundamentalls,
4. Addition of members.
we proceed in this manner: Such as desire to join to the church, do make known
their desire to the Eldership; who take a survey of their spiritual estates,
both of the knowledge in the principles of Religion, 1 King. 6.7.
and of the work of Grace in their hearts; as also their blameless and godly
conversation among men, in any of which, if they find any wounded, they
plainly declare it to the parties themselves, laboring by love and patience to
heal them and ripen them; where all things are clear to themselves, they
propound them to the church, and entreat them (as opportunity may serve) to
take some time to deal with them, about their spiritual condition, and inquire
of the godly approved which know them, that nothing may hinder when they are
called to admission: After some due space, the ruling-Elders call them before
the church in public, Confession of faith.
who hear them confess their faith in the grounds of Religion, then their
effectual Vocation to Christ: First, in their sound repentance from dead
works: Secondly, their unfeigned faith toward the Lord Jesus, Matthew. 3.7. Luke
3.7. Acts 8.37. Then, if they be satisfied in both these, (as where they
discern the least true breathing of Christ, though but as sinoaking slax, they
are) they call (if need be) for testification of their godly conversation,
which being done, they rest and testify all their consents to their admission,
by holding up their hands; after that, the Pastor or Elder propounds to them
the covenant which they are to make before God and his people, the sum of
which is to this effect: Covenant.


To give up one selves to the Lord in all duties of holiness; 2 Cor. 8.5.
then to the Church, and the Officers, in all love and submission, according to
the will of God; and this they do not trusting in their own strength, See
Cottons way of the Churches in New England page 55. more fully expressing the
Covenant.
but in the name and by the grace of Christ himself. To this Covenant when
they have given their consent, the Elders in their own name, and the Churches
reciprocally, do covenant also with them, to perform the like duties back
again unto them: Then after prayers made by the whole Church, for his gracious
assistance, in performing these mutual duties each to other, and all of them
to God, they depart away with a blessing.

If any member thus admitted, Of reco^mendation and dismission of members.
in some other Church; that we may the better know according to our charge
received of them, what becomes of our members, he is wont to acquaint the
Elders whither he goes, and the occasions of it; withal to desire them to
propound to the Church for their Letters recommendatory; Romans 16.1. 1 Cor. 3.1.
which being done, the Church grants it, the scope whereof is to testify of
the godliness of the man, and to desire them to receive him as becomes a
Saint, and to be helpful to him in any thing that may need their assistance,
watchfulness, communion, and edification in the Lord, during the time of his
abode with them. The Letter is subscribed by the hands of the Elders in the
name of the Church, and delivered unto them; but if any member has a desire to
remove wholly from the Church to which he belongs, and to live elsewhere, he
uses to make known his desire to the Elders, and by their hands to the
Church, and where he desires to live; as also the grounds which lead him to
such a removal: which if upon examining they prove weak, or sinful,
savouring of self-will, covetousness, schism, or etc. more then of sound
reason, and such as are like to cast him upon eminent dangers, spiritual or
temporal, then (according to their covenant of love and faithfulness) they
with tenderness show him his weakness, and dissuade him from his purpose, so
prejudicial to his peace and comfort; to which counsel God usually bows his
heart to submit and stoop. But if after all the disswasions and brotherly
advice, they should see the bent of his spirit stand toward a removal, that
he cannot comfortably and fully be poysed by their judgments: In such a case,
if his sin be not apparent, his danger eminent, they use some indulgence,
(not willing to imprison the spirits of any) and they leave him to his liberty,
and permit him to depart; and this we observe, that when men thus depart, God
follows them with the cross, till they are driven to repent of such unadvised
proceedings, and desire to return to the place which they left.

But if they see his grounds be good and sound, and God leading him by the
hand, from themselves to another place, where he may sit down comfortably and
be edified, they use to say no more but as they did to Paul when Gods mind
appeared, Acts 21.14.
to have him leave them and go to Jerusalem (the will of the Lord be done;)
and so they write from that Church to the other, Letters of dismission, which
so we call for distinctions sake, which indeed are all one with Letters of
Recommendation, spoken of before, only those were for a time, these for ever;
wherein they do use to give testimonial of the brother, and entreat them to
receive him in all bowels of brotherly love, as their own in the Lord, and be
faithful to his soul, until they shall present him blameless to the great
Shepherd the Lord Jesus Christ; and so after godly counsel given him to walk
worthy of the Lord, in the place where he is to live, Acts 15.40. and 20.22.
This we have added out of Mr Cotton.
they commend him by prayer to the blessing of the word of grace. The Church to
whom he is commended, if they know not the person, make trial of him, as
above, before they admit him, knowing Churches may err in persons as well as
doctrines, etc.

So long as the Churches members walk blameless and holy, Censuring
delinquents. Gal. 6.1.
but in case any be fallen by temptation, (as who is exempted, if corruption
press in, and the Lord withdraw?) we pity him, and labor to regaine him by
such means as Christ has prescribed; as if his sin be private, and known
but to one only, we dare not (unless the necessity of the case requires,)
communicate it to a second, but use to deal in secret with himself, and cure
him of it: but if this will not serve, but either he remain unconvinced of the
evil of it, Heb. 3.13.
and so is like to be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; then the
other takes himself bound in conscience, if the evil be apparent, to observe
the rule of Christ, Matthew. 18.15, 16.
and gradually to proceed further with him, that is, takes one or two more with
him, such as are most able, and likely to prevail with the delinquent brother;
and after prayer made to God to bow his heart, and boar his ear to attend to
their admonition; they endeavor to gain him to the Lord, from his sin; if
this means prevail, his soul is healed, the offense removed, their love
renewed: But if yet he remains impenitent, they inform the Elders, and they
tell the Church, the delinquent is convented in public, and his sin laid
open, they endeavor to regaine him by opening his sin, together with the
uneffectualnesse of the former means witnessed; by which very particular, his
former sin is much aggravated upon his conscience before the Lord, from the
Word applied and pressed; all which, if even then it shall work kindly, to the
melting of his heart into godly sorrow, and humble confession, it is
acceptable, and no further proceeding attempted against h^^.

But if none of all these works effectually upon him, 1 These. 5.19. Mat.
18.19.
then a solemn admonition by the vote of the whole Church, in the name of the
Lord Jesus, by the hand of the Pastor or Ruling Elder, is sadly laid upon him,
wherein his sin being set home with ground from the Word, is left upon him,
as stronger physic to purge out the distemper, which more private and gentle
means would not effect.

All the while the Church (imitating the patience of our blessed Lord unto our
selves) is willing to wait, to see, 2 Timothy 2.25.
if God at any time, by any means, will grant him repentance; which if it so
be, and he come forth and declare it publicly (for the plaster must be as
broad as the soar) to the satisfaction of the Church, and glory of God, and
shame of himself, by the humble acknowledgement of the evil of his sin, and
his former impenitency, in withstanding so many precious means, so patiently
used toward him, with promise by the help of Christ, for better endeavors
for the time to come, the Church proceeds no further, but is satisfied,
comforted, and renders praises to the God of all grace, that has given us such
free use of such precious Ordinances, and has crowned our poor endeavors
with such a blessing on the soul of his poor servant.

But if he be so far shut up under an hard heart, that he departs away
impenitent, the Church accounts it, (as indeed it is) a sore blow from the hand
of the Lord, not only upon the soul of the poor brother, but upon them all,
who are so nearly united unto him, Josh. 7.25. to 11, 12. Number. 16.22.
and may justly make them sinart, as he did all Israel for the sin of Achan.

As the Church uses these means toward him in public, so the Elders, and
the godly ablest brethren also, are wont (all this time) to repair to him in
private, if it may be to set on the Churches censure, and to further the
working thereof; and the Church also before they proceed to further censure,
do call him before them once and again, usually, to see if the Ordinance in
any measure be effectual upon him. All the while that brother (and so any
other delinquent member, though not so fame proceeded against by the Church as
he is) stands thus offensive in the Churches eyes, he presumes not to
communicate Though he be admitted to hearing and prayer. Cotton way of
Churches, page 93. 1 Chronicles. 28. 1 Cor. 11.28. Hag. 2.13, 14. Levit. 22.3, 4.
Agreeably to Mat. 5.23, 24.
, or if he does presume, he is dehorted and prohibited, to eat of the holy
bread amongst the prepared and invited guests of Christ, as not having by
examination prepared himself, as all such are commanded to do, and for fear
he should defile it, as the unclean under the Law did such holy flesh as they
touched; for look as the Priest that was unclean, though he was not degraded
from his Priesthood, yet suspended during the time of his uncleanness from
meddling with the holy sacrifice; so we deal and that according to God with
this unclean member; and this also we use as a further means to procure his
humiliation, when he shall see himself through his own fault barred from the
enjoyment of this holy privilege, and must now fit and mourn (as the Leper
under defilement,) being barred from communicating at the Table of Christ,
among the holy Saints of God, which he was wont to enjoy with freedom and
comfort.

But if neither the one nor the other, public or private means are able (no
not at last) to overcome his hard heart, and bring him to sound humiliation for
his sin; then we judge it full time to use the last and forest means of cure
that Christ has ordained in his Church, even to out off the gangrened member,
1 Cor. 5.6, 7. Gal. 5.9.
that the whole body be not infected by it; and to purge away the leaven, lest
the whole lump be thereby leavened; and for this we do not send to any
external authority out of that particular Church whereof the offender is;
whether Bishop, or Classis; because we conceive it more then Paul himself, 1
Cor. 5.4. See Willets Synopsis, edit. 1634. p. 286. 1 Cor. 5.3, 4. 1 Timothy 5.21.
(who had more authority from Christ, then all the Bishops, Presbyters in the
world) dare undertake, who did but inform, direct, and stir up the Churches
to do it, but did not do it himself; but we freely use the liberty and
authority which the Lord himself has given us, and does charge us to use in
such cases as these; namely, all the Churches do solemnly meet together, and
if it be an open and known sin, all the Congregation (that they may see the
Churches impartial severitie against sin in her own members) and having set
the delinquent before us, and having set out his ^inne in the latitude, and
aggravations of it, the Pastor or Elder having propounded it to the Church, and
they having testified their consents (as before for his admission, so now) for
his expulsion, he solemnly in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the
whole Church, delivers up that man unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5.4.
for the destruction of the flesh, and the saving of his spirit in the day of
the Lord Jesus.

Which dreadful sentence being with much fear and trembling, and yet with
much power and dread denounced against him, he labors to set home the terrors
of it upon his conscience, and does charge him, though he has abused all
other ordinances, yet to make use of this, as being the last means which Christ
will use toward him for his recovery, and withal, warnes him to depart from
the Assembly and the fellowship of the people of God, 2 These. 3.14.
and withal, directs and charges the Brethren, that they so walk toward him,
that he may be ashamed and humbled, that what in them lies, they should not
hinder, but further the working of that ordinance upon his soul.

And though our proceedings in censure be thus slow and graduall, as we have
expressed, See Cottons Way of churches in New England, p. 92. 1 Cor. 5.11.
Matthew. 18.15.
against sins of a lesser nature and less notorious, were not so much the
nature and quality of sin it self, as the impenitency of the delinquent has
called for the sharp censure, according to the rule of Christ, Matthew. 18.15,
16. yet for sins very scandalous and notorious, we go more quick and roundly
to work against the offender, and stay not to admonish once and again, and then
pause, to see how the plaster works, before we use the salve, but (unless
speedy and very eminent repentance, which is early stepped in to prevent, which
possibly may call to us as a voice from heaven to Abraham, Genesis 22.10, 11, 12.
to stay our hand) we presently, without any more ado, meet together, and give
up that man to Satan, according to that other rule of Paul, 1 Cor. 5.45.7.11.

When we have thus cast him out of the church, we have not withal cast him
out of our hearts and care, but still attend the cure of his soul, Matthew. 9.2.
2 These. 3.6.14
by looking to the God of all grace and mercy, on his behalf, doing by him, as
they did by the Palsie-man, carry him to Christ, when happily he wants
strength to go of himself, by following him with private admonition, to help
the physic the better to work: Lev. 26.39.40.
And if we discern his uncircumcised heart is humbled, and that he accept of
the punishment of his iniquity, and confess, that as God has walked contrary
to him, so he has walked contrary to God, and is ready to judge himself
before the Lord and his people, 2 Cor. 1.7.8, and 2.6. to 9.
taking shame to himself, and giving glory to God; (in a word) when we see Gods
end is attained, and the cure of his soul effected, then (as before we called
for no external power from Bishops, or other Presbyters to bind him, so now)
we need no license nor commission from any to loose him, but the church her
self only, 2 Cor. 2.6. to 9
as she had liberty according to the rule of the Gospel to take him in, and to
cast him out; so now, to absolve and release him from all the censure, who all
being met in Christ's name, and persuading themselves, that as Christ unloosed
him in heaven, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.
so it is their duty to unloose on earth; and so their vote being called for by
the Pastor or Elder, and testified by themselves, he is as the Leper by the
Priest of old, in the Law, pronounced clean, and so they (as Paul exhorts the
Corinthians to do) they forgive him, they comfort him, they renew their love
unto him, and now not only their Temple doors, but their arms and hearts are
ready to receive him.

As the church has power from Christ over a delinquent member to reject him
from their societies, so also over a scandalous officer, to deprive him of his
office among them (though this we speak de jure, non de facto, for blessed be
God, we never had any accasion to put this in practice, and we desire we
never may) for as they, and they only had power from Christ to call one to
administer unto them, so they have the same power (upon just cause given, and
he making himself unworthy and unfit to perform that work they called him to,
and to administer holy things with his impure hands) that when they shall see
one just ground that Christ himself has discarded from ministering unto them,
then they also may be Christ's Instruments to depose him from the office they
called him unto.

In all these church-administrations, spoken in this Discourse, Acts 2.46. and
4.25. and 5.12.
our great desire and care is to carry all things with joint consent of all the
members, which was the practice and honor of the Primitive times, which Paul
so much desired, 2 Cor. 2.10.
should be in the church of Corinth, and through Gods great goodness we have
obtained that mercy that usuually in all our admissions, dismissions, elections
and censures, it has been so with us to our great comfort.

But in case there should any difference arise (as possibly they may through
the remaining darkness of our minds, all not being able to see alike) then
such as dissent from their Brethren and propound their grounds which are either
weighty from the Word, and then it is the voice not of the Brethren only, but
of Christ speaking in thee, to which the rest submit and yield, or else their
reasons have little or no strength in them, which the Brethren are able with
ease to answer; and then either the rest see it and yield, or if they are not
convinced of the invalidity of their reasons, and the strength of their
Brethrens answers, it is either through the weakness of their judgment, or
the stiffnesse of their will; if the former be the cause, the rest lovingly
inform them, and patiently bear with them, till things be in some sort cleared
up; that they are content wholly to submit and consent to make no further
trouble, which they are frequently taught, to do in cases of such nature, but
if stiffnesse of will plainly appear, or a spirit of contradiction, if they
will not by loving information lay down themselves, they think it meet to
admonish them of pride and wilfulness, and leave them under it till they shall
repent, whereby the liberty of their voice is taken from them, till they have
removed the offense.

But if the cause should be weighty and dark, Cottons Way of Churches, page 95.
Acts 15.
and the doubtigreat on both sides, we call in light from other churches, to
whom by agreement they repair, and crave their counsel: This being faithfully
done, by Gods ordinary blessing and presence (to our comfort we speak it) we
have found it conclusive and avail.

[That which follows is added out of Mr Cottons late book of the way of the
Churches in New England, that this Narration might be complete.]
HItherto of their practice in regard of each Church by it self, and the
members of it: in the next place is to be related what the course is in respect
of many Churches in communion and fellowship; and this (omitting that was said
before in their mutual assistance about the constitution of particular
Churches, and recommendation of members, etc.) consists in two points generally
(for we will name only the chief) first, the combination into Synods or
Assemblies: Secondly, Dealing with Delinquent Congregations.

For the first; When either corrupt opinions, or suspicious practices are
scattered, Assemblies.
the Elders of the Churches desirous to maintain verity and unity of
judgment, in matters of doctrine and integrity of life throughout the
Churches, do both acquaint the Magistrate, being nursing Fathers (amongst us)
to the Church, with the necessary occasions and ends of a general Assembly,
and do also solicit the Churches to send some fit persons at such a time and
place where the Assembly is to be held, to consider and discern of the matters
in question.

The Assembly being met in the name of Christ, and his presence called for by
humble and earnest prayer, the matters to be discussed are propounded by one of
the Elders of that Church where we meet, or by some other appointed by them,
and consented to by the Assembly. The matters propounded, the Elders do declare
their judgment, together with their reasons from the Word.

All which time it is free for any man present, (and all may be present, if
they will) as well the Messengers of the Churches, as others ( after leave
orderly craved and obtained, Acts 15.7.
to propound their doubts without offense) whence disputation does arise (as
Act. 15.7.) till all parties be either satisfied or convinced.

In points which are not so fully cleared and agreed upon, or the nature of
them such as may admit further discussion,
difference of apprehension without disunion of affection, or disturbance of
the Churches peace is permitted, and each man is left to his Christian
liberty; so far as they all attain, they judge and mind one thing; if any
be otherwise minded, who in simplicity of heart seeks the truth, and in
meekness of wisdom and love, holds forth the same, we hope God will in
time reveal the same unto him; in the mean time, Romans 14.2, 3.
all agreeing in this one, Not to condemn nor to despise one another in
differences of weakness.

For the second, viz. the dealing with, admonishing of offending Churches. When
a scandal arises in a Church, Admonition of delinquent Churches.
whether by corruption of doctrine, or in manners; if upon diligent search it
prove true, the Church hearing thereof, sends Letters, or Messengers, or
both, unto the Elders of that Church, and exhorts them to take a speedy
course to the redress thereof.

But if the Elders prove remiss therein, (or be faulty themselves) they then
certify the whole Church thereof,
to call upon their Officers, as Paul sent to the Church of Colosse, to call
upon Archippus, Col. 4.11. Col. 4.11.


If the Church hear them not, the Church offended takes in the help of two
or three Churches more to join with them. If still the offending Church
persist in the neglect of their duty, and of the counsel of their brethren,
either the matter would be referred to a Congregation of many, or all the
Churches together, (if need should require) or else if the offense be evident,
and weighty, and of ill, though not of general consequence, the Churches
offended would (as justly they might) withdraw themselves from the right hand
of fellowship, and so forbear all such exercises of mutual brotherly
communion with them; which all the Churches of Christ are wont to walk in one
toward another; as mutual 1. Participation of Ordinances; See Cottons Way of
churches, cap. 6. Sect 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
2. Recommendation of members; 3. Consultation in matters of weight; 4. Joining
in Assemblies; 5. Contribution to their outward wants; 6. and helping to
propagate such Churches which are (with this 7. of admonition) the several
acts of communion which we hold as Churches one with another.

And though we have never been put to the utmost extent of this duty, because
the Lord has so prevented that no church has stood out so long; yet if it
should so fall out (as God forbid) we look at it as our duty, by proportion as
one brother is bound to be faithful to another; and by example of the Church,
Song. 8 8. who looks for her little sister that had no breasts; and of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 11.28. who took care of all the Churches, which public spirit
of grace and love is not dead with them; all the Churches of Christ ought to
have a care and watchful eye over the public good one of another, though not
virtute officii, yet intuitu charitatis.

Now, let all godly minded judge, what error or iniquity is in our Practice,
so much cried out upon by the sons of men, and some of our dear Brethren,
Psalm. 81.5. and 11.3.
who cry us down for Separatists, Schismamaticks, Anabaptists, and what not?
The foundations are cast down, and what has the righteous done? Oh, let men
show us from the blessed Word of truth, where our error lies; let them set
down a purer pattern before us, and we hope God will not so far leave us, but
that he will open our eyes, and bow our hearts to entertain it; but if upon
mature thoughts they judge this to be the very Way of God, 1 Cor. 11.1. Acts
26.9.29.4. 2 Pet. 5.10. James 1.17. Isa. 13.12. and 45.4. Lam. 4.2. Psalm. 2.15.
Phil. 2.10.15.
(as we believe verily God is now about to clear it, so to be to all the world)
let them in the name of God, lay away all prejudice against our persons and
practices, and follow us so far as we follow Christ; So we could wish that all
men were as we are, saving our meanness. Now the God of all truth, and the
Father of all lights, persuade the spirits of all his precious ones, duly to
prise those ways of Christ, and bow their hearts to stoop to the simplicity of
the Gospel of our blessed Lord and common head, Jesus Christ, in whose blessed
bosom of love and care, I leave them and you, ever resting

Their and your loving Brother.

FINIS.

