ASTROLOGY Theologized: Wherein is set forth, What Astrology, and the light
of Nature is. What influence the Stars naturally have on Man, and how the
same may be diverted and avoided.

AS ALSO, That the outward Man, how eminent soever in all Natural and
Political Sciences, is to be denied, and die in us.

AND, That the Inward man by the light of Grace, through profession and
practice of a holy life, is to be acknowledged and live in us: Which is the
only means to keep the true Sabbath in inward holiness, and free from outward
pollution.

By Valentine Weigelius.

Sapiens dominabitur Astris. LONDON, Printed for George Whittington, at the
blue Anchor in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1649.

Astrology Theologized.
CHAP. I. What Astrology is, and what Theology; and how they have reference
one to another.
Astrology is Philosophy it self, The Kingdom of Nature.
or it is the whole light of Nature, from whence arises the universal
natural Wisdom, or a solid, sincere, and exquisite knowledge of natural
things: which light of Nature is twofold, external, and internal: External
in the Macrocosm, internal in the Microcosm. Or, Astrology is the very
knowledge of good and evil, which is, and bears rule in things subject to
Nature; which science flourishing in man, unless it be ruled and governed by
Theology, that is, divine Wisdom, as the handmaid by her mistress, it is
vicious. And by her specious appearance, and concupiscible jucundity man
seduceth himself, and as it were by eating of the forbidden tree, or by who
reing with the creatures, he makes his soul the Babylonian Whore sitting upon
the Beast, having seven heads and ten horns, etc. and being sweetly deceived
of himself, obtains eternal death to himself.

But Theology is the whole light of grace, The Kingdom of grace.
happening to man from the holy Spirit effused from above, which is the
universal wisdom of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the saving knowledge of divine
and supernatural things, making chaste and purging the soul from every
defilement of sin abiding in the mortal body; in respect whereof that natural
Wisdom is but a shadow, which, when the world is blotted out and removed, will
together with it be blotted out and removed, and then Theology alone shall
reign.

Astrology is so called because it arises from the Stars. As,

Theology, because it flows from God.

To live Astrologically is with a pleasing concupisence to eat of the Tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, and to bring death to himself.

To live Theologically is, to eat of the wood and Tree of life by an intimate
abnegation of ones self, and thence to attain to ones self, Life and Salvation.

The Light of Nature in Astrology, with his incitative fruits, is the
probatory instrument whereby Man placed in the midst, that is, between God and
the Creature is proved which way he would direct or convert his free will,
desire, love and appetite; whether to God his Creator, by loving him above all
things, with his whole heart, with his whole mind, with his whole soul, and
with his whole strength; which should be the Theological life. Or whether
casting God behind, he would reflect to himself and to the Creature by love of
himself, and arrogating of good things received, which was the Astrologicall
life, at the Babilonish fornication, as will appear by that which follows.

Astrology possesses our soul with the external body, wherein the Light of
Nature dwells and shines forth, in some more excellently, in others less. And
it contains in it self two things.

1. All kind of Sciences, Arts, Tongues, Faculties and natural Studies; all
the gifts, as well of the mind, as of the body, and also all negotiations,
occupations, actions and labors of men, how many soever of them are found,
exercised and used in all times upon the whose earth, every where amongst men,
as well gross as subtle, as well old as new, serving as well to good as to bad
uses.

2. Under Astrology, are referred all orders, states and degrees of men,
distinctions of persons, dignities, gifts, offices, and every kind of life as
well naturally ordained by God himself, as thought of and invented by humane
wit, and found out in the whole world from the highest and most honorable to
the lowest and most base.

All these are the fruits of the Stars, and have their original from
Astrology, and pertain to the body and soul, and may be as well good as bad,
according to the diverse pleasures of the users and abusers.

But Theology possesses our Spirit which we have from God, which alone is
Theologus, that is the Speech of God, the Breath of God, the Word of God, being
and inhabiting in the Temple of our heart, from which alone according to sacred
Letters true Theology is to be drawn forth; That is, the knowledge of God, of
things divine and celestial and supernatural, arising from within, from the
illumination of the holy Spirit it self dwelling within us: According to whose
beck, will and command we ought to institute, direct and finish all our
Sciences, Arts, Studies, Actions, Offices, Vocations, Industries, Labors and
kinds of of life, invented and drawn forth on earth from the Light of Nature;
so as whatsoever we think, say or do in the world, in all Arts, Sciences and
Labors, it all proceeds from the Will of God, and seems as it were to be done
and governed by God himself in us, as by his fit instruments.

For every Astrologicall gift coming from the Light of Nature, ought to be
ruled and subjected to the Divine will by the Theological Spirit dwelling in
us, that so the will of the Lord be done, as in heaven, so also in earth. For
all Wisdom both Natural and Supernatural is from the Lord.

Astrology is the science of tilling and perlustrating of the inferior
terrestiall earth, ground, garden, Paradise, from which Man was taken and made,
as to his body and his soul, in the labor and culture whereof six days were
ordained and appointed: But because this Science of it self confers not
Salvation, and eternal Beatitude, but alone belongs to this present life: it
is necessary the Lady and Mistress of all Sciences and Arts, Theology, be
added, which seeing it is Wisdom from above, it has in it self the Science of
tilling and perlustrating the celestial earth, ground, garden, paradise, from
whence also man was taken, created according to the similitude and image of
God, which garden man also has in himself, to the culture whereof, the seventh
day alone, which is the Sabbath day, is appointed.

For so it was ordained between God and man from all eternity, that Man should
be God, and God Man, neither without the other: that is, as God himself is, and
will be the Paradise, Garden, Tabernacle, Mansion, House, Temple, and Jerusalem
of Man: So also was man created for the same end, that he should be the
Paradise, Garden, Tabernacle, Mansion, House, Temple, and Jerusalem of God:
that by this mutual union and friendship of God with Man, and of Man with God,
all the wisdom, power, virtue and glory eternally hidden in God, should be
opened and multiplied. For, God once made all things for man, but Man for
himself.

CHAP. II. Concerning the subject of Astrology.
THe study of Astrology or Philosophy is conversant about the universal
knowledge of all the wonderful and secret things of God, infused and put into
natural things from above in the first creation.

The exercise therefore of the light of Nature is the most sagacious
perscrutation and enucleation of the abstruse, internal and invisible virtues,
lying hid in external, corporal and visible things; to wit,

What should be the first matter of this great world whereof it was made.

What the Elements should be, and those things which are bred of the Elements,
and consist in them; of what kind is their creation, essence, nature, propriety
and operation as well within as without.

What might be in the Stars of Heaven, what their operation.

What in Volatiles, what in Fishes, Metalls, Mineralls, Gemms; what in every
species of Sprigs and Vegetables.

What in Animalls, beasts, creeping things, and in the whole frame of the world.

Lastly, what is in Man, who was made and created of all these; to wit,

What is that mass, or slime, or dust whereof the body of the first man was
formed, and whence he received his soul, and what it is: and whence he has
the Spirit, and what he is: And so the light of Nature, or Astrology
comprehends in it self all the wisdom and knowledge of the whole Universe;
that is, all these are had and learned in the School of the light of Nature,
and are referred to Astrology, or are rather Astrology it self: to wit,

The subject of Astrology therefore is double; the Macrocosm and Microcosm,
the greater World, and the lesser World.

The greater World is this very frame and great house, or this huge tabernacle
wherein we inhabit and live; and it consists of the four Elements, Fire, Air,
Water and Earth; and is twofold, visible according to the body, invisible,
according to the soul or spirit.

The lesser World is Man, the offspring, or some of the greater world,
extracted and composed out of the whole greater World, who also in himself is
two fold, visible and external, as to his body, invisible and internal, as to
his soul.

And as Man is made of nothing else but the world, so also is he placed and put
no where else but within the world, to wit, that he might live, dwell, and walk
therein, yet so as that he should take heed of that subtle Serpent, and should
not eat of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, least he die; that is,
that he serve not the soul of the world, and creatures subject to vanity: but
as a wise man rule the Stars, and resist the devil tempting him, by the
concupiscence of the flesh, of the eyes and pride of life; and suppress
sinful nature, living and walking in wisdom and simplicity of the Divine God
head inspired into him, not in the subtilty of the Serpent by arrogance and
love of himself. For it is most certain.

Of what any thing is born and procreated, from thence also it seeks, desires
and receives it is nourishments, convenient to it is essence and nature for the
sustentation of it self.

Now Man was taken from, and composed of the Macrocosme, and placed in the
same: Therefore also necessarily he is nourished, cherished, receives his meat
and drink, is clothed and sustained according to that, Genesis 3. v. 19. Thou art
taken from the earth, and thou shall eat thereof in labor all the days of thy
life, and shall eat the herbs of the field until thou shall return unto the
earth, for from it thou art taken.

Seeing therefore Man, as to his body, is composed of the Elements, and as to
his soul, of the Stars, and each part is fed and sustained from that from
which it was taken: The food or aliment of the body, whereby the body grows to a
due stature, comes to a man from the Elements, the Earth, the Water, Air, and
Fire; not that Man should take to himself for food the crude bodies of the
Elements, but the fruit growing from the Elements: they are for nutriment. But
the food of the soul inhabiting in the Microcosmicall body, are all kinds of
Sciences, Arts, Faculties, and Industries, with which she tincts and makes her
self perfect.

Moreover, All aliment passes into the substance of the user, and is made the
same that he himself is; that is, whatsoever a man eats, and drinks, the same
thing is essentially transmitted into the substance, nature, propriety and
form of Man, by the digestion of Arthens in the ventricle. I say, the food
passes and is converted into the nature of the eater, and drink into the
substance of the drinker, and is made one and the same with him.

And in the first place, let these things be understood concerning the body
without wonder: because man is made of that which he eats and drinks.

So also whatsoever a man learns, studies, knows in things that are placed
without himself, that knowledge and intelligence passes into the very essence,
nature and propriety of a man, and is made one with him.

The Light of Nature is made Man in Man, and by a man's diligent searching, Man
is made Light both in light and by light; and by the benefit of that light he
finds out all things whatsoever he seeks and desires: but one more and another
less, because all do not seek with the like study.

Every Knowledge, Science, Art, Industry and Faculty passes into the nature of
Man, penetrates him, occupies him, possesses him, tincts him, is agglutinated
to him, united with him, and perfected in him, and he in it. For, Whatsoever
kind of aliment man uses, and whatsoever he endeavors to study, inquire,
know, and understand, this is not strange or different from his essence and
nature. The reason is,

Because whatsoever is without a man, the same is also within him, for that man
is made of all those things which are without him, that is of the whole
universe of things.

Therefore whatsoever Man takes from without from the Elements and Stars by
meat, drink, knowledge, study and intelligence, this is the same that man is,
and is made the same with Man: So man eating bread, and drinking water, wine,
etc. from the Macrocosme, he eats and drinks himself; and Learning, Arts,
Tongues, Faculties, and Sciences of external things, he learns and knows
himself.

And as he tincts his body by meat and drink, which pass into the substance of
flesh and blood, so also his soul is tincted with whatsoever kind of Sciences,
Arts, etc. eating and drinking he is united essentially with that which he eats
and drinks: And learning and knowing he is united essentially with that which
he studies, learns and knows: Wherefore this is a most certain rule,

Whatsoever is without us, is also within us. Which in this place, we,
philosophising of the soul and the body, do thus declare.

This whole world visible, as to the body, invisible as to it is soul, is
without us. From this we are all essentially in and with the first man
complicitly made and created, and incontinently after the Creation were put and
placed into it. And seeing it is manifest,

That every thing that is derived retains the essence, nature and propriety of
it is original: That although the Macrocosme is without us, yet nevertheless
it may also be found truly within us.

I say the World is in us, and we are in it, and yet this is, as that is
without us, and we without that. For indeed we have no existence or original
from any thing else, but from that which is without us, and which was before us:
Nor are we, nor do we inhabit, walk and live in any thing else, save in that
weherof we are made. Neither do we seek and draw forth meat and drink from any
other, either for the body or the sonl, but from that into which we are placed,
and which is placed in us.

As to the Spirit, we are of God, move in God, and live in God, and are
nourished of God: Hence God is in us and we are in God: God has put and placed
himself in us, and we are put and placed in God.

As to the Soul, we are from the Firmament and Stars, we wove and live
therein, and are nourished thereof: Hence the Firmanment with it is astralick
virtues and operations is in us, and we in it. The Firmament is put and placed
in us, and we are put and placed in the Firmament.

As to the Body, we are of the Elements, we move and live in them, and are
nourished of them: Hence the Elements are in us and we in them. The Elements by
the slime are put and placed in us, and we are put and placed in them.

So God is whole without us. and also whole within us, by the being of
inspiration, that is, by his spirit communicated to us.

So the World is whole without Adam, and also the whole World is within Adam,
by the being of extracted slyme.

So Adam is whole without us, and also whole within us, by the being of seed.

And so we bear God within us, and God bears us in himself. God has us with
himself, and is nearer to us, then we are to our selves. We have God every
where with us, whether we know it, or know it not.

We bear the World in us, and the World bears us in it self. Therefore
whatsoever we perceive, feel, touch, taste, smell, hear, see, imagine, think,
speculate, learn, understand, savor, know, eat, and drink, and wheresoever we
walk, this the very same from whence we have drawn our original. We are
always conversant in those things of which we are made. For,

Man is the center of the whole universe. So we learn nothing else, but the very
same thing that was before us, and whereof we are made, and which before we
begin to learn, lies hid in us. Yea, we learn, search, and know nothing else
then our selves: to wit, learning, searching and knowing that whereof we come,
and whence we have received our being. So we eat and drink nothing else but our
selves, to wit, eating and drinking that whereof we are made.

So our body has it is hunger and thirst in it self from within, and desires
perfection of it self by meat and drink taken fromthe Elements from without.
See Paracelsus of the Loadstone of Nature in the Macrocosme and Microcosme.


So the soul has it is hunger and thirst in it self, and desires the perfection
of it self, by meat and drink from the Stars, which is the wisdom and
knowledge of natural things; by Arts, Tongues, Sciences, etc. Hence spring the
Artificers and Wisemen of this world.

Moreover, as in meat and drink taken from the Elements, there is always pure
and impure conjoined, which when they come into the stomach to the Fire of
digestion, are by the internal Vulcan or Arthens of Nature separated from one
another after a spagiricall manner, an that which is pure is retained and
abides in us, that is the essence extracted from meat and drink, the pure is
separated from the impure which passes into flesh and blood: For it penetrates
the body like unto leven, and is made one with it, and causes it to incrtase,
that it may become greater and more solid in it is strength and nerves: but the
impure differing from nutriment is cast forth into the draught, and that by the
operation of Arthens laboring in the ventricle. By like reason the matter is
even in all Sciences arising from the Light of Nature, where always good and
evil are joined together. For in Nature all things are convertible, as well to
good as to evil. Wherefore unless Astroiogie be Theologized, that is, unless
that which is good be retained, and that which is evil rejected, Man from
thence acquires to himself eternal death. And this the probation of Man.

CHAP. III. Of the three parts of man: Spirit Soul and Body, from whence every
one is taken, and how one is in the other.
THe parts of the Universe, of which the whole Man is made, are three; The
World of Eternity, the Evial World; and the World of Time: The parts of Man are
three, Spirit, Soul, and Body: and these three parts spring and are taken from
these three parts of the whole Universe.

The Spirit of Man comes from the Spirit of God, and participates with Eternity
and Aevo.

The Soul in Man is extracted from the soul of the world, and participates with
Aevo and Time.

The Body of Man is formed and composed from the body of the world, as
Elements, and participates with Time only.

The Body extracted from the Elements, and constituted into this form, is the
House, the Tabernacle, the seat of the Soul, and resident chiefly in the heart.

The Soul of Man extracted from the soul of the world, and delivered over to
the heart, is the habitation of the Divine Spirit, and has the Divine Spirit
in it self.

So one exists inthe other, and dwells in the other, abides in the other, and
operates in the other.

The Spirit in the Soul, and by the Soul. The Soul in the Body, and by the
Body. The Body in and by external subjects.
Every thing which is without is as that which is within, but the internal
always excels the external in essence, virtue and operation. For,

By how much any thing is more inward, by so much the more it is more noble,
potent and capacious.

Great virtue is in the Body, if it be excited. Greater in the Soul of the
Firmament, if it be excited. Greatest in the Divine Spirit, if it be exhited.
By excitation all things are laid open, which are hidden and placed in
Ignorance. For both Divine and Natural Wisdom sleep in us, and each light
shines in darkness, and without excitation Man wants the having.

Great and excellent is the knowledgeof the humane body, extracted from the
Elements and disposed into this form.

Greater and more excellent is the knowledge of the Soul, taken from the
Firmament, and inserted into the body.

Greatest and most excellent is the knowledge of the Spirit inspired from the
mouth of God into the first man, and by the mysteries of multiplication equally
communicated to every one of us.

Wherefore is the knowledge of the humane body great? By reason of it is
wonderful composition, that is, because all the four Elements are essentially
composed in it. And moreover I say, the essence, nature and propriety of all
the creatures of the whole invisible world which are in the Earth, Water, Air,
and Fire, are incorporated and situate in Man: But seeing all things generally
are conjoined and included into one skin, they are not altogether and at once
discovered, nor can be revealed, but at least come forth and are known
inspecie, as they are drawn forth and excited.

Wherefore is the knowledge of the Soul which is in the heart of Man greater?
Because the whole Firmament, with all the essence, nature, virtue, propriety,
inclination, operation and effect of all the Stars is therein conjoined and
complicated, so as there is nothing in the whole power of the Spirit of the
Firmament or soul of the world, which the soul of man also has not in himself,
and in the exaltation of it self, can give it of it self.

Yea, the whole Light of Nature is in the soul of the Microcosm, which is the
wisdom and power and vigor of all things of the whole whorld throughout all
the Elements and things procreated of the Elements. For she is the
Astrologicall Spirit containing in her self all kind of Sciences, Magic,
Cabalistic, Astronomic with all their Species, Chimistry, Medicine, Pahisic,
all Arts, Tongues, all Workmanships and all Studies existent throughout the
whole shop of Nature.

But because all these things are collected in one, and generally comprehended
in the soul, they do not all lie open or can they be in act to gether, although
they are in power; but are let out and produced one species after an other.

Wheresoever therefore these kinds of diverse Sciences flourish and are
exercised amongst men, there shines the Light of Nature, and the soul of the
Microcosme is in her exaltation, that is the Firmament of the Microcosme is in
his ascendents.

But why is the knowledge of the Spirit of God greatest in us? Because he from
whom we receive this Spirit is greatest and most eminent above all. For in this
same Spriit all the divine Wisdom and Power from whence that saving knowledge
flows forth, that is, Theology, treating of supernatural celestial and
divine things, and is conversant in the Magnalia and mysteries of God placed
above Nature, and tends even to the inexhausted and unspeakable profundity of
the Deity, in which profundity, the very origianll matter, cause and end of all the works of God, and of things acted in time from the beginning of the
Creation even to the end of the consummation of the world, eternally and
essentially lay hid. For all things came forth from him; all things were made
by him, and all things consist in him.

By how much any thing is most inward, by so much it is more noble and
excellent. This visible world is a body compacted of Fire, Air, Water, and
Earth, which is without, has in it self the Spirit of Nature which is the soul
of the world which is within; to which soul this external body be longs:
because it is inhabited, possessed and governed by it. Hence the soul of the
world is more noble then the body.

This soul of the world has in it the Spirit of God, which comprehends and
possesses it. For nothing is beyond God or the Spirit of God. Hence the Spirit
is more noble then the Soul.

The more noble always exists in the more ignoble, and internalls prevail over
externells, as well in essence as in power. So our external body is indeed
great in it is stature and quantity, and a wonderful creature.

Yet the soul dwelling in the body is far greater, and more wonderful, not in
corporeal quantity, but in Essence, Virtue and Power.

But the Spirit is the greatest of all, not in the lump or corporeal quantity,
but in Essence, Virtue, and Power; and therefore most wonderful.

There is nothing greater then that in which are all things. And,

There is nothing less then that which is in all smallest things. Therefore
let us observe this rule well:

By how much any thing is more inward and more hidden from the external
senses, by so much the more it is more worthy, noble and potent in it is
essence, nature and propriety. Which we will demonstrate by exanples.

There is not any house built for it self, but for the inhabitant. Now the
edifice is an external thing, and the inhabitant and internal thing. The
house is for the guest, and not the guest for the house. Therefore the
inhabitant is far more noble, worthy and excelllent in his essence then every
edifice, although sumptuous. For, what is the house profitable, the guest being
absent?

So garments are made and prepared for the body, that it might be and walk in
them. Garments are external things: the body is internal. Therefore the body
in its essence is far more noble and worthy then all garments, although
precious. For, what need is there of garments, if they are wanting which should
put them on? Therefore garments are for the body, and not the body for garments.

So the Body, raiment, house and habitation is a certain external thing to the
soul, but the soul is internal.

And the body is for the soul, and not the soul for the body. Therefore the
soul in her essence is a far more noble and worthy Creature then the body,
although most comely and most excellently proportioned. For, what avails the
body, the soul being wanting it is a carcass.

So the Soul, made and created for an habitation of the Divine Spirit, is
external: but the Spirit is internal. And the soul is for the Spirit, and not
the Spirit for the soul. Therefore the Spirit of God is found far more noble
and excellent, and worthy in his original essence, nature, virtue, power and
propriety.

So God is and abides the most inward, chief, great, potent, noble and worthy
above all things: adn contains all things in himself, and he himself is
contained of none. Moreover,

By how much any thing is more inward, by so much it is more nigh and near to
us, but also so much the harder to be found and known. Every thing that is most
inward is most precious and most noble.


Because of the too much aversion and abalienation of our soul from divine and
heavenly things: and by reason of the too much tenacity and adherency of our
love to the Creatures of the world. And on the contrary,

By how much any thing is more exterior, by so much the more it is remote from
us, and by so much the more strange. For example sake,

The Spirit of the Lord truly is and inhabiteth in my soul, whose seat is in
the captula of my heart: But seeing every inhabitant is whthin and his
habitation without, it follows, That the Spirit of the Lord is more near to
me then I am to my self. And so it most evidently appears, That the Kingdom of
God is not to be sought without us, here or there, but within us: witness
Christ himself, who says, Luke 17. being asked of the Pharisees when the
Kingdom of God should come: The Kingdom of God shall not come with
observation; neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there; For, Behold the
Kingdom of God is within you. And the Apostle Paul 14. Romans The Kingdom of God
is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy
Spirit. For by these he which does service to Christ, is accepted of God and
approved by men.

The Soul is and dwells in the heart, and the heart is in my body, therefore
the soul is more near to me then the body.

My Body is clothed with garments: hence the body is nearer to me then
garments, and the soul nearer to me then the body: and the Spirit nearer then
the soul, and therefore more noble, more worthy, and of more moment.

And because it is true, That every internal is more noble and more worthy
then his external, in which it is and dwells; that even all of us do witness
hilling or willing, knowing or not knowing.

For behold, if we are in danger of life by fire, by water, by perstilence, or
wars, etc. these being imminent upon us, then indeed,

In the first place, we leave behind us all our edifices, as well sumptuous as
vile, with our external goods, and with few things, if there be any we can
carry with us; we betake our selves to flight: so that the body being clad
might be preserved safe and unhurt, with the life and soul. By which very thing
we testify, that the internalls are more desirable then externalls. For who
would be so foolish, that he would neglect, lose and destroy his body for the
retaining of his edifices and external goods? when, the body being lost and
destroyed, edifices and external goods are much more lost and destroyed.

Furthermore, danger pressing, and necessity and straights urging us, and
overwhelming us, we with John the Disciple of Christ, even leave and cast off
our garments, with which we are covered, and whatsoever else is abounding to us
of our substance, and naked and poor we commit our selves to flight, that the
body only with the life and soul may be preserved, and kept safe and sure. Do
we not by this very thing point out and show that internalls are better and
more greater then externalls? seeing that the body and life are internal, but
vestments, external.

And who would be of so perverse a mind, that he should embrace vestments with
greater love then the body and life, and would in that mind persist in danger,
that he would retain and keep his garments, although he were compelled to
loose, and to destroy his body and life.

Moreover, in persecutions for the name of Christ, or for the truth, putting
our body and life in danger, we even leave those, and give them up to our
enemies, to Tyrants, etc. with patience like the Lamb of God, whom all sheep
imitate, only that the soul may be kept entire, strong, safe and incorrupt, in
the faith and knowledge of God and truth. Do we not signify by this, that
internalls prevail over externalls; because the soul is internal, the body
external; and who would be of so foolish a mind, that he had rather neglect
and loose his soul with Faith in God, and knowledge of the truth, only that he
might keep his external mortal body, and temporal life? For faith and the
knowledge of the truth being destroyed and lost, the body with the temporal
life is of no moment.

Finally, in extreme torments, anguish and infernal dolours of our Conscience
for sins committed, even with David we leave and execrate the very soul it
self, and we bring to naught, and empty our selves of all the so lace both of
God and the creatures, and we are left unto our selves, crying out with the Son
of God, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: So that God only, and alone,
might be, and reman in us, unhurt, inviolated, just and perfect in all things
that he does with us, both sweet, and bitter. So by adverse things, we are
always reduced to internalls, and make a regression to our selves, and unto
God which is in us. Do we not therefore after this manner, testify the truth
of this rule. That every internal is more noble and more worthy then his
exterior.

Wherefore, seeing there is nothing in us so near and intimate as God is, it
follows, that any other thing is not to be so esteemed, sought and loved, as
God alone, who has put and hid in us, the most excellent Treasure of his
divine Wisdom, Light, Life, truth and virtue taken from his own self, and has
commanded to ask him, seek, and knock in the hidden place of our heart, in
Spirit, and in Truth, having given a testimony, that the Kingdom of God, first
of all, to be sought, is not here or there without us, but is to be found most
inward in us, as a Treasure hid in a Field.

From all these things it clearly appears to me, that God is not at all more
remote or nearer to me in this life whilst I am in this world, and in this
mortal body, then he will be to me in life eternal, etc. But I have and feel
my God equally now present and intimate to me, even as I shall have him in the
other world, in a new body. For he is in me, and I in him, whether I am in a
mortal body in this world, or without this body in that world. This alone
makes the difference, that this thing even hitherto is hidden: but then it
shall be manifest and open.

But that I am not so nigh and near to him, as he is to me, this is not to be
imputed to him, but to my aversion, who do not sabathize in my God who is with
me, that is, who by running up and down with my unquite and vagabond soul
through the creatures, I am more delighted to be and to be busined in my proper
will out of my internal Country; and I suffer that ever hissing Serpent to
creep on to the creatures in the multifarious concupiscence and delectation of
the flesh, of the eyes, and pride of life, or self-love: neither am I less
frequent in the various discourse of my thoughts, ever and a non day and night
ascending out of my heart, now desiring this, now that, speculating, willing,
nilling, now this, now that; where moreover I weary and burden my self with all
kind of care, and vex my self with various affections: All which things are the
Astrologicall operation and revolution of the internal Stars in our soul.

But if I could Theologize my Astrology, that is, if I could desist sometimes
from all these things, and study to be at rest in my God who dwells with me,
that is, if I could accustom my mind to quiet and spiricuall tranquillity, that
it should cease to wander in the variety of thoughts, cares, and affections,
that it might be at leisure from the external things and creatures of this
world, and chiefly from the love of my self, that I might wholly die, and as it
were be anihilated in my self, and could come into a loathing and oblivion, not
alone of all the things of the whole world placed without me, and of mundane
friendship, which I have with men, but also into a plenary dereliction of my
self, that is, of my will, of mine, if there be any Wisdom, Knowledge, Science,
Art, Industry, Prudence, of mine, if there be any dignity, praise, honor,
authority, estimation in the world amongst men, of mine, if there be any
Office, State, Degree, Order, and in brief, into an absolute forgetfullnesse of
all my negociations and occupations, and of my self as well within as without,
which is nothing else then to Theologize Astrology.

Then at length should I begin more and more to see and know the most present
habitation of God in me, and so I should taste and eat of the Tree of Life,
which is in the midst of Paradise, which Paradise I my self am, as a guest with
whom God is, and ought to be, and I in like manner with God.

This I say, should be the exercise of my soul, the theologization of
Astrology, and a regression From Externalls to Internalls. Nature to Grace.
The Creature to God. The friendship of the World, to the friendship of God. The
tree of Death, to the tree of Life. Terrene things to Celestial.



So should I go again to my first original, from whence I went forth, by
arrogating to my self a liberty of willing, desiring, coveting, thinking,
speaking and doing what I pleased me, God in the mean time being neglected,
without whom I ought not to do any thing.

Whatsoever therefore we have from the Light of Nature, all this with most
humble self-denial once in the week is to be laid down at the feet of the best
and greatest God, whether it be Magic, or Gabalistic, or Astronomic, or Chimic,
or Medicinal, or Physical Science: Also Liberal Arts, and Methanick work,
and whatsoever Study, Office, State, Order, Dignity, Kind of life, also Wealth,
Riches, Houses, and all kind of natural gifts: All these appertain to this our
Astrology, and ought so to be Theologized, by the exercise of sanctifying the
Sabbath, which is an universal forgetfullnesse of all things and of our
selves, and the rest of our soul from all disquiet, in a sacred silence, a
cessation from all will, thought, desire, affection, discourse, operation, etc.
as well within, as without. And this is that only and principal cause of the
Sabbaths being divinely commanded to Man: to wit, that man should not eat death
and perish to himself by the eating of the forbidden Tree.

To eat, is to be delighted in himself and in the creatures, rather then in the
Creator himself.

To kiss himself in the gift received, Romans 1. 1. Cor. 2. 1. John 2.6. Mat. 2.
Genesis 20. Exodus
neglecting the giver.

To love the world, and things which are in the world, neglecting God.

To serve Mammon neglecting God.

To use all things after his pleasure and will, dispising the Law of the Lord.
Thou shall not covet, thou shall not eat, thou shall not desire to turn himself
from God to the creatures, and to himself. To commit whoredom with the
creatures. To depend on himself, and on things created. To languish in love of
terrene things, and temporal good things; setting God aside, which may be
described a thousand ways.

Hence the Doctrine of Christ, who came from above, and brings celestial and
divine Wisdom from the Light of Grace, sounds altogether contrary, to wit,

That a man ought to be converted into a child, and to have so much of the
knowledge of good and evil to live in him, as he had when he was but a child,
or infant newly born.

I say the Doctrine of Christ commands a man to eat of the Tree of life, to
live by the inspiration of the internal Godhead, which is,

To fall off again from the creatures, and from himself to God.

To adhere to God, Mammon being left.

To be united with God, the love of the creatures being left.

To believe in God, to offer, and to give up himflef to God, to pray; thy will
be done, etc.

To put off the old Man, and to put on the new Man.

To fly evil, and adhere to good, which in like sort may be explicated by a
thousand manner of speakings, and phrases from the very writings of the
Apostles.

But in what manner all, and singular kinds of sciences, and natural gifts,
and those vain studies, actions, businesses and differences of men, etc. arise
from the Light of Nature, or the Stars; and in what order they are referred to
the seven Governors of the world, and how a man ought to use them: also how
every one of us ought to Theologize his own Astrology flourishing in himself,
and to erect to himself a new nativity, from the heaven of the new Creature,
and to institute and assume a new kind of life: and chiefly, what is the solid
and the most certain cause of all of the holy Sabbath, that is, after what
manner a man ought to labor six days, and on the seventh day to sanctify the
Sabbath rightly. All these things are most evidently set forth and propounded
in the following Chapters of this book.

CHAP. 4. Of the composition of the Microcosme, that is Man, from the
Macrocosme, the great World
ADam the first parent of the whole humane kind, was produced and formed by the
admirable wisdom, and workmanship of God, as to his soul and body of the slime,
or dust of the earth; which slime or dust was such a Mass or matter, which had
conjoined and composed in it self the universal essence, nature, virtue and
propriety of the whole greater World, and of all things which were therein. I
say that Mass, slime or dust was a mere quintessence, extracted from every
part, from the whole frame of the whole world; from which slime or Mass, was
made such a creature, with it is form excepted, was one and the same with the
great world, of which it was produced. Hence that creature was called Man, who
afterward his admirable creation and formation being revealed amongst the
wise, was wont most fitly to be called the Microcosme, that is, the little, or
less world.

The absolute description, and essential explication of this slime, dust or
mass extracted from the whole macrocosme, we shall find every where abundantly
and wonderfully declared, alone by Theophrastus Paracelsus in his most
excellent writings.

Seeing therefore it is manifest, that every produced and composed thing, can
take or assume his essence, nature and propriety from nothing else, but from
that where of it is made and produced; which even that first Man, as an other
and later World, made of the former World, by the Ens of that slime, is made
pertaker of the same essence, nature and propriety, as the Macrocosme had in it
self. For the whole great world existing and being compact in that quintessence
of extracted slime, forthwith it followed, that the whole Macrocosme was
complicitly collected and transposed into man, by divine formation, the
substance and nature of the Macrocosme remaining nevertheless safe and entire.
For such is the condition in the universal production and generation of things,
that every like of it self produces his like, and that without destruction of
its essence and nature.

Hence, that which has its original and derivation from God, is the same that
God is; 3. John That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. That which is born
of the flesh, is flesh.
The Spirit or breath of God which is in Man immidiately proceeds from God,
therefore God is of a truth in Man by the Ens of inspiration.

That which has its original and derivation from the world, is the same that
the world is. The soul and body of man are immediately taken, extracted, and
composed of the World, therefore the world is of a truth in Man, by the Ens of
slime.

So the first Man made of the Macrocosme, bears in himself the Macrocosme, with
the essence and nature of all creatures complicated, collected and compacted
together: yet nevertheless, he formed us to his body of the Elements and
things elementated: as to his soul of the soul of the Macrocosme, or the Spirit
of Nature which contains and comprehends in himself the whole Firmament, with
all its Stars, and astralique virtues and operations: So it comes to pass,
That there is nothing without a man in the whole heaven of Nature, and in all
the Elements, with which man in his composition does not participate, and is
endued with its Nature.

But there are two things in which the Microcosme and the Macrocosme differ and
appear to be contrary, to wit,

The form of the person, and the complication of things.

As to the form, it seemed good to divine wisdom to convert that Mass
extracted from the Macrocosme, and to be converted into a man, not to put and
set it into the form of the Macrocosme, which is round and circular: Nor
according to the animal form: But it pleased him to erect and apply it to the
form of his own Image and similitude. Man nevertheless in the mean time
remaining the Macrocosme.

Therefore this difference does not touch his essence.

The form does not take away the truth of the subject, that man may not be
believed to be the Macrocosme.

As to the complication or composition of all natural things, into one body,
or into one person; all things cannot be apparent and distinctly known together
in a Man; one thing after an other, as it is excited and provoked, See
concerning this this Foundation of Wisdom by Paracelsus.
is manifest and flourishes in the species, other things in the mean time
remaining hid in the Macrocosme, all things are explicitly existing, living and
operating in the species: But in the Macrocosme all things are compact and
conjoined together.

Moreover after that Man the Microcosme was, and held all things now in
himself, out of which he was taken, behold the whole plenitude of Nature, as
well corporally as spiritually was conjoined in him, and as a most rich
Treasure collected and laid up in one Center, yet so as man should be all
things complicitly; and yet none of them all explicitly.

And from this Protop last, or first formed man and begetter of all, even in
like manner are we constituted and formed: Adam (...)
not of the same slime or Mass as that was in the beginning, whereof Adam was
made: But by a Mass extracted from the substance of the Microcosme, which we
with Paracelsus call the Ens of seed, which seed has and bears in it self
complicitly the whole Macrocosme, that is, Man, and thence the humane
offspring, as to the essence, nature and propriety in all things a like grows
and comes forth to its begetter, as a most lively image, which truly could not
be done if all these things did not lie hid, and were extant in the Ens of the
seed. Hence every one of us has the same in himself essentially delivered over
to himself by the Ens of the seed from his parent: which the first man received
and had from the extracted Macrocosme by the Ens of slime, to wit, an elemental
body from the Elements, and a soul or syderean spirit from the Firmament.

CHAP. 5. That all kinds of Sciences, Studies, Actions and life's flourishing
amongst men on the earth and Sea do testify, That all Astrology, that is,
natural wisdom, with all it is species, is and is to be really found in every
man: And so all things whatsoever men act on earth is produced, moved, governed
and acted from the inward heaven. And what are the Stars which a wise man
ought to rule.
IT is manifest therefore by the abovesaid, how man appears to be made at
length as to his Creation and Formation of slime, that is, from the Macrocosme.

1. Because Man the Macrocosme placed in the Macrocosme, agrees altogether as
well with the whole Firmament, as with all the Elements, and is one and the
same (his form only excepted) as we see redness to be altogether one and the
same in wine, and with wine, and whiteness in snow and with snow.

Then it follows: Seeing Man for himself and in himself is the whole world,
as he which has his proper Heaven, his proper Firmament, and Spirit of Nature,
with the Sun, Moon, Planets, and all the Stars with him in himself, of which
from within he is constellated, inclined, directed, moved, excited, drawn,
turned, governed, taught, illuminated, made joyful, made sad is fortunate, and
affected: It is manifest, that he is in no wise forced and compelled by the
external Firmament of the Macrocosme, our soul of the world, that he should
assume and take a mind and affections, of willing, doing, and operating this or
that from without, from the revolution, and inclination, or constellation of
the celestial Stars in the Macrocosme.

For their opinion is of no moment, who not rightly knowing the Macrocosme, are
fallen into that error, that they doubt not to determine: That man by the
external influence of the Stars, by a certain natural necessity is
conditioned, predestined, constellated, directed, compelled, and driven to
this or that good, or evil, Hence those false Proverbs; the Stars incline;
the Stars rule men. which is in no sort so, if according to their opinion it
be understood of the external Stars.

But we must know, that all things whatsoever that are done by men, as well in
soul, as in body, arise and proceed from within, from their own proper
inclination and nature.

Within, I say, in man is that Heaven, that Planet, that Sydus or Starr, by
which he is inclined, constituted, predestined and signed to this or that,
and not from without, by the constitution of the external Heaven.

And that saying, A wise man will rule the Stars.
a wise man shall rule the Stars: is not to be understood of the external
Stars, in the Heaven or Firmament of the great World; but of the internal
Stars, bearing sway and running up and down in man himself, which will more
and more appear by that which follows. But this we promise for the beginning
to be noted.

That the external Heaven with it is continual revolution, has a most
convenient correspondency with the inward Heaven in the Microcosme, and this
with that, which you may thus understand.

Whatsoever the sigure of the external Heaven is, in the point of conception
of any men, which happens in the matrix of the woman by the Ens of seed, even
now sent forth from Man; that Man which is born and grows from that seed,
receives from within such a constitution of his nature and life to be
performed on earth.

Yet that constitution lies so long hid and unknown, that is, without act in a
naked power, until a man born into the world and educated to the use of
free will, and reason, putting forth it self, begins to be moved and incited.
For then, and not before, that constitution of his heaven, begins by little and
little, to roll, bring forth, move, and show forth it self, when the Ascendants
of that sigure, by the imagination and fantasy, newly sprung up in the will
and reason, arise and proceed to the motion of the mind, and operation of the
body. And so the internal Heaven in the Microcosme begins his motion and
course, that a man from within, from the guidance of his own Nature, begins to
imagine, think, desire, hear, speak, do the same thing which before was
signified, from the positure of the external Heaven, while he was conceived.

Therefore the external heaven in the Macrocosme, as it has respect to Man,
is at least a looking glass and perludium, by which the Astrologer may look
into, search, know, and describe what and what kind of nature and propriety
shall happen, and rule in him, from the beginning of his nativity, to the end
of his life, as he shall live Astrologically, and not Theologically; what and
what manner his imagination shall be, what his affections, what his cupidities,
what his desires, what his manners, what his study, what his kind of life and
death, with what things he shall be most delighted, and on the contrary, with
what he shall be adverse, and all things whatsoever seem to belong to the
condition of humane life. This I say, may from the position or erected sigure
of the external heaven be prognosticated and foretold, not that those things
are so done by necessity or coactive force: but only that those things are
presignified, and as it were preludiated, and are indeed a certain picture of
humane life, as in like sort a certain living man is painted by a painter on
the wall, from which picture his species and proportion with all his habit, is
exhibited and declared to be known: So also we men living according to the
course of nature, and not Theologizing our Astrology are known, described and
discovered by an Astrologer from the Table sigure, face and concordance of the
superior Firmament, as by a looking glass.

For living naturally, we have from the figure of Heaven a natural description
of our life, whether it be honest or dishonest, whether virtuous or vicious:
Yet so as the impulsive or efficient cause of living thus, or so, may not be
thought to proceed and be impressed on man from the external Heaven, but from
within, from our internal Heaven, which is in our soul delighted, with this or
that manner of living. For neither God nor the Macrocosme do compel or force
man (placed in the midst) from without, to this or that good or evil kind of
life, by a certain natural necessity: but that very thing which is put into us
by God, and by the Macrocosme, that is it whereby we are led, whereby we are
constellated, moved, Romans 6. Galat. 5.
instigated, stirred up, invited, governed and inclined.

The one is the Spirit of God, the breath of God, the deity and heavenly light,
the holy Spirit, the mind of God.

The other is the Spirit of Nature, the breath of the World, the Light of
Nature, the affections of the flesh, t^rrene Wisdom, the animal Man, the
Syderean Spirit, the reason of Man.

Both leads to their original, and shows what are theirs.

Our Nature instigates, moves, and leads to our naturalls: But the Spirit of
God, which we have in us from God, instigates, moves, urges and leads us to
supernaturalls, that is, thither whence he himself is.

There are I say, two Inspirers, two Governors, two Captains, two Lords in us,
to whom none of us can equally serve. The one tends to the straight way, to
inherit and possess the Kingdom of Heaven, by contempt of the world, and
denial of our selves: the other neglecting the Kingdom of God, to enter into
the broad way. The one is of God which is the Theological Spirit, propounding
and persuading the Theological life to Man: the other is from Nature, from the
World, which is the Astrologicall Spirit, propounding and persuading the
Astrologicall life to Man.

The Theological Spirit, being endued with supernatural Light, and Wisdom,
shows the Kingdom of God, and eternal life.

But the Astrologicall Spirit endowed with natural Wisdom and Light, shows the
shop of Nature, and the glory of this world; therefore those which are acted by
the Spirit of God, these are the Sons of God, that is, who live Theologically:
But they which are acted and led by the Spirit of Nature (caring nothing for
the Kingdom of God, and the eternal Country) these are the sons of Nature,
the sons of this world, animal men, not doing the will of God, but the will of
the flesh: in which with all their glory and magnificence, they whosoever they
are, how great soever they are, and wheresoever they are, must perish. For
without the Theologization of Astrology, no mortal man can attain eternal
salvation and beatitude. We must die once to flesh and blood, and to the whole
animal Man, and we must live to God; which life is altogether contrary to the
worldly life. Of which more largely in the Epistles of Paul, and other Apostles.

But the Stars which a wise man is commanded to rule, are not those celestial
Stars extant in the Firmament of the Macrocosme, which are set before the
Creator of the Elements, that they might illuminate the earth, and be for
signs and seasons, and rule over the day and the night; those have their
peculiar Regent, Lord and Governor, to wit, the Spirit or soul of the world
diffused into the seven Planets, and the rest of the Stars of the whole Zodiac,
by which he exercises his rule, has his influx into inferior things:
therefore there is no cause that any should through simplicity, think the
dominion which a wise man has over the Stars, belongs to the moderation of
the external Firmament; as if a wise man ought to rule the course of the
Celestial Stars and signs, and to reduce the frame of the Macrocosme under
his power, to direct and govern the Sun, Moon, Planets, and Stars according to
his pleasure, and to make calm and tempestuous weather according to his will.
Not so,

But the Stars over which we ought to rule, if we will be true wise men, are
all the cogitations, speculations, cupidities, affections, etc. ascending by
imagination out of our hearts, respecting the things and creatures of the
world, and tending by free will and reason to abuse and pleasure: to them we
ought not to be too much adicted, or overmuch to connive and indulge. For in
these that deadly and infernal snake or serpent lies hid, seducing man by all
sort of concupiscences into an unlawful love, honor, and worship of the
creatures, and thereof makes a Babilonish whore, as in the subsequent matter
will be demonstrated.

CHAP. 6. Touching a double Firmament and Starr in every man, and that by the
benefit of Regeneration in the exercise of the Sabbath, a man may be transposed
from a worser Nature into a better.
FRom the abovesaid, there appears a most elegant Doctrine, to wit, although
some of us by constitution and concordance of the external and internal
heaven, in the point of his conception and nativity, should happily have
attained the most wicked constellation and nature, ready and prone to commit
any kind of maliciousness: so as he should even bear in his face, in his
countenance, in his hands, and in his whole body, an evident signature or
phisiognomie to every most wicked crime, all which, should show most certain
tokens that he should act, not only a most miserable and most wicked kind of
life; but also should expect on himself the most cruel punishment and
destruction: Yet nevertheless we must not altogether despair of such a man's
correction and salvation. The reason is,

Because besides the natural Heaven, and Astralic Firmament which is in our
soul, we have another Heaven, another Sydus, another Starr, another Light,
another Constellation, which is the Spirit of God, by whose power being
supported, we may shake off, and drive away all the provocations of the evil
ascendents of natural Stars, as an Ass is wont to shake off, and drive away
flies and gnats stinging him on his back.

Therefore although nature is potent and strong in her self, in inciting and
forcing a man in his proper will and reason, by her diverse and delectable
concupiscences to any kind of crime: Yet the Spirit of the Lord in his virtue,
power, and fortitude, is far superior and exceeds nature in as great a measure
as the Sun is seen to excel the Moon. Let a man then at length learn, and do
his endeavor that he may know what that most profitable precept of God,
touching the sanctification of the Sabbath to be exercised, Sibi velit
every seventh day requires of him, in which exercise, nevertheless, the worst
of things may be corrected, and also transformed into the best things: For such
a medicine lies hid in the holy exercise of the Sabbath, as whole Nature with
her universal virtue is not able to exhibit to a man; for which medicines sake
this book is written

A man therefore inclined naturally, to this or that vice, by occasion of his
generation, ought not to connive at himself, or to frame any excuse, as if he
could by right accuse the external heaven, that that is the cause, wherefore
he cannot live honestly, and do that which is good, nor by any means can
overcome, change, break, correct his sinful nature, or convert it into better,
and so under the pretext of humane imbecility, as it were, defend his
spontaneous malice, avarice, lust, pride and intemperance, etc. and to go
forward in a vicious life.

O opinion most worthy of refutation, and to be acursed! I pray what should the
cry of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles avail? Repent, repent, be ye converted
unto me, and I will be converted unto you, put off the old Man, and put on the
new Man, and fly evil, and cleave to that which is good, and lay aside the
works of darkness, and walk in the light. I say to what end should these
things be spoken and commanded, if our defense or excuse should have place in
the divine Judgment?

Let such a man the refore so wickedly deceived of himself, suffer himself to
be instructed and taught by this our most profitable Theologization of
Astrology, wherein we have found and tried, not without the greatest joy of
the mind, that besides the shop and operation of nature, there is always
present in us something far more great and excellent, with the knowledge and
virtue whereof we being fraught, have power of resisting not only one, but all
vices, as well the greatest, as the least, whatsoever lie hid and are manifest
in us: Yea, power not only of casting down, and drowning one stone, but also
the whole mountain of the Macrocosme being in us, in the Sea of divine Power,
or extirpating utterly, not only one leaf, but even the whole tree of the
knowledge of good and evil extant in us, and of transplanting it into the
garden of the celestial Paradise.

For so all these things are manifest in Theological mysteries, to those that
understand these things. Truly it is evident, all things are essentially to be
transferred unto Man, which are divinely written for Man.

I say, we have a power lying hid in us of over ruling whole nature, See the
Scripture of Regeneration and Newbirth.
of stopping the Serpent, and overcoming all his force, and of instituting in
us a new, and that good, a better, the best nativity of erecting and
instituting in us, from a new heaven, a new kind of life, and a far more happy
sigure, and that by the sole benefit of the Sabbath; by which from day to day
we may put off the old Man, and put on the new Man, fall back from vices, and
pass on to virtues, that is, to shake off from us all the ascendent Stars, or
flames of diverse concupiscences and desires to all kind of pleasures of this
world, ever and anon provoking, drawing, and seducing us.

By this means we go forth safe and free from the house of Egypt, from the
Babilonian Captivity, and we escape from the power of the great Creature, we
overcome sinful nature, we resist the Serpent, we chase away the devil. And
by how much the more frequent we are in this exercise of the Sabbath, or in
this Theologisation of Astrology: by so much the more we are made strangers to
Nature, that we are scarce any more known or touched by her, neither does any
Astrologer, Phisiognomour, Signatour, Divinatour, Artist how industrious
soever, know any more to erect any certain nativity, or to prognosticate any
thing to come. Because they which are frequent in familiarity with God, these
are more and more alienated from the world, that they are not any more said to
be of the world, John 17.
but of heaven, although as to the body, they are as yet conversant in the
world. And whatsoever any one does by the Sabbath, in the introversion of his
mind, he acts and orders with God, and God with him, in the hidden place of his
heart, this cannot be seen or known by any Spirit: much less by Man.

In brief, by the Sabbath alone, the Phoenix of our soul is renewed, who
altogether denying, deposing, refusing and accompting for nothing, all the
vanity of this world, and it self from within and without, plainly dies in the
forgetfullnesse and contempt of all things, Romans 12.
and of it self, and offers it self a living and pleasing sacrifice to God, and
there being regenerate anew, becomes a new creature, a new offspring from the
seed of the woman, by conception from the holy Spirit is made a Son of God, a
new Man, an imitatour of Christ, following his steps, is made a hater of evil,
and a follower of good, a new plant, a new tree that is good, which brings
forth good fruits, this is true repentance, true penitence, the true putting
off the old Man, etc.

Here some Astrologers are to be admonished of their want of knowledge, who
have not doubted to subject even the whole man, with all things which are in
him, to the dominion of the world and Stars, in erecting their nativities, as
if a man were, or had no more in himself then a bruit or beast, through
ignorance passing by the constitution of Man in three parts, Spirit, Soul and
Body; whose soul arising from the Firmamentall Zodiac, and whose body from the
Elements, are altogether subject to the dominion of Nature: But not the Spirit
which we have from God; and listening nothing to that, that every Disciple of
Christ, and friend of God, regenerate from above, by faith and the death of sin
in the most holy Sabbath, has within himself, a most present medicine in his
heart, against all the poisonous and deadly wounds of nature, and the Serpent;
and also the divine Commandment of deposing, overcoming, and conquering the
old heaven, with his inclinations of diverse concupiscences, and of walking in
the newness of the Spirit, in the Light of Grace.

To wisemen therefore, that is, to those that know both God and themselves
rightly, the matter is far better to be looked into, for they know both are in
us.

God, and Nature. The Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of the world. The Tree
of Life, and the Tree of Death. The greater Light, and the lesser Light. The
seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent.
And also that man is placed between these two, to be exercised in this world
in a perpetual war: whether of these should overcome, thence shall man have his
reward, for God will render to every one, all crafty excuse and imbecility
being laid aside, etc. according to his works, whether they be good or evil.

Here you shall observe an example, touching the change of man from an
inferior and worser nature, into a superior and better nature. If you take a
certain stone, lying by chance in a sunny place, and very much heated by the
too much parching heat of the Sun, and put it into water, or some river, then
the Sun can no more make it so hot, or penetrate it with his heat; in like
manner the case is, in the Theologization of Astrology. The exercise of the
Sabbath, or Theologization of Astrology, is to dic to thy self and the whole
creature, to offer thy self wholly to God, with all things which are within and
without us. Hither belong all the Scripture, and all books, speaking of the
mortification of Man.
Take or gather, and apprehend all thy evil nature, and thy unsincere
affections, and unlawful lusts, too much operating and flourishing in thee, I
say take and put them by the Sabbath, into the mind or spirit of thy mind,
which thou have from God, who is the everlasting fountain and water of life,
and sabathize in a solid and constant abnegation of thy self, and of all things
known unto thee, which are within thee, as well as without thee, that thou
may almost wholly die there; then will thy soul with all her adherent stones
of concupiscences, fall down and be drowned in the depth of the supernall
water, which is the Spirit of God infused in us, and the firmamentall operation
will more and more cease and be wearied in thee, and the ascendant Stars of
thy concupiscences, will no more afflict, urge, drive, carry thee as before:
but from day to day, thou shall ease thy self from that most hard yoke of the
Zodiac, and of all the Planets, thy youth shall be renewed as an Eagle, and
thou shall be like an infant newborn, and shall perceive in thy self new
virtues, and affections to work and move in thee, arising, inclining,
oecupying, leading and governing thee from the celestial Starr, and influence
of the divine Spirit, etc. So as where heretofore, thou have bin the servant of
sin, and have given thy members weapons of unrighteousness, and malice, now
with trembling thou abhorrest the performances of thy forepast life, and
fraught with a new mind, heart, affections and desire, from the exercise of the
Sabbath, by the Spirit of God; hereafter thou shall serve God, and give up thy
members weapons of justice, piety, charity, mercy, meekness, temperance,
modesty, chastity, etc. and so thou shall rightly Theologize thy Astrology, so
shall thou best overcome, correct, amend thy nature, so shall thou rightly
tread the head of the Serpent under thy feet, so shall thou well silence in thy
self the assaults of the devil, etc.

Hence the true Sabbath instituted and commanded of God, is the best care and
medicine against all kind of evil, which quickly being death eternal to the
soul, and temporal to the body, by which we may put off, bear and take off
that great and most grievous yoke and mountain of so great a Zodiac, of so
great a Firmament, of so great Governors. I say to take away the Kingdom or
rule, and to precipitate into the immense Sea of eternal water, and ever and
anon get new strength, and come out more vivacious, which was well known and
used by the Patriarchs in the first age, whence also they could get to
themselves the Enochian long life upon earth, by the exercise of this kind of
mental Sabbath, which indeed is altogether obliterated, abrogated in this our
age, and seems to be a thing unknown.

But how every one of us ought, and may know, and try in himself, what and what
kind truly is their Astrology, or firmamentall action or operation of the
Light of Nature; and how he may and can Theologize the same, that is, overcome
Nature be made the Son of God, etc. this the following Chapters will
illustrate, and teach more clearly then the Sun.

CHAP. VII. Touching the distribution of all Astrology, into the seven
Governors of the world, and their operations and offices, as well in the
Macrocosme, as in the Microcosme.
THe whole shop of Nature, with all her sorts of sciences and actions, is
ordained and distributed into seven chief members, Kingdoms or Dominions,
according to the seven Astra's of the Planets of the, of the, of of, of, of,
of, who are the Governors of all natural things, extant in the whole frame of
the world, by the four Elements.

But the Light of Nature which we call Astrology, is nothing else, then the
very life, vigor, virtue, action and operation of the whole world, in things
which proceed and come forth from the soul of the world, or the spirit of the
Firmament, whose seat is in the body of the Sun. For there the soul of the
world, or the spirit of the Macrocosme dwells; as the soul of the Microcosme in
the heart, and in the Sun it is most potent, whence it diffuseth his virtues,
actions and powers, out of it self ever and anon into the other six Planets,
the,,,,,: And moreover in all the other Stars, being throughout the whole
stelliferous Chaos.

By this only soul the whole world lives, is governed, agitated and moved, as a
body by his spirit.

The Sun is the heart and light of the world, in this heart I say the soul
inhabits, which illuminates all and every the Planets and Stars, upwards above
it self, and downwards beneath it self, as well in the day as in the night
time, and disperses his power into all and singular bodies, as well the
superior things to the utmost superficies of the frame, as also the inferior
things even to the inward Center in the earth. Yea, the Sun by his virtue
passes through all corporealls like unto glass, The power and working of the
Sun.
and operates in them without any impediment.

So his force penetrates the whole body of the Sea as glass, without any
obstacle, even to the lowest bottom thereof: So the whole body of the earth,
full of pores on every side, is passable to the Sun, even to the inward point
of his Circle. So the Sun fills the sphere of Air: also the Spears of Heaven;
and enters into views, and possesses with his power all the Angels of all the
regions and parts of the world, as the soul does his body of the Microcosme,
and not only the Chaos and the bodies of Elements, but also all the generations
and substances of all things whencesoever existing, as well subtle as gross,
as well light as heavy, as well soft as hard, mettalls, mountains, hills,
gemms, rocks, stones, wood, and whatsoever is every where, so as it reaches to
the very Center of the earth, neither is his force and operation wanting, or
deficient there: For all bodies though never so great, gross, thick, are
altogether as glass, to the penetrative power of the Sun: and although our
eyes do not so expressly know and see this present ingressive, penetrating,
subtle and active power of the Sun in all things, but the gross bodies
always are and remain in our eyes gross, dark, shady: Yet in respect of the
Sun, and to the virtue of the Sun after their manner, all things are diaphane,
and perspicuous, and penetrable. Which solar virtue thrusts forth and produces
all things hid in the earth: and as the Air is such, that with the very virtue
of the Sun, it does essentially enter into all bodies, penetrate and fill all
things. For fire is the life of things, Lise is fire.
no fire can burn, that is, live without Air, wheresoever therefore there is
life or fire, or the virtue of the Sun, there also is Air. The world a great
Creature.
Now the whole greater world, as to its soul and body with all the creatures
that are therein, is one Creature by it self, and one animal, and lives like
an animal, having in it self its vital spirit, endued with a sevenfold
operation, or diffused into the seven Planets, into all the Stars, and into
all the Elements, and all vegetables, Mineralls and animalls generated of
Elements. The Element of Fire has his shop or seat in the body of the Sun,
Planets, and all the Stars: in that fire the Phoenix of the world, or soul of
the world dwells, which operates all things, and is the Light of Nature, the
Vulcan of Heaven, the Arthens of Nature.

The Air is it is respiration and balsome. The Water is it is blood. The Earth is
it is flesh.
In like manner also it is in the Minor World in Man, who as to his soul and
body (the form excepted) in all things answers to the Major World, as a son to
his father, because taken out of him, and placed in him.

In the heart, is the seat or habitation of the soul of the little world, or
the Syderean Spirits, whose virtue, life, motion, nature, force, operation,
ever and anon by going forth, diffuseth it self into the other six principal
members of the Microcosme, the Brain, the Liver, the Lungs, the Gall, the
Spleen, the Reins, and from thence into the whole body, and all the muscles,
veins, nerves, parts and extremities of the whole Microcosme; and so that only
soul resident in the heart, carries, governs, agitates, leads, moves the whole
body, according to the nature and propriety of these seven principal members;
by which the body performs all his works, as well artificial and subtle, as
simple and rude. As the soul of the Macrocosme laboring in the seven
Governors of his body, and the rest of the Stars produces all created things.

Therefore as to the concordance of these seven Governors, Planers, Stars, or
virtues in the Major and Minor World, it is certain, that 1. The Heart. In the
Microcosme is the same, and has the same force, that as 1. In the Macrocosme.
2. The Brain. In the Microcosme is the same, and has the same force, that as
2. In the Macrocosme. 3. The Lungs. In the Microcosme is the same, and has the
same force, that as 3. In the Macrocosme. 4. The Reins. In the Microcosme is
the same, and has the same force, that as 4. In the Macrocosme. 5. The Gall.
In the Microcosme is the same, and has the same force, that as 5. In the
Macrocosme. 6. The Liver. In the Microcosme is the same, and has the same
force, that as 6. In the Macrocosme. 7. The Spleen. In the Microcosme is the
same, and has the same force, that as 7. In the Macrocosme.


And as to the Elements.

1. The Flesh. Has his anatomy of the Microcosme. 1. The Earth. Of the
Macrocosme. 2. The Blood. Has his anatomy of the Microcosme. 2. The Water. Of
the Macrocosme. 3. The Respiration. Has his anatomy of the Microcosme. 3. The
Air. Of the Macrocosme. 4. The Heat. Has his anatomy of the Microcosme. 4. The
Fire. Of the Macrocosme.
For in the Flesh of the Microcosme lies hid the essence, nature and propriety
of all vegetables springing out of the earth, compacted and dispersed
throughout the whole body.

In the Blood, does exist the essence, nature and propriety of all mineralls
and mettalls bred of water, dispersed throughout the whole region of the blood.

In the Respiration, whose seat is in the Lungs, the Bowels, and the Veins,
and all pores, mirscles, etc. is the essence, nature and propriety of all the
airy creatures, dispersed through the whole body.

In the Heat dwells the essence, nature, force, operation and propriety of all
the Stars, and constellations of Stars, dispersed-through the whole body.

Moreover, as to the concordance of either Light, as well in the Major as in
the Minor world, thus it is.

Whatsoever things man living on earth has found out, first the oretically, by
speculating, meditating, searching and inquiring, excogitating from within in
his heart, and after by his free will or desire produces endeavors, attempts,
institutes, handles, operates and transferrs to practice in whatsoever kind of
Sciences, Arts, Faculties, (Theology excepted which is not a humane invention)
studies, handyworks, labors and negotiations, whether they be referred to good
or evil, Or also the fruit of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
which is evident only to Magies.
all these comprehended under one name, are called the Light of Nature; or
Astrology or natural Wisdom arising from the natural heaven, or Firmament
and Stars: That wisdom and that light is in the soul of Man, dwelling and
working in the heart, which if it be exalted in its power given to it, and
created in it, can do the same, and more, then the soul of nature in the
Macrocosme, whose seat is in the Sun; because Man the Microcosme is the
quintessence, extracted from the Macrocosme.

But seeing all and singular Sciences, Arts, Faculties, Orders, States, kinds
of life, and studies flourishing amongst men on the earth arise and proceed
from an internal invisible Heaven, Firmament, Starr and Light of Nature, in
the Microcosme, which is extracted from the Light, Heaven, Firmament and Starr
of the Macrocosme, and has his singular anatomy, distribution and conveniencie
to the offices and operations of the seven Governors of the world without: We
as the order of those Governors extant in the Firmament of Heaven, is exposed
to our eyes, will first of all handle Saturn, occupying the Supreme sphere, to
wit, what is the Theorie and practice of his Heaven, Starr or Constellation,
with his adjunct Stars in the Macrocosme, that is, what is his condition,
nature, propriety, virtue and inclination, what Science, what Art and Industry,
what Order, what Study, what fortune, what good, and what evil men draw, and
handle from him on the earth.

Whereby it will appear, that Saturn is not only without a man in the Major
world; but also in man, with all the legion and inclination of their adjunct
Stars.

Then how the whole Astrology, that is, the nature, propriety and operation of
this Planet ought to be Theologized, by the exercise of the Sabbath.

CHAP. VIII. Touching the Astrology of Saturn, of what kind it is, and how it
ought to be Theologized.
SAturn as to the description of his substance and nature in the Macrocosme, is
one of the chief of those seven Stars, which we call Planets, or Governors of
the world, walking next of all in the aerie Region under the Firmament or
Zodiac, and ordained in a certain Sphere, or Circle, or Mansion; the circuit of
circle he finisheth, he passes over once in the space of thirty years time,
through the twelve celestial Signs extant in the Zodiac. His body arising from
the Element of Fire, and illuminating that, is cherishing, and governing the
earth; and what are in and on the earth; his body is fiery and globous, his
Astralic force, which is the firmamentall or syderean Spirit, is invisible. Now
Saturn is conditioned with that nature and propriety from the first creation,
that he may send forth and exercise the virtue and operation of his splend or
and light, in his subjects existing here and there in the four Elements, as
are vegetables, mineralls, animalls, properly and in specie pertaining to him,
wherein he effects and frames such a nature and virtue, as he has in himself:
Now Saturn has his subjects appropriate to himself in every kind of creature,
amongst Vegetables he has his young twigs, his herbs, his plants, his flowers,
his trees in which he operates by his influence after his manner: So amongst
mineralls and mettalls, also amongst animalls, creeping, going, (creatures,)
cattle, beasts, watery and volatill (creatures.)

For the whole university of the creatures of this world with us men, is
divided into seven kinds or assemblies, and dispersed into every region, which
answer to these seven Governors in their natural virtues and proprieties, as
well internal as external.

But touching the Astronomicall condition of Saturn, and the rest of the
Planets, to wit, what kind of motion, position, course, quantity, distance,
opposition, conjunction, and other dimensions of this kind they have amongst
themselves; also touching the difference of their weights in mettalls, etc. it
is not our purpose here to handle them; concerning such kind of things consult
Astronomicall books, and Chimicall books, and the like, publicly extant
abroad; but we rather handle and show this. How all the studies, and offices,
and kinds of life of all men have their original from the Stars, and to which
Planet every thing is to be referred: Then how the whole Astrology ought to be
Theologized, that is, how every one of us ought to know, discern, hate, put
off, say aside, and deny the old man made of Astrology, with all his Wisdom,
Science, Knowledge, Prudence, Industry, Art, and whatsoever a man has,
occupies and possesses of the gifts of Nature, and in the denial of himself,
and all that he has, as well within as without, altogether to grow a child
again, to be made an infant, yea a fool; and to put on the new Man which is
created according to God, to walk in newness of life, to die to sin, and to
live to justice, to know that Babilonian Whore and her Beast, etc. and to
preserve himself from her, etc. to know the forbidden Tree, and to eat of the
Tree of Life, and to pass over from nature into grace, to be made a new
creature, to be born again, to transplant himself from the terrene Paradise
into the Heavenly; to labor six days, and rightly to sanctify the seventh,
and the like. This is the intention, end and scope of this our work.

Therefore Saturnists, or the worshippers of Saturn, whose minds, desires,
wills, inclinations, affections, concupiscences, pleasures, cogitations,
speculations, inventions, actions and labors are ascribed to Saturn, as to
their study and kind of life, are men in whom is and flourishes all kind of
science and industry.

1. Cain was a husbandman. Abell a keeper of sheep.
Of all Agriculture, as are Husbandmen, Countrymen, Farmers, Tyllers of the
ground: also Mowers, Threshers, Heardsmen, Swineheards, Pastors of cattle
Purveyors of corn, or those which exercise merchandise with corn and pulse:
also dressers of Vineyards, that purge Wines, Gardners: in brief all
agriculture, with all its species.

2. Jabal was the father of inhabitants in tents and feeders of sheep.
The whole art and science edificatory under; with all kind of Artificers and
Workmen, are comprehended, as Rough Masons, Stonecutters, Carpenters, Joyners,
and in brief the whole administration of oeconomie, or household affairs joined
with parsimony or frugality.

3. Tuball Cain found out every artifice of brass and iron.
The whole art and Metallic science, which teaches the manner of searching,
and trying the bowels of the earth, and of digging mineralls, metalls, and
riches, the provocations of evils: also Treasurers, and whosoever seem to seek
and take their livelihood from the earth by the labors of their hands, as are
Potters, Tilemakers, bearers of dead bodies, Fishmongers, Rootsellers,
Colliers, and others of this kind: and also Clothiers, Linnenweavers,
Shomakers, Cobblers, Cardmakers, etc. Also solitary men, as Monks, Hermits, and
like to these.

As touching the mind and vices, Saturnists are avaritious men, covetous of
gain, usurers, lenders for gain, Jews, Tolgatherers or Publicans, tenacious,
livers sparingly, Mammonists, altogether watching for their proper commodities:
Also thieves, robbers, makers of false money, Sergeants, false Judges, Hangmen,
Inchanters, Evilldoers: also men austere by nature, froward, more sad then
joyful, Thoughtfull, Melancholic, Phantastic, very Silent, Tedious, Infidells,
Sacrilegious, and what kinds of life soever of this sort. Likewise. (...),
laborious, full of business, tumbling, macerating and wearying themselves in
continual cares, and furthermore whatsoever appears like to these.

As to the quality of the body and external manners; Saturnists are men worn
with years and age, as well men as women, covered with gray-hairs, with a
slender and lean body, thin beard, eyes lying deep in the head, with a
neglected form, and not amiable, always looking grimly, (...), halting,
beggars, often sick, etc.

All these studies, and all and singular kinds of life of men, as they are
formed and seen abroad amongst all Nations, people, kindreds, etc. of the whole
compass of the earth, are referred to the Heaven, Region, Dominion, Nature,
and inclination of Saturn.

I say, all these kind of men, with all their studies and kinds of life, as
well honest as dishonest, as well good as bad, as well private as public, are
worshippers of Saturn, for that in the handling of Saturn, that is, in the
drawing forth of the nature of the Saturnine light, they spend their labor and
time, and by diligent study and inquisition they draw forth, search, produce
and manifest those things of Saturn, which are in natural things.

All the Industries, Inventions, Arts, Actions and labors of these men in
every season have proceeded, and as yet do proceed, from the internal
invisible heaven, which is in the Microcosme, and are part of the Light of
Nature, in which man walks, whether well or ill, honestly or filthily,
according to the diversity of his flexible will and desire, as well to good as
to evil, and men are busied about the external subjects of the Macrocosme,
without which, vain were the vigor, and endeavor of the Light of Nature in
man. For every action of the Microcosme from within, tends to the subjects of
the Macrocosme without; because there the works of man are perfected (or
performed.) For indeed man has from the Light of Nature in himself, the
Science of plowing and tilling the earth, Fields, building houses, of seeking
and handling mettalls, etc. but he has not in himself the subjects matter and
instruments, therefore he takes them from the Macrocosme, and perfects his
work, found out and excogitated, by the Light of Nature. Thus seeing all the
external work of men arise from within, from the invisible revolution of the
internal Stars, ever and anon ascending and shining forth by cogitations and
imaginations, and are perfected by external operations and labors; we may
from every work of man see and know the constitution of the internal heaven,
what kind of positure, what ascendents, what motions, constellations and
inclinations every artificer has; where it is wonderful to behold the variety
of the natural light. Hence by how much the more the artifice does appear in
external works, by so much the more and more perfect, has the constitution
and influence of the internal heaven, been with the workman.

Therefore we must know that every species, of whatsoever Science, Art, and
Faculty, is a singular constellation, starr, inclination and influence
ascending from the inward heaven, and shining, acting and operating one by one
in man; therefore all the cogitations, imaginations, inventions, desires,
studies and intentions of Saturnists bent or inclined to good or evil, are the
Astra's or Stars ascending from the inward heaven, and are the operation of
the Saturn, of the Microcosm in the soul with his Stars agreeable to himself,
in which cogitations and operations that crafty Serpent, which almost none in
this our age seems to know, is powerful and reigns, by leave permitted to
him by God, to tempt and prove man (placed in the midst) by these delights of
the Light of Nature, and of the things of this world, and to bend the will,
love, desire and concupiscence thereof from Good to Evil, from God to the
Creature, whereunto man (O grievous!) is too too ready and prompt.

Truly innumerable and infinite are the multitude of men living on the earth,
which are found in this kind or practice of Astrology: For it is (which we
would have mistically spoken) one of those seven Congregations or Generations
of the world, or people worshipping the Queen of Heaven, or venerating and
worshipping the Babilonian Whore, and adoring the Beast endowed with seven
heads and ten horns. And this is the sense which sleeps with wisdom, which will
appear better by the following things.

Now as the external heaven in the Macrocosme, always and ever and anon is
rolled and turned about with a perpetual motion, and always other and other
Stars are seen to appear ascending, and always descending, so as there is a
perpetual mutation and viciscitude of the actions of Nature laboring in the
greater world, where now it is Winter, now Spring, now Summer, now Autumn, now
day, now night, now fair weather, now tempest, now snow, now rain, now winds,
now storms, now this, now that, etc. which are all the Astralic operations of
the Heaven of the Macrocosme: So also in like sort is the course, viciscitude,
motion and revolution of the Stars, ever and anon ascending, and descending in
the heaven or soul of the lesser world, that is, The soul, or our syderean
Spirit, is an unquiet Spirit, wherein the ascendent cogitations, new
concupiscences, various desires, are always moved, excited and felt, now
willing this, now nilling that, now so, now thus, now we rejoice, now we
sorrow, now we are beaten and agitated with these, now with those affections,
now we are occupied with these, now with those businesses and labors, all
which are nothing else then the Astrology of the Microcosme, to be Theologized
in all of us that are willing to use them piously.

But how and wherefore ought the Astrology of Saturn to be Theologized in Man?
If thou ask me, wherefore and how all the natural Sciences appertaining to
the Astrology of Saturn, together with all the kinds of the Saturnine life,
ought and may be Theologized? I again ask thee, that thou tell me the cause;

Wherefore, according to that great precept of God, we ought to labor and
finish our work in six days, but the seventh day to sanctify the Sabbath: or,

Wherefore we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, and possess beatitude in
eternal life, unless we shall be converted and be made as infants. For these
have one and the same reason and cause, tend to one, will one, belong to one.

The answer therefore is: therefore we ought to Theologize Astrology,
therefore we ought to labor six days, and sanctify the seventh: therefore we
ought to be converted and become as infants, because nothing at all but the New
Creature, the new Man from Heaven, he that is regenerate from above, he that is
born again of immortal seed, is required to the possession or acquisition of
the Kingdom of Heaven, not the old Man from the Earth seeking earthly things,
gaping after earthly things, rejoicing in earthly things occupied, delighted in
earthly things, loving, possessing, savouring earthly things: I say not such,
but as we have now said, the man born again from above, seeking those things
which are above, and not those things which are below, not arising from the
will of the flesh, and not of the will of man, but of God.

But to the end that we may be the better understood of the ruder sort, first
we will handle a few things in general.

What is the Theologization of Astrology? afterward we will set upon our
Saturn, with his professions and faculties, where we shall demonstrate to the
eye, That in the sole Theologization of Astrology is to be sought and found
the gate of Paradise, to eat of the tree or word of life, which is in the midst
of Paradise, etc. Also what is that strait gate that leads to life, which few
find; and that the broad way, which leads to hell which many walk; Also, what
is that Babilonish Whore, with whom all the people of the world commit
fornication, etc. and many, and those the greatest Theological mysteries are
here shown to the intelligent, which otherwise are and abide hidden from the
eyes of all mortals.

Therefore to Theologize Astrology, is nothing else then to labor six days,
and to sanctify the seventh, that is to rest and desist from labor, and to
keep holy day in God, with the spirit, soul and body. Which God the Father
seriously commanded to his people, by the Law in the old Testament in these
words, Exodus 20.
Remember the Sabbath day that ye may sanctify it, six days shall thou
labor, and do all thy work; but the seventh day shall be a Sabbath to the Lord
thy God: thou shall not do any work, neither thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, nor thy servant, nor thy maid, nor thy beast, nor the stranger which
is in thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the Sea and
whatsoever is in them, and rested the seventh day: therefore the Lord blessed
the Sabbath day and sanctified it, Also, Exodus 23.
in six days thou shall do thy works, but the seventh day thou shall rest;
that thy Ox and thy Ass may rest together, and the son of thy hand maid, and
the stranger may be refreshed (or take breath.) And in all that I have said to
you, you shall be wary, to wit, because of the Serpent. Dent. 5.
Also observe the Sabbath day, that ye may sanctify it: even as the Lord thy
God has commanded thee: six days shall thou labor and do all thy work, but
on the seventh day shall be the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.

But although the divine Commandment amongst the vulgar has seemed, and yet
does seem to be spoken, only touching the corporal and external labor and
rest for reparing the strength of the body: yet those to whom it is given (as
well amongst the Jews as Christians) to know and understand the mysteries of
the mind of God, and of his Kingdom, they I say, have known a far more
profound and better cause and reason of this precept, of sanctifying the
Sabbath.

In the new Testament to Theologize Astrology is according to the doctrine of
Christ and the Apostles.

To receive the Kingdom of God, as a child or infant, to be born again from
above, having renounced and left all things to deny himself, and seek the
Kingdom of God, which lies hidden in us as a Treasure in a field.

The labors of the six days are all the actions, operations, studies,
offices, businesses and occupations of all men in the whole earth, and in all
Islands, and in every Sea amongst all orders, states and kinds of life,
whatsoever all men every where, every time act, study, handle, operate, this
they do by the Light of Nature, according to their diverse Sciences. Now the
seventh part of those labors, studies and actions of men are referred unto
Saturn, the several kinds whereof we have before recited.

Moreover the sanctification of the Sabbath, divinely ordained and commanded to
man on the seventh day, is, to cease once in a week from all labor and
handling of natural things, and actual studies, to desist from the
Astrologicall life, that is, to lay aside every motion and action, as well of
the mind, as of the body, by an absolute abnegation and oblivion of the whole
creature and of himself, as well within as without, to give and offer himself
wholly to God, with all that we are, within the six days we have known,
studied, gotten and gained by our labors, as well in the internal gifts of
wisdom, as in the getting of external things. Hither, hither and to this
Center tends that divine Commandment, touching the sanctifying of the Sabbath,
as by the following things will most pleasantly be laid open.

CHAP. IX. A specificall Declaration, how the Astrology of Saturn in Man ought
and may be Theologized.
FOr as much as hitherto we have heard, that all the sciences, actions,
studies, and states of life of all men, by a certain inevitable necessity ought
to be Theologized, or by the exercise, or sanctification of the mental Sabbath
be laid aside, denied, put off and accounted for nothing: now we would
particularly see, how the Astrologic of Saturn is to be Theologized in us. For
because infinite is the multitude of men, only handling and exercising this
Saturnine Astrology. And we do set down first of all in a certain Paradoxicall
sense, that is above the common intellect of the Vulgar: That no husbandman,
Countryman, Farmer, Gardner, Herbeseller, Vinedresser, Steward, Builder,
Mettleman, Potter, Weaver, Cobbler, Shomaker, etc. can ever enter into the
Kingdom of God, or come to the possession of a heavenly life, unless he learn
to drive away, to subject this power, his Saturnine Heaven, with all his
ascendent Stars, and resist every inclination thereof, tending to evil,
through the instinct of the Serpent, reign over it, and overcome it.

Good God, here will some ignorant say from the instinct of the Serpent, of
what kind is this your Theologization of Astrology, which you here handle?
what mortal can believe, that a husbandman, a farmer, a steward, a vinedresser,
a potter, a mettleman, a mechanic, a carpenter, etc. cannot be made an heir
and possessor of the Kingdom of heaven.

What is the Light of Nature, to be contemned and altogether rejected, and must
we cease from all labor? what ought we not at all to act, work, study, learn,
search, but to be plainly idle? whence shall we receive food and raiment, and
other necessaries, to the sustentation of life; seeing no man whosoever is
busied in the studies, labors, and works abovesaid, can from them attain to
eternal salvation? the sentence of this book seems to be wonderful indeed and
estranged from truth.

I answer, these things do not seem strange or obscure but to the ignorant, nor
are they indeed a hairs breadth estranged from truth, so that they be rightly
received and understood. For nothing can be so truly spoken or written, that by
the ruder and less intelligent may not be called into doubt, or be esteemed
even for a lie.

But a lesson read (which) pleases, being repeated ten times it will please.
Lo this our sense.

If thou art a Husbandman, a Countryman, a Farmer, a Steward, a Gardner, a
Seller of herbs, a Vinedresser, a Potter, a Mettleman, a Carpenter, a Builder,
etc. or busied in some other like kind of life, then thou art constituted and
walk in the sphere of Saturn, and art governed by the Saturnine Stars
(which are in thee) ever and anon ascending in thy imagination, cogitation, and
senses, ruling thee, inclining thee hither and thither, even as thy pleasure
draws thee by free will, and the inward serpent persuades thee.

Now unless thou as a wise man shall be cautious and attent, and shall
overruled thy Stars running up and down, flourishing and operating in thee, or
shall Theologize thy Astrology, that is, unless thou shall learn to
Sabbathize, and to cease from all thy work, and keep holy the Lords day,
according to the mind and sense of the divine precept; it altogether is and
abides impossible to thee, by any means to enter into the Kingdom of God, and
come to the possession of eternal salvation: For I will make it clear by a
most manifest demonstration, That never any Husbandman, Farmer, Countryman,
Steward, Mettleman, etc. could enter into the Kingdom of God, who neglecting
and omitting the sanctification of the Sabbath departed out of this world. But
I would thou should take these things rightly.

My judgment is that no Saturnist, such as are before recited, can enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, but that he ought to be thoroughly converted, and be made
as an infant; then at length he is fit to take, enter and possess the Kingdom
of God, not indeed as a Husbandman, a Farmer, a Steward, a Builder, a
Vinedresser, a Seller of herbs, a Mettleman, a Potter, etc. because there is no
such thing to be done there for such workmen; but see thou be as a child, and
infant, as a new Creature, as the Son of God. For no man has ascended to
heaven, but he which descended from heaven, the son of God which is Christ, and
as many as received him, he gave them power to be made the sons of God: Now to
receive Christ requires an inevitable putting off and mortification, yea
destruction of the old Creature, of the old man created of earth, and the new
birth of the same from above, from whence also Christ is arisen.

Therefore the reasons and causes, for which the Husbandman, the Farmer, the
Steward, the Builder, the Vinedresser, the Mettleman, the Potter, the Weaver,
etc. cannot come into heaven, are these:

First, because in the celestial Paradise, or the Country of the Heavens,
there are no grounds, nor oxen, nor plows for Husbandmen, nor farms or Lands
for Farmers, nor houses nor granaries for Stewards, nor stones nor wood for
Builders, nor vineyards nor forks for Vinedressers, nor gardens, herbs, plants,
seeds for Herbsellers, nor mountains fertile in metalls for Mettlemen, nor
loam, nor clay for Potters, nor flax nor wool for Weavers, and therefore there
is not any need of any Husbandman, Steward, Builder; Mettleman, Potter, Weaver,
neither shall those which inhabit there, want such kind of science and
industry. For all these things are, and are only to be found under the Zodiac
in this corruptible world, where in the last day at one time together and at
once, they shall be taken away and cease with the world.

So far therefore my husbandman as thy field, thy ox, and thy plow, shall be
transported after the last day to the Kingdom of Heaven: So far also shall thou
thy self with thy rustickscience and industry, after this life enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, that is never. Therefore put off the old earthly and
natural man, with all his science, prudence, craftiness, which thou usest in
the handling of natural things, and put on the new man which alone savours and
desires heavenly things, and leads thee to heavenly things, by the exercise
of the true Sabbath, to be had in the spirit of thy mind every week.

And so far my Vinedresser as thy Vine, and thy fork shall be found after the
last day, in the Kingdom of Heaven: so far also shall thou appear there with
thy vinitory science and industry, that is never. For then all old things are
passed away.

And so far my steward as thy household stuff and granaties, shall be found out
in the Kingdom of Heaven, after the world is blotted out: so far also shall
thou thy self be there with thy science and industry of domestic parsimony,
that is never. For we do not act those things there, which we are wont here.

And so far as my Gardner, my Potter, etc. thy colworts, herbs, plants, trees,
with thy garden, and thy loam and clay shall after the world is defaced,
remain, and be transferred into the perpetual heaven, so far also shall thou
thy self with all thy plantatory and pot-making science, be promoted to the
heavenly mansion, that is never. For the subjects and matter being wanting,
what can thy science profit thee?

So also it is with all the rest of the kinds, and Sciences, and Arts
appertaining to the Astrology of Saturn, as are, Mettlemen, Rough Masons,
Stonecutters, Smith and Carpenters, all kind of Mechanics, Colliers,
Cornsellers, Mowers, Heardsmen, Clothiers, Weavers, Shomakers, Cobblers, and the
like.

All these have their matter and subjects about which they are conversant, and
with which they are occupied without them in the Macrocosm, which being taken
away and withdrawn, all things will be taken away and withdrawn with them: and
they have within themselves in their soul, in which the light of Nature, the
wisdom, industry, art, and understanding rightly to instute, handle and perform
their works, which soul, and which light are nothing else, then the Astralic
Heaven and Firmament in the Microcosm, where every science, art and work, has
his peculiar starr with the ascendants convenient to it self.

Therefore this science and operation is once a week to be laid aside and put
off: and we must sabathize in God, that God may act and operate his work in us,
to wit, the work of our conversion, repentance, amendment, newbirth, and of the
new Creation, that we may be made fit to enter into his Kingdom after death and
the resurrection.

Furthermore, also for this cause none of the aforesaid can see, enter,
possess the Kingdom of Heaven; because such a workman is only born of flesh
and blood: is the old Creature of the earth of this world, and is the son of
the Firmament, the offspring of Nature; and although he excells in the
knowledge of natural things: yet all his science and knowledge is to take an
end with the life of time. He that would be capable of heaven, ought to be the
new Man born again of God, regenerate, the new Creature. For nothing that is
earthly can take or possess heaven: therefore none of those which we have
hitherto recited, and shall recite in the following things shall come thither,
unless ye be converted and become as an infant, who knows none of these
things. There shall be a new Heaven and a new earth, old things are passed
away, says he which does it, all things are made new. A new heaven therefore
requires new inhabitants, fit for it, and capable of it, for as man at first
was created of the old heaven, and of the old earth, and was born of mortal
seed, in which earth he now temporally dwells: So it also behooves him to be
created of that new heaven, and of that new birth, and to be born again, to be
regenerated of the immortal seed, in which earth he would be and inhabit
eternally.

The third reason is, because the Light of Nature, with all kinds of their
Sciences is given to man, for this life only to till the earth, for the labor
of his hands, to eat his bread in the sweat of his countenance, etc. and
belongs only to the sustentation of the natural and temporal life, living in
the mortal body, and the body being dead, and the world blotted out, no such
thing remains, therefore we have no need of corn, vines, buildings, tents,
houses, garments, meat, etc. therefore neither knowledge nor desire of getting
or laboring for such things, the cause ceasing, the effect cease.

The fourth reason is, because man was not made of God finally for this world,
or for those things which are in this world: but chiefly for the Kingdom of
God, where none of these things is found or is in use, which in this life are
every where agitated and handled with men, throughout the diverse shops of the
light of Nature.

The fifth is, because man was therefore constituted for a time only in this
world, that he might ascend from the inferior things, and seek after the
superior things, that is, that by natural light and wisdom, as it were from
a looking glass or shadow, he might learn to know and apprehend the heavenly
light and wisdom, at whose Majesty and Glory, all natural things, although
glorious, might plainly vanish and be annihilated; and so leaving the inferior
and lesser light, he should suddenly betake himself to, and follow the greater
and superior light, and departing from this transitory world, forsaking and
accompting all things for nothing, which he receives, has and possesses in
this time from the world, and having denied himself as a naked and newborn
infant, depart into that eternal mansion, and region of the eternal Country,
and so come thither fasting and empty from the possession of all natural
science, as if he had never at all been in this world, or had not known any the
least state of this world.

But these things are not propounded and written to that end, that they should
happen in contempt of Philosophy, or of natural sciences, arts and faculties,
which are and flourish amongst men, and which in this life cannot but be, but
rather that we being fraught with the sagacity of the Light of Nature, may be
led further, may go forward and be excited to the knowledge of the greater
light, which may confer upon us a new birth, eternal life and salvation. For
to all that covet and desire the Kingdom of God, is the old man made of nature
to be put off, and laid down; yea to be buried in an absolute abnegation and
oblivion, as well of himself as of all those things which he has, possesses,
studieth, knows, learneth; and the new Man is to be put on, which is created
according to God, where there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither male nor
female, neither bond nor free, but the new Creature.

I say, the new Creature is required to possess the Kingdom of God, wherein
there is nothing left of the old leven. The old leven is the knowledge of good
and evil, beginning to spring in man from the forbidden tree, and is the
prudence or subtilty of the serpent: But the new heaven is the heavenly wisdom,
the simplicity of the dove, from whom alone true life and beatitude flows, and
which also only shall bear rule in the elect heirs of the Kingdom of God, the
natural and terrene wisdom, being then utterly together and at once swallowed
up, blotted out and extinct.

For the Kingdom of God is of such only, who are converted from the old
Creature into the new, and become as children, who never knew neither good nor
evil. Matthew. 18. John 3.

FINIS.
PAge 5. line 22. read some. p. 6. l. 25. (and in diverse other places) for
Arthens, r. Archcus. p. 20. l. 11. r l was formed as. p. 22. l. 31. r. premise.
p. 25. l. 10. r. creatures. p. 30. l. 25. r. cure. l. 26. r. brings. p. 40. l.
15. r. wood.

Imprimatur. Theodore Jennings.


