THE Welsh Ambassador, or the happy News his Worship has brought to London.

Together with her thirteen Articles of acreements, which her propounds to all
her Cousens in her Countries and her Cities to consider of.



Printed for I. ^^^^rwood. 1643.

THE Welsh Ambassador.
IT is not uncaknowne to her oworlds that in her time of her Springs, or her
summer seasons, her Kings and Princes go out with her troops and her company
to Wars and to pattailes, as in her Low Countries does her cosen her Prince of
Orange, and in her Kingdoms of England her cosen Prince Ruperts with her
white Tog, which as her Moderns hold is a Prince disguised; and also her own
Countriman prince Griffith who is gone out the Lord caknowes whither, with her
troop in her beaten silver and her cold laces; for her thought it requisite and
fitting, it being her time of year when her men's and her 'omens are hot in her
Reins and her p^cks, and her motions and her agitations in her members and her
ploods, which makes her men go to wars with her 'omens, and fight with her in
her beds till her sweat again, to send her Ambassadors to all her peoples and
her natives to make her offers and her treaties of peace and attonements before
her proceed to her open wars, in which her men shall be sure to get holes in
her pates, out of which her wounds shall spring up her horns in such number
that her shall never be cured of while her has preath in her podies. And her
would have her to take notice and good regards that her Ambassador is a
Shentleman of Wales of fery ancient families, of a fery pig and a high house,
and her ancestors were with her cosen Noah's in her Arkes, and came into
Prittaine with her progenitor Prutes, and was had in creat estimation ever
since in her welsh Mountains. In Winter her has her uncaknown palaces, and in
Summer time her has her habutations in her oods and her Mountains, and if her
has desire to understand her names, her is called plain Cuckows, for her affects
no, other titles nor denominations then what has been given to her ancestors.
Her cares (...) Ri^ing in states or in her pontificalibus, in her Coaches, or
on her horses; out her is carried like her cosen Perseus through the avres,
and twixt her Heavens and Earths, and takes her journies on her wings; her
needs no interpreters, for her understand all her Languages, and all her
Nations understand her when her cries Cuckows; and so much shall suffice for
her descriptions of her persons and her qualities; now her shall proceed to her
Articles, and her effects of her Embassage. Her is sent to all Christian
peoples, to her Tuckes and her Infidels, her Pagans and her Shows, to let her
understand her pleasures, which her has set down as follows.

Her first Article of acreements which her propounds is to her men and her
wives, that live in her huge creat Cities which is, that her men shall in the
time of her Springs provide her backs of Armor of proofs, and have her long
pikes which her bears about her in her preeches, well st^^ld and stiff on all
her occasions when her coes to encounter her wives bodies to bodies, naked or
in her Co^slet of her shirts and her smocks in her fields of her peds or her
Coaches, or her shall be sure her wives will denounce open wars against her,
and never acree to peace, till her Ambassador of Wales have come to her
houses, and at her doors proclaimed her Cuckolds.

Her second Article which her offer in the behalf of her create Princesses,
her wives to her subjects her husbands is, That whereas her used in her winter
seasons not to firke her Tobies, nip her Nardivies, smooke her phob^sses,
tickle her Cuquoques, or which is in her plain welsh English whip her jetros,
or ^ounce her podies: Her must be sure to give her her due benevolence at least
twice every night, and once after her dinners called nooning, for her trinkings
betwixt her meals, or her does menace her accustomed p^oclamation of wars;
which is to cry Cuckoo to her faces; and her wives do threaten also to go to
peds to her Iournimen, and her eld^st or well-grown prentices, and experience
her with one of her forem^ns.

Her third Article which her tenders her of peace is, that her husbands call
her wives sweet Chucks, Honies and Pigs-nies, though her call her Roagues and
Rascals, nay beasts and Cuckolds; that her beware how her use her hands, or
often to bestow on her arms or her shoulders her plows or her pastinadoes,
though her wives break her pates with her Ladles or her Skimmers; or if her
will not acree to this her Article of peace without her exceptions, her is in
all her names to denounce her Husbands open wars and defiances, which shall
last till her houses be too hot to hold her, and till her boys as her walks
her streets use her Ambassadors Language, and cry out Cuckows. Her fourth
Article is, that as her Spring is fresh and creen as her Leekes or her Onions,
her first be sure to take her wives into her fields and her meadows and give
her creen cowns; her must also provid her new Clothes (as her cousens in Wales
do her wives once in seven years) and let her be in her fashions or her will
set eff her wares and her commodities by retayls to purchase her fine habits
and new Garments, which may breed much wars and divisions in her families. Her
fifth proposition which her makes to avoid civil wars and dissentions betwixt
her omens and her husbands is, that her husbands let her wives have her wills,
or her will have it inspight of her teets; that her husbands have no fears,
nor her jealousies, nor her misu^derstandings of her wives honesty, though her
chance to see her in pe^s with her friends; for her jealousies as her all
caknows are her author of her civil wars; and if her husbands crow yellow in
her hearts and her livers, her Ambassador tells her as her friend, that her
shall carry her ensigns on her foreheads, and be stander-bearer to her Cuckows
or Cuckolds Her sixth proposition is, that her husbands must satisfy her wives
appetites and her longings, which her are very subject to in her Springs, when
her plood flows in her veins and her arteries, as if her had a mind to have two
able men's, one to take her up before, and her other behind, and carry her in
her chaires which her call Sedans, to her creat ped at Wares her must suddenly
and with all celerities fulfill her pleasures, or it will beget j^rrs and
prible prables which her shall hardly appease, without creat peril of being
transformed as her cosen Ast^on. Her seventh Article is, that her must in no
wise hinder her wives from going at midnight to her cousens labors, though her
imagine her go to her houses of Hospitality, which her in welsh call
Bawdy-houses, nor in her mornings when her tincle Tankling bells rings from her
repavring to her spiritual exercise, with her brethren in her Conventicles;
not must her be so profane to think her is con to her podily Recreations, for
then her proclaims her open wats as an enemy to her peace and tranquillity, and
worthy to have her name of Cuckows.

Her eighth Article is, that her husbands for bear her Wines and strong
trinks, and her wicked herb of Rebeccas, for her strong rinks make her trunks,
and causes imbecillitys and disabilitys in the rising of her flesh, and
erecture of her members; and her Rebeccas makes her mouths stink like her close
stools or her privys which are beshitten, such as her all caknowes are very
odious and odoriferous in her omens nostrills; if her neglect this her Article,
her may kiss her wives blind sheeks as soon as her lips, and for want of
doing her drudgery her selves, her shall be sure to have it done by some of
her neighbors. Her ninth Articls for peace is, that her husbands be not
familiar with her Chamber-maids or her Kitchen queanes, nor take her ^p in her
holes and her corners, for that is her absolute preach of peace and will admit
none of her reconciliations or attonements till her wives have made her look
out before as does her town pulls, and then her Ambassador shall every day twit
her in her teeth with Cuckows.

Her tenth Article, which is the l^st her shall propound to her husbands is, that
her shall suffer her wives to consume her estates as her pleases, let her keep
her Cash and her Coins, and sheat her of what her lists. Let her have free
quarter in all places of her kingdoms, to have as many men as her has minds and
appetites to solace her po^ies and tickle her concupisence, to wink when her
sees her in ped with her friends as at small faults, and then her does testify
that in her ratification and subscription to these her ten Articles or
Propositions, her shall live as long ^s her can blow her nose backwards in
peace and amities with her wives otherwise if her refuse to set her hands to
all or any of these her Articles, her Ambassador has full power to renounce and
reclaim her open wars and pattailes, worse then those her Countrymen had at
Keyntons, and the word to give the signal to the fight shall be Cuckows. Her
Empassador has also her treaties and her negotiations with other peoples, and
all manner of creatures her has a Message in her first place to do to all her
Sectuaries, which is that other will not let her hairs crow or wear
night-caps, her shall be subject to take cold on her beads, that if her will
not leave her preaching in Tubs, and her false Dectrines, her shall if her
travail into Spain be burned for her heretics; and her was pid to tell her,
her may shance be whipped in E^glands, or hanged in cood times for papbling ou^
her blasphemies and her sectuaries. Her has a Message or Embassage, cat her as
you please to her Cavalliers, that Plunder and take her cousens purses on her
Kings Highways, that if her do not mend her manners and leave her nimming and
her shifts, her shall reckon her years by her Gregorian account, and finish
her days with a long Psalm at her Callows; for her Ambassador is to declare,
that Plundering is but plain Burglary or Robbing, it is but the word changed.
Her is to denounce open war to all her creat fat Bawds, that buy her young
wenches up that come out of Wales and other of her Countries at her Carriers,
and sell her firginities, though her have lost them five years before with
some of her own cousens, dearer then her do her welsh Runts, if her give not
over her Trades; her houses shall be plundered on May Day next by her
Prentices, and her be carried Prisoners in her Carts to Bride-well, her
Powdring-tub, or her New-gates, and there her shall lie without Bail or
Maine-prize. Her is to proclaim all her Tailors Thieves, and all our
Bayliffes, Sergeants, and her Yeomen caknaves. Her is charged to do her
Message to all Tapsters and Vintners that her do not nick her Cans and her
Quarts, least her go to the ^^vell for her measures, and be peaten by her
trunkards.

Her is friendlily to admonish all Nations under her Suns to beware least her
plead, more then her trinks, that her have a special care how her go to wars
one with another, least her get plows and caknocks on her heads an^ her Cox
combs, which may much prejudice her healths and her welfares. Her would wish
all her Cousens in her Kingdoms of England to spend no more then her gets or
buys in her Lands, by her Revenues, least her call her fool for her labors,
and proclaim her to all the world peggars.

Her is to pronounce her menaces to all her Whore-masters, that her shall dye
of her pox, or carry fire in her preeches which shall burn the rest of her
podies, if her do not leave her whoring.

Her is to tell as her part of her Embassage all her Usurers, that her are
tammed to creat king Plutarchs hell, where her shall be kept as safe as her
kept her baggs.

Her has as part also of her sharge to proclaim all omens that have pastards
or shildren lawfully begotten out of her Matrimonis, and in her Wedlocks,
crushes, that is because her let men crush her podies, and in plain
interpretations signifies, that her must give them her appellations of
Corkatrices, Giminivers or strikers, or as her ancients term her in Wales, her
Harlots or her whores.

Her must defy all such of her cousens for fools as wear pables, or refuse
money from her betters, and her must call all her back-biters caknaves, her
Pimps Panders, her roaring boys Rascals, and her Roundheads Russettings.

And this is the effect in priefe of her Embassage, which her has prought out
of Mountains of Wales to all peoples and Nations, and if her refuse to hearken
to her treaties her may shuse, and go hang her selves in her own Carters, for
her neglect of her Vrshipfull Ambassador her Cuckowes that will never chance
her notes as her fools now adays do her fashions, but justify her cries and
her Proclamations to her whole orlds, as her is a true Britain and a
shentle-man of Wales.

HER Ambassadors Message described,
to the tune of the merry Peddler, etc.
ON a day when Jenkin
Did walk abroad to hear
The Birds rejoice,
With pleasant voice,
In Spring time of the year;
Proudly and loudly
Her heard a Bird then sing,
Cuckoe, Cuckoe.
The Cuckoe never lins,
But still does cry so merry merrily,
And Cuckoe Cuckoe sings.
Her thought her had flouted
Poor Jenkin with a jeere,
And told in scorn
That the Horn
Should on her brow appear;
Soundly and roundly
This bird one note does sing
Cuckoe, Cuckoe,
The Cuckoe never lins;
But still does cry so merry merrily,
And Cuckoe Cuckoe sings.
It is known her Country
Does many profits bring,
Sheep and Goats,
And cloth for Coats,
And many a good thing;
Cheeses and Freezes,
And that fine bird that sings
Cuckoe, Cuckoe.
The Cuckoe never lins,
But still does cry so merry merrily,
And Cuckoe Cuckoe sings.
Her color is most comely,
And a Roundhead is she;
And yet no Sect
She does respect
But of her note is free;
It Is pity,
in City,
That this same bird near sings
Cuckoe, Cuckoe.
The Cuckoe never lins;
But still does cry so merry merrily,
And Cuckoe Cuckoe sings.
If that she in Cheape-side
Upon the Cross were seen,
Out of hand,
The trained Band:
Would come against her in spleen;
Drumming and Cunning,
To kill this bird that sings
Cuckoe, Cuckoe.
The Cuckoe never lins,
But still does cry so merry merrily
And Cuckoe, Cuckoe sings.
Therefore her Ambassador
No Peddler is of wares;
Her has no pack
Upon her back,
Nor for no Cuckold cares;
Without fear
Does jeere,
And in one note still sings
Cuckoe, Cuckoe.
The Cuckoe never lins,
But still does cry so merry merrily,
And Cuckoe, Cuckoe sings.
FINIS.

