THE SAINTS Delight. To which is annexed a TREATISE of MEDITATION.

By THOMAS WATSON, Minister of Stephens Walbrook in the City of LONDON.

Valida est ut mors dilectio Dei, sicur mors violenter separat animas a
corpore, ita dilectio Dei violenter segregat hominem a mundano amore, Isidor.

I will delight my self in thy statutes. Ps. 119.16.

Imprimatur, EDM. CALAMY.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E.M. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange. 1657.

To his loving Friends, the Aldermen, the Esquires, and the rest of the
Inhabitants of the Parish of Stephens Walbrook in the City of London.
Honored, and Beloved,
MY hearts desire for you is, that you may be saved. It has been a long time
in my thoughts after the many signal demonstrations of your love to me, to show
my gratefulness in a way of retaliation; Such as I have, give I you Gratius
venit quod facili quam quod plena manu datur Seneca.
I do here Dedicate this Manual to you, as a standing Testimonial of that real
respect, and zealous affection which I bear toward you. The subject of it you
will find to be a Christians delight Nec sine delectu nec intellectu Costerus
in Psalm. 1.
and meditation in Gods Law. I have purposely for your sakes laid down several
heads, or particulars for your meditations to dilate and run upon, as the
attributes, the promises, the love of Christ, etc. If he who by often looking
on a Ring with a deaths head, at last grew sober, who knows but by often
meditating on these things your hearts may be brought into a more serious and
heavenly frame? Meditation is a holy kind of usury, it is putting out Sermons
to use, which brings in no small profit at the years end. Meditation is a duty
which carries meat in the mouth of it; My soul shall be satisfied as with
marrow and fatness, while I meditate on thee, Psalm 63.4, 5. There is little
written (so far as I know) upon this subject. Most Discourses of this nature
digress into ejaculations. I have with the help of God cut out my way thorough
the rock, not finding any path that others had gone in before me; so that I
have not offered that to you which cost me nothing; for the style of it, it is
plain; but truth, when it is in the plainest dress, is most comely. The star
shines brightest in its native luster. Divinity has so much intrinsecal
beauty, that it needs no art of wit or fancy to set it off. Who goes to
embroyder a pearl? or paint over gold? this would but imbase and eclipse it; It
is a sign of a wanton Christian to look most at the fringing and garnishing of
a Truth. I wish it be not the sin of many in this City, they like the dressing,
but loath the food. The blew flowers which grow among the corn, make a fine
show, and are pleasing to the eye, yet are prejudicial to the Harvest.
Rhetorical flourishes may please the fancies of men, but I much question
whether they will not lessen Christ's spiritual barvest at the end of the world.
When men preach rather words than matter; they catch peoples ears, not their
souls; they do but court, not convert. If the patients wound bleeds, nay
rankles, it is better for him to have a deep incision made in the flesh, than
to bind it about with silk, or dress it with aromatic ointments. True it is,
Ministers ought to cloth the truths they preach in decent expressions to
preserve them from contempt; (though they must come in plainness of speech,
not in rudeness of speech.) But, let them take heed, lest with their affected
newcoynd phrases, (unsuitable to that gravity the Apostle speaks of Tit. 2.7
) they adulterate and corrupt the simplicity of the Word, like some kind of
sauces and compounds which take away the natural taste, and savor of the meat.
As for you (my friends) I hope the Lord has given, (at least some of you) a
spiritual palate to relish and thirst after, (...), the sincere milk of the
Word, 1 Pet. 2.2. A savoury heart is for wholesome doctrine: How glad should I
be (dear friends) if I might either by preaching, or writing become savingly
instrumental for your good, and before I die, might help to make up an happy
match between Christ and you 2 Cor. 11.2.
: I bless God that I see some of you walking in the truth; 2 John 4.
when so many in the world are marching apace toward hell. But O that I might
see an increase of holiness among you, that more converts might be brought in,
and as so many jewels make the Crown of Christ shine the brighter; do not
hearken to the Syrene songs of the world; the sins you commit in have, you will
repent at leisure; sugared poisons go down pleasantly, but afterward they wring
and torment the bowels. Let me earnestly beseech you to put a bill of divorce
into the hand of your sins; let not Error gangrene, lust burn, malice boil,
pride swell, intemperance overflow, covetousness root in any of your souls.
Purge out the old leaven; and as ever you expect to go to the new Jerusalem,
when you die, become new creatures while you live; Rest not in baptismal
privileges: all are not Israel which are of Israel Romans 9.6
; what is a man the better to have Christ's Name upon him, and Satan's image?
What is he advantaged to have the Oracles of God, and want the Spirit of God?
Think not that an empty profession will save; millions will be sent to hell in
Christ's livery Mat. 7.22
, Matthew. 8.12. Oh labor to know the grace of God in truth Col. 1.6
. The Lord has been at much cost and charges with you to bring you near to
himself; let not God be a looser by you. Pindar says, it was an opinion of the
people in ancient times, that Jupiter rained down gold upon the City of Rhodes:
Give me leave to apply it to you, God has rained down golden showers upon you.
What mercies has he enriched you with? what talents has he entrusted you
with? your estate is a talent, your health (in these sickly times especially)
is a talent, your Sanctuary-blessings are talents, every motion of the Spirit,
every opportunity for heaven is a talent, and nothing more sure than that you
will be called to an account shortly Marth. 25 19, 20
; now if you have let your talents lie rusting, and done no good with them, the
hiding your talents will not hide your sin, expect an heavy doom. Think not
these things impertinencies. Be not so evil, as to be too good to be advised. I
confess my felf with Ignatius, the least of all that labor in Gods vineyard,
but though I am with you in weakness, yet as the Apostle says, in much
trembling 1 Cor. 2.3
. I tremble to think how sad it will be, if any of you shall perish in these
days of the Gospel, though you have been placed under a trumpet, less shrill
and powerful. It shall be my prayer for you all, that you may be fruit-bearing
trees, that when the great Vinedresser shall remove you hence by death, he may
transplant you into the celestial Paradise.

Be pleased to accept of these few notes which (some years since) you did seem
to hear with much affection: I shall only desire two things of you, that you
would thoroughly peruse them, and then copy them out in your daily practice.
Get up into your Tower of Meditation, and look often with Moses upon him, who
is invisible Heb. 11.27
. But I will not hold you any longer; I remember Saint Paul in the close of his
Epistle, craves the Thessalonians prayers 1 These. 5.25
, and so shall I end my Epistle begging a contribution of your prayers for me,
that the Lord would give me the strength of heaven to do the work of heaven
(...). Ignat. Epist.
; that he would help me to take heed to my self and my doctrine, that he would
make me, not only faithful, but successeful in my Ministry among you: that so,
when the chief Shepherd shall appear, I may receive a Crown of glory which
fades not away 1 Pet. 5.4.
: I shall not further enlarge, unless in my affections toward you.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that
great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make
you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which is
wel-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.20, 21.
which shall be the earnest prayer of him who is,

Your friend, and servant for Jesus sake THOMAS WATSON.

THE EPISTLE To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THere are some exercises of Religion which stand only in a form of
godliness, when men draw near with their mouth and honor God with their lips,
and bestow a little bodily exercise and attendance upon him, when in the mean
time their hearts are far from him, running after other objects, Isaiah
29.13. Ezekiel. 33.31. Other duties there are which are more spiritual, and
wherein the life and power of godliness does consist. Among these, that of
heavenly Meditation is one, when, (as the Apostle says of the blessed Angels,
1 Pet. 1.12.) the heart desires to look into the mysteries of salvation.

Ever since the fall of Adam, sinful men have had the disposition of Adam, to
fly away, and to hide from the presence of the Lord. Natural men are without
God in the world, he is not in all their thoughts, they could be well enough
content to have him cease from before them, Esaias 30.11. He is every where else
to be found, only shut out of the hearts of wicked men.

The heart never willingly fixes on God, till he be the Treasure of it; for
where a man's treasure is, there will his heart be also. It cannot easily
Meditate, but where it does delight, Psalm 119.97. Love is the weight of the
soul, it readily moves to the object which it loves. Mary will not away from
the empty Sepulcher, where a little before her Lord had lien. Every good man is
of David's mind, Psalm 16.8. to set the Lord always before him, that he may
be in his fear all the day long.

There is nothing of a more unstable and roving temper than the mind of man.
Some have prescribed the study of Mathematics to fix the volatile agilitie
thereof; but certainly the more serious, the more settled the soul is. Nothing
therefore will so ballace and compose it, as true holiness, which does of all
other things make it the most serious, the most willing to acquaint it self
with God, that it may be at peace, Job 22.21. He is the Rest of the soul.
Inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te. The more it knows of him, the
more desirous it is to stay with him that it may know more. The more it tastes
of his favor, the more it longs after his glory, as Moses did, Exodus 33.17,
18. What the Philosopher says of all knowledge, is indeed true only of the
knowledge of God and Christ, that it is quies intellectus. And therefore our
Savior calls it eternal life, John 17.3. In which alone the soul does Rest.

Now one excellent means of fixing the heart on God, is meditation, whereby a
man calls together All that is within him to bless his name, Psalm 103.1.
Meditation is the wing of the soul which carries the affections thereof to
things above; by this, as Moses, it goes up to the top of Pisgah to take a
view of the promised land. It is as Clemens Alexandrinus says of prayer,
(...), a conversing with God; as Chrysostom says of faith, so may we of
Meditation, (...), It makes God, and Christ, and precepts, and promises ours,
by giving us a fuller possession of them. Hereby we hold fast the things which
we have learned, we awaken our faith, inflame our love, strengthen our hope,
revive our desires, increase our joys in God; we furnish our hearts, and fill
our mouths with materials of prayer, we loosen our affections from the world,
we praeacquaint our selves with those glories which we yet but hope for, and
get some knowledge of that love of Christ which passes knowledge. Meditation is
the palate of the soul whereby we taste the goodness of God; the eye of the
soul whereby we view the beauties of holiness; that (...) and (...), whereby
our spiritual senses are exercised, Acts 24.16. Heb. 5.14. it is the key to the
wine-sellar, to the banqueting house, to the garden of spices, which lets
us in unto him whom our soul loves; it is the arm whereby we embrace the
promises at a distance, and bring Christ and our souls together.

Though some learned men of former times have written some few things upon this
subject, yet of our age, and in our language, I do not remember any who have
purposely handled it, but our Christian Seneca, the learned and Reverend Bishop
Hall, which being one small tract in the midst of a voluminous work, may happily
not be in every man's hand to peruse. The necessity, excellency, and usefulness
of this Christian duty, the Reverend Author of this book has elegantly
described, which is therefore worthy the perusal of such as desire to acquaint
and furnish themselves with so excellent a part of Christian skill, whereby
Time may be redeemed and improved unto the prepossession of Eternity. The Lord
so fill us with the love of him, and with all the the fullness of God; that we
may be able continually to say, My heart is fixed O Lord, my heart is fixed, I
will sing and give praise

From my Study at Lawr. Jury, Nov. 7. 1657. Thine in the Lord Edw. Reynolds.

THE SAINTS SPIRITUAL DELIGHT.
PSALM. 1.2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord.


CHAP. I. Showing that negative goodness is but a broken title to heaven.
AS the Book of the Canticles is called the song of songs by an Hebraisme, it
being the most excellent; so this Psalm may not unfitly be entitled, the
Psalm of Psalms, for it contains in it the very pyth and quintescence of
Christianity. What Hierom says of St. Paul's Epistles Breves esse pariter, ac
longas. Hierom.
, the same may I of this Psalm; it is short for the composure, but full of
length and strength for the matter Psalmus hic reliquis anteponitur, estenim
quasi pro^^mium in univer sam sacram Scripturam Moller.
. This Psalm carries blessedness in the frontispiece; it begins where we all
hope to end: It may well be called a Christians guide, for it discovers the
quicksands where the wicked sink down in perdition, verse 1. and the firm
ground on which the Saints tread to glory, ver. 2. The text is an epitome, and
breviary of Religion. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law
does he meditate day and night. Every word has its Emphasis; I begin with the
first word But (...)
.

This But is full of spiritual wine, we will broach it, and taste a little,
then proceed.

But] This is a term of opposition. The godly man is described,

negation, in three particulars. 1. Verse 1.
He walks not in the council of the ungodly. He is none of the Council; he
neither gives bad council, nor takes it. 2. He stands not in the way of
sinners. He will not stand among those who shall not be able to stand in the
judgment, verse 5.3. He sits not in the seat of the scornful. Let it be a
chair of state, he will not sit in it, he knows it will prove very uneasy at
last. The word sitting (...)
implies,

Moles imposita sepulchroipsa est vis dura consuetudinis qua premitur anima,
nec resurgere nec respirare possit. Aug. in Mat. hom. 45. Adeo sunt pertinaces,
suisque perfricta front peccatis addicti, ut jam nihil cos pudeat, sed omnem
religionem habeant proludibrio. Moller.
Psalm. 50.20. Thou sit and speak against thy brother.

Sitting implies familiarity with sinners. Psalm. 26.4. I have not sat with
vain persons; that is, I do not haunt their company. The godly man shakes off
all intimacy with the wicked (...). Menander.
. He may traffic with them, not associate; he may be civil to them, as
neighbors, but not twist into a cord of friendship: Diamonds and stones may
lie together, but they will not sodor and ceament.

position, or rather opposition, But his delight is in the Law of the Lord.
From this word But] observe,

That negative goodness is not sufficient to entitle us to heaven. To be no
scorner, is good, but it is not enough. There are some in the world whose
religion runs all upon negatives; they are not drunkards, they are not swearers
Qui flagitium nou committit non est vir bonus, sed tantum non malus. natal. com.
, and for this they do bless themselves. See how that Pharisee vapors, Luke
18.11. God I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, etc. Alas, the not being scandalous will no more make a good
Christian than a cipher will make a sum. The godly man goes further, He sits
not in the seat of the scorner, but his delight is in the Law of the Lord. We
are bid, not only to cease from evil, but to do good, Psalm 34.14. 'Twill be a
poor plea at last, Lord I kept my self from being spotted with gross sin. I
did no hurt, but quid boni inest? What good is there in thee? It is not enough
for the servant of the vineyard that he does no hurt there, he does not break
the trees, or destroy the hedges; if he does not work in the vineyard, he
loses his pay; it is not enough for us to say at the last day we have done no
hurt, we have lived in no gross sin, but what good have we done in the
vineyard? where is the grace we have gotten? if we cannot show this, we shall
lose our pay, and miss of salvation.

Use. Virtutis est magis houesta agere quam non turpia.
many build their hopes for heaven upon this cracked foundation, they are given
to no vice, none can charge them with any foul miscarriages, and these are
their letters of credence to show; to such persons I say three things.

black is your eye, yet, our soul may be dyed black. Though your hands be not
working iniquity, your heads may be plotting it. Though you do not hang out
your bush, yet you may secretly vent your commodity: a tree may be full of
vermin, yet the fair leaves may cover them that they are not seen; so the
fair leaves of civility may hide you from the eye of man, but God sees the
vermin of pride, unbelief, covetousness in your heart: Ye are they (says
Christ) that justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts, Luke
16.15. a man may not be morally evil, yet not spiritually good. He may be free
from gross enormity, yet full of secret enmity against God; like the snake,
which though it be of a fine color, yet has its sting.

not being of the right metal, wanting the stamp of holiness upon thee, thou will never pass current, God slights thee, thou art but a brass Christian.

Matthew. 3.10. Every tree which bears not good fruit, is hewn down and cast
into the fire. One may as well die with not eating food, as with poison; a
ground may as well be spoiled for want of good seed, as with having tares sown
in it; They that were not active in works of charity, were sadly sentenced:
Depart from me ye cursed, etc. for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat,
Matthew. 25.41, 42. It is not said ye took away my meat from me, but ye gave me
no meat. Why were the foolish Virgins shut out? They had done no hurt, they had
not broken their lamps, I, but they took no oil in their lamps, Matthew. 25.3.
Their wanting oil was the indightment; therefore let not any man build his
hope for heaven upon negatives. This is building upon the sand; the sand is bad
to build on; it will not ceament Arena est terra sterilis, minuta, and grana
ejus non cohaerent.
, being ex materia friabili; but suppose a man should finish an house upon it,
what is the issue? the flood comes, viz. persecution, and the force of this
flood will drive away the sand and make the house fall; and the wind blows,
the breath of the Lord as a mighty wind will blow such a sandy building into
hell; Be afraid then to rest in the privative part of Religion, launch forth
further, be eminently holy. So I come to the next words, but his delight is in
the Law of the Lord (...). Theodoret in loc.
, and in his Law does he meditate day and night.

CHAP. II. What is meant by the Law of God, what by delight in the Law, and the
proposition resulting.
THe words give us a twofold description of a godly man.

First, He delights in Gods Law.

Secondly, he meditates in Gods Law.

His delight is in the Law of the Lord: The great God has graffed the
affection of delight in every creature; it has by the instinct of nature
something to delight it self in Ovis frondem, cervus fontem, Canis leporem,
Pylades sectatur Orestem.
. Now the true Saint, not by instinction, but divine inspiration makes the Law
of God his delight. This is the badge of a Christian, ejus oblectatio in lege
Jehovae, his delight is in the Law of the Lord. A man may work in his trade,
and not delight in it; either in regard of the difficulty of the work, or the
smalnesse of the income; but a godly man serves God with delight; It Is his meat
and drink to do his will.

For the Explication of the words, it will be enquired,

the Law of the Lord. This word Law (...)
may be taken either more strictly, or more largely. 1. More strictly, for the
Decalogue or ten Commandments. 2. More largely. 1. For the whole written Word
of God Musculus Diodat.
Tota dectrina a Deo patefacta and Ecclesiae tradita. Mollerus.
. 2. For those truths which are deducted from the Word, and do concenter in it.
3. For the whole business of Religion which is the counterpane of Gods Law,
and agrees with it as the transcript with the original. The word is a setting
forth, and Religion is a showing forth of Gods Law. I shall take this word in
its full latitude and extent.

delight in Gods Law. The Hebrew and Septuagint (...)
both render it, his will is in the Law of the Lord Plus valet consouantia
voluntatum quam vocum. Bern. Sermon. sup. salve. Regina.
; and that which is voluntary is delightful; a gracious heart serves God from a
principle of ingenuity; he makes Gods Law not only his task, but his
recreation; upon this Scripturestock I shall graffe this Proposition.

Doct. That a child of God, though he cannot serve the Lord perfectly, yet he
serves him willingly; His will is in the Law of the Lord; he is not a pressed
soldier, but a volunteer Quia Deus cor quaerit, cor intus inspicit, testis
est, judex, approbator, adjutor, coronator, sufficit ut offeras voluntatem.
Aug. in Ps.
; by the beating of this pulse we may judge whether there be spiritual life in
us, or no. David professes Gods Law was his delight, Psalm 119.77. he had his
crown to delight in, he had his music to cheer him, but the love he had to
Gods Law did drown all other delights; as the joy of harvest and vintage
exceeds the joy of gleaning. I delight in the Law of God (says Saint Paul) in
the inner man, Romans 7.22. the Greek word is, I take pleasure (...)
; The Law of God is my recreation, and it was an heart-delight,* 'twas (...),
in the inner man 2 Cor. 5.12.
; a wicked man may have joy, (...), in the face*, 2 Cor. 5.12. like honey-dew,
that wets the leaf; but the wine of Gods Spirit chears the heart; Paul
delighted in the Law, in the inner man.

CHAP. III. Whence the Saints spiritual delight springs.
THe Saints delight in the Law of God proceeds,

soundness of judgment. The mind apprehends a beauty in Gods Law, now the
judgment as the primum mobile draws the affections, like so many orbs after
it; The Law of God is perfect Lex Dei integra. Hierom. Pagnin. Absoluta and
consummata cui nihil desit Fabrit. in Psalm.
, Psalm 19.7. it needs not be eeked out with traditions: The Hebrew word for
perfect (...) seems to allude to a perfect, entire body that wants none of the
members or lineaments; Gods Law must needs be perfect, for it is able to make
us wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. The Septuagint renders it, The Law of the
Lord is pure, (...). Septuagint
like beauty that has no stain, or wine that is clarified and refined. The
soul that looks into this Law, seeing so much luster and perfection, cannot but
delight in it; The middle lamp of the Sanctuary being lighted from the fire of
the Altar, gave light to all the other Lamps: So the judgment being lighted
from the Word, it sets on fire the lamps of the affections.

from the predominancy of grace. When grace comes with authority, and Majesty
upon the heart, it fills it with delight; naturally we have no delight in God,
Job 21.14. Therefore they say unto God depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of they ways; nay, there is not only a dislike, but antipathy;
sinners are called (...) haters of God, Romans 1.30. Romans 1.30
but when grace comes into the heart; O what a chang is there! Grace
preponderates; it files off the rebellion of the will, it makes a man of
another spirit Josh. 14.24
. It turns the lion-like fierceness into a dove-like sweetness, it changes
hatred into delight; Grace puts a new by as into the will, it works a
spontaneity and cheerfulness in Gods service. Thy people shall be a willing
people in the day of thy power, Psalm 110.3.

is from the sweetness of the end. Well may we with cheerfulness let down the
net of our endeavor when we have so excellent a draught. Heaven at the end of
duty causes delight in the way of duty.

CHAP. IV. Showing a characteristical difference between a child of God and an
hypocrite.
cum animi prolubio, from a principle of delight, the other does not. The Law
of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and silver, Psalm 119.72.
With what delight does a covetous man tell over his thousands? I, but Gods Law
was better to David than thousands; a child of God looks upon the service of
God, not only as his duty, but his privilege. A gracious heart loves every
thing that has the stamp of God upon it. The Word is his delight. Thy Words
were found, and I did eat them, and thy Word was unto me the joy and rejoicing
of my heart, Jerem. 15.16. The Sabbath is his delight, Isaiah 58.13. If thou
turn away thy foot from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the
Sabbath a delight. Prayer is his delight, Isa. 56.7. I will make them joyful in
my house of prayer. Hearing is his delight, Esaias 60.8. Who are these that fly
as Doves to to the windows? The gracious soul flies as a Dove to an Ordinance,
upon the wings of delight; The Sacrament is his delight: On this day the Lord
makes a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the Lees, of fat things full
of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined, Esaias 25.6. A Sacrament-day is a
soul-festival day; here Christ takes the soul into his banqueting house, and
displays the banner of love over it, Cant. 2.4. Here are dulcissima fercula (as
Austin says) heavenly delicacies set before us. Christ gives us his body and
blood In vulneribus Christi dormio securus and requiesco intrepidus. Aug.
. This is Angels food, this is the heavenly Nectar, here is a cup perfumed with
the divine nature Sanguis Christi salus Christiani. Salvian.
; here is wine spiced with the love of God. The Jews at their feasts, poured
ointment upon their guests, and kissed them; Here Christ poures the oil of
gladness into the heart, and kisses us with the kisses of his lips Cant. 1.2
. This is the Kings Bath where we wash and are cleansed of our leprosy: The
withered soul, after the receiving this blessed Eucharist, has been like a
watered garden, Esaias 58.11. or like those Egyptian fields, after the
overflowing of Nilus, fruitful and flourishing; and do you wonder that a child
of God delights in holy things? He must needs be a volunteer in Religion.

But it is not thus with an hypocrite, though he may facere bonum, yet not
velle, he may be forced to do that which is good, but not to will that which is
good; he does not serve God with delight. Job 27.10. Will he delight himself
in the Almighty? That he has none of this complacency and delight, appears
thus, because he serves God grudgingly Vir'us nolentium nulla est.
; he brings his sacrifice with a wicked mind, Prove. 21.27. Such an one was
Cain: It was long before he brought his offering Genesis 4.3
, it was not the first fruits, and when he did bring it, it was grudgingly;
'twas not a free-will-offering, Deuteronomy. 16.10. It Is probable 'twas the custom of
his fathers family to sacrifice; and perhaps conscience might check him for
forbearing so long, at last the offering is brought, but how? as a task rather
than a duty; as a mulct or fine rather than a sacrifice. Cain brought his
offering, but not himself. What Seneca says of a gift, I may say of a
sacrifice Multum interest in ter materi am benefi cii and beneficium, itaque
nec aurum, nec argentum beneficium est, sed ipsa tribuentis voluntas. Sen. de
benef.
; It Is not gold and silver makes a gift, but a willing mind; if this be
wanting, the gold is only parted with, not given: So, it is not prayer and
hearing makes a sacrifice, but it is a willing mind. Cains was not an
offering, but a tax, not worship, but penance.

CHAP. V. Two Cases of conscience resolved.
BUt here are two Cases to be put.



Answ. Yes, but 1. this delight in God is not wholly extinct. This lassitude
and weariness in a child of God may arise,

From the in being of corruption, Romans 7.24. It Is not from the grace that is in
him, but the sin; (as Peter's sinking on the water was not from his faith, but
his fear;) yet I say still a regenerate persons will is for God, Romans 7.15.
Paul found sometimes an indisposition to good, Romans 7.23. yet at the same time
he professes a complacency in God, ver. 22. I delight in the, Law of God in
the inner man; one may delight in music, or any recreation, yet through
weariness of body be for the present dulled, and indisposed; a Christian may
love Gods Law though sometimes the clog of the flesh weighing him down, he
finds his former vigor and agility remitted.

and weariness in a regenerate person is not habitual; it is not his constant
temper; when the water ebbes a while it is low water, but there is soon a
spring-tyde again: it is sometimes low water in a Christians soul, he finds
an indisposition and irksomness to that which is good, but within a while there
is a springtyde of affection, and the soul is carried full sail in holy
duties; It Is with a Christian as with a man that is distempered; when he is
sick he does not take that delight in his food as formerly, nay, sometimes the
very sight of it offends, but when he is well he falls to his meat again with
delight and appetite; so, when the soul is distempered through sadness and
melancholy, it finds not that delight in Word, and Prayer (...)erly, but when
it returns to its healthful temper again, now it has the same delectability
and cheerfulness in Gods service as before.

That this weariness in a regenerate person is involuntary; he is troubled at
it; he does not hug his disease, but mournes under it. He is weary of his
weariness. When he finds a heaviness in duty, he goes heavily under that
heaviness; he prays, weeps, wrastles, uses all means to regain that alacrity
in Gods service as he was wont to have. David, when his chariot-wheels were
pulled off, and he did drive on heavily in Religion, how often does he pray for
quickening grace? Psalm 119.25, 37, 40, 88. When the Saints have found their
hearts fainting, their affections flagging, and a strange kind of lethargy
seasing on them, they never leave till they have recovered themselves and
arrived at that freedom and delight in God as they were once sencible of.

2. The second Case is, with delight? I answer, he may; Herod heard John
Baptist gladly, Mat. 6.20. and those that fasted for strife and debate, did
delight to know Gods ways, Esaias 58.2. An hypocrite may, out of some flashy
hopes of heaven, show a delight in goodness; but yet it is not such a delight
as is found in the regenerate; The hypocrites delight carnal.
for his delight is carnal. A man may be carnal while he is doing spiritual
things; It Is not the holiness and strictness in religion that the hypocrite
delights in, but something else; he delights in prayer, but it is rather the
showing of gifts he looks at than the exercising of grace. * He delights in
hearing, but it is not the spirituality of the Word he delights in; Cor. 2.14
(...).
not the favor of knowledge * but the luster. When he goes to the Word
preached, it is, that he may rather feast his fancy, than better his heart; as
if a man should go to an Apothecaries shop for a pill, only to see the gilding
of it, not for the operative virtue. The hypocrite goes to the Word to see what
gilding is in a Sermon; and what may delight the intellect. Hypocrites come to
the Word as one comes into a garden to pluck some fine flower to smell to, not
as a child comes to the breast for nutriment. This is rather curiosity than
piety. Such were those, Ezekiel. 33.32. thou art to them as a very lovely song, of
one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument. The Prophet
being eloquent, and having a pleasing delivery, they were much taken with it,
and it was as sweet to them as a fit of music, but it was not the spirituality
of the matter they so well liked, as the tunablenesse of the voice It was a
sharp, yet seasonable, reproof of Chrysostom to his auditory. This is that
(says he) which is like to undo your souls, you hear your Ministers as so many
minstrels to please the ear, not to pierce the conscience Chrysostom.
. You see an hypocrites delight in Religion is carnal; it is not the being
nourished up in the words of faith 1 Timothy 4.6.
which he minds, (...)
but the eloquence of speech, the rareness of notion, the quickness of
fancy, the smoothness of style; he strives only to pluck from the tree of
knowledge. Alas (poor man) thou may have the starlight of knowledge, and yet
it may be night in thy soul.

CHAP. VI. Trial of a Christians delight in God.


Quest. How may this spiritual delight be known?

Answ. 1. He that delights in Gods Law, is often thinking of it; what a man
delights in, his thoughts are still running upon; he that delights in money,
his mind is taken up with it; therefore the covetous man is said (...), to
mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. Thus if there be a delight in the things of
God the mind will be still musing upon them Sicut illis accidere solet, qui
cogitat^ouibus vel seriis vel adlubescentibus abstinere non possunt. Musculus.
O what a rare treasure is the Word of God! it is the field where the pearl of
price is hid; how precious are the promises, they are the conduit that hold the
water of life, they are like those two Olive branches, Zach. 4. which through
the two golden pipes did empty the golden oil out of themselves, Zach 4.12.
These seal up pardon, adoption, glory, O Lord by these things men live, Isa.
38.16. Where there is a delight in the Law of God, the mind is wholly busied
about it.

Extremos currit mercator ad Indos. Horace.
. The Merchant will compass sea and land to make money his proselyte. Men will
not be kept from their faires. If there be a delight in holy things, we will
not be detained from an Ordinance, for there we are traffiquing for salvation.
If a man were hungry, he would not stay from the market for the aching of his
finger. The Ordinances are a Gospelmarket, and those that hunger and thirst
after righteousness, will not for every slight occasion stay away. I was glad
when they said, come let us go up to the house of the Lord, Psalm 122.1. Thou
that art glad when the Devil helps thee with an excuse to absent thy self from
the house of the Lord, art far from this holy delight.

Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, Mal. 3.16. Where
there is gratia infusa, it will be effusa. The words of a wise man's mouth are
gracious, Eccles. 12.10. David delighting in Gods testimonies, would speak of
them before Kings, Psalm 119.46. The Spouse delighting in her beloved, could
not conceal her love, but breaks forth into most pathetical, and no less
elegant expressions: My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten
thousand (...) The standard bearer
, his head is as the most fine gold, etc. The disciples whose hearts were upon
Christ, make him the whole subject of their discourse as they were going to
Emaus; Luke 24.19. The primitive Christians who were fired with love to God,
did speak so much of heaven, and the Kingdom prepared, that the Emperor
suspected they meant to take his Kingdom from him; The words are (as one
says) the looking glass of the mind Verba sunt speculum mentis Bern.
, they show what is in the heart. Where there is spiritual delight, like new
wine, it will have vent; Grace is poured into thy lips, Psalm 45.2. a man that
is of the earth speaks of the earth (...).
, John 3.31. He can hardly speak three words, but two of them are about earth.
His mouth, like the fish in the Gospel, is full of gold, Mat. 17.27. So where
there is a delight in God, our tongues will be as the pen of a ready Writer
Psalm. 45.
. This is a Scripture touchstone to try men's hearts by. Alas, it shows how
little they delight in God, because they are possessed with a dumb devil; they
speak not the language of Canaan.

in Christ, will give him of her pleasant fruits, Cant. 7.13. and if she has a
cup of spiced wine, and full of the juice of the pomgranate, he must drink of
it, Cant. 8.2. He that delights in God, gives him the strength of his
affections, the cream of his duties Mat. 22.37
; If he has any thing better than other, God shall have it; Hypocrites care
not what they put God off with; They offer that to the Lord which costs them
nothing 2 Samuel 24.24
; A prayer that costs them no wrestling, no pouring out of the soul 1 Samuel 1.15
; they put no cost in their services. Cain brought of the fruit of the ground,
Genesis 4.3. It Is observable, the holy Ghost does not mention any thing that might
commend, or set off Cains sacrifice. When he comes to speak of Abels, he sets
an Emphasis upon it, Abel brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the
fat thereof Abel obtulit non exigua sed pinguia. Ambrose.
, verse 4. but when he speaks of Cain, he only says, he brought of the fruit
of the ground. Some sorry thing; perhaps pulled out of a ditch; God who is
best, will be served with the best. Domitian would not have his Statue carved
in wood or iron, but in gold. God will have the best of our best things, golden
services. He who delights in God, gives him the fat of the offering Lev. 3.3.
; the purest of his love, the hottest of his zeal; and when he has done all,
he grieves he can do no more, he blusheth to see such an infinite disproportion
between Deity and Duty.

Utitur mundo, fruitur Deo. Aug.
; Paul delighted in the Law of God, in the inner man, and how was he crucified
to to the world? Gal. 6.14. It Is not absolutely unlawful to delight in the
things of the world, Deuteronomy. 26.11. Thou shall rejoice in every good thing which
the Lord thy God has given thee. None may better take the comfort of these
things than believers; for they have the best right to them, they hold all in
Capite There is nothing ours but as we see out title in Christ. Greenham
; and they have the dew of a blessing distilled. Take two talents, said Naaman
to Gehazi, 2 King. 5.23. so says God to a believer, take two talents, take thy
outward comforts, and take my love with them; but the children of God, though
they are thankful for outward mercies, (which is the yearly rent they sit at)
yet they are not much taken with these things (...) 1 Cor. 7.31.
; they use them only as a convenience for their passage Omnia quibus uteris in
hac vita debent esse tanqua^ stabulum viatori non tanquam domus habitatori. Aug.
; they know they need them as a staff to walk with, but when they shall sit
down in the Kingdom of heaven, and rest themselves, they shall have no use of
this Jacobs staff. Believers do not much pass for these things which are
still passing 1 John 2.17
. Their delight is chiefly in God and his Law; and is it thus? have we this low
opinion of all undermoon comforts? is the price fallen? The Astronomer says,
if it were possible for a man to be lifted up as high as the Moon, the earth
would seem to him but as a little point. If we could be lifted to heaven in our
affections, all earthly delights would seem as nothing; when the woman of
Samaria had met with Christ Invenit non aquam, sed salutem Ambrose.
, down goes the pitcher John 4.
, she leaves that behind (...) Theophil. in Joh. 4
; he who delights in God, as having tasted the sweetness in him, does not much
mind the pitcher, he leaves the world behind.

pangs of desire and flashes of joy, which are soon over. The Jews did rejoice
in John's light for a season (...)
, John 5.35. Unsound hearts may delight in the Law of the Lord for a season;
but, they will quickly change their note, What a weariness is it to serve the
Lord! The Chrysolyte (which is of a golden color) in the morning is very
bright to look on, but toward noone it grows dull, and has lost its splendour;
such are the glistring shows of Hypocrites. True delight, like the fire of the
Altar, never goes out; affliction cannot extirpate it, Psalm 119.143. Trouble
and anguish have taken hold on me, yet thy Commandments are my delights.

CHAP. VII. A suasive to this holy delight in Religion.
Exhort.
Comment upon the Text. Let your delight be in the Law of the Lord Plurimum
refert, utru^ ex voluntate agas an necessitate, Ambrose sup. beat. immacul.
; And that I may the better enforce the Exhortation, I shall lay before you
several weighty considerations.

Considerat.


Verum.
1. Truth. 2. Goodness.


1. Truth, the Law of God is a series of truth, Psalm 119.160. Thy word is true
from the beginning Quid acrius desiderat anima quam veritatem. Austin. tom. 26.
in John 4.
. The two Testaments are the two lips by which the God of Truth has spoken to
us. Here is a firm basis for faith.

Goodness, Nehem. 9.13. Thou gave them true Laws, good Statutes. Bonum.
Here is Truth and Goodness; the one adequate to the understanding, the other
to the will. Now this goodness and excellency of the Law of God shines forth
in nine particulars.

1. This blessed Law of God is a letter Est quaedam Epistola omnipotentis Dei
ad creaturam. Greg.
sent to us from heaven, indighted by the Holy Ghost, and sealed with the blood
of Christ Fertur de Carolo Borromaeo quod Scripturam solebat assidue volvere,
and populo exp^^^are, idque tanto studio, devotione, and reverentia, ut ultimis
vitae suae annis, velut ipsissimas Deo ad homines literas, non nisi capite, and
flexis Genibus venerabundus lectitaret. Julius Nigr. Tract. ascetico. c. 3. n.
9.
; See some passages in the letter, Isa. 62.5. As the bridegroom rejoices over
the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee; and Hosea 2.19. I will betroth
thee unto me (...) for ever in righteousness and in loving kindness, and in
mercies. Is it not delightful reading over this loveletter?

that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Pet. 1.19
it is our pole star to guide us to heaven; 'twas David's candle and lanthorn to
walk with, Ps. 119.105 now, light is sweet, Eccles. 11.7. it is sad to want this
light; those heathen who have not the knowledge of Gods Law, must needs stumble
to hell in the dark. Hierom brings in Tully with his Oratory, and Aristotle
with his Syllogismes, crying out in hell; they that leave the light of the
Word, following the light within them, (as some speak) prefer the shining of
the glo-worm before the Sun.

spiritual glass to dress our souls by. David often looked himself in this
glass, and got much wisdom, Psalm. 119.104. through thy precepts I get
understanding. This glass both shows us our spots, and takes them away; it may
be compared to the Lavor which was made of the women's looking-glasses, Exodus
38.8. it was both a glass and a Lavor; a glass to look in, and a Lavor to
wash in; so the Law of God is a glass to show us our faces, and a Lavor to
wash away our spots.

our evidences for heaven; would we know whether we are heirs of the promise,
whether our names are written in heaven; we must find it in this Law-book, 2
These. 2.13. He has chosen us to salvation through sanctification, 1 John 2.14.
We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren,
and is it not comfortable reading over our evidences?

place of ammunition, out of which we must fetch our spiritual artillery to
fight against Satan. Sanctus Paulus in omnire and tentatione Scriptura se
armabat. Hierom. in ejus epitaph.
It may be compared to the Tower of David, builded for an armory, whereon there
bang a thousand bucklers; all shields of mighty men, Cant. 4.4. It is called
the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.16. It Is observable, when the devil tempted
our Savior, he runs to Scripture for armor, it is written Mat. 4.4
; three times Christ wounds the Serpent with this sword, Mat. 4. ver. 4, 7, 10.
Is it not good having our armor about us when the enemy is in the field?

physick-book, or book of receipts. Basil compares the Word of God to an
Apothecaries shop which has its (...) Basil epist prima ad Gregor. Nazian.
; when there is any disease growing in the soul, here is a recipe to take; if
we find our selves dead in duty, here is a recipe, Ps. 119 50. Thy Word has
quickened me; If our hearts be hard, here is a recipe; Is not my Word as fire,
Jer. 23.29. This is able to melt the rock into tenderness. If we grow proud,
here is a recipe, 1 Pet. 5.5. God resists the proud; if there be any fresh
guilt contracted, here we have a sovereign medicine to take, John 17.17.
Sanctify them through thy Truth. The Law of God is like a Physick-garden,
where we may walk and gather any herb to expel the poisor of sin.

divine treasury to enrich us; here are the riches of knowledge, and the riches
of assurance to be found, Col. 2.2. in this Law of God are scattered many
truths as precious diamonds to adorn the hidden man of the heart. David took
the Law of God as his heritage, Psalm 119.111. in this blessed Mine is hid the
true pearl In uno salvatore omnes florent gemmae ad salutem.
; Here we dig till we find heaven.

cordial in fainting times; and it is a strong cordial, Heb. 6.18. That we
might have a strong consolation (...).
. They are strong consolations indeed that can sweeten affliction, that can
turn water into wine, that can stand against the fiery trial. This is my comfort
in affliction, for thy Word has quickened me, Psalm. 119.50. The comforts of the
world are weak consolations; A man has comfort in health, but let sickness
come, where is his comfort then? He has comfort in an estate, but let poverty
come, where is his comfort then? these are weak consolations, they cannot bear
up against trouble; but the comforts of the Word are strong Consolations; they
can sweeten the waters of Marah. Let sickness come, the comforts of the Word
can alay and stupifie it. The inhabitant of the land shall not say I am sick,
Isa. 33.24. Let death come, a Christian can out-brave it: O death where is thy
sting, 1 Cor. 15.55. and is it not comfortable to have such a julip lying by,
as can expel the venom of death.

9. The Law of God is Manna cujuslibet saporis (...). Theophil. in Mat.
; an heavenly Manna that suits it self to every Christians pallat. What does
the soul desire? is it quickening, strengthening? he may find all in this Manna.
But I refer the Reader to the learned Origin, who has written fully to this Si
tu verbum Dei tota fide, and devotione suceperis fiet tibi ipsum verbum
quaecunque desideras; si tribularis consolatur te dicens; cor contritum, and
humiliatum Deus non despicies; si laetaris, pro spe futura cumulat tibi
gaudium, dicent, laetamini in domino, and exultate justi. Si iracundus es,
mitigat te, dicens desine ab ira, and derelinque furorem. Si in doloribus es,
sanat te, dicens, dominus sanat omnes languores tuos; si in paupertate, erigit
te, dicens, dominus allevat de terra inopem. Sic ergo Manna Dei reddit in ore
tuo saporem quemcunque volueris, etc. Origin hom, 7. in Exodus And this is the
first weighty consideration to make us delight in the Law of the Lord, there is
that in it may render it delightful. I will shut up this with that divine
saying of Austin. Tanta est Christianarum litcrarum profunditas, ut in cis
quotidie proficerem si cas solas ab incunte pueritia usque ad decrepitam
senectutem maximo otio summo studio, meliore ingenio conarcr addiscere. Aug.
Epist. 3. ad volusianum.
.

Delectatio perficit operationem Thom. 1. ae quest. 4. art. 2.
. Therefore David counsels his son Solomon, not only to serve God, but to serve
him with a willing mind, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Illud Deo (...) quod ex viva cordic
radice proficiscitur. Calvin.
Delight in duty is better than duty it self; as it is worse for a man to
delight in sin, than to commit it, because there is more of the will in the
sin Gravius est peceatu^ diligere qua^ perpetrare. Hier.
: so delight in duty is to be preferred before duty; O how love I thy Law;
Psalm 119.97. it is not how much we do, but how much we love; hypocrites may
obey Gods Law, but the Saints love his Law; This carries away the garland
Juvenal. Satyr. 12.
.

evidenceth grace; It Is a sign we have received the Spirit of adoption. An
ingenuous child delights to obey his father; he that is born of God is enobled
by grace, and acts from a principle of ingenuity; grace alters the byas of the
heart, and makes it of unwilling, willing. The Spirit of grace is called a free
Spirit, Psalm. 51. not only because it works freely, but because it makes the
heart free and cheerful in obedience; a gracious heart does not act by pure
constraint, but free consent.

Delectatio conservat operantem in opere suo A quinas Arist Eth. lib. 10.
Delight makes every thing easy; there is nothing hard to a willing mind;
Trahit sua quemque voluptas; -- delight turns Religion into recreation; it is
like fire to the sacrifice, like oil to the wheels, like wind to the sails,
it carries us full sail in duty; he that delights in Gods way, will never
complain of the ruggedness of the way; a child that is going to his fathers
house, does not complain of bad way. A Christian is going to heaven in the way
of duty; every prayer, every Sacrament, he is a step nearer his Fathers house;
sure he is so full of joy he is going home, that he will not complain of bad
way. Get then this holy delight. Beloved, we have not many miles to go, death
will shorten our way, let delight sweeten it.

If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self, Prove. 9.12. God has twisted
his glory and our good together. I gave them my statutes, which if a man do, he
shall even live in them, Ezekiel. 20.11. There is nothing the Lord requires, but
it tends to self-preservation. God bids us read his Word, and why? this Word is
his Will and Testament wherein he makes over a fair estate to be settled upon
us, Col. 1.12. 1 John 2.25. And this is the promise that he has promised us,
even eternal life; he bids us pray, and this duty carries meat in the mouth of
it, 1 John 5.14. This is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hears us. Ask what you will, he will sign
your petitions; if you had a friend that should say, come to me when you will,
I will furnish you with money, would you not delight to visit that friend? God
will give to more than half the kingdom, and shall we not delight in prayer?
God bids us believe, and there is (...) a honeycomb to be found in this
precept? Believe and you shall be saved. Salvation is the crown that is set upon
the head of faith. Well may the Apostle say, his Commandments are not grievous,
O then! if Religion be so beneficial, if there be such gold to be dug out of
this mine, it may make us delight in the ways of God. What will tempt, if not
self-interest?

Lo I come, I delight to do thy will, O my God, Ps. 40.7, 8. It Is by Expositors
agreed that it is spoken mystically of Christ Ecce venio videl. Ego Messiah ad
sum promissus salvator, qui tanquam vadis se sistit ad solvendum dobitum, me
tibi offero tau quam sacrificium (...) Mollerus.
; when he came into the world to sacrifice his life for us, it was a free
will-offering. I have a baptism to be baptized with, Luke 12.50. Christ was to
be (as it were) baptized in his own blood, and how did he thirst for that time?
How am I straightened (...)
till it be accomplished? Did Christ so delight in the work of our redemption,
and shall not we delight in his service? Did he suffer willingly, and do we
pray unwillingly? Did he so cheerfully lay down his life for us, and shall nor
we give up our lives to him? Certainly if any thing could make Christ repent of
shedding his blood, it would be this, to see Christians come off so hardly in
duty, bringing it rather as a penance, then a sacrifice.

as the Angels; spiritual delight would make us like them here; to serve God by
constraint, is to be like the devil, all the devils in hell obey God, but it is
against their will, they yield a passive obedience (...). Theophil.
; but service which comes off with delight is angelical: This is that we pray
for, that Gods will may be done on earth as it is in heaven; is it not done
with delight there?

Rerum juvenilium velox transmutatio. Thom. Aqu. Eth.
; hence it is we change from one sense to another; from colors to music, from
music to smell, etc. Too much pleasure is a pain; but spiritual objects do
not cloy, or tire the soul; the more we study in the Law of God, still the more
delight we find. And in this regard David might say, the Words of Gods mouth
were sweeter to his taste than honey, Psalm. 119.103. because one may soon
surfeit upon honey, but he can never surfeit with the Word of God. He that has
once with Jeremy, found the Word and ate it, Jer. 15.16. will not be cloyd with
it Augent spirituales delitiae desiderium in mente dum satiant. Greg. hom.
; There Is that savourinesse in the Word that a Christian cries out, Lord
evermore give me this bread Joh. 6.34
. There is that sweetness in communion with God that the soul says with Saint
Bernard, O si duraret. -- O that it might be always thus; O that what I now
feel, I might ever feel. He that delights in God does not complain he has too
much of God, but rather too little; he opens and spreads the sails of his soul
to take in more of those heavenly gales, he longs for that time when he shall
be ever delighting himself in the sweet and blessed vision of God.

Isa. 7.13. Will ye weary my God also? our delighting in God would make him
delight in us; but when we begin to say what a weariness is it to serve the
Lord, Mal. 1.13? God is as weary as we are; he is even sick of such services.
When duties are a burden to us, they are a burden to God, and what should he do
with them? when a man is weary of a burden, he will cast it off. Let all this
quicken delight in Gods service.

CHAP. VIII. Showing how a Christian may arive at this delight in Gods Law.


Set an high estimate upon the Word; what the judgment prizeth, the affections
embrace; he that values gold, will delight in it; we are apt (through a
principle of Atheism) to entertain slight thoughts of Religion, therefore our
affections are so slight. David prized Gods Statutes at a high rate; more to be
desired are they than gold, yea than much fine gold, Psalm. 19.10. and hence
grew that enflamed love to them; I will delight my self in thy Statutes, Psalm.
119.16.

Pray for a spiritual heart; an earthly heart will not delight in spiritual
mysteries; the earth puts out the fire. Earthlinesse destroys holy delight, get
a spiritual palate that you may relish the sweetness of the Word. He that
tastes the sweetness of honey, will delight in it. If so be ye have tasted that
the Lord is gracious, 1 Pet. 2.3. It Is not enough to hear a Sermon, but you
must taste a Sermon; it is not enough to read a promise, but you must taste a
promise; when you have gotten this spiritual palate, then Gods Word will be to
you the joy and rejoicing of your heart Jer. 15.16
.

purge out the delight of sin; sin will poison this spiritual delight: If
you would have Gods Law sweet, let not wickedness be sweet in your mouth, Job
20.12. When sin is your burden, Christ will be your delight.

CHAP. IX. Holy delight should cause thankfulness.
Thankfulness.
How did David bless God that he gave the people hearts to offer so cheerfully
to the building of the Temple? Who am I, and what is my people, that we should
be able to offer so willingly after this sort, 2 Chronicles. 29.14? Their
willingness was more than their offering; so should a Christian say, Lord,
when there are so many pressed soldiers; who am I, that I should offer so
willingly. Who am I that I should have thy free Spirit, and should serve thee
rather out of choice, than constraint; it is a great blessing to have this
(...), this promptitude and alacrity in Gods service; Delight does animate and
spirit duty; now we act to purpose in Religion. Christians are never drawn so
powerfully and sweetly, as when the chain of delight is fastened to their
heart (...). Chrysostom.
. Without this all is lost; our praying and hearing is like water spilt upon
the ground. It loses both its beauty and reward; then bless God (Christian)
who has oiled the wheels of thy soul with delight, and now thou can run
and not be weary. For thy comfort, be assured thou shall not want any thing thy
heart can desire, Psalm. 37.4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give
thee the desires of thine heart.

A CHRISTIAN On the Mount: OR, A TEATISE concerning MEDITATION. Wherein the
necessity, usefulness, excellency of Meditation is at large discussed.

By THOMAS WATSON, Minister of Stephens Walbrook in the City of LONDON.

Meditate upon these things, 1 Timothy 4.15.

I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies, Psalm. 119.59.

Amans Deum sublimia petit sumptis alis, and relicta terra in coelum volat.
Philo. lib. de victimis.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchauge. 1657.

PSALM. 1.2. And in his Law does he meditate day and night.


HAving led you through the chamber of delight, I will now bring you into the
withdrawing room of Meditation. In his Law does he meditate day and night.

CHAP. I. The opening of the words, and the proposition asserted.
GRace breeds delight in God, and delight breeds Meditation. A duty wherein
consists the essentials of Religion, and which nourishes the very life blood
of it; and that the Psalmist may show how much the godly man is habituated and
inured to this blessed work of Meditation, he subjoynes, in his Law does he
meditate day and night (...)
; not but that there may be sometimes intermission; God allows time for our
calling, he grants some relaxation, but when it is said, the godly man
meditates day and night, the meaning is, frequently; he is much conversant in
the duty. It Is a command of God to pray without ceasing (...).
, 1 These. 5.17. The meaning is, not that we should be always praying (as the
Euchites held) but that we should every day set some time apart for prayer; so
Drusius and others interpret it. We read in the old Law it was called the
continual sacrifice Juge sacrificium. Number. 28.24
; not that the people of Israel did nothing else but sacrifice, but because
they had their stated hours every morning and evening they offered, therefore
it was called the continual sacrifice; thus the godly man is said to meditate
day and night, that is, he is often at this work, he is no stranger to
meditation.

The Proposition that results out of the Text, is this, Psalm 119.15. I will
meditate in thy precepts, 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate upon these things. Meditation
is the chewing upon the truths we have heard; The beasts in the old Law that
did not chew the cud were unclean; the Christian that does not by meditation
chew the cud, is to be accounted unclean. Meditation is like the watering of
the seed, it makes the fruits of grace flourish.

For the illustration of the point, there are several things to be discussed.

1. I shall show you what meditation is. 2. That meditation is a duty. 3. The
difference between meditation and memory. 4. The difference between meditation
and study. 5. The subject of meditation. 6. The necessity of meditation.
CHAP. II. Showing the nature of Meditation.
IF it be enquired what meditation is, I answer, What meditation is.
meditation is the souls retiring of it self, that by a serious and solemn
thinking upon God, the heart may be raised up to heavenly affections. This
description has three branches.

retiring of it self; a Christian, when he goes to meditate, must lock up
himself from the world. The world spoils meditation; Christ went apart into
the Mount to pray, Mat. 14.23. So, go apart when you are to meditate. Isaac
went out to meditate in the field, Genesis 24.63. he sequestered and retired
himself that he might take a walk with God by meditation. Zacheus had a mind
to see Christ, and he got out of the crowd, He ran before, and climbed up into
a sycamore-tree to see him, Luke 19.3, 4. So when we would see God, we must get
out of the crowd of worldly business, we must climb up into the tree by
retiredness of meditation, and there we shall have the best prospect of
heaven. The worlds music will either play us asleep, or distract us in our
meditations. When a more is gotten into the eye, it hinders the sight; when
worldly thoughts, as motes, are gotten into the mind (which is the eye of the
soul) it cannot look up so steadfastly to heaven by contemplation. Therefore, as
when Abraham went to sacrifice, he left his servant and the Ass at the bottom
of the hill, Genesis 22.5. So when a Christian is going up the hill of meditation,
he should leave all secular cares at the bottom of the hill; that he may be
alone, and take a turn in heaven. If the wings of the bird are full of lime,
she cannot ^^i^: Meditation is the wing of the soul, when a Christian is
belimed with earth, he cannot she to God upon this wing. Saint Bernard when he
came to the Church-door, used to say, stay here all my worldly thoughts, that I
may converse with God in the Temple; so say to thy self, I am going now to
meditate, O all ye vain thoughts stay behind, come not near. When thou art
going up the mount of meditation, take heed the world does not follow thee, and
throw thee down from the top of this pinnacle. This is the first thing, the
souls retiring of it self; lock and bolt the door against the world.

meditate (...)
, signifies with intensenesse, to recollect and gather together the thoughts:
Meditation is not a cursory work, to have a few transient thoughts of Religion.
Canis ad Nilum; like the dogs of Nilus, that lap and away; but there must be in
meditation a fixing the heart upon the object, a steeping the thoughts; carnal
Christians are like quicksilver, which cannot be made to fix; their thoughts
are roving up and down, and will not fix; like the bird that hops from one
bough to another, and stays no where. David was a man fit to meditate, O God my
heart is fixed, Ps. 108.1
Psalm 108.1. In meditation there must be a staying of the thoughts upon the
object; a man that rides post through a Town or Village, he minds nothing; but
an Artist or Limner that is looking on a curious piece, views the whole draught
and pourtraiture of it, he observes the symmetry and proportion, he minds
every shadow and color. A carnal slitting Christian is like the traveller, his
thoughts ride post, he minds nothing of God; a wise Christian is like the
Artist, he views with feriousnesse, and ponders the things of Religion, Luke
2.19. But Mary kept all these things, and pondered (...) dicitur de ai^^ quo
secum dissertante. Grotius in loc.
them in her heart.

The third thing in meditation is the raising of the heart to holy affections.
A Christian enters into meditation, as a man enters into the Bath, that he may
be healed. Meditation heales the soul of its deadness and earthlinesse; but
more of this after.

CHAP. III. Proving Meditation to be a duty.
MEditation is a duty lying upon every Christian, and there is no disputing our
duty. Meditation is a Duty, Meditation a duty.
1. Imposed. 2. Opposed.


imposed; It is not arbitrary; there is a jus divinum in it. The same God who
has bid us believe, has bid us meditate, Josh. 1.8. This book of the Law
shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and
night. These words, though spoken to the person of Joshuah, yet they concern
every one; as the promise made to Joshuah concerned all believers, Joshuah 1.5.
compared with Heb. 13.5. So this precept made to the person of Joshuah, thou
shall meditate in this book of the Law, takes in all Christians; it is the part
of an hypocrite to enlarge the promise, and to streighten the precept. Thou
shall meditate in this book of the Law; the word Thou, is indefinite, and
reaches every Christian; As Gods Word does direct, so his will must enforce
obedience.

2 Meditation is a duty opposed. Nero persecutes; so you may know that is a
good duty which the heart opposes. We shall find naturally a strange
averseness from meditation. We are swift to hear, but slow to meditate. To
think of the world, if it were all day long, is delightful, but as for holy
meditation, how does the heart wrangle and quarrel with this duty! It is doing
of penance; now truly, there needs no other reason to prove a duty to be good,
than the reluctance of a carnal heart. To instance in the duty of self-denial.
Let a man deny himself, Mat. 16.24. selfdenial is as necessary as heaven, but
what disputes are raised in the heart against it? What to deny my reason, and
become a fool, that I may be wise; nay, not only to deny my reason, but my
righteousness? What, to cast it overboard, and swim to heaven upon the plank
of Christ's merits? this is such a duty that the heart does naturally oppose and
enter its dissent against. This is an argument to prove the duty of self-denial
good; just so it is with this duty of meditation; the secret antipathy the
heart has against it, shows it to be good; and this is reason enough to
enforce meditation.

CHAP. IV. Showing how meditation differs from memory.
THe memory (a glorious faculty) which Aristotle calls the souls scribe, sits
and pens all things that are done. Whatsoever we read, or hear, the memory does
register; therefore God does all his works of wonder that they may be had in
remembrance. There seems to be some Analogy and Resemblance between Meditation
and Memory. But I conceive there is a double difference.

memory is the chest or cupboard to lock up a truth, meditation is the palate
to feed on it; the memory is like the Ark in which the Manna was laid up,
meditation is like Isreal's eating of Manna. When David began to meditate on
God, it was sweet to him as marrow, Psalm. 63.5, 6. There Is as much difference
between a truth remembered, and a truth meditated on, as between a cordial in a
glass, and a cordial drunk down.

remembered, but not ruminated, will only serve to increase our condemnation.

CHAP. V. Showing how Meditation differs from Study.
THe Students life looks like meditation, but does vary from it. Meditation and
study differ three ways.

nature. Study is a work of the brain, meditation of the heart; study sets the
invention on work, meditation sets the affection on work.

design. The design of study is notion, the design of mediation is piety:
The design of study is the finding out of a truth; the design of meditation is
the spiritual improvement of a truth; the one searches for the vein of gold,
the other digs out the gold.

issue and result. Study leaves a man never a whit the better; it is like a
Winter Sun that has little warmth and influence: Meditation leaves one in a
more holy frame. It melts the heart when it is frozen, and makes it drop into
tears of love.

CHAP. VI. Showing the subject of Meditation.
THe fourth particular to be discussed is the subject matter of Meditation; The
subject of Meditation.
What a Christian should meditate upon. I am now gotten into a large field, but
I shall only glance at things; I shall but do as the disciples, pluck some ears
of corn as I pass along.

Some may say, alas I am so barren I know not what to meditate upon; to help
Christians therefore in this blessed work, I shall show you some choice select
matter for meditation. There are fifteen things in the Law of God which we
should principally meditate upon.

SECT. I.
attributes. The attributes of God are the several beams by which the divine
nature shines forth to us; and there are six special attributes which we should
fix our meditations upon.

omnisciency. His eye is continually upon us; he has a window opens into the
conscience; Our thoughts are unvailed before him. He can tell the Words we
speak in our bedchamber, Rev. 5.6
. 2 Kings 6.12. He is described with seven eyes to show his omnisciency Egyptii
olim in sceptro Regio Oculum designarunt
. Thou numberest my steps, Job 14.16. The Hebrew word (...)
signifies to take an exact account. God is said to number our steps, when he
makes a curious and critical observation of our actions; God sets down every
passage of our lives, and keeps as it were a daybook of all we do, and enters
it down into the book. Meditate much on this omnisciencie.

The meditation of Gods omniscience would have these effects.



Marcellius Titul. 7 did. sexta.
. God has set a grate at every man's breast, does not he see all my ways? Job
31.4. If I harbor proud, malicious thoughts, if I look at my own interest more
than Christ's, if I juggle in my repentance, the God of heaven takes notice. The
meditation of this omnisciency would make a Christian sincere, both in his
actions and aims. One cannot be an Hypocrite, but he must be a fool.

holiness of God. Meditate on the holiness of God. Mirabilis Sanctitate.
Holiness is the embroydered robe God wears; it is the glory of the God head,
Exodus 15.11. Glorious in holiness: It Is the most orient pearl of the crown of
heaven. God is the exemplar and pattern of holiness. It is primarily and
originally in God as light in the Sun; you may as well separate weight from
lead, or heat from fire, as holiness from the divine nature; Gods holiness is
that whereby his heart rises against any sin, as being most diametrically
opposite to his essence. Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity. Meditate much on this attribute.

The meditation of Gods holiness would have this effect, it would be a means
to transform us into the similitude and likeness of God; God never loves us
till we are like him Amor fundatur similitudine.
. There is a story in Peter Martyr of a deformed man, who set curious fair
pictures before his wife, that seeing them, she might have fair children, and
so she had. Jacobs cattle looking on the rods which were pilled, and had white
strakes in them, conceived like the rods, Genesis 30.38, 39. So while by
meditation we are looking upon the beams of holiness which are gloriously
transparent in God, we shall grow like him, and be holy as he is holy.
Holiness is a beautiful thing, Psalm. 110. It puts a kind of angelical
brightness upon us; it is the only coin will pass current in heaven, by the
frequent meditation of this attribute, we are changed into Gods image.

wisdom of God He is called the only wise God, 1 Timothy 1.17. His wisdom shines
forth in the works of providence; he fits at the helm guiding all things
regularly and harmoniously; he brings light out of darkness; he can strike a
straight stroke by a crooked stick; he can make use of the injustice of men to
do that which is just: He is infinitely wise, he breaks us by afflictions, and
upon these broken pieces of the ship, brings us safe to shore; Meditate on the
wisdom of God.

of government in his hand; and let who will rule God overrules; he knows how
to turn all to good; his work will be beautiful in its season. wisdom will
order it for the best. God will make a treakle of poison, all things shall be
physical and medicinable to me; either the Lord will expel some sin, or
exercise some grace. The meditation of this would silence murmuring.

power of God. This power is visible in the creation. He hangs the earth upon
nothing, Job 26.7. What cannot that God do that can create; nothing can stand
before a creating power; Creatio fit irrifistibiliter.
He needs no prae-existent matter to work upon; He needs no instruments to work
with, he can work without tools; He it is before whom the Angels veil their
faces, and the Kings of the earth cast their crowns. He it is that removes the
earth out of her place, Job 9.6. An earthquake makes the earth tremble upon her
pillars, but God can shake it out of its place. God can with a word unpin the
wheels, and break the axletree of the creation. He can suspend natural agents,
stop the Lions mouth, cause the Sun to stand still, make the fire not burn;
Xerxes the Persian Monarch threw fetters into the sea, as if he would have
chained up the unruly waters; but when God commands, the winds and sea obey
him Mat. 8.27.
. If he speak the word, an army of stars appear, Judges 5.20. If he stamp with
his foot, an Host of Angels are presently in a Battalia, if he lift up an
ensign, and does but hiss, his very enemies shall be up in arms to revenge
his quarrel Isa. 5.56.
. Who would provoke this God! It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God Laneos habet pedes sed ferrcas manus.
, Heb. 10.31. as a Lion he tears in pieces the adversaries, Psalm 50.22. Oh
meditate on this power of God.

The meditation of Gods power would be a great stay to faith. A Christians
faith may anchor safely upon the rock of Gods power. It was Sampsons riddle,
out of the strong came forth sweetness Judge. 14.14
; While we are meditating on the power of God, out of this strong comes forth
sweetness. Is the Church of God low? he can create Jerusalem a praise Is. 65.18
: Is thy corruption strong? God can break the head of this Leviathan: Is the
heart hard, is there a stone gotten there? God can dissolve it. The Almighty
makes my heart soft Job 23.16
; Faith triumphs in the power of God: out of this strong comes forth
sweetness; Abrabam meditating on Gods power, did not stagger through unbelief,
Romans 4.20. He knew God could make a dead womb fruitful, and dry breasts give
suck.

Meditate on the mercy of God.
mercy is an innate disposition in God to do good; as the Sun has an innate
property to shine, Psalm 86.5. Thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive, and
plentious in mercy to all them that call upon thee. Gods mercy is so sweet,
that it makes all his other attributes sweet. Holiness without mercy, and
Justice without mercy were dreadful. Geographers write that the City of
Syracuse in Sicily is so curiously situated, that the Sun is never out of
sight; though the children of God are under some clouds of affliction, yet the
Sun of mercy is never quite out of fight. Gods justice reaches to the clouds,
his mercy reaches above the clouds. How slow is God to anger. He was longer in
destroying Jericho, than in making the world; He made the world in six days,
but he was seven days in demolishing the walls of Jericho. How many
warning-pieces did God shoot against Jerusalem, before he shot off his
murdering-piece? Justice goes a foot-pace, Genesis 18.21. mercy has wings Psalm.
57.1
; the sword of justice often lies a long time in the scabbard, and rusts, till
sin does draw it out and whet it against a Nation; Gods justice is like the
widows oil, which ran a while, and ceased, 1 Kings 4.6. Gods mercy is like
Aarons oil, which rested not on his head, but ran down to the skirts of his
garment, Psalm 133.2. So the golden oil of Gods mercy does not rest upon the
head of a good parent, but is poured on his children, and so runs down, to
the third and fourth generation, even the borders of a religious seed. Often
meditate upon the mercy of God.

The meditation of mercy would be a powerful loadstone to draw sinners to God
by repentance Romans 2.4
. It would be as a cork to the net to keep the heart from sinking in despair;
behold a City of refuge to fly to; God is the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.
mercy does as naturally issue from him, as the child from the parent. God
delights in mercy, Micah 7.18. Chrysostom says, it is delightful to the mother
to have her breasts drawn; and how delightful is it to God to have the breasts
of mercy drawn; mercy finds out the worst sinner, mercy comes not only with
salvation in its hand, but with healing under its wings.

The meditation of Gods mercy would melt a sinner into tears; One reading a
pardon sent him from the King, fell a weeping, and burst out into these words,
A pardon has done that which death could not do, it has made my heart relent.

Meditate on the truth of God.
mercy makes the promise, and truth performs it. Psalm. 89.33. I will not
suffer my faithfulness to fail. God can as well deny himself, as his Word. He
is abundant in truth, Exodus 34.6. What is that? if God has made a promise of
mercy to his people, he will be so far from coming short of his Word, that he
will be better than his Word. God often does more than he has said, never
less; he often shoots beyond the mark of the promise he has set, never short of
it. He is abundant in truth. God may sometimes delay a promise, he will not
deny it. The promise may lie a long time as seed hid under ground, but it is
all the while a ripening. The promise of Isreal's deliverance lay four hundred
and thirty years hid underground; but when the time was come, the promise did
not go a day beyond its reckoning. Exodus 12.41. Exo. 12.41
The strength of Israel will not lie, 1 Samuel 15.29. Meditate on the truth of
God.

The meditation of Gods truth would, 1. Be a pillar of support for faith. The
world hangs upon Gods power, and faith hangs upon his truth. 2. The Meditation
of Gods truth would make us ambitious to imitate him. We should be true in our
words, true in our dealings. Pythagoras being asked Quidnam homines diis similes
faciat? cum vera loquuntur.
, what did make men like God, answered, When they speak truth.

SECT. 2.
Meditate on the promises.
THe second subject of meditatation, is, Meditate upon the promises of God.
Haben^ubera vere vino meliora and fragrantia unguentis optimis. Ber.
The promises are flowers growing in the paradise of Scripture, meditation,
like the Be sucks out the sweetness of them. The promises are of no use or
comfort to us, till they are meditated upon. For as the Roses hanging in the
garden, may give a fragrant redolency, yet their sweet water is distilled only
by the fire; so the promises are sweet in reading over, but the water of these
Roses, the spirits and quintescence of the promises are distilled into the
soul only by meditation. The Incense, when it is pounded and beaten, smells
sweetest. Meditating on a promise, like the beating of the Incense, makes it
most odoriferous and pleasant; The promises may be compared to a golden Mine,
which then only enricheth, when the gold is dug out; by holy meditation we
dig out that spiritual gold which lies hid in the Mine of the promise, and so
we come to be enriched. Cardan says, there is no precious stone, but has some
hidden virtue in it. They are called precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. When they
are applied by meditation, then their virtue appears, and they become precious
indeed. There are three sorts of promises which we should chiefly meditate upon.

I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy sins, Isa. 43.25. Whereas the poor sinner may say,
alas, I am deep in arrears with God, I fear I have not filled his bottle with
my tears, but I have filled his book with my debts; Well, but meditate on this
promise, I am he that blotteth out, etc. The word there in the original to blot
out (...)
, is a Metaphor alludes to a Merchant, who when his debtor has paid him, he
blots out the debt, and gives him an acquittance. So says God, I will blot out
your sin, I will cross the debt-book. Ah, but may the poor soul say, it may
be a great while first, I may be a long time under the convulsions of
conscience; I may even pine away, and my life draw nigh to the grave Psalm. 88.9
; No, in the Hebrew it is in the participle of the present (...). I am blotting
out thy transgressions. I have taken my pen, and am crossing out thy score.
Oh but may the sinner say, there is no reason God should do this for me? Well,
but acts of grace do not go by reason, I will blot out thy sins for my name
sake. Ah, but says the sinner, will not the Lord call my sins again to
remembrance? no, he promises an Act of Oblivion, I will not upbraid thee with
thy sins, or sue thee with a bond that is cancelled, I will remember thy
sins no more. Here is a sweet promise to meditate upon; it is an Hive full of
the honey of the Gospel.

healing, Hos. 14.4. and purging, Jerem. 33.8. Esaias 4^.3.
promises of sending his Spirit (...). Theophy act.
; which for its sanctifying nature, is compared sometimes to water which
cleanses the vessel; sometimes to wind, which is the fan to winnow and
purify the air; sometimes to fire, which does refine the metals. Meditate
often on that promise, Isa. 1.18. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
white as snow Scarlet is so deep a die, that all the art of man cannot take it
out; but behold here a promise, God will lay the soul a whitening; he will make
of a scarlet sinner, a milk-white Saint. By virtue of this refining and
consecrating work a Christian is made partaker of the divine nature; 2 Pet. 1.4.
he has an idoneity and fitness to have communion with God for ever; Meditate
much on this promise.

The Haven of rest, Heb. 4.9. The beatifical sight of God, Matthew. 5.8. The
glorious Mansions, John 14.2. The meditation of these promises will be as
bezar-stone to keep us from fainting under our sins and sorrows.

SECT. 3.
THe third subject of meditation is, Meditate on the love of Christ.
meditate upon the love of Christ Rev. 1.5
. Christ is as full of love, as he is of merit. What was it but love, that he
should save us, and not not the Angels? Among the rarities of the Lodestone,
this is not the least, that leaving the gold and pearl, it should draw iron to
it, which is a baser kind of metal; so that Christ should leave the Angels,
those more noble spirits, the gold and pearl, and draw mankind to him, how
does this proclaim his love! Love was the wing on which he did fly into the
Virgins womb. transcendent is Christ's love to the Saints! The Apostle calls it
a love that passes knowledge (...).
, Ephesians. 3.19. It Is such a love as God the Father bears to Christ; the same for
quality, though not equality, Joh. 15.9. As the Father has loved me, so have I
loved you: A believers heart is the garden where Christ has planted this sweet
flower of his love. It Is the channel through which the golden stream of his
affection runs. 2. How distinguishing is Christ love, Corinth. 1.26. Not many
wise, not many noble are called. In the old Law God passed by the Lion and the
Eagle, and took the Dove for sacrifice; that God should pass by so many of
birth and parts, and that the lot of free grace should fall upon thee; (...), O
the depth of divine love! invinsible is the love of Christ! It is strong as
death, Cant. 8 6. Death might take away his life, not his love Absorbeat igitur
mentem meam ab omnibus quae sub caelo sunt ignita and melliflua vis tui amoris
ut totus tibi inhaeream solaque suavitatis tuae dulcedine pascar and inchrier.
: and as death, so neither sin could wholly quench that divine flame of love,
the Church had her (...), her infirmities, her sleepy fits, Cant. 5.2. but
though black'd and sullied, yet still a Dove, Christ could see the faith, and
wink at the failing: He who drew Alexander while there was a scarre upon his
face, drew him with his finger upon the scar: Christ puts the finger of mercy
upon the scars of the Saints; he will not throw away his pearls for every speck
of dirt. And which makes this love of Christ the more stupendous; There was
nothing in us to excite or draw forth his love Non dilexit dignos, sed
diligendo efficit dignos Aug.
: He did not love us, because we were worthy, but by loving us, made us worthy;
4 How immutable is Christ's love? Having loved his own, Joh. 13.1
. The Saints are like letters of gold engraven upon Christ's heart, which cannot
be raced out. Meditate much upon the love of Christ.

The serious meditation of the love of Christ, Can one go upon bot coals, and
his feet not be burnt? Prove. 6.28. who can tread by meditation upon these hot
coals of Christ's love, and his heart not burn in love to him?

O that we should sin against so sweet a Savior? had we none to abuse but
our friend? had we nothing to kick against, but bowels of love? did not Christ
suffer enough upon the Cross, but must we needs make him suffer more? do we
give him more gall and vinegar to drink? O, if any thing can dissolve the heart
in mourning, it is disingenuity, and unkindness offered to Christ. When Peter
thought of Christ's love to him, Christ could deny Peter nothing, yet that he
should deny Christ, this made his eyes to water, Peter went out and wept
bitterly Mat. 26.75
.

the fire licking up the water, 1 King. 18.38. It Is usual for water to quench
the fire, but for fire to dry up and consume the water, which was not capable
of burning, this was miraculous! such a miracle did Christ show, his love did
burn where there was no fit matter to work upon, nothing but sin and enmity,
he loved his enemies, the fire of his love did consume and lick up the water of
their sins. He prayed for his enemies, Father fargive them; he shed tears for
them that shed his blood. Those that gave him gall and vinegar to drink, them
he gave his blood to drink. O amor his plagis membra cruentat amor. --

The meditation of this love would melt our hearts in love to our enemies.
Austin says Christ made a Pulpit of the Cross, and the great lesson he taught
Christians was, to love their enemies.

Cant. 5.6. yet when we consider how entire and immutable his love is Joh. 13.
; it will make us wait with patience till he sweetly manifests himself to us. He
is love, 1 John 4.16. and he cannot forsake his people overlong. He may take
his leave, not his last farewell Mic. 7.19
. The Sun may be gone a while from our climate, but it returns in the
spring: The meditation of Christ's love may make us wait for the return of
this Sun of righteousness. Heb. 10.37. For yet a little while and he that
shall come will come. He is Truth, therefore he shall come, he is love,
therefore he will come.

SECT. 4.
Meditate on sin.
meditate upon sin.

Reatus.
Meditate upon the guilt of sin. We were in Adam, tanquam in radice, as in a
common head, or root, and he sinning, we become guilty, Romans 5.12. (...) in
whom all have sinned; by his treason our blood is tainted, and this guilt
brings shame with it as its twin Conscia purpureus venit in ora rubor. Ovid.
, Romans 6.21.

2. Meditate upon the filth of sin; Macula.
not only is the guilt of Adams sin imputed, but the poison of his nature is
disseminated to us. Our Virgin nature is defiled, the heart is spotted 1 Kings
8.38.
; how then can the actions be pure? If the water be foul in the well, it
cannot be clean in the bucket. Isa. 64.6. We are all as an unclean thing. We
are like a Patient under the Physicians hand that has no sound part in him,
his head bruised, his liver swelled, his lungs perished, his blood enflamed,
his feet gangreen'd. Thus is it with us before grace comes, in the mind
darkness in the memory slipperinesse; in the heart hardness; in the will
stubbornness, from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head there is no
soundness, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores, Isa. 1.6. A sinner
befilthied with sin, is no better than a devil in man's shape (...). Macar.
hom. 11.
; and which is sadly to be laid to heart, the adherency of this sin. Sin is
naturalized to us, the Apostle calls it (...), an encompassing sin, Heb.
12.1. a sin that will not easily be cast off. A man may as well shake off the
skin of his body, as the sin of his soul; it sticks fast as the ivy to the
wall. There Is no shaking off this viper till death. Oh often meditate on this
contagion of sin. How strong is that poison, a drop whereof is able to poison
a whole sea? how venomous and malignant was that apple, a taste whereof
poisoned all mankind? Meditate sadly on this. The meditation of sin would
make the plumes of pride fall, if our knowledge makes us proud, we have sin
enough to make us humble. The best Saint alive who is taken out of the grave of
sin, yet has the smell of the grave-cloathes still upon him.

Maledictio
Gal. 3.10. Cursed be every one that continues not in all things written in the
book of the Law. This curse is like a blast upon fruit, which keeps it from
thriving; sin is not only a defiling thing, but a damning. It is not only a
spot in the face, but a stab at the heart. Sin betrays us into the Devils
hands, who like Draco, writes all his Laws in blood. Sin binds us over to the
wrath of God, and then what are all our earthly enjoyments, but like Damaris
his banquet, with a sword hanging over the head; sin brings forth the roll
written with curses against a sinner, Zach. 5. and it is a flying roll, v. 5.
it comes swiftly, if mercy does not stop it. Ye are cursed with a curse, Mal.
3.9. Thus it is till the entail of this curse be cut off by Christ. Oh meditate
upon this curse due to sin.

The meditation of this curse would make us afraid, retaining sin. When Micah
had stolen his mothers money, and heard her curse him, he durst not keep it any
longer, but restores it, Judges 17.2. he was afraid of his mothers curse; what
then is Gods curse? entertaining sin. We would not willingly entertain one
into our house who had the plague. Sin brings a curse along with it, which is
the plague of God that cleaves to a sinner; sin is like the water of jealosie
which made the belly to swell, and the thigh to rot, Numb. 5.22. The meditation
of this would make us fly from sin; while we sit under the shadow of this
bramble, fire will come out of the bramble eternally to devour us Judge. 5.19
.

SECT. 5.
Meditate on the vanity of the creature.
meditate upon the vanity of the creature. When you have sifted out the finest
flower that the creature does afford, you will find something either to
dissatisfie, or nauseate. The best wine has its froth, the sweetest Rose its
prickles, and the purest comforts their dregs; the creature cannot be said to
be full, unless of vanity; as a bladder may be filled with wind, Job 20.22. In
the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in streights; They who think to
find happiness here, are like Apollo who embraced the lawrel-tree instead of
Daphne. Meditate on this vanity. The world is like a looking-glass which
represents that face which is not in it.

The meditation of this vanity, Ridetura Tertulli^no Achilles dum discit stolam
fundere, comam struere, cutem fingere speculum consulere collum demulcere,
aurem Fo ratu effaeminare; quid forma? quid tota mundi compages?
? if the whole earth were changed into a globe of gold, it could not fill my
heart.

2. The meditation of the creatures vanity would make us look after more sollid
comforts; The favor of God, the blood of Christ, the influences of the Spirit.
When I see the life which I fetch from the cistern is vain, I will go the more
to the Spring head; in Christ there is an inexhaustible treasury: When a man
finds the bough begin to break, he lets go the bough, and catches hold on the
main tree; so when we find the creature to be but a rotten bough, then by
faith we shall catch hold on Christ the tree of life, Revel. 2.7. The creature
is but a reed, God is the rock of ages.

SECT. 6.
Meditate on the excellency of grace.
meditate upon the excellency of grace. Grace is, precious faith. Grace is
precious, original, it comes from above, Jam. 3.17. 2. nature Ardentes sui
amores excitaret si simulachru^ ejus ad oculos penetraret. Plat.
; it is the seed of God, 1 John 3.9. Grace is the spiritual enamel and
embroidery of the soul; It is the very signiture and engraving of the
Holy Ghost: Grace does not lose its color: Summa apud Deum nobilitas clarum
esse virtutibus. Hierom. Epist. ad Celantiam
, as a rich diamond adornes them that wear it, Esaias 43.4. Since thou were
precious in my sight, thou have been honorable. The Saints who are invested
with grace, are Gods jewels, Mal. 3.17. though sullied with reproach, though
besmeared with blood, yet, jewels; all the world besides is but lumber. These
are the jewels, and heaven is the golden cabinet where they shall be locked up
safe: A gracious man is the glory of the age he lives in; like Melancthon, who
was called the phaenix of Germany Bucauus praefat. loc. com.
. So illustrious in Gods eye is a soul bespangled with grace, that he does not
think the world worthy of him, Heb. 11.38. Of whom the world was not worthy
Therefore God calls for his people home so fast, because they are too good to
live in the world, Prove. 12.26 The righteous is more excellent than his
mighbour. Grace is the best blessing (...). Zenoph.
; It has a meliority and transcendency above all things else, there are two
things sparkle much in our eyes, but grace infinitely out shines both. 1. Gold.
The Sun does not shine so bright in our eyes as gold; it is the mirror of
beauty, money answers all things, Eccles. 10.19. but grace weighs heavier than
gold Nullae majores divitiae quam fides, quae caecos illuminat aegros curat
martyrs coronat, in haereditate aeterna cum Sanctis angelis collocat. Aug. de
verb. dom.
; gold draws the heart from God. Grace draws the heart to God. Gold does but
does enrich the mortal part, grace the angelical. Gold perishes, 1 Pet. 1.7.
grace perseveres. The Rose the fuller it is blown, the sooner it sheds, an
emblem of all things besides grace.

Petitur hac caelum via,
Nunquam stygias fertur ad umbras
Inclyta virtus --
-- sed cum summas.
Exiget horas consumpta dies,
itur ad superos gloria pandet. Sen. Trag.
Gifts. These are natures pride. Gifts and parts, like Rachel, are fair to
look upon, but grace excels. I had rather be holy than eloquent (...). Cyrill.
. An heart full of grace is better than an head full of notions. Gifts commend
no man to God. It Is not the paring of the apple we esteem (though of a
vermillion color) but the fruit. We judge not the better of an horse for his
trappings Non faciunt equum meliorem aurei fraeni. Sen. l. 5. Epist. 41.
and ornaments unless he have good mettel. What are the most glorious parts,
if there be not the mettel of grace in the heart? Gifts may be bestowed upon
one for the good of others, (as the nurses breasts are given her for the
child) but grace is bestowed for a man's own eternal advantage. God may send
away reprobates with gifts, as Abraham did the sons of the concubines, Genesis
25.6. but he entails the inheritance only upon grace. O often meditate upon the
excellency of grace.

The musing on the beauty of grace would, Damascen calls the graces of the
Spirit the very characters and impressions of the divine nature (...). Damascen.
. Grace is that flower of delight which like the vine in the parable, Judges
9.13. chears the heart of God and man.

What will thou give me (says Abraham) seeing I go childlesse, Genesis 15.2. so
would the soul say, Lord, what will thou give me seeing I go graceless? who
will give me to drink of the water of the well of life?

Florentine Cosm. Medices.
, who being to die, called all his sons together, and used these words to them,
It much rejoices me now upon my deathbed, quod vos divites relinquam. That I
shall leave you all wealthy; But a parents ambition should be rather to convey
sanctity, that he may say, O my children, it rejoices me that I shall leave
you gracious; it comforts me that before I die, I shall see Jesus Christ live
in you.

SECT. 7.
Meditate upon thy spiritual estate.
enter into a serious meditation of the state of your souls; while you are
meditating of other things, do not forget your selves. The great work lies at
home. It was Solomon's advice, know the state of thy flock, Prove. 27.23. much
more know the state of thy soul Cum sublatum e conspectu lumen est ( inquit
Seneca) moris mei jam conscius, totum diem mecum serutor, nibil transco.
Tacitus annal. l. 13
; for want of this meditation men are like travelers, skilled in other
countries, but ignorant of their own; so they know other things, but know not
how it goes with their souls, whether they are in a good state or bad; there
are few who by holy Meditation enter within themselves* There are two reasons
why so few meditate upon the state of their souls.

Self-guiltinesse. Men are loath to look into their hearts by meditation, lest
they should find that which would trouble them. The cup is in their sack. Most
are herein like tradesmen, who being ready to sink in their estates are loath
to look into their books of account, lest they should find their estate low;
but had thou not better enter into thy heart by meditation, than God should
in a sad manner enter into judgment with thee?

Presumption; men hope all is well; men will not take their land upon trust,
but will have it surveyed; yet they will take their spiritual estate upon
trust, without any surveying. They are confident their case is good Prove. 14.16
; It Is a thing not to be disputed on, and this confidence is but conceit. The
foolish Virgins, though they had no oil in their lamps, yet how confident were
they? They came knocking; 'twas a peremptory knock, they doubted not of
admittance; so, many are not sure of their salvation, but secure; they presume
all is well, never seriously meditating whether they have oil or no. Oh,
Christian, meditate about thy soul. See how the case stands between God and
thee; do as Merchants, cast up thy estate, that thou may see what thou art
worth; see if thou art rich toward God, Luke 12.21. Meditate about three
things 1. debts, see if thy debts be paid or no, that is, thy sins pardoned;
see if there be no arrearagies, no sin in thy soul unrepented of. 2. Will;
see if thy Will be made yet: Have thou resigned up all the interest in thy
self? Have thou given up thy love to God? Have thou given up thy will? This is
to make thy Will. Meditate about the Will; make thy spiritual Will in the time
of health; if thou put off the making of thy Will till death, it may be
invalid; perhaps God will not accept of thy soul then. evidences. These
evidences are the graces of the Spirit; see whether thou have any evidences.
What desires have thou after Christ? what faith? see whether there be no flaw
in thy evidences; are thy desires true? do thou as well desire heavenly
principles, as heavenly privileges? Oh meditate seriously upon your evidences.

To sift our hearts thus by meditation, is very necessary: if we find our
estate is not sound, the mistake is discovered, and the danger prevented; if it
be sound, we shall have the comfort of it. What gladness was it to Hezekiah,
when he could say, Remember now, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight,
Isa. 38.3. so, what unspeakable comfort will it be, when a Christian upon a
serious meditation, and review of his spiritual condition, can say, I have
something to show for heaven, I know I am passed from death to life 1 John 3.14
; and as an holy man once said, I am Christ's, and the devil has nothing to do
with me Bucer.
.

SECT. 8.
Meditate on the paucity of them that shall be saved.
meditate upon the paucity of them that shall be saved; but few are chosen,
Matthew. 20.16. among the millions in Rome, but few Senators; and among the
swarms of people in the world, but few believers. One said, all the names of
the good Emperors might be engraven in a little Ring Flavus Vopiscus.
; there are not many names in the book of life. We read of four sorts of
ground in the Parable, and but one good ground, Matthew. 13. How few in the world
know Christ? how few that believe in him? quis credidit? Who has believed our
report Is. 53.1
? how few that strike sail to Christ's Scepter, Luke 19.14? The Heathen
Idolaters and Mahometans possess almost all Asia, Africa, America; in many
parts of the world the devil is worshipped; as among the Parthians and
Pilapians; Satan takes up most climates, and hearts. How many formalists are
there in the world? 2 Timothy 3.5. (...), having a form of godliness; like wool
that receives a slight tincture, not a deep die, whose Religion is a paint,
(which a storm of persecution will wash off) not an engraving. These look like
Christ's Doves, but are the Serpents brood (...). Ignatius.
. They hate Gods image, like the Panthar, that hates the picture of a man.

Oh often meditate on the paucity of them that shall be saved. The meditation
of this, would, Thou shall not follow a multitude, Exodus 23.2. The multitude
usually goes wrong; most men walk, (...), after the course of the world Non qua
eundum, sed qua itur. Sen.
, Ephesians. 2.2. That is, the lusts of their hearts, and the fashions of the
times. They march after the Prince of the air. The meditation of this would
make us turn out of the common road.

Heb. 4.1. not a despairing fear, but a jealous and cautious fear. This fear
the eminent Saints of God have had. Austin says of himself, he knocked at
heaven-gate with a trembling hand. This fear is joined with hope, Psalm
147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in
his mercy; A child of God fears, because the gate is straight, but hopes,
because the gate is open.

working out our salvation; If there are so few that shall be crowned, it would
make us the swifter in the race. This meditation would be an alarm to sleepy
Christians.

SECT. 9.
Meditate upon final apostasy.
meditate upon final Apostasy. Think what a sad thing it is to begin in
Religion to build, and not be able to finish Luke 14 30
; Joash was good while his uncle Jehoiada lived, but after he died, Joash grew
wicked, and all his Religion was buried in his uncles grave. We live in the
fall of the leaf, how many are fallen to damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1.
Meditate seriously on that Scripture, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. It is impossible for
those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the
powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance. A man may be enlightened, and that from a double lamp, the Word and
Spirit, but these beams, though they are irradiating, yet not penetrating. It Is
possible he may have (...), a taste of the heavenly gift; he may taste, but not
concoct Potest summis labris delibare. Estius
; as one says, a Cook may taste the meat he dresseth, but not be nourished by
it M. Perkins.
. This taste may not only illuminare, but reficere Thom. Aquin.
; it may carry some sweetness in it, there may be a kind of delight in
spiritual things: Thus far a man may go, and yet penitus recidere, fall away
finally. Now this will be very sad (it being such a God-affronting, and
Christ-reproaching sin;) Know therefore it is an evil and bitter thing that
thou have forsaken the Lord, Jerem. 2.19. Meditate upon final relapses.

The meditation of this would make us earnest in prayer to God. make my heart
sound in thy statutes, Psalm. Ps. 119.80
119.80. Lord, let me not be an Alchimy Christian, work a thorough work of
grace upon me; Though I am not washed perfectly, let me be washed thoroughly,
Psalm 51.2. That which begins in hypocrisy, ends in apostasy. 2. The
meditation of hypocrites final falling away would make us earnest in prayer for
perseverance. Hold up my goings in thy paths that my footsteps stip not, Psalm
17.5. Lord, hold me up, that I may hold out. Thou have set the crown at the end
of the race, let me run the race, that I may wear the crown; it was Beza's
prayer, Domine quod coepisti perfice ne in portu naufragium accidat. Beza.
and let it be ours. Lord perfect what thou have begun in me, that I may not
suffer shipwreck when I am almost at Haven.

SECT. 10.
Vera Philosophia est mortis contemplatio. Plato in dial. de sap.
. We say we must all die, but who is he that meditates seriously upon it?
Meditate, statutum est; It Is appointed for all once to die, Heb. 9.27. There Is
a statute out. Et mors atra caput fuscis circumvolat alis. -- We are almost
setting our feet upon the dark entry of death. The Poets painted time with
wings; it not only rides Post, but flies, and carries us upon its wings. The
race is short between the cradle and the grave: the sentence of death is
already passed, Genesis 3.19. To dust thou shall return; so that our life is but
a short reprieval from death which is granted to a condemned man; Mine age is
(...), as nothing, Psalm. 39.5. nay, if it were possible to take something out
of nothing, our life is less than nothing, reckoned with eternity. Quis scit
an adjiciant hodiernae crastina vitae tempora, dii superi! Horat.
. How soon may God seal us a lease of ejectment? Our grave may be digging
before night. To day we lie upon a pillow of down, to morrow we may be laid
upon a pillow of dust. To day the Sermon-bell goes, to morrow our passing bell
may go. half done, there is no finishing it in the grave, Eccles. 9.10. There Is
no work nor devise, nor wisdom in the grave whether thou go. If a garrison
surrender at the first summons, there is mercy, but if it stay til the red flag
be hung out, and the garrison is stormed, there is no mercy then. Now it is a day
of grace, and God holds forth the white flag of mercy to the penitent, if we
stay till God hold forth the red flag, and storm us by death, now there is no
mercy. There is nothing to be done for our souls after death. Oh meditate of
death. It Is reported of Zeleucus, that the first piece of household stuff he
brought into Babylon, was a tombstone: think often of your Tombstone. The
meditation of death would work these admirable effects.

Cum sis humi limus cur non humilimus?
thou art but pulvis animatus; shall dust and ashes be proud? Thou have a
grassy body, Is. 40.6. Agnoscat homose esse mortalem, and franget elationem.
Aug.
and shall shortly be mowen down; I have said ye are gods, Ps. 82 but lest they
should grow proud, he adds a corrective, ye shall die like men, v. 7. ye are
dying gods.

nihil sic revocat a peccato, etc. No stronger antidote against sin, says
Austin, than the frequent meditation of death; am I now sinning, and to morrow
may be dying? What if death should take me doing the devils work, would it not
send me to him to receive double pay? carry the thoughts of death as a
table book always about thee, and when sin tempts, pull out this table book,
and read in it, and you shall see sin will vanish. We should look upon sin in
two glasses, the glass of Christ's blood, and the glass of death.

be a bridle for intemperancy; shall I pamper that body which must lie down in
the house of rottenness? Our Savior at a feast breaks forth into mention of
his burial, Mat. 26.12
Matthew. 26.12. feeding upon the thoughts of death would be an excellent
preservative against a surfeit.

Ephesians. 5.15.
Redeeming the time. Our lives should be like jewels, though little in bulk,
yet great in worth. Some die young, yet with gray hairs upon them; we must be
like grass of the field, useful, not like grass of the housetop, Psalm
129.6. which withers before it be grown up. To live, and not be serviceable, is
not vita, but tempus Seneca.
.

would make us lay in provision against such a time. It would spur us on in the
pursuit after holiness. Death is the great plunderer, it will shortly plunder
us of all our outward comforts; our feathers of beauty, and honor must be laid
in the dust, but death cannot plunder us of our graces. The CommonWealth of
Venice in their armoury have this inscription, happy is he that in time of
peace thinks of war Id etiam depictuon aurcis literis in porta aquaria
civitatis. Embrincensis.
; he that often meditates of death, will make preparation against its coming.

SECT. 11.
Meditate on the day of judgment.
God has appointed a day in which he will judge the world, Acts 17.31.
Meditate, 1. trumpet shall sound to summon all the world before the Judge Si
talis sit horror venientis, qualis erit judicantis? Aug.
, 1 These. 4.16. and Jesus Christ shall come in the glory of his Father, with
all his holy Angels, Mat. 25.31. We must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10. Kings and Nobles, all must come to the bar, there is
no exemption. I have read of a wicked King, who on his deathbed fell a
weeping, his brother asked him why he wept? to think (says he) that I, who
have judged others, am now going to be judged my self. He will judge the world
in righteousness, Acts 17.31. There are no bribes taken in this Court; no
relations take place here. The Thebanes did picture their Judges blind, and
without hands; blind, that they might not respect persons; Reusner.
without hands, that they might take no bribes. Christ's Scepter is a Scepter of
righteousness, Heb. 1.8. it is not nearness of blood availes; nor will he be
bribed with a tear. He will thoroughly purge his floor (...).
, Mat. 3.12. not a grace, or a sin, but Christ's fan will discover it; He will
judge the heart as well as the fact. Mat. 25.32. The wheat and chafe may both
grow together, but they shall not lie together.

Meditate often upon this Court of judicature, from whence is no appeal.
Feathers swim upon the water, but gold sinks into it; light feathery Christians
flote in vanity, they mind not the day of judgment, but serious spirits sink
deep into the meditation of it. Most men put far away from them the evil day,
Amos 6.3. they report of the Italians, that in a great thunder they use to ring
their bells, and shoot off their Cannons, that the sound of their Bells, and
the roaring of their Cannons may drown the noise of the thunder; so the devil
delights men with the music of the world; that the noise of this should drown
the noise of the day of judgment, and make them forget the sound of the last
trump. Most men are guilty, therefore they do not love to hear of the Assizes.
When Paul preached of judgment, Faelix trembled, Acts 24.25. he had a bad
conscience; Josephus tells us of Faelix, that he was a wicked man: The woman
that lived with him ( Drusilla by name) he had entised away from her husband,
and when he heard of judgment, he fell a trembling. Oh I beseech you meditate
upon this last and solemn day; while others are thinking how they may get
riches, let us bethink our selves how we may abide the day of Christ's coming.

The meditation of the day of judgment, fan and his sieve: Will this action
of mine bide the test at that great day?

Moses, who was (...), fair to God, as the Original has it Act 7.20
. The Galaxia, or milky way (as the Astronomers call it) is a bright circle in
the heavens containing many stars, but they are so small that they have no
name, nor are they taken cognizance of by the Astrologers. Give me leave to
apply it, possibly others may take no notice of us, we are so small as to have
no name in the world, yet if we are true stars, and can approve our hearts to
God, we shall hold up our heads with boldness, when we come to stand before
our Judge.

before Christ, but by being in Christ! if Christ be thine, then all is well;
no matter what is charged, if all be discharged, Romans 8 33, 34. There Is no way
in the world to stand in the day of judgment, but by making a party; make
Christ thy friend, and then thy Judge will be thy 1 John 2.1.
Advocate.

less censorious, they would not repobrate others so fast; who art thou that
judge another? do thou take Christ's Scepter into thy hand? dare thou sit
in judgment upon thy brother? perhaps when the critical day comes, he may be
found gold, and thou chafe. It Is true, we may judge men's way, but not their
persons, Romans 14.10. but why do thou judge thy brother? we shall all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ.



weakness of grace; a poor Christian when he sees his grace so defective, is
ready to be discouraged, but at the day of judgment if Christ find but a
dram of sincerity, it shall be accepted; if thine be true gold, though it may
be light, Christ will put his merits into the scales, and make it pass
current. If thou have no sin of allowance; Thou shall have grains of
allowance. I may allude to that, Amos 9.9. yet shall not the least grain fall
to the earth; He that has but a grain of grace, not the least grain shall
fall to hell.

censures and slanders. The Saints go here through strange reports, (...), 2
Cor. 6.8. There Is no walking in the world now a days, let us tread never so
warily without catching some spects of dirt; John Baptists head in a charger is
a common dish in this age, it is ordinary to bring in a Saint beheaded of his
good name; but at the day of judgment, Christ will unload his people of all
their calumnies, and reproaches, he will at that day wash his Spouse so white,
that she shall not only be guiltless, but spotless, her black spots of
reproach shall be taken away, Ephesians. 5.27. he will present his Church glorious,
sine macula and ruga, not having spot or wrinkle.

SECT. 12.
Meditate on hell. 1. Poena damni.
Meditate upon the pain of loss, Mat. 25.10. and the door was shut. To have
Christ's face veiled over, and a perpetual eclipse, and midnight in the soul,
to be cast out of Gods presence, in whose presence is fullness of joy, this
does accent and imbitter the condition of the damned; it is like mingling gall
with wormwood.

2. Meditate upon the pain of sense; 2. Poena sensus.
the Photinians hold there is no hell, but they speak in a dream, Psalm 9.17.
The wicked shall be turned into hell. And here meditate of two things. 1. The
place of hell. 2. The company.


a place of torment, Luke 16.28. There are two things especially in hell to
torment.

1. 1. Ignis Urens,
Fire, Revel. 20.15. It Is called a lake of burning fire, Austin, Peter Lombard,
Gregory the Great, say, this fire of hell is a material fire, though they say
it is infinitely hotter than any culinary fire; that is but painted fire to
this. I wish none of us may know what kind of fire it is, but I rather think,
the fire of hell is partly material, and partly spiritual; the material fire is
to work upon the body, the spiritual to torture the soul. This is the wrath of
God, which is both fire and bellows, who knows the power of thy anger, Psalm
90.11.

But it may be objected, if there be any material fire in hell, it will consume
the bodies there? I answer, it shall burn without consuming In rebus sacris
mirari non rimari sapientis est. Gerhard de. coena dom.
, as Moses bush did, Ex. 3.2. The power of God silenceth all disputes. If God
by his infinite power could make the fire of the three children not to consume,
cannot he make the fire of hell burn and not consume? Austin in his book, de
civitate Dei, Aug. lib. 21
tells us of a strange salt in Sicily, which if it be put in the fire swims;
That God which can make salt, contrary to its nature, swim in the fire, can
make the bodies of the damned not consume in the fire.

2. The worm, Mark 9.44. 2. Vermis Rodens.
Where the worm never dies, Homer in his Odisses faines, that Titius his liver
was gnawn by two vultures in hell. This never-dying worm Christ speaks of, is
the gnawing of a guilty conscience. Comment. 1 Cor. 11
Melancthon calls it Erynnis conscientiae (...).
; an hellish fury, Siculi non invenere tyranni tormentum majus, -- they that
will not hear conscience preaching, shall feel conscience gnawing Ge adag
Comment.
; and so great is the extremity of these two, the fire which burns, and the
worm which bites, that there will follow gnashing of teeth, (...).
Mat 8.12. the damned will gnash their teeth for horror and anguish. That must
needs be sad cheer (as Latimer says) where weeping is served in for the first
course, and gnashing of teeth for the second Latimer Sermon. ad cler. Ejus adesse
intollerabile ejus abesse im possibile. Aug.
: to endure this will be intolerable, to avoid it will be impossible.

Matthew. 25.41. Job complains he was a companion to owls, chap. 30.29. What
will it be to be a companion to devils? Consider, 1. Their ghastly deformity,
they make hell look blacker. 2. Their deadly antipathy; they are fired with
rage against mankind; first they become tempters, then tormentors.

Meditate much on hell. Let us go into hell by contemplation, that we may not
go into hell by condemnation. How restless is the condition of the damned; The
ancients feign of Endymion, that he got leave of Jupiter always to sleep
Impetrasse a Jove ut perpetuo dormiret. Natal. Com.
. What would the damned in hell give for such a License? in their pains is
neither intermission, nor mitigation.

The serious meditation of hell, would make us, Sampsons foxes Judges 15.5.
, carries devouring fire in the tail of it.

Mary's fear, Matthew. 28.8. They depared from the Sepulcher with fear and great
joy. A believer may fear to think of the place of torment, but rejoice to think
he shall not come into this place. When a man stands upon a high rock, he
trembles to look down into the sea, yet he rejoices that he is not there
struggling with the waves. A child of God, when he thinks of hell, he rejoices
with trembling. A Prison is not made for the Kings sons to be put in. A great
Naturalist observes that nothing will so soon quench fire as salt and blood;
sure I am, the salt brinish tears of repentance, and the blood of Christ will
quench the fire of hell to a believer. Christ himself has felt the pains of
hell for you. The Lamb of God being roasted in the fire of Gods wrath, by this
burnt-offering the Lord is now appeased toward his people. Oh how may the
godly rejoice. (...).
There Is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans 8.1. When the Son of
God was in the furnace, Dan. 3.25. the fire did the three children no hurt; so
Christ being for a time in the fiery furnace of Gods wrath, that fire can do a
believer no hurt. The Saints have the garment of Christ's righteousness upon
them, and the fire of hell can never singe this garment.

SECT. 13.
THe thirteenth subject of meditation, is, Meditate on heaven.
Meditate on heaven: From the Mount of meditation, as from Mount Nebo, we may
take a view and prospect of the Land of promise. Christ has taken possession
of heaven in the name of all believers, Heb. 6.20. Whither the forerunner is
for us entered, even Jesus. Heaven must needs be a glorious City, which has God
both for its builder and inhabitant. Heaven is the extract and quintessence of
all blessedness. There the Saints shall have their wish. Austin wished that he
might have seen three things before he died, Rome in its Glory, Paul in the
Pulpit, and Christ in the Flesh. But the Saints shall see a better sight; they
shall see, not Rome, but Heaven in its glory; they shall see Paul, not in the
Pulpit, but on the Throne, and shall sit with him; they shall see Christ's
flesh, not veiled over with infirmities and disgraces, but in its spiritual
embroydery; not a crucified, but a glorified body. They shall behold the King
in his beauty, Isa. 33.17. What a glorious place will this be! In heaven God
will be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Beauty to the eye, music to the ears; joy
to the heart, and this he will be to the poorest Saint, as well as the richest.
O Christian, who art now at thy hard labor, perhaps following the plough, thou
shall sit on the Throne of glory Rev. 3.21
. Quintus Curtius writes of one who was digging in his garden, and on a sudden
made King, and a purple garment richly embroydered with gold, put upon him; so
shall it be done to the poorest believer, he shall be taken from his laboring
work, and set at the right hand of God, Injectaci vestis purpura auroque
distincta. Curtius
having the Crown of righteousness upon his head. Mat. 25.33.
Statuet oves ad dextram.

O in effabile gaudium in beat is glorificatis qui ad dextram Christi sistent;
astituri ipsi ut subditi screnissimo suo principi, ut filii benignissimo suo
patri, ut regale sacerdotium gratiosissimo suo pontifici; matter solomonis fuit
ad dextram regis in Throno posita, 1 King. 2.19. O vero quam caduca haec, etsi
regia majestas! in novissimo autem die vere magnifica and gloriosa erit
constitutio ad dextram solomonis coelestis desiderium cordis plenissime illis
dabit, apponet capiti eorum diadema auri Ps. 21.3.
. Solom. Classius Exeg. 4.

Meditate often on this Jerusalem above.

The meditation of heaven, would, abound in the work of God, knowing that our
labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. The weight of glory would not
hinder us in our race, but cause us to run the faster: this weight would add
wings to duty.

pure in heart shall see God, Matthew. 5.8. it is only a clear eye can look upon
a bright transparent object.



SECT. 14.
Meditate on eternity
Meditate upon eternity; Some of the Ancients have compared it to an
intellectual sphere, whose center is every where, and circumference no where.
Eternity to the godly is a day which has no Sunsetting, and to the wicked, a
night which has no Sunrising. Eternity is a gulf which may swallow up all our
thoughts: Meditate on that Scripture, Matthew. 25.46. And these shall go away
into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.

eternal punishment; the bitter cup the damned drink of shall never pass away
from them. The sinner and the furnace shall never be parted. Gods vial of wrath
will be always dropping upon a wicked man. When you have reckoned up so many
myriads and millions of years, nay, ages, as have passed the bounds of all
Arithmitick, Eternity is not yet begun. This word EVER breaks the heart;
Horaque erit tantis ultima nulla malis.
Cogita centum millia annorum, cogita decies centena millia annorum, cogita
mill milliones annorum, immo seculorum, nondum inchoasti aeternum, Cornel. de
Lap. Think of this all you that forget God. If the tree fall hell-ward, so it
lies to all eternity, Paenae gehennales torquent non extorquent, puniunt non
finiunt corpora. Prosper.
Prosper. Now is the time of Gods long-suffering, 2 Pet. 3.9 after death will
be the time of the sinners long-suffering, when he shall suffer the vengeance
of Eternal fire, Jude 7.

Si Deus diceret damnatis impleatur terra arena minutissima, it a ut totus
orbis hisce arenae granulis sit repleta a terra usque ad coelum Empyraeum; and
mill simo quoque anno angelus veniat dematque ex hoc arenae ^umulo unum
granulum, eumque post tot millenarios annorum quot sunt granula ea exhauserit,
liberabo vos a gehenna, O quam exultarent damnati at vero, post omnes hos
millenarios restant alii, and alii millenarii, in infinitum, in aeternum. and
ultra, Drexel.

life eternal Eternitas Est. interminabilis vitae tota simul and perfect^
possessio. B^^^ius l. 5 de Consol. Philosoph. prosa 6.
. The soul that is once landed at the heavenly shore is past all storms. The
glorified soul shall be for ever bathing it self in the rivers of pleasure,
Psalm 16. ult. This is that which makes heaven to be heaven, We shall be ever
with the Lord. 1 These. 4.17. Austin says; Lord I am content to suffer any
pains and torments in this world, if I might see thy face one day; but alas,
were it only for a day, and then to be ejected heaven, it would rather be an
aggravation of misery; but this word ever with the Lord, is very accumulative
and makes up the garland of glory; A state of eternity is a state of security
(...). Theodoret.
, O vita vitalis, vita sempiterna, and sempiterne beata, ubi gaudium sine
merore, requies sine labor, sanitas sine languore, opes sine amissione,
perpetuitas sine corruptione. Aug. Manuali cap. 7. de gaud.

The meditation of eternity would, Zeuxes being asked, why he was so long about
a picture, answered aeternitati pingo, I paint for eternity. The thoughts of an
irreversible condition after this life, would make us pray and hear as for
eternity. Vive Deo vive aeternitati. --

Eterni^ inhianti fastidio sunt transit^ria Bern. Epist. 3.
? It Is but minutissima pars puncti Simonides
, which (as the Mathematicians say) is just nothing. He that thinks of
eternity will despise the pleasures of sin for a season Heb. 11.25.
.



SECT. 15.
THe last subject of meditation is, Meditate on your experiences.
meditate upon your experiences. Look over your receites; Genesis 48.15. The God
who has fed me all my days. Thou never feedest, but mercy carves for thee;
thou never go to bed, but mercy draws the curtains, and sets a guard of
Angels about thee. Whatever thou have is out of the Exchequer of free grace.
Here Is an experience to meditate upon.

temporal dangers has God screen'd off? Thy neighbors house on fire Paries
cum pr^ximus ardet. Virg.
, and it has not kindled in thy dwellings. Another infected, thou art free;
Behold the golden feathers of protection covering thee. 2. What spiritual
dangers has God prevented? when others have been poisoned with error, thou
have been preserved. God has sounded a retreat to thee; thou have heard a
voice behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk in it Isa. 30 21
; When thou have listed thy self, and taken pay on the devils side, that God
should pluck thee as a brand out of the fire, that he should turn thy heart,
and now thou espousest Christ's quarrel against sin. Behold preventing grace!
here is an experience to meditate upon.

Ananias and Saphira *, and you are preserved as a monument of patience? Here
is an experience; God has done more for you than for the Angels; he never
waited for their repentance, but he has waited for you year after year, Isa.
30.18. Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious. He has not only
knocked at your heart in the Ministry of the Word, but he has waited at the
door: How long has his Spirit striven with you? like an importunate suitor,
that after many denials, yet will not give over the suit. My thinks I see
justice with a sword in its hand ready to strike, and mercy steps in for the
sinner, Lord have patience with him a while longer: My thinks I hear the Angels
say to God as the King of Israel once said to the Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 6.22.
Shall I smite them? shall I smite them? So my thinks I hear the Angels say,
shall we take off the head of such a drunkard, swearer, blasphemer? and mercy
seems to answer as the Vinedresser; Luke 13.8. let him alone this year. See if
he will repent. Is not here an experience worth meditating upon? Mercy turns
Justice into a rainbow; the rain-bowe is a bow indeed, but has no arrow in
it; that justice has been like the rainbowe without an arrow, that it has not
shot thee to death, Here is a receipt of patience to read over and meditate upon.

Iehoshaphat, 2 Chr. 20 12. I have no might against this great army. Then God
has come in with auxiliary forces, his grace has been sufficient. When God
has bid thee pray for such a mercy, and thou have found thy self very unfit;
thy heart was at first dead and flat, all on a sudden thou art carried above
thy own strength; thy tears drop, thy love flames; God has come in with
assisting grace. If the heart burn in prayer God has struck fire. The Spirit
has been tuning thy soul, and now thou make sweet melody in prayer. Here is
an experience to meditate upon.

Satan nihil non molitur contra Sanctos, scutum fidei aggreditur, his
tentationum arie tibus sic porest copium obsi dear and in tantas dubitationes
pra^pitareout deum expauescat, ei irascatur and aliquando blasphemet. N^que
tur^a, neque Caesar unquam tanto impetu pessunt civitatem aliquam oppugnare,
quam Satan aliquando conscientias piorum, Luth^r in Ps. 118.
? When the Devil has tempted to infidelity, to self-murder, when he would
make you believe either, that your graces were but a fiction, or Gods promise
but a counterfeit bond, now that you have not been foiled by the Tempter, it is
God who has kept the garrison of your heart, else his fiery darts would have
entered. Here Is an experience to meditate upon.

renewed your strength as the Eagle; may not you write that writing which
Hezekiah did, Isa. 38 6. The writing of Hezekiah King of Judah, when he had
been sick and was recovered of his sickness; you thought the Sun of your
life was quite setting, but God made this Sun return back many degrees.
Here Is an experience for meditation to feed upon. When you have been
imprisoned, your foot taken in the snare, and the Lord has broken the snare,
nay, has made those to break it who were the instruments of laying it. Behold
an experience; Oh let us often revolve in mind our experiences. If a man had
physic receipts by him, he would be often looking over his receipts. You that
have rare receipts of mercy by you, be often by meditation looking over your
receipts.

The meditation of our experiences would, praise, but record (...). Plato.
, 1 Chr. 16.4. The meditating Christian keeps a Register or Chronicle of Gods
mercies, that the memory of them does not decay. God would have the Manna kept
in the Ark many hundred years, that the remembrance of that miracle might be
preserved; a meditating soul takes care that the spiritual Manna of an
experience be kept safe.

Bernard Duas babeo minutias domine etc. Bern.
, I have, Lord, two mites, a soul and a body, and I give them both to thee.

no hard master; we might bring in our experiences as a sufficient confutation
of that slander. When we have been falling, has not God taken us by the hand?
When I said my foot slippeth, thy goodness, O Lord, held me up, Psalm 94.18.
How often has God held our head and heart when we have been fainting (...).
Euripides.
? and is he a hard Master? is there any master besides God who will wait upon
his servants? Christians summon in your experiences. What vailes have you had
Ps. 19.11
? What inward serenity and peace, which neither the world can give, nor death
take away? a Christians own experiences may plead for God against such as
desire rather to censure his ways, than to try them, and to cavil at them than
to walk in them.

what God has done for our souls Psalm. 44.1
; at such a time we were brought low, and God raised us; at such a time in
desertion, and God brought a promise to remembrance which dropped in comfort. The
meditation of Gods gracious dealing with us would make us transmit and
propagate our experience to others, that the mercies of God shown to us may
bear a plentiful crop of praise when we are dead and gone.

CHAP. VII. Showing the necessity of Meditation.
It is not enough to carry the book of Gods lawabout us, but we must Meditate
in it. The necessity of Meditation will appear in three particulars. and know
the receipt, or that he should apply it? The end why God communicates his Gospel
receipts to us is, that we should apply them by fruitful meditatition: would God
(think we) ever have been at the pains of writing his lawwith his own finger
only that we should have the Theory and notion of it? is it not that we should
Meditate in it? would he ever have been at the cost to send abroad his
ministers into the world, to furnish them with gifts, Ephesians. 4. and must they for
the work of Christ be nigh unto death Phil. 2.30.
that Christians should only have an empty knowledge of the truths published?
is it only speculation or meditation that God aims at?

meditation is like a soldier without arms or a workman without tools. 1.
Without Meditation the truths of God will not stay with us, the heart is hard
and the memory slipery, and without meditation all is lost; meditation imprints
and fastens a truth in the mind, it is like the Selvedge which keeps the cloth
from ravelling. Serious Meditation is like the engraving of letters in gold or
marble which endure. without this allour preaching to you is but like writing
in sand, like pouring water into a sieve, like throwing a bur upon crystal
which glides off and does not stay. Reading and hearing without Meditation is
like weak Physic which will not work; want of Meditation has made so many
sermons in this age to have a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.

2. Without Meditation the truths which we know will never affect our hearts,
Deuteronomy. 6.6. These words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart.
How can the word be in the heart unless it be wrought in by Meditation? as an
hammer drives a nail to the head, so Meditation drives a truth to the heart. It
is not the taking in of food but the stomachs concocting it, which makes it
turn to blood and spirits, so it is not the taking in of a truth at the ear but
the Meditating of it (which is the concoction of it in the mind) makes it
nourish. Without Meditation the word preached may increase notion not
affection. There is as much difference between the knowledge of a truth, and
the meditation of a truth, as there is between the light of a Torch and the
light of the Sun: set up a Lamp or Torch in the garden, and it has no
influence. The Sun has a sweet influence, it makes the plants to grow, and the
herbs to flourish: So knowledge is but like a Torch lighted in the
understanding, which has little or no influence, it makes not a man the
better; but Meditation is like the shineing of the Sun, it operates upon the
affections, it warmes the heart, and makes it more holy. Meditation fetches
life in a Truth. There are many truths ly, as it were, in the heart dead, which
when we Meditate upon, they begin to have life and heat in them. Meditation of
a Truth is like rubbing a man in a swoon, it fetches life. It Is meditation
makes a Christian.

3. Without Meditation we make our selves guilty of slighting God and his word.
If a man lets a thing lie by, and never minds it, it is a sign he slights it:
Gods Word is the book of life, not to meditate in it, is to undervalue it. If a
King puts forth an Edict or Proclamation, and the Subjects never mind it, it
is a slighting the Kings Authority. God puts forth his Law as a Royal Edict, if
we do not Meditate in it, it is a slighting his authority, and what does this
amount to less then a Contempt done to the Divine Majesty.

CHAP. VIII. Showing the reason why there are so few Good Christians.
USE 1.
IT gives us a true account why there are so few good Christians in the world,
namely, Inform.
because there are so few Meditating Christians: we have many that have aures
bibulas, they are swift to hear, but slow to meditate. This duty is grown
almost out of fashion, people are so much in the Shop, that they are seldom on
the Mount with God. Where is the Meditating Christian? Diogenes, in a full
Market, was seeking up and down, and being asked what he sought for, says,
hominem quaero. I seek for a man, that was to say, a wise man, a Philosopher;
among the crowd of Professors, I might search for a Christian, videl. A
Meditating Christian. Where is he that Meditates on sin, hell, eternity, the
recompense of reward, That takes a prospect of heaven every day? where is the
Meditating Christian? It Is to be bewailed in our times that so many who go under
the name of Professors, have banished good discourse from their Tables, and
Meditation from their Closets. Surely, The hand of Joab is in this.

The Devil is an Enemy to Meditation, he cares not how much people read and
hear, nor how little they Meditate; He knows that Meditation is a means to
compose the heart and bring it into a gracious frame: Now the Devil is against
that, Satan is content that you should be hearing and praying Christians, so
that ye be not Meditating Christians, he can stand your small shot, provided
you do not put in this bullet.

CHAP. IX. A Reproof to such as do not meditate in Gods Law.
Use 2.
in the Law of God: Reproof
They turn all their Meditations the wrong way; like a man that lets forth the
water of his Mill which should grind his corn into the highway, whereit does no
good: So there are many who let out their Meditations upon other fruitless
things, which are no ways beneficial to their souls.

1. The Farmer Meditates on his acres of land not upon his soul: his Meditation
is how he may improve a barren piece of ground, not how he may improve a barren
mind: he will not let his ground lie fallow, but he lets his heart lie fallow:
There is no spiritual culture, not one seed of grace sown there.

2. The Physician meditates upon his receipts, but seldom on those receipts which
the Gospel prescribes for his salvation, Faith and Repentance. Commonly the
Devil is Physician to the Physician, having given him such stupifying physic
that for the most part he dies of a Lethargy.

3. The Lawyer meditates upon the common Law, but as for Gods law he seldom
Meditates in it either day or night: the lawyer while he is Meditating on his
clients evidences often forgets his own; most of this Robe have their spiritual
evidences to seek, when they should have them to show. The tradesman is for
the most part Meditating upon his wares and drugs: his study is how he may
increase his estate and make the ten talents an hundred. He is cumbred about
many things; he does not Meditate in the book of Gods law but in his
account-book day and night. At the long run you will see these were fruitless
Meditations, you will find that you are but golden beggars and have gotten but
the fools purchase when you dye, Luke. 12.20.

5. There is another sort that Meditate only upon mischief, who devise
iniquity, Mic. 2.1. they Meditate how to defame; and to defraud; James 8.5.
they make the Epha small and the shekel great. The Epha was a measure used in
buying, the shekel a weight used in selling, they know how to collude and
sophisticate Christians who should support too often supplant one another; and
how many Meditate revenge? it is sweet to them as dropping honey (as Homer
speaks) Their hearts shall meditate terror, Isaiah 33.18. the sinner is a
fellon to himself and God will make him a terror to himself. Jer. 20.4.


CHAP. X. An holy persuasive to Meditation.
USE. 3.
I Am in the next place to exhort Christians to this so necessary duty of
Meditation. If ever there were a duty I would press upon you with more
earnestness and zeal, it should be this, because so much of the vitals and
spirits of Religion lies in it. The plant may as well bear fruit without
watering, the meat may as well nourish without digesting, as we can fructify
in holiness without Meditation. God provides the meat, Ministers can but cook
and dress it for you, Meditation must make the concoction; for want of this
you may cry out as the Prophet, Isa. 24.16. My leanness, my leanness, woe unto
me. Oh let me persuade such as fear God, seriously to set upon this duty. If
you have formerly neglected it, bewail your neglect, and now begin to make
conscience of it: Lock up your selves with God (at least once a day) by holy
Meditation Ascend this Hill, and when you are gotten to the top of it, you
shall see a fair prospect, Christ and heaven before you. Let me put you in
mind of that sweet saying of Bernard, O sancta anima, fuge publi cum, fuge
domesticos, an nescis te verecundum habere sponsum, and qui nequaquam suam
velit tibi indulgere praesentiam, praesentibus caeteris: Ber: sermon. 40. in Can.
O Saint know thou not that thy husband Christ is bashful and will not be
familiar in company? retire thy self by meditation into the closet, or the
field and there thou shall have Christ's embraces. Cant. 7.11, 12. Come my
Beloved, let us go forth, into the field, there will I give thee my loves, O
that I might invite Christians to this rare duty. Why is it, that you do not
Meditate in Gods Law? Let me expostulate the case with you: what is the Reason?
My thinks I hear some say, we are indeed convinced of the necessity of the
duty, but alas there are many things that hinder. There are two great
objections lie in the way, I shall remove them, and then hope the better to
persuade to this duty.

CHAP. XI. The answering of Objections.
Object. 1. I Have so much business in the world, that I have no time to
Meditate.

Answ. The World indeed is a great enemy to Meditation. It Is easy to lose ones
purse in a crowd, and in a crowd of worldly employments, it is easy to lose all
the thoughts of God. So long as the heart is an Exchange, I do not expect it
should be a Temple; but to answer the objection. Have thou so much business
that thou have no time for Meditation? as if Religion were but by the bye, a
thing fit only for idle hours: What? no time to Meditate! What is the business
of thy life but Meditation? God never sent us into the world to get riches (I
speak not against labor in a calling) but I say this is not the end of our
coming hither. The errand God sent us into the world about is salvation, and
that we may attain the end we must use the means, viz. Holy Meditation, Now
have thou no time to Meditate? just as if a husbandman should say truly he
has so much business that he has no time to plough or sow; why, what is his
occupation but plowing and sowing? what a madness is it to hear Christians say
they have no time to Meditate? What is the business of their lives but
Meditation? Oh take heed lest by growing rich, you grow worth nothing at last.
Take heed that God does not sue out the Statute of Bankerupt against you, and
you be disgraced before men and Angels: no time for Meditation? you shall
observe that others in former ages have had as much business as you, and
public affairs to look after, yet they were called upon to Meditate. Joshua
1.8. Thou shall Meditate in this book of the Law. Joshua might have pleaded an
excuse, he was a Soldier, a Commander, and the care of marshalling his army
lay chiefly upon him, yet this must not take him off from Religion, Joshua must
Meditate in the book of Gods law. God never intended, That the great business
of Religion should give way to a shop or farm, or that a particular calling
should justle out the General.

2. Obj. But this duty of Meditation is hard. To set time apart every day to
get the heart into a Meditating frame is very difficult; Gerson reports of
himself, that he was sometimes three or four hours before he could work his
heart into a spiritual frame.

Answ. Does this hinder? To this I shall give a threefold Reply.

1. The price that God has set heaven at is labor; our salvation cost Christ
blood, it may well cost us sweat Plurimi mollitie quadam animi ^e fugiun
sudorem quem stbi in pere quenda faelicitate imaginantur, malunt brevi huius
vitae curriculo suis indulge^e^up^inibus and a eam futurerum subive, quam
lab^rem susciper. and portea vitam praestolari aeternam. Marcell. armamentarij
scientis: lib. 2.
The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, Matthew. 11, 12. It is as a garrison
that holds out, and the duties of Religion, are the taking it by storm: a good
Christian must offer violence to himself, (though not self natural, yet
self-sinful.) Self is nothing but the flesh, Gal. 5.17.
as Basil, Hierom, Theophylact, and Chrysostom, do all expound it. The flesh
cries out for ease, it is a Libertine; It Is loath to take pains, loath to pray,
to repent, loath to put its neck under Christ's yoke, now a Christian must hate
himself, no man ever yet hated his own flesh, Ephesians. 5.29. yes, in this sense
he must hate his ownflesh, The lusts of the flesh Romans 8.13.
. He must offer violence to himself by mortification and Meditation; say not it
is hard to meditate, (...)? Chrysostom.
is it not harder to ly in Hell?

2. We do not argue so in other things: Riches are hard to come by, therefore I
will sit still and be without them; no difficulty is the whet-stone of
industry. How will men venture for gold, and shall we not spend and be spent
for that which is more precious then the gold of Ophir? By Meditation we suck
out the quintessense of a promise.

3. Though while we are first entering upon Meditation it may seem hard, yet
when once we are entered it is sweet and pleasant. Christ's yoke at the first
putting on may seem heavy, but when once it is on it becoms easy. It Is not a
yoke but a Crown. Lord (says Austin) the more I Meditate on thee, the sweeter
thou art to me Quanto magis in te meditor, tanto es mihi dulcior and amabilior,
de lectant me bona tua, puro mentis intuitu, and dulcissime pii amoris affectu,
Aug. Tom. 9.
. According to that of holy David, My Meditation of the shall be sweet, Psalm.
104.34. The Poets say the top of Olympus was always quiet, and serene Olympi
cacumen semper quie tum.
: It Is hard climbing up the rocky Hill of Meditation, but when we are got up to
the top there is a pleasant prospect, and we shall sometimes think our selves
even in heaven Contemplationis pluma nos sublevat, at^ue inde divina dulcedine
ad coelum erigimur. Bonaventure.
. By holy Meditation the soul does as it were breakfast with God every morning;
and to be sure his breakfast is better then his dinner. When a Christian is
upon the mount of Meditation he is like Peter on the mount when Christ was
transfigured, Mat. 17. he cries out, bonum est esse hic, Lord, it is good to be
here: he is loath to go down the mount again. If you come to him and tell him
of a purchase, he thinks you bid him to his loss: what bidden manna does the
soul taste now? how sweet are the visits of Gods spirit? when Christ was alone
in the wilderness then the Angel came to comfort him; when the soul is alone in
holy Meditations and ejaculations, then not an angel but Gods own spirit does
come to comfort him: a Christian that meets with God in the mount would not
exchange his hours of Meditation for the most orient pearls or sparkling
beauties that the world can afford. No wonder David spent the whole day in
Meditation Homo meditabundus.
Psa. 119.97. Nay as if the day had been too little, he borrows a part of the
night too, Psalm. 63.6. when I remember thee upon my bed, and Meditate on thee
in the nightwatches. When others were sleeping, David was Meditating. He who is
given much to Meditation shall with Sampson find an honey comb in this duty.
therefore let not the difficulty discourage Virtus maxim nitet in arduo.
. The pleasantness will infinitely countervail the pains.

Having removed these two objections out of the way, let me again revive the
exhortation to Meditate in Gods law day and night. And there are two sorts of
Meditation which I would persuade to.

CHAP. XII. Concerning occasional Meditations.
1. OCcasional and 2 deliberate
1. Ocasional Meditations, such as are taken up upon any sudden occasion. There
is nothing almost does occur, but we may presently raise some Meditation upon:
as a good Herbalist does extract the Spirits and quintessence out of every
herb, so a Christian may from every emergence and occurence extract matter of
Meditation. A gracious heart like fire, turns all objects into fuel for
Meditation. I shall give you some instances: When you look up to the heavens,
and see them richly imbroidered with light, you may raise this Meditation, if
the Footstool be so glorious, what is the Throne where God himself sits? When
you see the Firmament bespangled with Stars, think, what is Christ, The Bright
Morning Star? Revelation 22.16. Monica, Austins mother, standing one day, and
seeing the Sun shine, raised this Meditation, Oh! If the sun be so bright, what
is the Light of Gods presence? When you hear music that Delights the senses,
presently raise this Meditation, What music like a good conscience (...).
Ignoepist. ad Philadelph.
? This is avis paradist, the bird of Paradise within, whose chirping melody
does inchant and ravish the soul with joy; he that has this music all day,
may take David's Pillow at night and say, with that sweet singer, I will lay me
down in peace and sleep, Psalm. 4. 8. How blessed is he that can find heaven in
his own bosom? When you are dressing your selves in the morning, awaken your
Meditation, think thus, but have I been dressing the hidden man of the heart 1
Pet. 3.4.
? Have I looked my face in the Glass of Gods word? I have put on my clothes,
but have I put on Christ? It is reported of Pambo, that seeing a Gentlewoman
dressing her self all the morning by her Glass, he fell a weeping: O, says
he, this woman has spent the morning in dressing her body, and I sometimes
spend scarce an hour in dressing my soul. When you sit down to dinner, let your
Meditation feed upon this first course, how blessed are they that shall eat
bread in the Kingdom of God Lu. 14.15
? What a Royal Feast will that be which has God for the Founder? What a
Love-feast where none shall be admitted but Friends?

When you go to bed at night, Dic dormituro potes non ex pergisci amplius, di
experrecto, potes non dormi re amplius, Sen.
imagine thus, shortly I shall put off the earthly clothes of my body, and make
my bed in the grave: when you see the Judge going to the Assizes, and hear the
Trumpet blow, think with your selves (as Hierom did) That you are still hearing
that shrill Trumpet sounding in your ears, Surgite mortui, Arise ye dead and
come to judgment. When you see a poor man going in the Streets, raise this
Meditation, here is a walking Picture of Christ, He had no place where to lay
his head Mat. 8.20.
. My Savior became poor, that I through his poverty might be made rich: When
you go to Church, think thus, I am now going to hear God speak, let me not stop
my ear; if I refuse to hear Him speaking in his Word, I shall next hear him
speaking in his Wrath, Psalm 2.5. When you walk abroad in your Orchard, and see
the plants bearing, and the herbs flourishing, Think how pleasing a sight it is
to God to see a thriving Christian; how beautiful are the Trees of
righteousness, when they are hung full of fruit Phil. 1.11.
, when they abound in faith, humility, knowledge. When you pluck a Rose bud in
your Garden, raise this contemplation, how lovely are the early puttings forth
of grace; God prizeth a Christian in the bud, he likes the bloomings of youth
rather then the sheddings of old age. When you eat a Grape from the Tree, think
of Christ the True Vine, how precious is the blood of that Grape? Such rare
clusters grow there, that the Angels themselves delight to taste of. It is said
of Austin, he was much in these ex tempore Meditations; A gracious heart like
the Philosophers Stone, turns all into Gold; It is all the year stilling-time
with a Christian, he stilleth out heavenly Meditations from earthly
Occurrences, as the curious Alchymist when several metals are mingled
together, can by his skill extract the Gold and Silver from the baser metals:
So a Christian by a Divine Alchymy, can extract golden Meditations from the
various objects he beholds; Indeed it argues a spiritual heart, to turn every
thing to a spiritual use, and we have Christ's own example for these occasional
Meditations, John 4.7, 10, 13, 14. While he sat on Jacohs well he presently
Meditates on that (...) and breaks forth into a most excellent discourse
concerning the Water of life. So much for occasional Meditations.

is a man set apart, Psalm 4.3. as God sets him apart by Election, so he sets
himself apart by Meditation.

CHAP. XIII. For the Right Timing of Meditation.
Quest. 1. WHat is the fittest time for meditation?

Answ. For the timing of it, it is hard to prescribe, because of men's various
callings and employments. But if I may freely speak my thoughts, the morning is
the fittest time for Meditation. The best time to converse with God is, when we
may be most private, that is, before worldly occasions stand knocking as so
many Suitors at the door to be let in: the morning is, as it were the cream of
the day, let the cream be taken off and let God have it. In the stilling of
strong water, the first water that is drawn from the Still is more full of
spirits, the second drawing is weaker; So the first Meditations, that are
stilled from the mind in a morning, are the best, and we shall find them to be
most full of life, and spirits. The morning is the Golden hour. God loved the
first fruits, Exodus 23.19. The first of the first fruits thou shall bring into
the house of the Lord. Let God have the first fruits of the day; the first of
our thoughts must be set abroach for heaven. The student takes the morning for
his study Aurora musis amica.
. The Usurer gets up in the morning, and looks over his books of account; a
Christian must begin with God in the morning. David was with God before break
of day, Psalm 119.147. I prevented the dawning of the morning.

But why the morning for Meditation?

Answer 1. Because in the morning the mind is fittest for holy duties. A
Christian is most himself then; What weary devotion will there be at night when
a man is even tired out with the business of the day. He will be fitter to
sleep then to meditate. The morning is the queen of the day, then the fancy is
quickest, the memory strongest, the spirits freshest, the organ of the body
most disposed, having had its recruits by sleep. It Is a sure rule, then is the
best time to serve God when we find our selves most in tune. In the morning the
heart is like a viol strung and put in tune, and then it makes the sweetest
melody.

The morning thoughts stay longest with us the day after, the wool takes the
first die best, and it is not easily worn out. When the mind receivs the
impression of good thoughts in the morning, it holds this sacred dye the
better, and like a color in grain, it will not easily be lost. The heart keeps
the Relish of morning meditations, as a vessel that receives a Tincture and
savor of the Wine that is first put into it Quo semel est imouta recens
servabit oderem testa diu.
; Or as a Chest of sweet Linen, That keeps the sent a great while after.
Perfume thy mind with heavenly Thoughts in the Morning, and it will not lose
its spiritual fragrancy; Wind up thy heart toward heaven in the beginning of
the day, and it will go the better all the day after: It is with receiving
thoughts into the mind as it is with receiving Guests into an Inn, the first
Guests that come fill the best rooms in the house, if others come after, worse
rooms will serve them; So when the mind entertains holy Meditations for its
morning-Guests, if afterward earthly thoughts come, they are put into some of
the worst rooms, they lodge lowest in the affections. The best rooms are taken
up in the Morning for Christ. He that loses his heart in the morning in the
world, will hardly find it again all the day after.

Aurorae filium, the first thoughts of the day; we give persons of quality the
precedence, we let them take the first place. If we honor God (whose Name is
Reverend and Holy) we will let the thoughts of God take place of all other.
When the World has the first of our thoughts, it is a sign the world lies
uppermost, we love it most. The first thing a covetous man meditates on in the
morning is dea pecunia, his money; a sign his Gold lies nearest to his heart.
Oh Christians let God have your morning Meditations. He takes it in disdain to
have the world served before him. Suppose a King, and a Yeoman were to dine in
the same room, and to sit at two Tables, if the Yeoman should have his meat
brought up, and be served first, the King might well take it in an high
Disdain, and look upon it as a contempt done to his person. When the world
shall be served first, all our morning thoughts attending it, and the Lord
shall be put off with the Dreggs of the day, when our thoughts begin to run
low, is not this a contempt done to the God of Glory?

Ephesians. 1, 4. Before the foundations of the World. Before we fell, he was
thinking how to raise us. We had the morning of his thoughts; Oh what thoughts
of Free grace, What thoughts of Peace has he had toward us! We have taken up
his thoughts from eternity: If we have had some of Gods first thoughts, well
may he have our first thoughts.

Job rose early in the morning, and offered, Job 1.5. David when he awaked was
with God, Psalm 139.17. and indeed this is the way to have a morning blessing.
In the morning the dew fell, Exodus 16.13. The dew of a blessing falls early;
now we are likeliest to have Gods company. If you would meet with a friend, you
go betimes in the morning before he be gone out. We read that the Holy Ghost
came down upon the Apostles, Acts 2.3, 4. and it was in the morning, as may be
gathered from Peter's Sermon, verse 15. 'twas but the third hour of the day; the
morning is the time for fruitfulness, In the morning shall thou make thy seed
to flourish, Isaiah 17.11. by morning Meditation, we make the seed of grace to
flourish.

I would not by this wholly exclude evening Meditation. Isaac went out to
meditate in the Eventide, Genesis 24.63. When business is over, and every thing
calm, it is good to take a turn with God in the Evening. God had his Evening
Sacrifice, as well as his Morning, Exodus 29.39. as the cream in the top is
sweet, so the Sugar at bottom; in two cases, the Evening Meditation does well.



impetus upon the heart, a greater aptitude and tuneableness of mind) dare not
neglect Meditation at such a time: who knows but it may be a quenching the
spirit; do not drive this blessed Dove from the Ark of thy Soul; in these cases
evening Meditation is seasonable; but I say, if I may cast in my verdict, the
morning is to be preferred; as the flowr of the Sun opens in the morning to
take in the sweet beams of the Sun, so open thy soul in the morning to take in
the sweet thoughts of God. And so much for the timing of Meditation.

CHAP. XIV. How long Christians should be conversant with this duty.
Quest But how long should I meditate?

Answ. For the quamdiu, how long, if we consider how many hours the world
has, it is hard if we cannot give God at least one hour every day. I shall
only say this for a general rule, Meditate so long till thou find thy heart
grow warm in this duty. If when a man is cold, you ask, how long he should
stand by the fire? Sure, till he be thoroughly warm, and made fit for his work.
So, Christian, thy heart is cold, never a day, (no not the hottest day in
summer) but it freezeth there; now stand at the fire of Meditation till thou
find thy affections warmed, and thou art made more fit for spiritual
service. David mused till his heart waxed hot within him, Psalm 39.3. I will
conclude this with that excellent saying of Bernard, Domine nunquam a te absque
te recedam. Bern.
Lord, I will never come away from thee without thee. Let this be a Christians
Resolution not to leave his Meditations of God till he find something of God
in him; some moving of bowels after God, Cant. 5.4. Some flamings of love,
Cant. 6.8.

CHAP. XV. Concerning the usefulness of meditation.
HAving answered these questions, I shall next show the benefit and usefulness
of Meditation.

I know not any duty that brings in greater income and revenue then this. It Is
reported of Thales, that he left the affairs of State to become a contemplating
Philosopher Diog. in vita Thal.
. Oh did we know the advantage which comes by this duty, we would often retire
from the noise and hurry of the World, that we might give our selves to
Meditation.

The benefit of Meditation appears in seven particulars.

chew not the cud, they do not meditate on what they have heard. If an Angel
should come from heaven, and preach to men, nay if Jesus Christ himself were
their Preacher, they would never profit without meditation. It Is the settling of
the milk that makes it turn to cream; and it is the settling of a truth in the
mind, that makes it turn to spiritual aliment: the Be sucks the flower, and
then works it in the Hive, and makes honey of it. The hearing of a truth
preached is the sucking of a flower, there must be aworking it in the Hive of
the heart by meditation, then it turns to Honey. There is a disease in
children called the Rickets, when they have great heads, but their lower parts
are small, and thrive not. I wish many of the Professors in London, have not
the spiritual Rickets, they have great heads, much knowledge, but yet they
thrive not in godliness, their heart is faint, their feet feeble, they walk not
vigorously in the ways of God, and the cause of this disease is, the want of
meditation. Illumination without meditation makes us no better then Devils.
Satan is an Angel of light yet black enough.

2. Meditation does make the heart serious and then it is ever best, Meditation
does ballast the heart; when the ship is ballasted it is not so soon overturned
by the wind, and when the heart is ballasted with Meditation it is not so soon
overturned with vanity. Some Christians have light hearts, Zeph. 3.4. his
Prophets are light. A light Christian will be blown into any opinion or vice,
you may blow a feather any way: there are many feathery Christians, the devil
no sooner comes with a temptation but they are ready to take fire; now
meditation makes the heart serious, and God says of a serious, Christian as
David of Goliahs sword, there is none like that, give it me. Meditation
consolidates a Christian; solid gold is best; the solid Christian is the only
metal that will pass current with God. The more serious the heart grows, the
more spiritual, and the more spiritual the more it resembles the Father of
Spirits. When a man is serious he is fittest for employment. The serious
Christian is fittest for service, and it is meditation brings the heart into
this blessed frame.

while I was musing the fire burned, Psalm. 39.3. David was meditating of
mortality, and see how his heart was affected with it verse. 4. Lord make me to
know mine end and the me asure of my days, what it is, that I may know how
frail I am. The reason our affections are so chill and cold in spiritual things
is, because we do warm our selves no more at the fire of meditation.
Illumination makes us shining lamps, meditation makes us burning lamps. What is
it to know Christ by speculation and not by affection? It is the proper work of
meditation to excite and blow up holy passions. What sparklings of love in such
a soul! When David had meditated on Gods law, he could not choose but love it,
Psalm. 119.97. O how love I thy law it is my meditation all the day. When the
spouse had by meditation viewed those singular beauties in her beloved, white
and ruddy Cant. 5. she grew sick of love verse. 8. Galeatius Caraccialus, that
famous Marquess of Vico, who had been much in the contemplation of Christ,
breaks out into a holy Pathos, let their money perish with them who esteem all
the gold in the world worth one hours communion with Jesus Christ!

4. Meditation fits for holy duties. The musician first put his instrument in
tune and then he plays a lesson; meditation tunes the heart, and then it is
fit for any holy service: as the sails to the Ship, so is meditation to duty,
it carries on the soul more swiftly.

1. Meditation fits for Hearing, when the ground is softened then it is fit for
the plough and the seed: when the heart is softened by meditation, now is a fit
time for the seed of the word to be sown.

2. Meditation fits for Prayer, Prayer is Spiritualis pulsus, the spiritual
pulse of the soul, by which it beats strongly after God. There is no living
without prayer; a man cannot live unless he takes breath, no more can the Soul
unless it breathes out its desires to God. Prayer Vshers in mercy, and prayer
sanctifies mercy; 1 Timothy 4.5.
; it makes mercy to be mercy: prayer has power over God, vincit invincibilem
Luther.
. Hosea 12.4. Prayer comes with Letters of mandamus to heaven, Isa. 45.11.
Prayer is the spiritual Leech, that sucks the poison of sin out of the soul.
What a blessed (shall I say duty or) privilege, is prayer! Meditatio nutrix ora
tionis. Gerson.
Now meditation is an help to prayer: Gerson calls it the nurse of Prayer.
Meditation is like oil to the lamp; the lamp of prayer will soon go out unless
meditation cherish and support it: meditation and prayer are like two Turtles,
if you separate one, the other dies; A cunning angler observes the time and
season when the fish bite best, and then he throws in his angle: When the heart
is warmed by meditation, now is the best season to throw in the angle of
prayer, and fish for mercy. After Isaac had been in the field meditating, he
was fit for prayer when he came home. When the Gun is full of powder, it is
fittest to discharge. So when the mind is full of good thoughts, a Christian
is fittest by prayer to discharge, now he sends up whole volleys of sighs and
groans to heaven. Meditation has a double benefit in it, it powers in, and
poures out; first it poures good thoughts into the mind, and then it poures out
those thoughts again in prayer; meditation first furnishes with matter to
pray, and then it furnishes with a heart to pray, Psalm 39.3. I was musing
(says David;) and the very next words are a prayer, Lord make me to know my
end; Hinc utilitas meditationis conspicitur quia animum Davidis ad pre candi
studium erexit. Calvin.
and Psalm 143.5, 6. I muse on the works of thy hands, I stretch forth my hands
to thee; the musing of his head, made way for the stretching forth of his hands
in prayer. When Christ was upon the mount then he prayed: So when the Soul is
upon the mount of meditation, now it is in tune for Prayer; Prayer is the Child
of meditation: meditation leads the van, and prayer brings up the Rear.

David had been contemplating the Works of Creation, their splendour, harmony,
motion, influence, he let the plumes of pride fall, and begins to have
Self-abasing thoughts, Psalm 8.3, 4. When I consider the Heavens, the Work of
thy fingers, the moon and Stars which thou have ordained, What is man that
thou art mindful of him?

Omnis passio inclinat cum impetu. Tho. Quest. 155. art. 2.
; would they be so brutishly sensual as they are, if they did seriously
meditate what sin is? Would they take this viper in their hand, if they did but
consider before of the sting? Sin puts a worm in to conscience, a sting into
death, a fire into hell; did men meditate of this, that after all their dainty
dishes, death will bring in the Reckoning, and they must pay the Reckoning in
Hell, they would say as David in another sense, Let me not eat of their
dainties, Psalm 141.4. The Devils apple has a bitter kore in it. Did men think
of this, sure it would put them into a cold sweat, and be as the Angels drawn
sword to affright them. Judge. 22.23.
Meditation is a golden Shield to beat back sin. When Joseph's mistress tempted
him to wickedness, meditation did preserve him, How shall I do this Evil, and
sin against God? Meditation makes the heart like wet tinder, it will not take
the Devils fire.

Idolater, Col. 3.5. Though he will not bow down to an Idol, yet he worships
graven images in his coin. Now meditation is an excellent means to lessen our
esteem of the World. Great things seem little to him that stands high, if we
could live among the stars, the earth would seem as nothing. A Christian that
stands high upon the pinnacle of meditation, how do all worldly things
disappear, and seem as nothing to him; he sees not that in them which men of
the world do. He is gotten into his Tower, and Heaven is his Prospect. What is
said of God He dwells on high, he humbles himself to behold the things done on
the earth, Psalm. 113.6. I may allude to with reverence, The Christian that
dwells on high by meditation accounts it an humbling and abasing of himself
to look down upon the earth, and behold the things done in this lower Region.
Saint Paul, whose meditations were sublime and seraphical, looked at things,
(...), which were not seen, 2 Cor. 4. ult. How did he trample upon the World,
how did he scorn it? I am crucifled to the world, Gal. 6.14. As if he had said
it is too much below me to mind it. He who is catching at a crown will not fish
for gudgeons, as Clopatra, once said to Mark Anthony. A Christian that is
elevated by holy meditation, will not set his heart there where his feet should
be, upon the earth.

7. Holy meditation banisheth vain and sinful thoughts it purges the Fancy
(...) Chrysostom.
. How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4.14. The mind is the
shop or work house where sin is first framed. Sin begins at the thoughts. The
thoughts are the first plotters and contrivers of evil. The mind and fancy is a
stage where sin is first acted; the malicious man acts over sin in his
thoughts, he contemplates revenge. The impure person acts over concupicence in
his thoughts, he contemplates lust. The Lord humble us for our contemplative
wickedness. Pr. 30.32. If thou have thought evil lay thy hand upon thy mouth.
How much sin do men commit in the chamber of their imagination? now meditating
in Gods law would be a good means to banish these sinful thoughts. If David had
carried the book of the law about him and meditated in it, he had not looked on
Bathsheba with a lascivious eye, 2. Sam. 11.2. Holy meditation would have
quenched that wildfire of lust. The word of God is pure, Psalm. 119.140. not
only subjective but effective. It Is not only pure in it self, but it makes
them pure that meditate in it. Christ whip't the buyers and sellers out of the
temple. John. 2.15. Holy meditation would whip out idle and vagrant thoughts
and not suffer them to lodge in the mind: what is the reason the Angels in
heaven have not a vain thought? they have a sight of God, their eye is never
off him. If the eye of the soul were fixed on God by meditation, how would vain
impure thoughts vanish? As when that woman Judge. 9.52. was in the tower and
Abimelek came near to the tower to have entered, she threw a millstone out of
the tower upon him and killed him: so when we are gotten into the high tower of
meditation, and sinful thoughts would come near to enter, we may from this
tower throw a millstone upon them and destroy them. And thus you have seen the
benefit of meditation.

CHAP. XVI. Setting forth the excellency of meditation.
ARistotle places Felicity in the contemplation of the mind. Meditation is
highly commended by Austin, Chrysostom, Cyprian, as the nursery of piety.
Hierom calls it his Paradise Dixit Hieronimus oppida and urbes videri sibi
tetros carceres solitudinem Paradisum Epist. 72.
with what words shall I set it forth? other duties have done excellently, but
Thou excellest them all. Meditation is a friend to the graces, it helps to
water the plantation. I may call it in Basils expression (...), Basil.
the treasury where all the graces are locked up. And with Theophylact, the
very gate and portal by which we enter into glory. By meditation the Spirits
are raised, (...).
and heightened, to a kind of angelical frame; meditation does sweetly
anticipate happiness, it puts us in heaven before our time. Meditation brings
God and the Soul together, 1 John 3.2.

Meditation is the Saints perspective Glass, by which they see things
invisible. It is the golden ladder by which they ascend Paradise, it is the spy
they send abroad to search the land of promise, and it brings a bunch of grapes
with it; it is the dove they send out, and it brings an Olive branchof peace in
its mouth; but who can tell how sweet honey is, save they that taste it? The
excellency of meditation I leave to experienced Christians, who will say, the
comfort of it may be better felt then expressed.

To excite all to this Pancreston, to this so useful, excellent (I had almost
said Angelical) duty, let me lay down some divine motives to meditation; and
how glad should I be, if I might revive this duty among Christians.

CHAP. XVII. Containing divine motives to meditation.
Prove. 23.7. for as he thinks in his heart, so is he; as the meditation is,
such is the man. Meditation is the Touchstone of a Christian, it shows what
mettle he is made of. It is a Spiritual Index; the Index shows what is in the
book: so meditation shows what is in the heart. If all a man's meditations are
how he may get power against sin, how he may grow in grace, how he may have
more communion with God. This shows what is in his heart, the frame of his
heart is spiritual; by the beating of this pulse, judge of the health of thy
soul. It Is made the character of a godly man, he fears God, and thinks of his
Name, Mal. 3.17. Whereas if the thoughts are taken up with pride, and lust, as
are the Thoughts such is the heart; Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity,
Isa. 59.7. When vain sinful thoughts come, men make much of them, they make
room for them, they shall diet and lodge with them; if a good thought chance to
come into their mind, it is soon turned out of doors, as an unwelcome Guest;
What need we further witness? This argues much unsoundness of heart; let this
provoke to holy meditation.

Joram did Jehu 2 Kings 9.22.
, is it peace Conscience, is it peace? and conscience shall say as Jehu, What
peace as long as the Whoredoms of thy mother Jezabel, and her Witchcrafts are
so many? O how sad will it be with a man at such a time? Christians, as you
tender your peace, meditate in Gods Law day and night.



Neglectis urenda filix innascitur agris. Meditation keeps the heart in a good
decorum. It plucks up the weeds of sin, Plantae nobiliores sine cultu,
siluescunt Albertus, Magnus.
it prunes the luxuriant branches, it waters the flowers of grace, it sweeps
all the walks in the heart, that Christ may walk there with delight. For want
of holy meditation the heart lies like the sluggards field, Prove. 24.31. all
overgrown with thorns and briars, unclean earthly thoughts. It is rather the
devils hogsty, then Christ's garden. It Is like a house fallen to ruin, fit only
for unclean spirits to inhabit.

meditations; one man lays out his thoughts about laying up; his meditations
are how to raise himself in the world, and when he has arrived at an estate
often God blows upon it Hag. 1.9.
. His care is for his child, and perhaps God takes it away, or if it lives it
proves a cross. Another meditates how to satisfy his ambition, Honor me before
the people, 1 Samuel 15.30. alas, what is honor but a meteor in the air; a
torch lighted by the breath of people Honor uihi solidi est, sed res imaginaria
hominum arbitrio positae. M^^cel.
with the least puff blown out; how many live to see their names buried before
them Miseram est alinram incumbe^e famae Satyr.
? When this Sun is in the meridian, it does soon set in a cloud.

Et stult us labor est ineptiarum
-- Martial.
Thus fruitless are those meditations which do not center upon God. It Is but
portare pulverem contra ventum, as Hierome speaks. But especially at death,
then a man sees all those thoughts, which were not spent upon God to be
fruitless, Psalm 146.4. In that very day his thoughts perish. I may allude to
it in this sense; all worldly, vain thoughts, in that day of death perish, and
come to nothing: What good will the whole globe of the world do at such a time?
Those who have ravelled out their thoughts in impertinencies will but be the
more disquieted, it will cut them to the heart to think how they have spun a
fools thread. A Scythian Captain, having for a Draught of water, yielded up the
City, cried out, quid perdidi, quid prodidi? What have I lost? What have I
betrayed? So will it be with that man, when he comes to dye, who has spent all
his meditations upon the world, he will say, what have I lost, what have I
betrayed? I have lost heaven, I have betrayed my soul. And should not the
consideration of this fix our minds upon the thoughts of God and glory? All
other meditations are fruitless; like a piece of ground which has much cost
laid out upon it but it yields no crop.

Mal. 3.5. a book of remembrance was written for them that thought upon his
name. As God has all our members, so all our meditations written in his book.
God pens our closet devotion.

viz. the blessedness affixed to the meditating Christian, Blessed is the man,
etc. verse 1. say not it is hard to meditate. What think you of blessedness?
(...). Theodor. in Psa. 1.
Lycurgus could draw the Lacedaemonians to any thing by rewards; If men can
meditate with delight on that which will make them cursed, shall not we meditate
on that which will make us blessed nay in the hebrew it is in the plural (...)
blessednesses; we shall have one blessedness upon another.

Josh. 1.8. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth but thou
shall meditate therein, for then thou shall make thy way prosperous. I leave
this to their consideration who are desirous to thrive in the world; and let
this serve for motive to meditation.

The next thing remaining is to lay down some rules about meditation.

CHAP. XVIII. Prescribing rules about meditation.
SECT. I.
be very serious in the work. Let there be a deep impression upon thy soul, and
that thou may be serious in meditation do these two things: 1. get thy self
into a posture of holy reverence. Overaw thy heart with the thoughts of God and
the incomprehensibleness of his majesty. When thou art at the work of
meditation remember thou art now to deal with God. If an Angel from heaven did
appoint to meet thee at such an hour, would thou not address thy self with
all seriousness and solemness to meet him? Behold a greater then an angel is
here. The God of glory is present. He has an eye upon thee, he sees the
carriage of thy heart when thou art alone. Think with thy self (O Christian)
when thou art going to meditate, thou art now to deal with him in private
before whom the Angels adore, and the Devils tremble. Think with thy self thou
art now in his presence before whom thou must shortly stand and all the world
with thee to receive their doom. Thou must be removed and how soon thou know
not, from the closet to the tribunal.

2. That thy heart may be serious in meditation labor to possess thy thoughts
with the solemnity and greatness of the work thou art now going about. As David
said concerning his building a house for God, the work is great, 1 Chronicles. 29.1.
so it may be said of meditation, the work is great and we had need gather and
rally together all the powers of the soul to the work. If thou were to set
about a business wherein thy life were concerned, how serious would thou be
in the thoughts of it: in the business of meditation thy soul is concerned;
eternity depends upon it; if thou neglectest or art slight in it thou runnest
an hazard of thy salvation. If Archimedes was so serious in drawing his
mathematical line, that he minded not the sacking of the city, O how serious
should a Christian be when he is drawing a line for eternity. When thou art
going to meditate thou art going about the greatest work in the world.

SECT II.
Read before you meditate, Josh. 1.8. This book of the law shall not depart out
of thy mouth but thou shall meditate in it. The law must be in Joshuas mouth.
He was first to read and then meditate. Give attendance to reading. 1. Tim.
4.13. Then it follows, meditate on these things verse. 15. reading does furnish
with matter Lectio primo occurrit, et data materia mittit nos ad meditationem.
Bernard.
. it is the oil that feeds the lamp of meditation. reading helps to rectify
meditation. Austin says well, that meditation without reading will be
erroneous Meditatio sine lectione erronea. Aug.
. naturally the mind is defiled as well as the conscience. Titus. 1.15. the
mind will be minting thoughts, and how many untruths does it mint? Therefore
first read in the book of the law and then meditate; be sure your meditations
be grounded upon Scripture. There is a strange Vtopia in the fancies of some
men, they take those for true principles which are false, and if they mistake
their principles they must needs be wrong in their meditations. He that is of
the Saduces opinion that there is no resurrection, he mistakes a principle. Now
while he is meditating on this he is at last carried to direct atheism. He that
is of the Antinomians opinion that there is no law to a justified person,
mistakes a principle, and while he is meditating on this he at last falls into
scandal. Thus the mind having laid in wrong principles, and taking that for a
truth which is not, the meditation must needs be erroneous, and a man at last
goes to hell upon a mistake; Therefore be sure you read before you meditate,
that you may say, it is written. Meditate on nothing but what you believe to be
a truth, believe nothing to be a truth, but what can show its Letters of
credence from the Word; observe this rule, let reading usher in meditation:
Reading without meditation is unfruitful, Meditation without reading is
dangerous.

SECT. III.
DO not multiply the subject of meditation; that is, meditate not on too many
things at once; like the bird that hops from one bough to another, and stays
no where, single out rather some one head at a time, which you will meditate
upon. Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula sensus. Too much variety distracts
Varietas distrabit animum. Sen.
One truth driven home by meditation will most kindly affect the heart; a man
that is to shoot, sets up one mark, That he aims at, to hit. When thou art to
shoot thy mind above the world by meditation, set one thing before thee to
hit; if thou art to meditate on the passion of Christ, let that take up all thy
thoughts; If upon death, confine thy thoughts to that: One subject at a time is
enough. Martha while she was cumbred about many things, neglected the One
thing; so while our meditations are taken up about many things, we lose that
One Thing which should affect our hearts, and do us more good Claou^ cla^um
pellit.
. Drive but one wedge of Meditation at a time, but be sure you drive it home to
the heart. Those who aim at a whole flock of birds hit none; Several Medicines
applied together, the one hinders the virtue of the other, whereas a single
medicine might do good.

SECT. IV.
To Meditation join Examination. the beginning of Wisdom Prove. 1.7.
, Put a query, O my soul, Is this fear planted in thy heart? Thou art almost
come to the end of thy days, Art thou yet come to the beginning of Wisdom?
When thou have been meditating on Christ, his Virtues, his Privileges; put a
query, O my soul, Do thou love him who is so Lovely Cant. 5. ult.
, and art thou ingrafted into him? Art thou a living branch of this living
vine? When thou have been meditating upon the Graces of the Spirit; put a
query, O my soul, art thou adorned, as the Bride of Christ with this chain of
Pearl? Have thou thy Certificate for heaven ready? Will not thy Graces be to
seek when thou should have them to show? Thus should a Christian, in his
retirements, parley often with his heart.

For want of this Examination Meditation does evaporate, and come to nothing.
For want of Examination joined with Meditation, many are strangers to their own
hearts; though they live known to others, they dye unknown to themselves.
Meditation is like a perspective glass by which we contemplate heavenly
objects, but Self-examination is like a looking glass, by which we see into our
own souls and can judge how it is with us. Meditation joined with Examination
is like the Sun on the Dial, which shows how the day goes, it shows us how our
hearts stand affected to Spiritual Things.

SECT. V.
Oration sine meditatione tepida; meditatio sine ^ratione infrugifera. Bern. de
scala claustrali.
; Pray over your meditations. Prayer sanctifies every thing; without prayer
they are but unhallowed meditations; Prayer fastens meditation upon the Soul;
Prayer is a tying a knot at the end of meditation that it does not slip; Pray
that God will keep those holy meditations in your mind for ever, that the
savor of them may abide upon your hearts, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. O Lord God of
Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel our Fathers, keep this for ever in the
imagination of the thoughts of thy people. So let us pray, that when we have
been musing of heavenly things, and our hearts have waxed hot within us*, we
may not cool into a sinful tepidness and lukewarmness, but that our affections
may be as the lamp of the Sanctuary always burning.

SECT. VI.
Let meditation be reduced to practice; live over your Meditation, Josh. 1.8.
Thou shall Meditate in this book, that thou may observe to do according to
all that is written therein. Meditation and practice like two sisters must go
hand inhand. Cassian says that the contemplative life cannot beperfected
without the practick. Cassian Collat. 19.
We read that the angels had wings, and hands under their wings, Ezekiel. 1.8. It
may be an Hieroglyphical Emblem of this truth; Christians must not only fly
upon the wing of Meditation, but they must be active in obedience, they must
have hands under their wings. The end of Meditation is action. We must not only
Meditate in Gods law but walk in his law. Deuter. 28.9. Without this we are
like those Gnostics of whom Epiphanius complains, they had much knowledge,
but were in their lives licentious. Christians must be like the Sun, which does
not only send forth heat, but goes its circuit round the world; it is not enough
that the affections be heated by meditation, but we must go our circuit too,
that is, move regularly in the sphere of obedience. After warming at the fire
of Meditation, we must be fitter for work. Meditation is the life of Religion,
and practice is the life of meditation. It Is said in the Honor of Nazianzen,
fecit quae docuit, he lived over his own Sermons. So a good Christian must live
over his own meditations.

Sin, which for its bitterness is compared to Grapes of Gall, for its
damnableness to poison of asps; and you begin to burn in an holy indignation
against sin, now put your meditations in practice, Give sin a Bill of Divorce,
Job 11.14. If iniquity be in thy hand put it far away, and let not wickedness
dwell in thy Tabernacles.

2. When you have been meditating of the Graces of the spirit, let the verdure
and luster of these graces be seen in you: live these graces; meditate, that
you may observe and do; 'Twas St. Paul's counsel to Timothy; 1 Timothy 4.7.
exercise thy self to Godliness. Meditation and practice are like a pair of
Compasses, the one part of the compass fixes upon the center, and the other
part goes round the circumference; a Christian by meditation fixes upon God as
the Center, and by practice goes round the circumference of the Commandments;
A man who has let his thoughts run out upon riches, will not only have them
in the notion, but will endeavor to get riches; Let your meditations be
practical; when you have been meditating upon a promise, live upon a promise;
when you have been meditating of a good conscience, never leave till you can
say as Paul, Herein I exercise my self to have a good conscience, Acts 24.16.
Meditatie sine exercitio similis est lyrae taciturnae.
Beloved, here lies the very essence of Religion.

That this rule may be well observed, Consider,

Rachel said to her husband, Give me children or I dye, Genesis 30. 1. So if
Meditation be barren, and does not bring forth the child of obedience, it will
dye and come to nothing.

2. If when you have meditated in Gods law, you do not obey his Law, you will
come short of them who have come short of heaven. It Is said of Herod (...),
Mark 6.20. He did many things; he was in many things a practicer of John's
Ministry: They who meditate in Gods Law, and observe not to do, are not so
good as Herod, nay, they are no better then the Devil, he knows much, but still
he is a Devil.

eschew the one, nor espouse the other, it will but incense the divine Majesty
so much the more against us, and we shall be beaten with many stripes.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX to the FORMER DISCOURSE upon Psalm. 139.18. verse. When I awake I
am still with thee.

By THOMAS WATSON Minister of Stephens Walbrook in the city of London.

(...). Macar. from. 11.

For where your treasure is there will your heart be also, Mat. 6.21.

LONDON, Printed by J.T. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhill. 1657.

A Christian on Earth still in Heaven.
PSALM. 139.18. When I awake I am still with thee.
THE Scripture is a Spiritual Paradise, the book of Psalms is placed as the
Tree of Life in the midst of this Paradise; the Psalms are not only for
Delight, but usefulness; they are like the Pomegranate Tree which is not only
for savor, but fruit; or like those Trees of Ambrose Epist. 42.
the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.12. both for food and medicine. The Psalms are
enriched with variety, and suited to every Christians estate and condition.
They are a Spiritual Panoply and Storehouse, if he find his heart dead, here
he may fetch fire, if he be weak in grace, here he may fetch armor; if he be
ready to faint, here are cordials lying by. There is no Condition you can name,
but there is a Psalm suited to that condition.

Psalm 41.3. Thou will make all his bed in his sickness, and sure that bed must
needs be soft which God will make; and there is a parallel-Psalm to this, Psalm
73.26. my flesh fails, (my health is declining) but the Lord is the strength
of my heart; (...) Septuag.
or as the Septuagint renders it, he is the God of my Heart.

I was a reproach among my enemies, Psalm 31.11. But I trusted in thee O Lord:
I said, Thou art my God, verse 14. Blessed be the Lord, for he has shown me
his mavelous loving kindness in a strong City: ver. 18. Here was some
Sunshine breaking forth of those black clouds Quisquis detrabit famae mere ad
det mercedimeae. Aug. in Psalm 39.
.

Psalm 55. For it was not an enemy, then I could have born it, but it was thou,
mine equal, my guide, and my acquaintance, we took sweet counsel together,
verse. 12.13. here was the malady, cast thy burden upon the Lord, v. 22. there
was the cure. The Chaldee reads it cast thy hope. The Septuagint, (...), Cast
thy Care. God is power, therefore he is able to help, he is Mercy, therefore he
is willing. He shall sustain thee, here is Gods promise, which is his bond to
secure us.

Psalm suited to this condition, Lord how are they increased that trouble me?
many are they that rise up against me, Psalm 3.1. I laid me down and slept, v.
8. David, when beleaguered with Enemies, could lie down and sleep upon the soft
pillow of a good conscience and Psalm. 27.3. though an host should encamp
against me my heart shall not fear. He shall hide me in his pavilion, in the
secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me, verse. 5. The Hebrew word is (...) he
shall hide me so safe as if I were in the holy place of the sanctuary where
none but the priest was to enter.

so low that like the widow 1. King. 17.12. he has nothing but a handful of
meal, and a little oil in the cruse left, There is a Psalm of Consolation. I am
poor and needy yet the Lord thinks upon me, Psalm. 40.17. I will bless her
provision, I will satissie her poor with bread. Psalm. 132.15. here is the dew
of a blessing distilled, and Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my portion O Lord. Behold
riches in poverty, what though the water in the bottle be spent if this well be
at hand?

Psalm. 65.3. Iniquities prevail against me, as for our transgressions thou
shall purge them away. In the Hebrew (...)
it is thou shall hide them. It alludes to the mercy-seat which was covered
with the wings of the Cherubims; so are the sins of the godly (when repented
off) covered with the wings of mercy, and favor.

7. In case of prayer and no speedy return. Psalm. 69.3. I am weary of my
crying, my eyes fail while I wait for my God. But in the same Psalm he draws
the breast of comfort, verse. 33. the Lord hears the poor and depiseth not his
prisoners. Would we have fruit before it is ripe? When the mercy is ripe, we
shall have it; and besides, there is nothing lost by waiting; we send out the
golden fleet of prayer to heaven, the longer this fleet stays out, the greater
return it will bring with it. David found it so; therefore he pulls off his
sackcloth, and puts on the garments of praise, Laudabo in Cantico, I will
praise the name of God with a Song, verse. 30.

8. In case of desertion. This is the poisoned arrow that wounds to the heart,
but still there is a Psalm to turn to. The Lord will not cast off his people,
neither will he forsake his inheritance, Psalm. 94.14. This is like a star in a
dark night, or like the plank and broken pieces of the ship on which Paul and
the rest came safe to shore, Act. 27.44. God may conceal his love from his
children, not take it away 2. Sam. 7.15.
, he may change his providence toward them not alter his purpose.

9. In case of death, though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death I
will fear no evil. Psalm. 23.4. The sting, and poison of this serpent is taken
away. Thou art with me; with thy power to support, with thy grace to sanctify,
with thy love to sweeten. Thy Rod and thy staff do comfort me. I have the staff
of thy promise in the hand of my faith, and with this I can walk through the
dark entry of death.

Thus in every condition David's Psalms like David's harp may serve to drive away
the evil spirit of sadness and unchearfulness from a Christian; so much
concerning the Psalms in general.

I come now to the words of the text, when I awake I am still with thee.

Where you have the very effigies and portraicture of a godly man drawn out, he
is one that is still with God. It was David's happiness that he lived above the
common rate of men, not only as he was higher in power and dignity, being a
king, but higher in sublimeness of affection Animam habuit angeliflcatam.
Tertul.
, having his heart and hope raised above the world, I am still with thee.
Divines give many reasons why David was called a man after Gods heart, but sure
this is not the least, because the frame of his heart was so heavenly, this
being most agreeable to Gods nature and will. David was a man that (as Ambrose
speaks) lived in the world above the world. As Soon as he awaked he stepped into
heaven. David was a Seraphical saint, a mortal Angel, like a true bird of
paradise he did seldom touch with his feet upon the earth. He was least alone
when he was most a lone Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus. Tul. Offic.
. When he awaked he was with God;

Nor was this only when the fit was upon him, a thought of God and away, but
it was a fixed temper of heart. I am still with thee (...)
. The pulse of his soul was still beating after God. The hypocrite may have a
blush of godliness which is quickly over, Job. 27.10. but the constitution of
David's soul was heavenly, I am still with thee.

Not but that David had some diversions of mind; Caution
(to have the eye always fixed upon God will be the state of the blessed in
heaven) but, David was still with God.

Subjectum a majori part.
. as we use to say a man lives at his house not but that urgency of occasions
draw him abroad sometimes, but he is said to live there because he is most
resident there.

The words hold forth this proposition.

Doct. That it is the sweet temper of a Gracious heart to be still with God. I
am still with Thee. David awaked in heaven. He was ever above. We read in the
old Law that those creatures which did creep upon all four were to be had in
abomination, but they which had wings to fly, and legs to leap withal were
accounted clean. Lev. 11.20. Those are among the unclean, and are abominable to
God, whose souls creep upon the earth, but they who have the legs and wings of
grace to mount up with, who are still with God, these are pure and precious in
Gods eyes. For the illustrating this point there are three things to be
explained, and amplisied.


Joh. 1.3. Our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus. In prayer
we speak to God, in the Sacrament he kisseth us with the kisses of his lips, he
gives us a privy seal of his love.



contemplation. So Ainsworth understands the Text. contemplatione
I am still with thee, that is, by divine contemplation. David's thoughts were
ever and anon running upon God. So verse. 17. How precious are thy thoughts unto
me. O God! David's mind was a spiritual mint, he minted most gold, most of his
thoughts were heavenly. Thoughts are as travelers and passengers in the soul,
David's thoughts were still traveling toward the Jerusalem above. In David's
dangers God was still with him, in David's contemplations he was still with God.
Anaxagoras said he was born to contemplate Heaven. Thus a Christian is still
with God, he is viewing glory, his thoughts are all packed up and gone.

2. Defiderio.
The soul is still with God by desire. His anchor is cast in Heaven, Hebr.
6.19. and he is carried thither with the sails of desire. David did shoot his
heart into Heaven by desire; Videmus terram torrefactam dehiscere, ac si aperto
ore potum e caelo appeteret, significat propheta se desiderio ferventem ad deum
accedere ac si vitalis humor eum deficeret Calvin in Psalm. 143.
he had strong anhelations and pantings after God. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in
Heaven but thee and there is none upon earth I desire besides thee, he says
not, he had nothing upon earth, he had his Crown and Scepter, but nothing he
desired like God. Psalm. 42.1. as the heart pants after the water brooks, so
pants my soul after thee O God. The heart (as Historians observe) is a dry
thirsty creature, especially when chased by the hunter, now nature is on fire
and must have water to quench it; thus the pious soul pants after the
refreshing streams of Christ's blood; (...). Basil.
and these desires of a Christian are rightly terminated; he desires as well
conformity to Christ in grace, as Communion with him in glory: he desires the
Sun of righteousness not only for its refreshing beams but for its healing
wings, he desires not only Christ's presence, but his image: Lord give me thy
self that I may be more holy, what should I do in Heaven with this unholy
heart? what converse could I have with God, or angels? thus the soul is still
with God by desire, and he desires not only mercy, but grace;

love. Where a man's love is there he is; what an egresse and expansion of heart
is there to that which we love. Bonaventure calls love the wing of the soul, on
this wing did David fly to Heaven. I am still with thee. Love has this
property, it unites at a distance, Amor est veluti junctura, duas personas
conglutinans. Suar. l. 12. de Trii Aquinas li. 1. sentendist. 15. Qu. 5. art. 3.
it fixes the heart upon the object. Thus the lovesick spouse when she could
not see Christ, yet she embraced him in her affections; when her eye was not
upon him yet her love was. Saw ye him whom my soul loves? Cant. 3.3. Christ my
love is crucified, said Ignatius. (...) Ignat. Ep. 12. ad To.
As Christ was fastened to the Cross so he is to a Christians heart. A true
Saint is like the Tribe of Manasseh, half of the Tribe was on this side Jordan
and half on the other side in the holy Land; Josh. 1.14.
So it is with a Saint, half of him is on this side and half in the holy Land,
his flesh is on earth, his heart in heaven; as it was said of Paul, 2 Cor.
12.2. Whether in the body I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot
tell; So it may be said of a good Christian, it is hard to tell whether he be in
the body, or out of the body, his love is in heaven Animam meam odio haberem si
alibi quam in Christo invenirem. Austin.
, he is lodged in the Tree of life. The fire of love boils the heart as high as
heaven.

4. The Soul is still with God by faith, unbelief is called, a drawing back
from God, Heb. 10.39. and faith, a drawing near to God, Heb. 10.22. by an eye
of faith, through the perspective glass of a promise, we look into heaven. The
people of Israel stood in the outer Court of the Temple, but the High Priest
entered within the vail, into the holy of holies; thus the senses stand in the
outward Court of the body, but faith enters within the vail, it sees Christ
clothed with the Robe of our humane nature, and sitting down in glory above the
Angels; faith imbraceth Christ. Austin moves the Question, how shall I put out
a long arm to reach Christ in heaven Quomodo in Caelum manum mittam? Aug.
, creed, et tenuisti, believe (says he) and thou have laid hold on him. Faith
is aureum vinculum, the golden clasp that knits us to Christ; by faith we put
on Christ as a garment, Romans 13.14. By faith we receive and concoct him as
food, Col. 2.6. by faith we are ingrafted into him as the ciens into the stock
John. 15.5. indeed, a believers life is out of himself; he lives more in Christ
then he lives in himself, Bernard.
tanquam radius in Sole as the beam lives in the sun; as the branch in the
root, Col. 3.3. even as Juda said concerning Jacob, his life is bound up in the
lads life, Genesis 44.30. so is a believers life bound up in Christ. And thus is
the Gracious soul ever with God, by faith.

Conversatione.
A Christian is still with God in the whole course and tennour of his life. Not
only his heart is in heaven, but his conversation too, Phil. 3.20. (...). Our
deportment and carriage is in heaven; we walk as Burgesses of that city. It is
said of Christ his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem, Luke. 9.53. a
good Christian should be known by his face, his outward carriage and demeanor
should show that he is going to the Jerusalem above. Socrates being asked of
what country he was, answered, he was (...), a citizen of the world, a true
saint is a citizen of heaven; he is known what place he belongs to by his
speech, habit, gesture. There is a kind of angelical brightness on him, he
shines in holiness, as Moses face did shine when he had been with God in the
mount. He is still doing Angels work: his life is (...) (as Chrysostom speaks,)
a very heaven upon earth, Noah walked with God, Genesis 6.9 It a pie and sancte
vixit quasi deum semper prae oculis, haheret. Aug. Tom. 10. Hom. 27.
. and in this sense the pious soul is still with God, he walks unweariably with
God; though he meets with some rubs and difficulties in the way, yet still he
keeps his walk; and thus we have seen in what sense a gracious soul is still
with God; the eagle may sometimes sit upon a low bough, but her nest is built
high Job. 39.27. A Christian walks upon the surface of the earth, but his nest
is built high upon the rock Christ. The moon is seen in the water, yet it is
seated in the firmament. So a Christian is seen here below, but he is above, he
is still with God.

from the nature of grace, grace carries the soul up toward God. Grace is like
fire est mollis flamma medullis. It Is the nature of fire to ascend. You that ly
grovelling on the earth feeding like the serpent on dust, or like eels wrapping
your selves in the mud and slime of the world had you that new and holy
principle of grace infused, your souls would sparkle upwards, you would mount
up to heaven as Eagles, Isa. 40.31. had you the sharp eye of faith to see
Christ, you would soon have the swift wing of desire to fly to him.

From that magnetical power of Gods spirit. The spirit has not only a
soul-purifying, but a soul-elevating power, as the sun exhales and draws up the
vapors from the Earth. So the Spirit draws up the heart to God, The Spirit
lifted me up, Ezekiel. 3.14. Though there be grace in the heart which would be
still mounting upward, yet there is much corruption to pull us down; a
Christian in this life, is both checked and spurred; Grace spurs him forward in
his way to heaven, and then corruption checks him; now here the spirit comes in
and draws up the heart to God Spiritu sancto accenditur renatorum voluntas,
Austin.
; which is a mighty power, as if you should see a millstone drawn up into the Sun

center of the Soul; and where should it ever be but in its Center; while the
heart is on the earth it shakes and trembles like the needle in the compass,
till it turns to God Irrequietum est cor nostrum do nec requiescit in te.
, God is the proper Orb where the soul does fix; he is centrum quietativum (as
the Schoolmen speak) A Christian rests in God, as the Be in the Hive, as the
Bird in the nest; Return to thy rest O my soul, Psalm 116.7. Noah's Dove was
never well till it was in the Ark, The Ark was a Type of Christ.

dear relations it has to God. There are all the terms of Consanguinity. God
is our Father, John 20.17. and where should the child be but with its Father;
he is our Husband, Isa. 54.5. and where should the wife be, but with her
husband? he is our friend, Joh. 15.15. now friends desire to be still together.
God is our Rock, 2 Samuel 22.2. where should Christ's Doves be but in the Cliffs
of this blessed Rock? God is the Saints Treasure, and where the Treasure is,
there will their hearts be also.

rare excellencies which are in God.

Fullness, Every one desires to be at a full fountain. Col. 1.19. For it pleased
the Father that in him should all fullness dwell. Observe, Christ is not only
said to be full in the concrete, but fullness in the abstract, nay in him is
(...) all fullness. a vessel may be full of water, but that is not all
fullness, it is not full of Wine; a Chest may be full of silver, but that is not
all fullness, it is not full of Pearl; but in Christ is all fullness (...),
macar.
. He is bread to strengthen, John 6.48. Wine to comfort, Joh. 15.1. Gold to
enrich, Rev. 3.18. He is all and in all, Col. 3.11.

Thus there is a variety of fullness in the Lord Jesus. O Christian, what is it
thou need? Do thou want quickening grace Christ is the Prince of life Act.
3.15. Do thou want healing grace, Christ has made a medicine of his own body
to cure thee Corpus Christi aegris medicina languorem sanans sanitatem servans
Bernard.
, Isa. 53, 5. Do thou want cleansing grace, there is the bath of his blood to
wash thee, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus cleanses us from all our sin. Let
not the Poets tell us of their Aonia and Castalia, Fountains in which they
supposed their Nymphs to have washed, These waters distilled out of Christ's
sides are infinitely more pure. Pliny says that the Watercourse of Rome are
the worlds wonder, Oh had he known these sacred Watercourse in Christ's blood,
how would he have been stricken with admiration? and do you wonder the soul is
still with Christ when there is all fullness in him?

Nay, but that all is not all; the Apostle goes further; it pleased the Father
that in him should all fullness dwell. (...).
To note the Duration of this fullness, it is not Transient but Immanent. This
fullness is not in Christ as the water in the pipe, or spout; the Spout may be
full of water, but it continues not there, Water does not dwell in the spout;
but this fullness is in Christ as light in the Sun, it dwells there. Christ's
fullness is a never-failing fullness; what can be said more? nay, but the
Apostle carries it yet higher; in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead;
if Christ had all the fullness of the Creation, the Treasures of the earth; the
holiness of the Angels, yet this could not satisfy the soul. In him there is
(...), The fullness of the Godhead, the riches of the Deity are in him; and the
communication of this blessed fullness Ephesians. 3 19. Pro cujusque membri medulo.
Beza.
, so far as there is a capacity to receive *, is that which satisfyes the Soul,
and fills it brim full; and if there be such a plenitude and fullness in God,
no wonder a gracious heart desires to be still with God.

2. Sweetness; God is love, 1 John 4.19. Every one desires to be with them from
whom they receive most love; The Lord does often make himself known to the soul
in an ordinance, as he did to the disciples in breaking of bread, Luke 24.35.
He manifests himself in the comforts of his Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
which are so sweet and ravishing, that they pass all understanding; and do
you wonder the soul is so strongly carried out after God? Truly if it be still
with God, to speak with reverence, It Is long of God. He gives those Jewels and
Bracelets, those love tokens that the soul cannot but desire to be still with
God.

still with God. A Good Christian begins his heaven here, Grace translates him
into the paradise of God Sunt pennae volucres mihi quae celsa conscendant poli.
Boethius.
; Eliah left his Mantle behind, but hewas taken up in a fiery Chariot; So it is
with a Saint the mantle of the flesh is left behind, but his soul is carried up
in a fiery Chariot of love.



never with God; Branch.
they live without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. It Is made the
characteristical note of a wicked man, God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm
10.4. He never thinks of God unless with horror and amazement, as the
Prisoner thinks of the Judge and the Assizes; and here two sorts of sinners
are indicted.

1. Such as are still with their sins. A child of God, though sin be with
him, yet he is not with sin, his will is against sin; Romans 7.15. Minus est
nocens qui sponte sua non est nocens. Sen.
That which I do I allow not; he would fain shake this viper into the fire; he
forsakes sin, but sin will not forsake him, so that though sin be with him; yet
he is not with sin; but a wicked man, and sin are together, as two Lovers
mutually solacing and embracing; a wicked man is (...), a Worker of iniquity,
Luke 13.27. like a workman that follows his Trade in his Shop.

still with the world; It Is counted a piece of a miracle to find a diamond in a
vein of gold: and it is as great a miracle to find Christ (that precious stone.)
in an earthly heart. The world is men's Diana. they mind earthly things, Phil.
3.19. (...).
like the Ostrich though she has wings yet by reason of the weightiness of her
body cannot fly high, most men are so weighed down with thick clay Hab. 2.6
, that they cannot soar aloft they are like Saul, hid among the stuff 1 Samuel
10.22.
, like Sisera who had his head nalied to the earth Judge. 4.21.
, so their hearts are nailed to the earth. Absaloms beauty stole away the
hearts of Israel from their king, 2 Sa. 15.6. the worlds bewitching beauty
steals away men hearts from God Curvae in terras a nim ae et caelestium inanes.
. It Is sad when the husband sends his wife a jewel and she so falls in love with
the jewelthat she forgets her husband: an estate should be a loadstone to draw
men nearer to God, but it is often a millstone to sink them to hell.

There is a moderate use of these things, but there is a danger in the
exercise. The be may suck a little honey from the leaf, but put it in a barrel
of honey and it dies.

Christians must stave off the world, that it gets not into their heart, Psalm.
62.10. for as the water is useful to the ship and helps it to sail the better
to the haven, but let the water get into the ship, if it be not pumpt out at
the leak, it drowns the ship: so riches are useful and convenient for our
passage. We sail more comfortably with them through the troubles of this world,
but if the water get into the ship, if the love of riches get into the heart,
then we are drowned with them, 1 Timothy 6.9.

seldom with God. Branch.
They are sometimes with God but not still with God. The shell fish (as
naturalists observe) has so little life in it, and moves so slow that it is
hard to determine whether it lives a vegetative or a sensative life: so it may
be said of many Christians, their motion heavenward is so slow, and unconstant;
that we can hardly know whether the life of grace be in them or no, They are
seldom with God. Revel. Menssacris tabescit.
2.4. Thou have left thy first love. Many professors have almost lost their
acquaintance with God. Time was when they could weep at a sermon, but now these
wels are stopped. Time was when they were tender of sin; the least hair makes
the eye weep, the least sin would make conscience smite: now they can digest
this poison; Time was when they trembled at the threatenings of the word, now
with the Leviathan they can laugh at the shaking of a spear; Job. 41.29. Time
was when they called the sabbath a delight Isa. 58 13.
, the queen of days, how did they wait with joy for the rising of the sun of
righteousness on that day! what anhelations and pantings of soul after God!
what mounting up of affections! but now the case is altered, what a weariness
is it to serve the Lord? Mal. 1.13. Time was when they delighted in the word
(indeed it is a glass that mends their eyes that look on it,) now they have
laid it aside, seldom do they look in this glass. Time was when they could send
forth strong cries in prayer Heb. 5.7.
, but now the wings of prayer are clipped; they come like could suitors to God,
their petitions do even cool between their lips, as if they would teach God to
deny Qui frigigi^e rogat do^et negare.
. Oh why have you left of your communion with God? what iniquity have your
fathers found in me that they are gone far from me? Jer. 2.5. Let Christians
lay this sadly to heart. Remember from whence you are fallen and Repent and do
your first works. Rev. 2.5.
. You are in a spiritual lethargy, Oh never leave till your hearts are scrued
up to such a heavenly frame as here David's was, when I awake I am still with
thee. And that brings me to the next.

Exhort.
be still with God. You shall never go to heaven when you die, unless you begin
heaven here. The church in the revelation has a crown of stars on her head,
and the moon under her feet, Rev. 12.1. Christ is not to be found in the
furrows, but upon the pinnacle, now that you may get your hearts losen'd from
these things below and be still with God, I shall only propound two arguments.



2. It is unworthy of his profession. Seek thou great things for thy self?
Jerem. 45.5. what thou Baruk? Thou who art a Godly man? a Levite? Oh how sordid
is it for him that has his hope in heaven to have his heart upon the earth. It
is just as if a king should leave his throne, and follow the plough, or as if a
man should leave a golden mine to dig in a gravel pit. The lapwing has a crown
on her head and yet feeds on dung. A fit emblem of those who have a crown of
profession shining on their head yet feed with eagerness on these things below.
Christians should deny themselves, but not undervalue themselves, they should
be humble but not base. If Alexander would not exercise at the Olympicks, it
being too far below him; (Kings do not use to run Races) then shall they who
are the holy seed, the heirs of glory, disparage themselves by too eager
pursuit after these contemptible things?

The second argument to persuade us to be still with God is, consider what a
rare, and excellent life this is which will appear in four particulars. 1. To
be still with God is the most noble life (...). On^ylostom ad Romans Homil. 13.
. It Is as much above the life of reason as reason is above the life of a plant,
the true Christian is like a star in the highest orb, he looks no lower then a
crown; Grace puts hie thoughts, Princely affections a kind of heavenly ambition
into the soul. Grace raises a Christian above himself, it makes him as Caleb a
man of another Spirit; he lives in the altitudes, his thoughts are lodged among
Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect: and is not not this the most
noble life to be still with God? The Academicks compare the soul of man to a
Fowl, mounting up with her wings in the air: Thus with the wings of grace, the
soul flies aloft, and takes a prospect of heaven.

2. To be still with God is the most satisfying life, nothing else will do it.
All the Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full, Eccl. 1.7. Let all
the golden streams of worldly delights run into the heart of man, yet the heart
is not full: strain out the quintessence of the creature, it turns to froth:
Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities: but in God is sweet satisfaction and
contentment. My soul shall be fatisfied, as with marrow and fatness, Psalm.
63.5. Here is an Hive of sweetness, a mirror of beauty, a magazine of riches;
here is the River of pleasure, where the soul bathes with infinite delight,
Psalm. 36.8. and this River has a Fountain at the bottom, ver. 9. For with thee
is the fountain of life: Dulcius ex ipso font, etc.
and is not this most satisfactory? It is a witty observation of Picus
Mirandula, That in the Creation of the World, God gave the water to the fish;
the earth to the beasts; the air to the fowls; and afterward, made man in his
own image, that man might say, Lord, there is nothing upon earth to be desired
besides Thee; what can satiate my soul, but to be still with thee?

3. To be still with God is the most comfortable life: what sweet harmony and
music is in that soul? The Bird, the higher it takes its flight, the sweeter
it sings: so the higher the soul is raised above the World, the sweeter joy it
has. How is the heart inflamed in Prayer? How is it ravished in Holy
Meditation? What joy and peace in believing? Romans 15.13. and these joys are
those mellea flumina, those honey-streams which flow out of the Rock Christ.
Tell me, is it not comfortable being in Heaven? He that is still with God,
carries Heaven about him: he has those praelibations and tastes of Gods love,
which are the beginnings of Heaven Romans 8.23.
. So sweet is this kind of Life, that it can drop sweetness into the troubles
and disquiets of the World, that we shall be scarce sensible of them Nihil
sentit crus in nervo quando animus est in coelo. Tertullian.
. It can turn the Prison into a Paradise; the Furnace into a Festival; it can
sweeten death. A soul elevated by grace, can rejoice to think of dying: Death
will but cut the string, and the Soul, that Bird of Paradise, shall fly away
and be at rest.

4. To be still with God is the most durable life, nunquam deficit semper
resicit: Diuturniora sunt praestantio ra.
the life of sense will fail; we must shortly bid farewell to all our outward
Comforts, these blossoms will drop off: We read of a Sea of glass mingled with
fire, Rev. 12.2. Bullinger, and other learned Expositors understand by that Sea
of glass, the World. Indeed it is a fit emblem of it; the World is a Sea, and
it is seldom calm; and it is a Sea of glass, slippery; and this glass is
mingled with fire, to show, it is of a perishable and consuming nature. Riches
take wings, and relations take wings: but you that by the wings of grace are
still soaring aloft, This life shall never have an end; it is the beginning of
an eternal life; happiness is but the cream of holiness: you that are still
with God shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. You shall see God in all
his embroidered Robes of majesty In Coelesti beatitudine sine alique taedio
manens aeternitas, inspectio sola divinitatis efficit ut beatius nihilesse
possit, Cassidor. lib. 2. Ireneus lib. 4. contra haeres. cap. 37. Greg. Nyssen.
lib. de beatitud. Damascen. lib. 4. de fide.
. 1 John 3. We shall see him as he is; and this sight will be ravishing, and
full of glory Oh then is not this the best kind of life? He who when he awakes
is still with God; when he goes to sleep at death, shall be ever with the Lord.

But how shall I arrive at this blessed frame of heart, to be still with God?

Answ. 1. Get a right Judgment: It Is a great matter to have the Judgment set
right: Get a right judgment of sin, and you will be never with it: get a right
Judgment of God, and you will be still with him. In God are all combined
excellencies: How sweet is his love, how satisfying is his presence? But as the
Painter drew a vail over Agamemnons face, because the greatness of his grief
for his daughter Iphigenia could not be expressed: So when I speak of the
glorious perfections in God, I must draw a vail, neither pen, nor pensil can
set them forth in their orientlustre, the angels here must be silent.

2. If you would be still with God, watch over your hearts every day. Lock up
your hearts with God every morning, and give him the key. The heart will be
stealing out to vanity Nihil cord meo fugacius. Bern.
: Lord (says Bernard) there is nothing more flitting then my heart. Keep watch
and ward there; especially (Christians) look to your hearts after an Ordinance;
when you have been with God in duty; now expect a temptation. Physicians say,
The body must be more carefully looked to when it comes out of an hot Bath; for
the pores being open it is more in danger of catching cold: After your
spiritual Bathing in an Ordinance, when you have been at a Sermon or Sacrament,
now take heed that you do not catch cold.

3. Beware of remisness in duty: Sic putamus orasse Jonam? sic Danielem inter
leones? Sic latronem in Cruce? Hierom.
when you begin to slacken the reins, and abate your former heat, and vigor in
Religion, there steals insensibly a deadness upon the heart, and by degrees
there arises a sad estrangement between God and the Soul. And Brethren, how
hard a Work will you find it to get your hearts up again, when they are once
down. A weighty stone, that has been rolled up to the top of a steep hill, and
then falls down to the bottom, how hard is it to get it up again!

Oh take heed of a dull, lazy temper in Gods service: we are bid to be fervent
in spirit, Romans 12.11. (...). Lecto neglecto mollem discute somnum.
Sarisburiensis in Policrat. lib. 1.
The Athenians enquiring at the Oracle of Apollo why their plagues did continue
so long; the Oracle answered them; they must duplare aram, double their
Sacrifices Plutarch.
, those who would hold constant communion with God must double their devotion,
they must be much in prayer, and mighty in prayer; we read that the coals were
to be put to the incense, Lev. 16.13. incense was a Type of prayer, and the
coals put to the incense was to show, That the heart of a Christian ought to be
inflamed in holy services; nothing more dangerous then a plodding formality.

4. If you would be still with God be much in the Communion of Saints. (many
Christians live as if this Article were blotted out of their Creed) how does
one Saint whet and Sharpen another. As vain company cools good affections, so
by being in the communion of Saints we are warmed and quickened. Be often among
the Spices, and you will smell of them; These directions observed, we shall be
able to keep our acquaintance with God, and may arrive at this blessed frame as
here David had, When I awake I am still with thee.

FINIS.
CHRIST'S LOVELINES, OR, A Discourse setting forth the Rare Beauties of the Lord
Jesus, which may both amaze the eye, and draw the heart of a sinner to him.

By THOMAS WATSON Minister of Stephens Walbrook in the city of London.

Si scribas, non plac et mihi nisi legam ibi Jesum, si conferas, non sapit mihi
nisi sonuerit ibi Jesus, quia Jesus est in ore meo mel, in aure melos, in cord
Jubilum, Aug.

1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you therefore which believe he is precious. LONDON, Printed
by J. T. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhill. 1657.

CHRIST'S LOVELINES.
CANT. 5.16. Yea, he is altogether lovely.


IN this book (which is a Divine Epithalamium or Marriage-Song) are all the
strains of holy love set forth in the purest allegories and metaphors, such as
do represent that dear affection and union between Christ, and his Church. The
Text is nothing else but the breathing forth of the Spouses love to Christ, He
is altogether lovely, in the verses precedent she had made her sacred
Panegyricks, and had been setting Christ forth in his spiritual embroidery.

He is white and ruddy, v. 10. This denotes the excellency of complexion
Perfecta pulchritudo sita est in suavitate caloris, and harmonia membrorum.
Plato
; in him is a mixture of the purest colors; he is of unspotted beauty.

-- Niveo natat ignis in ore purpureus -- The chiefest among ten thousand. The
Hebrew word is (...). The Standard Bearer among ten thousand (...) significat
vexillum erigere, seu insignire.
; The Standard is a Warlike Ensign, and he who did bear the Standard in ancient
times, was the most eminent person in the Army; so Christ is the most glorious
Person of renown, the Standard Bearer; According to that Isa 11.10. He shall
stand for an Ensign of the People.

His head is as the most fine Gold, ver. 11 Aurum obryzum, Vatabl.
. Kings have crowns of Gold, Christ is described with an head of Gold. The
Hebrew word (...) signifies, Shining Gold, or sparkling Caput ejus vestitum
lapidibus pretiosis, sive gemmis aureo diademati internextis. Co. de lap.
. To set forth the infinite resplendency of Christ's Beauty, it is of that
sparkling luster, that the Angels are fain to wear a vail.

His eyes are as the eyes of Doves, ver 12. (...)
Christ is described with eyes like a flame of fire, Rev. 1.14. so indeed he
has to the wicked; He is a consuming fire; but to his Children he has Doves
eyes; which are the emblem of meekness; he has eyes dropping tears of love
and compassion.

His Cheeks are as a bed of Spices ver. 1 3. There is an Aromatic perfume
comes from him to refresh a fainting soul. Some Expositors understand this Bed
of Spices to be meant of the fragrancy of his virtues, which are in Scripture
compared to sweet ointments.

Thus the Spouse goes on deciphering Christ's Beauty; at last being in an holy
rapture of spirit, She winds up all with this Epiphonema, or passionate strain
of affection, His mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether lovely.

His mouth is most sweet; The Caldee paraphraseth it, the words of his Palate
are sweet as honey; in the Hebrew it is (...) His mouth is Sweetnesses. That
mouth must needs be sweet which has the words of eternal life John 6.68.
. That mouth must needs be sweet, a kiss of whose lips can make death sweet to
a Believer: well might the Spouse say, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, Cant. 1.2.

-- Dulcior hyblaeo cujus fl^it ore venustas Nectare, Boch. Antuerpiens.

concinnusque lepos --
Yea, he is altogether lovely, I^sunt ei omnia pretiosissima and splendi
dissima, Junius.
as if the Spouse had said, what do I go to set Christ forth in his several
parts, his Head of Gold, his Eyes like doves, his hands as Gold rings set with
the Beryll, his Belly as bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires, etc. alas, What
is all this that I have been speaking of Christ? how barren is my invention,
how dull are my expressions, what ever I have said of him falls infinitely
short of his worth, but this I affirm, he is altogether lovely (...), Sept.
Christi species eximia Gr-Nyssen
.

The word in the original is (...) he is all made up of loves and delights In
se continet eminenter omne quod est expetibile. Lap.
, ipse totus desideria, he is all that may excite desire. So Hierome and
Ambrose render it; he is composed of sweetness, and amiableness, Dici mus de
cedro quam pulcher visu, quam fragrans cortice, quam dulcis medulla interiori,
illum totum esse saccharum, sic sponsa de Christo, Ghislerus.
so Gregory Nyssen.

The text you see contains a glorious and magnificent description of Christ;
He is altogether lovely. Behold here a spring full of the water of life, and
whosoever brings his vessel hither, a heart fit to receive this water, may be
refreshed, as the woman of Samaria coming to Jacobs Well, for Christ is here.
The text is a sacred Cabinet which contains in it, first the Jewel, Christ, in
this word He; secondly, the Price of this Jewel, altogether lovely.



He is the most amazing, and delightful object; the very name of Jesus Christ
is as a precious ointment poured forth. It Is said that the Letters of this Name
were found engraven upon Ignatius his heart; Jesus Christ is in every Believers
heart, Col. 1.23. Christ in you; and nothing can do better there, for he is
altogether lovely.

This whole book of the Canticles is bespangled with the praises of Christ.
Homer might praise Achilles, It Epitaph Nepot.
Hierom might commend Nepotian, but who can set forth Christ's praise? all that
I can say, will be no more then the dark shadow in the Picture; and yet it will
be so much as may represent him very lovely. That Christ is thus transcendantly
lovely will appear four manner of ways.

By 1. Titles. 2. Types. 3. Resemblances. 4. Demonstrations.


1. By Titles, 1. By Titles.
which are so many jewels hung upon his crown; he is called, The desire of all
Nations, Hag. 2.7. The Prince of peace, Isa. 9.7. The holy one of God, Acts
2.27. Elect, precious, 1 Pet. 2.6. These are lovely Titles.

2. 2. By Types.
By Types; he was prefigured by such Types, as were very lovely, and these
Types were either of persons or things.

1. 1. Type.
Christ was typified by persons most lovely. I will name but three.

1. He was prefigured and typified by Moses. He was a person of Renown in
Israel, whom the Lord knew face to face, Deuteronomy. 34.10. Moses did type out Christ
in four things;

1. In his Natural beauty, he was a goodly child, Exodus 2.2. Josephus faith
Moses was so fair, that he drew the eyes of all to him, and that those who had
seen him were so amazed at his beauty, and did seed upon it with such delight,
that they were unwilling to look off again (...), Josephus.
. And herein he was a Type of Christin whom are all sparkling beauties to be
found; he is (...) altogether lovely.

2. Moses was a Type of Christ in his Education; he was bred up a while at
Court, and (as Josephus says) Pharaohs Daughter set a Crown of Gold upon his
Head; but leaving the Court he went and lived in the Land of Midian, Exodus
2.15. so Christ left the Royal Court of Heaven to come and live in the World.

3. Moses was a type of Christ in his Office; he was a Prophet, Deuteronomy. 34.10.
and there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses. He acquainted
Israel with the mind of God, he gave them the two Tables of the Law. So Jesus
Christ is a Prophet, Luke 24.19. he reveals to his people the mysteries of
salvation, He unseals the Book of Gods decree Ideo angelus dictus ob officium
propheticum. Tertul.
, and makes known his Will, Rev. 5.5. He is counted worthy of more glory then
Moses, Heb. 3.3.

4. Moses was a Type of Christ in his Noble Acts; Egyptian furnace, he was a
temporal Savior. So Jesus Christ, his Name (...) signifies a Savior Mat.
1.21. He shall save his people from their sins.

Moses was an intercessor for Israel and turned away the Wrath of God from
them, Number. 14. (...).
So Christ is the Saints Advocate, Romans 8.34. Who also makes intercession for
us.

2. Christ was typified by David.

1. David was a King, So is Christ adorned with Regal power, he is a King
to govern his people, Revel. 15.3. and to conquer his enemies, Psalm. 110.1.2.
David was a man after Gods own heart. This did prefigure Christ in whom God was
well pleased, Mat. 3.17.

Solomon. 1. In his Name (...), which signifies peaceable; so Christ is called
the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.7. This the Angels proclaimed at his incarnation,
Luke 2.14. Peace on earth; all his wars tend to peace; he gives that peace
which passes all understanding (...). Ignat.
. 2. Solomon typified Christ in his government: His was a most flourishing
Kingdom, 2 Chr. 9.22. King Solomon, passed all the Kings of the earth in
riches; so Christ's Kingdom is very glorious, all his subjects are made Kings;
he reigns in heaven and earth, and of his Kingdom is no end. 3. Solomon
typified Christ in his Wisdom; he was the Oracle of his age, 1 King. 4.31. He
was wiser than all men (...). Joseph. antiq. l. 8.
. So Christ received the unction from his Father; he had a spirit of wisdom and
holiness poured upon him without measure, John 3.34 Isa. 11.2. Behold, a
greater than Solomon is here. Thus Jesus Christ was prefigured by those persons
who were most lovely.

Things most lovely. I will instance only in five. pillar of cloud and fire,
which was Isreal's guide and conduct in the Wilderness, Exodus 13.21. Erat
columna corpus quoddam ex acre condensato mirum in modum a Deo preparatum ad
usam Israeliticum in cremo. Tornielli Annal.
This did typifie Christ our pillar of cloud, who guides our feet into the way
of peace, Luke 1.79. The cloud was unerring, for God was in it; such is Christ,
who is the way, and the truth, John 14.6. How lovely is this pillar to behold?

Manna. This pointed at Christ. He is like the Manna in three things.

1. The figure of Manna was circular, Exodus 16.14. There lay a small round
thing, etc. The circle is a figure of perfection; this typed out Christ in whom
is all perfection.

2. Cibus paratus.
The Manna was a meat prepared for Israel in an extraordinary manner; so the
Hebrew word (from whence Manna seems to be derived (...)
) signifies to prepare. Manna was a meat cooked and dressed in heaven; God
himself prepared it, and then served it in; Thus Jesus Christ was like Manna,
he was prepared and set apart by his Father to the blessed work of
mediatorship, Heb. 10.5. Abody have thou prepared me

3. The Jewish Rabbis say, Manna suited it self to every ones pallat; whatever
he desired, that he found in Manna; so Jesus Christ suits himself to every
Christians condition; he is full of quickening, strengthening, comforting virtue
Amaritu dines mundi dulces reddit. Austin.
, What fools are they that prefer the earthly mammon before this heavenly
Manna!

mercy-seat which was a sacred emblem or hyeroglyphick representing the mercy
of God to his people; there the Lord did give forth his Oracles and answers of
peace to his people, Exodus 25.22. There will I meet thee, and I will commune
with thee, etc. This mercy-seat was a type of Christ Cyrill de incarnat unigen.
Greg. hom. 6. sup. Ezekiel. Rupertus.
; in, and thorough whom God is appeased toward us. Therefore he is called
(...), a Propitiation, Romans 3.25. O how lovely is this mercy-seat! We could not
speak to God in prayer, nor would he commune with us, were it not for this
blessed propitiatory. The Hebrew word for mercy-seat (...)
, signifies a Covering, to show that in Christ the sins of believers are
covered.

brazen Serpent, Numb. 21.9. The brazen Serpent resembled Christ two ways. 1.
It was made like a Serpent, but it was no real Serpent; so Christ was in the
likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3. but he was not a sinner; he was made sin,
but he knew no sin. Christ was as void of sin, as the brazen Serpent was of
a sting.

2. Qui istam Scrpentem metallinum intuerentur a Serpentum morsibus sanati
fuerunt; ita qui Christum fide contemplantur, etc. Tostat. Paradox. 4.
When the people of Israel were stung by the fiery Serpents, v. 6. then
whosoever did look upon the brazen Serpent were cured. Thus when sin stings
the souls of men (for it is a Serpent with five stings, it stings men with
guilt, shame, horror of conscience, death, the curse of God.) Now Christ that
brazen Serpent being looked upon with a penitent believing eye, Zach. 12.10.
cures these deadly stings. Joh. 3.15
Oh how lovely is this brazen Serpent! many of the Jews (says Tostatus)
worshipped the Serpent of brass; let us in our hearts adore this brazen
Serpent the Lord Jesus.

Noah's Ark, which saved Noah and his family from the flood. Thus when the wrath
of God, as a deluge, overflows the wicked, Christ is the Ark in which the
believer sails above those bloody waves, and is preserved from drowning. And
is not the Lord Jesus lovely? all these types did but serve to shadow forth the
divine excellencies of Christ, and render him amiable in our eyes.

By resem. blances.
That Christ is thus lovely, appears by those things to which the Scripture
does resemble him. He is compared to things most illustrious. There are seven
lovely resemblances of Christ in Scripture,

Rose, Cant. 2.1. I am the Rose of Sharon i. e. Rosa odoratissima; ut illa quae
in locis apricis Florent. Junius.
. The Rose is Regina florum; the Queen of flowers: it is most delicious for
color and scent; to show that fragrant perfume which Christ sends forth. All
Roses, though beautiful, have their prickles; only the Rose of Sharon excepted;
so sweet is this Rose of Paradise, that it makes us become a sweet savor to
God, Ephesians. 1.6. This Rose is semper vivens, it never loses its color or
fragrancy, and is it not very lovely?

Vine, John 15.1. The Vine (as Pliny says) is the noblest of plants; to this
is Christ compared. Oh what lovely clusters grow upon this Vine! the fruits of
Justification, Sanctification, etc. These bunches of grapes hang upon the Lord
Jesus. We are beholding to this Vine, Hos. 14.8. From me is thy fruit found Qui
viret in foliis, venit a radicibus humor.
; nay, Christ excels the Vine. For, 1. Though there be many things in the Vine
tree besides the fruit useful, the leaves, the gum, the ashes of the Vine
Pliny.
; yet the wood of the Vine is unuseful, Ezekiel. 15.3. Will men take a pin of it
to hang any vessel thereon? now herein Christ is more lovely than the
Vine-tree; There is nothing in Christ but is useful. We have need of his humane
nature; we have need of his divine nature; we have need of his offices,
influences, privileges; there is nothing in this Vine we can be without. Oh
how blessed are the branches of this Vine. The Virgin Mary was saved, not by
bearing the Vine, but by being ingraffed into the Vine.

cornerstone, 1 Pet. 2.6. and that in two respects 1 The whole weight of the
building lies upon the cornerstone; so the weight of our salvation lies upon
Christ Dicitur Christus lapis ecclafiae angularis, quia est primarium ac
principale ejus fundamentum, Estius
, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12.2. The cornerstone does unite and knit together both parts
of the building; so when God and man were at variance, Christ, as the
cornerstone did unite them together, yea, and did ceament them with his own
blood. Oh how lovely and precious is this stone?

Rock, 1 Cor. 10.3. That Rock was Christ i.e. Metanym: per petram significatur.
Estius.
. He is a Rock in a threefold sense. 1. He is a Rock for offense. The Rock
breaks the waves; the Church being built upon Christ, all the adversaries that
come against her are like a ship coming full sail against a Rock. 2. A Rock
for defense; the Dove hides in the rock, Cant. 2.14. O my Dove in the clifts of
the Rock. Christ's wounds are the clifts of the Rock where the believing soul,
This Dove hides it self. 3. A Rock for comfort; and that two ways, 1. The rock
is a screene to shade off the heat; so Christ is called, Isa. 32.2. a shadow
from the heat; he shades a poor sinner from the scorchings of Gods wrath. 2.
Honey came out of the Rock, Isa. 32.13. He made him to suck honey out of the
Rock, and oil out of the flinty Rock. The honey of the promises, and the oil
of gladness comes out of this blessed rock.

river in a dry ground, Isa. 32.2. When by nature we are as a scorched heath,
dry and barren, Christ sends forth the sacred influences of his Blood and
Spirit, making us like the fields of Sharon, full of moisture and fertility,
and are not these silver streams lovely?

Rich treasury. Riches are lovely in men's eyes Gratius aurum quam solemn
intuemur. Austin.
, Ephesians. 3.8. The unsearchable riches of Christ; the Angels can never dig to
the bottom of this golden Mine. Christ has the true monopoly, because he has
those riches as are no where else to be found. The riches of his merit, the
riches of his Spirit. Christ has a partnership with the Father, John 16.15.
All that the Father has are mine: He is crowned with the Riches of the Deity.
Alexander regarded not the Kingdom of Macedonia, when he heard of the riches
of India; a Christian will in a manner despise all other riches when he has
Christ's Riches, Philip. 3.8.

beautiful Robe Romans 13.
, Isa. 61.10. He has covered me with the robe of righteousness. Hierom
interprets it of Christ: His righteousness is a lovely Robe; no Robe of gold,
or Ermyn wherewith Kings are invested is so honorable as this: in this robe we
shine as Angels in Gods eyes; The Highpriests glorious vestments Voluit Deus
plusquam angelicum in Christo splendorem istis vestibus oftendere. Willet.
; Exodus 28.2. the Mitre, the Robe, the Ephod of Gold, and the breastplate of
precious stones, did all but serve to set out the beautiful garment of Christ's
righteousness wherewith a believer is adorned. Thus Christ appears lovely in
these several resemblances, which can but faintly shadow out his beauty.

1. In himself. 2. In the account of others.


He is lovely in himself, and that five manner of ways. Intrinfice.
person; and that, man, Psalm. 45.2. Thou art fairer than the children of men.
The Hebrew word (...) is emphatical in the form Pulchruisti prae filiis
hominum Pagnin. Ar. Montanus.
, it denotes excellency of beauty: For though it be said he has no
comeliness, Isa. 53.2. that was in regard of his afflictions, which did so
disfigure, and as it were draw a veil over his glory, yet certainly the person
of Christ was incomparably fair, as Hierome and Chrysostom observe; and if
his body on earth was so beautiful, what is it now in heaven? The Apostle calls
it (...), a glorious body, Phil. 3.21. If Christ can make a Lily of the field
more beautiful than Solomon in all his glory, how fair is he himself? how
white is that Lily which grows in Paradise?

God-man (...). Chrysostom de sancta Trin.
. He may not unfitly be compared to Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28.12. which reached
from earth to heaven; Christ's humane nature which was the foot of the ladder,
stood upon the earth; his divine nature, which was the top of the ladder,
reached to heaven. The Arrians and Socinians deny his Godhead, as the
Valentians do his manhood (...). Ignat. Ep. ad Antioch.
. If the Godhead be in him he must needs be God, but the Godhead shines in
him, Col. 2.9. In him dwells (...), All the fullness of the Godhead Non dicit
(...) sed (...) quod discrimen contra Eutichianos notatu dignum. Beza.
; and to confirm us in this truth, let us consult with those Scriptures which
do clearly assert his Godhead, 1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is but one God the
Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and Phil. 2.6. who being in the form of God; Basil lib. 1. Cont. Eunom.
which is as much (says Basil) as to exist in the essence of God, 1 Timothy 3.16.
God was manifest in the flesh, and 1 John 5.20. We are in him that is true,
even in his son Jesus Christ, (...), THIS IS THE TRUE GOD (...). Ignat.
. Besides these testimonies of Scripture which do expressly assert the
Godhead of Christ, it may be clearly demonstrated by those incommunicable
properties belonging to the Deity which are ascribed to Christ, and are the
flowers of his Crown.

As, 1. Omnipotency Justin. Martyr. Orat. 1. ad Graec.
, Heb. 1.3.

2. Omnisciency. Mark 2.8.

3. Ubiquity, Mat. 28.20.

4. Power of sealing pardons, Mat. 9.6.

5. The mission of the holy Ghost, John 16.7.

6. Coequality with God the Father, Phil. 2.6. both in power, John 5.19, 21.
and dignity, John 5.23.

Thus we see his Godhead proved; and as he is God-man, he is altogether
lovely. He is the very picture of his fathers glory. Therefore he is called the
express image, and character of his person, (...).
Heb. 1.3. The very effigies and print of Gods face is seen in Christ, the
glory of Gods wisdom, holiness, mercy does most transparently shine forth in
him. Thus his person is lovelie.

disposition. A good nature is able to render deformity it self lovely. Christ
is lovely, not only in his complexion, but in his disposition; He is of a
loving and merciful disposition, and in this sense may be called deliciae
humani Generis Titus Vespas.
. It is reported of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, that he was of a most affable
winning temper, given to clemency, and every day he would set one hour apart
to hear the causes of the poor. Thus Jesus Christ is of a most sweet
disposition (...). Macar.
, He will not always chide, Psalm 103.9. He is inclinable to show mercy to
the penitent. He delights in mercy, Micah 7.18. He envites sinners to come to
him, Mat. 11.28. he begs of them that they would be saved, 2 Cor. 5.20. he
knocks at their hearts by his Spirit, till his head be filled with dew, and his
locks with the drops of the night, Rev. 3.20. If any poor soul accepts of his
offer, and does arise, and go to him, how does Christ welcome him (...).
Macarius.
. Christ makes the Feast, Luke 15.23. and the Angels make the music, verse 7.
But if men will not receive the tenders of grace, Christ grieves, Mark 3.5. He
is like a Judge that passes the sentence with tears in his eyes, Luke 19.42.
And when he came nigh the City, he wept. Ah sinners, I come to save you, but
you put away salvation from you Acts 13.
. I come with healing under my wings, but you bolt out your Physician; I would
have you but open your hearts to receive me, and I will open heaven to receive
you, but you will rather stay with your sins and die, than come to me and
live, Psalm 81.11. Israel would none of me. Well sinners, I will weep at your
Funerals; Oh how lovely is Christ in his disposition! he comes with his
suppling oil to pour into sinners wounds; He would feign break their hearts
with his mercies, He labors to overcome their evil with his good.

sufferings; when he did make expiation for our sins 1 Pet. 2.24
; but what, lovely in his sufferings? lovely when he was buffeted, spit upon,
besmeared with blood? O yes, he was most lovely upon the cross Rubore sui
sanguinis nos candidos effecit. Ghislerus.
, because then he showed most love to us; He bled love at every vein; His
drops of blood were love-drops. The more bloody, the more lovely Quanto pro me
vilior, tanto mibi charior. Aug.
. The more Christ endured for us, the more dear he ought to be to us. Osorius
writing of the sufferings of Christ, says, Gal. 6.14
that the crown of thorns bored his head with seventy two wounds Doles domine
non tua vulnera sed mea. Ambrose. Quid dicamin crucem tollere? Tully.
; and Tully when he comes to speak of the death of the Cross, shows his
rhetorique best by an Aposiopesis, or silence; what shall I say of this death?
Though a great Orator, he wanted words to express it.

Nor did Christ only endure pain in his body, but agony in his soul. He
conflicted with the wrath of God; which he could never have done, if he had not
been more than a man. We read that the Altar of wood was overlaid with brass,
that so the fire on the Altar might not consume the wood, Exodus 27.1, 2. This
Altar was a type of Jesus Christ. The humane nature of Christ, which was as the
wood, was covered with the divine nature, which was like the brass, else the
fire of Gods wrath had consumed it; and all this Christ suffered was nostra
vice, in our stead (...). Ignat.
, Isa. 53.5. We eat the sour Grape, and his teeth were set on edge: We climbed
the tree, we stole the forbidden fruit, and Christ goes up the ladder of the
Cross and dies. Oh how lovely ought a bleeding Savior Pendet anima, and dulcia
poma de ligno decerpit Bern. de Floribus.
to be in our eyes? Let us wear this blessed crucifix always in our heart
Inspice vulnera pendentis, sanguinem morientis, caput habet inclinatum ad
osculandum, cor apertum ad diligendum, brachia extenia ad amplexandum, totum
corpus expositum ad redimendum; haec quanta sint, cogitate, haec in statera
vestri cordis appendite, ut totus vobis figatur in cord, qui totus pro nobis
fixus fuit in Cruce. Aug. lib. de Virgin.
. Crux Christi clavis paradisi. The Cross of Christ says Damascen, is the
golden key that opens Paradise to us. How beautiful is Christ upon the Cross:
The ruddinesse of his blood took away the redness of our guilt. How lovely are
those wounds which wounded the red Dragon; When this blessed rock was smitten,
water came out of it to cleanse us, and blood to cheer us, 1 John 5.6. When
Christ was on the Cross (says Bernard) jam fuit vitis amputata. Now the Vine
was cut, and salvation came to us in the blood of the Vine; Oh how lovely is
this bleeding Vine! Christ's Crucifixion is our Coronation Haec une medela
corrofit illas quae in immensum exereverant cicatrices, and vim suam
concupiscentiarum perdidit corruptela, and deleta damnationis conscriptione,
novis literis assignata est and restituta libertas; privilegio dato, charta
indulgentiae figillo plaga lateralis firmata Cyprian. de Pass. Christi.
.

4. Christ is lovely in his Graces Christus. Candidus, quia multifaria virtute
dealbatus. Hierom, Anselm, Rupertus, Abbas.
; his graces as a divine embroydery did bespangle and set him off in the eyes
of the world. Grace was not in Christ as a quality, but essence; as light is
intrinsecal to the Sun, and is of the essence of it. Christ did open a box of
precious perfume, and because of the savors of his ointments the Virgins love
him Cant. 1.2.
; In Christ there was a constellation of all the graces (...). Chrysostom. in P^.
45.
; how did he shine in Wisdom Isaiah 11.7.
, Humility, Zeal, heavenly mindedness; and which did not a little adorn him,
HIS MEEKNESS Matthew. 11.29.
. How lovely was Christ in this grace!

1. He came into the world Meek, Mat. 21.5. Behold thy King comes meek. He
came not with a Sword, or Scepter in his hand, but with an Olive Branch of
peace in his mouth, He preached tidings of peace. Though he was the Lion of
Judah, yet he was the Lamb of God.

2. When he was in the world, he was a pattern of meekness, 1 Pet. 2.23. When
he was reviled, he reviled not again. He left his Fathers bosom (that hive of
sweetness) to come and live here; and truly, he exchanged his palace for a
dunghill; how often was he called a friend of sinners, nay, he was charged to
have a devil, but see how mildly he answers; (This Dove had no gall) John 8.49.
I have not a Devil, but I honor my Father. All his words were steept is honey.

3. When be was going out of the world, he showed unparalled meekness. He
prays for his enemies. Father forgive them, Luke 23.34. When the soldiers came
to take him by force, one would have thought h^ should have called for fire
from heaven, as the man of God did, 2 Kings 1.10. but behold, Grace was oured
into his lips Psalm. 45.2
; see what a mill answer he gives, enough to have mde the hardest heart relent,
Matt. 26.55. Are ye come out as againsta thief, with swords and staves to tke
me? What wrong (I pray) hae I done you? What have I stolen from the world, but
their sins? What have I robbed them of, but the wrath of God? Oh the
mildness of this Savior! surely had not the soldiers hearts been very hard O
duri, and indurati quos non emollit tanta flamma mansuetudinis! Bern. in Cant.
Ser. 20.
(for in the whole story of Christ's passion, I do not read of one soldier
converted; there was a thief indeed converted, but no soldier) Christ's
meeknese would have melted them into tears of repentance. When he was led away
to be crucified, he went as a Lamb to the slaughter (...), etc
, He opened no his mouth, Isa. 53.7. He opened he sides, but not his mouth in
repinins; and was not Christ lovely in his meekness? No wonder the holy Ghist
descended upon him in the likeness of a Dove; not a Lion, or Eale, but a Dove,
Vita Christi in terris disciplina morum. Aug. de vera. rel.
which is the emblen of meekness.

conversation. What was said of Saul and Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.23. They were
lovely in their lives; is much more true of Christ. His life (says
Chrysostom) was purer than the Sunnebeames. All the Ethics of Aristotle, all
the wisdom of Greece could never so describe virtue as it was lively
pourtrayed out in Christ's holy example. His life was a fair copy; never did
any one write without blotting besides Christ; he is called a Lamb without
spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. (...).
His lips did never speak a word amiss. Luke 4.22. All bare him witness, and
wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. Thus were his
lips like Lilies, dropping pure myrrh, Cant. 5.13. His foot did never tread a
step awry. He who was a way to others, did never go out of the way himself. He
was so pure that no tentation could fasten upon him. Tentation to Christ was
like the throwing a bur upon a crystal glass, which will not stick, but
glides off. The Prince of this world comes and has nothing in me, John 14.30.
There was no powder for the devils fire to take. What was Christ's whole life
but a pattern of good works! He went about doing good, Act. 10.38. He was
either anointing the blind, or healing the sick, or raising the dead; either
preaching, or working miracles. Thus he was altogether lovelie.

Estimative
Christ is lovely in the account of others. Three ways.

1. To God his Father, 2. To the Saints, 3. To the Angels,


1. Christ is lovely to God his Father. God is infinitely taken with him.
Christ is called the Rose of Sharon, and how does God delight to smell to this
Rose Mat. 3. ult (...). Signif. vel. In illo been sentire; que^ sensum
sectatur. Iraeneus. Vel refert ad propensum in Deo patre affectum. Grot.
! Isa 42.1. My elect in whom my soul delights. Surely if there be loveliness
enough in Christ to delight the heart of God, there may well be enough in him
to delight us. Christ is the center where all the lines of his Fathers love do
meet,

These. 1.10. He shall be admired of all them that believe. He is admired now,
and he shall be more admired of them. Well may the Saints admire to see Christ
sitting in the bright Robe of their flesh above the Angels in glory. Well may
they admire to see their nature united with the Deity. O how lovely and
beautiful is this sight! Well may Christ be admired of his Saints.

Ipse candi-ruber, quia Angelos quosque ad sui excitat desiderium. Ca^^iodore
. They adore him, Heb. 1.6. And let all the Angels of God worship him. The
Cherubims which did represent the Angels, are painted with their faces looking
upwards, to show, that the Angels in heaven all are still looking upward, as
admiring, and being ravished with the amazing beauties of Jesus Christ.

Use 1. Information. And it has three Branches. 1. Bran.


1. Behold here as in a Scriptureglasse the transcendent excellencies of the
Lord Jesus, He is altogether lovely Si de placenta mellea aut saccharea, si de
fructu sapidissimo v. g. de ficu, quae nulles habet acinos, sed tota est edilis
and delicata, dicimus, haec placenta tota irritat orexin, si de vino
suavissimo, falerno, cretico, moscatellato dicimus hoc vinum sum est,
desiderabile; quid dicemus de Christo, qui omne desiderium non tantum satiat
sed long superat? Corn. d. Lap.
, here is a fair prospect set before us. I wonder not that Paul, that
Seraphique Saint, defired to know nothing, save Jesus Christ*, 1 Cor. 2.2. What
would he know more? He is altogether lovely; No wonder the Apostles left all
and followed him, Mat. 19.27. had I the tongue of Angels I could never set
forth Christ in all his lively and lovely colors. Besides what has been said,
take a further view of Christ's lovely excellencies in three particulars.

1. He is our light. Light is a glorious creature, Eccles. 11.7. Truly the
light is sweet; The light pulls off the veil, and draws aside the dark
curtains of the night, making every thing appear in its fresh colors. Thus
Jesus Christ is lovely; (...).
He is called that true light, John 1.9. and the bright morning star, Rev.
22.16. when the soul is benighted with ignorance, Christ is the morning star
that enlightens it. He is the Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. i. e.
tanquamradiis justitiae suae perfundens electos Tremel.
This Sun of righteousness is more glorious than that in the Firmament, 1. The
Sun in the firmament rises and sets, but the Sun of righteousness, when it
once rises upon the soul in conversion, never sets finally upon him; it may
pull in its beams, when the clouds of our sin come between, but it comes out
of the cloud again, (as it did to David) it never sets finally. 2. The Sun in
the Firmament only shines upon us, but the Sun of righteousness shines
within us, Gal. 1.16. but when it pleased God to reveal his Son in me. The
Sun in the Firmament shines only upon our faces, but the Sun of
righteousness shines in our hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6. God has shined in our hearts:
How sweet are these beams! 3. The Sun in the Firmament shines only in the
daytime, but the Sun of righteousness shines in the night. In the night of
desertion, and affliction this Sun shines; Psalm 112.4. Unto the upright
there arises light in darkness. Oh how lovely is this Sun of righteousness!
by the bright beams of this Sun we see God. (...). Theodoret. in secund. Ep.
ad Cor.
.

food. He is not only lovely to the eye, but to the taste, John 6.55. My flesh
is meat indeed. This is Princely fare; Accedis ad Christum non carne sed cord,
edis Christum non dente sed fide Aust.
it was never prepared for the Angels, but for us. It Is lovely feeding here; All the rarities of heaven are served in in this dish.

And my blood is drink indeed; This blood is better than wine. 1. Wine may be
taken in excess; Noah took too much of the Grape; but it is otherwise with the
wine of Christ's blood; there is no fear of excess here. Though a drop be
sweet, yet the more we drink, the better; the deeper, the sweeter! Drink yea,
drink abundantly Obeloved, Cant. 5.1. Excess here makes us sober Hac ebrietas
sobrios reddit
! 2. Wine, though it cheares the heart, yet at some times, if it be taken, it
may be hurtful; give wine in a Fever and it is as bad as poison. But this wine
of Christ's blood is best in a Fever. When the heart burns as hot as hell in
the sense of Gods wrath, and is, as it were, in a spiritual Agony and Fever;
now a drop of Christ's blood does allay the inflammation, and sweetly refreshes
the soul, it is lovely drinking at this fountain.

life, Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall appear. Life is sweet; life
makes every thing comfortable. In this the Devil said true, Skin for skin, yea
all that a man has will he give for his life, Job 2.3. A man will cast the
plate and jewels overboard to save his life; he will lose a leg or an arm,
to preserve the vital parts -- Vt serves vitam ferrum patieris, and ignem. --
Is life lovely, and is not Christ who is our life lovely? He was typified by
the the tree of life in the Garden, Genesis 2.9. That tree was Symbolical (as
Austin says) it was a pledge and sign of life, if man had continued in
obedience. It was certainly a lovely tree, but it was only a type of Christ,
who is called (...), The tree of life, Rev. 2.7. This tree of life the Lord
Jesus is a better tree than that which grew in Paradise; Adams tree in Paradise
might preserve life, but it could not prevent death; there was dying for all
that; but this tree of life, Jesus Christ, prevents death, John 11.26.
Whosoever believes in me shall never die; that is, not die the second death,
Rev. 2.14. This blessed tree is an antidote against death. If there were a tree
to be found in the world that could preserve men from dying, how far would
they go on pilgrimage? What vast sums of money would they give for one leaf of
that tree? such a tree is Christ, he will keep you from dying, and is not this
tree very lovely? In particular, there is a threefold life flows from Jesus
Christ. 1. The life of grace, Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness have we all received,
and grace for grace. This life is gemma aeternitatis; a bud of eternity, it is a
life purchased for us by Christ's death. 2. The life of comfort, which is the
cream of life, John 16.22. Your heart shall rejoice. This is an holy
jubilation of Spirit; so sweet and ravishing is this joy, that if David, when
he had lost his joy, had lost also his crown, and God had put the question to
him, which of these two he would have restored, David would have said, Lord,
restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, Psalm. 51.12. Rather my comfort, than
my Crown. It Is Hilary Term with a Christian while these joys last. 3. The life
of glory, John 17.22. This is the most noble life; this is to live the life of
Angels, nay to live the life of God; It Is the highest elevation, and perfection
of the reasonable creature, and may we not cry out with Chrysostom (...); What
more lovely than Christ, from whom these golden streams of life flow? Oh that
all this might make him amiable in our eyes!

What should we admire? what should we rejoice in, but Christ? Christ's beauty,
like his coat, is w^ven without seame. We read of Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.25. In all
Israel there was none to be so praised as Absalom for his beauty, from the sole
of his foot, even to the crown of his head, there was no blemish in him. This
may be far more truly applied to Christ. He is the mirror of beauty; the map
of perfection, the Paradise of delight. He is the crown of the Gospel; if the
Gospel be the field, Christ is the pearl hid in this field; If the Gospel be
the Ring, Christ is the Diamond in this Ring. He is the glory of heaven, Rev.
21.23. The Lamb is the light thereof. Well might Saint Paul account all things
dross and dung for Christ Phil. 3.8.

2. Branch. 2. Bran. Inform.
If Christ be altogether lovely, it shows us the true reason why men do not
embrace Christ, namely, because they are ignorant of his beauty. A blind man
does not admire the colors in a rainebowe; when the God of this world has
blinded men's eyes, they see not any excellency in Christ (...). Mac.
; therefore they cry out as here the Watchmen did, What is thy beloved more
than another beloved? verse. 9. Men admire not this Sun, because the cloud of
their ignorance comes between. Christ is a treasure, but an hid treasure; he is
fairer than the children of men, Infoelix homo qui scit caetera omnia, Christum
autem nescit. Austin.
but to a natural person he is like Moses with a veil upon his face. The men
of the world see not the stupendous beauty of Christ. He does not want worth,
but they want eyes. Oh unhappy man (says Austin) who know all things else
but Christ; thy knowledge will but serve to light thee to hell.

Quest. But you will say to me, What, not know Christ? I hope we are better
bred than so; has Christ been preached so long in our streets, and not know
him?

Answ. 1. I wish there were not many persons grossly ignorant of Christ, who
understand nothing of his person, offices privileges; A Reverend Divine told
me, that not long since, he went to visit a neighbor of his Parish lying on
his deathbed, a man fourscore years of age, one that came frequently to
Church, and questioning with him what sin was, he said he knew not, and what
Christ was, he told him he knew not; but says the Minister to him, if thou
do not know Christ, how do thou think to go to heaven? his answer was
this, If I cannot get to heaven, then I must stay by the way; Oh gross
ignorance (...)
! Balaams ass spoke better sense to the Prophet, Numb. 22.28.

That people have been very ignorant of Jesus Christ, appears by this, because
they have been so inclinable to error, so greedy to drink in every new opinion
as soon as the Devil has set it abroach.



It is a speculation without Conviction. Affection. Operation.


conviction. Men are not thoroughly convinced of the excellencies of Christ;
John 16.8. and when he (that is the holy Ghost) comes, (...) he shall convince
the world of sin.

Strange! was not Christ in the world? had not he made many Sermons about sin?
it is true, he had, but the Jews were not yet convinced of it, therefore he
shall send his Spirit to convince them. And of righrighteousnesse] why? had not
Christ told them that there was no righteousness to be found but in him, that
they could graff their hopes of salvation upon no-other stock besides? yes,
they had heard Christ say so, but they were not yet convinced; therefore the
Spirit shall come and convince them. Hence I gather, that men may have a
speculation of Christ, yet be ignorant of him, that is, not know him
convincingly; and that they have not a convincing knowledge, is clear; for were
they convinced in their conscience of the lovely excellencies of Christ, would
they value a lust or trifle, would they with Judas, prefer thirty pieces of
silver before him?

affection; men have notions of Christ, but are not warmed with love to Christ.
Their knowledge is like the Moon, it has light in it, but no heat. True
knowledge of Christ is like fire to the ice, it melts it into water; so this
knowledge melts the sinner into tears of love. I do the hypocrite no wrong to
tell him he bears no true affection to Jesus Christ. There is a great deal of
difference between the knowledge that the prisoner has of the Judge, and the
knowledge that the child has of the parent. The prisoner knows the Judge, but
has no affection at all to his person, his knowledge is joined with fear and
hatred; but the childs knowledge of his parent is joined with affection, he
loves to be in his presence. The hypocrite knows Christ as the prisoner does
the Judge, or as the devils knew him, Mark 1.24. with a knowledge of horror
and amazement, whereas true knowledge is filial; The affections are drawn forth
in an inflamed manner after him. The Apostle has an elegant expression to set
forth the nature of true knowledge, he calls it (...), the savor of knowledge,
2 Cor. 2.14. as a man tastes a savory sweetness in his meat. Hypocrites have
no taste.

operation. The knowledge that hypocrites have of Christ has no saving
influence upon them, it does not make them more holy; it is one thing to have a
notion of Christ, another thing to fetch virtue from Christ. The knowledge of
hypocrites is scientia infrugifera, a dead, barren knowledge 2 Pet. 1.8
; it brings not forth the child of obedience. There is a great deal of
difference between a Scholar that studies physic for the theory and notion,
that he may have the rules of it lying before him, and one that studies Physic
to practice; hypocrites are not practitioners; they are all head, no feet, they
walk not in Christ, Col. 2.6. Their knowledge is informing, but not
transforming, it does not make them a jot the better, it leaves not a spiritual
tincture of holiness behind: The flux of blood runs still, and such a
knowledge is no better than ignorance, 1 John 2.4. He that says, I know him,
and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. A man
may have a knowledge of speculation, and be no better than a Devil. And this is
the reason why men do not embrace Christ who is infinitely lovely, because they
know not his worth; though they are not grossly ignorant of Christ, yet they
are spiritually ignorant. To this day the veil is upon their heart.

3. Branch, 3. Bran. Inform.
If Jesus Christ be so lovely, it shows us the misery of a man out of Christ
1. That lives without Christ. 2. That dies without Christ.


Behold his misery that lives without Christ. He is very deformed and unlovely;
for all loveliness flows from Christ. A sinner in the state of nature is like
an infant tumbling in its blood, Ezekiel. 16.6. Thou were in thy blood. The Leper
in the Law was but the sad emblem of a sinner. 1. Lev. 13.
The Leper was to live alone, as being unworthy to come into the congregation
of the holy. 2. The Leper did wear three marks to be known by, his garments
torn, his head bare, his mouth covered. 3. He was to cry unclean, unclean.
This spiritual leprosy is upon every Christlesse sinner. Therefore a man in a
state of unregeneracy is in Scripture compared to things most unlovely and
unbeautiful. To a dog, Revel. 22.15. a swine (...).
, 2 Pet. 2.22. a Viper, Mat. 3.7. Homines a bono deficientes, humanam quoque
amisere naturam; evenit igitur, ut, quem vitiis transformatum videas, hominem
aestimare non possis. Alienarum opum ereptor, lupo similem dixeris; Ferox, and
in quietus cani aut leoni parem; insidiator, fraudibus surripuisse gaudens,
vulpeculis exaequetur; pavidus, and fugax, cervus habeatur; immundis
libidinibus se immergens, porcae comparetur; ita fit ut peccans, vertatur in
belluam. Boethius lib. 4. prosa. 3.
a Devil, Joh. 6.70. a sinners heart is a poisoned spring; It Is like a piece of
muddy ground which defiles the purest water that runs thorough it. The
Heathen had this kind of notion ingraffed into them, for (as Authors report)
they had their stone pots of water set at the doors of their Temple, where
they used to wash before they went to sacrifice; a sinner is blind, Rev. 3.17.
and the more blind, because he thinks he sees. He is dead (...)? Chrysostom. ad
Pop. Anticch.
; and though he may be decked with some moral virtues, this is but like
strowing flowers upon a dead corpse Non vivit homo qui superbia inflatur, qui
caeteris insicitur pestibus, quia hoc non est vivere, etc. Bern. in Sermon 1. de
Apostol.
, Ephesians. 2.1. dead things have no beauty in them; a sinner out of Christ is a
filthy excrementitious creature Job 15.16
, he runs nothing but dregs, he is hell epitomized. There Is no part of him
sound, -- Totum pro vulnere corpus. The man who had his running issue in his
flesh, Levit. 15.2. was but a type of a sinner who has the plague-sores of
sin running upon him, 1 King. 8.38. Oh how ghastly and deformed is every
Christlesse soul! God loathes him, Zach. 11.8. My soul loathed them. So
abominable and unsavory is a sinner, that God stands afar off, Psalm 138.6. He
will not come near the stench of him. The sinner is so deformed and diseased,
that when he comes to be converted, the first thing he does, is to loath
himself, Ezekiel. 36.31. Ye shall loath your selves in your own sight for your
iniquities. Thus unlovely is every person out of Christ. If he brags of his
goodness, it is because he never yet looked his face in the glass of Gods
Word, that would discover his spots and blemishes.

without Christ. Though Jesus Christ be so infinitely beautiful, the sinner
shall see none of his beauty. Christ will put a veil upon his face, as Moses
did when his face shined, Exodus 34.33. Nay, that is not all; though Christ be
so lovely in himself, yet to an ungodly sinner he will be terrible to behold. A
wicked man shall see nothing in Christ that is lovely. The Sun of
righteousness will be eclipsed to him, his beauty will be changed into fury.
The Lamb will be turned to a Lion. Christ's visage will strike the heart of a
sinner with horror and amazement. King Ahashuerus was pleasant to Queen-Esther
to behold, when he held forth the golden Scepter, but how dreadful was his
visage to Haman, when he arose from the banquet of wine in his wrath, Esther
7.7. His look did carry death in its face: So, though Christ be so lovely in
himself, and full of smiling beauty to his Saints, yet to those who reject him,
and die in their sins, O how ghastly and affrighting will his look be? His eyes
will be as a flame of fire, Revel. 1.14. Christ is represented with a bewe, and
a crown, Rev. 6.2. Give me leave to allude. Christ will appear to the Saints
with a crown, very lovely, and glorious to behold, but to the wicked he will
appear with his bow, to shoot at them with the arrows of his indignation. We
read, Psalm 97.2. clouds and darkness are round about him. To believers
Christ will shine forth with his rays of Majesty and beauty, but to the wicked
he will cover himself with a cloud of displeasure; This will be the hell of
hell to the damned, they shall be shut out from a sight of Christ's glory, and
shall behol donly a sight of his wrath. They shall cry to the mountains to
cover them from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb, Rev. 6.16. The humane nature of Christ, Hierom.
(says Hierom) will be as terrible to a sinner as the sight of hell fire.

Use 2. Exhortation, 1. Branch. If Christ be so infinitely lovely, Exhort. 1.
Bran.
then let us labor to get a part in Christ, that the cursed deformity of our
nature may be taken away, and the bespangled beauties of holiness may shine in
us. It Is little comfort for the soul to say, Christ is altogether lovely,
unless it can also say, My beloved is mine, Cant. 2.16. Ignatius cared not
what befell him so he had Christ (...). Ignat. Epist. 12. ad Romans
. Clear the interest. The ground of privilege is union. There are (says
Bernard) many Christians who have nothing of Christ in them Sine Christo
Christiani. Bern.
. Oh labor to be made one with Christ, to have Christ not only in thy Bible,
but in thy heart (...).
; renounce thy own beauty, all thy parts, moralities, duties, these are a
rotten bough to hold by, Phil 3.9. That I may be found in him not having mine
own righteousness. When Augustus Caesar desired the Senate of Rome to join
some with him in Consul-ship, The Senate answered that they held it a great
disparagement to him to join any Consul with him; Sueton. in vit. Aug. Caes.
So Jesus Christ takes it as a great disparagement to him, to join our Duties
in equipage with his Merits. O sinner cast away thy beggars rags, that thou
may put on Christ's lovely robes. I would not take thee off from duty, but
from confidence in duty; Noah's Dove might make use of her wings to fly, but
she did not trust to her wings, but to the Ark. A man makes use of his feet to
go over a bridge, but he trusts to the bridge for safety; Christians while they
walk with the feet of obedience, must trust to Christ as the bridge to lead
them over the devouring sea of hell; in short, if thou would get an interest
in Christ, rely on Christ by faith, and resign up thy self to Christ by
service. A believer with one hand receives Christ, with the other hand gives up
himself to Christ. Christ says to a believer, with my body, yea with my blood
I thee endow, and a believer says to Christ, with my soul I thee worship. Oh
Christian part with all for a part in this lovely Savior.

2. Branch. 2. Bran.
If Christ be thus full of sparkling beauties, then fall in love with this
lovely object; and with the Spouse, be sick of love to Christ. Beauty does draw
love. Ministers are Paranymphi, friends of the bride groom. This day I come a
wooing for your love. Love him who is so lovely. Let Christ lie as a bundle of
myrrh, always between your breasts. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Mara-natha, 1 Cor. 16.22. Love (says Chrysostom)
is the diamond that only the Queen wears, viz. The gracious soul. Oh that all
these surpassing beauties of Christ might kindle a flame of divine love in
Christians hearts. Christ is maxim diligibilis (as the Schoolmen speak) he is
the very extract and quintescence of beauty, he is a whole Paradise of delight
(...). Macar. hom. 31.
. He is the flower of Sharon enriched with orient colors and persum'd with the
sweetest savor; Oh wear this flower, not in your bosom, but in your heart,
and be always smelling to it; and show your love to this lovely Savior.

1. By the degrees of it. 2. By the effects of it.
degrees of it. Love him above all other things Minus te amat qui aliquid tecum
amat. Aug.
; let him carry away the crown and the glory from the creature, 1. Love him
plusquam tuos, more than thy relations, Matthew. 10.37. He that loves father and
mother more than me, is not worthy of me. Nay, our love to relations must be
hatred in iin comparison of our love to Christ, Luke 14.26. Great is our love
to relations. The creatures void of reason teach natural affection; the young
stork feeds the damme, and helps to carry her when she is old and can hardly
fly. Ciconiae parents senio confectos nutriunt and volando fessos juvant.
Pliny Aristot. Unde (...).
Children should exceed, and out-flie the stork in affection. There is a story
in the French Academy of a daughter, who when her father was condemned to die
by famine, she made means to get to him, and gave him suck with her own
breasts, which being made known, she obtained his pardon; But Christ must be
dearer to us than all; He must weigh heavier than relations in the balance of
our affections; for, He is altogether lovely. If parents lie as a
stumbling block in our way to Christ, if they either come in competition with
Christ, or stand in opposition against Christ, here odium in suos is pietas in
Deum Hierom.
, We must either leap over them, or tread upon them.

2. Love Christ plusquam tua, more than thy Estate. Gold is but shining dust,
though it may be lovely, yet it is not altogether lovely. 1. Gold is worse than
thy self, it is of an earthly extract. If thou love any thing, love
something which is better than thy self; and that only is Christ, who is
altogether lovely. 2. Riches avail not in the day of wrath, Proverbs 11.4.
Riches are no life guard to defend us from divine fury; but how lovely is
Christ who can screene off the fire of Gods wrath from thee; Oh then love him
more than these perishable things Non satis magni a nobis fit Christus, nisi
tanti aestimemus ut reliqua omnia quae homines reddere solent bonorabiles prae
hoc uihili putemus. Davenant.
. Christ's gleanings are better than the worlds Vintage. Be not like Noah's
Raven, which when it had found a carrion to feed on, cared not for returning
home to the Ark. He that loses all for Christ, shall find all in Qui omnia
propter Christum dimiserit, omnia inveniat in Christo. Hierom. ad Paulin.
Christ.

3. Love Christ plusquam te, more than thy Life, Revel. 12.11. They loved not
their lives to the death. They carried their sufferings as ensigns of their
glory. They had pangs of love stronger than the pangs of death. Did the Curtii
die for the Romans, the Codri for the Athenians, and shall not we be willing to
lay down our lives for Christ who is so infinitely lovely?

Effects of love.

1. 1. Fruit of love.
The first of love is desire of converse Ps. 42.2.
. Love is a transporting of the affections; Lovers desire to be often talking
and conversing together before the Marriage day. Christ converseth with the
soul by his Spirit, and the soul converseth with him by prayer, and
meditation. The soul that loves Christ, desires to be much in his presence. He
loves the Ordinances, he thinks it is good lying in the way where Christ
passes by. Ordinances are vehicula salutis. The chariots of salvation. Christ
rides into the Believers heart in these chariots. Ordinances are convivium
pinguium, the feast of fat things, Isa. 25.6. The soul feasts with Christ
here, Cant. 2.4. He brought me to the banqueting house, etc. In the Hebrew it
is ad domum vini (...)
. He brought me to the house of wine. Word, Prayer, Sacraments are to a
Christian The house of wine. Here, often Christ turns the water of tears into
of wine. How lovely is this house wine! The Ordinances are the lattice where
Christ looks forth and shows his smiling face to his Saints. Christ's parents
found him in the Temple, Luke 2 46. The soul that loves Christ, desires
conference with him in the Temple.

2. 2. Fruit of love.
Where there is love to Christ, there is sympathy. Friends that love do grieve
and rejoice together. They have sympathizing spirits. Homer describing
Agamemnons grief when he was forced to sacrifice his daughter Iphigenia brings
in all his friends weeping with him, and accompanying him to the sacrifice in
mourning. And I remember Aristotle in his Rhetorique spends almost a whole
chapter upon this, proving a sympathy among friends. (...). Ar^st. Rhet.
Lovers grieve together: Thus if we love Christ, we shall grieve for those
things that grieve him, Psalm 119.158. I beheld the transgressors, and was
grieved. We shall grieve to see truth bleeding, Heretics increasing. -- Victa
jacet pietas Ovid.
-- We shall grieve to see tolleration setting up its Mast and Top-saile, and
multitudes sailing in this ship to Hell. Tolleration is the grave of
Reformation. It was a charge drawn up against the Angel of Pergamos, that he
had them there, (nestling and brooding,) who held the doctrine of Balaam,
Revel. 2.14. by tolleration we adopt other men's sins, and make them our own.
I pray God this does not hasten Englands Funerals. He who loves Christ will lay
these things to heart.

3. 3. Fruit of love.
He who loves Christ will endeavor to preserve his memory. Friends that bear
respect will preserve the memory of those persons they love, by keeping their
pictures, letters, love tokens; sometimes by preserving their monuments. Herein
Artemisia Queen of Caria showed an act of singular love to her husband
Mausolus, for he being dead, she caused his body to be reduced to ashes, and to
be mingled in her drink every day, so making her body a living Tomb to hold her
dead husband. Thus the soul that loves Christ will be often eating his body
and drinking his blood in the Sacrament, that he may remember Christ's death
till he come. They that live without Sacraments show plainly that they have no
love to Christ, because thee do not desire to preserve his memory among them.

4. 4. Fruit of love.
He that bears love to Christ, this lovely object, will not entertain any
other Lovers; What have I to do any more with idols? Hosea 14.8. The Hebrew
word is with sorrows (...)
: Indeed sin raises a tempest of sorrow in the soul, and he that is
espoused to Christ has now changed his judgment, those sins he before
looked upon as Lovers, now he looks upon as sorrows. He that loves Christ can
look a tentation in the face and turn his back upon it Posse peccare and
nolle, nobile est. Ambr.
. When Cyrus would have tempted the chaste wife of Tygranes, she took no notice
of him, (though a King) she had a husband at home; When sin like Mercuries
rod with a snake about it, would wind it self subtly into the soul, he
that loves Christ dares not give it entertainment, he says all the rooms are
taken up already for Christ, and a better ghuest cannot come, for He is
altogether lovelie.

3. Branch. 3. Bran.
If Christ be so lovelie in himself, then you that profess Christ, labor to
render him lovely in the eyes of others. And that two ways.

to pourtray and set him forth in his glory. My beloved is white and ruddy, the
chief among ten thousand. Tell others that Christ is all marrow, all
sweetness. He is the richest jewel in the cabinet of Heaven: Set up the
trophies of his honor; triumph in his praises, that you may tempt others to
fall in love with his person. The tongue is the Organ of praise; It Is pity the
Organs are so often out of tune, in murmuring and complaining; Oh let these
Organs be still going, let our tongues sing forth the praises of him who is
altogether lovely. Daughters of the blood Royal have the pictures of Kings
brought to them, and by seeing the pictures, they fall in love with their
persons, and are married to them; By our commendations of Christ, we should so
paint out Christ to others, and draw his picture, that when they see his
picture they may fall in love with him, and the match may be presently struck
up.

walking worthy of Christ, Colos. 1.10. It is an honor to a Master to have
good servants, and how does it proclaim Christ to be lovely, and glorious,
when they that profess him are eminent for piety, 1 Peter 2.9? Christ appears
lovely in the holy lives of his people.

Brethren, there are some persons among us whose scandalous impieties masked
over with Religion, has made Christ appear unlovely in the eyes of others; it
is enough to make men afraid to have any thing to do with Christ. As if he did
abet men in their sin, or at least connive at them. The blood of some will
not make reparation for the injury which their tears have done to Christ. I
have read of certain images which on the outside were covered with gold and
pearl resembling Jupiter and Neptune Lucian.
; but within nothing but spiders and cobwebs; and have not we many who have
been covered with the gold and pearl of profession resembling the Saints of
the most high, but within (as Christ says) full of all uncleanness, Matthew
23.27? insomuch that we may see the spiders creeping out of them; O that all
who profess the Name of Christ might dedepart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. that
they might set a Crown of honor upon the head of Christ, and make him appear
lovely in the eyes of others.

Use 3. Consolat.
Here is comfort to them who are by faith married to Christ; this is their
glorious privilege, Christ's beauty and loveliness shall be put upon them;
They shall shine by his beams; This is (as learned Davenant says) caput
honoris, the apex and crown of honor; the Saints shall not only behold Christ's
glory, but be transformed into it, 1 John 3.2. We shall be like him; that is,
irradiated and enameld with his glory. Christ is compared to the beautiful Lily
Lilium flos emnium gratissimucob ui^^ veum candorem. Guadal^ pens^s.
, Cant. 1.2. His Lily-whitenesse shall be put upon his Saints. A glorified soul
shall be a perfect mirror, or crystal, where the beauty of Christ shall be
transparent. Moses married a blackamore, but he could not make her fair; but
whomsoever Christ marries, he alters their complexion, he makes them altogether
lovely. Other beauty causes pride, -- Fastus inest pulchris -- but no such
worm breeds in heaven. The Saints in glory shall admire their own beauty, (...).
Gr. Nazian.
but not grow proud of it. Other beauty is soon lost. The eye weeps to see its
surrowed brows, the cheeks blush at their own palenesse. Nec semper violae,
nec semper lilia florent,
Et riget amissis spina relicta rosis Ovid.
.
But this is a never-fading beauty; age cannot wither it; it retains its
glossinesse, the white and vermilion mixed together to all eternity. Think of
this, O ye Saints, who mourn now for your sins, and bewail your spiritual
deformities (you are comely, yet black) remember, by virtue of your union with
Christ you shall be glorious creatures; then shall your clothing be of wrought
gold, then shall you be brought unto the King in raiment of needlework, Psalm.
45.
and you shall hear Christ pronounce that blessed word, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all
fair my love, and there is no spot in thee.

Printed for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhill.
Loves intercourse between the Lamb and his Bride, Christ and his Church. Or a
clear Explication and Application of the Song of Solomon. By Will. Guild. D.D.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
FOr Mediation. page 71. line 12. read meditation. for medulo, p. 304 marg. r.
modulo. for isunt. p. 331. marg. r. insunt. for (...) p. 338. marg. r. (...).
for Isa. 32.13. p. 346. l. 5. r. Deuteronomy. 32.13. for love p. 363. l. 6 r. lovely.
for (...) p. 366. marg. r. (...). In the Sermon upon Psalm. 37.37. p. 2. for
praemit r. premit. for (...) p. 38. r. (...).

THE INDEX.
CHAP. I. THat negative goodness is not sufficient to entitle a man to heaven.
Page 4 CHAP. 2. What is meant by the Law of God. 11 What is meant by delight in
Gods Law. 12 Doct. That a true Saint delights in Gods Law. ibid. CHAP. 3.
Whence the Saints delight in the Law springs. 13, 14 CHAP. 4. A
characteristical difference between a child of God and an hypocrite. 16, 17,
19 CHAP. 5. Two cases resolved. p. 20, 23. CHAP. 6. The trial of a Christians
delight in God, and his Law. 27, 28 CHAP. 7. An Exhortation to this spiritual
delight in Religion. 35, 36, 37 CHAP. 8. How a Christian may attain to this
blessed delight. 51, 52 CHAP. 9. This delight in God should cause thankfulness
to God. 53, 54
Concerning Meditation.
CHAP. 1. That a good Christian is a meditating Christian. p. 59 CHAP. 2. What
Meditation is. 61, 62 CHAP. 3. That Meditation is a duty. 66, 67 CHAP. 4. How
Meditation differs from memory. 69 CHAP. 5. How Meditation differs from study.
71 CHAP. 6. The subject matter of Meditation. 72 SECT. 1. Meditate on Gods
Attributes. 73 Six in particular. 1. Meditate on Gods omnisciency. 74 2.
Meditate on Gods holiness. 75 3. Meditate on Gods wisdom. 77 4. Meditate on
Gods power. 78 5. Meditate on Gods mercy. 81 6. Meditate on Gods truth. 84
SECT. 2. Meditate upon the promises. 85 SECT. 3. Meditate upon the love of
Christ. 90 SECT. 4. Meditate upon sin. 96 SECT. 5. Meditate upon the vanity of
the creature. 101 SECT. 6. Meditate upon the excellency of grace. 103. Grace is
better than gold. p. 105 Grace is better than gifts. 106
SECT. 7. Meditate upon the estate of your souls. 109 SECT. 8. Meditate upon
the fewness of them that shall be saved. 113 SECT. 9. Meditate upon the
sadness of final apostasy. 117, 118 SECT. 10. Meditate of death. 120 SECT.
11. Meditate upon the day of judgment. 125 SECT. 12. Meditate on hell. 133
SECT. 13. Meditate on heaven. 139 SECT. 14. Meditate upon eternity. 143 SECT.
15. Meditate upon your experiences. 148
CHAP. 7. Discovering the necessity of Meditation. 193 CHAP. 8. Use 1. Inform.
It shows why so few good Christians. 199 CHAP. 9. Use 2. Rept. It reproves them
who do not meditate in the Law of God. 201 CHAP. 10. Use 3. Exhort. A holy
persuasive to Meditation. 203 CHAP. 11. The answering of Objections. 207, 210
CHAP. 12. Concerning occasional Meditations. 215 CHAP. 13. For the right
timeing of meditation. 222 CHAP. 14. How long Christians should be conversant
in this duty. 231 CHAP. 15. The usefulness of Meditation. 233 CHAP. 16. The
excellency of Meditation. 249 CHAP. 17. Divine motives to Meditation. 251 CHAP.
18. Rules for Meditation. 259
In the Appendix to MEDITATION.
Doct. THat it is the sweet temper of a gracious heart to be still with God.
289 What it is to be still with God. 290 In what sense the soul is said to be
still with God. 291, 292, 293 Why the soul is still with God. 298 Use 1.
Showing how a Christian may be in heaven before his time. 305 Use 2. Reproof 1.
Branch. It reproves them who are never with God. 306 2. Branch. It reproves
them who are seldom with God. 309 Use 3. A persuasive to Christians to be
still with God. 312 1. Argument, How unworthy it is to have the heart set upon
the world. 313 2. Argument. What a rare kind of life it is to be still with
God. 314 1. It is the most noble life. 315 2. It is the most satisfactory life.
316 3. It is the most joyful life. 317 4. It is the most durable life. 318 How
a Christian may arrive at this blessed frame of heart. 320
Concerning Christ's loveliness.
Doct. Jesus Christ is infinitely lovely. 332 That Christ is most lovely,
appears, 1. By his titles, 333 2. By Types prefiguring him; which were either,
1. Of Persons, as Moses, 334 David, 336. Solomon, 337. or, 2. Of things. 1.
Christ was typified by the pillar of cloud and fire. p. 338 2. Christ was
typified by the Manna. 339 3. Christ was typified by the mercy-seat 340 4.
Christ was typified by the brazen Serpent. 341 5. Christ was typified by Noah's
Ark. 342 3. That Christ is lovely, appears by several resemblances; He is
compared to things most lovely. As, 1. To the Rose of Sharon. 343 2 To a
precious Vine. ibid. 3 To a cornerstone 344 4 To a Rock 345 5 To a river in a
dry ground 346 6 To a rich Treasury ibid. 7 To a beautiful Robe 347 4 Christ's
loveliness appears by real demonstrations. 1 Christ is lovely in himself five
manner of ways 1 He is lovely in his person. 348, 349 2 He is lovely in his
disposition p. 352 3 He is lovely in his sufferings. 354 4 He is lovely in his
graces 357 5 He is lovely in his conversation 360 2 Christ is lovely in the
esteem of others. He is lovely, 1. To God his Father. 362 He is lovely, 2. To
the Saints 363 He is lovely, 3. To the Angels ibid. Use 1. Information. 1
Branch. Behold the lovely excellencies of Christ. 364 2 Branch. It shows us
that the reason why many embrace not Christ, is their ignorance of his
loveliness. 371, 372 3 Branch. It shows the misery of a Christlesse person. 1
Who lives without Christ 379 2 Who dies without Christ 382 Use 2. Exhort. 1
Branch. Labor to get a part and interest in Christ, 384 2 Branch. Fall in love
with this lovely Savior 387 Try your love to Christ. 1 By the degrees of it p.
389 2 By the fruits of it 391 3 Branch. Labor to render Christ lovely in the
eyes of others 397 1 By commending his beauty. 398 2 By adorning his Gospel 399
Use 3 Consolation. Christ's glorious beauty and loveliness shall be put upon
the Saints. 401, 40^
FINIS.

