We the KNIGHTS, GENTLEMEN, MINISTERS, and FREEHOLDERS Of the COUNTY of
WARWICK,
BEING deeply affected with, and sadly sensible of the present Miseries, which
both our Selves and the whole Nation groan under, We can no longer forbear to
express our Griefs, and declare our Desires and Thoughts of the most probable
means (by Gods assistance) to give some remedy to our present sufferings, and
prevent those yet greater Calamities which threaten our speedy and utter Ruin.

The cause of our present Calamities, (we conceive) proceeds from the many
Revolutions, through Maladministration of Government, and want of the right
Constitution of Parliaments: And that after all our great and intolerable
Sufferings, the vast expense of Blood and Treasure, for our Rights and
Liberties, and Privileges of Parliament (which we take to be the good Old
Cause) we, with most of the Counties of this Nation, have not our
Representatives in a Free Parliament:

We therefore do declare, That we shall not consent to pay any Tax or
Imposition, but by our Representatives freely elected, according to the
Fundamental Laws of this Nation; It being the Indubitate and Indisputable Right
of all the Free born People of England, that no Tax or Imposition whatsoever,
be put upon, or exacted from them, but by their consents had by their
Representatives in Parliament.

And we further declare, That we heartily desire the burying of all Animosities
and Differences, by a full and General Act of Oblivion and Indemnity: And
consideration to be had of Purchasers claiming by Act of Parliament.

And, That no Officer or Soldier who has ventured his life for the freedom
of his Country, and shall continue faithful to those Principles, should be
hereby discouraged, We also declare, That we shall freely and willingly consent
that all such shall receive their Arrears, and be continued so long as the
Parliament shall think fit, in order to the safety and preservation of the
Nation. And that such Liberty be allowed to Tender Consciences as is agreeable
to the Revealed Will of God in the Holy Scriptures.

We also declare, That we shall not be wanting to our Utmost powers, by all
lawful ways and means, to endeavor the effecting of these our Just Desires;
And shall think nothing too dear to hazard for the Redemption of our undoubted
Rights. And hoping that our most Gracious God has yet a Mercy for this
bleeding Nation, We trust that he will more especially move the hearts of those
into whose hands he has put the most power. And that his Excellency General
MONCK, with the Honorable City of LONDON, together with all the good people of
the Three Nations, will concur with us in these so just and reasonable
things, whose Peace, Prosperity and Safety is equally concerned with ours.

[Subscribed by many Thousand hands.]
London, Printed for R. L. at the White Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.


