COSMETICK OR, The Beautifying Part OF PHYSIC.

By which all Deformities of Nature in Men and Women are corrected, Age
renewed, Youth prolonged, and the least Impediment, from a Hair to a Tooth,
fairly amended.

With the most absolute Physical Rarities for all Ages.

Being familiar Remedies, for which every one may be his own Apothecary.

All extracted out of that eminent Physician John Jeams Wecker, never yet
extant in the English Tongue before, but was promised to the world by Mr. Nic.
Culpeper.

London, Printed by Tho. Johnson, at the White Cock in Rood-lane. 1660.

To all truly virtuous LADIES.
Ladies,
THe suspicion and jealousy that every man has of himself, when he is to
publish any thing of novelty to the world, makes a man always willing at that
time to speak something for himself, and in the behalf of what he writes. As
for the presumption of this Address, I am confident it will be easily excused
in me, doing no more than what all the world does, while they endeavor to
serve, with the utmost of their diligence, that Sex, for whose reading this
little Work was chiefly intended. For these Secrets of Nature by which Nature
has taught us how to beautify, and make her self more comely, coming to my
hands, I could not choose but disperse them for the Benefit of those to whom I
owe so great a respect. To speak of the things themselves, they are such, as
the most diligent Searchers into Natures Secrets, have delved out of her most
hidden and concealed Bowels, and composed by them with so much Art, and
Experience, that for the certainty of their Operation, they surpass, I may
boldly say, what ever has been to this purpose yet made. Nor let any think it
irreligion, to make Age endure comely and graceful, or to cover those
deformities by which the decay of Time renders a person not only unhandsom, but
despicable? why should a woman loose one of the chiefest Ornaments of her whole
frame, a long Train of disheveled Hair, if that can be restored by Art, which
has been lost by the malice of some Disease? Why should not the height of
Cleanliness be as much in commendation, as the height of Sluttishness is
discommended? Briefly therefore we shall say once more of this Treatise, That
there is nothing therein contained, but what the poor, as far as they are
concerned (for all Physic it self is not for their purse) may use with profit,
and the Rich both to their profit and pleasure. Therefore Ladies, buy these few
Receipts, and make use of 'um, and if they fail, then never believe me another
time; which displeasure of yours I would not willingly incur, out of my zeal
always to appear,

LADIES, Your most faithful and devoted Servant, L. D.

THE INDEX.
B
Balls against the Plague and Pestilence. Page 137. Burns. Page 102 Biles and
botches. Page 92, 93 Beaurifie the face. Page 107, 108 Breasts made small. Page
116, 117 made less. Page 118 to hinder their growth. ibid. to harden them. Page
119, 120 to make the smooth. Page 117 for those that hang down. Page 119 Black
and blewness of the Eyes and Eyelids. Page 84 Beard caused. Page 69, 70
Baldness. Page 65, 66, 68 Brighten the face. Page 21, 24 Black the face. Page
35 Bunches in the face. Page 37, 93 Body fatted. Page 39 Baths for the body.
Page 40, 41 Baths for the Choleric. Page 40 for the skin. ibid. sweet for
great men. ibid.
C
COuntess of Arnsburgs Perfume. Page 138 Color hair and beard black. Page 49
Cold. Page 59 Cleopatra's Ointment. Page 64, 87, 88 Clefts of the lips. Page 97
Coloring for the face. Page 107, 108 Clefts of the hands etc. Page 113, 114
Clefts of the nibbels. Page 119 Candels to Perfume. Page 135
D
DArkness of sight. Page 14 Dander and Sores Page 87, 90 Dentifrices. Page 125,
126, 127
E
Eyes faulty. Page 10 Eyes red* Page 11, 86, 87 Eyes pained. Page 11 Eyes
bloodshed. Page 13 Eyes dropping. Page 86
F
FAce adorned. Page 15 Face beautified. Page 17 to 25, 53, 54 made fair. Page
25 whitend. Page 25 to 30, 54 Freckels. Page 30, 31, 38 Fucus of the Duke of
Millains. Page 26 Face red. Page 31, 50, 54 Face made red. Page 32 made
youthful. Page 35, 36 Face bunched. Page 36, 37 Fatten the body. Page 39 Face
Colored. Page 42 Fair hands. Page 111
H
HAnds swelled. Page 112 Hair taken away. Page 74, 75, 76, 77 to grow again.
Page 64, 67, 69 made thick. Page 52 made black. Page 48, 60 to grow long. Page
5. 45. 57, 58 made black. Page 6. 56. 60 made yellow. Page 7, 8. 42. 46. 58
made red. Page 8. 50. 58. made white. Page 8. 50 increased. Page 9. 50, 51. 53,
54. 57 shedding of it. Page 9, 10. 59, 60, 61 62 growth hindered. Page 10. 52.
74 made of a Gold color. Page 47, 48, 49 of a Saffron color. Page 44, 45 to
curl it. Page 45 52 hardness of the feet. Page 121
I
ITalian Damask-water. Page 3
K
KNobs under the skin. Page 100
L
LEanness caused. Page 21. 39 Lotions or Lies. Page 42 Lice in the Eyebrows.
Page 82, 83 Lice. Page 90 Leprous. Page 100
M
MUsk-water. Page 1, 2 Mark of the small Pox. Page 38. 104
N
NIts. Page 91 Nails leprous. Page 114 contused. ibid. cleft. ibid. shedding.
Page 115 made to fall. ibid.
O
OIntments brave-scented. Page 122, 123 to yellow hairs. Page 78 to whiten
hair. Page 79. 81 to black the hair. Page 79 to black the beard. ibid. to black
gray hairs. Page 80 to red the hairs. Page 81 to curl the hair. Page 81, 82 for
falling of the hair. Page 82, 83 to make it grow again. Page 83
P
PImples in the face. Page 57, 92 Pain from clefts. Page 119 Powders for the
teeth. Page 124 to whiten Page 127 to fasten them Page 127 Powders to adorn the
hands. Page 126 to whiten them. ibid. Perfumes. Page 129 Pomanders for the
Pestilence. Page 133, 134 Purging Pomander. Page 134 against the Plague. ibid.
Perfuming Candels. Page 135 Perfumes in the form of birds. Page 139 to make
Candels or Troches. ibid.
R
REd hair caused. Page 8 Red face cured. Page 32, 91, 98, 99 Red face caused.
Page 32, 33, 34, 35 Ring-wormes. Page 37, 55, 95, 96, 97, 101
S
SCabs in children. Page 106 Scalds and burns. Page 102 103 face smoothed after
burns. Page 103 Scabby face. Page 99, 105 Scurf in childrens heads. Page 89
Sores of the head. Page 87, 88 Shedding of the beard etc. Page 84 Sweet Waters.
Page 1, 2 Sight preserved. Page 11 restored. Page 12 darkened. Page 13
Sun-burns. Page 25, 97, 100 Skars of the face. Page 27, 28, 54 Spots in the
face. Page 55 Speckels in the face. Page 97 Sweet smelling Soap Page 122 Soap
muskified. Page 123, 136 Sweet and white. Page 123, 124 Sweet bags. Page 129
T
Tears of the eyes. Page 13, 85 Teeth whitened. Page 13 strengthened. Page 14
fastened. Page 15 Thickness of the face. Page 94 Tetters. Page 102 Troches for
Perfumes. Page 137, 138
V
VIolet powder. Page 129, 130, 131, 132
W
WHiten Hair. Page 8 Whiten Teeth. Page 13, 14 Warts in the Face. Page 36. 95,
96 97 Wrinkles of the face. Page 36, 37. 54.92 Whiten Freckles. Page 37 Worms
and Scabs of the head. Page 89 Whiten Skars. Page 93 Whiten the face. Page 108
the hands. Page 109, 110, 111 Warts in the hand. Page 116 Wrinkles after
Childe-bearing. Page 120
OF Ornamental Waters.
OF SWEET WATERS.
SECTION I. A sweet Water for the Body or Garments.
TAke of Rose Water, of Orange-flowers, of Myrtels, of Musk-water, each a pint,
Powder of Oriental Orrice one ounce, Sivet a dram, mix them and boil them in a
Glass vessel, till a third part be wasted, then keep in a Glass vessel very
well stopped.

Another sweet Water.
Take of Rose Water as much as is sufficient, of Musk one scruple, Sivet and
Ambergris, each a little, set them in a Glass vessel by the fire till they
are hot, then stop it well, and keep it for your use.

Another of the same Authors.
Take rose water four pints, benjamin, styrax, cloves, camphire, wood of aloes,
each one ounce, musk and sivet each one scruple, mix them in a glass vessel
well stopped, and boil them four hours in Balneo Mariae, then when it is cold,
strain it, and put it in another glass vessel well stopped, and set it in the Sun
five days, adding fifteen grains more of musk.

The Authors Musk-water.
Take of the best rose water two pints, the best musk one ounce and a half, mix
them and still them in Bal. Mariae with a very gentle fire, then keep it in a
vessel well stopped.

Another.
Take of rose water twelve pints, water of lavender, cloves, cynamon, each one
dram, mace, cardamoms, musk, ambergreece, each half a scruple, citron pill,
yellow saunders, orrice, each half a dram, benjamin, storax-calamite, each one
scruple, mix them all in a glass vial, and put them in Bal. Mariae ten days,
then set it in the Sun fifteen days more, and it will be most excellent.

Another of the same.
Take of rose water four pints, lavender-water six ounces, the water of
jasmine-flowers three pints, musk one scruple, mix them, and when they have
been well stopped up ten days in a vessel, then distill them in Bal. Mariae, and
keep it for your use.

A sweet water of the Italians, which they call Damask-water.
TAke of cynamon one ounce, cloves half an ounce, sweet-marjoram, rosemary,
lavender, Bay Leaves, pennyroyal, green province roses, each a handful,
mallego wine, rose water, each a pint and a half, cut the green things, powder
the dry ones, and set them in the Sun six days, then distill them in a double
vessel: some add to them citron pill, storax calamite, o^rice, each one dram,
and flowers of jasmine, they sprinkle this water on their garments, linen,
hands, and nostrils.

Another.
Take of cloves half an ounce, rose water a pint and half, mix and distill them.

Another pretty fancy.
Put twelve grains of musk into a vessel with a narrow mouth, and put roses or
violets into another vessel, join the mouths of these vessels together, and set
them in the Sun, so that the roses be uppermost, but let their mouths be parted
with a linen cloth; some bruise the roses a little, instead of musk you may
use cloves and cynamon.

Another.
Let the lowest part of the glass be filled with roses, then strew on lillies,
and let every row have cloves strewed on, and a little musk, but let the
uppermost row be of roses, and so distill them.

Or this way is made a most sweet Water.
Take of Roses cut three pound, Cynamon, Cloves, each two drams, Camphure half
a dram, Orrice root half an ounce, Nutmeg, Mace each two drams, put them in a
glass, and pour upon them Candy-wine, Rose, and Lavender-water, each three
ounces, steep them eight days, and distill them, relish it with a scruple of
Musk, and digest it in the Sun five days: you may add also Storax-calamite
and Benjamin.

Another compounded of the former.
Take of rose water a pint, of damask-water, of water of citron pills, of
orrice, each one ounce, storax-calamite half an ounce, cloves two drams, musk,
ambergris, sivet, each one scruple, set them in the Sun fifteen days,
shaking the glass every day, it is excellent for the heart, brain, and stomach.

Of Waters that make the Hair grow long.
TAke of lard as much as is sufficient, shave it very thin, then beat it in a
marble mortar, that it may be like paste, then distill it in an Alembick, and
you shall receive a white liquor, with which you must anoint the Hair.

Another to lengthen the Hair.
Take of streined honey three pints, forty yelks of eggs, mix them and distill
them, and anoint the hair with it.

Another of the same.
Take of fresh Maidenhair bruised, one handful, of the best honey as much as
is sufficient, mix them in the form of a paste, and distill them.

Of Waters that color the Hair.
A Water to make the Hair black.
TAke of Gum-arabick four ounces, chebul and emblick, myrobalanes, each half a
pound; being powdered and distilled by a gentle fire, set them in the sun two
hours, and the head being washed with a Ly, and dried, last of all wet the hairs
with wine and salt, and wash them with the distilled water, but let it not
touch the skin.

Another of the same.
Take of Gum-arabick four ounces, chebul, myrobalanes, roses, each half a
pound, being bruised, distill them with a gentle fire, and let the head, being
first washed with water, and not exactly dried again, be washed with this
distilled water.

Another to black the Hair.
Take of privet and date-stones powdered, each alike, of the water in which
bean rindes and gauls have been boiled, as much as is sufficient, mix them.

Another of the same.
Take of Cypress nuts as many as are sufficient, of red wine, red vinegar, each
alike, boil them together, and with this Decoction wash the hairs.

Another of the same.
Take of the spume of silver, as much as is sufficient, of vinegar, or the
juice of Citrons or Lemons as much as is sufficient, boil them together half an
hour, then wash the hair with it.

Another.
Take of the filings of iron, as much as is sufficient, put it into the
sharpest vinegar for ten days, then wet the hair with it.

Another.
Take of the dross of iron, filings of lead, as much as is sufficient, boil
them in vinegar till one half be wasted, strein it, and wash the hairs.

Another of the same.
Take of Caper roots as much as is sufficient, boil them in Asses milk till a
third be wasted, wash the hairs, and let them alone all night.

Another.
Take of salt Gemm, scales of brass, privet, each alike, powder them, and
distill them in an Alembick.

Another.
Take of salt Gemm one pound, Roman Vitriol half a pound, salt Niter four
ounces, the green roots of Celandine two pound, being bruised and powdered, draw
a water with an Alembick; cast away that which comes out first, but the next
colors the hairs, being first washed and dried in the hot Sun.

Another most excellent.
Take of Aquafortis half an ounce, fine silver two drams, mix them, and when
the silver is dissolved, add of Rose Water three ounces, and wash the hair.

A Water to make the Hair yellow.
Take of the best honey two pints, Gum-arabick two ounces, distill them with a
gentle fire; the water which comes forth first, does whiten the face, the
second and third makes the hair yellow.

Another.
Take of the shaving^ of Box, French Lavender, Citron, Liquorish powdered, the
roots of Coltsfoot, Maidenhair, each as much as is sufficient, a little
Saffron; boil them all together till a third be wasted.

Another.
Take of Agrimony one ounce, one stone of a horse dried, boil them in spring
water and distill them, and use it, the head being first washed.

Another of the same.
Take of vinegar two pints, salt niter half a pound, and distill them.

A Water to make Hair red.
Take of the water of raddish, of privet as much as is sufficient, mix them and
wash the hair.

A Water to make the Hair white.
Take of the greater Cento^y four ounces, the lees of Allom eight ounces,
Roch-allom, Gum-arabick, each two ounces; clean white soap, Gum-tragacanth,
each four ounces, water six ounces, boil them to one half and strein it, and
the head being washed with it, and dried by the sun, last of all wash it with
Lie.

Of Waters that increase the Hair.
A Water to make Hair grow.
TAke of the flesh of snails, wasps, bees, horsleeches, burnt salt, each alike
quantity, put them in a glazed Vessel, having small holes at the bottom like a
sieve, and put under that another glazed vessel, which may receive the moisture
which will drop forth in many days by degrees; take that and rub the places
that have no hair with it.

A Water against shedding the Hair.
Take of pure honey, candy wine, a boys urine, milk, each one pint, and distill
a water, with which you must wash the places from whence the hairs fall.

Another more effectual.
Take of mountain hyssop, mountain calamint, the leaves of southernwood, each
two handfuls, rich Candy wine, piss, honey, milk, each two pints, mustard seed
half a pound, powder those things which ought to be, then mix them, and let
them steep three days, afterward distill the water; the use of which will
suddenly bring forth a beard, and restore hair to bald places.

Of waters that hinder the growing of Hair.
Take of the blood of Frogs, sealed earth, sumach, roses, each a sufficient
quantity; vinegar, juice of house-leek, each enough, steep them 24 hours, then
distill them, and bathe the part often with it.

Another of the same.
Take of a Cowes horn, roch-allom, black Poppy powdered, each a sufficient
quantity, fresh Cows blood two pints, steep and distill them: use it every night.

Another.
Take the decoction of Spurge made with vinegar, unslaked lime, and mallows.

Another.
Take of Henbane powdered half a pound, put it in a moist place, and after a
time adding two ounces of the leaves of Orpin, distill it, and the hairs being
pulled out, often bathe the bare place with it.

Of Waters that take away the faults of the Eyes.
Against tears of the Eyes.
TAke of ripe Strawberries, as much as is sufficient, steep them in horse dung,
fifteen days, then distill them.

Another of the same.
Take of the flowers of white thorn, the flowers or tops of Sallows, and the
leaves of Sallow, each a sufficient quantity, and distill them in a glass vessel.

Against redness of the Eyes.
Take the juices of Celandine, Vervin, Rue, Fennel, each three ounces, the tops
of Rose-leaves as much as is sufficient, Sugar Candy three ounces, the best
Tutty and Dragons blood, each four ounces, prepare them and distill them.

A Water to preserve the Sight.
Take of Myrrh one ounce, Aloes two drams, Saffron one dram, Frankincense,
Ginger, Sarcocol, Camphure powdered, each a little, put them into water and
keep it for your use.

Another.
Take of Fennel, Vervin, Eybright, Endive, Betony, red Roses, Maidenhair, each
three handfulls, bruise them and steep them a day in white wine, and then
distill them.

Another of the same.
Take of Fennel, Celandine, Sage, Rosemary, Vervin, Rue, each a like quantity,
distill them in an Alembick.

A Water against pains of the Eyes.
Take of Rose Water, Eyebright, Celandine, each one ounce, Tutty prepared one
dram, mix them: the water from a vine cut, is good for the same.

A Water to restore the sight.
Take of Fennel, Celandine, Vervin, Rue, leaves of Elecampan, each one handful,
small wild Teasel, Milfoil, each a handful, Camphure half a dram; distill then
in an Alembick.

A Water to dry up tears from the Eyes.
Take of Tutty prepared one ounce, the boodstone half an ounce; Dragons
blood, Acacia, Antimony, each a dram, Camphure two scruples, sealed earth a
dram, Frankincense, Mastick, white Pepper, each half a scruple, water of
Fennel, Eyebright, each one ounce; water of Violets, Roses, each two ounces,
old wine three ounces, boil them all in a double vessel till half be consumed,
and then strein it.

A Water for the redness of the Eyes.
Take of the juice of unripe Grapes two ounces, Aloes a dram and half, bind it
in a linen Cloth, and steep it in the said juice, and at night wet the eyes
with it.

A Water against darkness of the sight.
Take of Tutty prepared four ounces, the juice of unripe Grapes half an ounce,
or five drams, set them in the Sun fifteen days, and adding half an ounce of
Rose Water, sun it fifteen days more, and five days with Eyebright water,
afterward powder the Tutty, and strein it through a fine cotton cloth, and
keep it for your use.

A Water against bloodshed Eyes.
Take the pieces of a Marchesite and burn them, then quench them in old, clear,
common oil, powder them and distill them, and powder them over again with the
reffuse, and distill it again.

Another of the same.
Take of Benjamin one ounce, pure white honey half a pint, Fennel and Rue water
each twelve drams, water of Sweet-marjoram half an ounce, distill them in an
Alembick.

A Water for swellings of the Eyelids, and tears of the Eyes.
Take of Agrimony, Vervin, Fennel, Roses, Celandine, each a sufficient
quantity, being all cut and sprinkled with a little white wine, distill them.

Of Waters that whiten the Teeth.
TAke of salt Arabic, salt Gem, each half a pound, sugared Allom three ounces,
powder and distill them, and rub the teeth with a scarlet cloth dipped in the
water.

Another of the same.
Take of Roch-allom, salt Niter, each one pound, a little Vinegar, being
powdered, dissolve them with Vinegar, and distill them: to every ounce of the
water, add four ounces of juice of Lemons, and rub the teeth with it.

Another.
Take of red Allom six ounces, common Salt three ounces, Mastick one ounce,
Myrrh half an ounce, Cloves six drams, mix and distill them, with which rub the
teeth.

Another.
Take of Salt cleansed and bruised, one pound, of Ice-alume one ounce, distill
them in an Alembick, with an ounce of this water mix an ounce of plantane
water, and rub the teeth with a Cotton cloth dipped in it.

Another precious one.
Take of the first water of honey distilled, which is white, one pint, white
Salt one ounce, Allom half a pound, salt Niter one ounce, water of the leaves
of the Mastick tree one pint, Mastick, White-wine-vineger, each two ounces,
distill them all in Bal: Mar: then rub the teeth with a Mastick stick dipped in it.

Another.
Take of white Wine six ounces, the tops of Myrtil, Servas-tree, Cypress, each
three ounces, Pomgranate flowers, the bark of Nut tree roots, Pellitory of
Spain, Dragons blood, Date stones burnt, red Rose-buds, Cynamon, each one
ounce, bruise them and distill them with a gentle fire; mix with two ounces of
this water, one ounce of burnt Hartshorn, and one ounce of Dragons blood, and
set them in the sun four days, then rub your teeth with it.

A Water to strengthen the Teeth.
Take three Nutmegs, two roots of Ginger, a little Mastick, Pellitory of Spain,
sweet Marjoram, Hyssop, Mint, Rosemary, Sage, Salt, each half an ounce, put
them all into sweet wine, and let them boil till a third part be consumed, then
strein it well, and use it hot.

A Decoction to fasten the Teeth, cleanse, and strengthen the Gums.
Take of the water of Mastick tree leaves, of Rosemary, distilled Vinegar, each
half a pint, Myrrh, Mastick, Bolearmenick, Dragons blood, burnt Alume, each
one ounce, choice Cynamon half a dram, Rainwater three pints, mix them all and
boil them with a very slow fire a quarter of an hour, adding of despumed Honey
half a pint, a little Benjamin: wash the teeth often with this, holding it in
your mouth a while.

Of Waters that adorn the Face.
TAke of the Crum of Barley-bread two pound, of Goats milk three pints, white
wine half a pint, of the four greater cold seeds bruised, each three ounces,
Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh, each one ounce, fresh Beans two pound, or
Beans-flowers three small handfuls, or of dried Beans and red Cicers, each two
pound; Rice half a pound, flowers of water Lillies, Violets, white Roses, each
two small handfuls; ten Eggs, distill them in Bal. Mar. If you add Turpentine
before you distill it, the liquor will be the better, and preserve the face the
longer.

Another of the same.
Take of the Decoction of a Chicken, Capon, or Hen, three pints of the juice of
Lemmons, one pint White wine vinegar, half a pint Bean and Water-lilly-flowers,
each three small handfuls; Camphure and whites of Eggs, each two drams; mix
them and distill them with an Alembick. In stead of the Decoction of a Capon or
Hen, you may use the milk of a white Goat.

Another of the same.
Take of Bran separated from the best grain, and of the strongest Vinegar, each
a sufficient quantity, mix them and make a paste; to which add in the mixing
twelve whites of Eggs, and distill it.

A water to beautify the Face.
Let the water made of the whites of new Eggs through a sponge, with an equal
quantity of Juice of Lemmons, be distilled as Rose Water; afterward add to
this water two ounces or thereabouts, of common Lie, and put into it a whole
Lemmon bruised, after eight days preserve the Juice from it, and mix it with
the water; let the face be first washed with common water and dried, and then
with this distilled water.

Another.
Take of Rosemary, white Tartar, white Wine, each a sufficient quantity, mix
them and distill them in an Alembick.

A water to make the face very fair.
Take two young Pigeons, two pound of Veal, Spurge-seeds cleansed four ounces,
Pine Nuts, sweet and bitter Almonds, the Roots of white and blew Lillies, Beans
bruised and cleansed, Ox-gaul, the Root of Grass Plantane, bastard Dittany,
each as much as is sufficient; one Lemmon cut and cleansed, the crum of white
Bread steeped in Milk, Gumarmoniack dissolved in Vinegar, Privet flowers, each
a sufficient quantity; mix them and distill them with a gentle fire, and put a
little Musk and Benjamin about the top of the neck of the Receiver, and keep it
in a vessel well stopped.

Another.
Take of green Pine-nuts cleansed and cut, as much as is sufficient, put them
in milk three days, every day adding new milk, then distill it with the things
following, viz. Glass powdered four ounces, red Coral three ounces, Sugar Candy
four ounces, Allom one ounce, mix them and make a powder, then take of
Quicksilver killed with spittle, one ounce and a half, twelve new laid Eggs
shells and all, broken and beaten together, Turpentine nine times washed four
ounces, white Sea-periwinkles which Perfumers sell, two ounces, Earth-snails
fifty, bruise them all, and mix them, then put in part into a Glassgoard, and
then part of the powder, afterward part of the Turpentine, last of all part of
the snails, thus laying one upon another till the Goard be full, then add a
sufficient quantity of white Wine, and with a slow fire distill it for your use.

A Mellon Water to beautify the Face.
Take of white Mellons cleansed from the Rine, as many as needs, and cut them
into pieces a finger thick, then take of Sugar'd-allom four ounces,
Burnt-allom, Quicksilver killed, each one ounce, white Sea-periwinkles two
ounces, washed Turpentine one ounce, twelve new laid Eggs bruised with their
shells, white Lemmons cut in pieces, as many as you please, Sugar four ounces,
Goats milk, white wine, each a sufficient quantity, put all these in a
Glass-goard, one upon another, as has been said, then distill them with a
gentle fire, and keep it in a glass vessel for your use.

A complete Goard-water.
Take as many Goards as you please, cleansed from the Rines, and cut in round
pieces, Sugar'd-alume six ounces, Alume one ounce, Myrrh a dram, washed
Turpentine half an ounce, four new laid Eggs bruised, six Lemmons sliced,
Snailes as many as you please, white Wine a sufficient quantity. Powder what is
to be powdered and mix them, laying the first row with Sugar, then with
powders, the third with Snails, the last with Wine, Lemmons, and Eggs, and so
distill them with a gentle fire, then keep it in a glass vessel eight or fifteen
days.

A water to set forth the Face.
Take two Calves feet, twelve pints of rain water, boil away half, then add
one pound of Rice, the Crumb of one Loaf softened in Milk, two pound of fresh
Butter, ten whites of Eggs with the shells, mix them all and boil them, then
distill them; to which at last add a little Camphure and Sugar'd-alume, and it
will be excellent.

Another of the same.
Take of Chrysocol or Borax two ounces, of Roche-alume, Scissil, Squammous,
each one ounce, Camphure two drams, powder them all, then mix them, and put
them in a glass vial filled with spring water, and close stopped, then set it to
the fire two hours, then take it away, and when it is cold put it into another
vial, adding two whites of new laid Eggs beaten well together with the Juice of
unripe Grapes, and you will have a most complete water.

A water to adorn the Face.
Take Eggs cut in pieces, Orange-pills, the roots of Mellons, each as much as
is sufficient, in a large vessel with a long neck distill it by an Alembick with
a strong and careful fire.

Another.
Take of Bean-flowers six handfuls, Lemmon water one pint, Lilly roots eight
ounces, Bean-flour one pound, Gum-arabick and Tragacanth, each one ounce,
distill them, and use it.

Another.
Take of Fennel, Rue, Vervin, Eyebright, Endive, Betony, Mountain-siler, red
Roses, Maidenhair, each six handfuls, infuse them a day and night in white
wine, then distill them in an Alembick.

Another.
Take of white Beans cleansed from the Rine, as much as you please, steep them
in white Wine nine days, then bruise them and put them in again; to which add
Rice boiled in Goats milk, whites of Eggs, each a sufficient quantity, mix them
all, and distill them.

Another.
Take of fresh unripe Barley, Goats milk, whites of Eggs, each a sufficient
quantity, mix and distill them.

Another.
Take of Lemmons, dried Beans, steeped in Wine, Honey, Goats milk, the whites
of Eggs, each a sufficient quantity, mix and distill them.

Another of the same.
Take of Cowes milk in the month of May two pints, three Oranges, five
Lemmons, cut them small, then add of Alume, Sugar, each one ounce, mix them
all, then distill them.

Another to make the Face bright.
Take of the Crumb of white Bread two pound, Bean-flowers one pint, flowers of
Roses, Water Lillies, Lillies, each four pints, Goats milk six drams, Venetian
Flower-deluce one ounce, distill them in Balneo Mariae.

Another of the same.
Take of Turpentine, the whitest Mastick, Tutty prepared, Camphure, Alume, each
four ounces, infuse them three days in sharp Vinegar, then distill them in an
Alembick.

Another.
Take of fresh Grass-plantane one ounce, Rue one handful, Ground Ivy two
handfuls, Borax one ounce, Wood of Aloes one dram, Styrax-calamite half an
ounce, Musk half a scruple, Unguent three ounces, Camphure six drams, the flesh
of a Capon two ounces, Lemmon and Orange Pill, each one pound: distill them.

Another.
Take of Camphure three drams, red Alume, Borax, each six ounces, Musk two
scruples, bruise them all, and then add of Tartar one ounce and half,
Rose Water two pints, mix them well with a spattle, then distill it through a
Filter, and keep it in a Vial well shut, then with a cloth take a drop or two
of the water, and rub the face.

Of Waters that color and whiten the face.
Take of wild Rue, Fennel, Vervin, roots of Betony, Rose-leaves, Maidenhair,
each alike parts, steep them all night in fragrant white wine, and distill them
in an Alembi^k.

Another of the same.
Take of Cuckow-pintle as much as is sufficient, bruise the thicker parts, and
with Rose Water dry them by the Sun three or four times, and pouring more
Rose Water on it, use it.

Another.
Take the white of an Egg, of rocky Borax, Salt, Roche-alume, each one ounce,
powder them severally, mix them with the whites of Eggs and distill them, and so
use it.

Another of the same.
Take of Roche-alume powdered three ounces, whites of Eggs as much as is
sufficient, mix and distill them.

Another.
Take the Flowers of Water-lilly, white Thorn, Elder, Beans, Violets,
Maidenhair, each equal parts, mix and distill them.

Another of the same.
Take of Lytharge powdered half a pound, boil it in three ounces of white wine
Vinegar, and strein it through a cloth, and put it in a glass vessel, then add
Camphure, Jasmine, Alume, Borax, Oil of Tartar, each alike parts, Rose Water as
much as is sufficient, mix them and distill them.

Another approved one of the Authors.
Take of distilled Turpentine two pound, Frankincense three ounces, Maftick,
Dragons, each half an ounce, powder them and mix them with Turpentine-water and
distill them again; then take of fresh Hog's Grease melted, one pound, Cloves two
drams, three Nutmegs, Gold one dram, Silver two drams, powder them finely and
distill them in an Alembick.

Another.
Take of Bean-leaves ten handfuls, Roche-alume one pound and a half,
Sugar'd-alume five drams; Endive, Alume, four ounces and a half, salt Niter
three ounces, the Lees of Alume six ounces, Quicksilver killed three ounces;
distill it with a slow fire, and when it begins to drop increase the fire.

Another of the same.
Take of Jasmine, Alume, Borax, Roche-alume, all powdered, each three ounces,
the whites of Eggs as much as is sufficient; distill them.

Another.
Take of choice Silver, Quicksilver, each one ounce, powder them on a
Marblestone, and adding a little Sublimate, set them in a moist place, and
distill in an Alembick that which is melted.

Another to make the Face bright.
Take of the roots of Lillies, Cuckow-pintle, Dragons, each half a pound; the
Water of Bean-flowers a pint and a half, Rose Water eight ounces; distill them,
adding Musk, Cynamon, each two drams, and wash the face twice a day.

A Water to make the face look white.
Take of live Sulphur one ounce, white Frankincense two ounces, Camphure one
dram, Rose Water a pint, powder them and mix them, and set them in the sun
fifteen days, and wash the face with it at night, but in the morning wash it
with the Decoction of Bran and Roses.

A Water to whiten the Skin, and take away Sun-burn.
Take of Rainwater, the Juice of unripe Grapes, each alike quantity, boil them
together till one half be consumed, then whises it boyls add so much Juice of
Lemmons as was boiled away before, then when it is boiled enough, take it from
the fire and add four whites of Eggs after it is cold, and keep it for your
use.

Another to whiten Freckles, and Skars of the Face.
Take of Aquavitae four times distilled, three parts, the tops of
Rosemary-flowers, two parts, steep them together a day and a night in a vessel
well stopped, then distill them.

The Water of a certain Noble-woman.
Take of Sublimate one ounce, Camphure one dram, powder them very well, then
infuse them in the Juice of Lemmons, Rose Water, white Lilly, Goard, and
Bean-flower-water, each half a pint, set them in the sun fifteen days, and keep
it for your use.

A Fucus or Coloring of the Duke of Millaines.
Take of Goats milk three pints, the Crum of two white Loaves, mix them
together six hours, then add Lemmons cleansed from their pill, twelve whites
of Eggs, Lime, Egg-shell, Venus-shell, each half an ounce, Camphure, Alume, red
Corral, each two drams, Borax one ounce, Cerusse three ounces, mix them and
distill them with care.

Another of the same Authors.
Take of the Flowers of Beans, of Water Lillies, each one pound, the Crum of
white Bread, the Flower of Rice, of Orrice root, of wild Cowcumber, each six
ounces, honey one pint, white Wine, Spring Water, each three pints, mix them
and distill them in Bal. Mariae, adding Goard-seeds cleansed three ounces;
Frankincense, Myrrh, each one ounce, and keep it for your use.

Another to whiten Skars.
Take of the roots of Orrice, wild Cow-cumber, each three pound, the roots of
Marsh mallows, Lillies, each two pound, ripe Grapes half a pound, Dittander
roots three ounces, the plant of Beans, Pellitory of the wall, each one
handful; the Flowers of Water Lillies, Mallows, each a small handful; Barley
bread one pound, steep them in white Wine or Goats whey, and distill them; then
add of Raddish half an ounce, the four greater cold Seeds, each one dram, a
Boys urine half a pint; set them in the sun, and keep them for your use.

Another.
Take of Brimstone, Salt, each half an ounce, Camphure, Tutty, each one dram;
Rose Water two ounces and a half, powder them and mix them.

A Water to whiten the Face.
Take of the Juice of Lemmons one ounce, of Venus-shell five ounces, steep them
till they are dissolved, then add twelve Lemmons sliced, ten whites of Eggs,
Camphure, Borax, each one dram and a half; Water of Pine-apples half a pint,
mix and distill them.

Another of the same Authors.
Take of the scum of Silver half a pound, white wine vinegar three pints, boil
them till a third part be consumed and distill them, then add to the distilled
water Camphure half an ounce, Endive, Alume, Oil of Tartar, Sugar'd-alume, each
one ounce, leave them so till they are dissolved, afterward strein it, and
keep it safe for your use.

A Water for a Red-face.
Take of the roots of round Birthwort, of white and red spatling poppy, each
half an ounce, Orrice roots five ounces, Lilly roots six ounces, red Vetches,
burnt Lupines, each half a pugil; Nutmeg, Cynamon, each half a dram, bitter
Almonds bruised two ounces, Oil of Tartar four ounces, Rainwater two pints,
the blood of a Hare, as much as is sufficient, powder and distill them.

A Water to whiten the Face.
Take of white Roses, the Flowers of Water Lillies, Elder, white Lillies, each
one pound, Bean-flower water half a pint, the crum of bread a sufficient
quantity, twelve whites of Eggs; Frankincense two ounces, powder of Cerusse one
pound, mix them and distill them.

Another of the same.
Take of Goats milk, Flour of Bread-corn, each a sufficient quantity, work them
into the form of a Loaf, and bake it in an Oven, then take the Crum of this
Bread steeped in Goats milk, twelve whites of Eggs and distill them; add to the
distilled water, of Lime one ounce, Camphure, Sugar'd-alume, white Curral, each
two drams, powder and mix them, and distill them again.

Another.
Take of white Tartar, white Wine, Rosemary flowers, each a sufficient
quantity; mix and distill them.

Another very good one.
Take six new laid Eggs, half a pint of Mallego wine, young Pigeons, new Cheese
without salt, each one, eight Oranges, Oil of Tartar three ounces, Cerusse one
ounce, bruise them, mix them and distill them.

Another of the same Authors.
Take thirty Snailes, two pints of Goats milk, Hog's Grease three ounces,
Camphure one dram; powder the Camphure by it self, them bruise them all
together and distill them.

Another.
Take the crum of white bread steeped in a sufficient quantity of Goats or
Asses milk, and distill it.

Another.
Take of Myrrh two ounces, Frankincense, Mastick, each half an ounce, white
Ginger three drams, choice Cynamon, Sublimate, each two drams, Camphure one
dram, the whites of Eggs one pint; powder them and put them in the belly of a
hen, adding three pints of Goats or Asses milk, and distill them.

A Water to whiten the Face, and take away Freckles.
Take of Borax one ounce, Camphure one dram, Roche-alume three drams,
Gum-arabick, Tragacanth, each half an ounce; Sarcocol, ^weet Asa, each two
ounces, Cerusse four ounces, powder them and add the Water of Grass-plantain;
of Lilly flowers, of Broom flowers, of Water Lillies, each half a pint, mix and
distill them.

Another for the same.
Take four young Pigeons, fresh Butter, or the fat of Milk four ounces, the
whites of twelve new laid Eggs, the root of Salomons-seal twelve drams, Borax
two ounces, Flour of Crystal three ounces; Camphure, Endive, Alume,
Sugar'd-alume, each half an ounce; water of Goards twelve ounces, water of sour
Grapes three ounces; powder what is to be powdered, then mix and distill them.

Another excellent one of the same Authors.
Take two pints of white wine vinegar, one pint of Rose Water, water of
Orenge-pills, and Orenge-flowers, each six ounces, Whorehound one handful,
honey half a pint, Musk three grains, Cloves four drams, Sugar'd-alume two
ounces, Mastick one ounce, powder and distill them.

Another.
Take four Lemmons, Sugar Candy half an ounce, the Juice of wild Grapes one
pint four ounces, Asses milk half a pint, the whites of eight new laid Eggs,
the Crum of white Bread three ounces, Camphure one dram and a half,
Bean-flowers two pound, mix and distill them.

Another.
Take the Juice of green Cane, the Juice of Gentian, of Housleek, of Lemmons,
each two ounces; Asses milk six ounces, Bean-flower water two pints, white
Curral three ounces; Venus-shell dissolved in Juice of Lemmons one ounce, Borax
half an ounce; powder and distill them.

Of Waters that make the Face red.
To make the face ruddy, use shavings of Brazzeel dissolved in Rose Water with
a little Camphure.

A Water to color the Face.
Take white young Pigeons, feed them fifteen days with Pine-nuts, then open
them, cast away their heads, feet and bowels, and then take half a loaf,
Sugar'd-alume as much as is sufficient; five hundred leaves of Gold, three
hundred of Silver, the crum of four white loaves soaked in the milk of sweet
Almonds, the marrow of a Calf, or Ox, or Hogsgrease one pound, mix them and
distill them.

A red Water for the Face.
Take five and twenty whites of Eggs boiled hard, a cup full of the milk of
Figs, mix and distill them; then add to this water for every pint, two ounces
of Scissil-alume, Dyers Grain half an ounce, Berries with which Silk is dyed,
two drams; mix them and put them in a glass Vial well stopped, in dung, or in
warm water for eight days, then take them out, and strein and press them very
well; which being done, add again as much Alume and Berries as before, and put
it likewise in dung or warm water for eight days, and strein them again as
formerly; which when it is done three times, add half an ounce of Gum-arabick
to one pint of water, and leave it eight days in a warm place, as before; and
last of all strein it and keep it for your use.

Another more ease, and of less price.
Take of the Glue of fishes dissolved five or six days in white wine, two
ounces, Brazzeel slized, as much as is sufficient, Spring Water a sufficient
quantity, mix and boil them with a very slow fire till it is enough, then add
powder of Alume one ounce, Gum-arabick two drams; mix them, then taking it from
the fire, keep it in a vessel very well stopped.

Another to make the face red.
Take of the Root of Salomons-seal ten ounces, the roots of Sows-bread five
ounces, of Grass-plantane or Cuckow-pintle, one ounce; clean Lard one ounce and
a half, five Lemmons sliced, the Crum of white Bread steeped in milk, as much
as is sufficient; Sublimate, Endive, Alume, each two ounces Roche-alume one
ounce and a half, Venus shell dissolved in the Juice of Lemmons, one ounce; mix
and distill them.

Another.
Take of the roots of the greater Grass-plantane cleansed and bruised, as much
as is sufficient, Spring Water a sufficient quantity; mix and boil them till a
fourth part be consumed, then take it from the fire, and keep it in a vessel
well stopped: also the water distilled from the roots of Grass-plantane, the
roots of Bryony, and the roots of Sows-bread do make the face red.

Another.
Take of the roots of Dragons, or Grass plantane, of white Lillies, of fresh
Lard, each half a pound; Bean-flower water four ounces, Rose Water eight
ounces, Musk, Cynanom, each one dram; powder and distill them.

Another of the same.
Take of Borax one dram, Sublimate two ounces, Camphure half a dram, salt Gem
one dram, salt Alkali, Roche-alume, Endive, Alume, each two ounces;
Plumed-alume, Sugar'd-alume, each half an ounce, Rose Water as much as is
sufficient; boil them in a glass vessel till half be consumed, and keep it for
your use.

Another to color the Face.
Take two ounces of Aquavitae, Bean-flower water, Rose Water, each four ounces;
water of the Flowers of Water Lillies six ounces, Tragacanth powdered one dram,
mix them and set them in the sun for six or eight days, then strein it and keep
it for use: let the face be first washed before you use it.

Another of the same Authors.
Take of Goats milk two pints, one hot white Loaf, the root of Dragons, or
Grass-plantane, the root of Salomons-seal, each half a pound; the head of one
Wether cut, Borax, Endive, Alume, each half an ounce, the Juice of Lemmons,
Venus-shell dissolved in the same, Cerusse, each one ounce; Litharge,
Sublimate, each half an ounce; powder what is to be powdered, and cut small
that which is to be cut, then mix and distill them.

Another.
Take of Cerusse two ounces, Sublimate one ounce, Plumed-alume, Endive, Alume,
each half an ounce, Borax two drams, Camphure one dram Sugar Candy two
scruples, Roche-alume one scruple; powder them and tie them up in a linen
cloth, then add a young white Pigeon cleansed and cut in small pieces, boil
them all together in Goats or Asses milk till the flesh be severed from the
bones, afterward distill them all in an Alembick.

Another.
Take of Snails, salt Gem, Juice of Lemmons, each a sufficient quantity, being
cut and powdered mix them well, and distill them in Balneo Mariae.

Another.
Take 12 Lemons sliced, the Juice of Bryony, white wine, each a sufficient
quantity, the whites of three Eggs, mix and distill them.

Of Waters that black the Face.
With Chemical Instruments extract a most clear water, from green Walnut-shells
and Gauls; with which if you wet the face or hands, they grow black by
degrees, like to an Ethiopian; which if afterward you would restore to their
former whiteness, you must distill Vinegar, Juice of Lemmons and Colophonia, and
washing with that will take off the blackness.

Of Waters that make the face youthful.
Take of Live-sulphur one ounce, Olibanum, Myrrh, each two ounces, Ambergreece
six drams, powder and mix them, adding a pint of Rose Water, then distill them
and keep the water in a vessel well stopr^; which if any one will use, at night
when he goes to bed let him wash his face, and in the morning with spring
water, and it will be most comely.

Another.
Take two Calves feet, River-water nine quarts, boil them till one half be
wasted, then add one pound of Rice, the crum of a Loaf mollified in milk,
fresh Butter two pound, ten whites of Eggs with their shells, mix them all and
boil them, then distill all the water from them; to which add at last Camphure
and Sugar'd-alume, each a little, and it will be excellent.

Another.
Take two ounces of Aquavitae, Bean-flower water, and Rose Water, each four
ounces; water of Water Lillies six ounces, mix them all, and add to them one
dram of the whitest Tragacanth, set it in the sun six days, then strein it
through a fine linen cloth: you must use it in the morning, and not wipe it off.

Of Waters that take away spots in the Face.
A Water for Warts and bunchings out in the Face.
TAke of salt Ammoniack, Roman Vitriol, Verdegrease, each two ounces, red Alume
an ounce, unslaked Lime half an ounce, distill them in a glass Alembick; cast
away the first liquor, the second is more effectual, and to be kept for your
use.

A Water for wrinkles of the Face.
Take of the Decoction of Bryony and Figs, each alike quantity, and wash the
face with it.

For Ring-worms of the Face.
Take 4 ounces of the water of sour Dock, Borax three drams, common salt one
dram, Vinegar of Squills one ounce, mix them.

To prevent them.
Take of the best white Wine-vineger three ounces, the Juice of sour Dock, the
Juice of Lemmons, each three drams, Lytharge of Gold one pound, boil them
gently, then distill them and keep it for use.

A Water to whiten the Specks or Freckels of the Face.
Take three parts of the best Aquavitae, two parts of Rosemary-flower, steep
them together a day and a night, then distill them.

A Water that takes away all troubles whatsoever from the Face.
Work the Flour of Bread-corn with Goats milk, bake a Loaf of it gently, and
draw it before it be too much, leave the crum of this bread broken into small
pieces, steeping in fresh Goats milk for six hours, mix with it the water of
twelve whites of Eggs made with a sponge, Egg-shells calcined one ounce,
Camphure, Sugar'd-alume, white Corral, each two ounces; powder them all,
incorporate them with the liquors, and distill them in a glass Alembick.

Another for Wrinckles.
Take one Pomegranate, hollow it and cleanse it from the inward parts, then
infuse it in whey and wine, each a sufficient quantity, and boil them till the
wine be evaporated, then use it.

For Freckles of the face.
Take Rose Water, Juice of Lemmons, each eight ounces Sublimate two drams, four
whites of Eggs, mix them all well, then set it in the sun for eight days, and
keep it for your use.

Another.
Take four pints of Asses milk, one pint of white Wine, the crum of two new
Loaves, twelve Eggs with their shells, Sugar Candy three drams, bruise and
distill them.

A Water to take away the marks of the Smallpox.
Take of Mastick, Myrrh, Hepatick-Aloes, Nard, Dragons blood, Olibanum,
Opoponax, Bdellium, Carpobalsame, Saffron, Gum-arabick, liquid Styrax, each two
drams and a half, powder them all, and with Turpentine the weight of them all,
distill a liquor with glass instrumen^s. Water from Beans, Calves, Ram^, Hogs
feet, of Honey, of the root of Grass-plantane, Lemmons, O enges, Bean-flowers,
Egg-shells, will do the same.

Of Potions that adorn the Body.
A Potion to make the Body fat.
TAke of the flour of Vetches, Beans, Barley, Rice, each alike parts, flour of
Lentils, white Poppy, each half as much: flour of bread corn, Turky-millet,
each alike quantity, Sugar twice as much, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
Sheeps milk, of which let him take one cup every morning fasting, sleeping upon
it half an hour.

Another of the same.
Take of Milk, Spring Water, each one pint, boil them together till the water
be consumed, then add Sugar of Penidies, fresh Butter, each one ounce, Oil of
sweet Almonds newly drawn, half an ounce, give them one boiling more, and so
let it be taken fasting, and sleeping upon it.

A Drink to make the body lean.
Take of round Birthwort one dram, the lesser Centory one scruple, Gentian,
Poly, Parsley, each three drams, powder them and take them with white Wine
fasting.

Of Baths to mundifie the Body.
Take of Pellitory of the wall, Mallows, Bears-breech, Violet leaves, each one
handful, whole Barley two pugils; Violet, Chamemel-flowers, each three pugils;
make a Decoction in rainwater, and with that make a Bath, with which wash
fasting, afterward when the Body has sweated in the bed, wipe it carefully.

Another to cleanse the Body, and make it comely.
Take of Sage, Lavender-flowers, Rose-flowers, each two handfuls, a little
Salt, boil them in water or in a Lie, and make a Bath not too hot, in which
bathe the body two hours before meat.

Another of the same.
Take of Rose Water, Vinegar, Salt, each as much as is sufficient, make a
Decoction with Spring Water; of which take two cups full, and a sufficient
quantity of Bran, mix them and rub the body with it, then wash with warm water,
or with a sweet Bath.

A Bath for faults of the Skin in Choleric Bodies.
Take of Barley cleansed three pugils, of Marshmallows, Mallows, Violet
leaves, each three handfuls, Beets, Pellitory of the wall, Bugloss, Burrage,
each one handful, the seeds of Goard, Citrul, Mellon, Cowcumber, Flax,
Fenigreek, each two drams, flowers of Violets, Roses, Water Lillies, Lillies,
each two handfuls; make a Decoction with the head and feet of a ram, and make a
warm Bath.

A stronger Bath for faults of the Skin.
Take of the roots of Lillies, Grass-plantane, Bryony, each one pound, Burrage,
Bugloss, Fumitory, Sope-wort, each two handfulls, Pellitory of the Wall,
Maidenhair, Mallows, Violet leaves, each one handful; whole Barley, Beans
blanched, Rice, each three ounces; Flowers of Melilot, Chamemel, Rosemary,
Mallows, Violets, each two pugils; roots of Orrice, Niter, each a sufficient
quantity, make a Decoction for a Bath.

A sweet-scented Bath for Noble-women.
Take of Roses, Citron pill, Citron flowers, Orange flowers, Jasmine, Bays,
Rosemary, Lavender, Mint, Pennyroyal, Spring Water, each a sufficient quantity,
boil them together gently and make a Bath, to which add Oil of Spike six
drops, Musk five grains, Ambergreece three grains, sweet Asa one ounce; let her
go into the Bath two hours before meat.

Of Lotions or Lies that adorn the Hair.
A Lie to make the Hair fair.
IF you would have your hair fair, and sweet cented, wash your head with Galens
Lie, called The distilled Lie, which is made of a little ashes of a Vine burnt,
of the Knots of Ba ley straw, and liquorish Sowes-bread, and whiles the head is
combed, sprinkle the hair with the powder of Cloves, Roses, Nutmeg, Cardamom
and Galingale, with Rose Water, dipping the Comb also in it: also they are made
fair, being often washed with the Decoction of Beech-tree nuts.

Another to make the Hair yellow.
Take of Dyers Madder, yellow French Lavender, Maidenhair, Wormwood, Lupines,
each a sufficient quantity, put them in water or a Lie, in a glass vessel for
nine days, stirring of it every day twice, and steep a sponge in it, with which
wash the hair, and after it is dried, wash it with warm water and soap.

To make the Hair of a Gold color.
Take of Barley straw, the rine of Liquorish, shavings of Box, leaves of Box,
Saffron, Cummin, each a sufficient quantity; the Lie of the ashes of prunings
of Vines, as much as is sufficient, boil them all well and make a Lie, with
which if the hairs be often washed, they will be exceeding yellow, and like the
color of gold.

To make it yellow.
Take of the Lie of Vines, as much as is sufficient, to wash the hairs once,
the flowers of Mullein, French Lavender, the roots of Celandine, each one
pugil, boil them together; let the head be first washed with a common Lie, and
being dried, wash it with this decoction, and dry it by degrees with hot linen
clothes. The Italian women boil in a common lie the flowers of French Lavender
bruised, and the shavings of yellow Sanders.

Another for the same.
Take of the shavings of Box, French Lavender, Citron pill, Liquorish powdered,
the roots of Coltsfoot, Maidenhair, each a sufficient quantity, a little
Saffron, boil them in water till a third part be consumed, strein it and wash
the head, and anoint the comb with it.

Another of the same Authors.
Take of Barley straw, as much as is sufficient, Myrtle-flowers, shavings of
Box, Saffron, Cummin, Privet, each three drams, boil them in a Lie of Vines,
with which wash the head.

Another.
Take of Lupines one ounce and a half, Myrrh one ounce, Stavesacer, white
Tartar, each half an ounce, boil them in a Lie, and wash the hair.

Another.
Take of Oat straw, the roots of Celandine, Agrimony, the shavings of Box,
Vine-ashes, Oat ashes, each a sufficient quantity, make a Lie with warm water,
and wash the head.

A Lie to dye the hair of a Saffron color.
Take Lie in which a little Rubarb has bin dissolved, will dye the hair of a
Saffron color.

Another.
Raw Lupines anointed on the hair with water and Niter, do make them yellow,
says Galen.

Another.
Take of Lupines powdered, Myrrh, each five drams, salt Niter, white Tartar
burnt, each three drams; the Lie of prunings of Vines, a sufficient quantity,
mix them and with this wash the hairs in the sun with a sponge or comb.

Another.
Take the rine of Barberries half an ounce, the root of Liquorish two ounces
and a half, Spleen-wort, Oakfern, each one handful; make a Decoction in water
or Lie, strein it, and to one pound, add common honey one ounce, water of
Grass-plantane, of Cuckow-pintle, each half an ounce, mix them and with a
sponge or comb dye the hairs in the sun.

Another.
Take of Tartar calcined half an ounce, the roots of privet two ounces, Raddish
roots three ounces, bruise them well and boil them, rub the hairs when you go
to bed, and in the morning wash it with the Lie of Vines.

Another.
Take the Lie of the ashes of the wood of Ivy unbarked, wash the head often,
and the hair will become yellow.

A Lie to make the hair red and curled.
In Bononia they wash them in a Lie of prunings of Vines, in which the shavings
of Box and Citron pill are steeped. In Italy also they say, that a Gentian root
will do the same.

A Lie to make the hair yellow, bright, and long; and to help the Memory.
Take so much common Lie as will wash the head ten times, six sweet Orange
pills, Citron pill as much as you please, Chamemel flowers, Bay Leaves,
Maidenhair, each one handful, Agrymony half a handful, Barley straw cut, three
handfuls, dry Lupines a handful, Fenigreek two handfuls, burnt Tartar half a
pound, Flowers of Matweed five handfuls, mix them and put them in some great
vessel, and keep it for your use: when you would use it, take a little out of
the vessel, and heat it in another vessel, and add if you please, a little
Myrrh and Cynamon, and so it will be excellent.

A Lotion for the Hair.
Take the lees of Alume eight ounces, Centory one pound, Gum-arabick,
Starch-corn, each three ounces, white Soap one ounce, River-water one pint, mix
them and boil them till a fourth part be wasted; after that the head has been
washed with a Lie, let this water dye them with a sponge in the sun.

A Lie to make the hair yellow.
Take the flowers of Mullein one handful, Fenigreek two ounces, Vine ashes, the
wood of Ivy ashes, each one handful, Rainwater ten points, boil them together
till one half be consumed; strein it, and add four pound of the whitest Soap,
Saffron two drams, mix them and set them in the sun for one month, with which
dye the hair in the sun with a sponge or comb.

Another for the same.
Take of the Lie made of the ashes of the wood of Ivy, as much as is
sufficient, the flowers of Mullein, St. John's Wort, Fenigreek, each as much as
is sufficient, boil them and make a Lie, with which wash the hair.

Another.
Take of the Lie of prunings of Vines, the flowers of Mullein, French Lavender,
the shavings of Butchers-broom, the roots of Celandine, each a sufficient
quantity, boil them and wash the hair.

A Lie to make a Gold color.
Powder the stems and roots of Coleworts, and mix them with the shavings of Box
or Ivory powdered, and with those Powders make a Lie, which will do the
business.

Another for the same.
Take of the Lie of Vine ashes, as much as is sufficient, Saffron, white Soap,
each a sufficient quantity, mix them.

Another.
Take of the Lie of prunings of Vines, Pennyroyal, each a sufficient quantity;
mix, boil them, and wash the hair.

Another.
Take of the Lie made of Colewort ashes, a sufficient quantity, the roots of
Agrimony, Salt, each as much as will suffice, a little Aloes, boil them
together, then add Saffron, Rubarb powdered, each a little, mix them and make
a Lie, with which wash the head at night, and wrap it up with a hor linen
cloth, and next morning they will be yellow.

Of Lies that color the Hair black.
Take of the Juice of the rine of Walnuts, three pints, Litharge powdered one
pound, mix them together with a Lie, and wash the hairs.

Another.
Take of the rines of Fig Tree, Gauls, Datetree, Brambles, Cypress, each a
sufficient quantity, mix them and make a Lie to wash the hair.

Another for the same.
Take of Fig Tree leaves, of black Vine, of Mulberry leaves, each one pound,
Rainwater a sufficient quantity, steep them one day, then boil them and wash
the hair.

Another.
Take a sufficient quantity of common Lie, leaves of Beets one handful, Sage
three or four handfuls, Myrrh, Bay Leaves, the rines of green Nuts, each a
sufficient quantity, mix and boil them, and so wash the head; then in the end
wash the face and neck with a simple Lie.

Another.
Take of Myrtle-berries, Sumach, Sage, Cypress Nuts, Citrine, and Chebul,
Myrobalans, common Lie, each a sufficient quantity, boil them all together till
a third part be consumed, and make a Lie to wash the head.

Another.
Take of Indian Myrobalanes, Gauls, Cypress Nuts, Pomegranate flowers,
Myrtleberries, each one ounce; Roche-alume half an ounce, salt Gem one dram,
powder them and boil them in water, with which wash the hair.

Another.
Take of common Lie a sufficient quantity, Litharge of Gold one pound, boil
them awhile together, then take them from the fire, and add Oil of Tartar half
an ounce, mix them and anoint the hair.

Another.
Take of common Lie two parts, the ashes of Mast-tree, salt Niter, each one
part, mix them and wash the hair.

Another to color the hair and beard.
Take of the scum of Silver, burnt Brass, each one part, of the strongest Lie
four parts, boil them with a gentle fire, and when it rises in bubbles, wash
the hair, and when they are drid again, sprinkle them with warm water.

Another.
Take the water of Stillatory, in which put four iron needles till they are
dissolved, and yellow Arsnick powdered, and with a feather wet the comb with
the same water, and comb the hair by the fire side, or in the sun, but so as it
touch not the skin.

Of Lies to color the Hair red.
Take of Lupines powdered ten drams, Myrrh half a dram, the flowers of Sallow,
burnt Tartar, each three drams, being powdered, put them in a Lie, and boil
them till they are thick, with which dye the hairs.

Another.
Take of Sumach two ounces, Gauls three ounces, Madder two ounces, Maidenhair,
Wormwood, each one ounce, Lupines husked two handfuls, water ten pints, steep
them for some days, then wash the hair.

Of Lies that color the Hair white.
Take of the greater Centory four ounces, the Lees of Alume eight ounces,
Roche-alume, Gum-arabick, each two ounces, clean white Soap, Gum-tragacanth,
each four ounces, clear water six ounces, boil half away then strein it, and
the head being washed with that, and dried in the sun, last of all wash it with
a Lie.

Another.
Take of Vine ashes one pound, water six pints, and make a Lie.

Of Lies to lengthen the Hair.
Take of Agrimony, Elm bark, Vervin, Rainwater, each a sufficient quantity, mix
and boil them till a third part be wasted, with which wash the hair once every
week.

Another for the same.
Take the rine of Sallow, Wormwood, Southernwood, dried Roses, Water, each a
sufficient quantity, mix and steep them for a whole Friday and Sunday, boil
them till a third part be wasted, and wash the hair.

Another.
Take a sufficient quantity of Goats Milk Whey, the ashes of a Cane, Flax-seed,
each a sufficient quantity, boil them together, strein it, and make a Lotion
for the hair.

Another.
Take of Maidenhair, Emblick, Myrobalanes, Sorrel, each a sufficient quantity,
boil them in water, strein it and add a little Myrrh, and make a Lotion for
the hair.

Of Lies to increase the Hair.
Take of Agrimony, Elm bark, the roots of Sallow, Southernwood, Marsh-mallowes,
white Popler buds, ashes of Colewort-stalks, water, each a sufficient quantity;
make a Lie to wash the hair.

Another of the same.
Take of Bears-breech, common Lie, each a sufficient quantity, boil them and
wash the hair.

Another to make the hair thick.
Take of Agrimony, Elm bark, roots of Vervin, roots of Sallow, Southernwood,
Flax-seed burnt, Cane-roots, each a sufficity, mix them all and boil them in
Goats milk or water, and wash the hair.

A Lotion to increase the hair.
Take of Maidenhair three ounces, Labdanum, Myrtle, a Goard burnt, each one
ounce, ten pints of water, powder them and steep them twenty days, every day
mixing them, then boil them till a third part be consumed, and make a Lie to
wash the head.

Another.
Take a sufficient quantity of white Wine, the ashes of Maidenhair burnt, a
pretty good quantity, boil them together to wash the hair.

A Lotion to hinder the growth of hair.
Take the Decoction of Spurge, mixed with Vinegar, unslaked Lime, and Mallows.

A Lotion to make the hair curl.
Take the roots of Marshmallows boiled in water, press them and strein them,
and add to it the seed of Flax, Fleawort, each a sufficient quantity,
afterward strein it and mix it exactly, and rhen wash the hair.

Another.
Take the flour of Fenegrick, Henbane, Litharge of gold, each equal parts, put
them in a Lie, with which wash the hair.

Another.
Take of the roots of Fern, the leaves of Beets, each a sufficient quantity,
boil them together till a third part be consumed, then take it from the fire,
and add of Gum-arabick as much as will suffice, mix them and make a Lotion,
with which wash the hair, and when they are dried, wet them with Oil of Myrtles.

Of Oils that adorn the Face.
An Oil to beautify and take away black Pustels.
TAke Tartar of white Wine broke into pieces, wrapped in a linen cloth wet with
strong vinegar, or wrapped in Colewort leaves and course Flax under the hot
ashes, till it may be reduced into an exact Powder; which set in an earthen
vessel bending downwards four or five days in the sun, then with the Oil that
does distill anoint the face, it being first washed with warm water and Soap, and
then dried with Bran-water.

Another used by the Venetian Curtizans.
Take of burnt Tartar half a pound, powder it and dry it as they do salt, then
take that salt and put it within the whites of Eggs boiled.

An Oil to clear and whiten the Face.
Take twelve yelks of Eggs boiled hard, half a cup of Oil of the Mastick tree,
a double quantity of Turpentine washed, mix them and boil them awhile together,
then draw an Oil with a press, with which anoint the face at night.

An Oil to cure a red Face.
Take four ounces of Peach Kernels, Goardseed two ounces, bruise them and make
an Oil to anoint the face morning and evening.

An Oil to color the Face.
Take of common Oil, Rosemary-flowers, each one part, mix them and put them in
a glass vial under horse dung, for three weeks or a month, then strein it and
set it in the sun for some days, and so use it.

Oils to take away the wrinkles of the face.
Oil of Turky-miller, and the Decoction of its Berries, do distend, mollify,
and consolidate wrinkles; also Oil of Nuts is good.

Another.
Oil of Tartar takes away wrinckles of the face; also Oil of bitter Almonds,
and Oil of Lillies.

An Oil to take away Skars.
Oil of Dates avails much to blot out the marks of the Skars.

An Oil for Pimples of the face.
Bruise Walnuts and boil them, till an Oil from them does swim above water,
which use

An Oil for Spots in the face.
Take of Rosemary-slowers, as much as is sufficient, bury them in a glass
vessel under dung safe from rain, keep it thirty days, and that which is
dissolved, expose to the sun for nine days, with powder of Polypodie mixed, as
much as you can take in three fingers; of which take every day for a month.

An Oil for a Ringworm in the face.
Take a green live Lizard, boil it in wine and oil, till the wine be consumed,
then strein it and use it. Oil of Mezereon, Oil of Ash, Oil of Eggs, do
likewise take away all spots and speckles of the face.

Oils to preserve and increase the Hair.
FIll a wild Goard, (casting away that which is in it) with Oil of Bays, and
adding Henbane-feed and yellow Arsnick, anoint the hairs.

To increase the Hair.
Take the seeds of Marshmallows, a sufficient quantity, boil them in common
Oil, with which anoint the hairs.

Another.
Also the Oil of Earth-vvorms does increase the hair.

Another.
Take of sour Grapes juiced, six ounces, Oil of Mastick, Oil of Myrtle, Oil of
Labdanum, each two ounces, Maidenhair four ounces, boil them till the Juice of
Grapes be consumed, and anoint the hair with the Oil.

Another.
Take a wild Goard cleansed from the inward parts, in the hollow of which put
as much Oil of Mastick-tree as it can contain, a little Saffron, boil them
together till a third part be consumed, and use it.

Oil of Southernwood does produce hair.
It is made as Oil of Rue, it is good to cause hair grow; and in shedding of
hair it is anointed with Labdanum and Bears fat.

Of Oils that color the Hair.
An Oil to black it.
Oil made of green Lizards does black the hair.

Another.
Take of Privet, Vitriol, common Oil, each a sufficient quantity, set them to
the fire till they begin to boil, then keep it to anoint the hair.

Another.
Take of the Juice of the rines of Sallow, common oil, or Oil of Costmary, each
a sufficient quantity, mix them and anoint the hair.

Another.
Take a hundred green Nuts, common Oil a pint and a half, liquid Alume three
pound, put all these together into a new earthen vessel first made wet, and
being carefully anointed about, set is in a place not too moist nor too hot,
and let it be under the earth three months, then take it away and use the Oil.

Another.
Take the Juice of red Poppy, the Juice of green Nuts, Oil of Myrtles, Oil of
Costmary, each one part, boil it a while and anoint the hair.

Another.
Take of Emblick, Myrobalanes one ounce, of the binding Bean-tree ten drams,
Gauls, Acorn-cups, Myrtle-berries, Sumach, each ten drams, Oil of unripe
Olives, Oil of sweet Almonds, each eleven ounces, Labdanum three ounces, a
little Vinegar; mix them and boil it till the Vinegar be consumed, and so use
it.

Another.
If a wild Goard, the seeds being taken out, be filled with Oil, or as others
will have it, with Oil of Bays, and the whole seeds of black Henbane, and be
set so a day and a night in a warm place, and the hairs be anointed with the
oil, it blacks them, and keeps off gray hairs.

An Oil to make the hair yellow.
Take of choice Myrrh, the root of the greater Madder, the root of Celandine,
each alike parts, powder them all, and boil them in oil in which shavings or
pieces of Box and Saftron have been first boiled; with this anoint the hair,
being often washed with a Lie made of the spirits of Beans and Barley.

Another to make them long, yellow, and as bright as Gold.
Take of Oil of Turkey-millet one measure, flowers of Matweed cut, three
ounces; white Lilly-seeds one ounce, Turmerick two drams, Saffron half a dram,
Cynamon, Benjamin, Musk, Sivet, each a little; mix them all and put them in a
glass Vial, and set it in the sun a whole summer; with this Oil anoint the
comb, then comb the hair in the sun, and cover the head combed with a warm
cloth gen^ly that it do not press it.

An Oil to dye the hair red.
Take of burnt Tartar, Oil of Mastick, Rozen of the Pine Tree, each as much as
is sufficient, mix and anoint the hair with it.

Oils to lengthen the hair.
Take three green Lizards, Oil of Myrtles, as much as is sufficient, boil them
together till their flesh be dissolved, and anoint the comb.

Another of the same Authors.
Take of Emblick, Myrobalanes, a sufficient quantity, steep them in Oil of
Turky-millet till they swell, then boil them together a quarter of an hour.

An Oil to preserve Travelers from cold.
First chafe the extreme parts well, then anoint them with the oil of
Euphorbium heated, with oil of Pellitory of Spain, and oil of Peppers.

Of Ointments that hinder shedding the hair.
Take of Labdanum steeped in ^owr wine, and powdered, a sufficient quantity,
Oil of Myrtles what will suffice; mix them and make an Unguent, wi^h which
anoint the hair before bathing.

Another of the same.
Take two parts of Labdanum, Oil of Myrtles, Wine, each a sufficient quantity,
Maidenhair one part, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Myrtle-berries, Labdanum, each three ounces; with the Decoction of
binding Bean-tree, boil it to a thickness, then add Oil of Nard or Myrtles, a
sufficient quantity, make an Unguent.

Another to preserve the hair, and make them black.
Take of Myrtle-berries, seeds of Smallage, Beets, sprouts of Myrtles, each a
pint and a half; Maidenhair, Labdanum, each twelve ounces, black wine seven
pints, boil them till they are wholly dissolved; and when a third part is
remaining, add four pints and a half of Oil of Myrtles, and boil it again till
it is thick.

Another to preserve the hair.
Take a pint and a half of Candy-wine sodden, Labdanum one ounce, the ^ine of
Pinenuts burnt, two ounces; Maidenhair burnt, one ounce, Bears-grease one
pound, juice of Beets three cups full, boil the Labdanum and Wine till they
come into one body, then put in the rest, and taking them away, keep it in a
leaden vessel.

Another.
Take Small age seeds two ounces, Maidenhair, Frankincense, each two ounces,
fifteen Walnuts, Labdanum two ounces, rines of Pine-nuts one pound, put them
all into a new earthen vessel well stopped with clay, and burn them in the
furnace of a bath, then take them out and powder them, and add of Bears fat one
pound, work them into a body and put them in an oaken or Cypress Box; and at
time of use, take as much as will be needful, and beat it up with what sweet
ointment you please, and anoint the head with it twice a day

Another.
Take of dried Coleworts a sufficient quantity, powder it, and with water bring
it into the form of an Unguent, and use it.

Another.
Take Labdanum sprinkled with sour wine, powder it, and with Oil of Myrtles and
wine poured to it by course, bring it to the thickness of Honey, and anoint the
head with it before and after a bath.

Another.
Take Juice of sour Grapes, or unripe wine, a pint and a half, Labdanum one
ounce, the rine of Pine-nuts burnt two ounces, Maidenhair burnt three ounces,
the fat of a Bear or Duck four ounces, Juice of Nightshade half an ounce; boil
the Wine and Labdanum together, then add the rest and keep it for use.

Another.
Take of Labdanum, Maidenhair, Oil of Myrtles, each one dram, Rue two drams,
old wine a sufficient quantity, bruise and mix them, then add enough Bears
fat, and make an Unguent.

Archigene's Ointment against falling of the Hair.
Take of Labdanum, Wormwood, each equal parts, ten Juniper Berries, Oil as much
as is sufficient; bruise, mix them, and reduce them into the form of an Unguent.

Another of the same Authors.
Take of black Maidenhair, black Myrtles, each equal parts, the double quantity
of Gauls; with Oil of Mastick or Myrtles, bring to the thickness of Honey, and
use it.

Another.
Take of Frankincense, Vitriol, Gauls, Maidenhair, each equal parts, powder
them in the sun and bring them with Wine to the thickness of Honey, or boil
them gently till they look black, then mix them with Oil of Mastick or Myrtles,
and so use it.

Another.
Take of Wormwood, the rine of Pine-nuts, leaves of Myrtle, Maidenhair, each a
sufficient quantity, burn them to ashes; to which add Labdanum powdered,
Myrrh, each equal parts; Oil of Raddish-seeds, old wine, each as much as is
sufficient, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Labdanum steeped in wine and powdered Oil of Myrtles, each one part,
mix them and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take the Juice of binding Bean-tree, Labdanum, each three drams, Oil of
Myrtles, Wine, each half an ounce, mix them to an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Gauls, Indian Myrobalanes, leaves of Myrtles, each equal parts, boil
them in Wine, strein them, and boil it again to a thickness, then add Labdanum,
Mastick, each one ounce, oil of unripe Olives, water, each one pint, boil them
again to a thickness.

Another.
Take of Labdanum th^^e ounces, Gauls, Myrrh, Mastick, Frankincense, each one
dram, wild Carduus two drams, dissolve them all in oil of Roses, and so use it.

Another.
Take of the Juice of Myrtle-leaves, the Juice of wild Olives, each two
ounces, dried Roses half an ounce, Roman Wormwood two drams, Vinegar half a
pint, boil them together till one half be consumed, strein it, and add Labdanum
two ounces; to all which well bruised, add Oil of Myrtles, Juice of sour
Grapes, as much as will suffice to make it thick as honey, Maidenhair powdered
three drams, Gallia Moschata one dram or two, and make an Ointment.

Another.
Take of Myrtle-berries, the rine of Reeds burnt, the rine of Pine-nuts burnt,
each half an ounce; leaves of Myrtles, Wormwood, each two drams, powder and mix
them with Oil of Myrtles to the form of an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Maidenhair burnt, Myrtle-leaves, the rine of Pine burnt, each equal
parts; Frankincense, Labdanum alike, powder them and mix them with the oil of
Raddish-seeds and Wine, into the form of an Unguent.

Of Ointments to restore the Hair.
Cleopatra's Ointment to engender Hair.
WHen you have bruised the roots of tender Reeds, press forth the Juice and mix
dried Flies with it into a pulstise, and when you have wrought it together and
mixed it with Bears fat and oil of Cedars, use it to anoint with; but to take
away the smell of it, pour some wine to it.

Another of Cleopatra's.
Burn dried Flax seed together with the stubble of Flax, and being powdered,
lay it on with oil of Turky-millet.

Another.
Lay upon the Hair burnt Bees mixed with Honey.

Another to make the hair grow again.
Take oil of Juniper, oil of Nuts, each one ounce, white honey, juice of Dock,
each half an ounce, Smallage-seeds, Asarabacca powdered, each two ounces,
incorporate them and anoint the place.

Another.
Take the roughest foam of the Sea burnt, and powdered and smoothed with oil,
lay it on the place, but especially let it be Lampoyl.

Another.
The shells of Sea Hedge-hogs burnt, and wrought together with Bears-grease,
lay upon the places, being first rubbed.

Another.
Take the roots of Reeds burnt, mix them with Bears-grease, and lay it on the
place.

Another of Orestinus against an old Baldness.
Take of Mouseturd, Frankincense, each two ounces, dissolve them in the
sharpest Vinegar, and anoint the place, first shaved.

Another of the same.
Take of Sea-Hedge-hogs burnt together with their shells, unripe Gauls, bitter
Almonds burnt, each two ounces, Mouseturd one dram, powder them well and
dissolve them in vinegar, and lay them on.

Another.
Take the hairs of a Bear burnt, Maidenhair burnt, the roots of Reeds burnt,
the leaves of Missletoe burnt, shreds of Hair-cloth burnt, each equal parts,
mix it up with Bears-grease and Rozen of Cedar-tree.

Another of Ortho the Sicilian.
Take of the ashes of the least Frogs burnt in an earthen pot, one part;
Mouseturd, white Hellebore, the roots of Reeds burnt, white pepper, each alike
parts, mix them with vinegar, and apply them to the place first rubbed and
shaved.

Another.
Take of the ashes of Goats hoofs burnt, the Juice of Thapsia, the foam of the
Sea, Mouseturd, the scum of Niter, Myrrh, white Pepper, Ginger, each alike
parts, powder them well and mix them up with Goats gaul.

Another.
Take the Juice of the leaves of Sallow, the Juice of Myrtle leaves, each half
an ounce, Labdanum one ounce, Oil of Myrtles as much as will suffice to make it
into an Unguent, mix them and use it.

Another.
Take of Bees burnt, Maidenhair burnt, Oil of Roses, each a sufficient
quantity, make an Unguent.

An Ointment to make hairs grow on those troubled with an Elephantiasis.
Take the ashes of a Moul, of Wasps, of Hens, each two drams, Oil of
Flower-deluce two ounces; Labdanum one ounce and a half, a little Wax, and make
a Liniment.

An Ointment to produce hair.
Take the rine of Reeds, scum of Niter, each half an ounce, mix them up with
Tar, and use it, but you must daily scrape the place, and rub it with a Cloth;
for so it will cause the hair very quickly.

Another.
Take of House-mice burnt one part; shreds of flaxen-cloth burnt one part, rine
of Reeds one part, these being all dried, powder them, and mixing them with
honey, reduce them to the consistence of it, and then add marrow and fat
melted, and put them in a brass Box, and rub the bald place till the hair comes.

Another.
Take of red Poppy, leaves of Myrtle, Maidenhair, Lavender, Cyperus,
Smallage-seeds, Emblick, Myrobalanes, Cypress-nuts, each one dram, water three
pints, boil them all till two pints be wasted, strein it, and add Oil of
Myrtles one pound, boil them again till the water be consumed, and add the
rines of Pine-nuts, Labdanum, each one scruple, mix them and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take the head or hide of an Earth-Hedgehog burnt, powder it and work it up
with honey, and anoint the place.

Another.
Burn together a Seahorse and a little Niter, mix them up with Goose-grease,
and the place being prepared with Niter, anoint it.

Another.
Take of Sword-flag a sufficient quantity, burn the leaves in a pot, then mix
it up with Rozen and Pine-ashes, scarifie the bald place and lay it on, and
bind it.

Another of Soranus.
Take of Bears-grease, the ashes of Reedleaves burnt, the powder of Brass, each
one part, Vinegar, old Oil, each a sufficient quantity, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take the ashes of Reed burnt, the hairs of a Bear, Maidenhair, Bears-grease,
Tar, Goats hairs burnt, Rozen of Cedar, each alike parts, mix them together,
and anoint the place rubbed before.

Another.
Take the leaves of Greek-reed burnt, half an ounce, Mouseturd two drams,
Hedge-hogs burnt one dram, powder them, mix them with Vinegar, lay it on.

An Ointment for Baldness.
Take of Bulls fat sunned one pound, the froth that cleaves to Canes, one
ounce, the juice of Thapsia an ounce and a half, Myrrh one ounce, Maidenhair
one pound, an Asses member, an Asses spleen, Labdanum, each one pound, steep
the Labdanum in a little wine, and melt the fat with the steem of water, burn
the Asses member and shave it, but burn the Spleen in a new pot with
Maidenhair, and powder and searce what ought to be, then make them with new
wine, and use it before bathing, the head being first combed.

An approved Ointment to cause a Beard.
Take of Oil of sweet Almonds, Myrrh, each an ounce, the rine of the roots of
Reeds burnt, Maidenhair burnt, each two drams, heads of Flies burnt, Bees
bruised in their emptiness, each half a dram, Labdanum two drams, Honey one
ounce, powder them, and with a little Wax, make a Liniment.

Another for the same.
Take the ashes of a Mole dried in an oven, two ounces, the ashes of Bees, of
Filberds burnt, each one dram and a half, Mouseturd two drams, Labdanum a dram
and a half, the best Honey one ounce, Oil of Nard, Wax, each a sufficient
quantity; make a Liniment, but in the morning following you must wash your face
with this Decoction: Take of Maidenhair, male Southernwood, Rosemary,
Myrtle-leaves, the rine of Reed roots* Flowers of Chamemel, red Roses, leaves
of sour Dock, each one handful, Pockwood half a pound, make a Decoction and
use it as has been said.

Another.
Take of Fenigreek six pints, Flax-seed three pints, Labdanum eight ounces, the
Juice of binding Bean-tree two ounces, of the Indian leaf two ounces, twenty
Gauls, Aromatical Onyx two ounces, Syrian Cane two ounces and a half, Bdellium
two ounces, Myrtle burnt twenty four ounces, Musk three ounces, Florence
Flower-de-luce two ounces, powder them severally, searce them and mix them.

Another to cause Hair.
Take the ashes of Grasshoppers burnt, of Bees burnt, Oil of Myrtles or fat,
each a sufficient quantity, mix them and make an Unguent.

Of Ointments that hinder the growth of hair.
Take the Decoction of Spurge mixed with Vinegar, unslaked Lime and Mallows.

Another.
Take the Gum of Ivy, Ants Eggs, yellow Arsnick, Colophony, each one ounce,
Leeches burnt half an ounce, powder them and mix them with the blood of Frogs,
and make an Ointment.

Another.
Take the blood of Bats, the Juice of Ivy, the Juice of Radish, Goats Suet,
each a sufficient quantity, mix them and make an ointment.

Another.
Take the fat of Frogs, of a Mole, a Bat, Gum of Ivy, each a sufficient
quantity, make an Ointment.

Another.
Take of Opium, Henbane, each a sufficient quantity, powder them, and with
Vinegar bring them into the form of an Unguent, with which anoint the hairs
daily.

Another.
Take a sufficient quantity of Castor, scum'd Honey enough to make it into an
ointment.

Another.
Take a whole Hedgehog, boil it in oil till the flesh be parted from the
bones, strein it, and with the aforesaid oil mix Ants Eggs, and anoint it.

Another.
Take of Hemlock-seed a sufficient quantity, powder them, and with the blood of
a Bat, bring them to the form of an Unguent.

Another.
Take the Gum of Ivy one ounce, yellow Arsnick, Colophony, Hemlock-seed, each
half an ounce, Castor two drams, Opium one dram, Henbane one dram and a half;
Juice of Hemlock, the blood of a Bat, each a sufficient quantity, make an
Ointment to anoint the bare places.

Another.
Take of the blood of a Bat, of man's blood, new Cassia, each alike parts, Ants
Eggs, Henbane-seed, black Poppy-seed, each alike parts, powder what is fit, and
mix with the rest.

Another.
Take of Cimolian earth, Cerusse, each one part, Roche-alume half a part, juice
of Henbane a sufficient quantity, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of white Tartar powdered, scum'd Honey, each a sufficient quantity, mix
them and anoint.

Another.
Take the Gum of white Vine, Gum of Ivy, Bryony, powder them and mix them with
oil into the form of an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Ants Eggs, the blood of Frogs, the rust of Iron, mix them up with
spittle.

Another.
Take the Gaul of a Hedgehog, the Gaul of a Co^morant, Sea-shells burnt and
powdered, the blood of a Bat, each a sufficient quantity; make an Ointment.

Another.
Take the ashes of Swallows burnt, the milk of Spurge, each a sufficient
quantity, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Gum-arabick, Tragacanth, burnt Brass, Verdigrease, Arsnick,
Long-pepper, white, black Pepper, Boodstone, Starch-corn, Dyers Madder,
Scales of Brass burnt, each two drams, Dragons blood, Juice of binding
Bean-tree, each a dram and a half, Frankincense, Spike, burnt Gauls, each one
dram, Sarcocol, Ammoniacum, dissolved in Aquavitae, each half an ounce, powder
them and mix them with the Juice of Citrons or Lemmons, and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Henbane, Dragons blood, Gumarabick, white Frankincense, each six
drams, Nightshade water a sufficient quantity, powder them and mix them to the
form of an Unguent.

Another.
Take of burnt Dates two drams, Spike one dram and a half, powder and mix them
with Honey, and the turd of a Mole, to the form of an Unguent.

Another.
Take the rust of Iron, Sea-shells burnt, each a sufficient quantity, mix them
with fasting spittle.

An Ointment to make the Hair shed, and grow no more.
Take of yellow Arsnick, Ants Eggs, Gumarabick, each half an ounce, Gum of Ivy
two ounces; with the blood of a Bat, or Juice of Henbane, make an Unguent,
apply it, the hairs being first cut.

Of Ointments that take away the hair.
Take of gold colored Arsnick, seven or ten scruples, unslaked Lime the same
quantity, Starch-corn two ounces, Selinusian earth an ounce, powder them and
fine searse them; when you would use it, take a sufficient quantity and shake
it together with water, then lay it on, and see that it burn not.

Another.
Take two parts of unslaked Lime, yellow Arsnick, one part, put them into a
leaden mortar, and powder them with water or the juice of Ptisan poured to
them, and when they are black, command them to be laid on hot, especially in a
Bath.

Another.
Take of Sandarach one dram, unslaked Lime, eighteen ounces, pounder them and
boil them carefully with water, and when they begin to boil, take it off and
use it.

Another.
Take of Starch-corn, unslaked Lime, yellow Arsnick, each one ounce, powder,
searse them and lay them by, and use them as has been said.

Another that presently takes away the hair by the roots.
Take of unslaked Lime, Cimolian earth, a burnt Pummy-stone, each eighteen
ounces, yellow Arsnick three ounces, powder them and lay them by; when you have
occasion to use them, dilute them with water, and so use it.

Another to take away the Hair, and thin the Skin.
Take the juice of the leaves of wild Cowcumber, milk of Almonds, unslaked
Lime, yellow Arsnick, Galbanum steept in Wine, and streined, each a sufficient
quantity; when they are boiled, add to them Oil of Roses, Mastick, each a
sufficient quantity; Frankincense, the Gumm of Juniper-tree, Roses, Cloves,
Cummin, Nutmeg, Cynamon, each a little, mix them and make an Unguent.

Another of the same.
Take of the ashes of Mast-tree, two parts, yellow Arsnick one part, boil them
in River water.

Another.
Take of black Soap one pound, Tartar, one ounce and a half, yellow Arsnick six
ounces, juice of Cyperus fifteen drams, unslaked Lime half an ounce, capital
Lees one ounce, put the Lime in the Lees, strein it, and mix it with the rest.

Another.
Take Gum of Ivy two ounces, yellow Arsnick, Ants Eggs, Gum-arabick, each three
drams, powder them and mix them with strong Vinegar.

Another.
Take of yellow Arsnick three ounces, unslaked Lime one dram, strong Lie a
sufficient quantity, boil them till the feathers come off, a quill dipped in it.

Another to take hair off the face.
Take of Colophony two ounces, Mastick, Ammoniacum cleansed, each one ounce,
dissolve them in a clean earthen vessel, and stre^n it upon cold water, take it
and work it together, and dissolve a little of it over the fire, and apply it
warm, letting it lie on for two hours, and then take it away.

Another to take away the hair.
Take of the powder of an Owl one ounce, Cummin, the blood of a Bat, each three
ounces, Musk one scruple, make a Liniment: we must have a special care that the
part to which the Ointment must be applied, be first washed with the Lie made
of Vine ashes, and if an itching be left in the part after application of the
Medicine, anoint it with Rhases, white Ointment, or with the Decoction of
Henbane-seeds, or of Colewort-seeds.

Another.
Take the blood of a Tortoise, of Frogs, of a Bat, Ants Eggs, red Ar^nick, Gum
of Ivy, each a sufficient quantity, mix them with Vinegar, and anoint it
discreetly, that it do not excoriate.

Another of the same.
Take of yellow Arsnick, Juice of Henbane, each alike parts, mix them and
anoint the part.

An Ointment to take away hairs from any part of the Body.
Take three whites of Eggs bruised, unslaked Lime eight ounces, yellow Arsnick
one ounce, a sufficient quantity of Lie, make an Unguent, with which besmearing
a feather, anoint the hairy parts, but when they have been anointed a quarter
of an hour, wash off the Unguent with warm water.

Another.
Take of Ants Eggs, Juice of Henbane, Hemlock, seeds of Fleawort, the blood of
a Bat, of a Tortoise, each a sufficient quantity, mix them and anoint the
place: others run over the place with a plate of Gold red hot, so that no Down
any more appear.

Of Ointments that color the Hair.
To make the Hair yellow.
RAw Lupines laid on with water and Niter, do make the Hair yellow.

Another.
Take the middle Bark of Elder, Flowers of Broom, Saffron, yelks of Eggs, each
a sufficient quantity, boil them in water, and gather that which swims a top,
and so anoint the hair.

Another.
Take of white Tartar burnt, Oil of Acorns, each a sufficient quantity, make an
Unguent, with which anoint the hairs in the sun, by combing.

Another.
Take of Myrrh one ounce, white Salt half an ounce, powder and mix them with
Oil of Acorns into the form of an Unguent.

Another.
Take the Flowers of Mullein one handful, Fenigreek two ounces, Vine ashes, and
of the wood of Ivy, each one handful, ten pints of water, boil them all till
one half be consumed, strein it, and add of the whitest Soap three pound,
Saffron two drams, leave them so in the sun for a month, mixing them every day
with a stick; with this anoint the hairs in the sun.

A Liniment to clarify and whiten the Hair.
Take of Swallows dung, the roots of Elecampane, Radish-seeds, Brimstone,
flowers of Capers, Frankincense, each half an ounce, incorporate them all
together with the like quantity of the Gaul or a white Ox; rub the hairs with
it, being first washed with the Lie of Vines, and dried, and while the hairs
are dried of their own accord after the Lotion, rubbing them, wash them again
in the same Lie, and dry them by degrees with a hot cloth.

Of Ointments that dye the hair black.
Take of the scum of silver, Limolian earth, liquid Alume, each alike parts,
the hairs being first washed and dried, anoint them over night, and bind over
them Beets leaves.

Another.
Take of Selinusian earth, scum of silver, Lime, each alike parts, reduce them
with water to the thickness of Honey, and when you have first washed the hairs
with a Lie, then anoint them; and likewise laying on the leaves of Beets, bind
them up, and in the morning comb them out.

Another to black the Beard.
Dried and burnt Lead mixed with the juice of crude Beets, to the thickness of
Honey, laid on, and let alone till dinner time, then washed off.

Another.
Take of Gauls, Frankincense, Gith, each two drams, powder them and put them in
a Quince hollowed, close it up, and wrap it in Bread-paste, and bake it in an
oven, till it is burnt, powder it and mix the ashes with oil.

Another.
Take of Gauls burnt with common oil, two ounces, Roche-alume two drams, salt
Gem one dram, with Oil of Costmary make an Ointment.

A Liniment that will make gray Hairs black.
Take of Black, Emblick, Myrobalanes, Gauls, each twenty, Labdanum a sufficient
quantity, Leaves and Berries of Myrtle, each threescore, powder and searse
them, and infuse them in three pints of Oil for three days, then boil them till
they grow thick, and anoint the roots of the hair with it.

Another.
Take of the dross of Iron, filing of Lead, each a sufficient quantity, boil
them in Vinegar till one half be consumed, strein it an anoint the parts: an
unction of burnt Lead made with the juice of Beets to the consistence of honey,
will make the Beard black.

Of Ointments that die the hair white.
Take of Swallows dung, the Gaul of a Bull, each a sufficient quantity, mix
them and make an Ointment.

Another.
Take of Elecampane, the rine of Radish-root, Alume, Glue, each one part, mix
them and anoint.

Another.
Take of Swallows dung, Radish-seed, Brimstone, the bark of Caper-roots, a
Cows Gaul, the best Vinegar, each a sufficient quantity, make an Unguent.

An Ointment to color the hair red.
Take of burnt Tartar powdered, Oil of wild Cucumber, each a sufficient
quantity, make a Liniment to anoint the hair.

Of Ointments to curl the hair.
Take a sufficient quantity of Rams horns, cut it and powder it with Oil, and
anoint the hair.

Another.
Take of the root of Danewort, and powder it with Oil, then anoint the head,
and bind leaves of the same over it.

Another.
Take the juice of Beets, of Myrtles, common Oil, each a sufficient quantity,
mix and anoint.

Another.
Take Pine-kernels burnt and powdered, Oil of Myrtles, each a sufficient
quantity, mix them and make an ointment.

Another.
Take of the scum of Salt, which is gathered in boiling, Myrrh powdered, each
a sufficient quantity, mix them and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Myrrh, Gum-arabick, Oil of Fenigreek, Oil of Henbane, each a
sufficient quantity, mix them and make an Ointment for the hair.

Of Ointments to take away the faults of the Eyebrows.
For the falling of the hair off the Eyebrows.
TAke of the filings of Lead, of Drakes fat, each a sufficient quantity, mix
them and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Filberds roasted and powdered, the fat of a Goat or Bear, each a
sufficient quantity, mix them to an Ointment.

Another.
Take the seeds of black Henbane two drams, Maidenhair one dram Ointment of
Flower-de-luce three spoonfuls, powder and mix them to the form of an Ointment.

An Ointment to make the hair of the Eyebrows grow again.
Take of Henbane-seed burnt, a sufficient quantity, with water make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Bees burnt and pounder'd, a sufficient quantity, and with Oil make a
Liniment for the Eyebrows.

An Ointment for Lice in the Eyebrows.
Take the yelk of an Egg boiled hard, a little Aloes, mix them and anoint.

Another.
Take of Quicksilver killed with spittle, Stavesacer, each half an ounce,
butter a sufficient quantity, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take one Apple roasted and cleansed, Quicksilver killed with spittle, a
sufficient quantity, mix them well and anoint.

Another.
Take of Stavesacer one ounce, Oil of Wormwood two ounces, Wax a sufficient
quantity, make a Liniment.

Another.
Take of Sugar'd-alume, Aloes, Stavesacer, Vinegar of Squills, each a
sufficient quantity, make an Ointment.

Of Ointments that take away the black and blewness of the Eyelids and Eyes.
Take of Beans husked and powdered, a sufficient quantity, Honey what is
convenient, mix them and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take a sufficient quantity of yelks of Eggs boiled hard, Honey what is
convenient, and beat them together to the form of an Ointment, with which
anoint the parts.

Another.
Take of Cerusse, Cummin, Bean, each a sufficient quantity, powder them, and
with the juice of Coriander make an Unguent.

An Ointment for the shedding of the hairs of the Eyelids.
Take of Stibium burnt, and quenched in woman's milk thirteen drams, Aloes,
Myrrh, Spikenard, each two drams, burnt Barley half an ounce, powder them and
mix them with a sufficient quantity of water.

Another.
Take the Marrow of the right leg of an Ox, of Sut, each a sufficient quantity,
and mix them.

For the shedding of the Eyebrows and Beard.
Take of Henbane two drams, Mouseturd one dram, Maidenhair two drams, Oil of
Flower-de-luce a sufficient quantity, powder and mix them with the Oil, foment
the part and then anoint it.

An Ointment for dropping of the Eyes.
Take of Myrrh, Cummin, Frankincense, Mastick, Ammoniacum, Bolearmenick, each
half an ounce, Saffron 2 drams, powder them all and mix them with the whites of
Eggs, and lay them on the forehead and tempels.

Another of the same.
Take of Frankincense, Mastick, Gum-arabick, Tragacanth, Bolearmenick, Tutty,
Dragons blood, each half an ounce, powder and mix them with the whites of Eggs,
and apply them to to the forehead and tempels.

Ointments to stop droppings of the Eyes.
Take of Celandine, Rue, Vervin, the bark of Fennel-roots, each one handful,
bruise them, and make a paste with old Hogsgrease, which boil in white Wine
till the wine be almost consumed, strein it, and add new white Wax, Aloes,
each three drams; Verdegrease, Saffron, each one dram, Frankincense three
drams, Mastick four drams, Camphure one dram, make an Ointment to anoint the
eyes.

Another of the same.
Take of Aloes, Sarcocol, Frankincense, each a sufficient quantity, pouden and
mix them with the Juice of Fennel.

An Ointment for tears of the Eyes.
Take of Tutty prepared Sarcocol, Myrrh, Frankincense, Styrax-calamite,
Ambergreece, each one scruple; dried Roses, Sumach, Dragons blood, each six
drams, powder them, and with the mucilage of Gumtragacan^n and Arabic make an
Ointment, of which put a little in the eyes.

An Ointment for red Eyes.
Take of Cummin poude^'d, a sufficient quantity, mix it with Wax, and lay it on
the eyes when they are asleep.

Another of the same.
Take of Tragacanth, Gum-arabick, Roses powdered, Starch-corn, Cerusse, each
two ounces, Opium one scruple, powder them and mix them with woman's milk.

Of Ointments that cure the faults of the skin of the Head.
For Running-sores of the Head.
TAke of Cerusse six drams, scum of Silver half a dram, Brimstone six drams,
Oil of Roses or Myrtles, Wax a sufficient quantity, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take the scum of Silver one dram, tender leaves of Rue, five and twenty drams,
Vinegar, Oil of Roses or Myrtles, each a sufficient quantity, mix them and
anoint with a feather.

Another of the same.
Take of burnt Ce^usse, Rue, Manna, Frankincense, each a hundred drams, Bark of
Pine Tree fifty drams, Oil of Myrtles three pints, and as much Vinegar, mix
them.

Another.
Take of the filings of Lead, Vine-branches, Frankincense, Myrrh, scum of
Niter, each fifty drams, Oil of Myrtles, Vinegar as much as is sufficient, mix
them.

An Ointment of Queen Cleopatra's for the same.
Take of rubbed Cerusse, Frankincense, each two drams, brimstone one dram,
powder them and with Oil lay them on.

Another for Sores and Dander.
Take of Niter Copperas, each one dram, Oil a sufficient quantity, powder and
mix them.

Another of Cleopatra's.
Take of live Sulphur six drams, male Frankincense, cleft Allom, wild
Stavesacer, rocket, scum of Niter, Copperas, each one dram, three forigs of
Rue, Oil of Bays or Myrtels, Vinegar, each a sufficient quantity, make an
Unguent.

Another.
Take of live Sulphur, scum of Silver, Cerusse, each alike part, Saffron half
so much, powder them and use them with Candy wine.

Another.
Take scum of Silver, unslaked Lime, each twenty five drams, Vinegar or Oil,
three parts of a pint, powder and mix them.

Another.
Take of Copperas two drams, Sandarach half an ounce, scum of Silver one dram,
Oil of Myrtels, Vinegar, each a sufficient quantity, mix them and make an
Unguent.

Another for Sores and Worms.
Take of juice of Beets, of Celandine, Hogsgrease, each two ounces, white
Hellebore two ounces two drams, mix them and make an Ointment.

Another for Worms and Scabs.
Take of white and black Hellebore, live Sulphur, yellow Arsnick, Litharge,
unslaked Lime, Vitriol, Alume, Gauls, Sut, each half an ounce, Quicksilver
killed, Verdegrease, each two drams, juice of Fumitory, Oil, each a sufficient
quantity, make an Unguent.

Another for Worms.
Take of Fenigreek one pound, Dragons blood powdered, one ounce, Pummy-stone
one pound, Turpentine five ounces, Honey one ounce, four yelks of Eggs, Oil of
Roses two ounces, mix them and make an Unguent; which use, the head being first
shaved, and washed with a childs urine, and cleansed with a sponge, and
anointed over with Oil of Flax-seed.

Another for the same.
Take of Celandine three parts, Sowesgrease as much, white Hellebore one part,
mix them.

An Ointment for scurf in childrens Heads.
Take of Myrrh, Orrice-root, black Hellebore, Oil of Eggs, each a sufficient
quantity, powder them and mix them into the form of an Unguent, also Oil of
Bread-corn is good.

For Dander in the Head.
Take flour of Vetches, Fenigreek, Niter, Bran, Myrtles, Mustard Seed, each
fifteen drams, common Oil* as much as is sufficient, Vinegar, Water, each a
little, make an Unguent, with which anoint the head, first washed and shaved.

Another.
Take scum of Niter, Copperas, each alike parts, wine a sufficient quantity,
mix them and rub the head three o^ four times a month.

Another.
Take of Lee^ of Wine, a Pummy stone, Niter, Lupines, each one part, mix them.

Another.
Take of Cimolian earth, the Gaul of an Ox or Sow, Vinegar, each a sufficient
quantity, mix them.

An Ointment for Lice.
Take of Stavesacer two parts, Sandarach, Niter, each one part; Oil, Vinegar
each a sufficient quantity, mix them and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of white Hellebore, Stavesacer, Niter, each alike parts; Oil a sufficient
quantity, mix them, and apply them in a Bath.

An Ointment for Lice and Nits.
Take of Stavesacer, Quicksilver killed with spittle, each three drams, common
Oil three ounces, Wax one ounce, make an Unguent, with which anoint the head in
stead of Soap, when it is washed.

Another.
Take of Sandarach, Niter, each one dram, Stavesacer two drams; Oil, Vinegar,
each a sufficient quantity, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take Oil of Bays, Radish-seeds, each two drams; Pepper, Saffron, each a
sufficient quantity, mix them.

An Ointment for red Specks in the face.
Take the roots of Dock, Sows-grease, each two ounces, white wax one ounce,
melt them and add Quicksilver killed, Camphure, each a little; Juice of
Wormwood, Honey, each a sufficient quantity, make an Unguent.

Another for a red face.
Take of live Sulphur, yellow Arsnick, Turkey Soap, each half a dram, Sut two
drams, mix them.

Another of the same.
Take the Juice of seven Oranges, Juice of Nightshade, water of Water Lillies,
Snail-water, each two drams, white Wax half an ounce, the fat of a Hen, and a
Ram, each one ounce and a half, the green roots of (...) two drams, make an
Unguent.

An Ointment for Wrinckles and Pimples of the Face.
Mix the Gaul of a Goat with the flour of Lupines, and at night rub the face.

Another.
Take of white Curral half an ounce, salt Gem, Cerusse, Camphure, each two
drams, white Wax one dram, Rose Water an ounce, the fat of a Hen washed, two
ounces, powder and mix them for your use.

Another for Pimples.
Take of white wax one pound, oil of violets one ounce, Quicksilver half an
ounce, Mastick one dram and a half, a little Camphure, Litharge one dram, make
a Liniment.

Another for Biles or Botches.
Take the flour of Lupines, Beans, white Vetches, everlasting Pease, each two
drams, flour of Barley, of Lentils, each one dram, Radish-seed, Tragacanth,
Starch-corn, each half a dram; Melon-seeds husked three drams, Saffron half a
scruple, powder them and work them with woman's milk, at night anoint the face,
and in the morning wash it with the water of the rines of Melons and Violets.

An Ointment that takes away all Bunchings and Speckles of tho Face.
Take of the roots of Ass-cowcumber, white Been, Bryony, Lupines, each half an
ounce, Cerusse, Litharge, Tartar, each one dram; Cane-roots, Serapine, Pigeons
dung, each two scruples, Oil of Turky-millet three ounces, Oil of Juniper, Oil
of Bread-corn, each two ounces and a half; Juice of Orenges four ounces, powder
what is to be powdered, and fine searse them, then boil them all till the Juice
is consumed, then take them from the fire, always stirring them with a spattle
till they are cold, then add the white of one new laid Egg beaten and streined;
Camphure powdered one dram, always mixing them, then wash it in one pint of
water, pressed from young Canes, washing it ten times in that water, and stirring
it with a spattle, and it is excellent.

For Botches and Worms of the Face.
Take of Hens fat, Betony, each as much as is sufficient, mix them and beat
them together.

An Ointment to whiten Skars.
Take of Oil of Tartar, seeds of Fleawort, each one ounce, infuse them in the
mucilage of Borax, or salt Gem dissolved in Oil of Roses, an ounce.

A Liniment for high red Skars.
Take Oil of Litharge two drams, Oil of Tartar, Balsom of Saturn, each one
dram, camphure one scruple, Spermacety one dram, Oil of Eggs two ounces, mix
them and make a liniment, use it four times a day; the richer sort may use Oil
of Talc, which is most excellent for all blemishes.

An Ointment to take away the thickness of the face.
Take of fresh Butter, Turpentine, each one ounce, Lilly roots roasted in the
leaves of Beets under the ashes, three ounces unslaked Lime five times washed in
Rose Water, or the juice of Balm, fresh Hog's Grease melted in Rose Water, each
one ounce, mix them and make an Unguent.

Another for the tenderer sort.
Take of Lilly roots roasted under the ashes one pound, bruise them in a mortar,
to which add Sugar Candy three ounces, make an Ointment to apply to the face.

An Ointment for Warts in the face.
Take of Athenian Honey, the sharpest Vinegar, each twelve drams, mix them
carefully and anoint them, rubbing them with the fingers.

Another of the same.
Take the scum of Quicksilver three drams, pure Turpentine the quantity of an
Egyptian bean, a little Oil; mix them, and when you have cleansed the face,
take a little on your finger, then bruise it well, and anoint them.

Another.
Take of Allom cut and well powdered, Turpentine, each as much as it
sufficient, mix them.

Another.
Take of Indian Costus bruised and searsed, a Goats Gaul, each a sufficient
quantity, make an ointment, with which anoint them toward night, and in the
morning wash the face with milk.

An Ointment for Ringworms in the face.
Take of Vinegar of Squills two ounces, Aloes, the Juice of sour Dock, Oil of
Tartar, each three drams, make a Liniment.

Another.
Take the distilled water of sour Dock four ounces, Borax three drams, common
Salt one dram, Vinegar of Squills one ounce, mix them, and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take Dock-roots three ounces, roast them under the ashes, afterward with
Vinegar of Squills make a Liniment; if this cure not, add of Quicksilver half
a dram, or Sublimate one scruple; wash the face often with the water of
Myrtles, or of Rose-seeds, afterward add also a little white of an Egg, that
the skin may resist it the better.

Another.
Take of Tartar two drams, powder it and apply it with the whites of Eggs, or
with three drams of burnt Alume do the like.

An Ointment for callous Warts.
Take of French Soap half an ounce, Ammoniacum, Styrax, Frankincense, each one
dram, dissolve them in water and make it to the thickness of a Cerot, then
anoint with it, and after one hour, wash it off with warm water.

Another.
Take of red Niter, Hyssope, Pennyroyal, Salt dug up, each equal parts, beat
them and searse them, make it up with Cerot of Roses, and use it.

Another.
Take the seeds of Bastil, red Niter, green Pennyroyal, cleft Alume, Indian
Costus, each alike parts, powder and searse them, and mix them with a
sufficient quantity of Goat, or Hens-grease, to the form of an Unguent.

Another.
Take of burnt Salt, Pennyroyal, Hyssope, Ammoniacum, Sumach, each equal parts,
oil of Roses as much as is sufficient, make an Unguent.

An Ointment for Ringworms of the face.
Take of Aloes two drams, dissolve it in Vinegar of Squills to the form of a
Liniment, anoint the parts affected at night.

Another.
Take the roots of Bryony, as many as are sufficient, work them up with salt in
the sharpest Vinegar, and apply it.

Another approved one.
Take of sharp Dock two parts, Gentian one part, boil them in water, then
strein them, and mixing it with Calves-grease, boil it again with a slow fire,
to the consistence of an Unguent.

An Ointment for Surn-burns, Clefts of the Lips, and Speckles in the Face.
Take twenty Snailes with their shells, bruise them, then add the weight of
them in Cerusse, new Wax three ounces, Hartshorn one ounce, make a Liniment,
then wash the face.

An Ointment for Warts in the Face.
Take the roots of Asarabacca, temper them in Rose Water two days, bake them
and anoint the part.

Another.
Take the roots of Celandine, as much as is sufficient powdered, mixed with
grease and applied, it wastes and takes them away.

For a red Face.
Take Brimstone one ounce, Cerusse washed two drams, Juice of Lemmons one ounce,
apply it at night with the Decoction of Bran.

Another.
Take Oil of Tartar, Oil of Roses, Juice of sour Dock, of Bays, of
Grass-plantane, each four ounces, Cerusse one ounce and a half, Litharge of
Gold two drams, Quicksilver killed one ounce and a half, roots of Asphodel
burnt under the ashes two ounces, make a Liniment in a leaden mortar.

Another.
Take of Citrine ointment half a pound, Litharge four ounces, Cerusse washed two
ounces, Cotton, Alume burnt, Tartar calcined, each one ounce and a half, the
Juice of Elecampane roots, the Juice of sour Dock, Sowsbread, Lemons, each five
ounces, Camphure three drams, oil of Roses a pound and a half, mix them.

Another.
Take the Juice of Fumitory, Plantane, Sorrel, each three ounces, Oil of Roses
one ounce, Gum-tragacanth, Arabic, each half a dram, Dragons blood two drams,
new Wax as much as is sufficient, make an Ointment to use going to bed, and the
next day wash with the Decoction of Beans.

Another.
Take of Litharge twice or thrice infused in Vinegar, one ounce, nourish it
with white Wine and Goard-seed, and stir it till it be brought to the form of
an Unguent, add of Camphure dissolved in Rose Water half an ounce, anoint the
face, and in the morn wash it with the Decoction of Beans.

A Liniment for a scabby face.
Take of Litharge of Gold one ounce and a half, Cerusse washed in
Plantane-water, and Horse-tail two ounces, Oil of Roses three ounces, boil the
Oil, and with white Wax make a Liniment.

For redness and bunchings in the face.
Take Oil of Roses, Oil of Tartar, each four ounces, juice of Wood Sorrel three
ounces, Cerusse washed one dram and a half, Litharge of Gold two ounces,
Quicksilver killed one ounce and a half, roots of Asphodel burnt under the
ashes, make a Liniment in a leaden mortar.

For leprous Faces.
Take the powders of Citrine-ungent, Litharge of Gold, each four ounces,
Cerusse washed two ounces, Borax, Alume burnt, Tartar calcined, each one ounce
and a half, the juice of Elecampane-roots, of sour Dock, Sows-bread, Lemmons,
each five ounces, oil of Roses one pound, Quicksilver killed with spittle four
ounces; make an Unguent.

Another.
Take the ashes of the root of Birthwort, Grass-plantane the fine taken off and
washed nine days in spring water, then searse it all, and take what you please,
and dissolve it in Plantane, or Purslane-water, and anoint the face.

An Ointment for Knobs appearing under the Skin.
Take the roots of Saffron, mix them with woman's milk, and apply it.

An Ointment for Surn-burns.
Take Juice of Plantane, Nightshade, each one dram and a half, Litharge of
Gold, of Silver, each one dram, burnt Lead an ounce, Tutty prepared six drams,
Camphure half a dram, oil of Roses, Wax, each a sufficient quantity, make an
Unguent.

An Ointments for Ringworms.
Take of Vitriol, Frankincense, Myrrh, cleft Alume, each one ounce; Aloes,
live Sulphur, each half an ounce, make it up with wine to a convenient
thickness, and twice or thrice a day anoint the parts first rubbed.

Another.
Take of Vitriol half an ounce, Juice of binding Bean-tree two drams, scales of
Brass half an ounce, live Sulphur six drams, white Vitriol, Gum each one ounce,
Vinegar, as much as is sufficient, in which when you have dissolved the Gum and
mixed the other things, add the Lees of Oil.

Another.
Take of live Brimstone, Frankincense, Myrrh; Copperas, raw Vitriol, each two
drams, Gum half an ounce; Vinegar, Oil of Cedar, each a sufficient quantity,
mix them.

Another.
Take the Gum of Ethiopian-olive, five and twenty drams, Gum forty drams,
Copperas sixteen drams, live Brimstone, Frankincense, rust of Brass, the Juice
of binding Bean-tree, white Myrrh, each ten drams, Vinegar as much as is
sufficient, when they are all dissolved, mix them up with thick Lees of Oil.

An Ointment for old Tetters.
Take of Copperas, Fenigreek mollified, Cardamoms, each two drams, Gith,
Figtree leaves, each one dram and a half, the sharpest Vinegar, as much as is
sufficient, powder them, and bring them to the thickness of Honey.

An Ointment for Burns.
Take Oil of Roses, Rose Water, whites of Eggs, each a sufficient quantity; mix
them, and for four days apply them to the burnt place, the fifth day lay on the
following plaster: Take of Oil of Nuts, new Wax, each one ounce, melt them
together.

An Ointment for Scalds and Burns.
Take of the middle bark of Elder, six drams, Oil of Roses one ounce and a
half, Mastick, Frankincense, each half a dram, white Wax, two ounces, boil them
in four pints of water till one half be wasted, scum'd, and cooled, that which
swims a top is fit to apply to the burn.

Another for a Burn.
Take of the juice of Nightshade, Plantane, each two ounces, the middle bark
of Elder, Oil, each one ounce, boil them in a double vessel till the juices be
wasted, then add Cerusse washed in Rose Water, Litharge of Gold, each a dram and
a half, Tutty prepared, three drams; the bark of Frankincense two drams, fresh
Hog's Grease w^sht in Rose Water, ten drams, white Wax as much as is sufficient,
make a Liniment; toward the end add three whites of Eggs, Camphure half a
dram.

Another.
Take of new Lime washed in Rose Water, three pound, Juice of Roses, Juice of
Plantane, each two pound, mix them and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take Oil of Roses two ounces, Oil pressed from Goard-seeds, one ounce and a
half, white Wax as much as is sufficient, make an Unguent.

An Ointment to smooth the Face after a Burn.
Take of Pomatum, Oil of Roses, each four ounces, ointment of Roses two ounces,
make a Liniment.

Another.
Take of Pomatum four ounces, Oil of Roses three ounces, Citrine ointment half
an ounce, make a Liniment.

Another for Burns and Scalds.
Take old Lard, and put it upon a red hot iron, then receive the hot drops
falling into cold water, and take the fat which swims a top, and w^^k it with
Rose Water, and lay it on the Burn.

Another for a Scald.
Take of Cerusse washed in Rose Water, one ounce, Lime washed in Rose Water,
three drams, the powder of Citrine Ointment half an ounce, the mucilage of the
seeds of Quinces and Pears extracted with Rose Water, three ounces, beat them
all in a mortar to the form of a Liniment.

An Ointment to take away the marks of the Smallpox in children.
Take Oil of Lillies one pint, Fat four ounces, Oil of Roses one ounce, wash
them a good-while with the water of Roses and Lillies, then take four whites of
Eggs, prepare them in their shells, and coagulare them a little by the fire,
then mix them in a mortar with the former, then add of sweet and bitter Almonds
blanched, each one ounce, then beat and incorporate them with the former, and
add the roots of Reeds two drams and a half; Sarcocol, Melon-seeds cleansed,
Litharge of Gold, Sugar, Marrow, Anise, Chalk, each one dram, mix them all in a
mortar to the form of a Liniment.

Of Ointments for Scabs.
Take of live Sulphur half a pound, as much Salt, Hog's Grease two pound, Oil of
Bays half a pint, mix them.

Another more powerful for the Scab and salt Fleag^.
Take of Litharge, yellow Arsnick, Quicksilver, Tartar, Mastick, Olibanum, live
Sulphur, each half an ounce, old Hog's Grease six ounces, Oil of Bays two ounce,
a little Vinegar, mix them and make an Unguent.

Another free from all danger.
Take of Turpentine washed in Rose Water, three drams, Oil of Roses four ounces,
Juice of Orenges, a sufficient quantity, three yelks of Eggs, mix them and make
an Unguent.

Another.
Take of fresh Butter six drams, Jasmine, Alume, common Salt, each two drams,
the Juice of sour Dock, of Fumitory, each half an ounce, three yelks of Eggs,
powder of Orrice two drams, liquid Styrax six drams, mix them.

Another approved one against any Scab, Ringworm, or Tetter.
Take of Litharge, Alume, Quicksilver, each half a dram, Roses, Cerusse,
Savine, the fish Sepia, Cadmian earth, each one dram; the ashes of
Mastick-tree, Calamint, each half a dram, mix them with Juice of Mint, and boil
them with Oil of Roses to a third part, adding a little Wax.

Another for Scabs in children.
Take of washed Turpentine, one ounce, the yelk of an Egg, Oil of Flax, one
ounce and a half, mix them.

Another.
Take of washed Butter two ounces, washed Turpentine three ounces, Salt, yelks of
Eggs, Oil of Roses, each one ounce, mix them.

Another.
Take of fresh Butter washed with Fumitory-water, washed Turpentine, common Salt,
each three ounces, two yelks of Eggs, Juice of orenges as much as is
sufficient, mix them.

Of Ointments that beautify the face.
To make the Face bright.
TAke Oil of Tartar three ounces, seeds of Fleawort one ounce, infuse them in
the mucilage, mix and dissolve with them in an ounce of Oil of Roses, Borax,
salt Gem, each one dram, and make a Liniment.

A Coloring for the Face.
Take of Citrine Ointment fresh made three ounces, sweet Almonds very well
bruised, flour of Beans, each one dram, the bone of the fish Sepia, Hartshorn,
Barley flour, each two drams, incorporate them all with Honey.

Another.
Take of Sea-frogs without their shell, put them in a glass vessel, and
sprinkle them with the powder of salt Gem, and cover them with Lemmon-water,
and set them so long in the sun till they become like an Ointment, with which
anoint the face, afterward wash it with Bean-flower water.

Another.
Take of Citrine Ointment four ounces, Pomatum two ounces, mix and anoint night
and morn, then wash with Bean-flower water.

A Liniment after the manner of Virgins milk, to adorn the Face.
Take of Litharge of Gold two ounces, boil it in a little leaden vessel, with
six ounces of white wine vinegar distilled, stirring it all the while with a
stick, strein it through a linen cloth, and keep the water; at last take of
Salt, or Oil, or Tartar, one ounce, and dissolve it in a glass with four ounces
of Water of Lillies, then take in your hand three or four drops of each of the
aforesaid waters, and they will turn to a Virgins milk, with which rub the
face, and let it dry in.

An Ointment to illustrate the face.
Take the Oil of the Marrow of a Heart, two ounces, Oil of Goard-seeds one
ounce, Goats far, washed Turpentine, each half an ounce, new Wax three drams,
melt them by the fire, then add Mastick, Borax burnt, each two drams, mix them
and make an Unguent, with which anoint the face at night, and in the morning
wash it with Branwater.

To whiten the face.
Take of Virgins milk two ounces, Oil of Tartar one ounce, mix them and anoint
the face at night going to sleep, in the morning wash it, and it will be clear,
bright and fair.

Of Ointments to whiten the hands.
Take of salt Lard bruised and steeped in a Lie three days, (changing the Lie
twice a day) a sufficient quantity, white Wax a little, white Lilly-roots
roasted under the ashes and bruised, two; melt them by the fire, then pass it
through a thin searse, into cold water, wash it well, changing the water five
or six times, afterward keep it in a glass vessel for your use.

Another.
Take Goats far or suer cleansed, and steeped in Rose Water two days, and very
well washed, a sufficient quantity, bruise it in a mortar, continually washing
it with Rose Water, then add white Wax, Musk, Sivet, each as much as sufficient
melt them together, and diffuse it in Rose Water, or some other sweet water,
then keep it for your use.

Another.
Take Oil of bitter Almonds well washed in Rose- or Violet-water, a sufficient
quantity, white Wax enough, mix them by the fire, and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Melon and Goard-seeds cleansed, Pine-nuts cleansed, Peach-kernels,
Barleyflour, each one part, bruise them all well, then with one pint of Honey,
mix them to the form of an Unguent, with which anoint the hands at night, and
wash in the morn.

Another.
Take Oil of sweet Almonds well washed, white Wax, each a sufficient quantity,
Camphure one dram, mix them and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take the root of white Orrice one ounce, Lilly-roots three ounces, white Sugar
one ounce, bruise them all well, and make them up to the form of a paste, with
which rub the hands, then wash them.

Another.
Take Oil of Tartar, Oil of sweet Almonds, white Wax, each a sufficient
quantity, dissolve them by the fire, and add Myrrh powdered, one dram,
Mastick bruised two drams, mix and infuse them in Rose Water, wash them, and
then add Musk, Ambergreece, Camphure, each a little, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take the seeds of Goards, Melons husked, Pine-nuts cleansed, Peach-Kernels,
each six ounces, Barley-bran a sufficient quantity, powder them and mix them
with the best Honey.

Another.
Take of Pine-nuts cleansed and bruised, one pound, Mustard Seed one ounce,
Fige three ounces, Camphure two drams, beat them all well and mix them, and
make a paste to rub the hands.

An Ointment to make the hands fair.
Take of common Oil washed, fresh Butter washed, Goats fat washed, each one part,
steep them together four and twenty hours in Rose Water, then dissolve them by
the fire, and add white Wax a sufficient quantity, a little Musk, make an
Unguent.

Another.
Take the crum of Bread, Rice, red Vetches, each three ounces or four, soft
Soap an ounce and a half, scum'd Honey a sufficient quantity, make a paste.

Another.
Take Juice of Pompions a sufficient quantity, bitter Almonds infused in Whey,
as much as is sufficient, a hundred Figs infused in the same, Mustard Seed two
ounces, Orrice-roots one ounce, Ox Gaul five drams, incorporate them and make a
paste.

Another.
Take a pint of water in an earthen vessel, leaded and well covered, and boil
half away, then add Juice of Lemmons six ounces, Honey, Oil of bitter Almonds,
each two ounces, mix them and make an Unguent.

An Ointment for hands swelled with cold.
Take the grease of Wool, Goose, and Ducks grease, the mucilage of
Quince-seeds, each two ounces, Starch-corn six drams, Turpentine one ounce and
a half, Oil of Roses, Oil of yelks of Eggs, each two ounces, yellow Wax a
little, make a Liniment.

Another to wash the hands.
Take of Pine-nuts cleansed, powder of Mustard Seed, each three ounces, the
best Honey half a pint, mix them and make a paste.

Another for hands swelled with cold.
Take the seeds of Flax, Fenigreek, Marshmallows, each half a dram, of Mucilage
extracted of Lilly-water, and the forementioned ointment, each one ounce, oil
of Dill, oil of sweet Almonds, each half an ounce, make a Liniment for the
hands with course Wool.

For Clefts of the hands.
Take ointment of Litharge, of Cerusse, each one dram, mix them.

Another.
Take of Rams-grease, Starch-corn, Litharge, Oil, each a sufficient quantity,
make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Litharge of Silver, Myrrh, Ginger, each a like parts; Honey, Wax,
Oil, each a sufficient quantity, make an Unguent.

Another for clefts of the Hands and cold.
Take of common Oil four ounces, white Frankincense, clean Wax, each one ounce,
the Juice of Elder-leaves three ounces, well scented white wine four ounces,
boil an Apple in the Wine, Oil and Juice of Elder, afterward add the
Frankincense and Wax, and then strein it.

Another.
Anoint them with the roots of sour Dock and Sows-grease.

Another for the clefts of the hands.
Take of Mastick, Oil of Roses, white Wax, each a sufficient quantity, make an
Unguent.

Another.
Take of Bran burnt to ashes, the hairs of a Horse tail burnt, each one part,
Honey as much as is sufficient, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Tutty, Cerusse, Litharge, each half a dram, Arsnick, Sublimate three
granes, Lead, Alume, each half a scruple, Water of Roses, Plantane, Purslane,
each a sufficient quantity, the white of one Egg, make a mixture.

Another.
Take of Tragacanth one scruple, flour of Starch-corn half an ounce, Juice of
Plantane two drams, with Syrup of Roses make a mixture.

An Ointment for scabby and leprous Nails.
Take of Rams fat, Colophony, each two drams, mix them.

A Cerot for the same.
Take of Turpentine, Cummin, each one dram, mix them.

Another.
Take Oil of Mastick, unripe Olives, each two ounces, Cynamon one dram, Cerusse
washed, burnt Lead, each half a dram, Tutty prepared six drams, white Wax, Rozen
washed with wine, each one ounce, mix them.

An Ointment for a contusion of the nails.
Take of new Wax, Cummin, Costmary, each a sufficient quantity, powder them and
mix them up with the Wax.

Another.
Take of Ducks-grease, Bears fat, Euphorbium powdered, each a sufficient
quantity, make an Unguent.

An Ointment for Clefts of the nails.
Take of Diachylon, Oil of Almonds, Oil of Been, Mastick, Raisons, each a
sufficient quantity, make a Plaster.

Another.
Take of Flax-seed, Honey, each a sufficient quantity, mix them to the form of
a Plaster.

For leprous Nails.
Take of Pitch and Wax, each a sufficient quantity, melt them together, and
make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Goats Suet, Sandarach powdered, each a sufficient quantity.

For pill'd Nails.
Take of Salt, Flour of Barley, Costmary powdered, each one part, Honey a
sufficient quantity, mix them.

An Ointment after shedding of the nails.
Take of Flax-seed one ounce, Cardamoms three drams, Honey a sufficient
quantity, mix them.

An Ointment to make the nails fall.
Take ointment of Roses, Cantharides, each a sufficient quantity, mix them.

Another.
Take Missletoe of the oak, Arsnick, each a sufficient quantity, mix them.

An Ointment for warts in the Hands.
Take the roots of a Vine, sheeps-dung, and Goats-dung, each one part, the milk
of Figs or of Spurge, as much as is sufficient, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take the Lees of Oil, Sugar-alume, each one ounce, Verdegrease two ounces, Tar
half an ounce, mix them and use them.

Another.
Take rust of Brass, yellow Arsnick, Dates, unslaked Lime, froth of the Sea,
Tartar, Vitriol, Pigeons-dung, the flower of Rye, of Gith, each equal parts,
Bulls-gaul, as much as is sufficient, make an Unguent to lay on the Warts first
scarified.

Another.
The bark of Sallow burnt, and mixed with Vinegar, and laid on; also a Dogs-turd
with Wax.

Of Ointments that adorn the Breast.
To keep the Breasts small.
TAke of Roch-alume powdered a sufficient quantity, Oil of Roses as much as is
sufficient, mix them and anoint the breast.

Another.
Take of Bolearmenick powdered, green Gauls bruised, each one part, Honey a
sufficient quantity, make an Unguent.

Another.
Take of Cerusse, white Marble, each one part, Oil of Myrtels a sufficient
quantity, powder them and mix them.

To make the Breasts decrease or grow less.
The juice of Hemlock mixed with Camphure and laid on, makes them less; also
white Frankincense with Navel-wort and sharp Vinegar, hinders their growth.

An Ointment to hinder their growth.
Take a sufficient quantity of Dyers-earth, boil it with Honey, and make a
thick Poultesse, and apply it from morning to night, then lay over it a Sponge
soaked in cold water till the Poultesse be taken off, and if you would have it
more effectual, mix with it ten unripe Gauls, it will make them right and
straight.

To harden soft and loose Breasts.
Take clay, the white of an Egg, unripe, Gauls, Mastick, Frankincense, each a
sufficient quantity, bruise them all and mix them with hot Vinegar, and anoint
the breast, and suffer it to lie on all night; if once will not do, do it again.

To hinder the growth of the Breasts.
Bruise Hemlock, and let a Mass of it with Vinegar be laid on a Virgins breast,
it will so confine them that they grow not, though at the time of milk coming
in them.

A Liniment to smooth flaggy, wrinckled Breasts.
Take Lees of Oil, as much as is sufficient, Gum-arabick, Tragacanth, Mastick,
each a little, Camphure a very little, mix them.

To make the Breasts less and hard.
Take of green Mint, dried Roses, wild Pears, Medlars, Servaces, Slooes, Juice
of binding Bean-tree, Pomegranate-flowers, Pomegranate-rinde, unripe Pine-nuts,
Plantane, Flowers of Archangel, each alike parts, bruise them and boil them in
Vinegar, then add flour of Beans, as much as is sufficient, make a Plaster.

Another for the same.
Take of Quinces, unripe Plums, each a sufficient quantity, bruise them very
well, and add Bolearmenick, Plantane-seed, Aniseseed, Fennel, Cummin, each a
little, Juice of Plantane, Vinegar, each a sufficient quantity, mix them.

An Ointment for Breasts that hang down.
Take of Bean-flower, Frankincense, Mastick, Juice of Housleek, hot Vinegar,
whites of Eggs, each a sufficient quantity, mix them.

Another for the same.
Take of dried Figs, Raisons, Cummin, Vinegar, each as much as is sufficient,
bruise them and boil them to the form of a Plaster.

Another.
Take of Gauls, Mastick, Frankincense, whites of Eggs, hot Vinegar, each as
much as will suffice, mix them: Bran boiled with Vinegar and laid on the
Breasts, will do the like.

An Ointment for Clefts of the Nibbles.
Take Oil of Roses, the middle rind of Elder, each one ounce, Wax as much as
is sufficient, mix them.

Another for pain proceeding of Clefts.
Take Oil of Violets, or Oil of sweet Almonds, white Frankincense, Wax, each
two drams, and then mix them.

Another for Clefts.
Take Badgers fat half an ounce, Martialum, and Agrippa's Ointment, Ointment of
Marsh^mallowes, and that called Anodyne, each one dram, Oil of Nard one ounce
and a half, mix them.

Another.
Take Oil of Roses two ounces, new Wax half an ounce, Litharge, Frankincense,
each one dram, mix them.

Another.
Take of Tragacanth one scruple, flour of Starch-corn two ounces, Juice of
Plantane three drams, mix them and anoint.

Ointments to adorn the Belly and Feet.
To take away the Wrinckles of the Belly after Child bearing.
TAke of burnt Hartshorn, the stone Amiantus, Ammoniack, Salt, Myrrh,
Frankincense, M^stick, each as much as is sufficient, powder and mix them with
Honey.

Another of the same.
Take of Rams Suet, nine times washed in cold water, one pound, two whites of
Eggs, a little Butter, bruise them all very well, then add Mastick, Olibanum,
each two drams, mix them and make an Ointment for the Belly.

Another.
Take of Sea-onion burnt, burnt Hartshorn, Plumed-Alume, Ammoniack. Salt,
Myrrh, Olibanum, Mastick, Gith, Barley-flour, each a like parts, powder and
mix them with honey.

An Ointment for hardness of the feet.
Take the flour of Gith, the flour of old Bread-corn, Wax, each a sufficient
quantity, mix them, and make a Cerot to lay on the place.

Another.
Take of Drink made with Vinegar and Honey, Ammoniacum, each one ounce
Bdellium, Sagapen, each two drams, Turpentine three drams, Oil of Orrice, two
ounces, mix them and make an Unguent.

Another.
Take the ashes of the rind of Sallow, Vinegar, each as much as will suffice,
mix them and anoint the place.

Another.
Take the green leaves of Rue, Raifons, each a sufficient quantity, bruise them
togegether, and make a Plaster.

Another.
Take of Galbanum, Wax, each a sufficient quantity, and mix them.

A brave-scented Ointment.
Take of Musk, Ambergreece, Sivet, each four granes, with Oil of sweet Almonds,
reduce them to the form of an Ointment.

Or thus:
Take Oil of Nutmegs made by a Press, one dram, the best Sivet one scruple,
choice Musk six granes, Oil of Spike, Lavender, each two or three drops, mix
them and make an Ointment to anoint the Nostrils, Forehead, and principal
parts, to fortify them.

Of Soaps that Beautify.
A white Sweet Smelling Soap.
TAke of old Venetian Soap scraped, and six days set in the sun, as much as is
sufficient, beat it very well with one pint of the best Rose Water, then
dissolve it by a gentle fire, and add powder of Orrice four ounces,
Starch-corn six ounces, white Saunders two ounces, liquid Styrax, Oil of Spike,
each one ounce, mix them very well, and when it is cold, make balls.

A muskified Soap.
Take of the best Soap scraped one pound, choice Cynamon, Nutmeg, Cane, Styrax,
each one ounce, wood of Aloes two drams, Benjamin two ounces, Cloves one ounce,
beat them all to a fine powder, and add powder of Cy^erus one dram, Musk,
Siver, each a little, dip them in Rose Water, afterward set them in the sun
for forty days, and make Balls, which must be kept in Cotton in wooden vessels.

A white sweet Soap.
Take of old common Soap scraped, a sufficient quantity, dry it well for eight
days or ten, then bruise it and searse it, and add Powder of Orrice four
ounces, white Saunders three ounces, Mahaleb two ounces, flour of Starch-corn
one omnce, powder them all and mix them, and put them in a mortar together,
with one ounce of liquid Styrax, and a little Oil of Spike, beat them all well
together, and at last with the Flour of Starch-corn; make Balls, dry them in
the shade, and keep them for your use.

Another most excellent one.
Take six granes of Musk dissolved in Rose Water, Sivet four granes, mix them
with the forementioned Soap, but the Musk must be hot in the Rose Water.

Another to whiten the hands.
Take of bitter Almonds cleansed and bruised one pound, Turky-soap the bigness
of an Egg, Mustard Seed one spoonful, powder them all and mix them.

Of Powders to adorn the Teeth.
A Powder to make them white.
TAke of red Co^^al. Date-stone Pummystone, the bones of the fish Sepia, burnt
Salt, each a sufficient quantity, mix them and make a Powder.

Another to fasten the Teeth, and strengthen the Gums.
Take of red Corral, Pearl, Dragons blood, Bolearmenick, Frankincense, Crabs
shells, each one part, mix them and make a Powder.

An excellent Dentifrice.
Take of Hyssope, Organy, Mint, each two ounces, cleft Alume, Hartshorn,
common Salt, each one dram, take them and burn them in a pot to coals, then
add Pepper, Pummy-stone, Pellitory of Spain, Mastick, each half a dram,
Myrrh, Cynamon, each one scruple, make a fine Powder.

A Powder to whiten the Teeth.
Take the bones of the fish Sepia, white Marble burnt, each one ounce, Cloves,
Cynamon, Pellitory of Spain, each three ounces, Sponge, Pummy-stone, Salt, each
one ounce, mix them and make a fine Powder to rub the Teeth.

Another.
Take of Ginger, Cynamon, Cloves, Pummystone, wood of Aloes, Nutmeg, Mace, each
half an ounce, Pepper, Pellitory of Spain, Mustard Seed, Stavesacer, each three
ounces, Sponge, white Marble, each half an ounce, Date-stones burnt white
Hellebore, each two ounces, Barley bread burnt with Salt and Honey, half an
ounce; red Tyles, burnt Hartshorn, Feather'd-alume, Olivestones burnt,
Myrobalane-stones burnt, each three ounces, mix them and make a fine Powder.

Of Powders to adorn the Hands,
To make the Hands white.
TAke the flour of Beans, of Lupines, of Starch-corn, Rice, small Beans,
Orrice, each six ounces, mix them and make a Powder, with which wash the hands
in water.

Another.
Take of Pine-nuts cleansed and bruised two ounces, Mustard Seed one pound,
Almonds cleansed and bruised two ounces; make a Powder and dry it in the sun,
with which rub the hands with the Juice of Lemmons, and then with water.

Another.
Take the seeds of Rocket six ounces, Orrice, Cummin, each one ounce, dregs of
Alume half an ounce, Sugar Candy, Tragacanth, each one ounce, Camphure one
scruple, Pine-nuts, Almonds cleansed three ounces, the crum of white bread half
an ounce, old Soap scraped two ounces, powder them all and mix them, and make a
Powder to wash the hands.

A Dentifrice to whiten the Teeth.
Take of Rosemary, Mint, Pennyroyal, each half a dram, Orrice-roots,
Cammelshay, each one scruple; Nard, Pepper, each half a scruple, Pummy-stone,
burnt Salt, Hartshorn, each two scruples, make them up with Tragacanth steeped
in Rose Water. Sticks of the Mastick-tree may be found fit to cleanse and
strengthen the teeth.

Another.
Take of red Corral one ounce, Majorican earth half an ounce, the bones of the
fish Sepia, Pummy-stone, each two drams; Cloves, Cynamon, Mastick, each one
scruple, choice Pearl one dram, Dragons blood two drams, Musk one grane, powder
them and work them into a mass with Tragacanth steeped in Rose Water; of which
make Dentifrices like pensils.

Another.
Take of Hartshorn, a Horses teeth, each two ounces, Sea-shells, common Salt,
Cypress nuts, each one ounce, burn them together in an Oven, and make a Powder,
to be wrought up with the mucilage of Gumtragacanth.

Another in Powder.
Take of Myrrh, Mastick, Frankincense, each half an ounce, Hartshorn burnt
and washed, red Corral, Roses, Musky-Saunders, Cloves, each two scruples, the
bone of the fish Sepia, Roche-alume burnt, each two drams, Pummy-stone one dram
and a half, common Salt burnt one dram, make a Powder; you may use it with a
Mallowroot prepared.

Another eminent one.
Take the tops of Myrtle, of Mastick-tree, Wilde-Olive, Sage, Rosemary, each
one handful; red Corral, Ivory, Horses-teeth, each half an ounce, common Salt
one pugil, burn them together in an earthen vessel till they be white, then
powder them and add of Cloves, Roses, thick Cynamon, each three ounces, mix
them and rub the Teeth, or with the Cremor of Tragacanth make long Pensils.

Of Perfumes.
A sweet Bag.
TAke of Cubebs half a dram, Cloves one scruple, Gith burnt one ounce and a
half, Mace two scruples, powder them and put them into silk.

A Violet Powder.
Take Orrice of Florence half a pound, Roses four ounces. Cyperus half an
ounce, Marjoram, Cloves, each half a dram; sweet-scented white Saunders,
Benjamin, each four ounces, Styrax-calamite one ounce, powder them and put them
in silk for a scent.

Another.
Take Florentine Flower-de-luce four pound, dried Marjoram one fourth,
Calamus-Aromaticus three ounces, Roses, Violets, each five drams; Cloves half
an ounce, Musk one dram, powder them and put them in silk.

Another.
Take Orrice of Florence two pound, red Roses one pound, Styrax-calamite,
Cloves, white Saunders, Aromatic, Cane, Coriander, Cyperus, each four ounces;
Marjoram, Lavender, each six drams; Sivet, Musk, each a sufficient quantity,
then mix them.

A Pomander.
Take of Styrax-calamita one ounce, Cloves two drams, Benjamin half an ounce,
Ambergreece half a dram, Musk fifteen granes, of the aforesaid Violet-powder a
sufficient quantity, Rose Water as much as will make it up.

Another.
Take of Styrax-calamita one ounce and a half, Benjamin two ounces, Labdanum
half an ounce, Cloves, white Saunders, each three drams; Roses, Marjoram, each
two drams and a half; Musk, Ambergreece, each one scruple; make a Pomander with
the infusion of Gum-tragacanth in Rose Water.

Another.
Take of Styrax-calamite, liquid Styrax, Benjamin, Gallia Moschata, Alipta
Moschata, Labdanum, each one ounce, choice Cynamon, Cloves, white Saunders,
each half an ounce, red Roses, Nutmeg, Mace, Wood of Aloes, Cardamoms,
Marjoram, Gum-Elemni, Gith-seed, Zedoary, each a dram and a half, Turpentine as
much as is sufficient, with a little infusion of Tragacanth made in Rose Water,
then make a mass.

Another.
Take of yellow Saunders six drams two scruples, Wood of Aloes half an ounce,
red Roses, Basilicon, Lavender, Rosemary-flowers, Marjoram, each three drams
one scruple, Citron-pill seven drams; Cynamon, Nutmeg, Mace, Cloves,
Corianderseed prepared, Cardamoms, each three drams one scruple; pure Labdanum
eight ounces, Styrax-calamita six drams two scruples, liquid Styrax three
ounces, Benjamin ten drams, yellow Wax one ounce and a half, Turpentine four
ounces, Rose Water two ounces and a half, Musk of Alexandria, Ambergreece, each
two scruples and a half, make a mass.

Another.
Take Powder of Violets a dram and a half, Roses, Marjoram, Styrax-calamite,
Labdanum, each one dram, Cloves two drams, Benjamin, Nutmegs, each one scruple;
Ambergreece half a scruple, make a mass with Rose Water, in which Tragacanth
and Gumarabick have been steeped, and sprinkle it with a little Oil, either of
Cynamon, or Cloves, or Nutmegs.

Another.
Take Styrax three drams, Cloves, Cynamon, each two drams, Mace, Nutmeg, each
one dram, Wood of Aloes half a dram, Musk, Ambergreece, each three granes,
Mastick one dram and a half, powder and searse them, then make them up with the
distilled Water of Marjoram, and liquid Styrax, and make round sweet Balls.

Another.
Take of Virgins Wax four ounces, Oil of Olives, Turpentine, each half an
ounce, Labdanum three drams, Olibanum, Mastick, each a dram and a half, Myrrh,
Styrax-calamite, each two drams, white and red Been, red Roses, dried Mint,
Marjoram, Cloves, Cardamoms, white and red Saunders, Cynamon, Nutmeg, Wood of
Aloes, Camphure, each one dram, Ambergreece, Musk, each half a dram, powder
them and make a Pomander.

A Pomander for the time of Pestilence.
Take of Labdanum, Styrax-calamite, each one dram, Cloves half a dram,
Camphure, Nard, Nutmeg, each seven granes, bruise them all to a fine powder,
and mix them with Rose Water in which Tragacanth and Gumarabick have been
steeped, and make Balls.

Another.
Take of Labdanum three ounces, Styrax-calamite one ounce, Benjamin half an
ounce, Cloves three drams, red Roses two drams, Wood of Aloes, white Saunders,
each one dram, Majoram, Lavender, Gith-seeds, each half a dram, Camphure three
granes, liquid Styrax half an ounce, with the infusion of Gum-tragacanth in
Rose Water make a Pomander, the rich may add a little Musk and Ambergreece.

A Pomander that will purge.
Take of Scammony, Aloes, Myrrh, each one dram, Spurge, Coloquintida, each one
dram and a half, powder and searse them, and with the Juice of Coriander make
two Pomanders; which hold in your hands, often changing them from one hand into
the other, that they may be hot and alter the air.

Another against the Plague.
Take the Flowers of Water Lillies, Bugloss, Violers, Roses, each one dram,
Pomecitron rind one dram and a half, Mace half a dram, all the Saunders, each
a dram and a half, white Poppy one scruple, Camphure half a scruple, Labdanum
two drams, Ambe regreece four granes, powder them and make them up with the
distilled Water of Lettice and liquid Styrax, and make sweet Balls.

Another.
Take of Styrax-calamita, Benjamin, eace one ounce, Labdanum, Mastick, each
half an ounce, Cloves, Wood of Aloes, yellow Saunders, each one dram;
Gith-seeds two drams, with a little Venice-Turpentine, make sweet balls, and
aromatize them with a little Musk, and Ambergris dissolved in Oil of Cloves.

A sweet Ointment.
Take of Musk, Ambergreece, Sivet, each four granes, Oil of sweet Almonds, as
much as is sufficient, make a Liniment.

Another.
Take Oil of Nurmeg made by a press, one dram, the best Sivet one scruple,
choice Musk six granes, Oil of Spike, Oil of Lavender, each two drops or three,
make an Ointment, to anoint the forehead, nostrils, and other principal parts.

A Candle for a Perfume.
Take of sweet Asa, Styrax-calamita, each four ounces, red Styrax, Olibanum,
each twelve ounces, Labdanum eighteen ounces, Cloves one ounce and a half, Gith
one ounce, Coriander prepared, Juniper Berries, each half an ounce, liquid
Styrax six-ounces, Turpentine half an ounce, Coals of Linetree or Sallow,
thirty ounces, with the infusion of Gum-tragacanth made in Rose Water, make
Candles.

Perfuming Candles against Poison and Pestilence.
Take of Labdanum three ounce, Styraxcalamita ten drams, sweet Asa six drams,
Frankincense one ounce and a half, French Lavender two ounces, red Roses,
Cloves, each three ounces, Pomecitron-pills, yellow Saunders, each two drams,
Juniper Berries half an ounce, Ambergris, Musk, each half a scruple, Coals
of Line-tree one pound and a half, mix them all with Gum-tragacanth and
Rose Water warm, and bring them into a Mass, then make small Candles out of
it, and dry them gently.

A Muskified Soap.
Take of Venetian Soap four pound, cut it very small, and add powder of Cloves,
white Saunders, each two ounces, Benjamin one ounce, Musk twenty granes, temper
them with Rose Water, some add a few drops of Oil of Spike, but Oil of Cloves
or Mace will do better.

Balls against the Plague or Pestilence.
Take of Labdanum three drams, powder of Roses, Aromatick-cane, Orrice, the
true Dittander, Angelica, Cynamon, sweet Saunders, Nutmegs, each two scruples,
Benjamin, two drams and a half, Ambergris one scruple, Musk twenty granes,
Styrax-calamita, half an ounce, with six ounces of Gum-Arabick or Tragacanth,
infused in one ounce of Rose Water, make Balls according to Art, and anoint
them with Oil of Benjamin.

Of sweet Scents or Perfumes.
Troches for Perfumes.
TAke Wood of Aloes, Labdanum, Benjamin, each two drams, Styrax-calamite half a
dram, Sugar Candy three ounces, Musk two granes, mix them with Rose Water into
a Paiste, and make Troches, which will smell the better if you sprinkle a
little Rose Water on them when you use them.

Troches of Gallia Moschata.
Take raw Wood of Aloes, choice and good, five parts, Ambergreece three parts,
good Musk one part, Mucilage of Tragacanth dissolved in Rose Water, as much as
will suffice to make them up, and make Troches of the figure of a Myrtle-leaf,
seal them up, and put them in an Earthen Vessel.

Troches of Benjamin.
Take of Benjamin six ounces, Wood of Aloes eight ounces, Styrax-calamite three
ounces, Musk half a dram, Orrice two ounces, Sugar Candy three pound, powder
them, and with Rose Water make Troches.

The Countess of Arnsburg's Perfume.
Take fresh white Roses bruised four ounces, Benjamin steeped in Rose Water a
day and a night, two ounces; Ambergreece three granes, Musk two granes, Siver
one grane, powder and beat them with the Roses, then add of the best Sugar
half an ounce, then let them alone in a mortar, well covered for two days,
then work them into a mass, and make Troches; but you must mix a little
Gumtragacanth steeped in Rose Water, and Gumdragon to make them stick together
the better.

A Perfume made in the form of little Birds.
Take of red Styrax half a pound, liquid Styrax one ounce, Styrax-calamite one
ounce and a half, coals of Sallow, Tragacanth, each two drams; let the powder
of the Coals and the Tragacanth be steeped three days in Rose Water, then work
them into a mass, of which make the figures of Birds.

An excellent Perfume for Candles or Troches.
Take of sweet Asa half an ounce, Powder of Orrice two drams, Wood of Aloes,
Nutmeg, Cloves, Mastick, each one dram, Styrax-calamite two drams, all the
Saunders, each half a scruple, Camphure five granes, Ambergreece, Musk, each
four granes, white Sugar four ounces, with the mucilage of Tragacanth and a
little liquid Styrax and Rose Water with Musk, make Candles or Troches.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Book.
IT teaches to make variety of sweet Waters, for the Body or Garments, to
illustrate and adorn the face, to take away Freckles, Skars, Sun-burns,
Pimples, Redness; with the Art of making several Colorings or Fucusses, also
how to take away Spots, Bunchings, Warts; to kill Ring worms, to smooth
Wrinkles, raze out the marks of the small Pox; with Potions to make the Body
fat or lean, sweet Baths to cleanse the body, also how to color the Hair of
any color whatsoever, to make it grow thick, to make it curl, to lengthen it,
to cause it to grow where it is wanting, and take it away where it is
superfluous, to hinder the shedding of it; also to cure all blemishes or
infirmities of the eyes and teeth, with Dentrifrices and Powders to cleanse and
whiten them: to make Lotions, Lies, and Ointments; As also to cure sore Heads,
Dander, Nits, Lice, Scabs, Scars, Leprosies, Tetters, Scalds and Burns; to
whiten the hands, to take away all deformities of women's breasts: how to make
sweet and muskified Soaps to wash with; also Perfumes, sweet Bags, Pomanders
for delight, and those that will purge by smelling to them, Candles that
perfume as they burn, and several Troches for Perfumes.


