The Judgment Set, AND The BOOKS Opened.

RELIGION TRIED whether it be of GOD or of Men.

The Lord comes to visit his Own, For the time is come that Judgment must
begin at the House of God.

To separate The Sheep from the Goats. and The Precious from the Vile.

And to discover the Blasphemy of those that say,

They are Apostles, Teachers, Alive, Rich, Jews,
but are Found Liars. Deceivers. Dead. Poor, blind, naked. The Synagogue of
Satan.


In several Sermons at Alhallows Lumbard-street, By JOHN WEBSTER, A servant of
Christ and his Church.

Micah 3.5, etc. Thus says the Lord, concerning the Prophets that make my
people err that bite with their teeth, and cry peace: and he that puts not
into their mouths, they prepare war against him: Therefore night shall be upon
them, that they shall not have A vision, etc. The Sun shall go down over the
prophets, and the Day shall be dark. Their Seers shall be ashamed, and the
Deviners confounded; yea, they shall All cover their lips, for there is no
answer of God. LONDON, Printed for R. Hartford at the Bible and States-Arms in
little Britain; and N. Brooks, at the Angel in Cornhil. 1654.

To All those Dear and Precious Souls that have been Hearers, and are (in any
measure) partakers of the power of those Truths delivered in these following
Discourses.
Dear Friends,
IT was for your sakes that the good pleasure of the Heavenly Father, ( who
makes all things work together for the benefit of those that love him, Romans
8.28.
who are called according to his purpose) carried me forth and made use of me,
who am less then a worm, and most weak in my self; yet strengthened through
his Almighty power, to manifest these things unto you. And it was for your
sakes, that the goodness of that Father of all mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.
and God of all consolation kept me so long to sojourn amongst you, for I can
truly say, that what I am or have been unto you in the way of Christ, it was
his good pleasure and grace that made me so; for the mutual comfort both of you
and me, for I cannot do any thing against the truth but for the truth; for I am
not able to think or say any thing as of my self, 2. Cor. 3.5
but my sufficiency is of God, and I am able to do all things, yet no
otherwise, but through Christ who strengthens me. Phil. 4.13.


And therefore it is unto you, that I direct and be queath these ensuing
Discourses, who have been, Ear-witnesses unto what God gave me a door of
utterance to deliver amongst you. And I hope in the Lord Jesus Christ, that
they are not only written in your papers or table-books, but in the fleshly
Tables of your Hearts; 2 Cor. 3.3
not with the hand of man, but with the finger of God. And being requested that
they might be made public; the Lord led me unto a willingness thereunto, for
these Reasons I shall now declare.

1. That you, whom God (in some measure) has endued with the spirit of
discerning, and made you to hear the voice of Christ, and not the voice of
strangers, Joh. 10.3, 4.5.
may judge and bear witness out of what principle these things are spoken,
whether they proceed from that wisdom which is from above, Jam. 3.15.17.
that is first pure, then peaceable; or from that which is from beneath, which
is earthly, sensual, and devilish; Mat. 11.19
for wisdom is only justified of her Children, and of no others, for it is
Christ in you the hope of glory; who is that quickening spirit, Col. 1.27.
or spiritual man that judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.15.
yet he himself is judged of none.

2. That those, who are alienated from the life of Christ, Ephesians. 4.18.
through that ignorance that is in them, and are The JEW in the Mystery, that
always resists the Holy Ghost, and as their Fathers did so do they, Act. 8.54,
55, 56, 57.
may know that though they gnash upon the Saints of God with their teeth, cry
out with a loud voice, stop their ears, run upon them with one accord, cast
them out of the City and stone them, yet do those holy ones of God look up
steadfastly into Heaven, and see, and behold the glory of God, the Heavens
opened, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and do freely cry aloud
unto the Lord, that he may not lay this sin to their charge.

3. That those poor creatures who are wise in their own eyes, and think they
know someting, Pro. 3.7.
when they know nothing as they ought to know; may behold and see, that the
stone which is rejected and set at naught, by those who think, and call
themselves Master Builders, and would have others to think also so of them,
Mat. 21.42
is becom'd the head stone in the corner, and it is the Lords doing, though
wonderful in the eyes of men.

4. That those who have spoken evil of these Truths, accounting them as
blaspemous, erroneous, and heretical, may know that according to that way which
they call Heresy, Act. 24.14
I worship the God of my Fathers: And if there be any thing in these Discourses
that the wisdom, learning, or reason of men, can overthrow, then it is not of
God; for, Mat. 15.13.
every plant that the Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out;
but what is of him must stand. And therefore, if the wisdom of the Serpent has
any thing to say against any thing herein contained, let it be brought forth;
for I hope and know that the Lord in me, and in all his, will defend his own
truth, so that the gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail against it, Mat.
16.16
and I can truly say, the Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do
unto me.

5. That the Lord alone may be magnified who has carried forth my spirit, to
bear witness against all unrighteousness of men, who withhold the truth of
God in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18
and that without respect of persons; and especially against all those
Churches, Worships, Professions, Confessions, Opinions, Covenants, Gatherings,
Traditions of men, observations of Times, Idol-Pastors, Hirelings, false
Teachers, Forms, and such like, which are made, appointed, constituted,
ordained, set up, and practiced by men; by the carnal wisdom, learning, wit,
reason, and policy of the world. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
For I witness One body and One spirit, even as I am called in one hope of my
calling, one Lord, One Faith, one Baptism, Heb 8.7.
one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in all: And
this is the Tabernacle that God has pitched, and not man, in which Temple all
the Saints are living stones, 1 Cor. 3.9
are Gods building, Gods workmanship, and are all gathered into this body by
the spirit and power of God, and not by man, for by one spirit they are all
baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13.
whether they be Jews or Gentiles, and have been all made to drink into one
spirit. I also bear witness to One Ordinance, and One Administrator, Mediator,
Redeemer, and Intercessor, which is the Lord Jesus Christ blessed for ever:
Joh. 14.6.
who is the way, the truth, and the life, and no man comes to the Father but by
him, and it is HE that is ordained, Acts 10.42.
to be Judge of quick and dead by the Father, and there is no name given under
Heaven, Acts 4.12.
by which men can be saved, but the name of Jesus; neither is there salvation
in any other; for there are diversities of gifts but the same spirit, and there
are differences of Administrations, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6.
but the same Lord: and there are diversities of Operations, but it is the same
God, which works all in all. And I witness that it is Jesus Christ only, by
his spirit that makes men Able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the
Letter, 2 Cor 3.6
but of the Spirit. And do all teach and speak in, and from the power of that
spirit, as IT is pleased to give them utterance. And therefore, all those that
claim an Ordination by man, or from man, that speak from the spirit of the
world, from wit, learning, and humane reason, who preach for hire, Jer. 23.1.
Ezekiel. 34.2. Zach 11.17 Joh. 10.1.
and make merchandise of the souls of men; I witness they are all Baals
Priests, and Idol-Shepherds, who destroy the Sheep, and are Thieves and
Robbers, who came not in by the door of the Sheepfold, but climbed up another
way, And are the Magitians, Sorcerers, Inchanters, Micah. 5.12.
Soothsayers, Necromancers, and Consulters with familiar spirits, which the
Lord will cut off out of the land, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9.
so that his people shall have no more Soothsayers; And as Jannes and Jambres
resisted Moses, so do these resist the Truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith: but they shall proceed no farther, for their folly shall
be manifest to all men, as theirs also was: woe unto them; for they have gone
in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the errors of Balaam for reward, and
perished in the gainsaying of Core. Jud. 11.12, 13.
These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you; feeding
themselves without fear: Clouds they are without water, carried about of winds:
Trees, whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the
roots: Raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, wandering Stars, to
whom is reserved the blackness of Darkness for ever.

And now Brethren, I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, Act. 20.32
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
that are sanctified. Mind and give heed to that meek, still, quiet, and silent
spirit of the Lord Jesus that is in you, which is Pure, Holy, Innocent,
Underfiled, and Righteous, teaching, and leading into all truth, righteousness,
and purity like it self, unto which if you give heed as unto a light shining
in a dark place, it will preserve and present you spotless and without blame
before him whose eyes behold no iniquity; which that the Lord may fulfill in his
due time in you, is the Continual prayer of him who is

Yours in the bonds of Love in the Lord Jesus Jo. WEBSTER.

To the Reader.
THe Author of these ensuing Sermons, being cast by providence upon some
employment in the Lords work, in this great City, was much Carried forth in his
ministration, to set up the LORD Jesus in the Hearts of men, in opposition to
all that is of flesh, and all that is of man, which caused many out of an
impatient spirit to distaste the things that were delivered. But many that
heard him being inwardly acquainted with what was spoken by him, were very
desirous to have that published for the benefit of all, which they themselves
had the happiness to receive from his own mouth, apprehending it to be the
Bridegroomes voice in him, and therefore savory to them. He being now at a
great distance from the Press, and not in a capacity of overseeing that which
the Transcriber may have failed in, the Reader is therefore desired not to mind
the manner of delivery, but the matter of that which is here presented, wherein
(if single-hearted) he will doubtless find a lively Discovery of many sweet
Breathings of the spirit of Jesus Christ, from One that appears to have been
long inwardly taught of God, and that wholly laid aside all those Humane
advantages wherewith he was and is plentifully furnished, that he might commend
his Message unto the hearts and consciences of men, Not with enticing words of
man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power. Upon which
account and no other, what follows is recomended to the perusal of all that
desire to benefit by what they read, by Him that Teaches to profit.

Thine, In the service of our most holy Faith, JOHN CARDELL, JOSHUA SPRIG,
ROBERT BACON.


TO THE READER.
Dear Friends:
HAving obtained the sight of these ensuing Sermons, and read some of the
matter therein contained, they yielded such a relish and savor to my Spirit,
that I could not choose but set to my Seal, that it flowed from that spirit
which is both pure and peaceable, which I do not to praise the person or the
matter; for to man there is none due, and to the matter there is none needful,
because it is Truth, and therefore needs not the shelter, approbation, or
praise of men, being in it self able to win praise to it self, and to carry
forth it self against all the oppositions of men or Devils. Here thou shall not
find Terms of Art, nor quirks of humane Learning, and FALLEN Wisdom (though the
party through whom it was conveied, excel in natural aquirements as much as the
most) but naked truth declaring it self through an earthen vessel in simplicity
and plainness of speech, evidencing thereby that our faith ought not; nay does
not stand in the wisdom of men's words but in the power of God.

And hereby thou may see (if thou be not blind in the carnal conceits of thy
earthly wisdom, as most of the Earthen Saints of our times are) what
self-denial is wrought in this Creature, through which the Eternal Spirit has
breathed forth these ensuing precious truths? that he having and enjoying all
those humane Excellencies of Learning and knowledge which are so in the worlds
account, and looked upon as helps to understand the things of God, but used to
help those that have them, to worldly honor and preferment, which indeed is
the only use is made of them, and no other, whatever is otherwise pretended;
but He in the height of this wisdom is made to become a fool for Christ's sake,
and is willing to lose all honor, dignity, and preferment, that the world and
the wisdom thereof can confer upon him, that he may enjoy his wisdom,
knowledge, dignity, and preferment in Jesus, the Eternal Savior of his Soul;
therefore, I say, here may any that live in the light, see the great work of
the Lord, even when the greatest wisdom is made folly, the greatest knowledge
made ignorance, and all that Gods wisdom may appear.

Oh what a wonder is it, yea a Beautiful thing (in this case) to see a rich man
spoild of his riches, a strong man robbed of his strength, and a spirit adorned
with All carnal exercises made willing to suffer the loss of all that it may
enjoy and be filled with the fullness of him that fills all in all: there is
none but such spirits as His, that are made willing to suffer the loss of all,
that will forsake the Worlds Crown for Christ's Cross; yet his spirit has
chosen with poor Moses, rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God,
then to enjoy the pleasures and profits of the world for a season; As does
appear plainly, in that he is not afraid to declare and witness forth to the
unbeleeving world, what great things the Lord has done in and for his soul,
though he receive nothing from the world but scandal, persecution and reproach,
which was and is all the reward that the people of God do or ever shall
receive from the world; because they bear forth the witness of the Lord
against all its formal, covetous, self-ended Religion, which covers it self
under the mantle of Christ, thereby to gain the honor, riches, and pleasant
endowments of the earth, and makes the mercy and goodness of God which leads
into all charity toward All creatures, a cloak for them to hide their carnal
and selfish practices under; but this Poor heart having cast off and abandoned
the cloaks of shame, and renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, deals not
craftily, neither handles the word of God deceitfully, but declares the truth
to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

For, first here is laid open the foundation, declaring that there is no peace,
life, power, wisdom, righteousness, nor Eternal happiness in any other but in
Jesus Christ, and the heart of the Fathers love made manifest in flesh; And
also that there is no way to attain to the knowledge of this Jesus, but by his
own life, power, and wisdom; And this is that which makes the professing ones
in this (as in all ages) to bend their utmost power and strength against it;
For, now cries BABEL (that is hunting after God, on purpose to get worldly power
and riches into its hand, that when by its pretended Religion it has got
earthly power, it may oppress, persecute, and undo the poor groaning and
distressed Saints of Jesus Christ, who have relinquisht the world that they may
serve him, in doing good to every one of his creatures) if this truth (says
she) go forward, then the hope of all our gain is gone, and we shall no longer
be applauded, esteemed or set by; for this teaches all men to deny themselves,
to forsake the world The riches, pleasures, and profits thereof, and always to
do good, by relieving the oppressed, and paying the debts of the imprisoned,
and that every poor captive may go free.

Nay, and not only so, but also it declares the emptiness of all our Forms,
Negative Religions, Duties, precise Walkings, preachings, prayings, and all
other of our Customs and Observations; therefore is she forced to seek the
downfall of it, or otherwise to lose all her self-glory. But, O ye Religious
Ones! let me ask you one Question or two; Did Christ or his Apostles deny all
ou^ward gross sins, as drunkenness, swearing, lying, and the like, that they
might become covetous, proud, and powerful in the world? as it is too too
apparent by your practice YE do; as I shall clearly evince and demonstrate, in
these ensuing particulars.

1. Is there any that have increased and advanced their carnal and worldly
estates more then you in these times?

2. Is there any that flatter men in Authority more then you? and if for any
other end then earthly preferment, let the effects and fruits speak. I know
your pretenses are, that you aim at the glory of God; but what are the fruits?
are they not self-glory? for who are more self-seeking, who more rich, who more
high and potent then you? who are more desirous of worldly honor and rule then
you? And, why do you say the Scriptures are a rule of life, and make them no
less then God; and walk not according to their Rule? Do you ever read in
Scripture, that Christ or his Apostles grew rich and mighty in the world by
declaring and witnessing forth the truth in life and doctrine? and wherefore
are you not like them? And ought not all to follow their examples? if They
ought, then why do not you? Where is that self-denial and forsaking the world
that Christ so often commands and exhorts to, amongst you who are embracing and
thrusting after the world with all eagerness, and love to go in long
clothing, to be known from other men, that ye may receive Greetings in
Markets, and the chief seats in the Synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at
Feasts? these are the things that please you: How can you believe, who thus
love to receive Honor of men, and seek not that which is of God? Would it not
be a happiness to you to have the Scripture changed into another form? where it
says, forsake the world, deny thy self, that it might say, embrace the world,
and cleave to thy self; for sure I am, the one agrees more with your ways
then the other.

But now to my second Question, did ever Christ or his Apostles persecute and
hate any that were not of their minds, yea or no? if they did not, then why do
you? And where is that spirit of love amongst you, that is kind to the evil
and unthankful? and why do you seek to civil Governors to assist in upholding
that you call your Religion, and in punishing all those that are contrary to
it, seeing Christ and his Apostles did not so? does it not hence plainly
appear, that you own the Scripture in words, but denies it in your practice? Oh
my dear Hearts! Are you talking of the Word being a rule, of being frequent in
duties, of becoming obedient to Gods revealed will, and walk not according to
that rule, but in words and outward restraint of some common vices? have any of
you at any time given freely of your goods to the poor, or relieved poor
Captives imprisoned for debt, or visited the poor Widows and Fatherless
children in their necessities, purely for Christ's sake? nay this is not with
you; and if it were, what were it available if it should not be from a right
Principle; yet I know you can speak well, but alas that helps not.

Well, thus I have clearly declared your estate; it therefore now remains to
show unto you, why you do all these things; even because you have not known
Christ nor the father working in you death to all these devilish deceits, that
your souls might come to live in him who is Truth it self, And then you would
not only be professors, but possessors of that Eternal love which would lead
you into the truth and goodness in sincerity.

But because this friend of truth will not, nor cannot own, your outside
worship, he having by Gods power found the deceit thereof, he is therefore by
you cast out as a Heretic, and so are all those that in truth and uprightness
of heart, are led and acted forth by God, to work his own works; for Wisdom is
justified of her Children.

The second thing that is breathed forth in this book, is this, that as Christ
is the Foundation, so he alone it is that does build upon this Foundation, that
building that will stand when all other shall and must fall; and not only so,
but he likewise begins the work of his own power in every particular soul and
carries on the same with his own hand, in despite of all opposition; causing
flesh and all the power thereof, to fall down before his face, into death,
misery, judgment, and condemnation, where all the glory of the first creation,
is sealed down under the covenant of death, never to rise again in its own
strength, power, wisdom, nor righteousness; but if ever it rise again, it may
rise in the power, wisdom, and righteousness of Jesus, the Eternal Son of the
living God.

And thus God exercises his people under the administration of his power, by
bringing life out of death, mercy out of misery, fullness out of emptiness,
strength out of weakness, sufficiency out of insufficiency, joy out of sorrow,
peace out of war, and does not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking
flax, until he has brought forth judgment into victory; and as he begineth and
carries on his own work so also he it is and none but he that perfects it, as
says the Apostle, he that has begun a good work will perfect it; For it was
the Eternal love of the Lord which by his Son planted the righteous seed in
every soul of his, and it is the same power and love that causes it to grow
in the spirit of man above all carnal power, strength, or policy; for the pure
seed shall reign till all its enemies be subdued, and the spirits of those in
whom it is, perfectly redeemed from the Shrines and Vizzards of mortality.

Oh how it does cheer my heart! to see our near and dear IMMANVEL springing
forth unto the blind world in and through earthen vessels, to the praise of the
glory of Gods great grace, who has made us accepted in his beloved Therefore
Reader, if thou find any of these workings in thy own soul, then may thou
know that they are no fictions, but the real operations of Gods great power;
but if thou look not on them in the light of truth, there will be no unity
between thee and the party through whom they were uttered; for he lives in the
life of that which here is declared by words, and if thou live in the same
life, and look upon them in the same light, then will they be matter of
rejoicing to thy soul; but if thou look upon them any other way, they will be
nothing to thee but Parables and Riddles. Thus hoping and knowing that God will
make this work and every other, work together for good to them that love him, I
commend thee to God and to the work of his grace; Resting thy Brother and
Companion in tribulation, in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ,

THO. SOMERTON.

THE TITLES, CONTENTS, And TEXTS contained in this Book.
1. THe Vail of the Covering spread over All Nations.

What it is, and How removed, with a Discovery of that Mountain of Fat things
full of Marrow and Wine on the Lees well refined.

Delivered on a Public Day of Thanksgiving, the 23. of June 1653. at
Alhallowes Lumbard street.

Upon ESA. 25.6, 7.

In this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto All people a Feast of Fat
things, A Feast of Wines on the Lees, etc. In one Sermon.

2. THe Builders of Babel confounded in their Language.

Being an Exposition by Mr. Webster at the end of a Disputation at Alhallows
Lumbard street. He being requested to dismiss the multitude with some
profitable exhortation, which was from Genesis 11. the nine first verses.

And the whole Earth was of one Language, and of one Speech; and it came to
pass as they journyed from the East, they found a Plain in the land of Shinar,
and they dwelt there; and they said one to another, Go too, let us make brick
and burn them thoroughly, etc.

3. THe Power of Divine Attraction, or The Fathers great love in drawing poor
Sinners unto his Son.

Delivered at White Hall,

On JOH. 6.44.

No man can come unto me except the Father which has sent me draw him, and I
will raise him up at the last day. In one Sermon.

4. THe Cloud taken off the Tabernacle, that the Israel of God may journey. At
Alhallows Lumbard street. In two Sermons.

EXODUS 40.36, 37, 38.

And when the Cloud was taken up from over the Tabernacle, then the Children of
Israel went onward in all their journeys: But if the Cloud were not taken up,
they journyed not until the day it was taken up, etc.

5. THe secret Southsayer or Hidden Sorcerer discovered.

At Alhallows Lumbard street. In two Sermons.

MICAH. 5.10, 11, 12, 13.

And I will cut off the Cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strong
holds. I will out off Witchcrafts out of thine hand, and thou shall have no
more Southsayers; Thy graven Images also will I cut of, and thy standing Images
out of the midst of thee, etc.

6. THe rooting up of every plant not planted by the Heavenly Father.

Delivered at Alhallows Lumbard street. In two Sermons.

MATTHEW. 15.13, 14.

Jesus answered and said, Every plant which my Heavenly Father has not planted
shall be rooted up: Let them alone, they be blind leaders of the blind; and if
the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

7. THe Saints perfect freedom, or Liberty in Christ asserted, in opposition to
all yoaks of bondage.

At Alhallows Lumbard street. In two Sermons.

GALA. 5.1.

Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us Free, and be
not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

8. IN the second of these last Sermons, Mr. Webster was freely drawn forth to
give that Testimony to Dr. Everards Sermons lately printed, which is placed at
the end of the Book; and are all the Sermons can be expected of his, there
being not any more preserved. Which are sold by R. Harford at the Bible and
States-Arms in Little Britain.

9. LAstly, hereunto is added A Responsion by Mr. Jo. Webster to certain
pretended Arguments against his Book, called The Saints Guide.

Reader,

THere are some few faults escaped at the Press, some litteral, others in some
owrds mistaken, but being only such as an indifferent understanding may
perceive, and rectify, we have not set them down in an Errata: But tender all
as it is, to the Experience, Love, and Acceptance of all, to whom these things
shall come, Greeting.

If any thing be obscure to the Reader, let him reflect into himself, to see
whether the cause be not want of experience in the Mysteries of Heaven, before
ever he adventure to Censure; For till men are really judged in themselves,
they are not fit to judge. But if thou can Feed here, fall too, And Much good
do thee; and if thou can not, censure not those that can.

Farewell.
THE Veil of the Covering, spread over All Nations, What it is; And how
removed.
With a Discovery of that Mountain of Fat things full of Marrow, And Wines on
the Lees well refined. Delivered on a public day of Thanksgiving, June 23.
1653.
ESAI. 25.6.7. etc. In this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all
people a Feast of fat things, a Feast of Wines on the Lees, of Fat things full
of Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined. And he will destroy in this
Mountain the face of the Covering cast over all people, and the Veil that is
spread over all Nations, etc.
THE Prophet in the former part of the Chapter, having seen and taken notice of
those wonderful works wrought by Jesus Christ, both in his Judgments and
Mercies, he breaks out into wonderful praise; rejoicing and admiration of his
wonderful Works, and of his Counsels of old, O Lord thou art my God, I will
exalt thee, I will praise thy name, V. 1.
for thou have done wonderful things, thy Counsels of old are faithfulness and
truth; In which, he gives thanks, as in the person of Jesus Christ, or as a
member of him, and expresses the deep and wonderful things which have been
wrought only and alone by Him. From whence we may take notice, that the songs
and praises of all Saints, are only and alone to magnify and lift up Jesus
Christ: Psalm. 29.9.
In his Temple every one speaks of his glory: they have nothing to say in
praise of man, of the power of man, wisdom of man, or the glory of man, of the
faithfulness of man, of the counsels of man, but of the Lord alone.

They are not telling forth what they have done, to bring glory to themselves;
or to set up their wisdom, or power, or parts, or any thing in them; of their
righteousness, of their holiness, of their love, of their joy, of their peace,
or any thing of this nature; Luk, 18.11.
as the Scribes and Pharisees, I am not so and so, and I do thus and thus,
thereby to magnify themselves, or to make others think highly of them; no, but
their songs and their praise is alone to exalt Jesus Christ, and to tell of his
doings, of his counsels, of his faithfulness and truth, of his mercies and
loving kindness, of his righteousness and judgments; this is their glory,
and this is their song.

In the Second verse, you may see how he sets out the spoils and the ruins
that Jesus Christ has made; Great and glorious Cities made heaps; of a
defensed City a ruin: That strong city Babel built up by the power and wisdom
of man, Genesis 11.
for his protection and defense, which he would raise up to Heaven, to prevent
destruction hereafter, that the deluge of wrath may not swallow him up; The
soul having seen the Almighty power of Jesus Christ, ruining, and bringing
down this Tower, and this BABEL in himself, and making all this work power,
wisdom, providence of man, of self and flesh to be made Babble, Confusion; here
now, the Saints give all the glory to Jesus Christ alone; Man finds that he was
raising a Temple, setting up a Worship of his own devising; for what end? that
he may secure himself, provide for himself, deliver himself from wrath, from
hell, from the overflowing scourge, from the devouring flood; he thought
himself to be wonderful in working and glorying in his own devices, Esa. 28.15
in his own religion, in his own forms, and thereby thought this Tower would
secure him, no deluge could reach him, he was above all danger; as Paul, he was
marching on confidently and boldly in his own uprightness, and thought he
acted all things according to the rule; Acts 9. and chapter 26.9. Psalm. 49.11. Dan.
4.30.
Now in the height of all his pride and confidence, Jesus Christ brings him
down, smites him from his horse, he had built a city (as it were) and called it
by his own name, mangified his own strictness, his own holiness, and said as
Nebuchadnezzer, Is not this great Babel that I have builded? Now the soul
seeing all this to be a lie, to be confusion, and a deceit, and a delusion, and
all turned by Jesus Christ into ruin and confusion in his own soul, and not a
stone left upon a stone which is not thrown down; Matthew. 24.2.
this the soul comes to see is alone the work of Christ; that he has made, of
a glorious city an heap, Esai. 25.2.
and of a defenced City a ruinous place of strangers: and this to be no City
and shall never be built again: when once Jesus Christ pulls down Babel in us,
it shall never be built again: He has laid it all flat to the ground. All of
man's setting up must be utterly ruined: no part of that building set up upon
the ruins of man's power, wisdom, strength, parts, will Christ make any use of
for his kingdom, but all must be ruined, Luke 21.6. Ezekiel. 21.27.
laid flat to the ground, and he will not leave a stone upon a stone. The work
of Christ is an overthrowing, overturning, overturning work: the work of Christ
is to slay, strip, and undo men: to strip them of all conceit of themselves to
lay them flat to the earth, to equal and level them with the worst of men. The
work of the Devil is to build up man in his own wisdom, in his own strength, to
make him something; to cry peace peace to him, when there is no peace; Jer.
6.14.
to put wrath far away, and to tell him he is thus and thus, he has such love
and charity, and meekness, and conformity to the will of Christ, and therefore
fear not, Matthew. 16.22.
none of all those things shall happen to thee. When indeed this is nothing but
the work and wisdom of the Devil in man: Esai. 28.15.
to make him secure, and put the evil day far from him and thereby has made a
covenant with death and hell; and of all men, he shall be preserved from ruin;
why? he is a holy man, he has submitted to ordinances, he is under the purest
forms, most agreeable to the will and mind of Christ: Whenas all this may be
nothing but the work of the devil in man, merely to delude him, and to keep
away guilt, that he may not see the bottomless gulf of sin and delusion that
is in his own heart.

But when once Jesus Christ has thus declared his power in this soul, and
brought forth his eternal counsels in it, then he comes to see that all this is
done in faithfulness and loving kindness, and in tender compassion; then he
comes to see that he was deluded, Hos. 12.1.
and fed himself with lies, with wind and vanity, and that the way to safety
was not to build up this Babel, Esaias 25.4
but to bring it into confusion: for, says he, in the fourth verse; Thou have
been a strength to the poor and needy in their distress, a refuge from the
storm, a shadow from the heat. So that you see, the matter of Saints praises is
only to magnify and set up, and exalt and make Christ great and wonderful.
They cannot say any thing of themselves, or of men, for they see them to be
nothing but sin, and the fountain of misery, desolation, and destruction, even
the very best, the highest, the holiest in their own esteem. And so he goes on,
Thou shall bring down the noise of the strangers, etc. the branch and the
Terrible ones shall be brought low: V. 5.
And all this is, but to show forth what further work Christ makes; how he goes
on making more Havoc in Satan's building; Man's work, or the work of Satan in
him, is to set up and exalt the wisdom of man, and power and holiness of man,
and to slight and debase the wisdom, holiness, and power of God, all this is
foolishness; but his own is wisdom indeed, and holiness indeed: Now the work of
Christ is to pull down these strong holds and high imaginations: 2 Cor. 10.4.
Babel must be confounded, and Bethel must be erected: Christ will himself set
up his own Temple, his own house, his own Kingdom, and will bring man to see
that he is nothing but want and misery, Note.
emptiness and confusion, sin and death, Hell and condemnation: And that Jesus
Christ alone is fullness, riches, life, light, glory, and all that can be named
or esteemed good, and man s nothing but what may be named and esteemed evil,
And this is certainly the work that Christ makes in every soul wherever He
enters: And Christ brings the soul really to see, All this true, in it self,
all done and acted in man: that this Babel, and this Antichrist is set up in
him; and also, that the power and wisdom of Jesus Christ has ruined and
destroyed them in him; and that this can be no other, but the work of Christ,
conquering and bringing all things, even every thought, into subjection in him,
Jude. v. 5.
and he gives him the sole praise and glory of these mighty works in him, why?
for he knows he had no hand in it himself: he could not believe of himself,
repent of himself: never would the strong man bind himself, ruin himself; Luke
11.22,
but when a stronger then he comes, then he is disarmed, and never before: and
thus he sees himself delivered from bondage, set free from the devils chains,
brought out of Babylon; and that Christ alone is all in all, he is all fullness
and no emptiness, all riches and no want, all wisdom and no folly, all
righteousness and no impurity at all: But contrary, himself to be nothing but
emptiness and nothingness, darkness, misery, folly, madness; folly and madness
is in his heart while he lives, Eccl. 9.3.
and afterward goes down into the pit: while men thus build up themselves, and
have these high opinions of themselves, they are in the pit, in darkness, in
misery, in bondage, but they see it not, till at length they fall down and sink
into it for ever.

But where Christ appears in mercy, there he brings down the noise of
strangers, all this in man and of man is but the noise of strangers, though man
have a high opinion of himself, and glories in these conceits, and thinks
himself in the Kings favor, and if any shall be saved he shall, and so blesses
himself and all is well, and no wrath, nor no devil, nor no hell, shall come
near him; yet alas, this is but the noise and the voice of strangers, which
must be brought down, Christ cannot own this voice (for it is the voice of
strangers) but will bring it down to hell and to the sides of the pit, for,
Esa. 14.15
all this language is nothing else but the language of death, and the language
of Babel, the language of the devil, and the language of confusion: all this is
but the branches of the Terrible ones; Esaias 25.5
the branch which has enlarged and spread it self over the whole earth; Psalm.
14.3.
Every one is gone astray, and there is none that does good, no not one. And
all the imagination of man's beart is evil, Genesis 6.5.
and only evil continually: not a man upon the face of the whole earth, but this
branch has spread it self over him, Esaias 30.3
and he sits under the shadow of it; he has something of man to shroud and
cover himself withal, This is the branch of the terrible one, that Jesus
Christ will cut down. Man's holiness bears great sway, and who dare speak against
it? Its high and lifted up, and reaches to heaven, yet the power and
faithfulness of Christ shall bring it low, it shall fall and never rise again,
Ibid. 24.20.
and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it. And cursed be he that
builds again the walls of Jerico.

And then he comes to the verses read, what shall come to pass after the
accomplishment of all these things, In this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts
make unto all people a Feast of fat things, etc. He spoke not of any mountain
before, but of a branch, and he presently changes the metaphor, and speaks of
a mountain. It shows us thus much (by the way) that there is not any one thing
in the World but it holds forth Jesus Christ: Note.
all the whole creation is a representation of Jesus Christ: all tipes, all
metaphors are resemblances of him.

In this Mountain: Mountains are things of the greatest strength, most stable,
most immovable, most durable: and he is in Scripture often called, The mountain
of strength, The mountain of holiness, Jer. 31.23. Esaias 33.6
The strength of Salvation, and the Mountain of his Glory. No man ever comes
into the mountain of strength, nor into the mountain of Glory, nor of Holiness,
nor of Salvation, till they come to Jesus Christ: strength and glory and riches
and power and righteousness and peace is only to be had in him and no where
else, only In this Mountain will the Lord of Hosts make a feast of fat things
full of Marrow, Esaias 12.3 Rev. 2:17.
and wine on the Lees well refined; in him only can we drink out of the wells
of Salvation, and eat of the hidden Manna: So that these words contain a
further making out of the excellency and glory of Jesus Christ, unto miserable
and undone man: If once man come to be thus lost, undone, and brought down in
himself, then will Jesus Christ make him a Feast of fat things; if once his
peace be lost, his righteousness lost, his joy lost, his help lost, his strength
lost, then will Jesus Christ be all these unto him, he will make out a peace
for him, a righteousness for him, a glory for him; he will be to him, a feast
of fat things full of marrow, and wine on the lees well refined.

And so, as he says in the next verse, I will destroy in this mountain, the
face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all
Nations. That is, man's opinion of his own goodness, his seeming righteousness,
which was as a covering, as a vail, that man could not see himself miserable
and under wrath and hell and darkness: This is the covering; every man
naturally has an opinion of his own goodness, he has something or other to
cover himself withal; but some have finer, and (as they conceive) richer
coverings then others, they think they have more holiness, and more repentance,
and more love, and more good works: and these are by so much the worse, these
are at a farther distance from the Kingdom of Heaven: Matthew. 21.31,
And Publicans and Harlots, and the vilest sinners shall go into the Kingdom
of heaven, and they themselves (that have so much holiness) shall be shut out:
Luke 23.45.
Here now The vail of the Temple must be rent, from the top to the bottom, The
rock of their righteousness must be rent, their shame must be laid open, Ibid.
12.3.
what they have done in the secret chambers of their own hearts, must now be
proclaimed upon the house top, they cannot conceal it, the covering is removed:
Now they come to see that Jesus Christ is only the rock of their righteousness,
and that they have none at all; all other rocks, all other righteousnesses must
be rent, that so their want, their misery, their condemnation, their hell,
their horror, their darkness and delusion, may be discovered: and if men be
once brought to this, to be content to be miserable (as indeed all mankind is
by reason of the fall) to be content to see themselves undone, to be shut up
under the wrath of God, condemnation sealed upon them, and the pit to have shut
her mouth upon them: having once thus lost all their power, wisdom,
righteousness, then all death, hell and darkness shall be swallowed up in the
death of Christ, Then he will as it is in the eighth verse, Esaias 25.8
Swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God shall wipe away all tears from
all faces: In this mountain he will take away all sorrow, and the rebuke of
their sins, all guilt, all condemnation, all bonds, all captivity, all strong
holds, all chains, all death, all fears, griefs, terrors, and all things of
that nature: This rock, this mountain will swallow up all, and so take away the
rebuke of his people.

When a man is brought into this mountain, he shall be thus fed with fat things
and wine on the lees, and all tears washed away, nothing left of that nature
and this is that day of the Lord, this is the Lords resting day, and this is
the souls Sabbath and resting day, when all rebukes, all frowns, all griefs
are removed: All other Sabbaths and rests external are but figures and
representations of this true rest. And then it follows in the ninth verse, And
it shall be said in that day, Lo, Esaias 25.9
this is our God, we have waited for him, this is the Lord, we have waited for
him, he will save us, and we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation, for in
this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, etc. when Christ has thus
appeared to the destruction of all things in man and has brought him out of
himself, and has ruined all his strength, righteousness, wisdom, etc. then
Christ will be all in all to him, then will he feast him in this mountain; and
the soul seeing all these things accomplished in it self, then it cannot choose
but rejoice, triumph and sing; Even the Song of Moses and the Lamb, This is our
God that we have waited for: This is the Lord, in him alone is power, and
wisdom, and righteousness, loving kindnesses and tender merecies, Thou O Lord
only art worthy to receive honor, Rev. 4.11.
and glory, and power, thou alone art our strength, and Our salvation; all
their happiness is concentred in this One God, and they have no God but him, no
Savior but him; they have but One God, and one faith, and one baptism, Ephesians.
4.4, 5, 6.
One body, one spirit, one hope; One Lord, one God and father of all, who is
above all, and through all, and in all. They rejoice in this, that they see
themselves made nothing, that they are emptied of themselves, of their power,
wisdom, righteousness: they now rejoice, triumph and sing because the vail of
covering of the all Nations is removed, in their hearts: that their high
thoughts are brought down, that their wisdom is made folly, that their opinion
of their own glory, of their own somethingness, of their own holiness is
removed, and Christ alone is He in whom they enjoy all things.

From hence ye may conclude upon this point:

That Christ alone is the Saints strong mountain, and their feast of all good
things. He is only their mountain of strength, he is their joy and their song,
he has rent and destroyed the face of the Covering which is upon all people;
they see that none can remove this Covering, but Christ alone: and therefore he
having done this in them and for them, Psalm. 4.7.
this rejoices their hearts far more then if he had increased their Corn, or
their Wine, or their Oil: here is their feast, here is their day of
Thanksgiving, here is their Sabbath, which shall never end; here is their
marrow and fatness, here their wine, and their fat things full of marrow: He is
their mountain, their glory, their rock; and all this they see is wrought in
them by the power only of Jesus Christ. And this adds to their rejoicing, that
they see they had no hand in it, they see that they did not choose him, but he
chose them; that they instead of choosing him, ran away from him, opposed him,
fought against him; and yet he followed them, and never left them till he had
conquered them: and this now is their joy, and their praise, and their song;
and nothing in heaven or earth shall be exalted or magnified by them, but only
Jesus Christ, their strong mountain, their feast of all good things.

These Souls only come to see, that there is a vail, and that this is the vail
of Covering spread over all Nations; all those, upon whom the vail is, see not
the vail, but he only in whom it is rent, from whom its removed: And all their
desire is, that it may be removed from all people, that others may see that
which he sees, and enjoy that which he enjoyes, that Christ may be a mountain
to them as he is to him, a rock to them as he is to him, a feast to them as he
is to him. And they can say truly, and name this mountain Jehovah-jireh;
only in the mount of the Lord, can this be seen: Abraham could not sacrifice
his Son, till he came up into this mount: once come in to this mountain, then
the soul can part with all things for the love of Christ, nothing is so dear
as Christ. And this is the conclusion wrought by the Spirit in Abraham:
Jehovah-jireh, says he, in the mount of the Lord it shall be seen: there is no
seeing any of these things, nor there is no true feasting till we come into
this mount of the Lord. What was that going up of Abraham to the mount Moriah
think you? In the truth of it, it was no other thing but this, his going up
from himself, and out of himself, forsaking all things for this one thing, and
coming up to this mountain of the Lod, where the Lord alone was all in all:
Beloved, know this for truth, there is no wisdom, no rightousnesse, no
strength, etc. nowhere else, but here, In the mount of the Lord it shall be
seen, and nowhere else: There is no self-denial, no true repentance, no
conquering of the least sin, no true peace, no joy, no love, no wisdom but
only in this mount; whatever men pretend, that they are wise, or holy, and the
like, it is all but deceit and a delusion, till we come up to the Mount, till
this Veil be removed: we can never bind the strong man, we can never cut off
our right hands, or pull out our right eye til then; Matthew. 29 30.
we can never forsake our selves, we can never deny our own power, wisdom and
holiness.

Here now is this mountain of strength, here it was that Abraham staggered not
through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God. Romans 4.17.20:
Here he (...) and was fully persuaded that he that had promised was able to
perform; that though Isaac were sacrificed, yet God was he who could quicken
the dead, and calls things which are not as though they were. Herein was
Abraham, the father of the faithful, and Isaac the seed of many Nations, and
all the faithful are his seed in this: And his going up to the Mountain, is no
other but what is done by all the faithful; that litteral mountain, was not the
truth, but only the figure of this strong mountain Jesus Christ, he is that
mountain spoken of Esai. 2.2. called there the mountain of the Lords house,
Esa. 2.2.
which shall be established on the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted
above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. Jesus Christ is that
mountain, who is unalterable, unmovable, unchangable, never to be shaken, nor
never to be removed: and to be established on the top of all mountains above
all the mountains of man: the mountains of man's wisdom, of man's
righteousness, which were esteemed (by men) never so high, never so strong,
yet this mountain shall overtop them all, and be established above all.
Beloved, none come to know these things, but those in whom they are wrought, in
whom the Veil of the covering is removed; men may pretend to these things and
be very confident they enjoy them, when indeed they are under the Covering to
this very day.

This is that stone also that Daniel speaks of, Dan. 2. which was cut out of
the mountain without hands, which smote the Image, which was so terrible in the
form thereof, Dan. 2.
he head being of fine Gold, his breast and arms of Silver, his belly and
thighs of Brass, his legs of Iron, and his feet part Iron and part clay. Now
the stone cut out without hands, smote this terrible Image, and it self became
a great mountain, V. 25.
and filled the whole earth: However this may be applicable (as by some it is)
to the outward Monarchies in the world, one succeeding and overcomming another:
yet, all those things are but figures of the truth: for those things are not
done without hands: but the truth is done in spirit: whatever it is that men
set up to shelter themselves under, any form, any religion to defend themselves
from the wrath of God, from the guilt of sin, from seeing themselves odious,
with all their righteousness and rags, All things of that nature are Images, and
are such Images, and so Terrible that no man is able to break them to pieces:
it is only The Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, can bring them down
or break them to pieces. These Images are diverse, and of several tempers and
conditions; some are of Clay, that is, some are of low rudiments, poor and mean
things that Men set up and rely upon and shelter themselves with all, their
good meanings and good hopes and the like; and these may be esteemed but as the
feet of this Image: others go higher, and they depend up on things of more
worth and strength, that seem to be made of Iron, they cloth themselves with
moral virtues, and put confidence in them, and these they think will defend
and save them: But there are some that go higher then all these, and they
pretend to cloth themselves with the garments of Jesus Christ himself, and
the graces of the Spirit, and in these they glory: and this glisters like Gold,
but it is not Gold, and they seem to have faith, but have not faith, and love,
but it is not love, and patience, but it is not patience, etc. And they are no
other but Images and Idols, upon which many men (professing Religion, and under
the strictest forms and fellowships) rely, and shelter themselves under, and
think these will defend and protect them from hell and destruction, and Gods
wrath: these things cover them and cover the wickedness of their hearts, that
they cannot see themselves how vile they are, how infinitely wicked in the sight
of God; Esaias 30.1
these cover themselves with a covering, but not with the Lords spirit, Woe be
to all such; for these poor souls do most pitifully and miserably delude
themselves: these instead of putting on the rich and glorious robe of Christ's
righteousness, do cloth themselves with the stinking, loathsome, abominable
and divelish righteousness of man: I, and they prefer it before the
excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ: and of these Christ himself says,
verily, such can never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but Publicans and
Harlots, and the vilest of sinners shall enter into the Kingdom, Matthew. 21.31.
when they shall be shut out. For these are those that have put the stumbling
block of their iniquity before their face, as the Lord says by Ezekiel; and
have set up their Idols in their heart, Ezekiel. 7.19. and 14.4. etc.
and yet come to enquire after the Lord; and these men of all other will the
Lord cut off; these men the Lord will answer, them by himself, and will set
his face against them, and will make a sign and a proverb above all other, and
will cut them off from the midst of his people Israel: I will answer them
according to the multitude of their Idols, says God, and will not be enquired of
at all by them, for these are the rebellious house: These commit the highest
abominations: These set up their posts by the Lords posts, and their thresholds
by his threshold; which is the highest iniquity: These have daubed up a wall
with untempered mortar; they are the Wall; and the Prophets that prophecy
peace to them, they are the daubers, and the sowers of pillows under all
armholes, that pollute the Lord among his people for handfulls of Barley, and
for pieces of Bread, that slay the souls that should not dye, and save the
souls alive that should not live, by their lying to his people that hear and
receive their lies; having made the righteous sad, Ezekiel. 8.12. and 18. Esa.
29.15.
and strengthened the hands of the wicked that he should not return from his
wicked way by promising and showing him the true way of life. These are those
of the house of Israel that have set up the Idols of Jealousy in the Chambers
of their Imagery, and dig deep and think to hide their Counsels from the Lord,
and these are their Idols and their Gods they worship, serve, rely upon, and
sacrifice to: Therefore with these will the Lord deal in fury, because these
wipe their mouths and put the branch to their nose and please themselves in
their own Idols, and with the gods that their own hands have made.

Now men being thus confident in their own righteousness, and thinking this
form, and that duty, and their strict walking, shall deliver and protect them,
and they resting secure under this mighty Image, then comes the Stone cut out
of the Mountains and breaks in pieces this glorious Image; Dan. 2.45.
It falls upon all their duties, upon all their righteousness, upon all their
towers, upon all their Idols, and crushes them all to pieces, breaks in pieces
that stately Image made of iron and clay, and brass, and silver, and gold, and
makes all their high opinions of themselves become like the chaff upon the
summers threshing floor that the wind carries away. Ib. 2.35.
And then they are brought to see, that all their confidence was but an Idol,
an Image, a Lie, Vanity, wind, delusion. And then, and never before, this
little stone becomes (in them) a great Mountain, and this fill the whole earth:
Man being once discovered to be, as he is, Vanity, a Lie, Babel, Confusion,
Darkness, Hell, Horror, Misery, and what not, with all his glorious
righteousnesses, discovering them to be but rags, Esai. 64.6.
and filthy rags; when man is brought really and not in words only, (for that
is part of the Covering) to be nothing but sin, emptiness, nothingnesse;
then is the work begun, the foundation laid: Thou art Peter, upon this rock
will I build my Church: Matthew. 16.18.
and the foundation being thus laid, the gates of Hell shall never prevail
against it: the other building was but upon the sand, and cannot withstand when
therain falls and the winds and storms blow, but the fall thereof will be great;
but when this work is brought about in the soul, that man is laid low, made
nothing, emptied of himself: this is a foundation upon which building, let the
rain fall, Ibid. 7.25
and the winds blow, and the storms beat, yet it shall stand, because it is
founded upon a rock. This rock is only and alone Jesus Christ, that blessed
eternal rock of ages; upon whom all the Saints from the foundation of the world
to its consummation are founded and bottomed, as upon mount Sion, which shall
never be removed: All the Patriarcks and Prophets give testimony of this rock;
to him that is the rock of ages, and is that great Mountain that shall fill the
whole earth: He that shall only reign, and shall be all in all, whose Kingdom
alone shall be exalted: 1 Cor. 10.4.
All the Fathers drank of this rock; as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.4. they
were baptized unto Moses, but they all eat the same spiritual meat, and all did
drink of the same spiritual drink; for they drank of that spiritual rock that
followed them, and that rock was Christ.

He is that unspeakable glory, power, majesty, eternity, etc. that can never be
lift up enough, never able to be unfolded nor set forth by Men and Angels
according to his greatness, his goodness, his unchangablenesse, his glory,
his wisdom and infiniteness: He is the wonder of ages, the brightness of his
Fathers Glory, Heb. 1.3.
and the express Image of his person: He it is that is set forth by all
creatures, by all Types, Metaphors, Representations, and yet all come infinitely
short of him. He that once comes into this mountain we have been speaking of,
he shall be fed with these fat things: there is no attaining these high and fat
things but in the Lords Mountain; it is not man's Mountain, nor man's fat things
can feast us with these things: but this man shall be fed and shall have the
Vail rent from the top to the bottom: the Covering that is the Covering of the
Veil of all Nations, that is more or less upon every man; But it is He only
in whom man's glorious Temple is destroyed, and all of man's building laid flat,
and not a stone left upon a stone, Mat. 24.2.
that is not thrown down.

That we may come and make some use of all we have said, and apply it to our
selves:

This discovers, hew out by their own wisdom, or power, and frame never such
curious Images, they are all abominable, all must be destroyed, broke to
pieces, blown away, made nothing: All fat things are only to be had in this
mountain; There is no destroying the Vail of the Covering of all Nations, no
bringing man to see his own misery, his own hell, his own darkness, but here;
no showing man the excellency of the riches and glory of Christ, but here; no
true feast, but here; all other feasts are but death and poison: what ever
feast man provides, or takes content in, he feeds himself with lies, he is but
as an hungry man still, that dreams he eats, and when he awakes he is empty:
but this Feast of fat things, and Wine on the lees, Esaias 29.8
and fat things full of marrow, and wine on the lees well refined, is only
prepared and given unto us by Jesus Christ; Man naturally feeds upon nothing
but sin and misery, and hell and damnation: and these are sweet to him: why?
because there is a vail upon them, the Covering of all Nations; some things,
more or less excellent, some righteousness, some holiness, some duties, some
reformation, some forms, some shadows; and These are the Covering, by reason of
which he neithr sees nor tastes death, nor hell, nor destruction. In Christ
there is all life, all rest, all peace, all discovery of good things; but if
man remain in himself, and dwell in his own mountain, there is all darkness,
and all deformity, nothing but death, trouble, briars, thorns; but it never
appears so, till but death, trouble, briars, thorns; but it never appears so,
till the vail be taken away; till then, man is never stripped of himself, never
turned outward, but all is under this Covering; and while so, he blesses
himself and says I am safe, all is well, there is no death nor hell can come
near me, I am a reformed man, I walk exactly, I press after the strictest
rules of the word, I am under the purest Ordinances; here now, Genesis 3.6.
man eats death, and tastes of the forbidden tree, and the tree is sweet to
him, and to be desired.

But now when Christ comes into the soul really, all these thoughts are cursed,
damned, thrown to hell, and the man becomes vile, abominable in his own fight:
instead of seeing himself an heir of glory, as before, his thoughts are clean
altered: the vail, the Covering is removed, and he now sees himself an heir of
hell, a poor deluded undone creature: He sees THE ASS the flesh, must not go
up into the mountain with Abraham, but must be left below, let that bear the
burden, as fit and meet it should, let it bear the wrath of God, it must be
destroyed, it must be condemned, it must go to hell; All the glory of man, all
the excellency of nature, all the holiness of man, the wisdom of man, all must
be left below with the Ass, the flesh, at the bottom of the hill, and there
must be a going out of our selves, a loosing of our selves, that we may go up
to the mountain, and there be feasted, and there see visions, there see
strength, there see glory, there see power, there see riches, righteousness,
and all good things; then man shall see how he called evil good, and good evil,
Esaias 5.20
darkness light, and light darkness; there he shall be feasted with all
delights, there he shall see how wisdom has furnished her table, Prove. 9.2.
there the scales are removed; here he beholds Jacobs ladder; here is the
valley of Achor, here he enjoys his hopes, here he sees visions, and the third
heavens opened, and here he feeds upon the hidden Manna, etc.

But know this, Rev. 2.
that all these thing are not done at once, but by degrees; as man leaves the
Ass behind, so he ascends the mountain: as man goes out of himself, so he
enjoyes Jesus Christ, and is made one with him; as man is made nothing, so
Christ comes to be made all; man becomes all in Christ, and nothing in himself:
so far as man utterly denies himself, so far he eats of these fat things; when
he see himself oppressed with sin, or wrath, or hell, he presently runs to this
mountain when he is parched with drought he runs to this rock, to this fountain
of living waters; Jer. 17.13.
below in the valley in himself he can find no comfort, nothing but wrath, and
death, and darkensse, and destruction, there is is nothing but the bottomless
pit, there is nothing but madness and folly, nothing but lies and vanity;
there is nothing but fears and frights, horrors and amazements, and the smoke of
the bottomless pit: he now cries out, Woe is me, Rev. 9.2.
did I so much delude my self, to think my self to be wise, holy, etc. when as
there was nothing but folly, and an infiniteness, of madness! And now he sees
that there is in him Antichrist indeed, the beast with seven heads and ten
horns, and himself bearing the mark and image of the beast.

And all this the soul sees by faith, for faith is the souls eye; when Faith
goes up from its self, and looks upon Jesus Christ, there it sees all riches,
all glory, all wisdom, all unchangeableness, all purity, all life, all rest,
all in all; in a word, it sees him to be unutterable, unspeakable, and in him
things not able to be uttered, not fit to be uttered, but only to such as are
admitted into the same condition, for others cannot comprehend these words,
they are paradoxes and riddles: They see themselves to be nothing but sin and
horror, and there is the bottom or the foot of Jacobs Ladder; and they see
also Jesus Christ with all his riches, glory, power, wisdom, righteousness,
there is the top of the Ladder: these things are only to be seen in this
mountain.

When Saints by faith look down into what they are in themselves, they see
there is a bottomless pit of smoke and darkness, blackness of darkness,
darkness that may be felt, Exodus 10.21.
and they see the smonk covers the face of the whole earth: there he sees in
this valley such a bottomless depth of sin and Misery, that he is ashamed of
himself, and ashamed that others should see him to be so.

Now while the vail is untaken away, all the endeavor, all the wit, all the
power of the natural man, is, to keep on this covering, to keep it from being
rent: he would by no means have it removed, he would upon no terms see himself
as he it, to see himself undone; to be nohing but emptiness and misery, this
kindles the fire of hell in him: what? he that thought himself so holy, so full
of goodness; now to see himself to be so far deluded as to be all sin, and all
darkness, and all hell: he that thought himself to be a lover of God, and a
lover of righteousness, to be no other but a hater of God, and a bater of true
holiness, and a hater of the truth! Oh now, by all means, he would cover and
hide this monstrous Image from himself, and others: he would not for all the
world see himself, nor have others see him, thus vile, and thus miserable, but
the contrary to admire himself, to magnify himself as good, excellent and
holy; but when Jesus Christ comes, he will in despite of all man's wisdom, and
cunning, and power, discover him to himself; he shall whether he will or no,
behold his own shape, see himself in his own colors: Then he cries out, Ob
miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me? ^^m. 7.24
Lord help me, I am undone, I am a man of polluted lips; and with Peter, Lord
help or I perish, I shall fink for ever into this bottomless gulf, from
whence there is no redemption.

He sees now the vail rent, and himself lost for ever: and that such is the
bottomlesness of this gulf that he is in, that nothing can redeem him thence,
but only the blood of Christ; no hand can help him, but only the infinite
bottomless mercy of the Son of God. He sees now nothing in Heaven or earth, no
righteousness of men or Angels could suffice for his ransom, but Jesus Christ
alone, the Son of God himself, must lay down his life to redeem him out of the
nethermost hell: Now Christ revealing this to him, he hereby ascends up into
this mountain, and there he feasts, and there he has all his wisdom, all his
power, all his life, all his meat, Jer. 17.13
all his living waters: here, he now has all his teachings; he now sees
Christ's mountain exalted upon the top of all mountains, above the top of all
man's mountains, of wisdom, power, holiness, etc. though they have been raised
in man's esteem never so high, and esteemed as the mountains of the Lord; he
sees his knowledge now mere folly, his wisdom, darkness; his righteousness,
sin; his power, weakness; his glory, shame; his Heaven, Hell: this he sees in
himself, and he can see nothing else but this misery and this blindness upon
the face of the whole earth; every man is under this darkness, is under this
Covering, the face of the Covering of all Nations.

Christ went up to the mountain, and taught the people. Mal. 2.2.
The truth is, this is that mountain where Christ alone teaches: all other
teachings are folly and ignorance till we hear the word at his mouth: Here in
this mountain the soul beholds visions, and receives the manifestations of
Christ, and the mysteries of the kingdom; hereit sees from the bottom to the
top of Jacob, Ladder: Mat. 24.15.
here he sees the Abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet,
that had it not been for the love of Christ, the mere power and hand of Christ,
he had been gone for ever; lost for ever, swallowed up in a mystery of iniquity;
but when Christ brings him into this mount, then he sees himself escaped, then
he sees Sodom and Gomorah all on a flame, all self and flesh, and al man's
wisdom and righteousness burnt up, and the smoke thereof ascend as the smoke of
a furnace: and then he can say experimentally Jehovahjireh; Genesis 22.14.
In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.

Saints can testify of these things, because they have seen and felt them done
in themselves, and it is that which their hands have handled of the word of life:
1 John 1.1.
they can give testimony to the wisdom of Christ, to the power of Christ, to
the righteousness of Christ, to the evrlasting, and unexpressible goodness of
Christ, as it is expressed and put forth in their hearts; they can give no
testimony of man, of any goodness, wisdom, power, etc. in themselves, but they
know Christ to be all in all: he see man and himself, and all things of man to
be nothing but a pit of darkness, a lump of sin, a gulf of misery, without the
least wisdom, goodness or power; but whatever is good or strong, or holy in
him, it is not himself, it is not of man, but of an from Christ alone: he sees
experimentally, that he has (as of himself) no power, no strength to resist
sin, no repentance, no mind to hate or resist the least sin, but the contrary:
He finds a cursed, hellish, demned, unbeleeving heart, full of evil and that
continually, Genesis 6.5.
a heart instead of loving God, it fights against God, in stead of doing good
to his Neighbor really, he seeks not his good, but his own ends in all he
does, that he does nothing at all for God; but himself is his supreme and
ultimate end, so that his highest and best actions are loathsome, defiled,
abominable. Now the soul seeing these things to be really thus, Then all his
strong, high and towering conceits fall down before the light, wisdom, power
and excellency of Christ: and he sees that there is none of all these through
all the whole earth but in Christ alone, no wisdom at all but his, no power at
all but his, no righteousness at al but his, and no creature to receive any
glory but hm alone: then he falls down and cries out O'wretched man that I Am,
who shall deliver me from that body of death? Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this bottomless gulf? who shall deliver me from this
monsterous fiend my own self? Romans 9.3.
he now sees the Locusts of the bottomless pit, covering the face of the whole
earth: every one running after his own ways and following his own laws, every
man setting up new Gods, every man setting up the Image of his Imagery, and the
abomination of desolation in himself, every man making himself his own god, and
seeking to be something, and making the eternal glorious God to be an Idol and
nothing: He sees himself with the whole earth besides, saying with the builders
of Babel, Genesis 11.4.
go to, let us build us a Tower and a City, whose top may reach up to Heaven,
that we may not be seattered and destroyed; they will save and deliver
themselves from hell, wrath, and destruction, by their own power, by their own
wisdom, by their own inventions, by the brick, slime, and mortar that they
have made; Now the Lord looking down from Heaven, to see what the Children of
men are doing, and he in himself sees how God has said, Let us go down and
confound their language: God in them has discovered the evilnesse of their
ways, the evil of self-seeking, self-glory, of their selfe-wisdome,
selfe-power, self-righteousnesse; and they in whom, or to whom the Lord
discovers these things, all this contrivance, and all this work n them is made
BABEL, Confusion, a heap of Lies, it is all deceit, destruction and misery: but
in Jesus Christ he has righteousness indeed, life indeed, power indeed,
heaven indeed: And then he can add and say with the Apostle, Thanks be unto
God who has given us victory through Jesus Christ: O death, where is thy
sting? 1 Cor. 15, 54.55.
Oh grave, where is thy victory; then has this corruptible in him put on
incorruption, and this mortal put on immortality, and then is brought to pass
in him the saying, as it is written, death is swallowed up in victory.

Herein the Saints find Jesus Christ to be their joy, to be their feast, to be
their mountain, to be their glory, to be their All. In this mountain they find
and receive all these good things, and are fully satisfied, and that they are
to be had nowhere else: If they look anywhere else, they know there is nothing
but sin, corruption, death, hell, mortality, and the grave. And they having
found this mountain, they find themselves escaped, delivered from all those
things: And now they sit down with Abraham, Isaac, Mat. 8.11.
and Jacob in the kingdom of Heaven: They have found Abraham's bosom; they
have found the tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God, they have
found the Hidden Manna, Rev. 3.
they have received the White Stone, with a New Name, which none can know but
such as receive it. They see themselves delivered; I, and are at rest from
themselves. They see their own wisdom, their own power, their own holiness
to be as it is nothing but sin and hell and misery; and a delusion. And this
they rejoice in, to see this Pharaoh overwhelmed in the sea, this makes
themselves sing the song of Moses and the Lamb, and to see all this to be done,
not by their power, nor by their wisdom, nor by their watchfulness, nor by any
endeavors of theirs, but that the whole work in every part of it was Christ
alone, that it is he alone that is mighty to save, he that is also glorious in
apparel, Esa. 63.1.2.
and traveling in the greatness of his strength, none assisted him, no man
stood by him, but he alone, made bare his own arm, that so he might have all
the glory: These things seen and accomblished in themselves, is their feast of
Fat things, their Wine on the Lees, their keeping the Sabbath, their day of
praise and Thanksgiving. They have none to praise, nor to speak well of but of
him alone: They find that he alone was their deliverer, and he was their
Captain and their Conqueror: that he alone was their leader, their guide, their
teacher: And that all teachers were but Deluders, Southsayers, Liars and
Deceivers, but only Him: they can call no man Master and Father upon earth,
Mat: 23.9
for one is their Master and Father, which is Christ alone: As Paul says, he
received not his Gospel of man or by man, Gal. 1.12.
but by the revelation of Jesus Christ: so they receive not their power, not
their wisdom, nor their teaching of, or from man, but only by and from Jesus
Christ alone.

Then also, of the face of the Covering of all people, because they seek help,
and strength, and riches, and glory, and wisdom in other mountains besides
this Mountain, because they find strength, and wisdom, and rest, and rejoicing,
and feasting in their own mountains: And the more comfort and delight men take
in their own wisdom, or holiness, or the like, so much the more miserable,
so much the farther from the Kingdom of Heaven; when men look upon themselves
as being strict or holy more then others, because they are under such and such
forms, such rules, and are so comformable to the word and mind of Christ, and
here solace and feast themselves, Luke 17.21.
and cry, Lo here is Christ, and there is Christ, in this form, or that
fellowship, and think therefore they are in a safe condition, but it will go
ill with all others, Esa. 65.5.
stand farther off, I am holier then thou: The dangerousnesse of these men's
condition, I say, you may discover from the present point, when they make any
other thing their rock, or their mountain but Christ alone; when they think
they can guide themselves, provide for themselves, teach themselves, these are
in a very miserable condition, these are those of which Christ says, go not
after them, for they are deceivers and deluders; Luke 17.20.
for the Kingdom of God comes not with observation, as they say, by observing
this rule and this form, or that fellowship, or any way that man has found out
to cover himself withal. All these are but fig leaves, which will not bear
out the wrath of God, these are but men's Coverings, which cover themselves with
a covering (as they think) from all evil and wrath, Esa. 28:20
but it is not the Lords Spirit: The Bed is too broad, and the Covering is
narrow, it will not defend them from the Lords fierce wrath: These are they
that have kindled a fire to warm themselves at, Ibid. 50.11.
but they shall lie down (says the Lord) in the fire that they have kindled,
and in the sparks that they have gathered together: And for all their forms,
and prayers, and duties, and ordinances, and holinesses, and washings, and
baptizings, and receiving the Sacraments, and the like, yet this is that they
shall receive at my hand, They shall lie down in sorrow: for when you did all
these things, did you them at all unto me, and not unto your selves? did you at
all fast unto me? though ye pretended to seek me early, and to seek me daily,
and did delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and as
if they forsook not (in the least) the ordinances of their God, and take
delight in approaching to God: yet for all this says the Lord to the Prophets,
Cry aloud, Esa. 58.1.
lift up your voices like a Trumpet, and show my people their Transgression,
and the House of Israel their sins: All these things will not deliver thee from
wrath, but thou (rather then any other) shall lie down in sorrow, and Publicans
and Harlots (for all your holiness and strictness) shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven before you, Mat. 21.31.and 11.22.
And it shall be easier with Tire and Sydon in the day of judgment, then for
these that have done these and these things in his name; yet for all this will
Christ say, depart from me, I know you not, ye workers of iniquity: there was
nothing but iniquity in your righteousness, in all your duties, in all your
forms and professions: you of all other I will not know: you of all others
depart from me; you of all others are workers of iniquity; you above all shall
lie down in sorrow, and in the sparks that you have kindled: you thought your
selves better then others, holier then others, when you are indeed and in truth
the vilest and worst of all others. Therefore most desperate and most miserable
are these above all, in as much as they thought themselves before all: when
they think because of their holiness, because of their conformity, because of
their moderation, because of their abstinence, because of their meekness,
because of their gravity, therefore they are better then others; here is the
great and unspeakable delusion of their own hearts; For grace and true religion
never teaches any man to think highly of himself: but to think highly of Jesus
Christ; grace debaseth man more and more; and brings him to see the Bottomless
deceit and delusion of his own heart; It teaches men not to think better and
better of themselves, but worse and worse; and makes men not to desire praise
or high esteem from others, but it would have Christ have all the glory and
praise, and it self to be less and less, and worse and worse it its own
esteem; for the more grace, the more light, which discovers more and more the
infinite and bottomless vileness and delusion of their own natures.

Beloved, this is the true teaching, which comes only and alone from Jesus
Christ: man's teaching can never bring this about; but this teaching and
learning is from the Father, from Heaven: men learn this lesson only in the
School of Christ; Joh. 6.45.
there God is made something, and indeed all in all, and man is nothing but an
infiniteness of sin and misery. Let every one therefore examine himself by
this rule, and lay it close to his own heart: if he feeds himself, or glories,
or feasts himself with any other thing then this, that he is brought to
nothing: that God alone may in him and in the whole earth be all in all: let him
be sure he has not his teaching from this one Father, Esa. 29.13
and this own Master, but his teaching is only by the precepts of men. And
till a man be come to know this in experience, whatever he thinks of himself,
and whatever acquired parts or holiness he has, and though he be never so
much admired by others, he feeds but on the wisdom of the flesh, and lives and
depends on that the World adores for their gods, either on the external lusts
and pleasures of the world, or else on Silver, and God, riches and honor,
Lands or preferments, etc. which cannot profit a man in the day of wrath, Prove.
11.4. or else they feed upon their own righteousness, their own duties, on
their leaving this sin, Prove. 11.4
or that sin, or (as they suppose) all sin, all gross sin, and it may be
conceive that their obedience is according to the rule and mind of Christ,
conforming strictly to the highest and perfectest forms and fellowships; and
resting in this, they feed but upon husks and vanity, and delude their poor
souls; as the Prodigal, he would fain: have filled his belly with the husks,
but no man gave unto him: Luke 15.16.
none of all these things can satisfy; they will not deliver, nor keep off the
wrath of God; they will prove no covering, no shelter at all, but the wrath of
God will break in upon them, and make them appear wretched and miserable, vile,
naked and abominable. And that soul that is brought to this, to be stripped of
all its garments, and made naked, and lost, and undone, (as to it self and all
things of man;) this is the happy Soul, the blessed Soul. The other, all others
put their trust in the arm of flesh, and are departed from the fountain of
life, Jer. 2.13.
from the living God, and therefore are not, nor cannot be blessed, but are
those that are cursed.

Therefore we would that ye should take special notice of these two things:
First, Note these two things. Jam. 3.15 1. What the Vail is. Genesis 3.6:
what this Cursed disposition in man is, what the Vail is wherewith he so
deludes and deceives himself: and Secondly, how this Vail is removed: First
what it is; It is that earthly, sensual, and devilish wisdom in the hearts of
the Sons of men, persuading them to be that which they are not: that they are
holy, and just, and good: that they have goodness, and holiness, and wisdom,
and power, etc. and if they improve these (say they, as they may,) they may
bring themselves into a happy and a safe condition, and conclude that they can
forsake sin, and they can be righteous and holy: this is that devilish wisdom
that the Devil infused into Adam in his fall: this was and is his eating the
forbidden fruit: When God had created him dependant upon himself for all his
power, wisdom, goodness, holiness, he fell from this condition, to have a
dependence upon himself and on the creaturely being, on his own wisdom and
holiness, etc. to have a power in himself: and thus he departed from the
fountain of all good, to seek a happiness in himself in his own nothingness;
and thus he became lost, cursed and miserable: This is THE VEIL, The Covering,
the deceit that is upon all flesh, the Veil of the Covering of all Nations.
And it is called a Covering, because it hides and keeps away the light that so
man cannot see himself as he is, cursed, and hellish, and infinitely miserable.
Now this Vail will not suffer the light to come upon him, to see himself as he
is, because man by all means and ways labors to maintain a good opinion of
himself, and for others to have the same, and would by no means see himself
lost and undone; this Vail hides that darkness and gulf of sin that is in him,
and tells him that it is not so nor so with him, but he is holy and righteous,
and has wisdom and power, and the like: This is the Veil that is upon the
heart, which must be rent, if ever man come to be happy; if ever he hopes to
feast in this mountain of fat things. You know we use Vailes, that the defects
and deformity of things may not appear: and so man does by his own heart; he
would by no means see the ugliness, the monsterous deformity thereof, he would
by no means once think that hell and the bottomless pit is in him; he would by
no means see the smoke of that bottomless pit arise out of his own heart: but
it is certain, though men hide this from their sight and Beholding; yet all men
have covered themselves with this Vail, and it is the covering of all Nations;
In Adam all die: 1 Cor. 15.22.
not a man upon the face of the earth, but all have eaten of this forbidden
tree: and because we have eaten, all the endeavor of man now is to keep away
the sight of guilt; he would not see his deformity, his lost condition; but
with Adam he runs among the bushes and hides himself among the trees from the
presence of the Lord; Genesis 3.8.
he labors to keep away the light, that he may not see his own blackness and
deformity. What says he, Have I no wisdom, no power, no holiness, no love, no
faith, no power to repent, no ability to any good thing? this he cannot endure
to hear of, this he runs away from, as from death and the devil; this cuts him
to the very heart. Therefore all his endeavor is, to keep this Vail whole,
that is may still phiremain: thus he remains under the Old Testament: 1 Cor.
3.14.
and the Vail is unrent, and is still upon the heart. But in the day that the
soul turns to the Lord, it is content to see and acknowledge its own misery,
its own darkness; then is the Caul of his heart rent, Hos. 13.8.
then is hell laid open in him, and the bottomless gulf seen in himself: And
that Hell men so much talk of, he sees to be really in himself, and that
himself is the very Image of the Devil.

Secondly take notice how this Veil comes to be removed and taken away.

Now this Vail is only rent and done away by Jesus Christ: Secondly, How the
Vail is rent. Rev. 5.5. and 9.1.
not all the power: nor all the art of all the Sons of men is ever able to
remove this Covering; there is none to be found in Heaven or Earth to open the
seven seals but only he, Jesus Christ alone has the key of this bottomless
pit: None can unlock this hellish heart of man but himself; his heart is the
bottomless pit, and the Devil is the keeper: And till Christ himself come and
unlock and open this gulf, Mat. 12.29.
and remove the Devil, it is not all the endeavors of the Sons of men can bind
this strong man, nor open the foul and dark heart of man; but all their study,
and all their endeavors are to strengthen this Veil, to make it thicker, that
they may not see the horrible pit: man runs to this thing and the other thing, and
all is to keep from his sight the knowledge of himself; either I say to the
Cares of the world, or the pleasures, or the riches and contents thereof, that
if it once begin to be opened, and he sees the smoke thereof begin to ascend,
he strives by all means to cover it close again; he choaks these thoughts, Mark
9.44.
and to quench the fire which can never be quenched but only by the blood of
the Son of God; or else I say, when men are still dogd with the thoughts of
hell, and these things will not be a sufficient covering, they seek out
farther, and get a covering of their own devising; they get to this duty and to
that form, and change from better to better (as they think) and from one degree
of holiness (as they conceive) to another, and thereby get an opinion that they
are children of God and Heirs of Heaven, and therefore they are safe and all is
well with them; and they think they do all this in conformity to the mind and
will of God, when it is merely to hide and cover themselves from their own
beholding, and that they may behold themselves holy, and wise, and gracious,
and happy: Now I say, the work of Christ is to discover all this to be a
delusion and a lie, and to let him see that he is a cursed, hellish, damned,
undone, miserable creature; and no good in him at all; And to let him see that
Christ Jesus alone is the only Ordinance appointed of the Father to bring many
sons unto glory, Heb. 2.10
and that there is nothing an Ordinance but Christ alone; and in vain do men
talk and keep such a stir about Ordinances, except Christ be the power of every
Ordinance: Acts 10.42. and 5.31
He is ordained of the Father to be Judge of quick and dead; he is also
ordained to give repentance, and forgiveness of sins; what can an Ordinance do
if he be not the Ordinance, if he be not the power and virtue of all
Ordinances? it is he alone is ordained to be the only Teacher, and Master, and
Father; and therefore call no man Father nor Master, nor no external Ordinance
a guide, but only as he is in it: and therefore, that is in it self empty and
dead, and whatever acts not in this one Ordinance Jesus Christ the son of the
Father without whom ye can do nothing at all, Joh. 15.5.
whatever it be, it is no other but a deceit, a Covering and a Lie.

THE Builders of BABEL confounded in their Language. BEING An Exposition by Mr.
Webster, At the End of a Disputation at Alhallows Lumbard street; He being then
requested to dismiss the multitude with some profitable Exhortation; Which was
from Genesis 11. the nine first verses.
And the whole Earth was of one Language and of one speech; And it came to
pass as they journyed from the East, they found a plain in the Land of Shinar,
and they dwelt there, and they said to one another, Go to, let us make Brick
and burn them thoroughly, etc.
THis is a portion of Scripture, which in the Letter and History is apparent to
all that hear or read it, and every one knows the meaning thereof; But what is
the mind, the mystery and meaning of the Holy Ghost, is only made known to them
that are taught of God: and making no question, Joh. 6.45.
that those who have the spirit of God will own the mystery and divine sense,
we will through his assistance proceed to open them to you; Mark 4.11:
for to them it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom; but to all
others they are parables and paradoxes, which they neither will, nor can
understand.

The whole earth was of one Language. The whole earth; that is, that natural
lost condition, in which all the Sons of men are, all being gone down into the
earth to seek a Happiness there: Jer. 2.13.
Having forsaken their life and happiness in God, they have all dug unto
themselves broken Cisterns, hoping to find a life and a happiness below among
the creatures: And this is the condition of all the Sons of men; this is the
condition, and this is the Language of the whole earth: And in this all the
sons of men are equal; darkness is come upon all, the Image of God is defaced
in all; All the whole nature of man, has but one Tongue, but one Language;
they are ALL gone ont of the way; there is none that good, Psalm. 14.3
no not one: there is not one better then another among all the sons of men,
but all are equally lost, All equally departed from God: All are under the same
condemnation, they all speak one Language; and with one mouth, they all
Blaspheme; and what one does, all do, there is no difference: And in this
condition men proceed and go on, they are journying from the East. What way
soever any of the Sons of men go, they are still journying on, in and under
this misery: The nature of man is laboring and traveling further from God,
from the East, from the light of God, from the life of God, which they have
lost, and are now walking on in darkness, misery, and blasphemy; and all saying
and concluding in their practice, that there is no life to be had in God, no
comfort in him, he is a helpless dead Image, a mere Name, and there is nothing
at all in him to relieve and help them; he has neither power, nor mercy, nor
goodness, nor wisdom, nor Alsufficiency: he is a dry tree: And therefore they
have turned their backs upon him, and will seek out a rest, and a god, and a
help of themselves; And they are journying: whither? To the Land of SHINAR;
what is that? to the City of drowsiness or the Land of sleepiness; when men think
that by their own industry and endeavors, and by their acquired parts, or by
their rules and forms, or by their religion which they have taken up, to secure
themselves, and to find rest: Here now they begin to erect a BABEL, a Tower
that may reach to Heaven, which may secure them from all danger, and that they
may ascend and dwell there, where no destruction may reach them, thereby to
prevent the overflowong deluge, that it may not come at them.

When man is once gone out from God, who was his life, and his light, and his
rest, and his happiness, being not content with him alone, Genesis 3.1.
nor with the tree o life of which he might eat freely, but casting his eye
upon the tree of knowledge of good and evil, he lusts to eat thereof, V. 6.
for it is pleasant to look upon; man would by no means live upon God, and have a
dependence out of himself, but he will take a secure course and provide for
himself; he likes well this tree; and here he feeds and eats; he travailes in
this pleasant plain of Shinar, and here he begins to bethink himself to dwell
and take up his rest; here he can sleep quietly under his own labors, and sit
reposedly under his own vine, and here now is the place where all men consult
together to raise a Babel; This is done by, and in every man: man having lost
himself and gone out of his way, having no House nor Tabernacle, having
departed from his house built by God without hands, he bethinks himself of
building himself a house made with hands, by his own study and invention, 2
Cor. 5.1
and this shall be his abiding, and here he will dwell, and here with his own
hands he will make himself a shelter from all storms and from all destruction.

And they say one to another, Go to, let us make brick and burn them
thoroughly: They say to one another: that is, not as if men singly spoke thus to
one another, but every man enters into a consultation with himself, and with
the Prince of Darkness. And now they having forsaken God the true guide, they
hearken to the Devil and to the Father of deceit and lies, and take his
counsel, Joh. 8.44
and him they will follow, and his works now they do, and not the works of God.
And what do they? And they say one to another, Go to, let us make brick and
burn them thoroughly; That is, they think and resolve to act like wise men, and
make all secure for themselves; their building shall be strong and durable, and
their materials accordingly: Bricks thoroughly burnt, which shall not fail and
moulder away; that is, the things that he chooses shall be things agreeable to
his own liking, and they must be of his own inventing, else he will put no
confidence in them; none shall choose for him: whatever it be that will advance
man and make him something and great, as to himself and others, and things that
men esteem highly of, those he chooses: Nay, and not only so, but he will have
something of his own to trust to, to come into the presence of God with, and he
will frame to himself a religion and a righteousness that shall avail before
God, which he shall accept, and in which himself may put confidence. And here
now poor man has deluded himself, and they have made themselves aprons, Genesis
3.7.
and (as they think) a secure Covering: here has he made himself a shelter and
a Tabernacle, and built up to himself a Tower reaching to Heaven, and so shall
prevent destruction and condemnation; When man begins thus to build, he chooses
(as he thinks) the likeliest and the probablest means for his security, and in
his conceit builds so strong, that no winds nor no storms can shake him, nor no
deluge overflow his building: and so confident he is, that he thinks the power
of Heaven and Earth can never shake this building: for the Top thereof shall
reach to Heaven: he is so far safe, that he is sheltered from the wrath of God,
and from the frowns of God: he has gotten such a righteousness and such a
conformity of the rule and mind of God, that he is as it were a perfect man, he
sees little amiss in him: and though he may in words confess he is a sinner,
yet let but any one sin be charged upon him, and he has (as he thinks) a
sufficient excuse, and will clear himself from all sin.

But is this all the end of this strong and stately building? no; But let us
make us a Name, least we be scattered upon the face of the whole earth: Least
we should be in as bad a condition as others are, and as the wicked of the
world are: we will be wiser, and condemn them, we will not be like the Publicans,
wicked and profane; but we will forsake sin and live uprightly, and we will do
something that we may get us a Name that we are holier then others, Esa. 65.5.
1. Cor. 3.10:
and we will be no less then Master Builders; no such wise man as we; no such
strict holy men as we; and the end of all this, is, least death and misery, and
sin, hell, and condemnation should break forth and seize upon them, with the
rest of the world.

But now in all this time what does God do? He beholds their works, and their
doings, and their contrivings verse. 5. And the Lord came down to see the City
and the Tower, which the children of men builded; which is not to be understood
as if God removed or came down Locally, as leaving Heaven, to come down to the
Earth, as men when they remove from one place to another: But God came down,
that is, he began to manifest himself, to show himself to the Sons of men;
before he let them alone, and they thought themselves secure and all was right,
safe and well, which they had done; now the Lord he begins to appear, to
confound their thoughts and inventions, and to show all the sons of men their
folly, vanity and madness, in all this they were so confident of, they think
they are securing themselves from ruin, when alas poor souls, they are
running as madly upon their own ruin and destruction as any else in the whole
Earth; nay, are farther from returning then any other, in as much as they are
more wise, more holy, and more confident then others. Luke 13.28.
And herein is their misery the greater; therefore it is high time for the Lord
now to come down, to scatter this building, and to make it BABEL and Confusion.
Behold, the people are one, and they have all one Language, and this they begin
to do, and nothing will be restrained from them which they have imagined to do.
As if he should say, all the sons of men are running headlong to their own
destruction, they are all as one man, all do one and the same thing, and they
have one Name and one Language, and all go one way: Satan has almost gotten
his full possession, and they will be wholly guided by him, and follow his
counsel, they are all departed from me, and he is almost quite and
irrecoverably lost and gone: and yet every man thinks he is right, and no man
considers what he does, nor once thinks of returning; for every man is right in
his own eyes, and nothing will be restrained from them, and if I go not down,
if I do not discover my self, and make their folly and madness, and their
misery appear, they are running on confidently, never to return. Therefore I
will go down and confound their Language; I must bring to naught all their
works, wisdom, confidence, and inventions, that I may save man from
destruction. Now the work of the Lord is to pull down, ruin, and destroy all
this stately building of man's erecting, and to lay it all flat, and to let man
see, that whatever he plants is in vain; Every plant which the Father planteth
not, Mat. 15.13.
must be rooted up: whatever man has wrought by his own power, and in his own
wisdom, must be brought to confusion, Luke 21.6.
and be made Babel, and not a stone left upon a stone; Though the Temple which
the Sons of men have set up, be never so glorious and precious in their
beholdings, yet all must be destroyed, and they and all their works and
endeavors, all their forms and inventions turned into a ruinous heap. Esa.
17.1. and 25.2:


And the Lord will not only say this, but he will also do it verse. 8. So the
Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon; the face of all the Earth, and
they left off to build the City. When men is once convinced of his miserable
condition, and sees himself and all the sons of men thus deluded and befooled,
and begins to see that all their confidence is madness, and all their works
sin, Ibid. 64.6
and all their duties as menstruous rags, and all their forms and inventions no
other but Babel and destruction, then and not before, they leave off to build
this City; for then they see themselves (as it were) swallowed up in death and
misery, and that their best actions are but dung and dross, and abominable
things, and that there is no stability in any of the sons of men; and this is
the Lords work alone, this man has no hand in, it is the Lord that says and
does it, Ezekiel. 22.14.
to confound this Language, and scatters men from this building, so that they
can now no more contribute their wisdom or counsel, their strength or
endeavors to this City of Confusion.

Verse. 9. Therefore is the Name of it called Babel, because the Lord did there,
confound the Language of all the earth. All that is of man, from the power,
wisdom, excellency, righteousness, of man, let it be never so beautiful, and
never so esteemed, all is mere BABEL, but a City, a Temple, a refuge of
confusion. And the Lord will scatter and confound every builder thereof; that
is, he will commix, confound their language, they shall be all amazed,
confounded to behold what the Almighty has done, to see their strong mountains
so removed, and their strong City of refuge ruined and blown down.

My Friends, so far as the Lord has declared to me, this is the Mystery and
the living sense of this portion of Scripture. Mat. 11.10: and 19.12.
He that has ears to hear let him hear: and he that has eyes to see, shall
see; he that can receive it, let him. The truth and things of God carry light,
power and demonstration in themselves; he that thinks by his own power, or by
his own wisdom, or his own light, or his own learning, to discover them, he is
still in darkness, he is to this day raising Babel, and the Lord is not yet
come down to confound his Language, and the truth is hid and sealed up from him.

Now that I may come to make a little farther application of these things to
our selves. The first Use let it be this, all the sons of men, the whole race
and every particular person, is equally in one and the same condition, they are
all of one mass, of one Lump; not one wise, and another foolish; one
righteous, and another sinful: not one earthly and another heavenly; not one in
light, and another in darkness: not one carnal, and another spiritual: bue the
whole earth is of one language: They all, even the best, the righteousest, they
act nothing but sin, and rebellion, death and emnity, Jer. 2.13. Psalm. 1413
they are all carnal, all departed from the fountain of living waters, they are
all gone astray and become abominable, and not one that does good, no not one:
every one of the sons of men are under wrath, with ALL their works and
righteousness: every one is no other but a child of hell, and a son of
perdition and confusion. And there is no good that any of them can appropriate,
or lay the least claim to; for there is no wisdom but the wisdom of God,
nor no righteousness but the everlasting righteousness of that only ONE and
Alsufficient Savior the Lord Jesus Christ: He that says there is any good
thing in man, any righteousness, wisdom, power, any endeavors, after any
good or the like, he is no other but a most abominable blasphemer. And this
conceit and presumption the Lord has cursed and will confound: Mat. 12.33.
for can an evil tree bring forth good fruit? Either make the tree evil and his
fruit evil, or else make the tree good and his fruit good: can man be evil and
wholly evil, and yet bring forth any thing that is good? or is there any good
or any holiness but what is from the fountain of good? for any to dare to say
otherwise, is high blasphemy to God and Jesus Christ, to take that which is
proper and peculiar to the ever blessed God, and to ascribe it to a sinful,
nothing, empty creature: for any man to take the Crown from off the head of
Jesus Christ, and to set it upon his own head, and say this is his, what
greater indignity? what higher blasphemy then to say that which is crooked is
strait, Esa. 5:20. Job. 38.2.
and to call darkness, light, and evil, good? Who are these, that darken
counsel by words without knowledge? From what principle think you, comes all
the religion of this nature? and from whence comes this kind of teaching? That
man must be something, and MAN must do, and HE must act, and HE must believe,
and HE must repent, and there is something required of him to do by way of
condition, or else the grace of God is frustrate. Certainly these men are no
other but Babel. builders: they never yet knew the confusion of Languages in
themselves, they were never yet undone, made nothing, nor stripped of their own
power, wisdom, righteousness, nor convinced of the vanity, and nothingness
of all their power and endeavors: they never yet saw that these things were
alone proper to Jesus Christ, but they must work, and they must do, and they
must act. These certainly (whatever they say) never yet were convinced, that
man was a lump of sin and weakness, never yet saw where the bottomless pit is,
never yet cried out misery and shame upon themselves, but think they have some
goodness and some power, and while they are in this condition, they do behold
much goodness in themselves, and many fine things of their own making: Acts
19.24.
many Silver shrines and goodly performances; they can reform, and repent, and
give laws, and take ability to themselves to keep them: And thus miserable man
deludes himself and erects Babel.

But when the Lord comes down to see what the children of men are doing, and
begins to show them their madness and folly, and to open the mouth of the
bottomless gulf in them, then man appears to himself black and ugly; and
that he is as a Blackamoor that can never by all his endeavors change his
skin, or alter his course: Jer. 13.23
but that he is mere weakness and nothing but emptiness and confusion, but till
this time, what a proud conceited creature is man? and how does he look upon
himself, and upon his riches and his parts, and his endowments before others,
and thinks every one should admire him, as he does himself, and all his
actings tend to this end, To be admired and to get himself a Name, and he is
still speaking of his rules and of his doings, and of his righteousness, and of
his strictness; and all this is but to magnify and make himself as great and
as excellent as may be. This Beloved is the condition of all the Sons of men:
their folly is their wisdom, and contrariwise, their wisdom is their folly.
For man to be made nothing, and emptied of all his glory, to be made naked and
bare, and poor, and blind, and miserable, Rev. 3.17 Mat: 26.24.
and to fo^sake himself, and take up the Cross of Christ: this he abhors and
spits at: This Doctrine is Heresy and Blasphemy: This is the preaching he
calls folly and ign^rance, Familisme and Ranting, any reproaches that can be
invented. Joh. 19.12
And if Christ himself were upon earth, they would call him a Heretic, an
enemy to Caesar, and a Seducer, and a Devil, what not? and who would be so
forward to scourge and Crucify him, as those that so much outwardly pretend
for him, and say, they are his servants and pretend to walk according to his
life and commands?

In the hearts of All the sons of men there is nothing but this confused
Language: for how can a clean thing come out of an unclean? Job. 14.4. Mat.
15.11.
This is the Language that comes out of man that defiles man, yea ALL the sons
of men, the wisest, the learnedest, the holiest; who sought more after a
conformity to the rules of the Scripture, then the Pharisees? Who more exact in
those rules? Who attained more external learning then they? The spirit of man
being once gone out from this ONE and Only Rest, he hunts and pursues after a
thousand things to make up his emptiness; having lost the Center of Eternal
joy, he is in continual motion and rests nowhere: He walks up and down through
dry places, and finds no rest, Luke 11.24.
he hunts up and down for the Land of SHINAR, a place to sleep in, but cannot
find it.

Consider O ye sons of men, whereto tend all your labors, all your endeavors,
all your unweariednesse? is it not to get something to rest upon some pillow,
something to lay down your troubled and unquieted spirit upon? is there not
something of self in all you do? to provide for your self, to lay up for your
self? Are you not travailing from the East to the Land of Shinar, that you may
get to the Land of sleepiness? Some, journying to one thing, some to another,
and all to this Land of Shinar; to find a Rest, to repose themselves upon, and
to trust in; Some, they are journying after riches, some to honor, some to
vainglory and esteem of those whose estimation they think to be a happiness;
and these things (and such like) of the lowest and poorest things, many make
their SHINAR, their happiness, their glory, their rest: And others there are,
and they go a little higher: these things do well, that the other rest in; but
those things they think somewhat too low, and therefore they will seek some
better things, as they conceive, as Learning and Arts, and skill in Tongues and
Languages, Philosophy, Astronomy, Astrology, Geometry, and the like, and to
excel others, and to be more able then other men. These or someof these they
count is their glory, and excellency, this is their SHINAR, and place of
sleepiness: But moreover some there are, who rest not here, that cannot sleep
here; but they think if they can but attain to some higher things, that concern
the soul and Heaven, and Eternity, then they could therein take their content
and rest; the other who contented themselves in riches and honor, and the
like; or those that gloried in their Arts, and Sciences, they are convinced,
all these were too short, because they reach but to the body, and to humane
things, to those glories that men esteem highly of; But if they could but
attain to something to please God withal, if they could but worship God after
this or that form, in observing strictly these and these duties, and get into
this or that fellowship, this or that gathered Church, which worship God after
the purest and most Primitive way, and nearest the rule of Christ, if they can
but leave this sin and that evil, or if they could but leave all known sin,
herein and the like, many men make this their peace and their rest; this is
their SHINAR, and and place of sleepiness and slumbering. And having gotten
thus far, they think they can patch up a righteousness, that will be pleasing
to God himself: for they can hardly see a slip or a falling really in
themselves, though they are ashamed to say so, yet let them but examine their
inward parts and they shall find it so: They think they have in a Gospelway,
performed the condition required on their part, and they are sincere in what
they do; and if at any time they come short, then Christ by his righteousness
will supply and make it up, and herein is their peace, and this is in their
esteem a goodly, and a glorious, and an excelling righteousness; none so high
at they, none so holy as they, stand farther off, I am holier then thou, and I
am thus and thus qualified; And he looks upon other men with disdain, because
they come short of him, and because they are not so strict as he, nor have
taken so much pains in religion, and done so many duties and walked up to such
rules as he, as the Pharisee, I bless God I am no Whoremonger, Drunkard,
Swearer, nor as this hase Publican; Luke 18.11.
I make conscience of omitting the least duties, I fast twice a week, and I
relieve the poor, and pay my dues to the Minister, and I would leave all sin,
and I would do every duty: and thus men thinks they have convered themselves
warm, and this is their Shinar, the place of their desires and rest, here they
have found a place to sleep in, and a pillow to repose and lay their heads
upon, and to rest their travailing and wearied thoughts, and they could never
rest till they come to THIS Shinar. But I here proclaim to all such, be they
never so secure in themselves and applauded and cried up as happy and blessed
men by others, yet all this is, but This Shinar, this is but the Babel which
here the Lord speaks of, and it shall be no other but the place of Confusion:
Luke 13.28.
Nay Publicans and Harlots shall go into the Kingdom of Heaven, when they
themselves, these perfect men in their own, and in others esteem shall be
thrust out: Alas, they cover themselves with a Covering, but not with the Lords
spirit: the bed is too short, and the covering too narrow, Esa. 28.20.
they cannot cover themselves therewith: yet have indeed preached in my name,
and prophesied in my name, Mat. 7.22.
and in my name done many GREATWORKS, and wonderful, but for all this depart
from me, ye are no other but workers of iniquity, says Christ to such: the
highest and gloriousest, and the most seemingly holy of all these things cannot
be the place of rest: Ibid. 5.20 Mich. 2.10
for except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye can in no case enter inter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Arise
therefore and depart hence, this is not your rest: For indeed there never is,
nor never was, nor never shall be any other but one only place of Rest for all
the Sons of men: And that is only and alone Jesus Christ, that Eternal Rock
and Refuge for all Nations and Generations, that perfect sacrifice of the
Eternal son of God, to which nothing in the least can be added, and nothing
else was ever required or accepted, but only this Beloved IMMANUEL, in whom
alone God is well pleased. Mat. 3.17.


But when thou think thou must do this duty and that, leave this sin and that
evil, and why? because this is the condition on thy part which thou must
perform, or else Christ will not perform the promise of life and salvation on
his part: herein men are deluded and for all their pains and endeavors and
strictness, yet they fall short of the kingdom of Heaven. For it is not thy
works, nor thy duties, nor thy forms, nor thy notions, nor thy
Church-gatherings, nor any thing else of thine which is the accomplishment of
the promises, but they are all yea and amen only and alone in him, 2 Cor. 1.20.
in whom the promises are made; if these works be wrought by thy industry, by
thy care, by thy watchfulness, by thy wisdom, by thy power, they are all
odious and abominable: Esa. 66.3
God will as soon accept the offering up of Swines blood, and regard as soon
the cutting off a dogs neck as many of these thy duties: for, whatever is done
by thee or in thee, except it be done by the wisdom, power, and hand of Jesus
Christ, who is the promise maker, and the promise worker, and accomplisher,
they cannot be in him Yea, and in him Amen; for he alone is the promise, that
is the maker and fulfiller; he must work it by his power; but as long as thou
think thou can do any thing, or have any thing to offer, or any thing to
accomplish, and thou must do it on thy part as a condition, the Lord abhors all
such sacrifices as abominable: when thou think such and such rules are
prescribed, and I must obey and submit to every rule, not the least but I must
do it, and then the promise is mine, for now I am in the right way; and then
say to thy soul, soul take thy ease, this is the true place of rest, Luke
12.19.
here thou may lie down in safety: examine thy self, is not this thy end?
How be it all this is nothing else but the building up of Babel in the Land of
Shinar: All this while when thou thoughtest thou wast traveling to thy rest,
thou art traveling quite contrary; to ruin, destruction and confusion: thou
art but traveling from the East, to the plain of Shinar, a place beautiful
indeed and pleasant to the sons of men, when they had turned their backs upon
the East, and were gone out from God, their rest, and were not content with the
fountain, Jer. 2.13.
but followed the Streams which in the end are dried up, and there is no water
to quench thy thirst, but only a mere hell and place of torment, Luke 16.24.
and not one drop to cool thy tongue.

Secondly, Sleepiness is the end that all these builders of Babel, propound to
themselves; they would have some rest from their doings, and from their
labors, and from their wisdom, and their endeavors: their end in all they
do is Security, that they may sleep quietly, that they may not fear neither
death, nor hell, nor judgment, that they may cry to their souls, Jer. 6.14.
Esa. 28.18.
peace, peace, when there is no peace; and how they having made a covenant with
death and hell, here they will rest, and here they will build, and here they
will sleep. Being come to this pleasant plain, here they resolves to secure
themselves, and build a Tower reaching to Heaven: They consult and conclude,
now they have their hearts desire, and nothing shall be restrained from them:
And all this they do, says the Holy Ghost, least we be scattered: All these
things, and all these devices, are but Coverings of men's inventing to save
themselves from wrath and from the guilt of conscience, which else would gnaw
within them, Mark 9.44. Esa. 4.6. Mat. 7.26
and be in them the worm that never dies: hereby they think they have made
themselves a shelter from the storm and the wind, but it is but as the house
built upon the sand having no Foundation, it can never stand, here is no
security; though they think to provide for, and secure themselves, and think
themselves wiser and holier then all other men; Their end is always
selvishness, to secure and provide for themselves; and the means by which they
attain all, is also within themselves, by their own wisdom, power, parts,
righteousness, endeavors, and the like.

Also in this way of man to come to life and rest, what does he? bethinks
himself with all the wisdom he can, to choose wisely and discreetly: we will
here build (say they to themselves) and we will build sure and safe, and we
will make brick and burn them well; that so their building may endure, and not
fall upon their heads. They have still something or other, that they themselves
invent, and pretend the rule of the word to go by, as the safest way:
something that they find out, that their own self tells them is a likely way:
Say they to themselves, Christ has promised if men believe and repent, then
they shall be saved: Well, I will go and perform these, and reform my life and
the like, (says man) and then these promises are mine. The Jews (especially
the Pharisees) were ever expert and nimble at this; who more strict according
to Gods own rule, who more searched after every Iota of the Law, and as far
as they were convinced strived after conformity? herein lay the top of their
Religion: And here they had builded up Babel. Now when Christ comes and strips
them of their righteousness and pulls down their Babel, and by his Doctrine
lays them open to the world, and makes them appear as they are, to be open
Sepulchers, dissembling Hypocrites, Mat. 23.7
to be but pretenders to righteousness when they have none at all but to make
Religion a cloak to devour Widows houses, and to serve their own turns, to make
for their entertainment with the world; Christ now He opening these filthy
Sepulchers, he shows what they were within, how fair, and beautiful, and holy
soever they seemed to be without: This made them so mad, as to persecute him
even to death, nothing would serve them but his blood, and the cruellest death
was too good for him: yet these were men of no low principles (as men think)
they were the gravest, the soberest, the wisest, the learnedest, the strictest
observers of the Law, and the teachers of it to others. Men highest in esteem,
the strictest for worship, according to the pattern: they feared God (as they,
and generally all men thought) and loved their neighbor, and did righteous
theings to men, and herein was their glory.

Now some among us go farther then all this; they strive to walk according to
the rule, and wherein they come short, they have a Mediator and an
Intercessour, and that is Jesus Christ who died at Jerusalem, whom the Jews
would not acknowledge, but crucified; and they will repent and believe in him.
And now Beloved, these have builded up Babel higher then the other: for alas,
this is nothing but wearing a garment of linsey-woolsey, Levit. 19.19. Mat.
9.16.
this is nothing but sewing a new piece into an old garment, and making the
rent worse; this is but putting new wine into old bottels, and the bottels are
broken, and both bottels and wine (as to these men) utterly lost. They think
man must do, and man must teach, and man must inform, and see not that Jesus
Christ is the only Teacher, the only Master, the only Guide: they must find
out, and they must study, and they must collect, and they must gather here a
flower and there a flower, and this they present to the people as a precious
posie, whereof they themselves in their own experience know nothing at all; but
they have sought it out by their learning, and stole it out of other men's
labors; Luke 10.2
Are these (think you) Prophets and Laborers of the Lord of the Harvests
sending: No No; all these things must be lost, esteemed as dirt and dung: you
know what Christ says, Luke 5.37
put new wine into new bottels, and then both are preserved: If all that we do,
be any thing but what Christ does in us: If all we teach, be not Christ his
teachings in us: If all our works be not from the new man, born of God which
cannot sin: if all be not the works of Christ in us, whatever it be that man
erects and sets up to direct or guide him, but only the wisdom from above:
whatever it is that strengthens him, but the power from on high, all must be
pulled down and scattered, Mat. 15.
all made BABEL: Every plant that the Father has not planted, must be rooted
up: if it be not wrought and acted by his Spirit in us, it cannot stand.

When men think by their power and wisdom, and by their Authority to act for
God, and they can propagate the Gospel and establish truth and settle Religion,
and they can make an uniformity which all ought to submit to: whereto does all
this tend, but that man should take upon him the work and sovereignty of the
Almighty? and this is the plain English, God is not wise enough, nor powerful
enough, nor Allsufficient enough to erect the Kingdom of his Son: Luke 10.2
but we must do something, and we will contrive, and we will send forth
Laborers as we shall think meet: and what we judge to be truth and wisdom,
and holiness, that and no other, shall be established: What Is all this, but to
establish the wisdom of man, and the power of man, nay indeed the weakness and
ignorance, and the blasphemy of men above the strength, wisdom, righteousness
and alsufficiency of the eternal God? What Is this, but charging of God with
weakness and insufficiency, and ascribing that to man, which alone is due to
God? Is this any other, then to make the weapons of our warfare strong in man,
2 Cor. 10.4.
and in the power of his might? Now the blessed work of God, is to pull down
this Babel, built by the sons of men: oh says man, Lets have the wisdom and
power of the magistrate, and let him show himself strong for God: and what he
judges evil, and sin, and schism, and heresy, let that be rooted up: and
he will make the crooked things strait, and he will undertake to make men
religious and to reform their lives: Luke 3.5.
What Is all this, but to be wise in his own wisdom, and confident in his own
strength, and holy in his own holiness, and that he alone is judge in the
things of God. What greater blasphemy can there be? In stead of being strong in
God and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10
they are mighty and strong in man and in themselves. Now all these works also
the Lord will ruin and destroy; All this strong building he will make Babel,
CONFVSION; all this Language will the Lord confound, scatter and destroy.
Whatever it be, which is of man or by man erected (though pretending a service
and a worship of God) either found out ad invented by himself, or else
pretending a prescribed rule in the word for it, and this done by the power and
wisdom of man, it is no other but a Babel, and shall be made a City of
Confusion. And this the Lord will certainly do and bring to pass in man;
either that both he and his works, his wisdom, righteousness, power, etc. may
be destroyed and confounded together, that both himself and all his works may
be burnt up together, or else that his work shall be burnt, and yet he may be
saved, yet so as by fire; for this fire of the Lord shall try every man's work
of what sort it is; 1. Cor. 3 13.
if the Lord in mercy descend and come down among the sons of men, to burn up
all their works, their wisdom, their strength, and all things of this nature,
to strip man of all his abilities and righteousness, and make him nothing in
himself, and abominable in his own sight, this destruction of the flesh is
that he may be delivered from death and wrath, Ezekiel. 20.43. 1 Cor. 5.5
and that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord, and that he may bring
him to rest, peace, wisdom, righteousness and glory in that alone and
A^sufficient Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom alone are all these: but in
the creature nothing but trouble, confusion, death, sin, hell, and
condemnation, in which All the sons of men are concluded, and all their best
works; and Christ alone is ordained of the Father to be our strength, wisdom,
righteousness, redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and salvation. Him alone has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince
and Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Him alone
I say, being made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption; 1 Cor. 1.29.
That so no flesh should glory in his presence, but according as it is written,
He that glories, let him glory in the Lord, and in the Lord alone.

THE Power of Divine Attraction, or the Fathers great Love in drawing poor
sinners unto his Son; Delivered at Whitehall on the Sixth of John, verse 44.
No man can come to me except the Father which has sent me draw him, and I
will raise him up at the last day.
BEloved, when the power of God from Eternity (which was himself,) was made out
in the appearance of flesh at Jerusalem when this eternal word (I say) was in
that Veil, which was the making out of the true body of Christ: when the
Savior of the world appeared in the flesh, to make out himself to the Sons
of men; in all his actings and speakings we find nothing else sought, acted,
or spoken by him, but the fulfilling and accomplishing of the work and will of
the Father, about which he was sent; Joh. 6.38
and therefore whatsoever he did, or said, was only that he might finish and
accomplish that great work about which the Father had sent him; therefore in
that regard he said he had meat to eat that man knew not of, John. 4.32
understood not, did not see. And as he came to fulfill the work of the Father,
not only in the flesh in those manifold and unparalleled sufferings he
underwent, but also in the power of that spirit that he might convey life and
salvation to the souls of men, this was his meat and drink; so that this is it
that in all his speakings he chiefly holds out; so here he having declared that
he was that bread that came down from Heaven, that only true and spi^itual
Manna which comes down from Heaven, Joh. 6 33.
that nourishes the souls of men, and besides which there is none other:
Hereupon (he holding forth this so boldly and so clearly) the Jews, the
scribes and Pharisees, those Religious and learned men of the times not knowing
the mystery of this bread, became extremely offended, and despised and derided
him, saying, Verse. 41
Hew can this man give us his flesh to eat? Truly Beloved, that which is held
out to us by this, is, That the Jew is in every man by nature, and is
discontented at the speaking out of the spiritual things of Jesus Christ. When
it is holden out that there is no other Wisdom, Strength, Righteousness, and
Holiness but that which is only in and from the Son of God, and that this is
the only meat and drink of the soul: And that there is not any one of the
sons of men, that has either wisdom, or holiness, or power, or any good
thing of his own: this is a hard saying to flesh and blood; 1 Cor. 2.14.
for the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, neither
indeed can he, for they are spiritually discerned.

The Words now read, are the answer of our Savior to the murmuring objection
of the carnal minded man or Jew saying, how can this man be bread unto us, or
Manna, or meat and drink? Joh. 6.42
Is not this the Son of Joseph? and the reason is, because they saw only the
Vail, but not the Godhead, the eternity or everliving WORD that was under that
Vail, viz. his flesh or his external appearance. Now he therefore gives an
answer to this their murmuring, and shows the reason and ground why it could
not be otherwise with them, that their carnal minds could do no other but
murmur at these spiritual makings out of the mind of God; Because no man could
know him, love him, and believe in him, but those that were given him of the
Father; those that were drawn by the spirit and love of the Father only, would
understand, love, and believe, and know him; but otherwise all others they
would nor could do no other but murmur and repine: for all others, in seeing
they did see and not understand, for their foolish heart was blinded and
darkened with impenitency of heart; therefore says he, no man can come to me
except the Father which has sent me draw him.

First, here is discovered by way of Negation and Exclusion, the impossibility
of man (as man) to come to Christ: no man, etc.

Secondly, here is laid down the power, way and means by which man comes on to
Christ, and that is in and by the drawing of the Father: when the FATHER draws,
man cannot but come; and when the Father draws not, man cannot come unto
Christ. No man can come to me except the Father which has sent me draw him,
and I will raise him up at the last day (as if he should say) if he be not
drawn and raised up by me, he can never come, and I never raise nor draw till
the last day, till man's day, man's power, wisdom, strength, holiness, all that
is in or of man, is at an end, and that he is lost, distressed, and undone.
Then at that last day I will raise him up, I will come in and stay no longer;
for while man's day, (that is, man's life, wisdom, and strength lasts) there is
nothing but resistance, blindness, fightings, and oppositions.

First, no man can come, that is, In his natural, blind, dead, and lost
condition, wherein he is as a dead bone, Ezekiel. 37.
there is no life at all in him, wherein he is stark blind and sees not the
things that concern his peace, therefore he has no will, nor power, nor mind
to come unto me: UNTO ME, Luke 19.42.
who am the Savior of the world, the truth, righteousness, and Sactification
it self; to come unto me, that is, to ME indeed; for men had power enough to
come to Christ's bodily appearance while he was on the earth, but this is not
the coming to him: to come in conceit, notion, opinion, or in a verbal or
litteral way, according to the History and relation of him. But to come to
Christ, is, to come in the life of Christ, in the power of God, to come unto
him in the eternal power, that HE may only teach them, lead them, and guide
them, and be their only Master that they may know no Master, no Father, no
Teacher, no Leader, nor no strength besides him; Oh Beloved, this is not to be
done without the drawing of the Father; or not but in a Fatherly way, since he
is the fountain of eternal love; the Father or Fountain of love that has made
out his eternal Love himself in the similitude of flesh: 2 Cor. 5.19:
for God was in Christ (says the Text) reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing to them their trespasses. It must be the love and good will of the
Father made out to the soul that must call it and will draw it, and cause it
to come in, to be at peace with him and be reconciled, only by his own making
out his love in Christ. So I say this Eternal love that sent out Christ, and
that gives with Christ all good things, it is the same eternal love and power,
Romans 8.32
and everlasting goodness and good will of the Father that draws and brings the
spirits of men unto Christ, else they come not.

Draw them; how is that? with such a drawing as must be effectual. As the Rain
falls not in vain, but the earth brings forth fruit meet for them for whom
it is appointed: Heb. 6.7.
So the eternal word and power of the Father made out through the flesh of
Christ to the soul, calls, invites, draws and works effectually and brings home
the soul; and this drawing of the Father is the eternal and everliving power of
the Godhead or spirit that wonderfully draws the souls of men: and when they
are thus drawn, they cannot but follow: and being thus drawn by him, this is
the joy, life, wisdom, and righteousness of the soul, here it dwells, rests,
recreates it self; having lost its own life, it lives and receives full
satisfaction in the life, and power, and wisdom of Christ. Then, it is the
office of the Son whom the Father has sent to quicken it, and raise it up at
the last day, and make it like himself, even to sit together with him in
heavenly places. Ephesians. 2.6.
The point I shall offer to your Considerations is this.

That the drawing of the Father only leads the souls of men unto Christ,
otherwise none can come unto him. Before this truth can be believed in us, or
be of benefit unto us, it must become a truth of evidence and manifestation and
experience in our hearts; yet to witness this from the litteral word, that
this is truth, you may be pleased to look upon a place or two; yet they can
make out nothing to us except the sam be made out by the eternal spirit in u^;
^lse the word is but a dry tree and a dead letter: Cant. 1.4.
The experience of the Spouse in Cant. 1.4. witnesses the same; draw me and we
will run after thee; her experience had known, that the drawings and leadings
of those cords and bands of love (that are never to be broken in Jesus Christ)
the drawings of these bands of love only made her willing to go after that
Husband, Father and God of Loving Kindness and mercy; otherwise man never
comes, nor is ever drawn but only by these cords of his love. Again the same
is witnessed in Jer. 31, 3. there he tells you, because he had loved them, Jer.
31.3.
therefore with loving kindness had he drawn them: And in Hosea 11.4. he
declares he had drawn them with the Cords of a man, with the bands of love;
Hos. 11.4
the soul finds it is only the power of the Father, the love of the Father
that has drawn him out of many waters: as the Psalmist witnesses, for David
had found it so, Psalm. 69. Ibid. 40.2
that he had delivered his soul out of the mire and horrible pit. There is
nothing but the eternal power of God that is able to draw a soul out of the
deep and mierry pit in which it lies: the drawing of the Father, the power of
the Father only draws men unto Christ; otherwise they will not, nor cannot
come. That this is so, Divine truth witnesses, and the experience of all
Saints, that men will not, cannot do, act or work, nor come in unto Christ
without this drawing.

First, because Jesus Christ is not known and understood in the pretiousness,
excellency and value of him to the lost, blind, carnal heart of man; for man in
this condition knows not the worth, sweetness and excellency of him; therefore
man comes not unto Christ, as David witnesses; He looked down to see if any of
the sons of men would seek after God, Psalm. 14.2.
but they are all gone out of the way; there is none thath does good, no not
one: so I say, man comes not to Jesus Christ, because he is ignorant of that
life, glory, righteousness, and immortality that is laid up in him; therefore
the Apostle renders it as the reason why the Princes of the world (Princes of
learning, and Princes in zeal and religion) killed him; why, because (says he)
none of the Princes of this world knew him; for had they known him, they would
not have crucified the Lord of life. So I say, the ground why our spirit comes
not to Jesus Christ, is, that blindness and ignorance that is in the heart of
man, because he knows not the excellency and pretiousness of Christ; As our
Savior said to the woman of Samaria, John 4.10. Joh. 4.10.
If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me
to drink, thou would have asked of him and be would have, given thee living
water; and so it was with Jerusalem, Luke 19.42. Reas. 2.
she did not know the things belonging to her peace; because they were bid
from her eyes.

Again, men cannot come to Jesus Christ, because as he is the power of God, and
appears in the wisdom of God, so he appears as folishness unto them, and they
disdain him as a weak and mean thing; as Isaiah faith in chapter 53. v. 2. there
is no form nor beauty in him why he should be desired: Esa. 53.2.
as a root out of a dry ground, he has no form, no comeliness, and when we
shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him; he is despised and
rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs, and we hid our
faces from him: he was despised, and we esteemed him not; therefore the Apostle
tells us 1 Cor. 2.14. the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God, because they are foolishness unto him, and are spiritually discerned: and
says he in 1 Cor. 1 23. we preach Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 1.23:
to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Greeks foolishness; so that man does
not, will not, nor cannot come to Jesus Christ, because the spirit of Christ
appears a poor despicable thing, 1 Cor. 3.10. Psalm. 118.22.23. 1 Pet. 2.7
and the heart of man is set against him: and even that stone that is to be the
head stone of the corner, it is rejected and laid by, even by those that
account themselves Master builders; and this is the Lords doing, and it s
marvailous in our eyes.

Again, another ground why the souls of men come not to Christ, the spirit
makes all the hidden things of man's heart lie open, even that which man
himself never saw, nor never thought was in him, and this man hates, and will
not abide to see nor behold that depth of pride, that selfe-glorying,
hypocrisy, etc. and taht bottomless pit of misery; man's eye never looked into
himself, into his own heart: but in the day of the appearance of Jesus Christ
all this is discovered and laid open; therefore man would by no means come to
Christ, because the appearing of Christ discovers his sin and condemnation: man
loves his own life: skin for skin, and all that a man has will be give for his
life; but he that loses his life shall find it: Job. 2.4. Mat. 10.39. John.
3.19
therefore our Savior tells us plainly that this is the c^ndemnation that
light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light, because
their deeds are evil; for he that does evil hates the light, neither comes to
the light, lest his deeds should be made manifest that they are evil. So here
the ground is rendered why the Gospel is Condemnation to the sons of men; the
Gospel brings light, but men resist it and hate it. Certain it is that the
light of Christ is in every creature, for he is the true light that enlightens
every one that come into the world. Joh. 1.9. Mat. 6.23.
And if this light that is in us be darkness, how great is that darkness. Here
is the condemnation of all the sons of men that they dare not stand in the
light of Christ, not being able to behold hell in their own hearts, but labor
by all means to cover it; for the light of Christ would show them that there is
no thought, action, or duty, or performance that ever they did, that had any
thing of purity in it, but it was all sin; Now man not daring to see his own
misery, therefore he runs from this light, and gets himself behind any tree.
He runs from the appearance of him that sits upon the Throne, and so resolves
he will not see his own misery, death, and condemnation; Rev. 6.16
neither will he believe it though he be told it by an Angel from Heaven, he
will not come to the light, lest thereby he may know, or be convinced that his
deeds are only evil.

Again this is the work of the Father to draw men unto Christ, because no
less then infinitness and Eternity is able to bring God and man together; the
separation between God and man is so vast, and they are at such an infinite
distance since his fall, that nothing but Infinitness can bring these two
infinite ends together; for the soul of man in one sin, sins against an
infinite God; in any one sin it goes out and turns away from the infiniteness
of all blessedness, good, joy, glory, and peace, and so goes down into the
infinitness of nothing, (for nothing is a kind of infinitness) and he is
indeed gone into a far Country, Luke 15. 13.
as the Prodigal was; now therefore nothing but the infinite powers, and
infinite wisdom and strength that is in the Lord, is able to bring life out
of death, something out of nothing; therefore there is nothing to bring the
heart of man out of that far country wherein to it is gone, and out of that
bottomless pit into which is is fallen; nothing can do it but infinitness and
eternity; 2 Cor. 4.14.
nothing but the same spirit that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, can
quicken our mortal bodies: there is nothing I say, able to do it (but the same
spirit) to bring a poor soul from hell and condemnation, and make it one in
unity with the spirit; And therefore the Apostle witnesses, Ephesians. 2.13. you that
were aliens, has he made nigh by the blood of Christ; Ephesians. 2.13
and you that were sometimes afar off, has he made near by the blood of
Christ. So now, I hope this appears a truth to you, and I hope the Lord will
make it so in you by experience; till then it is not a savor of life unto
life; for except you have the Scriptures made good in the power thereof, in
your own hearts, what are the Scriptures to you? And I have alleged them for
that very end that you may find and say, These things are all fulfilled, not
only among the Jews and at Jerusalem, but really and truly in my self. So
then I hope some of you see it is the alone power of the Father that draws the
souls of men unto Christ: otherwise no man can come unto him. But give me
leave yet a little farther for the clearing it, and explaining it by the way;
What this power of the Father is, or how the Father does draw or bring the
souls of men unto Christ?

God is said to be a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit and in truth: Joh. 4.23.
God is nothing but life, glory, and power, spirit and immortality; and
whatsoever thing we could have a notion, or similitude of, that is able to set
out strength, and life, and glory, and wisdom: yet all these come infinitely
short of setting out the strength and power of the Lord of Hosts, the great
Jehovah, who is ( Psalm. 121.5.) he that keeps Israel: Psalm. 121.5.
he that keeps Israel, neither slumbreth nor sleeps; so that is is to be
cleared, what power it is that brings the spirits of men unto Jesus Christ.
Certainly there is nothing but the same eternal spirit that was in Jesus
Christ: it is the same immortal and immediate hand and power of God that does
ever raise up the soul of man, and bring it unto Christ, and nothing but that
spirit only: and therefore from hence is that of the Apostle, that no man can
so much as say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost: 1 Cor. 12.3. Joh.
3.5.
and except a man be born of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God: for it is all one, and it is wrought by one and the same Almighty
Spirit, to say that Jesus is the Lord by the spirit, and to be born of the
spirit: for man to say and confess so ten thousand times, if he do not feel him
to be the Lord and the Almighty in him, all his confessions in words are
nothing; And by one spirit (says the Text) ye are all baptized into one body,
even the whole body, and they all testify one and the same thing, that there
is but one spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. Ephesians. 4.4.
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, Ephesians. 4.4. and
they have all been made to drink into one spirit, which is that One, Boundless,
Infinite and Eternal Spirit of the Father, that like the wind, blows where it
lifts, and we may hear the sound, and tasste the operation of it in us, Joh:
3.8:
but know not whence it comes, nor when it will work, but comes and goes
when it pleases, and not in the least when men will: they have no command of
that free and good spirit. It is only this one spirit that makes the soul one
with Jesus Christ; therefore the Apostle witnesses, if Christ be in you, Romans
8, 11
he that raised up Jesus from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies
by that spirit that dwells in you: this is that spirit that searches all
things, and tries all things, even the hidden things of God: 1 Cor, 2.10.
this is that living spirit that blows upon the dry bones: the spirit of the
four winds that blows upon the dead and rotten bones: Ezekiel. 37.4.
and the blowing of this spirit brings sinew to sinew, bone to bone, and this
makes them live and stand up before him; and there is nothing else but this
spirit that does it, there is nothing can be conjoined with it. However men may
say, and keep a great deal of busling about the power of man, that so it may
not be said there was any to help him: yet I say it is the spirit of God alone
that draws man to Jesus Christ, that it may not be said that his Idol has done
it; for otherwise the mouths of all would not be stopped, Ibid. 48.5 Romans 3.19
Zach. 2.13
and all flesh would not become silent before him. Neither would it be said
that the Saints rejoice in nothing else but in the Lord Jesus alone.

Obj. But I know it will be objected, O^bj.
though God does thus, and he only draws the soul to Jesus Christ; yet this
is not done without means, and instruments.

Answ. First, like himself infinite, and he is infinitely wise, and his ways
are past all the thoughts and imaginations of the hearts of men; for eye has
not seen, Romans 11.33. 1 Cor. 2.9
nor ear heard, nor is the heart of man ever able to find out the secret ways
of the Lord.

Secondly, God has not only determined a thing, but determined also by what
power, and instruments, and means he will bring it to pass; but in this it is
otherwise with God then with man. Man may propose a means to an end, that is
weak and may fail; but God never intends and purposes an end, but the means is
as infinite as himself, and as eternal and omnipotent as himself, so that his
means cannot fail: he speaks and it shall and must come to pass. It Is true
God has ordained the means by which he brings men to Jesus Christ; Psalm. 33.9.
but this means is hiw own power, and spirit, and strength.

Obj. But thou will say, solely by himself alone without an Organ and
Instrument? is there not something subordinate?

Answ. Truly the workings of God have always a subject wherein to be
manifested: Recipient and subject in which the things of life and death are
acted; there is usually an Organ: And how should they hear without a Preacher?
Romans 10.14.
yet both the Organ and the Preacher are empty dead things; And if I or any
man, in being exercised about the things of God, should look upon our selves
otherwise, quite laying by all thoughts of power, wisdom, ability, to do any
thing, but to be only as a Pipe or Cistern, through which those divine things
pass, and no more, we take that praise to our selves which is alone due to
God. Now though it be so, I say, that this Organ is but a dead thing through
which the life of God passes, if we be any thing else in our message and
speaking to you but as men that have denied our selves, laid aside our own
wisdom, strength, conceits and abilities, and all the workings of our own
heads, if we be not dead to all things, that so the Lord may speak through us,
then I may boldly say we are not those Instruments and Ambassadors by which he
entreats his people to be reconciled unto him: 1 Cor. 3.6
Therefore be pleased to consider that place of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 3.6. I
have planted, and Apollo has watered: So then Paul may be called a Planter,
and Apollo a Waterer; but does he go no farther? nay, (says he) Neither is he
that planteth any thing, nor he that waters any thing; but God that gives the
increase; thoug they may improperly be called PLANTERS and WATERERS, yet
neither is the Planter any thing, nor the Waterer any thing: So that it is
clear, it is no otherwise but thus; It pleased God out of his own love and
goodness to condescend so low as to speak the Words of Eternal Life and mercy
by us, and to one another, that men of the same Blood and Frailty should
become Instruments and no other, in the hand of the Lord, taking no glory to
themselves in any thing; only to be as weak, and frail, and dead Instruments
whereby the Lord will speak out the Words of Eternal Life. But this creature is
to be considered as nothing at all; neither is he that planteth any thing, nor
he that waters, but God is all; therefore, I say, 1 Cor. 3.7
till it be so with us, that we are dead to all our own wit and reason, and all
our understanding; till these are killed and dead, and we stand only waiting
upon the Lord, as Habakkuk says, Hab. 2.1.
Hab. 2.1. I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the Tower, and will
watch to see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer; I say, when the
soul is thus dead and silent to his own wit, to his own selfeseeking, to all
his own opinions, of wisdom, or strength or parts: I say, there is no man which
is a true Prophet or a Messenger from God till then: For all the Prophets and
Ambassadors from God come thus qualified, and they are not ashamed thus to
shame themselves, and to be as nothing in the eyes of themselves and others,
that so the Lord alone may be lifted up and exalted in them. And when God
appears thus in the poor dead Organ, then usually God works in them, and by
them: For, says the Apostle, We have this treasure in earthen vessels. 2 Cor.
4.7
God uses Organs and Instruments, but there is no Efficiency in the
Instruments; for, notwithstanding all that I can say and speak, if the eternal
sense and mind of the spirit be not at the back of it, and go home with it, it
will be but a Parable, a History, and a Paradox to you. Mat. 13.11.
Says Christ, to you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom. So then
it is only the immortal Word of the Lord that draws the soul, and it is the
power of eternity which works all, and it is from mercy and great condiscension
(on his part) to speak out these things by such frail Instruments; but it is
so, 1 Cor. 1.29.
That no flesh may glory in his presence: And that the praise may be of God,
and not of the Vessel, or of man.

And know farther, It is the Spirit of the Father, the same Eternal power of
the Father, even the same that is God: for it is the same God, though the
manifestations be diverse, and though there be the manifestations of the
Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, yet they are One: for they are not Three, but
One.

The next thing I shall explain, is, what is meant by Christ; no man come UNTO
ME: By Me, here is not meant the coming to the fleshly presence and body of
Christ: then must we (with Mary) seek him among the dead; no, he is risen, he
is not here; it is not meant of the coming to Christ in the History, and
Notion, and in the Letter: so all men making profession are come to Christ: 2
Cor. 5.19. Joh. 1.14.
the Text says, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself: and the
Text says again, The word became flesh, and dwelt in us: what is it to come
unto him? Certainly then it is to come to the EMANUEL: he that is God with us,
or rather God in us; but says the Apostle, to those that are called we preach
Christ crucified: 1 Cor. 1.24.
Christ the power of God and wisdom of God. So that to come unto Christ, is to
come to the power of Christ in us, to have him abiding and dwelling in us,
carrying us, and leading us into all truth: and therefore he tells you again,
Joh. 16.13. Col. 1.27.
Christ in you the hope of Glory; and therefore says the Apostle, try your
selves know you not that Christ is in you, except you be reprobates? So that to
come to Christ, is to come unto the power of Jesus Christ; and Christ is the
power of God, 2 Cor. 13:5.
and the wisdom of God; Nay, it is God in us, teaching us, and guiding us, and
directing us; he being the sole Master, Ruler, power, and strength in us; this
is to come to Jesus Christ: From whence it being thus explained, there is a
deduction or two we would draw from what has been said.

First, if the immortal Spirit only draw the souls of men unto Christ, that
is, unto himself; love of the Father made out unto us; for Christ was God
dwelling in flesh; Then if it be so, then Man considered (as Man) cannot be any
ways drawn, or driven, or can come unto Christ: Not any power of man (as man)
or the power of the whole Creation is able to draw man unto Christ, but only
the power of the Father. Let men say what they will, there is no power of man,
or any actions or disciplines of man are able to bring man unto Christ; for he
is weak and cannot, wilful and will not, guilty and dare not come to Christ;
he dare not appear before him. But this is a drawing whether the carnal mind
will, or will not; though it murmur and repine, yet it draws him out of this
spiritual Egypt and bondage: Then this shows how false all their pretenses are
which the world so much admires and cries up. Every man thinks he can go to
Christ, and he can bring others to Christ by arguments and persuasions, and the
like, and for this purpose are all the forms of Religion set up under pretense
of coming, and bringing, and going to Christ, and going on to the Heavenly
Canaan, and to the New Jerusalem. But did they but look into their own hearts,
they would see this was but going from the Lord, instead of going, or coming
to him: all these devices are but to cover over the iniquity of their own
hearts: For every several way and form will say, they are journying to Christ,
and to find him; when alas, where is the man that minds him? but only seeks
himself, his own rest, and to quiet his own heart, and to cover the smoke, and
the cry, and the guilt that lies upon him, and to get comfort to himself, and
then he is safe, and he thinks he is gotten near to Jesus Christ. And when he
wants peace, then he bethinks himself of walking more close, and stricter to
those forms and rules that quieted his conscience before; and thus he runs in a
round, and makes himself, his works, and duties his Savior. For if thou ask
thy own heart seriously what is the reason of thy praying and going into this
form, or the other form, is it not because thou think God therefore accepts
thee, and loves thee? And is not this to deny this truth, that there is nothing
but the power of the Father can draw thee, that there is nothing able to draw
thee, but the immortal seed and Almighty hand of God; and to say, that
something else is sufficient to draw thee unto Christ? But here now lies the
depth of this deceit; thou drawest in a Religious way, and have gotten a
covering, and a profession, and such and such actions into thy hands; and here
thou restest, and what follows? thou gatherest together, and heapest up all
Nations to make thy self strong and secure; Hab. 2.5.
but thou coverest not with the covering of the Lord; and so thereby layest sin
upon sin, thou coverest indeed with a covering, that thereby the Condemnation,
Esa. 30.1.
Hell, and Guilt in thy own heart may not be made manifest in thee.

Now consider whether ever thou can come at Jesus Christ, who is the Rock of
Ages, that go not in the leadings of the Father. But if thy heart did
apprehend that thou were that child (which Ezekiel speaks of) cast out into the
open field, Ezekiel. 16.
and had no hand to help thee, nor no eye to pity thee; if it were so with
thee, then he would appear in thee, and lead thee: if thou thoughtst thou wast
the ignorantest creature in the world: if thou wast but blind enough, and bad
enough in thy own sight; but the misery of the world lies herein, Joh. 9.41
because they think they see, therefore their sin remains; for there is no
difference among all the sons of men, for All have sinned and fallen short of
the glory of God: Thou may, Romans 3.21
and I know do think so, that there is a difference in some; but truth has
witnessed it that every man has sinned, and is at an infinite distance from
the Lord God of mercy; and there is no salvation, nor no power, but in the hand
of the Allmighty, and that he alone is able to make peace and bring together
those two Infinite distances, and to make them One.

Now judge whether this, or the way of the world brings the greatest
inconveniency, and whether this way of man do not set him at a farther distance
from his true rest; for if man think he can come to Christ by any thing of
himself, by any Religious actions, and performances: then from this it must
needs follow, that he sees not his own weakness nor wickedness; nor there is
no sin, nor wickedness, nor misery made manifest unto him: And he makes lies
his refuge, Esa. 22.15
and under falsehood he has hid himself, and drawn way his heart from the
living and eternal God, to depend upon the lying and deceitful power and
wisdom of man, and dug to himself broken Cisterns. Jer. 2.13.
So that

Secondly, this will follow, that this man has made a Rock to stay himself
upon; for if thou think that thy actions and performances will bring thee
nearer unto God then other men, or that any thing can draw thee nearer, but the
mere hand and spirit of the Father: is not this (I say) to set up something
against the power of the Father? Is not this to set up error against truth,
and darkness against light, and Antichrist against Christ? for here it is
manifest that there is nothing but the power of the Father to draw men unto
Christ. Now seeing thou have made Lies thy delight, and vanity thy trust, see
what is pronounced against thee, for all thy confidence and strong opinions of
thy safety and security: Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes
flesh his Arm, and whose Heart departs from the Lord. Jer. 17.5.
So, I say, this merely leads man from a denial of himself, to a setting up of
himself; from a waiting and depending on the power of God, to a depending and
hanging on the wisdom and power of the flesh; now when the soul has made
experiment of this in it self to find, see, and feel it really in his own
heart, that no hand draws to the Father, but the Spirit only; Oh then! this
will make the heart of man lament, and say, what a hard heart have I? I cannot
go one step toward my Savior; Mark. 10.51:
this makes him cry out, and say, come Lord Jesus and open my blind eyes, that
I may receive my sight, and thou Son of David haver mercy on me; and there is
none but thou alone can cure my leprosy, and save my spirit, or else I perish,
I perish for ever: and this is that which makes man to have the true
circumcision, and to worship God in the Spirit, Phil. 3.3
and have no confidence in the flesh.

Then if it be the Fathers power and spirit, that only draws men unto Christ:
man nor Magistrates can draw or drive them thither: the work of the Father is
his own work, and he has not substituted any other in his place; for he will
not give his glory to another, neither suffer his holy name to be polluted.
Esa. 42.8.
Now if it be thus, that unless the Father draw man unto Christ, man cannot
come, then it must needs be lies and vanity for any of the sons of men to take
upon them, and say they can and they must act something, either to draw or
drive men unto Christ; we know this has been the undertakings of all ages and
times; Joh. 16.2
but what was the fruit of it? Under pretense of doing God good service, they
have shed the blood of the Saints, that it might be fulfilled that not a
Prophet perishes OVT of Jerusalem; Luke 13.33.
for still in all ages, who have more persecuted the Gospel, and the true
Professors thereof, then those who show most Zeal and profession of it? Christ
and all the Prophets and Apostles, and generally all the Martyrs have suffered
upon this account; that upon them might come all the blood shed upon the earth,
Mat. 23.35. Gal. 4.29.
from the blood of the righteous Abel, to this very day; and that the
bondwoman always persecutes those that are from above. Now, I say, for the
Magistrates to say, they can propagate the Gospel, and keep back errors; alas!
what is all of this nature, but high presumption against the power and absolute
Authority of Jesus Christ, and taking the government of the Church out of his
Hand, and proclaiming themselves wiser then He? But I shall but propose to
these poor selfe-wise Creatures, these one or two things. Are they able to rule
themselves, and to keep errors out of their own hearts? I suppose no man so
ignorant of himself as to deny or affirm that he can, the nature of man being
so depraved, that he cannot resist really one sin, as it is sin. And moreover,
is it not a truth, that if the Lord watch not the City, the watchmen watch in
vain? Psalm: 127.1.
And yet thou that could not keep one sin out of thy own heart, how can
thou undertake to watch over the Church of God, and keep out Errors and Wolves
that they come not in? Alas! poor ignorant man, this is thy pride and the
vanity of thy heart; 1 Samuel 17 28. Psalm. 121.4.
for it is the Lord alone, that keops Israel, and he neither slumbereth nor
sleeps.

Again, do thou not say that thou art a Christian? if so, then thou would
believe that he is a God Alsufficient; I am God Alsufficient, walk before me,
and be thou perfect: Genesis 17.1
Is he alsufficie^ntly Wise, and Strong, Holy, Good, Merciful? etc. then is not
this the manifestation of thy absolute infidelity, when thou think he will
not take care of his own Church? Or else thou concludest thus, if he be Wise
enough, yet he has not Power enough, and therefore thou must help him. And is
he not Alsufficiently Good, and will he not take care of his own cause? Never
fear, but he will: I, and take so much care, Mat. 16.18
that the gates of hell shall never prevail against it.

And again, is it not said, that it pleased the Father, Col. 1.19.
that in him should all fullness dwell? And that in all things he might have the
pre-eminence: and, says he, plainly, Joh. 5.22. Mat. 28.18. Esa. 9.6.7.
the father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto his Son: And
that all power in Heaven and Earth is given unto him. And again, to us a Son is
given, and the government shall be upon his shoulders. And that of the Increase
of his Government and peace there shall be no end, upon the Throne of David,
and upon his Kingdom to order it, and establish it with Judgment and Justice,
even for ever. And that the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. And
again, Col: 2.3.
that all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in him. Now, is all the
power of the father given into the Hand of Christ? And, have not we all said
the Pope is not the Viceroy nor Vicar of Christ? and does not every man throw
dirt upon him, and yet we can get into the POPES place, and sit in his seat and
say, we are the Substitutes of Christ. That which we deny him, we take to our
selves: certainly all this is nothing else but hellish arrogance, and the pride
of the man of sin, and ANTICHRIST within us that exalts himself (in us) above
all that is called God, 2 These. 2.4.
that puts us into these ways: and to think that we can draw, or we can drive
to Jesus Christ, when there is none can do this, but merely and solely that
only and eternal power and spirit of the Father.

Thirdly, if it be so, as we have clearly proved, and none dare deny it: draw
nor drive others in, but it is only the drawing and driving of the eternal
power of the Fathers spirit; It is true, the Sons of Men may do and have done,
and do compass Sea and Land: and what is it to do? to make a Proselyte; and
what then? he is but twofold more the child of perdition then before. Mat.
23.15.
They may indeed gather men into Fellowships and Churches (as they call them.)
But to gather men into the spirit of the Lord Jesus, this was never the work of
man: no strength, nor power, nor wisdom of man could ever do it: and without
question every plant that the Heavenly father has not planted, Ibid. 15.13.
shall be rooted up.

It is true, and I grant, there was some mention made of the Church and
Churches in the times of the Apostles; but what Churches were they? They were
no other but what were called by God himself, in the power of his spirit, and
not of or by man. Where do we read of this man's Church, or the other man's
Members? but they were called the Church of God, and not divided by those
distinctions of vainglorious, self-seeking, ambitious, covetous men, as they
are in these days. Nor did they Own one another, or had any relation one unto
another in their love or esteem upon that account. Note.
But they looked upon one another in what place soever, as but one body, and
having all but one spirit, merely because thty were all baptized into One body
by that One Spirit. 1 Cor. 12.13.
They did not know one another as they were of Paul and of Apollo, of Cephas
and this man's Church (as they now call it) But as they were all baptized by one
Spirit, and into one Body, and as they were of one mind and of one spirit, and
so of one heart, Heb. 12.13.
and so brought to the general assembly of the Church of the first born. And
therefore we must conclude there is nothing that gathers or draws in the soul
of man unto Jesus Christ, but the everlasting power of God. We know also, men
may worship at Jerusalem this way and that way, and pretend to honor that
Christ who died there, and yet they do but draw nigh to him with their lips,
Esa. 29.13
but not with the spirit and in truth; but no man can do these things in the
power of God, nor so much as SAY that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost,
and by the power of Jesus Christ. And be sure that every plant that my heavenly
father has not planted, shall be rooted up.

From whence also lastly, only draws the spirit of man unto the Son, and unto
Jesus Christ: then let every man look in, and unto his own heart, and see
whether he do not resist the drawing of the spirit: Behold, says he, I stand
at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come
in to him, and sup with him, Rev: 3.20
and he with me: enter but into thy own Chamber and be still, and look into thy
own breast and see whether thou be not daily and hourly resisting the Spirit of
God that would draw man unto Christ; did thou but look into thy own heart,
thou should find there was never any thought that did ever arise in thee to
check or control thee in thy evil ways, but that very thought was a light in
thee, (if thou would have heeded, or regarded it.) And that light also did
tell thee, that all thy best actions were but sin; and that all the ways thou
walk in, there is nothing but fear in them, and death in them, and misery in
them. And thy best and holiest services are an abomination. There is a spirit
within thee that is still troubling and checking thee, for every proud, and for
every evil thought; and what is this for? 2 Cor. 8.2
only to let thee see that thou art dead and reprobate to every good work, and
all thy deeds are evil; and all that thou know, thou know not as thou
ought to know: It is to let thee know that thou art naked, and poor, and
blind, and miserable: It is to take away thy false strength, and thy false
wisdom, and riches, and to let thee see thy weakness, and folly, and
poverty; but this is thy only misery, and the general universal misery of all
the sons of men that they dare not stand in the light and abide in it; To abide
in such a light which shows that man has not one good thought, Psalm. 73.22.
but is as a beast before God; That he has no holiness, nor no righteousness
at all: Now for thee so far to presume and to think so highly of thy self,
that thou art of such abilities, and wisdom and parts as to sit down at the
head-end of the Table: or because that thou have gotten in thy own conceit into
the best way of Religion for knowledge, and practice, and performances: and
therefore thou art Somebody, and thou must be magnified and reverenced: and
for these men now, to be brought back, to look into their own hearts, and see
themselves as bad as the rest of the world, and to see themselves the worst of
men; Oh Beloved, what a mighty fall must these men have, before ever God brings
them into this condition? which must be if ever they be brought or drawn home
to Jesus Christ by the power of the Father.

And yet to add to this, besides all this thou have gotten a covering for thy
sins, and have wipt thy mouth, and said thou have done nothing, when all thy
ways are nothing but resistings, fightings, and emnity against God: Do not men
resist him when they seek esteem to themselves, and they must be great, and
respected, and honored? what is all this but to rob Jesus Christ of his
honor, and steal it away to put upon themselves? Oh that the power of God
would but make men abide in the Center of their own hearts to see that there is
nothing there but darkness, nothing but folly in regard of God and Christ: if
man would but dwell and abide here, to see himself lost, and wretched,
miserable and undone, then God would lead him, and bring him unto salvation:
but this is the condemnation, Joh. 3.19.
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light,
because their deeds are evil. I make no question but are all here pretend at
least to be seekers of God. Now enter into thy own heart, and tell me what is
the end of all thy Religious actions? are they not done for this purpose, that
thereby thou may gain and get a good opinion to and of thy self, that thou
have served God in a way he commands, and when thou have done, think thou
now art accepted? is this think thou the free will offering that is in Jesus
Christ, wherein we serve him not as Slaves or as Servants, but as Sons? Sons
that are begotten out of love, and out of love serve him without fear all the
days of our life. Now, I say, Luke 1.74
when thy Religious actions are only made use of to hide over thy sin, and to
get a good opinion of thy self, this is not the work of the spirit of God,
this is not a drawing to God but from God: this is a drawing into thy self, to
depend on flesh, and to feed on the dead ashes of thy own heart, Esa. 44.20
and not to know that there is a lie in thy right hand. But now if thou did
but see thy own sin, and thy own evil heart, thou would not dare to
speak of God but with much trembling: but know if thou speak of him or of
Divine things, thou speak as vainly, and as dissemblingly as wickedly, and
have nothing of Divine nature more then another: then the world of men for all
thy many words and large professions; thou will not say We see; for then thy
sin remains. But if thou go out mourning and weeping over thine own
misery, and over thy cursed heart, to thee I say, the Lord will draw thee and
lead thee in the everlasting power, so that thy own carnal heart, and all the
power of hell shall not be able to keep thee from Christ; but thou shall
understand and find that it is the power of the Father only that draws every
man unto Christ; And he will cause thy captivity to return as the streams in
the South: Psalm: 126.4.6.
and thou shall find that he that goes forth weeping, shall doubtless come
again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him: that so thou may
rejoice and magnify him alone, utterly renouncing thy self, and all the power
of man, as having no hand in His Almighty work.

THE CLOUD taken off the TABERNACLE, that the ISRAEL of God might journey.
Preached at Alhallows Lumbard-street.
EXODUS 40.36, 37, 38. And when the Cloud was taken up from over the Tabernacle,
then the Children of Israel went onward in all their journeys. But if the Cloud
were not taken up, then they journeyed not until the day it was taken up. For
the Cloud of the Lord was upon the Tabernacle by day, and the fire was on it by
night, in the sight of all the House of Israel throughout all their journeyes.
THis Book out of which we have taken these words, is called EXODUS, that is,
the Book of the go^ng out, or the Book of the goings forth: for it shows the
manner of the going forth of the children of Israel out of Egypt, being brought
out thence by a strong and mighty hand.

But Beloved, if we look on the things contained in this Book of the goings
forth, or going out, only as an History of the Jews going out of that Land of
Egypt, wherein they were inslaved in their cruel bondage, we fall far short
of what the Holy Ghost intends: For their going out is the type and
representation of all the people of God in all generations, and of their going
forth from under the bondage of spiritual Pharach, and out of the Kingdom of
Darkness.

When Moses as you may see, had obeyed the command of God, he showing him the
form of the Tabernacle, and Moses setting up all things therein according to
the pattern, then it is said, Heb. 8.5. Ver. 34.35.
in the preceding verses; when Moses had finished the work, then a cloud
covered the Tent of the Congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the
Tabernacle, so that Moses was not able to enter in for the glory thereof. Which
Tabernacle was always to be carried before the children of Israel; and if the
cloud was not taken up from off the Tabernacle, then they journeyed not, but
sat still; but if it was taken up, then they were to arise and go on upon
their journey: this rule they must observe, and this was to be their Leader,
and their Guide in all their journyings.

Thus it is in the History, and this is the Letter: now if there were no more
in it then so, what advantage is it to us, but only to deduct and raise some
moral observations and directions, which every carnal man may do, and be never
the nearer the meaning of the Scriptures, or to eat of the tree of life, and of
the Hidden Manna, or knowing the mind of God? and having no more, we have but
the Letter that kills, Genesis 3.3.
and is no other but the eating of the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
whereof God has commanded ADAM, that is whole ADAM, all Mankind not to eat
thereof: For to think that that eternal, infinite, and most spiritual, and
divine wisdom, should have no greater depth, nor no farther wisdom to employ it
self in, then in relating Histories of an outward Tabernacle, and of silken,
blew, and purple curtains, and of the Pot of Manna, and of outward sacrifices,
and washings; what depth of wisdom answerable to that infinite wisdom in the
Almighty Jehovah were this in him? To tell of Solomon's State, 2 Chro. 9.
and his Throne, and his Majesty: of his Gold and Silver, and of the
magnificent stately Temple that he builded, of the workmanship and great cost
and the like; what were all this, if there were not more in it then the Letter,
and what every man by his study, and reason, and learning can find out? but
without all question, there is that Mystery and depth of wisdom and knowledge
hid and covered in all these things which none can find or know with all their
utmost endeavors, unless we be anointed with that holy anointing which
teaches all things; 1 John 2.27. Mat. 19.11.
neither can we ever know them, except they be given us from above, that so
these things may be spoken out only by that divine teaching in us.

And for that History for which this Book is called Exodus, that we are now
upon, the Book of the goings forth, without all question, and to be brief,
Satan in us, is that true Pharaoh, which keeps the true Israel in bondage,
which is here held forth by that external Pharaoh: for what is that Pharaoh to
us, except we find in our selves all those things acted and done? And Egypt
there, to us, is no other thing but man's bondage, and miserable slavery under
the Prince of darkness, and shows what cruelty is exercised upon the true
children of Israel, and what mighty signs and wonders the Lord is feign to
work before the soul can be brought from under this bondage; and without
question, he that has not found it so in himself, was never yet brought out of
Egypt, he never yet found the true MOSES, which is Jesus Christ, pleading with
spiritual Pharaoh, that the soul may depart out thence, to serve the Lord; for
till then, man serves but himself, even in his highest forms and duties. And
likewise the children of Isreal's passage through the red Sea, and Pharaohs
pursuing, and their journyings, and fightings, and meeting with so many enemies
in their passage to Canaan: what are all these things but the oppositions and
dangerous passages of the soul to the heavenly Canaan, and the pursuing
thereof, by the Prince of darkness, and the god of this world: what is this but
the violence used by the Prince of the power of the air, which continually
works in the children of disobedience, 2 Cor. 4.4 Ephesians. 2.2.
that is, in all the sons of men till they are by a mighty and strong hand
brought out of this their Egypt and bondage?

All this trouble and shaking is that which the Lord promises in Heb. 12.26. I
will once more shake the Heavens and the earth; Heb 12.26
what he did then externally, he will once more do, that is, after the same
manner, but now spiritually. And this is that work and that birth of Christ, at
which Herod and all Israel is troubled. The spiritual Birth of Christ causes
the whole power of the natural man to shake and tremble, even those under the
purest external forms. And when the people of Israel were led a long and
tedious passage to Canaan, being carried up and down, backward and forward,
what is all this to us and them, in the substance and mystery, but holding
forth man's lost and miserable condition in the way of his own heart, in the way
of sin, showing the desolations, the darkness, the forlorn and lost condition
of all men by nature; that even when the heart of man thinks he is upon the
borders of Canaan, and he is now in the right way, and shall surely by his
travel and industry possess that good Land, he is for all this deceived and
brought back again to the very borders of Egypt, Esa: 14.15
and is brought down to the very sides of the pit. And it is revealed and made
known to him, for all his fair progress in his religion, and for all his forms
and inventions, that he is still under misery, and darkness, and sin, and
condemnation: and that all those things were but things taken up of himself,
and were no other but shows and pretenses, and coverings to delude himself
and the world, because he could not abide to see the internal misery, and that
bottomless gulf in himself: he could not endure to see the smoke of the
bottomless pit arise out of his own heart, Rev. 9.2:
and those innumerable Locusts crawling and covering the whole earth; that
there are in his heart, pride, and Lust, and Malice, and Murder, and
Covetuosnesse, and Idolatry, and Witchcrafts, and Sorceries, and Lies, and
every thing that works abomination, which cannot enter into the new
Jerusalem. Rev. 21.26
Therefore, I say, because man cannot abide to see himself thus, nor that any
other should see him thus vile and abominable as indeed he is, therefore he
gets himself a covering for all these things; he makes himself Aprons because
he knows he is naked; and he would cover himself as to himself, so to others,
Genesis 3.17
and from the face and sight of God himself: and having done this with all the
Art and Cunning he can invent, then (he thinks) he has covered the gulf: he
labors having thus seen himself in this gulf, to forget what manner of man he
is; Jam. 1.23 24.
he stops the guilt and cry of his own conscience by these aprons, coverings
and forms, and be begins to be secure, and he is holy both in his own sight,
and in the sight of others, and he thinks he shall enter and possess the good
Land flewing with Milk and Honey. Now for this man to be uncovered and laid
open, Exodus 3.8
to be emptied of all this goodness, and stripped of all his forms and holiness,
and to be brought back to the borders of Egypt, and to let him see he is as far
from the promised Land as the worst of men, nay Publicans and Harlots are
nearer then himself, this cuts the very caul of his heart, this undoes him,
Mat. 21.31.
and he is no more able to abide these words then the Pharisees could the
preaching of Jesus Christ, who sought in all his Teachings to pull off their
coverings, and to make them appear as they were, and not to be such as they
would have the world believe them to be with their holy shows and pretenses.

Now every man, the best of men, being in this condition, if they could but be
content to see themselves so, that they are filthy, and abominable in all their
works, and that they were utterly lost and destroyed and confounded in
themselves, and knew not what to do, nor which way to turn themselves, then
indeed would the Lord come in and shine upon them with light and life; and the
Tabernacle of the Lord should guide them, and it would show them the way, the
truth and life; and the holy spirit would guide them into all truth; Joh.
16.13. Rev. 21.23.
The cloud and the darkness should be taken up, and the Lord himself would be
their Sun, their Light, and their Guide; then they should see experimentally by
the teachings of the Father in them, Esa. 60.19 Heb. 8.2.
and not by the outward teachings of men, that Jesus Christ is the True
Tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not man, as the Apostle applies all to
Jesus Christ in the ninth of the Hebrews, at the beginning, Ibid. 9.1. etc.
As the Sanctuary and all things therein contained, viz. The Candlestick and
the Shewbread, and the Golden Censor, and the Ark of the Covenant, and the
Golden pot of Manna, and Aarons rod that was always green, flowrishing and
budding, etc. The Holy Ghost signifying, that the way into the holiest of all
was not yet made manifest, which were only figures for that time, and could
not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience,
which stood in meats and drinks, and diverse washings and carnal Ordinances
imposed on them, until the time of reformation. But Christ being become an high
Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, and
not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building, and so he goes on.
Of which tings, I must say, as the Apostle does that of them we cannot now
speak particularly: Jesus Christ, Mat. 5.15
He is the light set upon the Candlestick, giving light to all that are in the
House, and He is the Hidden Manna to nourish us to eternal life; Col. 1.19.
and 2.9.
and it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, even the
fullness of the Godhead, bodily. Oh Beloved, He is that true Tabernacle, which
the Lord has pitched, and not man: From this Tabernacle must the soul expect
all its leadings, all its teachings, and not from the wisdom of man, or the
ordinances of man; for here they are all taught of God, and they shall no more
teach every one his Brother, Heb. 8.10 11.
saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least to the
greatest. And, whosoever is not led by this light, and by this Star only to
behold the Lord Jesus Christ, as his only and true Guide, if he look any other
way, he does the same thing that the Prophet said of old to them that followed
the Tabernacle of Moloch, and the Star of their god Remphan; and follows
after lies, and the inventions of their own evil Adulterous hearts, Acts 7, 42
and Amos. 5.25.26.
figures which they have made to worship, says the Holy Ghost, in the fifth
Chapter of Amos, and the twenty fifth and twenty sixth verses.

Now then, you may hence see and take notice, that until the cloud be removed
by the Lord himself, there must be no journying, no going forward by any of the
sons of men: and it is the Lord, and not man can remove it: the children of
Israel must wait the Lords time (when he pleases) man he is always furnished
and ready; your time is always ready, (says our Savior,) Joh. 7.6.
but my time is not yet; There are certain days and times while the Cloud is
upon the glory of this Tabernacle; and till the Lord remove it, man can do
nothing but wait; he must sit still in his Tent: And that is, when all things
are in darkness in man, both within him and without him, and he sees himself
lost as to all his own wisdom, power, endeavors; in this case it is in vain for
man to arise and think to create a light, and a wisdom, and a power to
himself; for then he goes on in his own power and light, and not in the light
and power of God. Ye know, the fire in the Tabernacle never went out; there was
always light there; Lev. 6.13
but if there be a Cloud upon it, and thou can not see it, and yet wilt be
journying, and doing, and acting, this will be thy fall and stumbling, and a
curse will be upon thee, and not a blessing, and thou shall not prosper. When
that fire kindled the word in the mouth of Jeremiah the Prophet, then that word
was a light to them and a command to depart out of their Captivity, and to
return to their own land; till then the cloud was upon their way, and they were
as in a waylesse wilderness. where no man passed, a land of deserts and of
pits, a land of drought and shadows of death where no man dwelt, Jer. 2.6.
as in that second chapter of Jeremiah. While man is in this condition and in
this night of blindness and darkness, and land of death and drought, he
knows not his way, until the Lord show him a light; till He remove the cloud,
there is no finding the place of rest, nor any feeding on the Hidden Manna, nor
drinking at the Wells of Salvation. Esa. 12.3.
When man is in this dark night, how can he arise? but if he sit still as to
all his own powers, really seeing his own weakness, and utter inability, then
this light in due time will shine forth; and if he ever stir before this day,
he arises, and works, and walks unto his own ruin and destruction. It may be
this Doctrine may seem harsh and very unwelcome to most men, That they shall not
be doing, and going on, and journying, Phil. 2.12
and working out their own Salvation: many are hereat much offended, at which I
do not wonder; for they not being able to see the Mystery of the Scripture,
only rest in the Letter, and know not the teachings of the spirit; and think
they must do something by way of condition, or else all is nothing. And herein
is the great mistake of most men who (though never so highly esteemed by
themselves and others, Luke 6.39
yet) herein are no other but blind leaders of the blind, and both fall into
the ditch. But those who are acquainted with these things in their own
experience, know and feel this mystical interpretation to be the truth, and
all other in the Letter to be but resemblances and shadows under which the
truth is hid and covered from all save only such to whom it is given to know
the mystery of the Kingdom, Mat. 13.11.
but to others in parables, that seeing they may see and not perceive, and
hearing they may bear and not understand; As in that seventh and eighth Chapter
to the Hebrews, where the Apostle speaking of the Law, and of many particulars
appertaining to that Priesthood, he shows that the Law made nothing perfect,
but the bringing in of a better hope did, by which we draw nigh unto God; and
so there by several arguments he proves that Jesus Christ alone, was the true
Priest, and the true ORDINANCE. Now in the first verse of the eighth chapter,
Heb. chapter 7. and 8.
he applies all that he had before spoken to Jesus Christ alone, that perfect
high Priest: Chapter 7.19
Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum; And so he goes on
and applies it to Jesus Christ, that true high Priest, who is set on the right
hand of the throne of the Majesty on high, a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of
the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not man; which things serve but
unto the example and shadow of Heavenly things, Chapter 8.1. etc.
he having obtained a far more excellent ministry, by how much he is made the
mediator of a better covenant, and established upon better promises: he is not
a high Priest of a Temple, or contained in any Temple made with hands: 2 Chronicles:
6.18.
but he is such a one whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain; And he offers
not sacrifices, but himself, his own body; And He and all his members are the
true Tabernacle wherein the Lord is served and well pleased; for the Law made
High Priests which have infirmity, Heb. 7.28.
says the Apostle, but the word of the Oath which was since the Law, makes
the Son, who only is consecrated for evermore.

But what shall we say then of all those things wherein Moses was commanded to
be so exact, and to make all things according to the pattern? and here he calls
Christ the true Tabernacle; what was theirs a false one? I, Ibid. 8.2.
it was in regard of Christ who is the Son himself; for not any of all those
things the Jews themselves were to rest in, though done exactly according to
the Pattern. But this MESSIAH was he that they should have eyed through and
beyond all those figures and shadows; for that Tabernacle was but pitched by
man; mark that; though commanded by God; but the true Tabernacle is pitched by
the Lord himself. So that the Apostle there, we may clearly see, expounds this
last chapter of Exodus, and reduces all those shadows to the substance,
proving that Christ himself is the true Tabernacle, and the true Ministry, and
the true Sanctuary, and that those things are but the Patterns and Emblems of
the heavenly things. Now all things must be according to him; for he is the
true pattern, and is that one and alone Sacrifice, once ffered; as in that
ninth chapter of the Hebrews, Heb. 9.11. etc.
and the eleventh verse and so on, Christ being an high Priest of good things
to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands; that is
to say, not of this building; and by his own blood he entered into the Holy
Place; and if the blood of Bulls and Goats sanctifyeth to the purifying of the
stesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered up himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead
works? etc. Though all these things were done by Moses, and all done according
to the example and pattern; yet, says he, the things we speak of are not
things done hy man, not of this building, that is, not done by the wisdom,
power, or will of man; no, nor those done by them according to the direction of
God himself, (and in that sense commanded and unquestionable Ordinances) yet
these made not the comers thereunto perfect; therefore, says he, in the three
and twentieth verse of that ninth chapter, It was therefore necessary that the
PATTERNS of the things in the Heavens should be purified with these; Verse. 23.
but the Heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices: for Christ is not
entered into the Holy Places made with hands, which are the figures of the
true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us: The
Heavenly things themselves purified, what is that? That is, the souls of men,
which are of Heavenly natures and Immortal; and if those External Sacrifices
must be purified with blood, it is much more necessary that that Heavenly and
Immortal soul of man should be purified with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ. Man having departed from God, and defiled his soul by turning away from
him, and being gone down to earthly things, to find himself a God, and a Trust,
and a Refuge: this departure is of that infinitness, that nothing but this
Eternal Priest and Mediator could reconcile and bring together again the
Majesty and Nature of God, and polluted man thus at an infinite distance; but
He by himself and of his own mercy and good will has reconciled us to his
father, 2 Cor. 5.20. Esa. 63.3
and has trod the Winepress alone and none stood by him; and herein was the
eternal and infinite love of Jesus Christ our alone Savior seen.

And by the way, let me mind you of one thing: That when the Scripture speaks
of Christ his Ascending and entering into the third Heaven, and far above all
Heavens, and sitting down on the right hand of his Father: Ephesians. 4.10. Heb: 12.2
I would not have you so childish as to be deluded by those tricks and devices
of the men of the Letter, who not being able to see the mystery, do take those
things as spoken literally, as though Christ now had a material body, flesh
and bones, the same which he had in the flesh, when he was upon earth; these
are very fond inventions of men, that Christ is in a local place and sits upon
a Throne above in Heaven, next his Father as upon his right hand or the like:
and when he comes to judgment he will set himself in the material Clouds, and
call all Nations before him, just as Judges do at the Sizes; and there to sit
in a Chair of State above all, or as Solomon upon a glorious Throne. Truly the
world has been a long time deluded with these fancies. Now as the Apostle
says, plainly, he is not entered into a place made with hands, nor into any
thing of this nature, Heb. 9.24
nor of this building: But we are when we speak of him, to separate all our
thoughts far from all carnal things, and all creaturely beings. For there is no
tincture of the creature concernments in those heavenly and divine things; but
all those things are done spiritually and in a way far above the thought or
comprehension of all creaturely conceptions.

But from all this which has been spoken, hence it is clear, That the
Tabernacle here spoken of, is, the glory, wisdom, power, righteousness of
Jesus Christ, and whatever is HIMSELF, who is nothing else but majesty, purity,
glory, wisdom, love, goodness, fullness, infiniteness, blessedness, and
Alsufficiency, and all good; he alone is the Lord, Mat. 6.13.
he alone is King, his is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever, and
no creature can without blasphemy in the highest degree appropriate or assume
any one, or any part of these to himself; Here now Beloved, we have set before
you the Tabernacle, and the Fire in the Tabernacle. This is that fire of the
Lord which can never be put out, nor extinguished, Levit. 6.13.
but is ever one and the same; it can never decrease nor increase in regard of
himself, but only in regard of manifestation to us; and which cannot be
procured one day sooner by all the Wisdom, Learning, Industry of man, but only
when he is pleased to remove the cloud, then have ye liberty to journey, and
walk, and wo^k, and not before; whatever the dark and blind and the poor
deluded sons of men make you believe.

And further be assured, that until you come to possess and enjoy in your
selves, these spiritual and divine things, you cannot know what they mean; and
whatever you do, and whatever you see, or adore, below these, you adore nothing
but the patterns and the images of them, wherein no man ever yet had any other
but a false rest., and they lived in a false light, and enjoyed not the things
themselves; nay, though we should know and behold Christ after the flesh and
look upon him in his Conception, Life, Death, Crucifying, Burial, Resurrection,
Ascension, yet all these things are but the patterns of the Heavenly things,
and of the Lord himself, Heb. 9.23
which are to pass a way and be forgotten when that Christ himself is
personally manifested; Hence forth know we him no more, 2 Cor. 5.16.
says the Apostle. When the Eternal Majesty and Splendor of that which is the
Truth comes in, all the glory of all other things vanishes before its presence.
These are the things which are purified with better things then the blood of
Bulls and Goats: nothing could purchase nor purify these things, but only the
blood and the death of the Son of God. Here the soul comes to fee clearly, and
to handle, and experiment and taste the Heavenly things themselves; which were
from the beginning, 1 John 1.1
which we have heard, and which we have seen with ^ur eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life. Then the soul
truly falls in love with Christ, then it eyes him, and surveys him, then it
magnifies and adores him; then it loses it self in him, and dotes upon him,
then is he all beauty, and all perfection to it; and then it loses
self-seeking and self-interest, and self-glorying and the like, and sees him
only to be the Lord of life, life alone, glory alone, riches alone, mercy
alone, light alone, precious alone; and nothing in Heaven or earth to be
desired but him alone. Then it can say experimentally and feelingly with David,
and not complementally as most professors do, Psalm. 73.25, 26.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none in the earth that I desire
in comparison of thee; And my flesh and my heart fails, but God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever: This soul is indeed the Temple
of God, and has in it the true light, Majesty and Glory of God; but all other
men do but play with shadows, and are but exercised about the patterns of these
things which are to come, and have not the things themselves, notwithstanding
their confidences and strong conceits.

And now this light being in thee, this is to be thy guide, this is to be thy
teacher, thy Master, and no other can be; till this come in, the Scriptures
themselves, nay Christ in the flesh, and all things whatever ye can name, are
but Dark lanthorns without these divine teachings; for he is only a light and a
guide, a Master, and Ruler unto spiritual men, and he is only Riches, Peace,
Power, Love, Glory only unto these men: it is not those that can talk much of
him, and who have high notions and speculations of him, that can love or adore
him truly, but only those who thus enjoy him. He that walks by any other
light, or any other guide then by the light of the Tabernacle, Esa. 5.11.
he walks in his own light and in the sparks of his own kindling, and they
never did, Esa. 5.1.
nor never can receive other at the Lords hand, but to lie down in sorrow. But
this is to lean upon the highest and purest wisdom, to depend and rest on him
who is only Alsufficient: this is to be taken off all other things, all other
sufficiencies, which are so to other men: They can really see there is nothing
in man, nothing in the world, but that all are full of emptiness and vanity,
and deceit; this man sees and really knows all this: other men talk much of
them, as if they were to them the only excellencies; and that all below them
are nothing but shadows and delusions; but secretly in their hearts they do not
think so, and their practices tell us otherways: their eager seeking them,
their close holding and hugging them, plainly declares, that they lie with
their tongues, Psalm. 78.36.
and dissemble in their hearts: And they teach to others, that which they never
yet touched with one of their fingers: And to them the things themseles, to act
in them, to live by them, Luke 11.46.
are those heavy burdens which the Pharisees laid upon other men shoulders, but
not touched them themselves.

He that is guided by any other light, or by any other teachers, he forsakes
the light, the life and glory of Christ, and goes down into Emptiness,
Darkness, Misery, Sin, and the delusions of his own heart. He that thinks the
Scriptures to be a light and a teacher, or a rule, or a guide, without this
Heavenly and Divine Teacher in him, he depends upon that which can never teach,
nor guide aright without him; and therefore when men talk so much of the
Scriptures, and miss this light, they are but in darkness, and merely delude
themselves and others. While Adam in the state of innocence beheld this light
in him, he adhered to it alone, he saw no other light, no other fire, no other
guide; this was the Tree of life to him, this was Riches, Glory, Fullness, Genesis
3.
all in all: but, he casting his eye upon the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, this false light misled him, and led him down into darkness, death,
blindness, irrecoverable misery, and never to return to the tree of life: and
this was by following the counsels and teaching of his own heart: and indeed
this is the condition of all the sons of men, not one excluded, no not one can
return: for there is a flaming cherub turning every way to keep the way of the
tree of life: And there is none can remove this Cherub, but only the Son of
God: man with all his wisdom and power can do nothing in it; he with all his
excellencies is gone down for ever into the pit of Darkness, Job. 10.21
never to return: Now only Jesus Christ is the new and living way, the gate to
life, the true Teacher, the only guide, the only UNDERTAKER for all those that
shall return: He alone says to Adam, Where art thou? have thou eaten of the
tree whereof I commanded thee thou should not eat, Genesis 3.9.
and in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die? Jesus Christ alone is he
that discovers man to be naked, to see himself undone and miserable, by
following his own will and wisdom; he alone can set up a light in the soul, to
show man his folly and madness: he alone can set before him Hell, Death, the
Curse, Damnation, and Destruction. And if man go about to return in his own
light, or by his own wisdom, he sets himself but more into misery and
darkness: and even Publicans and Harlots shall sooner return then these men,
Mat. 21.31. Ibid. 23.15.
who in their own and others eyes, are the wisest of men, the highest, the
holiest of the sons of men. And these men for all they take so much pains, and
are so strict over themselves, (as they would be thought to be) and require it
of others, yet they are no other but those Pharisees and Hypocrites which
compass Sea and Land, to make if possible ONE Proselyte; and when he is made,
Genesis 2.25
they make him twofold more the child of Hell then before.

While Adam lived in that state wherein he was created, in the Light of God,
and in the Glory of God, in the Wisdom and Life of God, man was not ashamed,
though he was naked; for the glory and light of God was in him, which was his
life, excellency and glory; but when he went hence and followed other Counsel,
Chapter 3.6.
the whispering of the subtle Serpent within him, then followed Death, Hell,
Misery, and Condemnation: then he sees his folly and madness in harkning to
and giving way to this false Liar, who before told him he should better his
condition, and he should be like God himself. And thus seeing and beholding his
nakedness, his folly and misery, he being not able to behold it, nor live in
the sight thereof, for he is not able to behold the wrath of God, and Hellfire
flashing in his face: then he bethinks himself of some Covering, some Shelter,
some Clothes to cover his nakedness; he is not able to behold his own
condition: and he invents a thousand ways to shelter himself: runs to this
duty and that rule, and he will find out something, he will do something to
quench the fire in him that is kindled by the breath of the Lord. And is not
man in this more mad; Esa. 30.33
and more vain, and more miserable? For by all these things he does but add
fuel to this fire; for does he think, till one stronger then himself come,
even to be delivered? Alas, Luke 11: 22.
thus are all the sons of men deluded; but when Christ who is the true
Mediator comes, when he sets up his light in man, then he convinces him of his
Emptiness, of his Weakness, of his Nothingnesse, and that he cannot arise,
Joh. 11.43:
nor live, without the loud and mighty voice of the son of God quicked him;
when this light and life comes upon him, then though he be naked in himself,
yet he is not ashamed: but he standing in this condemnation, all sin, and
darkness and condemnation vanish before the glory of these heavenly things and
come to nothing, and empty themselves into their own nothingness, that so the
glory of Jesus Christ may come in the room thereof, who is truth, and life, and
fullness, and perfection, and all things.

But while man walks by the light of his own fire, Esa. 50.11
and in the sparks which he has kindled, he is holy, and good, and pure, and
excellent, and great in his own sight, and high in his own wisdom; but when
once he comes to be guided by the fire and light of the Tabernacle, then he is
a Miserable, Empty, Bare, Beggarly thing: nothing in him of Wisdom, Power,
Glory, Riches, Goodness, a mere naked, empty, and simple thing, except he be
made happy in the light of God, and in the union with Jesus Christ; wise in the
wisdom of God, and holy in the holiness of God: Here, says the Apostle, I
permit not a woman to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.34. Ibid. 11.16.
here let her head be covered: that is, let not man speak any thing in the
Church in the presence of the Lord; of his wisdom, of his goodness, of his
upright walking, but let Christ be all these in the Church: There let all the
Weakness and Womanishnesse of man come upon him, and let him be covered with
shame in the presence of this Bridgroom; for it is a shame for a woman to speak
in the Church; let not her show so much pride, but let her ask her Husbad at
home, let him have all the glory. Let not the Bride speak any thing of her
riches, of her beauty in the presence of her Lord; but to see her self rich in
his riches, and glorious in his glory, and wise in his wisdom: let her not
meddle herein without her head be covered, so that she sees she has nothing of
glory, nothing praiseworthy, nothing beautiful in her; but that her head be
perfectly covered with the righteousness, riches, and glory of Jesus Christ.
All the men in the world, be they of what parts, learning, strength, or
excellency can be named, are but WOMEN in this respect, and are to cover their
heads in the presence of Christ, in the Church of Christ: In thy Temple every
one speak of thy glory, Psalm. 26.9:
says David: If a Woman offer to speak in the Church, this is but weakness,
this is but shame and confusion of face: in the CHURCH, what is that think you?
without question the meaning of the Apostle is not to be taken Literally of a
material Church; nor it is not meant of a Congregation of men or women assembled,
or congregated together (as the wisest of men take it) for this in the
Scripture sense is not called A CHURCH; much less in a low and vulgar
acceptance, of a meeting place built of bricks or wood, or stone: But the
CHURCH is the Temple of God, the House of God, the Body of Christ in which the
Lord discovers his Riches, Glory, Wisdom, Bounty, and the Treasures of Wisdom
and knowledge, and his everlasting power and goodness to the souls of
Believers: and in this Church where the Lord is present, let not weakness
discover its pride, insolency, or vain-boasting; for, this is the Church, and
this is the Woman that ought not to speak there.

Now this fire of the sanctuary, is that which discovers all this Weakness,
Darkness, and Blindness in the soul; when this light of God appears, then all
shadows vanish, then all coverings are removed, and all things in and of Man,
appear as they are to be nothing but Darkness, Deformity, Delusion, Lies,
Confusion and Misery; and God appears to the soul to be only Light, Life,
Happiness, and Perfection; Genesis 2.25
and the soul is not ashamed to be thus naked, because this makes way that God
may have all the glory, all the wisdom, all the excellency, and man may come
to be nothing but sin and emptiness. Thus the soul comes with the Apostle to
rejoice in and to glory in his infirmities, 2 Cor. 12.5.
and that the power and wisdom of God is made perfect in his Weakness and
Folly. As a good Wife, she is not ashamed to be as nothing in the presence of
her Husband, but rejoices that He is esteemed, and that he is made all in all
to her: So does the true Spouse of Christ; let her be nothing, so He may be
all: for she acknowledges that she is only rich in her Husbands riches, and
wise in his wisdom, and strong in his strength; 1. Pet. 1.7.
she sees she lives not by her own care and industry, but in the love and care
of her Husband: and thus she glories not in her self, but in her Husband: This
is to become NAKED, and yet not ashamed, as was Adam in his Innocence: Rev.
3.17 2 Cor. 10 5.
To have a poor sinner freely to confess, to the glory of Christ, Time was when
I was rich and had high imaginations of my self, and I was in my own esteem
able to guide and rule, and direct my self and all my affairs, and I thought my
self in a blessed and secure condition: but I find now, that was nothing but
a lie, and a delusion; But even then, the mere love and tender compassion of my
Savior and Redeemer set up a candle and light in my soul whereby I was
discovered to be nothing but A sink of sin, A body of death, A bottomless pit
of abominations: Mark. 4.21. Romans 7.24. Rev. 9: 2.
that I was a fool, and madness was in my heart in all I did. And that he alone
was goodness, mercy, power, wisdom, eternity, salvation, and Alsufficiency;
this he freely, and with all readiness acknowledges, and this he is not
ashamed to declare, as those are that would be esteemed holy Ones, but to tell
it to all the world; though all the wise and holy men of the world esteem him a
fool and a madman, yet this is his glory, to take shame to himself.

But all your wise and righteous men, all their contriving is to hide all their
shame, and they would be thought to be holy men, and strict men, and that they
walk exactly, and according to the rule of the word: and this is their glory,
that others have this esteem of them, they would not for a world be thought as
vile and finful as others: they hate that Jesus Christ should so far lay them
open to the world and themselves: Psalm. 56.8 Ezekiel. 8.11.
What, are they to come before the Lord and have no Goodness, no Endeavors,
no Watchfulness, no Bottles of Prayers to offer, no sweet incense to offer, no
Duties, thereby to think well of themselves? this would be Death and
Destruction, and Desolation to them. When (God knows) when once he will arise
in them, Psalm. 50, 21.
and set their sins in order, then all their delusions and coverings will be
removed, and they made naked. Then all their fine and neat contrivances to
disguise themselves before God and men, shall be rent and destroyed; Joh. 9.39
when the Lord will arise and come to Judgment in their hearts, then all their
inward parts shall be laid open; and what they have d^ne in secret shall, be
proclaimed upon the house top. Mat. 24.15.
When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel
the Prophet, stand in the holy place (whosoever reads let him understand) then
shall there be in those days great tribulation in them, Luke 8.17 Mat. 24.21.
Mark. 13.14. Luke 21.25.
and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven,
and the powers of the Heavens shall be shaken. Then he that is on the house
top, shall not come down to take any ting out of his house: he shall not go
down to fetch any of his Riches, or Gold, or Silver: none of his fine utensils
for worship, none of his fine and workmanlike duties, none of his strictnesses,
none of his holy walkings: he is stripped of all, left naked: and how are their
houses left unto them desolate, in one moment? Babylon in them is fallen, is
fallen, and she that said in her heart I shall sit a Queen, and am no Widow,
and shall see no sorrow; therefore shall her plagues come upon her in one day,
Rev. 18.2 etc.
death and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire: for
strong is the Lord God who judges her. Then is the hour of Judgment come, and
the Lord will arise, and nothing can hinder or stand before him. This will be a
miserable day to these men a day of blackness and gloominess, and thick Clouds,
the Sun turned into darkness, and the moon into blood. A deluge of wrath is now
irresistibly coming upon them, and then the Heavens shall be rolled together
as a scrole and the earth shall melt with fervent heat, and all their works
burnt up. 2 Pet. 3.10.


Then from hence we may conclude that at that day, all men, even the wisest men
of the world, will be at their wits end, to cover and hide themselves from the
wrath of the Lamb and from him that sits on the Throne: Rev. 6.16.
Then all those Merchants of Babylon shall lament for her, That their Whore,
their Strumpet, with whom they have all their days committed fornication, is
made desolate, etc. their trade of Religion is quite overturned; Mich. 3.11.
those that made Merchandise of the Word, and Preached for money and for hire,
and to get bread, or to make themselves great, and to that end got into forms
and duties, and fellowships, that men might have high thoughts of them; and
made long prayers under pretense, and to grow rich by devouring widows houses:
Mat. 23.14.
and yet these things, these pretenses, these prayers and duties they heap to
themselves, thinking they may please God with them, and these things (as foul
and abominable as they be) they think to be a goodly sacrifice. But when this
day comes that the Lord will arise and plead his own cause, all these things
will stand in no stead; all their works must be burnt up: then he will remember
how these foolish men blaspheme his name, Psalm. 74.22, 23. Psalm. 74.22, 23.
And if they should bethink themselve wherewithal to come before the Lord, and
to offer thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil, nay if they give
the fruit of the Body for the sin of their Soul, Micah. 6.7.
all were to to no purpose: For the Father, the Eternal Majesty of Heaven can
be pleased with nothing but that One Eternal and Alsufficient sacrifice, the
blood of his own dear Son: For men to call themselves Christians and Saints,
and for others to esteem them so, is a poor covering: now in this day, it will
not cover their nakedness; The bed is too short to stretch themselves on it,
and the covering is too narrow, they cannot cover nor wrap themselves in it.
Esa. 28.20
It Is not all their fellowships and Congregatings, nor washings, nor External
eatings, and sitting down with Christ at his Table, nor their Persuasions that
they do the mind of God, and conform exactly to the rule and letter of the
word: All things of this nature is but of man, Phil. 3.19
and they glory in their own shame; Thou dishonourest thy head Christ, to pray
or prophecy and thy head not BARE: if thy self be not stripped naked, it is a
dishonor to Christ, who is the head of the Church; for all honor, all praise,
all wisdom, all goodness, all righteousness, is Christ's crown, and no
creature is to wear that Crown but himself alone. If thou take these, or any
part of these which are due alone to him, thou make Christ ashamed, he is
dishonored: for there is no Goodness, no Love, no Beauty, no Life, but only
in the Son of God: and whatever is in him, is his for the Church; not that they
enjoy it in themselves, but in him: all glory be to him, and all shame and
confusion upon themselves; and hereby is their head magnified.

Christ alone is their Covering, their Righteousness, their Wisdom, their
Redemption, their Savior, their Beauty; they have no shelter, no hiding place
but in him: Those that are ashamed thus to acknowledge and confess him before
men, Mat. 10.32.
he will be ashamed to confess them, or own them before his Father. Those that
are ashamed to bear this testimony of him, and to be Witnesses and Martyrs for
him, he will be ashamed of them. He is not ashamed to own thee in thy blood and
filthiness; and shall we be ashamed to own him and to ascribe that to him
which is his due? But in stead of giving testimony to the glory of HIS name,
thou studiest and contrivest, which way thou may be something, that thou
may be esteemed, and that Christ may be nothing, that he may be debased; but
be assured In that day all these things shall be laid open. And God is a
jealous God and will not suffer his honor to be polluted, Esa. 42.8:
nor will give his glory to any other.

Further, from all this which has been said, it appears that it is in vain to
seek for, or expect any light to guide any of the sons of men any where else
but from the Tabernacle: It Is in vain to follow any other Star but that which
led the Wise men to Jesus Christ: he that sets up any other Sun of
righteousness to guide him, Mal. 4.2.
any other light, any other rule to walk by, that thinks he can teach himself
or offer any sacrifices or prayers to be accepted with the Father, but his
alone, or assumes any power to command himself in any thing: this man is no
other but a liar, a thief, and a robber, a blasphemer and a traitor; for he
robs God of his honor, and denies Jesus Christ to be King, Priest, and
Prophet, which is alone his right,

Beloved, happy is that soul who has forsaken himself, and all other lights,
and minds only this light from the Tabernacle, that cannot follow any other
counsel, that knows the voice of Christ, and the light and life of Christ from
all other Lights or Lives, Joh. 10.5.
and that will not follow the voice of any stranger: They know the Light and
shinings forth of God from all other shinings: These are the true Wise men, the
spiritual and true Magicians: if they see any other Star, any other false
Meteor: they can distinguish it and follow his Star alone; they have found in
experience where they have followed any other light or guide, they stumbled and
fell: He knows if he do, he shall be led into the Land of darkness, into a
Wilderness of sorrows and miseries, where are Tigers, Leopards and the Owls,
and the scrith Owls, the Jims and Ziims of the desert, or Night-Monsters as
the Prophet esaiah excellenly and elegantly speaks. And again, says he, Ye
shall kindle a fire and walk in the sparks thereof, Esa. 34.11.14. and 13.20.
Ibid. 50: 11.
but this ye shall receive at my Hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.

Man naturally follows that light that he has found out, not regarding the
fire of the Sanctuary, and as with a Stone and a Steel he strikes fire for
himself, and gathers up some combustible matter, Wood, Hay, 1 Cor. 3.12.
and Stubble of his own finding, some things of his own getting together, and
here he makes himself a light and a fire, and he thinks by his Wisdom, and by
his Learning to hammer, beat and find out the truth of the Scriptures; Romans
2.19 Esa. 55.4.
and he thinks that he can teach, and he can counsel, and he is a leader of the
blind, which is only Christ's work and office; and he can define out errors,
and restrain them by his rules and directions, when alas poor blind man he
never yet found the darkness of his own heart, he never yet saw the errors of
his own heart; are not these then blind leaders of the blind (as our Savior
says) and both must needs fall into the ditch? Mat. 15.14.


This is the very same thing which Nadab and Abihu did, to offer strange fire
of their own before the Lord; when thou bring all thy duties, Levit. 10.1.
all thy parts, all thy endeavors, and though thou offerest them (as
pretended) on the true Altar Jesus Christ, yet if offered by thy self, thou art
that Nadab and Abihu there described: And the fine of the Lord will break forth
to thy utter ruin and destruction: for, never any thing ever pleased the
Father, but that one alone and Eternal sacrifice which is continually offered
only by himself: he abhors that any of thy duties, any of thy menstruous rags
should be joined in with his most perfect, Esa. 64.6. Deuteronomy. 22.11:
yea only righteousness: This Garment of linsey-woolsey his people may not
wear. All things that are done in the world, proceed but from two principles:
there is not one action of any of the sons of men, but proceeds either from the
power or wisdom of man, or from Jesus Christ: if from man as man, its
loathsome, stinking, abominable, though never so refined; though they bestow
never so much labor, industry, learning, all their Wits and Parts, To put upon
it the neatest cut, and the finest dress, Jam. 3.15 Nah. 1.5. and 2 Pet. 3 20:
they are all but earthly, sensual and devilish, which must to Hell, and the
earth with all the works thereof shall be burnt up for ever.

Every sacrifice that is offered in the world, must be kindled with fire from
Heaven, by the fire of the Sanctuary and offered on this Altar, which alone is
Jesus Christ, and that alone perfect High Priest: else it is kindled by this
strange fire which is no other but devouring fire: either it is of the earth,
earthly, or else it is of the Lord from Heaven: 1 Cor. 15.47.
if it be from Heaven, it shall be raised up to heaven: It is sown in weakness,
but it is raised up in power: if it be from man, it is from the bottomless pit, it
is from fin and weakness, and thither it must return: and in this state and
condition are all the actions of the world: even all the actions, inventions,
forms, in dustrys of men: and they all tend to crucify the Lord of life and
power, that so man and his doings, Joh. 18.40.
his contrivances, his Idols may stand and be adored. All the sons of men cry
out for a Barrabas, that so the wisdom of the flesh and the power of man may be
established, and that that everlasting, righteous Son of God, which would be
working, living, reigning in man, may be crucified and utterly destroyed: This
they may do, and do do, and yet may talk much of an outward and external
Christ, which once dyed at Jerusalem, and pretend much love to him. Never any
of the sons of men ever received that true Christ we speak of, (though much
cried up in the world) for never any received him, but to them he gave power to
become the sons of God; Never any received him, nor followed him, but he denied
himself, Joh. 1.12
and took up his Cross: which never any man did that is not emptied of
himself, made nothing in his own sight, Luke 14.7
that is not stripped of all his power, wisdom, parts, righteousness, and
whatever man (as man) adores: All true Saints are brought to see this, in
experience; they see, all the world seeking themselves, following after the
gods that they have made, and crying up their Diana: they see all the whole
earth always and continually crying out, Not this man, but Barabbas: Mat.
27.21.
And they know them to be all Thieves and Robbers.

But these only come to the light, and walk in the light: Joh. 10.8.
And the light of Christ in them has discovered, that in man is nothing but
sin, and darkness, and misery, and condemnation: This they really see, both
within themselves and without themselves, that he that would be exalted, is in
them brought low, and he that humbles himself is exalted: Luke 14.11.
Christ in them, and to them is all in all: and this is their Glory, this is
their Kingdom, this their Pearl for which they have sold all, this is their
Heaven. Then they come to see, Mat. 13.46.
as the truth is, that they have no power, wisdom, excellency, nothing at all
but what is to be condemned: and that all their works which are accepted are
wrought in God: Joh. 3.21 1 Cor. 1.30.
That Jesus is their Wisdom, Rgihteousness, Justification, Sanctification, and
Redemption: they come to this light, and they walk in this light: they
continually see, that Jesus Christ has all power and wisdom in himself: he
has not given any part of his excellencies out of himself, but whatever is
wrought in them, is wrought by Him: they dare not say, I must do and I must
act, and I must pray that I may be accepted, nor think as others do; I must
perform the conditions on my part to do, Heb. 6.6:
and then I shall be accepted. All Doctrine of this nature, is no other but
crucifying the Son of God afresh, and putting him to open shame, and walking in
darkness: Those that preach this, Acts 20.29. John 3.31
are those grievous wolves which Paul speaks of Acts 20.29, 30. I know that
after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the
flock; also of your own selves shall men arise speaking, perverse things, to
draw disciples after them. Of your own selves, that is, men that hold forth the
same doctrine, and preach Jesus Christ too, and hold him forth for a Savior,
yet under that pretense, crucify him, and make him as no Christ, and his
Cross of no effect. But those that are in the light, they come to the light,
and follow this light, live in this light, that their deeds may be made
manifest, whether wrought in God, or no; Then he sees this is the true wisdom
from above, Jam. 3.17.
which is pure, peaceable, easy to be entreated, full of good works: it is not
high, and stern, and subtle, and rigid, to keep at distance from all but whom
they like: but they are easy to be entreated, meek, ready to do good to all;
they see no such excellency in houses, inheritances, money, honor, praise, but
for the love of Christ, they are not dear to them; they know, if they have
these, they are not given to make them great, or high, or praised among the
sons of men; but that by them, Christ in them may make himself great; That
they may be of another spirit then any other natural man in the world, Acts
26.18.
showing forth the virtues of him that has called them from darkness to light,
from the power of Satan to God.

Then is their Tongue Touched with a coal from the Altar, Esaias 6.6.
and they must declare Jesus Christ, to make him alone glorious, powerful,
wise, mighty, eternal, etc. And then, it is no longer they that speak, Mark
13.11.
but the spirit of their Father that is within them. My beloved breathren, if
men were but come to the sight of this light, and were able to stand in it, and
walk in it, They would not go forth (as they do) in their own name, and in
their own wisdom and power, having furnished themselves by their study, and by
their Books, and by their borrowed matter; but all this is because they have no
light in them: How many Speakers be there now in the world, and with what
confidence do they come unto you? when this spirit from on high never came
upon them, Pro. 8.34 Luke 24.49.
they never yet waited at Wisdoms gates, never yet stayed at Jerusalem for the
promise of the Father, but run before they are sent, and they of themselves
have found a way to be furnished: they can go to the University and there lay
the foundation, and they can have the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, and then they can study Authors, and they have wisdom, and parts,
and eloquence of their own; and thus they come furnished, and are (as they
think) able Ministers of the Gospel: 2 Cor. 3.6 John 10.1
Alas poor souls, Christ calls these no other but thieves and Robbers which
come not in at the door, they come not in by him, but climb up some other way:
These have not made Christ the door and the way, for did They but live in the
true light, they durst not do thus; they durst not speak till he had opened
the door, they durst not walk till the fire of the Sanctuary guided them, till
this cloud of ignorance, not knowing themselves, nor the work of Christ, were
taken up, else they sit still.

And I say, there would not be so many speakers as there be, they would not
covet so much to be some body that they may be taken notice of, to be wise, to
be learned, to be holy, to be sober, to be endowed with the gifts of Christ, as
they would be thought to be. All this, is but putting new wine into old
bottles, Luke 5.37
and both are lost: but if this light of God, this spirit from on high, this
fire of the Sanctuary were upon them, then this new wine, would be put into new
bottles, and both preserved: Oh, my brethren, it woes my very heart to see how
confident and bold men are in their own light, and he that will say to the
contrary, but that it is the light of God, he must be a deceiver, and he must be
a Schismatic, a Familist, any thing, yea the most odious of all men: Oh that
these men did but know from whence they speak: Oh that they did but know
whether they were Moseses or Magicians, whether sent from God or the Devil,
whether from Christ or Antichrist, who indeed sit in the Temple of Christ, as
if sent from Christ: Nay, let me tell you, they come with such deceivablenesse
of unrighteousness, with such signs and lying wonders, 2 These. 2.9.10.
that they are able to deceive the very Elect of God, if it were possible: but
the truth is, it is only they can discover them; it is only the spirit of Christ
that can lay them open; only He that has the true light can discover these
hidden deeds of darkness.

He that has this true light, and this true spirit, he sees he is nothing, nor
cannot step one step in this work except the Lord go with him; not only in
words to say this, that is nothing, but really from the light of God to know
this. Then, he durst not go forth to speak of the things of God, but in
trembling and fear: Nature, it thinks it self always ready, its never
unfurnished; call him when ye will, he can preach, he can pray, he can fit you
for mourning, for rejoicing, he is furnished for all occasions, he can manage
and order all his affairs, and govern the very Church of Christ by his wisdom
and learning, John 7.6.
and he is never to seek, but is always ready, as Christ says: These men are
become Masters of their Religion: I it is true, for Religion was never yet Master
over them. But beloved, it is not thus with the Saints of God, nor with the
Ministers of Christ, but they see Christ the sole Master, and the sole Orderer
of the Church, Cant. 2.7.
and they dare not awake their beloved until he please; they know none other
can furnish them, nor Commission, nor command them to go forth, but only Him;
Mat. 23.9, 10.
they know there is no other Master, no other Father, no other Teacher, but
Christ alone: They cannot think it enough that they have University learning,
that they have the most ORTHODOX Authors, (as they call them) and sometimes
Most excellent DIVINES, but most blasphemously to rob Christ of his Honor;
For, there can be no Divine but Christ, Verse. 7, 8.
no Teacher but Christ, no Doctor but Christ: They know, they must have the
inward teaching, before they can open their mouths; the Coal from the Altar
to touch their lips, Isa. 6.6.
or else they dare not speak: They know the spirit of their Father is an
Almighty, Eternal, Free spirit; like the wind which blows whether it
lists; Man neither knows whence it comes, John 3.8.
nor when: Sometime the Cloud is removed, when He pleases; and then they may,
yea must go forth, then they may journey; but when the day is cloudy and
dark, and the spirit of the Lord does not speak in them, then they must be
content to sit still, till the day, that the Lord himself takes up the Cloud:
Man can never remove it, no not one hour nor minute sooner, but when the spirit
lists: But in the day of light, then they may go forward: nay, then they
shall go forth with power: then they shall not speak as the Scribes and
Pharisees, but with Authority: Then, Mat. 7.29.
they shall not regard the honor of men, nor glory in those things that the
foolish and vain heart of man does: As because they are sent forth by the
Presbytery, and they have gifts etc. and they can speak and declare themselves,
and that they stand up in a Pulpit or high place above all their Brethren, and
they are in high esteem and the like. All these things are banished in that
soul, when the Lord sends forth a messenger. Far be it from me, to think that I
have Wisdom or Learning, or Knowledge more then the meanest Saint among you;
what am I? what is Paul? what is Apollo? but Ministers, and your Servants, and
the Servants of Christ, by whom ye believed? for me to think because I stand in
this High place; therefore I am ever the better, or, have the more honor, or
more esteemed, God for bid: For I am nothing if Christ speak not out by me,
any, yea every experience of the truth: Therefore look only at him; Mat. 11.7.
for what come ye out into the Wilderness to see? a reed shaken with the wind?
Oh look look not at the weak instrument, but behold the Wisdom, the Power, the
Majesty, the Authority of the Almighty: Rather then I should hide him, let me
be as I am, nothing, a vain and light shaken reed, and I confess a Hill or a
Mountain in a Wilderness, or a Stool were more fit for me, or for any man: Oh
let no woman be heard in the Church, but only the voice of Christ; there every
one speaks of and seeks his glory, even the glory of him that sent him, and
that same is true, Psalm. 26.9. Joh. 7.18. Psalm. 69.15.
and there is no unrighteousness in him. Let him increase, but let man and all
the womanly weakness in man decrease, and whatever is of man: when ever he
would have glory or be any thing, let him be confounded, and the pit shut her
mouth upon him. For it is not only unseemly, but a shame for The Woman to speak
in the Church.

THE CLOUD taken off the TABERNACLE, that the ISRAEL of God might journey.
SERMON II. Preached at Alhallows Lumbard-street.
EXODUS 40.36, and. And when the Cloud was taken up from over the Tabernacle,
the Children of Israel went onwards in all their journies. But if the Cloud was
not taken up, then they journied not till the day that it was taken up.
WE have beloved, according as God was pleased (in mercy) to be present with
us, spoken concerning the meaning of these words; wherein we have manifested,
that the Holy Ghost holds out higher, and deeper, and more mysterious things,
then is conceived of by the mere History and Letter; and we have showed and
held forth the same exposition that the Author to the Hebrews has given of
them; That these things were but the patterns of Heavenly things, Heb. 9.23
and this Tabernacle built by Moses was but a shadow, similitude, and type of
the true Tabernacle which God did piteh, and not Man; and from thence we have
showed that the Tabernacle in the mystery is the Riches of that glory, life,
mercy, and immortality which God makes out to the sons of men. And that Jesus
Christ is that spiritual Moses, that spiritual high Priest, who has once
entered into this holy place, even once for all; And that the light in this
Tabernacle, which is as a fire by Night, is that light and fire only that
guildes and directs the souls of Saints in all their journeying through the
desolate Wilderness of their own dark and blind hearts, and that this
Tabernacle is covered with a cloud, that the eyes of men, nay, nor of Saints
cannot see or behold it, till God himself withdraws and removes it. And the
souls of Saints are not to go on, but to abide in their Tents till the Lord
remove this cloud; as we may see expressly and fully commanded in Deu. 9. from
verse. 16, Deuteronomy. 9.16, etc.
to the end. And we have showed that in the day when he does not remove it,
they are to sit still till the day and time he pleases to remove it; and even
then, in the night, in the dark, when all other things are become darkness,
then this fire, this light is a lanthorn to them in all their journeys or ways
wherein they shall go, and whither they shall be led. For in this case, Esaias
30.7.8.
and under this dispensation they are not to walk or work, but Their strength
is to sit still: But I know these things greatly offend some, who are wise and
strong in themselves: Yet, says the Lord, verse. 8. Write it before them in a
Table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and
ever.

First, we have showed that the divine fire of this Tabernacle is that only
which guides and directs the souls of men in their way toward the spiritual
and heavenly Canaan; we have showed thereupon the happiness of the soul that
follows and keeps with this Tabernacle, that always sees and beholds this fire
of the Altar, that knows the fire that comes down from Heaven, that burns up
all things but it self, but that remains and abides for ever. And this is the
soul that in not a stranger unto the Lord, and the Lord is his Guide: Oh! happy
is the soul that knows this, waits upon it, is only led, councelled, and
conducted by it: We have likewise spoken of the misery of all men In offering
strange fire upon the Lords Altar, in seeking for another Star, but not the
Star of Jacob, Levit. 10.1, etc.
but following the Tabernacle of Molech, and the Star of their God Rempham,
Amos 5.26. Acts 7.43 Esaias 50.11.
and thinking to go on in the light thereof; and showing the misery of those
men who are kindling fires of their own, and compassing themselves with their
own sparks, and thinking to go on and walk in the light thereof, yet this they
shall have of the hand of the Lord, to lie down in woe and everlasting sorrow.

The next thing we shall observe, is concerning the Cloud that is over or upon
the Tabernacle: wherein in the first place, this is apparent, that the
Tabernacle, that contains all the Mysteries of life and mercy, all the glory of
life and eternal Salvation: But this Tabernacle has a cloud upon it, that it
cannot be seen till the Cloud be taken away and removed, which all the power of
man can never remove.

And secondly, that the remover and taker away of this cloud, is God, and not
man; that God, I say, is he alone that draws and takes up the cloud from the
Tabernacle; and again lets it descend upon the Tabernacle when it pleases him:
It Is the Lord that draws away the veil, and man with all his wisdom, learning,
industry, etc. cannot pull it off of himself; it is the Lord alone that opens the
eyes of the blind, and not the holiest man can do any thing in this work of
himself: It Is the Lord that circumciseth the heart, 1 Cor. 12.13.
it is the Lord who baptiseth the spirits of men with the true baptism; and all
by one spirit, into one body, whether they be Jews or Gentiles; and I have
showed that one man cannot baptize another, as they undertake to do in an
Ape-like imitation of the thing; for it is the Lords work only, he alone can
remove the cloud from off the Tabernacle, and gives the true Baptism: otherwise
it abides and must remain thereupon, and the soul is not washed, nor baptized.

Thirdly, take notice, that no man naturally walks by a true guide: and he that
(when the cloud is upon the Tabernacle) offers to journey or move toward the
heavenly Canaan, I say, when he offers or attempts any things in the way of God
and Christ, he acts but blindly and presumptuously, and he cannot choose but
stumble and fall; for, when the cloud is not taken off the Tabernacle by the
hand of the Lord, then he ought to sit in his tent, and abide in his
habitation, till the Lord remove the cloud: and then is the time of his travel,
and day of his journey, and not before.

First then it is clear, that by the Tabernacle, is meant the Mysteries of the
Tabernacle: for, whether it be the pot of Manna, the Censers, or Rod of Aaron,
and the rest; All these be the mysteries of Christ; and all these have a cloud
upon them, so that none can see them, or discern them, or behold the glory that
is in them, till the cloud be taken away and removed.

In the beginning God made the heavens and earth: Genesis 1.1, 2.
and the earth was without form, and void, and darkness was upon the face of
the Deep, till God commanded the darkness to withdraw, and say, Let there be
light: so, till God make a separation between light and darkness, otherwise
there is a darkness on the whole depth; the depth of HUMANITY or Creaturely
nature; there was and is a darkness on it all, till the Lord said, Let there
be Light, and there is light; there is a darkness on all flesh till the spirit
of the Lord blows upon it, and says, Come thou spirit of the four winds, O
Breath, Ezekiel. 37.9.
and breath upon these slain and dry bones, that they may live. When the Spirit
of the Lord that blows every way, and where it lists, comes and blows on
these dry bones, and they hear the word of the Lord, then they are moved, and
finews and nerves and flesh come upon them, and then they are joined together,
and breath enters into them that they may live; so that darkness is upon the
Deep, and the cloud is over the Tabernacle; none can remove it, take it up, or
disperse it, but the Lord alone. When the Lord takes away the cloud from the
Tabernacle, then the Tabernacle and the MYSTERIES thereof appears; otherwise
they are hid, and no mortal eye, nor the sharpest understanding, nor the
greatest Scholar, nor by the use of all external Ordinances, are they able to
discern them.

Secondly, when this cloud is removed, then is the time for the souls of Saints
to act and walk; when the cloud is upon the Tabernacle, then they should sit
still; and therefore says James, We ought not (speaking of the Saints) to
determine this or that, we will go this way or that, Jam. 4.13, etc.
threatening a woe to them that say To morrow we will go to such a City or
place, and remain there a year, and there we will buy and sell, and get gain:
but we must from our souls say, if the Lord will; when we once come under the
tuition and tutorage of the Son of God, and come to be of the congregation of
Israel, then we go not when we list, or would; but we are to attend the Lords
hand in removing the cloud from the tabernacle; and if he remove it not to day,
we are to stay till the next day; and whenever he removes it, then is the day
of our journey and going onwards. Therefore the Apostle tells us of a Councellor
and Leader they had; and I know also the world tells of a guide and rule; but it
is a Rule which they themselves know not, nor understand when it is crooked,
and when it is straight; but the Apostle tells us of another Ruler, and Teacher,
As many as are Christ's, are led by the spirit of Christ. Romans 8.14 Acts 17.7
And in the Acts it is said the Apostles would have gone into Bithynia. After
they were come to Missia they assayed to go into Bithynia, but the spirit
suffered them not: for they found trouble and opposition: there was the Lord
leading of them and guiding of them, otherwise they did not set a foot forward,
their eye was still upon the Lord: so till the cloud be removed from over the
Tabernacle, the soul will find nothing but trouble and destruction if it go
onward, and the Lord has not discovered the light of the Tabernacle and
himself go before it.

Then in the first place this discovers to us, that there are usually two
things in the way of Christ which oftentimes in the world are mistaken, and
taken one for another; there are, I say, the heavenly things themselves, and
there are the Patterns of them; now the Pattern is not set forth for it self,
but in reference and Relation unto the thing of which it is a pattern; And a
copy or exemplar, it is not for it self, but in relation to what we should
act, imitate, or do by it: so there are the heavenly things themselves, and
the patterns, or types, or similitudes of them; Take special notice of these
two things. Now we shall find it apparent if we consider it, that the world
has always been quick-eyed to see the one, but not at all to discern the
other. The world, and especially the great professors of Religion have been
quick-sighted, to discern the form, pattern, and similitudes of Heavenly
things, and there they have been satisfied. But, I say, to find, feel, and
enjoy, and to live in the Heavenly things themselves; Heb. 9.23. Col. 1.26. 1 John 7.6
this is that Mystery that has been hid from ages and Generations; your time
that is, the time of the flesh, is always; But My time, that is, the time of
Christ is not always (as to man) though always (as to God) I say, the world in
all Ages could never be found, to be without living upon and in the patterns,
forms and shapes of Heavenly things, according as they fancied; but to find the
sons of men living in, under, and by the power of Heavenly things themselves,
that is the Mystery that has, I say, been hidden from ages and generations, as
Paul says. We all find the Jews in the time of Moses, they all lived under the
Law in that form; they all saw the outward form of the Tabernacle, and had a
reverent esteem of that and there rested? And so how many are there now who
rest on the outward forms of washing and dipping? and these I take to be the
Familists, the world so much hates and talks of, for they are all of this
Family and Society; and herein lies so (far as I can see) their
Churchmembership which they so much Idolize. And for all this, how few are
there of them that are of the inward assembly of the Saints, that are come to
the general assembly of the Church of the first born which are written in
Heaven; they are come and are brought but only to the mount that may not be
touched and that burns with fire, Heb. 12.18. 22.
and unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest. How many of them, I say, are
these that are brought to Forms, Fellowships, and Washings, which as they are
used, produce nothing but blackness, and darkness, and fire, and Tempest? (not
into the Unity of that one Spirit) But Only to be baptized with Moses in the
Cloud, and in the Sea; 1 Cor. 10.1. etc. Ps. 95.11. and Heb. 3:17.18.19.
for with many of them, says the Apostle, God was not well pleased, whose
Carcasses fell in the Wilderness: And the Text says, they entered not into his
Rest, but were overthrown in the Wilderness because of unbelief. Now we shall
find no age in the world, where the people have wanted their forms of things
in one kind or other; but ye shall hardly find any age wherein people have
lived under and upon the Heavenly things themselves. How many patterns and
similitudes have the Papists in their Church? the Pope himself in imitation of
Christ, can wash the feet of twelve Pilgrims once in the year; and fares it any
better with those that call themselves members of other Churches, to be only
Apostles in imitation? some have one pattern, some another; one thinks he has
the true Baptism because he has the similitude, and pattern of spiritual
Baptism, which was then by some used by way of dipping in water, Another has
the pattern and similitude of eating Christ's Body, and drinking his Blood in
their breaking of Bread, which was but the type of the Heavenly bread that was
the Body of Christ. But Christ says, Joh. 6.53.
except a man eat his flesh and drink his blood he has no life in him. How
many Churches partake of the patterns and shadows and whatever they say, they
conclude from thence they are the Church of God: because say they, we have the
right use of the Sacraments, which is a sign of a true Church, because they
have the patterns, types, and shadows: observing only outward rules, forms,
and carnal ordinances, which all perish with the using; wherefore, Col 2.20.
if ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the world, why as though
living in the world are ye subject to Ordinances? yet impudently, and
blasphemously will they dare to say they are not Church of Man, but of God: when
they know not the mystery, nor live according to the power of the Heavenly
things themselves: and therefore herein that Scripture comes to be fulfilled,
that men shall have a form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5.
but deny the power of it, for the one may be where the other is not; and the
Apostle tells us, That he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, but he is a Jew
that is one inwardly, Romans 2.28 29.
whose circumcision is of the heart and spirit, whose praise is not of men but
of God. So from hence it is clear, many Churches, and many hundred thousands of
souls may have an exact pattern, and yet want the Heavenly things themselves;
they may have the pattern, as the Jews had, that were sanctified and washed
only with the Blood of Bulls and Goats: but to have the Heavenly things
themselves, viz. that Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of life, and to have the
Purifications and Sanctifications that are only by his blood, this they are
strangers to. This is the spiritual and living fire; and where ever it is in
the soul of man, it cannot but break forth to the destroying of all things of
man and flesh, and magnifying and exalting all things of the Spirit of God.

So that hence it is clear, that it would be the wisdom of the sons of men, to
see whether they have the heavenly things themselves, and not the patterns. For
says the Apostle, when that which is perfect is come, then that that is
imperfect shall be done away; and again the same Apostle; when I was a Child I
did as a Child, 1 Cor. 13.11. 2 Cor. 5.16.
I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child; but when I came to be a man, I
put away childish things: and hence forth (says he) know we Christ after the
flesh no more: Alas, the Apostle had (as well as other men) known Christ by the
way of the flesh, and in outward conformity and observations, and in a low
carnal apprehension of him; but when Christ was come into him in the Spirit,
Rev. 21.5.
then ALL THINGS were become New: Then he would not have a Christian to be
judged in respect of a Holy Day, New Moons, or of keeping Sabbath days and the
like, Col. 2.16.17.
which are but shadows of things to come; for the body is Christ. But there was
a time when they were under the type of breaking of bread, which was only to
show the Lords death till he came; 1 Cor. 11.29.
but when Christ was come, then he rebukes the Corinthians for using that
ceremony of of breaking bread, and said, they did not discern the Lords Body.
For the eating his Body, and drinking his Blood, was a thing of a far higher
nature.

And from hence will follow the great misery of the sons of men seeking rest
and life in the patterns and types, and not in Heavenly things themselves: For
if a man have the exactest patterns, or pictures (of any meat) that ever could
be drawn in the world, or of wine, and drink; would either of these feed or
refresh him when he was hungry, or satisfy him when he was thirsty? you will
say they could not; and how then can the patterns of Heavenly things feed any
more then they? So also it is the true Manna that feeds the soul, it is not
that Manna that fell in the Wilderness; your Fathers they eat of it, and are
dead, says our Savior: No, Joh. 6.49. 50.
it is the spiritual Manna, whereof if a man eat, he shall live for ever. Then
it must needs be a deceit of the Devil, and a woeful and sad delusion on the
spirits of men, and yet notwithstanding this is that great delusion, wherewith
Satan is gone forth to feed men, as the Prodigal was, with the husks and shells
of Divine things. He desired the husks and no man gave unto him; But when the
poor man had wasted that portion he had from his Father, when that divine
portion was gone, and he had wasted it among Whores and Harlots, that is, after
his own inventions, thinking they should nourish him, he says, he could eat
Husks, But he found they would not satisfy; I, he should sterve for hunger;
yet many thousands think, and accordingly do, could I go into such a
Church Fellowship, and walk as they walk, I should be as well as they, and yet
for all that, there is no man can give unto them; and had he them to the
utmost, alas they would not satisfy and fill him: But he cannot have that
others have, he would have their Holiness, and be able to pray, hear, and
speak, and have as much freedom and power against sin and the like but it, is
not given unto him; but if he have all these external things, yet alas, they
are but husks, and cannot satisfy: So that then there is a plain and absolute
necessity falls on him, and he sees there is no way but to go home to his
Father, else he starves and dies: Luke 15.18.
and now he sees his own weakness and poverty, then he begins to come to
himself, and says, I will return to my Father: So when the Soul is brought
into this condition, then it sees that it is not he that has brought things
into any good frame by his good husbandry, or by a providential care: now
nothing will serve his turn; no, I must to my Father, and I will go to my
Father. This shows the misery of the spirits of those men that would fain feed
upon husks. And from hence it comes to pass that they run here, and run there,
from one to another, even as a poor creature when it is thirsty and dry, and
sees many Wells or Vessels, thinking there is water: He runs to one to see if
there be any, and then to another, but they are all empty. So alas, a poor
hungry soul, here it picks, and there it feeds, and as long as it can find a
crum, it will never go to God; it had rather go to any MOUNTEBANK, then come to
Jesus Christ the true Physician. One day it will be of this Church, another day
of the other membership, to see if these things will feed them. But they whom
God intends to bring home find no satisfaction herein, but are ready to
starve: and the true Reason is, because they live by the patterns, pictures,
and resemblances of food.

Obj. I know thou will object, to make use of patterns.

Answ. I confess carnal reason will say so, 1 Cor. 13 10.
when that which is perfect is come, then that that is imperfect shall be done
away; and when the Apostle says, stand fast in that liberty wherein Christ
has made you free, and be not entagled again with the yoke of bondage: and
bids them they should not turn again to the beggarly rudiments of the world;
Gal. 5.1.
and again says, the shadows and patterns of Heavenly things consisted in
washing and rudiments, and was never able to make the doers thereof, and
comers thereunto perfect. Admit, Heb. 9.9.
I say, that breaking of bread, as it is in the External use of it, and admit
that using of Water Baptism were used by Christ, which is hard to prove, they
were never, or could be any thing else but the pattern of the Heavenly things
and of the spiritual baptism; else that Text also tells us a lie, that says,
there was never any but one baptism, which is that of the Spirit.

Now the Letter tells us of diverse, as the Baptism of the Children of Israel
in the Red Sea, and of the Baptism of John and the Baptism whereby an
unbeliever was baptized: and yet the Text says, there was but one Baptism;
for, these are but the shadows of the spiritual Baptism: Ephesians. 4.5.
and when that that is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect is done
away. 1 Cor. 13.10.
If thou did really find thus, thou would not then need to make so much of
Outward washing and breaking of bread: for, to the pure all things are pure,
but to the unclean all things are unclean, and to the impure all things are
impure, and even their very hearts and consciences are defiled.

And from hence this shows that thy soul must needs be wavering and unstable,
like the waves of the Sea, and still casting up mire and dirt, while thou
seek any refreshment in the patterns themselves, whatsoever pattern thou
can imitate, or build upon that is made by hands; and be sure God dwells not
in them; for says the Apostle, Acts. 7.43 and Chapter 17.24, 25.^
he dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is he worshipped with men's
hands, as though he needed any thing: seeing he gives breath and life, and
being, and motion unto all: Whatever Tabernacle or Temple man builds, they are
but like man, they are fading and perishing, Mark. 13.2. Heb. 12.23.
and there shall not one stone of them be left upon another; but when the soul
comes to the true assembly of the Saints, to spirits of just men made perfect,
to the spiritual Manna, and to the Heavenly Jerusalem, to the true Tabernacle
Jesus Christ, and eats that Manna that does not perish, but is meat indeed, and
life indeed, then it is silled and satisfied, and never before.

So that while the soul is seeking after a life, and to get food in the
pattern, and shadow, and form of Heavenly things, it is sure to find nothing
but emptiness, bitterness, and vanity; he shall be like the hungry man Isaiah
speaks of; Esa. 29.8.
who dreams and thinks he eats, and when he awakes finds nothing. So the
Carnal men they are praying and reading, and keeping themselves strict to
outward rules, and when they have done, they think they find comfort and
refreshment by them, and they break bread, and they are speaking one to
another, and think they have consolation by it; but alas, this food will all
fail; thou think thou have eaten Christ, when thou have used these: but when
the wrath of God falls upon thy soul, and thou art summoned to judgment, thou will find there was no meat to feed thee in these things thou call
Ordinances, nor there is no water in these Vessels to quench thy parched soul;
for though God of his good pleasure gave patterns of heavenly things, yet they
were not those heavenly things themselves, but are only the type and shadow of
that divine heavenly Tabernacle, which God did pitch, and not man. Heb. 8.2.
And hence it apparently appears, that the power, life, and the meat and drink
of a child of God, is only and alone Jesus Christ; for he never eats and
drinks, nor moves, out of God; for he eats and drinks, and does all in God; and
thus he is come to that which is perfect, to the fountain of all fullness, Heb.
12.27, 28.
to the Mount that cannot be shaken; now he is gone over and passed by all the
similitudes and shadows and patterns, and is come to that living fountain of
the water of life it self, of which whoever drinks shall live for ever, and it
shall be in him a well of water springing up to eternal life. Joh. 4.14.


Then this further discovers to us that the Tabernacle of God is a hidden
thing, that the mysteries of God in Christ are covered so that the Saints
themselves cannot see them, except they be given unto them from above; 1 Cor.
2.8, 14.
then much more the natural man perceives not the things of God which are
spiritually discerned, and which none of the men nor Princes of this world
knew; for had they known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of life;
Ibid. 1.21.
and when the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased the Lord by the
foolishness of preaching to save those that believe: So that I say, it is even
now too true, according as we have a proverb and received as a Maxim, but from
whence it arose I am not certain, that the place of PARADISE does not now
appear in the earth, no man knows where it is; but sure I am that Paradise and
place of pleasure which is the enjoyment of Jesus Christ, is vanished and
disappears, is gone away, and almost quite removed from the beholdings of all
the sons of men. Adam was turned out, and you never hear where it is, nor of
any that can describe the way to come to it: Even so is the true knowledge of
Jesus Christ in the mystery; So that the light of God, and the spiritual
Manna, it is a thing that is utterly hidden and removed from all the wisdom and
endeavors of any of the sons of men; and unless the Lord himself come
forth, and reveal it, and make it manifest: the wisest of men in the worlds
esteem may do as those wicked men in Sodom, (when the Angel was sent to bring
out Lot) being stricken blind, Genesis 19.11.
they labored to find the door, but could not: so he that is in the dark
knows not whither he goes: so this is clear and true to this very day, that
the true Tabernacle of the Lord is still covered with a cloud, no man can see
it till God discover it to him.

Now, notwithstanding this being so, yet what are the ways of men? what do
they undertake to do? Do not all men that come out under the name of being
the Ministers of Christ, undertake the opening and revealing the Tabernacle of
God? yes; but what is the light by which they can show it unto us? Is it any
other but what man has within himself, and what he has attained by his wits
and industry, by the University, and searching several Authors? Yet
notwithstanding they will discover this Tabernacle, and undertake to take off
the cloud that covers it, and they will show how the pattern leads to it; and
yet if they be put to it, they themselves must deny they ever saw it truly and
really what it was or is, but they will be guessing and imagining the way that
leads to it. Now for a man to direct another the way that never understood that
way, may very easily make good what Christ says, If the blind lead the blind,
both fall into the ditch. And there be other men that are so grossly ignorant,
as to tell us, That if they go but to an Academy a few years and gather a
little Philosophy, and although it be that of the worst sort, relishing of
those that hold the immortality of the World and mortality of the Soul, now
even these they come out as they think furnished, and by this they will
undertake to discover to us the heavenly Canaan and Tabernacle of God.

Generally most men what ever they be, though they differ in judgment, yet
say, they are either Papists or Socinians, etc. And they have the boldness to
hold forth these things, though they be never so blind and dark in the things
of God. And I find very few, but generally all take up this for truth; that
Humane learning is the way to discover this by: Now I beseech you see whether
this be any less then the hellish pride of Satan to make men go out in the
pride of their hearts, Jer. 29.23. and Ezekiel. 13.7, 8. Matthew. 15.14.
and say, they have heard the word of the Lord, and they have seen a vision,
when the Lord has not spoken by them, and they have seen nothing: If the blind
lead the blind, both shall fall into the pit: for he that comes out and says
that he can discover the Tabernacle, or that any can remove the cloud from the
Tabernacle, but the Lord himself, he is a blasphemer and a liar.

But I know they will object and say, mind of God: And having this help, we by
our wits and learning, and industry, are able to know the mind of God; for we
know and understand the Hebrew, and Greek, and Syriack Languages.

Truly, word to which they appeal, in the very Letter of it, witnesses against
them: for the word witnesses that it is a sealed book, Esaias 29.11, 12. Rev.
5.3. 1 Cor. 12.3. 2 Cor. 3.6 Luke 8.10. and Mark 4.11. Matthew. 11.15. Mark. 4.9.
and Luke 8.8. Luke 24.45.
whether delivered to the learned, or unlearned, and none is found worthy to
open it but the Lamb, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; and that none can so much
as say, Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy ghost: and again, that the letter
kills, but the spirit gives life; and to you it must be given to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom, or you cannot know them: and when Christ spoke with a
lively and audible voice, and spoke and preached so as never man did, yet said
he very often, he that has ears to hear let him hear: and so it is said of
the Disciples, that Christ opened their understandings when he was risen again;
although he himself had taught them the same things before his death, yet it is
said Luke 24.45. then opened he their understandings that they might know the
Scriptures, that it behoved him (according as it was written in the Prophets
and Psalms) to suffer and rise again the third day. So that hence it is clear,
there is not any wisdom, learning, or knowledge in the world that can unseale
this book; for though it be the declaration of the mind of God through those
Saints and Apostles by whom it was written: yet never can any man read the mind
of God in it, but by the same spirit that taught it, and unless the same Spirit
that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead do quicken us. Romans 8.11. and 2 Cor.
6.14.
Although the learnedest men in the world open it, it will not raise up our
mortal bodies, nor be any savor unto life. Now from hence, let but the world
judge, who are the BLASPHEMERS, and what is blasphemy, if this be not? We say
none can truly teach the spirits of men, but God himself, and none can come to
the Father but by the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. And
they say, Matthew. 11.27.
the way to understand the Scriptures, is to get learning and the tongues, and
to reform their lives, to get into this or that fellowship; I say, this sharply
reproves them that say they can open it with the WOODEN and fleshly key of
carnal wisdom and humane learning; for we have showed how there is a cloud
upon the tabernacle to this day, that none can remove but only God Himself,
not only in regard of men, but of Saints: for though a Saint be brought to see
into the Tabernacle, and to behold the glory of the Lord, yet when God
pleases, a cloud shall interpose it self, that this Tabernacle shall be hid
and covered again, and again, nay it shall be in hiding and opening continually
unto the soul: Mark this.
for the glory of the Tabernacle would not be made out, were there not a cloud
to make it out by: the strength of the Lord would not be made out, were there
not weakness to make it out by; the light of the Lord would not be made out,
were there not darkness to make it out by; and therefore there is a cloud on
the tabernacle, and it is the Lord only that removes it, that they may go on in
all their Journeys: and when he does it not, they must sit still; and he does
it for this very end, that the glory of God may be more made out, and that the
soul of man might more fully, more gloriously, and more welcomly enjoy those
discoveries.

Light cannot be made out in light, and wisdom in wisdom, but light in
darkness, and wisdom in folly, and strength in weakness, and fullness in
emptiness, and riches by poverty, and grace by sin, Alsufficiency by
insufficiency and nothingness; and even things that are high in things that are
low; one deep calls unto another; the DEEPNESSE of that glory and FVLLNESS that
is in God, calls upon that DEEPNESSE and EMPTINESS, and nothingness that is in
and upon the poor Creature; and this is that Cloud that is still covering and
removing from over the Tabernacle, that the Glory of the Lord may be made out
in and by that cloud, that we may know and behold that glory that was hid from
us, and that we may know how precious it is, by the cloud that withholds and
covers it from us.

And again, that we may know light is not in man's hand: as Peter said, Master,
let us be here, and build three Tabernacles, etc. So I say, Luke 9.33
it is that man may not build a Tabernacle of his own, least he should say, he
was Master of it, and would think to give and carry the light where he pleased;
but with a Christian it is otherwise ordered, that he might walk in darkness,
Esa. 50.10
and stay himself upon his God, so that the condition of a true Christian, is
not like the men of the world with their light; for they are the Orderers and
Masters of it. But it may indeed be said of your ordinary formal Christians,
that they have a light never goes out, in regard of their forms of
Church Government, so that their candle is always burning, and they are Masters
of their own light; and if it be out, they can light it again and recover it by
their own pains and industry; but it is not so with those that truly fear God.
For when the light appears, then they walk and journey; but when their light
appears not, then they must stand still; for they dare not go nor stir till the
glory of the Lord appears, and leads them, and that the Lord Himself goes
before them.

Further, if this Cloud be removed only by the hand of the Lord, then I say,
First it shows plainly the vanity, pride, folly and uselessness of men's
laboring to remove it, in their taking upon them that which belongs to God:
and First, I say, it discovers that horrible Pride, Robbery, Blasphemy,
Arrogance and Infidelity that is in the heart of man, to think he will do that
which none can do but the hand of God: And it is Infidelity to think God will
not do that he has promised to do to the ends of the earth; and robbery in
that it takes away Gods honor, and wisdom, and power; and this man's Arrogance
in assuming them to himself.

One while the Magistrate he will take upon him to remove the Cloud; and he
says, he is the great man to propagate the Gospel, (which is only and
properly the propagation of the Son of God) and he must plant the Ministers of
the Gospel. And it may be, perhaps, there are some would have them go with the
sword and blood to plant this in other Nations: surely, the fruit must needs be
good that springs from such a root! The Gospel you see is a Tabernacle that God
plants and pitches, and not man; but ever and anon they will be taking upon
them to do this, and then it must be their care to know and distinguish of
blasphemies, and errors, and heresies: and this they do merely out of that
principle of error and blasphemy that is in their own hearts; for this shows
their Infidelity, that God is not able to carry on his own work: And do we say
we are Christians, and believe in him, and when we have so done, tell him a lie
to his face? Esa. 9.6.
for he says Esa. 9.6. that the government shall be upon Christ's shoulders.
And Says the Magistrate, He has the government upon his shoulders; and yet
when we have made great profession in words, we trample him under the feet of
men: Mat 5.13.
for if he cannot do his own work without the power of man, then he stands in
need of man, and then must be weaker then man.

Then comes another, and says, The Churches, they must do this, they must send
out, and they must remove the Cloud from off the Tabernacle, and that darkness
that is in several corners of the Land; the Harvest is great, but the Laborers
are few. And our Saviors counsel is, when he tells us, Mat. 9.37 38. Joh. 4.35.
that the Harvest was white, even to reaping: says he, pray to the Father
that he would send faithful Laborers. He does not bid you go to the men of
Power, or Patrons, or Magistrates. And truly, then it were needless to pray to
the Lord of the Harvest when men can send them forth: now is not this pride,
infidelity, and arrogance for any of the sons of men to think to do it?

Obj. But you will say, if that men should not do it, men would become Heathens
and Mahumetans, or Atheists, and of no Religion.

Answ. Think thou so? is Religion Planted by men? I thought it had been such
a thing as the Text says: every plant that the Heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted up. Mat. 15.13.
May man then root up and plant at his pleasure? For the truth is, man's
Ministry and Ministers may send out men and plant Churches, that is, they may
make PROSELYTES, and they may make them worse, but can never make them better:
as the Pharisees, taking great pains that way, to furnish men, as to
imitations, notions, actions and external performances; Romans 2.28 29.
but to bring the heart to be a Jew inwardly, whose Circumcision is of the
Heart, and not of the Letter, this is that plant that is alone of the Heavenly
Fathers planting, and shall abide: but what plant either the Magistrate or
Churches, either by exclusion or inclusion have planted, shall be rooted up:
But what the Lord plants, what Tabernacle he pitches among poor creatures, the
sons of men that are neither called by the Magistrate or Churches, that is the
Church that shall abide, being founded on the Rock of Ages, and shall stand for
ever.

Nay further, they will themselves remove the Cloud of the Tabernacle (which
God must do and not man) and to do this they will lay heavy burdens upon other
men's shoulders, Mat. 23.4
etc. and to this end they will bring forth a Doctrine to put men upon it,
teaching that men have Free will, and may believe if they will, and repent unto
life; that so man may be persuaded he is not fallen so low as some say, that he
need but wipe or throw off a little the dust off his own eyes which he got by
his Fall, and then, he may see presently, and using but his utmost industry, he
may work out his own salvation. Alas, this is but a delusion of Satan, to make
a poor blind man rub his own eyes, and be afterward a great deal worse. No,
this is not the way; it is the Lord removes the Cloud, and not Man; therefore
till the Lord cause the soul simply to go out by believing, there is still a
cloud upon the Tabernacle, and upon all those Mysteries that concern Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 4.21.
and they cannot see the truth as it is in Jesus. Alas these souls look not at
God, but man; the truth is, all men in their Religion talk of God, but their
hearts are far from him. Esa. 29.13.
This people (says God) draw too near me with their lips, but their hearts are
removed far from me: Yet more, though all men's Religion talk of God, yet you
that have eyes to see, may see plainly their Hearts are on man and the
creature: they talk of God, of Christ, of grace, of gaining knowledge, of
acting by grace; and yet do but follow the point home in practice and
application, and ye shall find these are all laid upon man, and in effect they
say, man must remove the Covering off the Tabernacle, and he must by his study
and pains bring down light, and life, and the like. So I say, though they say
it with their mouths, their hears are far from God: So that when once man
really sees there is a Cloud upon the Tabernacle, then he looks not to the
right hand, nor to the left, Psa. 121.1.
thinking that man should remove it, but alone to the hills from whence his
help and salvation comes: for when a man thinks his own zeal, performances,
duties, belief, repentance and the like be the way to remove the Cloud,
thinking surely I shall remove it presently, I will go pray, and hear, and
watch over my self, and keep close to those rules I have chosen, and then I
shall have light and peace, and joy, and so remove the Cloud presently; and so
he is bragging and boasting thereof in himself, and throwing dirt and mire
upon all others that are short of him as he conceives, and so poor man is
feeding upon the dead ashes of his own heart, Esa. 44.20
and knows not that there is a lie in his RIGHT HAND; his very light is
darkness, and his goodness sin, and his riches beggary, and his life death,
and that he holds in his right hand is a lie. And if the light that is in thee
be darkness, how great is that Darkness? Are they repentings, beleevings,
actings, and workings, (if these be) as thou think, the means to remove the
Cloud off the Tabernacle? is not this to trust in man, Jer. 2.13. and Chapter 17.5.
in the power of man, and to distrust the living God? But is not this rather to
repent, and believe, and trust in God, to say, Lord, I am really blind, open
thou my eyes: thou Son of David have mercy upon me: why, Luke 18, 39.
now this soul seeing this, it cries to, and waits upon none but God, and
then indeed is the heart fixed upon him (where it should be) from whom comes
salvation and deliverance: Psalm. 57.7.
And whoever waited upon him that is faithful and strong, and only can deliver,
and was not in due time delivered?

And from hence it appears, when the soul walks in the light, he knows full
well, it will be in vain for him to think to remove the cloud till the Lord
remove it. It may be the time has been when thou have felt the heat of the
Divine displeasure, and thy ear was then boared, and thy uncircumcised heart
circumcised, and then light appeared, and thou blessedest the Lord in that day:
But now there begins to come darkness over thy eyes again, and thou beginnest
to see thy self lost again, and the Cloud is upon the Tabernacle, and thou art
gotten into the pathless way: Jer. 2.6.
and alas thou say to thy self and concludest, though I am out of my way, I
will up and be doing, I will come to it again, and I will recover it: and so
the poor man begins to wrestle and struggle it out, now at this thing, and then
at that thing: so that the poor Saint having lost the light he once had, he
runs through mire and dirt, thinking to come to the light by his prayers, and
holiness, and so recover himself. Then the poor soul thinks he is running to
Canaan, when indeed he is going back to Egypt. And therefore it is clear to me
both by the Scriptures and by the experience of the preciousest Saints I ever
met with, that in this condition its best to sit still: For he that believes
makes not haste, Esa. 28.16
but waits till the Lord will remove the cloud; but if thou will turn from the
Lord, and go by another guide and captain, and not by that Moses God has sent,
and art going to make a Golden Calfe, and and Idol to go before thee: if so,
thou may expect that thy carcass shall fall in the Wilderness for thy
unbelief, Number. 14.29.
and not waiting the good pleasure of the Lord: for not one entered the promised
Land but Caleb and Joshuah: know this is the condition and disposition of a
Saint, that he only rejoices in the Lord; all his expectations are from him
who has made light and darkness: I have learned, says the Apostle, Phil.
4.11.
in whatever state I am, therewith to be content: So that the happiness of a
Saint is when he can glory in infirmities (as Paul says) and rejoice in
darkness and misery; 2 Cor. 12.9, 10.
for he sees this is his portion, and he cannot remove the cloud, and he is
willing to sit still there till the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in him. 2
Pet. 1.19. Esa. 50.10.
Happy is the soul that can sit in darkness, and when he has no light, can
stay himself upon the Lord his God: Happy, I say, is that soul (though there
be a cloud on the Tabernacle) that can sit still, and wait the Lords good
pleasure, and cry unto the Lord, till he please to lead him onward toward
Canaan. And there was a cloud on it by day, and a pillar of fire appeared on it
by night.

Know this further from hence, That in the time of a Saints greatest light,
there is still a cloud upon the Lords Tabernacle at the greatest height of
light, liberty, and enjoyments to his own feeling and apprehension; even then
there is some darkness upon the Tabernacle, especially immediately after such
great light and glory. When Paul was wrapped up into the third heaven, 2 Cor.
12.7.
there was a messenger of Satan sent to buffet him, least he should be exalted
above measure; there was again a cloud let fall over the Tabernacle, when he
was in the height of his joys, a prick was sent him, in the flesh, a Messenger
of Satan to buffet him: and therefore he concludes in another place, we walk by
faith, and not by sight. It Is so with every Christian: in the day of his light,
2 Cor. 5.7
and the time of his greatest shinings, usually and then especially there is a
cloud upon the Tabernacle: why? to let man know thus much, that he must not
live upon the GIFT but on the GIVER, that man must not gather to day, for ever,
but he is to gather to morrow, and every day, as the children of Israel in
gathering Manna: for if thou layest up store, it will be dead the next time
thou come to feed on it, it will all stink, and it will not nourish thee;
but wait still on the giver, and then his mercy will be sweet, fresh,
flourishing, and green.

Lastly, from this that the fire shined on the Tabernacle by night, we shall
only note, that when the Light of the Tabernacle shines upon the souls of
men, all things else become dark; it is night in that soul to all things but the
light of the Tabernacle; in the night there was a fire, and in the day a cloud;
now, I say, when the fire shined, all things were dark round about it: And
herein observe these two things: first, when man's spirit is shut up, and sees
he no light, then is the time for the appearing of this light. And secondly,
this light never appears, but when all things are dark in man; for light
discovers darkness: if any thing else be light to thee, and all things else be
not darkness, thou never yet discoveredst this light: To this soul there is
nothing in the whole creation that seems to be glorious and excellent; but when
the Sun of righteousness in him has shined upon it, then it appears to be all
darkness; when the light of the Tabernacle shines in the soul of man, then
riches, honor, pleasure, preferments, all things below God are darkness: Then
the light of his reason, wit, morality, and holy qualities, that seemed to be
a great light and shined before gloriously, being compared one with another, or
with things inferior; Now, when the light of the Tabernacle appears, then all
these things appear to be nothing but darkness, emptiness, and blindness, and
are all as mere vapors before the Sun of righteousness, as the Prophet says,
Therefore thy goodness is as the morning dew, and as the cloud that wears
away; so that, I say, Hos. 6.4.
whenever the fire in the Tabernacle shines on man, then this will be the
sure effect in that soul, he shall look upon all things in himself as nothing
but darkness; and man will then no longer call light darkness, nor darkness
light, but he will say, Woe is me, verily I thought my righteousness, my
holiness, my performances and duties, and worshippings of God, I thought these
to be BRIGHT THINGS; but now the Lord has appeared upon me, I see that all my
goodness is as the morning dew, and as the cloud that passes away: And he
alone is my help, my deliverer, my holiness, my Sanctification, and my
Redemption: He alone is my song and my salvation, and of him alone will I make
my boast.

THE SECRET SOUTHSAYER, OR, Hidden SORCERER discovered, By Mr. Jo. WEBSTER.
Preached at Alhallows Lumbard-street.
MICAH 5.10, 11, 12, 13. And I will cut off the Cities of thy Land, and throw
down all thy strong holds; I will cut off Witchcrafts out of thine hand, and
thou shall have no more Southsayers. Thy graven Images also will I cut off, and
thy standing Images out of the midst of thee, and thou shall no more worship
the work of thine hands.
BEloved, there is in all the sons of men, a spirit of hatred and opposition
against the wisdom, power, and righteousness of God, ever since their going
out and departing from the presence of the Lord; having forsaken him their rock
and their stay, they have turned down into their own wisdom and power, and
having chosen that for their God and their guide, they will not by any means be
turned back to the Lord to forsake themselves, their own wisdom and
righteousness, power, and parts, but they use all their study and endeavors
to go on with all confidence after the gods of their own hands which they have
made and chosen; and man never returns to that love, peace and amity with the
Lord, but by the Almighty hand of the Lord, by the very same power, and no
other, but only that which can raise the dead out of their graves, Romans 4.24
and chapter 8.11 Jer. 2.13.
and the same spirit that raised Jesus Christ from the grave. And ever since
this departing from the fountain of life to the broken and empty Cisterns of
the creature, there are but only two Leaders, two Guides, two Masters, two
Teachers, which all the sons of men follow: there are but only two seeds, Genesis
3.14 15. and chapter 4.2. 1 John 3.9.
the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent: There are but only two
Brethren, Cain and Abel; the Immortal and perfect seed of God, which is holy,
pure, and undefiled, which cannot sin; and that wicked, cursed, hellish seed of
Satan which never did, nor never does, nor never shall do any thing else but
sin, rebel, and fight against the wisdom, light and power of God: There is no
middle seed between these two: All actions, all thoughts, all industry, all
inventions, all Religions, are either from the wisdom which is from above, Jam.
3.15, 17. 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49.
or else from that earthly and humane wisdom which is from man, and from below.
As the one is from Heaven Heavenly, so the other is from the earth earthly: the
first man is of the earth earthly, the second is the Lord from Heaven,
heavenly: And as are the earthy, such are they that are earthy; and as is the
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly: and as we have born the image
of the earthy, so shall we also bear the Image of the heavenly. The one of
these Guides, is light and truth, and glory, and leads to rest, peace,
fullness, satisfaction; the other leads to darkness, misery, and destruction,
and yet pretends to light and truth, and wisdom, but the ways thereof go down
to the chambers of death: This earthly guide always draws downward, to seek
rest in the creature, Pro. 7.27.
in something either without man, or within him, and so draws and deludes away
the poor soul of man from that Eternal All-sufficient JEHOVAH, to sit down
satisfied with the empty and broken comforts and helpless Idols, that the
inventions of men have made and set up, and say, These be thy Gods, O Israel,
Exo. 32.4
which will bring thee out of bondage, and give thee possession of the land of
Canaan; the one is the true light, and the true vision, the true URIM and
THUMMIM, which never can mislead or deceive; Ibid. 28.30.
the other is the spirit of darkness, ignorance, deceit, witchcraft, sorcery,
a lying and a familiar spirit: And it pretends to seek after God and after
holiness, and after peace and rest, but it is mere Sorcery and Witchcraft; This
is that Jannes and Jambres that always will withstand Moses: for they pretend
to imitate Moses, but they are no other but Wizzards, Southsayers, and
deceivers: they pretend for the truth, and yet withstand the truth; and says
the Apostle, As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist
the truth, 2 Timothy 3.8.
being men of corrupt minds and reprobate concerning the faith: But they shall
proceed no farther, for their folly shall be made known unto all men, as their
also was. They shall be found to be no other but Deceivers, Magicians,
Southsayers.

These words we have now read, they show us, what man is, and what all men do,
before they come to the light of God; they show that he is blind in himself, 2 Timothy 3.13
deceiving and being deceived; that he is confident in his own power, in his
own wisdom: and that he chooses to himself Horses and Chariots for his defense
and preservation; and he will have a Captain and a Leader of his own choosing,
whom he will follow: And he uses all his inventions to secure himself against
all that shall oppose him: Esaias 30.16 and Jer. 2.23.
he has builded himself Forts and Castles, and Strongholds and Bulwarks; and
he has the Charitos of Egypt and swift Dromedaries (as the Prophet speaks) to
secure and deliver him, on which he rests, trusts and depends, and on which he
rides, and thinks that those things shall defend and deliver him: And the truth
is, so great and so deep, and so subtily contrived are all his witchcrafts,
that all the wisdom of all the sons of men is never able to discover them to
be so, but only the wisdom and spirit of God, and that only can discover these
seeret and close, and fine contrived enchantments; like Pharaohs Magicians: how
did they act and imitate, and do the same things Moses did, for a long time,
as if they had wrought by the same power Moses did, Exo. 7.11, 22, etc.
when as they were no other, but Deceivers, and Enchanters, and Magicians? In
the same way do Magicians work in all ages; Whatever the Saints and people of
God do by the power of God, they can contrive and imitate the same, in all
their spiritual enchantments: they have their Temples, and their Worship, and
their Groves, their forms and inventions, Mark 13.21.
and cry, lo here, and lo there; when these are nothing else but their own
Idols, and Groves, and Images, the inventions and works of men's hands: And when
they have decked and trimmed their Idols gloriously, they not only fall down
themselves to them, as Nebuchadnezzar did, Dan. 3.11.
but enjoin this Idol-worship to all others; and he that will not fall down to
what they say is truth and Religion, Him they persecute and brand with those
odious names of Heretics, Sectaries, Schismatics, Familists, and the like.

But in the day when the Lord will appear to make all these Magicians and
Southsayers to be liars, (which day they hate and hide themselves from, because
they hate the light: John 3.20
Neither come they to the light, lest their deeds should be made manifest, and
declared that they are not wrought in God, but are acted in the power of man,
and by the wonderful working of Antichrist in all power, and signs, and lying
wonders, and in all deceivableness of unrighteousness: 2 These. 2.8, 10.
) And the Lord when he shall rise, will discover and consume them with the
breath of his mouth, and with the brightness of his coming, and all those
glorious Images and fine contrived modes and forms, and lying wonders, wherein
they trusted, in so much that all the world wondered after the beast, Rev. 13.3.
as if that these were the only religious men: But when God appears with his
light, all these shaddows, deceits and delusions, all these Enchantments and
Sorceries wherewith men have clothed themselves, shall be cut off; These
Cities that the sons of men have builded for their safety, security, and
preservation, they shall all be cut off from their hands: Now, of all things in
the world, these men hate nothing more then this light, and this day of the
Lord. These Sorcerers use all the means they can to keep away this light, and
to darken this glory, by their reproaches, slanders, lies and scandals: And
they will tell you, all this is false light; why? because it discovers their
Enchantments and delusions: And they will tell you that all these prophesies
concern other things: they were only literally fulfilled when the people of
Israel were carried captive into Babylon, and there can be no such Mystery in
them: And so for the promises, they will tell you, are to be fulfilled
externally and literally; or at the most they will carry out the prophesies to
be fulfilled only in the Great Messiah who was born at Bethlem, and was
crucified at Jerusalem, yet indeed know him not. And he that shall go farther
then thus, is with them a deceiver: which sense is no other then those low
poor and carnal thoughts and expectations which the Jews had of him,
expecting an outward and external deliverer, and all things to be fulfilled in
a litterall way: As if the holy and divine spirit of the Lord only busied it
self about shadows and forms and external worshippings, and bodily exercises,
which profit nothing, and carnal ordinances and things of the world, and that
he had no higher aim then what every one may come to act and do: when indeed
and in truth his main end is to declare the Kingdom of Heaven, and set forth
the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.2.
coming down from God out of Heaven, and to show, that his Kingdom is not of
this world, and consists not in meats and drinks, touching, tasting, Romans 4.17
or handling, or any thing the outward man can be exercised in, but that his
Kingdom consists in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

Yet some, yea most men who pretend very much in the knowledge of Christ, yet
carry all prophesies of him no higher then his appearing in the flesh, and
therein say, all Scriptures were fulfilled: As that prophecy here expressed, in
the second verse of this chapter, The virgin of Israel is fallen, Amos 5.2
she shall no more arise: she is forsaken upon her Land, and there is none to
raise her up: some say, this concerned Isreal's captivity, when all her glory
departed from her, and she was stripped of all her beautiful attire and virgin
rayments, to which it may be applicable I deny not; but that is but in an
outward, literal, and external way: but the spirit of God has a far higher
aim then this, viz. That outward and external glory, when men trust to that,
and profess themselves to be the Israel of God, because of that, then the Lord
threatens that the pride of all their external forms shall all be forsaken,
and no man shall regard them, and there shall be none to raise them up. And
that place in Micah chap. 5. verse. 2. they say is the promise of the
restoration of the Church, Micah 5.2
and that she shall be restored and her Rulers. But some who would seem to go
further, carry it to the highest interpretation, (as they conceive) to Jesus
Christ his coming in the flesh, and they have referred to this place, and
cited it in the margin in Matthew. 2.6. Thou Bethlem in the land of Judah art not
the least among the Princes of Judah, Math. 2.6
for out of thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my people Israel: That
in regard he was the MESSIAH which was then born, and given to the world, and
was to suffer, and die, and rise again: All which things are true in a lower
and external sense; but there is more in it then so, for Christ is yesterday
and to day, Heb. 13.8.
and the same for ever, and his goings forth have been of old from everlasting;
and therefore cannot he be limited according to the short time he was in the
flesh. But Christ is the same in all generations, and he is chiefly manifested
in the spirit; and all his words express no less; he still takes our eyes off
his fleshly appearance, and says his Kingdom is not of this World, Luke
17.21. and Joh. 18.36 John 6.51 Luke 22.20.
and his Kingdom is within you: and his body is the bread which comes down
from heaven; and the cup which he gives is, The cup of the New Testament in his
blood: It Is not the eating the bread made by men, or wine of grapes in that
whcih feeds the soul. And so for Christ's death and his going away, there is
more in it then his fleshly dying, or the application of that: But this is held
out, he must go away, else the Comforter which shall lead into all truth, John
16.7
will not come; His bodily presence, and our apprehending of his fleshly
appearing and fleshly suffering, He in this sense must depart, or else the
Kingdom of God cannot come upon us, nor the Comforter come: Touch me not (in
this way) for I am not ascended to my Father. And while ye look upon my fleshly
presence, I cannot send the comforter; Acts 1, 11.
But that must go away; Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven?
Why do ye gaze upon his External appearing? Says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.16.
Acts 1.
Henceforth know we no man after the flesh; no though we had known Christ after
the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more. This same Jesus which is taken
up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go
into Heaven: that is, whatever has been done by him to your sight, shall be
done in a Heavenly and Spiritual manner; after that same manner shall all those
things be done over again, of which all those things were but the symbol, the
pattern, and the resemblance of the actions of Christ in the soul for ever.

You know it is all along prophesied of the Messiah what a great and mighty
King he should be, and that the Government should be upon his shoulders, and
that he should rule over all his enemies with a rod of Iron, and the like: Esa.
9.6. and Psalm. 2.9.
That none of all the oppressing Conquerors, and Nimrods of the Earth should be
able to stand in the day of his power: Now we know these things were not
fulfilled in the days of his flesh, neither are all the strong and mighty
Nimrods destroyed to this day, but cruelty and oppression, and the Monarchies
of the World are in their full power still; Therefore there must needs be a
further meaning.

Certainly, therefore they are the Mighty Nimrods in the spirits of men, which
are to be brought down, those high thoughts and strong holds, and towering
Imaginations, that lift up men in their own thoughts, that say, I am, and there
is none besides; as Babylon, Isa. 47.8 Rev. 18.7.
I sit a Queen and shall see no sorrow: I have the only true worship, and lo
Christ is in my way, and in my form, and in my rules; and I of all other
Churches come nearest the rule; when Christ says plainly, go not after them;
for if it were possible, they shall deceive the very Elect: if they say he is
in the street, or in the wilderness, Mat. 24.23. Luke 17.20,
if they say he is in the secret chamber, believe them not: for the Kingdom of
God comes not with observation: There is nothing to be known of Jesus Christ
in the Spirit, and in the Mystery, by all the highest Forms and Ordinances (as
they call them) in the whole world; for we see how many men do daily live in
them, use them, handle them, and never yet come to enjoy Christ in the Spirit:
And all is, because they make these forms and duties, and fellowships, and
washings, and eating bread, and drinking wine, to be no other but graven Images
wherein they rest and bless themselves in their Idols, Exo. 32 4.
and say, these be thy Gods O Israel: For there is no one that ever entered into
these Forms and Modes, mending this, and reforming the other, and thinking this
man's fashion is better then the other; I say there is no one, but blesses himself
in kissing his Idol; saying (at least in their hearts) now God will bless me,
now I am in a better condition, now I have my hearts desire; and to all other
men they say secretly, stand farther off, Esa. 65, 5.
I am holier then thou; I am in a better way then any other Church, and so
censure all that go not in their new fashion, and after their new Cut. But be
assured for all these thy graven Images which thou have so bedecked, and that
are so SACRED, that no man may speak against them but he shall be censured for
a Devil, a Blasphemer, a son of Belial; yet the Lord when he comes with his
light, he will discover thy Nakedness, thy Witchcrafts, thy Sorceries, and he
will let thee see that thou art no Saint, as thou would be thought to be, 2
Cor. 11.14.
but a Devil transformed into an Angel of light; and thou shall be made to
confess this, and all thy goodness shall be as the morning dew: Hos. 6.4.
And thou shall see that all thy Inchanters, and Sorcerers, and Magitians, and
Peepers, and Southsayers, with all their cunning and neat Interpretations of
Scripture (to serve their own turns, to maintain their delusions and sorceries)
all these will not (when Christ shall come in his light) stand thee in any
stead: But thou and they, shall be utterly ashamed and confounded together;
when Christ shall once speak that word in thee in the power of the Spirit, Psalm.
97.7.
Confounded be all they that worship graven Images; then, both the Maker, the
Former, and the Worshipper thereof shall be in a most miserable condition: In
as much, as men have taken more pains about their Idols and Images, and made
them more neat and curious; and in as much as they have spent more time herein,
and have been OLD Worshippers of Old Idols; so much the more will be their
shame and their confusion. It Is true, you may call them Ordinances, and give
them neat names, but Christ will then ask, who required these things at your
hands? And yet they were the things he did require. Esa. 1.12.
But think you I am pleased with sacrifices or bodily worships, which profit
not at all; and which never could make the comers thereunto perfect? Heb. 10.1.


If Jesus Christ appear not in these, and strip thee of thy Idols, and of thy
Sorceries, thy ways lead down to darkness and to the bottomless pit, and thou
shall never enter into the new Jerusalem, but wilt be without among liars, and
whormongers, and sorcerers, and dogs; for even thou, Rev. 21.8. and 22.15.
who pretendest to serve Jesus Christ, thou art the very man that have
crucified him, and put him to death; thou art He that have slain the two
Witnesses which lie dead in the street of the great City, which spiritually is
called Sodom and Egypt, Ibid. 11.8
where also our Lord is crucified. When man thinks that any good thing is in
him, or shall deny that Jesus is alone wisdom, righteousness, power, goodness,
etc. he has slain and crucified Christ, and killed those two Eternal
Witnesses. And these are the two Olive trees, Verse 4, 5.
and the two Candlesticks which shall for ever stand before the God of the
whole Earth, and these two answer one another for ever, and run and empty
themselves into each other for ever before the presence of God: and if any man
shall dare to hurt these two Witnesses, which the Eternal God has ordained to
stand before him for ever; then fire proceeds out of their mouth and
devoureth their enemies; and if any man hurt them, he must in like manner be
killed.

When Christ will arise and will raise up these two Witnesses, which are slain
by all the sons of men, and which lie dead in every street, in every Nation,
and in the streets of the great City of the whole Earth; This is no other but
spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was and is crucified, and not only
at Jerusalem where he was Literally and Externally crucified, but here in
Sodom and Egypt spiritually, where was and is that true Crucifying, that every
believer experienceth in himself; for else how suffered he in Sodom and Egypt?

When Christ appears thus in man, then he appears as the great and true
MESSIAH; then he comes into his own Temple, and takes his own Throne; then he
casts out the Prince of darkness who has all this while usurped his Throne in
man, who is his Temple: here he makes a whip of many cords, and whips out the
buyers and sellers, and the money-mongers, Mark 11.17.
who trade for themselves, and aim at their private ends, seek their own
glory, and not his glory who is Lord of the Temple; and when he does this in
man, then and never before can it be called the House of Prayer, then is Jesus
Christ Mediator, and Intercessour, then has the Father made him King, Priest
and Prophet over his Church; then all that he did in the flesh is made good,
acted and fulfilled in thee; then thou have experience that Jesus Christ is he
who was dead, Rev. 2.8.
and is alive; then have thou experience of those two Eternal and Immutable
Witnesses; then have thou those two Olive trees in thee, and the two
Candlesticks which continually run one into another, and continually feed one
the other: and this light is the light of God which cannot be put out, but
stands for ever before God: here are the true discoveries of life and death;
these are the great changes and mutations, of which all the changes and
mutations, all the lives and deaths in the world, are but Types, Shadows, and
Symboles: Here now is Jesus Christ indeed whom the Father sends: Mark 24.23.
and Mark 13.21. and Luke 17.23.
But if man say, Lo here is Christ, or lo there, or he is in the wilderness,
or he is in the secret chambers, believe them not, go not after them: If they
say, Lo, he is in this form, or that mode; in this rule or that discipline:
and this man's Church is modelled after the purest form, and the neatest cut:
here thou shall find rest and satisfaction: here is He whom thou seek: here
is thy Beloved: Know, all things of this nature are but lies and delusions,
except thou find Jesus Christ coming thus in thee; and see that thy heart
is become an habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and the
cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. Christ manifests in thee where death
and life is really, and he discovers Death and Hell, and Darkness, and Sin,
and the Bottomless pit, and Satan and Antichrist, and the Dragon and the
like, mentioned througout all the Scriptures, to be all in the souls of men;
and that these are the things that are to be destroyed and consumed, and that
here Babylon is fallen within man, and is that great WHORE whom the Lord will
Judge: Rev. 18.2. and Verse. 11. Ibid. Chapter 19.6.
Then shall the Merchants of the earth weep and mourn because they can
Merchandise no more, and stand afar off and bewail her downfall: and here it is
that the Saints sing Allelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne, because he
has taken unto him his great power, and will reign for ever and ever.

If Jesus be not thus manifesting himself in thee, doing over again all those
things spoken of in Scripture (under several and diverse Allegories and
Metaphors) then is the Prince of Darkness still reigning and sitting in full
power upon his Throne in thy soul, and there he sits, and there he reigns,
Luke 11.21, 22. Chapter 10.18.
the strong man yet keeps possession, Lucifer is not yet thrown down, nor Satan
fallen from Heaven like Lightning; Rev. 17.1
Antichrist and the great WHORE are still sitting upon the seven Hills and many
Waters, arrayed in Purple and Scarlet, and decked with Gold and precious
Stones, yet full of filthiness and fornications, and thou art not yet come out
of her. That great Word, COME OVT OF HER MY PEOPLE, Chapter 18.4.
is not yet spoken by Jesus Christ in thy heart; though thou have been many
years a Worshipper of Christ, and pretended to him, yet if these things be not
effected in thee, whatever duties forms or fellowships thou have taken up, or
any exact observances, Jesus Christ is not in thee, since he is not in this
man's way, nor in that man's Church, as men blaspemously speak: for, has any one
a Church but only Jesus Christ? will any man dare to assume to himself any part
of the Immaculate Church, or of any one member of Jesus Christ, and say this or
these are my Churches and my people, and my Congregation? Oh Blaspemy in the
highest degree! And though these talk of Heresies and Schisms, and charge them
upon others; yet judge ye, who are those that make rents and utter blasphemies
against the honor and glory of Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.20.
that one eternal Savior, and that great Shepherd of the Sheep. And who is
Paul and Apollo, and others, but Ministers and Servants by whom ye believed?
are they any thing, or is there any glory due to them? But if Jesus Christ come
into thy soul discovering himself by casting out the strong man, and
Antichrist, and letting thee see death and hell, and all evil to be in thee,
and has quite slain man in all his excellencies and glory, then he will arise
in thee and appear to be life alone, glory alone, power alone: and till then
men merely delude themselves under all forms, pretending strictness,
conformity, and obedience to Christ, when indeed though they have preached and
prophesied, Mat. 7.22.23.
and in his name done so many great works, which shall amaze the people of the
world, and the general sort of professors, yet Christ who searches the heart
shall profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity; though men may admire them, and esteem them the highest, the wisest,
the holiest, the meekest, the gravest, the strictest of all the sons of men;
yet he sees them to be the worst, the wickedest, the profanest, the greatest
workers of iniquity, the purest Hypocrites; for that which is highly esteemed
among men, Luke 16.15.
is in the sight of the Lord abominable. For man has nothing of good in him,
but all his imaginations are evil, and only evil, and continually evil; and
Jesus Christ is good, all good, and continually good, and nothing else but
good: and he that gives other testimony, either in word or deed, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him. Rev. 11.8
And those two Eternal Witnesses are in him slain, and lie dead in the streets
of the great City, that is, in the whole nature of Mankind: which two Witnesses
can never be raised and stand up upon their feet till Jesus Chirst himself
come and revive them and cause them to live: HERE IS WISDOM, Ibid. 13.8
and let him that reads understand: and he that has read these things in
himself, he alone can understand these things.

And when the Lord is thus doing this work, we may see the manner of his
working and proceeding with the sons of men, in the following words: I will cut
off thy Horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy Charets; this
is one part of his acting: He will cut off his Horses and destroy his Charets:
that is, whatever it be that man rides on, or trusts in, or thinks to be
delivered by, all his helps or refuges, all his hopes or confidences that are
below or less then Jesus Christ himself, he will cut off and destroy: though
his confidence be never so great, and that wherein he trusts be never so
strong, and his Charets never so many, In that day when the Lord will arise,
they shall be all cut off, all utterly overwhelmed like Pharaoh and his Charets
in the Sea. Let it be what it will wherein thou trustest, Exodus 14.
and think to sit safely in the midst of all wrath and storms: if thou
put trust in riches, honor, power of men, wisdom, parts, or any thing thou
have chosen, and think thy self ever the better, or safer for them, all
these shall be cut off from thine hand: Nay, though thou art in the very
Chariot of Religion, Mich. 5.12.
and highest profession of the truth, and have chosen to thy self the purest
forms, and Ordinances (as thou call them) and Church-felloships, washings,
breaking of bread, or any thing else in thine hand, which can be named, except
Jesus Christ himself whereby thou have quieted thy spirit, and have thereby
gotten to thy self a peace and a rest, all is a delusion and an Idol. It may
be, Thou, when thy conscience began to accuse thee, and wrath appeard to amaze
and affright thee, thou said within thy self, I must now do something, that I
may deliver my soul from this guilt, I must quench this flame, for I am not
able to bear it: I will run to this duty and take up that form, and observe
such and such rules, and then I shall do well, and I shall secure my self from
wrath and hell: As the Pharisees, what think you drove them to the Baptism of
John? certainly it was this fear, and this guilt upon their spirits: For, says
he to them, O Generation of Vipers, Mat. 3.7.
who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? bring forth fruits meet
for repentance: as if he should say, when ye were affrighted and terrified, you
thought coming to my Baptism would secure you, but you are but Vipers for all
this; and this submitting to Baptism, does not declare true repentance: But
know, the Ax is now laid to the root of the Tree, Verse. 10.
and every Tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast
into the fire. And further, you boast of being the children of Abraham, and the
seed of the faithful, and because ye are members of the true Church; but, all
this is to little purpose; for God is able of these stones to raise up Children
unto Abraham: So that you see, for all your Forms and Fellowships wherein you
trust, you shall be in that day of the Lord stripped naked of all your garments,
and of all your refuges; all those Horses and Chariots which you thought should
preserve you, and carry you out of all danger, they shall all be broken and cut
off, and thy soul plunged into the bottomless pit, Psalm. 38.3.
and thou shall have no rest in thy bones, because of thy sin, and by reason of
thy misery, for thou shall not know which way to turn thee; for all thy Idols,
and all thy Images shall not in that day be able to help or deliver thee; Jer.
4.4.
for, the wrath of the Lord shall burn as an Oven, and then thou must stand
naked before the presence of the Lord, who is a consuming fire; Heb. 12. etc.
to burn up and consume every thing but Himself.

And not only so, but as it follows in the next words; I will cut off the
Cities of thy Land, and throw down all thy strong holds. As when outward
enemies came upon the people of Israel, and invaded their Land, and the Lord
had said, they should go into captivity, then nothing should be a defense to
them, but the enemy should break into their strongest places, and their Cities
should not secure them, nor any of their strong holds which they had made for
their defense do them any good. This now was true in the Letter, but this is
also as true in the Mystery, in the living and spiritual sense: When men have
made themselves defenses, and think they are secured from wrath and hell, and
all storms, and no evil shall touch them, neither will they be carried captive
by Satan, nor by the Prince of Darkness; and although by their wisdom they
contrived these forts and strong holds, and thought themselves never so secure
therein, yet all of them shall be vain, hopeless, and helpless: and nothing
within them, nor without them shall help them, and the wrath of the Lord shall
make them vile, odious, and abominable, which before they got coverings for:
now whether they will or no, they shall see themselves as they are, and they
shall not be able to have one good thought of themselves, but the contrary; for
this light of the Lord discovers their blackness, their deformity, and that
there is no power nor wisdom can help them, but only the good will, and the
good hand of the Lord, nothing but his mere goodness: and they shall see that
there is no power, no goodness, no mercy, anywhere but in the Lord alone; and,
if he do not pity them, there is no mercy at all for them.

And not only so, That men have their horses to ride on to carry them swift
away, that no danger may overtake them, and Chariots wherein they ride and put
their trust: so likewise that they have Cities and Strongholds for their
security: so that all the wisdom and power of man cannot make them more strong
and safe to bear off the wrath of God, but also (says he) in the next verse,
I will cut off witchcraft out of thine hand, and thou shall have no more
Southsayers: Men have their Juglers and Diviners, their Southsayers and their
Witches: All that witchcraft whereby men have deluded and deceived their souls,
in that day shall be discovered; those false SEERS who cried peace, peace, when
there was no peace: All that Witchcraft which men used in the things of God, in
setting up Images, and forms, and shadows, and herein deluded men, making them
believe they were the things themselves: And though they have wrought them up
never so curiously, and made them as near the life as might be, yet in that
day they shall come to see they were but Images and dead things, which could
not help at all: And now they shall no more live upon them, or hang, depend, or
call upon them for help or relief, though they were made after the best
pattern, and never so like the things of God, yet they shall then come and see
clearly they were deluded and bewitched, and all discovered to be mere fancies
and enchantments: but then it is here promised they should have no more
Southsayers, no Inchanters to deceive their eyes; who have so much cunning to
keep up their trade and their credit, and their maintenance, that they can make
things appear as they are not, Acts 10.27.
and to keep things from appearing as they are, as you know, that is the way of
Iuglers and those that use Ledger-de-main and HOCUS-POCUS tricks; they deceive
and delude the eyes of the beholders, with their nimblenesse, and with a
sleight of hand: So do these spiritual Juglers; by their wit, and by their
learning, they blind the truth of the Gospel, and make you take shells for the
substance, and counters for gold: Now, when the Lord himself will arise with
his light, all these enchantments shall vanish, and all the Inchanters be
confounded; you shall be no more deceived with fine, smooth, soft words; and
there shall be no more a Magician, nor a Southsayer, nor a Peeper, nor a
Sorcerer, nor any that works a Divination: And he will deliver his people out
of their hand. Ezekiel. 13.23. Numb. 23.23.
As Balaam said, when he would fain have cursed the Israelites, and wrought by
divination, and put upon them an Enchantment, he says, Surely there is no
enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any Divination against Israel: That
soul that is enlightened by the God of Israel, and has experience of the
truth, cannot be enchanted by these liars, or by these Southsayers, they have
no power over them, for they are built on a rock, on Jesus Christ that eternal
and unchangeable rock of Ages; Mat. 7.25. Deu. 32.4
who is that immovable BASIS on which all the Saints in all generations have
built and rested on, for their faith stands not in the wisdom of man, or on the
power of man, but in the wisdom and power of God.

And then he goes on in the next words, The graven Images also will I cut off,
and thy standing Images out of the midst of thee, and thou shall no more
worship the work of thine own hands. Now what is an Image, but the picture and
form of that thing to which it relates? those Images and pictures which men by
their own inventions have framed to imitate the things of God, and have squared
them (as they conceive) very like the pattern, and have made them very neat and
curious, so that they pass for current, and they are generally received, and
the men themselves esteemed rare workmen; yet this day of the Lord will
discover all these things, they shall all be taken away: nay, though they be
Old-received Idols, and of LONG standing, and made by the most exact and
curious workmen, and scarce ever questioned in many generations, but received
as if made by God himself: yet even these things shall be discovered and
detected, and the Idols and Idol-makers shall be confounded together.

And, why shall all these things be done? It follows in the last words read,
And thou shall no more worship the work of thy hands. Beloved, what do all men
when they by their wisdom and inventions cut out forms and platforms of
Religion, and one squares his Idol this way, and another the other way; this
Church has this way and rule, and the other another form, as every one thinks
best; so many Churches, (as they call them) so many several forms, and these
they pranke, and adore, and admire themselves in admiring them, this form and
that new cut, and that mode: and the next he must mend, and pare, and add, and
he thinks to neatifie it, and make it more passable and commendable, and so
more generally to be received, that the more may like it, that he may have the
more to be of his members and Church, and they may be esteemed the best
reformed, and nearest the rule: what (I say) do all these men do but worship
the work of their own hands? And, because they are squard according to the rule
(as they say) and have stood long in the esteem of the world, therefore he that
shall question their way, and their wisdom, and their Religion or their
principles, must be no less then an Heretic, a deceiver, a Jesuit, any thing.

Look upon the Papists, and observe how many generations they have stood in
their form of worship, and how generally it has been received in one half of
the world; yet we conclude they are no other but Idolaters. And if we shall
examine, and bring to the touch many received opinions concerning Christ, and
concerning the Scriptures, and the word of God, and washings, and baptizings,
and breaking of bread, as they are now used, and as they are and have been
generally in use, we shall find them no other but inventions of men, according
as they understand the Scriptures, and say, these are the things themselves,
though not in words yet in their practices they say no less, and are no other
(as they use them) but Idols, and the work of their own hands: and these they
worship, adore, and bless themselves in using thereof. And though they may go
so far, as to give the sense, and hit the litterall meaning, yet they may be
and are far from the mystery, the true meaning and the mind of Christ, as the
Apostle calls it, and the knowledge of truth, as it is in Jesus. For if they
do hit the letter, Ephesians. 4.21
and square their discipline according to it, alas they have not the life and
power for all that: they who think themselves most exact, and think to hit it,
and imitate it to a tittle; yet they reach but the shadow and the Image, 2
Cor. 3.6
the dead letter, and not the life, and the things themselves, for they are of
a far more excellent and spiritual nature, which no man (as man) could
imitate nor follow, nor observe, but only he who is taught of God, and that it
is given him from above to believe and comprehend; for, the dead letter is not
the life, but all things that the eye sees, and the ear hears, are things
that must pass away, they must remove, that so the heavenly things may come in
the room thereof, even those things of which all external things are but the
patterns and similitudes, Even Christ himself after the flesh: and this is
that Mystery of Christ which is hid in God, Ephesians. 3.5, 9. Col. 1.26. Heb. 9.23.
and kept close from ages and generations, but is now revealed in his Son,
only by the holy spirt; for, says the Apostle, it was necessary that the
patterns of things in the Heavens should be purified with these: but the
Heavenly things themselves with better Sacrifices then these; for Christ is not
entered into the holy places made with bands, whihc are figures of the true, but
into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. Therefore
all things but Christ in us must remove and pass away: else the heavenly
things cannot appear: for whatever is not of the Fathers setting up and
planting, John 15.2
must be rooted up, and it is the Lord himself must teach his own worship. For
Paul clearly confesses, he had his knowledge in the mystery of Christ, by
Revelation: for all his great knowledge in the letter, yet he saw he was blind
and ignorant of that, as you may see he expresses at large in Ephesians. 3. at the
beginning, and elsewhere. And none know this but the Church, and those that are
true members of Jesus Christ; nay the Angels, and Principalities and Powers,
know not these things, which he calls the manifold wisdom of God, verse. 10.

So that in these words read before you, it appears to me, there is included
these two things.

First, here is a description of man's day, and what he does in that his day: He
gets unto himself Horses of his own, and Chariots of his own, and he builds
unto himself strong Cities, and strong holds; that is, places of security of
his own inventing, and in that day his hand is full of Witchcrafts, Delusions,
and Lies; and he gets to himself Southsayers, and Diviners to promise to him
peace, safety, and security, and in that day, he is full of graven Images of
his own making, and he cleaves mightily to his old, ancient, and standing
Images, which both he and his forefathers have received.

Secondly, here is a threatening of an approach of the day of the Lord, and that
his hand shall be upon all these things: he will cut off his Horses, and
destroy his Chariots, and the Cities of his Land, and will throw down all his
strong holds, and will cut off all his Witchcrafts, and Southsayers, and graven
Images, etc.

And however, most Interpreters do take this in a Litteral sense only, and
look upon it as a History of what God did outwardly and externally among the
Jews, when they were destroyed and carried into captivity, yet to me there is
much more in it; for all those relations are types of spiritual things; the
word of the Lord enduring for ever; as David says, I have seen an end of all
perfection, but thy Law is exeecding broad: Psalm. 119.96.
And in this sense, it is promised, there shall be no more an Inchanter in
Israel.

But, we will endeavor to apply all this to our selves, and make Use thereof.

First, hence we may safely conclude, that all men without distinction, until
Christ be revealed in them, they are all joined in one way of Idolatry and
false worship; and that all those Histories and Descriptions of Idols and
Idolaters in Scripture, are but figures of what man does in his DAY: And
howerer they go not all one way, in regard of themselves, but many censure and
condemn each other, yet to God they are all Idolaters, Inchanters, Southsayers,
etc. and are gone a whoring after their own inventions, Psali 106.39.
and are mad after Idols; they all have their Horses and their Chariots, and
Cities of confidence, and strong holds, their Sorcerers and Inchanters, and
follow the way of Balaam, Jer. 19.14 1 Kings. 18.18.
and their god ASHTEROTH, as their Fathers have taught them. All that the
spirit of man can find out by his own wisdom, power, or invention is nothing
but as Saul's going to Witches and Wizzards in the day of their distress: they
every one in this way leave URIM and THUMMIM which the Lord has commanded,
Exodus 28.30. and 1 Samuel 28.7.
and they are all going to a weak woman and one that has a familiar spirit:
And all this he does by taking counsel of his own heart, and following his own
inventions, and does not wait upon that Divine teaching of the Father, and that
never failing URIM and THUMMIM which the Lord himself has commanded him to
wait upon.

All these inventions of man are but his Horses and Chariots to carry him away
swiftly from his enemies and pursuers; when conscience is awaked in man, and he
begins to apprehend wrath and vengeance, and sees what a vile, ugly creature he
is, and what ways he has taken, and how he has followed after witches and
wizzards to enquire of them, who have made lies their refuge; now man gets to
himself all the refuges, defenses, and deliverers he can possibly, to save him
from this wrath to come; Mat. 3.7. Deu. 19.6.
he rides swiftly from the pursuer of blood and the wrath of God: I say, let
this be the first Use we make of this point, even every man befroe me, and all
to whom these things shall come, to examine himself seriously, if these things be
not so; let him deal plainly with his own heart, let him get into his chamber
and be still, and there Commune with himself, and he shall find that all his
goings out, and seekings, and inventions have been nothing else but to stop the
mouth of conscience, to allay the fire that began to burn within him, and to
get some drops to cool his tongue, and to cover the fire and the smoke of the
bottomless pit. Luke 16.24.


Did not all your undertakings arise from a sight of a want, an emptiness,
poverty and misery? and have ye not gotten Horses to ride far away from this
guilt of conscience? have ye not with the Prodigal, gone out from your fathers
house, and spent your patrimony upon Harlots and riotous living? Ibid. 15.13.
and nothing could ever cause you to return: but though ye were never so poor,
and had spent all, yet you would join your selves to any thing in the first
place that may appear as a rich Citizen, wherein ye may not fear want; but for
all this, your poverty and misery still coming more and more upon you, you,
rather then you will return home and discover your folly, misery, and
nakedness, will live upon husks, shadows, figures; and they not being able to
fill your belly, nor supply that infinite emptiness in your souls, then you
have been forced to return and come home unto your father, empty, naked,
ashamed, miserable, lost, and undone. And till this be, there is not one of the
sons of men ever can come home or return to their fathers house, not until
they have nothing at all left, no goodness, no love, no wisdom, no power, etc.
but see that all these are in their Fathers house, and nowhere else: Being
persuaded that there is bowels of love, there is the rich robe, there is bread
enough, there is the embraces, there is the kisses of love, there is the
dancing and the melody: Till this day comes, the Prodigal is never received
with joy, his Father never falls upon his neck and kisses him. Beloved, I
appeal to every soul here this day, and to all the poor received Saints, and
people of God, if they have not found all these things fulfilled in them, and a
thousand times more after this manner, more then ever can be expressed.

Have all thy goings forth to this thing, or the other thing, been any other then
Jonahs Gourd, Jonah: 4: 7.
to sit under the shadow thereof, to shelter thee from the burning sun and heat
of Divine wrath? examine thy heart; Did ever take up any duty, any form, any
way of worship, purely for love to God, because thou saw him the fairest of
ten thousand, Cant. 5.10.
because that he was the joy of thy soul, thy portion, thy inheritance, thy All
in All: For till then, God is not thy God; if any other thing be thought good
or excellent but he, thou have not chosen him for thy God; do but examine thy
thoughts and thy ends in all those things, and thou shall find satisfaction to
thy self, securing thy self, getting happiness and rest for thy self, was the
chiefest moving cause; And being so, (as I am sure it is, till man see himself
empty, naked, and a miserable Prodigal,) what is all thy acting, doing,
sacrificing, washing, breaking bread, Forms, Modes? what is all thy highest
rules and strictness and walking up to the rule (as thou call it) but
working for thy self, Mat. 20.13. 2 Cor. 5.14.
and working for a penny, and mere mercinary working by force, thou do
nothing by the constraint of love; it is not for the excellency of holiness and
love to the Lord himself; but so thy own head may be covered, and thou may
be clothed, and that thou may have Cities to dwell in and live happily.
Says Satan, Job 1.9.
does Job serve God for naught? thou have peace and riches, and satisfaction to
thy self, and therefore thou servest him; if thou have not thy penny, thou will rather stand idle in the market; Mat. 20.6
thy working is to be freed from misery and to get that (which thou call
HEAVEN.) These are thy Horses to carry thee from wrath and to the place of
rest; where thou may with the Prodigal, live upon thy own, and spend
lavishly, and indeed it tends to no other, but to run thy self out of all, and
to bring thee to misery.

Beloved, from hence, let every one, every particular form, every several
division and distinction of Worshippers examine themselves from what principle
they act and work; if it be not to carry them into a far country, Luke 15.13.
that they may not see their misery, nor remember Hell, nor the wrath of God;
and their forms have been their Horses and Chariots which have saved and
delivered them, quieted their consciences, shut the mouth of Hell, kept off the
gnawing worm: And when they have got into this Chariot of Religion, and these
Forms of Worship, then they think themselves safe and well horst: How many
thousands of people are now got into these ways, and joined themselves to these
rich Cttizens, and never yet were emptied, made miserable, and nothing, never
lost their own lives, never took up the Cross of Christ, nor forsook
themselves? but having taken up a Form suitable to their liking, say they, now
I am safe, now I am well; what ever others do, I am in a good condition, I
have secured One, I am wiser then others, I am holier then they, stand farther
off, Esaias 65.5
I am now somebody; and every particular Form think themselves in the best way,
and censure all others, and applaud and deifie themselves: But in the day of
the Lord, all thy helps, hopes, Idols, witchcrafts, shall be cut off; nothing
of thy planting shall stand, but thou shall be left empty, naked, helpless,
hopeless, so that thou shall be utterly stripped of thy whole self, and no way
left to escape by all thy forms, wisdom, inventions, and thou shall be so
distressed that there is nothing left to help thee but a naked Christ, only
mere mercy and the good hand of the Lord. So that except thou can stand in
this light, and bear this discovery, there is no help for thee.

And when man is brought to this condition, he will look every way for help,
Genesis 4.16
any man to direct and offer him any likely way, any Chariot to carry him from
the presence of the Lord, that Hell may not pursue him, and that he may outrun
his own guilt; with Caine he will go dwell in the Land of Nod, thinking to get
from the presence of the Lord; he has now with the Prodigal, loft his fathers
house, that is, he has put himself out of his fathers love, care, and
protection, and he will manage his own portion, and provide for and direct
himself: but all this is to cover with a covering, but not with the Lords
Spirit. Esaias 30.1
To the Land of NOD: what is that? that is, to the land of Forgetfulness, or to
the Land of Dizzinesse; And there he has a portion, and patrimony upon which
he spends, and there he happens among Harlots, and lives by his own wisdom,
and inventions, and he gets to himself any thing that will but uphold his
spirit; though he be come almost to Beggary, yet he will shift still; before he
will discover and acknowledge his folly and beggary, he will live upon Husks,
upon his own duties; Luke 12, 19
and his own forms shall be his life, though there is no nourishment, no life
in them; And yet he says to his soul, Soul take thine ease, thou have goods
laid up for many years, and there he feasts himself, lives Deliciously every
day, he eats and drinks, and is merry, and will not think of returning to his
father, nor acknowledge his rebellions. And this is the far Country that he is
departed into, that so he may not see his own misery, his own lost condition:
But in this day of the Lord all these things shall be discovered, and he shall
see that he is deluded, and has fed himself with dreams, and that there was
nothing real in all he enjoyed: but all, even the best of his dainties, was
but Husks, a lie, and a deceit: Then shall even the very sinews of all his
strength be cut asunder, all his foundations removed, and himself utterly
beggered and undone; the very earth, and the works thereof, and all things
therein, 2 Pet. 3.10
shall be burnt up, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and he shall
be at his wits end: And this day of the Lord shall be like the Refiners fire
and Fullers Soap: Then he shall discover the Magicians and Inchanters of Egypt,
Mal. 3.2.
to be all liars and deceivers; when they told thee, Lo here, and lo there,
In this mountain, and on that hill, in this way and that form thou shall find
peace and rest: Then He whom thou have crucified and murdered by thy sins,
shall appear in the clouds to judge thee, and will set all thy sins in order
before thee: Psalm. 50.21
Then thou shall see that thou have crucified and put to death thy innocent
Savior, That meek one of the earth, who is all mercy, pity, loving kindness:
him, who came to save thee, and ransom thee from thy cruel bondage, and thou
have murdered him: And that thou have chosen Barabbas, a murderer, rather
then this innocent one. And in that thou have followed thy own ways, and thy
own wisdom, and bin thy own Guide, and by this have crucified and murdered the
Honor and glory of thy glorious Savior; And all this was, because he would
have condemned his and thy adversaries, because he would have destroyed thy
Hellish and divellish spirit: Mat. 27.66.
therefore thou have labored to destroy and crucify him, and have buried him,
and rolled a stone upon him, so that thou thoughtest he should never rise again.

But it is not all the powers of Darkness can keep him under; for after three
days he will rise again and triumph over his enemies, and appear in glory and
Majesty: Then it will be discovered who are those deluders, that cried Lo
here, and lo there, and said he is the chambers, or he is the wilderness, or
he is the secret places: Then he will speak that word in thy soul, Go not
after them, join not with them, for they lead thee from thy beloved; then thou
shall see, Luke 17.23,
that He whom thou calledst a seducer, a devil, a blasphemer, shall now be thy
Judge; and those thou runnedst after, and thoughtedst thy friends, will be
found liars, deceivers, and blasphemers.

Now this day of the Lord man would fain put off, with all his wit, wisdom,
and inventions: and this day of the Lord cannot be meant of a litterall day, or
a natural day; for that cannot be, for who is able to put off one day? And as
man cannot put off a natural day, nor the rising and setting of the Sun, nor
day, nor night; so cannot he put off this day of the Lord, but when it will
come, it shall come, and he cannot put it off with all the art, wisdom, power,
and all the inventions and subtilties he can devise: but Christ shall be born
in BETHLEM, Micah 5.2
as it is prophesied of him; In Bethlem, that is, in the house of Bread; for he
is the true bread, and the bread of life; man never had true satisfaction, or
any true bread, till He was born in him: Joh. 6.55
for his body is bread indeed, and his blood is drink indeed: Then all man's
wisdom and power, and all his Fortifications and Strong holds shall be blown
down; Jos. 6.20.
then shall the walls of Jericho fall at the sounding of these Rams-horns; And
then, when Christ is once born, Herod and all Jerusalem shall be troubled: Mat.
23.18
then is the day when Rachel shall mourn for her children, and will not be
comforted; yea, all those children which the children of men have begotten, and
thought they would be a comfort, and rejoicing to them, and a support to them,
they in this day shall all be slain with the sword: And that light of God that
is in every man, shall tell them, that all their wisdom and endeavors, that
all their righteousness, and conformity is nothing worth, and that when they
have done the utmost that they can, Luke 17.10
they are but unprofitable servants, and the best of their strictness is not
worth one bit of bread, Ibid. 13.27.
and that God is not bound to them in the least, when they have done never so
much, but Hell is their due, Luk, 13.27.
and their portion for all this; therefore depart from me ye workers of
iniquity.

And this day of the Lord will come on a sudden when neither men, nor all their
Magicians, nor Southsayers, nor their Sorcerers, nor all their Witchcrafts,
that delude the eyes of the understanding, shall be able with all their wisdom
and cunning to put it off, but they themselves shall be cut off and destroyed,
though they have used their utmost devices to delude the soul, and carry it
captive, and won them to a liking of their ways: and though Satan has so
deluded people, that he appears not a Devil and seducer as he is, 2 Cor. 11.14,
15.
but has transformed himself into an Angel of light, and his Ministers into
Ministers of righteousness. And for proof of this, consider but of two or
three places of Scripture and you shall see it clear. As

First, 2 These. 2.9, 10.
the Apostle in 2 These. 2.9, 10. speaking of Antichrist and his workings in
man, says, he shall be revealed and made known, and consumed with the spirit
of the Lord, and with the brightness of his coming; even He, whose coming is
after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and
with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness: Though they seem Saints, and to
be endewed with power, yet they are but lying wonders; and though they seem to
have righteousness yet it is deceivable righteousness: righteousness wrought
by the power of Inchanters and Sorcerers, and Magicians to deceive and blind
the understanding; for there is no such thing but the contrary; for it is no
other but the power of Satan, and the working of Satan, and they are his signs
and lying wonders: And, in that day of the Lord all these things shall be
discovered and made naked.

Nay farther, that Satan may hide himself, and not be known to be Satan, he
has this farther policy and enchantment, he can cry down an Enchantment in one
form that he may be more secure in another, and yet be Satan still, and all to
conceal himself from being known; for if he be discovered, and the day of the
Lord reveal him, then ye shall see him fall down from Heaven like Lightning:
Luke 10.18
therefore Satan will change his shape and cast out himself, and in this case
Beelzebub will cast out Beelzebub, the greater Devil will cast out the less, that
so he may take fuller possession: And all this is done by no other art but by
Magic, Enchantments, and Sorcery. Nay often times the Devil will call that
Enchantment which is farthest from it; even the wisdom, power, and
righteousness of Christ: Because he knows that if he can but make men so
apprehend of it, they will fly from it; for he knows himself hated. And except
he be disguised, he can do nothing: yet many men will cry out against Sorcery
and Enchantment, and Heresy, and Errors, and Delusions, when they know not
what they are: nay, when they themselves are most deluded and surprised by
Enchantment; So that Satan he is furnished with his subtle devices, and yet
keeps men ignorant of his devices, and they shall not know they are enchanted,
but cry out upon others to be so; They cry out such are Heretics and Ranters,
Seducers, and Jesuits, and see not the real Divination in themselves.

So that by this you may see, when God or the Scriptures speak of Sorcerers,
Magicians, Charmers, Inchanters, Southsayers, Diviners, Necromancers, Peepers,
a Woman with a familiar Spirit or the like: they not only mean that External
way of Magic, (though some things in that case may be lawful, which may
through ingorance be railed against) but God by those names chiefly intends to
discover and set out the Prince of Darkness in man, and the Man of sin, and
Antichrist in man, and the working of Satan in man; 2 These. 2.3. Joh. 16.11.
this the Scripture chiefly and ultimately intends all along; but men will not
see it, nor acknowledge it, because they are under the power thereof and cannot
endure the light, neither will thy come to the light lest their deeds should be
made manifest. Joh. 3.19, 20.


Add to this another Scripture, Exodus 7.11. Then Pharaoh also called the wise
men, and the Sorcerers: Exodus 7.11.
Now the Magicians of Egypt they also did in like manner with their
Enchantments. These were Jannes and Jambres which withstood Moses, (which were
the names of some of the Magicians, which wrought against Moses) which are in
all the Sons of men and cited by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9.
2 Timothy, 3.9. where he applys it to the working of Satan in man. Now as Jannes
and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth, men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith: But they shall proceed no farther for
their folly shall be made manifest to all men, as theirs also was; They would
undertake to do the same things by their power, which Moses did by the finger
and power of God: They would be Apes and Imitators to make the world believe
they did the same thing, and by the same power: but it was made manifest that
they were no other but Deceivers, Inchanters, Magicians, and wrought by the
Devil, and such shall all those be discovered to be who pretend to obey Christ
and work by the power of Christ, but are no other then Dreamers, Inchanters,
and Charmers. And who these were, that we may know them, he plainly lays them
forth there; They were men, that had the form of Godliness, Ibid. verse. 5.
but denied the power thereof: For they were lovers of themselves, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, unthankful, unholy, Truce Breakers, Ibid. verse. 3, 4, 6.
false accusers, feirce, despisers of those that were truly good, lovers of
pleasure more then lovers of God: Of this sort are they which creep into Widows
houses, and lead captive silly women: the last days perilous times:

And as Jannes and Jambres, resisted, and affronted, and labored to weaken the
credit of him who came with true miracles, and with the power of God: So these
resist and oppose, and counterfeit the Spiritual Moses, as if their works were
wrought in God, and done by the power of Christ; all which is no other but
Magic, Sorcery, Delusion, Charming, and Enchantment.

Also, take one place more, that in Esa. 8.19. And when they shall say unto
you, Esa. 8.19.
seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizzards that peep and
mutter; should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead; To
the Law and to the Testimonies. If they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. Now according to the Letter, there are none
in words will openly counsel to to Wizzards, (as such) and to such as Peep and
Mutter, and that they know deal with the Devil: but of necessity, these words
are spoken secretly in the hearts of men, and there they hearken and obey the
Counsel and Wisdom of the flesh: There is the chief Magic wrought which Satan
uses, in deluding and drawing away the soul of man, to hearken to these
Inchanters, who can Counterfeit the Graces and things of Christ, that so they
may be taken for Members and Ministers of Jesus Christ; And that those who
truly have his Life and Power, may be counted Deceivers: this is one of Satan's
greatest-depths; as we may see in the Prophet Jer. 27.9. when he had told the
people of Moab and Ammon and Tyrus and word of the Lord; Jer. 27.9.
that they should go into Captivity, and therefore should submit and put their
necks under the yoke of the King of Babylon; Now there were others that
pretended that they were Prophets also, and brought the word of the Lord, and
told them they should not consent to serve him. Says the Lord in that ninth
verse, Hearken ye not unto your Prophets, nor to your Diviners, Dreamers, nor
to your Inchanters, nor to your Sorcerers which speak unto you, saying, ye
shall not servs the King of Babylon; For whatever they prophesied was but the
devices of their own heart, and therefore they should not hearken to them; but
that which he threatened, because it was the word of the Lord, that should and
must come to pass. And the Apostle uses the same word in Gal. 3.1. Gal. 3.1.
which includes all those words of Sorcery, Enchanting, Witchcraft, etc. O
foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth,
before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth crucified among
you? Which word Bewitched, is the same word in the Greek which signifies
witchcraft, Sorcerie, Charming, or the like; thereby signifying that what ever
it was that was set up in man to cause him to mistake Jesus Christ, or is set
up in the room of him, was Enchantments, Witchcrafts, Sorceries; though they
were never so like him if they were not Him, and turned us away from the true
Jesus Christ, they are Foolish and Worldly rudiments: and are ye so foolish
(says he) in the third verse. Ibid. v. 3.
that having begun in the spirit, ye should think to be made perfect by the
flesh? Ibid. ve. 3.
If any fleshly or carnal, or external thing be set up in the room of Christ,
this is no less then Witchcraft, Sorcery, and Delusion: And whatever name the
Scripture gives to any External Witchcraft or Sorcery, it is to hold out unto
us that spiritual, deep, hidden and wonderful Charming that Satan uses to
cause us to mistake Jesus Christ, and that his power may be taken for the power
of Jesus Christ, and his wisdom and seeming holiness for the wisdom and
holiness of Jesus Christ.

Beloved, these things (as our Savior says) I have spoken unto you, and have
often pressed them upon you, That when ye find them true and come to pass,
Joh. 14.29.
ye may believe: for except ye find these things in experience ye cannot
believe them. But whoever shall teach no more, but that these things are only
Literally fulfilled, they do Delude, Deceive, Inchant, and Charm you; but the
same things which have been done externally, must be fulfilled in us; for what
is it to us what they did, and what they saw? what do thou meddle with or
talk of Christ his Miracles, and Sufferings, and Resurrection, if these things
be not done in thee? art thou ever the better for all that was then done?
Without controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness; for as he was
manifested in the flesh, so he was justified in the spirit: What is it to thee
what enjoyments Paul had, or John or any of the Apostles, if thou experiment
not the same things? without question, this is the truth and the life, whatever
the men, or the Masters of the Letter, or of the City of the Letter say unto
you. The words that I speak unto you (says our Savior) they are spirit and
they are life; Joh. 6.63
they are not only a dead Letter to the ear and to the understanding, but they
are quickening spirit declaring true death and true life in us. The Scripture in
every part there of holds forth either evil or good, death or life, light or
darkness, heaven or hell, the Temple of God or the Temple of Idols, Christ or
Belial; that is, either man in his lost, miserable, blind, dark, undone, and
helish condition; or else Christ the Savior, the life, the light, the glory,
the happiness, the Redeemer of man. Now, if we have not experience of either of
these two in our selves, all reading, hearing, preaching, praying, sacrificing
is in vain, 2 Cor. 3.6
and the Scriptures are no other to us but the killing and deadly letter.

Lastly, we will name one more of their Sorceries and Enchantments, and so
conclude, and it is a very great one; In that they take upon them the very Office
and place of Christ, they think themselves, and call themselves Teachers and
Divines, and men must come to them as to the Oracles of God, and they are the
Priests lips which shall preserve knowledge; come to us, and hearken to us, and
we will direct you, and teach you, what means, and what rules and ordinances ye
shall use, and which is the way to Heaven: when as Christ says plainly, call
no man Father, nor no man Master upon earth: for one is your Master, and one is
your Father, Luke 14.11, etc. Joh. 6.44.
which is in Heaven: but, he that is greatest among you, let him be your
servant: And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall
humble himself shall be exalted. And says again, No man can come to me, but
by the Father, and except the Father draw him. And again, I am the way, the
truth, and the life: And yet they say, come to us, join your selves in
fellowship with us, and conform to us, and walk with us, for we have the best
means, we will show you the best way; we have overlookt and examined all other
Church-fellowships, and none like ours, we are squared according to the
primitive pattern, and to the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16
and the word it self justifies all our rules, and our way of worship: And they
say moreover, we have the word of the Lord with us; and for us, and we have the
mind of Christ with us; we have a dream, and we have a revelation, and we have
seen a vision; when indeed they have seen nothing, but have stole the word of
the Lord from others, and borrowed of their neighbor, of this and that
Author, and have searched what this man says, or that man writes, of such and
such points, and then come and cry, the word of the Lord, when the Lord has
not spoken in them nor to them, but boast of things without their measure, 2
Cor. 10 14, etc. 1 John 1.1
and speak not the things that they have seen and heard, and that their hands
have handled of the word of life, but as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 10. Who seek
to commend themselves, boasting of other men's labors and experiences, and not
of their own; boasting beyond their line of things not distributed to them; 2
Cor. 10. Verse. 15. Ezekiel. 13.6, 7.
and yet will say, The Lord has spoken, and this is the Word of the Lord; and
yet never found it The Word of the Lord in them or to them: neither have they
seen any thing, nor the Lord has not spoken unto them. And therefore what ever
they may say, they cannot make it out to the hearts of others, but they talk of
it at random and by guess: and they say, it is so, and it must not be
questioned; for all other received Orthodox men (forsooth) have said it: Are
these Prophets, think you, of the Lords sending? have these received the Word
at his mouth? Ibid. 3.17
No, no, but they are furnished by their learning, and parts, and acquirements,
and so of and from Man.

And so likewise, not only is the Prophet deluded, but the people also; for
they have joined themselves with these Prophets, and there they will stick, and
their faith is pind upon their sleeves: Oh such a man, he is a sound man, and
he cannot err, and they will hear no where else: And so this Prophet (as thou
take him to be) becomes Thy Pope, and thy Holy Father: for to him thou give
heed, and him thou followest, and obeyest. And this is the great enchantment in
our times, when men forsake Jesus Christ the true and only Teacher, and depend
upon men: This is a great mischief, and a grievious plague: but the world is
not sensible thereof, but bless themselves in this great evil: What (say they)
shall we forsake our Ministers? shall we let the Gospel, and the preaching of
the Word fall to the ground? God forbid. As though men upheld the Gospel, and
men could teach the Gospel: It is then Gospel to thee, when Jesus Christ makes
it glad tidings in thy heart, and when there is nothing in Heaven and Earth
more welcome to thee, and when thou have forsaken and laid down thy self, to
receive it: But till we come to see that there is no other father, no other
Master but Jesus Christ in all the world, in heaven or earth, we are certainly
enchanted and deluded, and are under a spiritual CHARM:

But be it so; hear you; or receive what you say?

It Is true, if I should say otherwise in regard of my self, deluder, a liar,
and a charmer, and a Southsayer: I would by no means you should look at me, or
regard me, as if I could do anything; I desire to be no other but as a dead
instrument used by the Lord, and would not be thought of or esteemed any thing;
I am no more fit to speak then any of you all; if God will speak by you, ye may
all prophecy one by one, as the Apostle says. God forbid that I should think
my self better then any other Saint of God; or think my self more honored by
standing in a high place above you: the Lord he knows my heart. An hill, or a
mountain in the field were as fit for me; any place, I pass not, but only for
convenience of Hearing: So the Lord will but set up himself, and magnify his
own name (which he will do) let my praise, my glory lie in the dust, and I
would be no more stirred and disquieted in spirit with any such thing, then a
man that is naturally dead.

And therefore let them look to it, Math. 23.7, etc.
who love to be called RABBI or by that Blasphemous Title of DIVINE, and they
must be honored above other Saints of God; and they are The Clergy, and
others they are but the Layitie, of a meaner rank then we (say they:) And how
do they love to have greetings in the market, and the uppermost rooms at
Feasts, and the like? well, let them look to it; God will judge them one day
for all their Sorceries and enchantments, and for standing up between him and
his glory, To whom alone all praise is due, but to every man misery, shame,
confusion of face, blackness of darkness, hell and condemnation. But hence we
may see, that it is no new thing to be bewitched by the Sorcerers and
Inchanters, and Magicians of the World: The Galathians themselves were so: for
there are many Antichrists in the world; there are legions gone out from the
Prince of darkness to deceive the whole Earth: And if any from Christ speak
but the truth, he by his cunning devices will disguise it, under the shape of
Heresy, Schism, Familisme, or some odious nickname or other; that so the
truth may not be owned nor known; That so men may stop their ears against the
Heavenly voice of Christ, which brings down all things adored or loved in or
from man, and sets up nothing else but the power, wisdom, goodness, holiness,
and Alsufficiency of the Lord alone: He cries, Man's heart, and all the
imaginations thereof are only evil continually, and that there is none that
does good, Psalm. 14.3 and Romans 3 10.
no not one: They are all gone out of the way, and every one is become
abominable, there is none that understands or seeks GOD. And that there is
nothing in man of good, but all is evil, sin, death, darkness, abomination, a
lie, and utter desolation: But Satan cries, in the mouths of his Ministers,
Let man do something: he can pray, he can hear, and let him follow those
rules that we prescribe, and they shall bring peace and rest to his soul. But
if man were but content to hear the voice of Christ, and to stand in the light
of God, he should be convinced that he had no power, no goodness, and that
nothing but only the power of God could carry him out, and that he is dead in
trespasses and sins; Ephesians. 2.1
and that the voice of Christ alone can raise them from their graves; and that
no less power can quicken or raise, but the eternal Almighty power, which
raised Jesus Christ himself from the dead: Romans 8.11
It is not, as men say, If you will come to us, and join and walk with us, and
be dipped with us, or break bread with us, will give any life, any peace to the
soul, but the standing in the light of God, that so man may take to himself
death and darkness, misery and wrath, and here to stand and dwell; and that in
him is no good thing: then this light, would also show him that in Christ is
all life, liberty, fullness, satisfaction, peace, and rest, and nowhere else:
If men did but abide in this light, it would debase and keep low the lofty
thoughts and those great expectations of and from man; it would also give Jesus
Christ his due; it would not suffer him in the least to act against the glory
of Christ, but man would be dead and buried, and Christ would only ascend and
sit upon his Throne. There would nothing be esteemed in Heaven or Earth, Mat.
19.21.
but Christ, and he would be content to sell and lose all for him: This light
would curb every wicked act, every desire of the flesh; this alone is the means
to crucify and kill thy vile nature, and not any outward external thing, by
washing or dipping in water, or eating such a poor, empty, carnal thing as a
bit of bread, or drinking a sup of wine; this thing never did, nor never will
do it: but to eat and drink that which Christ gave, which was not a little
bread and wine only, but HIMSELF; Joh. 6.56, 1 Cor. 11.29. Ibid. v. 20 and
chapter 10.16.
and by feeding on him, eating his body, and drinking his blood, this will
nourish to eternal life. When ye are met together into one place, this is not
to eat the Lords body: For the bread which we break is the Communion of the
body of Christ; and he that eats and drinks unworthily, discerns not the
Lords body.

Object. But may I not use these things?

Ans. Yea, never the better for using them: for it is not they can feed or
comfort thee; nor it is not going on in thy own power, nor thy using of means;
for Christ alone is the way, and the means: As if you come to a Feast, you are
not invited to eat the platters or earthern dishes which bring the meat, but
you are invited to the meat; they do but bring the meat, and if thou eat not
the meat thou may starve and die: if thou follow the dreams of thy own heart,
and think thou eatest, and do not, what a horrible delusion and
enchantment is this? But of these things we may have an opportunity to speak
more fully hereafter. Thus you see what are those things which the Lord will
cut off, in that day when he shall come: Thy Horses and thy Chariots, thy
Cities, and thy strong holds, Thy witchcraft, and thy Southsayers, Thy graven
Images, and thy standing Images out of the midst of thee.

THE SECRET SOUTHSAYER, OR, Hidden SORCERER discovered, By Mr. Jo. WEBSTER.
SERMON II. Preached at Alhallows Lumbard-street.
MICAH 5.10, 11, 12, 13. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the
Lord, That I will cut off thy Horses out of the midst of thee, and I will
destroy thy Chariots. And I will cut off the Cities of thy Land, and throw down
all thy strong holds; I will cut off Witchcrafts out of thine hand, and thou
shall have no more Southsayers. Thy graven Images also will I cut off, and thy
standing Images out of the midst of thee, and thou shall no more worship the
work of thine hands.
I Have, beloved, according to the appearance of God in me, showed the meaning
of these words according to the Spirit and the Mystery, declaring that great
work which is brought to pass by Jesus Christ, when he appears gloriously in
the world, in the souls of men, and is exalted as Lord and King, and then it
is when Jesus Christ is exalted in the earth, and not when men are exalted, or
when there is peace, and plenty of outward things: But all the speakings of the
Prophets, and of Christ himself tend to set out that Kingdom, and PERSONAL
REIGN which generally all men know little of, and neither will nor can own for
a glorious state, because not accommodated with outward power, riches, and
eternal glory; But in that day when Jesus Christ will come and arise in power
spiritually in the souls of men, then is that great day (and a thousand years
will be but as one day) when he will accomplish these things; and also all
those glorious prophesies declared by himself, and by all his Prophets. And
this work is begun by way of destroying, conquering, and cutting off all those
things that stand in the way, and hinder the setting up of this glorious
kingdom. And that is, all MAN'S refuges, defenses, or strong holds; whatever
has been a rock, or stay, or peace, or rest to his soul to depend upon, what
ever it is that he has trusted in to deliver him: As first, all his Horses and
Chariots, to carry him out of all danger; whatever he rides upon, and thinks it
will carry him swiftest away from fear, wrath, or destruction: All these
things, when Christ comes to reign gloriously, shall all be cut off, and
utterly destroyed; he shall have nothing left him to fly with, or ride upon.

Secondly, All his Cities and Strongholds shall be razed and thrown down;
whatever has been raised by man for his security, shelter, or safety, to
prevent or keep off the day of evil; not any thing shall stand which he
promised himself safety from; but when Christ is to come, he will send before
him such a destruction and overflowing deluge that shall quite carry away all
man's building, and there shall not a stone be left upon a stone of any thing
built or set up by man.

Thirdly, not only so, All his horses and chariots, all his Cities and
strongholds shall be quite removed; but whatever Witchcraft or Sorcery, or
enchantments he has in his hand, though they be never so cunningly contrived
and full of subtilty and delusion, yet all these shall be discovered and cut
off, So that he shall have no more Southsayers, Necromancers, Cheaters,
Sorcerers, Diviners, Peepers, Mutterers, Dreamers: Then HE who is The man of
Sin, shall be revealed, 2 These. 2.4, etc.
the son of Perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped, so that HE as God sits in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God. But then, shall that wicked one be
revealed, Rev. 20.3.
whom the Lord will consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy
with the brightness of his coming: this ANTICHRIST, He shall no more delude
nor deceive the Nations with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, though
they work as subtly as Satan himself: showing as if they had power and
righteousness, by their glorious pretenses and great signs and shows: but in
that day the Lord will appear in his own light and life, and they shall be
discovered to be but lying wonders, and deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, to
delude those that perish. The men of the world, and all your professors and
pretenders to Religion, they shall no more deceive, they shall no more make a
show of that they are not, but all their neat and curious contrived juglings
shall appear to be no truth nor reality, but only the form and the LIKNESS of
things. But the truth and light of God appearing, all these things shall be
laid open, that the eyes of men be no more deluded with false and lying shows
and pretenses, but they shall be discovered by the truth and light of God, and
thereby destroyed and cut off, and they shall be no more.

Fourthly the Lord will also cut off All the graven Images; All those Idols and
Images which man has made and set up by his own wit and invention, even all
his Religion, and all his Forms, wherein he so much pleased himself: And
although he have bestowed never so much carving and graving, and decking and
painting, to make them seem neat and curious, to take the eyes of the
beholders: nay, though they be made of Silver and Gold, and be never so
glorious, that they even dazzle the eyes of the beholders, and cause them to
run wondering after the glory of the BEAST, Revel. 13.3.
yet all these graven Images shall be destroyed and quite cut off: Nay, not
only the graven Images, but the standing Images, Though they have been of
never so long standing, and never so generally received and owned for the
truth, which have scarce ever been questioned, and have been received and
rested on from Generation to Generation; yet these shall appear in the light of
God to be but Images, and Lies, and shall all vanish in that day of the Lord,
and man shall have nothing left him of all his strength, riches, Horses,
Chariots, strong holds, witchcrafts, images, standing images; so that he shall
have nothing at all in his hand to trust to, and these men for all their strong
confidences they shall be utterly distressed, and stripped naked, and shall no
more worship the work of their own hands; that is, there is nothing of man can
stand, nothing of his righteousness, wisdom, power, acting, working,
worshipping, nothing but only the righteousness, power, and work of Jesus
Christ, who says, Behold I alone make all things new. Rev. 21.5.
Write, for all these things are faithful and true. Whatever men say, write
this for truth.

These things in part we have opened in the morning, especially two: first, his
Cities and strong holds for his defense. Secondly, his Chariots and his Horses;
in case the former will not secure him, yet his Chariots and Horses shall and
will uphold and secure him (as he thinks) that at last he may be free from
danger, and secure himself from the pursuer. Thirdly, the Lord promises he will
cut off Witchcrafts, and they shall have no more Southsayers: From hence we
held out this; That till the day of Christ his appearing, man is led by the
defilements of his own heart, and by no other guide but by Satan and his
instruments, by the father of lies, deceits and enchantments. He always
hearkens to the Counsel of the Serpent in him, which is more cunning and
subtle then any other beast of the field: and so cunningly are his devices
contrived, Mat. 24.24.
that if it were possible he would deceive therewith the very Elect. And there
is none that can throw out this deceiver, nor this cunning Serpent in man, but
only the holy seed of the woman; that alone can break his head and destroy
him. There is none else can overcome this Dragon but only MICHAEL the
Archangel, nor consume the Man of Sin but only the mouth of the Lord, and the
brightness of his coming: for he is so full of signs, deceit, and lying
wonders that none but the light and truth of God can discover his delusions;
Rev. 14.11. Luke 11.21, 22.
but even all the world have received the mark of the Beast, and they run
wondering after him, and they have in them the strong man armed: and what power,
wisdom, or strength of man is ever able to take off the one, or bind up the
other? but when this day of the Lord comes, then men shall no more be deluded
by Sorcerers nor Inchanters, nor by those that mutter and PEEP, and have
familiar spirits, and such as do no other in all their Religion but enquire
after the dead (as the Prophet speaks) what is that? Esa. 8.19. Mark 5.3.
who enquire not after the living, the substance, and the truth, but after the
dead, and all their delight is to be among the Graves, and the Tombs, and dead
things which have no power nor life in them, being men very cruel and fierce.
But all things of this nature in man shall be cut off, when Christ shall arise
in us and become Lord and King, and be all in all, viz. to be alone King,
Priest, and Prophet in us; Then we shall hearken and give ear alone to him,
having no other Guide, nor no other Teacher or Master but him: when these
things come to pass in us, then all the delusions within us, and all in others
without us shall all be discovered and vanish: And indeed we can never discover
those Spiritual Sorcerers, and Inchanters without us, till we have sound them
out and discovered them within us. Then he alone shall shortly tread down Satan
under our feet. Romans 16.20. Rev. 18.23.
Then this MICHAEL will throw down out of Heaven the Dragon and his Angels
which deceived the Nations; Only the Breath and Coming of the Lord can
discover those depths of lies, and infinite deceits that are received and
rooted in the heart of man: and nothing but the good hand, wisdom and power of
the Lord Almighty can deliver the soul.

From hence then we may hold out thus much, and it is very clear. First, that
there is no greater Deceiver to be found then is within Man: No cunninger
Devil, no greater ANTICHRIST, nor no worse WITCH then what Man has in his own
heart; so that HE has in him all things described by the Name of EVIL. There
is in him the Devil, Sin, Antichrist, the red Dragon, the Jims and Ziims of the
Desert; There is in him Lucifer, and the beast with seven Heads and ten Horns;
There are in him Conjurers, Sorcerers, Southsayers, Witches, Mutterers,
Peepers, consulters with the dead, that is, delighting, and resting in formal
and dead Ordinances, and with Women which have familiar Spirits, and with the
GREAT WHORE, and what not? even with all things that belong to the Kingdom and
power of Darkness: And all these things, and whatever else can be named of
this kind, they all make up but one body, all these are but Satan and his
Members, and they all have but one and the same Head; As Jesus Christ
consists of whatever is good, righteous, holy, pure, undefiled, and the seed
and sons of God, and all things of that nature are his body, and he their Head;
so all the seed and sons of Satan make up but one body and one building, which
is ANTICHRIST and the Great Whore, and the Dragon, and Lucifer and the rest:
And however man is carried out to look for all these things without him, yet be
sure these Sorcerers, these Wizzards, these Necromancers, these Dragons,
Devils, Antichrists, all are in thine own bosom. Here is the true Necromancy
and Witchcraft, the true Antichrist; all other without are but shadows,
pictures, and representations of the true and real body of Antichrist, and the
Great Whore, and the like; If thou would find out Antichrist, and the true
Necromancer and Southsayer, It is thy self. When thou inquire and ask
counsel of thine own heart, then thou consultest with a familiar and lying
spirit; when thou make a show of that which thou art not, then thou art a
Necromancer, and a Sorcerer, and so every one of these evil ones according to
their names you shall find in your own practice the nature thereof. And truly
Beloved, herein lies the great and mighty Delusion, and Witchcraft amongst the
sons of men, that Satan in them is so cunning, that he always carries them out
of themselves to find out Antichrist, and Wizzards, and Southsayers, and
Lucifer, and the Great whore and the like: And the true reason is, because the
Devil he would not by any means have these things be discovered to be in man's
own breast, where indeed is his Temple and SEAT, more then at Room externally,
or literally in any other place. There is Antichrist, and there is Belial, and
there be the Southsayers and the Sorcerers in thine own heart; But man will by
no means endure this Doctrine: And so long as Satan can blind, delude, and
deceive man, making him look for that evil one, and the son of Perdition, 2
These. 2.3.7.
and the MYSTERY OF INIQUITY out of himself, so long Satan rests secure and
safe; But if the Light of God comes and discovers where his lurking, and hiding
place is, viz. to be within and at home, while we have been ruuning up and
down, far and near to find him: Then the soul either fights against this
light, or else blushes and is ashamed, and confounded in it self: And now it
will trust no longer to it self, now it sees the greatest cheating and
witchcrafts to be acted in it self.

But till this day of the Lord come, and this great light shine round about
him, man rides on boldly and confidently as Saul to Damascus, and is not
smitten down from his Horse, neither sees he what he is doing, Acts 9.1, 2
but blesses himself, and thinks all is well, and he censures this wicked man
and the other, and he can curse the Devil and Antichrist without him bitterly,
and thee whom he thinks to be at Rome, and concludes that there he must fall
and be brought down, but never remembers that there is ONE in him whom he knows
not; but if any shall say unto him as Nathan to David, Thou art the Man,
Antichrist is in thee, and Adam is in thee, and the Serpent is in thee, and in
whatever is said or related of Adam, or Satan, or Antichrist, or Lucifer, or of
Eve: What they did, behold I say unto thee, 2 Samuel 12.7.
Thou art the man: all this thou may read in thine own actions, in thy own
practices.

But oh! how tart and harsh is this Doctrine to all the wise, sober, grave,
holy and learned men of the world! Oh how do they hate and deride this
Doctrine! But let me tell them before the Lord, Angels and Men, That for all
this while they are blessing themselves, 1 Cor. 4.9.
from the Devil and Antichrist and the rest, and scorning these things should
be in them and think that they have discovered them here and there; Behold they
are nigh them, they are within them, in their hearts and mouths, though they
see them not. But if ever with all thy learning, and parts, and righteousness
thou had had but the light of God in thee, it would have showed thee the
Divil and the true Necromancer, and let thee know that for all thy vain
boasting, and swelling, and high, and proud conceits of thy self, that thou
never yet had the light of God, and that God never yet answered thee by that
true URIM and THUMMIM, Exodus 28.30,
where thou ought to enquire, but thou have still enquired of BAAL and
ASHTEROTH, and of Wizzards and familiar Spirits, and the Counsels of thine own
heart; otherwise, all thy high conceits had been laid low: but thou go out
to Sorcerers, and Southsayers, to ASHDOD or any thing, and consultest with
them, and they tell thee of a thousand Devils but themselves; and they will
tell thee thou art a wise, a godly, a holy man; who more holy? nay, that thou
art a Saint, and all others, especially such and such are Devils to thee: this
man sees every thing naught, and evil, and out of order, but in his own heart.
And what deep and desperate Witchcraft, and Lies are these, when all these are
in himself? But when Christ comes, then the mind is quite turned, altered, and
changed; then he sees that HIS heart is deceitful above all things; then he is
amazed to see those unspeakable deceits that are there, how loathsome and vile
he is, then he wonders that Christ should descend so low as Hell, to bring his
soul out thence: then he sees how all those things which before he would never
believe to be in him, they are now laid open, and now he sees that Christ is
He alone that has led Captivity Captive.

Secondly, this Doctrine notes out unto us the vanity of the minds of all men,
while they are anywhere exercised but within themselves, in their own hearts:
for all good and evil comes out of the heart, and it is that which comes out
thence which defiles the man: And again, a good man out of the good treasure
of his heart brings good things; Mat. 12.35.
but an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil
things. Therefore the maine of all is to know a man's self; for a man to have
high and great thoughts of himself, and in the mean time to be no other but a
Devil, a Wizzard, a Sorcerer, to be an enemy, and a deluder to himself, to
think himself to be in light when he is in thick darkness, to call in himself
evil good, and good evil, darkness light, and light darkness: This is one of
the Devils great Delusions, Exo. 10.21 Esa. 5.20.
and Witchcrafts in man, to carry him still out of himself, even in point of
Religion to look abroad and meddle with this man and the other man, and neglect
himself; other men's faults are heinous, but he neither sees nor once finds
fault with his own: Some men also are much carried out in company, and are full
of talk and high discourses, and curious notions, and these they trade withal
and think to be Somebody, and get themselves a name; and all these things tend
to this main end, to make man seem to be what he is not, something when he is
nothing, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 6.3.
and to cover and hide these Devils, these Witchcrafts, these Sorceries, these
Enchantments from his own and others beholding; If the Devil can but hide
himself that he be not known to be as he is, he knows he shall rest secure
enough; then the soul is quiet enough, and thinks all is well, and so the man
sleeps in the Devils arms, and knows nothing of his own misery, until he lie
down in sorrow, and condemnation with the Devil for ever; and this is that
which the Devil labors to do in man with all his might: This hiding and
eovering, and deluding is merely the work of the Devil. Now the work of Christ
is to undermine and to Counter-work all this, viz. by discovering and laying
open all these mischiefs and deceits, and by letting man see his own folly,
delusion, and misery; for the Devil would by no means be discovered, least he
should be cast out; Therefore he cannot abide that man should dwell at home,
and be over busy with his own heart, to see the Enchantments, and cheatings
that are there: For, there it is the Prince of Darkness rules, and fits as
King of the Bottomless pit, and he knows he can delude and deceive, and be too
hard for all the men in the world, except Jesus Christ undertake to uncover and
unmask his delusions.

But when Christ will discover him in thee, then thou shall see thy self to be
all these things that we have spoken, and that all those lying Divinations are
in thee; then all thy deceits and lies shall lie under the sentence of
condemnation; then and never before, can thou discover or bear witness
against Antichrist, and the Prince of Darkness; then thou shall come to know
whether thou art indeed a member of Jesus Christ, viz. by finding these
discoveries to be made in thee; Mat. 16.17.
for then thou can witness that flesh and blood never revealed these things
to thee. Then thou shall see experimentally, what it is to be in captivity,
what it is to be in Egypt, in Babylon, and that thou wast in such cruel bondage
once, and bound with such strong fetters, as no hand could deliver thee, but
only the hand of the mere mercy of God: and that it is that only which makes
thee to differ, and not any power, wisdom, or watchfulness of thine own:
nothing but that Almighty hand has delivered thee from the Witch, and the
Deluder, and the Sorcerer, and destroyed the Destroyer, and all this out of
mere mercy and good will to thee.

And then also this will follow, if thou have found these things done, and
acted in thy self, thou can not choose but pity and pray for all those who
are yet under the same Enchantments.

When thou beholdest them, thou can not choose but say, alas poor-soules! I
know full well that there is none but only the hand of Jesus Christ that can
help and deliver them; I was in the same condition; what was I more then they,
that so much mercy has been showed to me? and in seeing their misery, thou
can not but remember thine own, and so thou see thy self in seeing them:
This the Apostles did when they beheld others: they confessed that they were by
nature Children of wrath as well as others: It Is only the mercy of God that
pulls thee as a brand out of the fire, Ephesians. 2.3. Zach. 3.7. Jude 23.
while others are burning there still; And it is only his infinite and
undeserved goodness that has delivered thee from all those great Deluders and
Inchanters, from the Devil, and from Antichrist; for thou have truly seen and
found that the same principle of Hell and Darkness is in thee that is in any
other; and that there be none that do good, Psalm. 14.2.
none that seek after God, though they pretend never so much to him; All this
considered, and seeing it true in thy own heart who art now set at liberty,
Mark 5.9.
and knowing all these LEGIONS of Devils cast out of thee, thou will be so far
from insulting and upbraiding any in this condition, that thou will pity them
in thy very soul, from a fellow-feeling of the same misery.

Again farther, this will be another effect: If Satan and Antichrist be
discovered and cast out in thee, it will bring thee not to wonder to see such
infinite multitudes of men carried away with the spirit of Enchantment, and
Delusion, for it is a wonder any one is brought from under these delusions. There
are but two Spirits in the world, either we are carried away with the spirit of
Enchanting, or else with the spirit of Christ. All the Saints can bear witness
to this, and none else, for they only have experience of both states; They
know the snares of the Hunter, and they are not ignorant of his devices: and
they have the voice, the leadings, Psalm. 124.7. 2 Cor. 2.11. Joh. 10.5. 1 Cor.
2.15. Romans 2.2.
the teachings of their only Master, and they know what Doctrine savours of his
life, and what savours of the flesh; they know his voice from the voice of a
stranger, and a stranger they will not follow: for this is the spiritual man
who judges all things, and he himself is judged of no man; they hear his
judgment, for they know his judgment is true; and they know the voice of God,
from the voice of all the Inchanters, Diviners, Southsayers, or from any
stranger in the world; he cannot be (as formerly he was) deluded with lies,
shows, and pretenses.

Beloved, this is that the world cannot endure to hear of, that their Doctrine,
or their ways should be censured or judged; But the Saints who are really
freed, they have such experience of all these things that they do know God from
the Devil, and their own dear Master (who has done so much for them) from all
Deluders, Necromancers and Southsayers in the world; and the spiritual man he
hears, and ownes, and follows, and loves his Master; and knows him not in
conceit or notion, and opinion, or persuasion, but by a clear Revelation and
Manifestation of the day of Jesus Christ in him: He found that till then he was
in darkness, and the strong man kept the house, Mar. 3.27.
and he had an opinion that he was alive, and yet was really dead: before he
had high opinions of himself, and of his serving God, and pleasing God, and
conceited that he had brought every high thought, and every imagination into
subjection to Christ, 2. Cor. 10.5
and that they had observed every rule, not omitting the least command without
conformity to it: He did not pick and choose, but he was universal in his
obedience (as he thought) and he scarce knew any thing amiss by himself: He
was conformable to forms and duties, and washings, etc. but alas, to an
experienced Saint, all this is but delusion; for his very speech will bewray
him, since he cannot but speak of himself, and of his doing and acting; ye
shall never hear him complain of himself really, from a true sense of evil (but
formally he may) but he is still vomitting out his own pride, and vainglory;
showing his gifts and parts, and glorying in his wisdom and holiness, and
still tells what great and goodly things he did.

But all this is but [MAN] Man in the beginning, and Man in the middle, and Man
in the end: For this man was never fetched out of him self: never yet saw the
abominations of his own heart, Ezekiel. 20.43.
never yet loathed himself; and how can any thing of God come from him, who
never in himself had any thing of God, but all his actings were from man, and
from self, and from parts gained and acquired by his own diligence and
improvement? Mat. 7.16.
and do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles?

From hence also it is farther clear, that all Charms, Lies, Enchantments,
Sorceries, and all the secret workings of Satan and Antichrist lie hid and
undiscovered until the day of Jesus Christ; for Satan will never discover
himself, Beelzebub will never really cast out Beelzebub, Mat. 9.34.
though he by the Pharisees lyingly cast that upon Christ, merely to hide and
keep himself undiscovered; for his subtle working is, that he would have
Christ taken to be the Devil, and he would be the Christ; and this is the grand
policy of the Devil' who has wonderfully prevailed in the world upon this
account; True, Christ is the Devil to the world, and to all false Professors:
and the working of man and self, and of the Devil in man, this is received as
the Christ; and this is in such a white and glorious and innocent Devil to the
world that not all the men in the world, nor all out of Christ, could never
have discovered him convincingly, or cast him out; it is only the finger of God
that discovers, cuts off, and destroys this witchcraft from among us.

But, so this Devil may not be cast out, he will shift any way to save himself,
he will take up any form, any way to worship Christ, be conformable to any
external thing, being no other but false Apostles; And his Ministers shall be
Ministers of righteousness, though they be deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into the very likeness of the Apostles of Christ: as they are
called in the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. And no marvel: for Satan
himsel will transform himself into an Angel of light.

Nay, though he be a Devil, yet he will have a form of godliness, as the
Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3.3. 2 Timothy 3.3.
The word there translated false Accusers is, [(...)] Therefore the Devil must
by no means appear to be a Devil: for then he loses his credit and possession,
he knowing that if once he appears as a Devil, as a Devourer, as a Destroyer,
Tormenter, as seeking the death of the soul, as a red Dragon thirsting after
blood; If Jesus Christ once discovers him thus far, there is no staying for him
in that soul, for then out he must; but still this is the Devils method and
his deep design to hide himself, still to appear in a way of Juggling and
Conjuring: as you know the Serpent did to Eve, speaking to this purpose; I come
not but for thy good, I come not to hurt or destroy thee, I come to make thee
more glorious, more happy, and more like unto God, more wise, etc. The Devil
never appears as a destroyer, but as a friend to man: he always governs his
subjects, especially in the Religious part of the world, as an Angel of light,
as hating ungodliness and the ways of sin, 2 Cor. 11.14.
and loving the ways of righteousness and conformity to the external letter
and rule of Christ which these men call GODLINESS; As our Savior told the
Jews, John 8. Ye are of your father the Devil, and his works ye will do:
Believe it, this was very strange and harsh Doctrine to such great and learned,
and eminent Professors and Teachers of Religion: but he not only says but
proves that they are of their Father the Devil, for all their great shows and
external srictnesse: for (says he) there is no truth in him, he was a liar
from the beginning, and the father thereof, and so continues; he does nothing
but lie in all his Religious servants, for they will take up any form of
Religion, and are as conformable as may be, as though they were the true
servants of Christ; but in all this they do but lie and dissemble, and inchant
and delude. And my brethren, is not the Devil as fair in his pretenses now
adays, in taking up forms, duties, conformity, strictness, and following the
mind of Christ? many say they will do nothing, but they will have the rule of
the word for it: and they will undertake to open the Scriptures, and give out
the mind of Christ. These Servants of Satan come not on the account of
profaneness, or ignorance, but professing Knowledge, and Religion, and Learning,
and they are the great searchers into all knowledge, and think themselves not
ignorant of any thing, but obedient in all things: and indeed who more knowing,
or obedient according to the external Letter then they? These are very high and
fair pretenses: yet who were more learned and knowing, and more seemingly
zealous then the Pharisees? whose abilities were still manifested in their
marvailous cunning catching questions to entrap Jesus Christ: these men though
they know not the wisdom and the knowledge of God or Christ, yet they are
notable Apes and Imitatours of them; though they know not the truth, they will
pretend they do, and think verily they do: and they will frame themselves and
their notions as near as man can to understand the Scriptures, by his learning,
wit, and industry: but alas, while they make a show of knowledge, and yet are
ignorant of the Truth and the Mystery: and this is nothing but a lie, and it is
no other but the Language of the Beast: For man's bucket can never reach the
truth and the water of life: and no man in Heaven or Earth was counted worthy
to open this Book, and loose the Seals thereof, but only the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah: Rev. 5.5.
And there is no man knows the Father but the Son, Luk 10.22
and him to whom the son will reveal him.

Beloved, all things in the world are from these two Principles or Roots: they
are either from the wisdom that is from above, which is pure, peaceable,
humble, meek, long-suffering, Jam. 3.17. Verse. 15.
full of good works; or else they are from the wisdom which is from beneath,
which is earthly, sensual, and devilish; It is given to catching, carping,
insnaring, reviling, lying, slandering, etc. Now the wisdom from above, never
teaches men to carp and lie lurking to catch the innocent and guiltless man;
such was and is the wisdom of the Pharisees in all ages; Psalm. 10.9.
they will be very forward to argue, as though they would willingly know all
truth; but they do but argue to catch and ensnare, and when they cannot
understand or comprehend, then they will invent some gin, and forge some lie or
other.

Again, this wisdom from beneath, its very full of judging, Jam. 3.15.
and full of pride, and it magnifies all things of man's inventing and whatever
man magnifies; But do you think any of this is from God, or from the Divine
Wisdom? No no; the property of Divine Wisdom is to become humble, to lay
aside all things of self and flesh, and to become teachable, and nothing in its
own power or wisdom. This is the property of Divine Wisdom in man; but when
man would act, and be Something, and undertake to observe this rule and the
other, and they can undertake (the alone work of the spirit) to lead men into
all truth before Christ comes in by his light, power, and wisdom, Joh. 16.30
and they will be journying before the Lord remove the Cloud; Exodus 40.36. 2
Cor. 11.14,
All this is from the Wisdom of the Serpent in man, who can transform himself
into an Angel of light, and his Ministers into Ministers of righteonsness.

What do these men more then the Pharisees? for they by their own power,
conformed to all outward rules, and indeed unquestionable Ordinances, appointed
by God himself; and how exact were they in performing them? even far beyond
the strictest now adays, of all those things (they say) are Ordinances; and
yet they are not sure they are so; though they cry out The Temple of the Lord,
The Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.4.
and call for the ways of Christ, and the rules and mind of Christ, yet how
sharply does Christ fall upon them, and call them Hypocrites, Mat. 23.27. and
15.14. Joh. 8.44.
and painted Sepulchers, and blind leaders of the blind; nay, and calls them
Devils for all their strictness; ye are of your father the Devil and his works
and his will ye do, in all this that ye pretend to serve God by: For in all
this wherein they seem so holy, and strict, and to surpass and outrun all
other men, it is only the Devil that carries them out in their own power, and
the fruit of it is nothing else but to glory in men and in the flesh. The Jews
they had an outward and worldly sanctuary, 1 Cor. 3.21.
and a formal worship, and this they boasted of, and gloried in; And so it is
now, men have taken up some things equivalent, and like unto these; For now
Satan appears in things that men call ORDINANCES, as outward washings, and in
call this the true baptism and Church Order and Fellowships, and say his is
according to the rule of the Gospel, and partaking of Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, they call this the eating of the Body and drinking of the Blood of
Christ.

Now in nothing does the Devil more delude men then in these things, calling
them the Ordinances of Christ, when indeed they are not. As you see how the
Jews stood upon it and justified themselves, that they were the true seed of
Abraham; when he told them of being made Freemen, and would have convinced them
of their unknown bondage, they answered, We are Abraham's seed, and were never
in bondage to any; Joh. 8.33
and howsayest thou, ye shall be made free? Now indeed there was a kind of
truth in it, that they were the fleshly seed of Abraham, and they had submitted
to Circumcision and to those external iules commanded; and this seemed to be
somewhat, as to outward appeanance, as if they were the true seed of Abraham:
but that was not it: and they had Circumcision, and yet were not Circumcised in
heart; neither were they his true seed.

And so many boast of Ordinances, and Washings, and Baptism, and breaking
bread, and Church-fellowships, and laying on of Hands, and observing the rules
of Christ, and following the pattern of the Apostles, when alas poor souls
they quire mistake the matter: it is true, it is like Baptism, but it is not it: and
they are like the Ordinances of Christ, but they are not such; they would seem
to make and ORDAIN Ministers, and they speak of giving the Holy Ghost: but
alas, I say all these are but resemblances and shadows, they are not the true
Ordinances of Christ: and notwithstanding men's using of these things with so
much appearance of strictness and exactuesse, yet they have them not: For they
are in bondage still, they were never yet delivered, set free indeed, nor never
Baptized with the Baptism of Christ, never yet fetched off their own bottoms,
never taken into Union with Christ: who will undertake to give the Spirit and
the Holy Ghost, and yet never had it themselves: and therefore all those things
that these men use are nothing but shadows, Outsides, Shells and Carcasses of
the true Ordinances of Christ.

You know, many came to John's Baptism, even of the Pharisees, and yet they wre
but a Generation of Vipers: their consciences told them that John was a true
Prophet, Mat. 3.7
and they began to smite them, and they thought it was a duty they were bound
to, that thereby they should prevent the wrath to come, and they presently take
it up as having power of their own to do any thing in Religion, and here they
thought themselves secure, and that they had really prevented the wrath to
come: But the true Baptism, and the true Ordinanes, and the true Worship, are
things of a far higher nature: There is a HEAVENLY Baptism, and a Heavenly
Worship, and an Heavenly Ord inance: I (says John) Baptize with Water, but
there is one that comes after me, Ver. 11, 12.
who is preferred before me; He shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with
fire; I must decrease, but HE must increase: My Baptism is nothing, I must
stand by when he comes; I baptize but unto repentance, but He gives repentance
and the Holy Spirit: The Heavenly things are of a far higher nature: These are
but the pictures and the shadows, the shells and the outsides: the other the
Life and the Power, the Holy Ghost and the Fire it self. Now they that receive
these things, are indeed the Children of the Freewoman, and are the true seed
of Abraham: All other are the Children of the Bondwoman, and are HAGAR who is
in bondage with her Children to this very day.

For as it was with Hagar, so is it now, and has been always, in all ages and
generations: The children of the Bondwoman do always exalt themselves, and
are very saucy and peremptory toward the children of the Freewoman; why?
because they are Circumcised, and submit to Ordinances, and think themselves of
the seed of Abraham: therefore they grow proud, lofty, and censorious, and
usurp too much over the Children of the Freewoman, even as their mother before
the [Hagar] she despised her Mistress and lifted up her self more then was fit
for her: Therefore this is determined concerning her; Cast out the Bondwoman
and her Son: for the Son of the Bondwoman shall not be heir with the Son of
the Freewoman: Gal. 4.25.
When once the Handmaid (who is in the house but by sufferance) will exalt her
self above THE MISTRESS, and her SON born after the flesh begin to persecute
him that is born after the spirit, then away with her, cast out both her and
her Sons too.

And farther, know this that when the appearance of the power of Christ comes
into the soul: that is, when the Bondwoman and her son is cast out, then the
soul does not as some imagine and teach, work out its own liberty, nor is it
made free by its own power, Ibid, 5.1
but Christ brings in this liberty with him, and from this liberty the soul
acts and works. The children of the Freewoman do not work to be set free, but
because they are set free, therefore they work freely, and cannot but so work:
And herein lies a broad difference between the children of the Bondwoman and
the children of the Freewoman: When the sons of the Bondwoman hear of any
thing that man is required to do, presently they think to work themselves to it
by their care, watchfulness, resolution, etc. But now it is quite contrary
with the sons of the Freewoman; they having a Principle of Freedom, act and
work from this: the one worships God from an internal Principle, in the power
of the spirit; the other from an outward compulsory cause, and not from the
power of love. So likewise the one does all his actions out of love to men,
doing good to all men in the world, being willing to serve all out of love;
Pitying all, Counselling all, willing to help all (so far as lies in them.)
Imitating their Heavenly Father, who does good to all, to the good and evil,
just and unjust, Mat. 5.45
and merely from a Heavenly Principle of mercy, pity, and loving kindness,
and bowels of mercy. But the other, His Religion consists in outward forms, in
washings and dippings and conformity to Fellowships; and whatever they do, it
is not from the power of love, or from the nature of their heavenly fater in
them, but from some external cause, from something without them, from fear or
hope; either to prevent some danger, or to procure something which they
conceive in a general notion to be good for them, to make them happy and the
like; because Hell they hear is a terrible place, and full of Horror and
Destruction; and Heaven is a place of peace, joy and rest, and there they shall
live for ever in pleasure, which shall never end; upon these two grounds most
men act, and take up the strictest forms of Worship; and hereupon they may be
very constant, and very zealous and sincere, as they conceive: when alas, all
these things are nothing at all so nor so; for the truth is, Hell they love and
live in, and yet know not that they are in it; and that which is true heaven to
the soul, they hate and run away from, as being the place of misery, death,
and torments to them. Therefore ye may see what a miserable delusion and cursed
veil is generally upon the Hearts of most men, which call themselves Men
fearing God: and that which they call the Worship of God, is no other but
inventions of their own (as they practice them) and WILLWORSHIP: And though
they keep a great deal of stir about Ordinances and breaking of bread: yet
alas, how far they are from the Ordinances of Christ, let the effects of their
practice and lives declare: how little do they feed on Christ as they pretend
to do? He that feeds on Christ, partakes of his nature, and Christ in them
turns the stock into his own Nature, as Peter speaks, Luke 11.28. Ibid. 22.19.
and they hear the word and keep it, and these truly feed on Christ, and do it
in remembrance of him.

But these pretenders to Ordinances and outward duties, they in stead of
feeding on Christ, or being fed by him, they are fed indeed, but by whom? even
by Satan himself: for he makes them live and rest upon these shadows and
pictures, and to have their dependence and life on them, and to make IDOLS of
them: Ps. 106.37. 1 Cor. 10.20, 21.
and in this case says David and the Apostle Paul, They sacrifice unto Devils,
and not unto God; And yet none more precise, none more holy in words, and
gestures, and in their Apish Imitations and carriages then they; none pretend
more justice and carriages then was it not thus with the Pharisees? They made
it a great matter to be outwardly just to men, and stood much upon their
praying, fasting, paying Tithes, not keeping back so much as that of the
smalest consequence, Mint and Cummin; yet, what were they for all this, but
Hypocrites, Dissemblers, painted Sepulchers without, Mat. 23.27.
but full of rottenness and dead men's bones within?

But those that are indeed Saints and Members of the true body of Christ, their
minds are first changed, and they have a new nature, and from this they work,
and worship and do acts of Justice and Mercy. The other (whatever they pretend)
change but the outside, and wash but the outside of the cup and platter, Ibid.
v. 25
but the inside is as foul and loathsome as ever: they can be very strict in
their performances, and carriages, they can make long prayers and seem very
devout, but then they must be thought to be Somebody, and they must be
honored, or else all the fat is in the fire (as the proverb is:) and they must
have the uppermost seats, and grave greetings by the Name of RABBI, RABBI, and
they must be thought to be the only holy men, and are mighty circumspect to
keep their distances with all, but whom they think well of, and hereby they
think to keep up their honor and respect, and they are very conversant in
reading, praying, and expounding the Scriptures (as they themselves understand
them) and this is their Holiness and their Religion, and these things make them
to be feared and honored (as they think) and this makes them bold, and this
strikes an awfulnesse on the spirits of others, and makes them TERRIBLE; alas
poor, ignorant deluded souls! these things may be called holiness and holy
duties, and their many words and long bablings they may be called prayer by
themselves and others who are as blind as themselves, who cannot see their
pride and vainglory and self-confidence, and lifting up themselves: and indeed
men know them not: for says Christ, Luke 11.44. Luke 11: 44
They are as graves which appear not, and men are not aware of them: but as for
those who have the spirit of God in them, and a spirit of discerning in them,
they see plainly that all this is vanity.

They see that all their highest and strictest zeal and performances are a mere
sound of words, without any real life, to be no other but as sounding Brass, 1
Cor. 13.1.
or a tinckling Cymbal which vanishes and comes to nothing; it being no more
but air and emptimesse, having nothing of truth or reallity in it. The
Pharisees long prayer was no prayer at all, but was rejected, when the poor
dejected Publicans saying but a few words was esteemed a prayer and was
accepted, and he went home justified, and not the other.

These Pharisees they are furnished at all times, Luke 18, 13.
they can preach and pray, and do any thing, they are fitted at all times, they
can at any hour command themselves, they can pray either in the Chamber, or in
the Temple, or in the Closet, and keep their set rules and hours. And this is
their Holiness: and all that do not follow their Modes and their Forms, are
loose and profane; and they can judge and censure a brother for a Mote in his
eye, but perceive not a Beam in their own eye. Mat. 7: 3.


These are the men our Lord so much aimd at, Mat. 23.26. and 33,
and had so much to do to uncase and convince; and him they so much hated,
because he had such a slight opinion of them, and of their holiness, and
because he censured them for Hypocrites and blind Pharisees, nay the worst of
all men, yea worse then Whoremongers, Thieves, and Murderers: Nay he calls
them Serpents. But the other who worship God in the spirit, and have their
help, strength, and dependence on the Lord, they see really their own
insufficiency, and they receive all by waiting on God; they cannot speak nor
preach, nor pray but when he does all this in them; they will not be unjust to
men, because they have an inward principle that conforms them to the mind of
Christ; 1 Cor. 29.16. 1 John 5.18.
having a new nature they work all their works from that; being good, they
cannot but do good; but the other, they do good things thinking thereby to make
themselves good, and to procure favor and acceptance; But the sons of God know
that whatever is not acted from the spirit of God working in such, is no other
but from the Devil, and is no other but Witchcraft, Sorcery, Enchantment, etc.
In brief, the one keep a great deal of stir, and are very busy and exact about
outsides, and forms, and times, and places and the like, when as the other see
the vanity and folly of such things, and having a principle of holiness
within, from thence do they act and work.

This they know is the true circumcision, who worship God in the spirit, Phil.
3.3.
and rejoice in Jesus Christ, and have no confidence in the flesh; and doing
any duty from this principle of the new man, or the new creature in them, this
they esteem to be an ORDINANCE, because it is done with life and power, and in
the spirit of Jesus Christ; and they cannot call any thing an Ordinance. but
only this, whatever all the Wizzards, Southsayers, Diviners, Inchanters in the
world say to the contrary.

THE ROOTING up of every Plant not Planted by the Heavenly Father.
Preached at Alhallows Lumbard-street.
Matthew. 15.13, 14. But Jesus answered and said, Every Plant which my Father
has not planted shall, be rooted up. Let them alone: they be blind leaders of
the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.
THese words contain an answer of our Lord unto his Disciples. For they having
heard how the Scribes and Pharisees were much offended at some things he had
preached: they being very strict for the outside and formal part of Religion,
and being generally taken for great Professors, and our Savior knowing their
hearts, knew that though the outside was clean, aimable, and beautiful, yet the
inside was foul, stinking, and loathsome, for all their observances of washings
and fastings, and the like. Hereupon our Savior to undeceive the people
concerning them, calls the multitude together and tells them plainly: wishing
them not to be foold and deluded, but hear and understand: in the eleventh
verse, says he, It is not that which goes into the mouth defiles a man: but
that which comes out of the mouth, that defiles a man. reproached them, and
so much laid them open, and took away their glory, estimation, and high esteem
with the people: hereupon, I say, they became greatly, bitterly, and
maliciously offended with him; and the Disciples hearing, and observing of it,
they being somewhat troubled in themselves, as not seeing so much into them as
he did, they come to him and tell him, Master, know thou that the Pharisees
were offended after they heard this saying? Every plant which my Heavenly
Father has not planted shall be rooted up. As if he should say, it is true,
generally all men take the Scribes and Pharisees, and it may be you your selves
have taken them to be men of great holiness and purity, and to be very strict
in their lives, and indeed they seem to be men of great learning, and to be
very conscientious and zealous Teachers of the Truth; But I would not have you
so deceived; true Religion stands not in outsides, in observing of rites and
cerementes, in washing of cups and platters, and observing outward Ordinances;
But know, these men are no other but Hypocrites and Dissemblers: and well did
Esaiah Prophecy of them, Esa. 29.14
saying, This people draw nigh unto me with their mouths, and honor me with
their lips, but their heart is removed far from me: Therefore though they be
offended at my speech, yet be not you offended; let them alone, they be blind
leaders of the blind: And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into
the ditch.

And for all their great learning, and great shows of zeal, and knowledge in
the Letter, yet Christ saw their inside, how there was nothing but impurity,
blackness and ignorance; And indeed men may have and attain to much
strictness therein, and yet have no saving knowledge of God in the spirit, nor
of the truth as it is in Jesus: Now, says Christ, Let them alone; Ephesians, 4.21.
I know they have a high opinion of themselves, and they would by no means lose
their glory in the esteem of others: but be you not troubled, Let them alone:
they are blind, though they will not see it, and both the leaders and the led
shall both fall together. Now upon this account Christ using such cutting,
cauterizing words, can any wonder that they should be offended? I, and deeply
offended; Hereupon it is, that the Children of the Letter and of the Bondwoman
always hate and persecute the Children of the Mystery and the Freewoman: Gal.
4.29.
As the Children of the New Jerusalem are Heavenly, Divine, and Spiritual, like
their Mother, for they are born of the Second Adam which is the Lord from
Heaven, and they bear the very Image of the Heavenly, And as is the Heavenly,
such are they that are Heavenly: And as is the Earthy, such are they that are
Earthy: 1 Cor. 15.47. etc.
They are still carried out very zealously to outward observations, and carnal
things: And if any shall in the least touch them, in them, they are presently
offended, raging and mad: for ye touch their Absalom, their very lives; The
flesh always lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh:
Gal. 5.17.
for these are directly contrary the one unto the other; these two Principles
are so directly opposite and contrary one to an other, that they can never
agree, but ever were and shall be at enmity, never to be reconciled.

These Pharisees are always very much offended with the neglect ofo small
matters, and of things indifferent, which either the doing or leaving undone is
no sign of sincerity or insincerity: but they can neglect the weighty matters
of the Law themselves, and suffer others to do so, and never be offended. As
here in the second verse of this chapter, the Scribes and Pharisees which were
of Jerusalem, that is, they were the chief Preachers of the Nation, because
they were Preachers at the Chief and Metropolitan City JERUSALEM: Yet these
Great, and Learned, and Sage DIVINES (as they were esteemed) come to Christ:
And what was the great business they had to offer to him? Why do thy Disciples
transgress the tradition of the Elders? Mat. 15.2.
for they wash not their hands when they eat bread: Jesus Christ answers them
very pertinen tly: Why do you transgress the Commandment of God by your
traditions? They were more strict in observing the traditions of their Church
and of Men, then of the Commandments of God, and the weighty matters of the
Law: they were careful in observing washings and constant in outward forms of
worship and times of prayer and the like, but never minded what was in their
hearts; as Evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, Lies,
Malice, Falsewitnesse, Blasphemies; verse 19. These things they neglected and
passed by as small matters; they could hate the truth, and belly the truth, and
persecute the true Professors thereof, even to the death; But they could not
endure any should speak a word against their formal and outward worships; they
could neglect releiving their Father and Mother, love to others, and with them
this was nothing, so they did but bring a small gift to the Temple, and call it
CORBAN, this should excuse them and cut off all other Charity, or whatever
others might be profitted by them.

Now Christ thoroughly discovering their Hypocrisy, in their showing great care
of the outside, and of that which was obvious and apparent to the sight of men,
but they had little or none of their heart and- inside, upon which the Allseeing
eye of God was fixed: therefore he applies to them the words of the Prophet
Esaias and tells them, that they were the men He spoke of, when he said, These
people draw nigh to me with their mouths, Esa. 29.14
and honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me: For these are
not the things God looks at, or regards; and therefore all their worships and
all their washings, and all their prayings, and all their conformity to these
things, were all in vain; and this was no Religion at all, nor was no more
accepted then the offering up of swines blood, or the cutting of a dogs neck:
Esa. 66.3.
and he that sacrificed, as if he were a murderer: and he that offered
incense, as if he blessed an Idol. They were with him no better then Murderers
and Idolaters for all their fine forms: although they were never so curious and
exact about them; neatified, carved, or contrived with never so much wisdom:
yet if they were done merely by the art, wisdom, power, industry of man, and
not by the wisdom, and hand of Jesus Christ in them, all was nothing; and they
were in all their prayers and duties, no other but as sounding Brass, and as
tinkling Cymbal; That which defiles man, is not any thing without him, but that
evil and sin which is within, that PRINCIPLE of darkness, from whence all
evil actions come; this is that our Savior labors to clear and make out; Now
this was such spiritual doctrine, and such soul-seardching teaching, and that
which the Pharisees in no age could ever abide: No sooner come within them, and
turn them insides outward, but presently they are offended; and then, they will
show what is within: the poor blind world thought they were made up of purity
and conformity; but when Christ comes to preach, he discovers, that in their
hearts is nothing but malice, murder, thefts, blasphemies, Mat. 15.18, 19.
hatred of the truth, cruelty to the people of God: and then all this shall
come forth, and be no longer hid by their fine words, and smooth shows and
pretenses, but out it shall come and be discovered.

This is that Serpentive wisdom that lies hid, and lies lurking in the hearts
of all the sons of men, which can never be discovered by all the examinations,
and preachings of men, but only by the son of God, and by his teachings in the
soul: and indeed, HE is that stone that is disalowed indeed of men, refused
and rejected by the Master Builders, Psalm. 118.22. Mat. 21.42 1 Pet. 2.4. 1
Cor. 4.5
but chosen of God and precious: Now this Heavenly Doctrine the Disciples
themselves could not well bear; for they had as well as others a good opinion
of these Eminent men, and they thought this Doctrine was somewhat too harsh to
call them Hypocrites, Dissemblers, rotten Sepulchers, though gloriously painted:
They thought their Master might have been a little more moderate, and they
feared something of bad consequence might follow: for these were the men of the
greatest esteem, and most in favor with the Magistrate: and they for their
parts could expect no other but reproach, hatred, and persecution: these things
much troubled them, they not being sitted to suffer: But now Jesus Christ their
Master, he was delivered from all these slavish fears: he stood not in fear of
man, nor what he could do, but would in despite of all their power and malice,
hold forth the truth and the light, that is might discover the hidden things of
darkness and the bottomless depth of sin and darkness, that was rooted in
man's evil heart, and in them chiefly reigning, who were ignorant of these
things, and yet had high had great opinions of their own holiness and
excellencies.

Hereupon our Lord, to stay and quiet the troubled thoughts of his Disciples,
he makes them this answer we have now read to you, Every plant which my
Heavenly Father has not planted must be rooted up.

One would think this not to be a resolution, or a pertinent answer to clear
his former Doctrine: but he goes on: Not that which goes into the mouth
defiles a man, but that which comes out of the mouth, this defiles a man.
What fitness or congruity is there between these words and his doctrine
formerly urged to be as a proof to justify and maintain it? Truly unto fleshly
wisdom, it seems to be a very impertinent and no wise answer: But if we take
it according to the spirit, and the divine sense, it is very pertinent, fit and
congruous: For, it is as if he should say, Be not careful, take no thought about
them whatever they say, act, or do: they indeed are very strict and careful to
follow and obey all outward rites, ceremonies, and worships, and they glory in
these things and all others applaud; and honor them for the highest and
zealousest worshippers: but for all this, they are no other but Dissemblers and
Hypocrites, being only gildedi over with a form of Piety and Religion: but
within they are no thing but rotten and stinking Sepulchers, which are full of
stench and dead men's bones: Now, be ye not offended though they are mad and
rage against me and my doctrine, and though they incense the whole multitude
against me; yet I am not troubled, 1 Cor. 15.47.
neither would I have you: for this plant which they would make the world
believe is from heaven, it is not so, but it is only of and from man, is from
the earth, from beneath, and this Religion in its true savor savours of the
earth, earthy: For, says he, Every plant which my heavenly Father has not
planted shall be rooted up. But that which is from heaven, and is planted by
the hand of my Father, that shall grow, and root, and flourish: and though to
man it seem poor, and weak and despicable, and men will not own it, yet it
shall flourish, and neither men nor the Gates of Hell, nor all the powers of
Darkness, nor all the subtle wisdom of the flesh shall ever be able to
prevail against it.

Therefore I say, these words are a pertinent answer to establish the troubled
minds of his Disciples, in bidding them forbear and let them alone, and not to
be troubled to see them prosper and flourish in the world, nor to see them rage
and storm: for my Father is Alsufficient, and he is able to manage his own
business, and to maintain his own cause: Ps. 74, 22.
and I know also that they are blind, and they lead the blind, and you shall
see both will fall into the ditch: And therefore do you mind what I say, and
not what they say, for they are Blind: and you by all your talking and
reasoning with them, cannot make them see; you will but trouble your own peace,
and make them more mad: for they are blind and there is a ditch before them,
prepared for Blindness and blind men, wherein they are sure to fall.

So that these three things I would have you to take special notice of, from
these words.

First, that it is the Heavenly fathers own hand that plants every plant that
must grow and prosper.

Secondly, that every plant which is planted by any other hand or power, shall
not prosper but be rooted up.

Thirdly, that those which see not these things so, and cannot leave them to
God, 2 Cor. 7.10.
they bring upon themselves much trouble and unquietness: Worldly trouble and
fretting brings nothing about, but causes death. For the wrath of man
accomplisheth not the righteousness of God. Jam. 1.20.
Though these great blustering Doctors undertake to Teach, and others gladly
and attentively hear them, and they magnify one another, yet be not troubled,
they shall both fall together.

Every plant which the father plants not shall be rooted up: Now if we should
hold only to the Letter and the Grammatical sense, which the men of the Letter
cry out so much for, what an absurdity were here? to call spiritual things, by
the name of A PLANT, and they must be rooted as a Plant, before they can
flourish and grow; but the Scripture is very frequent in this manner of
speaking by Allegories, Metaphors, and Similitudes to set forth to our
apprehension the nature of Divine things; for if we look upon the bare Letter,
what is there in it? But by an Adegory, or figure, there is always something
resembled or shadowed out to us, besides and beyond the Allegory or Metaphor.
Therefore by the Plant here mentioned, is mean the New Creation, or the New Man
created in Jesus Christ: Ephesians. 4, 24.
And there is nothing can thrive or flourish but only this, which is only
planted by God himself: every other plant must be rooted up: this new man is of
God, spiritualized, like himself, of his own nature, and it knows and
understands the things of God; let there be a thousand Religions in the world,
yet only that which the Father has planted, and is from Heaven, that alone
shall stand.

I would, for testimony to this truth, refer you to two or three places of
Scripture to consider of: I will not name nor multiply many; for I will not
weary you with tumbling over the Letter (as the manner of some is) neither is
it of much use, or of any proof, or convincement to any, but those who have the
things themselves made good in them. Take that in John 15.1, 2. Joh. 15.1, 2.
There is the same similitude used as is here: I am the true Vine, and my
Father is the Husbandman. Every branch in me which bears not fruit, he takes
away: and every branch which bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring
forth more fruit. So that this shows that Jesus Christ is the only vine, and
his father only minds and husbands this Vine and every branch in it, for the
root and branches are all but ONE Vine; and the Father, he alone has planted
it, and he dresseth it, and waters it, and prunes it. Jesus Christ in himself
and members, he is the true root of Jesse whom the Lord will establish upon the
Throne for ever: And it is only the root of David that has prevailed, Romans
15.12. and Esa. 11.10.
and no other: All other Vines are as a wild Olive, and bear no fruit in him,
and therefore must be taken away and cut off: for except they abide in him,
they cannot bring forth fruit; Without me you can do nothing. Joh. 15.4, 5.
That which is a wild vine or a wild Olive, it bears no good fruit: therefore
men reject it and root it up as good for nothing but to cast into the fire to
burn: and so does the Heavenly Husband man reject, whatever is wild and not
planted by himself: Out of him all the fruit they bring withers and dies: nay,
they are fruitless, without they be graffed into him, and that they have his
spirit and his divine nature, that they are members of his body, flesh of his
flesh, bone of his bone: Ephesians. 5.30.
So that by this place you may see that the Heavenly Father is the true
Husbandman: and the only true plant is Jesus Christ: and every one which
bears true fruit, they are branches proceeding and growing in and from this
root.

Again, look on that place Romans 6.5. Romans 6.5.
if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be
also in the likeness of his resurrection. So that still the Scripture carries
it along in the person of Christ, and not to own any thing or any fruit brought
forth by any of the sons of men, but as they are rooted and bring forth fruit
in him. He is the choice and tender VINE, which brings forth fruit, acceptable
to the Heavenly Father: He is the tree of life in the City of God, spoken of in
Revel. 21.2. planted by the River: bearing twelve manner of fruits, Rev. 12.2.
and yielding her fruit every month, and the leaves of this tree are for the
healing of the Nations: And HE is the tree spoken of Psalm. 1.3. He shall be
planted by the Rivers of Waters, that brings forth fruit in his due season,
whose leaf shall not wither, Ps. 1, 3.
and whatsoever he does shall prosper. Every believer is a mameber of Jesus
Christ: A plant planted by the Lord in him: and none can possibly cause any
branch in him to wither: all else out of him cannot but wither and dye. Ps.
92.13.14.
So also take notice of that place Psalm. 92.13, 14. The righteous shall
flourish like the Palm Tree, and shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon; Those that
be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the Courts of our God.
They shall bring forth fruit in their old age; they shall be fat and
flourishing. Jesus Christ is also that spiritual house which the Heavenly
Father has builded, not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens: and every
Saint is a Spiritual Stone, in this spiritual house; and these are all
beautiful stones, being placed in this house: These are fruitful Trees being
planted there, and shall bring forth fruit and shall flourish when they are
old, and bring forth fruit to eternity.

One place more shall suffice: that in Jer. 17.7, 8. Blessed is the man that
trusts in the Lord, Jer. 17.7, 8.
and whose hope the Lord is: For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters,
and that spreads out her roots by the River, and shall not see when beat
comes, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not be careful in the year of
drought, neither shall cease from yiedling fruit. These places are sufficient,
I need not farther enlarge; for they give testimony and witness as far as the
Letter can: But what is the Letter to that man who has no Testimony nor
Witness of the truth thereof in his own heart? he can never set his seal to
the truth thereof: and it can do him no good, except it be a word of evidence,
and he has a witness within, it being true in his heart: But the mon of the
Letter, if they hold forth any truth, then they heap up Scriptures (as they
conceive) to prove it, and think they have done such an act; when as if there
be not a convincement and a witness thereof within, the Letter will never
convince men: but when the same thing is written in the heart, then man closes
with it and answers to it: and then the Word is, as David says, sweeter then
the Honey and the Honeycomb, Ps. 19.10.
and more to hbe desired then Gold, yea, then much fine Gold; else it is no other
but a dead Letter: and then is fulfilled that promise of the New Covenant, Jer.
31.33 and Heb. 8.10.
Jer. 31.33. Not according to the Covenant I made with their Fathers, which
Covenant they brake; But, I will put my Law into their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, and they shall no more teach every one his neighbor and
his brother, saying know the Lord for they shall all know me from the least to
the greatest, etc. And thus I hope there are many here find this truth made
good in themselves, and will set to their seal, that all other plants which the
Father has not planted must be rooted up.

And if this be so, Tree that the Father only has planted: And that is only
the Root of Jesse, which Isaiah speaks of, Esa. 11.10.
And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an
Ensign of the people, and to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be
glorious. Which the Apostle applies particularly to Jesus Christ, Romans 15.12.
Romans 15.12. There shall be a root of Jesse, and he shall arise to reign over
the Gentiles, Romans 15.12.
and in him shall the Gentiles trust. Then what wickedness is this in the sons
of men to think that any thing they plant shall stand, or that they have any
holiness, love, purity, goodness, power, wisdom or the like? Esey 64.6
And why are menstruous rags termed graces? For whatever is out of Jesus
Christ, and whatever is not planted in man by the Father, and so rooted in the
Father and in the eternal and ever blessed Being, must be rooted up.

And take that for a second use, and know it for certain; an undeniable truth,
that no other Tree ever did, does, or shall stand but only this; and indeed
this is the Tree of life in the Garden of Eden, Genesis 3.24. Genesis 3.24. Rev. 2.7.
And that spoken of Rev. 2, 7. In the midst of the Paradise of God, and there
is no other Tree grows or increases, or prospers but only He, neither is
there any True fruit, but what grows out of this root; and therefore for men
to say either in word or practice, that there is any other wisdom, any other
fruit, any other power, any other righteousness, is to rob Christ of his
honor, and to give that to man which alone is due to him: No, no, there is no
other plant but He, none loved of the Father but He; he is the choice and
chosen Olive, whose fruit is only accepted, and our actions only as they are
his actions: if we be in him, we then are branches in this Tree, and so the
root bears us and not we it, as most men assert in their practice, that they
must do, and they must work, and they must conform themselves to Christ;
what is all this but they to bear the root and not the root them? and they to
bring forth Christ, and not Christ them. And therefore men should be more
cautious and understand and mind what they say and do: When they say I will do
this, and I can, and I must perform this and that duty; Alas poor creature,
what can thou do? and who is it that bears thee? can thou bring forth God
and Jesus Christ and the Spirit? or rather does not he bear and bring forth
thee? have thou any thing of thine own but evil? hest thou any fruit unto
holiness? Romans 6.22.
any flower or blossom that can be accepted, which is not received from this
Tree and from this root? why then do thou so much look upon thy self and
talk of thy self? and why do thou boast and glory as if it were thine own,
and thou had not received it?

In this thou dishonourest thy head Christ; 1 Cor. 11.4.
for he that can do any thing, either pray, or preach, or prophecy, or do any
thing in the Church of God with his head covered, he dishonors Christ who is
the head who ought to have the sole glory of all good, or all grace, of all
power, wisdom, righteousness: Ibid. v. 5.
But let the woman be covered; all weakness and sin be laid upon man: but let
the husband have all the glory, all the praise: for the Spouse of Christ has
no riches but in his riches, nor no righteousness but in his righteousness;
nor no glory but in his glory: And therefore in all your sayings, actings,
speakings, carriages, expositions, exhortations, see that ye never dishonor
your Husband: Psalm. 29.2. and 96.8.
give him the glory due to his name, and take shame and confusion of face to
your selves; do not so much as once think that man can do or act, or believe,
or repent, or work, or do any thing of this nature, for ye belie him, and
dishonor, and blaspheme your husband: what do you in all this but forstake the
Tree of life, which is healing to the Nations, Rev. 22.2.
and turn to the Tree of knowledge of good and evil which is so strictly
forbidden to all the sons of men as much as to Adam? from whence they
continually eat Death and Damnation: And they can do no otherwise, while they
forsake their Father and Husband, and run a whoring after their own inventions.
Psalm. 106.39.


Beloved, what a do is there in the world everywhere, about man's doing and man's
working, and he must strive and he must improve grace? he must cherish this
plant, and do something that he may be accepted, and he must watch, and he must
water, and he must Lop and Prune this Bough and the other Branch, and by his
power and wisdom and watchfulness he must cut off this sin and the other
evil; And this is the great Religion of the world in all Ages; And alas, what
does he all this while? by doing of these things in his own name and by his own
wisdom and power, he does but undo himself: for what else can he do but
bring misery and sin, and darkness upon himself, and plunge himself deeper
in the pit? For, when man is bid to do any thing, repent, or believe, or watch,
or pray, Phil. 2.12. 1 Pet. 1.10.
or to work out his salvation with fear or trembling, and make his calling and
election sure; what do you think it was ever meant that he should do these of
himself, or do them out of Christ? No, no, there was never any such thing
intended by the holy Ghost.

But say they, man has received a power and a Talent from Jesus Christ. And of
this he must take care and use it, employ it to his Masters use. I answer it is
false, nothing out of hrist nor done, apart from him, but all in him; and his
works if right, it is Christ does them in him and not he; yet how ordinary is it
with men to put man to do, and why is not he so and so? And men are so
senseless that they are not sensible that man is dead in trespasses and sins;
though they acknowledge it in words, yet in truth they deny it, and declare
that they know not what they say: For, Ephesians. 2.1.
can any other thing raise the dead, but only the voice of the son of God?
Though Jesus Christ has said, That every plant that the heavenly Father has
not planted shall be rooted up; John 5.28
yet for all this (say they) man must be doing and planting; and he cannot wait
the Lords time; and this is the reason why men have so little experience of the
true work of God, because they are running and acting, and working before it be
given them to work or act; For they will not believe but they can do something
without Christ, although he has said expressly to the contrary.

But know, (let men say what they will) there are but two Roots in the whole
Earth, either God or Belial, Christ or Antichrist; Mat. 12.33
and therefore ye must either make the Tree good and his fruit good, or else
the Tree evil and his fruit evil. Now, is man nothing but death, sin,
darkness, and misery, want, emptiness? and yet will ye have him to live, and
arise, and walk, and do the works of God? what a most senseless ignorant thing
is this? does not the blind (in this) lead the blind? do not these men declare
that they are utterly blind in experience as to the things of God? I tell you,
and know it for an undeniable truth that when a Christian is spoken so to do or
act,
it is not to him as being in the old man, but as in the new; And when any
thing is required of any other, it is only to show him his weakness and
inability, and how infinitely short he comes of that he should do. But
therefore know, if any one shall call upon a dead man to live, and a blind man
to see, Psalm. 114.1.
or express any thing to this purpose, this language is no other but a strange
language which the house of Jacob must be brought out from: Psalm. 114.1. and
this is the Language of the Beast and the false Prophet, and to speak in the
work and root of darkness, Revel. 19.20.
and in which these men are: who would make more roots of good then one; and
make man to be somethings and to have a power and a wisdom to himself apart
from Christ; and yet this is frequent Doctrine even of those you call your
Orthodox men, nothing more common with them; And forsooth, many of these men
would not be thought to side with or own Arminius or Socinus by no means; but
the truth is, though in word they may renounce them, yet in their practice they
receive and embrace them, and they run hand in hand together, and Justify that
in all their practices which themselves deny in words: But if these men had any
true or real experience of themselves or of the ways of GOd (as they pretend)
they would never speak and teach, as they do, In not holding the head, to the
dishonor of Christ, who is the head of all things; As the Apostle speaks in
that 2 Col. 19. etc. Not holding the head, from which all the body by joints
and bands, Col. 2.19. etc.
having nourishment ministered and knit together, increases with the increase
of God: wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world,
why as though living in the world are ye subject to Ordinances? as touch not,
taste not, handle not, and such like, which are all to perish with the using,
after the Commandments and doctrines of men; which things have a show of
holiness in will worship and humility and neglecting of the body, not in any
honor to the satisfying of the flesh.

Beloved, know, if we be in him, then we see we are but sprigs and branches in
that Tree of life Jesus Christ: Rev. 27.
if we look on our selves any otherwise, we are deluded, nor it will never be
well nor otherwise with us, till we see and know experimentally, That we bear
not the root, but the root us; And therefore men should be very tender and
cautious, how they speak in the dishonor of Christ THE HEAD: do the branches
bear the root, or the root the branches? have thou any flower, any blossom,
any fruit, any grace (in thy account) which is not from this Tree? it must all
be cut off and wither, and be burnt up: And if they all grow out of him and
from him, why do thou not ascribe all the power and glory to him alone? why
do thou look upon thy self as any thing, or as better then another? if thou
have received it, 1 Cor. 4.7
why boastest thou as if thou had not received it: and so take away the
glory from him, and give it unto man? Oh let men be ashamed thus to profess
Christ in words, and dishonor him in practice, to let him wear a Crown of
Thorns, and they wear a Crown of Gold: for them to be seen to be Somebody, and
Christ as good as nothing: and therefore all their sayings and exhortations,
and counsels, and pressing of natural men to grow and bear fruit, and walk
holily and the like, they all proceed from ignorance of themselves and of the
work of Christ: and indeed it is no less then Blasphemy against the power,
wisdom, honor, Omnipotency, and Allsufficiency of Jesus Christ. It Is no other
but denying the Tree of Life, and living on the Tree of knowledge of Good and
Evil. Genesis 3.


All the Saints of God they have but one root, one life, one light, one
language, as growing up and out of that one root: they have no light, no life,
no power, no wisdom, no growing, no watering but in this One root; In thy
Temple every one speaks of thy glory: Ps. 29.9.
they have nothing to say in praise of any other. When men cry out Thou must
do, and thou must be holy, and thou must be watchful, and thou must grow, and
thou must walk exactly, and thou must keep close to God: Oh Beloved! this
sounds not like the Language of Saints; this sounds harsh in their ears; for
they cannot endure to have their HEAD dishonored. But when they hear that
Jesus Christ is all light, all life, all power, all glory: and man is nothing
but sin, emptiness, death, darkness, misery, these are the songs, and these
are the voices, and the melody in the Temple: This they know is the voice of
Christ and of their Beloved, Cant. 2.14. 1 Cor. 15.22. Phil. 4.13.
and to these songs their Hearts can ECHO and answer: Oh how pleasant is the
voice of my Beloved! they know that in Adam they all dye, but in Christ they
are all made alive, and in him they can do all things: They see Christ to be
the Master, the Teacher, the Fahter, the DOCTOR; and that he is such a Teacher
as not only teaches the ear, but the heart; That He not only cammands, but he
gives Wisdom and Understanding, and Acts 5.31. Phil. 3.3.
Repentance, and Love and Hope, and Joy, etc. he sees he has no sap, no
nourishment, but as he abides in the root; the truth is, they have no
confidence at all in the flesh, because it is weak, and crooked, and dark, and
nothing at all of good in it; But he sees Christ alone is his root, Jer. 2.13.
his life, his sap, his bread, his fountain of living waters: and if men knew
Christ aright, there would be no mention of any good in man; they would have
none to praise, none to boast of, none to talk of, none to represent as good,
and holy, or excellent but Christ alone: And thus ye shall find it was with
David frequently expressed; and so it is with all the Saints: 1 Samuel 2.2. and 2 Samuel 22.2, 3.32. and Ps. 18.31:36 Ps. 31.2, 3, etc. 2 Timothy 6.15.
He alone is their strong Rock, and their Fortress, and their Deliverer; He is
their Song, and their Praise, and their Salvation; and no god, nor rock like
theirs. He is their King of Kings, and Lords of Lords; He is with them above
all Principalities and Powers; He is their Head, King, the blessed and ONLY
POTENTATE, and exalted alone be thou the rock of my Salvation; do we read that
ever the Saints had any other Hymns, or any other Songs?

Father let us Hence take notice, If Jesus Christ is the only Tree planted by
the Father, then there is no other Tree of the Fathers planting but only HE; He
is the true Tree and the whole tree: there is not one Heavenly or Spiritual
branch, or a sprig, but what is of Him: it is most certain there is no other tree
of life, no other chosen OLIVE to stand up for ever before the God of the whole
EARTH, Romans 11.17
of whose root and fatness all the Saints partake. But truly Beloved, he that
will bear out this Testimony fully and freely, Oh! let him be sure he must
prophecy in Sackcloth: Rev. 11.3. etc.
the Religious World could never endure these Preachers, nor these great
Eternal Witnesses; they have been hated and persecuted in all ages by this
Beast, which ascends out of the Bottomless pit; For the world cannot but hate
the life of Christ, even then when they Crown him, and array him in a purple
robe, Mat. 27.29. Mark 11.10.
and when they seem most to honor him, and cry Hayle King of the Jews, HOSANNA
to the Son of David, then they are nearest to crucify him.

But know, as this Doctrine discovers Christ to be the only tree, so it also
discovers the Hand that has planted it, and that hand will root it and
establish it: Deu. 32.4. Esa. 28.16. 2 Timothy 2.19. Psalm. 110.4. Rev. 13.8.
He has laid the foundation thereof in Sion, and his work is perfect: His work
is like himself, perfect, infinite, everlasting, and stands sure (whatever
men say) He alone shall be established on Mount Sion: He has sworn he shall be
a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck: and he alone is the Lamb
slain from the beginning: when a man's eyes are opened, then all the whole
Scripture, and the whole Earth, and the whole Creation give Testimony to this
One Tree of the Fathers planting, and there is no salvation in any other: Acts.
4.12.
there was never any other in whom the Father was well pleased. Mat. 3.17:
The world talk of obeying Laws and keeping the Condition on man's part; but
there is no Law, nor no Condition but himself; and if he be the Law and the
Condition in us, then we are in Union with him, and there is no other way of
acceptance: Christ is he alone that remains and is established. He stands and
grows up to Eternity, and all his members in him; Mat. 15.18 18. 1 Pet. 1.25. 2
Pet. 3.10.
Heaven and earth shall pass away but [the WORD] This great word of the Lord
indureth for ever; And all the Elements shall consume and melt with fervent
heat, as the Apostle speaks: the earth also and all the works that are therein
shall be burnt up; And he shall be the only plant, and the only tree: When the
New Heavens, and the New Earth shall appear, then nothing shall hide this tree,
nothing shall ALTER it, nothing shall darken the glory thereof from the Sons of
God. Then this will be the DAY of the exaltation of Jesus Christ, and this is
the day of the Revelation of the Sons of God. Romans 8.18 Heb. 13.8.
Christ in himself is yesterday and to day, and the same for ever: but when
this day comes, he shall be so to all the Saints; this is the day of which the
Apostle speaks, Romans Romans 8.18. etc.
8.18. Romans 8.18 etc.
etc. When the glory of God shall be revealed in us, and this is the day when
the Creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God; when man is delivered from the bondage of
corruption, then is the Creature also. They shall not serve the sinful and
corrupt will of man (as now they do) but remain in that free state, in which
they were at first created, and they shall yield their service freely.

If men be not grafted into this true Olive, they are no other but Castawayes;
if they be upon any other root, they are miserable and undone; if the
happiness of a Christian lay in himself, in his own Power, Wisdom, Will,
Endeavors, Alas where were he? and what would become of him? man is a Dead,
Esaias 40.6 1 Pet. 1.24
Frail, Deceitful thing; he changes like Grass, he stands to day, to morrow
he is cut down and withers: but the work of the Almighty, that shall stand
fast, and shall abide for ever; for in him is the root of all power, wisdom,
life, goodness: Oh that men would but hold to this, as they hold it forth in
words and notions! in words they confess it, but in the power and practice
thereof, deny it.

Again, this is most certain, as Christ is the only root and the only Tree,
planted by the Father, so it is as certain that every Believer is planted in
him: and he has no root, no life but in him, he is a mystical member of this
Tree, as he is planted in him. And so far, and upon no other account, he
partakes of the power and virtue and the riches and privileges in Christ: even
of the very same nature, sap and fruit that is in the whole Tree; by this alone
he comes to partake of all; when Christ is in us, and we in him become the hope
of glory, Col. 1.27.
then we partake of his nature, of his fellowship, of his Communion, of his
life, glory, riches; Then there is also that true Communion of Saints which men
so much talk of, and know so little. Life you know is only in union, when we
come to that, that the root bears us, and not we the root; for so it is with
most professors in the world: they altogether bear the root, they think they
must work, and do, and act, and prune, and water, and cherish, and plant, and
pull up, and maintain their spiritual life and communion, and hereby they make
themselves the root, and so upon that account they bear the root and not the
root them; And hence we may know and it is no wonder though they are accursed
and bear no fruit to God but leaves, which must be cut down and cast into the
fire, and shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power; and what greater curse then this? Mat. 21.19 Luke 13.9


But a poor Saint he really sees that he lives in the root, and that he has
all his wisdom, knowledge, teaching, power, to act, to suffer, to live, to
move, to do any thing externally or internally, it is all from his union, and
all he has is from the wisdom, strength, grace, goodness, and gift of
Christ and from his shinings forth in them, and not in any thing or of
themselves. And, he growing on a good root, cannot but bring forth good fruit.
And a child of God may say as John expresses it, He sins not, neither can
he sin, 1 John 3.9
for he is borne of God. For he is a branch in this root which sins not, and
a branch in him cannot sin, for he is partaker of the Divine nature and the
Divine and heavenly sap, from which can spring nothing but Good fruits; and he
is Holy in the holiness of Christ, and rich in the riches of Christ, and wise
in the wisdom of Christ, etc. And he knows that whatever he is out of Christ,
or as he is in Adam, all must dye and be condemned and perish, Genesis 3.14.
and be made no other but meat for the Serpent.

Let the world consider then, what will become of them and their works when
they talk so much of my holiness, my duties, my parts, my learning, my
Religion, my working: It must all be condemned, destroyed, burnt up: You know
what Paul says; I labored more abundantly then they all, 1 Cor. 15.10.
but by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace which was bestowed upon
me was not in vain; yet not I (says he) but the grace of God which was with
me. And again, Romans 11.36.
of him and by him, and to him and through him are all things, to whom be glory
for ever.

This is one property of a true Saint, when he speaks of himself, of any
grace, of any goodness, meekness, charity, love, of any good in him, he is
very tender not to reflect upon himself as Holy, or as if men should think him
holy or wise, or meek: no, says he, this is none of mine, it is the grace of
God that is with me: so that this man he has no sap, no life, no goodness in
himself; but he lives by receiving, and when it is received he dares not think
it his own; for he has all his sap in Christ, and receives it every minute
from him: he does not look on himself as having a stock or gifts or a Talent
in his own hands, given out from Christ as most men take it, but he lives upon
the fountain, as the stream upon the spring, and as the branch on the root, if
the spring stop, or the root give not forth, the one ceases, the other withers
and dies; thus does a Christian suck virtue from Christ every moment, and of
this he has such real experience, that all the world shall never persuade him
otherwise, and he cannot endure to hear how the world will talk of their
wisdom, their carfulness, their endeavors, their holiness, and the like,
nothing more harsh to him: This is no other to him: Esaias 25.5.
but the noise of hell, and the noise of strangers, and the noise of the
bottomless pit: but he is well pleased to be among them that throw down their
crowns before the Lamb, Rev. 4.10.
that are always singing and saying, He alone is worthy to receive honor,
Psalm. 18.
and glory, and power, and dominion; He is our rock, our fortress, our
deliverer; He alone is become our salvation. These are his joy, these are his
songs in the night; no melody to this divine melody.

From whence also, this further discovers the inconsistency of the glory of any
creature, and that which is in Jesus Christ: these two cannot stand together;
if all be Christ's, then there is none at all to be given to any creature; Baals
Prophets in this case are many, which cry out for man's power, and man's
righteousness, and man's endeavors; but the Prophets of the Lord are very few:
but be sure the Lord in due time will appear, and the fire of the Lord will
try every man's work of what sort it is; 1 Cor. 3.13
The fire of the Altar will come down and declare the true worshippers;
whether those that cry up the power and righteousness of man, or those that
establish only the glory, power, wisdom, and virtue of the son of God; And
though Baals Priests be many, and they take much pains to establish man's
righteousness, and cut and lance themselves for madness; yet I say, 1 Kings
18 38 etc.
the fire of the Lord shall declare it, That the Lord alone, he is God, he is
God; and that fire of the Lord will burn up all things that are of man, the
wood, and the stones, and the dust, and will dry and lick up all the water in
the Trench, all man's power, gifts, parts, humane learning, and whatever man
has set price upon, and he shall be left bare and naked, and empty, and
miserable. And all the Priests of Baal in that day shall be ashamed of their
confidences and of their Idols wherein they trusted, and which they have so
decked up, to make the world believe they are the true worshippers; when as
they have done nothing else but set up their own inventions and the works of
their own hands; all savouring of flesh, and of man and humane things, and
nothing at all of Jesus Christ really, but merely in words and in names, and in
notions.

Has man any faith, or repentance, or hope, or love, or the like, springing in
himself, because they call so much upon man, to be up and be doing? or can
humane learning, wit, parts, or any thing in man work or procure this?
certainly no; if it could, where is the honor of Christ, who is both the will
and the deed, and the same God who works all in all? Phil. 2.13. 1 Cor. 12.6
Ibid. chapter 1.19, 20.
And where is the Truth of those Scriptures? I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and bring to naught the understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise?
where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this world? And again, He takes the crafty in their
own craftiness: Job 5.13. 1 Cor. 3.19
And he has hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto
Babes, and many such places. Then the wisdom of man, and the power and glory
of man, and the power and glory of God cannot stand together, there, is no
possibillity of subsistency: but so far, as man is something, or any thing, so
far God is debased, and made nothing. And these men do nothing in all their
Preaching and declaring but make a hotch-potch, and sowing a new piece into and
old garment, and so making the rent worse; Mat. 9.16.
though it be done never so curiously, with never so much Art, and drawn in, as
if it were of the same pieces; whosoever he be that brings in any thing of man,
as having a power, or being a cause of any good in man, that makes any thing
wise but Christ, any thing fair but him, any thing beautiful but him, the same
is no other but a Thief and a Robber, John 10.1
A wizzard and a Southsayer, and inticeth to Idolatry, and says, Let us go
serve other gods, Deu. 13.6
even the gods of the Nations that are round about us: for, this is held forth
by those Scriptures; when we withdraw our hearts from the Lord, and set up any
thing in his stead, we go a whoring and serve other gods, Hos. 1.2.
although we have never so fair and fine pretenses and excuses; For when we
exalt any thing in man, or give any thing to man, we at the same time pull down
something in Jesus Christ, and take away something which is due to him; and
there is always a magnifying thereof, and a resting in it and trusting to it,
whatever men say to the contrary: But, Oh blessed is that soul that puts his
trust only in the Lord; if any think he has any power, or that Christ has
given any sufficiency to man out of himself, and he having grace given him, he
is to work, and does not see that he lives and depends solely on him, and that
he thinks he can be upheld one moment without the fountain, or without drawing
and sucking sap from the root, they are merely deluded, and live out of the
Vine, and are cut off from the root that should feed and nourish them: Romans
11.17.
and every such branch is dead and fit for nothing but wrath and fire. Oh it is
a sad case for men to think to live upon their own stock, thinking thus, Christ
he is in heaven, and I have cast Anchor there, and he has given me a stock and
a Talent, and now I must bestir me, and show my self a good husband and a wise
man; I must now improve these graces, and these habits, and get something
together that I may live and depend upon hereafter; and if I do so, I shall
grow a rich and thriving Christian, and find rest for my soul. I confess most
men are led out this way, and they are hard at work, for they are working for
life, and to prevent death: but the sadness, and the blindness, and the
blackness of these men's condition is exceedingly to be lamented: For herein
they shall never find, nor enter into the Lords Rest.

And so for many others, they take much delight in reasoning, and talking, and
discoursing about Religion, and may be heap together many fine, high, and
curious notions, and hence they suck sap and life for a time: but alas this
fruit, it all withers and comes to nothing: For there was never any rest,
peace, or satisfaction in any thing below Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 3.18 Mat. 19.14.
And therefore there is no way for these men but to lose all, and sell all, and
to become poor; And for these wise men to become fools, and to become as
Innocents and children, and little in their own sight, and to lose their very
lives for Christ, which all their life time they have been a providing for;
scraping, and patching, and piecing up together something to live upon another
day; Oh! how hardly do such men lose all, sell all? for in their own esteem
they are very rich, and must needs go away heavy and sorrowful: Beloved, this
selling all, and esteeming and making Jesus Christ the only riches, Mat. 13.46
the only Pearl, is such a thing as man cannot abide to hear it named, to
lose all the opinion of their own goodness, to think basely of themselves, and
to be content to let others who had them in high esteem think so of them; And
to come to rejoice in this, to be nothing for Christ; And in him to lose his
Religion, his wisdom, his righteousness, Jud. 16.7.
and to become as weak as another man, and to be glad that Christ has done
this for him; this is to make Christ All in All. And this is to rejoice in his
infirmities and in distresses for Christ's sake, though Christ never called thee
to outward afflictions; for when thou art weakest then art thou strongest; And
his strength is made perfect in weakness. 2 Cor. 12.9, 10.


But when men think, that holiness consists in their own working, and doing
and observing rules, and coming under outward fellowships, and in dipping in a
little cold water, or breaking and eating a little bit of bread, and herein
think they have done some great matter; alas, what poor, empty, dry
Christians for the most part are these? keeping such a stir about exactness to
the shadow and pattern, and never once know the truth, never yet tasted how
sweet Christ is, nor eaten of the HIDDEN Manna, or the bread of God, or of the
living water: eat or drank of Christ's Body and Blood, John 6.51
being meat indeed, and drink indeed, which was given for the life of the
world: And yet these men think they have done so well, and they have brought
forth much fruit, and think to receive a great reward, and mean to knock boldly
at Heaven Gate; and who must enter and enjoy the Kingdom but they? Now for
these men to be deluded, and to be served as the five foolish virgins were,
Mat. 25.12
and to have the Gate shut before they come, thinking they had oil, when they
had none; and good works and good fruit, and then it shall be said unto them,
Luke 13.27.
Depart from me, I know you not, ye are workers of iniquity: Truly, this will
be a sad sentence: what will become then of all their confidence? of all their
Religion? Oh happy had it been for them had they hearkened sooner, and sold all
sooner! But no man could ever make them believe but they had true holiness,
and true wisdom: and now it is laid open in the sight of Men and Angels. And
they can receive no other (for they have kindled a fire, and compassed
themselves about with sparks, and have walked in the light of their fire, and
in the sparks that they have kindled, Esaias 50.11.
yet it is but their own sparks, and the fire of their own kindling) and
therefore, This ye shall receive at my hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.

Then thou will wish thou had given ear to the counsel of the Lord, and to
have learned what this meant, Their strength is to fit still; but this they
could not endure to hear of, Ibid. 30.7 15.
and he was a false and a lying Prophet that told them so; no: they would up
and be doing, and they would seek out and stir up their strength, and go out
valiantly, and go down to Egypt to seek help and make themselves strong, and
this was the way to overcome and to live at rest. But as sure as the Lord
lives, before whom I stand, This is not the way; but the way is for man to be
stripped, 2 Cor. 5.4
made naked, that he may be clothed upon: to deny a man's self and his own life
too, or else he cannot be my Disciple: if thou were but poor enough, and empty
enough, then Christ would fill thee, and make thee rich; but the thing is, thou
art too rich, too full, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and
know not (for all thy strong conceits) that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: And therefore I counsel thee, Rev.
3.17.
says the Lord there, to buy of me Gold tried in the fire, that thou may be
made rich; and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of
thy nakedness do not appear: and anoint thine eyes with eye salve that thou
see. If thou be once really convinced, and not in words only, that thou have
nothing, nor can do nothing, then thou will be willing to hearken to any
that will tell thee how thou shall be made rich, and strong, Phil. 4.13.
and able to do all things, and that is alone by living in the fountain, and
sucking sap from the root, Jesus Christ; by holding the head by which all the
body by joints and bands, Col. 2.19.
having nourishment ministered and knit together increases with the increase of
God.

THE ROOTING up of every Plant not Planted by the Heavenly Father.
Preached at Alhallows Lumbard-street. SERMON. II.
Matthew. 15.13, 14. But Jesus answered and said, Every Plant which my Heavenly
Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. Let them alone: they be blind
leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch.
FRom hence (as God was pleased to go forth with us) we have showed these
several things. First, That there is no plant can stand, or grow or thrive but
what Jesus Christ himself has planted. Secondly, That the plant which he
plants is but ONE, which is only himself: All but himself shall be rooted
up; for himself is that plant which the Father has chosen, planted, and
rooted: and himself says, I am the true Vine: and every plant bearing fruit
in him shall be rooted, Joh. 15.1, 2. Rev. 22.2.
and established, and bring forth more fruit. And this Vine is but ONE, and the
leaves thereof are appointed for the healing of the Nations, and there is no
other. Thirdly, we showed how it is the Lord alone who plants it, and not man:
All the inventions, wisdom, and industry of men can do nothing at all, either
in choosing or planting of the choice Vine: neither can they cause it to grow or
increase in the least, but God the Father is alone the Husbandman: He it is
that plants it, waters it, tends it, nourishes and cherishes it; and the
Wisdom, Care, Power, Providence of man has no hand at all therein. Fourthly,
We have showed That every Believer has no farther an interest in Jesus Christ,
or in the Kingdom of Heaven, and in the Riches and privileges thereof, but as
they are ingraffed into this Vine and in this Root, neither can they bring
forth any fruit but that which is cursed and abominable.

Then if it be so, as most certainly it is, that there is no other plant
accepted of the Father; and that Christ alone is the true Vine, and every
branch must be ingraffed into him, and they can have no nourishment any other
way, nor in no other root; and that all that are in him are his Body and
members of him, Ephesians. 5.30.
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh: I say, if this be truth, and truth
undeniable, then let us hold to this for truth, in practice as well as in
words, and not bring in the devices of the dark and ignorant sons of men; that
man may choose this plant by the power of himself, and by his own wisdom, and
he may plant Jesus Christ in himself, and cleave unto him: or at least (say
others) if he be once given (in their conceit) then man must do his part, to
water, and cherish and nourish this plant: and what He judges to be a wild
branch, or a dead joint, he may prune and cut it off, when as the Heavenly
Father has undertaken that work himself, and blind Man shall not undertake his
work, and go about to prevent his power and wisdom and Allsufficiency in
carrying on and nursing up this plant.

And let us consider seriously of this, who it is thaat undertakes this high
and Heavenly work: certainly it is the Lord, it is the the Lord that chooses it,
and plants and ingraffs it: Alas the best of the sons of men with all their
wisdom, power and parts, Mat. 21.20
are no better then wild Olives, nay they are all that Fig Tree to which Christ
came and could find nothing but leaves, and therefore cursed it, and no fruit
ever did, nor never shall grow on that root. Man is also that Earth that the
Lord has cursed, which of it self can bring forth nothing but briars and
thorns, and is rejected, Genesis 3.18. Heb. 6.8.
and fit for nothing but to be burned: And let not flesh and blood be offended
in holding forth these things; for the earth and all the earthliness thereof
shall be burnt up, for all its best works are no better, and fit for nothing
but the fire of hell.

And consider further if it be so, that the Heavenly Father has taken this
work upon himself, and quite excluded all other power, wisdom, help; then what
has any of the sons of men to do to undertake to prune, to judge, to censure,
to cut off? certainly it must not, nor cannot be done by any other hand but by
his who ingraffs; The same hand that ingraffs, and plants must only pluck up:
For, is poor ignorant man fit be to judge in this case? If it should be left to
man, he would pull up the Wheat with the Tares; nay, such is his ignorance and
depravedness, that he would take Wheat for Tares, and Tares for Wheat; and
indeed this has been the misery of all ages, men thinking themselves able to
judge of truth, and the things of God, what is truth, and what is error,
although himself was never yet purged, nor never freed from his own
defilements; vain, silly, and yet proud man, who cannot give a reason in the
ordinary things of nature, nor give a reason of any color, as why the grass is
green, or why the crow is black, or the like, which is within his own sphere
and compass, and yet so proud, conceited, and presumptuous is he, that he will
undertake to Judge of Heavenly things, and to sift out error from truth, and
root up, and plant, and do what he pleases.

But let vain man from this point know, he meddles where he has nothing to do:
all men are alone in the hands of the Father; he alone is Judge of quick and
dead; In his hands alone are the issues of life and death; Acts 10.42 Ps.
68.20. Joh. 6.44.
And no man can come to him except the Father himself draw him, and yet men
will be drawing and DRIVING to Jesus Christ: and they think to beget men, and
they like well to be called Doctors, and Masters, and Fathers: and yet the
spirit expressly sai:h: Of his own will begat be us with the word of truth, Jam.
1.18.
that we should be a kind of first fruits of his Creatures. There is no power,
wisdom, strength, rules, examples, or precepts can do it, but only the will
and power of God. And he says again, By one spirit are we all baptized into
one body: 1 Cor. 12.13.
has one man then any more power then another? can it be this man's learning, or
the other man's wisdom, or another man's elquence, or power of words, or
persuasions: Oh let no man think so: far be such thoughts from any that
profess to exalt Jesus Christ: for what can be more doshonour to him? and yet
how do the general course of the World, and all pretenders to Religion run this
way? though they say in words, Christ is All, and man can do nothing, and he is
dead: yet they in all their practices, and persuasions, and exhortations hold
forth, that they verily believe the power of man, and that he is but half dead,
and may raise himself, and uphold himself, and choose this plant Jesus Christ,
and ingraff it, and nourish it, and dig and hedge about it, and cause it to
bring forth more fruit, which is alone the work of the Father. Or at least
wise, if they give so much to God as to say he must give grace, yet this they
affirm, that man must nurse it, and water it, and cherish it, and maintain it:
else he may lose it quite say some: and others, to his own apprehension, sight
and feeling: And what is all this but to say, himself he is the Dresser and he
is the Pruner, and Purger, and Rectifier of all things amiss, He is the True
Husbandman.

But the Scripture holds forth otherwise, that these things are done only by
the hand of God, and that instruments are nothing: it is only the sword of the
spirit can cut off; and the word of God that is quick and powerful, and
sharper then a two-edged sword: Heb. 4.12.
and that can divide between the soul and the spirit, the joints and the
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. There is
nothing else plants, nothing else cuts off from the root, but only this spirit
which is as the wind, and blows where it lists; and man has nothing to do;
Joh. 3.8.
I say, the Creature has nothing to do, but to wait and expect when the Angel
will move the Waters. This is the Circumcision which is done without Hands:
Joh. 5.8. Romans 2.28 29.
And he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, made by Men, or any power of or in
man: but he is a Jew which is one inwardly: and circumcision is that of the
Heart, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.

And this work the Lord does, manageth, and carries on by his own strength,
and by his owu power; he is not at all beholding to man's wisdom or care: but
what is done in man, or by man, it is not he that does it, but Christ in them;
his work is not done by any outward and external means, but by a secret,
invisible, and spiritual power: He is that secret invisible sap that
communicates virtue and nourishment to every part and member, through the whole
body: so that man's power, wisdom, and care is not used at all, but only as an
instrument or subject in which, and by which it works; and therefore man has
nothing at all to speak of, or boast in; And one man is not more holy then
another, or improves more, because he has more wisdom, diligence, endeavor or
the like; in the work of God all things tending in the least to lift up man,
are to be cut of, but the spirit works where and when it lists, and man by
all his care, Joh. 3.8.
cannot fetch in the spirit but when it self pleases: so that no flesh may
boast or glory in his presence, nor one man lift up himself above another: For,
we are alone his workmanship, 1 Cor. 1.29. Ephesians. 2.10. 1 Cor. 1.30, 31.
created unto good works; And we are of him in Jesus Christ, who of God is made
unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

Therefore from hence let us make this conclusion, and seal to it, (not in our
words and judgments only) but in our hearts, in our practices, that we may
say, these are the very things that we have heard, and seen with our eyes, and
we have looked upon, and which our hands have handled of the word of life; 1 John 1.1.
for there is nothing more usual then to consent to truth, in the Notion
thereof, and in the Doctrinal part; but when they come to the Practical and
Applicatory, then they declare plainly that they have no experience of the
things, and of the work of God in themselves, but they make man a Worker an
Agent, Heb. 12.2.
and a finisher of Faith. Some confess that God he begins and lays the
foundation, but man must carry it on and do his part: else all is nothing: what
an high indignity is this to the grace and power of God? And hence it is that
men glory and pride themselves so much in their own doing, and are so forward
to censure and judge other men: wen alas, man has done nothing at all in this
spiritual planting and watering, but only taken up a conceit of his own doing,
acting and working, and priding himself in a mere empty fancy, without any
real doing at all.

For be sure this is that great work which Christ alone has undertaken, Heb.
2.10. Esa. 42.8. Joh. 3.8.
To bring many sons unto Glory: and in this He will never give his glory unto
another: He will be free, and his wind shall blow when he lists, and work
when he pleases: And for man to say that there must be any other power, or any
other means in the whole earth, is to rob God of his glory, and to give it to
another: But the practice of all the Saints is, I do not say in words only,
but in their practice, they ascribe all to God only. How violent was Paul
against the Truth and the Professors thereof? and yet he had attained to be a
forward and an exact Pharisee: far more strict then any we shall find in our
days: And how zealous was he (as he thought) for the Truth? Act. 26.11 Act.
9.1, 2.
exceedingly zealous against errors (in his way) and yet it was no other but
madness against the truth, and persecuting both men and women that were of
that way, that he might bring them bound to Jerusalem, dragging them out of
every City, and breathing out threatenings and slaughter, and compelled them to
blaspheme. Who now do you think turned Paul about, and of a Saul made him Paul?
was there any other hand did this but the good hand of the Heavenly Husbandman,
who of a Devil made him a Saint? No no; he clearly saw he opposed salvation
fought against it: and he had only a Notion of Salvation and Happiness in his
mind: but really to desire Salvation, he neither did, nor Knew not what
salvation was; Gal. 1.16. 1 Timothy 1.13.
but it pleased the Father to reveal his Son and Salvation in me, and to
receive me to mercy, because I did it ignorantly, and through unbelief. It was
alone his good pleasure to cut me off from the wild Olive and to plant me into
the true Olive.

And as the Apostle says, so say I, Such were some of you, but ye are washed,
1 Cor. 6.11.
but ye are sanctified and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God: There is not one natural man in the whole world that can
desire salvation, but under a false notion, as he thinks it will bring peace,
and rest, honor, and glory, and happiness; but salvation indeed, all men who
are not possessed of it, oppose it, fight against it, and should it be revealed
to them, in the true nature thereof, they would persecute it, and breath out
slaughters against the Professors of it. Then certainly no man loves Salvation,
nor no man seeks after it, nor can use any means to attain it, as men
ignorantly affirm and believe: For can a man love his own death? can any man
love crucifying and hate his own life? I tell ye nay; but he must be changed,
new molded and be leavened with a new leaven, that he may be a new lump. And
therefore when men talk of such things, 1 Cor. 5.7
they know not what they say, That man must do, and man must act, and man must
use the means and the like: it declares to me they were never yet met in the
way going to Damascus; they were never yet un-horst and laid flat to the earth:
Oh Beloved! this work of Salvation it is a mavelous work, for the Lord to
reveal his Son in man: Gal. 1 16.
the world knows nothing of it, but they have some notions of Heaven without
them, and of a Christ without them, and Religion is now made an easy and a
common thing; almost every one is Religious, Religion is the fashion of the
Age, and its a shame to be otherwise, and they think this is enough: But to
make Christ in us the hope of Glory, this is none of man's work, but it is the
Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes: For Christ to dye for us when we
were sinners and enemies to salvation, Col. 1.27. Psalm. 118.23. Romans 5.8.10.
and for him then to dye for us and to reconcile us by his death, this the
world knows little of.

I appeal to every renewed soul here, whence is it, that any of you are come to
be Christians, and of men and women of a Devilish nature, to be made partakers
of the Divine Nature? of a Bryar, and a Thorn, and a Bramble, 2 pet. 1.4.
which was fit for nothing but the fire and burning, to become a Heavenly
plant, and a branch in the true Vine Jesus Christ? How came this about? was it
ever your own work, or your own seeking? nay, did you not fight against this
work and oppose it? he that finds it not so, never yet was partaker of it: He
never yet could say, Unto me a Child was born, and a Son given, whose name is
called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, and the
Prince of peace: except he have found in himself (as the Lord says there in
Isaiah 9.5.6.) Esa. 9.5, 6.
Every battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in
blood; this must be with burning, and fuel of fire. This As that precious
instrument in the hand of the Lord, Dr. Everard expounds that place in his
Sermons, called, Gospel Treasure opened, page 61. etc.
always goes before that Christ is given to any of the sons of men.

Beloved, do but examine your own hearts, and you shall find it was thus, and
it must be thus: was ever the strong man bound, and cast out of his house and
possession without resisting? will man lose his life and suffer all his riches
and goods to be taken away, and never strive nor oppose? And was this work ever
done by a still-work and using of Ordinances, and joining here and there, and
man never disturbed? but that out of his natural and dead condition, he has
dreamed and slept himself into a new nature, and into the condition of a
Christian: No, my brethren; conversion is an otherguesse thing then most men
hold forth.

And if men see but a want in themselves, and then resolve that they must seek
after a Heaven to fill up this want, and to that end run to this duty and
the other fellowship, and think he must be constant in the use of Ordinances: and
if he do but believe in an external Christ, then the work is done, and the
Kingdom of Heaven is theirs, Alas, all this is but the way of man, and by all
this they do but make a Proselyte; and those that teach thus, they do but sew
pillows under all arm-holes, and cry peace, peace, when there is no peace, but
have made themselves Aprons, Ezekiel. 13: 18.
and bless themselves in an unsound condition, and heal the wound of the
daughter of my people slightly: Woe to these [Women] says the Prophet there,
for this is nothing but [Weakness:] nay, herein they have made them two-sold
more the Children of Hell then before. Mat. 23.15. Col. 3.1.
If men are risen with Christ, let them show me how they were crucified, dead,
and buried with him: if they are come to Canaan, let them show me how the alone
Mighty and Outstretched hand of the Lord has brought them out of Egypt, and
how they came through the Sea, and through the Wilderness; Indeed I confess
these people they talk of signs and marks of the people of God; Mat. 12 38 etc.
but to them there shall be no sign given but that of the Prophet Jonah; as he
was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so must the Son of man be
buried in the heart of the Earth: Go ye and learn what this means.

Art thou cut off from thy old root, from the wild Olive? have thou felt this
burning? have thou lost thy own life? art thou buried with Christ? have thou
been three days in the heart of the earth, and in the Whales belly? have thou
had in thee the battle of the Warriors and the confused noise, Esa. 9.5.
and the garments rolled in blood? have thou seen the massacre of thy own life,
and the burning, and the spoil, and the fuel of fire in thee? Then this shall
be a sign to thee, that to thee the Child is born, and the Son given: And thou
have then seen him to be the Mighty God, the great Counselor, the Wonderful,
and the Prince of peace. Beloved, you may talk what ye will of this mark, and
the other sign; for, says Christ, Ver. 6.
Indeed the men of this Generation seek after signs: but let them never once
name and other sign, till they find this sign in them. Have ye found this
cutting off from your selves, and this planting by the Lord alone? Never tell
me of Ordinances, nor of Washings, nor of Breaking bread, nor of any of your
rules or forms; mind you only this sign, this mark, before ever ye look for
any other, of being risen with Christ and the like. He that knows not these
things in himself, knows nothing; Christ comes not to send peace before he has
sent the sword. Mat. 10.34.


What Is now all your doings, all your dippings, washings, baptisms, if ye have
not this Baptism? all the other can never make the doers thereof, nor the
comers thereunto perfect: Heb. 9.9. and 10.1.
And till this be, all your baptisms and worships are but from men and not from
Heaven, and all your Ordinances are but the Ordinances of men: neither do you
know what an Ordinance of Christ is; for all these are but shadows: your
Sabbaths, your new moons, all things of this nature; for the body is Christ:
Col. 2.17.
If Christ himself will make use of these, then indeed they are HIS
Ordinances, and there is life and power in them; but as men use them, they are
empty, cold, dead, and they change not the comers thereunto at all; for they
are alive still, and their spirit is yet whole in them, and they have no change
wrought in them from the men of the World; for they are as much in love with
honor and credit and all the things of the world as any other men; Mat. 7.20.
Col. 3.1.
by their fruits ye may know them: and yet they profess to be risen with
Christ, and to seek those things that are above: why? because they mistake
things that are above: But because they go to Church, and hear, and pray, and
fast, and conform to John's Baptism, therefore they conclude, they mind the
things of God, and seek after them. Beloved, to be risen with Christ, is
another manner of thing, and it must be done by another manner of power then
these men ever felt: Even the very same Almighty power, that raised up Jesus
from the dead: else they do but delude themselves. This work is done by no
other but by his own eternal spirit: And men need not seek to any other help or
means but him, as thinking they can do themselves any good.

But here now comes in the common Objection, at which all men (having not the
work wrought in themselves) stumble and fall; does all, and he must give a new
heart, Ezekiel. 11.19.
and take out the stony heart, and give an heart of flesh; Thus far they will
join in with you; But must not man do his part and use the means, that it may
be effected?

This indeed has been, in themselves, they dream of man's doing, acting, and
working, and he must put himself upon this duty, and that; when as I told you
before, no man seeks for Heaven as this Heaven: and how then can he use the
means for it, when he never once desires the true Kingdom of Heaven, but
hates it, opposes it, runs from it, uses all his inventions and weapons
offensive, and defensive to keep it out, and desires the Lord to depart from
him, Job 21.14. Mat. 8.34
for be desires not the knowledge of his ways: and with the Gergesens rather
then they will part with their swinishness and that mire wherein they wallow,
they will meet Christ and desire him not to come near them, but to depart out
of their coasts? so well do all men out of Christ love him and seek after him,
or use means to come to him.

But to answer more particularly, I do not,
nor never did deny the use of the means in the hand of the Father; for the
means do nothing, but the Fathers hand only; And God never intended a carnal
means should effect a spiritual work: He is a spirit, and those that worship
him, John 4.24
must worship him in spirit and truth. The weapons of our warfare, are not
carnal, but spiritual; And they are mighty in the hand of God, 2 Cor. 10, 4.
John 3.6.
not in the hand of man; not in our selves but in him. That which is borne of
the flesh is flesh, but that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. And what
is it that men make out about this Objection but this, that men must do, and
men must strive, and men must watch? it is true, what means soever God pleases
to use shall prevail: but if use by man, it does nothing at all; can a
spiritual thing come out of a carnal? can a clean thing come out of an
unclean? And therefore it is clear to me and to all the people of God, and to
their experience, That the Lord makes no use of man's power, or strength, or
wisdom, or watchfulness, or industry: but what is done in man, Genesis 1.3.
it is purely the hand and power of the Lord. If HE say the word, Let there be
light in such a soul, it is done; if he say to the Lepers, Luke 5.12 and 17.17.
Mark 7.34 and v. 14. and Chap. 5.24.
be ye clean, it is done: If he say to the ears, EPHPHATHA, be ye opened, And,
young man I say unto thee Arise, And to the sick, Arise, take up thy bed and
walk, then the work is done; But men not knowing the work and power of God,
they are always Harping on this string, on man's power, acting, working,
striving, and the like.

I, but they object further; I, external means, as Preaching, and hearing, and
reading the Scripture and the like? Answ. Although he do, power of God be in
it? The Lord is pleased, in this Book of the Bible, to speak out the things
belonging to the Kingdom of Heaven, and he is pleased to stoop so low to us,
to represent by external things, those things that are high, and spiritual, and
saving; but alas, they are all MYSTERIES, and they cannot be known but in the
light of God, and not in the light of man, but as God is pleased to make them
out in man; else no man knows what they mean in their own nature; And no man
does teaeh, nor no man can learn, but only by that great Master, Father, and
Doctor. 1 Cor. 3.7 2 Cor. 4.7
Neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God which
gives the increase: And though it be brought in earthen Vessels, yet it is only
the power of God effects it: And if the carnal man open them, or handle, or
expound them, though he be never so learned, yet they do but play the mad men
with the sword of the spirit, and know not how to use it; but cut down that
which God has planted, and plant that which God would have rooted up; And they
help not at all in divine things.

For Gods time to work and speak is when all things in man as to his own
workings are still and quiet, and when there is the deepest silence: it is the
spirit only that can make the sword of the Lord to cut, to kill or make alive.
And he that acts or thinks otherwise, it is in him no other but Blasphemy
against the most high God to say any other power can do it, either in the
Magistrate or Minister; for it is He that has said it, Rev. 21.5.
Behold, I make all things new: And it is Christ alone who is set and appointed
of the Father for the fall and rising again of many in Israel. Luke 2.34
And it is true, there is also a great stir in the world among these men about
three persons in the Trinity; and he that will not own them according to their
understanding, presently they are Socinians and Atheists, and I know not what,
when as they themselves know not what they say, 1 Timothy 1.7
nor where of they affirm, for they themselves deny the Holy Ghost and his
operation, and have not so much as once heard in themselves that there is a
holy Ghost which works all the things of God in the sons of men: But the Lord
has denounced a severe and solemn curse upon all these practices, Jer. 17.5.
Cursed is the man that trusts in man, Jer. 17.5.
and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord: And what
do these men do else but withdraw their hearts from the Lord, and put their
trust in man and in the arm of flesh? what is this but to set up Idols in his
heart?

But all the Saints, they bear out their witness against this Idolatry; for
they find that never any of their endeavors, parts, or any means they could
use, has brought them off from themselves and their own bottomes, nor could
cut them off from that wild Olive, Romans 11.17 Mat. 12.29
and overcome the strong man in them and spoil his goods, but that one spirit
alone: And if no other power can do it, then certainly all other power must
fall and must be rooted up. Therefore this shows the intolerable pride and the
unexpressible danger of those men who will take upon them the office of the
three Persons. How many Church gatherings are there now in these days? And
they will undertake to plant, and gather, and refuse, and take, and pick, and
choose, as they judge, and as they think good, and they think they know the
members of Christ and the Members of Satan; And if they say such a one is a
Believer, then their Judgment must pass, though they are dangerous and most
abominable Hypocrites, who have only washed the outside of the cup and of the
platter, Luke 11.39. Mat. 23.27.
and are only painted Sepulchers, but within are stinking and loathsome, being
full of pride, vainglory, envyings, covetousness, and Idolatry, etc.

My friends, judge ye if these men do not take too much upon them: but this
truth shall and must stand against the gates of hell, Ibid. 16.18
That every plant which the heavenly Father has not planted must be rooted up:
For there is nothing in the whole Earth can make any one a member of Christ but
the spirit of the Father, which is the holy Ghost. 1 cor. 3.21 22, 23.
And therefore Let no man rejoice in men; Let no man exalt, extol, or ever
speak one word in praise of man; for all things are yours, whether Paul or
Apollos, or Life or Death, or Cephas, or the World, or things present, or
things to come, all are yours, and shall all serve you: but they are nothing at
all, but ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. And when ye say, I am of such a
man's Church, 1 Cor. 1.12
and I am of such a fellowship, and I am a member here and there: Are ye not
carnal and walk as men? 1 Cor. 3.3.
is Christ divided, or was Paul crucified for you? Is there any other Bond? or
any other membership but in the body of Christ did any of the Apostles to
Prophets, or any that ever had experience of the work of grace and of being
brought home to the great and true shepherd, speak of any other knot, of any
other Head, but that Christ alone in that head, Col. 2.19.
from which all the body by joints and hands having nourishment ministered and
knit together increases with the increase of God? All other Temples or
Fellowships, are no better then that material Temple; of which Christ speaks;
Although men have beautified it, and adorned it, and carved it, even to the
admiration of the beholders, yet Christ is not affected therewith, Luke 21.6
but threatens, as glorious as it is, yet The time is coming there shall not
be left a stone upon a stone which shall not be thrown down.

I but Sir, mean to speak thus freely, and so harshly against the Churches of
Christ, and the Saints and people of God? such a thought from my heart, I would
not do it fo a world. But this I say, if they were the people of God, Ephesians. 3.15
and of that family of whom the whole family in Heaven and Earth is named, then
they would not keep such a stir about an outward gathering, and an external
membership: But they would own the Church of Christ which is spiiritual and
mystical, for such is the body of Christ, It is univerfal and not locked up in
this way or that form: but here they pitch their love, and all others they
behold afar off, who are not squred to their Church way; And they would own no
teaching but the teaching of the spirit: They would look upon man but as a
mere empty pipe, having no worth, no excellency, no goodness at all in him;
but while man is so much admired, and cried up, in vain do they tell me of
their Saint-ship, or of being the people of God: And therefore for my part,
while men Idolize shadows and neglect the truth and the substance, and seek
not Christ HIMSELF, but content themselves with Christ literally, I must say
with the Apostle: Hencefrth oknow we no man after the flesh, no, although we
had known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more. 2 Cor.
5.16.


Were the Apostle here among us, and should bring such dctrine, it would seem
very strange to tell us, That all our fleshly and external apprehensions of
Christ must pass away; And if he himself must not be regarded in that kind; (
For the comforter cannot come except he go away: John 16.7 Ibid. 6.63
And the flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit that gives life, or
quickneth:) Then much more call your shadows, forms, Ordinances, washings,
breaking bread; For, while you rest in these and esteem of these, Christ in the
spirit, or the comforter cannot come; Therefore it is expedient for you that I
go away as to all these things: else, I cannot send the comforter, who shall
lead you into all truth.

I, but this doctrine overthrowes the power both of the Magistracy and
Ministry; only men to propagate the Gospel: I answer, command you to go to
Caesar, or to the Ministers to propagate his Gospel? He bids you only, Mar. 12.17
Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, viz: to yield them Civil
obedience, and pay them tribute and afford them your help, for carrying on of
the public charge, for the preservation of the Nation; but it was far from his
thoughts to make the Magistrate a Judge in spiritual things; How uncertain a
way were this? And how often are ignorant and blind men sat up, who know
nothing in divine things? And indeed, where shall we find men fit to Judge, or
fitly qualified for that business? If it were so, Christ had laid a ground for
the setting up the greatest persecution that ever the Sun saw; For the
Magistrate, and too commonly also the Ministers call evil good, and good evil,
Esaias 5.20
light darkness and darkness light: And for the Ministers, when did Christ
ever or his Apostles send you to them? but he says, The Harvest is great and
the laborers few, Luke 10.2
pray ye the Lord of the Harvest that HE would send forth faithful laborers
into the Harvest; Is man able to Judge, who are fit to be laborers to work in
the Lords Harvest? If he be blind, as most certainly he is, he is only fit to
lead the blind. Indeed it is true in all ages, the Harvest is great and the
Laborers few; How few are there of those that pretend to be Ministers, and
Laborers, and Pastors, and Gatherers of the Lords Sheaves in his Harvest, that
do so much as know truly the Lords errand, but bring things taken up on trust,
and borrow here, and there, Jer. 23.21
and yet say, Thus says the Lord, when he has not sent them nor spoken to
them; but bring forth the dreams and visions of their own heart, so leading
people on with mere fancies and dreams, that they are Christians, and they are
brought into the Sheepfold, when it is neither so nor so.

And again; what strange contradicting doctrine do these men bring? to say
Christ does all, and we cannot do the spirits work without the strength of the
spirit, and without this we are in Bonds and cannot stir one foot, and he
accepts no service but what comes from himself and much to this purpose; And
yet by and by man must improve grace, and he must nourish this plant and
cherish it, and he must preserve the seed of God in him, that it may not dye.
And he must repent and believe and perform the conditions required on his part
to do, and apply the promises, and the like; does not all this clearly show,
they understand not what they say nor whereof they affirm? 1 Timothy 1.7
Is not this to affirm and deny the same thing, both at once? If this be not
to begin at the wrong end, I know not what is; but this is the course of the
world, to put men upon getting and doing; Whereas the way of God is to strip
man of all his power, to reduce him to his own nothingnesse, to work the work
himself; And he that has found God in him acting and doing, he sees it was
none of his work; but while men set man thus upon his own doing, man comes to
be lifted up in his own sight, and he glories in himself and in his own power,
and he thinks himself a forward Christian, and he is some body, and he is a
wise man in his own conceit: And those that do not as he does, they are
ignorant, wicked, and profane; but a true Christian he finds no power, no
deliverance, no planting, but by the band of the Father, and he lives on that
sap and nourishment which he receives from the root, Jesus Christ. And though
he act or live, Gal. 2.20. Esaias 26.12
yet it is not he, but Christ lives in him, and works all his works for him;
And he finds and knows if he attempts to do any thing in his own name or
power, or thinks that he must do this, or he can do that, That he in that,
takes the crown from off the head of Jesus Christ, and crowns himself
therewith; Then which to a true Christian nothing is more hateful: and he
knows in experience, That every plant the Heavenly Father has not planted,
must be rooted up: And as the Prophet Isai. says 41.29. Behold they are all
vainity, Esaias 41.29
their works are nothing, and their molten Images are wind and confusion.

THE SAINTS Perfect Freedom. OR, Liberty in CHRIST asserted, In opposition to
all Yokes of Bondage. By Mr. Jo. WEBSTER.
Preached at Alhallows Lumbard-street.
GALAT. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
THe Apostle, Beloved, that he might establish the hearts of the Galathians
upon that foundation which is Eternal, unalterable, and unmovable, he uses in
this Epistle many arguments to confirm their faith, and among many other
arguments in the latter end of the fourth Chapter, he speaks there of the roots
or the two seeds that are in all the sons of men; And the one are the children
and offspring of the bondwoman, being always in bondage as Hagar was with her
children, and are not to inherit the blessing, but to be cast forth; and in
the MYSTERY this is that outward Jerusalem, wherein the Jew so much boasted,
viz. of his forms and outward worships, and because they were the outward and
carnal seed of Abraham, and were circumcised and the like: all which was
nothing; for all those things did typifie and hold forth the true seed, and the
children of the Free woman, and the seed of the promise; for these also are
like their mother which bore them, even that Jerusalem which is above, which is
free, and is the mother of us all; that is, of all the children of the promise:
and though this mother, be a long time barren and bears no children, yet she
shall bring forth; then it shall be said of her as it is written, Rejoye thou
barren that bear not, and cry thou that travellest not; for the desolate
has many more children then she that has an busband. Now we brethren (says
he) as Isaac was, are the children of the promise; But as then he that was
borne after the flesh, persecuted, him that was borne after the spirit; even so
it is now. Nevertheless says the Scripture, Cast out the Bondwoman and her
son, for the son of the Bondwoman shall not be Heir with the son of the
Freewoman: And then he concludes in the last verse, So then Brethren, we are
not children of the Bondwoman but of the Free. We, that is, those who believe
are not now tied unto Ceremonies nor live in the form and shadow of the
Heavenly things, or in bondage to external and worldly rudiments resting in
them, Romans 2.28 29.
as the outward Jew did; for he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is
that circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart and of the spirit, and not that
of the Letter: And this kind of doctrine, the Jew and he that Idolizeth his
outward forms, could not endure, but as then, so now, this divine teaching and
the Teachers thereof could never be endured, but have been persecuted in all
ages, and most of all by these who have pretended most strictly to worship God
according to the rule of his word; these ever had and ever will have a
contrariety thereunto; the children of the Bondwoman are always at enmity,
and have a continual hatred against the children of the Freewoman. And these
are Hagar, as the Apostle there says in verse 25. Gal. 4.25.
For this Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now
is, and is in bondage with her children: if men go no farther, but here stick
in shadows and forms and the outward worship of that at Jerusalem, (though
it be never so glittering and glorious) yet all this is but mount Sinai and
gendreth to Bondage; But says our Savior, John 4.21
The hour comes and now is, that enither in Jerusalem nor in this m^untaine
shall men worship the Father, but the true worshippers shall worship him in
spirit and truth. These two mountains always stand in opposition one to
another, because the one is to bring men into Bondage, and the other is still
laboring to set men free. The one kind of worshippers are altogether busied
and exercised and are very zealous for worldly Ordinances and external
worships, duties, and forms, an conclude that those who submit and take them
up zealously and constantly, are the true worshippers, and exclude all other:
Now the other worshippers, who worship the Father in spirit and truth they see
and bear witness against these outward forms (as rested in) as generally all
the other worshippers do, whatever they say; and their great Zeal for them is,
because they derive, suck, and draw life from the exercise of them; But the
other know there is no power, no life, no excellency in them, neither could
they any longer live or depend upon them, but they see that their life, power,
righteousness, freedom, is in those things which are from heaven, heavenly;
in the spirit, 1 Cor. 15.48.
not in the letter; they receive their nourishment and influence from the
Heavenly Jerusalem, not from the outward and external, not from carnal
Ordinances (as the Apostle calls them) but they suck the breast of the true
mother, whose milk is spirit and life; And here they live, and here they feast,
and here they dwell, and have not their life nor content, nor their abode with
the Bondwoman which in them is cast out with her children: for she can never
inherit the blessing, nor the life, nor the power, nor the liberty, but is with
all her children always in Bondage. And the Apostle appeals to all Believers,
their own experience, Gal. 3.2.
Did ye ever receive the promise by the works of the Law? that is, by whatever
man (as man) could do, with all his learning, power, strivings, acquirings,
etc. but only by the hearing of Fath?

So that you may see from thesr and many other arguments, the Apostles draws
this exhortation by way of conclusion in the verse now read: Stand fast
therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not
entangled again with the yoke of Bondage. Some of the Galathians had seen and
felt this true liberty, which he had cleared out to them, and they had lived in
it and enjoyed it. But some false Apostles crept in after his departure, and
told them they must still hold the forms of the Law, Heb. 9.10.
and they must be circumcized and observe outward and carnal Ordinances; Now
the Apostle very earnestly presses them to stand fast in their liberty
received, and not to suffer themselves to be entangled with those yoakes of
bondage; for Christ is their liberty, and Christ alone is their life, and their
freedom, their peace, their joy, their salvation; and herein to stand against
all those who would set up any thing with him; and upon that account the
Apostle calls them carnal Ordinances though appointed by the Lord himself: And
it is a wonder the men of the Letter which stand so much for outward forms, do
not cry out BLASPHEMY and HERESY. All those other things being included in
naming Circumcision, because that was the most high, absolute, and
unquestionable Ordinance ordained by God himself to Abraham, and which none
could remove or abolish but the Son himself, the Heir himself; who being
come to Age, must inherit, and take possession of his own, of his Inheritance,
Kingdom, and Glory; And shall any servant resist and keep out THE LORD, Heb.
1.12. Matthew. 3.3
The Heir of all things, and all these things say, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, for whom all things were made and created; and all other excellencies and
glories whatsoever are but to Usher in this great and mighty King; and shall
any Harbinger or servant say he will not, or he must not remove, or be so
impudent to say that the inheritance is his? No, says the Apostle, I testify
to every man, and I Paul say unto you, if ye be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing; and ye are under the Law, Gal. 5.3, 4
and under bondage, and he is a debtor to do the whole Law, and Christ is
become of none offect, and ye are fallen from grace.

This is that which so much moved the Apostle, that they being once set free
had tasted of the liberty which came by Jesus Christ, that they should be
again entangled with the yoke of bondage; That they who had received the new
teaching, and Christ to be the Teacher, should now hearken to false teachers:
Ibid. 3.3.
and having begun in the spirit should once think to be made perfect by the
flesh, as if Christ were not enough, but they must join with him the
corruption, and rudiments of men, their rules, and their forms, and their
precepts, these and these things they must do if they will be perfect, and so
join man with Christ, and so make Christ and his Cross of no effect; Nay the
Apostle, he did so magnify, and set up, and adore Jesus Christ, and esteemed
him so full, so rich, so large, so all in all, that he not only abhorred the
rudiments and the inventions of men but the Ordinances and the very law of God
as kept by men, to come in competition with Jesus Christ: for never any man
observed the the law, in the least tittle; It was only Jesuch Christ, and them
in whom he is conceived and borne, and in whom he works: For verily the law
was not given to tell man what he should do, to get peace and life, but to
condemn him to disable him, to slay him, to convince him that he is miserable,
and weak, and cursed; And therefore in vain did those false Apostles, or any
other in any generation put men upon doing this or that by way of condition, to
enable man to act or do any thing on his part by his own power, to please God:
But every true believer is a man lost and destroyed in himself: and he is
borne anew of this Divine seed, and he is settled not on himself by his own
doings, 1 Samuel 2.2
but on the Rock of Ages; And he harknes to this spiritual counsel given here
by the Apostle, To stand fast in this liberty (whatever men say) And will not
suffer himself to be bewitched by the plausible techings of men, tickling the
flesh with acting and doing that by themselves which shall bring peace, but
which tends to no other end but to keep men in bondage, and to hold them under
the old Jerusalem, because that is very pleasing to man; for there are many
glorious forms and worships, and man showing out himself to be something,
which things please the outward man and the flesh; and this is that man
esteems highly of, and much prides himself in; And indeed, all this is
nothing but to seek life in death, and for the living to seek to the dead, Esa
8.19.
as the Prophet speaks; all tends to death, to bondage, and to remain under
the Curse; But that which the Apostle here holds forth is the truth, the the
power, the life, the inheritance, the resurrection, the glory; and shows that
there is no other power, life, glory, inheritance, peace, rest, but only here;
there is no other spirit, no other Baptism, no other breaking of bread; he
alone is The true bread which came down from heaven, John 6, 51
and he alone can give it, And he alone is the means, the only Ordinance by
which we receive it; he is the way, and he is the do^re: this bread is given
down from heaven, as Christ shows at large in John 6.31. etc. He gave them
bread from Heaven to eat, Moses himself could not give them that bread; Your
Fathers have eaten Manna and are dead: Verse. 49.
That bread which Moses gave could not keep them from death, but for all they
eat of that bread which came down from the elementary Heaven, yet they are
dead; But my Father gives you the true bread from Heaven, for the bread of God
is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the world; I Am the
bread of life, V. 57, 58.
and he that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me
shall never thirst.

So that you see, The Apostle here sets the opposition between the
intanglements of men and the yoke of Bondage, against the pure, free, and full
liberty by Jesus Christ, whatever it be but this liberty given us by Jesus
Christ, that gives the least joy, the least peace, the least rest to the soul
of man, but purely Jesus Christ, he is entangled in the yoke of bondage; for,
the liberty of Christ consists not in any thing below himself in any Ordinances
(as men call them) in any duty, in any form, in any mode whatsoever, but only
in himself; all things else are too low, too poor, too mean, too base to stand
in the room of Christ, they cannot give the true bread, but only Jesus himself,
who is The Bread. There are but two principles from which all men work, either
from Christ or Antichrist, either from the bondwoman or the free woman: Jam.
3.15.
either from the wisdom that is above, which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy
te be entreated, full of mercy and good works, without partiality, without
hypocrisy: Or else, it is from the wisdom which is from beneath, which is
earthly, sensual and divelish, which is full of envying, strife, and confusion,
and every evil work.

And though this wisdom of the world will undertake to show us Christ, and the
true bread, and they cry Lo here, and lo there, he is in our way, says
every several separation: But, if they say he is in the wilderness, or he is in
the secret chambers, go not after them; Mat. 24.26.
for the Kingdom of Christ comes not with observation: who ever shall say he
is in this outward form, or in that way of washing, or breaking bread, believe
them not, go not after them; for know, Luke 17.20
The Kingdom of God is within you. All men that think to be helped by cleaving
to this Church, or that Fellowship, and are still going out of themselves to
find Christ, they are deceived; but if any man direct you to find Christ
anywhere but within, in his own heart, he is deceived; all these ways are
ensnarements and delusions, if men think to be helped by any thing in heaven or
earth, but only by the pure, perfect, and alsufficient righteousness of Jesus
Christ, which is only manifested in thy heart by his own spirit: for if thou
think that Jesus Christ External in the flesh, as dying at Jerusalem, will
help thee, thou art utterly deceived; it is Christ Only who is begotten within
thee; all other ways of men's devising, are mere lies, delusions, and
ensnarements.

In the words (for order sake only) take notice of these four things: 1. That
the state of a believing soul is a state of liberty. 2. That believers are
only made partakers of this liberty by Jesus Christ. 3. That the safety of
standing is only in abiding in this liberty and freedom. 4. That when any man
goes out from this liberty and freedom by Jesus Christ to any thing else
whatsoever, he goes out to be ensnared and entangled, and it cannot be
otherwise.

For the two first, it is clear, that there is a state of freedom and liberty
belonging to the people of God: and that Christ only is their deliverer; He who
is delivered by Jesus Christ, he only has true freedom, and he is the true
free man; all other, however they talk of freedom, and boast of freedom, if
Christ do not set them free, they are still bondmen, they are still in snares,
and locked fast in their fetters: for, who else can deliver and set free the
soul of man, but he that is Lord of all, Rev. 1.18.
and is subject to none? He alone has the keys of Hell and death; he alone is
the souls Captain and deliverer; This is that which all the Saints have
experience of, when they find themselves delivered from the bondage of flesh,
of self, of the world; if they feel this work done within them, they know
experimentally it is the very finger and power of Christ, and that he is only
Christ's free man; that none has brought it to pass, to set them at liberty, to
knock off their chains, and lead them out of prison, and set their feet upon a
rock, but only the Almighty power and mere mercy of the Lord Jesus; they know
that it has been he that has opened their eyes and their ears, Psalm. 40.2.
that has raised them from death, and given them feet to walk; and there is
none know this truly, but only those that feel it done in themselves.

And for proof of this point, though I might prove it by Scripture very
pleatifully, to show how many, yea all the Saints there spoken of, have found
it in their own experience that they were delivered from death, and from
prison, by the power of God, and by the hand of Jesus Christ; yet what is this
to thee, except thou sinde their experience true in thy self? else their
experience is but notions and riddles to thee, and such things whereof thou
have no knowledge, except thou see and know thy self to be under death, and
kept fast in prison; and except thou have found Jesus Christ restoring,
recovering, delivering and redeeming thee from this death; And that thou
find that he has said to thy soul, Arise and stand up on the feet, Acts
14.10
and has given thee strength and life; to what end is it to bring all the
examples in Scripture, and in the world, if this death and life be no
experimented in us? Insomuch that thou can say, This word is true to me,
because done in me, as the Apostle says, in Heb. 1.1, 2. Heb. 1.1, 2.
God who at sundry times, and diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the
Fathers, and by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his
son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things. Those truths, which he spoke
before by the Prophets, he has now spoken in us by his Son, so that we now
know them to be the word and speakings of God. But, as our Savior says, Mat.
12.39, 40.
An evil and an Adulterous Generation seeks after a sign. They expect every
speaking should be made good by an external word, and ye must go no farther; so
that the truth is never witnessed to in their hearts; but as he says there,
There shall no sign be given them but the sign of the Prophet Jonas; For as
Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, even so shall the son
of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the Earth. Except you
find the same things done in you, the same miracles, the same death, the same
lying in the grave three days and three nights, except you find Jesus Christ
taking thee by the hand, and restoring thee to life, thou art of an evil and
adulterous Generation, seeking after an external sign, and thou art a mere
stranger to these things. But I shall for their sakes who feel the work of
Christ within them, give you two or three places of Scripture, being the
experience of the Saints of old that you may see how the Saints bear witness
to each other in experience.

First Scripture, Esa. 61.1, 2, 3. Esa. 61.1, 2, 3.
speaking there of Christ being the only deliverer, says, The spirit of the
Lord God is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good tidings to the
meek: he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
Captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, etc. To appoint
unto them that mourn in Zion, to give them beauty for ashes, and the oil of joy
for mourning, and the garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness, etc.
Christ only is the breaker open of the souls prison doors; he alone gives
deliverance to the Captives, and he alone brings them forth from prison and
sets them free; and this he is to his people in all ages; for he is yesterday,
and to day, Heb. 13.8.
and the same for ever: and when the same word appeared in flesh, he testifies
the same of himself, Luke 4.18. Luke 4.18. and 21.
where he rehearses the same words and applies them to himself, verse. 21. This
day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. And this was that which he still
held forth in all his teachings; that there is no other Savior nor Deliverer
but himself, never was, nor is, nor ever shall be to the end of the world.
Moses was only an outward and external Captain or Deliverer; but His leadings
and deliverings are spiritual, and there is none can be delivered but by him;
Heb. 12.24
as he is a better Mediator then Moses, so he is a better deliverer; it is he
alone that frees the soul from the pit, from death and hell; his Kingdom is
within us: The Jews and Pharisees they still excepted an outward deliverer,
and could not own Him as a Prince and Savior, but were blind and saw not what
he still held forth in all his teachings. They could not see the truth, that
they were blind and miserable and full of Hypocrisy, and were no other but
painted Sepulchers, glorious outwardly, but within were full of rottenness,
stench, and dead men's bones: They could not endure to stand in the light of
this truth, Mat. 23.27.
but hated it, and persecuted him to the death for holding it forth: What are
we blind also? what we the learned, the wisest, the holiest? what we that are
strict our selves, and call upon others to be so? this was death to them. But
now had they but seen this and owned it, he would have been their
righteousness, their deliverer, their redeemer, to have set them free; but
because they said we see, therefore their sin remained, and their fetters and
bondage was not taken off: And again Christ tells them John. 8.31, 32. If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed, and ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free. Now these things they could not see
nor understand that they were in bondage, but answered to him, we are Abraham's
seed, and were never in bondage to any man; how say thou, ye shall be made
free? then Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that
commits sin, is the servant of sin; the servant abides not in the House for
ever; but the son abides for ever; And if the son shall make you free, ye
shall be free indeed. They every moment committed sin and were servants to sin,
and rejected Him that would have made them free, and yet were ignorant thereof,
and still justified themselves; so that Christ could not be a Deliverer to
them, notwithstanding he continually preached this Doctrine in their ears; He
would have spiritually made them freemen indeed, and he could never convince
them of their bondage, that so he might have made them Free.

And this Freedom is beyond all other freedoms: This is that perfect Law of
liberty which James speaks of, Iam. 1.25. Jam. 1.25.
All other deliverances are but imperfect deliverances without this. And in
Romans 6.22. says the Apostle, Romans 6.22
being made free from sin, and become servants to God, yet have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life: for when ye were servants of sin, ye
were free from righteousness: From all which Scriptures it appears, that never
any were or could be made free and set at liberty, but only by His power, and
by His Eternal right hand; it is not all the Power, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Endeavors; Rules, Strictness, Conformity that all or any of the sons of men
could use, could ever deliver them from their bondage to the least sin; though
they may pretend a godly reformation (forsooth) and strictness of walking, and
sticking close to God, and walking up to their knowledge, and to their strict
rules; yet they were never yet freed, nor delivered from any one sin by Jesus
Christ, nor ever left any one sin from any good end, but the Devil in them has
only shifted shapes, and left, or put off some particular sins which were not
profitable or convenient, or stood not with their credit, but he has caused
them to take up Forms to cover the defilements of their hearts, and of their
inward man, which notwithstanding all their shows is full of rottenness,
hypocrisy and all iniquity.

And again the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.22. He that is called in the Lord, being a
servant, is the Lords Freeman; 1 Cor: 7.22
likewise he that is called being Free, is Christ's servant. Therefore ye are
bought with a Price, be not ye the servants of men. All that are once made free
by Christ, they cannot be servants to men, that is to those things men are so
subject to yield obedience to: they not only ought not but cannot serve those
lusts, that men serve, when Jesus Christ has set the soul Free, they will be
only servants to him: They will not be servants to the world, nor servants to
their own will, they cannot go where they list, but they are girded to wait
upon the will of their Master, as Christ told Peter, when thou wast young, thou
girdedst thy self, John 21.18.
and walkedst whither thou pleasedst: but when thou art old, another shall gird
thee and lead thee whither thou would not. Christ Intimating thus much to
him, that while he was young and in the state of unregeneracy, he followed his
own will, and girded himself, and did what himself pleased; but hereafter he
should not do so, but he must serve his Master, and his commands should gird
him and rule him, he should be girded by Christ, and should cross his own will,
and follow his Masters in whatever service he should command.

And truly Brethren, he that is thus made a Servant by Christ, he is truly a
freeman and a Citizen of Heaven; And thus to have experience of Christ in us
to be the Deliverer, to know him, to feel him, and to rejoice in his salvation,
there is none like this: to see HIS mighty power, and his strong arm delivering
thy soul from the powers of Hell and Darkness; And holding this forth not only
by the Prophets and their pointing at Him, but chiefly in holding this forth in
Himself by all his external actions: what a mighty Mystery is this? yea such a
Mystery as none knows but only he who is delivered: Indeed men talk of it, and
run over it in words; but, to Feel Christ a Captain, a Conqueror, a Deliverer
in them, this is that Mystery that neither the Pharisees, nor all the Learned,
nor all the wisdom nor industry of man could ever yet comprehend, for it is
spiritually discerned.

In this sense the whole Scriptures are a Book sealed, and a Garden walled
about, Rev. 5.1. Cant. 4.12
and a Fountain shut up; few can make this out in their own experience; they
can tell you a story of Abraham, and David, and Peter, and Paul, but that they
are the men, no such matter; they can neither make out the way, the manner, nor
the means, how their souls were brought out and delivered from the pit, nor
from out of the mire and clay, nor how their fetters were broken off, nor how
their eyes were opened, nor how their anckle-bones received strength; Acts 3.7.
for how can they? when they never found they were in prison or under death or
condemnation? they were never blind, Mat. 13.42.
nor deaf, nor dumb: But it is only the Scribe that is instructed to the Kingdom
of Heaven, can bring out of his treasures things new and old: what Christ did
in him at first and how he carried him on, and how he brought him out and set
him at liberty.

And truly Beloved, there is one thing among others that I would gladly speak
out, that every man may examine himself: The world has made a great noise,
and made great boast of what they have received by Jesus Christ, and what
Freedom he has purchased for them; what a mighty and wonderful redemption he
has wrought by One Act of his suffering and dying upon the cross in the days
of his flesh, or at least, as some say, by all his actions and sufferings. And
this is their Anchor hold, their hope, and their trust, because he has
purchased thereby Heaven and Salvation for them; And if they do but perform the
condition on their part, viz. [Beleeve] then all is theirs, all his Riches,
Glory, Peace, Redemption, Salvation, Heaven, and all that is in Jesus Christ:
But alas, alas, what is all this to any man, if he do not experience the truth
thereof in himself, and have not Christ formed in him, and he be not baptized
into his death, Col. 3.1.
and have not experience of his Resurrection in himself, to be risen with
Christ, to seek those things that are above? In a word, what is all thy
external faith and believing, if thou do not know the Mystery of that
appearance? For He is the Lamb slain from the beginning: Rev. 13.8.
he is yesterday and to day and the same for ever: He is that Eternal Sacrifice
which is once and for ever offered up and presented to the Father; He is to
this day, from the foundation of the world, not only crucified at Jerusalem,
but he is crucified in all ages, in Sodom and Egypt, as Saint John witnesses,
Rev. 11.8. And their dead bodies (speaking of those two Eternal Witnesses,
which ever stood before the God of the whole Earth) and their dead bodies shall
lie in the streets of the Great City, which spiritually is called Sodom and
Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified: which cannot be meant literally; for
Christ in the flesh, was not crucified in Sodom nor Egypt. But all these are
spiritually to be understood, and they are GREAT Mysteries, which the world
has not been acquainted with; But has generally received a Notion of God-man
dying at Jerusalem. And indeed they have contented themselves with a shadow of
the truth, and little or nothing else: there have been very few that have seen
beyond the shadow, nor looked beyond the vail: they have not seen IMMANVEL in
themselves, and that he dwells in us, not among us, as your litteral men (to
justify their Litteral and External knowledge) have translated the word,
because they saw no farther: But it is properly God in us.

Wherever Christ is, he brings a new birth, works a change upon the whole man;
this did not, nor does Christ do by any of his actions that he did at
Jerusalem, neither by his holy life, nor his meritorious death: For was ever
any of the sons of men conformed to him by that act? It Is true, his death was
infinitely meritorious; and one act in him, as being God equal with his Father,
Phill 2.16.
was a sufficient sacrifice and atonement, to pacify the infinite wrath of
God; But yet know that Jesus Christ is not only a Sacrifice for an hour or two,
only for the time he suffered in the flesh under Pontius Pilat, but He is that
One Eternal everlasting Sacrifice, which is continually offered up to the
Eternal Father in the behalf of all the Elect. And also we grant, that by that
Act, the Eternal purpose and decree of God was fulfilled in bringing forth the
true IMMANVEL, God and Man in One person, who should more fully reveal the
Father, and in revealing the Father reveal himself; for it is said, Of Herod and
Pontius Pilat, Acts. 2.23
Acts 2.23. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledg of
God, by wicked hands have crucified and slain. But by his coming in the flesh,
and by his holy life and cruel suffering and death, or by his external presence
or company, or eating and drinking with him, or handling, or touching him, or
external believing on him: by nothing of this nature was any good done
spiritually upon the souls of men, nor had any one his nature changed or
regenerated; no, no; But the true coming of the MESSIAH and the fulfilling of
all the promises concerning him, was by being made IMMANVEL to us, and being
brought forth in us; this is the Life and Mystery of the Word, and of Christ
his being made flesh, and his true coming in the flesh: and he that denies
Christ thus come in the flesh, the same is ANTICHRIST, 1 John 2.22
although he do acknowledge the external coming and dying of Jesus Christ at
Jerusalem. If he be not come in thy heart, he is not yet come, asto thee; And
there is no difference between thee and the external Jew: for thou never yet
confessedst him by receiving him; for he is not a Jew which is one outwardly,
that is, that only makes a profession of God, but circumcision is that of the
Heart; Wherefore says the Apostle 1 Cor. 12.3. 1 Cor. 12: 3
I give you to understand that no man speaking by the spirit of God, calls
Jesus Accursed; And that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost.

This my Brethren, is not done by an outward profession and conformity, but
when Christ is in us made Lord and King, and that nothing within man, nor
nothing without him sits above Christ, nor is esteemed comparable to him: This
man and no other has acknowledged Christ come in the flesh: and this man only
says, that Jesus is the Lord: otherwise he is Antichrist, and calls Jesus
accursed, and has with the Jews scourged, disdained, hated him, spit at him,
1 Cor. 12.3
and crucified him: for there is no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the spirit of the Lord. But all that are Jews, do to this day crucify the Lord
of Life, and say, we will not that this man shall rule over us, and cry out,
away with him, and release unto us Barabbas, but let Jesus be crucified. John
8.39
And this is the Language of all the World, except those who have received him;
and they can answer with Peter, when all others are ignorant of him; But whom
say yet that I am? Thou art Jesus the son of the living God; Verily those that
can thus say experimentally, of them we may say, Verily, verily, flesh and
blood has not revealed this unto thee, Mat. 16.17
but the Heavenly Father: for this is that truth which never any man could
teach, but it is Heavenly and Spiritual: And herein lies the Spirit, and the
Mystery, which is hid from ages, but revealed unto us only by the Spirit.

But all outward things, though they were really done, yet they are typical and
representations still in all ages, more and more lively brought forth, and more
near, and more like unto the Truth: And when ever Christ came spiritually and
was received: to them he was come, and was the MESSIAH, but all others were
ignorant of him, and therefore crucified him; and therefore says Peter, I wot
that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers; for had they known
him, Act. 3.17.
they would not have crucified the Lord of Life. Where Christ is thus come,
there it may be said indeed, IT IS FINISHED; but where he is come but
externally, it may well be said, It is not finished; for Christ is the Author,
the End and the finisher of faith; and when he is come, then it is
accomplished, completed, And it is FINISHED; for there is nothing beyond him,
Heb. 12.2.
nothing better then him, nothing higher nor brighter, nothing more glorious,
nor more excellent, nor more full then Him.

Beloved, let no man be offended at these things, and think that we go about to
reproach or vilify any thing done by Jesus Christ, who in all he did fulfilled
his Fathers will; and all things done by him, or unto him, were done by the
Determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God: But, all that we labor to do,
Acts 4.28
is more to exalt and magnify the Truth, and the Mystery of the Gospel of
which so many (though professing it) are altogether ignorant of it, and set up
Idols in stead of God, and worship shadows, and indeed are to them no more but
Fancies and Images, for the Substance; and (in that case) I know none does more
reproach and vilify Christ in the flesh then they, though they pretend so much
for him; for himself often testifies, The flesh profits not, it is the
spirit gives life; Joh. 6.63
not those that eat a little Bread, or sup a little Wine, that eat or receive
me; but he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood; for my flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; and no man can give or take of this
bread, but my Heavenly Father only gives you of that Heavenly Bread, Ioh. 6.
Ibid. 6.
It Is not the outward flesh of Christ or his external body was the life of the
world: But that same spirit and nature that was in Christ, is to be in as many
as do receive him: this and no other is the life of the World, viz. Christ his
coming into the souls of men, discovering them to be of the seed of that evil
one and to be deceived, to be lost, to be in darkness; and discovering the
works of Darkness; making manifest the works of the Devil, and that he dwells in
the soul under a disguise, pretending himself to Christ, when he is a Devil and
Antichrist, and is no other but the father of lies. Now Christ without us,
never does this; but when he does it in us, then is fulfilled that of the
Apostle to the Galathians: Before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently
set forth Crucified among you, or in you. Gal. 3.1.
The seeing of him then or now crucified outwardly, was nothing: that was but
the shadow of the life and substance: but really to see themselves to be the
crucifiers of Christ, this was the lively crucifying, set out before them.

Then Beloved, from hence it is clear, against all gainsayers, that it is the
incomming of the Power of God in our spirits by which alone our Freedom,
Deliverance, and Salvation is wrought: It Is not all the bolding forth of a
Christ crucified the Letter can do it: though all those things done in the
Letter were true, yet they are nothing to us, if we be not saved, delivered,
redeemed from our bondage and captivity; therefore it is, that we see many
thousands in the world that can profess Christ, and tell large stories of his
external life and sufferings, and yet never felt the power of his death or life
in themselves; for they can follow their own wills, and they can love the
world, and extol and magnify themselves, and are as great in their own eyes as
any other who profess him not. Therefore Christ is not Salvation nor
Deliverance to them: Master, we have eaten and drank in thy presence, we have
preached and cast out Devils in thy Name; Luke 13.26.
we have cast away Swearing, and Lying, and Whoring, and Drunkenness, and we
have taken up this duty and the other, and we have held forth thy Name to the
World, and we have been Sober, Grave, and Austere in our conversation: but for
all this Christ will profess I never knew you, for ye are workers of iniquity.
For Satan had his full possession still, and ye are no other but painted
Sepulchers, fair and glorious without, but full of all rottenness, stench,
lothsomnesse, and dead men's bones: Then which nothing can stink more. Therefore
it is not holding forth the highest profession, or Christ in the Letter, or
externally, that sets us free, except Christ come into the heart and makes us
free indeed: else it is not freedom indeed; it is but the profession and the show;
but it must be even the same Almighty power that raised up Jesus Christ from
the dead, we having the same spirit of faith, as the Apostle says 2 Cor. 4.13,
14. knowing that he that raised the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up, 2 Cor. 4.13,
14. Romans 8.11.
by Jesus. And again in Romans 8.11. But if the spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall
also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit which dwells in you.

And therefore how woefully has the professing World been mistaken still in all
ages about Christ without them and of Christ according to the Letter? For if
they do but assent to that, and say Christ suffered for them, and they must
apply him by an external believing, and so he is made their Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption; and though they sin and fall, if they can but
cast their eyes upon Christ suffering upon the Cross, Joh. 3.14.
as the Israelites by looking up upon the brazen Serpent, they shall be healed
and pardoned, and saved; and yet we know withal, that all those things were
done and were necessary for the accomplishing of the Fathers purpose and the
mind of God, but in all those things it was not FINISHED: and yet here the
world sticks and builds their Religion, and this (they think) is as much as is
required; and he that shall speak against it and say, they fall short of Jesus
Christ; they cry out upon him for a Seducer, and an Heretic, and they are as
mad against him, as they were against Paul, when he preached that they were no
gods which were made by men: And are ready to burst out upon them as full of
wrath and madness as the Jews upon Steven, when he ripped them up and spoke
home to them, Acts. 7.54
Acts 7.54, etc. And when they heard these things, they were cut to the heart
and gnashed upon him with their teeth; Yet for all that, know, that all this
believing will not serve thy turn, but it must be Christ manifested in thee,
seeing him crucified and rising again, and sitting in Heavenly places in thy
heart: else whatever thou talkest of Christ and of his miracles, if thou have
no witness, no evidence of the truth of them, in thy own heart, what is all
that ever He did, and what is all that ever He suffered, to thee? It may be, thou
may have a notion and an opinion of the things of God, and thou have them by
History and by Relation, or Education, or Example, or Custom, or by Tradition,
or because generally all, or most men have received them for truths: but if
thou have no evidence of his mighty miracles, and God-like power in thine own
soul: how, or which way can thou be a witness, that they are the things thou
have heard and seen? for all those outward things are but Representations,
Figures, and Patterns of the Heavenly things themselves. Thou may have a
strong opinion, but yet no experience of them, that Jesus Christ has freed and
delivered thy soul.

Again, take notice hence, That as Christ delivers not but as he comes Himself
into the souls of men, and is born in them: so it is not opinions, nor
notions, nor forms, nor washings, nor disciplines, nor any external rules, or
conformities that can work deliverance for the soul; but it must be God in us
operating by his own Almighty power: every man is spiritually in Sodom and in
Egypt, Rev. 11.8.
where our Lord is Spiritually and most truly crucified. And as the world is
deceived in their Forms and their Notions, thinking they shall help and save
them; So likewise they take a great deal of satisfaction to themselves in
making of Books and Catechisms, and prescribing of Rules; in mending this way
and the other form and are still in mending and altering, and making their ways
and forms better and more reformed (as they think) when alas, all this is
nothing but man taking upon himself to cut, pare, and mend the worship of God:
This man he thinks to cut out a neater way then his neighbour-gathered-church;
and a another he thinks to mend and make his way more handsome then he, and
another then both: Every one has a Doctrine, a Psalm, has a Tongue, 1 Cor.
14.26.
has a Revelation, has an Interpretation, and none done to the edifying of
the body of Christ: For all this is but to rend and tear the Seamlesse coat of
Christ: in that man would fain be something, do something by his own wisdom and
power, and his righteousness must not be slighted nor vilified, nor all his
glory must not be laid in the dust: all these Worshippers and pretenders to
Christ, they live on the shadow, and rely on the shape and form of
Christianity, but not on the life and power: How have men beat their wits, and
laid their counsels together to form and model Religion, to make it pass for
current in the world, that they may be accounted Artists, and Pastors, and
Doctors? and according to that fine invented word ORTHODOX; and some adding
that blasphemous title DIVINE: and they will prescribe Rules and make Articles
of faith for all men to believe and receive and conform to, and still they are
new-modelling to cut it, and square it as like the Letter of the Word as may
be; and then they are pleased, and others applaud them as wise Master Builders:
And yet we may say of them as the Apostle Peter says, 2 Pet. 2.17. etc.
2 Pet. 2.17, 18, 19. They are those which have forsaken the right way, and are
gone astray, following the way of Balaam who loved the ways of
unrighteousness: These are Wells without water, clouds carried with a tempest,
to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever: For when they speak great
swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh those who
were clean escaped from them, who live in error; And while they promise them
liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption; for of whom a man is
overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. They are always learning and
teaching others to do this, and do that, and yet they themselves are the
servants of lust and corruption: Therefore be not deceived, but if they cry lo
here, or lo there, Go after such a Man, and such a Man; Luke 17.23.
join with this Church, or that Fellowship and ye find Christ: but go not after
them; believe them not, for they do but deceive; they cannot deliver nor redeem
themselves. And therefore this point is clear, that none but Jesus Christ could
ever free the soul, or deliver it from bondage; and this is a truth against
which the Gates of Hell shall never prevail. Mat. 16.18


Therefore we may conclude, that whatever spirit goes out any other way, or to
any other thing to find Rest, or Liberty, or Redemption by, but only by Jesus
Christ, he is deceived, for it is only in Immanuel, God with us; there is no
Redeemer, no Deliverer, no Savior but only He; All the Saints who have all
experience thereof in themselves, know this to be true and give out their
witness, that in vain did they run out to any thing else: and these only are
the true Wayters for the Kingdom of God, and the consolation of Israel: Mar.
15.43
here was the true Waiting and the true using of Ordinances: Oh that men did
but know what this waiting upon the Father was, that they knew, that there was
no life but in Christ, no power but in him, that they had no wisdom nor
goodness, nor that they could never be delivered but by and in the power, light
and life of Christ. Oh that men knew in experience, as they pretend in words
and notions; Joh. 5.22.
that all judgment is committed to the Son; And that in him alone was the power
of life and death, and that he alone had the keys to unlock the Mysteries of
Salvation: then whether (if they were persuaded of this) could the heart of man
go for relief? If it saw its own utter emptiness, nothingness, and that all
Creatures and all Ordinances and forms were broken Cisterns, Jer. 2.13.
how could they depend and wait on them? If then Jesus Christ be the only
fullness, the only power, the only riches, the only joy, the only treasure, then
would they sell all to buy this Pearl. Men's running out to this thing and to
that, is because they are unsatisfied, Luke 11.24.
and are in want of peace and rest, and this makes them go out and walk through
dry places to find rest, but can find none: this want makes them heap to
themselves so many varieties of things to give them peace; their souls fly to
and again from florwe to flower, but cannot rest any where; they fly to this
duty, and the other form, but they are all empty, they are no other but dry
places.

Oh wonderful to see! how Satan has deluded the sons of men: and all is,
because they cannot be content to sit down in their own poverty, to see
themselves naked and miserable, and then to wait upon Him, who would certainly
come in in due time, with true Peace, Riches, Rest, Power, Righteousness,
Satisfaction, Fullness, and whatever is good; But because men are not able to
stand in the sight of their own nothingness, how does Satan continually carry
them out, they cannot endure to stay within to see themselves; but either they
are carried out to Lust, or Luxury, or Wantonness, or Drinking, or Company and
the like, and if that will not hide and cover the pit, so that the mouth of
conscience will not be stopped, then it runs out to Duties, and Forms, and ways
of Worship, and thinks that will do it, when alas they are mere delusions, and
things which the soul has invented to play withal, to get peace and liberty
by, to make it forget its Misery, Poverty, and Emptiness; but the end of this
peace is death and misery, and the end of this liberty is confusion. Romans 6.21.
And what fruit have ye of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? But, oh
happy is that soul, that can say from experience and not only in words but
really, Job. 16.2.
That they are all miserable comforters, and that all below and besides Christ,
Esa. 28.20
all gender to death and bondage; and that he has found the Bed too broad, and
the Covering too narrow, so that he could not wrap himself therein; and that he
is resolved never to run out to any thing to relieve or stay his spirit, but
only to the Riches, Power, and Fullness of Christ; not to the gross lusts of
men, nor to the riches of the world, to honor, or praise, or the like: nor to
the Religion of the world, nor of the Nation, as ye know many usually do, and
if that will not do, then they fly higher, and they will be of the strictest
sort of the Pharisees, and join themselves with men of Learning, Gravity, and
Religion, and men esteemed Orthodox and sound in the Faith, and he will follow
their ways, in hearing and reading, and praying, and walking without offense,
and the like: but all these do but sow to the flesh, Gal. 6.8.
and of the flesh can reap nothing but corruption.

Do but examine thy self, although thou have joined thy self here and there,
and gone from one Church-society to another, and put thy neck under the yoke of
such a form and such a religion, what was the cause? was it not thy fears, thy
terrors within? or was it not that thou may cover thy filthy and corrupt
heart from the sight of others? have thou not for all this conformity, the same
heart, the same nature still, though thou have hid and covered it by these
inventions? and when the fire has still broke out, and thy misery and undone
condition would not be concealed, have not thou said within thy self, is there
not some other way, some better remedy? is there no better Physicians then
these? I have joind my self to the Presbyterians, and I have found their way
too short, that would not do; I have come over to the Independents and thought
that way seemed before, a better, and more refined way, yet it is too narrow, I
cannot wrap my self in that covering; well, says thy heart, is there no other,
nor no better Physicians? so I could but secure my self and prevent this fire
and this burning, I would be content to do any thing, and take up every yoke,
and submit to the strictest forms. Then say the Anabaptists, come over to us
and we shall give thee satisfaction: we have the true Baptism according to the
word, none so near the word of God as we: But when thou have done all these
things to find rest, and to quench the fire which began to burn, and to hide
thy deformities from men: do thou think there is any thing of Christ in all
this? is not this rather to run away, and turn thy back upon Christ, and to
live by thy own wits and inventions, and by thy own power, merely to prevent
death and destruction, and the losing of thy own wisdom and righteousness, and
that thou may not come into the light of God, least it should discover thy
darkness and blackness?

And now, seeing these things are so, how dare any of the sons of men boast of
these things, when they cannot free nor deliver the soul, but rather increase
their misery, and lengthen out their bondage: I say, dare any man stand forth
and call these the Ordinances of Christ, as they use them? what greater, what
higher blasphemy? an Ordinance of God is a thing of another nature, wherein the
wisdom and power of God is effectual to bring in the heart, to cause man to
renounce his own wisdom, power, etc. to empty him of all his power and
goodness, and to cause the soul to submit to the righteousness of faith; else
it is but an ordinance of man, and the word is but a dead Letter, and it is no more
but the word of man, Matthew. 7.29. 2 Cor. 10.5. Psa. 50.16.
except it come with authority and power upon the heart, bringing every high
thought, and every imagination into the obedience of Christ: What have thou to
do to take my word into thy mouth, and yet hate to be reformed? Truly
friends, there are many pretenders to Christ, and the world makes a great noise
of serving, and worshipping him, and there is great talk everywhere of fearing
God, in notion, and opinion, and delusion: For, who else more persecute and
crucify Christ, and hate, and oppose the true power of godliness, and the
teachings of the spirit, and the work of Christ in redeeming and delivering the
soul then these men?

Therefore Beloved, these things that men so much cleave to and magnify,
cannot be the rest of a Christian, nor the Ordinances of Christ (as used by
them) but of Antichrist, because, they may be used, and lived in, and admired,
and prized, and yet they are without any power: they let those that use them
and live in them, to be carried away with diverse lusts; 2 Timothy 3.6 2 Pet. 2.19
they pretend liberty, but themselves are the servants of corruption, and
enemies to the power of Christ, and the life of Christianity; and are acted by
Antichrist, who as God sits in the Temple of God, 2 These. 2.4
showing himself that he is God. Though he be a Devil and Antichrist, yet he
would not be known, all his policy is to conceal himself, and be thought to be
righteous, and pure, and to be the very Christ, the son of the living God. May
not one be dipped and receive water baptism and yet be a Sorcerer? Yes, was not
Simon Magus so? Acts 8 12.
May not one be at breaking of bread with Christ, and yet be a Devil? Mat.
26.23.
Yes, for so was Judas; though he was not there when Christ gave them his body
to eat, and his blood to drink, which was himself, which he gave to all the
rest; yet, he was at supper with him, at the Paschal Lamb, and externally brake
bread with him.

May not a man be full of good words and make great professions of strictness,
and yet be far from the Kingdom of of Heaven? Yes, Mat. 23.14.
for so were the Pharisees, they were the only Learned men, and the
Interpreters of the Scriptures, and used much and long praying; and uttering
many outward good words, sweet and smooth in their carriage, and were very
strict as to the outward command, and were generally taken for the holiest and
the gravest, and the soberest men; if any lend to them, they would lend to them
again; yet you know what Christ says of them, Ibid. v. 27.
they were but painted Hypocrites, and compares them to loathsome, stinking
Sepulchers. As the Apostle says concerning charity, though a man go never so
far in actions of love, though he give his body to be burned, 1 Cor. 13.3.
and have not true love, all is nothing. Men may come so far as to burn for
Religion, and yet have nothing of Christ at all: Therefore these outward
external actions of men do not truly declare a Christian, whether he act from
the power of Christ in him; for he may do the same acts by way of imitation,
that a true Saint may do.

Therefore Beloved, it lies us very much upon to discover and find out wherein
the truth lies; how we may know it from all forms, shadows, pictures, patterns;
to know that which is true, real, unchangable, and cannot deceive: for there
can be no true peace, nor no real satisfaction but where Christ is an indweller
in the soul; where all of man ceases to act, and he made as dead, as nothing,
as emptied to all things in themselves, so that they cannot say nor think that
they have any Wisdom, Power, or Goodness, or that by them they can act any
thing toward the worship or acceptance of the Father, but are reprobate in
themselves to every good work: Thou who have chosen any other Savior, Tit.
1.16.
any other Deliverer, any other Help but Jesus Christ, where will thou appear
when the Lord shall come to judgment? then all thy Saviors will forsake thee,
and not one stand by thee. When thou have said of thy forms, and fellowships,
and thy Ordinances (as thou call them) These be thy gods that will save
thee, these shall give thee a Rest and peace. Exo. 32.4.
And though with your tongues you do not say thus, yet this is the very end of
thy cleaving to them, to be rest for thy spirit here, and to save thee from the
wrath to come. What is all this, but to rob Christ of his Glory, and to set the
crown upon thy own inventions? And it is true we in words say Christ is all in
all, yet in practice we must bring in something of man, he must act and he must
do something, else he cannot expect that Christ should do his part; how then is
Christ all in all? how is he the Author and finisher of faith? These are
therefore those which Christ and the Prophet speaks of, Heb. 12.2.
that have eyes and see not, and cares and hear not, and hearts which cannot
understand.

Now if thou were able (I say) to stand in this light of God, and there rest
quiet, and sit down under hell, and wrath, and covered with damnation, and the
curse, as being thy right and thy portion, this were the way to come to life:
this is Christ his way: for life always springs out of death, and light out of
darkness, and fullness out of emptiness, and Alsufficiency out of
nothingnesse; and this is the great Mystery of the Gospel, which the whole
world, and all litteral and great knowing Professors; neither will nor can
understand, because they cannot endure this light of God to destroy, confound,
and undo them; But they are seeking out any covering to keep them from this
discovering light, for they must be something in themselves, and hate this
making nothing, and would by no means their deeds should be made manifest, nor
the foulness of their hearts laid open.

And know also, this light is within thee, if thou would let it shine out;
there is a voice within thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it: So that thou
need not say in thine heart who shall ascend into Heaven? that is, to bring
Christ down from above; Esa. 30.21 Romans 10.6, 7.
or who shall descend into the deep? that is to bring Christ again from the
dead, but the righteousness of Faith, says, the word is nigh thee, even in thy
mouth and in thy heart, and this is the word of faith which we preach. But man
he is still looking to external actings, and thinking he must be doing
something to procure peace and life, or else he thinks if he can but believe on
an external Jesus Christ, who died at Jerusalem, and fetch Christ from the
grave, or bring him down from above, this is his righteousness, what is all
this, but the righteousness of the Law, which Moses describes to be on this
wise, Ibid. v. 5.
that the man which does those things shall live in them? And this covenant of
works, man can never get from under: For the Law was given to show man his
weakness and inability to do the least; and this never works effectually till
Christ come in with his light to make man see himself as he is, poor, and
wretched, and blind and naked, to slay man, and to make him miserable to
himself; for he is miserable, and lost, and undone, but he hates to see it, or
acknowledge it; and by running from this discovering light, man thinks to save
himself, and to avoid hell and wrath, and the pit of eternal condemnation; when
indeed this very thing is his misery, and death, and condemnation; That he must
be something in his own esteem, and he cannot lose his life; yet all this is no
other, but seeking to make a covenant with death and hell; but this Covenant
will be broken, and will (and does in time) break in upon him, to his
everlasting condemnation: and none of all his coverings, shelters, forms, or
any of his fortifications, nor his strong holds will secure him, or keep off
the Deluge of wrath and vengeance due unto him.

Now Jesus Christ being, as I said, nigh thee, within thee, in thy mouth, in
thy heart, he by his light, Psalm. 91.11
if thou would hearken to his teaching, would direct and guide thee in all
thy ways: from whence come those secret whisperings and checks within thee?
when thou think to do this and that evil; and it tells thee, no, do it not,
it is evil, to wrong or hate thy brother, to persecute him, no says this light,
Do as thou would be done unto; Mat. 7.12.
and thou ought not to do the least hurt to any creature, because thou
would not be hurt thy self. He did evil (thou would verily think) if he
should do so to thee; and is it not the same in thee? this very light in thy
own breast is a sufficient judge and teacher, if thou would but still mind
it, and eye it, and be guided by what it teaches in thee. This light would
bring thee to see how weak thy strength is, how much folly is in all thy
wisdom, what confusion is in all thy peace, what rottenness of bones in all thy
health? what poverty in all thy riches, what sorrow and misery in all thy joy
and pleasure; But this is thy condemnation, that thou will not be condemned;
but as this light within discovers darkness, thou art still using thy utmist
inventions to cover thy self, and make thee seem otherwise, namely, Good, holy,
wise, righteous, and worthy of all praise and admiration: And this is the
epidemicall misery of all the sons of men; and He cries out against this
light, and hates it, and persecutes it, and those that profess it, and hold it
forth: No blacker devil to men, then this light that would show them
themselves. And in all ages, those whom God has made isntrumental to hold
this light forth in experience, they have been still hated and persecuted by
the most and greatest professors of Truth; no names black enough to smite them
with, nor no death bad enough for to cut them off by, to express their
unexpressible hatred and bitterness to them, to the utmost of their power:
what? to take away their life, their peace, their glory, their God, their
goodness, nay the very crown of their glory? Acts 22.22.
away with such a fellow from the earth, it is not fit he should live. And all
this comes from hence, that man dare not stand in his Own condemnation; he dare
not let this light shine on his works, because They know they are evil:
Therefore they hate it, preach against it, cry out upon it as damnable
doctrine, and call the Professors thereof Seducers, Familists, Quakers,
Jesuits, any thing to make them the most odious to the sons of men; and they
themselves resolve to smother it in themselves, and will not be guided or
directed by it; they are resolved not to be weak, not to be poor, not to be
fools, not to be vile, but make the world still think that they are wise,
strong, holy, sober, grave, regular, in all they do, and obedient to the very
smallest and strictest rules of Christ; and he that shall tax them, or conceive
or declare otherwise of them, is to them a Fiend, a Serpent, a Devil.

Lastly, from this ONENESS of the Deliverer, we may conclude, As there is but
One Deliverer, so there is but one way of Deliverance; though there may be in
the world thousands of inventions of men, some worshipping this way, and some
that, some after one form, and some after another; yet this is certain, there
is but one Deliverer, and one way of Deliverance: Ephesians. 4.5.
As the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.5. There is a unity in the spirit, which is the
bond of peace; There is one body, and one spirit, One Lord, that is, One
Deliverer, one Faith, one Baptism, that is one way of deliverance; One God and
father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in all. One Savior, and
One way of salvation; and there is no more: And this way is, Christ in man
bringing forth the light of God, to empty, kill, and destroy the glory and
wisdom of man, to make a man as poor as Job, having lost all, and lying upon
the dunghill full of boiles, scabs, and sores from the crown of the head to the
sole of the feet; and as miserable as Lazarus, with his sores, which the dogs
came and Licked, and to make them lie begging for he smallest crumbs to relieve
them: Whosoever thou art, if thy deliverance be not wrought this way, let me
tell thee freely thou were never yet dilivered, however thou flatterest thy
self to the contrary: You may talk of forms, and disciplines, and dippings,
and of eating and drinking with Christ; and breaking of bread, and of Baptismes
and all other external things. But this alone is the true Baptism, and the
true eating of Christ his body, and the drinking his blood; This is the One way
wrought by this One deliverer; and whoever he be that lives in multiplicity of
forms, and diversity of worships, or holds these things forth as Christ's way,
without this Baptism of the spirit, he holds forth a lie, and a delusion, and
misery and wrath and desolation of spirit will come in the end: for this is
that one; and only way which Jesus Christ has used in all the Saints from the
beginning of the world, and will do to the end to bring man low in himself,
that he alone may be exalted. As there is but One God and Father of all; but
one Husband, who is rich unto all: so there is but one Church, but one Spouse,
but one body; and this one Spouse, body, or Church, they are all joined,
married, or brought home to Christ but in this one way. And there is but one
power, but one wisdom, but one strength, whereby all the people of God were and
ever shall be delivered.

Beloved, what a stir does all the world make about setting up a world of
several inventions, with variety of washings, rules, dippings, forms? and
every individual fellowship, say, we are in the right way, our way is the
best, and we are nearest the rule, and the Primitive practice; and our way is
the way of peace and rest: such and such, they miss the rule of the word in
this, and in that, but our way is the most exact, and most perfect of all: All
which, is no other but that which Christ foretells shall come, when they say,
Lo here is Christ, or Lo he is there; but Christ's command is, Go not after
them, for the Kingdom of God comes not with observation, Luke 17.20.
nor consists not in outward observations, nor in eating or drinking, nor in
dipping in water, Col. 22.21, 22.
nor in meats and drinks, nor in obeying the commands and rules of men: As
touch not, taste not, handle not, which all perish in the using; for All things
of that nature are far below those spiritual things in which consists the
Kingdom of God, which is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans
14.17.
and in being Baptized with the spirit, and with fire: There is but one eating
of Christ's body and drinking his blood, and this is no other but what is given
by Jesus Christ himself; 1 Cor. 11.24.
and whoever eats not, nor drinks not of this, He it is that eats damnation,
not discerning the Lords body: And though men eat and drink, and break bread
together never so often, and be never so constant and observant therein, yet
the Apostle says plainly, This is not to eat the Lords body: but it is only the
eating the Hidden Manna that can nourish to everlasting life: Rev. 2.7.
It Is only the eating of the Tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God
that can make us live for ever. And of this bread all the Saints do eat; And
what one Saint is fed with, the same are all Saints: and, what a Sint lives by,
he eats daily, and this is his food and nourishment; the bread that feeds them
is not eating for an hour, or the like, but for ever; it is his daily food by
which he is nourished and fed to the Kingdom of God: He does not one day feed
like a Saint, and another day like a devil; He does not only examine himself
to eat a little bit of bread, and drink a sup of wine, but he daily examines
himself, and he daily and continually eats of this bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.
and drinks of this cup; for they being many are one bread, and one body, for
they are all partakers of that one bread; and, what ever they do, and when
ever they eat, Luke 22.19. and 1 Cor. 11.24.
they do it in remembrance of him; They live upon Christ in all things, they
see Him to be their life, their motion, their rule and ruler, their
righteousness, wisdom, redemption: They see there is not one creature acts or
moves, nor is there one change, of providence, but they see Christ do it more
truly then they see the creature does it: They see him the Sovereign Lord and
Commander, ruling and doing all things as in themselves, so in the whole
creation of Heaven and earth, and this is that they live by and feed upon; They
have such meat to eat, Joh. 4.32.
which none knows the virtue of, but only they who eat it; such meat it is the
world knows not of, nor cannot conceive of: And therefore all the world,
whether professing Christ or not, they not eating of this Divine food, they
starve, and die, and eat nothing else but death, the curse and damnation: And
yet what a noise, and a busling there has been in all ages about the forms and
shadows of things? and what censuring and condemning each other for not having
a uniformity, which can never be? for they only dwelling in the letter, and
upon external things, they see not the spirit, and the mystery, the life and
the true bread: 1 Gor. 10.17.
But those who eat of the true bread, they are one body, and one bread, for
they are all partakers of that one bread; with them there is a unity and a
uniformity, and nowhere else there can be; of which men have heard a talk and
report, and they speak of such a thing, but they know not what it means, nor
how to come by it; for, none can come at it, but those to whom this bread is
given, and they only can say experimentally, Joh. 6.55.
his body is bread indeed, and his blood is drink indeed; 1 Gor. 10.16.
And they only can give witness of the True Communion of Saints, and know the
happiness and true pleasure thereof, and what heavenly sweetness is therein,
All harmonizing and giving testimony to This One alone Great Deliverer, and
This wonderful Nonesuch Deliverance. No unity like this unity, nor love, nor
peace like this peace, which they have in Jesus Christ Their only Deliverer.

THE SAINTS Perfect Freedom. OR, Liberty in CHRIST asserted, In opposition to
all Yokes of Bondage. By Mr. Jo. WEBSTER.
Preached at Alhallows Lumbard-street. SERMON. II.
GALAT. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
WE have already spoke something from these words according as God was pleased
to give forth to us. The Apostle in the former Chapter having spoken of the
difference between the two seeds, showing that the one was the Heir, the son of
the promise, and the seed of the Freewoman, and was to inherit all the
blessings: The other was the son of the Bondwoman, who was always in bondage
with her Children, and was to be cast cut and rejected, for the Son of the
Bondwoman shall not be Heir with the son of the Freewoman. Now the Apostle
with these Galathians had taken great pains, and he had, as it were, Gal. 4.19
travailed in birth with them to bring them to Christ, and to have him formed
in them; and they being made children of the Freewoman, He comes in this verse
to exhort them to stand fast in that deliverance wherewith Christ had made them
free, and to stand fast under the true obedience of Christ, and not to be
entangled or to give ear to any other Doctrine; for all Doctrine, and all
other Government was no other but A yoke of bondage. And the point we then
stood upon was this,

That Jesus Christ was the only Deliverer from bondage: wherein we showed that
every believer was Christ's true freeman, bondage, but only and alone by Jesus
Christ. And we spoke something to show you how Christ was the Deliverer, Esa.
7.14.
whom I showed you was IMMANUEL, God in us; he being manifested and brought
forth in us, Col. 5.27.
then he was the hope of Glory, and never till then: For man is set free by no
other, nor no less power then the power of the Father, even the very same
power which raised up Jesus from the grave, Ephesians. 1.19.20.
The very same sets every believer at liberty: And was that which freed him
from his bondage, broke off his shackles, loosed him from his chains, and
delivered him out of prison. We showed hence the folly and madness of all those
who went about, or had any hope or expectation of freedom by any other way but
only by Jesus Christ alone: and how vain all the endeavor of man was, till
Christ was pleased to set him free; for where the spirit of Christ is, 2 Cor.
3.17.
there is liberty and nowhere else: This Liberty will abide, and men may stand
fast in it, but all other liberty is but a delusion, and will fail and come to
nothing; whatever peace, or power, or righteousness is brought into any soul by
any other means, it will fail and deceive him that puts confidence therein. But
where Christ has set a man free, there is real freedom, and his work will abide
and shall receive a reward. 1 Cor. 3.14.


In the next place we showed that this Deliverer, all his works were spiritual,
they were not wrought in a carnal and fleshly way: It was not external forms,
nor outward rules, nor disciplines, nor gathering into fellowships, nothing of
this nature could set the soul free, but only the infinite power of Jesus
Christ himself: And having laid these things down, we would now come nearer to
our selves, that every soul here may examine it self, to see what witness it
can bear to this doctrine; whether they can testify, and bear out their
witness in experience, that Christ has been their Deliverer or no, and
whether this deliverance have been wrought in them: I do not here come to ask
any, what he can say in words, or what he has by notion, by reading, or
hearing, or by custom, or education; but Art thou come to thy Deliverance by
the spirit and power of Christ? Have thou found in thy self, that all thy
wisdom, power, endeavors, all thy rules and strict walking could never deliver
thy soul from one lust, but that thou were forced to renounce all, as weak and
abominable, being utterly lost and stripped naked in thy self, being made as
weak as any other man, Judge. 16.17.
and that all thy power, working, acting, reforming, was but a mere forced
thing, and nothing therein done by the power of love and by the spirit of
Christ in thee; that all thy glorious shows of faith, and holiness, and
strictness in conversation was but mere shows and pictures, and that thou thy
self were but as sounding Brass, and as a tinckling Cymbal, and all thy
profession and religion mere air, apparition, 1 Cor. 13.1.
emptiness, and in truth A Ly and no such thing? However thou have been carried
out upon diverse considerations, and have had many glorious speculations, and
high expressions, which to thy self and others have seemed rare and glorious;
yet, I say, except thou can make these things out, as done and acted in thy
self by Jesus Christ, be assured all thy words and high profession is nothing:
But, has Jesus Christ been thy Savior, thy Deliverer? has he opened thy
eyes, and thy ears, raised thee from death to life? have thy ancklebones
received steength from him? Are those miracles (spoken of) which he did in the
flesh done in thee: Acts. 3.7
Are thy bones broken, Ps. 91.3
and is thy soul escaped from the snare of the Hunter? Have thou really seen
thy self lost, undone, made miserable? have thou seen that thy self was in
Captivity, and that thou wast deaf, and dumb, and blind, and lame? that thou
were shut up in darkness and death, and that there was none in Heaven or Earth
able to help thee in the least, but thou seeing thy self so miserable and
hopeless, that thou were at thy wits end, and no help at all appeared? If this
have not been thy condition, though thou could speak never so excellently of
the Letter and the History, and though thou submittedst to the highest forms,
and to the soberest, and most strict course of life, being constant and austere
in observing of thy rules for hearing, and reading, and set times of prayer,
and constant examining thy self, to keep thy self up the stricter to thy
Rules; alas poor soul, all this is nothing, though thou could speak with the
Tongue of Men and Angels, 1 Cor. 13.1
and pray with such sweet words and language as might ravish all the men on
earth: If thou do not find Christ Jesus in thee, breaking every bond, and
loosing every yoke, and that no other in Heaven or Earth could do it but he,
thou were never yet delivered, but art still under wrath, death, and bondage.

The chief thing that every soul is to mind, in reading and hearing, is, to
examine whether the same thing be wrought in them; whatever we find in the
Letter, if it be not made good in us, what are the words to us? we must see how
Christ is crucified and buried in us, and how he is risen and raised from death
in us; the chief thing, I say, is, to look into our own breasts. All generally
that hold forth a profession of Christ, they say in words, that Christ is the
Deliverer, but that is not the thing; but is he a Deliverer to thee? Is that
glorious MESSIAH promised, Romans 11.26
and the Deliverer out of Sion come with power into thy soul? has he exalted
himself there? and has he made bare his arm, and been a glorious CONQVERER in
thee? has he taken to himself his great power to reign in thee? Rev. 11.17.
Is he King of Kings, and Lord of Lords in thee? etc.

Beloved, all preaching, and reading, and praying, and duties is to this end,
to examine thy inward man, and thy spiritual condition. Thou joinest thy self
in fellowship, and walk conformable to all thy rules, and thou art washed,
and thou breakest bread with them, and think herein thou have obeyed the
commands of Christ: alas this is nothing, if Jesus Christ have not joined thee
to himself and made thee a member of him; what good do all these things? for
by all these outward actings thou do not discern the Lords body: To discern
the Lords body, is to eat him, to be united to him, to be made one spirit with
him, that so he may be made experimentally a Savior, and a Deliverer in thee;
That he has taken thy soul out of the mire and clay, Ps. 40.2.
and out of the horrible pit, thou can say experimentally and by feeling that
it was an horrible pit, and that there thy soul stuck fast, and thou had no
hope ever to get forth; and if Christ has set thee free, thou know full
well, no power could do it but only his, Ephesians. 1.19.
only the same power which raised Jesus Christ from the grave, and no less;
And thou, whoever thou art, who have experience of this work, thou art in one
of these two conditions; either thou art set free and delivered by the power of
Jesus Christ, or else thou see thy self in the pit, in straits, in misery, in
a hopeless condition, and art sighing, and groaning for deliverance, and
waiting when Christ will deliver thee: And if thou be but in either of these
two conditions, thou art in a safe and good Condition; but if thou have been in
this misery and condemnation, and thou have used all means to put this off, and
sought out deliverance for thy self, and by thy wisdom and strength, and
conformity, and holiness have got thy self a covering by any thing under
Heaven, then Jesus Christ never was a Deliverer to thee; but though thou
think thy self delivered, yet thou art for all thy peace, and for all thy
Coverings, under a worse bondage then before.

Therefore, I say, I would have every soul before me, examine it self, whether
he be a true seeker of Deliverance, which is to examine in which of these two
Conditions he is in, whether he has been under these Terrors and death, in
hell and condemnation, seeing himself lost and miserable, and that instead of
seeing any wisdom, or power, or righteousness in himself, that he has seeen
and does still see himself to be a mere sink of sin, and a cage of unclean
birds, and that in him is nothing but weakness, Rev. 18.2.
wickedness, and all abominations. And let me ask thee, when thou wast in this
condition, whither wentest thou for help? whether to dumb Idols that could not
help, that have eyes and see not, and ears and hear not, or to the living God,
in whom alone is help and deliverance? And if thou art at present in this
condition, and distress, Joh. 5.4.
thou art one that lies waiting at the pool till the Angel stir the waters,
expecting when Christ will put thee in. Thou will not run to this duty and that
form to ease thy self, and to allay these Terrors, and to quench these flames;
but if help come not, there thou waist, and there thou stand, and remainest
in this condemnation, and go up and down sighing and mourning all the day
long, and thou see it is not in the power of all the Ministers under Heaven,
not in all the forms and rules that can be invented, but only in the tender
mercy and good will of Jesus Christ; All other ways thou look upon but as
going out to Asher, Hos. 7.11.
and to Egypt, and to seek after dumb Idols that have a picture of eyes and
ears, and hands, promising as though they could help, but they can neither see
nor hear, nor help; though to others they appear glorious and goodly things,
and they bless themselves in using them, yet to thee they are dead, cold, and
helpless; so that now here thou waitest and sit alone like the Pelican in
the Desert, Ps. 102.6.
and there thou mournest and bemoanest thy condition, and with David thou have
no rest in thy bones, because of thy sins. Ibid. 38.3
Try thy self now, in which is thy condition; if in neither of these, thou art
in a most sad and miserable condition indeed, and so much the more sad, because
thou see it not: Or it may be thou have cured thy self, and healed thy self,
but art not cured nor healed, Jer. 6.14.
but the Prophets have healed the Daughter of my people slightly (as the
Prophet speaks) and have not thoroughly discovered their iniquity to turn away
their captivity.

Oh! that men were but to come to this condition, to be sensible of their
misery, that they did but really see they were in Babylon in Captivity. Oh then
what mourning, what hanging their Harps upon the Willows, Psalm. 137.1, etc.
sitting down by the Rivers of Babylon weeping and crying out, Oh, how shall we
sing the Lords song in a strange Land! And wishing and saying, Happy shall he
be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones: Will the Ox
lowgh when he has fodder? Job. 6.5.
says Job. Till they have deliverance, they cannot but mourn; Rev. 5.5.
and none can deliver them but the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; to such a soul
only is Jesus Christ precious; others may talk of him, and make a great
profession of Jesus Christ in the Letter, and talk of Jesus Christ his dying at
Jerusalem, and of believing, and Salvation by him; but they cannot love him
till Jesus Christ be IMMANVEL, a Savior in them; Mat. 1.23.
then and never before can these Elders throw down their Crowns before the
Lamb, saying, Thou only art worthy to receive honor, and glory, and power,
Rev. 4.10 11.
for thou only have redeemed us by thy Blood. Thou see thou can not so much
as move hand or foot to help thy self: All thy tears, thy prayers are nothing
but as Jesus Christ prays and cries in thee by his spirit, with groans
unutterable which cannot be expressed. Romans 8.26
This take as the first difference and examination between those that are
wounded and sick, and condemned; the one, he is so, and he can go to no other
but only to Jesus Christ, to be healed and saved. The others, when they are so,
they can find help and rest in men, in means, in ordinances, in fellowships,
in reformations, and better ordering of their lives, by their own power. The
other find there is no resting, no sitting still in any thing below Christ,
but they hunger and thirst, and wait the good pleasure of Jesus Christ, and
when the spirit which blows where it lists will blow upon their Hearts;
John 3.8.
They are like a hungry man, whose stomach does so gnaw he cannot rest without
food: and like a thirsty man who cannot be satisfied without drink. It is not
husks nor shadows, nor pictures, nor Idols will serve his turn, but he must
have real food, he must have Christ's body which is meat indeed, Ibid. 6.55
and Christ's blood which is drink indeed. He must have the Eternal God help
him, or all he can do is nothing to him.

Beloved, were men but come to this, to be really miserable, and truly in
bonds, which men so much talk of, and so little feel, ye need not direct them
this way and that way, ye need not bid them cry or pray, or run to hear or the
like, their very misery would constrain them; whereas otherwise men take up
these things for form and for custom and complement, and to be thought
religious, and to quiet their consciences and the like: But they would be like
the blind man, which notwithstanding they hindered him, and reproved him, and
bid him not pray, nor cry, yet the sense of his blindness made him cry out
after Jesus Christ, Jesus, thou son of David have mercy on me. Luke 18.39.
If men did but find, see, and feel the burning within them, and the sting of
the fiery Serpent, they need not be bid to look up to the Brazen Serpent. John
3.14.


Secondly, If thou be a true seeker of deliverance, and a true waiter, thou will abominate and scorn all other Deliverers, but only this Only Deliverer
Jesus Christ: all other, thou look upon them as Physicians of no value: Job.
13, 4.
Thou see there is but one Teacher, but one Counselor, but one Savior:
They will not go after them that say, Lo here is Christ, and lo there, Mat
24.23.
in this way and in that form, saying, join to us, we are in the best way, here
ye shall find rest and satisfaction: but they see really and are fully
convinced, that there is nothing else but the Eternal Father making out
himself through his son, 1 Timothy 3.16, etc.
even Christ manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into
Glory. And says the Apostle, Gal. 4.3, 4. Even so we, when we were Children,
were in bondage under the Elements of the world: but when the fullness of Time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
Sons: And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into
your hearts, crying Abba Father.

So that it is clear, that soul that truly seeks deliverance, it sees Jesus
Christ only to be able to deliver, that there is nothing less then Him,
nothing besides Him. But herein lies the misery of all the Sons of men: they
pretend to seek Jesus Christ, and think they have found him, because they have
heard of a Jesus Christ who died at Jerusalem; and though they have no union
with him, yet if they can externally believe in him, that is enough, though they
never receive any virtue from him, nor he was never formed in them; And herein
generally most men professing Christ sit down and rest, and bless themselves:
and never yet saw truly their own misery, how they are departed from the
fountain of living waters, Jer. 2.13.
and how they dig to themselves broken Cisterns which are empty and dry, and
can hold no water; And in their extremity, hither they come, to their own
Cisterns, thinking to refresh themselves, and quench their thirst, but they are
empty and dry; and so many men who are great professors of Religion dig wells
for themselves, but they are not the Wells of Salvation. Oh my dear friends!
Esa. 12.3.
my heart bleeds to think, how these men delude themselves with golden dreams;
And they pretend great love to Christ, and say, he is their hope, and their
help, and they will wait upon him and cast their souls upon him, when as they
do but as it is Ps. 78.34, 35. they returned and inquired early after God, Ps.
78.34 35.
and remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer.
Nevertheless, they did but flatter him with their mouths, and they lied unto
him with their tongues; for their heart was not right with him, neither were
they faithful in his covenant.

How do these men keep a great stir, and make a great noise for their Religion,
and who seem more zealous then they? or more eager for worship? who more
flattering and smooth in their expressions, and say thy Servants, thy Servants?
and who seem to be more affected with dishonor to Christ, and are very much
offended at errors, and heresies, and blasphemies? but I fear, and not without
demonstration enough, that they do but flatter Christ with their MOVTHS when
their hearts are far from him; says Iehu, 2 Kings 10 16.
See my zeal for the Lord of Hosts; but we know his zeal was but for himself:
So these men are offended if any thing be said to touch them or their ways,
pretending dishonor to Christ, and they cry out BLASPHEMY, because it reproves
their blindness or ignorance, showing that they are the blind leaders of the
blind, and both fall into the ditch: Luke 6.39
and so do it out of pretense of love to Christ and zeal for the Lord of Hosts.

If so be it were so, that they did make God their zeal, and Christ their rest
and their dependence as they would have all believe, what is the reason that
these men professing themselves Servants to Christ, and Messengers from Christ,
what is the reason, I say, they are so in love with the world? who more hunting
after Honor, after Riches, after Applause, and in all things seeking
themselves as much or more then others making no profession? what is the reason
that they must come forth as messengers sent out from Christ, and yet they must
have two coats, Mark 6.9.
contrary to their Masters command? and they must have their scrip and their
bag; and who more taking care to provide for the body, for food and raiment,
and the like? and yet they say they are doing the Lords work, yet dare not
trust their Master for outward things; shall any man think these men have
trusted their souls with him, who dare not trust their bodies with him, but
they must have so much a year, and they must indent with the people or else
they will not work: how say you? are not these those that make merchandise of
the word of God? certainly these men can never make out themselves messengers
from Christ, 2 Cor. 4.2
approving themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God: neither
has he Commissioned them, nor given them their errand, nor revealed his
secrets to them; but they run before they are sent, and say, thus says the
Lord, when he sent them not, Jer. 14.23
neither have they seen any vision, as the Prophet says: Certainly these are
not the men that preach the word of God out of a ready mind, and constraint of
love, depending on the Lord for their recompense and reward, 1 Pet. 5.2.
but for filthy lucre sake: These men never yet received the truth in the love
of it in themselves, but preach for honor, and for praise, and because it is a
place in credit, and this delights them, and is very pleasing to the flesh, and
because they are had in honor; and so much they will speak forth and no more
then may stand with those things; and they dare not venture either their honor
or riches, or credit, etc. upon the account of truth, no not for their lives.

Are these of Paul's mind, who cried out, woe is me if I preach not the Gospel?
but these men if they can have but the accomodations that attend a Minister in
these days, 1 Cor. 9.16.
as riches and honor, and praise, and full tables, and entertainments, and
feasting, and uppermost seats and the like, they will do well enough for
dispensing the Gospel, and do that warily and tenderly enough without
prejudicing their own esteem, or offending others. And are not these men
faithful Stewards, think ye (as they would fain be esteemed) that can thus
order their ways and keep up themselves, and dare not for their ears commit
themselves nor their works to the Lord, nor to the Authority and power of truth
in the hearts of men? I am much grieved to see these things: and yet who seem
more zealous then these men, who say they are doing their Lords work? just so
did the Pharisees up and down, whom Christ so sharply reproves for Hypocrisy,
and Blindness, and Covetousness, and Deceivers, etc. being blind leaders of
the blind, and both fall into the ditch. Mat. 15.14


But the reason of all this, is, because these men were never yet emptied in
themselves, they never took up the cross of Christ, Ibid. 10.38.
or denied themselves, but are rich, and full, and holy, and wise, and sober,
and very strict (as they would be thought, and think so of themselves) for
though they talk and babble of these things in a litteral way, yet they never
had them in experience, but boast of things in another man's line, 2 Cor. 10.14,
15.
and stretch themselves beyond their own measure, borrowing this man's words and
the other man's experience; and because Paul and others have been witnesses to
the truth, and of high manifestations of God brought forth in them, this they
appropriate and arrogate, and say it is their condition, when it is no such matter,
but having a show of humility and godliness they deceive the simple, and are
such who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own belly, and by good
words, Col. 2.23
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple; and are such who cannot
give testimony to the truth in themselves; they are full of curious collected
choice words: but if you bring those words to experience, they plainly discover
they know nothing of them, but do indeed oppose the truth in themselves; for
they love honor and greatness and the praise of men, of whom Christ says
plainly, How can YE believe who thus seek honor one of another, and not that
honor which comes from God only? Joh. 5.44
Certainly these men whatever they talk of Christ, and preach of Christ, and
make a great noise in words, yet they will be found to be no other but as
sounding brass and tinkling Cymbals. 1 Cor. 13 1
They will undertake to invite others to Christ, and never found Jesus in
themselves; for no man can come after him, but he that denies himself, Mar.
8.34
and takes up his cross and follows him, and though they in words and notions,
talk of self-denial and selling all for the PEARL, yet they are wise in
themselves, and holy in themselves, and rich in themselves; and they have a
power to act in the ways of God, and to conform them selves to the rule: have
these men sold all think you? and though they say men are dead in trespasses
and sins, yet how many MVSTS do they lay upon them, and do Thus and Thus? And
whence is all this, but because indeed they never yet followed Christ, never
yet found him, never yet believed in him, never yet denied themselves, were
never reduced to emptiness and nothingness, but are still alive and whole in
themselves, except it be for a few outward neglects or omissions now and then,
and that they can make up again with a little double diligence? and this is
their way, and herein lies the life and top of their Religion. And truly
brethren, how can these things be otherwise?

Did the woman with the bloody issue, ever come to Christ as long as she had
any thing left? neither does any of the sons of men return to him spiritually,
Mar. 5.26
till they are poor, empty, lost, naked, miserable and undone: And therefore,
though they say they are looking for this One and only Deliverer, and talk
much of him; yet, all their ways and practices declare the contrary; And this
true Deliverer is He that they speak against and oppose; And as he was
reproached, hated, spit upon, and crucified by the Jews, so is he in and by
these men; for the true Christ, and the true Messiah is always abused,
slandered, crucified by the world; Me it hates always, and therefore it hates
you; even all those that hold him forth in the spirit, John 7.7. etc. 15.20
it cannot but hate and persecute, because they testify that all the deeds
thereof are evil. And why? the reason is, because he brings light with him, and
that discovers their darkness, their lies, their Hypocrisy, because he
testifies that their goodly deeds are evil, and upon this account, all (that
know not the life of Christ in experience) do really hate it, and persecute it;
for when man has built up to himself much glory, riches, strength, wisdom,
and great seize, now for Jesus Christ to come and strip him and take away
all his beautiful garments, Ezekiel. 26.16.
and all his glory and strength, here now if man cannot be content to submit,
and lose all for Christ, then he bussles and strives to keep up his glory, to
keep on his glorious garments, that neither men nor himself may see his
nakedness, impurity, deformity, ungodliness, hypocrisy and lies.

It Is true, thou say in words, Jesus Christ is thy only Deliverer, and thou
art seeking after him; if so, why seek thou then the living among the dead?
Luke 24.5.
thinking to find Christ in dead forms, and dead duties, and ordinances (as
thou call them) and think that they will deliver and give life; and when
thou have done them with some spirit and quickness, here is thy comfort and thy
joy, and so thou set up thy self and thy own doings for thy Savior,
Helper, Deliverer.

But, why seek ye Christ and the true Deliverer without your selves? for what is
all the Deliverers and Christ's in the world, if if he be not a Savior in thee,
and a Deliverer in thee? Why seek ye Christ at Jerusalem and externally, and
say, if I do but believe in that person that there lived and died, it is
enough, though I never find him a Savior in me, and to me? The time is coming
when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the Father;
John 4.21 etc.
for the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for
the Father seeks such to worship him; for God is a spirit; and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth.

Now for men to come in the name of Christ, and say, lo here, and lo there,
and say he is in this form and the other mountain, in this ordinance and the other
dipping, in this manner and in the other way of breaking of bread and the like;
and they think by using these external things, to imitate Jesus Christ, and to
give the holy spirit, and to get grace; and they come preaching in his name,
and in his name have done many great works; Luke 13.27.
but says Christ, I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity.
They say also, they are Christ's Messengers and Ambassadors, and that he has
sent them forth, and yet Christ has not furnished them for their work, but
only being furnished from the Letter, and by reading men's Labors, they come
forth Audaciously, and say, we are the Messengers of Christ, when as the spirit
of Christ never furnished them; Ezekiel. 13.3
yet they say, Thus says the Lord, and have seen nothing, they have had no
vision, but say what others say, and so prophecy they know not what; And
farther, for all they say Christ sends them, yet they dare not trust him, not
so much as for external maintenance, but they must have their bag and their
wallet, Luke 10.4.
their scrip and their maintenance, or else they will not do their work; They
dare not commit themselves to the wisdom, and care, of him whom (they say) sent
them. But in vain came these men out in the name of Christ and bring forth such
fruits; who can believe them, or regard them, or honor them, coming forth in
this manner? furely none that have the power of truth and experience of the
work of Christ in them, and that really know him to be the true and only
deliverer: But those who are blind as themselves are blind, may indeed be led by
them; But my sheep know my voice, John 10.4 5.
and the voice of a stranger they will not follow: those who have experience of
Christ, must see a proof of Christ in them, 2 Cor. 13.3.
or else they cannot follow them. They know if Christ send them, he has spoken
in them, and that they have heard the word at his mouth, and he has preached
in their souls first, and discovered himself to be A Deliverer to them, Ibid.
c. 3.6
or else they bring but the voice of strangers, and are but Ministers of the
Letter, and not of the Spirit.

And let the sons of men run up and down from this fellowship to the other,
from Ordinance to Ordinance, and from Baptism to Baptism, from breaking bread
here and there, yet is this nothing so long as thy heart is dead still, and
lies under the power of lust and corruption, and is in bonds and fetters still;
for except Christ be thy Deliverer, except he appear pear in thee, except this
root of David spring up in thee, Rev. 5.5.
except the Lion of the Tribe of Judah arise in thee, all thou can do, and
all thou can run unto, cannot save thee; nothing else in Heaven or Earth ever
can save, help, or Deliver thee.

But, if may be; this Doctriue may seem harsh to some, Object, and say, What
then? shall I sit still, shall I do nothing, shall I not use the means, shall I
not prepare and fit my self for deliverance?

Consider I pray you, when ye have done what you can, can do to save or deliver
himself? is not man dead in trespasses and sins? Ephesians. 2.1.
and can any thing raise the dead but the voice of Christ? and is there any
good thing can be done by them, till Christ work it? is not all their works
without him sin? or can there be any thing properly called a means, or an
ordinance but only Him? when men have reformed themselves and their paths, and
trimmed their way to seek love, Jer. 2.33.
they have but gone astray in all this, and gone after their own lovers, and
sought themselves in all they did, and all was nothing else but sin and
abomination in the sight of the Lord. The sons of men are very inquisitive
after that which pleases their fancy, and their own inventions, and seem to
press after high things, and great questions, but they really oppose and desire
to be ignorant of the truth, as it is in Jesus. They speak of Deliverance, but
they really hate it, though they may say, whatever thou do with us, reform
us and make us holy and the like; but the truth is, they would not have it so,
nor they mean not as they say: for if Christ should take his own way with them,
viz. to bring man down in himself, and to strip him of his beautiful garments,
what would become of these men's smooth words, and long prayers, and seeming
devotion? would not their hearts give their mouths the lie, in all they said,
and discover themselves to be gross and abominable Hypocrites, and indeed would
with the Gergesites rather go out and beseech him to depart out of their
Coasts, Mat. 8.34.
and withal really pray, depart from us, Job. 21.14.
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways? So that when men who were never
yet lost, undone, and confounded in themselves, pray for the grace of God and
mortification, and to be crucified to the world, alas, alas, they pray they
know not what.

And again, these men because they can deliver the outward word, and the
Letter, and bring their matter into a handsome form and method, they think they
have preached the word of God to the people, when alas this is nothing: for the
outward letter is not the word; but, what is there expressed literally, is only
as a witness to the word and the truth, and of what the Saints of God have
found, and shall find in themselves: and if Christ be a Delivervr to them,
they shall find the like things in themselves: And there is none can understand
the Letter in the Mystery, but they in whom the same things are done: 2 Cor.
3.15.
These only have the Vail taken off the Letter, and none but Jesus Christ
himself can do this.

And particularly many Object; pray that we may have this Deliverance?

I Answer.

No man ever truly prayed, a sense of want; if you were brought into a true
sense of thy empty, naked and lost condition, of thy poverty, beggary, and
starved condition, then Christ and his spirit would pray in thee with sighs and
groans unexpressible, Romans 8 26
then thou would pray indeed, and could not but cry and pray, and groan
indeed: and this is true prayer: prayer is not to get together a many fine
smooth words, and to collect this fine expression, and the other, and observing
this and that time, and that hour; but prayer is words or sighs from so deep a
sense of misery and want, that we verily see we starve and die except we
prevail; Men, if they truly prayed, they would not come dreaming out with such
beggarly questions, what then shall we not pray? and shall we not hear and the
like? these questions show they never did any duty rightly, but only in a way
of form or complement, or to qualify the cry of conscience and the like; but
if men be really in misery, in hell, in bitterness, they cannot choose but cry,
and pray, and beg; I Will warrant you you need not bid them, for you cannot keep
them from it, nor will they ask, shall we not pray or hear and the like? for
they pray by the power of the spirit, and that speaks in them with groans which
are unutterable and beyond all expression of words.

We read of some of the Heathen persecuting Emperors, that in a way of cruelty
would constrain the Christians, though they were under tortures and torments,
yet they should not cry nor complain; if they did, they would torture them the
more: but it is not so in the tortures and torments of the soul, they cannot
but they must cry out, and complain, and seek deliverance; when the soul is in
bitterness it cannot but cry.

And farther, though they have done these things, as doing them by necessity,
yet those that are truly delivered by Jesus Christ that only Deliverer, they do
not esteem the doing of these things their deliverance, or them their
Deliverer; wherein lies the misery of the most of the sons of men, that if
their consciences begin to smite them, and sin begins to appear, and hell looks
them in the face; says the soul, I must now look out for a remedy, I must do
something to quench this fire, and to allay this burning; and then what do
they? they then think to reform their lives, and they will go pray and hear or
join themselves into this and that fellowship, and Church-gathering, and there
they will conform to the use of Ordinances, and it may be, get into the best
reformed fellowship (as they conceive) and nearest the rule of Christ, and here
they rest, here they are quiet and all is well, and wrath is past and they are
delivered: Alas, alas poor souls: In this very thing they have turned aside
from the true Deliverer and mist their Deliverance; But the true way to
Deliverance is, to stand in thy misery, and abide condemned in thy self till
Christ himself take pity of thee, and then Christ himself would pray in thee,
and he would carry thee out to reading and hearing, and praying after a
spiritual manner; for while these works are thine own, and thou seek for to
deliver thy self, thou art so much the more in bondage; for these duties, if
done rightly, are the work of the Deliverer, and the fruit of thy deliverance,
and not the cause of thy Deliverance, nor the Deliverer: and when he does them
in thee, then they are done with power; thou prayest from a real sense of
want, and thou hear with a circumcised ear, and then thy reading is in the
power of the spirit, and be awaketh thine ear to hear: Esa. 50.4.
for that is not true or spiritual reading, and hearing, and praying, which
every man may do outwardly, though it be never so often, and never so
constantly; and yet men call these DVTIES and ORDINANCES, and conformity, and
holy walking, when they are never so, except Christ the Deliverer perform them
in them, by the power of his spirit, and otherwise they are not spiritual nor
holy duties as men falsely call them; for they are but outward and carnal, and
nothing of the spirit in them, but done only by the power of self, and of the
carnal natural man.

And therefore when Christ teaches, Mar. 7.34, 35.
He opens the ear, and He gives sight to the blind; his work is not an empty,
cold, dead thing; Joh. 6.63.
but his word is spirit and life, and he requires an ear in an ear, and an eye
in an eye; He that has ears to hear, Luke 8.8.
let him hear, and eyes to see let him see; otherwise, whatever man may call
them, they are none of his Ordinances, but they most prophanly put their empty,
cold, dull, blind, and lame sacrifices upon him. And hereupon thus think and
concludest that He has been thy Deliverer; I say, whoever thou art that make
thy duties, and thy conformity, and indeed thy Ordinances (for they are none of
his) thy support, thy comfort, thy rest, in the least, herein thou have turned
from the true deliverer, Heb. 10.29.
the true Savior, and have trod him under foot and crucified him, and have
made thy self thy God, thy Deliverer, thy Redeemer, thy Savior: And the day of
the Lord is coming when these things will be made to appear to thee, and wrath
will come upon thee unexpectedly, even then when thou think thy self secure
and safe, and all is well, and when thou think that thy peace is made and
wrath is removed, and there is no more frowns and storms from the Almighty,
when indeed thou have all this while but made a covenant with death and hell,
Esa. 33.8. 1 These. 5.2.
and then the day of the Lord shall come upon thee as a thief in the night,
when thou think all is well, and thou may sleep securely; then will Christ
summon thee to Judgment, 1 Cor. 15.52. Luke 18.8. Rev: 1.7. Mat. 24.41.
and the Trumpet shall sound in thy own breast: And when the Son of man comes,
shall he find faith on the earth? No, but then all the Tribes of the earth
shall wait and lament because of him. Even so AMEN. Then two shall be grinding
at the Mill, and two in one Bed, the one taken and the other left; then he that
is on the house top shall not come down to take any thing out of his house; for
the day of the Lord shall surprise them on a sudden and as a thief comes when
no man expects him; and as our Savior says of his doctrine, so do I of these
things, he that has ears to hear let him hear, and he that has eyes to see
let him see, and he that has an heart let him read and understand. Mark 4.9.


I know Beloved, men talk much of what they should do, as if they were so
willing to do any thing Christ commanded; but really and in truth, what do all
these men, that seem to be so much for doing, I say, what do they do? do they
not in all these do quite contrary to what they should do? If Christ has
smitten them, then He alone can heal them, and yet they will be healing
themselves, and delivering themselves, when they should be seeking to Jesus
Christ, and looking to him, and waiting upon him for deliverance: And the way
to be delivered is not to run to this man and the other Minister, and hang upon
this man's preaching, and the other man's counsel; no, but thou would see that
all man's preaching and teaching, and counsel is in vain, and that there is no
other way, nor no other Deliverer but only Jesus Christ; thou would not be
tied to this man or the other, but thou would say of all, even of the
wisest, the gravest, the soberest, miserable comforters are ye all. But thy
trouble, and thy guilt, and thy sting within thee, would make thee hearken when
Jesus Christ would qualify thy conscience, and draw forth thy sting, and
quench the burning of Hell fire within thee, so thou might but hear the
voice of Christ: If thou be wounded, for any tidings of Christ, Amos 8.11,
12.
thou would run from country to country, from land to land, and from sea to
sea to hear the word of the Lord; for thou would see that in all men there
is a famine, Amos 8.11, 12.
not of bread, but of the word of the Lord; for Christ only gives forth his
word, he is the bread of life, Joh. 6.51.
the true bread which comes down from Heaven; it is not Moses nor any man can
give this bread, but only Our heavenly Father.

And when thou have done all that is commanded thee, yet thou must not rest in
thy doing, nor in thy using means, nor in thy praying, but still in all must
count thy self but an unptofitable servant. Luke 17.10.
Thou must not sit down and say, I have done my part, I have prayed, and heard,
and walked strictly, and joined my self to the best reformed Church: Alas, if
thou rest in these things, and think, now I have done well, and it shall be
well with me; all this praying and doing Christ calls vain babbling, Mat. 6.7.
and vain repetitions, which is but to do like the Heathen, who think to be
heard for their many words and much babbling; all this thy doing, which thou
keep such a stir about, Esaias 5.20.
is no other then calling darkness light, and evil good. And when thou go
out to look for any Minister or servant of Jesus to heal thy wounds, take heed
of the Idol-shepheards, Jer. 6.14.
which will prophecy peace when there is no peace, to speak deliverance when
Christ has not bid them, for none can heal thee but he that has wounded
thee: Ezekiel. 13.11.
And so for any other who prophecy lies and dawb with untempered mortar; who
say to thee, go thou and repent and believe on Jesus Christ, and thy sins shall
be forgiven thee; know this is not the way; neither are they true Prophets for
repentance and faith is alone Gods gift, and his work: And if he be a true
messenger of the Lords sending, all he can say, is, I am but an instrument, I
cannot give nor help thee to repentance nor faith, neither can I direct thee to
get them; but only by waiting on Jesus Christ, who alone is the Giver; I am but
the forerunner to the Bridegroom; I have nothing to give, nor I cannot direct
thee where to get that thou seek before he comes, or before his pleasure is
to bestow it: whoever he be that undertakes to be any other but a Messenger, as
John Baptist was, crying I am not he, but I am the voice of one crying, Mark
1.7, 8.
Prepare ye the way of the Lord: I baptize with water, but he that comes
after me, is mightier then I; he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost: He
cries, there is no Teacher but Jesus Christ, no Prophet but he, we have nothing
to give; there is no riches but His.

Examine thy self, how thou staiest thy heart; what quiets thy conscience? have
thou it from man, or from Christ? have thou found that all thy runnings too and
again from this man, and to the other, has done thee any good, but thou have
found, that let man say what he could, yet still thy trouble continued, and thou
could rest in nothing below Christ? I have known some, that by running hither
and thither, they have for a time, for a year or two, or more, somewhat allayed
the rage of conscience, being directed to outward conformity, and getting of
repentance, and taking up constancy in this and that, and the other duty; but
this cure being not thoroughly wrought, but as the Prophet Jeremy says, The
Prophets have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly; for they
having submitted to their directions, Jer. 6.14.
they have hereupon comforted them, and told them now all was well, and they
were converted, and both concluded that he was their spiritual father, that had
begotten them again: But for all this, the day of the Lord has afterward come
upon them as a thief in the night, 1 These. 5.2
and they have been robbed of all their comfort and confidence, and have lain
many years after in misery and bondage, and no man could speak any peace to
them, till Jesus Christ himself came; and then they found him indeed to be The
Deliverer; And that he alone was anointed to preach good tidings to the meek,
to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captive, Esaias 61.1,
etc.
and the opening of the prison doors to those that are bound, to proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord, and to comfort all that mourn; To appoint unto
them that mourn in Zion, beauty for ashes, joy for mourning, etc. that HE might
be glorified.

Therefore from hence I would press a word or two upon all those that think
themselves delivered. It is worthy your consideration that so your confidence
may not deceive you. If thou art DELIVERED by the power of Christ, and that the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah has ransommed and redeemed thy soul from the power
of the grave, Rev. 5.5.
Then thy testimony, and thy witness will be this: That nothing in Heaven or
Earth can deliver but solely the power of Christ: and this thou will and can
hold forth, not in general words, but really and from experience, that there is
no deliverer but Christ alone: Thou will, I say, bear out thy witness (if so
be thou art delivered) that it was not [Ordinances] (as men improperly call
them) could do it; it was not in the power of the Letter of the word, nor in
any thing whatsoever, nor in the power of thy doing, nor thy watchfulness, nor
strictness could in the least help thy soul to rest, but only the mighty arm
and power of Christ, He has trod the Wine Press alone. He can in experience
give Testimony freely, Esaias 63.3 etc.
to that Scripture in Esa. 63.3. Who is this that comes from Edom with died
garments from Bozrah, traveling in the greatness of his strength? it is I that
speak in righteousness being mighty to save: It Is I that have trodden the
Wine Press alone, And of the people there was none with me: for the day of
vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come: therefore mine
own arm brought salvation: And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and
make them drunk in my fury, and I will tread down THEIR STRENGTH to the Earth.

Here Beloved, is a true description of MAN'S deliverance; it can never be till
Christ will do it, and till the year of his redeemed be come, and he does it
alone and no man stands by him, no man can help: And in that day, they shall
drink in his fury,
and he will tread down THEIR STRENGTH: it is not man's power, nor wit, nor
learning, nor endeavors, nor doings, nor fellowships, nor Ordinances can help
him, or stand by him: But his own right hand has brought salvation: If it be
not by the hand and power of God alone, thou were never yet delivered; For in
that day all the strength of man, the wisdom of man, the righteousness of man,
all their strength must be all trodden down; Esaias 63.6 Jer. 25.15 etc.
and in that day he must be content to drink in the Lords fury, and he must
stand condemned and abominable in his own sight, and take the cap of this fury
at the Lords hand. Oh, says that soul (whom Christ has delivered) I find He
alone was my Savior, my Deliverer; there was none with him; If his hand had
not laid hold on me and saved me, I had gone down to hell, into the Nethermost
pit.

Oh Beloved, he cannot endure to hear any lift up any thing equal with Jesus
Christ, or join any thing with him to help him in this work in the least: He
had rather you should kill his dear Father, nay himself, rather then hear any
one speak against or undervalue the work of Jesus Christ. And this is the
witness he bears forth: for he testifies what he knows, and what his eyes have
seen, and what his hands have handled of the word of life. 1 John 1.1
Nay the very work of Christ it self bears testimony, that this was Christ his
own work in them; for it is such a work as none other could do: says our
savior, The works that I do bear witness of me; John 15.24.
for if I had not done such works, as no man ever did or could do, why should
you believe on me? For to make duties or those things falsely called Ordinances
his rest or his peace, or his Savior, this is DEATH to a true experienced
soul: he cannot endure any should wear that crown but Jesus Christ alone: he
knows experimentally, as Peter, when Christ asked them, Ibid. 6.68
Will ye also go from me? Lord, Whither shall we go? thou alone have the words
of Eternal life; They had experience of this in themselves, that he alone had
power and wisdom, and strength; and to turn away from him they turned to death,
to sin, to misery, to weakness, to helpless and dumb Idols, whatever it was
but only Himself: and the work of Christ gave testimony to this work; they felt
the workings thereof; they had it not by reading or hearing, or observing this
or that rule, nor by Notions, or fancies, or opinion, or persuasion, or
self-confidence, but they in themselves have had experience of the breaking of
their own bonds, and loosing off their own yoaks, and that in them, HE has
preached good tidings to the meek, and has bound up the brokenhearted, Esa.
61.^ etc.
and proclaimed liberty to the Captives, and has opened the prison doors, and
delivered them from death and guilt, and hell; And that the Tabernacle of God
is with these men, and to them there is no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, for the former things are passed away: And he that now sits upon the
Throne says, in them, Rev. 21.3.
Behold I alone make all things new; These things Write, says the BRIDE, and
also this Soul; for these words are true and faithful.

Beloved, can you give testimony to this work of Christ in you? have you seen
it, felt it, believed it? Oh! know it is not much talk of Christ, or much talk
of sin, or talking of Deliverance, nor thy persuasion, or the like; but has
Christ wrought it in thee by himself alone, Esa. 63.3. and 4.
when no man stood by him? not thy self by thy power, wisdom, or endeavors,
but he alone in them, was mighty to save, and that their wisdom and their
strength, and their help, and their doings, is all trodden down, and he alone
is exalted; Except thou can give a clear testimony to this, thou may
pretend what thou will, and be as strict and as formal as thou will; in vain
do thou talk either of the Deliverer or the Delivered; Acts 8.23
for thou art still (for all thy Forms) in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bonds of iniquity: Christ never yet set thee free, and thou have as yet been
but thy own Savior, and thy own hand has wrought all thy Deliverance thou yet
have, and thy own life is yet whole in thee; Luke 11.21
and the strong man keeps possession, for all thy forms, duties, obediences,
fasting, praying, using Ordinances, or closing with fellowships, or walking
with this or that Church, or for any of thy thoughts of Membership, or the
like, all this is nothing, and all this may be, and Christ never yet thy
Deliverer, nor thy Savior.

But because I would clear this point to you, that you may not be mistaken in
it, Note two things.
take notice more distinctly of these two things.

First, the Nature of this Freedom.

Secondly, the Relation of it. that is, what it is in it self, whom it belongs.

First, First, the Nature!
for the Nature of it, know, it is not any external nor outward Freedom, but it
is spiritual and inward; it sets the soul free, Mark. 12.17.
and delivers from all captivity and bonds, and taskmasters within; it does not
teach thee to deny to pay Tribute to Caesar, and submission to external laws;
It promises nothing of external Kingdoms or Thrones, or that the Saints shall
rule upon earth and the like, and that they shall sway Scepters, and be raised
up to worldly dignities or honors. No, nothing of this Nature; for Christ
says plainly, My Kingdom is not of this world, for then would my servants
fight: John 18.36.
These are not those things which they are to contend for; but for
righteousness, for peace, for joy in the Holy Ghost, to be delivered from
themselves, and from the Powers of Darkness, Romans 14.17 Ephesians. 6.12.
to be freed from the Oppressor WITHIN: this is the Freedom of Saints.

Many men keep a great deal of stir in preaching, and offering to the world
large Treatises, and promising great matters about external freedom, and of the
Saints having the ruling of the world, and of having all things in subjection
to them; but alas, alas, the Nature of Christ's Kingdom is otherwise; it lies in
being denied to all things in the world, to have no expectations of great
things therein, to esteem it an excellency to be content to be nothing: Indeed
I deny not, but what the Lord in his providence is pleased to order, and confer
upon Nations, or upon this or the others Saint Externally, or give deliverance
from outward oppressors, and in restraining wicked ones, and great men in
their wrath and curelty, they may and ought to receive them thankfully, and to
use them for the Glory of God, and the good of themselves and others; otherwise
they are not well used, if they be not faithful Stewards of them; and they are
to enjoy them moderately, and with self-denial, and with weaned affections, as
seeing them but temporary, and to be parted with they know not how soon;
Therefore whatever men talk, or can say, or write of such things, certainly
this is not the business, this is not the deliverance here meant, nor the
Freedom of Saints, but true freedom is inward and spiritual.

Again, neither does it stand in any outward observantions in meats or drinks,
or observing of Sabbaths or days, or this or that external worship, nor in
their actings or workings, but in the power of Christ delivering the soul from
death and spiritual wickednesses in high places: The worship and service of
Saints does not confist in VARIETY, one acting this way, another after another
manner; but the true Service of Saints is one and the same; One faith and one
Baptism; Ephesians. 6.12
And All eat of one bread, Ibid. 4.4, 5. 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. and Chapter 12. v. 12:
and all drink of the same cup, and all drink of the same spiritual rock;
outward eating, and drinking, and praying, and fasting is not the worship of
Christ: but if Christ be thy Deliverer, if he has set thee free by his own
hand, thou bear out thy witness, and wilt not endure to hear of any thing
set up equal with Christ; for whoever does so, does but seek to reconcile and
make a communion between Christ and Belial; and to make a fellowship between
the Temple of God and the Temple of Idols: 2 Cor. 6.14.
If men talk of Freedom, (although with much confidence) if the power of sin be
still in them, pride, and glorying in themselves, and love of the world, and
malice, and envy and the like, in vain do men talk of deliverance, for all
their forms and outward Holiness: Rev. 21.27
There cannot enter into the Kingdom of God any thing that defiles; the
fearful, or the unbeleeving, or murderers, or Sorcerers, or Idolaters, or
Layars shall have no part there. For be sure of this, nothing goes into the
Kingdom of Christ, but that which comes out from Christ; only that which is of a
heavenly and spiritual nature; Nothing of man is to enter therein: all in and
of him, is under condemnation: only the work of Christ shall stand and
remain: all things else must be trodden down, and annihilated and destroyed.

Farther know the that the liberty of a Christian is in his own breast within:
if it were outward, men might hinder it, or take it away: but this liberty
cannot be stolen from them, but they enjoy it in despite of all the powers of
the world; it is not subject to decays and changes as outward liberty is; which
outward liberty, men not knowing, nor having no experience of this spiritual
and inward liberty wrought by Jesus Christ which is constant and durable, this
makes them keep a great deal a do about external freedom, whereas if they knew
it, they would know this were far beyhond all that which is but external,
outward, and carnal. And it is called carnal and fleshly, because it is so
subject to alteration and change, it never continues in one state: and know
that men may be of very great abilities for external wisdom, or learning; they
may be Able Statesmen, Great Scholars Masters in the Liberal Sciences, Learned
Preachers, and yet never have any experience of this true Liberty, nor never
yet know what it was to be in Christ, though they may talk largly in the words
of it: for this freedom is infinitely above all things of this nature; it
exceeds whatever is in man, as Wisdom, Reason, Wit, Art; for no power or wisdom
of man can teach, or procure man this true liberty: No University, nor no
Academies can teach it: for it is only taught and wrought by Jesus Christ, and
it is infinitely above the reach of humane wisdom; nay man by all his Learning,
and Wisdom, and acquired parts and utmost industry, is so far from attaining it
in the true possession and power thereof, that by all those things he can never
come to know it, nor understand it: and yet such is the pride, arrogance, and
presumption of the sons of men, they will undertake to preach thereof, and
teach it to others, when as they never understood it themselves, nor ever came
to the practice thereof; for this power, and this liberty, and this
deliverance, can never be known but by the workings and feelings thereof: it
must be brought to us by the communication of the spirit workng it in us.

Secondly, concerning the Relation of this Freedom, Secondly, the Relation.
whom it belongs; and that is, only to men that find themselves bondslaves:
he that thinks himself a Freeman, and never yet found really his bondage,
except it were in words or notions, he was never yet delivered. It Is true, men
exercised about Religion, may and do ordinarily confess we are all sinners,
and that they are by nature bondslaves, etc. which men may do and never find
it true in themselves: 2 Pet. 2.19
But that of which a man is overcome, says the Apostle, of the same is he
brought into bondage; nay herein is man's bondage the greater, because when he
thinks himself free, and delivered, then is he most in bondage: And what a
pitiful bondage is this? Nay, when he partly sees himself in bondage,
thinking then by his own struggling and pains, to work himself out, he is more
in bondage: when he thinks to amend the matter, and to get himself to be a
Saint, then he is so much the more a Devil: how are most men captived to their
own Iusts, to every poor base and mean thing? and how are they captived to the
humors and inventions of men, to their forms, and their rules? and how ready
are they to obey and Idolize what men have found out for to worship by? wherein
they commit flat Idolatry, for the second Commandment requires, Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Image, etc. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them, etc. wherein lies a Great Mystery, Exodus 20.4, 5.
more then is in the litteral and external command; for whatever it be that
thou dependest on, or waitest on for comfort from, or hopest upon for any rest,
peace, or satisfaction, to that very thing Thou bowest down, and make it a
graven Image; when thou so far subjectest thy self to the will of man to let
him rule and ride thee, to follow his rules and directions to get peace
thereby, these then thou assuredly make thy God, and they are Images and
Idols to thee: Nay further, when men have so far enslaved thee as to cause thee
to submit to every poor and empty thing; Col. 2.20, etc.
as when they place Religion in meats and drinks, in touch not, taste not,
handle not, as the Apostle says, which are but things which perish with the
using; and yet they will enslave their consciences to such men, and such things.

And further, The world has made a deal of do about Christ's coming in the
flesh, and about his life and death, and sufferings, when as indeed they (as
they have used the matter) have even made it a just nothing, a mere Image, and
an Idol, and have by their inventions made the Cross of Christ in themselves
of no effect: Some saying his death is meritorious and satisfactory for sins
past, but not for sins to come; And that some sins are pardoned, not all; And
that man has power, and he must work out his salvation; quite mistaking the
intent, the drift, the life, marrow, and mystery of the Scriptures, but
content themselves with the bare letter, which every man may by his own wisdom
comprehend and find out. And others saying that sin is never pardoned till
there be actual repentance; And that there is a power in man (if he use his
utmost endeavor) that he may work out and accomplish his own salvation: And
that man must be a CO-WORKER with Christ; and he must perform his part by way
of fulfilling the condition required; else Christ will not perform his: and
many such ignorant, litteral and unexperienced Tenants are held forth by them.

And what is Christ made in all this, but a mere nothing, a very Idol? and
making the FVLL and PERFECT righteousness of Jesus Christ, a poor, scanty,
mean, narrow thing; and to say in effect Christ takes away sin but in part, but
man must do something, and he shall take away the rest. And that man's acting is
the cause of taking away sin; When as HE has trodden the Wine-pressalone, and
NO MAN stood by him, and he only speaks in righteousness, and is alone mighty
to save, and he despises and treads down all their STRENGTH, and all the
power of man to the earth; What is all this but to say, he shall not do it
alone? man shall stand by him, and he must help him; But we must know this
deliverer is as full and as large as the son of God himself, and the
Delivererance as deep and as high as the misery of man; the Defection of man is
not so deep, but the Descention of Christ is as deep: nor man's sins reaches not
so high, but his Ascension is as high; But these men cut short both the
VASTNESS of the Deliverer, and the LARGENES SE of the Deliverance.

It Is certain, man's misery and fall is so deep and so great, that nothing but
infiniteness could recover and fetch him up again; he is fallen into an
INFINITENESS of Nothingnesse; from whence all the creatures, Angels, or Men
could not redeem one soul, but it must be the infinite work of the Creator: man
by sin has thrown himself into a worse condition then any other creature, and
below the whole Creation: and he that sees it not thus really, never yet knew
what it was to be delivered: and he that thinks that less then infiniteness
will redeem him, He undervalues and circumscribes the Death and life of the Son
of God, and counts it a poor thing, and was never yet saved by them: he never
yet knew the height, and the depth, the lenghth, Phil. 4.7. Ephesians. 3.18.19. Psalm
68.13 and 88, 6.
and the breadth of the love of Christ, which is unspeakable and passes
knowledge: he never yet saw himself in the lowest Hell, nor ever saw Jesus
Christ stooping and descending down into the very bottom of the bottomless pit,
to bring him up again: He that is delivered by Christ, cannot but admire and
cry out, oh! the height, and the depth, the length and the breadth of the love
of Christ And again, Romans 11.33, etc. Oh the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments and his ways
past finding out? For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his
Counselor? Or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto
him again. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be
glory for ever. Amen. Seeing him to be so high and so rich, and so full, and so
perfect that He is so full of glory and Majesty, and yet to stoop so low, to
debase and disrobe himself, to make himself so poor, so low, so much nothing
to redeem and recover ME! Oh how great is this Freedom which is wrought by him
alone, without any seeking, or desire of mine! nay till he descended to find
me out, I never knew my own misery; nay when he did appear and condescended so
low to deliver me, I was not willing to be delivered, but opposed him, and
fought against him, and hated him, and used all the devices and shifts I could
invent to avoid this deliverance, and to remain still in bondage, and sided
with the Devil as my friend, and looked upon him as an Enemy, and a Devil, and a
Tormentor.

Herein was love indeed, that HE should thus far overcome himself to become
nothing, and less then nothing for me who am really so: and that he who is so
infinitely rich, full and blessed in himself should show so much love, patience,
long-sufferings, and bear so many affronts and indignities from such a
miserable forlorn creature as man is, and would never leave me till he had
persuaded and overcome me. Oh! herein was love indeed, transcendent love,
incomparable love.

My Friends, you that talk so much of Jesus Christ, and are very zealous for
him outwardly (as one would think) none more; And all you that keep such a stir
about your Forms, and Fellowships, and Orders, and Washings, etc. except you
have found Jesus Christ thus acting in you, in vain do you pretend to him, for
you do but draw nigh him with your lips, but your hearts are removed for from
him.

This is the word of the Lord concerning you, Esa. 1.10. etc. Hear ye the word
of the Lord ye Rulers of Sodom, and give ear to the Law of our God ye people of
Gomorrah. Why Sodom and Gomorrah? He speaks to Judah and Jerusalem in the
first verse: But because they were no other to him, but were as profane as
Sodom and Gomorrah, for all their Sacrifices, Sabbaths, Prayers, New Moons:
etc. Esa. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord? I am full of the burnt-offerings of Rams,
and the fat of fed beasts, and I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of
Rams, or of he-Goats. When ye come to appear before me, who has required this
at your hand, to tread my courts? Bring no more vain Oblations; Incense is an
abomination unto me: the New Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of assemblies I
cannot away with: it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting. Your New Moons, and
your appointed feasts my soul hates, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to
bear them. And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you:
yea, when ye make many prayers, I wll not hear: your hands are full of Blood,
etc.

Nay, and I dare be bold to say, if Jesus Christ should but come to you, to
convince you of your bondage and deliverance, you would hate him, spit at him,
crucify him with as much Malignity as ever the Jews did: For, in truth, the
whole world in all their Religion and Forms love not Jesus Christ, nor aim at
him, nor worship him, but love and seek themselves: and certainly this is THAT
LIGHT which shall break forth in these latter days of the world, to strip,
unmask, and discover all the Religion OF MAN.

In this Sermon was that Testimony given to Dr. Everards Sermons, which is
placed at the end of this Book.

A RESPONSION To certain pretended Arguments against my Book called The Saints
Guide.
I Find a Book lately published, called The Modern Statesman, by one who
subscribes his name by two letters G. W: Esquire; it may be the man is Armiger,
for I will not controvert what I know not, but I am sure he is not very
morigerous, nor manifests much, either of generosity or civility; for his usual
appellations are, Fellow, Wretch, Caitiffe, Jesuit, and the like, which I am
sure are Epithites in a Gentleman (as he would be thought, otherwise he would
not have written the word Esquire at length and not in figures) that all Civil
men will account to be Contra bonos mores; and yet the man ranks himself not
only in a Moral but Christian account; but how justly, let all men and
Christians judge.

This man pretends to answer to some Objections against Learning in a Book of
mine, entitled. The Saints Guide, in his 15. chap. page 109.

And first mark his mistakes in the contents of his Chapter; For he says it is
an answer to some Objections in my book Against Learning; now in my book there
is The clear definition of Learning and the division; also a plain position
laid down, and five arguments to make good the several branches thereof; and
afterward two Objections answered; and sure this is something more (if the man
understand his own terms) then some Objections barely and no more; yet the man
is so wise, that he dare not meddle with the Position, nor any one of the
single Arguments, but only snatcheth at one of my Queries, and fixes on a hint
in my first solution. A bold Adversary that bites behind, but dares not
grapple face to face.

Secondly, there is nothing at all in my Book spoken or argued against Learning
under a general term or acceptance, but with limitation; and yet this man
makes his Arguments against me, as though I had opposed learning simpliciter,
when all that I say is but secundum quid; But doubtless the man will prove A
great Logician, he begins so learnedly.

Thirdly, there is nothing in my Book spoken against Humane learning neither in
any general way, but under a precise respect, and punctual restriction, as it
cannot per se and ex propria natura, understand, nor apprehend the Mystery of
the Gospel, nor any way of its own nature be advantageous unto it; and this it
holds out, not in an abstract notion, but in a concrete Consideration: yet
the man (as Lucian says of fortune and folly like a mad, blind person, lays
about him, not caring nor seeing where he smites or wounds, and answers as
though I had argued against Learning in general; which how false, is evidently
manifest; thus the man has made a Giant of straw, and will now Combat with him
when he has done; doubtless here will be good game; ecce, Don Quixot and his
Wind-Mils.

The man seems a great Zealot for that which he imaginarily accounts Learning,
and I could wish he were a fit Champion; but alas! impar congressus Achilli:
for when I had pondered the levity and incomposure of his Argument, I could not
but conclude as learned Helmont did of RODOLPHUS GOCLENIUS, De Magn. vulner.
Curat. lib.
ingenui scientiae tam debilem Patronum obtigisse: But alas! he must needs
appear a MODERATE statesman, who has hardly yet learned good manners; it had
been a far better adviso for him to have stayed at Jericho until his beard had
been grown, and kept his papers by him, until Horace his advice had taught him
some better experience, decimum prematur in annum; but a full Vessel must needs
vent; let us therefore hear his responsion.

He begins the Chapter with the words of a namelesse Author, who says: Nor is
any Nation without some turbulent spirits of its own; the dishonor of the Gown
and Pulpit, the shame, and sometimes ruin of their Country; and amongst them
ranks me as one. Where we may note, that though the man be ready and rash,
groundlesly to call others the disciples of Satan; yet it is manifest he is one
himself; for Satan is an accuser of the brethren, Rev. 12.10.
and so is he, in these forecited words; he is also a father of Untruths;
Neither He, nor any in the Nation can justly make it forth that I am any way
guilty of turbulency of spirit, either to shame or ruin my country; and for
Satan, He was a liar from the beginning, and abode not in the truth: Joh 8.44.
But I can witness the truth of his Author in himself; for if he had not been
of a turbulent spirit, he would never have began, nor proceeded so boysterously
nor uncivilly; And if He be not the shame of the Gown, or Pulpit, I am sure he
is of the Press, that may well blush with those malicious falsities that he
has published against me who never thought, nor did him iujury. Does his
learning or Christianity teach him these things? The lips of truth shall be
established for ever: Pro. 12.19
but a lying tongue is but for a moment. And so he repeats my third Quaery.

And His first entrance is still like himself, full of poison and evil words:
He says, it is a Quaery Satan himself might blush to put. Surely the man was
ARMIGER to Goliath, or Rabshakeh, from whom he learned to rail; for I must
tell him, That some persons have put the same Quaere without blushing, who were
of more learning and piety then an hundred such as G. W. though they were all
Esquires. But it may be the man has spoken truth, and knew not; for I verily
believe, Satan would blush to put any Quaery that might unmask his deceits, or
discover truth, and so would not willingly have this question brought to the
rest, lest the foundation of his Kingdom be thereby shaken; Neither does this
Quaere any way disagree with the title of The Saints Guide; 1 These. 5.21.
for it is they who are advised to try all things, and to hold fast that which
is good: and that the wolf clothes himself in the lambs skin, is witnessed in
himself, whose wolfish nature appears in his malicious, devouring language,
though he would adorn it with the specious pretext of being a Christian. And
then he proceeds still in that work which his Master the Prince of darkness
has set him upon; to accuse unjustly and falfely; for he says, that I
reproach Learning; which is absolutely untrue; I do only but rank and place
it where it ought to stand; neither do I blasphemously (like himself) assume
or attribute any divinity to my self or words. Can any thing be truly and
properly called DIVINITY but the Nature and Being of God only? Surely his
Learning might have taught him more fit language.

But he proceeds, and says, That except the Old Serpent, and my self, (whom
he, Serpent-like, calls his Disciple) he never found any affirming that man
wanted any thing in his innocence, page 111. Where did he find (except in his
own Serpentine-heart) that the Old Serpent did ever affirm that man wanted not
any thing in his innocence? For if he had affirmed this, he had affirmed that
truth which he hates. Did the man never find, that the Spirit of God in the
Scriptures does affirm that Man wanted the knowledge of evil; that he wanted
sin, corruption, misery, and death, which all entered by the fall, and after it?
Had man before the fall an ignorant, blind, and darkened soul, or a bestiall
nature, subject to diseases, and death; or came not all these by, and after the
fall? and so he wanted them before? Who is the Serpents disciple, I, or the
Armiger, let all knowing men judge? Thus the man argues against he neither
knows what, nor whom, with much railing, but no reason.

But now he says he comes to the question; That reason was depraved and
darkened by the Fall; and that by the help of learning it is in some measure
restored; and this he allows, and affirms. Was this the question propounded
by me, let any man read, and judge? The great Logician with all his skill,
commits that Fallacy which every minor Sophister would be ashamed of, which is
Petitio principii, the begging of the question: For in the Quaery it is not
supposed nor granted, that man before the fall had reason or humane learning,
but is part of the question it self: And he himself page 110, urges it as my
affirmation, that man wanted it in his innocence, and yet now has forgotten
and lost the state of the question. Therefore I must put him in mind of it
again, and tell him, that the question was not whether reasen were depraved by
the fall, or in some measure restored by learning; but, whether before the fall
he had reason or humane learning or not; and so all that he spatters forth
about falling into a pit, and getting out, and the rest, to the middle of the
112. page, is but the foame of his raving fancy, and to no purpose in respect
of my Quaery, but is altogether extra limits questionis.

Then he proceeds, and says, The fellow seems to be a Scholar; I shall
therefore ask him one question. I would know of this Armiger how many such
fellows as my self his Worship maintains to wait upon him? It may be he looks
not upon me as his fellow; but however he might take me to be his brother
Animal: Joh. 9.29.
But I shall meekly and patiently pass by the Title, knowing that our Lord and
Master Jesus Christ was so called by the great Rabbis of the Jews: and only
wish, that God would be pleased to bring him to the fellowship of his Saints in
truth and sincerity. If I seem to be a Scholar (which I confess is in a very
little measure) I wish I could see it appear so in him; for I had rather
combat with solidity of Learning, then with passion and uncivil language.

But let us hear his learned question, which is this; Is not Reason the
specifical difference of man from a beast? and was man distinguished from a
beast by the Fall, or the Creation? Did the Devil, or God make him a rational
creature? I thought he would have asked but one; but here is a multiplication
into three; well, sure the man will not turn his responsions into questions;
he cannot but know, that question questionem non solvit: and besides, he makes
but a question of that which is doubted of in my Quaery, and so asks but what
he should answer. But I shall return him the same again. How does he prove
that reason is the specifical difference of man from a beast? Is it so because
Aristotle said so? where is the proof and demonstration of it? I return a
plain negative, That reason is not the specifical difference of man from a
beast; and if he affirm it, let him prove it; affirmanti incumbit probatio.

To his second, I answer, Man was distinguished from a beast by the Creation,
and came to be as a beast by the fall, which he might have known without
asking: Man was made in or according to the image of God by Creation, but that
image was not bestial, therefore therein lay the distinction; but man in his
fallen condition, though he would be wise, is born a wild asses colt, and Israel
is called a wild ass in the wilderness.

To his third, I answer; That God made him in his own Image, in a more perfect
condition then that of reason; and that by following the Devils advice, he
became as a beast, and has no other guide (in that darkened condition) in
himself but the duskie lamps of reason and sense, which is common to the
beasts. I will here but only urge one thing unto him; Was Reason, or something
else the Image of God, in which man was made? If reason, then no man has lost
that Image; for he holds (as I suppose) that omnis homo est animal rationale:
yet before he has said, that reason was depraved, and darkened in the fall,
and that by the help of learning (humane learning I suppose he means) it is in
some measvre restored: Is it not blasphemy to say that any thing restores any
jot of that which Adam lost, but Christ only? Let all judge how this will be
solved. And if the Image of God were something else besides reason, let it be
demonstrated what it is. Now let him consider his own horrid blasphemy, in
making reason the image of God, and consider whether it be a doctrine of
devils, or not; for rationality I deny to be the image of God, or the
perfection of man.

In the next place he proceeds to my first Parenthesis; but still without any
arguments to disprove, but only asking of questions, saying, If reason does
not distinguish from beasts, what does? Shape cannot, for so one beast differs
from another: Neither is it grace, for then all but beasts must have grace.
Excellently argued! brave Logic! who can refell such unanswerable arguments?
Can nothing but reason distinguish man from beasts? What, because the Heathens
could find out nothing else, must we be so heathenish to believe that nothing
else can do it? I have told him before, and now reiterate it, that the Image
of God does essentially distinguish man from beasts; And can he find nothing
but either shape or grace to distinguish them? Knows he not that every division
is vicious that contains less or more in the part then were in the whole;
less or more in the several species then was in the genus; and therefore is
this arguing perfect, when the division it self is imperfect? What does he
mean by shape? external figure, or internal form? If external figure, does
not man's shape distinguish him from a bird, a fish, and a horse? surely there
is some distinction in it. If internal form, does not that distinguish man
from beast? how then can rationality be forma hominis, or the constitutive and
specificall difference?

To my next, he asks another question, whether learning has not exalted and
rectified my reason so far from such and such premises to draw such and such
a conclusion, etc. I ask him, whether those which he calls and accounts
illiterate, do not know and exercise as much as all this without humane
Learning? but what is this to the question? We are not disputing whether
Learning exalts and rectifies reason or no? but whether they both be not of the
fruit of the forbidden Tree, and whether man wanted them in his innocence or
not? unto which he answers not one word, but goes on in pitiful railing
accusations with the Titles of ignorant and illiterate, against some hundreds
of persons, every one of which does far precede him both in spiritual and
humane Learning; Mat. 12.35.
but an evil man out of the evil treasures of his heart brings forth evil
things; and men gather not grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles. For his
terming of them and me Wretches, Caytiffs and the like; I confess I am
heartily sorry for the ignorance, insolence, and impudence of the young man,
who (God knows) is insensible of his own most miserable and wretched condition,
and knows not what spirit he is of; The Lord in mercy open his eyes, and give
him to see his own blind and lost condition, which yet is hid from his eyes.

For my making use of humane Learning, I detest to set it in the place of that
Wisdom that is from above, but do look upon it in its best condition, as
nescience and ignorance in comparison of the other; and if I use it against
such adversaries, it is but only as Paul, 2 Cor. 12.
to glory in mine infirmities, and to manifest that they have cause to glory in
the flesh, so have I, though I know that glory to be vain. For even those that
object my having or using any would as much triumph; and scandalize me for the
wanting of it, that thereby they might bring an odium upon that truth which God
in mercy has made me an instrument to publish; but I wish that they may desire
that the thoughts of their hearts may be forgiven them; Acts 8.22.
And so I leave him in the puddle of his own mire and clay, until almost the
end of the 116. page.

The next thing I observe is this; (he says) If I be not a very JESVITE, yet I
am the likest one that ever he met with, if the tree may be judged by the
fruits, and that my acts will aloud proclaim me a notorious Jugler: well, as he
may be a modern Statesman, so I am confident he is too young a POLITICIAN to
discern or know a JESUIT if he did meet him; but I would have him to tell us
how many he has met withal in his time, that he is become so quick-sighted to
discern them so easily. I believe he dare hardly nominate where or when he
has met and known One; it may be he has met with me; but if he did, though he
writes himself ESQUIRE, I am sure I could not descry him by his Coat of Arms,
nor his Attendants, except by a Shopkeeper, who seemed his Companion; I doubt
he scarcely discerns the cunning juglings of Romish JESUITS; And I am sure he
understands not Satan's juggling in his own breast, who has bewitched him, that
he does not obey the truth, but oppose it. Poor Creature, he can see and
discern others to be evil and wretched without him, but knows not the familiar
spirit in his own bosom, that deludes and deceives him.

He says, this habit of sin is destroyed, but tells not in whom, where, how
far, nor in what respect it is destroyed; no alas, all that must be understood
by the Readers; for he understands none of them at all: It had been his part to
have showed how far sin as it is inherent in us by nature, and habitual by
exercise, and custom, is destroyed, or annihilated; does there no relicts nor
remnants of it remain in a believer? what was that Law that Paul found in his
members rebelling against the Law of his mind, Romans 7.23
and bringing him into captivity to the Law of sin? was all sin, both Original
and Habitual, destroyed ad killed in him? If we say we have no sin, 1 John 1.8.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And whereas he says, the
Habit of Learning is not in the lest diminished, much less destroyed. I
answer, that it is destroyed in the same manner, and in respect that sin is,
Romans 6.12.
to wit, that it should not reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it
in the lusts thereof; so is Learning destroyed that it should not reign in the
sanctified soul, nor take place of the divine teachings of the spirit of truth,
but be kept under and so be destroyed. And I am sure the Apostle Saint Paul had
more learning then this Armiger; and yet in him it was so kept down and
destroyed, that he came not ( unto the Corinthians) in the wisdom of men's
words, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect. 1 Cor. 1.1^.
And is not man's wisdom or learning destroyed according to the meaning of the
Holy Ghost when it is made foolishness? Cor. 3.1
If any man seem to be wise, let him become a fool that he may be made wise:
and thus if the man had been blind indeed, he had had no sin, but he says he
sees, Joh. 9.41.
and therefore his sin remains.

Secondly, he urges that the whole man with all his endowments is sanctified,
as 1 These. 5.23, 24. 1 These. 5.23, etc.
etc. And then concludes, that either Learning must be sanctified, or something
remains unsanctified. A wondrous learned Conclusion, and sure it is with him a
great absurdity to say, that something remains unsanctified; does not some sin
remain, and can sin ever be said to be sanctified? Therefore I plainly affirm,
that something remains unsanctified; and because it is a mystery to the man, I
shall a little open it. There is mention made in the scripture of a double or
twofold man; first, the new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness; and this is the immortal seed of the second Adam, that sins
not, but is sanctified throughout. Secondly, there is the old man, Ephesians. 4.22.24.
or the body of sin from the first Adam, which is corrupt according to the
deceivable lusts; and this is to be put off and destroyed, is never sanctified,
but must be burnt up with unquenchable fire; and humane learning is the wisdom
of this old man which is earthly, sensual, and devilish, and must be put off
and destroyed. And the Scripture he alleges does not say that the work of
sanctification is done, but in doing; faithful is he that calls you, who also
will do it.

Thirdly, he says, that acquired Learning of it self and of its own nature is
not sin, and thinks he proves it by saying, sin is a transgression of the Law;
and then supposes no Law forbids learning, and asks where it is written,
Thou shall not be learned, etc. I answer, that still he is besides the limits
of the Question; for we are not disputing whether a man may be learned or not
learned, but whether acquired learning, in a Theological respect, as it is
ignorant of the mystery of the Gospel, be sin or not; and in this respect I
must tell him, that it is a transgression of the Law of God, and declared to be
sinful; and though it be not written, Thou shall not be Learned, yet it is
written, that the wisdom of the flesh is emnity against God, and is not subject
to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; and it is undeniably true, that
whatsoever is emnity against the law of God, and is not, nor can be subject
unto it, is a transgression of it. From whence the Argument lies thus.

All the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God.

But all acquired learning is the wisdom of the flesh.

Ergo, All acquired learning, is enmity against God.

The Major is the clear words of the Text, Romans 8.7. Romans 8.7.
If the Minor be denied, it is proved thus.

The greatest knowledge that man by acquisition can attain unto, must needs be
the wisdom of the flesh.

But humane learning is the greatest knowledge that man by acquisition can
attain unto.

Therefore humane learning must needs be the wisdom of the flesh; nay does not
the Text tell us plainly, that all the imaginations of man's heart are evil,
Genesis 6.5.
and that continually; and is not all humane learning the imaginations of man's
heart? Joh. 3.6.
and therefore evil continually? And is not that which is born of the flesh,
flesh? and flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: for to be
carnally minded is death; and is not all humane learning born of the product of
flesh, and so lusts against the spirit, and is therefore sinful and accursed?

Farther he says, And sure were learning either in it self sin, or less
unsanctified in a sanctified heart, we should not find the Apostle Paul giving
thanks for it in 1 Cor. 14.18. 1 Cor. 14.18.
I thank God I speak with tongues more then you all, etc. What consequence is
there in this? may we not give thanks for things that are sinful? many things
are good as they come from God, but made sinful in us, and by us; and may we
not give thanks unto God for them, seeing he gave them to us as they were good,
not as they were sinful? Our affections, desires, and senses are all good, as
they are given to us of God; but we exercising them in sin and lusts, may we
not give God thanks for them, because it is our faults that have made them
sinful. If Learning were placed where it ought, and moved not above its own
sphere, it were one of the greatest blessings that man enjoyes in this frail
life, and is only condemnable in a relative sense, as it will intermeddle with
the things of God, and yet when it is set in its due place, as it was in the
Apostle Paul, who did not preach in the enticing words of man's wisdom, 1 Cor.
2.4
but only used in its due place, to speak to diverse people in those tongues
that they understood: this was not to use it to understand the mystery by, nor
of it self to be advantageous to the Gospel, and so comes not within the Verge
of the Question: And besides, the knowledge of tongues was in Paul as a special
gift as in the rest, for he was not behind the rest of the Apostles; not as it
was an acquisition; and therefore he might lawfully Praise God for it; and so
this is altogether improper, and impertinent to this Argument or Question.

And for what he urges of Apollos, it is as improper; for he did it not by the
force and efficacy of humane Learning, Act. 18.25 28.
but through the power of the spirit of God; for the Text says, he was
instructed in the way of the Lord; and that was A teaching above humane
Learning, and it was in the strength of Divine Wisdom and not humane, that he
mightily convinced them: and it was out of the storehouse of the Scriptures
opened unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he spoke, and not from the muddy puddle
of man's broken Cisterns that can hold no water; Jer. 2.13. Act. 6.10,
but as Stephen who spoke with such a spirit, that the adversaries were not
able to resist, so it was in Paul and the rest, not in the words of man's
wisdom, but in the demonstration of the spirit and power.

He proceeds in his scurrilous language with fool and knave; it may be such are
his companions as most fitting for him: and in the 125. page he says, I keep a
coile about nothing; for the very Objecton as I have put it, asserts the good
to flow from the sanctification of Learning, so that I make it an Handmaid. Let
any one read the Objection and my Solution, and they shall easily perceive how
he either mistakes, or wilfully falsifies my words; for I say this, that if by
being sanctified, they mean, that the providential wisdom of God does order it,
or make use of it for the good of his people, I oppose it not, so that it be
understood that that good flows not from the nature of acquired Learning it
self, but from the wisdom and goodness of the spirit of God, who makes all
things work together for the benefit of those that love him who are the called
according to his purpose. Then which, nothing can be more clear; for that a
blind man could hardly have mistaken it.

Then he goes on, saying, Behold how he cheats you mistaking the Question; for
it is not whether by the help of humane learning, a man may attain a saving
knowledge to himself, whether he can save his own soul; but whether he may not
attain to such a knowledge as may enable him to hold out the way of salvation
unto others; and so proceeds in the proving of this unto the beginning of the
119. page

The poor creature is still accusing others of that which he is guilty of
himself; for alas, he cheats himself like a blind man, shooting he knows not
at what mark: for this Question was not moved nor denied by me, but in my
second Solution granted, that humane learning may conduce to the gaining of
Litteral and Historical knowledge, and is there showed to be an Objection not
ad idem because it profitteth not, and therefore the man is here arguing
nothing, against he neither knows whom nor what, but thinks it sufficient
confutation of any thing, if he do but babble forth wind and words enough,
though they be altogether beside the Question, and to no purpose. I will once
again tell him what he should have proved; to wit, That man had reason before
the Fall, and that humane learning is not the fruit and effect of the forbidden
tree; but not a word of this; It is a morsel too hard for his digesting.

And that men by reason and humane learning may get a litteral knowledge of the
Scriptures, and preach that unto others, is witnessed by himself and others of
the like principle who have but a carnal and litteral knowledge of the things
of Christ, Mat. 15 13.
and yet dare take upon them to inform and teach others, and so the blind lead
the blind, and they fall both into the ditch: and so many thousands preach that
which will neither save themselves nor those that hear them; and so the
Scripture is fulfilled in them, 1 Pet. 3.16.
who being undiscipled or untaught of God, Jude 19.
wrest both the writings of Paul and other Scriptures to their own destruction;
These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit.

But I must tell him, that he absolutely wrests and falsifieth that Scripture
in 1 Cor. 9.27. 1 Cor. 9.27.
For knows he what body the Apostle means? and in what sense does he
understand that Paul may be a Castaway? For, if he means that Paul might be
Eternally Cast away, or a Reprobate, if he preached to others, and kept not his
own body in subjection, them I utterly deny it as false and unsound; for he was
A Chosen Vessel, and was persuaded by the truth of the spirit of God, that
neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, Romans 8.38.39.
nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor
any other creature should be able to separate the Saints (of which he was one)
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus their Lord. For the Word (...)
will not bear A castaway, but one disapproved or disallowed of; now if the
Young man would but have looked a little farther, he might have found the
Apostle expounding himself, not that he might be disallowed of God Eternally,
but disapproved of men, and therefore he says, But I trust ye shall know that
we are not reprobates. 2 Cor. 13.6.7.
Now I pray to God that ye do no evil, not that we should appear (...)
approved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as (...)
Reprobates. So that I make him not speak an impossibility, but I am sure he
makes the Text speak an untruth, in holding that Paul might be Eternally
Reprobate, or disallowed of God. And I wish him to examine his own breast, and
he will find the Judas there, and himself to have but a form of godliness,
having denied the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5
and that he has but taken that word into his mouth in a carnal and fleshly
comprehension, which the holy spirit never planted, nor taught there, and
therefore must be rooted out, because not planted by the Heavenly Father. Mat.
15.13,


He concludes, saying, it is clear therefore, that learning and parts per se
ex propria natura can understand, and so apprehend the mystery the Gospel, as
to hold it out so to others, that the hearers cannot discern by the teaching an
Hypocrite from a true Believer, notwithstanding all his positions.

It seems the poor man thinks the mystery and the history all one, and makes a
conclusion from no man can tell what premises he has labored to prove (which
was not denied him) that learning may bring one to know and understand the
Letter and the History; and now he would make a flourish as though he proved
that humane learning could per se ex propria natura understand the mystery it
self, the contrary to which he has confessed in his 16. chap. page 131. that
many under the light of the Gospel fulnished with the helps of human learning
are strangly unacquainted with the knowledge of Christ crucified; and yet now
has forgot it, and vaunts that, to be clear which neither he nor any else can
perceive visible, and so equivocally shuffles in these words; So apprehend the
mystery, and so hold it out to others, which he dare not express, nor show
wherein or in what precise respect: and so holds forth an absolute untruth,
that the hearers cannot discern by the teaching an Hypocrite from a true
Believer. If he mean of such hearers as himself, I suppose it to be true, that
they cannot truly know the voice of Christ; but if he mean that no hearers
can, I deny it, and so does the record of truth; for though there come many
false Christ's, and false Prophets that may delude many, yet it is impossible,
and they cannot deceive the Elect: And the spiritual man judges all things,
Mat. 24.24.
yet he himself is judged of none; And those that are the true sheep of Christ
follow him, and know his voice, 1 Cor. 2.15. Joh. 10.4, 5.
but they neither follow nor know the voice of strangers.

He proceeds still in the same order, saying, that unless I prove that a man
by the help of learning cannot attain to such a knowledge as to be able to make
an outward profession, that I prove nothing: The Apostle did not prove that men
by humane learning could not attain to such a knowledge as to be able to make
an outward profession; but granted that by it they might; 2 Timothy 3.5.
Having a form of godliness; but having denied the power thereof, creeping
into houses, leading away captive silly women laden with infirmities, 2. Tim.
3.5.
and yet did he prove nothing, when he said, The natural man receives not the
things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: 1 Cor. 2.14
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Because HE
proves nothing, he imagins that neither the Holy Ghost nor any else can or does
prove anything, so wilfully blind and ignorant is he.

In the next place, he repeats my Objection, and the Solution, and says:
First, to this we say, That the habit of sin is destroyed, etc. now the habit
of learning is not in the least diminished, much less destroyed. Good Mr.
Armiger, do you know what an habit is? or is sin nothing but an habit? who
taught you this? the Schoolmen that were as blind as your self? Is not an
habit that quod crebris actionibus acquiritur, and is sin nothing more? what do
you deny original sin? or has sin no inherency in our corrupt natures, Ps.
51.5.
as we proceed from the loins of lost Adam? Are we not conceived in sin and
brought forth in iniquity? or dare you deny the plain words of the Apostle, who
says, and were by nature the children of wrath as well as others? now I never
knew that, that which is by nature could be an habit; for habits arise from
acquisitions and acts; yet this is the great Learning of the Armiger, and in
such like stands the whole strength of his Arguments.

In the same page, he says, it will be more manifest if we consider learning
in it self to be indifferent, either good or evil, according as it is used or
abused; now is sin so? Here is a very bold affirmation, that learning is an
indifferent thing, either good or evil; but where is the proof of it? not one
word to make it good withal; surely must his ipse dixit serve for an Argument?
well, I must tell him once again, that humane learning is not by me taken in
an abstract consideration, but in a concrete, as it is the Action and product
of corrupted nature, and so it is laid down in my definition of it, which was
obvious enough if he had not been wilfully blind? but according to the proverb,
There is none so blind as he that will not see.

If I had considered it abstractively, and separate from the subject of
inhaesion (which in my discourse had been improper and unprofitable) then I had
considered it precisely, quatenus scientia, and then the word HUMANE had been
cut off, and been left out, and so perhaps I should not stick, in a Physical,
or moral respect, with Aristotle to have asserted, that omnis scientia est de
genere bonorum. But it is clear, that what I argue of it is in a Theological
respect, and is so plain, that none but ignorant persons could mistake my
drift and expressions. This man would make it an indifferent thing, as though
some actions of sinful and wicked men were indifferent, and not sinful, Prove.
21.4.
when the Scripture says, the plowing of the wicked is sin. And therefore I
will give him an answerable argument or two.

Every tree that is evil, has also all its fruit evil.

But every man by nature is an evil tree.

Ergo, every man by nature has also all his fruit evil.

The Major is grounded upon the words of our Savior; A good tree cannot bring
forth evil fruit, Mat. 7, 18.
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Luke 6.45.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth that which is
good: and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth that
which is evil.

I suppose the Minor needs no proof, we are all born in sin, and conceived in
iniquity: Romans 3.23. Psalm. 14.3.
In Adam we all die, all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God; And
there is none that does good, no not one. And that humane Learning is the fruit
of the flesh, is manifest, because it is laid down in the definition, to be all
that science or knowledge that is or may be acquired by natural Power,
Capacity, and Industry.

Again, whatsoever is foolishness in the esteem and account of God, is sin.

But the wisdom of the world is foolishness in the esteem and account of God.

Ergo, it is sin.

I suppose no wise man will deny the Major, and the Minor is made out of the
Apostles words, For the wisdom of this world, (...), 1 Cor. 3.19.
is foolishness with God; And that humane Learning is the wisdom of the
world is clear, in the definition. Now, whether the Armiger or I be in an
error, He that says it is an indifferent thing, or I that say it is sin, let
the world judge.

And therefore his long story of making a man's end in Learning the Glory of
God, that thereby he may be better enabled to read, converse, dispute, and
speak concerning the mysteries of Salvation, with his Quaeryes in the end, are
as frivolous as the rest. For, man naturally knows not wherein the glory of God
consists; For he has sinned, and comes short of the glory of God: neither
knows he the true way that God is to be glorified in: Mat. 11.27
No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him;
And therefore this is but an Hypocritical pretense; Job. 11.12
vain man would seem to be wise, though he be born a wild Asses Colt. And for
man to labor to know the mysteries of God, in a way that God has not intended
to discover them in, is but to fight against him, and to labor to build up
what God has declared that he will destroy; For he will destroy the wisdom of
the wise, 1 Cor. 1.19
and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent: And therefore it is not
an holy pretense that will make the thing holy; We must not do evil that good
may come thereof.

And I must tell him, that I could have written and spoken as he does, by the
help only of humane Learning; but I could not write nor speak that Mystery
which has been hidden from Ages and Generations, and is now made manifest unto
his Saints, Col. 1.27.
without the Supernatural and miraculous teachings of that Spirit which leads
into all truth.

And therefore leaving his Physical Acts and Moral Circumstances, I shall
from what has been said, show him in what respects Theologically humane
Learning is sin.

1. As it is nescient and ignorant of the mysteries of Jesus Christ, and the
true spiritual worship; for nothing reveals that but the Son only, and so even
as privation, and deficiency it is sin, and sinful.

2. As it is the Act, Fruit, and product of man's corrupt heart, so it is
altogether sin and evil, and that continually. And therefore I truly conclude
against him (as I did before in the first Solution) that in this case and in
these respects, no more can be predicated of Learning then of sin.

He goes on in the 127. and 128. pages, and asks whether all reading, hearing,
and teaching, be like the principles from whence they flow? which he need not
have reiterated; For I must let him know, that all these are either done in the
power of that w sedome which is from above, and then they are not sinful, or
else in the power of that wisdom that is from beneath, and then it is sinful
and defiles. Therefore the Gospel to such is as a Parable, because they seeing
see not, and hearing they hear not, Mat. 13.13
neither do they understand; and so did the Scribes and Pharisees; they
preached to others, read, heard, and made long prayers, and yet died in their
sins, and all they did was but like the principle from whence it came,
earthly, sensual, and devilish; And so are all the Arguments this Adversary
has yet vomited forth.

Again, he makes a great noise about outward means, and the inward assistance
of the Spirit, but gives us no definitions what they are, nor what he means by
them: I shall tell him in one word, There is no means under Heaven but Jesus
Christ only that either brings the Fathers love unto man, or man unto the
Father: And therefore he might have remembered, that we are not arguing whether
man may hear, or not hear; read, or not read; but, whether Humane Learning
be sin or no; And therefore all that he has said here (nay anywhere else) is
but impertinent and not to the state of the Question. And for that Scripture,
it is neither wrested nor mistaken, as he would insinuate; for if either he or
any other look but to the beginning of 1 Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 3.1. etc.
he shall find that the comparison is made betwixt the Apostle Paul and those
that were but ministers of the letter; for he says, Do we begin again to
commend our selves, or need we as some others Epistles of commendation to you?
v. 1. and so positivly concludes, what kind of Ministers he and such like are
made; namely of the new Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for
the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. v. 6. And if the Comparison lay
betwixt the Ministers of the Law and the Gospel, it will be clear, That he that
is but A Minister of the Letter, can do no more but kill, but the Ministry of
the Spirit saves; and so, that I urged right and not improperly, as he suggests.

Well, the Man is so civil to take leave of me, but yet not without uncivil
languge; he must needs end as he began; a Leopard cannot change his spots, nor
a Blackamore his hew; and so he wishes some able Pen would take him to task,
and unmask the Impostor. I never perceived until now, that the man knew the
weakness of his own strength, and therefore calls for aid; I thought he had
done sufficient to confute me, and must he now have assistance from some other
able Pens? Alas, has he played so decevingly with himself, that he never knew
until now, that truth is great and will prevail?

A TESTIMONY Freely Given BY Mr. Jo. Webster of Dr. Everards late Printed
Sermons in his public speaking in the meeting place at Alhallows Lumbard
street.
Which are to be sold by R. Harford at the Bible and States-Arms in Little
Britain.
AND therefore I cannot but take notice, and I much wonder at that precious
Book lately printed, which it may be, many of you have not taken notice of,
being Sermons preached by Dr. Everard, called Gospel Treasures opened; wherein,
he among other Divine things expresses this point in several of his Sermons,
most Divinely and Elegantly; and I could not but recommend it to you, having my
self found so much sweetness in it; and I wonder much at the Heavenliness and
sweetness of his spirit; for to me it is as clear a piece as any I know extant;
Setting forth (as to this particular) the infinite and deep condescension of
the Son of God, being God equal with his Father, yet to stoop lower and beneath
the unexpressable misery of man, to bring him up again. He there showing, that
herein lay the great and unconceivable sufferings of Christ, far beyond his
external sufferings of whipping, revising, spitting upon, crowning with Thorns,
or his crucifying upon the Cross, and the like; all being far below and not
worth the naming the same day with these sufferings. And showing also how these
things are to be also in every Christian. And that this Liberty purchased by
Christ, is not to encourage the flesh, or purchase liberty for it; but it is for
the inward man, and the spirit; And how, he once having such a principle of
life, he cannot give way to sin, but sin is his bondage; and how the power of
Christ in him slayes all fleshly actings in the love of them; And that all
things of man shall be slain and crucifide in him by the death of the Son of
God; And that these are the things which shall be burnt up for ever and ever
with unquenchable fire. And although many self-wise Professors in the world are
offended at the Book, and stick not to asperse and belly it with their common
slanders of Error and Heterodoxal opinions and the like: Yet we know the World
can do no other, but will belly the Truth, as it always has done: And the more
Divine any truth is, the more they oppose it; Why? Because the Light thereof
Condemns their Darkness, Sin, and Ignorance, and their Practices: And they
are not able to stand in, or bear the Light thereof: For either they must
Condemn the Truth to Justify themselves, or else Condemn themselves by the
Truth, which they can never do, till they are overcome and Captived by the
Truth.

FINIS.

