We have brought our Hogs to a fair Market: OR, Strange News from Newgate;
Being a most pleasant and Historical Narrative, of Captain James Hind, never
before published, of his merry pranks, witty Jests, unparalled Attempts, and
strange Designs. With his Orders, Instructions, and Decree, to all his Royal
Gang, and Fraternity; the appearing of a strange Vision on Monday morning last,
with a Crown upon his head; the Speech and Command that were then given to Cap.
Hind; and the manner how it vanished away. As also how he was enchanted by a
Witch at Hatfield, for the space of three years; and how she switch'd his horse
with a white Rod, and gave him a thing like a Sun-diall, the point of which
should direct him which way to take when persued. With his Speech; the old Hags
Charm; and the raising of the Devil in the likeness of a Lion; To the great
admiration and wonder of all that shall read the same.

Unparalled Hind.



Imprinted at London, for George Horton, 165^.

To the Reader.
Beloved Contrymen,
WHereas there has been sundry various Relations lately divulged upon the
proceedings of Captain James Hind, and diverse impertinencies therein recited,
which he detests against: In order whereunto at his request and desire, (for
general satisfaction) I have drawn up this ensuing Tract; wherein is presented
to thy view, his merry Pranks, witty Jests, unparalleld Attempts, wonderful
Escapes, unexampled designs, never before published, and attested under his
own hand; so that what hatred the effects of his Feats purchased, the
quaintness of them palliated; that we may well conclude,

Though Clavil's fortune far more happy proved;
This lives, and yet may die, much more beloved.
G. H.

O yes, O yes, O yes.
THese are to certify all persons whom it may concern, That I James Hind, do
here strictly charge and require, all and every one of the Bilbo Blades,
lattely appertaining to Our Royal Gang and Fraternity, That they do not recede
or flinch from their principles, nor to betray each other for the lucre of 10
l. which is the Reward, and which will make them swallow a false Oath as
easily, as one do would buttered fish; I do likewise conjure you to keeep your
hands from picking and stealing, and to be in charity with all men, except the
Caterpillars of the Times, viz. Long-gown men, Committee Men, Excize-men,
Sequestrators, and otber Sacrilegious persons. I do likewise strictly order and
command, That you keep your hands from shedding of innocent blood* that you
relieve the poor, help the needy, cloth the naked, and in so doing* you will
e^^^nize your Fame to all Ages: and make the cutting Trade renowned.

Farewell, J. Hind.

How Hind was betrayed by two Whores; who sent two highway men to take his
money; and how he killed one of their horses, and robbed the other of his money.
HInd being full of gold, past away the day very merrily, and toward night,
rides to an Inn which stood in a private Road, where it seems some highway men
did use; after he had seen his horse carefully dressed and fed, came into the
house, where were two h^nd^ome Ladies by the fire; he bespoke a good supper,
and invited the Ladies to it; when supper was ready, he called for wine, and
made them merry; they seemed very coy to him; but knowing their humor, pulled
out of his pocket a handful of gold, singing the song, Maid* where are your
hearts become, look you what here is! after much mirth, to bed he went; he had
not been long a bed; but the two men came in who kept these two Whores, to whom
they said, that there was a Gentleman in the house that had abund^nce of Gold
about him: they resolve to watch his going, and to follow him in the morning;
Hind being wakeful, rose early in the morning, and was mounted before those
Lads were stirring: when they heard his horse prance, they looked out at a
window to see him; but the Theev^s seeing he had so good a horse, were like to
fall out who should have him: one said, I will have the horse, and you shall
have his money: Nay, said the other, I will have his horse. They quickly made
themselves ready, and rod after Hind; when they had overtaken him, they asked
him which way he rod; he answers them* toward Cambridge: and coming to a place
where no people were nigh, one of the The^ves jears Hind, holding money in his
hand, and sings, Maids where a^e your hearts become, look you what here is!
Hind seeing their intent, and knowing he was betrayed, answers them in the same
tune: Now you Rogues, you are bot^ undone, look you what here is; firing at one
of them, and shot his horse in the head; which the other seeing, betook himself
to flight; but Hind soon overtook him, and takes away his money, saying; Is
there but one Master-Thief in England, and would you venture to rob him:
verily, were you not of my own profession, neither of you should have lived;
but seeing thou ventured hard for it, thou deservest something: so Hind gave
him his money back which he had taken from him, saying to him, Remember what I
say unto you: Disgrace not your selves with small sums, but aim high, and for
great ones; for the least will bring you to the Gallows; and so farewell, O
precious Council.

How Hind was in^hanted by a cunning woman, who after some discourse switched
him with a ch^rmed R^d, not to b^ taken or harmed during the time this Charm
should last, w^^ch was for three years.
(...) high-way-men of their money, it was his chance (...) George-Inn being
then ^he Posthouse, where (...) Gentlemen that were there: In the morning very
early Hind calls for his horse, to be gone; being now mounted, he takes leave of
the Gentlemen; but as he rod along Hatfield, at the Towns-end, an old woman
asked an alms of him, his horse was so charitable minded that he presently
staid, and would go no further; Sir, said the old woman, I have something to
say to you, and then you shall be gone; Hind not liking her countenance, pulled
out 5 s. and gave her, thinking she would but like a Gipsee, tell his fortune:
said, Good woman I am in have: Sir, said she, I have staid all this morning to
speak to you; and would you have me lose my labor: speak your mind, said Hind.
Then the old woman spoke as follows:

Captain Hind,

YOu ride and go in many dangers; wherefore by my poor skill, I have studied a
way to preserve you for the space of three years: but that time being past, you
are no more then an ordinary man, and a mischance may fall on you, as well as
another: but if you be in England, come to me, and I will renew the Virtue of
this Charm again; In saying these words, she pulled out of her bosom a box like
a Sun-Diall, and gave it Cap Hind, saying; When you are in any distress, open
this, and which way you see the Star turn (being set at the end of a needle
like a Dial) ride or go that way, and you shall escape all dangers: So she
switched him with a white Rod that was in her hand, struck the horse on the
buttocks, and bid him farewell. The horse leaped forward with such courage, that
Hind had much ado to turn him to give her thanks. The time of this Charm was
expired in the year 1649.

Since which time, many strange Visions have appeared unto him, but especially
since he came to Newgate; where, on Monday last in the morning, falling into a
Dream, there appeared a Vision, in the likeness and portraicture of the late
King Charles, with a Crown upon his head, saying, Repent, repent, and the King
of Kings will have mercy on a Thief.

portrait of King Charles I

The next morning (being Tuesday) he told one of the Keepers* That he had heard
of many m^n going to Heaven in a st^nig; but he had bin there in a dream, where
he saw his Master the King, ^he nobl^ Lord Capel; but could not see Duke
Hamilton. The Keeper (...) Hind, was you mad to leave such a glorious place,
for to come again to this dark Dungeon. Truly, I am afraid you will sca^ce ever
come there again; and so they parted (...)

How Hind robbed two Gentlemen's servants near Dunstable, and ^aused a
Presbyterian Minister to be apprehended for a Highway man, and escaped himself.
HInd being informed of a purchase, mounted himself upon his Steed, and ranging
the Road, espied some Gentlemen drinking at an Alehouse on horseback, having
sent their servants before: Hind passed by them; but riding at a good rate,
quickly overtook the Gentlemen's servants; and soon perceived by their
Portmantle^ that there was money in them, said; Stand, deliver your money; or,
by the life of Pharaoh, you must forfeit your lives; the two Gentlemen being to
loath to dispute it with him, yielded; and resigned up the Portmantles, which
he soon cut open, took out the money, and tying the bags together, laid them
before him, and rid full speed away: one of the servants rod to acquaint their
Master, who persued Hind hard: Hind met a parson, and said to him, Sir, I am
like to be robbed, you must stand to it ^ow for your own good as well as mine:
they would have this money from me, which you see. Come sir, be of good cheer,
one honest man will skare ten Thieves: you shall have one of my pistols: so
Hind gives the parson a pistol ready cockt and charged, and bids him fire at
them that come first; while I ride down to to the next Village, and raise the
Country people to be our help. The parson having been at a Wedding, and
pot-valiant, rid up boldly to the Gentlemen, and fired his pistol at them; but
he was immediately taken prisoner, who cries out, spare my life, and you shall
have all my money: no Sir, said the Gentlemen, we will have you hanged: What?
a Parson and rob on the high way: they presently hale him to the next Justice
of the peace telling his Worship, that they were robbed almost of 200 l. and
that this parson was one of the Thieves; but the parson related the manner how
he was drawn in by a younger brother, protesting his innocence, and that he
never wronged any man of a penny: The Justice laughed to see the parson of the
parish apprehended for a high-way-man; but passed his word for his appearance
the next Assizes: who when he was brought before the Bench, was cleared: But he
made a vow never to ^ire pistols more.

How Hind being waylaid at Harborough in Liecestershire, raised the Devil, in
the likeness of a Lion, and cleared his way, to the great terror and amazement
of all that beheld him.
HInd having played some notable pranks in Leicestershire, fled to the Crown Inn
in Harborough, where he betook himself to a chamber, but immediately privy
search was made after him, and strong guards set about the said Inn, which he
perceiving, came into the Gallery, and inquired the cause thereof; answer was
returned, That they came to make search for one who had committed a great
Robbery, and that there was great suspicion that he was the man. Who I, said
Hind; No, I will make it manifest to the contrary; standing in this posture:
portrait representing highwayman Hind

Gentlemen, I am a man sent to do Wonders; and many Visions have appeared; and
sundry voices have I heard, saying, O thou great and mighty Lion, thou a^t
decreed to range the Countries to work and manifest to the people strange
Wonders: At which instant, a Rampant Lion appeared visible, but immediately
vanished; to the great admiration of the spectators; who peaceably departed to
their several Habitations, to tell the strangeness of this Wonder.

lion rampant

THe Scene's quite altered, for we plainly see
Our English Hind is the only Man: It Is he
Does far excel the Spanish Gusman; who
Did many brave and handsome Robb'ries too,
Yet is far short in that, as it is expressed;
For Hind could neatly rob, and neatly jest.
It Is He; the Sadlers Son, the Butchers Boy,
His Fathers grief and once his Mothers Joy.
Who run from's Master, and to London came
To seek his Fortune, and to get a Name:
Where he not long had been, but quickly made
Himself a Member of the Cutters Trade.
And grew therein so excellent, that He
Soon commenced Master of that Company:
And this to's Honor is Recorded further,
The poor he Robbed not, nor committed Murder.
Coasting the Countrey's, at the last a Witch
Enchanted him, and gave his Horse a switch;
Which lasted but for three years time, and then
His Spell expired, and he is as other men.
And to be short, he now in Newgate lies,
In th'hole a pris^ner, till he is cleared or dies.
Let this suffice thee Reader, for thou wilt find
The famous Gusman is our English Hind.
FINIS.

