A Prospect OF ETERNITY: OR Man's Everlasting condition Opened and Applied.

By JOHN WELLS Master of Arts, sometimes Fellow of St. John's College in
Oxford, and now Pastor of Olaves Jewry LONDON.

(...). Chrysostom. ad Theod. lapsum. paraen. Cap. 5. Edit Par. Amanda est illa
vita, ubi nullus labor est, ubi summa semper securitas, secura felicitas, felix
libertas, libera beatitud^. Audoenus. And these shall go away into Everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life Eternal. Mat. 25. 46. London, Printed
by E. C. for Joseph Cranford at the Phoenix in St. Pauls-church-yard, 165^.

September. 8. 1654.
Imprimatur

EDM. CALAMY.

To the right Worshipful Alderman Foot, Alderman Frederick, and the rest of
his much Honored and, dearly beloved Friends, the Inhabitants of Olaves Jewry,
LONDON; John Wells their unworthy Pastor wishes all increase of happiness
both here and to ETERNITY.
Dear and much Honored Friends,
THis small Manual had necessitated me to an Apology, to excuse my
precipitance in adventuring in public, especially in this age, which so many
Learned and Able Pens has visited; had not my passionate desire to serve you,
not only in the Pulpit, but in the Press, not only by Supplications and
Prayers, but by Meditations, enforced this presumption. It has been the
tedious controversy and long dispute of my thoughts, what testimony of my Love
and Thankfulness to present you with, and at last the vote carried it, to
present you with a Landscape of Eternity.

Indeed, I confess, this small Treatise calls for as many Apologies, as it has
lines in it self, but the unusualnesse of the subject, and your wonted favor
and goodness, shall be my Apologeticall plea. And as the Painter who pictured
Alexander with his finger on his defective eye, let your candidnesse cloud, and
conceal all the imperfections of it. What it is let me entreat you to
entertain and accept, and now it is come abroad into the world, let it not
wander up and down and no man own it, but let it be sheltred and received in
the kind embraces of your patronage. This I must inform you, that my ambition
to serve you was real and sincere, though this short Enchiridion be but a rude
draught of that ambition. I shall not (my dear Friends and Flock) dilate, or
digress in the amplifying of the seriousness, profoundness, necessity and
sutableness of the argument, the great state of Eternity; lest I should
anticipate and forestall my self, and leave the Treatise to be only a
rehearsal and repetition. Only let not this suggestion be troublesome and
unwelcome to you; if I mind you that Eternity is the end of all our hopes, the
stage of all our duties, the shore of all our labors, the reward of all our
prayers, and the consummation of all our happiness. Man himself was not
created to live in a Cottage made up of lime and hair, of mud and dirt, to fix
his thoughts or hopes upon fading and fainting enjoyments, but to be an
inhabitant of and residentiary in heaven where Eternity keeps the door. The
great Creator of Heaven and Earth, is Man's only fit companion, and Eternity is
essential to him, he is Deus aeternus and immutabilis; the comforts of the
Spirit are the souls only refreshments, and everlastingness is entailed on
them, Joh. 14. 16. Nay the soul it self, which is man's nobler and better part,
which is life incorporate, and activity wrapped in the windingsheet of flesh, is
immortal in its being, and only rests satisfied in the attainment Psalm. 17.
15.
of a glorious Eternity.

Let it not therefore (my endeared and Honored Friends, and as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 20. My glory, my joy) seem a tedious impertinency, or long
digression, to fasten your thoughts on Eternity: It may be (through grace, and
it shall be my importunate prayer for you) some of you may bless God for these
few hints to all Eternity; Who Eccles. 12. 11.
knows what a word in season, if as a nail it be struck down to the head, by
the Master of the Assemblies, may produce in an ingenuous and serious
Congregation? Only let Prayer usher in, and accompany your Meditations on this
Subject. I shall leave both the Treatise and You in the hands of the Lord, and
entreat the God Psalm. 65. 2.
that hears Prayer, that every line in it may be written upon your souls in
the blood of Christ, and with the point of a diamond, the Spirit of the Lord,
and shall rest expecting the longed for fruits of these inconsiderable labors,
and shall beg that the blessing of the Lord would enliven and enrich every
truth in them contained; and that this poor Tract of Eternity may in some
measure conduce to the landing of every one of your precious souls (whose
welfare shall be the crown of my joy, both here and for ever) in a glorious,
steady, and joyous eternity.

But I will no longer detain you, only let me tell you, I have endeavored in
this Treatise, not only to put my Sermons, but my Affections in Print. And if
this weak birth (which only your disrespect, and misinprovement can render
abortive,) shall put you upon more frequent thoughts of, and serious
preparations for Eternity, my design is accomplishshed, and it will not only
be an unspeakable joy unto, but an incompensable obligation upon

Yours in all soul-service in Jesus Christ, John Wells.
From my Study in the Old Jewry, Sept. 7. 1654.
The EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT was the cursed and Atheistical speech of Paul the third, who sat in the
Pontifical chair, when lying on his deathbed he said, He should now make
trial of three things whereof he had doubted all his life;

1. Whether the soul was immortal. Dignum patella operculum. Eras. Pudet fari
Catoniana, Chreste, quod facis, lingua. Mar.
2. Whether there was a God. And 3. Whether there was an Hell.
But however though most men will not so far play the Atheists, as to be
Skeptics in these things in their discourse and language, yet in their lives
and deportments, they act the verification of all these enquiries.

I have here (candid Reader) presented thee with a Subject of latitude enough
to take up all thy thoughts with the Sea of Eternity, which may drown all that
heat which boyles over in sinful, and sensual objects. Our age is the womb of
multiplied confusions, and every one is ready to bar up their own Cabbins,
and lock up their earthly enjoyments in security; but who is it that makes it
his enquiry how to ensure Eternity, and when death shall throw him overboard,
that he may be swallowed up in the Ocean of a glorious Eternity?

In the following Treatise (kind Reader) you have the nature of our eternal
estate unravelled; and so on necessity the joys of the blessed, and the woes
of the damned unbowelled; and if either the one shall affright thee from thy
sin, and why not, thy sin will ingulfe thee in eternal misery; or the other
allure thee to God, methinkes it should, when God is the very life of eternal
life: I say, if either physic work, it will abundantly compensate the poor and
unworthy Author in what he has contributed; nor will it be any loss to thee,
on whom the Treatise has tried its experiment. It is strange to observe with
what vain Speculations men misguide their zeal, and tire their own fervor and
vivacity; with what overboyling ambition do the Absaloms of the world raise
unnatural rebellions to seat themselves in the throne: and others turn
Curtizans to their voluptuous appetites, and spea^ Epicurus himself to be
illiterate in the sensual trade: And a third sort dig the golden mine by
indefatigable industry, and then bury themselves alive in it, by delight and
complacency: Nor are there wanting a fourth generation, who drown themselves in
the curious subtilties, trifling questions, and vain strifes and disputes of
secular learning, (not that I disallow, but honor Learning bespangled with
grace) and with eagerness pursue the vanishing delicacies of a better tempered
profaneness. When in the mean time, the great and main prey of man's pursuits
should be, how to lay claim to a rich eternity. How would the Saints
triumphant who now bathe themselves in rivers of eternal pleasure, if such a
passion could enter heaven, deride the folly and madness of most in the world?
It is thy soul, thy God, thy life, thy eternity calls for thy most serious
thoughts, precious time, active graces, fervent prayers, and diligent
inquisitions.

And let it not seem unto thee a tedious and troublesome impertinency to glance
thy eye on these short Meditations: I may say concerning this Manual, what Lot
said concerning Genesis 19. 20.
Zoar, Is it not a little oned? Thou know not what thy reading this short
Treatise, if the Spirit of the Lord give thee a meeting, may engender; what
heartmelting, sin-killing, grace-multiplying? Despise not Zech. 4. 10.
the day of small things. But I commend It and Thee to the grace of the Lord,
and rest

Thine in the Gospel of the Lord Jesus John Wells.
From my Study in the Old Jewry, Sept. 7. 1654.
A PROSPECT OF ETERNITY: The Introduction.
2 COR. 4. 18. The things which are not seen, are Eternal.
THis Chapter in the aim and intention of it, is a Consolatorie reserve for
suffering Saints; a Scripture-cordial for fainting Martyrs; and it may be
parcelled into four principal parts.

1. Here is Paul's vindication of his The first part of the Chapter.
Ministry; and that in three regards.

1. He advances his Ministry, by his call to it: by acknowledging free grace
in calling him to so glorious a function. Paul chains Ministry and Mercy
together, and reads Gods compassion in his own function: a practice unusual
with us, for we for the most part make the Ministry a cloth which will stain
most, and esteem that sacred office, our misery, not our mercy, our burden, not
our privilege; while we reproach the persons, deride the qualifications, and
dispute the office of the Ministry; but this great Apostle makes that his
honor, which we repute our scorn, ver. 1.

2. The Apostle magnifies his office by his sincere carriage in it, and as he
eyes Gods grace to him, in selecting him for this office, so he does not
overpasse Gods grace in him, in carrying him on in the office; he triumphs in
Gods bounty and his own innocence. And truly sincerity sheds a gloss upon the
Ministry, and dresses it in its genuine attire; Ministers should no more want
integrity in their office then qualifications for it: the first obstructing the
prevalency, the latter undervalanuing the dignity of the Ministry, verse. 2.
etc. Paul was no daubing sophister, who made the mine, and gain his end: who
did adulterate the truth, to get a real gain; he did not daub with untempered
mortar, nor preach fucatam Ezekiel. 13. 11.
Doctrinam, dissembled and painted Doctrine, or vent truth in a duskish light;
but he would weigh his intentions and practices, not in the balance of his
opinion, but in the scales of other men's consciences: he preaches not himself,
to make the Pulpit his pander; but Jesus Christ, and him crucified: and if his
own name must be mentioned, it was but as the cipher to the figure, to make
Christ the more glorious, verse. 2, 3, 4, 5.

3. Paul advances his office by opening the trust, that glorious trust, that
every Minister was entrusted withal, verse. 7. Ministers they are considerable
caskets, which contain rare jewels, as the matter of the Lamp to the light of
it. As Caesar said to the trembling mariner, Thy boat carries Caesar and all
his fortunes: so the Ministers they are the heralds of divine truth; and every
one of them may justly take up Isaiahs Apology, Isa. 6. 5. Woe is me, for I am
undone, I am a man of unclean lips: pure truth drops from their unclean lips;
and this is the first part.

11. And as the first part comprizeth The second part.
the glory of the ministerial office, so the second comprehends the troubles
of the Ministerial officers: they are not only earthen, but battered and
broken vessels, verse. 8. Paul and others they flamed in zeal, but many storms
fell upon the fire of their zeal; they were burning lights, but there were many
winds to blow these lights out; the dignity of the office did not prevent the
misery of the person; in the former part Paul admires his function, and in the
second he bewayles his condition; Ministers their calling is honorable, but
oftentimes their condition is deplorable; We are troubled, we are perplexed,
verse. 8. Indeed their embassage is glorious, but their usage is often grievous,
and Christ's Ambassadors Rev. 1. 20.
often find the same welcome with David's: they are sent out with renown, 2 Samuel 10. 4.
though entertained with reproach; they are stars mustled in a cloud: though
the misery mentioned ver. 8, 9. may be understood of the Saints in general.

But thirdly, there is a lamp appears The third part.
in this night; the third part of the Chapter comprehends the rare indulgence
of God, in providing planks for these shiprackt Ministers and people, harbors
for weather-beaten Saints, there were yet back-dores for straightned
professors, troubled but not distressed, verse. 8. 9. and the voice of despair
was not heard in the storm of their calamity, some twigs there were to keep
them above weather; God has either the castle of Providence, or the Act. 23.
17.
arc of a Promise, or the alsufficiency of his own grace, for the retirement 2
Cor. 12. 8.
of his people in the greatest storms and tempests.

But lastly, here is mention made, of The fourth part.
the glorious plot and design that God has in all the sufferings of his
Ministers and people; and that is to bring them to glory at the last; the life
of a Saint is a Tragicomedy; tears in the pilgrimage, but joy in the heritage;
weeping in the bud, but glory in the flower; here persecution, but shortly
coronation, verse. 15, 16, 17. The stripes of a Saint are easy, but the crown
is weighty,

1. For the massinesse of it: much glory.

2. For the value of it, and so I have now brought you within view of the text.

And the whole verse is the close of the discourse of this Chapter: and it is a
serious Aphorism argumentatively used, to stay the minds of Gods people in all
their infelicities, and to dry up all their tears: and the argument runs thus,
That supposing our life here were spread with roses, yet they are marcessible;
and if with thorns, yet they are dying; the jewels of the Crown will receive a
damp, and the terrors of the Cross will soon be at an end: groans and joys
in this life are both expiring, our troubles and our triumphs have their
setting, (...), for the things that are seen are temporal; the distresses of
the world are a short and sudden tempest, and the delights of it are a
shedding flower; and therefore the Apostles argument is, that there ought to be
an indifferency in men's thoughts, for the outward passages of this world,
wisdom and grace should make our judgments even, and we should be in an
aequilibrio, whether we sway the scepter, or are cast upon the dunghill, for
all things sublunary are (...), for a season: but the things that are not seen,
are eternal; (...). And now I have brought you within sight of the vast Ocean
of eternity, and the text is a pregnant argument that the great Apostle uses
why we should make it our inquiry, what our perpetuated estate should be; our
future condition, when millions of years shall be as millions of ciphers, and
signify nothing: when the Crown and the Cross shall be stretched out to
eternity, and there shall be neither fading in the one, nor waste in the other.
Now before I traverse the doctrinall conclusion that compriseth the subject of
the treatise, I shall unmaske the text it self in a percursory explication:
and the question will be what the unseen things are in the text. And first I
suppose these unseen things spoken of here, are principally those fruitions of
glory, which free grace has stretched out to eternity, that unshaking and
unshaken crown of eternity; that everlasting joy, that the Saints shall partake
of; that unfading happiness they shall flourish in, to all eternity; that
eternal house for the security of it, 2 Cor 5. 1. that eternal glory for the
renown of it, 2 Timothy 2. 10. that eternal inheritance for the riches of it,
Heb. 9. 15. that eternal redemption for the love of it, Heb. 9. 12. that
eternal salvation for the seasonablenesse of it, Heb. 5. 9. These are those
unseen things chiefly intended, those glorious beatitudes which are reserved
for believers entertainment, which shall never receive either damp or death;
those rivers of pleasure which run at Gods right hand for evermore. Psalm. 36. 8.
And there are two reasons which seem to enforce this interpretation:

1. your perplexities (suffering Brethren) do but weigh anchor, and sail into
the Ocean of eternity; and consider, there your happiness shall never be
blasted, and the waste of ages shall not precipitate the conclusion of your
joys: let this single eternity, as it is put into the lease of your glory,
revive your trembling and disconsolate spirits, when the storm of trouble
beats most upon you; And surely this very argument being weighed in the
balance, might be bladders to bear up the believer in the deepest waters; it
might as it were cork the soul, that it should not sink.

And 2.

1. The interest of man, we see not what the claim of man is here, many here
are but Mountebancks and cheats in Religion, Alchymie professors: men's
spiritual estates are no more known by their outward profession, then their
temporal estates are by their clothes; wherefore our conjectures are often
mistaken in our conclusion, what the interest of man is; whether their interest
be laid up in Christ, or whether misery shall be their portion. This may be one
of the invisibles in the text; but this unseen interest in man shall be
eternal, the Saints interest in Christ is eternal, his membership, his
relation, and the sinners loss is eternal: the impropriation of man is
eternal, their damage or their gain.

2. The state of man is eternal; as the tree falls, so it shall lie to all
eternity, there shall be no stoppage to, or breaking up of man's future
condition. We see not what the condition of man is here: but his estate shall
be everlastingly permanent; whether in the throne or on the wrack, estate of
felicity or calamity; his condition, whether grace has inamel'd it with
happiness, or sin inpoverisht it with misery, it shall be inalterably
everlasting.

And now at last I am arived at that conclusion or observation which shall be
the sum of the future discourse; and it is this, Man's future condition is an
eternal condition; and I shall take in as well the groans of hell, as the
joys of heaven; and now to unravell this bottomless knot, or to sound this
fadomlesse Ocean of eternity, hic labor hoc opus est. This indeed is a
constellation of difficulties, here the choicest understanding may be dazzled;
eternity being a problem, that may rather astonish, then fit the
understanding: we cannot faddome the Ocean of waters, much less that of
eternity: but through the direction and by the guidance of the invisible and
eternal Spirit, I shall endeavor to draw a map of this unlimited state, and
give you a prospect of this boundless and bottomless Ocean. And this I shall
do rather negatively, then positively; as Plato said concerning Plat.
God, What he is (says he) that I know not; but what he is not, that I know.
And as Augustine describes August.
the true beatitude of heaven by removing from it the very thoughts of all
evil; so in reference to eternity, we must rather remove from it what it is
not, then go about exactly and accurately to describe it; that we shall only do
when we are cast upon the shore of eternity. I shall set upon the enterprise in
several Propositions and conclusions.

Man's eternal condition admits of no changes or distinction of time. There
shall be no night in heaven, nor any day in hell: In the eternity of glory,
there shall be no full or wanes of the Moon, no falling of the leaf or
Autumnall declination: that is a pregnant place, Rev. 22. 5. And there shall be
no light there, and they need no candle, neither light Rev. 22. 25.
of the sun: for the Lord gives them light, (that is) by his immediate
presence, etc. In heaven the sun shall not set, nor the morning star arise:
there shall be no clouds to vail the Saints happiness, no storms nor tempests
to be the shadow of a disturbance, no frost to pinch or afflict the bodies of
believers, which shall be bespangled with glory; no winters day to shorten the
beatificall vision. And so in the eternity of misery, there shall be no spring,
nor pleasant resurrection from the doleful grave of a winter. That is very
remarkable, Mat. 25. 30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness,
(...), some render it abundant darkness; it may well be understood in tenebras
circumferentes, environing darkness, the mantle of darkness. In eternal
calamity, there shall be no chirping birds, or green-livered fields to be the
emblemes of an approaching Summer; hell shall not be gilded with a sunshining
day. But eternity shall be an identicall condition, simul and semel; the
interchangeable seasons of the year shall cease in eternity: the serenity and
blackness of the skies, the flourishing beauty and withered deformity of the
earth, the eclipses and changes of the celestial bodies, the dawning morning,
and the duskish evening, shall all be unknown in eternity. And an everlasting
night shall overshadow the damned; and an eternal morning shall refresh the
blessed, who shall be ever sunning themselves in the presence of God; and the
Sun shall be laid aside as useless in heaven, for it would not be seen for the
brightness of God. Now there can be no distinctions of time in the eternity of
the blessed (and this method shall run through the whole discourse).

Solennis ibi festivitas, and festiva ibi aeternitas; ibi nec est defectio, sed
optima refectio. Alard.
infinitely perfect, is immutable; such transient changes would cause a wane in
the Saints happiness: Now there is a double royal perfection in heaven; 1. Of
purity: 2. Of felicity. Imperfection is a weed which grows not there; there
shall no deficiencie Psalm. 17. 15.
stain the celestial beatitude. When man has attained to a perfection of
excellency, as infallibly he shall in glory, there shall then be no defect, to
be the womb of dissatisfaction.

Aeterna vita omni taediocaret Ambr. tom. 3.
and pass through a variety of seasons; for the Saints to be incht again with
the sharpness of a Winter, or scorcht with the over kind beams of a Summers
sun: this is inconsistent with that delight, they shall in heaven be ravished
with; so their comforts would grow as cold as the season. Besides that of the
Apostle is observable, 2 Pet. 3. 12. Wherein the heavens being on fire shall be
dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat: this text abrogates
such disturbance, whether it be understood of a purgation or annihilation.
Unquestionably this may be asserted: what ever may imply the least shadow of
trouble, or distaste, shall be banished the court of glory; the joys of eternity
shall not be eclipsed with the least vicissitude or unpleasantnesse.

Ex visione Dei omnia beatorum bona unice oriuntur, and dependent.
in his glory as in his nature, and the Saints shall ever in heaven lie under
his radiant appearancies; see his face, Mat. 5. 8. behold his glory, Joh. 17.
24. and he will be an everlasting spring to his glorified ones. Vicissitudes in
time shall melt in the presence of the Lord, the rivers of heavens pleasure
shall admit of no doubts or decays, there shall no night veil the day of
eternal salvation.

Nor shall there be any distinction or change of times in the eternity of the
damned. For

1. Eccles. 11. 7. Truly light is sweet and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes
to behold the sun. But in hell there shall be all severity, but no mercy; there
shall be no daybreak, to revive executed reprobates; could there be changes of
times or seasons in hell, there might fall out a winter, and Dives might meet
with a shower to cool his tongue; but pity visits not those dismal prisons,
what ever may contribute to the abatement of the damneds misery, shall be
everlastingly banished. In heaven there shall need no light, Rev. 22. 5. In hell
they shall have none, they shall so far want the comfort of the sun, as they
shall not be blessed with the light of a candle; none of natures variety and
embroydery in point of seasons, not the sharpest and the harshest seasons shall
shed the least refreshment on the tortured reprobate.

in actu moriendi, in the act of execution; August.
they shall hang in fiery chains, and those chains shall never break, or they
die in those chains. As our Savior expresses himself in that doleful
language, Mat. 8. 48. Where the worm dies not; Sed semper corrodit and
nunquam satiatur, which always gnawes, but never is satisfied: which language
might be a knell to awaken us, from our most stupefied security. But thus much
of the 1. Conclusion.

CHAP. II.
Man's eternal condition admits of no gradation.

THere shall be no degrees in eternity. In heaven there shall be all
perfection, in hell all defection. The buds of joy shall not blow in heaven,
there shall be no maturation of happiness, or ascension to superior thrones,
Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne. No
rising to greater dignity, or more sublime preferment: there shall be no
exaltation after a long enjoyment of honor; the first enthronizing of the
Saint, after the resurrection, is there ultimate honor, their Crown shall have
no new pearls set in it. I speak after the manner of men; there shall be no
accumulative advancement, or superadded happiness in heaven. Here the Saints
grow in grace, but they shall not grow in glory; though sanctification 2 Pet.
3. 18.
be, yet glorification shall not be graduall: no steps in heaven for the Saints
to ascend, the sight of God shall comprise all honor and happiness. And it is
impossible there should be degrees of promotion in glory; (I mean secundum
eundum, in reference to the same person) for that there should not be degrees
of glory, secundum diversos, in reference to diverse I dare not disavow, because
as Philosophers speak, Eadem est ratio contrariorum, contraries have the same
reason. If there shall be degrees of punishment in hell, as our Savior clearly
asserts, Mat. 10. 15. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, etc.
then I suppose there may be degrees of glory in heaven, especially there being
interposed this consideration, Mat. 5. 12. Great shall be your reward; that is,
more great, then others shall be crowned with; but secundum eundem, in
reference to the same person there shall be no gradation in the eternity of the
blessed.

1. nova causa honoris, some new reason of promotion. As Ahasuerus honored
Mordecai for the detecting of a conspiracy against his life; so Gods justice
would require it, that there should be some new impulsive cause for further
dignity. But this cannot take place in glory, when the Saints praises shall
always be in the same tune, and their hallelujahs shall be wound up as high as
their joys; nay their hallelujahs shall be part of their happiness. It is
fancy, nay misguided conception, to suppose that the Saints in heaven could
screw up their harps to a higher peg then they shall do for ever: their desires
to serve God in glory, shall be-sublimated to the same superlativenesse as
their rejoicing in God: Their love being perfect and their power, there shall
surely be no decay in their triumphant obediencies.

2. the state of the Saint before he came Psalm. 139. 12.
there; and therefore falling upon a more exact Survey, he promotes him to
greater dignities: which would be most absurd, and would not only impeach the
indulgence of God, who always gives measure running over; but also the
omniscience of God, who sees not only our visible actions, but our most
internal and retired motions; those secrets that men most obumbrate and
conceal. And therefore the Saints shall always be in the same state of glory,
and not rise, as the Sun, from a dauning to a noonday. But when once the soul
after its long widowhood shall at the Resurrection be espoused again to its
glorified body, and shall clothe its self with that rich apparel, then shall
the believer ever shine in the same state of perfection, and he shall flourish
though in most glorious yet identicall excellencies.

3. secundum eundem in reference to the same person, there can be no degrees of
glory; for then there would be imperfection in heaven comparatively, because
the Saints might be advanced to greater dignity; Perfectum est cui nihil addi
potest, says Aristotle, and quiequid potest recipere additionem est
imperfectum; that is perfect to which nothing can be added, and whatsoever can
receive any addition is imperfect. But now the weakling of imperfection shall
have no place in glory; all tears, and sins, and defectivenesse, all
capability of further felicity shall be banished heaven, and the Saints shall be
enthroned in consummated beatitude.

Nor shall there be any degrees in their eternity of misery, no ascension to
further ease, or descension to further misery; (for the damned shall be fully
miserable) there shall be no slacking of the pullies or allaying of the flames;
surely those fires shall not decay in their force, that have the wrath of God
for their fuel, and their bellows. Nebuchadnezzars fires, Dan. 3. 19. may
Isa. 30. 33.
be colder or hotter according to the degree of the Kings displeasure; but the
infernal flames shall always scorch with the same intensive heat, God
wrathfully kindling them, and the Devil and his Angels rigorously applying
them. In the primitive times the tormentors were wearied in the execution of
the Martyrs; but no such happiness shall befall the damned, the justice and
power of God being his nature, and so immutable; now there can be no degrees in
the eternity of misery.

1. For the damned shall be punished according to their capacity, they shall be
full of torment, the vessel of wrath shall be up to the brim in calamity. As
the Saints shall enjoy fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11. So the reprobates shall
be filled with fullness of wrath and the degrees of torment in hell shall not
arise from this, that any shall have a mitigation of their misery, but every
one shall be full of torture, but their gradualnesse. Their more tolerablenesse
mentioned, Mat. 10. 15. shall be according to the capacity of the damned, some
of their natures shall be stretched wider then others to receive more in, as a
tun contains more then a firkin, but their misery shall be coextentive to
their capacity. They shall be full of anguish and pain, as the Ocean is with
water, as the Fountain is with streams; and it must be so, else there would be
some alleviation in hell, some comfort, and mercy; the reprobates are not in so
doleful a condition as they might be, they might be worse, and this would be
some refreshment; but alas! mercies smile shall not be seen in hell: Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25. 41. The sound of Gods bowels
shall not be heard there. In miserable eternity the Reprobate shall reap no
more, then the fruit of a divine execration.

2. The damned shall be punished for ever according to demerit, which is from
adequate and proportionable justice; and therefore there is mention made of
many stripes, Luke 12. 47. where we may observe the justice, and regular
proceedings of God. Now could there be degrees in the sufferings of the damned,
there would be a variation and mutability in Divine justice, which is
^mpossible to Gods unchangeablenesse; there would then be a rising and falling
in the steady and inalterable severity of God; for hell is a place of pure
justice: Summi juris: so there can be no declension or slacking of wrath there.
Now this gradation cannot be admitted upon this account, it would cast an
impeachment of mutation and change upon God; Quod absit; which let us not dare
to affirm.

CHAP. III.
Man's eternal cnodition admits of no change.

THere shall be no telling of the quarters in heaven, nor observation of the
flitting hours in hell; no transition or passage of time. There shall be no
time in eternity, and durations Aeternitas nullam habet successionem. Ambr.
shall not be, as the waves of the Sea, one to follow upon the neck of another.
It is a pregnant description which Boethius lays down, though he describes
only the happy eternity, Aeternitas est interminabilis tota sunul ac perfecta
possessio, Eternity is an interminable possession, perfect, and all together:
And so the miserable eternity of the Aeternitas est indivisibilis, and non
habet parts sibi juvicem succedentes, and necessario tota coexisti^ omnibus
temporum differentiis; ut asserunt Patres, and Scholastici. Bonav.
damned, is all together; there is no division in eternity, no priority or
posterity; it is a Sun that neither rises nor sets; there is no lapsing of
time, one age does not justle out another; there shall be no maturity, nor
immaturity. Eternity is time by the wholesale; here indeed our life's are
parcelled into so many years, and retaild into so many months; but eternity is
an individual, indivisible possession. Nulla est juventus and senescentia in
aeternitate, there is no youth Aeternitas tota simul. Scotus.
or declining age in eternity: neither spring, nor fall: Time does not slide
away, the duration is always at the same length; eternity admits only the
present-tence, the (...), there is no clock in eternity, the hour-glasse runs
not there; when we are set upon the shore of everlastingnesse, there shall be
no progress or regresse. Eternity is no complex duration, to be compounded of
so many particular ages: in this it is unlike the sands of the Sea, and that
comparison will not hold, because the vast sands are but multiplied
particulars. Falsum est aeternitatem virtualiter habere parts, cum id suae
simplicitati and immutabilitati repugnat, non enim sequiillud esse in
aeternitate prius, quod est in priori temporis part, sed totum tempus simul
continetur, quantum est ex part aeternitatis. Sadreva in Thomam.
Time (if I may use the term, for there is no such thing in eternity) does
pullulate as fast as spend, and it sprouts out as fast as it is lopt off in
eternity. The womb of eternity, shall be always big with duration, and shall
never be delivered of one moment. No centuries or successions shall be found in
the state of eternity. All arithmetic numbers in eternity are ciphers. In this
it is no Ocean; for the Ocean is but a Sea drops, particular streams in a
greater body. Astronomers speak much of the slow motion of Saturn, and other
celestial bodies; but in eternity there is no motion known; no in fieries,
motion and succession are pure Anomalies. And it must be so, for

1.

2. All succession implies a motion, and all motion supposes imperfection,
while things are in motu, they are not arrived at perfection, then motion
cease, and there is no further tendency; but now the state of eternity is a
perfect state. The blessed shall be perfectly happy. Heaven is a place of
superlative perfection; and the damned shall be fully and perfectly miserable,
(...), there shall be no deficiency in their torment; nor can there be further
insufferably unhappy, (as before was hinted).

CHAP. IV.
Man's eternal condition admits of no change or alteration.

THe throne of the Saints shall In aeternitate nulla est mutatio. Aug. Nar.
never be overturned; the crown of glory shall not be changed into a Crown of
thorns. Nor shall the damneds bed of flames be altered into a bed of down.
All things in eternity shall be everlastingly in the same state: (I exclude not
the great change at the general assizes, when the bodies both of Saints and
sinners shall be reunited to their souls) Eternity may well take up Q.
Elizabeth's In quo quemque invenerit suus novissimus dies, in hoc eum
comprehendit Mundi novissimus dies; quoniam qualis in die ipso moritur quisque
talis in die isto judicabitur. August.
motto, it is, Semper eadem, always the same. As the tree falls, so it shall
lie for ever; Taliter, in every consideration and particular: The darkness of
the damned, shall never alter into day; their groans shall never be transformed
into smiles. There shall be no impoverishment in glory, and no enrichment in
misery. Here our state is the Chameleon of Providence, the map of mutability;
but in eternity all things shall remain for ever in eodem gradu, and eodem
statu, in the same state and degree. It was Origens opinion, or rather dream,
that the damned at last should find a relaxation; but this is an old exploded
error. There is no variety or revolutions in eternity. Identity is the
characteristicall note of eternity. In it neither tears shall be tuned into
triumphs, nor song turned into sorrows; All things for ever shall look with
the same visage and aspect. Weeping and wailing shall be the bitter and
everlasting potion of the wicked; triumph and honor the Mat. 8. 12.
sweet and eternal portion of the blesed. But more particularly.

Phil. 3. 15.
either damp or disease, those beautified and polished pieces, shall no more be
bloodied with wounds, wracked with distempers, or deformed with skarres.
Lazarus, whose body here was but a lesser hospital; in eternity his body shall
shine, and be bespangled with glory, which shall never be sullied or eclipsed
with the least soar or disease. Here Plato calls the body the souls prison;
Ergastulum animae. Plato.
but in heaven, in eternity, the bodies of the Saints shall not be the
curtains, but the rich clothes of their souls; their attire embroydered with
glory, which shall neither wear or soil. And so the souls of the Saints in
glory, they shall ever shine in the enamel of perfection, without the least
contrariant tincture. It is only man's sin that distempers, and incurvates the
soul, and Gods wrath the consequence of sin, that as I may say, makes the soul
look pale; now neither of these have place in heaven. The Israelites Deuteronomy. 29.
5.
clothes, which wore not out in forty years together, was a lively Emblem of
this invariable felicity.

And so on the contrary, the bodies of the damned shall remain in their
deformities, not any spot shall be wiped away; nor the least veil thrown over
their exulcerations. They shall never throw off the rags of their beleapered
bodies; but they shall ever be the dark prisons of their accursed souls; the
fires of hell shall wash away the paint of Absaloms beauty, but his deformities
shall never shed, because the fountain of them shall never cease, viz. sin: (as
shall be showed more fully). And their souls, those unclean birds in the
unclean cages of their bodies, shall wear the miserable livery of their sins to
all eternity. What should wash their souls? Christ's blood, they have no
interest in it; if so, they had never been overwhelmed in their intolerable
calamity; and all their tears shall be but muddied water: their wounded
consciences, their polluted hearts, their impostumated souls shall lie in the
sink of their uncleanness for ever. So there shall be no change in the
persons of those that are cast on the coast of eternity.

Joh. 17. 24.
everlastingly resident at the Court of Rev. 3. 21.
glory. They shall never change their Joh. 14. 2.
Mansions: where by the way, Mansions, not houses, not tents: to signify the
immutable duration of the Saints happiness. They shall be always under the
smiles, and in the immediate presence of God. They shall ever wait upon the
Lord in the Presence Chamber, and the Court shall never be removed. And
therefore heaven is called a Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. A City, Heb. 12. 22. A
Country, Heb. 11. 13. To demonstrate the permanency of the Saints state in
point of locality: Heaven shall be the Jerusalem, where shall be the perpetual
residence of glorified ones. And so the dark dungeon of hell, shall be the
Reprobates everlasting jail; as the chains shall never be loosned or filed
off, so neither shall they change their doleful habitation; but the same
prison and wrack, the same place as well as degrees of torment, shall fetter
them to all eternity: They shall not change Mat. 18. 3^.
their Tophet, nor alter their bed of flames.

Rev. 4. 11, 12.
Temptation the womb, and sin the birth shall not be found in heaven. There
shall be nothing to prompt the Saints to stain their purity; but they shall be
ever breaking out into sacred admirations of God. Here indeed there is a
variableness, and often a contradiction in the deportment of the Saints; but
in glory there shall not be the least titubation or fall. Nor shall eternity
Prove. 24. 16.
d^^ect the least eccentrick motion in a glorified Saint. But Christ in Ephesians. 5.
27.
heaven shall be Mediator sustentationis, a Mediator of sustentation to the
Saints as well as Angels. And so on the contrary, there shall be as little
alteration in the carriages of the damned; they shall be ever belching out
dishonours against the name of God, and for ever be sick of the same surfeit of
blasphemy; accusing the glorious attributes and holy name of God; nor shall
they in the midst of their woes, weep out with a truly penitential frame, the
least retractation. And the reason is, because sin in hell shall be in the
same, and greater impetuousnesse then it was here. Nor shall those punitive
fires turn one lust into ashes, those flames of misery shall not refine, but
exasperate the reprobate sinner; shall irritate and feed, not chase away sin.
Nor is hell a place for the influences of Gods operative grace; nor can
infernal fire be purificatory.

to the caitiffe-wretch, and the same glory entaild on the perfected Saint; the
wheel shall not turn in eternity. No hopes of better times in hell, nor Luke
16. 26.
fears of worse in heaven. Mutation, and change is obsolete in eternity. And
to show you the impossibility of change in our everlasting condition, First,
there can be none in reference to the blessed.

If there be any change, it must either be,

First, In meliorem partem, for the better; and then these inconsequences would
follow.

1. secundum eundem, in reference to the same person, contrary to Heb. 12. 22.
the Spirits of just men made perfect. For Gods justice is adequate, and he
rewards though not (...), for our works; yet (...), according Romans 2. 6.
to our works; and so that grace rising to an higher eminency, it calls for a
greater promotion. Now this would argue a falling short of perfection which
heaven is incapable of. Could the glorified Saints grow in grace, as they must
if they rise to higher happiness according to Gods justice; then was there a
deficiency in their grace before, which is anomalus to consummate perfection;
and glory signifies no more but grace maturated to perfection: And therefore
there can be no change for the better; because there can be no cause for this
change, especially after the resurrection, when the Grand assizes are over. And

2. This inconsequence would follow, a change for the better, an imperfection
in happiness; for now the Saint is advanced to greater blessedness, which
likewise is consistent to the perfection of beatitude, which the glorified
Saint is infall'd in. Or,

Secondly, This change must be in deteriorem partem, for the worse; there must
be a fall in the Saints glory: which would ^nforce these two absurdities.

1. The Saints in glory were capable of defaulting, for what can indammage them
but sin? God who is pure justice inferres no prejudice upon the Creature, but
as provoked by some criminal miscarriage; if otherwise, then Gods justice
might be impeached, which is most blasphemous. Now that no impurity can stain
heaven is most Hos. 13. 9.
clear, as from the immediate presence of God, which glorifies the Saints, not
only with perfection of happiness, but of purity also; or else perfection was
Rev. 21. 27.
but a titular perfection, it were but nominall, were it not spotless; and so
likewise from that consummate condition, which the Saints are arrived at in
glory, which cannot retre^^ back again to any the least prevarication. For
herein lies the difference between created perfection, that which Adam was
enricht with before his fall, and the perfection of glory; the one includes,
the other rejects all mutability. And

2. Could there be a change for the worse in glory, then heaven would be a
place of punitive justice; for all Rev. 7. 16.
deteriority and damage that befalls man, is the issue of Gods afflictive and
castigatory justice; but that is impossible, for in eternal happiness there
shall be nothing appearing but smiles, love, and indulgence. And as in eternity
the day of grace and favor is past to the reprobate sinner, so the day of
correction and displeasure is blown over to the glorified Saint, In glory the
least heat of anger shall not appear in the face of God; nor shall the sword of
vindicative justice be brandisht there: I speak after the manner of men.

And so on the contrary, there shall not be the least change in the eternity of
the damned: For the worse they cannot, for they shall be fully miserable, (as
before has been demonstrated). Nor for the better: for this change would
either proceed from Gods pity, or man's piety.

First, from Gods pity, now God will show no pity in hell. For

1. Hell is a place of pure justice, and exact severity; no mitigation or
favor in eternal misery; could one drop of mercy fall into hell, it would
alter the very propriety of it. Dives Mat. 5 26.
in hell begs a drop of water, but a Luke 16. 24.
drop, the smallest measure, and of water, the most common element, Natures
common bounty; yet in hell, there is no concession to so reasonable a petition.
Mercies sweet voice shall not be heard among the damneds groans. And

2. The day of grace is past; when once the sinner is set on the shore of
eternity, offers and overtures of mercy and peace are then buried in silence.
Sometimes the climacterical year of a Luke 19. 42.
Sinner is past before, but always then. There shall be no mercy, after the
sunset of mercy, more then the shadows of the night can counterfeit the light
of the day; here is the day of salvation, which when once blown over, the day
of love shall break no more. And

3. What should move Gods pity in hell?

1. The cries of the damned; they shall exalt his justice; not move his
compassion; the horrors and the lamentations of the damned, shall be the very
music of Gods justice, the Prove. 1. 26.
heralds of his righteous severity; Mat. 25. 12.
here Ephraims moaning turns Gods Jer. 31. 20.
bowels within him; but the reprobates groans shall only tune his justice. Or

2. Shall the sins of the damned move God to compassion, and therefore stir
up pity, because they are great? Surely sin is the fuel of wrath, not the
argument of commiseration, and grief and guilt shall be the reprobates livery
for ever. And

Secondly, as not from Gods pity, so neither from man's piety, shall any change
arise in the eternity of the damned. They shall not be refresht with mercy, or
their condition sweetened with an alleviating change, from any conversion to
God, penitency for sin, etc. For

1. This piety, had it been true, or could it be so, it had never come to hell,
nor could it lie there. True grace is no Salamander to live in the fire of
hell, no flower to grow in that stench; the fruit of the Spirit shall not lie
in the womb of eternal misery; that 2 Pet. 1. 4.
grace which is honored with the name of divine nature, cannot be the subject
of eternal divine wrath. Had they been, or could they after death be really
pious, they should not be eternally calamitous; the least degree of true grace
seals Christ and heaven to the soul, Weak faith, saint love, etc. And

2. If this piety be false, as all tears in hell shall be; for the weeping of
the damned cannot be ca^d a repentance, but only a watery desperation, an
execration of themselves steept in tears; then this dissembled mourning, is a
provocation, not a mitigation, to inflame not appease Gods wrath; and certainly
all the self-condemnations of the miserable reprobate proceeds not from a
detestation of sin, but a deploration of their torment. And therefore now, to
sum up the whole, this remains unfallibly true, There shall not be the least
alteration or change in our everlasting condition. Ah! what might this
consideration seriously weighed in the balance, work upon our feared and
unawakened consciences?

CHAP. V.
Man's eternal condition admits of no measure or commensuration.

ETernity is an Ocean without a shore, a Sea without land, it has neither
bottom nor banks; it is an unlimited estate. As Boethius forementioned, Status
interminabilis, an unconfined estate. What is said of eternal joy, 1 Cor. 2.
9. It has not entered into the heart of man; is true likewise of eternal
misery. Who can tell how eternity begins, or when it ends? who can divide or
parcel out eternity? who can set landmarkes to measure, or find plummets to
fadome it? It is nothing but the vast Ocean, the eye cannot see to the end of
it, nor the understanding reach to the bottom of it. The most curious, and
critical brain in the greatest abstractions, cannot comma, or put a stop in
eternity. Astronomers find out fictitious, and imaginary lines to measure the
heavens and the earth, the Equator, Meridian, Horizon, etc. but what imaginary
circles shall compass eternity? who can say, so much is gone, so many
Centuries, so many Lustra, so many Olympiads, and so many ages are yet to come?
Eternity is a boundless being, Aeternitas nec tempus, nec temporis ulla pars
est (nec e. in mensuram cadit) sed quod nobis tempus est, solis motu definitum,
hoc aeternis aevum est. Greg. Naz.
there is no infancy in it, no strength of years, no decrepitnesse, Nec
efflorescentia, nec canescentia aetatis; no triumph or decay of age. There are
no divisions, or subdivisions in it. Numbers and multiplications, are paradoxes
in eternity. There is no lease or determinate time, time it self being a riddle
(as before). But more particularly, Eternity is unlimited,

Psalm. 16 11. In thy presence is fullness of joy; 1 John 3. 2.
but this is a faddomlesse fullness: who can tell the portion of everlasting
happiness, or count it out? It is a sum that cannot be measured by number or
figure. The blessedness of the S^ints, shall be ineffable, inalterable,
inconceivable. Who knows how soft the down of the Saints rest is? how sweet
the bosom of Christ? how pleasant the smile of God? who can tell how
delightful the taste of the rivers of pleasure in heaven is? There is no
measuring or confining the Saints happiness. How unspeakably sweet is
communion with God here, that sometimes the S^int can set it out more by
admiration then eloquence? how ravishing then are those ecstasies of joy, which
the glorified ones shall be raised and sublimated with?

And so on the contrary, the misery of the damned, how inintolerable? how
incomprehensible? how unmeasurable? who can tell how hot Gods wrath is, when
turned into a flame? Or can any weigh the torments of the damned, and say they
rise to such an height? As they are insupportable, so they shall be innumerable
and inconceivable. Here indeed God corrects in measure, both the wicked Jer.
10. 24.
and the godly; he seems here to proportionate his bounds; but what boundless
calamity shall swallow up the reprobate in eternity? God will then draw his
arrow to the head, and screw his wrath to an unconfined degree. What shall
limit, or be a bank to the inundations of Gods everlasting displeasure? Thou
can not tell how many drams of poison God will put into the cup of trembling,
which the wicked must be drinking off for evermore; there is no ultimum, aut
maximum quod sic. as Philos. speaks: no stated or terminated height in those
anguishes; the element of fire has its stated heat, which it cannot flame
beyond; and if all the fuel and materials of the Creation were cast into one
conflagration; yet there would be a termination in those scorching flames, but
what bounds or rampires has the Anger of the Lord in eternity?

Duobus modis aliquid aeternum esse potest; uno modis ab intrinseco, alio modo
ex influxu alterius aeterno. Suarez.
shall stretch the future condition of man out to eternity; he that is
bottomless in power, and justice, and love, he shall support the beings of men
for ever; The incomprehensible God shall break down all banks in eternity. The
original and efficient cause of eternity is the unlimited Jehovah, the
infinite Majesty shall add fuel to his wrath for ever to the damned, and fill
the cup of the Saints joy for everlasting.



CHAP. VI.
Man's eternal condition admits of no decay or Consumption.

THere is no decay in eternity, no Autumnes; nor in eternity shall the days
grow shorter. There shall be no wast, or wearing out or moth to eat out in
eternity. All things shall subsist in the same force and vigor, in the same
state and strength. The Sun of eternity shall not decline. Nothing shall
moulder away toward a conclusion. Here all things are in a constant tendency
to ruin and devastation; the most excellent and flourishing pieces of the
Creation are continually posting to abolition. There is a moth in the richest
garments, a worm in the tallest Cedars, rust in the finest gold. Nor can our
greatest care shed an immotality on our choicest enjoyments, but duration and
time dampes and soyles the rarest excellencie^, and every thing yields to the
force and fury of age. Continued and numbered years wrinckle and deface the most
pleasing beauty, and leaves it to the surprisall of a necessary deformity; the
freshest youth, whether it be appropriated to man, or be predicate of inanimate
creatures, here soon it loses its splendour, and goes upon the crutches of
decay. But in eternity all things shall subsist in the same vigor and vivacity,
not any thing shall be overtaken with hoary age. Heraelitus (...).
his axiom shall be inverted, Nulla erit in aeternitate seneseentia, the
pillars in eternity shall never shake nor moulder. There shall be no fading
leas, or falling fruit; (though no such thing may be found in eternity) but
every thing shall be preserved in its full maturity, without the least
perishing or putrefaction. The Suns motions, Aepyptian Pyramids, and other
lasting Monuments of Antiquity, are but the darker hieroglyphickes of the
unperishable and undecaying estate of eternity. But more particularly,

There shall be no waste or decay of time in eternity, time shall not slide
away or spend, (but of this more at large in a particular conclusion.)

darken and obnubilate the sun of their Mind.

And so the bodies of the Saints admit of no decay in eternity, no weakness,
disease, or distemper shall ever batter or surprise them; but they shall be
preserved in the same resplendency and beauty for ever: all the issues of
infirmity which beset the bodies of the Saints here, shall be dried up in
illustrious radiancy; and their bodies shall shine for ever in a greater glory,
then the Sun when blazoned in its most vigorous light and irradiations; (as
before was suggested.)

And so on the contrary: The souls of the reprobates in eternity, shall not
saint away in their torments; nor shall they ever be blessed with the happiness
of temporary swoon; but they shall continue in their beings and existencies for
ever, and shall be preserved in their miserable immortalities. They shall be
spending, vitam morientem, August.
as the Father speaks, a dying life for ever; and so their bodies, those
cooperating Mar. 9. 48.
instruments of sin, shall not be scorcht into ashes by the infernal flames;
but like cursed Salamanders shall ever live in those fires; their bodies shall
be immortal capacities of torment, while Gods justice and Satan's malice shall
make everlasting depredations upon them.

Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
clothes shall not wear. And therefore the eternal felicity of the blessed
consists in a fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11. Not the fullness of the vessel;
there may be an evaporation in that; but of an Ocean that admits no droughts,
of a Spring that is continually fed: and to this fullness is added perpetuity,
in the same verse, for evermore: that if we suppose this fullness may shed or
spend; the holy Ghost tells us, it is an everlasting fullness: It is a bounty
that continues for ever up to the brim. The Original is very significant in
this (...)
place. There shall be a saturiry of joys. The souls of the blessed shall have
their fill of happiness. There shall be no want or deficiency, nor place for a
request. And this satiety shall be Saturitas cum Hebraeis maximam abundantiam
significat. Gerard.
eternized. And so the Prophet, Isa. 35. 10. speaking of the future glory of
believers, he says there shall be (...), Everlasting joys on their heads, to
show the immarcessiblenesse of the Saints glory. Their sight of God,
admirations of Christ, full draughts of the Spirits joys, and those divine
Raptures which shall flow from that communion they enjoy with unspotted Angels,
and glorified Saints, shall never receive the least abatement, or graduall
decrease. Their felicities shall never decay, nor after millions of ages grow
tedious; but their joy shall spring in the same vivacity for ever.

And so the miseries of the damned, they shall not be slackned or mitigated by
continuance of time; their woes shall be as wearisome and painful after many
ages, as the first moment. Nor shall the accustomednesse of the damned to
endure the fury of God, and the torments of Satan, so harden, or ease the
persons, that they shall be any thing the more insensible, or inapprehensive of
the pain. That of the Prophet is very remarkable, and seriously to be
considered, The * Isa. 30. 33. (...)
flaming breath of God shall ever feed their torments. And therefore the same
Prophet, Isa. 33. 14. makes mention of Everlasting burnings; the calamity shall
ever be in the same impetuous fury. Nor shall one spark of divine fury and
displeasure die, or be blown ^ver.



The love of God to the blessed shall be as vigorous, and full, after
innumerable centuries, as at the first enterview with the Saints. Duration in
eternity, as it cannot inflame, so it shall not allay divine affection. Gods
heart shall be as much Jer. 31. 3.
let out after numberless ages to his glorified ones, as at the first arrival
at their heavenly Country. There shall no dampe seize on Gods inexpressible
love. Indeed what should procure a decrease of Gods love to his people in
glory? Sin and deviation, and whatever may have Rev. 21. 27.
the sent of the least irregularity, is banished heaven; there will be no
failings or misdoings to wrincle the face of God into a frown, (to speak after
the manner of men). And therefore as there shall not be any aversation in God
to his glorified Saints; so neither shall for ever the least faintness or
abatement surprise divine affection.

And so neither shall the wrath of God to the damned ever wear away, or be
allayed. The wrath of God to the reprobate is no passion; that time Heb. 12.
29. Apostolus hic Mosem secutus, non de gratia, sed de ultione dei loquitur.
Corn. A lap.
may quench, or moderate; but the execution of Gods just severity, which shall
always burn in an equal flame. And indeed, what can the damned produce to
mitigate or divert Gods wrath? Alas! neither their tears, nor their
blasphemies, nor their cries can do it; all these are but the echoes of divine
justice: Nothing but the blood of Christ can allay this heat, and that fountain
is dry to the dead sinner, that is cast upon eternity. No, surely Gods
indignation as it is just, so it shall be ever full, nor shall eternity wast or
spill one drop of the Vials of his wrath. Here indeed God Jer. 18. 8.
makes frequent promises upon repentance Ezekiel. 33. 14.
of turning away from his wrath, and laying aside his rod, but in eternity God
shall whip the damned with Scorpions for ever, nor shall one spark of his
anger be quenched by multiplied durations; there shall be no waste in his
incensed, yet just fury.

CHAP. VII.
Man's eternal condition admits of no future hopes or expectations.

ETernity confines all the hopes both of the blessed and the reprobate: there
is then an end of all the expectations of man. Here indeed the faith of a
believer swells, and the sails of hope are filled with future expectations of
greater promotions Heb. 11. 25, 26.
and blessedness, having an eye to the recompense of reward. Nay oftentimes 1
Cor. 15. 19.
Meditation is sweetened, when enlarged in the thoughts of those transcendent
possessions which shall crown eternity. How does a believer here often
pleasingly compute his riches he shall enjoy in the immediate vision, and
perpetual smile of God? Nay, the very formal professor is raised and
elevated in the hopes of future, although but fancied, glory. But eternity is
the nil ultra, the stop of all expectation; the end and period of the souls
anhelations. And this will appear more clearly, if we divide eternity into its
usual duplicity.

For the hopes of the blessed they shall all run out in eternity.

1. Heb. 11. 13.
expectations. After Jobs change there was an end of all his waiting. Job 14 14.
Heaven is such an harbor, as will satisfy to the full all the curious
inquisitions, the fervent supplications, the vast, high, and boundless
computations of the Saints. It contains quicquid desiderabile, quicquid
optabile, quiquid amabile, whatever is desirable, appetible, or lovely.
Whatever was comprised in the large circuits of the Saints hopes, or fell
within the travailes of their most ambitious thoughts, is to be found in glory.
There the glorified believers shall rejoice in the supernumerary
accomplishments of all the desires. Jacob said it is Genesis 45. 28.
enough; I shall see Joseph before I die; but the glorified Saint shall say, it
is 2 Cor. 12. 9.
enough, I shall see God, and never die, Grace is sufficient, but glory is
superabundant. In eternity the Saint shall enjoy whatever his eye can glance
at; there shall be a plenary satisfaction of all his hopes, of all the pantings
and breathings of his soul.

but imperfection: what may be bettered, Perfectum est cui nihil addi potest.
Arist.
and cast into a nobler form, falls short of perfection. Now the Saints in glory
enjoy a double perfection.

1. A perfection in their persons: They are perfect in all purity, holiness,
and unspotted transcendency, their beings are refulgent, with all rich and rare
enoblements, in all excellent capacities; their natures shall shine with the
diamonds of perfection, (as I may so say). And

2. A perfection of inheritance, the fullness of possession; and therefore 2 Timothy 4. 8.
heaven is always represented by the Luke 12. 32.
most sublime enjoyments. A Crown, Joh. 3. 16.
a Kingdom, life, a throne. Now perfection Rev. 3. 21.
that is the bound and bank to As they said of Cyrus, Satia te sanguine Cyre:
So I may say, Satia te gloria Sancte.
limit all expectation. Our desires cannot sail beyond the pillar of
perfection: Nor fly above an (...), the top: the firmament confines the eye of
the body; and heaven the ambition of the soul.

Summum bonum in summo gradu, the chiefest good in the highest degree: God is
comprehensively all inconceivable good. As the Sun contains more light, gradu
eminentiori, in a more eminent degree and consideration, then all the candles
in the world, when lighted. The beatificall vision is not all happiness
epitomized, but enlarged in the most incomprehensible latitudes. And when the
Saints shall come to enjoy a free and full sight of God, without the
interposure of cloud or curtain; then shall they say, as the Queen of Sheba
concerning Solomon's glory, 1 King. 10. 7. Behold, the one half was not told
me. All the expectations of the glorified ones shall be swallowed up in
inexpressible admirations. How sweet those glorious intuitions shall be, that
the Saints shall enjoy in heaven; our most vast conceptions are not able to
comprehend; God being essentially whatever deserves the name of good. And I
need not by way of amplification of the Argument, make mention of that glory,
that the humane nature of Christ shall shine in, and how pleasing that precious
sight will be to the redeemed ones, when arrived at the heavenly country. And
therefore to look for further happiness, is a solecisme in a blessed eternity.

2 Cor. 5. 19.
were not totally restrained, but repentance might have enlarged them, the
treasury-door of mercy and grace was not locked up, but faith could have opened
it, and the oil of grace might have procured the oil of gladness; and there
was still a blanck in the lease for the sinners name to be put in upon
conversion to God. Mat. 25. 1.
But in the eternity of the damned, every door of hope is shut and locked up,
and all expectation of change or compassion shall be silenced. All longing for,
or looking after, either

1. A total extinction of the remembrance of them that ever there were such
caytiffes in the World might cease. Or

2. A releasment from their torturing extremities. Or

3. An advancement to happiness, and change of the wrack into a throne. I say
all these hopes shall cease and evaporate in the damneds eternity. Nay further,
the reprobates carnal hopes, which was their pleurisy here, and with which
they were so elevated and rejoiced, their hopes of pleasure and profit; All
their sinful hopes, that cursed tympany they did swell with here; their hopes
to satisfy their lusts, the titillation of their sinful hearts: nay, all
their formal hopes, that Christ would not blast a professed Christian, shall
all die and fade in their eternity. And the damned shall be overwhelmed with
cursed desperation, as full of torment, as void of comfort and hope for
evermore; the wretched despair of Judas, being the monster his exulcerate
conscience brought forth, was but a sad emblem of the Reprobates condition in
eternity, when they shall lie in an hopeless, helpless, endless, easelesse
condition of extremity to all everlasting. And it must be so,

any true hope, or rational expectation in this life. Indeed happily they were
inflated with presumption here; and their hearts were deluded into a vain dream
of future glory: but their souls were never winged with true hope, it may be
with the blaze of hope, but not with the grace of hope. They never were raised
with the Heb. 11. 1.
expectation of faith; and the reason is, because they never had any interesse
in Christ, which is objective, objectively the sum of all true hopes. Nor
Col. 1. 27.
was their hope fastened to, or fixed upon a promise; for they had no title to a
Gospell-promise. Indeed all the hopes and expectations of a sinner here; they
are but the ebullitions of fancy: an anchor in the water; both useless, and
ridiculous. And if their hopes were but counterfeit coin, and alchymie
expectation here, what shall their hopes be in miserable eternity, when they
shall be out of sight of the land of promise?



1. The greatness of their torment; this is but commensurate to regular
justice; their inexpressible miseries are but the execution of Gods justice,
which is essential to the divine nature; and which after this life is
inexorable; the very miseries of the reprobate shall be the glory of Gods
righteous severity, and the very flames of hell (as I may say) shall cast a
light on divine justice; Gods compassions in eternity are sealed up to
reprobate ones. Or

2. Shall the duration of their torments fill the reprobate with hope? Alas!
every sin they have committed, deserves eternal calamity; and that propter
infinitam Majestatem offensam, because of an infinite Majesty offended: For sin
being infinite ratione objecti, in reference to the object, the person
incensed, and because no punishment can be adequate to the deserving of sin in
the greatness of it: For how can a finite creature undergo an infinite wrath?
what is abated in greatness, shall be made up in the duration of the
punishment. So that the duration of misery shall be no argument to suggest the
least hopes to the damned; for eternal pain shall be proportionate to divine
justice. So that hope, the last comforter of a wicked man, shall leave him in
eternity; and everlasting despair shall be as an ever corroding worm to him.
The Prophet Daniel speaks of an Angel coming down from heaven, and saying,
Hew the tree down and destroy it, cut off Dan. 4. 23.
her boughs, shake off her leaves, and scatter her fruit abroad, yet leave the
stumpe of the roots thereof in the earth: Upon which words, Ambrose descants
elegantly, saying, the leaves and the fruit are shaken off, but the root is
preserved; that is, delights are taken from us here, and punishments are
inflicted upon us; but yet hope is not taken away from us, the root is
preserved, hope remains; but in hell it has no Prove. 13. 12.
rooting, there is no ground, no argument, Mat. 4. 1.
no object, no dawning or comfort of hope there; but the damned shall be ever
giving up the ghost in the extremity of torment, and yet never die, or be
coffined in insensible oblivion.

CHAP. VIII.
Man's eternal condition admits of no service or performance of duty.

ALL our working is here, there is no working in eternity; our task is here;
our tale of Joh. 9. 3.
brickes here: no sweating in our future condition. All our duties are either
active or passive, acting or suffering for God: now both these shall cease in
eternity; Prayer shall cease, and hearing have an end; and suffering reproach
for Christ; the Saints quotidian Martyrdomes, shall be swallowed up in
eternity. All the sighs, and weeping duties of Gods people, which with so much
fervency and secrecy have been acted, shall expire when the Saints shall be
cast upon the shore of eternity. Their holy ejaculations, and sweet
contemplations, their summoning themselves to the bar of conscience; their
communing with their own hearts; those conflicts and rugged contests with their
irregular corruptions, those pious groans, and bitter tears, those precious
expressions of wrath against themselves, shall all have an end in eternity;
their closet moanes, and dovelike lamentations, for the loss of their mate,
the Lord Jesus Cant 3. 1, 2.
Christ; their critical observations of Gods outgoings in his providence, and
their frugall improvements of time; their extractions of good from the
bitterness of afflictions, that holy Chemistry which the Saints are artists in;
those pious artifices and rare stratagems which believers often use for the
repelling and undermining of temptation; and those critical and curious
observances of the several and mysterious workings, windings, and waverings of
their own hearts; their agonies and trembling sweats, lest they should fall
into the ambuscado of sin: All these and more shall be as a cloud dissolved
into a shower of glory. Eternity is incapable of these services.

And on the contrary; all the dissembled and hypocritical duties of wicked
men, their Ahabs fasting, and Herod's hearing, and Pharisaicall praying; their
formal approaches to ordinances; their fluent Rhetoric, and rich eloquence,
with which their discourses are oftentimes filled, and glossed, about the
concernments of Christ, glorious times, and unwonted Gospell-discoveries, and
manifestations; their frothy duties so dexterously embroydered with elegancy
and hypocrisy, to cover and cloud their secret and internal impieties; and
which are only acted to be the Arras hangings before their cursed designs; All
these shall evaporate and cease in eternity. The formalists tears, and
pretended heart-melting, commenced only to be the unhappy harbingers of some
sinful policy, or to captivate the opinion of the vulgar, and uncircumspect
generation; their Jehues zeal, and Jerebels fast; all their misguided charity,
and vainglorious alms; their extrinsecall duties, those blazing Comets of
their profession, shall all fall, and be swallowed up in eternity; and the
remembrance of them, but only as they are the reflection of guilt, shall cease
for ever. Now to divide this particular according to the usual method.

1.

Because, Duty is via ad regnum, the way to the Kingdom: It is sweat in the
vineyard. It is motus ad finem, a tendency to the end; and while we are in Bona
opera sunt via ad regnum, etsi non causa regnandi.
service, we are still in motion, on this side rest. All duty has an eye to
reward. Prayer and Meditation are but their rowing toward heaven; but heaven
is the reward its self: while we are upon the sea of Ordinances and Rev. 3. 21.
Duties, we are not come to the shore: but heaven is a place of wages, not
work; the wearing of the crown, not the bearing of the cross. Here is 2 Timothy
4. 8.
pugna, the fight; but above victoria, the conquest. Indeed the sweetest
duties, and the most intimate, even close communion with God, is but the rise
to the crown, but heaven is the crown it self. Ordinances and Duties are but
the souls flight to glory, but heaven is the habitation of happiness.

aliquid infectivum, and aliquid defectivum; something polluted, and something
defective. Our most sublime and spiritual Luke 17. 10.
duties are not wound up to command. They are all tainted with disproportion to
the rule. As the Moon it shines in a lower chamber inferior to the Sun. And
not only so, but our choysest Isa. 64. 6.
services are beleapered with many spots; like the Moon in this regard too. But
in heaven there is all purity, all fullness, all perfection. No inadequatenesse
or disproportion; no taint or pollution inhabits glory; and therefore duties
are obsolete in eternity. Heaven shuts out anomalies, and mutilated
performances. It is true, here, the Saints double-refined duties are sent up to
heaven with a gale of complaning sighs, but that such winds should blow in
glory, is an absolute inconsistency.

e longinquo, a far off. They look on God at a disstance. Prayer looks up to a
Majesty above; and hearing receives a discovery from the Court above. All our
duties are but traffic with heaven. But now in the eternity of the blessed, 1
Cor. 13. 12.
the Saint lies in the embraces of God, has him in his eye, in his full
possession: All our performances here, as emblems of subjection, look on God in
a perspective, they are prostrations before a Majesty above. There is the
distance of heaven between the smiling God, and the praying Saint; and though
he stand on tiptoe on the mountain of meditation, yet God is infinitely above
him. Indead in duty the soul is Heb. 10. 22.
said to draw nigh to God, yet still there is a curtain between God and it,
which death can only draw, and a vail which only the dissolution of the
believer can take away. But in glory there shall be the clearest vision, the
highest, and entirest fruition, without the interposure of darkness or
distance. And there all the applications of the Saints shall be inhanced into a
beatificall vision.

when returns do come, then new wants are created. Our daily bread calls for
daily prayers. Every day supplyeth prayer with new matter of petition. But in
eternity all wants are swallowed up in transcendent abundance: there shall be
torrents of delight, and satisfaction, as the Original (...)
has it, Rivers of pleasure, fullness of joy, this is the language of Psalm.
36. 9.
heaven. And so likewise Sermons, Hearing, Meditation, they all imply a
duskishnesse in the understanding; and that the scales of ignorance are not
fallen from the eye of the mind. But there shall be in heaven a fullness of
knowledge, as well as of joy; and the mind shall be as full of light, as the
heart of joy.

Isa. 8. 20.
promises bribe duty. All our services are directed by the line of a Command,
Jer. 4. 14.
and encouraged by the love of a promise. But in the eternity of the Saints,
both precepts and promises cease; for in glory there can be no irregularity,
and therefore no need of a precept; and all promises are turned into
accomplishment. Commands they are the rules of unbridled nature; but they are
superfluous to nature, perfected in glory: to turn to God, wash our hearts,
bath our selves in penitential tears; these are anomalies and absurdities in
eternity. Promises they are spurs to sluggish nature: but to the Saint
glorified, they are supervacaneous incentives. God in glory shall be in stead
both of precept and promise; he shall then guide us by his eye, not his
scepter; and shall give us himself, not his bond in a way of promise. All
rudiments and discipline shall be outdated in heaven.

And so likewise there shall be no performance of service or duty in the
eternity of the damned. For*

ratione meriti, by the claim of merit; yet ratione promissi, in reference to
the Psalm. 50. 15.
promise of God. And now if Esau Heb. 12. 17.
cannot get the blessing if he seek it with tears here, what shall he do when
death has let down the trap door of eternity upon him? Promises which make the
believer heavens creditour, all cease in the bottomless pit. And the cries of
the damned, shall neither procure ease, or liberty; and their bitter
lamentations shall return upon them unpitied, there shall be no reward for all
their moans; God has sealed up the sentence of death unto them, and it is
irreversible. Now as Philos. speaks, Vbi cessat finis, cessant media, where the
end cease, all means cease; the reward of duty failing, there can be no
service; the smile and command of God, the supplies and happiness of the soul
which are the great incentives to duty, are all obsolete and impossible in
miserable eternity. God shall not illuminate Psalm. 4. 6.
hells darkness with the light of his countenance. And therefore all
adorations and services shall be a dream in endless misery. Do thou think
wretched sinner, that when thou art swallowed up in eternal flames, thou shall
then repent, believe, wrestle with God in prayer, open thy condition to the
Lord? shall thou then with an inundation of tears, and an heart covered with
mourning and sables fly to the arms of free grace, and as a prisoner by
pleading guilty sue out thy pardon? No surely, God will not hear, nor answer,
nor pity the soul lodged in flames. And all such services Mat. 25. 41.
shall in the eternity of the wicked be buried in silence.

Joh. 9. 3.
of the damned, deserve not the name or title of repentance and prayer. There
is nothing of duty in Dives his Luke 16. 24.
petition; the tears of the damned shall be only the exertions, and ebullitions
of torment; the fruit of their misery, not their love. It is their pain, not
their pie^y; the horror, not the dictate of their conscience suggests these
moans; the damned abhor duty more in hell, then they did upon earth. There is
no faith, no melting of soul, no fixed hope in all their lamentations: and
their violent importunities shall evidence their calamity, but not their duty;
their most fervent prayers are but fictitious services; and the fires of hell,
not the fire of zeal shall inflame their supplications; Nothing in the eternity
of the wicked can be called duty.

there? the tortured frenzy of the reprobate how incapable of service? what
methodiz'd prayer can a wrackt miscreant produce? Our diseases, and bodily
torments here in this life, how do they stifle and smoother the duties of the
patient; and turn the Saint into a frantic distemper? and what shall the
infernal fires do? the gout, stone, strangury, how do they inarticulate, and
so shatter the services of Gods people here, that they all seem to be a
distempered passion, and passionate madness? and therefore think not thou
painted hypocrite thou shall flow in thy usual elegancy, when thou lie on
the wrack of eternal calamity. No, all the complaints of the damned, shall be
fury, not fealty.

is no object of duty; God is the judge, not the father of the damned. God as
reconcilable, and in the notion of a compassionate father, is the object of
all duty; but he shall not be found in that notion to the caitiffe reprobates,
Contemplation it implies a sweetness. Psalm. 104. 34.
Prayer begins with Our Father. Hearing supposes the discovery of our fathers
will. And so all duties and performances wait on God in expectation of favor,
answer, and indulgence; and so duty is called communion with God: but after death
God shall be to Psalm. 63 2.
the wicked a severe, inexplorable and implacable judge. And all the cries
which the damned make are to God as their tormentour, not their Sovereign. They
would cry as much to Satan, would he burn with a cold iron. Here indeed God is
easily to be entreated, but hereafter never to be entreated; so that there is
no object of duty in the damneds eternity. God sits, as to them, no more in the
throne of grace, but in the judgment seat; he shall shine forth no more Psalm.
80. 1.
between the Cherubims; but break out 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
in flaming fire, in perpetual vengeance and executions.

But here it may be replied,

1.



They are the resultancies of service, not the performance; the rest at night
is sweet because of the labor. They are as the honey after the toil of the
working Be. They are the rewards of service. Those holy rejoycings, they are
but part of the glory, the Saints are crowned with. They are the pure vent, and
sweet overflowing of their love to God, that then they shall be filled with.
These Hallelujahs shall be the unlading of their affections.

They are triumph, not service; the ^.
souls everlasting ovation; there is nothing of toil in those holy
gratulations. They are the triumphant Rev. 4. 11.
song, the music, the jubiles of the glorified ones. Cantus coronatus,
crowned harmony; these blessed praises are but the Saints wedding day.

an enforcement of duty, as that beatificall vision. They are the ravished
acknowledgment of heavens Courtiers; the blessed sight of God extracts these
precious collaudations. The Lord says, Exodus 33. 20. No man shall see me, and
live: by reason of man's weakness, and sinfulness. But in heaven the sight of
God shall not only be the fountain of life; but shall spring a vein of eternal
praises and hallelujahs.



Rev. 1. 6.
dignity; and now God appears purely as a father. No longer as a God among his
creatures which resembles sovereignty and subjection; but as a father among his
children. So that now duty is transformed into delight, and service is changed
into satisfaction. God in heaven fits in his throne, not in his tribunal to
his Saints, and so there shall be an unclouded familiarity. 1 Cor. 13. 12.


Tim. 4. 8. which (...), the righteous judge shall give. Even Gods justice
shall be open handed, and overflow in donations. Indeed the Majesty of God in
heaven shall not be abated, but more communicated. Moses was called Gods friend
here: what shall Exodus 33. 11.
he be in heaven, when his Majesty shall be seen unveyled?

CHAP. IX.
Man's eternal condition admits of no waste or diminution.

AND here lies the great riddle of eternity, that time never wastes (I say time,
though it be an improper locution, there being no time in eternity) and that
after millions of ages are past over, there is not the thousandth part of a
moment spent; When there are as many centuries and ages spent, as there are
drops in the Ocean, or stars in the heaven, or hairs upon all the heads that
are, or have been in the world since the Creation; yet then there is not one
flying moment blown over; the taper of eternity spends not, nor does duration
shed or fade at all. As the Psalmist speaks of the Eagle, it renewes Psalm. 103.
6.
its strength; so there is a perpetual renovation in eternity. One flying
moment generates another. As the Sea is always full of water, though the waves
pass away. After the damned Mar. 9. 46. 48.
have tumbled on flames a tedious night of ages, it is as far from morning, as
the first moment. Could we sum up all those years which those Patriarchs of old
spent, mentioned in the 5. of Genesis; when their lives were stretched out to so
many centuries; and their glass was so long in running, and hoary age so
slowly seized upon them; I say, could we digest so many thousand years into one
total sum: nay, Est enim aeternitas duratio quaedam permanens, and unicum nunc
stans, and nunquam fluens. Cabrea. in Thomam.
and cast in the time of all their posterities lives into the computation: yet
this total sum would be a cipher in eternity; when so many ages are elapsed,
eternity is yet to spend, the clock has not struck one hour. And let not the
fond sinner, who is inebriated with the soft effeminacies, and dalliances of
the world, imagine his future miseries, shall be as fleet as his downy
pleasures here. Nay, eternity in this is like the Sun, that wears not out, nor
wastes its substance by all its swift and constant travail. Time sheds not (I
say time for explications sake) nor fails in our everlasting condition; nor
shall wrinckles ever surprise the face of eternity: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
that holy triumvirate, are at this day in the spring of their sublime
beatitude; nor shall their glory be blasted with the fear of an Autumn. In a
word, eternity cannot be lessened, nor curtaild by the longest tracts, or
circuits of duration. Time it self in eternity, is a pure anomaly. I say time,
which is the Genus of moments, days, hours, years, those winged parcels of
duration, is obsolete, and a cipher in our everlasting estate.

And there can be no diminution in the eternity of the blessed.

felicities with trouble and murmuration. It would be the womb of grief, and
leaven glory with sorrow. In Luke 20. 36. Christ says, the glorified Saints
shall be equal to the Angels; and those blessed Spirits, viz. the Angels,
never stained themselves with any crime, which might depopulate or waste, their
happiness. And indeed, heaven it self must be hung with mourning, could the
rivers of the Saints pleasures be capable of ebbing. Psalm. 36. 8.
This shall be Dives his misery in hell, to think of his past delicacies, and
with a sad recordation to review the pleasant banquets that are now blown over.
And now no sorrow shall veil glory, or benight heaven; no grief shall thrust
into the Brides-chamber; nor shall any trouble Mat. 01. 52.
overshadow the everlasting festival of the glorified ones: Gods smile shall
dry up all tears there. Rev. 7. 17.
Neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat: loco prius citato: the
Saints shall not be interrupted by the overkind embraces of a warming Sun: the
morning of glory shall not spend; there shall be a fountain of happiness, and
Gods presence shall be a spring to this fountain. So there can be no waste in
the Saints eternity.

Rev. 21. 23. And the City had no Isa. 60. 19.
need of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God did
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. I say God, in whom there is no
shadow of change. There is no rising or setting, Jam. 1. 17. Caelum lumine
long^ illustriore fulgebit, luce increata, Majestate dei immensa illustrabitur.
Par.
no oblique, or perpendicular beams in the divine Sun: the immediate presence
and glory of God, shall be an everlasting noonday. And this natural Sun at
the resurrection shall either, as some suppose, as a taper, be put out in the
socket of the universal conflagration; or else, as others conceive, be turned
into a more glorious luminary; analogicall to that of the Prophet Isa. 30. 26.
, yet not to amplify, but attend on the Saints glory; Gods presence being
universal happiness. Now the Sun being the gnomon of time, that being removed
from its office in eternity; time can suffer no lapse or waste.

Genesis 5. 27.
ages of men have at last been coffined in death and dissolution; and so there
would be end of, were there a waste in the Saints eternity: but eternity admits
no conclusion, as shall be fully showed hereafter.

And there shall be no waste or diminution in the eternity of the damned; their
time of execution shall not fly away; their suffering spaces shall be ever
filled up, and never slide away or wear out. And it must be so: For.

sparks of their misery were blown over: It is some consolation to the
shipwrackt mariner, that the bark is slipped off from the rock, though he be
cast upon a tempestuous Ocean. As 1 Samuel 15. 32.
the spruce Amalekite rejoiced, the bitterness of death was over, though
suddenly he was massacred by an unexpected slaughter. It would be some
relaxation to the tormented, if they could be so happy in their Arithmetic, as
to reckon by the rule of substraction, so many miseries are broak through and
gone; if they could say, totidem poenae, so many extremities are overpast. What
ease is it to the tortured patient, when the fit is over, not only that the
disease is not still in the same rage; but so many throws, of intolerable
pain, are past and fled away. But alas! there shall not the least shadow of
comfort cool the flaming reprobate, nothing that may be entitled or denominated
relief. No mixture of ease, no arguments of comfort, no consideration that may
taste of satisfaction, shall allay the damneds extremity. Could any interposure
of contentment be found in hell, hell it self would lose its nature; Luke 16.
25.
No time illapses, or torment flies away, but both multiply, as fast as spend,
in miserable eternity.

Isa. 33. The wrath of God like a stream of brimstone does kindle it: It is,
ira dei, qui est aete^nus, the wrath of God, who is eternal. And it is a
stream, not a flood, not a transient and sudden inundation, but a continued and
constant current. So there shall be no waste in Gods wrath; but that shall be a
flame his justice shall be always feeding. And the damneds beings shall be
stretched out to Gods indignation, which is inextinguishable fire. Misery and
duration shall no more die to the reprobate, then wrath shall die in God, or
malice in Satan. Think not presumptuous sinner, when thou shall fall upon the
doom of a woeful eternity, that thy tedious ages of imprisonment, and
execution shall abate the tale of thy future (though future be an unknown
phrase in eternity) calamity: No certainly, the flames shall scorch as much,
the pincers burn as hot, conscience corrode as deeply, Gods wrath break out
as severely, after the passage of millions of ages, as the first moment of thy
doleful execution.

Hacket in the reign of Q. Elizabeth.
into their everlasting condition, more envenomed, and impostumated with
villainous, and rancorous principles, with more bloody and malevolent
disposition, then when they were tenants to the world. And therefore as there
shall be no spending and diminution of sin, so neither of time; as their
rebellion shall not waste, so neither shall their duratition fade; they could
sin here indefatigably, with an unwearied carriere, much more in hell;
especially these 3. things being weighed in the balance.

1. In hell there shall be no examples of piety. No pictures of a godly father
to check an exorbitant son. No radiant grace of a famous preacher, precious
believer, pious Martyr, to dash the countenance, and bridle the insolency of an
audacious miscreant, and as the brightness of Moses his face to fetter the
Josh. 24. 15, 16.
enormous sinner with astonishment. Exodus 30. 30.
But in hell there is universal horror and blasphemy, nothing but a
diabolical concurrency of wickedness and provocation, and sin shall ever be
in the fever in the eternity of the reprobate.

2. In eternity there is no means of piety; all ordinances cease there, the
sunshine of the Gospel shall not visit the coast of the reprobates eternity.
And although the Gospel, Rev. 14. 6. be called an everlasting Gospel, yet this
does not import the use of the Gospel, but the fruit of it; the dispensations
of it here, Ejus authoritatem, effectum, and constantiam asseret, Par. in loc.
were of everlasting concernment; its converts shall be crowned with
everlasting glory, and its enemies wrackt with everlasting torment: But all the
offers and overtures of the Gospel shall cease and be at an end in eternity;
and the tormented reprobate shall have no precious promises to melt him,
righteous commands to guide him, severe threats to restrain him, faithful
Ministry to convert him, or holy communion to refresh him; all these fruits of
Gospel love, shall be to the damned buried in eternal silence: therefore sin
cannot be abated in everlasting misery: Let Dives his frustraneous prayer give
Luke 16. 24, 25.
verdict for the whole body of Gospel-exercise. And

3. In hell there shall be no shame for impiety: sinners shall not see Genesis 3.
7.
their own nakedness; but sin and blasphemy shall cover them as a garment,
hell shall be the stews of wickedness, as well as the prison of misery. So
that to close up this conclusion; as the carriere and violence of sin, not
abating, neither shall the term or time of torment pass away in the
reprobates eternity.

CHAP. X.
Man's eternal condition admits of no mixture or moderation.

ALL things in eternity are in the superlative degree: Every thing is scrued up
to the highest. No blended joys in heaven, joys dampt with tears; nor
mitigated miseries in hell: when the joys of heaven are described, how
gloriously are they represented, 1 Cor. 2. 9. In heaven there shall be joy in
its (...), its height, 1 John 3. 2.
in its fullness, and music of glory in Isa. 64. 4.
its sweetest harmony. Moderation here, is a virtue, in eternity it is an
anomaly, a mere impossibility. The happiness Quid quaeris ut ascendat in
linguam, quod in cor non ascendit? Aug. in Psalm. 85.
of the Saints shall be as the Sun at noonday, in its most sublime ascent. The
beatificall vision can be no moderate or ordinary possession, but joy in its
ravishment, felicity in its glory. Perfection is the perpetual sign in
heaven. And so the miseries of hell, are fire in its hottest inflammations; no
slak't or allayed flames. Here indeed David may sing, Psalm. 101. 1. and we may
feel mercy and judgment; we may observe black and white providence, the face
of providence sometimes looks pleasant with a smile, and sometimes clouded with
a frown, mixed together, the heat of indignation allayed with the waters of
compassion: but in heaven there is mercy, no judgment, and in hell judgment,
no mercy. In eternity there is no blending by a composition of contrarieties.
Here is correction in judgment, Jer. 10. 24. afflictions weighed in the scales
of pity, and commiseration; but in the eternity of the reprobate there is
judgment, no correction, pure flames of wrath, as Philos. speak, fire and
heat, ad octo. Cogita homo, quoslibet mundi cruciatus, quasque seculi poenas,
intend animo, quosque tormentorum dolores, quascunque dolorum acerbitates,
compara hoc totum gehennae, and leve. Isid.
Eternity is the womb of extremity, either of delight in transcendency, or
sorrow in extremity. The felicities of the blessed shall be always in a full
Sea, and the fit of the damneds pain shall be always upon them in the
greatest misery; the Saints happiness shall be incomparable, and the sinners
agonies shall be intolerable. Every thing in eternity, whether possession, or
execution shall be stretched out, and wound up to its superlative capacity. De
poenis excogitari non potest, quod ibi non erit. Orig.
All things shall be boyld up to the height. And it must be so. For there can
be no mixture or mean in the eternity of the Saints.

that shall arise from the ashes of Christ's sufferings, and shall that revenue
be ordinary? or indeed capable of being surpassed? A moderate possession is not
proportionate to Christ's bleeding passion. Could we compute what the riches of
his merits are; or how much value is contained in one groan of him, who was
innocence it self; we might easily collect how superlative the joys of the
Saints must be, which flow from the fountain of Christ's merit. Let
Arithmeticians cast up what one drop of Christ's blood comes to at the rate, how
much the Isa. 53. 11.
travel of Christ's soul comprehends; and then how exploded will the opinion
be, if any such be, of a mixed or moderate possession in glory: what felicities
must that blood purchase, which can fetch out the stain of those scarlet
sins, by which the infinite God has been provoked? And therefore Isa. 1. 18.
Christ's purchase speaks the Saints glory Superlative.

Alexander shall boast of Romans 6. 23.
donum Alexandri, Alexanders gift, what do the gifts of God weigh? what massy
happiness is included in them? Heaven as it is the price of Christ's blood, so
it is the fruit of Gods bounty, which must needs be transcendent; especially
these 3. things being seriously perpended.

Col. 1. 12.
himself, the sum of all beatitudes. In eternity the Saints have what they
must trust to, and that is superlatively enough. This glory is Gods
consummative bounty, Luke 12. 31. (...), the Kingdom. And God in his last
gift, will not, as I may speak, crown with a silver crown, I mean one that may
be bettered, will not give comparative happiness, that may admit of a higher
degree. Not like Herod, give half of Mar. 6. 23.
a Kingdom. Gods magnificence invests the Saints with superlative glory.

his creatures as his children, his (...), his little flock, such as his heart
yearns after. Can transcendent Isa. 49. 15.
affection bestow a moderate fruition? Surely there will be a proportion
between the fullness, and the fruit of Gods love; fullness of love, can give
no less then fullness of Joy. It is (...), the love of a father, and the
affection of a God; 1 John 4. 16.
of a father, whose love is his nature, and of a God, who has all treasures of
bounty by him; and his love is the key to these treasuries being oyled with the
blood of Christ; so Gods relation it amplifies the superabundancy of the Saints
eternal possession: this adds to the account.

Isa. 53. 11. He shall see the travel of his soul, and be satisfied. Ah,
remember the word, satisfied; what can satisfy the love of Jesus Christ to his
Saints, but most transcendent glory? to those believers who are the redeemed by
his blood, the birth of his travel; nay, and the travel of his soul, the
agonies and sweats of his soul: (...)
the Saints were born with the soarest travel, and therefore shall be crowned
with sweetest felicity: according to that Joh. 17. 24. That where I am, they
may be also: As it were, installed in the same Coronation, according to Christ's
one phrase, Rev. 3. 21. in the same throne with himself. The very promises of
God are assurance for transcendent glory and happiness. God has pawned his
promise, his irreversible bond, and he will see Christ satisfied, he will abate
him nothing of his agreement. Let the people of God Psalm. 40. 7, 8.
begin their triumphancies here, God will see their Husband satisfied for their
everlasting portion and dowry.

And here can be no mixture or In hac vita mera calamitas, in aeterna mera
felicitas. Ger.
beatificall, then to see God unveil his glorious face, the open face of God?
which phrase does import these three things.

The distinct knowledge of God; we distinguish men by their faces; their
countenances does diversifie them: and we shall see God in Vita beatorum,
visio, and cognitio beatae Trinitatis. Hugo.
glory distinctly; know him to be the great, glorious, omnipotent, infinite
God. I shall not, as many do, debate the way of Gods communicating Deus
videbitur in ^^gno coelorum paternaliter. Iren.
himself unto us; but certain it is, we shall see him clearly and distinctly,
without curtain or cloud: as the face is the characteristicall difference. We
shall see him, as Irenaeus speaks, Paternaliter, as a father is beheld by his
child, with knowledge and delight. His glory shall appear to be the glory of
God, infinitely above all the splendor and glory of the creature, though
clothed with brightness and perfection.

Psalm. 63. 2.
by gracious influences and distillations: or as Abraham saw God, Genesis 32. 30.
Genesis 18. 2. maskt in the veil of a body, as Divines speak symbolically, 1
King. 21. 19.
speculo symbolico. Nor yet as Moses saw God, in his back parts; though that
glorious vision, shed such a resplendency on the face of Moses, as the Exodus
33. 23.
Israelites could not behold the radiant Quatuor modis videmus deum; per fidem,
per contemplationem, per apparitionem, per apertam visionem. Biel.
luster of his countenance; but the Saints shall see God in heaven familiarly,
as one friend beholds another; the Saints shall behold God in a friendly,
close, and familiar way.

Jacob beheld the face of Joseph his Son. He saw not his wagons only, but his
Genesis 46. 2, 930.
face. In eternity we shall see God not in ordinances, not by letters, as 1
Cor. 13. 12.
here, but his face shall be visible to us, (i. e.) we shall see God fully,
with transcendent and inexpressible satisfaction. And our Masters joy, which
Mat. 25. 21.
we shall inherit, shall spring from this, Angeli Sancti vino sapientiae
inebriantur, dum ipsum deum facie ad faciem videntes omni voluptate satiantur
spirituali. Greg. M.
that we see our Masters face. Now the beatificall vision, is infinitely above
all graduall, mixed, or ordinary possession: this is the transcendentcy of
transcendency; in respect of which all excellencies and enjoyments, are but as
a drop to the Ocean. And as the learned Father, This vision only can limit the
vaste and comprehensive desires of man, and put a Ille est finis desideriotum
nostrorum; qui sine fine videbitur, sine fastidio amabitur, sine defatigatione
laudabitur. Aug. de civ. dei.
stop to the waves of his ambition.

And there can be no mixture or moderation in the eternity of the wicked; every
thing shall be superlative, and in the extreme to them. There shall be no water
in their fire, no correction in their judgment; No mercy in their misery, no
proportion in their calamity. And it must be so,

superlative evil; could we squeese out the poison of aspes, the venom of
Serpents, and all those detested Creatures which are the abhorrency of mankind,
into one draught, yet that venomous portion would yield a pleasant taste to the
bitterness of sin. Sin is that which the Schoolmen say Ibi vidi omnia genera
tormentorum, quorum minimum majus omnibus. Hugo Victor.
is totaliter malum, a comprehensive evil, that admits of no composition of
good. And therefore as there is no moderation or mixture in the evil nature of
sin; so neither in the everlasting punishment for sin. Sin is an unlimited,
boundless, and superlative evil, and then conceive all the reprobates Ibi
dolor intolerabilis, timor horribilis, foetor incomparabilis, and sic miseri
motientur ut semper vivant, and sic vivent, ut semper moriantur Bern. in Psalm.
sins digested into one lump, and wrapped up in one fardell; and what moderation
can there be in hell? It is sin that is the flint from whence the fire of hell
is struck; the womb of the monstrous pain of the damned; the superlative
cause of superlative misery: Extremes in moralls, breed extremity in
punishment. Indeed here, in this life, God does punish the wicked with
moderated, and intermitted judgments; but this does not arise from the nature
of sin, which they are stained with, but this does arise from the prevalency of
Gods mercy, which here is exercised, to render the impenitent sinner the more
inexcusable; but in eternity all hopes and capacities of mercy or compassion
are out dated and obsolete.

Nec dubium, quin ad fornacem Babylonicam, Dan. cap. 3. deducamur, inque typum
oeterni illius ignis observemus Gerard.
which shall ever be the sign and season in hell. It is a superlative flame,
and there shall be wrath without the least mixture or allaying of mercy. One
spark of Gods wrath is hotter then Nebuchadnezzars furnace, were it 77. times
hotter then it was. And so the Prophet, Isa. 33. 14. Who shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? Burnings, not findgings, not scorchings; and burnings in
the plural number, and the everlasting is more terrible then the burnings. One
drop of the vialls of Gods wrath, which he shall be ever pouring out upon the
damned, is multiplied misery; a pullulation of calamity, insupportable anguish,
and torturing perplexity. If God Orcus malorum omnium extremum. Plato.
lay his hand upon a sinner here, either in the agonies of his mind, or
wracking distempers of his body, with what fury and madness is he ready to
turn his own executioner, and to quench his frenzy in his own blood? Judas
cannot here the scriches, Coelestis ira, quos premit, miseros facit. Sen. Herc.
nor bear the throws of his tormenting conscience; but he must hasten his
damnation by a self-dispatching murder. Thus if God do but power out some drops
of his indignation, and assault man primitiis irae, with the first fruits of
his anger? And what then shall that wrath be which is unmixt, and consummate,
whose flames are oyled with resolutions of showing no further pity? and such
wrath shall Rev. 19. 20. Infernus dicitur stagnum ignis, quia ut lapis mari,
ita animae illic immerguntur. Anselm.
be the fuel of infernal torment; how miserable shall the caitiffe Reprobate
be, when he shall be drowned in an Ocean of such displeasure?

Pharaoh Exodus 8. 8.
himself distasted his own neglect to let Israel go, being macerated with
judgments. Nay sometimes mitigated afflictions are seasonable chains upon the
offendour, to restrain Psalm. 119. 6, 7.
him from further wandering and gadding.

But the torments of the damned are sweetened with no gracious end, in reference
to the Patient, but they proceed from a wrathful God, whose indignation shall
not be attempered with any bowels of mercy, which is a star that shines not
over the infernal house; no, but the damned shall lie in a Sea of tribulation,
which shall not be corrected by one drop of compassion.

CHAP. XI.
Man's eternal condition admits of no events or issues of Providence.

NOW to clear this proposition, Universalis Providentia est, qua Deus creaturas
omnes dirigit secundum arcanum instinctum, quem singulis in creatione indidit,
and ita naturae ordinem a se positum conservat. Bucan.
ye must conceive that I do not annihilate that universal providence, by which
all created beings are supported in their natures, and subsistencies; for from
such providentiall influxes, neither are the glorious Angels, nor the glorified
Saints to be excluded; but they are preserved by a common sustentation. In a
word, there is a double Providence which cease not for ever.

1. Providentia sustentationis, by which all created beings are sustained in
their power and nature till the Almighty speak abolition, and command
annihilation, and by which those essences which God has determined for
eternity Heb. 1. 3. Nisi deus impulsum suum aeterna cura, and providentia
prosequeretur, omnis natura rerum non consisteret. Pet. Martyr.
are supported; as men and Angels; for we must not, I say, exempt these
renowned creatures from their dependence upon God; even when they shine in the
most glorious sublimities, and when illustrious in their richest excellencies:
for this is an everlasting truth, That there is unum independens, one
independent being, and all other beings have their total reliance and
dependence on him: and to assert the contrary is a most Vnum est primum mobile.
Arist.
blasphemous reproach cast upon God himself. So that the most excellent
creatures are maintained in their essence by the omnipotency and wisdom of
God. And

2. There is Providentia operationis, a Providence of operation; by which Deum
omnia quidem regere, nil aliud est quam rebus omnibus communem influxum
suppeditare. Pet. Mart.
the Lord does not only support, but guide and rule all created beings,
according to their determinate natures; that all their actions or natural
propensions shall end and issue in the glory of the Creator. For as Divines
Providentia non est nuda cognitio, sed efficientia. Isid.
observe, Gods providence both here, and so for ever, is not only a bare
inspection of that variety he has formed; but a continued and virtuall influx,
Creatoris potentia, and virtus causa est subsistendi omni creaturae, quae
virtus, si aliquando cessaret rerum creatarum cessaret species, and omnis
natura concideret.
by which the creature is enabled to move in the sphere of his own nature; for
all beings would soon wither, and be dried up, did they want the animation of
Gods providentiall influences. All humane actions receiving life and power from
a distilled virtue of Gods universal providence; and so in heaven the most
glorious inhabitants of it, shall be guided for ever, and maintained in their
felicity, and purity, and praises by the necessary providence of God. I make
not mention of this division of Gods providence, as if it argued a diversity of
acts in God; and they were two distinct Providence, but they are identicall
and the same in God; his sustaining providence being operative, and his
operative sustaining: but only for explication sake, that we may view the
varieties of the same perpetuated and eternized providence; which shall not
cease, while God himself is independent, and his nature continues; which is
certainly eternal. I say, from this government, rule, and influence of
Providence eternity is not freed; and it is impossible it should, considering
the everlasting relation the creature Act. 17. 28.
has to the Creator, the fountain of its life and being. But to pursue the
present Conclusion. All events and issues of Providence shall be outdated in
eternity, and Providence shall cease:

Ratione obscuritatis, in relation to the darkness and obscurity of it. There
shall be no mysteries of Providence in eternity. No want of prayer Ibi quicquid
nos nunc latet, manifestum erit. Aug. de trip. habit.
for the unmasking of Providence, and the unveiling of Gods mind in his
obnubilated dispensations. We shall not in eternity lie at Gods feet, and cry,
Lord, what is thy meaning in Genesis 37. 11.
this affliction, in this scourge, in this indulgence? what is the
interpretation of the rods, or the roses of Providence? Providence in eternity
shall Ezekiel. 1. 16.
not be a sun in a cloud, a taper in a Quod beati hic crediderunt, ibi
videbunt, sui creatoris substantiam mundis cordibus contemplantes. Prosp.
dark lantern. Eternity shall take away the mask from the face of
Providence. We shall not turn questionists in the thoughts of God concerning
us, when strange and unexpected Providence, like the Angels, Genesis 18. 1, 2. to
Abraham, come to our door. The Saints in glory shall not turn Skeptics, to
observe the traces, Meanders, Labyrinths and bowers of Providence; but all
things shall be clear to the glorified and perfected Saint, who shall see the
whole intentions 1 Cor. 13. 12.
of God concerning Man, written in text and golden letters. In Gods O quanta
felicitas Deitatis visioni inter Angelorum choros adesse perpetuo, si tanta
transfigurata Christi humanitas duorumque societas sanctorum ad punctum visa
delectat! Beda.
face his mind shall be apparent: whatever may amplify the joy, perfect the
understanding, or enrich the apprehensions of the glorious believer, shall be
unridled to him; or else his happiness was yet in its growth. And so the
damned shall be fully acquainted with all the righteous, yet severe Providence
concerning them; they shall now see, what Gods intent was to leave them to
obduration and impenitency: when all his commands could not confine, nor his
promise melt them, was it not for this, That Isa. 6. 9.
their sins being ripe, they might be overwhelmed with everlasting calamity,
and he might draw his arrows to the head, and eternally shoot at them? Not
that God delights to contrive, or bring about the ruin of his creature; Ezekiel.
18. 23.
but the damned shall see the justice, righteousness, and wisdom of God in
their perpetual executions; and they shall observe the clear design of divine
Providence in all the difficulties and abstruses of it; which they could not
unravell in this life.

ratione varietatis, in reference to its variety: the wheel of Providence
shall not turn in eternity; the smiles and frowns of Providence shall cease,
quod eundem, in reference to the same person; the upper nail shall not be
lowermost. There shall be no inconstancy, flitting, and volubility in
Providence. And as it is here, the Sunshines of Providence shall not be turned
into a storm. Haman shall not be now in Court, and Est. 3. 1. and 7. 10.
presently on the gallows: the alternations and altercations of Providence
shall cease. The changes, turnings, and embroydery of Providence shalll end in
eternity. Providence in eternity shall not be as the Rainbow of changeable and
diverse color; but it shall be a sky always full of storms or serenity;
whose face is always of the same complexion: The reprobates always lying
under the frowns, and the blessed lying under the embraces of Providence.

Ratione disciplinae Providentiae, in reference to the discipline and
instruction of Providence. The counsels of In gloria sapientia ex ipso font
bibetur. Aug.
Providence shall cease in eternity; those sacred suggestions which here are
often pictured in the complexion of a providence, shall be at an end.
Providence as a Schoolmaster shall Mic. 6. 9.
cease. God here indeed makes Providence Psalm. 119. 67.
the Tutour of his people, and they are often bettered by doctrinall
providence. God here educates his children in the School of Providence.
Corrective Providence become corrasives to their lusts, and bounteous are made
encouragements to their graces. Providence is often the bellows of love, joy and
thanksgiving, and not only calls for, but guides the exercise of the Saints
graces: but in eternity providentiall instructions shall be at an end. Nor
shall the Saints in glory, who are arrived at perfection and incapable of
miscarriage, stand in need of the guidance and tuition of Providence. Nor shall
the damned be capable of providentiall directions, they being past the
happiness and hopes of recovery.

ratione plenitudinis providentiae, in reference to the accomplishments of
Providence; which shall no more be as the midwife to bring forth Gods decrees;
and to be the usher of Gods counsels. All the discoveries and executions of
Providence shall be outdated in eternity. Providence in eternity shall not be
the interpreter of Gods everlasting intentions; the womb to bring forth those
determinations of God, which had their rise from eternity. Providence in this
life is the herald of Gods will, and denotes to us what his mind was from
everlasting. Thus the Jews Act. 2. 23.
and Judas conspire together in a (...). Greg. Naz.
cursed combination to deliver up our Lord Christ to death; which Providence
did but explain to the world Gods eternal determination, that Christ should die
for sinners, and is but the execution of Gods decree. Now executive Providence
as it does finish and unmaske the intentions of God, shall be at an end in
eternity; and it shall be said of Gods decrees in our eternal estate, as
Christ said when he was giving up the ghost, It is finished; Joh. 19. 30.
so they are finshed. In a word, the Saints In futura vita, dei and divinorum
mysteriorum perfecta cognitio succedet; tunc plene and perfect intelligemus
ea, ad quorum claram intuitivam notitiam in hac vita penetrare non potuimus.
Gerard.
shall not fear the checkes or changes of Providence, tremble at the arrests of
it; admire the quintos actus, the last acts of Providence, shall not labor to
read the cipher of Providence, or take pains to trace the prints and footsteps
of it; but all shall be serene and clear to a Saint in glory; all Gods decrees
shall be legible in a fair Character. Providence is here often a clouded
firmament, but in eternity it shall be a clear sky. Nor shall the damned be
capable of the smiles of Providence, which often here so captivated the wicked,
that they did pretend a title to God himself. These providentiall prizes, which
often bespangle the wicked in this life, shall cease and wear the mourning of
eternal wrath. Nor shall the mistakes of providence find place in eternity;
Providence shall not be wrackt and tortured to speak the fancies of men, and
made corrivall with, if not superior to Scripture. It shall no more be the
implicit faith of man, and panderiz'd to men's sinful machinations: But all
various, and uncertain issues and accomplishments of providence shall be at an
end in eternity; now all providence, which are but the Alphabet of Gods will,
must cease in our everlasting estate.

Manasses his prison, and the 2 Cron. 33. 12.
brightness that shone about Paul; all Act. 9. 3, 37, 39, 40.
these are consummate in glory. Joseph's Providence, Peter Waldoes Providence,
Genesis 41.
shall all have their plot in eternity. What God aimed at in the strange
circumferences, and rare circuits of Providence, for the advantage, and
emolument of his people here, shall be all clear and visible in eternity; and
the design of all the artifices of Providence shall be eternized. And so those
ripening providence which fatten and sear the wicked for the slaughter of
misery. Hamans Providence, and those Prodences which waited on the ruin and
destruction of Herod, shall all be finished in eternity, and the design of
them consummate: those just, yet rare passages of Providence which often with a
conviction confute and confound the wicked, shall cease in eternity, when the
intention of them shall be eternally visible.

Videbit Sanctus deum ad voluntatem, habebit ad voluptatem, fruetur ad
jucunditatem. Bern.
in eternity: Providence is here man's prospective, the umbrage, and dark
discovery of the mind of God; and poor man ghesseth at the will of God by
reading Providence. But now God acts immediately in eternity, Heb. 12. 29.
without showing his mind in the looking-glass of Providence; God is an
immediate flame of love to the Saints, and a flame of fire to the Reprobate.
God uses in eternity no more the medium of Providence to ripen the sinner for
ruin, or the Saint for glory; but all the Conduit pipes and conveyances of
Providence cease, those effluxes of his will, Gods bosom shall be open to the
Saints: It is the face of God, not of Providence in glory.

Joseph's Providence which attended him, were the very embroydery of variation;
we find him now fettered in a dungeon, Genesis 30. 20.
not illustrious in the Chariot. Such Providence which encompassed Genesis 41. 33.
Bellisarius that famous Captain, now Da obolum pauperi Bellisario.
the terror of the world, and presently interred alive in the coffin of
poverty. Thus Providence in this life is the map of changes; the picture of
mutability. But all change cease in eternity, (as fully before). Here indeed
promises are sure, but Providence are most uncertain. Jeremiah, Moses, Daniel,
Job and other Pillars and Patriots of Religion have been the very tennisbals of
Providence. Our eternity shakes off both the fears, and the hopes of
uncertainty.

2 Pet. 1. 19.
office, Verbum dei fiet visio dei, the Saints in glory shall not hear of God,
but behold his face. They shall see verbum essentiale, the essential word.
Joh. 1. 1.
Indeed the Gospel, Rev. 14. 6. is called an Everlasting Gospel

1. In the Original of it: the Ideaes which have been in the mind of God for
ever concerning man, are written and recorded in the Gospel.

2. In regard of the effect of it; the Gospel converts the soul to eternal
life, and by the preaching of it, draws the believer to heaven, the place of
everlasting joy; it is everlasting in the fruits of it: But yet the Gospel
shall cease in eternity. Tunc plene, and perfect causas divinorum consiliorum,
and operum intellegemus. Gerard.


1. In reference to the instructions of it, the blessed in glory shall not need
the discoveries of it; nor shall the damned enjoy them: eternity shall draw the
curtain of all difficulty to the glorified ones; and there shall need no
Gospell-dispensations, no Gospell-beams to scatter the cloud of ignorance.

2. The Gospel shall cease in the conversion of it. No soul-converting
Preaching in eternity, the transforming power of the Gospel shall be at end,
the day of grace sets in the grave, and is buried in the night of death. And

3. The Gospel shall cease in the comforts and cordials of it; the refreshings
of the Gospel shall be at an end in eternity, that honey that here is found in
the strong, in the strength of a truth, or in the hive of a promise.

And now if the stable, studdy, immutable word, that Gospel which is the
inalterable rule of Saints, Romans 3. 2.
the Oracles and irreversible counsels of God, if this word cease; how much
more Providence which is oftentimes colored with so many varieties, and is the
womb of such multifarious uncertainty: So that we may reassume our former
assertion, and say, that all issues, events, varieties and clouds of Providence
shall all be swallowed up in immediate and clear appearances of immutable love,
and inalterable wrath in eternity.

CHAP. XII.
Man's eternal condition admits of no comparison.

WE may say of eternity, what our Savior says of the Kingdom of heaven,
Luke 13. 19. To what may we compare it, or whereunto shall we liken it? What
ever nature or reason has compared eternity to, falls short of representing
that vast Ocean, that bottomless depth, that endless state. Nature in all its
wardrobe, and reason in all its capacities cannot emblematize eternity. What
figure, globe, sphere, or Mathematical device can adequate, or measure out
this endless and boundless state? It is like the day of judgment, unknown.
And we may cry out concerning eternity, what the Apostle does concerning the
wisdom of God, (...), O depth! Romans 11. 33.
All those pictures which antiquity with so much care and industry have drawn
of eternity, do not draw it to the life, nor fully paint out the thing
pourtraid; and who shall look upon them shall hardly know eternities face. This
endless estate, est naturae mysterium, and rationis opprobrium; it is a riddle
both to studious nature, and reason in its greatest intellectual flowrish.
Aristotle the interpreter and secretary of nature, was so mistaken in fadoming
eternity, that he makes the world eternal, which is but a body of perishing
particulars. The Almighty asks the question, Who can span the heavens, and
tell the Isa. 40. 12.
full latitude and breadth of their curtains? And this question may be
likewise proposed, Who can give a pregnant and full Hieroglyphck of eternity?
Who can illustrate and explicate what it is, by some lively and full emblem?
But not to wrong our serious Predecessors of their industry this way; I shall
only inform you, that there were many things, that they represented eternity
by: the principal I shall only cast my eye upon.



Answ. But to this it may be replied,

1. That only the eternity of God is Aeternitas est duplex;
represented by this emblem; for man's eternity has its rise, though not its
1. Perfecta, quae est a part ante, and a part post, sic Deus est aeternus.
fall. But God is eternal, as neither being capable of a beginning, nor of
ending, and therefore the Egyptians used to signify God by a circle; and the
2. Imperfecta, quae initium habet, sed non finem; sic Anima, and Angeli sunt
aeterni. So our Divines.
Persians thought they honored God most, when going up to the top of the
highest Tower, they called him the circle of heaven. And it was a custom among
the Turks (as Pierius teaches at large) to cry out every morning Mercurius
Trismegistus vocabat Deum sphaeram intellectualem, cujus centrum est ubique,
and circumferentia nullibi.
from an high Tower, God always was, and always will be, and so salute their
Mahomet. Now therefore this emblem teaches not man's eternity. But

2. I answer, The Ring it self which represents eternity, is mortal; the
golden Ring will shortly be a rusty ring; the ring is a fragill matter to
represent eternity; that piece of dust will moulder into dust: the ring no more
represents eternity, then the rude draught of a picture represents the vitality
and beauty of vigorous man. We can no more by emblems paint out this
bottomless state; then draw the effigies of a rational soul.

3. The Ring though it is not broken of it self, but is an entire
circumference, yet it may be broken by a superior power: Man can break the
circumference, and deface the very form of it: But Gods promise, and his past
word has made eternity indissoluble. Eternity is a duration, which neither
will of it self crumble into pieces; nor falls it within the verge of any
created power, to put a stop to it, or mel^ it into a conclusion. And that
there shall be no end Heb. 6. 18.
or impairing of it, Gods word is irreversible; the divine Majesty has
determined eternity both to the Saint and the sinner: and it is he alone that
can bury and dissolve eternity it self. It is with the eternity of men, as with
Angels; Christ is the Mediator of their sustentation; the shedding of his
blood has purchased eternal joy for the Saints, and cries aloud for eternal
misery on the sinner: God has pawned his trust to support and supply eternity;
Joh. 3. 16.
and therefore the indissolubility of eternity renders the Ring to be an
imperfect emblem of it.



Answ. But this emblem likewise falls short of picturing out eternity, there are
many deficiencies in this emblematicall adumbration. As

1. The Phoenix is immortalized by propagation, the ashes of the damme is the
original of the young: Occasus Nec mors in vita nec vita in morte aeterna.
unius est ortus alterius, the ones ruin is the others rise. But now eternity
is a constant state, not by propagation, not by accumulation, not by
alteration, but by an eternized duration. New additions of times in eternity,
Isa. 60. 15.
do not flow from the preteritions, and transiencies of former, as 1 Pet. 5 10.
if one past age should leave another its successor, and eternity was nothing
Omnium beatotorum felicitas erit continua, nunquam interrumpenda, and
sempitterna, nunquam finienda. Ger.
but a family of ages in a lineall descent. No, but eternity is an
uninterrupted perpetuity; everlastingnesse without stop, comma, or
intermission. Eternity is not duration by multiplication, but continuation; the
same person is everlastingly blessed, or damned: the same Saint in eternity
becomes not a species by multiplication; but the same individual believer
shall be clothed with personal happiness for ever, and his glory shall be a
Phoenix for its rarity, but not for its multiplication.

2. The Phoenix is renewed by a Christus primitiae and resurrectionis and
interruptibilitatis and impassibilitatis nobis factus est. Damasc.
passive alteration; the living Phoenix is turned into ashes, and the birth is
produced from those ashes, so that the death of the one is the generation of
the other, there is ashes, and dying, and budding, all demonstrations of change
and suffering. But eternity is Corporibus sanctorum non adaequabitur aurum, aut
vitrum. Greg.
incapable of change (as before). Heaven shall not be the Saints urne, nor the
bosom of Christ their tomb; nor shall the glorious bodies of the Saints
crumble into ashes, there shall be no passivenesse seize on the persons, or the
bodies of the Saints, no decays, or fading, deaths or damps; glory shall be a
Phoenix which shall never turn into ashes. Nor on the other side shall
infernal fire become funeral: nor shall the scorcht bodies of the damned be
incinerated or converted into ashes. So that now the emblem of the Phoenix is
too dark an hieroglyphicke of eternity.



But the Sun does not paint out eternity.

Answ. 1. The Sun has its eclipses, its clouds, its various aspects: So that I
may say, Mutability is one beam of the Sun. The historian reports that
Procopius, and from him Pedro Mexia about An. 540.
the Sun gave not more light then the Moon, for almost one whole year in Italy,
the sky in the mean time being clear and without clouds, or any thing to
shadow the same. Thus the Sun is an alterable body. Nay in the very motion of
it, which is chiefly the emblem of eternity, there has been Josh. 10. 13.
stoppages and stays, and retrogradations. And the Scripture has pronounced
Amos 8. 9.
a doom upon its glorious Joel 2. 31.
body, that it shall it be turned into darkness, and be entombed in obscurity.
But now eternity, is an unmixt, invariable state (as before): there shall be no
eclipse in glory, nor suspension of happiness; joy in eternity shall never
stand still, or run retrograde. God himself who is the Saints Sun in heaven, is
essentially immutable. No beams of light shall visit hell: nor clouds or
eclipses darken heaven. There is too much variation in the Sun, so that it
should paint out eternity.

2. But further, there are many things considerable in eternity, besides the
duration which the Suns motion seems to be the emblem of. There is
immutability, superlativeness, voydness of succession, joy, torment, the
aggravation and varieties of both. Eternity compriseth more in the womb of it,
then duration let out for ever, eternity is but as the cipher added to the sum
of blessedness or calamity, it is always predicate of felicity or misery. It
is not a naked abstractive duration; but is a concrete, in its significancy;
and there is a great difference between the state and duration of eternity;
What shall we be, and how long we shall endure, they are 2. Questions. And all
these emblemes do but paint out the bare continuance of eternity. A line of
ages that has no end.

And this shall be a general answer to all the emblemes considered
complexively, and together: viz. That all these creature-representations, they
are at the great day dissoluble; the heavens shall pass away, and the 2 Pet.
3. 10.
element shall melt with fervent heat. The Phoenix ashes shall be scattered,
and the Ring shall be melted in the general conflagration; but the great
assizes shall but open the curtains, and see the general alarm of eternity:
Men Heb. 9. 27.
dying before are gone to their particular eternities: but after the grand and
universal trial, when every thought shall be anatomized, and chined up, then
nothing shall appear but eternity: And all the rivers of times shall be
swallowed and drowned in that Ocean. All persons then shall sail for ever upon
the Sea of joys, or calamitous eternity. After the day of judgment, all ages
and centuries shall be fledged and leave the world, which shall be remaining;
and the particular parcels of Time, shall be all summed up in the total of
Eternity. So that now these emblems which represent eternity, themselves shall
have an end; so that they are rather the shadows, then representations of
eternity.

CHAP. XIII.
Man's eternal condition admits of no revocation.

THere is no sounding of a retreat, after we are lanched into the Ocean of
eternity; then there is no setting us a shore again, to re-act a new life in
the world. When once the trap-door is let down upon us, there is no breaking
Fugit irrevocabile tempus.
that prison-door; when we have once passed through that dark entry, and shot
that inevitable gulf; there is then no more retirement back again from behind
those dark hangings to visit the shore of the world. Eternity locks up all
back-doores against them that are cast upon that condition; and prevents all
possibilities of flight or escape. Christ and his Apostles raised Joh. 11. 44.
indeed many from the dead, but it was Act. 20. 12,
in an extraordinary way, and their graves were forced open by the petarre and
engine of a miracle. Eternity, whether it lands its passengers upon the shore
of glory, or locks them up in the dungeon of misery, it makes their condition
equally irreversible. Death is not a dream or a swoon; Facilis descensus
Averni; Sed revocare gradum, etc. Hic labor, hoc opus est. Virg.
nor in this regard a sleep, to be awakened again in this life; but when once
it has closed the eyes of the departed patient, the deccased bids an
everlasting farewell to all things here below; and enters upon a new but never
ending condition. Pythagoras and his disciples speak much of a (...), a
transmigration of the same soul into many bodies; and that death only causes
the soul to change its tenement and habitation; but yet in this dream there is
no mention made of the same body to be animated again, and reflourish in this
life by a new resurrection. When the soul in death takes its flight, and leaves
its loving mate the body, it shall meet no more with it, till the day of the
general Assizes. The arrest of eternity, as it will not take bale, so neither
will it suffer any evasion. Let not the voluptuous sinner please himself with a
vain dream, that after death he shall return again, and gratify his sensual
luxuries; his palate shall be down in the grave; and being thrown into the
Ocean of eternity, he shall get up above water no more. We may meet with Dives
in the flames of death; but no Luke 16. 23.
more at his banquets: the Zelanders Psalm. 49. 19.
motto, Luctor, and emergo, I strive, and get up, is a paradox in eternity. And
what should make eternity cast its captives again upon the shore of the world?

1. The sinners sinfulness cannot demerit a relaxation, or a regaining of his
liberty; when the soul by death, elapsed from the body, and fallen into
torment, shall blaspheme God, exasperated by that misery it is tormented in;
how can justice it self give that damned soul a dispensation for a re-entry in
its body again? And

2. So likewise the Saints, when death has broken the fetters of all their
miseries here, and the grave has swallowed all their moans and fears: how
shall they return, to react all those tragedies, and martyrdomes, they broak
through in this life? Psalm. 44. 22.
Gods paternall indulgence will not suffer them to put to Sea again. No,
Eternity is like that cave, that whoever Soles occidere, and redire possunt,
Nobis cum semei occidit brevis lux, Nox est perpetua una dormienda.
entered into it, returned no more again. When once we are within the gate of
eternity, the key is turned upon us; and no ransom or price shall be available
to turn the lock again. And it must be so,

1 In reference to the blessed.

Rev. 14. 13. Sancti in coelo requiesoent a laboribus suis, nempe quia
exexantla^i sunt in stadio hujus vitae. Par.
have made all those prayers, and shed all those tears, performed all those
services, and underwent all those reproaches, they have suffered all those
wounds, and broake through all those prisons, God had allotted for them in this
life. The Israelites when they had undergone so many years of bondage, God then
made way for them to enter Canaan: and the Saints, when like the Sun, they
have broak through so many clouds; then they set sail on the Ocean of a
glorious eternity. And what Christ said, when he was giving up the ghost; so
may all the Saints say, It is finished. Their work Heb. 4. 9.
is over, their task is done, their toil is past, and now eternity makes
their bed in inexpressible glory and blessedness: the grave closes the work
of the Saints, and eternity gives them their wages; and when once they have (as
when death seizes upon them, they have) executed that message which their
father has sent them into the world to perform, have brought so much glory to
the name of God, toiled so much with their own hearts, scattered so many
perfumes Sancti in aeternitate sunt milites emeriti.
in the Church of Christ; then God gives them a dismission, and they shall lean
their heads in the bosom of Christ for evermore. And therefore nothing Joh.
17. 24.
can occasion the Saints re-entry into the world, after once they have bid
farewell to it, when the very end and intention of their stay here is fully
accomplished.

Hic via, superne Patria: as the Father speaks.
is but the Saints prison, not his paradise, not his delight but his dungeon;
and unkind lattice, or wall between Christ and him. Death is to the Saints, but
as the Jaylour, to open the grate, and set them free in everlasting liberty.
Now I say, for Heb. 11. 13.
them to be shackled in the world again after death had filed off their
chains; what is this but to cast a languour, and faintness on all their
performances? Indeed that is a rational plea of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 19. If
Sancti cuncta in hac vita patienter tolerant, and sustinent, spefuturae
compensationis, and gloriosae felicitatis, in coelis pro illis per Christum
repositae. Par.
in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most
miserable. This life to a poor believer is but the stage of a diversified
calamity, a den of Dragons, a place of trouble and amazements; and it is the
hopes of future enjoyment, that are the Saints crutches to walk by through his
shady pilgrimage; and therefore could there be a possibility of the Saints
return, after death, when sailing in the Sea of eternity, to this valley of
tears again; it would cast all their active and passive services into a dying
consumption.

Rev. 3. 21.
when once he enjoyes them in his everlasting embraces. After they are As
Luther said to the threatening Emperor, Aut invenies me sub coelo, aut in
coelo; but if once in coelo, no more sub coelo. Luth.
once courtiers in heaven, they shall no more be exiles on earth. The
bottomless love of Christ to his people, which was written in the characters
of his own blood, and broke out at every vein of his massacred body, will not
permit those belieuers, whom death brought with the veil, and ushered into the
presence of God, to be again banished into a tempestuous world. John, the
beloved disciple, who now lies in the bosom of Christ, shall no more see his
Patmos. And suppose we, that heaven can harbor any thing, that can breed a
discontent between Christ and his glorified ones; so that Christ 2 Cor. 5. 8.
again should expose them to the cruelty of the world; what infinite
solecismes would such an assertion be the womb of? If we find Moses and Elias
visiting the world again after their death, it is in a glorious
transfiguration, to solemnize that rare appearance. Mat. 17. 3.


And as there can be no revocation in the eternity of the blessed, so neither
in the eternity of the Reprobates.

Joh. 9. 14.
that closes the eyes of their body, As the Psalmist puts the Quest. Psalm. 30.
9.
likewise closes the eyes of their understanding, so far as it has reference
to their spiritual good; the grave buries and entombs all their hopes and all
their capacities. Now for what should the sinner be returned again into the
world? His destruction is sealed and irreversible, Dies operandi tempus est,
nox quiescendi. Musc.
his death speaks it in loud language. And shall he break the prison of the
grave, and react the part of a sinful caitiffe in the world? This is one
reason why God takes the sinner out of the world, and casts him upon eternity
to stop his blasphemous mouth, and put a period to his carriere in wickedness.
No surely, when once the sinner is cast into the sea of eternity, he shall swim
no more to shore. God will not revive the dead sinner, to obnubilate his glory
with further deeds of darkness. Eternity shall not be, as Jonas his whale,
when once it has Jon. 2. 10.
swallowed up the sinner, to cast him up again upon the shore of the world.

Heb. 9.
give up his accounts: when once the sinner is cast upon eternity, his work it
at an end, all the sinners deportments, and carriages, and conversation; now
only the cause comes to be tried; first death, and then judgment: No reprieves
or protracting: Death brings the sinner to the bar; and eternity finds him
condemned. And therefore let all unawakened sinners fill their thoughts with
this consideration, that when once death casts them on the state of eternity,
they shall sail back again no more into the world. They shall never enjoy their
possessions again; they shall never feed on their banquets again, nor wallow
Prove. 9. 17.
in their sins again; nor cry again to their stolen morsels, they are sweet,
nor be invited to Christ again, nor be capable of penitential brokennesse; Nor
of Gospell-grace, of gospel opportunities again. Eternity is an reversible and
irrevocable condition: the soul once lost, and death having drawn the
curtains, Redemption and restitution shall be a solecisme.

CHAP. XIV.
Man's eternal condition admits of no conclusion.

ETernity is a Sun that shall never Non beatitudo esset sic ertum sancti non
haberent, se ibi semper futures. Aug. de civit. dei.
set; a taper that shall never fall into the socket; a term without a
vacation, a race without an end. When men in eternity have spent as many
millions of ages, as there are atoms in all the beams of the Sun, Sicut
Sancti incessabile habent gaudium, ita injusti indesinentem poenam; dicuntur
ergo ituri in supplicium aeternum (i. e.) nunquam finiendum. Theoph. in Mat.
or drops in all the water of the world; they are as far from a close, or an
exit, as at the first moment of that state and condition. The Vestall fires are
out; Methuselahs age is spent; the Sun shall either be annihilated, or else
transformed; but the eyes of eternity shall never be closed. Eternity is an
Ocean that we shall be ever sailing in, and never see land: Let us but Ignis
infernalis qui semel accensus est, nunquam extinguetur. Gerard.
illustrate the never-ending duration of eternity in a familiar way, as a
Divine of late, has gone before us; Consider, says he, what is the length of
eternity? How long shall God and his Saints reign? How long shall the Dan. 12.
2.
damned burn in hell? For ever. How long is that? Imagine an hundred thousand
years: Alas! that is nothing in respect of eternity. Imagine ten hundred
thousand years, yea so many ages, yet that is nothing to eternity. Imagine a
thousand millions of years, and yet all this is nothing, no espying of a close
yet; imagine yet more, a thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand,
thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand millions of years, and yet no sight of
land. Imagine once more, so many millions of millions of years, as there are
drops in the Sea, and thou are not come to the very beginning of eternity. Such
for continuance is the eternity of the joy the blessed shall enter into, and
the eternity of the torments the damned shall be ever wrackt with. Gulielmus
Peraldus Bishop Diaboli, and impiorum omnium credimus aeternae tormenta. Hiers
in Isa.
of Lions has another manner of reckoning, meditating upon the innumerable
number of years, throughout which the damned shall be tormented. If the damned,
says he, should every day distill from their eyes but one small tear, and
those tears should be added together day after day, they would at length far
exceed the drops of the Ocean; for they have their number and their measure,
and it is with God to say, so many are the drops of the Ocean, and no more; but
the tears of the damned, exceed all number and measure. Alas! alas! How seldom
do our thoughts cast anchor upon this serious meditation? how freely and
willingly do we sin, and gratify the noisome titillations, and temptations of
corruption, and so make our selves guilty of eternal punishment; and in the
mean time consider not, how immense, infinite, and incomprehensible a duration,
eternity is. A word that is the fruitful womb of bottomless mysteries. Some
likewise have endeavored to explicate the infinite duration of eternity, by a
vast mountain of sand, others by the Ocean, and a third sort by a schedule of
parchment, which should be so long, as to encircle the whole earth, and this
full of figures. But all these are but cloudy explanations of eternity; who can
conceive our endless condition, to be a clock which being once wound up,
shall never go down again? Indeed eternity is like a fountain, which Hic
habent tam jucunda quam tristia finem, eumque celerrimum, illic seculis
extenduntur utraque immortalibus. Chrysostom.
is always overflowing, and yet loses nothing of its fulnesie, or is dried up,
or overtaken with emptiness. Time is like a blziang Comet, which amazeth the
world for a while with its light, but presently falls down, and disappears; but
eternity is like a Aeternitas est una dies continua, occasum non habens. Ger.
fixed star, which is not worn out with motion; but rangeth about the firmament
in a glittering perpetuity. Indeed eternity is a day, whether pleasant or
gloomy, serene or stormy, the doom of the wicked, or the delight of the
Saints, which shall never be entombed in the grave of a night: In it, the
passage of millions of ages do not precipitate or hasten an end. Astronomers
observe concerning the Sun, that the nearer it is setting, the more speedy and
swift its course is. But eternity admits not of either motion, speediness or
setting. The poor mariner after vast circuits, and roving upon the wide Ocean;
the Sea in all its cruelty, is at last so courteous to him, as to cast his
weather-beaten bark upon some coast or harbor; the unnatural waves dashing
Aeternae Deus ^ss^ jabet descendere poenae, Ire sub ardorem rabidae sine fine
gehennae. Tert. de jud. dom.
it upon some shore. But the reprobate after he is clapped under the hatches of
eternal calamity; when he has past through seas of Gods wrath, floods of
Satan's malice, storms of torment, and tempests of misery, and this for
millions of ages; yet then he is as far from a shore to refresh him, a creek
to shelter him, a night to hide him, or death (a miserable remedy) to strangle
him, as at the first moment. How clearly and fully do the Scriptures depaint
the everlastingnesse of our future condition; when the Scriptures inform us,
how long the lease of future glory shall be? with what pregnant phrases do they
explicate the thing intended? Sometimes Romans 2. 7.
the future blessedness of the Saints is called Everlasting life; sometimes
Joh. 3. 16. (...). 1 Cor. 15. 53.
a state of immortality; and sometimes heavens glory is entitled, everlasting
joy Isa. 35. 10. and 61. 7.
; sometimes an everlasting Kingdom; and sometimes an eternal weight of glory,
2 Cor. 4. 17. And sometimes an eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. So the
Scriptures set out the 2 Pet. 1. 12.
future condition of the Saints by an everlastingnesse; their glory being
unfading, and immarcessible for ever; and their happiness being incapable and
impossible to be overtaken, and smoothered with a night, conclusion or period.

And so the doleful accent of the Scriptures rings the knell of everlasting
Mat 25. 21.
misery to the damned. Sometimes their future condition is called everlasting
fire; Mat. 25. 46.
sometimes everlasting punishment, as if fire were too cold a torture,
therefore punishment, intimating all kinds, methods, Mar. 9, 46. (...).
and sizes of misery. Sometimes their future execution is called a never dying
worm; a worm which will never end its gnawing, as the Original; Jud. v. 6.
sometimes it is called evelasting 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
chains; and lastly sometimes everlasting Post hanc mortalem vitam, super est
alia, in qua totus homo, corpore and anima, vel in aeternum gaudebit, vel in
aeternum cruciabitur. Chemn.
destruction. Thus the Scriptures abrogate, and disavow all end, or conclusion
of man's future condition. In our greatest prospects our sight is confined, and
after the view of some few miles, we can see no farther, but there is a stop to
our most acute quicksightednesse. But in eternity we may look forward, and
forward, and after multiplied ages, we can yet see no end. Imagination it self
shall still row on, and never see any land. Those long lived Patriarchs,
mentioned Genesis the 5. chapter, after their long and tedious travels in this
valley of tears, they at last fell down into their graves; and rottenness and
stench has long since surprised them: But when death has brought us within
the arrests and surprisall of eternity; we shall then live more millions of
ages then the Patriarchs did moments, and never find the shroud of a winding
sheet, or thrust our selves into the dark cottage Qui semel illuc, sc. in
infernum ingreditur, ulterius egredi non permittitur; non exibis, donec
persolvas novissimum quadrantem; quia semper erit solvendo, dum poenas
sempiternas peccatorum luit peccator. Hier.
of a grave. Eternity is incapable of wound, or mortality. The reprobate, when
death has eternized his condition, may be ever praying to God to annihilate
him, and wooing Satan to assasinate him, may be ever studying ways and methods
to dispatch himself, and work his own death, and expiration; but he shall never
find a cord to strangle his miserable immortality. And this shall be the
triumphancy of the Saints happiness; their throne shall Mat. 16. 26.
never be transformed into a tomb. Ah! how should this cast the most
contumacious, and stubborn sinner into a palsy, and shaking fit; till God
settled his trembling soul, with some token of a joyous eternity? Alas! for what
a small parcel of time, and inconsiderable a scantling of enjoyment; do most
venture or lose their neverending, but suddenly-surprising eternity.

But more particularly, to debate and ventilate this forementioned conclusion:
Could eternity at last have an end, in reference to man, (not to make any
mention, or to speak of God or Angels) this end would be accomplished one of
these two ways, either by annihilation, or dissolution.

Scimus dei beneficio animam quoad substantiam suam esse immortalem. Chemn.


1. The soul cannot die of it self, unless it wither by the command of a
superior power; but of it self it cannot die; for in its own nature, it is
immortal; its essence is eternal. One calls the soul (...), and it is Eccles.
12. 7.
a bud of eternity; the original of the soul speaks it is immortal; God still
Mat. 10. 28.
breaths into men living souls, and our souls come from the father of lights;
God lights up souls in men, they bubble 2 Cor. 5. 10.
forth from the fountain of Spirits, Act. 23. 8.
that spiritual essence. They are a Act. 7. 59.
beam of the most glorious Sun. Our Mors saepe somno in Scripturis comparatur,
Joh. 11. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. sed sciendum quod hic somnus homini mortuo
attribuatur, non ratione animae quae est purus actus, sed ratione corporis.
Chemn.
bodies were raised out of the dust; but our souls are of a more noble descent
and original; the soul runs parallel to all eternity. There are strong and
pregnant probabilities of the souls immortality, to a natural eye, to a
Philosophical eye with common light. And

2. To evidence the souls unperishablenesse; we may but take notice, how
oftentimes in a languishing and consumed body, you have a most vigorous,
well-complexioned and flourishing soul. Sometimes the soul is so acute, that it
even cuts the sheath of the body in sunder; the body is often in the wane when
the soul is in the full, all which speaks the souls in mortality; so that
naturally the soul cannot die. To this argument I might annex many more.

3. As the testimony of conscience, (...). Chrysostom.
which discernes between good and evil, and often rejoices in the one, and
trembles at the other, even when there is no humane witness, or fear of man to
cause either. What is the reason that oftentimes when the sinner has committed
some villainous act, and the Sun it self has not been conscious to it, but it
has been perpretrated with admirable secrecy; yet then the sinner Multa
argumenta probant animae immortalitatem, 1. Dei cognitio, qua imbuitur, quia ad
vitae sontem non pervenit vigor evanidus. 2. Praeclaris dotibus, quibus pollet
anima, divinum aliquid ei insculptum esse clamitat, totidem essentiae
immortalis testimonia, quot recta, justa, and honesta concipimus, quae sensus
corporis latent, etc.
is broken upon the wheel, and tortured upon the wrack of conscience: does not
this clearly and pregnantly demonstrate, that there is a future immortality,
and the soul shall be dragged to a fearful tribunal? why should the soul
tremble at a sinful, if secret commission, could it be ascertained of a safe
impunity? And happily the sin committed is a violation of Gods law, and not
man's; or it may be so clancularly acted, that the eye of man may be never privy
to it. This and many other arguments, bring in their attestation for the souls
immortality, and that unfadingnesse is essential to it. And therefore the
assertion remains firm, that there can be no conclusion in eternity by
dissolution in reference to the soul, for that is immortal. And

2. Neither shall the body die, after the resurrection; this the Scriptures
clearly affirm. I shall only cast my eye upon one pregnant and full place, 1
Cor. 15. 53. where the Apostle speaking of the manner of the Resurrection,
says, This corruptible must put on Memorandum est, quod Apost dicit
demonstrative, Hoc corruptibile; hoc mortale, sc. corpus, aperte sic indicans,
hoc and non aliud s^bstantia corpus, quod nunc mortale gestamus, immortale
tandem resurrecturum. Par.
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality, speaking of our
bodies. Then shall the persons of mankind be eternized in their subsistencies;
nor shall death, or decay, eat or worm out their beings. But these shattered
pieces of clay, our bodies, which here are but the sink of diseases, and have
a thousand windows in them for death to creep in, after the resurrection shall
fall asunder no more; Gods decree shall infuse into them an essential
immortality. And if we consider the bodies of mankind after the resurrection,
as related to the Saints or sinners,

1. As the rich cases of the souls Luke 20. 36. (...).
of the glorified Saints; they cannot die. Let that clear text give in its
verdict, Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our vil body that it may be fashioned
like unto Cristus transfigurabit corpus in aliam figuram, non essentialem, sed
accidentalem, ut sc. ex corruptibili faciat corpus incorruptibile, ex passibili
impassibile, ex terrestri coeleste, A Lap.
his glorious body: observe here a rare change indeed, but no intimation of
death; the bodies of the Saints, which here were the common subjects of pain,
torment, and distemper, when past the resurrection shall outvie the Sun in
glory.

2. Nor can the bodies of the damned die after the resurrection; those deformed
cages of more deformed souls shall never be blessed with a dissolution. Divine
wrath shall make the bodies of the reprobates, lapides (...), like those
stones, which naturalists speak of, which do always burn. They shall be buts
for the arrows of Gods displeasure ever to be shot at: the smoke of the lake
shall not smother them, nor the flames of hell consume them: not the least
member shall be turned into cinders by everlasting burnings. The torments of
hell are Mat. 25. 46.
often called fire; whether figurative or Mat. 3. 12.
real, we shall not discuss the question, Mat. 25. 41.
but this we may conclude, that the bodies of the damned are more proper fuel
for fire then the souls, Isa. 33. 14.
and everlasting burning will call for immortal bodies.

Nor shall eternity have an end by annihilation. After the passage of millions
of ages in eternity, man's person shall not be annihilated; the glorious Saints
shall not be by divine power reduced into an empty nothing, those crowned
personages shall not be folded up in a confused Chaos. Nor Poena infernalis est
restis ex tribus c^ntexta funiculis, ex obscuritate tenebrarum, acerbitate
poenarum, and diuturnitate miseriarum. Innoc.
shall the tortured Hypocrites be reduced into their primitive and original
principles, or blow themselves up into an aerie conception; a mere chimera; for
besides the absurdity of such a fond im^gination, which has no argument or
reason to be founded or bottomed upon; for what should cause the Lord to dash
in pieces his vessels of honor, or melt them into their materia prima, their
primitive vacuity? heaven cannot harbor any sinful provocation. Or what
should induce the Lord so Ephesians. 5. 5.
far to draw out his pity to the damned, as to command their torments to
dispatch them, or cause their souls to evaporate? Hell is a Sodom which
harbors no Lot in it, it is no place of pious inclination; among all the
damneds cries, there is not one penitential groan. God may say to all the
damned, what he said concerning Sodom, and yet yield no relief to them; to
wit, if there be ten righteous among them, he will save the whole body of them.
So that I say, there is no rational foundation can be conceived, that
annihilation should be found in eternity: but not only so, but if we peruse the
Scriptures, which are the established rule of our faith; we shall not find the
least footsteps, or prints give light to any such imagination. In Eccles. 12.
7. the wiseman The soul upon its separation must return to receive sentence and
judgment; God sent it into the body, and he may recall it, and judge it, for
what it has done in the body. Pemble.
speaks of the souls return to God, but makes no mention of the souls
returning to nothing. Death indeed opens the window of the cage, for the soul
to fly up to her Creator, to receive a sentence of absolution, or execution.
But

That there should be a time when the persons that are cast upon eternity shall
be buried in a total abolition; or wither into a final extinction; the
Scriptures are wholly silent. his pious pursuites after the honor of God. And
how would this prompt the presumptions of wicked men, in all sinful
abomination; should the Lord after the passage of some spaces of time,
extinguish, and put out the beings of the glorious Saints, and calamitous
sinners? The sinner would grow audacious upon this account, that his miseries
shall be but pro tempore, for a certain time and duration.

Creasti nos propter te, and irrequietum est cor nostrum, donec veniamus ad te.
Aug.
favorite, to be partaker of those honors, and beatitudes he should shed upon
him; or else to proclaim his justice in undergoing the torment, and woe of his
eternal vengeance. It is inconsistent to the wisdom of God to create man, to
communicate himself unto, and then annihilate him, to vote a design and to
cross it; God is an eternal being, and must be enjoyed by an eternal being,
which of all the creation, is Men or Angels. Nor is this to be overpast in
silence,

Psalm. 49. 20.
that when other creatures die, and evaporate into nothing, Man only survives
to all eternity. In Rev. 14. 13. the Spirit says there, the Saints die, and
their works follow them; what to do? unless as a Jury to give in their verdict
for the Saints, that he may be enthroned in everlasting felicity. What need was
there for the gracious actions and holy life of a Saint to follow him as a
goodly train to Gods tribunal, if this glorious inhabitant in heaven shall be
taken asunder into its primitive nothing? That is a very pregnant place, Dan.
12. 3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament,
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever:
observe, for ever and ever.



What reason is there more for the annihilation of man, after the transiency of
certain ages, then for the annihilation of Angels? the glorious Saints are as
pure as the good Angels, shining in as much royal perfection: Luke 20. 36.
(...).
and the damned sinners cannot embrue themselves in more guilt, then evil
Angels do. Now that the Angels shall be annihilated, in Scripture we find not
the least conjecturall probability. And for the close of this Argument Jud. v.
6.
we are now upon, let us but weigh that wish of Balaam, mentioned Number. 23. 10.
O that I might die the death of the righteous, and that my latter end might be
like his. Now I say, how vain, frivolous, and ridiculous would this wish be,
should the curtains of eternity be drawn by an act of annihilation, could
extinction stop the breath of eternity? and the vanity of this desire will
appear in three things.

shall be the Sepulcher of that felicity, that death ushers the Saint into?

Balaam desire to shelter himself in the dissolution of the godly? Annihilation
would strangle all those fears. Could an extinction befall eternity, the fires
of hell would be but a sharp supper, as the Martyr said in another case. And
could we fall into the tomb of annihilation, trembling and fear would be
buried with us.

Balaam seems in this petition, to put a large distinction between the
departure of the Saints and the sinner out of this world, death dealing with
the hypocrite and the believer, as Pharaoh did with his Baker and his Butler,
the one he restores, the other he executes. But now annihilation Genesis 40. 21,
22.
puts no difference, but makes all even alike. Where was the difference between
righteous Abel and bloody Cain, famous Sion, and filthy Sodom, before the
Creation; when all things were abortive in an empty nothing? Colors differ not
in the dark, the most orient are not distinguished from the most pedantique;
and therefore some Philosophers make light to be the ratio formalis, the
specificall difference of color: And so all things are of the same value in
the night of extinction, or annihilation.

But let me only subjoyne, at the foot of the argument, these two things.

Fiet in resurrectione ut in singulis beatis resurgentibus, mors abolebitur,
and vita aeterna efflorescet. Alap.
which he has made to his converts, and to believers, with the seal of
everlastingnesse, that there should be any stop, or close in eternity: if
Christ promise his Saints life, it is everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16. if an
inheritance, it is an eternal inheritance, Hic est finis mortis, redemptionis,
and mediationis Christi, totiusque novi testamenti, a Christo instituti, ut sc.
adipiscamur aeternam haereditatem a Christo promissam. Id.
Heb. 9. 15. Nay the Apostle amplifies this argument in a rare phrase, 2 Timothy
1. 10. Who has brought life, and immortality to light though the Gospel, he
has brought (...), life and incorruptibility to light, which as learned men
observe, is an Hendyadys, for life and incorruption in the text, is no more
then an incorruptible life. All the promises of Christ, they are bonds for
eternity. They are not for a lease of happinnesse, but they are for a free
purchase, Ephesians. 1. 14. And by faith we are co-purchasers with Jesus Christ;
co-heires says the Apostle in another place, Romans 8. 17. Christ has bought
glory not for us and our heirs for ever, but for us and our souls for ever.
The precious, free, Haereditatem terrae Canaan acceperunt Patres ex pacto
legali. Haere ditatem aeternam'ex morte Christi; est ergo hic alter effectus
mortis Christi aeterna Patrum haereditas, per terram Canaan adumbrata. Par.
sacred, and superlative promises of Christ, they shall be ever performing,
they shall be making good for evermore. All the promises of God are precious
and great, not only from the things promised, but from the duration of what is
promised; this enamels Gods promise of life to believers, that it shall be
everlasting.

And what I have said of the promises of Christ, may also be averred of the
threatenings of Christ. Promises and threatenings run parallel, they bear the
same date, and they shall be of the same duration; the mercies and the menaces,
the comminations and the consolations of Christ shall be both lengthened out to
all eternity. So that there cannot be any conclusion in eternity, for a
stoppage or a close, (whether by death or abolition) would benight the glory of
Christ's promises, and impeach the justice and righteousness of his threatenings.

Act. 20. 28.
given answerable to the blood of Patet salutem electorum aeternam merito and
beneficio Christi mediatoris Sanctis obtingere. Ger.
him that was God himself? and what comparison between an infinite merit, and a
finite enjoyment? as all the enjoyments of man must be; he being a creature,
and so finite; I speak ratione subjecti, in reference to the subject. So
therefore the transcendency of the possession falling short of Christ's merit,
eternity is cast into the scale to make up weight. I say not, but ratione
objecti, in regard of the object, viz. God that is possessed, and whose face
the Saints see, and shall see for ever, the 1 Cor. 13. 12.
possession is infinite; but in reference Visio dei est tota vita aeterna.
to man, whose nature, and capacities, and possibility is finite, limited and
Aug. de Sp. and An.
circumscribed, the inheritance cannot be but disproportionable to the price,
and therefore it must be that everlastingnesse of duration must come in to make
up the sum. That which is the life of every enjoyment is perpetuity; grace is
therefore the most considerable riches, because inamissible. Those revenues
which are short-lived, and are capable of a flight; they are but nominall, and
titular advantages; the pictures and umbrages of enjoyment, the riches of the
coffer; they are inconsiderable, not only because they are inanimate, but
because they are winged. As the wiseman says, Prove. 23. 5.
They have wings, and so are always fledged, and ready to escape our embraces.
Those inheritances cannot be superlative, which are fugitive, all fading, are
but fancied riches; eternity is the life of glory it self. There are two words
best express the happiness of heaven, life, eternal; both Joh. 3. 16.
which Christ has bought for his. And faith in the blood of a Savior, crowns
the believer with both; if duration (as certainly it does) does shed a gloss,
and set the crown on the head of possession; what below eternity can be Heb. 1.
3.
the purchase of the death of him, who is the express image of God the father
himself? The German Emperors have a custom to be crowned with three Crowns,
an Iron one at Millan, a Silver one at Aken, and a Golden one at Rome. And
truly Christ shall crown all his glorified ones with three crowns; first with
life, secondly with glory, and thirdly with eternity; a perpetuity of
subsistence, their beings shall be supported: their life shall be superlatively
glorious, a gloriousness of enjoyment; and eternity of both. So that the merit
of Christ chases away all fond conceptions of a close in eternity.

And now there can be no conclusion in the eternity of the blessed.

farewell create in glory? what wounds would it make? When Christ was to leave
his disciples, and re-inthrone himself in glory; how did the thoughts of his
absence fill the disciples Joh. 16. 6.
hearts with sorrow? Their thoughts of the miss of that precious communion
which they enjoyed with Christ, what griefs did they produce? what tears did
they spring? So that Christ was fain to quiet their lamentations with the
promise of a substitute; no other then his own Spirit; the glorious, divine,
consolatory, holy Spirit of Christ. Now I say, If Christ's departure from his
disciples, Joh. 14. 2.
which was but to make their way to the Crown, did spring such a fountain of
sorrow; how would this inarticulate and smother the joys of heaven, could the
Saints love the sight of Christ in glory, or be snatched from his embraces?
Death here is the more terrible, by how much the more sweet our enjoyments have
been it robs us of: Ah! who can compute that loss, which draws the curtain
between Christ and the glorified Saint? Pessima poena, est poena damni.
Divines say, that the worst punishment which the damned undergoes, is the
punishment of loss: In that they shall not hear the music, see the glory,
enjoy the company, and be blessed with the happiness of heaven; they shall not
smell the perfumes of the bride-chamber: Mat. 25. 10.
But how would this loss be amplified, had they ever felt how Objectum divinae
scientiae, sunt omnia quaecunque aliquam habent entitatem, aut quomodocunque
veris entibus convenient.
soft the embraces, how pleasant the smiles of Christ are in heaven? In 1 Cor.
13. 12. the Apostle says, In heaven we shall know as we are known; that is,
not only perfectly, but everlastingly; for as the Schoolmen say, God knows all
things from eternity to eternity by one individual act: So then the
impossibility of any distaste or unpleasantnesse in glory, clearly removes all
conclusion in the Saints eternity.



1. That some default of the Saints should disinherit them, and God in point of
justice did shut up their eternity: (but that there can be any miscarriage in
glory, I have at large showed it is impossible.) Or

2. There was a deficiency in the power of Christ to stretch out the beings,
and lengthen out the joys of Joh. 5. 19.
the Saints to eternity; but this is equally blasphemous and impossible. For by
Christ all things were made, Col. 1. 17.
and by the same power of h^s they are sustained in their beings, and forms
they were cast in, in their creation; Omnia opera ad extra totam recipient
Trinitatem.
and to question the omnipotency of Christ, is to rob him of his divinity; his
omnipotence being an incommunicable property of the Godhead. Now let him lay
aside the profession of Christianity, Heb. 1. 3.
who shall with any doubtfulnesse Opera ad extra sunt indivisa, seu omnibus
personis communia. Wolleb.
call in question the deity of our blessed Redeemer. Or

3. There was a defect in the love of Christ, and so their happiness sunk into
a conclusion, and was over-taken with a period. But to show the inconsistency
of this, that there should be any defect in the love of Christ to his glorified
ones; let these three things be weighed in the balance.

1. Let us but consider how tender the compassions of Christ are to his people
Isa. 63. 9.
here, how he commiserates their afflictions, Heb. 4. 15.
weighs their temptations, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
orders and methodizeth his own dispensations Jsa. 40. 11.
to them: that all his Romans 5. 10.
transactions with them may breath nothing but love, and mercy, and indulgence.
Ab aeternofuit erga nos ita aeffectus Christi, ut nos ad aeternam salutem
elegerit, in tempore crearit, and redemerit, ac perpetuo regat, and s^rvet non
sua, sec nostra causa. Zanch.
How tender was Christ in leaving a Comforter when he must depart; making many
promises to be on the file to support and relieve his fainting mambers, when
need shall be? how does Christ never take the rod in his hand, step behind the
hangings, but when the offenses and miscarriages of his people necessitate him
unto it? Now all these rarities are but branches from the same root of love.
Ah! how tender, gracious, spiritual, precious, superlative, constant and
beatificall is the love of the Lord Jesus to his people in this life! And shall
his love to his Saints in glory faint, or be eclipsed with a wane or decay;
when now he has his people in his own embraces? Can no miscarriages, relapses,
and failings quench the flames, or stop the ebullitions of Christ's love to his
people here, and shall a languor or dampe surprise it, when they are purged
from all spot and wrinckle, and shine in the immaculate Ephesians. 5. 27.
beauty of purity and perfection?

2. Let us consider, that in heaven Christ enjoyes the fruit of all his love;
the birth of his death, the issue of his blood, the result of his sufferings,
and the music of his groans, and that is, he sees his own spouse, his Saints
enthroned in glory. The end of all his passions, and of all the Saints
afflictions, the scourge he endured, and the rods they often lie under; was
glory at the last. And now after the travel of his foul, and the trial of
theirs, they are arrived at heaven, shall the pulse of his affection beat
faintly, or his loves be surprised with decay? In heaven our marriage with Rev.
19. 7.
the Lamb is consummated when we are entered into the bride-chamber, and shall
the wedding day, (for the felicities of glory, are but an eternal wedding day)
slacken, or invalidate the transcendencies of Christ's affection?

3. And then let us take notice how clearly the Scriptures paint out the
eternity of his love to his people. I shall only comprise one Scripture, Jer.
31. 3.
within my consideration, Joh. 13. 1. Quid sibi vult illa particula, sc. in
finem dilexit eos: hoc est (...), semper dilexit, and hoc signum magnae
dilectionis ponit. Chr.
Having loved his own, which were in the world, he loved them unto the end;
observe there, unto the end, that is, for ever, as the Hebrew has it, (...)
for ever, which is the same, as the learned observe, with (...) eternally: to
the end, which has no end, to the end, (i. e.) to perfection. Now perfection
supposes perpetuity; that cannot be perfect which is not everlasting, glory it
self is perfect, because eternal. Christ loves his people to the end, that
is, to the end of their capacities of enjoying his love, which is for ever; as
long as they have beings Dilexit eos in sinem, (i. e.) in tantum eos dilexit,
ut eos dare voluerit, summum and maximu^ bonum quod dari potest homini, sc.
vitam and be atitudinem aeternam. Carthus.
to be sweetened with his love: and he loved his to the end, that is for ever,
because he loved them; he that is all love; the fountain, and spring of sweet
and divine affection, he loved them to the end, who knows not how to break off
love from his people. Jesus Christ is the everlasting original of love, and
his love cannot suffer a diruption, or period, being planted in his breast. As
Musculus observes, Haec est vere divina, and germana dilectio, quae non
flaccescit sed ad finem usque constans perseverat, and talis amoris origo,
radix and causa in Christo est. In a word, the love of Jesus Christ when fixed
upon, and centred in a believer, shall not be either allayed, or intermitted,
but shall break forth into visible, and real expressions of it to all eternity.

And as there shall no period stop the process, or put an end to the eternity
of the blessed; so neither shall there be a conclusion in the eternity of the
damned, they shall hang in chains for ever, and never go away, or die in their
fiery chains. Their miseries shall never find a grave or be quenched in a long
looked for expiration. Indeed their sins soon fade and wither in their
sweetness, but never shall die in their torment: the rose of their sin shall
soon shed; but the worm of their sin shall not so soon be strangled, they
shall not be so happy as Saul was to fall upon their 1 Samuel 31. 4.
own sword, but they shall cry out as the Roman Emperor in his torment, Jer.
8. 3.
and Nero in his despair, for one to kill them, and none shall be found. It was
an usual saying of a bloody Cremabit ad dictos ardens semper gehenna and
vivacibus flammis vorax poena, nec erit unde habere tormenta vel requiem
aliquando possint, vel finem. Cyprianus.
Emperor, that when any had laid violent hands on themselves, to take away
their own lives, whom he designed to torment; he usually said, They had escaped
him; but there shall be no such way found for the damned to escape the eternal
vengeance of God. They shall have no instruments by them to dispatch
themselves. Death, which is here the horror of the wicked, and the very
thoughts of which fills them with trembling, and seizes on them with palenesse,
and clammie sweates, shall in hell be their courted advantage; and nothing
shall be more pleasant, and desirable; but as sinners studied all ways, and
evasions to escape the stroke of death here: so all their artifices and
contrivances shall not find death in eternity. This shall be poison in their
cup of trembling, they shall never see the bottom of it. The fit of their
torment shall be intolerable; and yet they shall never give up the ghost in it.
Pain shall wrack them, but not waste them, shall corrode and afflict them, but
not consume them. The Saints that lie under the Rev. 6. 9, 10.
altar, and cry, How long Lord, holy Servabuntur cum corporibus suis animae
infinitis cruciatibus ad dolorem, and erit sine fructu dolor poenae, inanis
ploratio, and inefficax deprecatio. Cypr.
and true? They shall be heard at last, and be clothed with white and glorious
roabes; but the reprobates shall after millions of ages, cry, How long Lord,
how long? pity our torments, slacken our misery, compassionate thy flaming
creatures; but all their moans shall be nothing availeable, but Gods wrath
shall break out afresh for evermore, the burnings, let sinners remember are
everlasting, Isa. 33. 14. Diseases here in this life, and tortures they are but
the harbingers of death; the stormings and violent assaults of those pieces of
clay we carry about us: And this is oftentimes some relief to the afflicted
patient; that the more violent the distemper is; the more hopes he has, that
death will suddenly free him from the malice, and the violence of his disease.
But in the misery of the damned, their torments are but the supplies of death,
shall but feed their executions; they shall ever be torn with the pangs of
death; but never be buried in the silence of it. Ah! how should this break the
adamantine spirits of impenitent sinners, never to find ease or end, hope or
help, consolation or conclusion? always to be gasping, by reason of extremity,
and yet never give up or breath out the last gasp?

And it must be so,

Ibi sc. in coelo, nec est deformitas sed omnium conformitas, ibi nec est
iniquitas sed una semper aequitas. A lard.
sinning; now in hell they shall sin eternally, curse themselves, cry out
against Satan, blaspheme God, belch out their reproaches against all the
attributes of the most high. As it is part of the blessedness in heaven, never
to sin, so it shall be part of the misery of hell, ever to sin; the fires of
hell shall inflame their ulcerous hearts, not humble them, their sin shall
eternize their torment. What should restrain or check the ranco^^us spirits of
the damned: the heart-subjugating spirit of the Lord, shall never visit that
stews of sin, nec incubare inferno, nor more upon the fires of hell. It is
reported of the Apostate Julian, that hellish enemy of the Gospel; that being
wounded, he takes his blood, and in contempt throws it up toward heaven, and
cries, Vicisti Gal aee, thou Galilean have overcome. And this shall be the
everlasting practice of the damned to be throwing up dishonours even into the
face of God himself: so that their constant blasphemy shall perpetuate their
insupportable extremity.

Mat. 25. 46.
God has enrold his decree of eternal doom to the wicked in his everlasting
Gospel, Mat. 3. 12. and many other places; and his determinations are
irreversible; who can interline in Gods counsels; or blot out, or alter his
everlasting resolutions? Not one title or iota Mat. 5. 18.
of his wi^^ shall be obsolete or pass away. And there are two reasons, why
God has set down his decree of eternal misery to the damned.

1. For caution: the more dreadful any decree of God is, the more cautionary;
great fires are more avoidable then sparks or smoothered flames; when all the
Beacons flame together, we are more certain of, and so more prepared for the
enemies approach. God records this sad determination; not that men should
shipwreck themselves upon it; but that they might avoid it: sands are more
dangerous, then rocks, because less visible; God has registered this doom,
that it might be a visible caveat.

2. For vindication of Gods own justice; that sinners might not think to cloud
the name of God with dishonours, and yet escape with a temporal execution; God
has decreed, they shall smart for their sins for ever, they shall be always
reaping the miserable fruits of their sinful folly; the whole will amount to
thus much: Let sinners by this consideration be fired out of their security;
let them study what it is to lie on the wrack for ten thousand millions of
ages; but what is is that to eternity? And let them speedily prevent their
eternal misery, by a serious, real, and temporal penitency.

CHAP. XV.
Man's eternal condition admits of no conception.

MAN cannot fully conceive it, grace may believe it, but reason cannot fadome
it. Man may apprehend it, but not comprehend it. As Moses did the Lord, see
Exodus 33. 23.
the backparts of it; this is one of those things, that in this world we cannot
bear. In the fadoming of eternity, acuteness is but ignorance, ingenuity
stupidnesse, and the largest latitudes of knowledge are but purblind. If all
Aristotle's reason could not Haec aeternae vitae faelicitas, nobis in hac vita
est incomprehensibilis, si de accurata, quidditativa, and scientifica
cognitione agatur. Gerard.
find the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the small river Euripus, what
then can it do to sound the Ocean of Eternity? What the Apostle says of the
natural man in reference to spiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 14. that all cannot receive
them; may be well said in reference to eternity. It is with the Prospect of
eternity, as with the eye to the Ocean, it may see the surface of Concipe animo
statum vitae illius, quantum homini concipere datur, nam juxta rei dignitatem
nobis sermo nullus adesse potest, ex iis tamen quae audimus, seuper aenigmata
conjecturam quan^ulamcunque faeiemas. Chry.
it, but not its bottom; some glimmering knowledge we may have, sed quis
intima vidit? who ever saw the inside, and end, and bottom of it? As the blind
man, Mat. 8. 24. I see men as trees walking; so we may glance at eternity with
an imperfect sight, gathering some few weak parcels of the knowledge of it.
When the great Apostle Paul was carried up to the third heaven, to see a
landscape of glory, and to take a view of those transcendencies heaven was
enricht with; at his return, with what astonishment 2 Cor. 12. 2. etc.
does he make his relation, and tells us indeed, he can make no full relation;
those beatificall sights he had been blessed with, were not to be drawn by the
pencill of the most rare and fluent Oratory, he heard (...), such words as are
not to be repeated. It is a great contest among grave and learned writers, what
these words should be, which neither Paul could express in his best oratory,
nor yet would in point of duty, for (...), it was not convenient, says the
text. Gregory the great, supposes that these secresies were many discoveries
of the nature, gifts, qualifications, and glory of the Angels. Dionys.
conjectures that Paul saw the glory of Christ, and heard many things here
altogether unknown. Theod. says, Paul saw the beauty of heaven, heard the
music, and the joys, numerosam, and modulatam hymnorum coelestium, of the
inhabitants of glory. Others opinionate, he heard many things of
Predestination, and the calling of the Gentiles. But what fell within the
glorious view of the Apostle, or was suggested to him in this extraordinary
revelation is uncertain, and shall not be discussed; Hic certo nibil dici
potest, cum Paulus ipse ea siluerit, as the learned man observes. But from the
whole this inference may be deduced, That the glories that do attend the Saints
eternity are a sphere above the apprehensions of humane understanding. Eternity
to come, is like Providence Ezekiel. 1. 15.
here, it is a wheel within a wheel; it is a state vaild with mysteries: like a
Picture with the curtain drawn before it. I speak ratione nostri, in respect of
us, who are in via, as the Father speaks, In vita aeterna dei essentia non
quidem sensibus verum animo seu mente cognoseetur a beatis. Martyr.
in our travel to eternity. There is nothing in future eternity that lies
liable to our consideration, which has not brought forth many debates,
differences, several conjectures, and tremulous probabilities even among
Divina essentia ab angelis, aut beatis videri non potest. Alcuinus. Chrysostom.
Theop.
the most eminent Patriots of learning. How it is debated at this day, whether
the Saints shall see the essence of God in heaven, or else some circumambient
glory; whether we shall know one another in happiness, and so our joys
receive a fresh tide from that perpetual fellowship: whether we in heaven
shall see God, oculis corporis, aut mentis, with a corporal vision, or Ignem
gehennae corporeum esse non ambigo, in quo certum est corpora cruciari. Greg.
(...). Damasc.
only with an intellectual apprehension.

And so on the contrary hand, how it is debated among learned men, whether the
fire of hell be material or metaphorical; on the sad emblem of of the heat
and force of Gods displeasure; whether there be corporeal worms in hell or no.
Basil and others say, they are (...), etc. A kind of worms casting poison, and
eating flesh; and others interpret these worms metaphorically; and say, by
worms are understood, morsus conscientiae, the corroding tortures of
conscience. And so there are multiplied controversies which do arise in men's
apprehensions of our future eternity. Eternity it is the seed of difficulties,
the womb of mysteries, the scandal of learning, and the very reproach of
knowledge it self. Indeed some dawning knowledge of this future state seems to
rise in the minds of men. But how to graspe scientiam quidditativam, as Gerard
says, the full, satisfactory and plenary knowledge of it; this is too large a
circumference to be comprised in our intellectual sphere; the tired thoughts
of man cannot travel to the end of this knowledge. We must do with eternity,
as Geographers do with Countries, they describe in their Maps and Globes; for
large and spacious Countries, they only set down the situation, and bare name
of those Lands: so must we for a full apprehension of our eternal estate rest
in a twilight speculation. What understanding furnished with all the auxiliary
helps of learning, experience, natural vivacity, nay with grace it self, while
in this life, can unriddle these things, viz.

That millions of ages should pass away in eternity, and yet not one moment
wasted or elapsed. That in the passage of thousands of millions of years there
should not be the least variety or mutation, no accidental or unexpected
occurrences; and which is most inccomprehensible, that there never fall out an
end; no night, no grave, no breaking up, no conclusion; that eternity should
never be terminated with a close or period. Here our diseases have their
heights, terms and ends, either in the recovery and restorement, or else in
the death of the patient; the grave buries all distempers. And so likewise our
delights, harmonies, and musicks, they have their set times and periods; and
they either vanish in themselves, or else are buried in our own apprehensions;
and our lives which are the stage upon 1 John 2. 17.
which both are acted, they after the transition of a few winged spaces of
time, faint away, and are emtombed in the dust, and death draws the curtain
between us and all our possessions. But now in eternity the understanding may
be ever enquiring after, and searching for an end, a sunset, some event, or
issue to fix and anchor upon: but still the sea of everlastingnesse opens wider
and wider, and all period flies away, as death from the damned, and there is
no bottom for the plummet to give a glace of any approaching Land. This is
that which puts a mask and vail upon the face of the richest understanding,
and turns that sun into darkness.

That inscription which the vain and Idolatrous Athenians did engrave upon
their altar, which they dedicated to their God, (...), to their Unknown God,
may in a great measure Act. 17. 23.
be attributed to eternity; Aeternitati ignotae, to unknown eternity. Eternity
is the amazement, not the prey of knowledge; we may admire, believe, foretast,
and prepare for it, but we shall not fadome or comprehend it, while we are
locked in the lower room of this world.

Nor are there some Reasons deficient, why eternity cannot be fully
comprehended by us in this life.

inconceivable so the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Neither Isa. 64. 4.
have entered into the heart of man, the (...). Nilus.
things which God has prepared for them that love him. Those riches which are
attendant upon the happiness of the Saints; they are above the computation of
the most noble understanding; nor can the large conjectures of the mind sound
the bottom of them. They are as the Apostle speaks, divitiae
imperserutabiles, unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3. 8.
such riches as reason heightened with industry and grace cannot find out the
value, not search to the end of them. And so the miseries of the wicked, they
transcend all imagination; the most serious, large, and well-composed thoughts
cannot suppose the extremity of them; how much heat is enclosed in one spark of
Gods wrath. God himself to stop the proud and presumptuous thoughts of man,
has himself given it in, that the loves and losses of eternity are above the
reach of our most superlative conceptions. Can we span the heavens, and give in
the true dimensions of them, count the stars, and set down their number how
many individuals they amount to; or tell how many drops the vast Ocean is
composed of; how many waves the Sea is curled with; or can we give the exact
number of all the atoms that are in all the beams of the Sun? And yet if all
these impossibilities of knowledge, fell within the verge of our
understandings; the mysteries of eternity were still wisdoms riddle, the
disgrace of all intellectual capacities. Aristotle says, Arist. Ethic.
that the Will can velle impossibilia, will and desire impossibles, which how
true (...). Greg. Nys.
that is I shall not dispute; but of this I am sure, and God himself has
affirmed, that the understanding cannot intelligere aeternalia, understand the
things of eternity, (I speak of a full and accurate knowledge). But the mind
dressed with all ornaments of accumulative learning, and let holiness be the
Pilot of it, must strike sail, when eternity is the theme of it; God in this
particular has by his own word put a stop to man's curiosity.

Eccles. 1. 8.
the joys and griefs of it being beyond our suppositions, but likewise that we
only have a superficial knowledge of it, arises from the weakness and
obscurity of man's understanding. Our poor purblind understandings cannot fadome
such a depth. This candle of the Lord, Prove. 20. 27.
as the wise man calls it, burns in the sock et, Adams fall has put a thief in
this candle, and our continual sins dampe the light of it. Our intellectuals
are like a star in a cloud, or a taper burning De illa ineffabili laetitia, and
mansione aeterna, nunc ex part narrantes tanto nobis evangelizavtmus, tanquam
si quis ex pelago maris aquae gustum digito suo potest auferre. Ephrem.
behind the curtains. What we might have done, had not Adams fall caused a
perpetual eclipse in our understandings by the interposition of it, is
uncertain; but what a faint and fallacious knowledge our minds are now
possessed with, is sadly visible; the light of our understandings being but as
the light of a gloworme: the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13. 12. We see but through a
glass, and darkely too, what a dimnesse, and duskishnesse surpriseth, and in a
catarix upon the choysest understanding? So that the mind of man is masked with
mistake and imperfection. That eternity falls not within the view of our
knowledge, is not only so objective, objectively, from the transcendency of it;
but subjective, subjectively, from our own inability, there is a weariness in
our intellectuals. Our understandings are to be considered in reference to
eternity, as our eye in reference to the siars; that we see not those glorious
Job 8. 9.
bodies more clearly and according to their vaste proportion: this arises not
from any disappearance of, or cloud before them, but from the weakness and
faintness of our sight, there is an ocular inability. Eternity receives the
greatest cloud from our shattered knowledge. Let us but consider our
understandings;

1. As being dark, clouded and veiled with much ignorance.

2. As being fallacious, easy to be seduced, and miscarry in their
apprehensions. Prove. 3 5.


3. As being imperfect, falling short of that glorious sight, they were created
with.

4. As being capable of receiving continual shadows, and being overcast with
the commission of new sins, and lastly as being finite, and so crowded into a
small room: How impossible then can these darke-lanthornes guide us to the full
knowledge of eternity? No more then we can see the whole world, uno intuitu, in
one view by the help of a perspective. Indeed grace and industry are the 2
Pet. 3. 18.
best cure for our weak, and faint understandings; but while grace here is of
so low a stature, how can knowledge be gigantique? grace and knowledge always
bearing a proportion.

1 John 3. 2.
liever in this life shall never know how great the Summer of his felicity
shall be; there is more behind the curtain, then that Saint which is most
acquainted with God can discern. Those that dig in a mine, their hopes of
wealth Bona regni caelestis, dicere, vel cogitare, vel intelligere ut sunt,
nullus potest carne vestitus; multo et majora and meliora sunt, quam
cogitentur, vel intelligantur. Regnum namque dei omni fama majus, omni laud
melius, omni scientia iunumerabilius, omni gloria, quae putatur, excellentius.
Aug de trip. habit.
and leisure whet and fleet their industry. And there are many reserves in
eternity, which are magnetic, to draw out the orient graces of the Saint; and
these inflame the Saints inquisitions. Faith and hope sail to eternity with a
full carreer, as to rich, but yet not fully known beatitude; that which remains
in the dark is but graces noble incentive. The desire after natural knowledge
so inflamed that ingenuous Roman, that he lost his life in searching after the
cause of Vesuvius his sulphurous vomits, why that hill should be the womb of
such flaming ejections; and how does this animate even grace it self, and
supply it with more vigorous conquests and strength, that the believer cannot
see the end of his happiness, cannot sum up how much the interest of his glory
comes to? This portion behind which our understandings cannot see to tell out,
is a rare encouragement, and puts life Heb. 11. 1.
into our vivacious grace; this plumes and inflames grace, and this makes faith
to swell, to consider what eternity will be, what felicities it will be the
fruitful womb of. And so inconceivable Hujus poenae potentiam, nulla vox
exponere, nullus poterit sermo explanare; nihil est in^ebus corruptibilibus
quod conferri possit incorruptibilibus sive bonis, sive malis. Non est dubium
quin id quod nulla temporis mensura circumscribitur, nulla etiam creata mente
comprehenditur. Aug.
miseries which the damned shall be overwhelmed with, naturally and genuinely,
they are like beacons upon a hill, or lanthornes upon a watchtower, for caution
and prevention; but however they aggravate the fears and amazements of wicked
men, sinners here cannot fadome the torments of their execution; how sharp and
smarting and penetrative their miseries shall be, they know not the worst of
their punishment; this is a worm to the wicked here; there are bitter, but yet
concealed calamities behind. Unbelievers in this life, cannot imagine, or in
their most sorrowful conceptions apprehend, what wounds, how sore, how deep,
how intolerable the scorpions of Gods eternal wrath shall make, when twisted
into his scourge. There is more calamity reserved for the reprobate, then
either he will believe, or can conceive.

arcana divini imperii, those secrets which God has locked up in his own
knowledge, nor will communicate to inferior beings. As the day of judgment is
one Romans 8. 18.
of the times and seasons, which is not given us to know. Some things there
Sicut infans in utero matris conclusus, de pulcritudine hujus lucis nihil
novit; sic and in hujus vitae tenebris de aeternitate nil possumus perfecti,
aut solidi scire.
are, the knowledge whereof is shut up in the breast of God, nor shall his mind
therein be opened, until the accomplishment and fulfilling of all things at
the great and last day, wheraof the full knowledge of eternity is one great
considerable counsel. Nor does God in this cast a disrepute, or disrespect
upon his people here below, as if they should wholly be shut out of his
counsels, for this the Psalmist contradicts: Psalm. 25. 14.
But there are three reasons, why God is pleased to conceal some things from
his people here.

Place of appetite not satiety. Could the Saints fill and quiet their ambitions
here, they would sail no further to seek another coast; but here is no place of
satisfaction. God has many things written in such a cipher and character, that
here we may long to interpret, but cannot unriddle them.

Quemadmodum imbecillior est visus quam ut ad stellas pertingat, sic
intellectus noster infirmior est, quam ut coelestia gaudia plene percipiat. Ger.
the people of God see all with an open face, this would feed and foster their
pride and presumption, as if they were the privy counselors and secretaries
of God himself: God covers many things in his own wisdom, to teach man the
lesson of his own darkness, and imperfection. The riddles of nature limit and
keep down the boasts of Philosophy, and so God draws the curtain in a great
measure here, to fix men's eyes on the cloud of his own disability. Paul, when
he was 2 Cor. 12. 6.
acquainted in his rapture with inexpressible revelations, God sends him Satan,
to be a thorn in the flesh to statuminate and confine his thoughts, that they
might not exceed their due station. These mysteries which God keeps in his own
breast do but unravell man's weakness, and they are a clear demonstration,
what an infant in knowledge our understanding is; God does in this smother
those thoughts of man, which otherwise would prove immoderate and exorbitant.

1 Cor. 13. 12.
eye of their understanding; yet in heaven God shall be a sun to chase away all
clouds; and all Gods everlasting decrees, secret counsels, and Tum justi omnia
scient, quae Deus fecit scienda, tam ea, quae praeterita, qua^ postmodum sunt
futura. Anselm.
sacred determinations shall be in a fair print, and Jesus Christ shall be the
interpreter. This shall be one part of the Saints blessedness hereafter, they
shall be as free from the cloud of ignorance, as from the spot of impiety. And
in Gods concealing many things, whereof the full knowledge of eternity is one,
he does but raise the market of glory it self.

And now at last, the imperfect Anatome of our eternal estate is finished, and
in it has been made good, what has been asserted in this last conclusion; (to
wit) that our knowledge of eternity here in this life is but faint and
faltring; and the unskilfulnesse of him that has undertaken the description
has but thickened the cloud, and encompassed the argument in hand with greater
difficulties. But if any light has broke forth from the weak discussion of
this point, so that eternity may be any thing more apparent or visible; his
imperfections shall not wholly annihilate his happiness. But the sum of all
shall be this, Eternity is a superlative, identicall, never-ending condition;
whether it set us upon the throne of glory, or see us fastened to the wrack of
eternal calamity.

close Application, which shall run in two streams. The first part of the
Application shall be more general as taking in within its circuit the whole
body and corporation of man; it shall be to all universally. But the second
part shall be more particular, either as relating to the Saints being the
fullest argument of their joy and triumph; or else referring to sinners, as
being the saddest word in their doom. Eternity is the torture, and poison of
their highest extremity.

CHAP. XIII.
Use of Exhortation.
To fill our thoughts with Eternity. Let this word always lie floating on our
meditations. It is recorded of Philip K. of Macedon, that he gave a pension to
one, to come to him every day at dinner, and to cry to him, Memento te esse
mortalem, Remember thou art but mortal; and this should always ring in our
ears, Memento te esse immortalem, Remember thou art immortal: thou have an
eternity to spend; thou have an everlasting condition to succeed. All our
thoughts should be always drawn as so many lines to this center. As the
Psolmist he did never Psalm. 139. 18.
awake, but he was with God, his meditations fastened upon that infinite and
pleasant object; and in the night Psalm. 16. 7.
which buries all things in a silent confusion, his heart bubbled forth holy
Ejaculations toward heaven: Let us in this draw David's picture, to make
eternity the sphere of our thoughts, and the object of our meditations. There
is no occurrence or passage that can befall us, which may not draw eternity
into our thoughts; when we see the graves of others, we may conclude, they have
already hoysed sail upon the the Ocean of eternity; when we observe the
prosperity of others, we may conceive they are but ripening for eternity, as
the Sun when it is at the highest, it then posteth to a setting. Our lives
here, let them be the pageants of never so many temporal felicities; they are
but a short dying groan; and are always lanching into the vast Ocean of
eternity. When we observe our own corporal distempers and indispositions, then
death is but scaling the walls, which being broken down, the soul flies to
eternity; when we 2 Cor. 4. 17.
observe the fleet pace and swift carreer of time, how the several parcels of
it slide away in an inobservable velocity, one hour treading upon the heels of
another; all these diversities of time are but so many streams running into the
sea of eternity. There is no passage or Providence can knock at our doors, but
eternity may be behind it. Therefore let our contemplations be always preying
upon our everlasting Luke 12. 20.
estate. It is not what I am here, whether gorgeous or inglorious, filled with
the good things of the earth, or covered with the reproaches of the Psalm. 73. 6.
world; but what shall do, for ever? where shall I take up my lodging in
eternity? St. Hierome used to say, Nier.
He could never go forth, but he always supposed he heard the sound of the
last trumpet, and the Angel crying, Surgite mortui, and venite ad judicium,
Arise ye dead, and come to judgmen. It is strange to consider how men rally up
their thoughts, and muster them, to prosecute their baseness here below; with
what eagerness and studiousnesse they methodize their earthly affairs; how do
they live and clog their reasons and understandings with a multiplicity of
occurrences? how do they put judgment, and memory, and conscience it self upon
the Act. 5. 2*
wrack, to put to usury their advantages, and in the mean while seldom or
never seriously, and practically put this one question to themselves, What
shall I do, whither shall I fly, where shall my harbor be to all eternity?
Insomuch that most men, like that dying Heu vaga, animula, blandula, quae nunc
abibis in loca?
Pope, when they come to lie on their death-beads, they then begin to enquire,
where they are going, and which way their travels must be. So pleasingly and
inconsiderately does poor man delude and turn cheat to his own soul. But ah!
let our contemplations, Mat. 24. 28.
as the Eagle to the carcass, flock to eternity, and there be always hovering
and brooding till we get a sight of an eternal crown.

But now to set home this argument, and to invite your meditations to this
necessary problem and subject, to chain your thoughts to vast, boundless
eternity; a Sea we must all sail in, whether rough or pleasant: I say to
further this design, let me cast in these few considerable incentives.

It is the noblest study, it is most sublime and generous. Eternity compriseth
all those noble enjoyments and subjects which are fit for the speculations of
the soul of the Saint. God, and Christ, and glory, the souls chiefest
possession, these are Contemplations fit to give the As he said, when he used
to contemplate on God; Nunquam minus sosus, quam cum solus.
studious soul entertainment; these are suitable company for our cogitations and
thoughts. It is strange to take notice, how men for the most part, fill their
thoughts with dirt, and the muddie profits of the world; how Psalm. 63. 6.
they disgrace and discredit their own souls, those pieces of divinity in their
breasts, with frothy, carnal, and earthly contemplations. How many are there,
who put only pibble in the beautiful casket of their understanding, study
dross, and dung, and that which the Apostle calls loss, are Phil. 3. 8.
versed about their inaminate comforts, their corn, their wine, and their oil:
what is this but to carry rubbish and rags in a Chariot? But the most
adequate and noble study of the soul is eternity; to be always sounding and
fadoming that Ocean: how shall my soul fare for ever? what will be the portion
of my eternity? what will God settle on me for everlasting? Platoes Treatise,
De immortalitate animae, of the immortality of the soul, spoke him divine. The
understanding of man is the noblest faculty of the noblest part, (viz.) his
soul; and what more proportionable for the encounters of this noble light, then
eternity, and those things that are attendant upon it?

What a low degeneracy is it, for men to corrupt and putrefie their thoughts
with perishing and dying objects, and crowd into their most serious meditations
nothing but earth, and the things of the world? How does poor man, when wholly
taken up in these drossie contemplations, but debase Nec in rebus caducis
aeternitas complacere potest. Bern.
himself into the vileness of an idol, undervalue and uncoyne himself, blot
out Gods image and superscription, and write in the image and inscription of
earth? he does as it were turn himself into brass, and iron, and reprobate
silver; the soul whose heat and studies are vented and wasted upon these
sublunary things, does but stain its original, and cast a dampe upon the
divinity of its own nature.

Now how low and sordid these meditations upon terrestrial and drossie
vanities are, will appear in our viewing of these three things.

Romans 14. 17.
a mere parenthesis. These outward things they are nothing to our purpose. We
are traveling toward eternity, and to fix our thoughts on these crackling
thorns, is but a mere digression. It is strange to observe how Mat. 6. 33.
men vex their own thoughts, plot, contrive, foster, and commence their
designs for these outward things, which shall never fall into the account, no
further then as they aggravate the guilt of a sinner, the joy of a Saint, in
the improvement or mispending of them. The question is, whether thou have
gained an interest in Christ, got thy sins blotted out, or have had the
beatificall sight of a smile from God. For the trash and chafe of the world,
who required, will God say, these things at your hands? what are all these
things to thy soul, thou studious worldling? It is eternity should take up all
our Contemplations, how thou should fare for ever; to spend our thoughts on
these earthly enjoyments, is as to go to law for another man's right, or
intrude our selves into his controversy.

for ever. This Mat. 2. 10.
should be the Contemplation of a Christian, how soft Christ's bosom, how
glorious his face, how sweet Gods smile; what those felicities are that are
reserved for the Saints? But to fill our cogitations with extrinsecals, is but
the alienation of our thoughts, an unnatural diversion. When the poor
travaller surveyes Heb. 11. 13.
many Countries, his thoughts and contemplations, they are often at home, and
settled on his own coast. Our meditations should always be sailing toward our
home, and let not the world and its flatteries obstruct or stop our Carreer.

Gospel; with what regret, and reluctance Luke 12. 20.
of spirit, when he is casting upon eternity, does he cry out, Farewell my dear
enjoyments, those pleasant darlings of my soul; I say, with what reluctance and
contraction does he then think of eternity, when he is entering upon it? how
ghastly is the face, and how unwelcome the arrests of eternity? Nothing is more
dreadful to this imprudent miserable wretch, then to look from the mast of
this life down into the Ocean of eternity. What clammy sweates, and sad
affrightments does now the thought of an everlasting condition create? These
worldly and drossie meditations how do they unhindge the soul; and make it
jarre and discompose it for its entrance upon eternity. But then man acts most
nobly and in a genuine spear, when his contemplations fly forward to
eternity, and are descrying that boundless Sea. Now to close this first
particular, let us but observe a double proportion between eternity and the
understanding of man.

in it, is unlimited, and unconfined (as before has been discovered), and so
the understanding of man is filled with vast apprehensions, it only (the Angels
excepted) can fadome what God is, survey the excellencies of his nature,
attributes, glory, and can conceive what a rare creation the Angels are, how
fine spun the Angelical nature, what a rare thread the soul; only man's
understanding can read Gods counsels, and bottom his everlasting decrees, when
revealed, and make holy and serious animadversions on them; thus the
understanding can raise it self, and call within its view the most noble and
generous speculations. Now eternity which compriseth not only the
transcendencies of beings but enjoyments; how exactly proportionable and
analogicall to such a glorious lamp as man's understanding is, especially when
snuft and increased by grace?

does this fit the ambitions of men's understandings, which are always Eccles.
1. 8.
unsatisfied in their enquiries; but still are prying into more and more
abstruses. The wise man observes of the corporal eye that it is unsatisfied in
this life, how much more the intellectual? The mind of man is pregnant and
operative, and as the Be of the soul is always wandering for some prey of
future knowledge. This then, (not further to amplify the argument) let it be a
golden spur to us, to enrich our minds with constant and serious thoughts of
eternity; as being the most sublime and suitable study of the soul.

Initium hujus abitionis est in nativitatis nostra hora, and singulis momentis
and horis propius accedimus ad scopum, quem ipsa morte attingimus. Chemn.
they are but as candles in the wind, which every blast may blow one; they are
as glasses, that every knock may batter and break; what more fragill and
brittle then the life and continuance of man in this world? Every affliction,
every distemper, every day may see it entombed in death; and observe its
funerals. And therefore what Jam. 4. 14.
more proper, what more seasonable, then always to fix our thoughts on
eternity, which is our state behind the curtain? what more apposite then to be
peeping within the vail? There is no stability in this life, no uncertainty in
the other; we will descry the Sea we are to sail in; ah! why not eternity we
are every moment entering upon? Thou know not how soon thou shall be cast on
this shore, yet a little while and eternity shall swallow thee up; therefore
what more seasonable then always to anchor our meditations here? It was a
grave speech of him, who said, Tota vita est meditatio mortis, our whole life
is but the meditation of death. But I say, Our whole life should be a
meditation of eternity; this is always seasonable to consider, What shall we
do, whither shall we fly, what preparations are made, what enjoyments are
provided, what shelter, what honor for the poor soul to eternity? It is not
what we are here, whether we are wrapped up in sores or solaces, whether we act
Jobs misery or felicity; but what shall we do, and what shall we be for ever?
And can then the thoughts of eternity be at any time unseasonable? no more,
then our prayers to God, and our visitations of the throne of Act. 12. 23.
grace. Every moment may put a period to our possessions here, and see them all
withered into nothing, and therefore what fare is at home, how am I provided
for eternity? what lands, what leases in glory? what treasures have I blanckt
up in heaven? The poor tenant at will, waits still at his Landlords door for
a lease; that he may Vniversum vitae nostrae carriculum viae conferatur, and
mors est ultima hujus vitae lin^a, quae nobis januam aperit ad aeterditatem.
have something certain, some security he shall not be cast out of his dwelling
the next hour: In this life we have no lease, nothing certain, therefore think
on eternity. Ah! how few, amongst men, which are every moment ready to be
turned out of the tenements of their bodies, are looking after and
contemplating of eternity? here should be that center of all our heat,
animosities, studies, designs, and meditation. The poor traveller cares not
for his Inn, but what is his home; and yet foolish men, more mind their Inn,
this world, then their home. It is now thy day, sinner, to think of eternity,
this day is declining, and when concluded, thou shall ever feel, but never
contemplate more on eternity: Heb. 9. 27.
Here is our Term, shortly comes an everlasting Vacation of misery or
happiness: Now is the season to ruminate on, and revolve the state of
eternity. Can it be ever unseasonable to mind thee of thy soul, of God, of the
blood of Christ, of the work of grace? All these things have a tendency to
eternity.

Let us but take a short view of the foolishness of most men, how foolish
creatures they are; how ready and easily willing to forfeit and lose their
seasons. Man in his infancy says, It is not yet time to think of eternity, I
am but a bud newly visible in the blossom, in the immaturity of my age; I have
taken newly a lease of this life, (Infant, let me tell thee, thou have none) I
am newly come upon the stage of the world, and therefore to vex or discompose
my thoughts with a future eternity, is not a duty but a solecisme; thus man in
his unripe years locks out the thoughts of an everlasting condition. And man
in the beauty of his youth, he suspends his thoughts of eternity; lest those
grave and serious contemplations might embitter those pleasures he drenches
himself in; he shuts out those unwelcome Eccles. 11. 9.
guests which would interrupt the harmony and music of his mirth. The young
man he conjectures that to think of eternity is a hysteron proteron, and so he
looks on it as a vain anticipation; it is too soon in the morning of his age,
to think of the evening of eternity. And man in his full age, looks on himself,
as too strong and vigorous to fall into eternity, and in his own vain
presumption, supposes that he could wrestle with, and foil death it self; his
veins are full of blood; his bones are full of marrow, his body is full of
strength, and he prides himself in the encrasie and healthful temperament of
his constitution; and therefore for him to think of eternity, is to cast
himself upon an unseasonable and unnecessary toil: thus the strong man bolts
all such meditations out of door. Nay man in his old and decrepit Avaritia
senectuti naturalis. Arist.
age, when he feebly and faintly walks upon the crutches of decay; he is then
more agglutinated and chained to the world, how tenacious are then his desires,
ambitious his pursuites, and how close his embraces of the things of this life;
and when his eternity Genesis 4. 7.
as well as his sin lies at his door, how does he banish eternity out of all
his thoughts, and makes his brain but a Mine of dirty contemplations? Thus all
ages of men look upon the serious, solemn and sober thoughts of eternity, but
as a piece of unseasonable melancholy, and overbusie intrusion into their
otherwise-imployed designs. And so poor man is swallowed up in eternity,
before he has seriously considered it: the poor Ant guided only by a sensual
instinct, thinks of a future winter, and so accordingly prepares and lays in
for it; shall the Ant think on a winter, and not thou stupid man on eternity,
the never sinking condition, never failing or ending estate of thy soul? as the
wise man says, Learn policy and wisdom from Prove. 6. 6.
the poor Pismire. Nay let this knowledge of the poor Ant condemn and check
the imprudence of Christians, the Ant is not sure of Winter, but may die under
some foot or other, and yet the Ant thinks of it; but thou art as sure of
eternity, as thou art of thy soul in thy bosom, that must be cast upon, and
was created for it. Is not this folly below the beasts, and the most
inconsiderable of them too? Ah then, let the seasonablenesse of the study fix
your thoughts on eternity.

Eternity is the most rational study of man. We must conceive as the
Philosopher (...).
says, That man is an incorruptible creature, and therefore to be
contemplating on that duration, which is most suitable to his being, is most
proportionable. So many of the Philosophers have spoken darkly of eternity,
that there should be such a state and being, but have been at a stand, what
should attend that being. Man is created to eternity, and death is his change,
not annihilation; and therefore it is against the nature of reason it self, to
fix our thoughts on any object below eternity.

of eternity, that makes our losses intolerable, and that makes our gains
inconceivable? No loss is confiderable but as eternal, nor advantage
remarkable but as everlasting. Eternity ponderates our losses, and enriches our
gains. Why Mat. 16. 26.
is the loss of the soul so amplified by Christ; but as it is created
immortal; and its life cannot be taken away? Temporal disadvantages they are
but a gentle blast; but eternal, are an insupportable storm. Job himself
encompassed with so many losses, the loss of children, friends, goods, health,
credit; insomucch that his poverty was proverbiall; I say, Job himself, who was
the skeleton and anatome of misery, his right and entail to a blessed eternity
being not cut off, cannot be denominated truly miserable. It is eternity that
is the poison of misery it self, and is the edge of all calamity.

What is the reason, that Christ preferres the beauty of a flower, and that
none of the most rare neither, a Lilly, before all glory of Solomon, Mat. 6. 26.
which was so great that it was the worlds wonder, and the Queen of Shebaes
amazement? I conceive, that this may be one among others, the fadingnesse and
transiency of it. Solomon's glory was but a blazing star, which making a
glorious show for a while, suddenly disappeares, and vanishes. It is eternity
that makes glory 2 Cor. 4. 17.
it self weight, and which puts a sting into misery and infelicity.

Pharaoh Genesis 41. 8.
and Nebuchadnezzar, which distracted Dan. 2 3.
and troubled the spirits of those Princes. Should we cast our eye only on that
example of Ahab, 1 King. 21. 4 when he would graspe the Vineyard of Naboth into
his possession, and being denied, with what anguish of spirit, and torture of
mind does he cast himself upon his bed, and there leaves himself a prey to the
perplexities of his disquieted mind; he throws himself upon the bed, which was
his bed of thorns, and denies to eat, he refuses the common commands of nature
it self.

And indeed, Convulsion fits and agonies wrack the thoughts of covetous and
ambitious men; how restless their designs? how unsatisfied their desires?
there is a perpetual tempest in their cogitations. Absalon and Achitophel
those twines of ambition, 2 Samuel 16. 21.
with what amazement and hurry do they pursue their traitorous conspiracy? Sin
and earth, they are the quicksilver and disease of men's thoughts, they are the
very earthquake of men's meditations. But eternity Psalm. 104. 34.
is the center and rest of the souls Contemplations. As David says of God,
that his meditations of him were sweet. In conversing with eternity, our
thoughts meet with a harbor, there is something to stay, and stop, and
satisfy the ambition of the soul; there is God the portion, Christ the rock,
heaven the refuge, joy the music, and everlastinguesse the triumph of the
believer.

Nay, there is some contentment in viewing and contemplating on the eternity of
misery: As it is the triumph of Gods vengeance and wonder of his justice, the
woeful reward of sin, the souls pregnant and lively caveat, the lantern to
guide the soul to avoid the rock, and escape the bottomless gulf of endless
perdition; there is something in eternity to settle and compose the meditations
of man. The world and lust they are but the Maze and Meander of men's thoughts.
What care do men take? what hazards Eccles. 2. 22, 23.
do they run? what pains of body, plotting of brain, conflicts of passions,
biting of conscience, disrepute among men? Any thing, and every thing will men
undergo to acquire the vain vexations of the world, or the filthy
satisfactions of sin. Amnon 2 Samuel 7. 2.
grows lean, is vexed and sick for his sister. Thus men torment their own
minds for these outward or sinful enjoyments, make themselves perpetual
drudges and servitours to the times, fawn, flatter, comply, couple, strike in
with the instruments and authors of their hopes, hazard their salvation and
consciences to swim Adorare vulgus, jacere ^scula, and omnia serviliter pro
imperio. Tacit. Hist. And I may too, pro peccato.
through all to their adored haven, whether the paint of the creature, or the
pleasure of a sin. These concussions and confusions attend the distempered
thoughts of man, when they have either outward things, or lust for their
object. But eternity allayes all tumults in our meditations, when the soul
bethinks it self, Where shall I lean my head, where lodge my soul, where find
my home, where build my nest for ever? these thoughts shed a serenity on the
spirit of man. As Christ says, Mat. 11. 28. that those that came to him shall
find rest for their souls, and those that fix their contemplations on eternity
shall find a bottom, shall find ground to anchor their thoughts upon; here is
the Nil ultra, the pillar our meditations cannot sail beyond, therefore reason
may attract our thoughts to be much on eternity.

Eternity it is the study of grace, more then of reason. All the graces of a
believer, they have an eye to eternity. Repentance turn the soul to God to
prevent and eternal loss of Gods presence; the eye of penitency is toward
eternity; the eye weeps for sin here, that it may not weep by sin in eternity;
here the penitent drenches himself in tears, that in his everlasting condition
he may not be Mat. 8. 12.
drowned in misery; here he is weeping Luke 13. 28.
with brokennesse of heart, that hereafter he may not be weeping with gnashing
of teeth. And here indeed he fills his eyes with tears; that hereafter in
eternity God may wipe away all tears from his eyes, Rev. 7. 16. And so love is
inflamed upon the point of eternity, because the Saints shall lie Isa. 35. 10.
everlastingly in the arms of Christ. Who will not love that husband, that
shall crown his Spouse with everlasting joy? Indeed the love of a Saint to
Christ, is but the imperfect relation, and dark picture of Christ's love to a
Saint; Christ's love is eternal, Joh. 13. 1. and the Saints love breaks out
toward Christ, because his love is eternal. Eternity as it is put into Saints
portion, it is the bellows of the Saints love, it fans and oils those flames:
What can be more incentive to the believers affection, then that Christ shall
endow him with everlasting possession? It is the Everlasting crowns the gift of
Christ, and fires the love of a believer. For ever, for ever, to have his soul
sweetened with the pleasant smiles of the Lord Jesus, Can. 5 7.
and always to lie in his soft and beatificall embrace, how sick of love, must
this make the Saint! The grace of love likewise principally glanceth its eye
upon our future eternity.

Faith acts immediately upon eternity, Heb. 11. 16.
as the Apostle speaks, It is the (...). Theod.
evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. that is, those things that are within
the vail of eternity. Faith it does bring down, those felicities a believer
shall inherit hereafter, to him here below, and puts the believing soul in
perfect possession. Faith is the eye of the soul, by which we peep through the
curtains of mortality, and take a view and foretaste of heavenly things. This
glorious grace has that rare power, that it can either sublimate the soul and
carry it up into the bosom of Christ, or bring down Jesus Christ as a bundle
of myrrh into the bosom of a believer. Eternity is the very prospect of
faith, it is usual Pisgah sight. Faith takes the soul, as the Lord did Moses,
and gives it a view Exodus 31. 1.
of Canaan. Here lies the difference between Fides est credere quod non vides,
cujus veritas and merces est, videre quod credidisti. Aug. in Joan.
the eye of faith, and the eye of sense, the one is circumscribed by a present
view, we see only what is before us; but faith can take a survey of eternity it
self, and lay a present claim to a future inheritance. The Fides divina credit
quae non videt; and quae nullo sensu assequitur, and credit infallibiliter,
sive praeterita sunt, sive praesentia, sive futura. Par.
excellency of this grace is remarkable in this, it can draw the Arras from
before the glory of heaven it self. We sail upon the Ocean of eternity here,
already, in the bark of faith.

In a word, this grace presentiates eternity, and looks on our future condition
as already attained to, in all its considerables, it lays the soul in the
everlasting arms of Christ by its vigorous and undaunted acts: thus faith is a
grace that does cast an immediate eye upon the S^a of eternity.

And Hope its tendency is wholly toward eternity, and the rare possessions
thereof. It is the rational dispute of the Apostle, that hope must cast an eye
upon a future condition, for says he, Hope that is seen is not hope; Romans 8.
24.
that is sense, not the grace of hope. That is a pregnant place, Col. 1. 5. For
the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, observe heaven is made the proper
place and seat of hope. And res sperandae, the things hoped for, are called
hope, as in the before cited place. So glory is sometimes annexed to hope, Col.
1. 27. And sometimes salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. And hope is called a blessed
hope, Heb. 6. 18.
Tit. 2. 13. A hope of future beatitude and blessedness. And sometimes hope is
united to eternal life, Tit. 3. 7. The very center and stage of hope is
eternity. It looks beyond this life, and being fledged by lively acts and
exercise, it makes its nest in eternal felicity. Observe that reviving
argument of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 19. If in this life only we have hope in
Christ, we are of all men the most miserable. Observe, I say, hope flies beyond
this Spes nostra penetrat and pervadit ipsum coelum, ipsamque coelestem
gloriam. A Lap.
life, and treads down the limitations of it, if in this life only. Hope
anchors upon eternity, casts its anchor within the vail, Heb. 6. 19. Pareus
observes that this phrase, Alludit ad sanctuarium Interiora sunt ipsa dei visio
omnis gloria, and beatorum opes. Id.
templi, quod velo separatum a reliquo templo, coelum praefigurabat. Eternity
is the prize of hope. Hope is here in the bud, but is blown in eternity.
Everlasting blessedness is the shore hope sails to; the crown hope aims at.
It is that only which quiets the patient, yet springing expectations of a Saint.

And so Joy, its triumph is in eternity, Ex beatifica dei visione, quae est
summum beatorum in vita aeterna praemium orietur in cordibus sanctor um
ineffabilis latitia and exultatio. Ger.
which is the noonday of joy. The Saints joy is in its harvest in glory. And
therefore the Apostles phrase is full, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Joy unspeakable and full of
glory. Heaven is the palace of joy, and eternity is the day of the Saints
everlasting nuptials. And the Apostle Jude couples the presence of Gods glory
and joy together, Jude v. 24. Isa. 61. 7.
In the presence of his glory with exceeding 1 John 1. 4.
joy. The believers joy here is but the Gaudebunt* electi propter loci
amoenitatem; propter jucundam societatem, propter corporis glorificationem,
propter mundum quem contempserunt, propter infernum quem evaserunt. Bonav.
softer-musick, and his joy in heaven the fuller harmony. This joy of eternity,
Mat. 25. 21. is called, The joy of our Lord, because God shall fill the souls
of his people with this joy, by himself, not by his creatures, by his immediate
presence, not by the interposition of creature-contributions, riches, delights,
etc. God being the highest and infinite good, the sweetest pleasure, and the
most pleasant sweetness shall spring to the Saints by his presence
inexpressible joy. So the grace of joy it swells here, and is as a river posting
to the sea of a joyous eternity.

Thus all graces have their design Gaudebunt sancti infra se de coeli and
creaturarum pulcritudine; intra se de corporis and animi glorificatione; juxta
se de hominum and Angelorum associatione. Lud.
in eternity, they all hoyse sail on this Ocean. Every grace has its peculiar
relation to eternity, and it is in fieri till it be perfected in eternal
glory; it is in the womb till it be delivered by eternity, which is the aim
and the consummation of all grace. Do thou study thy own grace, thou will be
always quoting eternity. In a word,

Jub. 19. 25,
and hope resolute as shortly both to be landed in eternity, and there to be
inhanced into a nobler form, faith to be turned into vision, and hope into
fruition: this settles the waverings of grace, of love, patience and zeal, that
in eternity they shall be resolved into glory; and these divine qualifications
2 Timothy 4. 8.
shall be transformed and nobilitated into perfection. Grace would be the
trouble, not the triumph of a Christian, were it to be buried for ever, and
entombed in the dust; but the eternity to come melts away all the fears and
hesitations of grace.

Gal. 2. 20.
be enthroned in his bosom for ever? It Is Constantines motto, (...), In this
overcome. This flings sparks into a gracious heart, thy patience shall triumph
in eternity. Grace and faith 1 Timothy 6. 12.
fight undauntedly; eternity holding the crown before them; this is bellows to
the fire of grace, it shall be enshrined in eternal fruition. The sun of
eternity does shoot up the flower of grace, puts heat into the flames of zeal
and love it self; to believe on God by courageous faith, suffer for him with
invincible patience, act for his glory with fired zeal, all this is but
suitable; because the soul shall enjoy God for ever. It is the for ever, the
long lease of heaven, (if glory may be stained with the name of lease) turns
every grace into a springing Psalm. 103. 5.
eagle; this for ever, puts spirits, animation and life it self into the graces
of a believer.

for ever; snatch it out of all the storms of eternal wrath, will bolt hell
gates, and keep down the trap-door of a miserable eternity, that the poor soul
shall not be ingurgitated in endless calamity.

There are two things amplify the riches of grace, and ennoble it to an
inestimable value: The Divinity of its 2 Pet. 1. 4.
nature; and the eternity of its being; for grace cannot be annihilated, but
melted, or rather raised into glory. The Philsopher Bias rejoiced in this very
sentence, Omnia mea mecum porto, I carry all about me. And so the poor
believer rejoices in this, he carries faith, love and grace about him; which
are the choysest riches, and which will be not only his rescue, but his renown
to all eternity. The poor Saint concludes, all the excellencies 2 Pet. 3. 9, 10.
of the creature shall crumble into the same dust with me, but one dram of
grace shall not leave my soul to see corruption. If I am stripped of Qui fidem
and gratiam semel habet, eam amittere non potest. Benef.
the clothes I wear, and put on the same putrid garment which Job did on the
dunghill, when he was clothed with soars; yet having but the least measure of
grace, I shall triumph for ever; my grace is my jewel, which I shall not lose
for ever. Eternity sheds a beauty on grace it self. Grace is the fiery chariot
to carry up the Eliahs to glory; and it is the glory, the eternal felicity
that sets the price on the fiery chariot of grace. For could the same
expiration stop the breath of grace and our lives together; how low would the
market of grace be? I mean, versus hominem, in reference to us.

But again,

1 Cor. 13. 12.
its last hand, is flowred into perfection, is dissolved into the pearl of
superlativenesse. We should always think on eternity upon this account, as
there our graces shall be refined into In coelo erit absque nube amaenitas, and
absque nocte claritas, and absque labe puritas. Guliel. A lard.
the highest power and purity; eternity is the proper study of a gracious
heart, in the point of his graces. How sweet should this Contemplation be to
the Saint! though here often his love has its winter in his breast; yet in
eternity it shall be fire ad octo, and a flame that has neither the smoke of
corruption blended with it, nor yet any allaying of imperfection. In eternity
grace is drawn to the life, wants no degrees, no measures, no reflections,
grace here is polisht with glory.

Rev. 3. 21.
with glory. Every gracious soul shall be as Esther, made Queen in eternity.
Gods everlasting smile shall recompense, and honor the grace of a Saint. All
the graces of a Saint in Genesis 40. 43.
eternity shall be as Joseph, advanced from a prison to a throne, from the
dark prison of the body, to a place of pure and rare perfection. The graces of
a Saint here are like a star imprisoned in a cloud; but in heaven shall be as a
star, or rather the Sun in a clear and glorious sky. Eternity shall crown and
inaugurate faith and love with the perfect sight of God, who was the sole and
constant object of all their actings and exercise here.



Consider, in eternity the reason of the Saints patience under the shot of
trouble; their zeal when flames were Dan. 3. 17, 18.
their reward; their undaunted faith, winged hope, flaming love, their rowing
against the stream, and slighting the Comet of honor; their despising Heb. 11.
25, 26.
the delicacies, and soft temptations of pleasure; their repudiating the silver
bait of riches, will fully be known in eternity: that will expound all this,
and be the comment of the strange and vigorous acts and exercises of grace. In
eternity we shall know why Job had rather abide his torment, then leave his
faith: Why Abraham should rather destroy his Son, then displease his God; and
Moses entertain affliction, then court temptation; eternity shall be the
interpretation of all.

In eternity we shall know the reason why Daniel would rather incur Dan. 6.
a Praemunire, then lay aside his usual oraisons and prayers, though but for a
day or two; and why the Martyrs rather kiss their chains with a Joseph's
kiss, then their Christ with a Judas his kiss; and why Paul would 2 Timothy 4. 6.
rather be a Martyr for Christ, then Act. 13. 11.
a God to the people: all this in eternity shall be unfolded in a plain
explication.

In a word, Eternity shall unriddle all the designs, intentions, exercises,
heights, fights, resolutions, ambitions, and conquests of glorious grace. Thus
eternity is a gracious, as well as a noble, rational, and seasonable study. But

profitable study; this serious study is the womb of multifarious advantages.
Could ye always be glancing at, and thinking of eternity; ye would find the
Philosophers stone, to turn all into gold. The solemn thoughts of eternity
would cure the soul of many usual distempers, which frequently do attend it.

Non tanti emam poenitere. Them.
sin damn my soul to eternity, and render me the subject of everlasting wrath?
And will the sweetness of my present lust countervail scalding lead, burning
pitch, boiling oil, empoysoned arrows in my soul for ever? Those furies and
torments, unmixt calamities, and superlative miseries, that the damned scrietch
and cry under for evermore? Will the poor helpless thoughts of a transient
lust or pleasure of an unconscionable or inordinate action, will these
miserable comforters and naked shadows any way solace me under the scorching
wrath of God? Thoughts of eternity would strangle the thoughts of sin. Our
corrupt nature is the poison of temptation; but our meditations of eternity
would be poison to temptation. Joseph makes the enquiry, when assaulted by his
lascivious Mistress, How can I do this and sin against God? Genesis 39. 9.
And every tempted soul might make this answer to all temptations, How can I
yield to this, and murder, and assasinate my soul to eternity? The thoughts of
eternity would divorce the soul from the lustful embraces of sin; and look on
those painted Jezabels as the everlasting troublers of the soul. Let the
tempted patient always look upon sin in the multiplying glass of eternity,
and conclude, this sin, which my corrupt judgment perhaps calls venial may
blast my hopes, stop my ambitions, check my desires, destroy my comforts, and
ruin my soul for ever.

Could we, or did we set sail for eternity in our Contemplations; how much

1. Treachery, such as Absalom, Joab, 2 Samuel 3. 27.
Judases treason was inconsiderable 2 Samuel 16. 2.
to it; Mat. 26. 49.


2. How much filthiness;

3. How much guilt to condemn the soul for ever;

4. How much madness would be found in every sin: Surely could we paraphrase
upon a future condition, pain without ease, and torment without end, it would
make us sound a retreat to all our darling enchantments of sin. What benefit
will it be to remember the amorous and adulterous bed, when we shall take up
our lodgings, (not our rest) in a bed of eternal flames? Will Belteshazzers
Dan. 5. 2, 3.
riots, and sacrilegious prodigalities sweeten or purfume the stench and
torments of hell to him? Nay the very thoughts of a blessed eternity would
unriddle the poison, unmaske the infinite evil, and chine up the multiplied
mischiefs of sin; glory it self would be a looking-glass 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
for us to see the deformity of sin in. Sin that monster of evils, which can
shut heaven gates against, and darken the beatificall vision to the soul; which
can raise a wall of separation between the soul and God Isa. 59. 2.
himself.

Indeed our future estate well weighed in the balance of serious meditation,
would be as an Angel in the way to stop transgressors from traveling in the
road of sin. Ah! how would such thoughts as eternity Numb. 22. 25, 26.
would engender, raise a nausea, and distaste in the soul against the most
pleasing cheates of sin. Let us but observe the dismal effects of the
handwriting on the wall, which sin procures; sin which is now a rose in thy
bosom, will be a dagger in thy heart for ever. Ah! remember the for ever.

Indeed sins sinfulness and contamination (...). Chrysostom. ad prop. Antioch.
is best drawn by the pencill of eternity. In all thy overtures with sin, and
pleas with temptation, let eternity be the umpire: What rage and holy passion
would such thoughts produce and procreate? Put but thy finger into the fire of
eternal wrath by sacred and serious Contemplation, and then sin if thou can;
thou will then either throw away thy faith, or thy sin. I conceive the sinner
rocks these thoughts asleep, before he courts and embraces the offers of
corruption. A poor sinner upon second thoughts, lest by sin he shall provoke an
infinite Majesty with a two-edged sword Psalm. 7. 12.
in his hand to make everlasting wounds Jer. 48. 2.
in his soul, will hardly adventure the gratifying his sweetest lust: If thou
would at any time cast a chain upon thy corrupt heart, to restrain its
liberty in sin, draw eternity into the counsels of thy soul.

after them; were these meditations greater inmates with us, we should not grow
sick for Naboths Vineyard; 1 King. 21. 4.
and as Eve, lose a world to gain an Apple. Did we think of eternity, we should
fall upon such reasonings as these, and plead with our souls in their strength;
viz. What advantage does Dives reap now of all his delicate morsels, his rich
fare, the elixars of all his banquets? What taste has Cleopatra of her
dissolved jewels? Or Heliogabalus of all those vast and various preparations,
those unheard of sensualities he drowned himself in? Does the sensual and
effeminated sinner Fallax felicitas, ipsa est major infelicitas. Aug.
who is shut under the hatches of eternity; relish any of those varieties which
he sinfully pleased himself with here? does any delightful smatch refresh him
from all his luxuries and profuseness in this life? Do the rich Da domine, ut
sic possideamus temporalia, ut non perdamus aeterna. Bern.
man's barnes now relieve him in his eternal famine? How would such thoughts as
these embitter the sweet dalliances of the world? When we turn sensual in our
pleasurous enjoyments, we remember not eternity. What tears did David's
Adultery, when he sinfully gratified his corrupt temptation, squeize from him
here; how did he water his couch with his tears, that he had defiled with his
lusts? The thoughts of eternity would Voluptatem vincere est voluptas maxima,
nec ulla est major victoria, quam ea quae a cupiditatibus refertur; qui enim
hostem vincit, fortior est altero, qui cupiditates fortior est seipso. Cyp. de
bono Pud.
put a mask before all the beauties, and blend bitterness with all the
luxuries, and cast a rust on all the riches of the world; would sour all
creature-satisfactions, and take their taste from them; nay such solemn
thoughts would wrincle temptation it self. Did we sometimes penetrate into the
Sanctum sanctorum of such thoughts, how much art, paint, imposture,
witherednesse and fugacity should we see in the complexion of the most
flourishing contentments? Then the very quintessence of the Qui amant
voluptates non possunt affici dee, and rebus divinis: Voluptates enim
spirituales quae animum erigunt ad coelestia, contrariae sunt carnalibus, quae
animum deprimunt. and effeminant. Theoph.
creature, would grow stale and curdle into vanity. The Dagon of all created
excellencies would fall down before the thoughts of eternity. These
contemplations would anatomize the world in all its varieties; and find out
all the veins and arteries of its cheat and delusion; we should look then upon
all our pleasures as what really they are, fantastic but dangerous dreams.
Eternity ruminated on would soil the color of the fairest courtships of the
world; it would draw off our hearts from all sublunary satisfactions. Ah! my
eternity, my eternity; What shall become of me for ever? When the soul shall
seriously ask it self, what real advantage, what soul-satisfaction, what
stable or solid comfort is wrapped up in these creature-possessions? but above
all am I the more interessed in Gods favor, assured of sins pardon, or fitter
for my eternity by these pleasing enjoyments? Or rather are not these delights
I enjoy, the damps of my grace, the infections of my desires, the temptations
of my soul, the traitors without the wall of my heart, Satan's weapons, and
varnisht spies and obstructions to mysterious thoughts of eternity? how would,
I say, such a question as this, put seriously and closely to the consciencience
flat the taste of the most sweetened delicacies?

Serious and frequent thoughts of eternity, would be cordials and counselors
in all our troubles. This would sweeten 2 Cor. 4. 17.
and take off the bitterest potion of affliction and calamity, there is an Isa.
54. 8.
eternity to come. Those flames I am Mat. 10. 28.
now scotcht by, shortly death will turn into a smoke, and then I shall sail
upon the pleasant sea of a glorious eternity. This everlasting condition Melior
est modica amaritudo in faucibus, quam aeternum tormentum in visceribus.
to come, it takes out the core of every affliction: It does as Edward the
firsts Queen did to him, it suckes the poison out of the wound of every
trouble; it cuts every calamity of the stone. The poor Saint thinking of
eternity concludes, I am passing through a sudden storm to an endless calm,
through a tempest to an everlasting tranquillity, through a rough Sea to an
eternal harbor.

There are three things sweeten affliction;

1. The pleasure of a promise, Isa. 43. 2. The promises are the believers
bladders to swim through the highest waters of Marah of miseries. They are 2
Pet. 1. 4.
precious, not only in their futurition, as they shall be dissolved and melted
into reward; but as they are present balm in the wounds of affliction,
precious balsame to a groaning and troubled Saint.

2. The smile of a God, that cannot only mitigate affliction, and allay the
pain of it; but transform the Serpent of misery into a blossoming rod of
consolation; the favor and smile Psalm. 119. 67.
of Christ cannot only pare an affliction, Psalm. 23. 4.
take off the noxious skin of it; and take out the sting the torment of it, but
can change the nature of it, and turn a perplexity into a perfume, into an
advantage: Can make the melancholy face of trouble it self, look pleasant.

3. The thoughts of eternity; these contemplations Guttatim poend sumitur,
liquando bibitur, per minutias transit: In re muncratione torrens est
voluptatis, and fluminis impetus, inundans laetitiae, flumen gloriae, and
flumen pacis. Bern.
can carry up the soul above, and make it look beyond trouble. All the
distresses of a Saint in the world, they are but as one fit of the stone,
compared to eternity; they are a little foul weather, and plashie dirty way in
his journey to a glorious eternity. One moments fruition of eternal joy shall
take away the smell of all our troubles here; the very memory of these flashes
of affliction shall not remain in eternity, unless it be to enlarge the
ecstasy of joy. In all thy flames of trouble remember eternity: what is this
tear, this sigh, this single groan of misery, to an Ocean of satisfaction?
when I shall sail upon a sea of boundless and endless mercy. This moment, as
the Prophet speaks, Isa. 54. 8. this flash of lightning to an endless state?
When I have passed millions of ages in a blissful everlastingnesse, will this
transient recollected? What darkness or woe does Jeremiahs dungeon, or Jobs
Jer. 38. 6.
dunghill cast upon their glorified souls; Job. 2. 8.
now shipped upon the Ocean of a blessed eternity? or does the stench of either
offend those enthroned Spirits? Meditations on eternity would make the oil of
gladness to swim above the water of affliction.

There are four Questions one should ask his soul in the time of trouble.

1. Josh. 7. per tot.
Achan. What causes this earthquake, this perplexity, Christians in affliction
Psalm. 239. 23.
should fadome their own hearts, search their own ways; and observe what is it
that jarres their prosperity, and the harmony of it. This is the first
Question, What is it that springs a leake in my happiness?

2. Mic. 6. 9.
has it; what is its language? Every one should read the superscription of his
trouble, see the contents of his affliction, and so answer Gods letter in it.

3. ancillari gratiae, wait on my souls felicity? How shall I turn this misery
into gold, by a rare Chemistry? This should be another question. As Manasseh 2 Chronicles. 33. 13.
who turned his fetters into golden chains by holy and serious repentance. But

4. this gentle and short gale to a perpetual estate? Am I in Christ? Is my
everlasting estate sure? Is the bond of God sealed to me? Am I enrolled in the
new covenant? Has Christ left me his blood for a legacy? Have I searched his
will, and found my name in it? Is my name written Luke 10. 20.
in the book of the Lamb, and transcribed in the volume of heaven? Then what is
this transient fit of misery, this short-breathed affliction, to my endless,
boundless, and bottomless felicity?

Nay, the very thoughts of eternity, would yield some comfort to the wicked in
their calamities here, in that they would reinforce the industry of the sinner
to get an interest in Christ, that being tortured in present calamities, he
might find rest in eternity.

would be Spirits in duty. I hear for eternity; I pray for eternity, if I pray
not my self into the sweets of Christ's bosom, I shall fall into the flames of
Gods Joh. 9. 4.
wrath, what heat would eternity beget? what zeal, resolution, invincible and
unanswerable buldnesse in all our duties? Now are my prayer-seasons,
Sermon-seasons, and my everlasting estate depends on the good improvement of
them. How would this fire animate and awaken our souls in all ordinances, and
in all our services? I now wrestle, I now fight for eternity; Thalami in Sancta
Ecclesia sunt illorum corda, in quibus animae per amorem sponsae invisibili
conjunguntur, ut ejus desiderio men's ardeat, praesentis vitae longitudinem
poenam deputet. Men's itaque quae jam talis est, nullam praesentis seculi
consolationem recipit, sed ad illam quam diligit, medul litus suspirat, fervet,
anhelar, anxiatur* Vilis and sit ipsa salus sui corporis, quia transfixa est
vulnere Amoris. Greg. Hom.
the crown lies at stake, my everlasting joy and rest. Mariners in a storm,
how do they pump, work, sweat, throw overbord their lumber, nay their richest
Merchandise, because their lives are concerned: When thou hear or prayest,
remember, Thy eternity stands in competition Had those damned spirits, who have
tasted of the miseries of eternity, but a renewed capacity of duty, to pray and
hear again, how would they nail their eyes to heaven in holy contemplation,
chain their knees to the earth in prayer; and turn their flesh into iron in a
constant adoration? as one in the Primitive times. Eternity would make zeal
leap in the womb of duty. And it is worth our considerations, What a short
breath, would our duties be, were our life but one constant service? Did we
seriously think of our future eternity, it would be a good cure for all our
frothinesse, drowsinesse, carelessness, formality, coldness, indifferency,
infrequency, extravagancy in duty: Such thoughts would inflame the heart, raise
the mind, fire the spirit, set on work the affection, nay spiritualize and
sublimate the body it self in holy services. As Archimedes who was so intent on
his Mathematical studies, that he heard not the Soldiers when they came to
his study-door to kill him. Ah! what intention, heat, bent and abstraction of
mind would these contemplations produce? Do thou complain poor soul, of thy
coldness and deadness in duty? cast thy thoughts on eternity; Can thou
sleep on the scaffold or on the block? remember, thou rowest and runnest for
thy life; nay, for thy eternal life; if thou give God any rest now, he will
give thee no rest hereafter: what sedulity, diligence, holy passionatenesse,
importunity, and violence would these serious meditations fill and bespangle
duty with? Thou now actest (soul) for eternity, storm heaven now, or thou are
undone for ever; yet a little while, and thou shall pray no more for ever; the
thoughts of our everlasting estate, would make us turn Anchorets in duty, and
scale heaven it self, with holy and impetuons importunity.

There are four things are great spurs to duty.

1. Obedience to our liege Lord. Cant. 2. 4.


2. Communion with our dear husband.

3. Increase of our precious graces. And

4. Especially; the thoughts of our everlasting condition. These would wing our
duties. Ah! what hours do we spend in vanity? But do we pray and cry as for our
everlasting condition? Serious and cool thoughts of eternity would easily cut
the vein, and wash off the paint of formality in our services: and let this
come in to reinforce the argument: Our communion with God in duty here, is but
glory it self in the swadling-cloathes; and our enjoyment of God above, is but
communion sublimate. With what irresistible force does thirsty Samson Jud. 19.
18.
send up his prayers to heaven, that God would quench his thirst, and not his
life; his life, I say, which was but a twinkling taper that would soon fall
into the socket, how should our prayers be plumed and fledged that wrestle for
eternity? Why stand ye idle Christians? will not a few drops of holy sweat
here, be sufficiently compensated with everlasting delight?

Eternity well studied will be an invincible argument to seriousness and
circumspection in life. It is with men, as with Mariners in the Ocean, if they
be thrown overboard; there is no recovery; here is a few paces to walk; and
then we come to an endless condition. Observe the serious phrase of the
Apostle, Seeing then that all these things shall be 2 Pet. 3. 11.
dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and
godliness? observe, What manner of persons? Can Beatos vocat Christus homines
electos studio and zelo gloriae fervidos, ardore salutis flagrantes. Par. in
cap. 11. ver. 12. Mar.
not we tread even for a few paces? now walk purely, now act zealously, now
live fruitfully, ye are going to eternity; observe our lives, what a narrow
passage they are to eternity; how narrow a ford, how small a river to lanch
over; what not live piously a few hours?

I commend not the anchoret life of many, for man is, as the Philosopher says,
(...), a communicative and sociable creature; and the capacities of doing good
are especially to be found in a community; yet certainly those deceived souls
minded eternity; they were willing by austerity to prepare themselves for their
everlasting condition. Ah! how severely should we live, we are going to a
bottomless estate. Christ asks the question to his drowsy disciples, Will
not ye watch with me one hour? so Mark. 14. 37.
may I say, Will ye not walk strictly for a few moments? ye shall presently be
on the shore of everlastingnesse; what not keep close to God for a little
little time? We walk not over a bridge but with great care and circumspection.
What is our life but only the short narrow bridge to eternity?

Indeed eternity might bribe our sanctity and holiness upon this account, We
shall find all our prayers, and tears, holy and close walking with Rev. 14. 13.
God put to usury in eternity. Our lives are but like candles in the socket;
and cannot ye watch, work, weep, pray, act and live holy, while this faint
light is out. Our life is compared to a race, and those that run do neither
stop, nor sleep, nor fall, nor step* aside, because the race is but once, the
prize is for ever: our race is but once, and it is a short; Ah! So run that ye
may obtain. The 1 Cor. 9. 24.
thoughts of eternity, would cause us to make a covenant with our tongue, as
David did, Psalm. 39. 1. With our eyes, as Job did, Job 31. 1. with our palate
and taste, as the wise man counsels us, Prove. 23. 31. and summon the whole
man to a grave, and solemn deportment. Our lives are but a short Winters day,
which will soon be shut in; and cannot we a little follow the lantern of Gods
word, the Sun Psalm. 119. 105.
of Gods glory, the guidance of Gods Spirit, the winter day will soon be buried
in the darkness of a night; but eternity knows no evening. The poor sentinel
watches carefully, undergoes the terrors of the night, the frightfulness of
the dark, the fears of an alarm, the unkindnesse of the seasons cheerfully,
because he knows he shall soon be relieved; Ah! watch and pray, keep your Luke
21. 36.
guards, and shortly ye shall be relieved for ever, and be swallowed up in
eternal victory. And this argument will receive strength, if we consider but
three things.

1. If we miscarry, we are lost for ever; if we walk not holy, live piously,
tread evenly, non ratione perfectionis, sed ratione sinceritatis, not in
reference to perfection, but sincerity, we are thrown overboard into a sea of
endless misery; and will the flames of eternal wrath and indignation, be
proportionable to a few transient miscarriages? and let us remember we shall
never react this life, Yet 40 days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, says the
Prophet; yet a few moments Jon. 3. 4.
and the miscarrying womb of this life, may not only be abortive and barren,
but in travel of pain and misery for evermore. Now live according to rule,
lest ye die for ever according to justice.

2. All our holiness shall be rewarded for ever, non ratione meriti, sed
ratione gratiae, not of merit, but of grace; and every tear in the bottle,
every prayer on the file, every accepted service Rev. 14 13.
and every perfumed duty shall be remunerated with advantage: the sacrifices of
believers washed clean in the blood of Christ, shall wear the laurel of
everlasting felicity. Every spark of zeal, every act of grace, every regular
pace that the Saint takes, shall Psalm. 56. 8.
come in for a child's part in glory; why does God bottle, if he would bury the
tears of a believer?

3. In eternity we shall be incapable of unholinesse; there fears of error,
or fall shall be obsolute. There can be no bypath in Paradise. In this life
Erimus in coelo (...). Naz.
is the place of thy pious fears, holy cares, religious tremblings, lest
temptation draw thee into the snare of sin. In glory temptation it self is
spurious In aeterna felicitate similes deo erimus, haec similitudo nunc incipit
reformari, quam diu homo interior de die in diem renovatur, secundum imaginem
ejus qui creavit eum, sed ad illius eminemiae perfectionem quae tunc futura
est, quid hoc aut quantum? Aug.
and reprobate, no sinful suggestion lodges within the veil. Unstained purity
there is in an everlasting spring. And therefore now study holiness, walk
circumspectly, act grace, flame in love to Christ; contract that rare and
salubrious sickness, to be sick of love with Jesus Christ, Cant. 5. 5. and
remember eternity is at the door, and then all regulation of steps is at an
end. In hell there is no rectitude, in heaven no obliquity. In eternity there
is no pendulousnesse, or wavering, or possibilities of this uneven walking; but
the Saints enshrined in glory shall flourish for ever in an unspotted beauty.
Now here (dear Christian) walk and watch till the Sun of this life be turned,
and then eternity shall put an end to all ambiguity. What is one pace, one step
to a million, ten hundred thousand millions of miles? or what one severe,
modest, serious, pious glance to our whole life here? no more is our holy life
here to eternity. A little short scene of piety here, and then for heaven,
where Godliness shall put on the spotless and rich attire of glory for ever.
Phil. 1. 27.


Thoughts of eternity will be our encouragement in conflicts against
corruption. Now thou fightest for eternity, if this lust, that corruption
reign, thou art undone for ever. Observe the phrase of our Savior, Rev. 3. 21.
To him that Romans 6. 12.
overcomes will I give to sit in the same throne with me; to him that
overcomes. What life, vigor, rage against lust would eternity in the
meditations of it infuse? How would the tempted patient cry out, Thou bloody,
truculent lust, seek the life, of my eternal soul; the poor assaulted
patient might (assisted with grace) strangle the most headstrong corruption,
with such meditations as these, This barbarous lust may lose me an immortal
crown, mask Gods face to me for ever, may cause to be pronounced a sentence of
everlasting: divorce 2. Tim. 1. 10.
between Christ and my soul, clap me in fiery, and everlasting chains, and
leave me a prey to the dilapidations of eternal wrath. Thou fightest (dear
professor) against lust, and the 2 Timothy 4. 8.
conquest is of an everlasting concernment; (...) R. J. Badresh.
the throne, the crown, the life, the love, the kingdom of eternity is the
prize. And now poor combatant is thy duel with lust, if thou get the victory,
Gal. 5. 17
thou shall wear the laurel of blessedness, and triumph for ever: thy loss,
or thy conquest is eternal. It is with the battle between lust and the soul,
as it was in the fight between Caesar and Pompey, Pompeyes loss was for ever,
and Caesar's victory set him in the throne. Let every fighting Christian
remember eternity lies at the stake; and let this be perpended, there is no
recruiting in the grave, no rallying of thy scattered strength; the battle ends
with thy life. What passion would the damned show against those lusts, that are
now worms and Scorpions in their consciences, and shall be so for ever, were
they again to enter and begin the fight? how would they as Samson in his anger
against the Philistines, Jud. 17. 30.
summon all their spirits, muster all their strength, and gather together all
their vivacities, to pluck down the house upon the head of their corruptions?
The thoughts of eternity should be to a Christian, as despair is to a coward,
should make himself magnanimously puissant. The Historian reports, that the
Roman Soldiers, when they heard the word (Quirites) they received a kind of
new life, and they doubled the files of their valor: the word eternity should
double the guard of our force and wrath against corruption. Is it not more
noble, manly, Christian, by a holy strength, and in a pious resolution to tread
down lust here, then in an effeminate desperation to weep over it, and curse it
to eternity? Do but see how bloodthirsty, and sanguisugous every lust is in
the glass of eternity. Lust in the soul is but the Devils spy, Satan's ambush
to betray the soul to a miserable eternity: one of the truest glasses of all
sin is everlastingnesse, there ye may see it to be the Devils pander, a spark
of Gods wrath; Natures impostume; which if not broken, kills for ever, the
souls harlot; and if not crushed, and crucicified, the womb of never ending
calamity. And let me recruit the argument with these three considerations.

1. Lust, what a sordid prize for eternity? Our Savior makes it a piece of
impolitick weakness to exchange the soul for the whole world, Mat. 16. 26.
and yet the world is a systeme, and Quam stultus est qui cum aeterna jactura
post hanc vitam, pauxillum bonorum temporalium corradit, and retinent, cum
possessio rerum in hoc seculo obtentarum, nihil ipsi post hoc seculum prodere,
neque animam semel perditam ternents bonis redimere possit. Chemn.
large body of Gods creatures, a mass of excellencies and varieties, how
fragrant the roses, sweet the musickes, savoury the delicacies, glittering the
honors, and ravishing the adulations and applauses of the world; and yet
Christ brands this for inexprimable folly to purchase this glorious world with
the loss of an immortal soul. But how mean a prize for eternity is a base
corruption, which is, as the Schoolmen speak, totaliter malum, all evil, more
bitter then wormwood, destructive then poison, terrible then death, tormenting
then hell, more deformed then deformity it self? One sin acted in a moment
could destroy a world which God himself was six days in the creation of it.
Will thou lose eternity for a lust, which is a firebrand of hell, the very
incurvation of nature?

2. Observe the very remembrance of a satisfied lust, will add torment to
eternity: how cutting will that speech of Abraham to Dives be, Luke 16. 25. Son
thou had thy good things here. Sinner thou had thy lustful
satisfactions here, thy ambition, thy Prove. 28. 8.
Avarice was surfetted here, thy sensualities were gratified here, thou had
thy stolen morsels, and thy pleasant baits, thy beloved, checkred,
bosome-corrptions here in this life, therefore now thou art tormented. This
will be Luke 16. 25.
oil in the sinners flames, the recollection of that poison of Aspes, viz.
sin, that they did so pleasantly and greedily drink up. This then will be
gravel in their belly, a thorn in their eye, a dagger in their heart, and
torment in their bones, and fire in their bosom. Olim haec meminisse dolebit.
Sin in the remembrance of it, will be an everlasting ghost to the reprobate,
will keep the wound, raze the sore open, the corture quick, the wrack in the
extremity.

3. Consider what vast disproportion there is between the pleasure and misery
of a lust, its delightfulness is transient, Romans 5. 17.
a perfume that quickly will evaporate: how soon did our first Parents eat
their fruit; but the world to this day cannot rid it self of the miserable
consequence of that woeful banquet. As a lease is not writing an hour, but the
tenor of it will not be worn out in many years: the satisfaction of sin is
suddenly abortive, in the twinkling of an eye; but the weight, the guilt, the
enditement, the condemnation, the torment of it, is eternal. Ah! how Act. 12.
23.
marcessible the rose of sin; how sharp and durable the rod, that will be
turned into an everlasting Scorpion!

Now therefore, (not to spin out Quia deo nos totos and omni nostra debemus,
certe in infinitam ejus majestatem injurii sunt, and aeternam mortem merentur,
qui vel in minima re sanctissimam ejus voluntatem transgrediuntur.
the argument in hand any further) how should there be sudor and sanguis, sweat
and blood drawn out against every corruption; what prayers, sighs, tears,
strugglings, wrestlings against the inhumanity of sin, and cruelty of lust?
can thou hang in chains with flames scorching thee for ever?

Indeed the thoughts of eternity might put a stone into the sling to strike
dead Goliah-lusts: What for sin to damn me for ever, totally and finally to
disinherit me, and exclude me my Fathers presence to all eternity? Never to see
his face more? Rally such thoughts as these against the onsets of corruption.
As Caesar said in a battle he fought against one of Pompeys sons, at other
times he fought for honor, but then for his life. Ah soul! thou sightest for
thy life, thy Christ, thy portion, thy God, thy soul, thy eternity. Now watch,
cry, weep, contest against every sin, thy everlasting condition waits upon it.

The thoughts of eternity would inflame our love to Jesus Curist. He has
brought immortality to light: What argument 2 Timothy 1. 10.
of love would this be to the believer; he will crown me with unwithering
glory; with diamonds that Joh. 3. 16.
shall never receive dampe; the River of his blood shall bring me to an Ocean
of joy. Eternity of joy is but the purchase of Christ's death, he has Luke 22.
29.
bought a lease of glory that will never expire; we may magnify the Lord Jesus
for our endless, bottomless happiness that is to come, how sweet my Savior
who can immortalize my honor, and transform it into a neverdying dignity.
Every glance of eternity should spring new and more lively affections in us to
Jesus Christ: should warm the heart with more impetuous love. Our blessed
eternity Suscepit tristitiam nostram, ut nobis largiretur laetitiam suam. Aug.
is the primogeniture of Christ's merits, the rich result of his sufferings, the
glorious masterpiece of his philanthropie, his love to mankind. Joh. 3. 16.
Christ says there, God so loved the Omnia perpessus est, ut nos ab omnibus
liberaret; timuit, ut nos a timore liberaremur; doluit, ut dolores a nobis
abessent. Cyril.
world; so, as to send Christ, his beloved, to make a crown of immortality to
set on the heads of his people. How should our hearts bubble forth in sacred
adorations of, and divine affections to Christ, the great Patron of eternal
happiness, who has found out for us a mint of glory, that shall enrich us for
ever. If at any time thou find thy love to Christ decline, be in a swoone, or
surprised with some cold distemper, look down upon the sea of eternity, and
this ice will turn into a flame. Let all believers say, Thanks be to Jesus
Christ for eternity.

And consider Christ has bought eternity by temporal sufferings, and yet
without any injustice,

1. For his sufferings were equivalent to eternity, though not in the duration,
yet in the magnitude of them: what agony, what torment Isa. 63. 3.
was our Savior wrackt with, when he supposed his Father had forsaken him, My
God, my God, etc. his soul Mar. 14. 33.
was heavy to death; how deep were his Videmus quam graves dolores, and angores
etiam piis, quandoque sensus irae divinae incutiat, cum tamen non pro aliorum,
sed pro suis tantum peccatis doleant, and iram dei sentiant, cumque in poenis
illis deus non effundit totam iram suam, Isa. 78. 38. Infinitis ergo modis
major fuit moestitia in Christo, in quem peccata mundi erant conjecta, and in
quem totam iram suam Pater coelestis effuderat. Gerard.
wounds, how weighty his burden, how full of trembling his cup, when he lay
under the mountains of the guilt of all the elect? Therefore what was wanting
in time and duration, was made up abundantly in weight and measure; How bitter
were his tears, how painful his sweat, how sharp his incounters, how
dreadful his death, insomuch as he seems to decline the end of his coming into
the world; and he supplicates his Father to take off the fine and release him
from his engagement; nature in Christ himself seems to sink under the future
massacre, that God decreed, Act. 2. but man acted; so that easily ye may
discern the time of Christ's suffering will be compensated with the terror of
it, do but compute how many vials of Gods inexpressible, insupportable wrath
Christ drunk of, and the question is at an end.

2. For a second reply to this question, let it be considered, the blood of him
which was shed was the blood of him that was God as well as man, Act. 20. 28.
(...), the pure blood Heb. 12. 24.
of the omnipotent deity, so that the Ephesians. 1. 14.
divinity of Christ sheds an unreckonable mass of merit on his blood shed;
which has purchased; as many rare prerogatives for the Saints here, viz.
justification, sanctification, adoption, grace, supports, strength, the
Comforter, etc. which are the precious pledges of future and greater
happiness; so likewise, which is the sum of all, Eternity of glory with
himself. And Cant. 5. 5.
how should this argument set our hearts on fire in love to the Lord Cant. 1.
13.
Jesus, and make him lie as a bundle of Myrrh and Camphire between our
breasts? And we might well enquire, why might not heaven set with the Sun; and
our glory be overshadowed with a sudden night?

1. Our duties are short, momentary and transient, we are quickly weary Gal. 6.
9.
of well-doing: the golden chains of duty, how soon do we shake them off as
being burden some shackles, and unpleasant to the delicate flesh?

2. Our affections to Christ are short-breathed, quickly cold, the pulse of our
spiritual love soon beats faintly: and a sudden languour surpriseth our most
divine Anhelations. And

3. Our life is short in which we act for God, fight against lust, serve Jesus
Christ, Jam. 4. 4.
and are as flaming torches of zeal Isa. 2. 22.
and light in the world; and yet after Psalm. 39. 6.
this transient exhalation the Saints are Nemo tam Divos habuit faventes,
Crastinum ut posset sibi polliceri: Res deus nostras celeri citatas turbine
versat. Sen. in Thyest.
crowned to eternity; Vnde bone Deus! All this must be scored on the account of
Jesus Christ. He has added eternity to our lease of happiness: what exertions
of divine love should these considerations procure, how should they melt and
overcome the soul, dissolve it into affectionate admiration, and wound it with
wonderful affection, and make us not only his soldiers in magnanimous
puissance; but his spouses in conjugall embraces, to use the phrase of the holy
Ghost? how should the thoughts of eternity makes us look on Christ as the
fairest among women, Cant. 5. 9, 10, 11.
the chiefest of ten thousand, whose head is as fine gold, whose eyes are as
the eyes of Sane Christus solus, lacte lotus dici potest, quia solus candidus,
and albus inse, and alios dealbans, and candidans, a nullo tamen nisi a seipso
dealbatus. Del-rio. in Cant.
doves by the rivers of waters, whose cheeks are as the bed of spices, as sweet
flowers, whose lips are like lillies, droping sweetsmelling myrrh, etc. and so
forward, as the Spouse there draws the effigies and picture of our dearest,
sweetest, most lovely, most loving Savior. And always in the same beauty would
Christ appear to our souls, did they make eternity their study and
contemplation.

The thoughts of eternity would swallow up our sollicitous care for the
supplies of the creature. What shall we eat, or what Mat. 6. 31.
shall we drink, or what shall we put on? such thoughts, I say, would Quid
sericum? quae regum parpura? quae pictura textricu^? via haec floribus
comparari possunt. Hier.
drown these impertinent questions; they would indeed bring men in a better
esteem and liking of Providence; for what are all our provisions here? they
are but corn for the way, Genesis 42. supplies for travelers for to bring them to
their journeyes end. But the great Question is, Am I provided for eternity? to
spend here, and to starve for ever; to have wine here, and no water as Dives,
to eternity, why do I wrack my spirit? my candle will go out, if not by want,
yet by disease, and then comes eternity. Our Savior in Mat. Job. 7. 1.
6. urges many rare arguments to Omnia si perdas, animam servare memento.
stifle and smother the vain carking care of men; and to those may be
superadded this one more; What are all these provisions to eternity? there is
my life, this short breath here below is but a dying groan, a giving up the
ghost. Man is in a consumption from his birth, and all creature comforts do but
patch him up for a while, piece a ragged piece of flesh; and yet the frenzy of
men is strange, how Luke 12. 33.
do they torture their spirits to find a Mine for the present supplies, but
eye not, nor take care for provisions for eternity? Who lays up for the famine
of the soul? Our heads are filled with cares in pinching, and necessitous
times, how we should live in the world; when we should be more inquisitive how
we should out of the world, when death has landed us in eternity; for what
matters it, how short the stock of our preparations is here, where we are
breaking up house and departing every moment? A man that comes to an Inn, if
he meet with hard fare, course lodging, harsh and churlish usage, he is not
perplexed nor disquieted, for it is but for a night, and he shall away next
morning. Our securest and strongest habitations Jon. 4. 7.
here below, they are but as Jonas his goard, but for a night. Aeternis
inhianti, in fastidio sunt omnia transitoria. Bern.


But now the great question is, What glory we have banckt up in heaven, what
treasures we have laid in there, what riches, what revenues we have stored up
in unmouldring eternity? what do thou lay in for a tottering life, or wrack
thy thoughts to shore up the falling sinking temple of thy body? All thy cares
are but as the putting in of a little pin into an inch of candle, which will
suddenly fall into the socket. Carke for thy soul for an interest in Christ,
how thou shall live to eternity, that Mat. 6. 33.
is a condition, that understands not Primo spiritualia, posterius temporalia,
omnes lahores, and actiones nostras a regno dei ordiamur. Par.
the language of death or a Sepulcher. The life of man here is but a span long,
short and swift, then turn the stream of all thy care to unmeasurable eternity.
Here (in reference to eternity) care as much as thou will, summon all thy
thoughts, use all means, contrive all thy designs, torture thy intellectuals,
be as solicitous, as studious, as laborious, as full of holy fear, of
spiritual tremblings, as thou may, rise as early, go to bed as late as thou
please; and all this is but rare policy and rich ingenuity. In this to eat
the bread of carfulness, is the way to feed upon Manna for ever.

Did we but enlarge our Contemplations on our everlasting estate; with what a
holy indifferency would our souls be possessed, whether our cruse of oil run or
no, no further then what might supply our short journey, our short step to
eternity; how light then would the heaviest gold weigh in the balance of our
judgments? we do not usually hang our Arbours with Arras or Tapestry, because
the flourishing boughs which make them soon wither and decay. And why should we
spend our choysest strength, our most vivacious spirits, our most precious
time, to preserve, enrich, and make delightful that temporal life, which
every moment may be extinct and blown out? All those creature-accommodations,
riches, delights, etc. which are the bribes of our cares, the tormentours of
our thoughts, the wrack of our mind, they are but as the diet, and the
banquets of a condemned prisoner, they only keep him alive till the sad day of
his execution. Like Belshazzars riotous banquet, Dan. 5. 2, 3, etc.
which was not so much the preparations of his festival, as of his funeral;
for, as historians report, he was slain that very night. The thoughts of
eternity would banish many unnecessary cares from the solicitous and
unsatisfied soul. And let this double consideration surprise your thoughts.

1. Our care for the world, is nothing to our errand into the world. Thou were
not created to study the lump of clay thou carriest about thee, but to
glorify thy Creator, to be the Gal. 2. 20.
herald of his praise, the engine of his glory, the witness of his honor,
Psalm. 17. 15.
to execute his commands, live upon his promises, and to breath after Joh. 4.
32.
his everlasting presence. This was the work God sent thee into the world for,
to advance the fame of his Majesty, adore the eternal being and to publish the
transcendencie of all his glorious attributes. Ah consider! a piece of clay,
thy body; a winged piece of duration, thy life; a Romans 17. 17.
few floating enjoyments, thy present inheritance, were never set out by God,
to be the task and the toil of thy care and animosities.

2. Nor is thy care for the world any thing to eternity. Thy eternal condito^n
Ibi erit fames maxima, erit enim tanta inopia, ut damnati neque guttam aquae
poterunt habere. Bonav.
in glory shall want no supplies; in misery shall find none, not a drop of
water to cool nor to cherish. The rich man shall not find his barnes in
eternity, though happily with much care and sweat he obtained the filling of
them. Nero shall not find his Crown in his everlasting condition, though he
tortured both brain and conscience to wear the imperial laurel. Eternity
explodes all creature-enjoyments, the Saints in glory shall live at a higher
rate then the mean and perishing provisions of the world. 1 King. 17. 6.
Elijah does not want now a Raven to be both his cook and his caterer. And the
damned in their endless misery, shall want the crummes that fell from their
own tables.

In a word, carke for thy soul, professor, think of the gulf of eternity.
This moldy bread thou carest for will be no food there. Our everlasting
condition has no to morrow, no years of famine or plenty; therefore provide
for thy everlasting soul; get thy name engrossed in the lease of glory with
Gods hand, and the Spirits seal to it; and then Providence will either spread
thy table here, or bring thee to thy Fathers house, where thou shall keep an
everlasting festival. And let this additionall consideration come into the
account, viz. That those outward enjoyments, which men's cares are fixed upon,
and many are so sollicitous to gain and atchieve, may occasionally prove the
unhappy murderers of the soul, and drown it in everlasting perdition. How
often do Joh. 14 2. Deuteronomy. 6. 12.
the riches and delights of the world effascinate the mind, blind the
understanding, Dan 4. 30. 2 Chronicles. 26. 16.
wantonize the spirit, in^briate Luke 12. 21, 22.
the affections, sear the conscience, Luke 18. 23.
and hearden the heart of the possessors of them, and open (quatenus
instrumenta, as instruments) the floodgates of eternal wrath upon them? Then
the whole amounts to thus much, that eternity well weighed will cure the
frenzy and distraction of men's spirits for sublunary contenements.

The thoughts of eternity would make us admire Christianity. Only the Christian
profession acknowledges the state, 2 Timothy 1. 10.
and the way to eternity. What fancies and forgeries do other professions hold
forth and acknowledge? The Jews look for a Messiah to come, as if the way to
heaven were yet to be found out. The Turks have a tradition and frantic
opinion, that wicked men at the great day, shall carry their sins in satchels
after their Captain Cain, and such like ridiculous inventions. Diverse of the
Pagans suppose another temporal life to succeed this, and therefore give their
dead clothes, and money and other appurtenances to bear their charges there.
Only the Christian profession can unriddle the mystery of eternity. How many
thousands shall taste of eternity of misery, that never heard of an eternity of
being; this perpetual estate is only written in a Christian character; the
knowledge of Christ is our only conduct to the Mar. 16. 16.
knowledge of eternity. Gospel knowledge Purgatorium est duplex; unum, in quo
est poena damni and sensus alterum in quo est poenadamni tantum. Bell. Nemo
manet in purgatorio ultra december annos Domin. a Soto.
can only lead us to the mount to behold a future Canaan, and teach us how to
escape a future Tophet. True Evangelicall profession brings us to the shore, to
view the Ocean of eternity. How do the Romanists themselves defile and
adulterate the doctrine of eternity, with their fiction of Limbus Patrum,
Purgatory, Limbus Puerorum; and many of their guilefull Non est desperatio, aut
metus gehennae in purgatorio; est carentia divinae visionis. est poenasensus
inflicta: est poena ignis. Bell.
yet gainful inventions? Only the doctrine of the Gospel unmaskes the riddle
of our boundless and bottomless eternity, gives us a map of heaven, draws a
landscape of glory, opens to the believer the wardrobe of eternal beatitude,
Rev. 21. 16, 17, 18, 19, etc. And in Evangelicall story how lively are the
flames of hell described; how clearly the pains, horrors, despaires,
everlasting doomesday is set down, and at large deciphered? And they said to
the rocks, Rev. 6. 16.
and mountains, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on
the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Thus only the Christian faith
gives a prospect of evernity; which is one of the articles of its belief.

The thoughts of eternity would be a good preparation for death. Such thoughts
would Observetur suavis mutatio, quod cadentibus mors non est miseria, aut
perditio, sed transitur ad vitam aeternam. Chemn.
conduce much to cast us into such a frame, that death should not be the womb
of our fears, but of our joys; not our affrightment, but our contentment; our
dying day should be reckoned our wedding day; the day of our dissolution, the
day of our coronation. The thoughts of eternity Toll tunicam hanc graviorem,
and da mihi leviorem. Greg.
would put us upon getting an interest in eternity, which would familiarize,
meet with, and sweeten death it self, and put the soul upon enquiries after it.
How would our everlasting condition well studied, frame us to a serious,
patient and joyful embracement of death? that the gracious expectant having
sent his heart to heaven before, looks on death but as a good wind to carry him
to the Ocean of a joyous eternity. Now we may hoise sail upon that sea, he had
been long in the meditation of. Nay, what wrestlings with God for assurance,
Phil. 1. 23.
for one smile upon the soul in the face of Christ, for God to open his pardon
and let him read it? what desires that God would draw the curtain, and let the
soul see Jesus Christ, what diving into, and searching after tokens of love,
broken pieces of the ring, and former experiences would the thoughts of
eternity produce? And all by way of preparation for death.

This endless state well balanced in a serious, and continued meditation
would make the soul restless, and in a constant motion till death, which
originally is a curse as being the fruit of sin, were turned by God into a
blessing, and had the stamp of Christ upon it; how would the soul be
unsatisfied, till it saw death clothed 2 Cor. 5. 8.
with the arms of Christ, as his Herald to go before him into the Court of
glory; till he observed death to be only the golden bark to bring the soul to
the shore of a blessed eternity. And such meditations would make the soul to
keep Court every day, to call conscience to the bar, and to arraigne irregular
thoughts, to put Job. 14. 14.
the heart upon more recluse searches, and all to facilitate death, and to
sweeten the approaches of it. When a soul seriously and in its coolest thoughts
considers eternity, how does it look on death as its greatest Crisis, Mors
ultima linea rerum.
that which will turn the scale one way or the other, either land the soul safe
in an eternal rest or harbor, or shut it Psalm. 49. 8.
within the grate of everlasting imprisonment, from whence there is no
redemption? Such seasonable contemplations Tota vita est meditatio mortis:
would fill the soul with cares, solicitousnesse, preparations for,
expectations of, reckoning upon death; as the Swedish King before the day of
battle, what ordering of his army, encouraging his Soldiers, multiplying his
prayers, pouring out his tears before God, he knew not but he might die the
next day. So eternity well contemplated would make us weigh, dive into, study
the nature of death, the original, the suddenness, the certainty, and above
all the consequence of it, it kills or cures for ever.

In a word, the study of eternity will make death,

More familiar to us: we cannot study the Sea of eternity, but we must
contemplate on the wind of death, which is but the style over which we go
either into the wilderness of misery, or into the green pastures of
happiness. Our daily Contemplations of our everlasting condition, would make
death a household servant, which is the common road to eternity (as more
hereafter). Death would not be strange in its stroke, were it not so in our
meditations; thoughts of eternity step beyond death. And to familiarize death,
would be the womb of these three great advantages.

1. Were death familiar to us, it (...). Arist.
would break the force of death, and take away the horror and terror of it,
the stroke would not be so grievous, so frightfull, so full of execution,
dangers the more invisible the more intolerable, the burden is the lightest
that is well poysed beforehand. Sinners that put far off the evil Amos 6. 3.
day, as the Prophet speaks, how tremblingly, and with what horhour do they
behold the ghost of death?

2. Were death familiar to us, it would arm us against death; we prepare more
rigorously for the enemy in the field, then for the enemy in the ambush. Men
fight not a duel without a Second; nor should we meet death without our
armor, a pardon in our bosom, an interest in Christ, the great seal for glory
and heaven. Therefore men so little prepare for death, because they so little
think of death; it is so little in their provisions, because it falls not in
their contemplation. But did we meditate on eternity, those very thoughts would
be a constant passing bell in our ears, a deaths head before our eyes, and
alarm to our souls; the thoughts of death and eternity being inseparable. But
this familiarizing of death it would u^^^ske the ambuscado of it, and for^^e us
against it. Have I found thee O my enemy, as the 1 King. 21. 20.
King said. And

3. Were death familiar to us, it would strangle many fruitless and frothy
thoughts and designs; hear the passingbell; when thou look upon the gaudy
picture of the world, cast an eye upon the deaths-head. Remember that sentence,
Luke 12. 20. This night thy soul may be taken from thee. Had we a deaths-head
in our study, our coffin, our windingsheet, it would smother many a carnal
design, sinful contrivance, vain dream of the world, peevish resolution, and
frothy Contemplation.

The thoughts of eternity would make death more expected. We should not Mors
sanctorum non interitus, sed introitus. Chrysostom.
only think of death, but wait for it; as the Prisoner for his keeper to open
the prison-door; as the Sentinel for the morning, or the poor tired watchman
for the dawning of the day: such thoughts look on death, as the traveller does
on a muddy plash at the entrance of a famous City. Observe Jacobs speech, Genesis
49. 18. when waiting the good hour of death, I wait for thy salvation O Lord.
This is the foord the Felix ante obitum nemo supremaque funera. Ovid.
Christian is to pass over, the narrow and slippery bridge. The contemplative
Christian, whose meditations prey upon eternity, does but wait when the clock
will strike, when death will come, that is the alarm to eternity; Death is but
a Watch with an Alarm. Death is but the Rev. 6. 8.
pale horse which carries every one out of this world into an everlasting
state. (...). Dlato.
So the confiderate Christian winding up his meditation to this bottomless
state, is always upon his watchtower, when the postern gate of death will
open; as the passenger waits at the shore side for the Packet boat, so is
death to mankind.

The thought of eternity would make death more facil, and easy, and pleasant.
2 Cor. 5. 1.
When mortal diseases batter this tabernacle of clay we carry about us, viz.
our bodies; meditations of eternity, look on Christ now storming the body to
take the soul. As one in an enemies Garrison rejoices to see his own party
coming to storm the Town and release him. All death pangs (says eternity well
studied) do but lanch the soul into the Ocean of eternity, these distempers
open the gate to eternity; they rend the vail of the temple of the body, and
let fly the soul to eternity; death to the contemplative Christian, is not so
much his storm, as his style; not so much his tempest, as his triumph; in
death, the Saint cries Victoria. The wicked wretch, whose cogitations have 1
Cor. 15.
fled from eternity, nor ever would sail on that sea; with what difficulty does
he wrestle and struggle with death? How is he dragged to dissolution, as to
execution; how would he bribe, stop, suspend, and divert the stroke of death,
could all his Quando impii moriuntur, in inferno posi^i sunt, and mors depascit
eos. Ger.
strength, allies, greatness, and revenues purchase it? There is nothing more
terrible, ghastly and frightfull to him, then the dreadful app^rition of
death; and the great reason is, because he has set the skreen of sin and the
world between him and eternity; this makes him he will not to the block, he is
arrested by death, he is passively the patient of death; the sinner, I say, who
has not minded Psalm. 49. 14.
his everlasting condition, nor laid up for it, he falls into the arrests of
death. But the Saints, whose word all his life time has been eternity, and who
has been in all his conversation pronouncing this shibboleth, he falls into the
embraces of it, he may be said, as Christ was, Joh. 10. 15. To lay Morte
tabernas nostras pulsante non terremur.
down his life, to lay down his head upon the cushion of the grave, and sweetly
to sleep being rockt to it by death. Now what sweetens and facilitates death to
a believer? only he has studied eternity, and has got the scarlet thread in
the window, eternity Josh. 2. 18.
is assured to them. The Saint whose heart is landed at the stairs of eternity
before, when he comes to die, he does but as the Sun break thorough a cloud to
shine both gloriously and eternally; and indeed the body of a Saint is but the
dark cloud, the curtain drawn before his shining soul. Rally therefore, and
muster up all your thoughts, and let them meet with eternity; this is the way
to perfume the winding sheet, to strew flowers on the coffin, and to make death
it self smile, and become a pleasing presage to a more pleasing crown.

The thoughts of eternity would make death more welcome. I long, says the
Saint, whose heart before is in heaven, to come to the stage of eternity; he
Phil. 3. 20.
is in a longing fit, impatient as the longing woman, and smiling with joy Rev.
22. 20.
and triumph on approaching death; cries, welcome that parting blow that brings
me into the everlasting embraces of my dear Redeemer.

CHAP. XVII.
Use of Exhortation.
That we would make sure of Eternity.

THere are two great ends, Why the womb delivered us into the world; the one
is to adore an eternal being; the other, to obtain eternal life; and where
the first is rightly performed, the second is infallibly accomplished. It was a
good question the young man proposed, What shall I do to inherit eternal life?
Luke 10. 25.
And indeed the answering of this question calls for all our cares, fears,
troubles, time, duties, industry and what ever falls within the verge of our
highest and most extended capacities. Things that are most precious, we most
secure, and expose to them to the least hazard, our jewels are locked up in our
cabinets, our gold sealed up in the coffer. Now the excellency of man is his
soul, the excellency of the soul is life, and the excellency of life is
eternity, and with what ambitions should we graspe the diadem of a blessed
eternity? What artifices did Si peccandum est, pro corona est peccandum.
Absalon use to secure his Fathers throne to himself? he lies with his Fathers
Concubines in the sight of the people, 2 Samuel 16. 22.
a most odious practice. What 2 Samuel 13. 9.
ways did Ammon use to secure his beauteous Sister for his lustful embraces?
he bolted out all that might interrupt his unnatural incest. What Luke 12. 20,
21.
thoughts did the Rich man take to secure his plenties, the overflowing
abundance of his fruits? he erects new barnes, and leaves not his Corn either
a prey for the birds, or a morsel for the Gleaners. And the Barbarous Turk he
kills all his younger Brethren, and sacrifices them to his bloody ambition, that
he might secure the Crown to himself. And shall we be Omnia ei salva sunt cui
salva est aeternitas.
less solicitous in our fears, cares, our holy policies, and sacred stratagems
to secure etetnity, that everlasting blessedness which is the supreme gift of
God, the reward of Saints, the honor of Angels, the rich provisions of heaven,
and the total of all Christ's merits and bloody passion? How can thou (dear
Christian) be satisfied, or thy heat chilled, and ambitions surfeted, till thou
have obtained the reversion of a glorious eternity, and God has entailed on
thee a crown of 2 Pet. 1. 10.
immortality? Review with thy self the bowels of Gods pity, the voice of
Christ's blood, the desperateness and activenesse of Satan's malice, the
shortness and uncertainty of thy own life, the accusations of thy guilt. Nay
the very present glory of the triumphant Saints, all call upon thee to make
sure of eternity. Can thou sleep on the main mast, with the dreadful Ocean
under thee; or take up thy lodgings in the enemies field? What do thou else,
when thou have nothing to show for eternity? Consider thy danger and
disadvantagein this. Those who can clear up no propriety in a blessed eternity,
may be considered under a double notion.

I. As sinners; and with what a multitude of dangers is every Christlesse soul
encompassed? He is but as a wanderer in the wilderness, who may be a prey for
every beast; he is out of all protection. God may suffer,

1. Satan to destroy him; had not Job been a righteous man, his disease Job 2.
4.
probably had been his death, and Satan had not only been his tormentour, The
danger that every wicked man is in.
but his executioner; every wicked man is Satan's prisoner, and who knows how
soon he may be his prey?

2. God may suffer the Creature to destroy him, as the Lion did the Prophet, 1
King. 13. 24.
the Bears the children, and the 2 King. 2. 24.
worms King Herod in all his magnificent Act. 12. 23.
pomp. Every creature is up in arms against a wicked man, and wants only the
word of commission to fall on and destroy him. Gods wrath, and his
wretchlesnesse can turn the persumes of the world into ponyards, as the Pope
who died with joy.

3. God may suffer him to destroy himself, as Judas did, and to become his own
assasinate. It is only the untired, boundless patience, and infinite
long-suffering of God, that keeps the wicked man's knife from his own throat.
Every sinner, did not Gods mercy throw a chain over him, he would make his
grave in his own wounds; he would with Saul fall on 1 Samuel 31. 4.
his own sword, or like the Jaylour Act. 26. 27.
be ready to fall a sacrifice to his own bloody distemper. For God withdrawing
his providentiall care from a sinner, what should hinder, but that nature it
self should become a stepmother?

4. God himself may destroy a wicked man by an immediate execution, as he did
Aarons two sons; Lev. 10. 2.
these unhappy brethren who were brethren not only in nature, but in iniquity
and misery, who as they came from the same womb, so they found the same death;
I say, these brethren offered up strange fire but once; but a sinner is
continually offering the strange fire of his lusts, and therefore God himself
may break him in pieces as a Potters vessel.

5. And lastly, God may suffer good men to destroy him. As Phinehas, who
quenched the lust of that adulterous couple Zimri and Cosbi with their Numb.
25. 14.
own blood. The good man's zeal and the bad man's fury may either destroy the
wicked man, he has no security, his life is a prey for any that God will
suffer to seize upon it. He is outlawed, a condemned man; every tile on the
house, every thief on the way may dispatch, him and this is to be considered,
his death and his damnation go both together when he dies, he dies for good and
all, he dies everlastingly, thus for the sinners danger.

That every moment he is ready to be disrobed of the flesh, turned out of the
sinking cottage of his body, and to be disinherited of all his patrimonies
here; and he knows not whether he may not beg with a vain importunity, a drop
of water to all Luke 16. 24.
eternity. How then should every of us ask the question, as the Spouse in
another case the, Spouse asks, Did Cant. 3. 3.
ye see my beloved? so our enquiry should always be, Is my name written in
heaven, have I an interest in Christ, will the Lord make over glory to me, did
I ever enjoy the smile of God, which is the porch to a glorious eternity? I
say, rest not, feast not, delight not thy self, sleep not till God has
morgag'd the lease of a joyous eternity to thee. We should not sleep quietly,
till God had put the crown of immortality under our pillow, till we were sure
of an eternal rest. And now on the contrary, the assurance of eternity, did
God deliver the deeds of glory into our possession, how would it wing duty,
fill the sales of grace, of faith, love, joy, etc. sweeten affliction, Jam. 2.
2.
put a comeliness on the blackness Cant. 1. 5.
of trouble, make Christ's yoke not only easy, but pleasant and complacentiall.

In a word, How would a certainty of eternal glory make the Saints condition
here, even while he Genesis 47. 9.
writes Pilgrim, to be truly Angelical?

Now to reinforce this Argument, that I may bribe your industry, to get
something under Gods hand for thy future eternity, let it not seem a digression
to supply your thoughts with some few Considerations.

Thou can have assurance of nothing on this side eternity: Death will strip
thee of all thy enjoyments, the grave shall find thee as bare, as the womb
delivered thee, only with this Job. 1. 21.
difference, the womb delivered thee Quod dicitur nudus revertar illuc,
intelligitur in illum statum quem habuit in utero matris. Aquin. in Job cap. 1.
enricht with a life, landed thee alive in the world, but the grave shall
receive thee only a cold dead piece of clay, covered with a winding sheet.
Death is called an uncloathing, 2 Cor. 5. 4. We that are in this tabernacle d^
groan, being burdened; not that we would be uncloathed, that is, not that we
would die. I say, Death is an uncloathing, because it pulls off all outward
things from a man, it pulls off his raiment, his riches, his land, his honors;
yea death uncloathes the very bones, our flesh quickly wears off in the grave.
There was little difference between Job on the dunghill, and Job in the grave,
in point of poverty, only that dunghill kept him a prisoner fettered with
various miseries, and the grave loosened him, and enfranchised him to eternal
liberty. Death will rob and strip thee of all thy glittering titles,
flourishing revenues, pleasing dalliances, and sweetest, most indeared
relations, will impoverish thee of all thy claims and fruitions thou did
sport and pride thy self with: the dust of the rich man and the poor, the
honorable and the ignoble promiscuously mingled, will take away all the
distances, degrees, and differences between them. Death will bury indifferently
the Crowns of Kings, and the shackles of Prisoners, the roabs of Princes, and
the rags of beggars, the Gallants bravery, and the peasants russet, and the
Courtiers luxury, and shall cast them all into an equal denudation and
poverty. Pliny in the Natura noverca unum hominem animantium cunctorum alienis
velat opibus: caeteris veria tegumenta tribuit, testas, cortices, coria,
spinas, villos, setas, plumam, pennas squammas, pellem; trunceos etiam arboris
cortice interdu^ gemino a frigoribus and calore tutata est: hominem tantum
nudum, and in nuda humo, natali die abj ecit. Plin. Not. Hist.
Preface to the seventh book of his Natural history, complains, and does as
it were chide with nature it self, for turning man into the world in such a
helpless forlorn condition, as if men were dealt more hardly with, then any
other creature, the birds of the air, or the beasts of the field. I shall not
commend the reluctance of this Heathen against the Providence of God; but shall
only say, the womb does not (as before was hinted) deliver us more helpelesse,
naked, forlorn, then death does make us, or the grave shall find us. Death
shall fully Absalons beauty, and spoil Herod's bravery, shall destroy Agags
delicacy, and put an end to all Solomon's temporal felicity; death is a worm
that will consume all the felicities on this side 2 Samuel 18. 14.
the veil; but only the riches within 1 Samuel 15. 31, 32.
the veil, as they are unsearcheable, and admirable, so they are immarcessible,
Act. 12. 23.
and inamissible. Therefore make sure of eternity, all other things are
fledged, and will escape our embraces; only the revenues of glory, the Crown of
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
the honors of heaven we shall Et ibi vita sine morte, veritas sine eriore,
felicitas sine perturbatione.
find for ever. Neither death nor confusion shall make the triumphant Saint
look pale, or wither the magnificent preparations of a blessed eternity. Aug.
Enchir.


eternity; That a chief part of the Angels blessedness consists in this, that
they Mat. 18. 10.
are confirmed in their eternal happiness; Aeterna electio beatorum
Angelorum, est praedestinatio, qua deus ab aeterno Angelos quosdam ex gratia
constituit in communione sui perpetuo conservare, and in bono in quo eos
creaturus erat confirmare ad beatitatis sempiternae fruitionem. Polan.
that Jesus Christ is their Mediator sustentationis, as our Divines speak, and
that they are incapable of following the cursed example of their fallen
companions, but are settled for ever in their triumphancies; I say, this is one
of the chiefest pearls in the Crown. Now let us strive after, and make it our
great plot and design to obtain this Angelical happiness. Let the nobleness
of the argument be a golden spur to you to pursue this service. It is the
Angels happiness to be confirmed in a glorious eternity; and let it be your
sollicitousnesse; it is their felicity, let it be you duty. Those blessed
Spirits, who never eclipsed Gods glory with one single offense, rejoice in
this, that they are sealed to a blessed eternity. And shall not we endeavor
after, pray for, draw out all our designs to attain the accomplishment of that
happiness, which runs 1 Timothy 5. 21.
parallel with the felicity of the unsinning Angels viz. to get a bond for Luke
20. 36.
heaven. This is, to wit; (to make sure of eternity) to be in an equality with
the Angels.

To lose eternity is not only a naked privation, a mere loss, a disappointment
only of happiness. When we lose heaven; we do not only as the mariner Mat. 25.
12.
lose our good wind, which Mat. 16. 26.
would bring us to the harbor, but the loss of eternity compriseth all Jon.
14 16.
varieties of misery; privative miseries, the loss of God, of Christ, of the
Poenae damnatis secundum corpus, and secundum animam infligentur. Corpus quidem
poenis variis quoad omnes sensus afficietur, and anima secundum omnes suas
potentias cruciabitur. Gerson.
soul, of the Comforter, of the Saints company, of what we have enjoyed, of
what we did enjoy, of what we might enjoy; positive miseries, torment of soul,
anguish of mind, agonies of conscience, exquisite, dilacerating, corroding
torture of body, (as more ^ully hereafter). The loss of eternity it
comprehends accumulative, exaggerated, multiplied, pullulated calamity: Misery
from God, from S^tan, from the good Angels, from our selves. As Condemnation
does not only deprive the Prisoner of the liberty of his person, the credit of
his name, the enjoyment of his possessions, the refreshing of his friends; but
it exposes him to the burden of his chains, the reproach of the world, and to
the torment and shame of a sudden execution. And therefore let this fire your
hearts to secure eternity, else ye will be exposed to as many varieties of
misery, as there are sparks in the surnace, or wounds in your own conscience.
The loss of eternity includes all possibilities of future misery. David
complains he Psalm. 44. 22.
was killed all the day long; but in losing eternity we shall be killed to all
eternity.

The neglect of this duty of making sure our eternity: It disappoints the end
of our creation, the offers of grace, the promises of the Gospel, the voice of
Christ's blood, the calls of heaven, and the constant courting and incitation of
the Spirit within us: All these with an unanimous voice cry out to the soul,
let your first work be to secure your everlasting condition, the methods Luke
19. 42.
thods of divine Providence, the sweet Rev. 2. 10.
yet several varieties of Gospel dispensation, Joh. 3. 16.
the striving, patience, waiting, Luke 22. 29.
importuning of God himself, cry out, Make sure eternity. The promises of God
are nothing but bonds for eternity; the offers of grace invite us to eternal
glory; the rules, counsels, directions by a holy manuduction lead us in the way
to eternity: therefore the Gospel it self is called eternal, Rev. 6. 14. And
this omission of this duty will cast a reproach and defamation on all the
indulgence of divine compassion.

securing eternity, is not only plausible, but feasible. Smiles from God may be
had, an interest in Christ may be gained, a work of grace may be acquired,
Romans 8. 16.
some token, some pledge of Gods love may be purchased, some internal Ephesians. 1.
4.
testimony and witness may be suppena^d 2 Cor. 1. 22.
by prayers, and tears, and expectation, some privy seal, private bond for
eternity may be found out; and therefore let all thy capacities be De electione
sua unusquisque nostrum securus esto, securita e non carnis sed spiritus, non
sensus and experientiae, quae est alterius vitae, sed fidei qua pe^severamus in
charitate Christi ad finem. Polan. Synt.
wound up, heart, hand, time, talents, strenght, to get a bond for eternity.
The Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 10. calls upon us, to make our Calling and Election sure.

Now Election is our eternity a priori, and Glory is our eternity a posteriori,
the one before the creation of world, and the other after the dissolution of
it. God, I say, imposes it upon us as our duty, to make our election sure; and
therefore our election to Psalm. 84. 11.
eternity, and our possession of it may be made sure: God lays not commands on
us which imply impossibilities: No, but as election, so glory may be
ascertained; the spring of mercy is in election, and it bubbles out in calling,
and runs to and fro in obedience and faith, and at last it loses it self in
the Ocean of glory. So that its possibility of accomplishment should be a good
inducement to duty, and how sweet a smile from God gained at last, (as most
certainly it may be, unless the default lie in us) which God shall morgage to
thy soul, for thy security of eternal blessedness will be, I may admire, but
not depaint or describe.

And that this branch of the exhortation may not be incomplete, let me carry
the torch before you in some few directions.

Be earnest in prayer: Prayer perfumed in the blood of Christ, has the key of
the Treasury door, where all blessings are stored up. It is an omnipotent duty,
so God himself says, Isa. 45. 11. Concerning the works of my hands command ye
me. The Prayer of faith can draw the curtain from before Gods face, scatter the
cloud between him and the soul, cause God to hold forth the scepter of grace,
and can induce Romans 5. 5.
Jesus Christ to shed a dew of love upon the soul, fervent, invincible,
importunate, believing, irrefistible prayer, can as it were take the ring from
off Christ's finger and put it upon the suppliants. This Protomartyr Stephen,
Act. 7. 53.
when he was breathing out his last breath in holy prayer, God draws the
curtains of the heaven and shows him his glory, and Christ at his right hand.
Prayer as it can banish that scrupulous muntinie of the soul, so it can make
way for a soul-satisfying smile. And pray for these three things.

1. A soft heart. 1 Pet. 3. 16.


2. A serene conscience. And 1 Timothy 1. 5.


3. A spirit fired with zeal. This threefold cord hell it self cannot break:
these three divine characters are Christ's mark for glory; the pledges of that
love he will be drawing out to eternity.

To assure thy eternity,

Labor after a real and rich faith, a faith which continually breaks out, and
sparkles forth in vigorous acts, and the spark of faith, will at last be
turned into the flame of assurance, which is is only praemium fidei emeritae,
the compensation of a long-fighting and experienced faith: Assurance it is the
triumph of faith, its jubilee, its present hallelujah, its consummation, the
Spirit at last, as the Philosophers stone, will turn the silver of faith into
the gold of assurance. Faith is only assurance in incunabulis, in the cradle,
and assurance is faith with the crown. Thus Job after all the conflicts,
wrestlings, and exercises of his faith, with the loss of his estate, the
malice of a Devil, the cursing and cursed temptations of his wife, the scoffs
and hypocrisies of his friends; he at last breaks out into a triumphant
assurance, I know my Redeemer lives, and Joh 19. 26.
that with these eyes I shall see him, etc. Causa instrumentalis fiduciae est
fides, and fidei verbum.
Faith will sprout out and bloffome forth into a greater certainty. And
therefore pray, read, hear, and use all those means which usually generate and
produce faith.

That thou may find some evidence for thy everlasting condition, study
holiness, and exactness of life. Thou can not walk with a trembling heart,
even foot, and watchful eye, and yet miscarry; I speak not of a moral
unblameablenesse, but of an evangelicall holiness, that is, when we study to
tread surely, and walk in-offenfively upon a threefold account.

1. Obedience to God. 2. Love to Christ. And Joh. 14. 15.
3. Pity to our own souls.
Now Sanctification is the echo of Election, Holiness the blossoming of
happiness, and Piety the dawning Bona opera sunt via ad regnum. Nostra
conversatio in coelis est per vitam coelestem, quia in terris vitam agimus
puram, qualem Angeli agunt in coelo. A Lap.
of felicity; and therefore a holy conversation is called a conversation in
heaven, Phil. 3. 20. While we live purely, and walk closely with God, we draw
a map of heaven, we live more like Angels then Men, we are as corporeal
Angels, we enjoy heaven upon earth two ways:

1. In a pure conversation.

2. In spiritual consolation. 2. Pet. 1. 8. In a holy life, we follow Christ
in the same tracke to glory. Thou 1 Cor. 11. 1.
may read thy eternal life in thy Prove. 24. 16.
spiritual, and see Vestigia beatitatis in vestigiis sanctitatis. I speak of
holiness ratione partium, non graduum, of parts, not degrees, else heaven door
would be shut to all, but God expounds desires after perfection for the
attainment of it. So you may see Gods smile, and your own crown in the glass
of a holy life, and so thou may assure eternity to thee, by beginning heaven
before thou come to heaven.

Often enter into the withdrawing room of thy own heart, and search for some
tokens of love there. Thou may read the intentions of Coelum non tantum sit
super nos, and juxta nos, and circa nos, sed and intra nos.
Gods concerning thee, in the impressions of thine. Men need not climb up to
heaven in a vain curiosity to search the records and register book, to see
whether their names be pricked down for glory. They may dive into their own
souls, and see Gods will concerning them in his work upon them; as the Mariner
in the dark night, that he may find whether he be near land or no, throws
down his plummet, and happily he observes himself near the shore, but it is not
by his eye, but his plummet; throw down the plummet, make a curious, narrow,
impartial, diligent search into thy own soul, and see what humility, what self
denial, what sin-abhorrency, what affectionatenesse to Christ, what ravishings
of the Spirit, what love to the Ordinances, what zeal for Gods glory, what
contempt of the world, what sympathy with the afflictions, and desires after
the society of the Saints, etc. And if thou find any impressions of grace,
any spiritual work, any saving, savory, distinguishing operations upon thy
heart, that the Spirit has been there with his cure, thou art in the port of a
glorious eternity already, thou may see the face of God in the water of
thine own heart. If Christ sit Ephesians. 3. 17.
in the throne of thy heart here by a Confirmavit quasi sigillo promissiones
suas deus, dando juxta eas pignus futurae haereditatis, gratiam sc. qua nos
vexit, and signavit in filios dei. Chrysostom. Theod.
work of grace, thou shall sit in the throne with him, and enjoy the weight of
glory; the work of grace foreruns the ways of glory; grace and glory differ
non specie, sed gradu, in degree not kind, as our Divines speak; here the
Spirit is a refining spirit, above a ravishing; the Spirit does seal, Ephesians. 1.
13. as well as sift it; does win to Christ and so to glory, Col. 1. 27. as well
as wean and winnow it from sin; the Spirit is the pawn, as well as the Ephesians. 1.
14.
purifier of the soul; grace is but the dawning, heaven is the noon day, 2 Cor.
1. 22.
death will blow the bud of grace into the flower of glory. So the Psalmist
joins grace and glory together, as indeed they are individual and
inseparable, Psalm. 84. 11. grace does but usher in glory, grace is but the
greener fruit of heaven. So that to get security for heaven and eternal
felicity, is to search for some privy token in thy own soul; see the prints of
Jesus Christ there; and he will know his own hand, when death shall summon thee
to him.

Electionis nostra ad viram aeternam comes est crux and afflictio a mundo, sed
ejusdem comes ^st and victoria certa. Polan.
Labor after not only a patience under, but a joyfulnesse in afflictions, and
trouble. It is the Apostles advice, Jam. 1. 2. and the character of a
Christian, the heir of the promises, to triumph in tribulation, to carry
Christ's Cross with gladness, and not wearisomenesse: therefore Martyrdom in
the Absit mihi gloriari nisi in cruce Christi, crux est scala heatae
aeternitatis. A Lap.
primitive times was called Corona Martyrii, the Crown of Martyrdom, the
Cross going before Crown. It is the Apostles argument, Romans 7. 18. If so be
that we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified together; observe the
together, inseparably, unquestionably. If we drink of the cup of gall with
him, we shall likewise drink of the cup of gladness with him; if we fall into
the Martyrs fire, we shall likewise enter into the Masters joy; when a believer
is filled with alacrity in suffering, it is probable he sees the crown before
him, as Paul, Col. 1. 24. Wherefore we rejoice Col. 1. 24.
in our sufferings; and why? one great Paulus ostendit quomodo se gerat in
afflictionibus, non solum animo sorti, sed laeto and alacri. Dav.
reason was, those Martyrdomes stormed heaven for him. The troubles and wounds
of a Saint here, they are those skarres, which shall be his trophies for ever,
and his sighs shall be turned into everlasting persumes. So that one means to
secure eternity, is to labor after life, courage, magnanimity and alacrity in
sufferings, which are those bloody badges of Christ, which he will cure and
crown with eternal felicity; if thou followest Christ in via arctiore in a
rough way, thou will find him in patria uberiore, in a glorious home. Therefore
do not decline, shift, find out methods for the evasion, and escape of
necessary afflictions.

CHAP. XVIII.
Use of Exhortation.
That you would entertain a right notion of Death as an inlet to Eternity.

WE must look upon death, as the common passage, as the Posterne gate to
eternity, the Straights to the Ocean; the Heathens they fancied concerning
death, that after death there was Charon to waft them over the River Styx, etc.
But this is most certain, Mors est vehiculum morientis.
that death only lands the soul upon the coast and shore of eternity, it is
only the short bridge to an everlasting condition. It is but the twinkling of
eye when man dies, but he awakens either in eternal woe, or welcome. Death
only is the dying Mors non est obitus sed abitus.
patient, either Sledge or Chariot to carry the Prisoner, or Courtier to
misery, or everlasting felicity.

Indeed, some men's passage is more rough then others; some men die with more
torment, and pain, and distemper then others, but yet death is but the common
road to eternity. It is strange to observe what notions most men have of death.

debt of nature, that common engagement Job 1. 1.
which every one must discharge, and Job 14. 14.
for which death will arrest every one of us. And so men suppose that having
paid the debt, they are clear for ever, as if there were no eternity behind the
hangings. And therefore they pant not after a Christ, nor search the rols of
heaven for a pardon, nor wrestle with God for a smile; but conjecture that
surrending according to deaths summons, there is an end of all their troubles
and triumphs; they confine all their care and heat to cocker and supply a
subsistence here, and when they come to die all their debts are paid. What
stupid ignorance are most men infatuated with, to suppose that because death
gives them a discharge of their life, it should therefore give them a discharge
of their sins? Let such desperate sinners conceive, that death immediately will
clap up their souls in everlasting darkness, and at the resurrection their
sins shall drag their worme-eaten bodies from the gaol of the grave to receive
the sentence and doom of a miserable eternity; and Mat. 5. 26.
they shall find death, not to be the discharge, but the beginning of their
debt, and that it shall deliver them into such pursevants hands, Mat. 18. 28.
as will be plucking them by the throat to all eternity.

exit of all their perplexities; they wait for the good time, and do imagine
that after Mors corporalis est privatio vitae corporis facta per animoe se
parationem ab illo propter peccatum. Polan.
all their restlesnesse, heats, disturbances, disappointments and agonies in
the world, they shall take up their Inn, or rather their home in the
Sepulcher, and shall lie as free from trouble, as their marble statues, the
coffin shall ent^mbe all their vexations; they suppose they shall go to bed,
and to rest in their winding sheet. Ah! do such vain men conjecture, the sin
which is the great Promoter, Wolf, Lion, Tiger of the soul, will cease its
pursuites when the sinner comes to the grave, or will be bribed by the
rhetoric Heb. 9. 22.
of a worm? Sin to a wicked man is like a tormenting disease to the poor
helpless patient, which will not be enchanted with good words, but will be at
the heels of death, as the messenger of Gods wrath, to lay hold upon the soul
immediately, and nonsuite it to everlasting loss and misery. These deluded
sinners, who suppose that death will crucify all their troubles, and
obliterate all their calamities, do but take up their rest in a shadow, death
shall not rock their souls asleep, though it cast their bodies into a
temporary swoon.

thing of course, and they cry, we must all die sooner or later. And it is the
inquiry of the world when any die, more what he has left, then where is he
gone; the inquest is rather after his wealth, then his soul. Most men look upon
the setting of their lives, as we do upon the rising of the Sun, as a thing
common and inobservable. And is this all, deluded Sinner? It is true, when the
Modus moriendi, the way of dying, is strange and prodigious, then greater
impressions are made; but otherwise the thing it self is but the subject of a
talkative discourse. But let the Vulgar of the World steep their thoughts in
this meditation; death determins us to the throne, or the wrack for ever. It is
either Christ's herald to proclaim concerning the deceased Saint, Thus shall it
be done unto Esth. 6. 11.
the man, whom the King delights to honor, as Haman cried before Mordecai:
Or else it shall be the Sergeant of God sent to arrest the sinner without bail
or mainprize to under go the stroke of eternal vengeance.

In a word, let us ralley up the follies of most men into these four ranckes:

1. The sick patient, he cries out for death, to take him out of the furnace of
his torment, that his disease and distemper may be at an end. But let me tell
the Patient, if he is sick of sin, death will be a bad Physician, it will
heighten his disease: turn the rod into a Scorpion, will turn the mild soft
distemper, imagine it in the highest torture the Patient undergoes, into a
miscellany of all torments, let them be boyld to the height.

2. The discontented sinner, whose disappointments and losses in the world fill
him with agonies and perplexities, he hanging upon the Cross, stretches out
his arms to embrace death, and supposes that it will ease him of all his
pangs and vexations; but fond sinner, death to the wicked, is but a Goal
delivery, and how fretfull will thou be, when thy soul shall be disappointed to
eternity?

3. And the old, decrepit, bedridden sinner, whose body is a common hospital;
who has a bundle of diseases, and a systeme of distempers about him, who has
more diseases then veins; so that if Galen had lost any disease to treat on, he
might find it in him; he courts and calls for death, and waits for one issue
more, among all the rest, an issue out of the world. But does such reumatique,
flegmatique, decrepit, frantique sinners suppose death will be a crutch to keep
them from falling into hell? Surely those diseases which attend nature in the
socket, in the declension of it, if grace have not cured them, death shall
turn them into insupportable maladies.

4. And the tired worldling who has gone himself out of breath in the
pursuance of world affairs, he looks upon death as a quiet and retired chamber
to rest in. But let such a one consider, if in all his pursuites he has not
followed an interest in Christ, and made that the object of his sweat, he shall
take up his lodging in a bed of eternal flames.

Not to amplify the argument further, Death does not strangle the sinner, or
stiffle the Saint, but only serries them both over to eternity. But it shall
land them at a different place, as may be manifest upon the review of these
particulars.

And first let us observe what death is to a believer.

Job 14. 14.
a believer dies, God does but take a flower out of the wilderness, and plant
it in his Garden, or take a rose out of the field, and put it in his bosom.
Joseph's change from the Prison to the Genesis 42. 12.
Throne, from being a Prisoner to become a Prince; and Jobs change from Job.
41. 39.
the dunghill to a reduplicated condition, were but the pregnant prefigurations
of the Saints change by death. It does only change the copy, the state, the
countenance of a child of God, and make him who looked pale with trouble and
misery here, look fresh with glory and beauty for ever. Death to a Saint only
turns the scale, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
and makes it weigh down with a weight of eternal glory. As the Moon after its
change comes to its full; so death it places the poor, inconsiderable,
derided, scoft Saint, whose body it may be is covered with soars, and soul
beleaguered with agonies, and name with reproaches, and estate with losses, in
the throne of boundless felicity, and sets the Crown of immortality on his
head.

Si tanta and tam suavis est a^^ha, quam deus hic suis largitur, quanta erit
hareditas ipsa, quam suo tempore praestabit? A Lap.
of the Saints Apprentiship, it manumits the Saint to eternal liberty. Here
all the Saints are like Jacob, they serve for their Ruchels, and death puts a
period to their servitude, to all their longings, groanings, sighs, to all the
harshnesse they endure, all the toils they sustain, all the bread of
adversity, Observa quod Christus non dicit, ut serviant mihi Sancti, sed ut
videant gloriam meam. Musc.
and water of affliction they feed upon.

In a word, Death frees the believer from all, not only his labors, but from
his mean allowances, as he is an heir under age, an heir of promise (observe
the word promise) and puts him in possession of the full transcendent revenues
of everlasting, never-dying honor and glory. Death is the Saints Secretary to
write his releases.

Joh. 17. 28.
it opens the door for the Saint to come in to God, and a conclave of Angels:
the life of a Saint here is but an unkind wall, an injurious lattice between
Christ and him; now death breaks down this wall, and opens the wall for the
Saints entry to lie in the everlasting embraces of Jesus Christ, it Cant. 2. 14.
plucks up the hedge that the Saint may Mors piorum nihil allud est, quam (...)
ad Christum; laetabatur Patriarcha Jacobus, cum videret currum a filio Josepho
missum; and nos contristabimur quando coelestis Joseph currum nobis mittit quo
in coelum evehamur? Ger.
go over to his beloved, it draws the curtain that the believer may have a
full view of the beauties of Christ, it does as it were pluck the mask from
the face of Christ, to present him in his sweetest loveliness to the Saint.
Death takes away all obstructions and impediments of an absolute and entire
fruition of the Lord Jesus; while we are here, we may receive a letter from
Christ now and then in Gospel communion, but death lodges us in the bosom of
our precious friend. Death is the fiery chariot to bring us to the Court of
Christ.

world, (...), the quiettation of a Saint. A learned man observes, that (...),
rest, is the same with that which the Hebrews call (...) refrigeration or
refreshment. And so death indeed, is nothing but the unlading of a Saint of all
his burdens, the closing after the sunset; it lays the body of a believer in a
sweet sleep for a while, and brings his soul into the banqueting house of In
altera vita deus sanctos ab omnibus miseriis liberatos, in vera and prepetua
quiet, laetitia, gaudio, and gloria constituet. Chemn.
eternal felicity. Here the poor believer is scorcht sometimes with the heat
of Gods wrath; sometimes with the storming of Saints malice, sometimes with the
boiling of his own corruptions, and sometimes with the toils of the affairs of
the world; but death takes the Saint out of the heat, Sed in Christo, iis qui
in ipsum credunt, mors est somnus, quies and refocillatio. Id.
and brings him into the chearing shade of endless happiness. The Saints
dissolution shall unchain him from all his distemperatures and oppressions he
was fettered with here, and shall lay him at rest in the refreshing, ravishing
bosom of Jesus Christ.

to usher the Saint to the throne. Here lies the indulgence of the Lord Christ,
and one precious fruit of his blood, That death which was the effect of sin,
the monster from the womb, part of the curse which sin drew upon the head of
mankind, is now blossomed into a rare blessing, and is under Christ the Saints
best friend, the honorable Ambassador of Christ to tell the Saint of an
approaching crown.

But now let us traverse the dark side, and see under what woeful notions we
must paraphrase upon the death of the wicked.

Hab. 3. 2.
against a sinner, is full of mixtures of mercy and pity, is attempered with
bowels and compassion; has its intermissions and breathing times, has its
pauses and stops; but death shall cast Rev. 6. 17.
the sinner into the furnace, whose heat shall not be allayed by any mitigation.

doomesday, the firstday of his dreadful account; as soon as ever death
divorces Heb. 9. 27.
vorces the soul from the body, and gives Seneca and Philosophi aiunt; Mors
homini natura est non poena, immo vero ipse dico; mors homini poena est, non
natura. Corn. A Lap.
the parting blow, God passes an immediate sentence of eternal death upon the
widowed soul, and the Lord begins the execution of the deceased sinner, which
shall never be overtaken with a close or end. Then the sinner shall begin to
reap the fruit of all his evil ways, and passively discharge every
particular debt. Then all the wounds of a wicked man's conscience shall fester,
and ranckle with intolerable pain, and Gods executions shall find out every
vain thought, and die it in the blood of the soul, death immediately Mors est
peccati comes, filia, and stipendium.
in its stroke summons the sinner to the bar to receive the sad sentence and
doom, which shall be to all eternity in the execution; vengeance does but wait
for a sinner till the clock of death strikes, and then it seizes on him, as an
everlasting prey.

Indeed the soul being the nobler part of man, and so the more blameworthy as
casting it self away upon the account of sin, and likewise being the principal
agent in all offenses, for the poor body is dragged and animated by the soul to
all miscarriages, that gives life and will, and love to all corporcall
iniquities, the body of it self being but a dead piece of clay. I say, the
soul being thus the grand agent in all sin, it receives its doom first, and
falls under its woeful execution, and death does cast it upon the spikes of
immediate and everlasting ruin.

As the Poet says, Mors ultimalinea rerum; and I may in reference to the
wicked, solaminum too.
days are buried in the grave with him. No lightning of comfort follows the
thunder of his death: when once the sinner dies, there is no hope left, of ever
enjoying again a smile from God, applause from the world, refreshment from
relations, supplies from the creature, sweetness from ordinances, or ever
lying in the shade of any relaxation. In dying the sinners sun is set, with all
its beams of mercy and consolation, the darkness of the night of death, as
Joh. 9. ^.
death is called sometimes, shall bury all color of satisfaction or ease to
the sinner.

In a word, to close this Chapter, Death in the general, is not man's
conclusion, but his initiation to joy or torment, rather the budding then the
withering of his being. In death the 2 Cor. 5. 8.
soul is neither must out, nor rockt asleep; death is but the Alarm of the
soul to triumph or tribulation. Death is not a gulf, but a gale, not to drown
the dying patient in, but for him to pass thorough; it can no more bury the
soul, then the grave could detain the body of Christ. Finally it is man's
summons, which cites both Saints and sinners before God, the courtiers to
attend and wait on his throne, and the prisoners to here and undergo their
doom.

CHAP. XIX.
Use 2. of Terror.
AND if our future condition be eternal, What terror should it strike into
the hearts of all wicked men? What do ye mean fond sinners? Can ye hang in
fiery chains for ever? Remember your everlasting Mat. 3 12.
condition, your eternity, the unquenchable fire. Can ye undergo a fit of the
stone for a thousand years? Or lie upon the wrack for a million of ages? Can
ye lie upon the points of needles for more ages then there are atoms in the
Sun, or drops in the Sea? Can ye suffer scalding lead in your wounds, in the
raw gashes of your consciences for such a duration? And what is this cold
picture of misery to the damneds eternity? Look with amazement Ephesians. 3. 17.
on your future calamity, unless by faith you hide your souls in the Mat. 25.
41.
wounds of Christ. Pray consider, how dolefully will thae dismal voice sound,
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire* The Martyrs fire turned them into Quam
tristis* vox est, judex cum dixerit, Ite!
ashes, but the damneds shall not, they shall be scorcht with everlasting
flames, be ever in the act of execution. Can O aeternitas, aeternitas, tu sola
ultra omnem modum supplicia damnatorum exaggeras.
ye endure, ye delicate, soft, effeminated sinners, who now cannot endure the
buffeting of gentle blast of wind; I say, can ye endure to be stung with
Serpents for as many ages as there are hairs on your heads; or to drink the
poison of Aspes, for as many centuries as there are sands on the shore, if ye
can go on in your licentious vanities. Tell Quis dicere valeat, quae impiis,
and male viventibus tormenta sunt praeparata. Cassianus.
me sinner, when thou have spent millions of years in torment, what an agony
will it be to recollect thou have not spent a moment? Should thou lie to
eternity on a bed of down, how tedious, how wearisome would it be, how then
can thou lie on a bed of flames? How wretched sinner can thou hear the
doleful knell of an Adesse intolerabile, Abesse impossible.
everlasting funeral? And will those transient glances of sin and pleasure
thou have enjoyed here, make eternity spend the more delightfully; shall thy
enjoyments, the bed and the banquet, thy lust and luxury, in rumination of them
be any pastime in hell? Remember if thou art Christlesse, thou art to be pressed
to death for ever, for ever. And therefore awaken, ye drowsy and secure
sinners, lest suddenly ye fall into infinite death. Is it not more noble and
plausible to swim in tears, then melt in flames? The Saints under Potior est
p^^nitentia, quam poena.
the Altar cry, How long Lord, holy and true, Rev. 6. 10, 11. But they shall
wear white garments; but how dolefully shall the damned cry, how long? Nec qui
torquet, aliquando fatigatur, nec qui torquetur, aliquando moritur. Bern.
Their tragedy shall never be acted, their painful wounds shall increase as
fast as they are made. Let those voluptuous sinners, who please themselves with
varieties of musicks and harmonies here, and as the Prophet speaks, who chant
to the sound of the Vial, and invent to themselves instruments of music, Amos
6. 5. ask themselves the question, Whether they can hear the scrietchings,
roarings, and cursed blasphemies of a damned crew for ever.

Now to prosecute this particular use, I shall handle it under two general
heads:

1. I shall open the extremity. 2. The eternity of the damneds torment.
For the extremity of the sinners future misery, it will be demonstrated, if ye
will cast your thoughts on these five things considerable.

Duplex damnatorum poena est in gehenna, nam and mentem urit tristitia, and
corpus flamma. Bern.
double notion. There is a twofold universality in the Reprobates calamity.

1 An universality of the Patient; every part of the damned shall undergo
insupportable torment, every artery, and vein in their bodies, every faculty
and power in the soul, shall be excoriated, and tortured with the pincers of
Gods wrath.

2. The souls of the reprobate which have been chief in sinning, shall be chief
in suffering; and as the joys of the soul surpass the pleasures of the body,
so shall the misery of the soul, the calamity of the body. But let me give you
a more particular anatomy of the souls torment.

1. The understanding shall be cruciated Poenae damnatis secundum corpus and
secundum animam infligentur. Corpus poenis variis quoad omnes sensus
afficietur, anima secundum omnes suas potentias cruciabitur. Gerson.
and wrackt, in that now it more clearly sees its vanity, observes the
sweetness of Gospel-mercy, and the pretiousnesse of the offers of grace. Now
the understanding observes too late, how dreggish and drossie those lustful
embraces, sinful dalliancies, worldly profits and delicacies were, he has
lost heaven and the soul for. Now it sees more clearly how beautiful Christ
was, how tender his bowels and melting his compassion, against which he spurned
with so much refractory stubbornness. Now it animadverts how much of hell was
wrapped up in the pill of the most plausible sin, too late it observes the hand
of the Devil in every temptation; and God in wrath shall wipe all dust away
from the glass of the Reprobates understanding. And what Scorpions will such
animadversions be to the perplexed and pained understanding?

2. The Will too shall be upon the invill of misery; how will it then macerate
the wills of the damned, that now it has no pleasure to feed upon? No sins to
cherish or pursue, no grace or favor to abuse or withstand.

The will of the Reprobate that here was too free in its embraces of sin and
vanity, in hell, in eternity shall be fettered and chained to a necessity of
despair and blasphemy. The damned shall will nothing but self-destruction and
murder (which yet shall be impossible) and God-provocation, how to un throne
Christ, crucify the Angels, and if possible drown the Saints triumphant in the
same deluge of horror and confusion with themselves. The wills of the
Reprobates shall be as so many vultures to make every thing a prey.

3. The affections of the reprobates shall be tormented even in this, in having
Affectus, animae pedes.
nothing desirable, and they which have been the feet of the soul, shall be the
fiends and furies of it. And although here they bathed themselves in the sweets
of sin, and the creature (For ah! How did Ammon 2 Samuel 13.
love his Tamar, Judas the bag, and 2 Samuel 16. 1, 2.
Absalon the crown?) yet these very desires in eternal misery shall be the
vermin, the plague, the horseleeches of the soul. With what horror shall the
understanding behold its cursed and viperous affections, which drink up the
poison, that now causes so much smart?

4. And the memories of the damned, those woeful treasuries of all
opportunities lost, all mercies slighted, time misspent, sins committed, favors
abused, Infandum reginajubes renovare dolorem. Virg.
shall be scorcht and wrackt with the wrath of God; those dismal registers and
records of Gods justice, and the souls own folly, shall keep fresh, vigorous,
and lively, the torments of the damned in a constant reviewing of the causes of
them. And then all things acted in the flesh shall come into mind, and fall
within the hold of this cursed repository, the memory. Nay those very sins
that on course, without study or artifice had been forgotten by the sinner here.

5. So the conscience shall not only be a thousand witnesses, but a thousand
Devils to the damned, shall be a perpetual worm, corroding lacerating, Mark.
9. 48.
and branding the reprobate; then its wounds, and checkes, and scrietches shall
be scrued to the height. It shall in eternity be awakened from 2 Timothy 4. 2.
all its searednesse, stupidity, and Continuus erit conscientiae remorsus, and
assidua peccatorum perpetratorum ruminatio in anima. Chemn.
swoones, and shall feed its own torments, it shall not sleep in hell. All
those artifices, and wiles that the unconscionable sinner has used to bribe,
flatter, and smother conscience, shall cease and fail in eternity. There the
pangs, agonies, convulsion fits, and Dan. 3. 19.
perplexities of conscience, which here as firebrands were a present hell to
the ghastly sinner, shall as Nebuchadnezzars furnace, be turned into a hotter
flame. In the everlasting condition of the damned conscience shall neither be
gagged nor charmed, but shall be Vermis rodens est morsus conscientiae
perpetuus and continuus ex peccatorum recordatione or tus, rabida quaedam
displicentia, and infructuosa poenitentia, angor cordis maximus, and nunquam
interruptus. Ger.
an ever-killing Basiliske to the reprobate, and its tempests shall never be
blown over, as earthquakes never cease. The sinner which sinned away all
conscience here, and seared it by habitual and constant wickednesses, shall
find it in hell, and it shall be sensible and tender enough, and the wounds of
it shall be ever kept open to receive the impressions of divine wrath. It shall
reverberate^ all the sins of the damned upon the raw soul.

And now here I am enforced necessarily to dilate my self something, and to
open to you, what a corroding, painful worm the conscience shall be to the
tormented reprobate. I shall only paraphrase a little upon this morsus
conscientiae, aching, tearing, gnawing, biting of conscience, and delineate this
rigorous disease in some few particulars.

Omnia mala in memoriam recipiet conscientia. Orig.
be never fell within the glance or eye of our strictest observation, those
thousands of ranks of guilt shall appear; not only those internal corruptions,
those vipers which lodged in our breasts here and never broak the prisons, but
those extrinsecall abominations, deeds of darkness which clouded the sun it
self. All then shall arraign the soul at the bar of a tortured Luke 8. 17.
conscience. Here the caitiffe miscreant is sometimes eased by oblivion, but
then all his vanity and violence shall stand as so many ghosts before him.
Conscience shall be but as the clear glass to see all his deformities. One sin
shall not be behind the curtain, shall not be annihilated or concealed; the
Damned sinner shall not do to his sins, as Rachel did to her Genesis 31. 34.
Gods, hide them with a lying excuse. No, conscience in eternity shall give up
all, the whole beadroll of sin. Those numberless numbers of evils, which
would silence all Arithmetic to give the total sum of them, shall
particularly and singly not only be observed and animadverted by conscience,
but give fresh and everlasting wounds to the tortured miscreant. Every wanton
glance, proud look, loose gesture, vain thought, unprofitable word, every
transient if unholy imagination, shall not only be within the sad prospect of
conscience, but be continual tortures to it.

in their greatest aggravations. Then conscience shall Luke 19. 42.
feel what it was to refuse Christ, to neglect heaven, to pride the body, and
lose the soul. Every extravagant thought in ordinances, those Term times for
the soul, every misspent minute shall be scrued to the highest. Then will come
in, what funshines, what Heb. 2. 3.
showrs, what offers, what means, what manna the prodigal and frantic sinner
has trampled upon. The conscience shall see all its guilt in bloody colors,
in their just amplifications; not as here they are palliated by Satan, and
misrepresented Genesis 3. 5.
by the world, curiously and cunningly extenuated by the sinner self. Every
sin^^^ ^ll then be known to the conscience to be able to damn the soul,
dishonor the infinite God, and shut men out of glory; and sin shall then be
aggravated with two dreadful examples.

1. Of Satan's Angels, how sin, and for ought we know, but (...) sin,
discolored their glory, and sanke them into perpetual contempt and misery,
and this will lash the conscience with Scorpions.

2. Of the misery of eating one apple by Adam, and that it should ingulf all
posterity in one common desolation, this likewise will fetch blood from
conscience.

Then indeed shall all sins against Scholastici docent morsum vermis, long
superare ustionem ignis. Ger.
mercy, means, menaces, light, love, checkes, chidings, prayers, protestations,
appear in their genuine colors to the sacrificed and tortured conscience.

viz. in eternity, shall remember all its sins as mixed with Gods wrath. All the
sins of the Reprobate shall be as Samsons foxes having Jud. 15. 4, 5, etc.
firebrands at their tails. Here the sinner remembers sin notionally, and God
seems to conniv^^^ them, but in eternity every sin shall (...) remembered, and
it shall be big with vengeance. Every sin shall fall on and storm conscience
fired with Gods indignation, shall be a granado, a fireball in the soul. All
recollected sins, (as all the sins of ^^e damned shall be recollected) shall be
envenomed with punishment; every vain thought shall have its sting, its bullet
in it, and every idle word edged with Gods wrath shall excoriate the soul.

unpardonable, as being for ever incapable of forgiveness and remission.
Conscience shall then look upon every sin as died in grain, that shall never
Vermis conscientiae tripliciter lacer abit, affiget memoria; sera turbabit
poenitentia, and to quebit angustia. Innoc.
lose its color, its blackness, its bloudinesse, as that guilt which shall
never be entombed in oblivion. Of all the sins the consciences of the damned
shall be burdened with, not one, the least of them shall either fall out of the
remembrance, or the revenge of the Lord. The massacred conscience shall look
upon all its guilt, as unremoveable for ever. Not one sin of ignorance shall
ever be overpassed; the close venereall sin shall never lose its poison; but
the conscience shall see its self ever to be tortured with the vultures of its
own sins. Here indeed in this life, the awakening of conscience is a singular
mercy, and a rich privilege, and it does accelerate and hasten the sinner to
fly to the City of refuge, Phil. 3. 9.
the blood of Christ, whereby he may be freed from his stinging Serpents, his
sins, and cured of the intolerable wounds of conscience; but the awakened
conscience in the eternity of misery shall look on the deluge of its guilt, as
that not one prop of it shall fall, or ever be dried up.

But I cannot yet put a stop to my Contemplation on this subject, viz. What a
worm conscience will be in Animus aeger, and ^ale sibi consci^s semper est
^nfernus. Luth. ^i diabolus non ^aberet malam conscientiam ^sset in coelo. Id.
hell? and the rather, because it may be the discussion of the woeful misery of
the conscience of the damned in eternity, may awaken the Conscience of some
Reader here.

Further to amplify the misery of the tormenting conscience of the Reprobates,
let be considered,

The intimacy of these gripes. The soul shall be put into an everlasting agony.
Conscience is a bosom friend, Erinnys Et quantum spiritualia bona excedunt
corporalia, tantum and spiritualia mala.
in cord, a flame in the spirit. It is the fury in the closet. Oftentimes here
the conscience is on the wrack, when none but God is the spectatour of that
misery; but in eternity conscience shall be fire in the inward man, a soul
torment; it is not supplicium carnis, but supplicium cordis, not the punishment
of the skin, but of the soul. And this aggravates the torment of conscience, it
shall cruciate, fester, and wrack the more noble, more spiritual, more
capable, more sensible and apprehensive part of Man; the soul can drink in more
punishment and more fully feel the burden and weight of it. Its capacities are
more extensive, which is easily discernible in that it can enjoy the
beatificall presence of God himself. Ah! what measures of torture can this
sublime piece of immortality take in?

continuednesse of its torment. No sleeping moment. Nec mo^^^ur vermis, nec
m^ratur, sed semper corrodit peccatorem.
It shall be an ever awaking Lion, always devouring, yet never killing. No
rest, no ease, no slumber, no pause shall mitigate the pain of conscience in
miserable eternity. These Scorpions of sin and guilt shall be ever tormenting
the conscience. No intermediate quiet; the storm is perpetual, no vacation.
In hell there shall be darkness, Quocunque aspicias obviabit peccatum. Basil.
but no sleep. Conscience shall be always a flaming torch.

justness of its torment. Ah faith conscience, I might have been in glory,
installed in eternal beatitude, but my sins have righteously crushed me into
these flames. And this will be the very poison of conscience it self. The
sinner suffers not as a Martyr, but as a malefactor; he is burnt in the hand
as a thief. The Martyrs though they were the sacrifices of the cruelty and
tyranny of men, yet how serene and calm, how full of peace and joy were their
consciences? they were as crystal seas within them; and the reason was,
because they dyed not for their sins, but their sanctity, as the witnesses of
Gods truth, and not as Act. 24. 16.
the stains of Christ's Gospel; but this shall be the sting in the worm of
conscience to the damned, they reap the miserable fruits of their own sinful
deserts. This will inflame the reckoning the loss of offered grace: And now
the wind shall ever blow contrary, they die justly, as the prisoners of Gods
wrath, and not as the heralds of their own innocence.

infiniteness of them. The soul shall be lasht with sin and guilt, which is
all venom and rancour. Sin is the sharpest sword when edged with Gods wrath;
the fire indeed scorches sorely, but it is a creature, there is something
Conscientia mala, non solum recordationem, and scientiam perpetratisceleris and
maleficia ob oculos ponit; sed etiam dolorem and anxietatem comitem habet.
Chemn.
of good in it, but sin is all deformity, all mischief, as the consciences of
the damned shall be lasht with a scourge made up of the cords of innumerable
sins. Ah! who knows the torment that one sin sets home by the anger of the
Lord, can create in the soul? How smarting the lash of one crime? What
palenesse of face, anguish of spirit, trembling of knees, terror of heart did
the handwriting on the Dan. 5. 2, 3, 4, etc.
wall, the repercussion of an evil conscience cast Princely Belshazzar into?
Neque ullum erit peccatum quod non proprium suum ibi habeat cruciatum. Ger.
what furies will the reflections of conscience be, when awakened in everlasting
and irrecoverable misery?

innumerablenesse of its torments, when every sin shall fetch blood at the
soul. Compute the evils of one day, how many thousands it is stained with, and
what then are the sins of man's life? and yet every sin shall have its full
blow, (as before was hinted). Every sin in specie, in the kind of it, Pride,
Excess, Covetousness, Romans 2. 9.
Formality, etc. and every sin in individuo, individually considered, every
act, ebullition, nay conceiving of Pride, Vanity, Hypocrifie, etc. shall strike
upon the hot iron of conscience, and there shall be no warding of any one blow,
the soul shall be naked to it, and God shall see the execution done.

envy shall produce; that shall likewise put conscience on the wrack. The
Fathers make much mention of Livor damnatorum, the envy of the damned, to see
the Saints crowned and themselves wrackt, the Saints living in the embraces of
Christ, and themselves lying under the wrath of the Lamb, and it may be both
lived under Mat. 8. 11, 12.
the same means, enjoyed the same mercies, were wet with the same Gospel
showers; this likewise shall keep open the wound, that when others are arrived
at the harbor, they are shipwrackt upon a woeful eternity.

madness and folly, to come to be tortured by so many vultures, and for what?
to please a Mat. 16. 20.
piece of clay, for the spending of a few moments, and those interrupted by
manifold afflictions, and imbittered with various troubles; the greatest
jollities of this world are sowred and overtaken with many disturbances; our
sweetest musicks jar, all delights below have their distasteful pauses; Prove.
13. 14.
and how will this torture conscience to undergo the frowns of a God, the
loss of a Crown, the perishing of a soul, the divorce of a Christ, the malice
of legions of devils, and the executions of eternity, and all for the paint of
a few specious, but fallacious, but fugacious satisfactions, and accommodatious?

And thus you see what those torments are, which shall torture the consciences
of the damned to eternity.

faculties shall ever be upon the wrack; so likewise the bodies of the
reprobates in all their parts, shall be scorcht in the flames of eternal
vengeance. Could I, as a skillful Anatomist by a rare dissection open every
considerable Patietur etiam corpus, non qua sentire quid sine carne non potest
anima, sed qua necesse est, illam etiam carne sentire. Tertul.
particular in the body, I might then fully describe the universality of its
torments. There is not a vein, not an artery, not a muscle, not the least and
most latent part of the bodies of the damned, but shall be torn with
intolerable torments and anguish. Those curious pieces of workmanship, the
bodies of the damned, (for so they were in point of formation) which the
Psalmist looked upon as Psalm. 139. 26.
the subject of admiration and wonder, shall after their resurrection be but
the common slaughter-houses of pain and punishment.

1. The heads of the damned shall then be fuller of pains, then here they were
of plots, those forges of covetousness, Ad patiendum societatem carnis
expostulat anima ut tam plene per eam pati possit, quam sine ea plene agere non
potuit. Idem.
lust, ambition, etc. which oftentimes in this life were tortured to beat out
and accomplish wicked and facinorous designs, shall feel the inexpressible
surprisals of Gods everlasting displeasure, and their sinful impostume which
they labored with here, shall break into eternal pain and agony. And all the
paint of that ensnaring beauty, their faces were comely with, shall melt away
in inextinguishable flames.

2. And so the hands of the damned, which it may be, here must not be Mat. 3.
12.
besmeared or sullied with any soil, but must be sweetened with the perfumed
glove, and enriched with the sparkling diamond, which here could not think to
graspe corruption, shall be burnt with the hot iron of Gods eternal
indignation. Those hands of the wicked, Isa. 33. 14.
which here were the boisterous executours of Will and Passion, the common
receivers of bribes and usury, the manual instruments of manifold wickedness,
shall feel the corroding pain of eternal flames.

3. The feet of the reprobate, which here have been swift in running to
mischief, as the wiseman says; which Prove. 6. 18.
have chaunted after the vial, as the Prophet speaks; which have often Amos.
6. 4.
posted to execute the commands of the inordinate will and sinful affections,
which have pleased the wanton soul in its measures and dances, shall in
eternity be fettered with the burning irons, and bear the shackles of
everflaming wrath, and be copartners with the rest of the body in a common
execution.

4. The heart of the reprobate, which here has been desperately wicked,
hereafter in eternity shall be intolerably tormented. Here it has been the
cage of uncleanness, and hereafter it Jer. 17. 9.
shall be the furnace of misery, and every lust it has harbored, shall be
Jer. 5. 27.
turned into a Scorpion, an Aspe, a Mat. 15. 19.
Fury; here it was the sink of all those venomous principles the sinner acted
by; and hereafter it shall be the Sodom which shall be ever consuming Genesis 19.
per tot.
with fire and brimstone, and those very corruptions which here checkered the
sinner, shall hereafter cruciate him; and what here was his pleasure, shall in
hell be his torture. And so all parts of the body shall be wrackt in a
perpetual conflagration. Then all the haughty looks of a sinner shall be taken
down. How little will the flames of hell respect the loveliness and beauty of
those bodies which here they were painted with? but as death and the worms did
not reverence the feature of their delicate bodies, so neither will the flames
of eternity spare their comeliness. And let these three things be subjoyned to
this Argument.

together, not by way of succession, of priority or posteriority. Here indeed
diseases run from one part of the body to another, and as some parts are full
of, so others are free from pain: But no part of the bodies of the reprobate
shall escape the seizure of Gods wrath, and hell flames; the vengeance of God
shall be searching, Mat. 25. 41.
and tear every vein of the damned. In ignem aeternum est totaliter, non tantum
corpus, sed and totum corporis.
All the members shall suffer in a common destruction. There shall not be one
sinew unstretcht, it shall not be with the members of the body, as with the
sentinels, that one should relieve another; but as there shall be no
relaxation, so no exemption.

All the parts of the body shall be tortured with the extremest pain. Indeed
happily here some parts of the body have been more forward and froward in sin
then others, but in eternity every part shall be pullied up, and scrued with
the extremest rigor, and in the most insufferable perplexity. As the Father
speaks, Adesse erit intolerabile. The most choice, tender, delicate parts of
the body, which here, it may be, should not suffer the discourtesie of a gentle
blast, shall in hell Nunquam dei oculos, memoriam, manus, effugere posset
pecator. Theoph.
be excoriated and unbowelled by unspeakable and inexorable severity. Those
sost and curious parts of the body which the mimick Dames and proud Gallants of
the world have indulged, and enshrined in so much bravery, shall in eternity
suffer the most bloody, tragical and everlasting execution; nor shall the
Ladies vail, or the Curtizans mask secure their beauty, when they shall have
no other looking-glass to see themselves in, but the glass of Gods severe and
eternal wrath, but the bodies of the most dissolved and effeminated sinners
shall be wrackt with a general torture. Here age and diseases can wrinckle
their loveliness, and in eternity wrath and vengeance shall take away all ease
and mitigation.

without the least consumption of them: Miseries shall not wast them, shall
corrode them, but not consume them. Here diseases do not only tire the spirits,
but waste the body; the face loses its color, the stomach its appetite, the
knees tremble with feebleness, and the flesh melts away. But though every part
of the body in eternity shall be parched and scorcht with consuming fire, yet
nothing of its Heb. 12. 29.
strength, or capacity to endure torment shall for ever be abated; for could
the parts of the body sink, and gradually consume, the whole in time would
fall into an extinction, which is a felicity, God will never give the grant of
to the damned reprobate.

parts of the bodies, and faculties of the souls of the damned, shall be
tortured with misery for ever: so all the senses shall bear their part in the
inexpressible doom. Those galleries which men so delightfully walk in here,
those windows and perspectives of the soul, through which the sinner often
espies the Bathsheba whose beauty enthrals him; those senses which sinners have
so studied to bribe and gratify, Esau his taste, Genesis 25. 30. Herod his ear,
Act. 12. 23. Ammon his eye, 2 Samuel 13. 6. etc. I say, these senses, which have
been the inlets of sin, the eye of Pride, the taste of drunkenness, the hearing
of curiosity, vanity and error, etc. Those senses which have been the spies of
temptation to find out the bait, the panders of the heart to gratify its
lusts and ambitions; the Nihil est in intellectu, quod non prins fuit in sensu.
Arist. and alii.
false and treacherous sentinels of the soul, shall in the dungeon of eternity
not only be imprisoned from their pleasant liberty, and recreative
satisfactions they here enjoyed; but be filled and fed with those miseries and
distasts which are most noisome and abominable to their susceptible capacities:
as more particularly,

1. The sight shall be cruciated and afflicted with many ghastly and
distasteful objects, Nihil nisi tremendum, Oculi cruciabuntur Daemonum aspectu.
Ger.
nihil nisi horrendum, nihil nisi eavendum, objectum erit visus. Nothing but
tragedies and tragical executions, the wounds and wastes, the torments and
tribulations and terrous of themselves and others, shall be the everlasting
object of the damneds view. The rolling Quoad visum, est ibi luminis privatio,
quod delectabile est oculis videre. Gerson.
eye of the wanton sinner, which often fed it self here with beautiful
objects, whether complexioned in a face, or painted in the rarest prospects of
the creature, shall see nothing but what shall be the fountain of horror and
amazement. And the bloudshot eye, which diseased, has looked upon every object
with malignity and envy, shall see nothing but the perpetual slaughters of
doomed malefactors. And

2. The hearing of the damned, which Quoad auditum, est ibi sonus horribilis,
gemitus miserabilis, and blasphemia execrabilis. Id.
it may be here, was often raised and ravished with exquisite musickes, and
pleasing harmonies, which oftentimes committed sensual idolatry with the the
Vial and Lute; or happily the receptive of errors, and blasphemies, or other
perturbant affairs, for which soul-work was laid aside, shall be everlastingly
tortured with the groans, frights, cries, moanes, scrietches, revilings and
blasphemies of a damned society. That delicate ear which was so curious in its
musical apprehensions, will then take up Jeremiahs wish, Jer. 9. 2. that it
were in a wilderness to hear nothing but the ruffling of a few leaves, or the
murmuration of a few streams. How dolefully will those self-cursing accents of
the reprobate crew sound? How mournfully the pitiful, yet fruitless
lamentation of the cast and condemned sinner? How tragical the roarings which
shall be drawn from their inexpressible torture? And

3. The smell of the Reprobates which here was so choice in singling out its
fragrancies, and oftentimes the nosegay was laid in the bosom; I say, that
Rev. 14. 10.
smell which sometimes perfumed it self in an odoriferous bed of flowers and
roses, shall everlastingly be offended with the sent of sulphur and brimstone,
and that distasteful and noisome smell which the imprisoned reprobates shall
evaporate. Heliogabalus that Sardanapalus Petrod' Mexia in Imper. Hist.
of Rome, who here could not bathe himself but in waters sweetened with
perfumes; shall have nothing in eternity to refresh that sense, but the stench
of Gods eternal wrath. And

4. So for the taste, the critical palate of sinners which here was so rare in
its inventions, how to please and Quoad gustum, ab synthium, amarus cibus, Item
fell draconum potus, uva illorum uva fellis, and potus amarissimus fell draconum,
vinum eorum, and venenum aspidum insanabile.
intoxicate it self, which often has been non-plust which dish in the feast,
which dainty in the banquet to seize and prey upon; which sometimes has been
at a controversy, whether it has pleased the Drunkard or the Glutton most,
shall in eternity drink and taste nothing but the cup of trembling, the vials
of Gods wrath, the poison of Aspes, the vomit of Serpents, and the spirits of
Satan's malice. And

5. The touch which here was gratified with softness and effeminacy, and was
indulged with the finest coverlets, which could not endure the smart of a
wound, the unkindnesse of a storm or the intolerablenesse of a spark, shall be
tormented with the most penetrative Mar. 9. 48.
and wracking torments, with Quoad tactum ibi est ignis urens, vermis
corrodens, aestus insuperabilis, and frigor intolerabilis, Gers.
flames which have intolerable heat, but no light, and with all those tortures
which with most exquisiteness can afflict that sense. That sense which the
Philosophers call the most common, shall in the eternity of the damned be the
common capacity of insupportable misery. And thus for the first universality,
that of the Patient.

But further to draw this Map of misery, I shall unfold and fall upon a second
universality, viz. That of Punishnent. Not only every artery of the body, every
faculty of the soul, (I speak in reference to the damned) every exertion of the
sense, shall live in an everlasting execution and Martyrdom, (if I may use the
word) But every imaginable misery, omnigenous, De poenis excogitari non potest
quod ibi non erit. Greg.
multifarious, innumerable calamities shall seize upon every particular. The
soul in its full capacities shall drink in all soul-torment, and the body all
corporeal tortures. Every division of both (if the soul may be parcelled)
shall lie under multitudinous extremities. Ah! Consider this Psalm. 10. 22.
all ye that forget God.

But not to traverse only universals, Non mihi si linguae centum essent, oraque
centum, Omnia poenarum percurrere nomina possem. Virg.
and to glance only at the torments of the damned in general; the usual
allotment and division of these pains are cast by Divines into three heads:

1. The punishment of loss. 2. The punishment of sense. 3. The punishment of
separation.
But the first and the last, may seem to be coincident.

Mill gehennas ponai, and nihil tale est, quale est excludi a gloria dei, and
odio haberi a deo. Chrysostom.
in regard of the presence of God, and the unspeakable joys of heaven; and this
Divines have called the worst punishment, and so indeed it must be, because the
good the reprobates are deprived of, is infinitely Absentia Christi quoad
visionem, omnia alia tormenta superat, and omnibus poenis intolerabilior est.
Aug.
more valuable, then the pains the damned undergo can be considerable. The
loss of God is infinite, in reference to the object; but the torments cannot
be infinite, because a finite creature undergoes them. But only to touch on
this sad particular, besides the loss of God, the damned shall lose,

Vbi non habet locum dei gratia, ibi nec obtinet gratiosa Angelorum praesentia.
Luth.
the world; those pieces of purity which never were deflowred with a sin, The
Courtiers of heaven, Dan. 7. 10. The comforters of Christ himself, Mat. 4. 11.
The ministering Spirits who Sicut fumus apes, and faetor columbas abigit, sic
Angelos (...). Basil.
wait on the Saints here, as the Spouse of the Lord Jesus. And this is
intolerable misery; and one particular of the damneds calamity. As the Angel
was not here their ministration, so not in eternity shall he be their
companion. Here the Angel did not officiate to them, nor hereafter shall he
associate with them.

Mat. 8. 12.
be blessed with that glorious association* Mat. 22. 13.
The joys, perfections and persons Justi in manu Dei erunt, peccatores in loco
Diaboli, justi cum Deo, peccatores cum Satana. Cyril. Alex.
of the glorious Saints shall not yield a happiness to the imprisoned
reprobates. The glorified Saints which here were the derisions; shall not in
eternity be the companions of the wicked, which here was their scorn, shall
not then be their society. Those pieces of immaculate perfection shall not be
overshadowed with the sight, much more with the communion of one reprobate
miscreant. The sinner that here avoided, shall not in eternity be blessed with
the company of the Saints.

glory it self; whatever blessedness arches heaven, they shall be excluded
Mat. 21. 13.
the feast, turned out of the Court, expelled the bride-chamber, shut out of
Mat. 25. 12.
Paradise; and the skreen of Gods Job 20. 26.
wrath shall stand everlastingly between them and the festivities of glory. The
reprobates shall never see Paradise in Nec sol, nec luna, nec stella videbitur
una. Leon.
the Landscape of a single glance, unless it be to accumulate their infelicity.
Their souls shall not be refreshed with the dewes of celestial happiness. God
in the full passage of eternity shall not once draw the curtain to refresh the
damned with a transient view of that glory, which shall for ever encompasse his
Saints.

everlasting redundancies of the Angels obedience, and the Saints joy. And

Prove. 1. 26.
have the Levits courtesy, the refreshment of a compassionate look; they shall
eternally be banished all moaning Psalm. 92. 8.
language, they shall never hear the Ipsimet damnati sese invicem odio
prosequentur, ac miseriis suis mutuo insultabunt. Ger.
sounding of the bowels of man, nor be indulged with the compassions of God. I
say, these things might be enlarged, but this punishment of loss, which the
damned shall be afflicted with, will more clearly appear, when the gain, the
felicities of heaven shall come into debate and discussion.

I now fall upon the punishment of sense, consisting in all those actual
torments which the damned shall undergo, which as David speaks of Gods works,
Psalm. 40. 5. Many O Lord my God, (...). Hom.
are thy wonderful works. And as Nestor spoke of the miseries they endured at
the siege of Troy, so I may say of those calamities, they are not more grievous
for their nature, then numerous for the account. As the Father comprised all in
one short sentence, Ibi nihil aderit boni, nihil aberit mali: But I shall
comprise those chief punishments which shall consume and torment the damned
under these few heads.

Mat. 18. 9. Mat. 3. 12. Mar. 9. 48. Luke 16. 24. etc.

Now for the handling of this particular, I shall dispatch it in these three
things;

1.

Answ. Gehenna illa, quae etiam stagnum ignis and sulphuris dicta est,
corporeus ignis erit, and cruciabit corpora damnatorum. Aug. de civ. dei.
for the assertion. As

1. In the articles of faith, we are to adhere to the letter, unless evident
and necessary occasion draw us from a literal interpretation. Now these
miseries are often called fire Mat. 15. 41, etc. And

2. To this fire is ascribed sulphur, flames, wood, Isa. 30. 33. Now the Word
would not give such properties to immateriall fire.

3. The bodies of men cannot be more exquisitely tormented, then with fire: one
spark is exceeding dolorous. And Nebuchadnezzars furnace, was but a type of
hell, and therefore there is no reason to recede from their opinion.

And then on the contrary part, it is urged,

1. That corporeal fire can make no impressions on a spirit, as the Devils and
the souls of men are. All agents, Daemonas and animas ^ationales, non aliter
cruciari igne corporeo quidam asserunt, contra suam voluntatem quam quod in eo
detineantur tanquam in perpetuo carcere. Thom.
as Philosophers observe, do act on a capable object; now spiritual
substances are not so to material agents.

Now to this it is answered,

1 Our souls here are often afflicted in corporeal distempers, Et corpore
afflicto anima ipsa dolet.

2. Although coporeall fire do not act on the soul by a physical and natural
power; yet God can infuse a power into fire as the instrument of his wrath and
vengeance, even to scorch and singe the souls of the damned. Though fire cannot
do it, as Divines observe, Virtute physica, tamen virtute hyperphysica. And it
is a good observatio^ a learned man, that Talis est cujusque rei natura, and
actio, qualem Deus creator Omnipotens eam vult esse; si corpora damnatorum
urantur, and non consumantur, nonne illud est miraculum? Et quomodo dicitur
ignis contra naturam agere, cum agat voluntate Dei? that is, The nature and the
action of every thing is such as the Almighty creator will have it, and
commands it to be; if the bodies Alii dicunt, si ignis infernalis esset
materialis, tum extingui posset; sed resp. sicut corpora damnatorum etsi
comburuntur, tamen non consumuntur, sic and ignis inferni, etsi se exerit in
damnatorum poena, tamen non extinguitur: Vtrumque ergo est per miraculam.
of the damned are burned and not consumed, is not this a miracle? as the bush,
Exodus 3. in the beginning. And then how can that fire be said to act against
its own nature, that acts according to the will of the God of nature? and
therefore it may be asserted, that the fire of hell may reach the souls of the
damned if God give it a command, or impose on it a quality and power so to do.

Now to clear the whole in a word, The infernal fire may be considered two
ways;

1. Ratione sui, in reference to it self, and so it cannot have any power on a
spiritual substance.

2. Ratione agentis principalis cujus est instrumentum, in regard of the
principal agent whose instrument it is: and so it can act upon spiritual
beings, and make the same painful impressions, as it would do upon corporal.
But not further to amplify the controversy, that saying of St. Augustine is
August.
remarkable, Cujusmodi ignis infernalis est, hominem scire arbitror neminem,
nisi forte cui Spiritus divinus ostendit; (i. e.) None can know what this fire
is, of what kind, of what power, unless extraordinarily the Spirit of God
reveal it to him. And another piously, Let us earnestly importune the Lord,
that this knowledge whether the fire of hell be material or not, be never
manifested to us by experience.



Cant. 8. 7. but Job 20. 26.
the fire of the hearth can be extinguished, Deuteronomy. 32. 22.
the greatest conflagrations will either die of themselves, or be quenched by
an exterior power. But the fire of hell is an everlasting flame, tears cannot
quench it, blood cannot allay it. Could the damned weep an Ocean, they could
not extinguish one spark of this fire.

the pile of wood and the fire goes out; but the fire of hell shall not be Isa.
30. 33.
fed with wood, but with wrath, Gods indignation shall be an everlasting supply
to hels conflagration; the breath of his mouth shall be both bellows and fuel
to the infernal fire.

infernal fire, urit and cruciat, sed non extinguit, it shall burn but not
bury, afflict but not annihilate, or change the nature of the bodies of the
damned. Those flames as they shall be preserved by a miracle, so shall the
bodies they torment not consume, nor smoke choke thed amned. Hic ignis nec
extinguit, nec extinguitur; as he said.

cum vi (...), with its burning and afflicting power, sheds and casts a light
and illumination. Our flames are but burning torches, and scorching candles;
they be objectivum Visus, as well as Tactus, the object of sight as well as
feeling; the fire has its beams as well as the sun, though it enlightens
lumine tenebricosiore, with darker rays. But the infernal fire Mat. 25. 30.
is void of all light or brightness, Comburentur damnati igne urente, sed non
lucente.
there is utter darkness. And the reason is; for light would be the womb of
comfort, it brandisheth pleasure, to the beholder, how do we admire the Moon
though it shines with a borrowed light? and with what wonder do we Eccles. 11.
7.
gaze on the stars those illuminated diamonds, as being the bright tapers of
heaven. Now could the tormenting flames of hell be radiant, and scatter that
darkness the damned shall be thrust into, they would procure more happiness
then the reprobate shall ever enjoy: light is a blessing that shall never visit
the infernal coasts.

ad eundem modum, according to the quantity of the supply and the fuel it seeds
upon; but the infernal fire shall burn diversimode, after a different kind
according to the demerits of the reprobate, It shall be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrah Mat. 10. 15.
then, etc.

Noster ignis est est ignis pictus ad magnum. ignem Polyc.
were all the combustibles of the whole creation turned into one flame and
fire, they would not contain so much vehemence and servour Vna scintill^ ignis
infernalis magis affligit, quam si parturient mulier mill annos in suis
continuaret cruciatibus. Bern.
in them, as one spark of infernal fire: and the reason is, our fire is fed
and increased by the supply of inanimate creatures, wood, oil, flax, pitch,
etc. but the fire of hell is fed by the wrath of the living Almighty and
eternal God. As fire in the chafindish, is not to be compared to fire in the
furnace.

etc. but the infernal fire shall Act. 28. 1, 2.
be purely, totally, everlastingly tormenting. And to distinguish between our
fire and the fire of hell, the Scripture always adds some epithet and title
to hell fire when it is mentioned; as sometimes it is called hell fire, Non
propter pe^^o^^s comburentes, sed propter eorum immortalitatem in igne. Isid.
Mat. 5. 22. sometimes a furnace of fire, Mat. 13. 42. and sometimes it is
resembled to the Babylonish furnace, Dan. 3. not for the persons that were in
it, for they were holy and precious, but for the immortality of those who were
cast into it. Sometimes hell fire is called a lake of fire, Rev. 19. 20. where
the abundance of it is denoted. So that the Scripture distinguishes our fire
from the infernal always by some attribute or other. But

infernal fire should not be material, but metaphorical, yet the phrase
would import thus much:

exquisiteness of the torments of the Reprobates: nothing more intolerable
then fire, we cannot endure one spark of it. If Martyrs have endured the
flames not only with patience but ease, as it is reported Baynham and others
did, this has been miraculous. In fire every spark is a single torment, and
one flame is but a multiplied misery. The height of Gods wrath is compared to
fire; to torment with Heb. 12. 29.
fire, is the extremity of man's malice. And so the Marian persecution was the
most cruel, because it was fiery; We in our Land burn Wives which destroy
their Husbands, that being one of the highest impieties. The rage of
Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 3. per tot.
was prosecuted with a fiery furnace that was prepared as the most tragical
instrument to pursue his displeasure.

consumptivenesse of this misery. Fire is a devouring element, turns the most
beautiful fuel into ashes in a moment; so the torments of hell shall eat,
corrode, and consume, but yet never dispatch. They shall consume the hopes, the
happiness, the joys and the very persons of the damned, yet not so as to
kill, its consumptions shall be repaired again, as the wound in the flesh is
stopped up when heald.

unnaturalness of the misery. Fire how many ways useful, it is an element
that is absolutely necessary, one of the supports of the world. How useful was
fire to the Israelites, Exodus 13. 21. when God went before them in a pillar of
it? The Spirit it self is called fire, Luke 3. 16. Fire is an antidote against
the killing invasions of the sharp Winter. It makes the dead flesh of the
creatures, which otherwise would be noysomnesse to us, and not our food, to be
genuine and savory diet for man, and yet hels misery is called fire: here the
servant becomes indeed the tyrant, the slave becomes executioner, what was for
help is now for torment.

penetrativenesse of the misery. Fire is of a penetrating nature, Lam. 1. 13.
pierces and windeth it self into the narrowest chinkes, and so these pains
shall pierce usque ad ipsius animae essentiam, to the very nature and essence
of the soul.

in^ernall fire of hell answering the internal fire of lust, these flames
those fires. The wicked man Retaliatio est poenae ad formam culpae.
here has burnt with ambition, lasciviousness, insatiable desires after the
world and the creature, and there he Job. 4. 8.
shall burn in everlasting miseries, in miseries which are called fire.

And thus much for the first torment, which shall seize on the Damned, shall be
cast into inextinguishable fire, Mat. 3. 12.

The Mat. 8. 12, 13.
extremity of cold. Strange it is, yet most Mat. 13. 50.
infallibly, Scripturally true, That the damned should be punished not only
with diversities, with contrarieties of pains, is it not, because as Physicians
observe, the pain is greater in the Antiperistasis; that as they say, when
contrary humors meet and struggle together in the body as two meeting
torrents, then the pain is most intolerable. Surely this is one great reason,
Mat. 25. 30. There Christ says, In hell there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth; weeping from heat, the pain of fire; and gnashing of teeth, from the
extremity of cold; so Haymo, Remigius, Hierome, and others.

Luke 16. Dives petitions no more, Luke 16.
no better cure for his torment in the flame, then that Lazarus should dip the
tip of his finger in water and touch his tongue to cool it.

therefore according to the rule in the Poenae damnatorum erunt acerbissimae,
and intolerabiles; erit ibi poena ignis, and secunda est vermis, tertia foetor,
and quarta maximum frigus. Bonav.
Schools, not argumentative, being stretched beyond its scope and end. And to
the other Aquinas answers, That it shall be no mitigation at all of the pain of
the damned, in regard it shall not be by the changing and the transmutation of
the body from its former disposition and passion, but by bringing a new passion
upon it, the old remaining, which it does, says he, per actionem spiritualem,
by a spiritual action; for by its natural action, being contrary to heat, it
quenches it and mitigates the pain of it, but by its spiritual action, which
it has from the principal agent, Gods justice, whereof it is the instrument,
and whereby it does act and prey upon the body, it does not; so that learned
and acute Schoolman. Indeed this shall be a great additionall to the Reprobates
misery, they shall ever be parched in intolerable heat, and yet spend an
eternal winter; and the misery of chillness and coldness is insupportable.
Cold here how does it benumme the joints, dead the spirits, shrivell up the
body? how does it cast the body into an universal swoon, it pains the members,
and if rigorous, endangers the life; as in some Northerly nations in the world,
the cold is a common distraction; and how shall the frosts of hell disjoynt and
torture the bodies of the damned for ever?

famine and Luke 6. 25.
hunger, a most insufferable misery* Quinta poena damnatorum erit fames maxima,
in inferno namque est tanta inopia, ut neque guitam aquae damnati poterunt
habere. Bonav.
In the 24. of Jeremiah there are three great plagues mentioned, (...), Famine,
Pestilence, and the Sword; Famine is enumerated as one of those soarest
calamities. And so Ezekiel. 14. 21. it is reckoned one of the four judgments
there. Famine it wastes the strength, enfeebles the knees, soyles the beauty,
alters the frame of nature; it makes the child look wrinckled, and furrows the
clearest complexion, it makes man a walking ghost, the picture of misery, the
monster of deformity, and this is one cord in the overflowing, and everflowing
Isa. 28. 15.
scourge that shall scarifie and torment the damned. David, 2 Samuel 24. 13. when
he was put to that sad choice, what punishment and rod to lie under, he rather
casts himself upon the dispatching destruction of the Plague, then the
lingering calamity of Famine. Famine makes man his Lam. 4. 9.
own homicide, assasinate and vulture. Mat. 23. 27.
What our Savior called the Pharisees, (...). Hom. Od.
is most true of those whom famine has surprised, they are but whited
Sepulchers. And this is one of those vialls of wrath the damned shall be ever
drinking of. Hunger and thirst like to wild horses shall be always tearing in
pieces the tortured reprobates. Then shall they cry, ah for a drop of water,
for one of those spare dishes that our nauseated stomachs did disdain the
sight of.

bonds and imprisonment, Mat. Impii in singulis membris igneis constringentur
catenis.
12. 13. And this punishment is not fuller of pain then shame, not more branded
with anguish then reproach. The damned shall always be the prisoners of Gods
wrath, roaring in their fetters, crying in their shackles, begging mercy with a
fruitelesse importunity out of the grate of their eternal dungeons. Diogenes
being asked what was the best thing in a man's life, answered liberty. And he in
the Comedy, compares a Captive to a bird in a cage. Now the damned shall be
deprived of that glorious privilege liberty; they shall be chained to, and in
their torments for ever. No Act. 12. 4.
Angel shall open the iron gate for them, they shall live or rather die
Vincula illa non ex ferro, sed ex igne sunt inextinguibili. Chrysostom.
the perpetual slaves of Gods wrath. Here they abused their liberty, hereafter
they shall not enjoy it; their freedom in sin here, shall fetter them to
misery herafter; there shall be no liberty, either for comfort or escape. Here
they were chained to their lusts, and in eternity they shall be to their
losses. They shall be bound hand and Luke 16.
foot: to omit the piercing torment of Catenis reprobi constringentur, (...) ad
been operandum demonstrare.
their straightness, they shall be everlastingly incapable to help
themselves, or break their loathsome prison. The justice and wrath of God shall
pinion them to the stake of execution for ever.

intolerable stench which shall for ever offend and afflict the damned, those
sulphurous fumes and distasteful Rev. 19. 20.
smoke which shall arise from the lake of fire, how shall they render the
miseries of the damned, exquitely more miserable? Paradise it self was not more
odoriferous in all the varieties of its fragrant plants, especially when
refreshed with the sweet waters of heavenly dew, (for before Adams fall, the
dew was but pearly perfume) then the dungeon of hell that dark cage of the
damned miscreauts, shall be intolerably suliginous, and it shall be the sink
of all offensive sents and ejections, the common dunghill of putrid
evaporations.

darkness, that obscurity the damned shall for Job 20. 26.
ever be buried alive in, they shall be Tunc coacti in tenebras exteriores
mittentur, qui nunc interioribus voluntary delectantur. Greg.
overwhelmed with the shadows of an eternal night; they shall not see again
that Sun which here they clouded with their sins; their deeds of darkness
shall turn into the doom of darkness. The Egyptian darkness mentioned Exodus
10. 22. and the Cimmerian darkness so famed by ancient writers are but the
dark hieroglyphckes of infernal darkness; they shall lie, I mean the
reprobates, in palpable darkness.

In a word, the damned shall be punished with a threefold darkness.

1. Tenebris privationis. They shall never see a glimpse, either of the light
of the Creature, or of the brightness of glory* or of the irradiations of God
himself; the curtain shall be drawn between them and the least dawning of light
for ever. No star Diabolus princeps tenebrarum, infernum qui est regnum
tenebrarum tanta obfuscat caligine, ut luci naturali ad eum non pateat aditus.
Ger.
shall arise or cloud break to shed any luster; no gloworme light shall appear,
they shall not be blessed with the dreadful aspect of an eclipse.

2. Principe tenebrarum. The Prince of darkness shall be their everlasting
companion. He who has traded in the dark, assaulted with dark temptations, who
leads to darkness, who dwells in the dark and abominates all light, shall for
ever be a fury to the damned. And

3. Tenebris interioribus, with the darkness of mind. The reprobates shall
enjoy no more knowledge then what shall amplify their torment, they shall be
cursed with a blindness of mind, an ignorance of God, a spiritual mist and
cloud. The Sun of righteousness shall not rise upon them, nor bless them with
one beam. No pleasing knowledge shall be set up in their minds. No savoring
discoveries or light. Damnati in extrema falutaris Damnati erunt merae tenebrae.
(...) inopia versabuntur, destituentur luce cognitionis divinae. They shall
not sparkle with any divine knowledge. Here their understandings were filled
with errataes, and in eternity they shall be filled with blots.

I should further mention the horrors and griefs that shall perplex the damned
for ever; but I will no further wade in these bitter waters, nor stretch the
argument to a further terror, but will leave these few beacons fired, to be a
serious and an epidemicall caution to all prurient and unawakened sinners.

There is yet a third universality to amplify the damneds misery, and that is,
the universality of the persons tormenting. And those are,

Vengeance is mine, but repay himself Heb. 10. 30.
the interest of all his patience and longsuffering. He shall be a consuming
fire, Heb. 12. 29. Non tantum instrumentaliter, not only by employing
instruments, but shall strike with his own sword. More particularly, God shall
torment the damned,

1. By masking his own face, and drawing the curtain between them and the
beatificall vision; after the Cant. 3. 1.
sentence of death is past in the damned, they shall never see Jesus Christ
more.

2. By shutting the door against them: they shall not only be deprived of the
sight of the bridegroom, but they shall not enter into the bridechamber; the
door of all happiness Mat. 25. 12.
shall be locked everlastingly against them, they shall never be made happy with
the sight of an Angel, of a glorified Saint, it may be, one that here was flesh
of their flesh, and bone of their bone.

3. By pouring contempt upon them; God shall deride their tears, Prove. 1. 26.
reproach their cries, neglect their lamentations; he shall laugh at their
calamity, and despise their trembling fears; their moans shall be his music,
and their groans his delight: he bids them farewell with a Goye cursed, Mat.
25. 41. and that shall be the language they shall have for ever.

4. By emptying the Vials of his severe vengeance upon them for ever. Wrath is
terrible, but vengeance is implacable. God shall be pouring out divine, unmixt,
just yet dreadful, intolerable wrath upon them Rev. 14. 10.
for ever; wrath not allayed with any pity, or mercy, suspense or mitigation,
the least spark of which could turn the whole world into a common flame.

keep open their wounds for ever. And this is reward, he shall compensate them,
for rejecting the commands of God, forsaking Christ, and slighting their souls,
and it may be, at the suit of his temptations.

And Satan shall be to the Reprobates,

1. A malicious enemy, their pain shall be Satan's pleasure, their lamentation
his satisfaction, (if he is capable of any.)

2. A powerful enemy, who can fetch blood at every stroke, he is a fallen
Angel. And one Angel could destroy 185. thousand in a night, and Satan's power
for mischief is not abated.

3. An implacable enemy, whom neither Heu, heu quales sunt Angeli infligendis
poenis destinati, quam immites, and truculenti! Cyr. Alex.
tears nor blood can reconcile, who has no pity, no bowels, no relenting;
whom no rhetoric can soften.

And 4. An eternal enemy, who will never be wearied with managing his
executions.

In Satan Silla and Caesar meet, chose famous Romans; the one was ^alled the
bloody, the other the perpetual Dictatour; Satan shall be a bloody and a
perpetual tormentour.

Judases and Saul's to themselves! How shall they abominate and loath themselves
as the spawn of folly and fanaticall frenzy! Then shall their consciences lash
and torture them, their understandings burden them, their memories cruciate
them, in gathering up all the parcels of their sinful precipitancy. They shall
breath out revenge against none more then their own selves; and with what
thirst shall they desire to massacre their own souls!

cannot here endure the groans of a tormented patient, whose disease wrings
from him bitter lamentations; how shall the Reprobates undergo the bloody
blasphemies of the tortured miscreants! The damned Homo homini lupus, et homo
homini demon.
shall be as Wolves and Devils one to another. Job in the midst of his
calamity curses the day of his birth. Job 3. 1.
Blasphemy, yelling and cursing, shall be all the music of hell; Shimei 2 Samuel
16. 7.
shall find cursing enough there. The tender and delicate sinner, which here
could not endure the cry of an infant, or the moan of an afflicted Saint, in
eternity shall be saluted with nothing but groans and terrible schricks to
eternity.

And now I have done with the first part ^f the extremity of the damneds
torment, viz. the universality of it. I now fall upon the second part, the
hight and exquisiteness of it.

And this I shall demonstrate,

1. Comparatively. 2. Positively.
For the first, The Scripture has emblematised and painted out the miseries of
the reprobate, by many sad, but full comparisons, I shall only glance at some
few. And

I. Sometimes the Scriptures compare the pain and torment of the damned, to the
pain of a woman with child. And this pain is the most 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
intolerable, what scrietches, and Gravis est poena damnatorum, propter
tormenti acerbitatem, gravior propter dolorum diversitatem, gravissima propter
suppliciorum aeternitatem. Carthus.
tears, and cries does it wring from the travailing patient. It is most
exquisite,

1. In the the Original of it; It was the first curse of the female sex, Genesis
3. 16. Gerard calls these pains Dolores acutissimos, the most cutting pains. Nay

2. When the Lord would express the soarest pains and miseries, he compares
them to the torment of this travel, Psalm. 48. 6. Isa. 13. 8. God by this pain,
would give us an instance, and a map of the soarest misery. And observe this
pain,

3. In the suddenness of it; it seiseth on the pregnant woman unexpectedly,
sometimes before time, sometimes after time, someti^es in the midst of
affairs, and the greater the misery is, by how much the more sudden it is in
the surprisall.

4. Consider this pain, in the extremity of it, unspeakable; what strange
roarings and cries it fetches from the Patient?

5. In the dangers of it, what diseases Genesis 35. 18.
and deaths it brings forth? It Vna gehenna scintilla magis cruciat damnatos,
quam si faemina in dolor, and partu, mill annos continuo perduraret.
was the saying of Hecuba, Mallem decies in acie stare, quam semel parere, She
had rather stand ten times in the midst of a battle, then bring forth once;
so great are the dangers this pain casts the patient on. But

II. Sometimes the Scripture compares the miseries of the damned to Torments,
so Luke 16. 23. a word full of horror and amazement, a phrase which implies
all misery boiled to the height; the wound in the pain of it, wrancled and
festered calamities; this word torments seems to leave a piece of the sword in
the open wound; they are misery scrued and pullied to the highest severity. But

III. Sometimes the Scriptures compare the miseries of the damned, (...), Rev.
22. 18. to Luke 12. 48.
plagues and stripes. Stripes the punishment of a Slave. The most
inconsiderable drudges and prisoners lie under the Strapado, stripes and
scourgings; this is Non domini sed servi castigatio, not the punishment of the
Prince but the Vassal.

2. The most exquisite torment, when every single stripe make the succeeding
more tormenting: and so likewise plagues, not diseases, but the fruit of Gods
sudden and saddest wrath.

There are many other comparisons the Scriptures are fruitful in, in which the
miseries of the reprobate are lively depainted, which I purposely omit.

Positively. And here could we reckon up all those extremities of torture, that
cruel Tyrants and the enraged enemy have executed upon those whom they have
attached, and brought into their power; all those miseries were but the burning
with a cold iron, if paralleled with the damneds calamity. Should we peruse the
Histories of the ten primitive persecutions, which were bloudied with so many
deaths and tortures, they were a calm report to those executions the reprobates
shall be overwhelmed with. These lingering deaths which barbarous Tyrants
inflicted on the magnanimous Martyrs, when they did wiredraw their pains and
extremities, and did embrue their ravine and malice in the tedious martyrdoms
of those Sainted Angels, were but a rude draught and imperfect map of the woes
that shall crush the damned to eternity. All those tragedies were but like the
painting of a bloody fight in a lively picture.

Let us but a little particularise the births of man's cruelty as they have been
wreaked on their fellow creatures, and it may something delineate the torment
of the reprobate. Should we mention how some in this life have been wrackt upon
a wheel, and beaten with soar stripes, as Machabeus was; observe the
conjunction of the misery. Others bound about a Globe, and their skin flead
off, as Machir was. Others broken in a mortar. Others fried in a pan. Others
roasted. Others hanged and fleaed. Others their tongues cut out. Others sowed up
in the skins Sic in Neronis persecutione.
of wild beasts, and then worried to death with dogs. Others thrown to Lions,
and bears and Tigers. Others cast into a hot lime-kilne, and afterward
thrown into a scalding bath, as Phocas Bishop of Pontus was. Others hung by
the hair of the head, and Heb. 11. 37.
then scourged. Others pressed, and Which is a catalogue of miseries, a short
book of Martyrs and Martyrdomes.
others stoned to death. Others thrown from rocks and broken in pieces.
Others starved. Others choked with smoke. Others their flesh torn with the
claws of wild beasts. Should we 2 Cor. 11. per initium.
mention Lawrences gridiron, Paul and Peter's Crucifixion, Isaiahs sawing in
There is a map of Paul's calamities.
sunder; or take notice of the impaling which the Turks use, the lingering
poisons which the Italians use, the scarpins and breaking on the wheel which
the French use, the smothering and strangling, a form and barbarous custom
among us. Should we mention Ravilliackes torments; which Du Serres observes,
came nearrest to Du Serres
the miseries of hell; this intolerable torment of some corporal diseases, the
Stone, the Strangury, etc. yet all these summed up in a total sum, were but
a cold representation of the damneds extremities.

And there are four Reasons for it;

1. They are tortured by an infinite Heb. 12. 29.
agent, by God. Omnipotentis justitia futurorum praescia, a mundi origin ignem
inferni creavit. Greg.


2. They are punished for an infinite guilt.

3. They shall be tormented for an infinite duration.

And 4. They shall have no comfort to allay, no hope to extenuate, no ease to
mitigate their miseries.

And thus much for the second thing, viz. the height and exquisiteness of the
torments of the damned.

extremity of the reprobates Illis ululatus and planctus, gemitus and mugitus
continue sonant, simulque clamor ubique confusus attollitur, quem dira vis
tormentorum exagitat, and incendii arsura extorquet. Cassianus.
torments, may be the continuednesse of them. In hell there shall be no
intermission, no rest, no pause; the iron shall always burn, the fit shall
always be on the reprobate; the execution shall neither be reprieved nor
interrupted. The wrath of God shall be a stream, Isa. 33. 30. There was some
intermission in the sins of the ^icked here, but there shall be none in their
sufferings. The painful wound shall be everlastingly renewed. There shall be
no abatement, or suspending, mitigation in the disease that shall wrack the
reprobate, (as was hinted before concerning conscience in particular). The
furnace of their misery shall always burn with an equal heat. Gods wrath
shall not in the least be pacified, nor Satan wearied, nay the damned shall not
be tired in cursing and crucifying their own souls. They shall never be so
happy as to say, we thank God we have now a little ease. But I shall dilate no
further, only let this be considered. It is impossible it should be otherwise,
when only the smile of God, and the blood of Christ can alleviate and
extinguish those flames, which the damned shall be everlasting strangers unto.

infernal miseries, is the efficient cause of them, which is the Almighty,
upon the enforcement of sin. And how does this multiply the pain, that God
which is so gracious and sweet,

1. In his name, which is spelle^ Exodus 34. 6.
with the golden letter of mercy and compassion, who is known by the title of
Gracious, Longsuffering, Merciful, Numb. 14. 17.
etc.

2. So mild and good in his Attributes. Vbi not andum Deum irae suae terminum
ponere, Misericordiae nullum. Riv. in Exodus
Only one attribute of justice among all the rest; he has wisdom to contrive,
Love to appoint, Power to perform, and faithfulness to renew happiness to the
creature that waits on him. His attributes all smile, unless justice provoked;
the justice of God is among his attributes, as the tree of knowledge of Good
and Evil, Genesis 3. ivit.
was among the trees of Paradise, which if ye touch not that one property to
excite it, all the rest will yield pleasant and savory viands; all the rest
shall be the delight of the soul; there is but one sword, one rod among all the
tutelary and beatificall properties.

3. So good in his nature. God is essentially good. Love and goodness is not
his qualification but his nature, as the Apostle, 1 John 4. 16. God is love.
Compassion and mercy are not so much the effects of God, as Dei ratio formalis,
his essence.

4. So sweet his works (...) Every work of the Creation, every particular
action, every single determination was filled with righteousness and
goodnesses. God is essentially and communicatively good, ratione sui, ratione
effectus, as one observes. And

5. How gracious is the Lord in his Son, who sacrificed himself for us, and
Romans 5. 10.
bled love at every vein, who was mankinds Martyr, the common salvation of
believers, and whether his affections to us, or sorrows he underwent for us
were more numerous, is very questionable! And

6. How sweet is God in his Spirit, who is, (...), the Advocate, Joh. 14. 16.
the Comforter, the Substitute of Christ, whose graces beautify, Joh. 16. 7.
influences purify, supports strengthen, joys refresh, and testimonies
rejoice the believing soul, and whose internal confirmation and attests cause
the court of heaven to begin here.

Now all these particulars being summed up, and digested together, how
intolerable will the miseries of the damned appear to be, and all their
calamities shall spring from this God provoked, and shall be the repercussion
of his inflamed justice. A. It is the Lord to whom goodness and mercy is not
only habitual but natural, who, being incensed shall wreak his wrath in the
blood of the Reprobate for ever.

And now having thus paraphrased upon the extremity of the Infernal torments,
I now cast my eye upon their Eternity.

Obj. But here the sinful caltiffe objects. He cannot apprehend that the
bowels of the Lord should be everlastingly restrained, so as never to sound
again, God has not created them, eternally to destroy them. God will at last
be entreated, They cannot fancy their miseries never to be shut up, and put
out, they cannot see to the further end of them. Joseph though he Genesis 45. ^.
may for a while refrain his love, yet at last he must break out, and weep upon
the necks of his brethren; and surely God is Dum satagunt Deum perhibere
misericordem, non verentur praedicare fallacem. Greg. Mor.
infinitely more compassionate and affectionate then Joseph could be, and
therefore he cannot always brand and torment his poor creatures with shame and
confusion; He will at last remember that they are but dust, weak and frail. He
will consider their souls are his own breath, 2 Genesis 7. and their flesh is not
brass nor their bones iron, God will surely remember his ancient loves at last.

Misericordians, as some call them, flatter and deceive themselves with; I
shall though it be fully and learnedly performed by others, give this short and
brief answer, if possibly by it undeceive these poor deluded Miscreants.

But first I must inform you, that these Objectours fortify themselves with
many arguments, to indulge those hopes they conceive of a stop to their future
miseries.



Ans. 1. I reply with Augustine; this Jam. 2. 13.
goodness does belong ad vasa misericordia Objecta divinae misericordiae is
futuro seculo non sunt damnati sed beati. Ger.
non irae, to the vessels of mercy, not wrath. God is infinitely good, but this
goodness shall be only extended to the sons of promise: Gods justice and his
mercy must be harmonious, and not interfere; Mercy must be given to them, to
whom it belongs, and judgment to whom it belongs. 2.

God makes degrees of punishment, 12 Luke 48. some shall be beaten with many
stripes, others with few. Ans. It is true, our Savior in this place, asserts a
diversity of punishments in hell, but he does not subvert the eternity of hell;
though there may be degrees in reference to the measure, yet there shall be no
diversity Illud (pancis) non sinem, sed diversitatem supplicii declarat. Basil.
in regard of the duration. 2. As some answer, this is spoken non absolute, not
absolutely, but comparatively, in reference to the Christ-rejecting,
Ordinance-despising, Grace-slighting sinner; Every sinner shall not drink equal
draughts of Gods wrath, but all eternal.

The Objectour argues, pro tempore, not only small, but transient, for a few
months, a little time, a shorth breathed life; not the tenth part of one day
with the Lord, which is a thousand years; as the Apostle observes, and
therefore, says the 2. Pet. 3. 8.
sinner, to lie on the wrack for ever, for the transient glance of a little
sinful pleasure is such injustice, God cannot be charged with.

Ans. We are to conceive that crimes are not to be weighed according to the Non
temporis longitudine, sed impietatis magnitudino peccata sunt punienda.
time of the commission, but according to the nature of the crime it self,
which is amplified or extenuated according to the quality of the person
offended. Even in temporal and civil courts of Men, few crimes but they
deserve punishment of a longer continuance then the commission of them; to
think therefore that the punishment of sin should be proportioned according
to the time wherein it is perpetrated, what greater folly? Some faults deserve
Dic quae Dementia major Bapt. Vant.
imprisonment, some proscription and banishment; Now how shall the party
peccant be exiled, and remain in durance no longer then the sin for which he
was banished was in perpetration? Murder is soon committed, shall the
punishment in respect of time be accordingly? And to bring it nearer to our
purpose,; what infinite, intolerable, Everlasting calamities do so many
thousand sins committed by a vassal, a subject, a worm, a grasshopper, a pure
nothing, compared to God, against Almighty, Incomprehensible, Infinite,
Independent Majesty deserve? Eternity it self is too short a space for God to
revenge himself on sinners, those petulant and contumacious shadows. But I
shall no longer wrestle with the vain cavils of fond sinners, who, because they
cannot find Repose in the bosom of Christ; think to make their bed in a
fancied indulgence, and build their hopes on a pleasing dream: But I shall draw
up my thoughts in asserting the truth, viz. that the damned must necessarily be
tormented to Eternity, in a few considerations.

Luke 26. And besides all this between us and you there is a great gulf fixed,
so that they which would come from hence to you cannot, neither Sed revocare
gradum, En. Virg.
can they pass to us that would come from thence, Here, in this scripture this
truth is cleared; there is no shooting of the gulf to heaven, for the damned;
there is no rising of the sun in the Horizon of hell: that is an Everlasting
stoppage between the damned sinners and the glorified saints.

Mat. 25. 12. God shall never unlock to them. 13. Luc. 25. Clausae erunt
portae; per quas, aut consolatio, aut minima spes liberationis possit intrare.
1. The gate of grace. 2. The gate of mercy and pity. 3. The gate of
indulgence. 4. The gate of repentance. 5. The gate of Hope, 6. The gate of
Comfort. All ease, rest or consolation shall be barred up for Ever.

Heb. 9. and so the sinners shall be on the wrack for Constat quod sicut finis
non est gaudio bonorum, ita nec tormento malorum. Greg. Dial.
ever; the saints joys and the sinners groans shall both be without period:
the saints pleasure and the sinners pains shall never be shut up; neither shall
death bury the one, nor extinction the other.

Mat. 41. and their doom is eternal Jud. 6. Now as they shall make up one
cursed company, and damned crew, so shall they for ever taste the same wrath
from the sinne-revenging God: I shall not determine the measure, but assert the
duration.

infinitae malitiae, of infinite evilnesse, and therefore it merits eternal
punishment. Now finne is infinitely evil many ways.



59. Isa. 2. Christi meritum est infiniti valeris, si hoc perdit peccator.
of God himself, sin is the great thief, it shuts the soul out of the
presence of God; it steals away the heart of God from a sinner, it makes him
bankrupt of the most transcendent possession, which is God in Jesus Christ.

Nunquam vellet peccare definire peccator, immo vivere vellei, u^ semper
posset. Bern.
still in the sinner; Et si peccator in aeternum viveret in aeternum peccaret,
the wicked man if he lived eternally, he would sin eternally: Now the desire
of sinning is sin in Gods account, and therefore that being eternal, so must
the punishment be. And as one observes, Homo semper peccavit in suo aeterno,
ideo semper punietur in Dei aeterno. The sinner always sinned in his eternity,
therefore he shall be always punished in Gods eternity.

infinite in point of destruction, the sin of the sinner destroys an
immortal, an eternal soul; a soul created for eternity,, to be the
Everlasting companion of God himself; to be crowned as well as indu'd wirh
immortality: and upon that account the sin shall be punished eternally. The
destructive power of sin is of everlasting concernment and it therefore shall
subject the sinner to Everlasting punishment.

eternally, because of the impenitence of the sinner. If repentance never be
made then release can never be had: Penitence forerunneth pardon, the tears of
the sinner usher in the smiles of the Savior: now repentance cannot befall the
sinner in eternity.

Repentance turns to a reconcilable God, looks on an embracing Savior; The
Prodigal, The penitents pattern, runs to a meeting Father: but in eternity
all possibility of reconciliation with God escapes the damned: their day Quando
istinc excessum fuerit, nullus jam locus poenitentiae; hic Vita aut amittitur,
aut tenetur, hic saluti aeterne providetur. Cypr. Ille judex sc. Deus, nec
gratia praevecitur, nec misericordia flectitur, nec pecunia corrumpitur, nec
poenitentia, aut satisfactione mittigatur. August.
is past, their term is ended, and now they must for ever behold with
amazement God, as an angry Judge, but never again as a reconciled Father:
Christ who only can betroth God and Man together, was rejected by the sinner
here; and he shall never offer himself again, after death has shut up both the
day of grace and nature together.

2. Repentance is a grace, Now all spiritual qualifications and habits, all
grace is a star that shall never shine in the darkness of of Hell, in the
shades of the Reprobates eternity; the works of the Spirit shall not lie in the
womb of misery, that is impossible (as before was suggested.)

3. Sin in hell shall be aggravated, not crucified, shall be envenomed by a
more violent blasphemy, and not wounded and weakened by a serious and savory
penitency. Now impenitency for sin leaves the sinner to eternity of misery. For

a wound, which if not cured is mortal,, or rather immortal, and will cause
eternal death: the slightest wound if not healed, festers and wranckles and
kills, and so does unrepented sin for ever.

Sin is a Fall, in which if there be no rising, it is perpetual; sin casts
the soul upon punishment, which if not removed, is everlasting.

Romans 6. 13.
Now if the theft of a piece of money deserves a temporal death; what death
does the theft of Gods glory demerit? Let us but cast up the Account.

2 Pet. 3. 6.
the person that is bound be not loosed, he remains bound for ever: Can the
chain Isa 6. 18. Vincula insoluta manens. Bern.
break it self, or the cord untwist it self, and ye know sins are called the
Cords of Vanity: Now only Repentance can file of these chains, which is
impossible to the damned in eternity, (as before).

Ahab sold himself to sin, and sin sold Ahab to wrath: Now 1 King. 21. 20.
if no ransom be made, then the sale remains for ever; and only Christ can
pay this ransom, in whose merits the Reprobate shall never interest himself.
And though the sale may be made in a moment; for how few sinful days do the
damned sell themselves, yet the force and the end of the sale is for ever. Thus
ye see, sin must be eternally punished, in reference to the impenitency of it.

eternally, in respect of the ingratitude of sin: the obligation of every
sinner is eternal; for as a creature he is obliged to serve God eternally; so
God being the fountain of his being and sustentation, all man's service is but a
small retribution, for this life which streams from God. Now every sin breaks
this obligation, and there can be no reparation for this breach; but only in
Christ, to whom the reprobate has no title; Now therefore the obligation being
forfeited, the punishment must be adequate to the obligation, which was
eternal: And man once sinning, and so breaking this obligation, he acts now no
more as Gods creature, but as Gods enemy, and so all his actions being sin, not
duty, he is Everlastingly punishable.

everlastingly punished upon the account of his own sin, but in regard of God
too.

1. In regard of the dishonor, that one, the least sin casts upon the
glorious Name of God. Every sin casts a treble dishonor upon God: 1. In its
malignity, as being most contrary to the pure, unspotted, perfect nature of
God; his justice, his righteousness, his holiness. Sin is as contrary to the
Nature of God, as light to darkness, hell to heaven, nay infinitely More. 2. In
its obstinacy, it opposes the Commands of God, slights the will of God;
contradicts the designs of God. And 3. principally in its choice: the sinner
in sinning, chooses a base lust, a venomous sin, a crooked Way, a sordid
corruption; before the glorious, precious, desirable good; the Lord himself;
who is summum bonum, and summa felicitas.

2. In regard of the Magnificence of God. Shall a poor worm, a painted
sepulcher, a gaudy nothing, Annullity dressed with flesh, for so man is
comparatively to the Almighty: I say, shall such a pedantique dream as man is,
kick and rebel against the most glorious, incomprehensible God? the Great
Sovereign of the Universe? and does not this fasten the sinner to eternal
torment?

3. In regard of the Justice of God, Pure Justice exacts and requires eternal
punishment, and will pluck the sinner by the throat for ever: and in the
eternity of the wicked; there shall be summum jus. Justice with the sowrest
looks, the most dreadful frown, and the sharpest edge; there shall be justice
inexorable, implacable in its greatest rigor, and severity, such as tears shall
not mollify, or blood satisfy.

eternity; for the pleasure of the Saints, They shall be delighted to see the
enemies of Christ overwhelmed with eternal Misery: Gods justice in heaven shall
be as Vide non indutum vest uuptiali ex sponsali dome exemplum, and nemipro
illo intercedentem; and sic de december talentu^ habente, and quinque stultis.
virginibus. Crysost. I^. 66. 24.
pleasing to them, as any other Artribute: They shall behold with delight
decorem divinae justiciae; the beauty of Gods justice. How would the Saints
here rejoice, to see the Turk, the Pope, the bloody implacable Enemies of the
Gospel buried in ruin and confusion? much more when they shall be perfect, and
lie in Christ's bosom: And as Gregory observes; Although the just in glory, by
the goodness of their nature be merciful; yet being conjoined to the justice
of God, in such a Cap. 20.
rectitude, they cannot be moved with any compassion at all toward sinners:
They shall rather loath and abhor them.

CHAP. XX.
Use 3. of consolation.
AND now at last I fall upon the third and last improvement of the proposition
our future eternity; and that is: This flows with unparalled comfort and
consolation to all the saints; this Truth is a mine, a mass, a spring of
happiness to them: Their felicity to come shall be for ever. it shall Haec
Haereditas Sancti est vita, and incorruptio and regnum, and coaterna cum Deo
babitatio. Hilar.
never fade nor receive damp. Their spring shall know no autumn, nor falling
of the leaf of glory; no declension or abatement No, not for ever. The sun of
their blessedness shall never set, or be eclipsed: Let the saints remember
with delight and complacency this one word Eternity. Duration is the life of
Happiness. A tottering crown is but an honorable misery; the best flowers,
are fond sweetnesses because dying. Gold is but dross, because 1 Pet. 1. 18.
corruptible, what is the lease of the greatest revenues, which will soon
expire; but the saints happiness shall be immarcessible, their crown is made
of immortality: This shall be the blessedness of the glorified ones, that after
they have past millions of ages in glory, one moment of their happiness is not
shed; The saint shall ever spring with fresh felicities, and shine in an
everlasting flourish and renown. The Ocean of their joy shall know no bottom.
When 3. Rev. 21.
they have sat in the same throne with Christ for millions of centuries, the
entail of their honor shall be as firm as the first moment. There shall no
tediousness, interruption, or close, deflowre or surprise their joys for
ever. The smiles and light of God, and of Christ gloriously arrayed with the
humane nature, shall spring everlasting Halelujahs in the saints, And the
Spirit, The Comforter, shall shed an eternal 14. Rev. 2. 5. Rev. 8.
dew of refreshment and delight on them. And the Angels shall join their harpes
in their everlasting and sacred felicity. In a word,

Being for ever; They shall live for ever in the Arms 17. Hos. 3. Quid vita
illa beatius est, quod illic pauperiem non metuas, aut morbum. Chrysostom.
of Jesus Christ. There are three things destroy the life of Man; 1. External
Violence; 2. Internal distemper; and 3. Sin in an extraordinary Manner; as
Herod, and Aarons sons etc. Now none of these shall surprise the glorified
saint; sin, Satan, sorrow that Cerberus of mischief shall be excluded the
Bridechamber. The saints in glory are confirmed in their existence and life:
nothing in misery shall Kill the damned, nothing in Heaven shall destroy the
blessed. The Apostle ascribes incorruptibility to the bodies of the Blessed, 1
Cor. 10. 53. And the soul claims right to immortality by descent, upon the suit
of its own Nature. The life of the saints in glory John 17. 3.
shall be an inextinguishable lamp. The saints in heaven shall weep no more,
much Rev. 7. 16.
less die no more. The life of the saints is the stock on which all their
felicity grows, Resuscitati similes Angelis qua non nupturi, quia nec morituri,
sed transituri in statum Angeli cum per indumentum incorruptibilitatis. Tertul.
Erimus similes Angelis, and fulgebimus sicut ipse sol. And.
and the main pillar of all their happiness, by which it is supported, and
could that taper be put out, all their enjoyments would be entombed in silence
and darkness. Their beings are the susceptive capacities of all their honors,
and beatifical fruitions, and therefore they must be immortalized with a
perpetual spring and Vivacity: and in this, the Saints shall run parallel with
the Angels, their lives shall be enriched with the same perpetuity, and
perennity.

their joy for ever, their ravishments. The joys of the wicked here, is like
the crackling of thorns; but the joy of the blessed hereafter Psalm 16. 11.
shall be as the shining of the sun, excepting Eccles. ^. 6.
its setting and eclipses: It were not fullness, but emptiness of joy, was it
not eternal. The sight of God shall tune their hearts into everlasting
rapsodies. Their Revel. 4. 8.
praises and triumphancies shall be the births of their joy for ever. The
saints shall Psalm. 96. 10.
rejoice, as long as God shall smile, and ravish them with a pleasant
countenance, which shall be to eternity: God shall be a perpetual spring of
life and of joy to the Visio. Dei omnium bonorum, and gaudiorum coelestium sons
est. Ger.
Saints. The Saints shall Everlastingly rejoice, for the indulgencies of God,
for the possession of the Husband, for the society of the Angels, those joyous
and glorious Spirits; for their escape from misery and Everlasting Calamity:
Every glance of Gods eye, Every sight of his will, every smile from Christ's
face, every touch of the Angels harps, every distillation of the Spirit's
Comforts shall spring fresh joys to the glorified ones. And the joys of the
Saints must be subscribed with Eternity; if we either cast our eye on, 1. the
confirmation of the Elect in good. Or 2. the duration of Gods mercy and love,
John 13. 1. Or 3. the perfection of their own Exultabunt Sancti in gloria,
videbunt Deum and gaudebunt, laetabuntur and delectabuntur, and fru entur
gloria, and in felicitate jucundabuntur aeterna: Non labescent, non senescent,
non putrescent amplius. Cypr.
happiness, which could not be attained, unless the joys of the blessed were
wound up to eternity: Nay the very nature of our eternal condition, which
admits no succession, no vicissitude, no fading, no wast, speaks these joys
eternal, and demonstrates them Everlasting.

The Saints shall enjoy their Father for ever, John 14. 2. Christ says he, is
going home, to prepare us Mansions in our Fathers house; And this is Enough; we
shall see our Father when we die, as Jacob said concerning his son Joseph
before he died, we shall enjoy him for ever. Elisha as Elijah was departing
from him, cries, My 2 Kings 2. 12. Quando veniam and apparebo ante faciem tuam.
O dies nesciens vesperam, and nuilum timens occasum. Aug.
Father, my Father. Now the saints shall ever lie in their Fathers bosom; They
shall see the father of all their mercies, and they shall be banished his sight
no more. Then shall the Saints fully and perfectly see how tender the bowels of
a Father are, Isa. 49. 19. how soft the compassion of their gracious, wise,
indulgent, careful and bountiful Father is: And God shall unriddle to the
Saints all the traverses and circuits of his own Providence, and how fatherly
his love and care was, though often it had the mask of mysteriousness, the
reward of affliction before it. And what a Ibi erit omne bonum, and non erit
aliquid malum, and ibi erit quicquid voles, and non erit quicquid noles. Erit
gaudium super gaudium, gandium vincens omne gaudium extra quod non gaudium.
fountain of blessedness will this be, that the Saints shall no longer cry out,
Our Father in a penitential petition and prayer, but shall everlastingly feed
and prey upon Paternal Smiles, and lie in Paternal Embraces; They shall for
ever converse with their Father, not on their Knee, in a strange Land, but with
their eye in their Fathers Court.

their husband for ever: the bride shall eternally enjoy her Bridegroom, the
beloved of her soul: 22 Rev. 17.
here the saints were sick of love for Jesus Christ, 5. Cant. 5. and that
feavour shall be satisfied with his company for ever. This life was an unkind
wall, an injurious lattice between Christ and the Saint, and death having broke
down this discourteous wall of separation, the saints shall always bath
themselves in the loves of 17. Jo. 24.
Christ's presence: Eternity shall be the eternal wedding day of Christ and his
spouse. How does the poor believer here Cant. 17. 3.
complain, 1. Sometimes of frowns and unkind looks; the smile is clouded and
veiled. 2. Sometimes of absence, Christ Cant. 5. 6.
has retired and withdrawn himself. And 3. Very often of various and different
behavior, now loves, now distaste. But in Eternity Christ shall ever look
pleasingly and ravish the Saint with a grateful countenance; There shall be no
divorce, nor disunion, nor local separation. Christ and his Members shall be
ever together in the same Bride-chamber, the Saints shall enjoy eternal
espousals: no fear of retiring or absence. And how pleasing a prospect will
Christ be to his friends (for so the Jo. 15. 15.
Saints are called;) when the Saints shall everlastingly see him wear his
Incarnation-robes.

that purity for ^ver. In heaven they shall not be subject to Nulla ibi existit
malitia, nulla carnis miseria, non inimici tentatio, non peccandi libido, immo
nec male agendi facultas. And.
the rape of a Temptation, nor to the assault of a sinful onset. This shall be
glory in its Noontide, the blessed shall ever shine in unblemisht perfection.
Their garments shall be as unspotted as their glory. In Eternity their hearts
shall not be traitors; nor their eyes the panders of their treacherous hearts.
Their perfection shall be fair as the Moon, as it was said of Christ, Cant. 6.
10. Untainted and undeflowred for ever. No sinful tincture or shadow of
pollution shall bespecle their illustrious purity: No fear of apostasy, or the
loss of uncontaminated perfection, and the reason may be, because heaven
cannot lodge the least natural or sinful defilement. it being the sacred
Court of Gods immediate presence, where the eyes of the Lord shall not nor can
be offended with Ephesians. 5. 27.
the rising of the least deformity. And duration shall not engender temptation.
Lot, though he lived long in Sodom without any taint, which is recorded; yet
he could not long abide in the Cave without Incest. But the glorified Saint
shall remain for ever, Genesis 19.
and shall not be stained with the least degeneracy.

their Comforter for ever. That sweet spirit shall eternally refresh them, with
constant diffusions of Jo. 14. 16.
of joy and consolation, and refresh them with perfumed gales of unspeakable
gladness. Then, viz. in eternity the saints shall enjoy the Spirit in a more
ample, heroical, and magnificent manner. 1. Ratione plenitudinis, in points of
fullness; the Spirit shall bath the Saints arrived, with glory in seas of
comfort; They shall drink at the spring head, and accept the gracious
invitation of Christ, to drink abundantly, 5. Cant. 1. 2. Ratione immediatae
praesentiae: The Saints in Eternity shall not only feel the operations, and
rejoice in the conduct and comfort of the Spirit; but shall with ecstasy enjoy
Jo. 16. 13.
and admire the glorious presence of the Holy Ghost; and see him with delight
and ravishment face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. and 3. Ratione permanentiae, the
Blessed shall enjoy the Spirit, not as they do here, sometimes with full tides
of comfort and lively impressions and increases of grace, and at other times as
beating faintly in the soul, and casting an uncomfortable look on the
impoverished believer; nay sometimes Ephesians. 4. 10.
as chased away with grief, (though it cannot totally and finally leave the
soul in point of grace, as might largely be demonstrated) but the saints in
eternity shall enjoy the Spirit for ever, with rich redundancies and
overflowings of peace, joy, comfort, and serenity; nor shall that emplying
spring abate. And all the corrasives, bondage, checks and smarts of the Spirit,
which here were wholesome and necessary, shall wholly cease in the blessed
Etern^ty.

the Knowledge of what they desire, for ever. There shall be no imperfection or
oblivion in eternity And the Blessed shall know what ever is adequate to, or
fit for the sphere of humane Capacity, not by discourse, but by intuition,
intuitive, as the Schoolmen Omnis in hac vita (...), and Deo (...) est verbum
defectivum, sed in vita fuiura est verbum perfectivum.
speak. And the Saints shall be acquainted with all Divine Mysteries; Christ
does, as some friends who reserve secret things to a Meeting, not trusting them
in a Letter. Indeed Christ opens much to his people here, he does unbosome
himself, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 25. verse 14. But in Eternity, all
Maskes and Clouds, and Curtains shall be drawn: Those Mysteries which here did
rather raise, then fill the Apetite, shall be uncased to the Believer in
eternity, and these secrecies may be ranked into three heads.

1. Those incomprehensible Mysteries, which are above, but not against nature,
as the Mystery of the Trinity, the Incarnation etc. These shall be no
difficulties, nor Mysteries in heaven.

2. Those supernatural Miracles which had the object in the creature, as how
God created the World, the Nature of those Miracles Christ and the Apostles
wrought and effected; and all those wonders which are bounded in the creature.

Hic modicum e multo cognoscimus.
not at a distance, but perfectly, clearly, and closely: And in all these and
infinitely more enquiries shall the Saints in glory be fully satisfied. The
Saints shall see the will and heart of God without a perspective or
looking-glass.

their company for ever: They shall for ever see the courtiers of heaven; the
creature in its best attire, their godly relations, the Angelical beauties:
Nor shall that innumerable Heb. 12. 22. Ibi, sc in coelo, cum myriadibus
Angelorum laetos and festos id agemus, in omni felicitate, gloria gaudio,
jubilo, and triumpho. Alap. in Hebr.
company of of glorious Angels, and glorified Saints, which do, as it were
bespangle heaven it self, as they are perfected by the presence of God, ever be
veiled or disturbed with sorrow, for the departure, funeral, or extinction of
one of that rare society: No falling stars shall shine in glory: And, to draw
up all, and close up the whole Treatise, Every particular Saint in Eternity
shall receive Everlasting delights from that perpetual communion he shall have
with the most perfect creatures, Gods Fiat, his Omnipotent Word produced; and
the Pure Angels and Blessed Saints incorporated into one Eternal society, as
many stars joined together, shall make one glorious and Everlasting
Constellation.

(...).
BOOKS Printed for Jos. Cranford at the Phoenix in S. Paul's Churchyard.
THe Practice of CHRISTIAN PERFECTION wherein several Considerations, Cautions,
and Advices are set down for the Perfecting of the Saints and Completing them
in the Knowledge of Christ Jesus by Thomas White Minister of Gods Word at Anne
Aldersgate. London.

(...), or the Sum of Practical DIVINITY Practiced in the Wilderness, and
Delivered by our Savior in his Sermon on the Mount being Observations on the
fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh Chapters of S. Matthew; to which is prefixed
PROLEGOMENA or Preface, by way of Diologue; wherein the Perfection and
Perspicuity of the Scripture is vindicated from the Calumnies of Anabaptists
and Papists: By Thomas White, Minister of Gods Word at Anne Aldersgate. London.

ANIMADVERSIONS, or the Rabinical Talmud of RABBI John Rogers: Wherein is
Exammed his Doctrine, as of the Matter of a Church The Duty of Separation The
Subjects of Church Power. Form of a Church The Duty of Separation The Subjects
of Church Power. etc. By Zach. Crofton, Minister of Gods Word at James Garlic
Hythe, London.

A PRACTICAL DISCOURSE of PRAYER: Wherein is handled the Nature, the Duty, the
Qualifications of Prayer, viz. Ejaculatorie, Public, Private, and Secret
Prayer; with the Necessity and Engagements unto Prayer, together with sundry
Cases of Conscience about it: By Thomas Cobbet, Minister of Gods Word at Lyn.

Refreshing STREAMS flowing from the Fullness of JESUS CHRIST: Held forth in
several Sermons; by William Colvill sometimes Preacher at Edenburg.

JUS DIVINUM Ministerii Evangelici; or the Divine Right of the
Gospel-ministrey. Published by the Provincial Assembly of LONDON.


