THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent From BRISTOLL: Wherein is set down the true
Relation of the great Victory obtained by Sir WILLIAM WALLAR, against the Welsh
Forces, under the Command of the L. Herbert.

With the number of Prisoners taken by him, and other material Observations.

As also* a Catalogue of the names and qualities of such Commanders as were
taken in that Battle.

Together, With the names of the Conspirators against the City of BRISTOLL,
with their Vocations and Habitations; as it is appointed to be published by the
Council of War in Bristoll, and the names of that Council thereunto Annexed.

From a true hand in this City, who presented it to the Committee of Lords and
Com. Apri. 3. at Haberdashers Hall.

April 4. Printed for R. D. 1643.

BRISTOLL, 1. April, 1643. SIR,
I Presume the report of Sir William Waller his good success against the
Welsh, is very common with you; yet lest you may not have full information of
the truth, I have made bold to insert it upon assured knowledge. Sir William
pretending when he went from Malmsbury, to fall upon Cirencester, sent thither
all his prisoners, whereof one hundred have taken Oath to fight for the King and
Parliament, and are entertained into pay, but Sir VVil iam made toward the
Forest of Dean, and to give passage over the River, made use of 30. boats
that were intended for service at Worcester, and with them made a bridge over
Sabrin, and so marched, forcing his passage through the Forest to Highnam, a
place where the Welsh Forces were entrenched, and fell upon the rear of them,
while other forces out of Gloucester fell upon the front, and so encompassed
them, slew many, took 1326. prisoners, 500. Horse besides Commanders; a List
whereof I have herewith sent you, as also a publication made by the Council of
War in Bristoll, with the names of the Council, to which I refer you: since
which overthrow given to the Welsh, some other of the Kings forces took a
Troop of Sir William Wallers Horse, but he soon recovered it again, and
about 51. horse more of theirs, nine hundred pounds in money, and store of
Victual sent in by the Country. A judicious Gentleman your special friend,
told me, that the House of Ragland and all Wales, cannot raise such another
Army for Horse, Arms and Commanders; he has spent at the least threescore
thousand pounds in the expedition. The miscarrying of the last Post, as it has
made me loose my journey to Bristol, so it does much prejudice the business
here, cutting off all intelligence and commerse, giving advantage to the
Ma^ignants to raise what reports they please, who to make good this great
loss, give it out, that the Lord General has received a great overthrow, but
we believe it not. I pray you afford me two words of the truth, the Country
here, giving much credit to my relations, for which your pains they think
themselves all engaged. The plundering the last Carriers has undone diverse
poor men, and unless some remedy be provided the mischief will be great,
and the distaste greater, in respect that their robberries are don with in so
few miles of Windsor: excuse my boldness, who rest,

Your humble Servant, T. W.

A CATALOGVE of the Names of the most emminent Officers of the Lord HARBERTS
Army; taken Prisoners at Higham upon the 25th. of March, 1643.
SErgeant Major General Bret. Sergeant Major Fox. Sergeant Major Griffeth a
Recusant. Sergeant Major Throgmorton. Colonel Treaver Williams Baronet, a
Commissioner of Array in Munmouth shire. Lieutenant Colonel Wigmore, a
Captain of a Train Band in Hereford-shire. Lieutenant Colonel Dukes a York
shire Man. Captain Kenus whose Father is Steward to the Lord Herbert and
Commissioner of Array. Captain Henry Lingurne a Commissioner of Array of
Hereford-shire, a Gentleman of 3000. l. per annum, and a Recusant. Captain
Lochard, late High Sheriff of Radnor-shire a Recusant. Captain Berrington a
Gentleman of 2000. l. per annum. Captain Elton son of Mr. Ambrose Elton a
Justice of Peace of Hereford-shire. Capt: Adams Muster Master General, and
Prevancer a Recusant. Capt: John Abraall heir to Rich: Ahraall of Iuxen. Cap.
Canniford a Commissioner of Array for Munmouth-shire. Cap. Arnold Burfill
brother to Colonel Burfill a Man of 2000. l. per annum. Capt: Brook a
Somersetshire Gentleman. Captain Lews. Captain Hook. Captain Philip
Morgan. Captain Roger Williams. Captain Jews Thomas. Captain Thomas Hunt.
Captain Sympson. Lieutenant Thomas Lingurne, brother to Cap. Henry Lingurne a
Recusant. Lieutenant Lochard a Recusant. Lievte: Wear. Lieutenant Butler.
Lieutenant Charles Sommerset. Lieutenant James Wigmore, brother to Lieutenant
Colonel Wigmore. Lieutenant homus Morris. Lieutenant Pawlet. Lieutenant
Knowles. Cornet Roger Vaugham of Ruerden a Recusant. Coronet Carny. Coronet
Lee. Coronet Bradford. Ensign Charles Madock. Ensign John Thomas. Two sons
of Captain Charles Booths Ensigns. Ensign Pilkington.
BRISTOLL the 28th. of March, 1643. It is this Day Ordered by a Council of
War with direction, to be Published,
THat whosoever either in this City or Country, have or shall have in their
hands any goods or estates belonging to any of the late bloody conspirators of
Bristoll, whose Names are hereunto annexed, who endeavored to cut off the
garrison there, and let in Prince Ruperts plundering Forces, or shall know where
any of their goods are, and conceal the same, or has, or shall help to carry
any of them away, or whosoever has, or owes any debts, Rents, ammunities or
sums of money to any of the said conspirators, and shall not in some
convenient time after the publishing hereof: make kown the same to the
Governor of the City BRISTOLL, shall undergo and suffer the same penalty and
forfeiture in their own goods, Estates, and Persons, as men adherent to them,
which are or shall be infl^cted upon the same Conspiraters, and whosoever
servant or other, that shall discover and make known to the said Governor any
of the concealed goods, estates, Rents, amunities or sums of money to or of
the said Conspirators belonging, whereby the said goods, debts or sums of
money, shall come unto our possession for the service of the King, Parliament,
and Kingdom; shall have a good reward.

The Names of the CONSPIRATORS.
ROwland Sachfild Mercha. Joh. Waldron Hornemak. Mr. Brint Parson. George
Butcher Merchant. John Butcher Merchant, Francis Belcher Sope-maker. Thomas
Barret Cutler. Thomas Brown. Phillip Barrow. John Casly. Robert Tailor. Cap.
Boon. Edw. Boon. John Nichinas Trunke-maker. Tobie Goodier. John Williams,
Hatter. 2. Haines, William and John Helliers. 2. Tristams brothers. Joh.
Sopemaster and William. Richard Howell. Ephraim Goodier. Rich: Yeomans grasier.
William Yeomans Marcha. To; Yeamans. Marcha. John Bradway, Vintner. Mr. Miller
of St. Michaels. William Bean. Edward James Rope-maker. George Teague. Rich:
Lucket. John Tailor Merchant. John Tailor. Edward Arundell Merchant. Edmond
Dakers Plummers. John Dymmut Carpenter. John Throupe Gent. Dr. Marks. John
Postor. Mr. Thomas Bursill* Jo: Collins To: Blacburough, Brewer* To: Brown of
Clifton. Tho: Vaymond Jo: Carry Coop Captain Do^ty, Captain Cole. William
Coulson: Edw: Caple. Rich: Grigson. John Goodman. John sweetman. William Evans.
John Bucher son to great Butcher. Walton Cugly. Robert Dowlesse. Thomas Hilman.
Mr. Green Lawyer, and Stew- of the City. James Terrey. Griffen Batten.
Nathaniell Street. William Pope. John Potrell. Corn Bradway. Samuel Warn.
Henry Rusten. Thomas Matten. Edward Hungerford. James Abbot. Edward Hunt.
William Dabber. Joseph Brown. Edmund Lews. Henry Priest. William Cox of Long
Ashton. John Tilley Mercer. John Council. John Rowde. Edward Tailor. William
Jones. Thomas Redding. James Thomas. Nathaniell Blanch.
The Council of War.
NAthaniell Fiennes. John Seymor. Thomas Walker. Hercales Langriedge. Henry
Vaughan. Thomas Talbot. Thomas Rawling. Richard Hyrsley. William Lews. Thomas
Air. Barnard Lasly. Matthew Swain. William Franklin.
FJNJS.

